HISTORY

O F
SCOTLAND

DURING THE REIGNS OF
Qpeen MARY and of King JAMES VI.

TILL
His AccEssIoN to the Crown of ENGLAND.

WITH A
REVIEW of the SCOTTISH HISTORY previous to

that PERIOD;
And an ArP E N DIX containing OR GI NAL PAPE RS.

IN TWO VOLUMES.
By WILLIAM ROBERTSON, D.D.

VOLUME n.
THE SEVENTH EDITION.

D U B L IN:
PRINTED FOR THE UNITED COMPANY OF BOOKSELLERS.

MDCCLXX V.

# BOOK VII.

T H E
HISTORY

o F
SCOTLAND.

B O O K VII.

H I L E Scotland was torn by intestine factions, Eliza- Boox VIs.
beth was alarmed with the rumour of a project in

agitation for etting Mary at liberty. Francis Throgmorton, 5S84.
a Cheshire gentleman, was fulpeAted of being deeply con- Thrg-,
cerned in the design, and on that suspicion he was taken into confpinct
custody. Among his papers were found 'two lits, one of the sgainft
principal harbours of the kingdom, with an account of their Elisabtb.
ituation, and of the depth of water in each; the other, of
all the eminent Roman Catholics in England. This circtum-
fance confirmed the suspicion against him, and ome dark and
desperate conspiracy was supposed just ready to break out. At
first he boldly avowed his innocence, and declared that the
two papers were forged by the queen's ministers, in order to
intimidate or infhare him; and he even endured the rack with
the utmost fortitude. But being brought a econd time to the
place of torture, his resolution failed him, and he not only ac-
knowledged that he had held a secret correspondence with the
queen of Scots, but discovered a design that was formed to in-
vade England. The duke of Guise, he aid, undertook to
furnih troops, and to condut the enterprize. The pope and
king of Spain were to supply the money necessary for carrying
it on all the English exiles were eager to take arms many
of the Catholics at home would be ready to join them, at their
landing; Mendoza, the Spaniih ambaflador, who was the life .
of the conspiracy, ipared no pains in fomenting the spirit of
difaffeaion among the English, or in hastening the preparations
of the continent; and, by his command, he had niade the
two lifts, the copies whereof had been found in his poefleion.
This confeflion he retracted at his trial; returned to it again,
after sentence was paied upon him; and retratted it once more
at the place of execution .

VOL. I1. B 'T

* Hollinaghed, 1370.

Boon VII. To us in the present age, who are assisted in forming our
~-v7" opinion of this matter, by the light which time and history

1584. have thrown upon the designs and charaters of the princes of

Guise, many circumifances in Throgmorton's confession ap-
pear to be extremely remote from truth, or even from proba-
bility. The duke of Guise was, at that juncture, far from be-
ing in a situation to undertake foreign conquests. Without
either power or office at court; hated by the king ; and per-
fecuted by the favourites, he had no leisure for any thoughts of
disturbing the quiet of the neighbouring states, and his vast
and ambitious mind was wholly occupied in laying the foun-
dation of that famous league, which shook the throne of
France. But about the time Elizabeth detected this confpi-
racy, the close union between the house of Guise and Philip
II. was remarkable to all Europe, and as their great enter-
prize against Henry III. was not yet disclosed, as they en-
deavoured to conceal that under their threatenings to invade
England, Throgmorton's discovery appeared to be extremely
probable; and Elizabeth, who knew how ardently all the par-
ties mentioned by him wished her downfall, thought that flie
could not guard her kingdom with too much care. The in-
discreet zeal of the Englifll exiles increased her fears. Not

Designs of satisfied with incessant outcries against her severity towards the
Mary's ad- Scottish queen, and her cruel persecution of her Catholic sub-
gainft Eli- jes, not thinking it enough that one pope had threatened her
zabeth. with the sentence of excommunication, and another had ac-

tually pronounced it, they now began to disperse books and
writings, in which they endeavoured to persuade their dif-
ciples, that it would be a meritorious ation to take away her
life; they openly exhorted the maids of honour to treat her, as
Judith did Holofernes, and by such an illustrious deed, to ren-
der their own names honourable and sacred in the church,

Camd. throughout all future ages *. For all these reasons, Elizabeth
497. not only inflited the puniflment of a traitor on Throgmorton,

but commanded the Spanifli ambassador instantly to leave Eng-
land; and that flie might be in no danger of being attacked
within the island, fie determined to use her utnloft efforts, in
order to recover that influence over the Scottifli councils, which
she had for tome time entirely loft.

She endea- T HE R E were three different methods, by which Elizabeth
OreUefto might hope to accomplifl this; either by furnishing such es-
blifli her fe&ual aid to the banifled nobles, as would enable. them to
influence resume the chief direaion of affairs; or y entering into such
in Scot- a treaty with Mary, as mnight intimidate her son, who being
land, b now accustomed to govern, would be apt to agree to any
Arran. terms, rather than resign the fieptre, or adnit an associate in

the throne; or by gaining the earl of Arran, to secure the
direction of the king his master. The lal was not only the

cafieft,

easiest, and peedieft, but most likely to be successful. This CooKVII.
Elizabeth resolved to pursue; but without laying the other two ---
altogether aside. With this view, he sent Davison one of her 584.
principal ecretaries, a man of abilities and address, into Scot-
land. A minifler so venal as Arran, hated by his countrymen,
and holding his power by the most precarious of all tenures,
the favour of a young prince, accepted Elizabeth's offers
without hesitation, and esteemed the acquisition of her pro-
tection, to be the most solid foundation of his own greatness.
Soon after, he consented to an interview with lord Hundfon the August
governor of Berwick, and being honoured with the pompous '13
title of lieutenant general for the king, he appeared at the
place appointed, with a splendid train. In Hundfon's presence,
he renewed his promises of an inviolable and faithful attach-
ment to the Englilh interest, and assured him that James flould
enter into no negotiation which might tend to interrupt the
peace between the two kingdoms; and as Elizabeth began
to entertain the fame fears and jealousies concerning the king's
marriage, which had formerly disquieted her with regard to his
mother's, he undertook to prevent James from listening to
any overture of that kind, till he had previously obtained the
queen of England's content .

THE banifled lords and their adherents oon felt the es- Severe pro.

seas of Arran's friendship with England. As Elizabeth had ceedings a-
permitted them to take refuge in her dominions, and several of gairi the

banilhed

her ministers were of opinion that fie ought to employ her arms lords.
in defence of their cause, the fear of this was the only thing,
which restrained James and his favourite, from proceeding to
such extremities againit them, as might have excrted the pity
or indignation of the English, and have prolrpted them to
exert themselves with vigour in their behalf. But every ap- August '
prehension of this kind being now removed, they ventured to
call a parliament, in which an a was pafled, attainting
Angus, Mar, Glalis, and a great number of their followers.
Their estates devolved to the crown, and according to the
pratice of the Scottilh nicnarchs, who vwere obliged to reward
the faction which adhered to them, by dividing with it the spoils
of the vanquished James dealt cut the greater part of these to
Arran, and his affociatcs -.

No was the treatment of the clergy less rigorous. All Against the

ministers, readers and profeffrrs of Colleges were injoined to clergy.
subscribe, within forty days, a paper tefi.rying their approbation
of the laws concerning the chuch enacted in las parliament.
Many, overawed, or corrunitcd by the court, yielded obedience;
others flood out. The ftipL-nds of the latter were fequeftcred,
some of the more ative committed to prison, and .umbers

B z compelled

* Cald. 3. 49,. Mclv. 315, See Append. No X.
t Cald 3. 517,

BoOVII. compelled to fly the kingdom. Those who complied, fell un-
<-- der the suspicion of a ning from mercenary or ambitious mo-

·584. tives. Those who suffered, acquired high reputation, by giv-

ing such convincing evidence of their firmness and sincerity.
The judicatories of the church were almost entirely suppressed.
In some places, scarce as many ministers remained, as to per-
form the duties of-religious worhip; they oon funk in re-
putation among the people, and being prohibited not only from
discoursing of public affairs, but obliged, by the jealousy of
the administration, to frame every sentiment and exprellion in
such a manner,

a mrs to give the court no offence, their sermons

were deemed languid, insipid, and contemptible; and it be-
came the general opinion, that together with the most vir-
tuous of the nobles, and the most faithful of the clergy, the
power and vigour of religion were now banished out of the
kingdom -.

MEANWHILE, Elizabeth was carrying on one of those

fruitless negotiations with the queen of Scots, which it had be-
come almost matter of form to renew every year. They ser-
ved not only to amuse that unhappy princess with some pro-
fpest of liberty; but fumi/hed an apology for eluding the soli-
citations of foreign powers in her behalf; and were of use to
overawe James, by hewing him that he could, at any time,
et free a dangerous rival to dispute his authority. These
treaties she suffered to proceed to what length she pleaed, and
never wanted a pretence for breaking them off, when they be-
came no longer necessary. The treaty now on foot was not,
perhaps, more sincere than many which preceded it; the rea-
sons, however, which rendered it ineffeEtual were far from be-
ing frivolous.

New con- As Crichton a jesuit was failing from Slanders towards
fpiracy a- Scotland, the ihip on board of which he was a passenger hap-
gainft Eli- pened to be chased by pirates, who, in that age, often infested
zabeth. the narrow seas. Crichton, in great confution, tore in pieces

ome papers in his custody, and threw them away; but, by a
very extraordinary accident, the wind blew them back into the
ship, and they were immediately taken up by ome of the pas-
fengers, who carried them to Wade, the clerk of the privy
council. He, with great industry and patience, joined them
together, and they were found to contain the account of a
plot, said to have been formed by the king of Spain, and duke
of Guise, for invading England. The people were not yet
recovered from the fear and anxiety occasioned by the con-
fpiracy, in which Throgmorton had been engaged, and as his
discoveries appeared now to be confirmed by additional evi-
dence, not only all their former apprehensions recurred, but
the consternation became general and excefllive. As all the

dangers,
t Ibid. 3. 589.

dangers, with which England had been threatened for ome BooKVII.
years, flowed either immediately from Mary herself, or from ^
those who made use of her name to justify their insurrections 1584.
and conspiracies, this gradually diniinidiid-the compiffiondue
to her situation, and the English, instead of pitying, began to
fear and hate her. Elizabeth, under whole wife and pacific
reign the Englilh enjoyed tranquillity, and opened sources of
wealth unknown to their ancestors, was extremely beloved by
all her people; and regard to her safety, not less than to their
own interest, animated them against the Scottifi queen. In Occrfion
order to discourage her adherents, it was thought neceflary to an affocia
convince them, by some public deed, of the attachment of the tion I op-
Englilh to their own sovereign, and that any attempt against Maly.
her life would prove fatal to her rival. With this view, an oa. 19.
Ajoriation was framed, the subscribers of which bound them-
selves by the most solemn oaths, " to defend the queen againf
" all her enemies, foreign and domestic; and if violence

Should be offered to her life, in order to favour the title of
any pretender to the crown, they not only engaged never
to allow or acknowledge the perf6n, or persons, by whom,
or for whom, such a detestable at ihould be committed,
but vowed, in the presence of the eternal God, to pro-

"fecute such person, .or persons, to the death, and to pursue
, them, with their utmost vengeance, to their utter over-
" throw and extirpation*." Persons of all ranks subscribed
this combination, with the greatest eaemerefs and unani-
mity t.

MA R Y confidered this combination, not only as an avowed Which

design to exclude her from all right of fucceflion, but as thegreatly a-
certain and immediate forerunner of her deftruftion. In order larms her.
to avert this, she made such feeble efforts as were still in her
power, and ent Naue her secretary to court, with offers of
more entire resignation to the will of Elizabeth, in every point,
which had been the occasion of their long enmity, than all her
sufferings hitherto had been able to extort . But whether Mary
adhered inflexibly to her privileges, as an independent overeign,
or yielding to the necelfity of her situation, endeavoured, by
conceflions, to ooth her rival, flie was equally unfucefsful.
Her firmness was imputed to obstinacy, or to the secret hope
of foreign afliftance; her concessions were either believed to be
insincere, or to flow from the fear of some imminent danger.
Her present willingness, however, to comply with any terms
was o great, that Walsingham warmly urged his miftref to
come to a final agreement with her. But Elizabeth, was per-
fuaded, that it was the spirit raised by the association, which
had rendered her so paflive and compliant. She always Im-
agined that there was something mysterious and deceitful in all

Mary's
* State Trials, . i12. . Ca md. 499. t Camd. ibid.

BOOK VII, Mary's acions, and fufpetled her of carrying on a dangerous
'-v ~- correspondence with the Eglifh catholics, both within and

'584. without the kingdom. Nor were her suspicions altogether void

of foundation. Mary had, about this time, written a letter to
fir Francis Inglefield, urging him to haften the execution of
what she calls the great plot or designment, without hesitating
on account of any danger in which it might involve her life,
which lhe would most willingly part with, if, by that sacrifice,
lhe could procure relief for so great a number of the oppressed

sheeid children of the churcht. Instead, therefore,. of hearkening
with grea- to the overtures which the Scottilh queen made, or granting
ter rigour. any mitigation of the hardships of which flhe complained,

Elizabeth resolved to take her out of the hands of the Earl of
Shrewsbury, and to appoint fir Amias Paulet, and fir Drue
Drury, to be her keepers. Shrewsbury had discharged his trust
with great fidelity, during fifteen years, but, at the fame time,
had treated Mary with gentlenes and respeCt, and had always
sweetened harlli commands, by the humanity with which he
put them in expecution. The fame politeness was not to be
expected from men of an inferior rank, whose evere vigilance,
perhaps, was their chief recommendation to that employment,
ad nd the only merit by which they could pretend to gain favour

5Cmd' or preferment *.

Gray, a As James was no less eager, than ever, to deprive the ban-
new favou- ilhed nobles of Elizabeth's protetion, he appointed the master
rite of the of Gray his ambafiador to the court of England, and entrusted
king's. him with the conduEt of a negotiation for that purpose. An

honour for which he was indebted to the envy and jealousy
of the earl of Arran. Gray possessed all the talents of a cour-
tier; a graceful person, an insinuating address, boundless am-
bition, and a restless and intriguing spirit. During his residence
in France, he had been admitted into the most: intimate fami-
liarity with the duke of Guise, and in order to gain his favour,
had renounced the protestant religion, and professed the utmost
zeal for the captive queen, who carried on a secret cprrefpon-
dence with him from which ffie expected great advantages. Or,
his return into Scotland, he paid court to James with extra-
ordinary assiduity, and his accomplifllments did not fail to make
their usual iniprelfion on the king's heart. Arran, who had in-
troduced him, began quickly to dread his growing favour;
and flattering himself, that absence wouid efface any senti-
ments of tenderness from the mind of a yourg prince, pointcd
him out, by his malicious praises, as the inofl prper person in
the kingdom, for an embassy of fuich iportance: and contri-
buted to raise hin to that high dignity, in order to haten is
fall. Elizabeth, who had an adnirable dexterity in difcov.:ring

the
1j Strypc, 3. 2.6.

the proper instruments for carrying on her designs, endeavoured, BooKVII.
by caresses, and by presents, to secure Gray to her interest. -
The former flattered his vanity, which was great; the lat- 1584.
ter supplied his profuseness, which was till greater. He
abandoned himself without reserve to Elizabeth's directions,
and not only undertook to retain the king under the influence
of England, but, ated as a spy upon the Scottilh queen,
and betrayed to her rival every secret, that he could draw from
her by his high pretensions of zeal in her service *.

GRA Y'S credit with the English court was extremely gal- His interest

ling to the banished nobles. Elizabeth no longer thought of with the
employing her power to restore them; lie found it easier to curtl Of
govern Scotland, by corrupting the king's favourites; and in
compliance with Gray's solicitations, he commanded the exiles
to leave the north of England, and to remove into the heart of
the kingdom. This rendered it difficult for them to hold any Dec. 3'.
correspondence with their partizans in Scotland, and almote
impolfible to return thither without her permission. Gray, by
gaining a point which James had so much at heart, rivetted him-
self more firmly than ever in his favour; and by acquiring greater
reputation, became capable of serving Elizabeth with greater
success t.

AR A N had now possessed, for some time, all the power, 158.

the riches, and the honours, that his immoderate ambition Ar ran.
could desire, or the fondness of a prince, who set no limits to and info-
his liberality towards his favourites, could bestow. The office lence.
of lord chancellor, the highest and most important in the king-
dom, was conferred upon him, even during the life of the earl
of Argyll, who succeeded Athole in that dignity *; and the * Crawf
public beheld, with astonishment and indignation, a man edu- sic. of
cated as a fodlier of fortune, ignorant of law, and a con- App. 447
temner of justice, appointed to preside in parliament, in the
privy council, in the court of feflion, and intrufed with the
supreme disposal of the property of his fellow-fubjeats. He
was, at the fame time, governor of the castles of Stirling and
Edinburgh, the two principal forts in Scotland; provost of
the city of Edinburgh; and as if by all there accumulated dig-
nities his merit were not sufficiently recompenfed, he had been
created lieutenant general over the whole kingdom. No person
was admitted into the king's presence without his permiflion; no
favour could obtained but by his mediation. James, occupied
with youthful amusements, devolved upon him the whole regal
authority. Such unmerited elevation increased his natural ar-
rogance, and rendered it intolerable. He was no longer con-
tent with the condition of a subjet, but pretended to derive
his pedigree from Murdo duke of Albany; and boasted,
openly, that his title to the crown was preferable to that of

the
* Strype, 3. 301. Mclv. 316. t Cald, 3. 643.

BooKVII. the Iing himself. But, together with there thoughts of royalty,
v --v--^ he retained the meanness, suitable to his primitive indigence.

·585 His venality as a judge was scandalous, and was exceeded only

by that of his wife, who, in defiance ofdecency, made herself a
party in almost every question which came to be decided, em-
ployed her influence to corrupt, or to overawe the judges, and
almoR openly dicaated their decisions . His rapaciousness as a
minister was insatiable. Not satisfied with the revenues of so
many offices, with the estate, and honours which belonged to
the family of Hamilton; or with the greater part of Gowrie's
lands, which had fallen to his share; he grasped at the pof-
fellions of several of the nobles. He required lord Maxwell
to exchange part of his estate, for the forfeited lands of Kin-
peil; and because he was unwilling to quit an ancient inheri-
tance for a pofleflion so precarious, he firred up against him,
his hereditary rival, the laird of Johnston, and involved that
corner of the kingdom in a civil war. He committed to prison
the earl of Athole, lord Home, and the matrer of Caflils; the
firl, became he would not divorce his wife, a daughter of the
earl of Gowrie, and entail his estate on him; the second, be-
cause he was unwilling to part with ome lands, adjacent to one
of his estates ; and the third, for refusing to lend him money.
Iis spies and informers filled the whole country, and intruded
themselves into every company. The nearest neighbours dif-
trusted and feared each other. All familiar society was at an
end. Even the common intercourses of humanity were inter-
rupted, no man knowing in whom to confide, or where to utter
his complaints. There is not perhaps in history, an example
of a minister so universally detestable to a nation, or who more
juilydeferved its detestation .

AR R A m, notwithitanding, regardless of the sentiments, and

deipifing the murmurs of the people, gave a loose to his natu-
ral temper, and proceeded to acts till more violent. David
Home of Argaty, and Patrick his brother, having received let-
ters from one of the banished lords, about private business,
were condemned and put to death, for holding correspondence
with rebels. Cunningham of Drumwhafel, and Douglas of
Mains, two gentlemen of honour and reputation, were accused
of having conspired, with the exiled nobles, to seize the king's
person. A ingle witness only appeared; the evidence they
produced of their innocence was unanswerable; their accuser
himself not long after acknowledged that he had been sub-
orned by Arran ; and all men believed the charge against them
to be groundless: they were found guilty, notwithstanding, and
filffered the death of traitors f.

A o 1T

* Cald. 3. 331. ScotlRrvet' Staggering State, 7.
' Spuo; 337, 338. $ Spots. 338. Cald. 3. 794.

AB v T the fame time, that there gentlemen were puniih- BooVLf.

ed for' a pretended con1piracy, Elizabeth's life was endangered - -'
by a real one. Parry, a doctor of laws, and a member of the ' 585-
houre of commons, a man vain and fantastic, but of a resolute Por"i'a
spirit, had lately been reconciled to the church of Rome ; and against
fraught with the zeal of a new convert, he offered to demon- Elizabeth.
firate the sincerity of his attachment to the religion which he
had embraced, by killing Elizabeth. Cardinal Allen had pub-
li/hed a book, to prove the murder of an excommunicated
prince to be not only lawful, but a meritorious aion. The
pope's Nuncio at Venice, the jesuits both there and at Paris,
the Engliih exiles, all approved of the design. The pope him-
self exhorted him to persevere; and granted him, for his en-
couragement, a plenary indulgence, and remiflion of his fins.
Cardinal di Como wrote him a letter to the fame purpose. But
though he often got excess to the queen, fear, or some re-
maining sense of duty, refrained him from perpetrating the
crime. Happily, his intention was at last discovered by Nevil,
the only person in England, to whom he had communicated it;
and he hmfelf having voluntarily confessed his guilt, he sus- March a.
sered the puniihment which it deserved *.

Tn ES E repeated conspiracies againit their sovereign awak- A severe

ened the indignation of the Engliih parliament, and produced a atu'
very extraordinary statute, which, in the end, proved fatal to hfat'a r-
the queen of Scots. By this law the afociation in defence of Mary.
Elizabeth's life was ratified, and it was further ena&ed ; " that

if any rebellion Ihall be excited in the kingdom, or any thing
attempted to the hurt of her majesty's person, by or for any
person pretending a title to the crown, the queen flhall em-
power twenty-four persons, by a commiflon under the great
feal, to examine into, and pass sentence upon such offences;
and after judgment given, a proclamation fliall be issued, de-
claring the persons whom they find guilty, excluded from
any right to the crown ; and her majesty's subje&s may law-
fully pursue every one of them to the death, with all their
aiders and abettors: And if any design againit the life of
" the queen take effect, the persons, by orfor whom filch a

detestable a is executed, and their ifues, being any wife
afienting or privy to the fame, fliall b disabled for ever
from pretending to the crown, and be pursued to death in

" the like manner t." This at was plainly levelled at the
queen of Scots; and whether we confider it as a voluntary cx-
preflion of the zeal and concern of the nation for Elizabeth'r
safety, or whether we impute it to the influence, which that
artful princess preserved over her parliaments, it is no easy mat-
ter to reconcile it with the general principles of jullicc or hu-
manity. Mary was thereby rendered accountable not only for

her
State trials, Vol,. 1. 03, ' State trials, Vol. . 113.

BooKVII. her own acions, but for those of others; in consequence of

v-- which, fle might forfeit her right of fucceflion, and een her
,585. life itself.

She ri- MA R. justly confidered this at, as a warning to prepare for
which she the wort extremities. Elizabeth's ministers, it is probable, had
was treat- resolved, by this time, to take away her life ; and fulfered books
ed, in- to be published, in order to persuade the nation, that this cruel
reafed. and unprecedented measure was not only necetfary, but just *.

Even that short period of her days which remained, they ren-
dered uncomfortable, by every hardship, and indignity, which
it was in their power to inflia. Almost all her servants were
dismissed; he was treated no longer with the refpet due to a
queen; and though the rigour of eventeen years imprisonment
had broken her constitution, ihe was confined to two ruinous
chambers, scarce habitable, even in the middle of summer, by
reason of cold. Notwithstanding the scantiness of her revenue,
the had been accustomed to diltribute regularly omne alms a-
mong the poor in the village adjoining to the castle. Paulet,
now, refused her liberty to perform this pious and humane office,
which had afforded her great consolation, amidst her own sis-
ferings. The castle, in which ihe resided, was converted into
a common prison; and a young man, fufpeced of popery, was
confined there, and treated under her eye, with such rigour,
that he died of the ill usage. She often complained to Eliza-
beth of those multiplied injuries, and expoftulated as became a
woman, and a queen; but as no political reason now obliged
that princess to amuse her any longer with fallacious hopes,
far from granting her any redress, he did not even deign to give
her any answer. The king of France, closely allied to Eliza-
beih, on whom he depended for assistance, was afraid of es-
pouting Mary's cause, with any warmth ; and all his folicita-
tions in her behalf were feeble, formal, and inefficacious. But
Caftelnau the French ambaiador, whose compassion and zeal
for the unhappy queen supplied the defe&s in his infcruaions,
renlontrated with filch vigour against the indignities to which
flhe was exposed, that, by his importunity, he prevailed at length
to have her removed to Tuthbury; though she was confined,
the greater part of another winter, in her present wretched ha-
bination t.

A breach N 'IT.i'I. R the insults of her enemies, nor the negle of
hew.,,cn her friends, made such an ipreflion on Mary as the ingrati-
r.tv :.nl tucke of' her son. James had hitherto treated his mother with
ht. iun. filial refpct, and had even entered into negotiations with her,

which gave umbrage to Elizabeth. But as it was not her in-
terell that this good correfpondcnce should continue, Gray,
wlio, on his return into Scotland, found his favour with the
kil;, greatly encreafed by the success of his embassy, persuaded

him
" Stryp, 3. 99. + Jlbb, v. a, 576.-598.

him to write a harsh and undutiful letter to his mother, in which BooKVII.
he exprefly refused to acknowledge her to be queen of Scotland,
or to confider his affairs as connected, in any wife, with hers. 15s8-
This cruel requital of her maternal tenderness overwhelmed
Mary with sorrow and despair. " Was it for this, said he,
" in a letter to the French ambaflador, that I have endured so

much, in order to preserve for him the inheritance, to which
I have a just right ? I am far from envying his authority in
Scotland. I desire no power there; nor with to set my foot
". in that kingdom, if it were not for the pleasure of once em-

bracing a son, whom I have hitherto loved with too tender

"affection. Whatever he either enjoys, or expets, he de-
"rived it from me. From him, 1 never received afliftance,

supply, or benefit of any kind. Let not my allies treat him
any longer as a king; he holds that dignity by my content;
" and if a speedy repentance does not appease my just resent-

ment, I will load him with a parent's curse, and surrender
my crown, with all my pretensions, to one, who will re-
ceiye them with gratitude, and defend them with vigour *."

The love which James i&re to his mother, whom he had never
known, nay, whom he had been early taught to confider as the
most abandoned person of her sex, cannot be supposed ever to
have been ardent; and he did not now take any pains to regain
her favour. But whether her indignation at his undutiful be-
haviour, added to her bigoted attachment to popery, prompt-
ed Mary at any time to think ferioufy of disinheriting her son;
or whether there threatnings were uttered in a sudden sally of
disappointed affection, it is now no easy matter to determine.
Some papers which are till extant seem to render the former
not improbable t.

CA RE s of another kind, and no less difquielirg, occupied Darge-

Elizabeth's thoughts. 'rhe calm, which file had long enjoy- rous fitua-
ed, seemed now to be at an end ; and such tcorms were ga- tion ns
thering in every quarter, as filled her with just alarm. All the lizabeth;
neighbouring nations had undergone revolutions, extremely to
her disadvantage. The great qualities, which Henry II. had
displayed in his youth, and which raied the expectations of
his fubjec6s so high, vanished on his ascending the throne; and
his acquiring fipreme power seems not orly to have corrupted
his heart, but to have impaired his understanding. He Ibon
loft the esteem and affection of the nation ; and a life divided
between the aufterities of a fiperftitious devotion, and the ex-
travagancies of the most dissolute debauchery, rendered hiim as
contemptible as he was odious on account of his rapacious-
ness, his profusion, and'the fondness with which he doted on
many unworthy minions. On the death of his only brother,
thoee sentiments of the people burst out with violence. Henry

had
Jebb, a. 571. See Append. No. X, Sec Apr'nd. No. XI.

Boo VII. had no children, and though but thirty two years of age, the
-_-v- fuccelion of the crown was already confidered as open. The

58s. king of Navarre, a distant descendant of the royal family, but

From the the undoubted heir to the crown, was a zealous protestant. The
progreft profpe of an event, so fatal to their religion, as his ascending
es e the throne of France, alarmed all the catholics in Europe, and

the duke of Guise, countenanced by the pope, and aided by
the king of Spain, appeared as the defender of the Romish
faith, and the affertor of the cardinal of Bourbon's right to
the crown. In order to unite the party, a bond of confederacy
was formed, diftinguilhed by the name of the Holy League.
All ranks of men joined in it with emulation. The spirit
spread with the irresistible rapidity, which was natural to reli-
gious paflions, in that age. The destruction of the reforma-
tion not only in France, but all over Europe, seemed to be the
objeft and wiih of the whole party; and the duke of Guise,
the head of this mighty and zealous body, acquired authority
in the kingdom, far superior to that, which the king himself

From the poflTefed. Philip II. by the conquefof Portugal, had greatly
power of increased the naval power of Spain, and had at last reduced
Philip I. under his dominion all that portion of the continent, which

lies beyond the Pyrenean mountains, and which nature seems
to have-deftined to form one great monarchy. William prince
of Orange, who first encouraged the inhabitants of the Ne-
therlands to assert theirliberties, and whose wisdom and valour
formed and proteted the rising commonwealth, had fallen by
the hands of an affafiin. The superior genius of the prince of
Parma, had given an entire turn to the fate of the war in the
Low-Countries ; all his enterprizes, concerted with confum-
mate kill, and executed with equal bravery, had been attended
with success ; and the Dutch, reduced to the last extremity,
were on the point of falling under the dominion of their ancient
mailer.

Hci wire No N E of those circumstances, to which Elizabeth had hi-
snd vgo- therto owed her security, existed any longer. She could derive
duol. no advantage from the jealousy, which had subsisted between

France and Spain; Philip, by means of his confederacy with
the duke of Guise, had an equal sway in the councils of both
kingdoms. The hugonots were unable to contend with the
power of the league; and little could be expected from any
diveifion they might create. Nor was it probable that the Ne-
therlands could long employ the arms, or divide the strength of
Spain. In this situation of the affairs of Europe, it became ne-
ceflaiy for Elizabeth to form a new plan of condu and her
wifdoni in forming it, was not greater than the vigour with
which (Te carried it on. The mcafures, nmot suitable to her
natural temper, and which flie had hitherto pursued, were cau-

tious

ilous and safe; those he now adopted were enterprizing and BooKVIi.
hazardous. She preferred peace, but was not afraid of war; *v-
and was capable, when compelled by neceflity, not only of de- S58S·
fending herself with pirit, but of attacking her enemies with
a boldness, which averted danger from her own dominions.
She immediatelyr furnifled the hugonots with a considerable
supply in money. She carried on a private negotiation with
Henry III. who, though compelled to join the league, hated the
leaders of it, and wilhed for their destruCtion. She openly un-
dertook the protecion of the Dutch commonwealth, and sent a
powerful army to its assistance. She endeavoured to form a
general confederacy of the protestant princes in opposition to
the popish league. She determined to proceed with the utmost Resolves
rigour against the queen of Scots, whose sufferings and rights to punifl
afforded her enemies a specious pretence for invading her domi- Mary, and
nions. She resolved to redouble her endeavours in order to es- king.1
set a closer union with Scotland, and to extend and perpetuate
her influence over the councils of that nation.

SH a found it no difficult matter to induce most of the Scot-

tifi courtiers, to promote all her designs. Gray, fir John Mait-
land, who had been advanced to the office of ecretary, which
his brother formerly held, fir Lewis Bellenden the justice clerk,
who had succeeded Gray as the king's resident at London, were
the persons in whom fie chiefly confided. In order to diret and May 29.
quicken their motions, fle dispatched fir Edward Wotton along
with Bellenden into Scotland. This man was gay, well bred,
and entertaining; he excelled in all the exercises, for which
James had a pallion; and amused the young king by relating
the adventures he had met with, and the observations he had
made, during a long residence in foreign countries; but under
the veil of these superficial qualities, he concealed a dangerous
and intriguing pirit. He oon grew into high favour with
James, and while he was seemingly attentive only to pleasure
and diversions, he acquired influence over the public councils,
to a degree which was indecent for a stranger to possess *.

No TH I N G, however, could be more acceptable to the Propofesa

nation, than the proposal he made of a ifrif alliance be- league
tween the two kingdoms, in defence of the reformed religion. with Scot-
The rapid and alarming progress of the popimh league seemed "d
to call on all protestant princes, to unite for the prefervaion of
their common faith. James embraced the overture with Julys9.
warmth, and a convention of eates impowered him to con-
clude such a treaty, and engaged to ratify it in parliament '.
The alacrity with which James concurred in this measure, must
not be wholly ascribed either to his own zeal, or to Wotton's
address ; it was owing in part to Elizabeth's liberality. As a
mark of her motherly affection for the young king, fle fettled

on
* Mclv. 317. Spotlw. 339.

BooR VII. on him an annual pension of 5ooo pounds; the fame fum which

_I-v-' her father had allotted her, before he ascended to the throne.
i s5. This circumstance, which he took care to mention, rendered a

fum, which in that age was far from being inconsiderable, a
very acceptable present to the king, whose revenues, during a
long minority, had been almost totally difiipated *.

Under- BUT the chief object of Wotton's intrigues, was to ruin
mines Art Arran. While a minion so odious to the nation continued to
ran' pow- govern the king, his afliftance could be of little advantage to

Elizabeth. And though Arran, ever since his interview with
Hunfdane, had appeared extremely for her interest, hle could
place no great confidence in a man, whose conduct was so ca-
pricious and irregular, and who, notwithstanding his protetta-
tions to the contrary, still continued a secret correspondence
both with Mary, and with the duke of Guise. The banihied
lords were attached to England from affetion, as well as prin-
ciple, and were the only persons among the Scots whom, in any
dangerous exigency, he could thoroughly trust. Before Bel-
lenden left London, they had been summoned thither, under
colour of vindicating themselves from his accusations, but, in
reality, to concert with him the most proper measures for ref-
toring them to their country. Wotton pursued this plan, and
endeavoured to ripen it for execution ; and it was greatly facili-
tated by an event, neither uncommon nor considerable. Sir
John Forster, and Ker of Fernihert, the Englih and Scottilh
wardens of the middle marches, having met, according to the
cuRfom of the borders, about mid-summer, an affray arose, and
lord Ruffel, the earl of Bedford's eldest son, happened to be
killed. This scuffle was purely accidental, but Elizabeth chore
to confider it as a design formed by Ker, at the inffigation of
Arran, to involve the two kingdoms in war. She infiRted that
both of them hould be delivered up to her ; and though James
eluded that demand, he was obliged to confine Arran in St.

Aflifs the Andrew's, and Ker in Aberdeen. During his absence from
banished court, Wotton and his aflociates carried on their intrigues
nobles. without interruption. By their advice the banifled nobles en-

deavoured to accommodate their differences with lord John,
and lord Claud, the duke of Chatelherault's two sons, whom
Oaoo. 6, Morton's violence had driven out of the kingdom. Their

common sufferings, and common interest, induced both parties
to Lury in oblivion the ancient discord, which had fiubfifed be-
tween the houses of Hamilton and Douglas. By Elizabeth's
permiflion, they returned in a body to the borders of Scotland.
Arran, who had again recovered favour, insisted on putting the
kingdom in a posture of defence. But Gray, Bellenden, and
Maitland, secretly thwarted all his measures. Some neceflary

orders
* Cald. 3. 305·

orders they prevented from being iflied; others they rendered BooK Vls.
ineffecual, by the manner of execution ; and all of them were --
obeyed slowly, and with relutance '. S8-

WOTT N'S fertile brain was, at the fame time, big with

another and more dangerous plot. He had contrived to seize
the king, and to carry him by force into England. But the de-
sign was happily discovered; and in order to avoid the punili-
nent his treachery merited, he departed without taking leave-s.

ME A N WH I L E the baniflied lords hastencd the execution of They re-

their enterprize ; and as their friends and vaflals were now Sclndo
ready to join thelm, they entered Scotland. Wherever thcyal, are re-
came, they were welcomed as the deliverers of their country, conciled
and the most fervent prayers were addrelfed to heaven for the to the
success of their arms. They advanced, without losing a na- king
rent, towards Stirling at the head of 1o,oo men. The king,
though he had aembled an army superior in number, could
not venture to meet them in the field, with troops, whose
loyalty was extremely dubious, and who, at best, were far
from being hearty in the cause; nor was either the town or
castle provided for a siege. The gates, however, of both were
shut, and the nobles encamped at St. Ninian's. That fame Novem. .
night they furprized the town, or more probably it was betrayed
into their hands; and Arran, who had undertaken to de-
fend it, was obliged to save himself by a precipitate flight.
Next morning they invested the castle, in which there were
not provisions for twenty-four hours; and James was necetli-
rated immediately to hearken to terms of accommodation.
They were not so elated with success, as to urge extravagant
demands, nor was the king unwilling to make every reasonable
concession. They obtained a pardon in the most ample form,
of all the offences they had committed ; the principal forts in
the kingdom were, by way of security, put into their hands;
Crawford, Montrose, and colonel Stewart were removed from
the king's presence; and a parliament was called, to establish
tranquillity in the nation ..

THOUGH a great majority in this parliament confied of A prl;.-

the confederate nobles, and their adherents, they were fare' .,.
from discovering a vindictive spirit. Satisfied with procuring an
at, restoring thelm to their ancient hnours andeftates, and
ratifying the pardon granted by the king, they seemed willing
to forget all patl errors in the adminifiration, and spared James
the mortification of feeing his ninifters branded with any pub-
lic note of infamv. Arran, alone, deprived of all his honours,
tfripped of his borrowed spoils, and declared an enemy to his
country by public proclamation, funk back into obfcilritv,
and muff, henceforth, be mentioned by his primitive title of
captain James Stcwart. As he had been, during l:, unmeritcc

prot-
* Spotfw. 340o. tMclv. 335. t Culd. 3. 795.

BooKVI. prosperity, the object of the hatred and indignation of his
-v*-- countrymen, they beheld his fall without pity, nor did all

isB5. his sufferings mitigate their resentment in the leaf degree.

Church TH a clergy were the only body of men, who obtained no
*asirs. redrees of their grievances by this revolution. The confederate

nobles had, allalong, affecaed to be confidered as guardians
of the privileges and discipline of the church. In all their
manifestos they had declared their resolution to reitore these,
and by that popular pretence, had gained many friends. It
was now natural to expec some fruit from these promises, and
some returns of gratitude towards many of the most eminent
preachers who had suffered in their cause, and who demanded
the repeal of the laws passed the preceding year. The king,
however, was resolute to maintain these laws in full autho-
rity ; and as the nobles were extremely solicitous not to dif-
gut him, by insisting on any disagreeable request, the claims of
the church in this, as well as in many former intfances, were
sacrificed to the interest of the laity. The ministers gave vent
to their indignation in the pulpit, and their impatience under
the disappointment broke out in some expressions, extremely
difrefpedtfl even towards the king himself .
s156. THE archbishop of St. Andrew's, too, felt the effecas of

their anger. The provincial Synod of Fife summoned him to
appear, and to answer for his contempt of the decrees of for-
mer afeinblies, in presuming to exercise the function of a
Bishop. And though he refused to acknowledge the jurif-
diction of the court, and appealed from it to the king, a sentence
of excommunication, equally indecent and irregular, was pro-
April 3. nounced against him. Adamson, with no less indecency,

thundered his archiepiscopal excommunication against Melvil,
and some other of his opponents.

SOON after, a general assembly was held, in which the

king, with some difficulty, obtained an at, permitting the
name and office of a bishop still to continue in the church.
The power of the order, however, was considerably retrench-
ed. The exercise of discipline, and the infpeEtion of the life
and doctrine of the clergy, were committed to Prefbyteries, in
which bifiops ihould be allowed no other pre-eminence, but
that of presiding as perpetual moderators. They themselves
were declared to be subject, in the fame manner as other pas-
tors, to the jurifdiEion of the general assembly. And as the
difcullion of the archbiihop's appeal might have kindled unufu-
al heats in the aflembly, that affair was terminated by a com-
promise. He renounced any claim of supremacy over the
church, and promised to demean himself suitable to the cha-
racter of a bifilcp, as described by St. Paul. The aflembly,
without examining the foundations of the sentence of excom-

munication,
Spotfw. 343,

munication, declared that it should be held of no effet, and BOOKVII
reltored him to all the privileges, which he enjoyed before it '-v-
was pronounced. Notwithstanding the extraordinary tender- A586.
ness shewn for the honour of the fynod, and the delicacy and
refpeEt, with which its jurifdition was treated, several mem-
bers were so zealous as to protest against this decision *.

THE court of Scotland was now filled with persons, so A league

warmly attached to Elizabeth, that the league between the with Eng-
two kingdoms, which had been proposed lai year, met with claded.
no interruption but from D'Esneval the French envoy. James July 5.
himself first offered to renew the negotiation. Elizabeth did
not susser such a favourable opportunity to flip, and instantly
dipatched Randolph to conclude a treaty, which he so much
desired. The danger to which the protestant religion was ex-
posed, by the late combination of the popish powers for its de-
itruction, and the neccfity of a ftrit confederacy among those,
who had embraced the reformation, in order to obftruc their
pernicious designs, were mentioned as the foundation of the
league. The chief articles in it were, that both parties ihould
bind themselves to defend the Evangelic Religion ; that the
leage should be offensive and defensive against all, who shall
endeavour to disturb the exercise of religion in either kingdom;
that if one of the two parties be invaded, the other, notwith-
standing any former alliance, should not, direcly or indirectly,
aflift the invader ; that if England be invaded in any part re-
mote from Scotland, James flould aflift the queen with 2ooo
horse, and 5000 foot ; that if the enemy landed or approach-
ed within sixty miles of Scotland, the king should take the
field with his whole forces, in the fame manner, as he would
do in defence of his own kingdom. Elizabeth, in return, un-
dertook to act in defence of Scotland, if it fliould be invaded.
At the fame time, flie assured the king that no itep should be
taken, which might derogate in any degree from his pretenfi-
ons to the Englilh crown *. Elizabeth expressed great fatisfac- * Spotfw.
tion with a treaty, which rendered Scotland an useful ally, in- 351.
stead of a dangerous neighbour, and alforded her a degree of
security on that fide, which all her ancellors had aimed at, but
none of them had been able to obtain. Zeal for religion, toge
ther with the blessings of peace, which both kingdoms had en-
joyed during a considerable period, had so far abated the vio-
lence of national antipathy, that the king's condut was uni-
verfally acceptable to his own people t.

THE acquittal of Archibild Douilas, at this time, expos-

ed James to much and deierve.l ccniIfie. This man was deeply
engaged in the conspiracy ot the life of the king his father.
Both Morton and Binny one of his own servants, who suffered
for that crime, had accuscd him of being present at the mur-

VOL. II. C der.

Cald. 3. 894. Sontf'.oodl, 346. Camd. i3.

BboKVII; dirt. He had escaped punihment by flying into England,
'--v--' and James had often required Elizabeth to deliver up a person

1586. so unworthy of her prote&ion. He now obtained a licence,

from the king himself, to return into Scotland; and after un-
dergoing a mock trial, calculated to conceal rather than to
dete& his guilt, he was not only taken into favour by the
king, but Cent back to the court of England, with the ho-
nourable character of his ambassador. James was now of such an
age, that his youth and inexperience cannot be pleaded in ex-
cufe for this indecent tranfa&ion. It must be imputed to the
excessive facility of his temper, which often led him to gratify
his courtiers at the expence of his own dignity and reputa-
tion. t.

Rife of NOT long after, the inconsiderate affetion of the Engliih
Babington's Catholics towards Mary, and their implacable resentment a-
aainftcy gainft Elizabeth, gave rife. to a conspiracy, which proved fa-
Elizabth. tal to the one queen, left an indelible stain on the reputation of

the other, and presented a fpeaacle to Europe, of which
there had hitherto been no example in the history of man-
kind.

DocTo R Gifford, Gilbert Gifford, and Hodgson, priests

educated in the seminary of Rheims, had adopted an extrava-
gant and enthusiastic notion, that the bull of Pius V. againff
Elizabeth was ditated immediately by the Holy Ghost. This
April 6. wild opinion they instilled into Savage, an officer in the Spa-

niri army, noted for his furious zeal, and daring courage; ·
and perfiaded him that no service could be o acceptable to
Heaven, as to take away the life of an excommunicated he-
retic. Savage, eager to obtain the crown of martyrdom, bound
himself, by a solemn vow to kill Elizabeth. Ballard, a traf-
sicking priest, had at that time come over to Paris, and solicit-
ed Mendoza the Spanifll ambassador there, to procure an inva-
sion of England, while the affairs of the league were so prof-
perous, and the kingdom left naked by fending so many of
the queen's best troops into the Netherlands. Paget and the
Englilh exiles demonfirated the fruitlessness of such an attempt,
unless Elizabeth were first cut off, or the invaders secured of a
powerful concurrence on their landing. If it could be hoped
that either of these events would happen, effecual aid was
May 15. promised; and in the mean time Ballard was ent back to re-

new his intrigues.

HE communicated his designs to Anthony Babington, a

young gentleman in Derbyshire, of a plentiful fortune, and
many amiable qualities, who having contracted, during his
residence in France, a familiarity with the archbishop of Glaf-
gow, had been recommended by him to the queen of Scots.
He concurred with Paget in confidering the death of Elizabeth

as
t See Append. No. XII. t Spotfw. 348. Cald. 3. 917.

as a necefrary preliminary to any invasion. Ballard gave him Boo VII.
hopes that an end would soon be put to her days, and impart- _v
ed to him Savage's vow, who was now in London waiting for 1586.
an opportunity to Rrike the blow. But Babington thought the
attempt of too much importance, to rely on a single hand for
the execution of it, and proposed that five resolute gentlemen
1hould be joined with Savage in an enterprize, the success of
which was the foundation of all their hopes. He offered to
find out persons willing to undertake the service, whose ho-
nour, secrecy, and courage, they might safely trust. He ac-
cordingly opened the matter to Edward Windsor, Thomas Sa-
lifbury, Charles Tinley, Chidioc Tichbourne, Robert Gage,
John Travers, Robert Barnwell, John Charock, Henry Dun,
John Jones, and Robert Polly, all of them, except Polly,
whose bustling forward zeal introduced him into their society,
gentlemen of good families, united together in the bonds of
private friendflip, fcrengthened by the more powerful tie of
religious zeal. Many consultations were held ; their plan of June.
operations was at las fettled; and their different parts afligned.
Babington himself was appointed to rescue the queen of Scots; The
Salisbury with ome others, undertook to excite several coun- scheme of

the con-

ties to take arms ; the murder of the queen, the mos danger- fpiratrs.
ous and important service of all, fell to Tichbourne and Sa-
vage, with four afociates;. And so totally had their bigoted
prejudices extinguifled the principles of honour, and the fen-
timents of humanity suitable to.their rank, that without fcru-
ple or compuntion, they undertook an ation, which is viewed
with horror, even when committed by the meanest and most
profligate of mankind. This attempt, on the contrary, ap-
peared to them no less honourable than it was desperate, and in
order to perpetuate the memory of it, they had a picture
drawn containing the portraits of the fix affalins, with that of
Babington in the middle, and a motto intimating that they were
jointly embarked in ome hazardous design.

THE conspirators, as appears by this wanton and impru- Discovered

dent infance of . vanity, seem to have thought a dlfcovery by alfin
scarce polfible, and neither ditirufted the fidelity of their com- h
panions, nor doubted the success of their undertaking. But
while they believed that their machinations were carried on with
the most profound and impenetrable secrecy, every ftep they
took was fully known to Walsingham. Polly was one of his
spies, and had entered into the conspiracy with no other design
than to betray his alociates. Gilbert Gifford, too, having
been ent over to England to quicken the motions of the con-
fpirators, had been gained by Walsingham, and gave him sure
intelligence of all their projets. That vigilant minister imme-
diately imparted the ditcoveri.s which he had made to Eliza-
beth ; and without conununicating the matter to any other

C of

BoKVII. of the counsellors, they agreed, in order to understand the

-*^ v--~ plot more perfectly, to wait till it was ripened into some sorn,
1586. and brought near the point of execution.

They are AT last, Elizabeth thought it dangerous and criminal to ex-
felzed and pose her own life, and to tempt Providence any farther. Bal-
Augut 4. lard, the prime mover in the whole conspiracy, was alrrefted.

His aflociates, disconcerted and truck with astonishment, en-
deavoured to save themselves by flight; but, within a few
days, all of them, except Windsor, were seized in different
places of the kingdom, and committed to the Tower. Though
they had undertaken the part, they wanted the firm and deter-
mined spirits of assassins ; and, influenced by fear or by hope,
discovered all they knew. The indignation of the people, and
their impatience to revenge such an execrable combination a-
Sept. 2o. gainft the life of their overeign, hastened their trial, and all of

them suffered the death of traitors *.

TH s far Elizabeth's conduc may be pronounced both pru-

dent and laudable, nor can flie be accused of violating any law
of humanity, or of taking any precautions beyond what were
necessary for her own safety. But a tragical scene followed,
with regard to which, pfterity will pass a very different judg-
ment.

Mary is TH E frantic zeal of a few rash young men accounts fuffi-
iccufed of ciently for all the wild and wicked designs which they had
being ai formed. But this was not the light, in which Elizabeth and
accomplice
in the con- her ministers chose to place the conspiracy. They represented
fpiracy. Babington and his associates to be initruments employed by the

Queen of Scots, the real though secret author of so many at-
tempts against the life of Elizabeth, and the peace of. her
kingdoms. They produced letters, which they ascribed to
her, in support of this charge. These, as they gave out, had
come into their hands, by the following singular, and myiteri-.
ous method of conveyance. Gifford, on his return into En-
gland, had been intruded by some of the exiles with letters to
Mary; but in order to make a trial of his. fidelity or address,
they were only blank papers made up in that form. These be-
ing safely delivered by him, he was afterwards employed with-
out farther scruple. Walsingham having found means to gain
this man, he, by his permission, and the connivance of Paulet,
bribed a tradesman in the neighbourhood of Chartly, whither
Mary had been conveyed, who deposited the letters in a hole
in the wall of the castle, covered with a loose stone. Thence
they were taken by the queen, and in the fame manner, her
anfwersreturned. All there were carried to Walsingham, o-
pened by him, decyphered, fealed again so dexterously that
the fraud could not be perceived, and then transmitted to the
persons to whom they were directed. Two letters to Babing-

ton,
Camd. 55i. State TrialS, vol. i. xlo.

ton, with several to Mendoza, Paget, Englefield, and the BooKVII.
English fugitives, were procured by this artifice. It was given '-v
out that il there letteis Mary had approved of the conspiracy, i586.
and even of the assassination ; that he direEted them to pro-
ceed with the utmolt circumfpeeion, and not to take arms till
foreign auxiliaries were ready to join them; that she recom-
mended the earl of Arundel, his brothers, and the young earl
of Northumberland, as proper persons to conduct and to add
reputation to their enterprize ; that fle advised them, if pof-
fible, to excite at the fame time, fomne commotion in Ireland;
and above all, besought them to concert with care the means
of her escape, suggesting to them several expedients for that
purpose.

AL L these circumllances were opened at the trial of the The in-
conspirators. And while the nation was under the influence of dignation

of the

those terrors which the association had raised, and the late dan- Englilh
ger had augmented, they were believed without hesitation or against her
enquiry, and spread a general alarm. Mary's zeal for Iher reli- on that
gion was well known ; and in that age, examples of the vio- account.
lent and sanguinary spirit which it ipired, were numerous.
All the cabals againit the peace of the kingdom for many
years had been carried on in her name; and it now appears
evidently, said the Englilh, that the safety of the one queen is
incompatible with that of the other. Why then, added they,
hould the tranquillity of England be sacrificed for the fake of
a stranger ? Why is a life so dear to the nation exposed to the
repeated assaults of an exasperated rival ? The cafe supposed
in the association, has now happened, the sacred person of our
sovereign has been threatened, and why hould not an injured
people execute that just revenge which they had vowed ?

No sentiments could be more agreeable than there to Eliza- Elizabeth

beh and her ministers. They themselves had at first propagat- resolves to
ed them among the people, and they now served both as an proceed to
apology, and a motive for their proceeding to such extremities extremities
against the Scottish queen, as they had long meditated. The against her,
more injuries Elizabeth heaped upon Mary, the more flhe feared
and hated that unhappy queen, and came at last to be perfua-
ded that there could be no other security for her own life, but
the death of her rival. Burleigh and Walsingham had promo-
ted so zealously all her measures with regard to Scottiih affairs;
and had ated, with o little reserve, in opposition to Mary,
that they had reason to dread the molt violent effects of her
resentment, if ever lhe ihould mount the throne of England;
and therefore they endeavoured to hinder an event so fatal to
themselves, by confirming their mistress's fear and hatred of the
Scottifl queen.

M A NWHI LE, Mary was guarded with unusual vigilance, Her domes-
and great care was taken to keep her ignorant of the discovery of the tics, papers,

conspiracy. &c. fiacd.

BooKVII. cy. Sir Thomas Gorges was at last sent from court to acquaint
,--.' her both of it, and of the imputation with which she was loaded
«586. as acceifary to that crime ; and he furprized her with the ac-

count, just as ffhe had got on horseback to ride out along with
her keepers. She was struck with astonishment, and would
have returned to her apartment, but he was not permitted;
and in her absence, her private closet was broke open, her ca-
binet and papers were seized, Cfaled, and sent up to court.
Her principal domestics, too, were arrested, and committed to
different keepers. Naue and Curie, her two secretaries, the
one a native of France, the other of Scotland, were carried
prisoners to London. All the money in her custody, amount-
ing to little more than o20o pounds, was secured. And after
leading her about, for some days, from one gentleman's house
to another, she was conveyed to Fotheringay, a trong castle in
Northamptonihire *.

Delibertes No farther evidence could now be expe&ed against Mary,
thoncerinog and nothing remained but to decide what flould be her fate.
the method e
of proceed- With regard to this, Elizabeth and those ministers in whom
ing. fie chiefly confided, eem to have taken their resolution; but

there was still great variety of sentiments among her other
counfellQrs. Some thought it sufficient to difinifs all Mary's
attendants, and to keep her under fuchclofe reftraint,aswould cut
off all poflibility of corresponding with the enemies of the
kingdom; and as her constitution, broken by long confinement,
and her spirit dejeced with so many cares, could not long sup-
port such an additional load, the queen and nation would oon
be delivered from all their fears. But though it might be easy
to secure Mary's own person, it was impossible to diminiih the
reverence which the Roman Catholics had for her name, or to
extinguish the compaflion with which they viewed her susser-
ings; while there continued, infurreaions and invasions would
never be wanting for her relief, and the only effe& of any
new rigour would be to render them more frequent and dan-
gerous. For this reason the expedient was rejected.

Deter- A PVu l c and legal trial, though the most unexampled,
mines to was judged the most unexceptionable method of proceeding,
tryl hr and it had, at the fame time, a semblance of justice, ac-

. companied with an air of dignity. It was in vain to search the

ancient records, for any atute or precedent, to justify such
an uncommon ftep, as the trial of a foreign prince, who had
not entered the kingdom in arms, but had fled thither for re-
fuge. The proceedings against her were founded on the at
of lft parliament, and by applying it in this manner, the in-
aention of those who had framed that fcvere statute became
mnore apparent t. E Z.A

EL IZ BET! I

ELIZAB E TH resolved that no circumstance of pomp orBooKVII.

foleminity hould be wanting, which could render this tranfacti- '*v'"
on such as became the dignity of the person to be tried. She '586
appointed, by a conimifllon under the great feal, forty persons,
the most illustrious in the kingdom, by their birth or offices,
together with five of the judges, to hear and decide this great
cause. Many difficulties were started by the lawyers, about the
name and title by which Mary fliould be arraigned ; and while
the essentials of justice were so grofly violated, the empty forms
of it were the objects of their care. They at length agreed
that fie flould be ftiled, " Mary, daughter and heir of James
' V. late King of Scots, commonly called Queen of Scots, and
" Dowager of France t."

AFT E R the many indignities which Ihe had lately suffered,

Mary could no longer doubt but that herdeftru&ion was deter-
mined. She expected, every moment, to end her days by poison, or
by some of those secret means, usually employed against captive
princes. And left the malice of her enemies, at the fame time
that it deprived her of life, hould endeavour likewise to blast
her reputation, fle wrote to the duke of Guise, and vindicat-
ed herself, in the firongeft terms, from the imputation of encou-
raging or of being accessory to the conspiracy for aflafinating
Elizabeth . In the solitude of her prison, the itrange refolu-
tion of bringing her to a public trial had not reached her
ears, nor did the idea of any thing so unprecedented, and o
repugnant to regal majesty, once enter into her thoughts.

ON the eleventh of Oaober, the commifioners appointed The trial

by Elizabeth arrived at Fotheringay. Next morning they de- at Fothe-
livered a letter from her to Mary, in which, after the bitterest ingay.
reproaches and accusations, he informed her, that regard to
her own safety, had, at last, rendered it necessary to make a
public enquiry into her conduct, and therefore required her, as
Ihe had lived so long under the protection of the laws of En-
gland, to submit now to the trial, which they ordained to be
taken of her crimes. Mary, though furprized at this meflige, Mary re-
was neither appalled at the danger, nor unmindful of her own uls at firit
dignity. She protested, in the mot olemn manner, that fle to plead.
was innocent of the crime laid to her charge, and had never
countenanced any attempt against the life of the queen of En-
gland ; but, at the fame time, refused to acknowledge the ju-
rifdiction of her commiflioners. " I came into the kingdom."
said Ihe, " an independent sovereign, to implore the queen's
" afiftance, not to subject myself to her authority. Nor is my
" spirit so broken by its past misfortunes, or so intimidated by
"present dangers, as to stoop to any thing unbecoming the
" majesty of a crowned head, or that will disgrace the ancef-
"tors from whom I am descended, and the on to whom 1

" hall
' Srype, 3. 361. t Jcb, . 183.

BooKVII." shall leave my throne. If I must be tried, princes alone

" can be my peers. The queen of England's fubjets, howe-
s586. " ver noble their birth may be, are of a rank inferior to mine.

" Ever since my arrival in this kingdom, I have been confined
" as a prisoner. Its laws never afforded me any protection.
"Let them not now be perverted, in order to take away my
"life."

THE commissioners employed arguments and intreaties to

overcome Mary's resolution. They even threatened to proceed
according to the forms of law, and to pass sentence against
her on account of her contumacy in refusing to plead; he
persisted, however, for two days to decline their jurisdiction.
An argument urged by Hatton, the vice-chamberlain, at last
prevailed. He told her, that by avoiding a trial, fle injured
her own reputation, and deprived herself of the only opportu-
nity of setting her innocence in a clear light ; and that nothing
would be more agreeable to them, or more acceptable to the
queen their mistress, than to be convinced, by undoubted evi-
dence, that he had been unjustly loaded with foul afperfi-
ons.

Conents No wonder pretexts so plausible hiould impofeon the unwary
however queen, or that she, unaflifted, at that time, by any friend orcoun-

fellor, should not be able to detec and elude all the artifices of
Elizabeth's ablest ministers. In a situation equally melancholy,
and under circumftanccs nearly similar, her grandson, Charles I.
refused, with the utmost firmness, to acknowledge the usurp--
ed jurifdition of the high court of jutice; and posterity has
approved his conduc, as suitable to the dignity of a king. If
Mary was less constant in her resolution, it inuft be imputed
solely to her anxious desire of vindicating her own honour.
Oa. 14. Ar her appearance before the judges, who were feated in

the great hall of the castle, where they received her with much
ceremony, fle took care toproteft, that by condescending to
hear and to give an answer to the accusations, which flhould
be offered against her, he neither acknowledged the jurifdi&i-
on of the court, nor adnitted of the validity in jftice of tholf
acts, by which they pretended to try her.

TH E chancellor, by a counter-proteftation, endeavoured to

vindicate the authority of the court.

The Iccu- TH E N the queen's attorney and solicitor opened the charge
catin a-
ainfl her. against her, with all the circumstances of the late conspiracy.

Copies of her letters to Mendoza, Babington, Englcfielcd and
Paget were produced. Babington's confefion, those of 13al-
lard, Savage, and the other conspirators, together with the
declarations of NauC and Curie her secretarics, vwere read, and
the whole ranged in the most specious order, which the art of
rt!h l,.lvvcrs could devise, andceighltcnel by every colour their
eloquence could a.d.

M1

MA R Y listened to their harangues attentively, and without BooxVII.

emotion. But at the mention of the earlof Arundel's name,
who was then confined in the Tower, on suspicion of being ac- 1586.
ceflary to the conspiracy, she broke out into this tender and
generous exclamation: " Alas ! how much has the noble
"house of Howard suffered for my fake !"

WH E N the queen's council had finished, Mary food up, Iter de-

and with great magnanimity, and equal presence of mind, be-ene.
gan her defence. She bewailed the unhappiness of her own
situation, that, after a captivity of nineteen years, during
which she had suffered treatment no less cruel than unmerit-
ed, flie was at last loaded with an accusation, which tended
notonly to rob her of her right of fucceflion, and to deprive
her of life itself, but to transmit her name with infamy to fu-
ture ages: That,without regarding the sacred rights of fove-
reignty, she was now fubjeaed to laws framed against pri-
vate persons ; though an anointed queen, commanded to ap-
pear before the tribunal of subje&s ; and, like a common cri-
minal, her honour exposed to the petulant tongues of lawyers,
capable of wresting her words, and of mifreprefentng her ac-
tions: That, even in this dishonourable situation, he was de-
nied the privileges usually granted to criminals, and obliged to
undertake her own defence, without the presence of any
friend with whom to advise, without the aid of council, and
without the use of her own papers.

S H E then proceeded to the particular articles in the accufa-

tion. She absolutely denied any correfpondencewith Babing-
ton : The name of Ballard was not so much as known to her:
Copies only of her pretended letters to them were produced:
Though nothing less than her hand-writing or subscription was
sufficient to convict her of such an odious crime: No proof
could be brought that the letter'; were delivered into her hands,
or that any answer was returned by her direction: Tle consef-
sions of wretches condemned and executed for such a detelfa-
ble aEtion, were of little weight ; fear or hope might extort
from them many things inconfifent with trnth, nor ought the
honour of a qiiuci to be :ailcd by such vile testimony. The
declaration of her fecrctarics was not more conclusive : pronli-
fes and threats might cafily overcome the rclolution of two
frangers; in order to screen themselves, they might throw
the blame on her ; but they could discover nothing to her
prejudice, without violating, in the first place, their oath of
fidelity; and tcir perjury, in ore iftance, rendered them un-
worthy of credit in another: The letter; to the Spa,ins am-
baflador were either nothing more than copies, or contained
only what was perfedtly innocent: " I have often," continued
lhe, " made fich efforts for the recovery of mny liberty, as are
"natural to a hui.ian creaAtr-'. And convinced, by tlie fad

" c.xperienc<:

BooKVII. experience of so many years, that it was vain to expec it

.-v---" from the justice or generosity of the queen of England, I
1586. " have frequently solicited foreign princes, and called on all my

" friends to employ their whole interest for my relief. I have,
" likewise, endeavoured to procure for the Engliih Catholics

rome mitigation of the rigour with which they are now treat-
" ed; and if I could hope, by my death, to deliver them

from oppression. I am willing to die for their fake. I wifli,
however, to imitate the example of Esther, not of Judith,
and would rather make interceflion for my people, than flied
the blood of the meanest creature, in order to save them. I
have often checked the intemperate zeal of my adherents,
when either the severity of their own persecutions, or indig-
" nation at the unheard-of injuries which I have endured, were

apt to precipitate them into violent councils. I have even
warned the queen of dangers to which these harsh proceed-
ings exposed herself. And worn out, as I now am, with
cares and sufferings, the profpec of a crown is not so invit-
ing, that I should ruin my foul in order to obtain it. I am

"no ltranger to the feelings of humanity, nor unacquainted

with the duties of religion, and abhor the detestable crime
"of afaflination, as equally repugnant to both. And, if ever

I have given content by my words, or even by my thoughts,
"to any attempt against the life of the queen of England, far

from declining the judgment of men, I shall not even pray
' for the mercy of God *.

Two different days did Mary appear before the judges,

and in every part of her behaviour maintained the magnanimity
of a queen, tempered with the gentleness and modesty of a
woman.

Sentence TH E commiflioners, by Elizabeth's express command, ad-
nrainil her.journed, without pronouncing any sentence, to the Star Chanm-
OC. 5. her in Wcftminfter. When aflembled in that place, Nau and

Curie were brought into court, and confirmed their former de-
claration upon oath. And after reviewing their whole pro-
ceedings, the commifioners unanimously declared Mary " To
"be acceflary to Babington's conspiracy, and to have imagined
"divers matters, tending to the hurt, death and deftruEtion
"of Elizabeth, contrary to the eprefs words of the fia-

tute, nuade for the security of the queen's life t."

TrrePul-i. IT is no easy matter to determine whether the injustice in
hric1 in appointing this trial, or the irregularity in conduaing it, were

gie el eatet and noll flagrant. By what right did Elizabeth clain
authority over an independent queen? Was Mary bound to
connlFlv with the laws o a foreign kingdom ? How could the
si blct, of another prince becnie her judges ? Or if such an
ii.lult on royalty were allowed, ought not the common forms

of
,' Card. 51 0. *' Camrd. 515.

of justice to have been observed ? If the testimony of Ba- BooKVII.
bington and his associates was so explicit, why did not'
Elizabeth spare them for a few weeks, and by confronting them I58s
with Mary, overwhelm her with the full conviction of her
crimes ? Naue and Curie were both alive, wherefore did not
they appear at Fotheringay, and for what reason were they
produced in the tar-chamber, where Mary was not present to
hear what they deposed ? Was this suspicious evidence enough
to condemn a queen ? Ought the meanest criminal to have
been found guilty, upon such feeble and inconclusive proofs ?

IT was not, however, on the evidence produced at her

trial, that the sentence againit Mary was founded. That
served as a pretence to justify, but was not the cause of the
violent steps taken by Elizabeth and her ministers towards her
deftrution; and was employed to give ome appearance of
justice, to what was the offspring of jealousy and fear. And
the nation, blinded with resentment against Mary, and folici-
tous to secure the life of its own sovereign from every danger,
observed no irregularities in the proceedings, and attended to
no defects in the proof, but grasped at suspicions and pro-
babilities, as if they had been irrefragable demonstrations.

T H E parliament met a few days after sentence was pronounc- The parl'a.
ed against Mary. In that illuitrious assembly more temper and ment con-

. firm the

discernment, than are to be found among the people, might fenence,
have been expected. Both lords and commons, however, were
equally under the dominion of popular prejudices and paflions,
and the fame excesses of zeal or of fear, which prevailed in
the nation, are apparent in all their proceedings. They enter-
ed with impatience upon an enquiry into the conspiracy, and
the dangers which threatened the queen's life, and the peace
of the kingdom. All the papers, which had been produced at
Fotheringay, were laid before them. And after many violent
invectives against the queen of Scots, both houfcs, unanimoufy,
ratified the proceedings of the connniflioners by whom she had
been tried, and declared the sentence against her to be just and
well founded. Not satisfied with this, they presented a joint andi lictm.d

the execti-

address to the queen, beseeching her, as Ihe regarded her own ai 'it
safety, the preservation of the protcllant religion, the welfare
and wishes of her people, to publifl the fentcncc; and with-
out farther delay to inflict on a rival, no leIs irreclaimable than
dangerous, the punilhment which she had merited by so many
crimes. This request, diaated by fears unworthy of that
great assembly, was enforced by reasons tlill more unworthy.
They were drawn not tiom justice, but from conveniency.
The mol rigorous conlinclment, it was prctcnded, could not
curb Mary's intriguing spirit; her aldrcls was found, by long
experience, to be an overmatch for the vigilance and jenloulv

of

BooKVIi. of ail her keepers: the severest peval laws could not restrain
^ -
Je her adherents, who, while they believed her person to be

5;86. sacred, would despise any danger to which thenmfelves alone

were exposed: several foreign princes were ready to second
their attempts, and waited only a proper opportunity for in-
vading the kingdom, and aflerting the Scottish queen's title to
the crown. Her life, for these reasons, was incompatible with
Elizabeth's safety; and if flhe were spared out of a false cle-
mency, the queen's person, the religion and liberties of the
kingdom, could not be one moment secure. Neceflity required
that flie fliould be sacrificed in order to preserve these; and
to prove this sacrifice to be no les juR than neceflary, several
examples in history were produced, and many texts of scrip-
ture quoted, but both the one and the other were misapplied,
a:d dif'orted from their true meaning.

Flzabj' NoT H I NTING, however, could be more acceptable to Eliza-
hi ilati- beth than an address in this ifrain. It extricated her out of a

situation, extremely enbarrafiing ; and, without depriving her
of the power of sparing, it'enabied her to puniih her rival with
less appearance of blame. If file cofr the frmer, the whole
honour would redound to her own clemency. I flhe determin-
ed on the latter, whatever was rigorous might now seem to be
extorted by the solicitations of her people, rather than to flow
from her own inclination. Her answer, however, was in a
stile, which flhe often used, anbiguous and evasive, under the
appearance of openness ad candor; full of such professions
of regard for her people, as served to heighten their loyalty;
of such complaints of Mary's ingratitude, as were calculated
to excite their indignation ; and of such insinuations that her
own life was in danger, as could not fail to keep alive their
fears. In the end, i betought them to save her the infamy
r.nd the pain ol delivering up a queen, her nearest kinfwonian,
to puniflicnt ; a;:d to confider whether it might not fill be
poli5!e to provide cr the public security, without forcing her
to i:nhrue her hands in royal blood.

Tn E true meaning of tiis reply was early undertood.

Ti:e lor:s and co !mons renewved their former request, with ad-
ditional importunity, which was far from being either unexpe&t-
ed, or oltc."five. Eliz.!beth did not return any answer more
exp;icit; and I:ving ohtniIlcd such a public sanction of her
piocetdings. there was no longer any reason for protraaing this
f:.'ne of diliii;;lation; there was even some danger that her
Iig.ced cilTiultlic; imih!t at laif be trealed as real ones; she
tjrc:.;::,te djourncd the purlin:Ient, and reserved in her own

-, -.-.

i l' .

h "p'. i f i- '

!( o .l , icr l-l\v;i's te.tc .

, , ;., A 1. r. iln , !!;:c.: s i l'ui: F'' :If'.rved the proceedings against
'- ,*11 u. Mi':" :. i: :.l..::;!lil:ent ard horior; and even Henry III. frot-

*~~~:"" ~

~ ~ ~ ~ ':'
." withstanding

* Cii·!. ;6, D'Ee, 5.

withltanding his known aversion to the house of Guise, was BooKVIl.
obliged to interpose in her behalf, and to appear in defence of-'r
the common rights of royalty. Aubefpine his resident ambafla- i58'6
dor, and Bellievere who was ent with an extraordinary corn-
miflion to the fame purpose, interceded for Mary with great
appearance of warmth. They employed all the arguments
which the cause naturally suggested; they pleaded from justice,
from generosity, and humanity; they intermingled reproaches
and threats. But to all these Elizabeth continued deaf and in-
exorable; and having received ome intimation of Henry's real
unconcern about the fate of the Scottilf queen, and knowing
his antipathy to all the race of Guise, fle trutfed, that these
loud remonltrances would be followed by no violent resent-
*ment *.

SH E paid no greater regard to the solicitations of the Scot- James en-

tifh king, which, as they were urged with more sincerity, me- ,ieavours ta
rited more attention. Though her commissioners had been Iave his.r-
extremely careful to sooth James, by publilhing a declarationter'
that their sentence agains't Mary did, in no degree, derogate
from his honour, or invalidate any title which he formerly pof-
sessed; he beheld the indignities to which his mother had been
exposcd with filial concern, and with the sentiments which be-
came a king. The pride of the Scottilli nation was rouzed,
by the insults offered to the blood of their monarchs, and called
upon him to employ the most vigorous efforts, in order to pre-
vent or to revenge the queen's death.

AT first, he could scarce believe that Elizabeth would ven-

ture upon an ation so unprecedented, which tended so visibly
to render the persons of princes less ficred in the eyes of the
people, and which degraded the regal dignity, of'which, at
other times, fhle was so remarkably jealous. But as soon as
the extraordinary steps which the took difcdvered her intention,
he dispatched Sir William Keith to London; who, together
with Douglas his ambassador in ordinary, remonstrated, in the
firongef terms, against the injury done to an independent queen,
in fubjeaing her to be tried.like a private person, and by laws
to which she owed no obedience; and besought Elizabeth not
to add to this injury, by suffering a sentence unjust in itself, as
well as diflionourable to the king of Scots, to be put in execu-
tion -.

EL I Z A Bn i T I returning no aiifwer to these remonfrances of

his ambassador, James wrote to her with his own hand, com-
plaining in the bitterest terms of her conduct, not without
threats that both his duty and his honour would oblige him to
renounce her friendflip, and to act. as became a son when call-
ed to revenge his mother's wrongs . At the fame time he

afenibled
* Camd, 531, ' See Apptndix, No. XIII. t Birch, Mem, . 51.

BooKVIl. alembled the nobles, who promised to land by him in so good

a cause. He appointed ambassadors to France, Spain, and
1586. Denmark, in order to implore the aid of there courts; and

took other feps towards executing his threats with vigour.
The high strain of his letter enraged Elizabeth to such a de-
gree, that he was ready to dismiss his ambassadors without
any reply. But his preparations alarmed and embarrafled her
ministers, and at their intreaty Ihe returned a soft and evasive
answer, promising to liften to any overture from the king, that
tended to his mother's safety; and to suspend the execution of
the sentence, till the arrival of new ambafiadors from Scot-
land .

Decemb. 6. ME A N WH I L E, ihe commanded the sentence against Ma-
'he fen- ry to be publilhed, and forgot not to inform the people, that
gteait Mary this wasextorted from her by the repeated intreaties of both
published. houses of parliament. At the fame time, fle dispatched Lord

Buckhurft and Beale to acquaint Mary with the sentence, and
how importunately the nation demanded the execution of it;
and, though file had not hitherto yielded to these solicitations,
Ihe advised her to prepare for an event, which-might become
necessary for securing the Protestant religion, as well as quiet-
ing the minds of the people. Mary received the melnage not
only without symptoms of fear, but with expressions of triumph.
"No wonder, said she, the Englihl flould now thirif for the
"blood of a foreign prince, they have often offered violence
"to their own monarchs. But after so many sufferings, death

comes to me as a welcome deliverer. I am proud to think
"that'my life is eleemed of importance to the catholic reli-

gion, and as a martyr for it I am now willing to die ."

She is treat. Ar T E R the publication of the sentence, Mary was stripped
ed with the -
utmost ri- of every remaining mark of royalty. The canopy of state in
gour. her apartment was pulled down; Paulet entered her chamber,

and approached her person without any ceremony; and even
appeared covered in her presence. Shocked with these indigni-
ties, and offended at this gross familiarity, to which flie had
never been accustomed, Mary once ilore complained to Eliza-
beth; and at the fame time, as her last request, intreated that
fie would permit her servants to carry her dead body into
France, to be laid among her anccftors, in hallowed ground;
that omc of her domestics might be present at her death, to
bear witness of her innocence, and firm adherence to the catho-
lic faith ; that all her servants might be suffered to leave the
kingdom, and to enjoy those small legacies, which ihe flould
bestow on them, as testimonies of her affeEtion ; and that, in
the mean time, her almoner, or ome other catholic pric,
might be allowed to attend her, and to allifl her in preparing

for

t Spotfwood, a51. Cald. 4, .
* Cmd,. 58, Jebb, 19g.

for an eternal world. She besought her in the name of Jesus, BooKVII-
by the foul and memory of Henry VII. their common proge- '
nitor, by their near conlanguinity, and the royal dignity with '5.86.
which they were both invetted, to gratify her in these particu-
lars, and to indulge her' o far as to signify her compliance by a
letter under her own hand. Whether Mary's letter was ever
delivered to Elizabeth is uncertain. No answer was returned,
and no regard paid to her requests. She was offered a Protef-
tant biflhop or dean to attend her. Them she rejeted, and
without any clergyman to direct her devotions, she prepared,
in great tranquillity, for the approach of death, which she now
believed to be at no great distance .

JAMES, without losing a moment, ent new ambafladors 1587.

to London. These were the master of Gray, and Sir Robert James re-
Melvil. In order to remove Elizabeth's fears, they offered that olicit.tins
their master would become bound that no conspiracy ihould be i,, her be-
undertaken against her person, or the peace of the kingdom, half.
with Mary's content; and for the faithful performance of this, January i.
would deliver ome of the most considerable of the Scottish
nobles, as hostages. If this were not thought fuflicient, they
proposed that Mary hould resign all her rights and pretensions
to her son, from whom nothing injurious to the protestant reli-
gion, or inconsistent with Elizabeth's safety, could be feared.
The former proposal Elizabeth rejected as insecure; the latter,
as dangerous. The ambassadors were then inftru&ed to talk
in an higher tone; and Melvil executed the commillion with
fidelity and with zeal. But Gray, with his usual perfidy, de-
ceived his master who trusted him with a negotiation of so
much importance, and betrayed the queen whom he was em-
ployed to save. He encouraged and urged Elizabeth, to exe-
cute the sentence against her rival. He often repeated the old
proverbial sentence, " The dead cannot bite." And whatever
ihould happen, he undertook to pacify the king's rage, or at
least to prevent any violent effects of his resentment ..

EL Z A B E T H, meanwhile, discovered all the symptoms of Elizbeth';

the mofi violent agitation and disquietude of mind. She aixetyL Int
fliuhned society, fle was often folud in a melancholy and muf- n.
ing posture, and repeating, with much emphasis, these fen-
tences which fle borrowed from some of the devices then in
vogue; Aut ser au feri ; neferiare, feri. Much, no doubt,
of this apparent uneasiness muff be mputedl to diflimulation;
it was impofible, however, that a princess, naturally o cau-
tious as Elizabeth, would venture on an ation, which might
expose her memory to infamy, and her life and kingdom to
danger, without reflecting deeply, and hesitating long. The
people waited her determination in suspense and anxiety; and

left

' Camd. 5z8. Jebb, , 295.
t Spofw, 35A. Murdin, 568. See Append. No. XIV.

BooKVII.left their fear or their zeal hould subside, rumours of danger

were artfully invented, and propagated with the utmost indus-
'587. try; Aubelpine, the French ambafador, was accused of haar-

ing fubored an assassin to murder the queen. The Spanish
fleet was said by fonie to be already arrived at Milford-haven.
Others affirmed that the duke of Guise had landed, with a
strong army, in Suffex. Now, it was reported that the north-
em counties were up in arms; next day, that the Scots had
entered England with all their forces; and a conspiracy, it was
whispered, was on foot for seizing the queen, and burning the
city. The panic grew every day more violent; and the people,
aftonifled and enraged, called for the execution of the sentence
against Mary, as the only thing which could restore tranquillity
to the kingdom *.

Warrant WHILE there sentiments prevailed among her fubjeas,
for Mary's Elizabeth thought flie might safely venture to ltrike the blow,
execuLion which flie had so long meditated. She commanded Davison,
F.gne. one of the fecretariesofftate, to bring to her the fatal warrant;

and her behaviour, on that occasion, plainly shewed that it is
not to humanity, that we muftafcribe her forbearance hitherto.
At the very moment fle was subscribing the writ which gave
up a woman, a queen,'and her own nearest relation, into the
hands of the executioner, he was capable of jesting. " Go,
lays file to Davison, and tell Walfingharn what I have now
done, though I am afraid he will die for grief when he hears
it." Her chief anxiety was how to secure the advantages
which would arise from Mary's death, without appearing to
have given her consent to a deed so infamous. She often hint-
ed to Paulet and Drury, as well as to foine other courtiers,
that now was the time to discover the sincerity of their con-
cern for her safety, and that he expeted their zeal would. ex-
tricate her out of her present perplexity. But they were wife
enough to seem not to understand her meaning. Even after the
warrant was signed, he commanded a letter to be written to
Paulet, in less ambiguous terms; complaining of his renil-
ness in sparing so long the life of her capital enemy, and beg-
ging him to remember at last what was incumbent on him as an
affectionate ubjee, and to deliver his sovereign from continu-
al fear and danger, by hortening the days of his prisoner.
Paulet, though rigorous and harfl, and often brutal in the dif-
charge of what he thought his duty, as Mary's keeper, was
nevertheless a man of honour and integrity. He rejeCted the
proposal with disdain ; and lamenting that he should ever have
been deemed capable of aling the part of an afahflii, he de-
clared that the queen mightdifpofe of his life at her pleafire,
but he would never ain his own honour, nor leave an ever-
Jaling mailk of inlhiny on his posterity, by lending his hand to

perpetrate
* Caml, :;:, 5j.).

perpetrate so foul a crime. On the receipt of this answer, BooKVIL
Elizabeth became extremely peevifl ; and calling him a dainty '-vc
and precise fellow, who would promise much, but perform 1587.
nothing, fie proposed to employ one Wingfield, who had both
courage and inclination to firike the blow *. But Davison re-
monltrating againlt this method, as no less dangerous than dif-
honourable, file again declared her intention that the sentence
pronounced by the commiflioners should be executed according
to law; and as she had already signed the warrant, he begged
that no farther application might be made to her on that head.
By this the privy counsellors thought themselves sufficiently
authorised to proceed; and prompted, as they pretended, by
zeal for the queen's safety, or instigated, as is more probable,
by the apprehension of the danger to which they would, them-
selves, be exposed, if the life of the queen of Scots were
spared, they aflembled in the council chamber, and by a letter
under all their hands, empowered the earls of ShrewIbury and
Kent, together with the high iheriff of the county, to fee the
sentence put in execution $.

ON Tuesday the 7th ofFebruary, the two earls arrived at Mary's be.

Fotheringay, and demanding access to the queen, read in her haviour at
pretence the warrant for execution, and required her to prepare her e.
to die next morning. Mary heard them to the end without
emotion, and crofling herself in the name of the Father, and
of the Son, and of the Holy Ghot, " That foul, said the, is
not worthy of the joys of heaven, which repines because the
body must endure the stroke of the executioner; and though
I did not expect that the queen of England would set the firR
example of violating the sacred person of a sovereign prince, I
willingly submit to that which providence has decreed to be
my lot." And laying her hand on a bible, which happened
to be near her, fie foleminly protested that flie was innocent of
that conspiracy which Babington had carried on against Eliza-
beth's life t. She then mentioned the requerts contained in her
letter to Elizabeth, but obtained no fatisraEtory answer. She
entreated with particular carncftnefi, that now in her last mo-
ments, her almoner might be suffered to attend her, and that
fie might enjoy the consolation of those pious institutions pre-
fcribed by her religion Even this favour, which is ufiially
granted to the vilell criminal, was absolutely denied.

HER attendants, during this conversation, werebathed in

tears, and though overawed by the pefence of the two earls,
with difficulty fitppreffed their anguillf; but no sooner did
Kent and ShrewSbury withdraw, than they ran to their nlirrefs,
and burst out into the mot pafionate expreflions of tendernefa
and fotrow. Mary, however, not only retained perfect conm

VOL. II. D pofurc

I3iogr. BniLtn. Article DaviflJn.
t Card. 534. Scrypc, 3. 361, 364 . ebb, z, 301.

BooK VII. pofure of mind, but endeavoured to moderate their exceflive

v'' grief. And falling on her knees, with all her donlefics round
s587 her, Ihe thanked heaven that her fiifferings were now so near

an end, and prayed that he might be enabled to endure what
still remained with decency, and withfortitude. The greater
part of the evening she employed in fettling her worldly as-
fairs. She wrote her testament with her own hand. Her mo-
ney, her jewels, and her cloaths, he difiributed among her
servants, according to their rank or merit. She wrote a short
letter to the king of France, and another to the duke of Guise,
full of tender but magnanimous sentiments, and recommended
her foul to their prayers, and her affliaed servants to their
protection. At supper, he eat temperately, as usual, and
convered not only with ease, but with chearfulnefs; fle drank
to every one of her servants, and fked their forgiveness, if
ever ihe had failed in any part of her duty towards them.
At her wonted time /he went to bed, and slept calmly a few
hours. Early in the morning file retired into her closet, and
employed a considerable time in devotion. At eight o'clock,
the high sheriss and his officers entered her chamber, and found
her fill kneeling at the altar. She immediately flarted up,
and with a majestic mien, and a countenance undifinayed, and
even chearful, advanced towards the place of execution, lean-
ing on two of Paulet's attendants. She was dressed in a mourn-
ing habit, but with an elegance and splendor, which file had
long laid aside, except on a few feflival days. An Agnus Dei
hung by a pomander chain at her neck; her beads at her 'gir-
dle; and in her hand fle carried a crucifix of ivory. At the
bottom of the fairs the two earls, attended by several gentle-
men from the neighbouring counties, received her; and there
Sir Andrew Melvil, the mafler of her houfhold, who had been
secluded, for some weeks, from her presence, was permitted'to
take his las farewell. At the fight of a milfrefs whom he ten-
derly loved, in such a situation, he melted into tears; and as
he was bewailing her condition, and complaining of his own
hard fate in being appointed to carry the account of such a
mournful event into Scotland, Mary replied, " Weep not,
good Melvil, there is at present greater cause for rejoicing.
Thou shalt this day fee Mary Stuart delivered from all her cares,
and such an end put to her tedious sufferings, as flhe has long
expected. Bear witness that I die conflant in my religion ; firm
in my fidelity towards Scotland; and unchanged in my affection
to France. Commend me to my son. Tell him I have done
nothing injurious to his kingdom, to his honour, or to his
rights; and God forgive all those who have thirsted, without
cause, for my blood."

WITr much difficulty, and after many intreaties, he pre-
vailed on the two earls to allow Melvil, together with three of

her

her men servants, and two of her maids, to attend her to theBoOKVIL.
scaffold. It was erected in the fame hall where he had been v=
tried, raised a little above the floor, and covered, as well as a '8
chair, the cuhion, and block, with black cloth. Mary mount-
ed the steps with alacrity, beheld all this apparatus of death
with an unaltered countenance, and signing herself with the
cross, he fat down in the chair. Beale read the warrant for
execution with a loud voice, to which she litfened with a care-
lefa air, and like one occupied in other thoughts. Then the
dean of Peterborough began a devout discourse, suitable to her
present condition, and offered up prayers to heaven in her be-
half; but flie declared that she could not in conscience hearken
to the one, nor join with the other; and falling on her knees
repeated a Latin prayer. When the dean had finished his de-
votions, he with an audible voice, and in the English tongue,
recommended unto God the afflited slate of the church, and
prayed for prosperity to her son, and for a long life, and peace-
able reign to Elizabeth. She declared that flie hoped for mercy
only through the death of Christ, at the foot of whose image
she now willingly ihed her blood; and lifting up, and kifling
the crucifix, fie thus addrefled, " As thy arms, O Jesus, were
extended on the cross; so with the outfiretched arms of thy
mercy, receive me, and forgive my fins."

SHE then prepared for the block, by taking off her veil,

and upper garments; and one of the executioners rudely en-
deavouring to assist, {he gently checked him, and aid, with a
smile, that he had not been accufomed to undress before so
many fpeaators, nor to be served by such valets. With calm
but undaunted fortitude, he laid her neck on the block; and
while one executioner held her hands, the other at the second
stroke, cut off her head, which falling out of its attire, disco-
vered her hair already grown quite gray, with cares and for-
rows. The executioner held it up ill fireaming with blood
and the dean crying out, " So perifli all queen Elizabeth's ene-
mies," the earl of Kent alone answered Amen. The reft of
the fpedators continued silent, and drowned in tears; being
incapable, at that moment, of any other sentiments, but those
of pity, or admiration *.

SucH was the tragical death of Mary queen of Scots, after Sentiments

a life of forty-four years and two months, almost nineteen of hinorin"c
years of which Dhe pafled in captivity. The political paries concernitD
which were formed in the kingdom, during her reign, have
subsisted, under various denominations, ever since that time.
The rancour, with which they were at first animated, hath
descended to succeeding ages, and their prejudices, aa well as

D 2 their
Cam534. Spotfv. 355. Jebb, z 300. Sype, 3. 383.

BooKVII. their rage, have been perpetuated, and even augmented. A-
-v"on mong historians, who were under the dominion of all these

587' pafiions, and who have either ascribed o her every virtuous

and amiable quality, or have imputed to her all the vices, of
which the human heart is fulceptible, we search in vain for
Mary's real character. She neither merited the exaggerated
praises of the one, nor the undiflinguifiing censure of the
other.

Iercha- To all the charms of beauty, and the utmost elegance of
raster. external form, she added those accompliflments, which render

their impreffin irresistible. Polite, affable, insinuating,
sprightly, and capable of speaking and of writing with equal
ease and dignity. Sudden, however, and violent in all her
attachments; because her heart was warm and unfufpicious.
Impatient of contradiction; because ihe had been accustomed
from her infancy to be treated as a queen. No stranger, on
some occasions, to diflimulation which in that perfidious
court where he received her education, was reckoned anlong
the necessary arts of government. Not insensible of flattery,
or unconscious of that pleasure, with which alnofi every wo-
man beholds the influence of her own beauty. Formed with
the qualities which we love, not with the talents that we ad-
mire; he was an agreeable woman rather than an illultrious
queen. The vivacity of her spirit, not sufficiently tempered
with found judgment, and the warmth of her heart, which
was not, at all times, under the refiraint of discretion, be-
trayed her both into errors, and into crimes. To fay that he
was always unfortunate, will not account for that long and al-
moil uninterrupted fucceflion of calamities which befell her;
we mufl likewise add that she was often imprudent. Her pas-
sion for Darnly was rash, youthful, and excelfive. And though
the sudden transition to the oppofire extreme was the natural
effec of her ill-requited love, and of his ingratitude, insolence
and brutality ; yet neither these, nor Bothwell's artful address,
and important services, can justify her attachment to that no-
bleman. Even the manners of the age, licentious as they
were, are no apology for this unhappy paflion ; nor can they
induce us to look on that tragical and infamous scene which
followed upon it, with less abhorrence. Humanity will draw
a veil over this part of her character which it cannot approve,
and may, perhaps, prompt some to impute her ations to her
situation, more than to her dispositions ; and to lament the un-
happiness of the former, rather than accuse the perverseness
of the latter. Mary's sufferings exceed, both in degree and in
duration, those tragical distresses, which fancy has feigned to
excite sorrow and commiseration ; and while we survey them,
we are apt altogether to forget her frailties; we think of her

faults

faults with less indignation, and approve of our tears, as ifBooKVII.
they were Ihed for a person who had attained much nearer to '-v-
pure virtue. 1587.

W TH regard to the queen's person, a circumtance not to

be omitted in writing the history of a female reign, all cotem-
porary authors agree in acribing to Mary, the utmost beauty
of countenance, and elegance of shape, of which the human
form is capable. Her hair was black, though, according to
to the faflion of that age, flie frequently wore borrowed locks,
and of different colours. Her eyes were a dark grey; her com-
plexion was exquisitely fine; and her hands and arms re-
markably delicate, both as to shape and colour. Her stature
was of an height that rose to the majestic. She danced, flhe
walked, and rode with equal grace. Her taste for music was
jut}, and he both sung and played upon the lute, with un-
common kill. Towards the end of her life, she began to grow
fat; and her long confinement and the coldness of the houses
in which she had been imprisoned, brought on a rheumatism,
which deprived her of the use of her limbs. No man, fays
Brantome, ever beheld her person without admiration and love,
or will read her history without sorrow.

No N E of her women were suffered to come near her dead

body, which was carried into a room adjoining the place of
execution, where it lay, for ome days, covered with a coarse
cloth torn from a billiard-table. The block, the scaffold, the
aprons of the executioners, and every thing stained with her
blood, were reduced to aflies. Not long after Elizabeth ap-
pointed her body to be buried in the Cathedral of Peterborough,
with royal magnificence. But this vulgar artifice was employ-
ed in vain; the pageantry of a pompous funeral did not efface
the memory, of those injuries, which laid Mary in her grave.
James, soon after his acceflion to the English throne, ordered
her body to be removed to Wefminfter-abbey, and to be de-
posited among the Monarchs of England.

EL I Z A E H affe&ced to receive the accounts of Mary's Elizabeth

death, with the most violent emotions of furprize, and of con- afreas ta
cern. Sighs, tears, lamentation and mourning, were all em-lanent
ployed to display the reality and greatness of her sorrow. Evi- M::Try
dent marks of diflimulation and artifice may be traced through
every period of Elizabeth's proceedings against the life of the
Scottish queen. The commission for bringing Mary to a public
trial was seemingly extorted from her, by the intreaties of her
privy counsellors. She delayed publiflhing the sentence against
her, till fle was twice solicited by both houses of parliament.
Nor did fie sign the warrant for execution without the utmost
apparent reluctance. One scene more of the boldet and molt
solemn deceit remained to be exhibited. She undertook to make
the world believe that Mary had been put t death without her

know

BOoKVII. knowledge, and against her will. And Davison, who neither

-v.-> fufpefted her intention, nor his own danger, was her in-
s587. ftrument in carrying on this artifice, and fell a victim to it.

IT was his duty as secretary of slate to lay before her the

warrant for execution, in order to be signed; and by her com-
mand, he carried it to the great feal. She pretended, how-
ever, that she had charged him not to communicate what flue
had done to any person, nor siser the warrant to go out of
his hands, without her express permiflion that, in contempt
of this order, he had not only revealed the matter to several of
her ninifters, but had, in concert with them, assembled her
privy counsellors, by whom, without her consent or knowledge,
the warrant was issued, and the earls of Shrewsbury and Kent
impowered to put it in execution. Though Davison denied all
this, and with circumstances which bear the strongest marks
of truth and credibility; though it can scarce be conceived
that her privy council, composed of the persons, in whom he
most confided, of her ministers and favourites, would aflemble
within the walls of her palace, and venture to tranfa a
matter of so much importance without her privity, and con-
trary to her inclination; yet so far did fie carry her diflimula-
tion, that, with all the signs of displeasure and of rage, he
banilhed most of her counsellors out of her presence; and
treated Burleigh, in particular, so harflly, and with such
marks of disgust, that he gave up hinmfclf for loft, and in the
deepest affliction wrote to the queen begging leave to resign all
his places, that he might retire to his own estate. Davison

ife instantly deprived of his office, and committed him a close

prisoner to the Tower. He was oon after brought to a olemn
aI rch trial in the fIar chamber; condemned to pay a fine of o,ooo

pounds, and to be imprisoned during the queen's pleasure. He
languished, several years, in confinement, and never recovered
any degree of favour or of power. As her jcaloufy and fear
had bereaved the queen of Scots of life, in order to palliate
this part of her conduct, Elizabeth made no cruple of facrific-
ing the reputation and happiness of one of the nmof virtuous
and able men in her kingdom .

Elizabeth TH s olemn farce, for it deserves no better name, fur-
endeavohurs pied Elizabeth, however, with an apology to the king of
to ooth
James. Scots. As the profpeat of his mother's danger had excited the

king's filial care and concern, the account of her death filled hilm
with grief and resentment. His fubjeas felt the diflonour
done to him, and to the ntion. In order to ooth both,
Elizabeth inltantly dispatched Robert Carey, one of lord
Hunfdane' ons, with a letter cxprefling her extreme affliction
on account of that miserable accident, which, as fle pre-
telded, had happened far contrary to her appointment, or in-

tention.
Clmd. 536. Strype, 3. 3c.

tention. James would not permit her meflenger to enter Scot- BooKVII.
land; and with ome difficulty, received a memorial he sent -.
fronm Berwick. It contained the tale concerning Davison, dref- '587
fed up with all the circumstances, which tended to exculpate
Elizabeth, and to throw the whole blame on his raflinefs or
treachery. Such a defence gave little satisfaction, and was
confidered as mockery added to insult; and many of the nobles,
as well as the king, breathed nothing but revenge. Elizabeth
was extremely solicitous to pacify them, and neither
wanted instruments, nor reasons to gain her end. Leicester
wrote to the king, and Walsingham to ecretary Maitland.
They represented the certain destruCtion, to which James would
expose hinmfelf, if, with the forces of Scotland alone, he should
venture to attack a kingdom, o far superior in power; that
the history of paR ages, as well as his Mother's fad experience,
might convince him that nothing could be more dangerous,
or deceitful, than dependance on foreign aid; that the
king of France would never wifli to fee the Britilh king-
doms united under one monarch, nor contribute to invest a
prince so nearly allied to the house of Guise, with such for-
midable power; that Philip might be a more active ally, but
would certainly prove a more dangerous one, and under pre-
tence of assisting him, would aflert his own right to the En-
gliih Crown, which he already began openly to claim; that
the fame statute, on which the sentence of death against his
mother had been founded, would justify the excluding him from
the fucceflion to the crown; that the English, naturally averse
from the dominion of strangers, would not fail, if exafpe-
rated by his hostilities, to apply it in that matter; that Eliza-
beth was disposed to repair the wrongs which the mother had
suffered, by her tenderness and affection towards the son ; and
that by engaging in a fruitless war, he would deprive himself
of a noble inheritance, which, by cultivating her friendihip,
he mult infallibly obtain. These representations, added to the
consciousness of his own weakness, to the smallness of his re-
venues, to the mutinous spirit of some of the nobles, to the
dubious fidelity of others, and to the influence of that faction,
which was entirely at Elizabeth's devotion, convinced James
that a war with England, however just, would in the present
juncture be altogether impolitical. All these considerations in-
duced him to ftifie his resentment; to appear satisfied with the
puniflment inflicted on Davison; and to preserve all the fem-
olances of friendship with the English court . In this man-
ner did the cloud which threatened such a florm pass away.
Mary's death, like that of a common criminal, remained
unavenged by any prince; and whatever infamy Elizabeth
mnight incur, flie was exposed to no new danger on that ac-
count.

MA LRY'3
* Spotfw. strype, 3. 377.

BooKVII. MARY'S death, however, proved fatal to the maler of

C^T5 ' Gray, and los him the king's favour which he had for ome

Dirra' co time posses'ed. He was become as odious to the nation, as
the master favourites, who acquire power without merit, and exercise it
of Gray. without discretion, ufiually are. The treacherous part, which

he had acted during his late embassy, was no secret, and filled
James, who at length came to the knowledge of it, with
aftonifh.ient. The courtiers observed the symptoms of dii-
gus: arising in the king's mind, his enemies seized the oppor-
tunity, and fir William Steward, in revenge of the perfidy
with which Gray had betrayed his brother captain James,
May to. publickly accused him before a convention of nobles, not only

of having contributed, by his advice and suggestion, to take
away thelife of the queen, but of holding correspondence with
popish princes, in order to subvert the religion established in
the kingdom. Gray, unfuppo, ted by the king, deserted by all,
and conscious of his own guilt, made a feeble defence. He
was condemned to perpetual baniflinsent, a punishment, very
unequal to his crimes. But the king was unwilling to abandon
one, whom he had once favoured lb highly, to the rigour of
justice; and lord Hamilton his near relation; and the other
nobles who had lately returned from exile, in gratitude for the
zeal with which he had served them, interceded warmly in his
behalf.

HA Vi N G thus accomplished the destruction of one of his

enemies, captain James thought the juncure favourable for
prosecuting his revenge on..then all. He singled out secretary
Maitland, the most eminent both for abilities and enmity to
him ; and offered to prove that he was no less accessary than
Gray to the queen's death, and had even formed a design of
delivering up the king himself into the hands of the English.
But time and absence had, in a great measure, extinguished the
king's affetion for a minion, who so little deserved it. All
the courtiers combined against him as a conmlnon enemy. And
inftcad of gaining his point, he had the mortification to fee the
office of chancellor conferred upon Maitland, who, together
with that dignity, enjoyed all the power and influence of a
prime minister.

IN the affcmbly of the church, which met this year, the

fame hatred to the order of biffops, anti the fame jealousy
and fear of their encroachments, appeared. But as the king
was now of full age, and a parliament was ftiiiiioned on that
occasion, the clcrgy remained fati;fied with appointing once of
their number to represent their grievances to that court, from
which great things were expe ced.

The king P R E v o u s to this meeting of parliament, James attempted
ttempts to work worthy of a king. The deadlyv studs which fubfiilel
unite the
nobltes. bctweenl many of the great tamil:e, and '.?hich were tranfinit-

ted

ted from one generation to another, weakened the strength of BooK VII.
the kingdom ; contributed, more than any other circumstance, --'
to preserve a fierce and barbarous spirit among the nobles; and 587 .
proved the occafio- ofmany disasters to themselves, and to
their country. After many preparatory negotiations, he in-
vited the contending parties to a royal entertainment in the
palace of Holy-rood house; and partly by his authority, partly
by his intreaties, obtained their promise to bury their dissentions
in perpetual oblivion. From thence he conducted them, in
folen proceflion, through the ifreets of Edinburgh, march-
ing by pairs, each hand in hand with his enemy. A collation
of wine and sweet-meats was prepared at the public cross,
and there they drank to each other, with all the signs of re-
ciprocal forgiveness, and of future friendfluip. The people,
who were present at a fpetacle so unusual, conceived the
niot sanguine hopes of feeing concord and tranquillity efta-
blilhed in every part of the kingdom, and testified their satis-
fa&ion by repeated acclamations. Unhappily the effes of
this reconciliation were not correspondent either to the pious
endeavours of the king, or the fond wishes of the people.

THE first care of the parliament was the security of the

protestant religion. All the laws passed in its favour, since the
reformation, were ratified; and a new and severe one was
enacted against seminary priests and jesuits, whose restless in-
duftry in making proselytes brought many of them into Scot-
land about this time. Two as of this parliament deserve
more particular notice, on account of the consequences with
which they were followed.

T H E one refpeted the lands of the church. As the public General

revenues were not sufficient for defraying the king's ordinary annexation
charges; as the administration of government became more of church

and

complicated and more expcnfive; as James was naturallyla
profuse, and a itranger to aeconoiny; it was neccffary, on all
thele accounts, to provide omne fund proportioned to his exi-
gencics. But no conliderahle funi could be levied on the com-
mons, who did not enjoy the benefit of an extensive com-
nlerce. The nobles were unaccustomed to bear the burden of
heavy taxes. And the revenues of the church were the only
source whence a proper supply could be drawn. Notwithltand-
ing all the depredations of the laity since the reformation, and
the various devices which they had employed to seize the
church-lands, some considerable portion of them remained still
unalienated, and were held either by the bishops who posiesed
the benefices, or were granted to laymen during plcafurc. All
these lands were, in this parliament, annexed, by one gene-
ral law *, to the crown, and the king was iinpowered to ap-
ply the rents of them to his own use. The tithes alone were

reservcd
Parl. ia. Jac. VI. c. 29,

BoocVII. reserved for the maintenance of the persons who erved the
.-.-.. cure, and the principal manfion-houfe, with a few acres of

S587. land, by way of glebe, allotted for his residence. By this

great accefiion of property, it is natural to conclude, that the
king must have acquired a vast increase of power, and the
influence of the nobles have fufered a proportional diminution.
The very reverfli of this (eems, however, to have been the
cafe. Amolt all grants of church-lands, prior to this at,
were thereby confirmed; and titles, which were fonrerly
reckoned precarious, derived from thence the fanaion of par-
liamentary authority. James was li;kewise authorized, during
a limited time, to make new alienations; and such was the
facility of his temper, ever ready to yield to the solicitations of
his servants, and to gratify their nioft extravagant demands,
that not only during the time limited, but throughout his
w!:ole reign, he was continually employed in bestowing, and
his parliament in ratifying grants of this kind to his nobles;
hence little advantage accrued to the crown from that which
might have been so valuable an addition to its revenues. The
ifihops, however, were great sufferers by the law. But at
this junture neither the king nor his ministers were solicitous
about the interests of an order of men, odious to the people,
and persecuted by the clergy. Their enemies promoted the
law with the utmoit zeal. The profpet of haring in their
spoils induced all parties to consent to it; and after a ttep so
fatal to the wealth and power of the dignified clergy, it was
no difficult ilatter to introduce that change in the government
of the church which oon after took place *.

Ltrer ba- TH E change, which the other lsatute produced in the civil
aon, admit- constitution, was no less remarkable. Under the feudal fyllem,
t<d intopar- every freeholder, or vassal of the crown, had a right to be pre-
~lient by

,,- e.' sent in parliament. These Freeholders were, originally, few
^.ienla- in number, but pofleffed of great and extensive property. By
C.ve,. degrees, there valt pofielions were divided by the proprietors

thenmfelves, or parcelled out by the prince, or split by other
accidents. The number of freeholders became greater, and
their condition more unequal; betides the ancient barons,
who preservcd their estates and their power unimpaired, there
arose another order, whose rights were the fame, though their
wealth and influence were tar inferior. But, in those rude
ages, when the art of government was extremely iperfect,
when parliaments were feldoin aflcmbled, and deliberated on
matters little interesting to a martial people, few of the Le/?ir
Pirons took their feats, and the whole parliamentary jurifdic-
tion was excrcilcd by the Greatr Barols, together with the
cclcfinlical order. James 1. filln of imitating the forms of
the iEnglili conlitution, to which he had been long ac-

cuftome d,
Spof.'o:,l, 365.

customed, and desirous of providing a counterpoise to the power BooKVII.
of the great nobles, procured an a in the year 1427, dif- *'
pensing with the personal attendance of the lesser barons, and '587*
impowering those in each country, to choose two commiflioners
to represent thein in parliament. This law, like many other
regulations of that wife prince, produced little effec. All the
king's vaflals continued, as formerly, possesed of a right to be
pre ent in parliament, and, unless in ome extraordinary con-
junaures, none but the greater barons attended. But by means
of the reformation, the confitution had undergone a great
change. The ariftocratical power of the nobles had been
much increased, and the influence of the ecclesiastical order,
which the crown usually employed to check their usurpations,
and to balance their authority, had diminished in proportion.
Many of the Abbies and Priories had been erected into temporal
peerages; and the protestant biffops, and indigent race of
men, and odious to the nation, were far from pofleffing the
weight and credit, which their predecessors derived from the
exorbitant wealth, and the,fuperftitious reverence of the peo-
ple. In this situation, the king had recourse to the expedient
employed by James I. and obtained a law reviving the statute
of 14z7; and from that time the commons of Scotland have
sent their representatives to parliament. An ac, which tended
so visibly to abridge their authority, did not pass without op-
position from many of the nobles. But as the king had a right
to summon the lefier barons to attend in person, others were
apprehensive of feeing the house filled with a multitude of his
dependants, and consented the more willingly to a law, which
laid them under the restriction of appearing only by their re-
presentatives.

TH E year 1588 began with an universal expectation through- i $8.

out all Europe, that it was to be diftinguiflied by wonderful The ap-
events and revolutions. Several astrologers, according to the proach of

thcSpanilb

accounts of cotemporary historians, had prediced this; and Armada.i
the situation of affairs in the two principal kingdoms of Europe
was such, that a sagacious observer, without any supernatural
intelligence, might have hazarded the prediction, and have
foreseen the approach of ome grand crisis. In France, it was
evident from the atonifling progress of the league, conduc-
ted by a leader whose ambition was reltlainled by no scruples,
and whole genius had hitherto surmounted all difficulties; as
well as from the timid, variable, and impolitic councils of
Henry III. that either that monarch mull fitbinit to abandon
the throne, of which he was unworthy; or by onle sudden
and daring blow, cut off his formidable rival. Accordingly,
in the beginning of the year, the duke of Guise drove his
nmater out of his capital city, and forced him to conclude a
peace, which left hiln only the ilhadow of royalty; and be-

fore

BoobVIIr.fore the year expired, he himself fell a victim to Henry's

Jv-' fears, and to his own lfcurily. In Spain, the operations were
i;e8 such as promilifd something still more uncommnon. During

tlhl-e vears, Phiiip had emplved ail the power of his European
doi!iions, and cxhaufled the treasures of the Indies, in vast
preparations fr -ar. A fleet, the greatest that had ever ap-
perald in thle ocean, was ready to fail from Lilhon, and a nu-
merous land army was affiebled to enmbark on board of it. Its
detrination was still unknown, though many circumstances
inade it probable that the blow was ailned, in the first place,
against England. Elizabeth had long given secret aid to the
revolted provirces in the low-countries, and now openly afforded
them her poteCion. A numerous body of her troops as in
their service ; the earl of Lciceftcr comnmaided their armies;
fle had great sway in tle civil government of the republic; and
ftine of its mo conficierable towns were in her poflcfion. Her
fleets had insulted the coasts of Spain, intercepted the Galleons
from the Weft Indies, and threatened the colonies there.
Roused by so nany injuries, allured by views of ambition, and
animated by a fuperfitious zeal for propagating the Romifli
religion, Philip resolved not only to invade, but to conquer
England, to which his dcecent from the house of Lancaster,
and the donation of Pope Sixtus V. gave him, in his own opi-
nion, a double tile.

Con,:u of ELI Z A B H saw the danger approach, and prepared to
Ja.c, .-n encounter it with the uoff: intrcpidity. The mealilres for

ii.- the dfeCce of her kingdom were concerted, and carried on,
L"t.* with tl-. wisdom, and vigour, which dilfinguilhed her reign.

Her clief care was to ecure the fiiendfhip of the king of
Scots. She had treated the queen his mother with a rigour uri-
klnown an:ong Frirces ; he had often used himself harlhly, and
with conteliFt ; and though he had hitherto prudently sup-
prcid his reltfiliet of there injuries, lhe did not believe it to
be altogether extinguiflid, and was afraid that in her present
situation, it might bullt out with a fatal violence. Philip, fen-
fille how much an alliance with Scotland would facilitate his
enterprize, courted James with the utmost assiduity. He ex-
cited lin to revenge his mother's wrongs; he flattered him with
the hopes of iliaring his conqueis and offered him in mar-
ringc hi:; daughter the infant Inlabella. At the fame time,
Scotiand fwarined with priests his nciiiiarics, who educed soei
of tle obles to popeiv, and corrupted others with bribes and
proiill;s. Hunitiy, Eirol, Cawford, were the heads of a
th:clcion, which cpcnly cfipnulo d the interest of Spain. Lord
Mlxwell, arriving fioni tliat court, began to afiemble his fol-
I1.vc,-r, and t i;:ke arms, tlhat e might be ready to join the
:,pailanr'. In order to counter-balance all there, Elizabeth
uiude tl c warn'.flt prolellions of fricndfliip to the king; and

Afn by,

AfIlby, her ambaflador, entertained him with magnificent hopes BooKVII.
andpromiles. He allured him that his right of ficcellion to
the crown fliould be publickly acknowledged in England ; that 'I58-
he should be created a duke in that kingdom ; that lie hiould be
admitted to lonie fare in the government; and receive a confide-
rable pension annually. James, it is probable, was too well ac-
quainted with Elizabeth's arts, to rely entirely on thei pronies.
But he understood his own interest i the prefcnt juncture, and
pursued it with much Itcadinefs. He rejected an alliance with
Spain, as dangerous. HIe re;uilcJ to admit into his presence an
ainbaflhdor fromi the pope. I ic lzed colonel Seruple, an agent
of the prince of Prman. He drve inany of the trafficking
priests out of the kingdom. HI- marched luddenly t Duni-
fiies, disperscd Maxwell's followers, and took hin prisoner. In
a convention of tie nobles lie declared his resolution to adhere
inviolably to the league with England; and, without listening
to the suggestions of revenge, determined to at in concert with
Elizabeth, againf' the common enemy of the protellant faith.
He put the kingdom in a pollure of defence, and levied troops
to obltruct the landing of the Spaniards. He offered to ferd an
army to Elizabeth's afliftance, and told her ambassador that he
expected no other favour from the king of Spain, but that
which Polyphemus had promised to Ulysses, that when he had
devoured all his companions, he would make him his lai mor-
fel .

THE zeal of the people, on this occasion, was not inferior

to that of the king ; and the extraordinary danger, with which A national
they were threatened, suggested to then; an extraordinary ex- c venant
pedient for their fccurity. A bond was framed for the mainte- i" derence

c - ~ i , r oi religina,

nance of true religion, and the defence of the king's person and
government, in opposition to all enemies foreign and domefiic.
This contained a confeflion of the protestant faith, a particular
renunciation of the errors of popery, and the most solemn pro-
mises, in the name, and through the strength of God, of ad-
hering to each other in supporting the former, and contending
against the latter, to the utnioft of their power -. The king,
the nobles, the clergy, and the people ffcribel it with equal
alacrity. Strange or uncommon as such a conmhination niny
now appear, many circumstances contributed, at that timen, t.)
recommend it, and to render the idea faniliar to the Scot;.
When rouzed by any extraordinary event, or alarmed by any pub:-
lic danger, the people of Ifiael were accufinined to bind threm-
selves, by a solemn covenant, to adhere to that religion, wihich
the Almighty had eftablifled among them ; this the Scots con-
fidercd as a facred'precedent, which it became theni to imni-

tate.

* Camd. 44. Johnft. 139. Spotfw, 369.
t Dunlol,'S Coll t. of Concil'. Vol. , iog.

]BoorVII. tate. In that age, no considerable enterprize was undertaken

V- in Scotland, without a bond of mutual defence, whici all
i58. concerned reckoned necessary for their security. The form of

this religious confederacy is plainly borrowed from those politi-
cal ones, of which o many instances have occurred; the ar-
ticles, flipulations, and peculiar modes of exprellion, are ex-
actly the fame in both. Almost all the considerable popish prin-
ces were then joined in a league for extirpating the reformed re-
ligion, and nothing could be more natural, or seemed more es-
ficacious, than to enter into a counter-affociation, in order to
oppose the progress of that formidable conspiracy. To there
causes, did the Covenant, which is become so famous in his-
tory, owe its origin. It was renewed at different times during
the reign of James *. It was revived with great solemnity,
though with considerable alterations, in the year 1638. It
was adopted by the Engliih, in the year 1643, and enforced by
the civil and ecclesiastical authority of both kingdoms. The
political purposes to which it was then made subservient, and
the violent and unconstitutional easures which it was then
employed to promote, it is not our province to explain. But at
the juncture, in which it was first introduced, we may pro-
nounce it to have been a prudent and laudable device for the
defence of the religion and liberties of the nation; nor were
the terms in which it was conceived, other than might have
been expeaed from men alarmed with the impending danger of
popery, and threatened with an invasion by the molt bigoted,
and most powerful prince in Europe.

PH I L I P'S eagerness to conquer England did not inspire him

either with the vigour or dispatch necessary to ensure the fuc-
cess of so mighty an enterprize. His fleet which ought to
have failed in April, did not enter the English channel till the
middle of July. It hovered many days on the coast, in expec-
tation of being joined by the prince of Parma, who was blocked
up in the ports of Slanders by a Dutch squadron. Continual

iadi de- dififters pursued the Spaniards during that time; fuccefive
fecaed. storms and battles, which are all well known, conspired with

their own ill condua, to disappoint their enterprize. And by
the blefling of Providence, which watched with remarkable
care over the protestant religion, and the liberties of Britain,
the Englifli valour scattered and destroyed the Armada on which
they had arrogantly betlowed the nanme of Invincible. As-
ter being driven out of the Englis seas, they were forced to
steer their course towards Spain, round Scotland and Ireland.
Many of them suffered flSipwreck on there dangerous and un-
known coasts. Though James kept his subjects under arms to
watch the motions of the Spaniards, and to prevent their land-
ing in an hotile inanner, he received with grclt humanity 700

v.ho
* Cal, 4, 9zg.

-O:X SCOT L A N D. 47

who wee forced. aflhore by a tempest, and after supplying them BooKVIL
with .eceflaies, permitted them to return into their own
country. 58-.

ON the retreat of the Spaniards, Elizabeth sent an ambaf-

fador to congratulate with James, and to compliment him on
the firmness and generosity, he had discovered during a con-
juncture so dangerous. But none of Afliby's promises were
any longer remembered; that mlinifler was even ccufed of
having exceeded his powers, by thefc too liberal offers ; and
conscious of his own flfcehood, or aflamned of being disowned
by his court, he withdrew secretly out of Scotland *.

PHI I. IP, convinced by fatal experience of his own rafl- '1S9
nes in attempting the conquest of England, by a naval arma- Phllp'I;n-

trigues ia

ment, equipped at so great a distance, and fubjeEted in all its Scotlad
operation, to the delays, and dangers, and uncertainties, ari-
sing firom seas and winds, resolved to make his attack in another
form, and to adopt the plan which the princes of Lorrain
had long meditated, of invading England through Scotland. A
body of his troops, be imagined, might be easily wafted
over from the low countries to that kingdom, and if they could
once obtain footing, or procure afliflancc there, the frontier of
England was open and dcfencelefs, and the northern counties
fullof Roman Catholics, who would receive them with open
arms. Mean while, adefcent might be threatened on the fou-
ther coast, which would divide the Englifl army, diitract their
councils, and throw the whole kingdom into terrible convulsions.
In order to prepare the way for the execution of this design,
he remitted a considerable fum of money to Bruce, a seminary
priest in Scotland, and employed him, together with Hay,
Creighton, and Tyrie, Scottish jesuits, to gain over as many
persons of distinction as poflible to his interest. Zeal for popery, Popfli no-
and the artful insinuations of these enlifraries, induced several of'le cI1-
the nobles to favour a measure, which tended so nianifcftly to1"'' i: l
the destruction of their country. Huntly, though the king
hadlately married him to the daughter of his favourite, the
duke of Lenox, continued warmly attached to the Romnifnl
church. Crawford and Errol were animated with the zeal of
new converts. They all engaged in a correspondence with the
prince of Parma, and in their letters to him, oferlcd their
service to the king of Spain, and undertook with the aid of 6ooo
men, to render him niafter of Scotland, and to bring Lfb nr.ny
of their vasals into the field, that he flould be able to enter
England, with a numerous army. Francis Stewart, grandifn
of James V. whomi the king had created earl of othwell,
though influenced by no motive of religion, for lie still adhered
to the protestant faith, was prompted merely by caprice, and
the reftlefilefs of his nature, to join this trealbnable correl-
pondence.

ALL
* Johnt. 13.1, Cmnd. 548.

BOOKVII. ALL these letters were intercepted in England. Elizabeth,

c-^r ~ alarmed at the danger which threatened her own kingdom, ent
r'88. them immnediately to the king, and reproaching him with his

Fib. 17. former lenity toward the popilh party, called upon him to check
T!he king's this formidable conspiracy, by a proper severity. But James,
n'..xims though firmly attached to the protestant religion, though pro-

;th egard soundly versed in the theological controversies between the re-
pope.y. formers and the church of Rome, though he had employed

himself, at that early pericd of life, in writing a commentary
on the revelations, in which he proved the pope to be Anti-
chris, had nevertheless adopted, already, those maxims con-
cerning the treatment of the Roman Catholics, to which he
adhered through the reft of his life. The Roman Catholics
were at that time a powerful and ative party in England
they were far from being an inconsiderable faction in his own
kingdom. The pope and king of Spain were ready to take
part in all their machinations, and to fccond every effort of their
bigotry. The opposition of such a body to his succession to the
crown of England, added to the averseness of the Englifl
from the government of ifrangers, might create him many dif-
ficulties. In order to avoid these, he thought it necessary to
fboth, rather than to irritate the Roman Catholics, and to re-
concile them to his succession, by the hopes ofgentler treatment,
and some mitigation of the rigour of those laws, which were
now in force against them. This attempt to gain one party by
promises of indulgence and as of clemency, while he adhered
with all the obstinacy of a disputant, to the dotrines and te-
nets of the other, has given an air of mystery, and even of
contradicion, to this part of the king's character. The pa-
pifts, with the credulity of a fee struggling to obtain power,
beheved his heart to be wholly theirs ; and the protestants, with
the jealousy inseparable from those who are already in possession,
viewed every aft of lenity, as a mark of indifference, or a fymp-
tom of apoftacy. And in order to please both, Jaimes often
aimed at an exceflive refinement, mingled with diflhnulation,
in which he imagined the perfecion of government, and of
king-crafr, to consist.

I-Tis excel- Hi s behaviour on this occasion was agreeable to there ge-
fivelenity neral maxims. Notwithstanding the solicitations of the queen
to the con- of England, enforced by the zealous remontrances of his own
irators. clergy, a short imprisonment was the only puniflment he in-

flicted on Huntly and his associates. But he Coon had reason to
repent an at of clemency, o inconsistent with the dignity of
government. The first use which the conspirators made of
their liberly, was to assemble their followers, and under pre-
tence of removing chancellor Maitland, an able minister, but
warmly devoted to the Englifl interest, from the king's councils
and preence, they attempted to seize James himself. This

attempt

attempt being defeated, partly by Maitland's vigilance, and BooKVII.
partly by their own ill condut, they were forced to retire to the --^r
North, where they openly erected the Rtandard of rebellion. '89
But as the king's government was not generally unpopular, or
his ministers odious, their own vaflals joined them slowly, and
discovered no zeal in the cause. And the king, in person,
advancing against them with such forces as he could suddenly
levy, they durst not rely so much on the fidelity of their troops,
which though superior in number, followed them with reluc-
tance, as to hazard a battle; but suffering them to disperse,
they surrendered to the king, and threw themselves on his mer-
cy. Huntly, Errol, Crawford, and Bothwell were all brought April sc.
to a public trial. Repeated as of treason were easily proved
against them. The king, however, did not permit any fen-
tence to be pronounced; and after keeping them a few months
in confinement, he took occasion, amidst the public feltivity
and rejoicings, at the approach of his marriage, to set them at
liberty '.

As James was the only descendant of the ancient monarchs The king's

of Scotland, in the diret line; as all hopes of uniting the mi"Agne
crowns of the two kingdoms would have expired with him ; as of Den-
the earl of Arran, the presumptive heir to the throne, was mark.
lunatic; the king's marriage was, on all these accounts, an
event which the nation wiihed for with the utmost ardour.
He himself was no less desirous of accomplilhing it; and had
made overtures, for that purpose, to the eldest daughter of
Frederick II. king of Denmark. But Elizabeth, jealous of
every thing, that would render the accefion of the house of
Stewart more acceptable to the Englifl, endeavoured to per-
plex James, in the fame manner flie had done Mary, and em-
ployed as many artifices to defeat or to retard his marriage.
His ministers, gained by bribes and promises, seconded her in-
tentions; and though several different ambafladors were sent
from Scotland to Denmark, they produced powers so limited,
or insisted on conditions so extravagant, that Frederick could
not believe the king to be in earnest ; and suspecting that there
was some design to deceive, or amuse him, gave his daughter
in marriage to the duke of Brunswick. Not discouraged by
this disappointment, which he imputed entirely to the conduc
of his own ministers, James made addresses to the princess
Anne, Frederick's second daughter. And though Elizabeth
endeavoured to divert him from this, by recommending Cathe-
rine the king of Navarre's sifter, as a more advantageous
nmatch ; though The prevailed on the privy council of Scotland
to declare against the alliance with Denmark, he persisted in
his choice. And despairing of overcoming the obstinacy of
his own ministers, in any other manner, he ecrctly encouraged

V L. II. E the

* Spotlv . 373 Cald, 4. 03.

BooKVII. the citizens of Edinburgh to take arms. They threatened to
^-v--' tearin pieces the chancellor, whom they accused as the person,

5'89· whole artifices had hitherto disappointed the wishes of the king,

and the expectations of his people. In consequence of this,
the earl Marlhal was ent into Denmark, at the head of a
splendid embafly. He received ample powers and inftruCions,
drawn with the king's own hand. The marriage articles were
quickly agreed upon, and the young queen set fail towards
Scotland. James made great preparations for her reception,
and waited her landing with all the impatience of a lover;
when the unwelcome account arrived, that a violent tempeit
had arisen, which drove back her fleet to Norway, in a condi-
tion o (hattered, that there was little hope of its putting again
to ea before the spring. This unexpected difappointnient he
felt with the utmost sensibility. He instantly fitted out ome
lhips, and without communicating his intention to any of his
Oaob. 2z. council, failed in person, attended by the chancellor, several

noblemen, and a train of 300 persons, in quest of his bride.
He arrived safely in a finall harbour near Upflo, where the
Nov. 24. queen then resided. There the marriage was foleilnized. And

as it would have been rash to trust those boisterous eas, in the
winter season, James accepted the invitation of the court of
'Denmark, and repairing to Copenhagen, paied several months
there, amidst continual feasting, and amusements, in which,
both the queen and himself had great delight .

No event in the king's life appears to be a wider deviation

from his general character, than this sudden aflly. His on
Charles I. was capable of that exceflive admiration of the other
sex, which arises from great sensibility of heart, heightened by
elegance of taste ; and the romantic air of his journey to Spain
suited such a disposition. But James was not fufccptible of any
refined gallantry, and always expressed that contempt for the
female character, which a pedantic erudition, unacquainted
with politeness, is apt to inspire. He was fretted, however, at
the many obstacles which had been laid in his way. He was
anxious to secure the political advantages, which lie expected
from marriage, and fearing that a delay might afford Elizabeth,
and his own ministers, an opportunity of thwarting him by
new intrigues, he suddenly took the resolution of preventing
them, by a voyage from which he expeEted to return in a few
weeks. The nation eemed to applaud his conduct, and to be
pleased with this appearance of amorous ardour, in a young
prince. Notwithlanding his abence o long beyond the time
he expeted, the nobles, the clergy, and the people, vied with
one another in loyalty and obedience ; and no period in the
king's reign was more remarkable for tranquillity, or more free
from any eruption of thofc factions, which o often disturbed
the kingdom.

* Mclv. 352. Spotfw. 377.

# BOOK VIII.

THE
HISTORY

O F
SCOTLAND.

BOOK VIII.

N the firfl of May the king and queen arrived at Leith, B o K
and were received by their fubjeEts, with every poflible VIII.

exprefiion of joy. The solemnity of the queen's coronation -
was conducted with great magnificence; but so low had the '59°
order of bithops fallen, in the opinion of the public, that none The king

orr i falle i e o n public, an aod queen

of them were present on that occasion, and Mr. Robert Bruce, arrive in
a presbyterian minister of great reputation, set the crown on Scotland.
her head, adminiftred the sacred unction, and performed the
other customary ceremonies.

TH E zeal and success, with which many of the clergy had

contributed towards preserving peace and order in the king-
dom, during his absence, reconciled James, in a great degree,
to their persons, and even to the presbyterian form of govern-
ment. In presence of an assembly, which met this year, he Augt 4;
made high encomiums on the discipline, as well as the doc-
trine of the church, promised to adhere inviolably to both,
and permitted the afflembly to frame such ats, as gradually
abolished all the remains of episcopal jurisdiction, and paved
the way for a full and legal eltablifllmcnt of the presbyterian
model .

AN event happened oon after, which afforded the clergy £59;,

no finall triumph. Archbilhop Adalnilb, their ancient enemy,
having fallen under the king's dirpleafilrc, having been de-
prived of the revenues of his fee in conlqtuence ot the at of
annexation, and being opprefled with age, with poverty, and
diseases, made the mcaneft fubmilion to the clergy, and de-
livered to the afembly a formal recanation, of all his opinions
concerning church government, which had been matter of
offence to the prcfbyterians. Such a cnnfeflion, from the
most learned person of the order, was considered as a tefti-

E 2 mony,
* Cald. 4. Z04.

B o o maony, which the force of truth had extorted from an ad-
VIII. verfary .

-v ME A N w H 1 L , the king's exceflive clemency towards of-

iS91' . fenders multiplied crimes of all kinds, and encouraged such

the king.s ats of violence, as brought his government under contempt,
dom. and proved fatal to many of his fubjecs. The hifory of fe-

veral years, about this time, is filled with accounts of the
deadly quarrels between the great families, and of murders
and affaflinations perpetrated in the mos audacious manner,
and with circunftances of the utmost barbarity. All the de-
feots in the feudal aristocracy were now felt more sensibly,
than at any other period in the history of Scotland, and uni-
versal license and anarchy prevailed to a degree, scarce con-
fiftent with the preservation of society. While the king, too
gentle to punish, or too feeble to aa with vigour, suffered all
these enormities to pass with impunity.

An attempt BUT though James connived at real crimes, witchcraft,
of Both- which is commonly an imaginary one, engrossed his attention,

ell's a- and those suspected of it, felt the whole weight of his authori-
gait the ty. Many persons neither extremely old, nor wretchedly poor,
im-' which were usually held to be certain indications of this crime,

but matters of families, and matrons of a decent rank, and in
the middle age of life, were seized and tortured; and though
their confeflions contained the most absurd and incredible cir-
cumftances, the king's prejudices, those of the clergy, and of
the people, conspired in believing their extravagancies without
hesitation, and in punishing their persons without mercy. Some
of these unhappy sufferers accused Bothwell of having consult-
ed them, in order to know the time of the king's death, and
having employed their art, to raise the storms, which had
endangered the queen's life, and had detained James o long
in Denmark. Upon this evidence, that nobleman was com-
mitted to prison. His turbulent and haughty pirit could nei-
ther submit to the restraint, nor brook such an indignity. Hav-
ing gained his keepers, he made his escape, and imputing the
accusation to the artifices of his enemy, the chancellor, as-
fembled his followers, under pretence of driving him from the
king's councils. Being favoured by ome of the king's at-
tendants, he was admitted, by a ecret passage, under cloud
of night, into the court of the palace of Holy-rood-houfe.
He advanced diretly towards the royal apartment, but hap-
Dec. 17. pily, before he entered, the alarm was taken and the doors

ifut. While he attempted to burfl open some of them, and to
set fire to others, the citizens of Edinburgh had time to run to
their arms, and he escaped with the utmost difficulty; owing
his safety to the darkness of the night, and the precipitacn-
wiit which he fled t.

HE
* Spotfv. 385. Cld. 4.1. t Melv. 388. Spotfw. 386.

HE retired towards the North, and the king having unad- B 0 0

vifedly given a commission to the earl of Huntly, to pursue VIII
him, and his followers, with fire and sword; he, under colour - '
of executing that commillion, gratified his private revenge, and '59a
Surrounded the house of the earl of Murray, burnt it to the
ground, and flew Murray himself. The murder of a young Feb. 8
nobleman of such promising virtues, and the heir of the re-
gent Murray, the darling of the people, excited universal in-
dignation. The citizens of Edinburgh rose in a tumultuous
manner; and though they were refrained, by the care of the
magistrates, from any act of violence, they threw aside all
respect for the king and his ministers, and openly insulted and
threatened both. While this mutinous spirit continued, James
thought it prudent to withdraw from the city, and fixed his
residence for ome time at Glasgow. There Huntly surrender-
ed himself to justice; and notwithstanding the atrociousness of
his crime, and the clamours of the people, the power of the
chancellor, with whom he was now clotely confederated, and
the king's regard for the memory of the duke of Lenox,
whose daughter he had married, not only protected him from
the sentence which such an odious ation merited, but exempt-
ed him even from the formality of a public trial *.

A s T E p of much importance was taken, oon after, with Pretyte.

regard'to the government of the church. The clergy had long "r gChureC
complained of the encroachments made upon their privileges and efablifhile
jurifdiaion, by the acts of the parliament 1584, and though by lw.
these laws had now loft much of their force, they resolved to
petition the parliament, which was approaching, to repeal them
in form. The juncture for puhfing such a measure was well
chosen. The king had loft much of the public favour, by his
lenity towards thepopilh faction, and still more by his re-
miftnes in pursuing the murderers of the earl of Murray.
The chancellor had not only a powerful party of the courtiers
combined against him, but was become odious to the people,
who imputed to him every faire fRep in the king's condut.
Bothwell still lurked in the kingdom, and being secretly sup-
ported by all the enemies of Maitland's administration, was
ready, every moment, to renew his audacious enterprizes.
James, for all these rcafons, was extremely willing to indulge
the clergy in their request, and not only consented to a law,
whereby the ats 584. were rescinded or explained, but he
carried his complaisance frill further, and permitted the par-
liament to eftablilh the presbyterian government, is general
afemblies, provincial synods, prelbyteries and kirk eflions, with
all the different branches, of their discipline and jurisdiction, in
the most ample manner. All the zeal and authority of the
clergy, even under the administration of regents, from whom

they
. SpofCw. 387.

B o o x they might have expe&ed the most partial favour, could not
VIII. obtain the fantion of law, in confirmation of their mode of
v" ecclefaftical government. No prince was ever les difpoftd
J59t than James to approve a yftem, whose republican genius in-

spired a pallion for liberty, so repugnant to his exalted notions
of royal prerogative. Nor could any aversion be more invete-
rate than his, to the austere and uncomplying character of the
presbyterian clergy in that age ; who, more eminent for zeal,
than for policy, often contradited his opinions, and cenfur-
ed his condu&, with a freedom equally offensive to his dog-
matifin as a Theologian, and to his pride as a king. His
situation however obliged him, frequently, to conceal, or to
dissemble his sentiments; and as he often disgusted his sub-
jects, by indulging the popish fation more than they approved,
he endeavoured to atone for this, by conceflions to the pref-
byterian clergy, more liberal than he himself would otherwise
have chosen to grant *

IN this parliament, Bothwell and all his adherents were at-

tainted. But he soon made a new attempt to seize the king at
Falkland; and James, betrayed by ome of his courtiers, and
feebly defended by others, who withed well to Bothwell, as
the chancellor's avowed enemy, owed his safety to the fidelity
and vigilance of fir pobert Melvil, and to the irresolution of
Bothwell's aflbciates .

A new SCA RC E L Y was this danger over, when the nation was
confp,- alarmed with the discovery of a new and more formidable con-
rcyf the fpiracy. George Kerr, the lord Newbottle's brother, being
Lords, eized as he was ready to set fail for Spain, many suspicious

papers were found in his custody, and among these, several
blanks signed by the earls of Angus, Huntly, and Errol. By
this extraordinary precaution, they hoped to escape any danger
of discovery. But err's resolution flirinking when torture
was threatened, he confeficd that he was employed by these
noblemen, to carry on a negotiation with the king of Spain;
that the blanks subscribed with their names were to be filled
up by Creighton and Tyrie; that they were inftruded to offer
the faithful service of the three earls to that monarch; and to
solicit him to land a body of his troops, either in Galloway,
or at the mouth of Clyde, with which, they undertook, in
the first place, to establish the Ron'an catholic religion in Scot-
land, and then to invade England, with the whole forces of
the kingdom. Sir David Graham of Fintry, and Barclay of
Ladyland, whom he accuscd of being privy to the conspiracy.
were taken into custody, and coi:fiinred all the circuuiftances of
his confeflion It
, Cald 4 148, 5i. SiFotfw. 3R, 'TMelv, 0, Ryrner, 6 1oo.

T H E nation having been kept for ome time in continual ter- B o o K

ror and agitation by lb many fucceflive conspiracies, the dif- VIII
covery of this new danger compleated the panic. All ranks of-"
men, as if the enemy had already been at their gates, thought Zea Ss
thenifelves called upon to stand forth in defence of their coun- the peo-
try. The minitlers of Edinburgh, without waiting for any pie.
warrant from the king, who happened at that time to be absent
fiom the capital, and without Laving received any legal com-
niflion, afletbled a considerable number of peers and Ba-
rons, in order to provide an instant remedy against the impend-
ing danger. They seized the earl of Angus, and committed
him to the castle ; they examined Kerr; and prepared a re-
monstrance to be laid before the king, concerning the state of
the nation; and the necessity of prosecuting the conspirators
with becoming vigour. James; though jealous of every en-And pro
croachment on his prerogative, and offended with ubjects, dkin
who, instead of petitioning, seemed to prescribe to him, found againt
it neceflary, during the violence of the ferment, not only to thum.
adopt their plan, but even to declare that no consideration
flould ever induce him to pardon those, who had been guilty
of so odious a treason. He summoned the earls of Huntly Jan. 8.
and Errol to surrender themselves to justice. Graham of Fintry,
whom his peers pronounced to be guilty of treason, he com-
manded to be publickly beheaded; and marching into the
North at the head of an army, the two earls, together with
Angus, who had escaped out of prison, retired to the moun-
tains. He placed garrisons in the castles which belonged to
them; compelled their vassals, and the barons in the adjacent
counties, to subscribe a bond containing professions of their
loyalty towards him, and of their firm adherence to the pro-
tetant faith; and, the better to secure the tranquillity of that
part of the kingdom, constituted the earls of Athol, and Mar-
Ihal, his lieutenants there *.

H A v T NG finified this expedition, James returned to Edin- Marh ,

burgh, where he found lord Borrough, an extraordinary am- Flizabeth
baflador from the court of England. Elizabeth, alarmed at,, treat
the discovery of a conspiracy, which flhe confidered as no less them with
formidable to her own kingdom, than to Scotland, reproached rigour.
James with his former remissness, and urged him, as he re-
garded the preservation of the protestant religion, or the dig-
nity of his own crown, to punifli this repeated treason with
rigour; and if he could not apprehend the persons, at least to
confiscate the estates of such audacious rebels. She weakened,
however, the force of these requests, by interceding, at the
fame time, in behalf of Bothwell, whom, according to her
usual policy in nourishing a faEtious spirit among the Scottili
;obles, {he had taken under her protection. James absolutely

refused
Spotfw. 391. Cald, 4. g9t.

B o o x refuied to lifen to any interceilion in favour of one, who had
VIII. so often, and with so much outrage, insulted both his govern-

m went and his peron. With regard to the popilh conspirators,
1593 he declared his resolution to prosecute them with vigour; but

that he might be the better able to do so, he demanded a small
fum of money from Elizabeth, which ffie, difiruftful, perhaps,
of the manner in which he might apply it, shewed no incli-
nation to grant. The zeal, however, and importunity of his
own fubjeCs obliged him to call a parliament, in order to pass
an act of attainder againff the three earls. But before it met,
Ker made his escape out of prison, and on pretence, that legal
evidence of their guilt could not be produced, nothing was
Concluded against them. The king hinifelf was universally
fufpeced of having contrived this artifice, on purpose to elude
the requests of the queen of England, and to disappoint the
wishes of his own people. And therefore, in order to sooth
the clergy, who exclaimed loudly against his condut, he gave
way to the pafling of an' at, which ordained those who obfti-
nately contemned the censures of the church, to be declared
outlaws .

Bothwell Wi I L £ the terror excited by the popish conspiracy poffefied
furprizes the nation, the court had been divided by two rival factions,
the king. which contended for the chief diretion of affairs. At the

head of one was the chancellor, in whom the king reposed en-
tire confidence. For that very reason, perhaps, he had fallen
early under the queen's displeasure. The duke of Lenox,
the earl of Athol, lord Ochiltree, and all the name of Stewart
espoused her quarrel, and widened the breach. And James,
fond no less of domestic tranquillity, than of public peace,
advised his favourite to retire, for rome time, in hopes that the
queen's resentment would subside. But as he stood in need, in
the present juncture, of the assistance of so able a minister, he
had recalled him to court. In order to prevent him from re-
covering his former power, the Stewarts had recourse to an
expedient no less illegal than desperate. Having combined with
Bothwell, who was of the fame urname, they brought him
July 4. back secretly into Scotland ; and seizing the gates of the palace,

introduced him into the royal apartment with a numerous train
of armed followers. James, though deserted by all his cour-
tiers, and incapable of refilfance, difovcred more indignation
than fear, and reproaching them for their treachery, called on
the earl to finish his treasons, by piercing his fovcreign to the
heart. But Bothwell fell on his knees, and implored pardon.
The king was not in a condition to refuse his demands. And a
few days after he signed a capitulation with this successful
traitor, to whom he was really a prisoner, whereby he bound
hlnfelf to grant him a remiflion for all pift offences, and to pro-

cure

Cald. 4. S343 otw.
Spt . rl. 13. Jac. VI, c. 164.

cure the ratification of it in parliament; and in the mean time, B o o K
to dismiss the chancellor, the master of Glamis, lord Home, VIII.
and fir George Home, from his councils and presence. Both-
well, on his part, consented to remove from court, though 1593
he left there as many of his aflociates, as he thought sus-
ficient to prevent the return of the adverse faction.

B u T it was now no easy matter to keep the king under the

fame kind of bondage, to which he had been often fubje
during his minority. He discovered o much impatience to
shake off his fetters, that those who imposed, durst not con-
tinue the restraint. They permitted him to call a convention
of the nobles at Sterling, and to repair thither himself. All He reco-
Bothwell's enemies, and all who were desirous of gaining the vers his li-
king's favour by appearing to be so, obeyed the summons. berty
They pronounced the insult offered to the king's person and 7
authority to be high treason, and declared him absolved from
any obligation to observe conditions, extorted by force, and
which violated so efentially his royal prerogative. James,
however, still proffered him a pardon, provided he would sue
for it as an a& of mercy, and promise to retire out of the king-
dom. These conditions Bothwell rejected with disdain, and
betaking himself once more to arms, attempted to furprize
the king, but finding him on his guard, fled to the borders*.

THE king's ardour againfl Bothwell, compared with his Sutpefed

flow and evasive proceedings againfl the popilh lords, occasioned of favour-
a general disgust among his subje&s; and was imputed either ing the p.
to an excessive attachment to the persons of those confpira- Ph lords.
tors; or to a secret partiality towards their opinions; both
which gave rife to no unreasonable fears. The clergy, as the
immediate guardians of the protestant religion, thought them-
selves bound, in such a juncture, to take extraordinary steps
for its preservation. And the provincial fynod of Fife hap-
pening to meet at that tmne, a motion was made to excom-
municate all concerned in the late conspiracy, as obstinate and Sept. -^.
irreclaimable papists. And though none of the conspirators
resided within the bounds of the iynod, or were subjea to its
jurifcdiaion, such was the zeal of the members, that, over-
looking this irregularity, they pronounced against them, the
sentence of excommunication, to which the aft of last par-
liament added new terrors. And. les this flould be imputed to
a few men, and accounted the a: of a small part of the
church, deputies were appointed to attend the adjacent synods,
and to desire their approbation and concurrence.

AN event happened, a few weeks after, which increased His lenity

the people's suspicions of the king. As he was marching on towards
an expedition against the borderers, the three earls coming fud- them.
denly into his pretence, offered to submit themselves to a O. 7

legal
Cald, 4. 36. Spotfw. 395.

B o o K legal trial; and James, without committing them to cuflody,
VIII. appointed a day for that purpose. The conspirators prepared
s'~-'"'' to appear with a for.idable train of their fiiends and vassals.

'593 But, in the mean ime, the clergy, together with many peers

and barons, assembling at Edinburgh, remonitrated against the
king's extreme indulgence with great boldness, and demanded
of him, according to the regular course of justice, to commit
to sure custody persons charged with the highest ats of treason,
who could not be brought to a legal trial, until they were ab-
solved fom the censures of the church; and to call a con-
vention of estates, to deliberate concerning the method of pro-
ceeding againit them. At the fame time they offered to ac-
comnpany him in arms to the place of trial, left such audacious
and powerful criminals fliould overawe justice, and dictate to
the judges to whom they pretended to submit. James, though
extremely offended both with the irregularity of their proceed-
ings, and the presumption of their demands, found it expedient
to put off the day of trial, and to call a convention of estates,
in order to quiet the fears and jealousies of the people. By be-
ing humoured in this point, their fufoicions began gradually
to abate, and the chancellor managed the convention so art-
fully, that he himself, together with a few other members,
was impowered to pronounce a final sentence upon the confpi-
Nor. 6. tators. After much deliberation, they ordained that the three

earls, and their associates should be exempted from all further
inquiry to prosecution, on account of their correspondence with
Spain; that, before the first day of February, they should
either submit to the church, and publickly renounce the errors
of popery, or remove out of the kingdom; that, before the
firif of Januarv, they Ihould declare which of there alternatives
they would embrace; that they should find surety for their
peaceable demeanour, for the future; and that if they failed
to figniy their choice in due time, they should lose the benefit
of this aa of abolition, and remain exposed to all the pains of
lavw *.
915'.. BY this lenity towards the conspirators, James incurred

much reproach, and gained no advantage. Devoted to the
popifli fnperftition, fubniiifve to all the diEtates of their priests,
:inI buoyed up with hopes and promises of foreign aid, the
three earls rclufed to accept of the conditions, and continued
their reasonable correspondence with the court of Spain. A
[ian. S1. crnvention of estates pronounced them to have forfeited the

Lenefit of the articles, which were offered; and the king rc-
cluir.d t!'enl, by proclamation, to firender theinfelves to jus-
tice. The prefli:ce of Ilhe Engliff aniballador contributed,
per!'p',to to he vigour of these proceedings. Eli.abeth, ever
att itive to Jan:es's uolions, and imputing his reluflance to

ptini i
* C'(IJ. ,4, 33. Sotlv. 397.

punim the popish lords to a secret approbation of their designs, B o o K
had ent to lord Zouche to represent, once more, the danger VIII.
to which he exposed himself, by this faire moderation; and --v
to require him to exercise that rigour, which their crimes, as '594-
well as the posture of affairs rendered necessary. And though
the steps now taken by the king silenced all complaints on
that head, yet Zouche, forgetful of his chara&er as an am-
baffador, entered into private negotiations with such of the
Scotch nobles, as disapproved of the king's measures, and
held almost an open correspondence with Bothwell, who, ac-
cording to the usual artifice of malecontents, pretended much
solicitude for reforming the disorders of the commonwealth;
and covered his own ambition with the specious veil of zeal
against those counsellors, who restrained the king from purfu-
ing the avowed enemies of the protestant faith. Zouche en-
couraged him, in the name of his mistress, to take arms a-
gainft his sovereign.

ME A N w I L E, the king and the clergy were filled with A new ast

mutual dituft of each other. They were jealous, perhaps, tmpt of
to excess, that his affeaions leaned too much towards the Bothwel's.
popish faction; he fufpeded them, without good reason, of
prompting Bothwell to rebellion, and even of supplying him
with money for that purpose. Little instigation indeed, was
wanting to rouze such a turbulent spirit as Bothwell's, to any
daring enterprize. He appeared suddenly within a mile of
Edinburgh, at the head of 400 horse. The pretences, by
which he endeavoured to justify this infurredion, were ex-
tremely popular; zeal for religion, enmity to popery, con-
cern for the king's honour, and for the liberties of the nation.
James was totally unprovided for his own defence; he had
no infantry, and was accompanied only with a few horsemen
of Lord Home's train. In this extremity, he implored the
aid of the citizens of Edinburgh, and, in order to encourage
them to at with zeal, he proiuifcd to proceed against the
popifi lords with the utnioft rigour of the law. Animated by
their ministers, they ran chearful y to their arms, and ad-
vanced with the king at their head against Bothwell ; but he,
notwithstanding his success in putting to flight lord Home, who
*had raffly charged him with a far inferior number of cavalry,
retired to Dalkeith without daring to attack the king. Hi
followers abandoned him soon after, and discouraged by o
many fucceflive disappointments, could never afterwards be
brought to venture into the field. He betook himlf f to his
usual lurking places, in thl North of England ; but Eliza-
beth, in compliance with the king's remonftrinces, obliged
him to quit that retreat *.

NQ
* Spotfw. 43, Cald. 4. 3;9.

B o o No sooner was the king delivered from one danger, than
VIII. he was called to attend to another. The popiih lords, in
' -v', consequence of their negotiations with Spain, received, i the

'1594 spring, a supply of money from Philip. What bold designs
ingeera this might inspire, it was no easy matter to conjeEture. From
from the men under the dominion of bigotry, and whom indulgence
rFopifh lods. could not reclaim, the most desperate aions were to be
April 3. dreaded. The aflembly of the church immediately took the

alarm; remonRfrated againfl them with more bitterness than
ever; and unanimously ratified the sentence of excommunica-
tion, pronounced by the fynod of Fife. James himself, pro-
voked by their obstinacy and ingratitude, and afraid that his
long forbearance would not only be generally displeasing to
his own. fubjets, but give rife to unfavourable suspicions a-
inong the English, exerted himself with unufilal vigour. He
Jene 8. called a parliament; laid before it ail the circumitances, and

aggravations of the conspiracy; and though there were but
few members present, and several of these connected with the
conspirators by blood or friendship, he prevailed on them by
his influence, and importunity, to pronounce the most rigorous
sentence the law can inflict. They were declared to be guilty
of high treason, and their estates, and honours forfeited. At
the fame time, statutes, more evere than ever, were enafted
againt the profelbors of the popiih religion.

Ho w to put this sentence into execution, was a matter of

greater difficulty. Three powerfill barons, cantoned in a
part of the country amoft inaccellible, surrounded with nu-
merous vassals, and supported by aid from a foreign prince,
were more than an overmatch for a Scottilh monarch. No
intreaty could prevail on Elizabeth to advance the money,
necelFaly for defraying the expences of an expedition against
them. To attack them in person, with his own forces alone,
might expose him both to disgrace and to danger. He had
recourse to the only expedient which remained in such a si-
tuation, for aiding the impotence of overcign authority; he
Jelegated his authority to the earl of Argyll, and lord Sorbes,
the leaders of two clans at enmity with the conspirators; and
gave them a commifion to invade their lands, and to seize
the castles which belonged to them. Bothwell, notwithftand,
ing all his high pretensions of zeal for the proteRfant religion,
having now cnterted into a close confederacy with them, the

tt le of danger became every day more urging. Argyll, follicited by
tl-nlivat. the king, and rouzed by the clergy, took the field at the head

of 7o000o en. Huntly and Errol met him at Glenlivat, with
an army far inferior in nulmber, but conlpofed chiefly of
gentlemen of the low countries, mounted on horseback, and
who brought along with them a train of field-pieces. They
Oc. a. encountered each ther with all the fury, which hereditary

cnmity

*nmity and ancient rivalihip add to undisciplined courage. B o
But the Highlanders, disconcerted by the firLt discharge of VIII
the cannon, to which they were little accustomed, and unable 9.3
to refiit the impreflion of cavalry, were oon put to flight. 594'
And Argyll, a gallant young man of eighteen, was carried
by his friends out of the field, weeping with indignation at
their disgrace, and calling on thein to stand, and to vindicate
the honour of their name *.

ON the first intelligence of this defeat, James, though obli-

ged to pawn his jewels in order to raise money t, afiembled a 595
inall body of troops, and marched towards the North. He
was joined by the Irwines, Keiths, Lefleys, Forbeses, and o-
ther clans at enmity with Huntlyand Errol, who having loft
several of their principal followers at Glenlivat, and others rc-
futing to bear arms against the king in person, were obliged to
retire to the mountains. James wafted their lands ; put garri-
sons in some of their castles; burnt others; and left the duke
of Lenox, as his lieutenant in that part of the kingdom, with
a body of men sufficient to restrain them from gathering to any
head there, or from infesting the low country. Reduced at
last to extreme distress, by the rigour of the season, and the
desertion of their followers, they obtained the king's permiflion Popif lds
to go beyond seas, and gave security that they hould neither driv e out
return without his licence, nor engage in any new intrigues a- ingdom
gainft the proteflant religion, or the peace of the kingdom t.

BY their exile, tranquillity was re-established in the north

of Scotland; and the firmness and vigour, which James had
displayed in his last proceedings against them, regained him,
in a great degree, the confidence of his protestant fubjets.
But, he funk, in the fame proportion, and for the fame reason,
in the esteem of the Roman catholics. They had aferted his T'he Ro-
mother's right to the crown of England with so much warmth, man C-
that they could not, with any decency, reje& his. And the cen;ed a-
indulgence, with which he affected to treat the profeirors of gintt
that religion, inspired them with such hopes, that they viewed James.
his acceflion to the throne as no undesirable event. But the
rigour with which the king pursued the conspirators, and the
severe statutes against popery to which he had given his con-
sent, convinced them that there hopes were visionary; and
they began to look about in quef of some new fuccelror, whole
rights they might oppose to his. The Englifl papists turned
their eyes towards the earl of Esex, whose generous mind,
though firmly etablifhcd in the protestant faith, abhorred the
severities inficted in that age, on account of religious opinions.
Those of the fame sea, who were in exile, (brmed a bolder
fchcme, and one more suitable to their situation. They ad-

vanced

* Cald. 4. 408. f Birch, Mem. i. 186.
t Sptrfw. 404. Cald. 373, S&c.

B o o K vanced the claim of the infanta of Spain; and Parsons the

'III. jesuit published a book, in which, by false quotations from
"' hitlory, by fabulous genealogies, and absurd arguments, inter-

s59S nmingled with bitter invetives against the king of Scots, he

endeavcured to prove the infanta's title to the Englifl crown to
be preferable to his. And Philip, though involved already in
a war both with France and England, and scarce able to de-
fend the remains of the Burgurdian provinces against the Dutch
commonwealth, easily grasptd at this airy projec. The dread
of a Spanilh pretender to the crown, and the opposition which
the papists began to sorn against the king's fucceflion, contri-
buted not a little to remove the prejudices of the protestants,
and to prepare the way for that event *.

Bothweil BOTH WELL, whose name has been so often mentioned as
orcerd to the disturber of the king's tranquillity, and of the peace of
fly into the kingdom, was now in a wretched condition. Abandoned
Spain. by the queen of England, on account of his confederacy with

the Popish lords; excommunicated by the church for the fame
reason; and deferred, in his diltrefs, by his own followers ; he
was obliged to fly for safety to France, and thence to Spain and
Italy, where, after renouncing the protestant faith, he led, ma-
ny years, an obscure and indigent life, remarkable only for a
low and infamous debauchery. The king, though extremely
ready to sacrifice the strongest resentment to the slightest ac-
knowledgments, could never be fotened by his fubmlliffions, nor
be induced to liften to any interceflion in his hehalf.
,596. TH s year the king loft chancellor Maitland, an able mi-

nifter, on whom he had long devolved the whole weight of
public affairs. As James loved him, while alive, he wrote, in
honour of his memory, a copy of verses, which, when com-
pared with the compositions of that age, are far from being in-
elegant f-.

A change So o N after his death, a considerable change was made in
in the ad- the administration. At that time, the annual charges of go-
minilia. vernmnent far exceeded the king's revenues. The queen was
tion. fond of expensive amusements. James himself was a stranger

to oeconomy. It became neceflary, for all these reasons, to
levy the public revenues with greater order and rigcur, and to
hulland them with more care. This important trufi was com-
mitted to eight gentlemen of the law T, who, from heir num-
ber, were called Oqaiviarns. The powers veRted in them were
ample, and almost unlimited. The king bound himsel neither
to add to their number, nor to fpply any vacancy thLt might

nappen,

Winw. Mcm. i. Spoil'tv. 4n. ' Spotfw. 411.

t Alcxinder Seaton Frcfidcnt o the Ir'flon, Walter Stewart conmmen-

dat(r of Blantyre rdil liivy lial. DIavil Carnegy, John Lindsay, Jarmcn
E.lphinflon, Thomat Hami;ion, Jhn Skcne clerk regiflcr, and Pct'.
Young Eirmolyuar.

happen, without their content: and knowing the facility of his B o o r
own temper, agreed that no alienation of his revenue, no VIII.
grant of a pension, or order on the treasury, lhould be held va- ~
lid, unless it were ratified by the subscription of five of the corn- '96.
millioners; all their ats and decisions were declared to be of
equal force with the sentences of judges in civil courts ; and
in consequence of them, and without any other warrant, any
person might be arrested, or their goods seized. Such exten-
five jurisdiction, together with the abfoiute disposal of the pub-
lic money, drew the whole executive part of the government
into their hands. United among themlelves, they gradually
undermined the reft of the king's ininiters, and seized on every
lucrative or honourable office. The ancient servants of the
crown repined, at being obliged to quit their stations to new
men. The favourites, and young courtiers, murmured at fee-
ing the king's liberality Ainted by their prescriptions. And the
clergy exclaimed against some of them as known apostates to
popery, and fufpeled others of secretly favouring it. They
retained their power, however, notwithetanding this general
combination againfl the ; and they owed it intirely to the
order and ceconomy which ihey introduced into the adminiftra-
tion of the finances, by which the neccflary expences of go-
vernment were more easily defrayed, than in any other period
of the king's reign *.

TH E rumour of vast preparations which Philip was said to Violence

be carrying on at this time, filled both England and Scotland of the n.
with the dread of a new invasion. James took proper measures ti t the
for the defence of his kingdom. But these did not satisfy the po.ini
zeal of the clergy, whose suspicions of the king's sincerity be- lords.
gan to revive ; and as he had permitted the wives of the ba-
niflied peers to levy the rents of their estates, and to live in their
houses, they charged him with rendering the a of forfeiture
ineffectual, by supporting the avowed enemies of the protestant March 24.
faith. The aembly of the church took under consideration
the state of the kingdom, and having appointed a day of public
fasting, they folcmnly renewed the covenant, by which the na-
tion was bound to adhere to the protestant faith, and to de-
fend it against all aggressors. A committee, confiding of the
most eminent clergymen, and of many barons, and gentlemen
of distinction, waited on the king, and laid before him a plan
for the security of the kingdom, and the preservation of reli-
gion. They urged him to appropriate the eflates of the ba-
nifhed lords, as a fund for the maintenance of soldiers; to
take the ttriteft precautions for preventing the return of such
turbulent fubjces into the country; and to pursue all who
were fufpeued of being their adherents, with the utmost ri-
gour.

NOT IING
* Spo!fw 413, 435.

B o o K No r H I N G could be more repugnant to the king's scheme;,
VIII. or more disagreeable to his inclination, than these propositions.
\-v--J Averse through his whole life, to any course, where he expec/-

It96, ed cppofition or danger; and fond of attaining his ends, with

Theing' the character of moderation, and by the arts of policy, he ob-

itth regt.d served with concern the prejudices against him, which were
tu them. growing among the Roman Catholics, and resolved to make

tome atonement for that part of his condua, which had drawn
on him their indignation. Elizabeth was now well advanced in
years; her life had lately been in danger; if any popifli com-
petitor should arise to dispute his right of fiucceflion, a faction,
so powerful as that of the banished lords, might be extremely
formidable; and any division among his own subje&s might
prove fatal, at a juncure, which would require their united
and most vigorous efforts. Instead, therefore, of the additio-
nal severities which the assembly proposed, James had thoughts
of mitigating thepunifhment, which they had already suffered.
And as they were surrounded, during their residence in foreign
parts, by Philip's emissaries; as resentment might dispose them
to liften more favourably than ever, to their suggestions; as
despair might drive them to siill more atrocious actions; he
resolved to recall them, under certain conditions, into their na-
tive country. Encouraged by thee sentiments of the king in
their favour, of which they did not want intelligence, and wea-
ried already of the dependant and anxious life of exiles, they
ventured to return secretly into Scotland. Soon after, they
presented a petition to the king, begging his permission to re-
fide at their own houses, and offering to give security for their
peaceable and dutiful behaviour. James called a convention of
estates to deliberate on a matter of such importance, and by
their advice he granted the petition.

The rh So soon as they were informed of this, the members of a
proceedings committee, appointed by the last assembly, met at Edinburgh,
ns the cler- and with all the precipitancyof fear, and of zeal, took such
gy and po- resolutions as they thought necessary for the safety of the king-
l te' dom. They wrote circular lettets to all the preibyteries in

Scotland; they warned them of the approaching danger;
they exhorted them to stir up their people to the defence of
their just rights; they commanded them to publish, in all their
pulpits, the aft of excommunicating the popish lords ; and en-
joined them to lay all those who were fufpeted of favouring po-
pery under the fame censure, by a summary sentence, and with-
out observing the usual formalities of trial. And as the danger
feemled too prefing to wait for the stated meetings of the judi-
catorics of the church, they made choice of the most eminent
clergymen in different corners of the kingdom, appointed then
to reside constantly at Edinburgh, and to meet every day with

the

the ministers of that city, under the name of the Standing B o K
Csuncil of the Church, and vested in this body the supreme au- VIII.
thority, by enjoining it, in imitation of the anci nt Roman--V"
form, to take care that the church flould receive no detri- '596
nent.

THE SE proceedings, no less uncontitutional than unprece-

dented, were manifcft cncroachments on the royal prerogative,
and bold ¢tcps toward open rebellion. The king's conduet,
however, justified in some degree such excesses. His lenity to-
wards the papists, so repugnant to the principles of that age; his
pardoning the conspirators, notwithstanding repeated promises to
the contray ; the refpet he paid to lady Huntly, who was at-
tached to the Romisih religion, no less than her husband ; his
committing the care of his daughter, the princess Elizabeth,
to lady Levingfton, who was infected with the fame fuperPtiti-
on ; the contempt with which he talked on all occasions, both
of the character of mini:fers, and of their function ; were cir-
cumftances which might have filled minds, not prone by na-
ture to jealousy, with rome suspicions; and might have preci-
pitated into rash councils, those, who were far removed from
intemperate zeal. But, however powerful the motives might
be which influenced the clergy, or however laudable the end
they had in view, they condufed their measures with no ad-
dress, and even with little prudence. James difcovereda strong
inclination to avoid a rupture with the church, and jealous as
he was of his prerogative, would willingly have made many
concessions for the fake of peace. By his command, some of
the privy counsellors had an interview with the more moderate
among the clergy, and enquired whether Huntly and his afbo-
ciates might not, upon making proper acknowledgments, be a-
gain received into the bofoll of the church, and be exempted
fiom any further punifunent, on account of their past apoftacy
and treasons. They replied, that though the gate of mercy
stood always open for thole who repented and returned, yet as
these noblemen had been guilty of idolatry, a crime deserving
death both by the law of God, and of man, the civil magi-
trate could not legally grant them a pardon ; and even though
the church fliould absolve them, it was his duty to infliCt pu-
niltment upon theni. This inflexibility in those, who were
reckoned the nlol compliant of the order, filled the king with
indignation, which the imprudence and obltinacy of a private
clergyman heightened into rage.

Mt. David Black, minister at St. Andrew's, discoursing in Seditious

one of his sermons, according to custom, concerning the state do'trine '
of the nation, affirmed that the king had permitted the popifl taugel by
lords to return into Scotland, and, by that action, had discover- Black
ed the treachery of his own heart ; that all kings were the de-
vil's children ; that Satan had now the guidance of the court;

VOL. II F that

B o o K that the queen of England was an atheist; that the judges
VIII. were miscreants and bribers ; the nobility godless and degene-

rate; the privy counsellors cormorants and men of no religion;
'596. and in his prayer for the queen, he used there words, We murt

pray for her for fashion fake, but we have no cause, he will

Nov. io. never do us good. James commanded him to be summoned be-
The c!ergy fore the privy council, to answer for such seditious expreflions;
espouse his and the clergy, inltead of abandoning him to the punifliment
defence. which such a petulant and criminal attack on his superiors de-

served, were so imprudent as to espouse his cause, as if it had
been the common one of the whole order. The controversy
concerning the immunities of the pulpit, and the rights of the
clergy to testify against vices of every kind, which had been
agitated in 1584, was now revived. It was pretended, that
with regard to their sacred function, ministers were fubje to
the church alone ; that it belonged only to their ecclesiastical
superiors to judge of the truth or falfliood of doctrines, deli-
vered in the pulpit; that if, upon any pretence whatever, the
king usurped this jurisdiction, the church would, from that mc-
ment, fink under servitude to the civil magiltrate ; that inflead
of reproving vice, with that honest boldness, which had often
been of advantage to individuals, and salutary to the kingdom,
the clergy would learn to flatter the palfions of the prince, and
to connive at the vices of others ; that the king's eagerness to
punifl the indiscretion of a protestant minister, while he was
so ready to pardon the crimes of popifli conspirators, called on
them to stand on their guard, and that now was the time to
contend for their privileges, and to prevent any encroachment
on those rights, of which the church had been in poffeflion ever
since the reformation. Influenced by these considerations, the
council of the church enjoined Black to decline the jurisdiction
of the privy council. And he, proud of such an opportunity
to display his zeal, presented a paper to that purpose, and with
the utnoft firmness refused to plead, or to answer the questions
which were put to him. In order to add greater weight to
there proceedings, the council of the church transmitted the
declinature to all the prefhyteries throughout the kingdom, and
commanded every minister to subscribe it, in testimony of his
approbation.

JA M ES defended his rights with no less vigour than they

were attacked. Sensible of the contempt under which his au-
thority mutf fall, if the clergy should be permitted, publickly,
and with impunity, to calumniate his ministers, and even to
censure himself; and knowing, by former examples, what une-
qual reparation for such offences he mnight expea from the judi-
catories of the church, he urged on the inquiry into Black's
conduCt, and issued a proclanation, commanding the members

of

of the council of the church to leave Edinburgh, and to return B o Rs
to their own parishes. Black, instead of ubmitting, renewed VIIT.
his declinature and the council, in defiance of the proclama- i*
tion, declared, that as they met by the authority of the church, 59
obedience to it was a duty still more sacred, than that which
they owed to the king himself. The privy council, otwith-
landing Black's refusing to plead, proceeded in the trial; and,
after a solemn inquiry, pronounced him guilty of the crimes of
which he had been accused; but referred it to the king, to ap-
point what punishment he should susser.

ME A s while, many endeavours were nsed to bring matters

to accommodation. Almost every day produced some new
scheme of reconcilement; but through the king's fickleness,
the obstinacy of the clergy, or the intrigues of the courtiers,
they all proved ineffectual. Both parties appealed to the peo-
ple, and by reciprocal and exaggerated accusations, endeavour-
ed to render each other odious. Insolence, sedition, treason,
were the crimes with which James charged the clergy; while
they made the pulpits resound with complaints of his exceflive
lenity towards papists, and of the no less exceflive rigour, with
which he opprefed the eftabliflied church. Exasperated by
their bold invectives, he, at last, entenced Black to retire be-
yond the rver Spey, and to reside there during his pleafire;
and once more commanding the members of the standing coun-
cil to depart from Edinburgh, he required all the miniters in
the kingdom to subscribe a bond, obliging themselves to submit,
in the fame manner as other fubjets, to the jurifdieqion of the
civil courts, in matters of a civil nature.

THts decisive measure excited all the violent passions, A tumult

which possess disappointed factions ; and deeds no les violent in Edin-
immediately followed. These mutt be imputed in part to the burgh
artifices of some courtiers, who expected to reap advantage
from the calamities of their country, or who hoped to lessen
the authority of the OEtavians, by engaging them in hostilities
with the church. On one hand, they informed the king that
the citizens of Edinburgh were under arms every night, aid
had planted a strong guard round the houses of their ministers.
James, in order to put a stop to this imaginary insult on his
government, issued a proclamation, commanding twenty-four
of the principal citizens to leave the town, within fix hours.
On the other hand, they wrote to the ministers, advising them
to look to their own safety, as Huntly had been secretly ad-
mitted to an interview with the king, and had been the author
of the severe proclamation, against the citizens of Edinburgh".

F They

* Though matters were induftriouny aggravated by perrons, who vwi(h-

ed both parties o puls'ue violent menlureu ; neither of these reports were
il:aeether defitutc of foundation. A their miniilers were supposed to be

in

B o K They doubted no more of the truth of this intelligence, than
VIII. the king had done of that which he received, and fell as blind-

ly into the snare. The letter came to their hands, just as one
Dc596c of their number was going to mount the pulpit. They refolv-

ed that he hould acquaint the people of their danger; and
he painted it, with all the strong colours, which men natural-
ly employ, in describing any dreadful and instant calanity.
When the fernon was over, he desired the nobles and gentle-
men to aflreble in the Little Church. The whole multitude,
terrified at what they had heard, crowded thither; they prc-
mifed and vowed to iland by the church ; they drew up a pe-
tition to the king, craving the redress of those grievances, of
which the clergy complained, and befeechinghim to deliver
them from all future apprehensions of danger, by removing
such of his counsellors, as were known to be enemies of the
protestant religion. Two peers, two gentlemen, two burgef-
fes, and two ministers, were appointed to present it. The

The king king happened to be in the great hall of the Tolbooth, where
in danger. the court of feflion was fitting. The manner in which the pe-

tition was delivered, as well as its contents, offended him. He
gave an haughty reply ; the petitioners insisted with warmth;
and a promiscuous multitude pressing into the room, James re-
tired abruptly into another apartment, and commanded the
gates to be lhut behind him. The deputies returned to the
multitude, who were still aflenbled, and to whom a minister
had been reading, in their absence, the fto:y of Haman.
When they reported that the king had refused to liften to
their petition, the church was filled in a moment with noise,
threatnings, execrations, and all the outrage and confusion of
a popular tumult. Some called for their arms, fometo bring
out the wicked Haman ; others cried, the sword of the Lord
and of Gideon ; and rufling out with the most furious impetu-
ofity, surrounded the Tolbooth, threatning the king hinmfelf,
and demanding some of his counsellors whom they named, that
they might tear them in pieces. The nlagiftrates of the city,
partly by authority, partly by force, endeavoured to quell the
tumult ; the king attempted to ooth the malecontents, by pro-
mifing to receive their petitions, when presented in a regular
manner; the ministers, sensible of their own raflnefs in kind-
ling such a flame, seconded both; and the rage of the popu-
lace, subsiding as suddenly as it had risen, they all difperlfd,
and the king returned to the palace ; happy in having escaped
from an infurrelion, which, though the initantaneous and un-
concerted effect of popular fury, had exposed his life to imnii-

nent

in danger, Tome of the more zealous citizenR had (leterminedl o derend
them, by force of arms. Birch. Mem, . 50. -luntly had been pri-
vately in Edinburgh, where he had an interview, if not with the king, at
leat with Iome of his minillers. Birch. Ibid, 230.

rent danger, and was confidered by him as an unpardonable B o 0 K
affront to his authority . VIII.

As loon as he retired, the leaders of the malecontents as- `

fembled, in order to prepare their petition. The punishment 1596.
of the popilh lords; the removal of thole counsellors, who
were fufpeted of favouring their persons or opinions ; the re-
peal of all the late ats of council, subversive of the authority
of the church; together with an at approving the proceedings
of the landing council; were the chief of their demands.
But the king's indignation was still so high, that the deputies,
chosen for that purpose, durl not venture, that night, to present
requests which could not fail of kindling his rage anew. Be- He leaves
fore next morning, James, with all his attendants, withdrew Edinburglh
to Linlithgow the feltion, and other courts of justice, were ceeds with
required to leave a city, where it was no longer confident ei- severity a-
ther with their safety, or their dignity to remain ; and the no- gainft the
blemen and barons were commanded to return to their own citlzens.
houses, and not to reaflemble without the king's permiflion.
The vigour, with which the king ated, struck a damp upon
the spirits of his adversaries. The citizens, sensible how much
they would susser by his abfeRce, and the removal of the courts
of justice, repented already of their condut. The ministers
alone resolved to maintain the contest. They endeavoured to
prevent the nobles from dispersing ; they inflamed the people
by violent invetives against the king; they laboured to pro-
cure subscriptions to an aflciation for their mutual defence ;
and conscious what lustre and power the juntion of Come of
the greater nobles would add to their cause, the ministers of
Edinburgh wrote to lord Hamilton, that the people, moved
by the word of God, and provoked by the injuries offered to
the church, had taken arms ; that many of the nobles had
determined to proteCt the protestant religion, which owed its
ellabliflment to the piety and valourof their ancestors ; that
they wanted only a leader to unite them, and to inspire them
with vigour ; that his zeal for the good cause, no less than
his noble birth, entitled him to that honour: They conjured
him therefore not to disappoint their hopes and wishes, nor to
refuse the suffering church that aid which fle so much needed.
Lord Hamilton, instead of complying with their desire, carried
the letter directly to the king, whom this new insult irritated to
such a degree, that he commanded the magistrates of Edin-
burgh instantly to seize their ministers, as manifest incendiaries
and encouragers of rebellion. The magistrates, in order to
regain the king's favour, were preparing to obey ; and the mi-
misters, who saw no other hope of afety, fled towards En-.
gland t.

Tn :
* Spotfw. 417, Sc. Caldl. . 4, S&c. Birch. Mcm, . 35.

t Sotfw,r 4S. Cld, 5. i 6.

70 THE HISTORY
B o o K TH s unsuccessful infurreaion, instead of overturning, es-
VIII. tabliihed the king's authority. Those concerned in it were
' ---' confounded and dispersed. And the reft of his fubjees, in

'?7- order to avoid suspicion, or to gain his favour, contended who

buhibles flhould be most forward to execute his vengeance. A conven-
the power tion of eltates being called, pronounced the late infurretion
'of the to be high treason ordained every miniftcr to subscribe a de-
Church. claration of his fubmiflion to the king's jurifdicion, in all mat-
Jan. 3. ters civil and criminal impowered magistrates to commit, in-

ltantly to prison any minister, who, in his sermons, should ut-
ter any indecent reflecions on the king's conduct; prohibited
any ecclesiastical judicatory to meet, without the king's li-
cense; commanded that no person should be eleEted a magif-
trate of Edinburgh for the future, without the king's approba-
tion; and that, in the mean time, the present magiftratcs
lhould either discover, and inflict condign punishment on the
authors of the late tumult, or the city itself hould be subject-
ed to all the penalties of that treasonable action *.

Abridges AR M E D with the authority of there decrees, James re-
the privile- solved to crulh entirely the mutinous spirit of his subje&s. As
gitizens of the clergy had, hitherto, derived their chief credit and strength
Edinburgh. from the favour and zeal of the citizens of Edinburgh, his

first carewas to humble them. Though the magistrates sub-
mitted to him in the most abjec terms ; though they vindicat-
ed themselves, and their fellow citizens, from the most distant
intention of violating his royal person or authority; though,
after the ftri&eft scrutiny, no circumstances that could fix on
them the suspicion of premeditated rebellion had been disco-
vered ; though many of the nobles, and such of the clergy as
frill retained any degree of favour, interceded in their behalf;
neither acknowledgments, nor interceflions, were of the leaf
avail t. The king continued inexorable, the city was declar-
ed to have forfeited its privileges as a corporation, and to be li-
Feb. S8. able to all the penalties of treason. The capital of the king-

dom, deprived of magistrates, deserted by its ministers, aban-
doned by the courts of jufice, and proscribed by the king, re-
mained in desolation and despair. The courtiers even threaten-
ed to raze the city to the foundation, and to ereEt a pillar where
it Itood, as an everlasting monument of the king's vengeance,
and of the guilt of its inhabitants. At last, in compliance
with Elizabeth, who inteipored in their favour, and moved by
March sr. the continual solicitations of the nobles, James absolved the ci-

tizens from the penalties of law, but at the fauie time, he
stripped them of their woft important privileges ; they were
neitherallowed to elc& their own m,.gillrates, nor their own
minicers; many new burdens were ipoled on theni and a
great rum of money was exated by vav of peace offering .

JAME
Cald. . 147. 'f Ibid. c. 149. t il';I". 434, 444.

JAME s was, mean while, equally assiduous, and no les B o o K

ficcefsful, in circunifcribing the jurifdiaion of the church. VIII.
Experience had discovered that to attempt this, by acts of - "
parliament, and sentences of privy council, was both ineffec- , 'e9.
tual, and odious. He had recourse, now, to an expedient lations with
more artful, and better calculated for obtaining his end. The regard to
ecclesiastical judicatories were composed of many members; the church.
the majority of the clergy were extremely indigent, and un-
provided of legal stipends; the ministers in the neighbour-
hood of Edinburgh, notwithstanding the parity eftablifled by
the prelbyterian government, had assumed a leading in the
church, which filled their brethren with envy; every nume-
rous body of men is susceptible of sudden and trong impreflions,
and liable to be influenced, corrupted and overawed. In-
duced by these considerations, James thought it poflible to
gain the clergy, whom he had in vain attempted to ubdue.
Proper agents were et to work all over the kingdom; pro-
mises, flattery, and threats were employed; the.ufurpations
of the brethren near the capital were aggravated; the jea-
lousy of their power, which was growing in the diifant pro-
vinces, was augmented; and two different general assemblies
were held, in both which, notwithstanding the zeal and bold-
ness, wherewith a few leading clergymen defended the pri-
vileges of the church, a majority declared in favour of those
measures, which were agreeable to the king. Many prac-
tices, which had continued since the reformation, were con-
denmed; many points of discipline, which had hitherto been
reckoned sacred and uncontroverted, were given up; the
license, with which ministers discoursed of political matters,
was restrained ; the freedom, with which they inveighed a-
gainft particular persons, censured; sentences of fuminary
excommunication declared unlawful ; the convoking a general
assembly, without the king's permiflion, prohibited; and the
right of nominating ministers, to the principal towns, vested
in the crown. Thus, the clergy themselves surrendered pri-
vileges, which it would have been dangerous to invade, and
voluntarily submitted to a yoke, more intolerable than any
James would venture to impose by force; while those who
continued to oppose his measures, instead of their former po-
pular topic of the king's violent encroachments on a jurif-
diaion which did not belong to him, were obliged to turn
their outcries against the corruptions of their own order*.

BY the authority of these assemblies, the popish earls were

al'owed to make a public recantation of their errors; were
absolved from the sentence of excommunication; and re-
ceived into the bosom of the church. But, not many years
after, they relapsed into their former errors, were again re-

conciled
* Spotw. 433. Cald, . 89, 133.

B o o . conciled to the church of Rcme, and by their apoftacy ju(-
VIII. tified in some degree, the fears and scruples of the clergy with
"'"" ' regard to their absolution.
1597. THE ministers of Edinburgh owed to the itercefflion of

these assemblies, the liberty of returring to their charges in
the city. But this liberty was clogged in such a manner as
greatly abridged their power. The city was divided into dif-
tir.n pariflies ; the number of rnirniters doubled; persons on
whose fidelity the king could rely were fixed in the new
parilhes and these circurmfances, added to the authority of
the late decrees of the church, contributed to confirm that
absolute dominion in ecclesiastical affairs, which James pof-
fefled during the remainder of his reign.

THE king was so intent on new-modelling the church,

that the other tranfa&ions of this period scarce deserve to be
remembered. The Otavians, envied by the other courtiers,
and splitting into factions among themselves, resigned their
commiflion; and the administration of the revenue returning
into its fermer channel, both the king ard the nation were
deprived of the benefit of their regular and frugal ceccncmy.
rec. 19. T o A R D s the end of the year, a parl ament was held in

order to restore Huntly, and his aflociates, to their estates
and honours, by repealing the a of ffeiture paflfed against
them. The authority of this supreme court was likewise
employed to introduce a farther innovation into the church
but conformable to the fyflvem which the king had now a.
dopted, the motion for this purpose took its rife frcm the

Fcclefianics clergy themselves. As the a of general annexation, and
reitored to that etabliflirg the presbyterian government had reduced lth
a feat in few bishops, who frill survived, to poverty and contempt; as

arliament. those who pofirffed the abbeys, and priories, were nere lay-

me, and ii-.ary of them teinpoial peers, few or rone of the
ecciefiaftical order remained to vote in arliamr.t, and by
means of that, the influence of te crown was confidelably
dimini-flld there, and a proper balance to the power and
nrnlber of the nobles was wanting. But the prejudices, te
nation had conceiv.d againfl the name and charaEtcr of
biflhops, were so i(,lnt, that Jamcs was obliged, with the
utmost care, to avcid the apcarance of a d-fign to revive
that order. He prevailed terefcre on t; e cominifion ap-
pcentco y last afflehly to complain to the parlianment, ti.at
the church was the only body in the kingdom dellitute r.s its
representatives in that fuprenie court, where it so nearly co"-
cerned every order to h;ave nime, who were bound to defend
ils iigihts; and to crave :hat a competent number of te
clergy fliould be admitred. accoiding o aient cuflom, to a
scat there. In conipliarce vith tlhii requiefc, an ait \vsS
p'iffd, y which thole inini.trs. on whci.C tin: L ing ,t!.oul

LOii'C.;

confer the vacant biflhopricks and abbeys were intitled to a B o o K
vote in parliament; and that the clergy might conceive no VIII.
jealousy of any ercroachment on their privileges, it was re-
mitted to the general afembly, to determine what spiritual '98
juri:dicion or authority in the government of the church these
persons fliould posses .

THE king, however, found it no easy matter to obtain

the concurrence of the ecclesiastical judicatories, in which
the a of parliament met with a fierce opposition. Though
the clergy perceived how much luster this new privilege would
reflec upon their order; though they were not insensible of
the great acceflion of personal power and dignity, which
many of them would acquire, by being admitted to the fu-
preme council of the nation, their abhorrence of episcopacy
was extreme ; and to that, they ficrificed every consideration
of intere:l or ambition. All the king's rofcffions of regard
for the prelent contitution of the church, did not convince
them of h:s sincerity; all the devices that could be invented
for restraining and circumscribing the jurifdition of those,
who were to be raiscd to this new honour, did not iiminifh
their jealousy and fear. Their own experience had taught
them, with what insinuating progress t'.e hierarchy advances,
and though admitted at firil with modcrate authority, and
under pecious pretences, how rapidly it extends its dominion.

Varniflh over this fcheine, aid one of the leading clergy-

men, with what colours you please ; deck tle intruder Vwith
the utmott art ; under all this disguise, I fee the horns cf his
iiitre." The fame entiments prevai'ed among nany of his
brethren, and inducrd then to rejec power, and honours,
with as much zeal, as ever tlofe of their order courted them.
Many, however, vere alu:! L:v the hope;i of pres'nerment;
the king himrif an! Ns i!.:.'-r; c:r;pl. cd te f;tie arts,
which they had trie.J b fuicc; ow!'' latl vcar; andI afecr long
debates, and murh noppofiion, ilc gcrcli aicmibly declared MarLh 7.
tiat it was lawfu! 1ir nllnifer to acrcpt of a feat in parlin-
nient; that it wou'd be hitily V neinfici' il t'ie churchi, to
have its representatives in that liiplrn! couirr : nwi thiat riiy
one perrons, a numiil er nearly c(;u:l to ti:lat of the ccclc.ti-
sPies, who wcle anciienly called lo par!ia'! '.t, h::ld be cho-
l'n fron aioln A tile clcrgv ir rli:il ptnu liii. "s'i; manner of
their elecion, t i het hel with tie i),)w r t I,. vi!l' le in t'lei:,
were left undlecid!edl for tile rirc.lc;, Ai.l lifnrltled ilatier of
future dcliberntion 'j.

As the ponipcl of ucccc'ding to r!l: cro.wn o, Englnd '',::"v

drew nearer, Jainmes iuliplicd precatri.) : in orelr to render !,, ;
it ccrtain. As he wa; allied to iitan o rt!i priac:; of Ger- v.::, :·.. -.

Iina.ny tn ,;-, '

w Sp"tf'. 4. . 'rl. lth Jlac :V c .e.. pal:y i
*j S)LIV. .t;C`. Caldl. . L ngla :.J.

B o o K many by his marriage, he sent ambafTadors extraordinary to
vili. their fcveral courts, in order to explain the justness of his title

".- to the English throne, and to desire their alliltance, if any
3599. competitor flould arise to dispute his undoubted rights.

Thele pinces readily acknowledged the equity of his claim ;
but the aid they could afford him was diltant and feedle. At
the fame time Edward Bruce abbnt of Kinlofs, his ambaf-
fador at the Englifl court, fol cited Elizabeth, with the ut-
most warmth, to recognize his title by ome public deed, and
to deliver her own fubjets from the calamities, which are
occasioned by an uncertain or disputed ficceflion. But age
had flrengthened all the palfions, which had, hitherto, in-
duced Elizabeth to keep this great question obscure, and un-
decided; and a general and evasive answer was all that James
could obtain. As no impreflion could be made on the queen,
the ambassador was commar.ded to found the disposition
of her fubjeds, and to try what progress he could make in
gaining them. Bruce poffeled all the talents of secrecy,
judgment, and address, requisite for condui. a negotiation,
no less delicate, than important. A minister of this chara&er
was intitled to the confidence of the English. Many of the
highest rank unbofoned thenfelves to him without reserve, and
gave him repeated afierances c their resolution to assert his
master's right, in opposition to ever pretender-. And as fe-
veral pan'phlets were dispersed, at this time, in England, con-
taining objetions to his title, James employed some learned
men in his kingdom to answer there cavillcrs, and to explain
the advantages which would result to both kingdoms, by the
union of the crowns. These books were eagerly read, and
contributed not a little to reconcile the English to that event.
A book published this year, by the king himself, produced an
effect till more favourable. It was intitled Bafilicon Doron,
and contained precepts concerning the art of government,
addrefled to prince Henry his son. Notwithitanding the great
alterations and refinements in national taste since that time, we
mufl allow this to be no contemptible performance, and not to
be inferior to the works of iiiofl cotemporary writers, either in
purity of style or justness of colnpofition. Even the vain
parade of erudition with which it abounds, and which now
disgusts us, raised the admiration of that age; and as it was
filled with those general rules, which fpecuative authors de-
liver for rendering a nation happy, and of which James could
difcouife with great plausibility, though often incapable of
putting them in practice; the Englih conceived an high
opinion of is abilities, and expectd an increase ns national
honoul and prolperily, under a prince so profoundly killed in

politics,
* Johnl. z4t.

politics, and who gave such a specimen both of his wisdom, B o o0
and of his love to his people t. ViiL.

TH a queen of England's sentiments concerning James, were C

very different from those of her fubjets. His exceflive indul- 59S9-
gence towards the popish lords; the facility with which he Spotfw.
pardoned their repeated treasons; his restoring Beaton, the 457.
popih Archbishop of Glasgow, who had fled out of Scot-
land at the time of the reformation, to the pofeflion of the
temporalities of that benefice; the appointing him his ambaf-
fador at the court of France the applause he bestowed, in
the Bafilicon Doron, on those who adhered to the queen his
mother, Elizabeth confidered as o many indications of a
mind alienated from the protestant religion; and fufpe&ed
that he would soon revolt from the profession of it. These Accuret
suspicions seemed to be fully confirmed, by a discovery which him of
came from the master of Gray, who resided at that time in cngriph
Italy, and who, rather than susser his intriguing spirit to be the pope.
idle, demeaned himfei'F o far as to a as a spy for the En-
glihl court. He conveyed to Elizabeth the copy of a letter,
written by James to Pope Clement VIII. in which the king,
after many expreflions of regard for that pontiff, and of grati-
tude for his favours, declared his firm resolution to treat the
Roman catholics with indulgence; and, in order to render the
intercourse between the court of Rome and Scotland more
frequent and familiar, he solicited the pope to promote Drum-
mond, bishop of Vaizon, a Scotfinan, to the dignity of a
cardinal*. Elizabeth, who had received, by another chan-
nel I, some imperfet intelligence of this correspondence, was
filled with us furprize, and immediately dispatched Bowes into
Scotland, to inquire more fully into the truth of the matter,
and to reproach James for an a:ion so unbecoming a protefant
prince. He was no less ationifncd at the accusation, and with
a confidence, which nothing hut the consciousness of in-
nocence could inspire, affirmed the whole to be a mere calumny.
and the letter itself to be forged by his enemies, on purpose
to bring his (incerity in religion to be fufpeaced. Elphingfton
the secretary of state denied the matter with equal solemnity.
It came to be known by a very fingu!-r accident, which hap-
pened ome years after, that the information which Elizabeth
had received was well founded, thoughl at the fe time the
king's declarations of his own innocence were perlc&ly con-
fiftent with truth. Cardinal Rcllarminc, in :I reply which he
publilhed to a controvcrlial trcatifc, of which thi king was
the author, accused him of having abandoned the favourable
sentiments which he had once entertained of the Roman catho-
lic religion, and as a proof of this qluot d his letter to Clenent
V11I. It was impollible, any longer, to believe this to be a

si. ioll;
* Cald. 333. t 'ilnw. hltm, vol. i. 37, 5''

Ba o oK ficion and it was a matter too delicate to be pafird over
VIII. wvithout atris inquiry. James immediately examined Elphing-
~'* ~ fs Ron, and his confession unravelled the whole myfRery. He

'5s99 acknowledged that he had huffled in this letter among other

papers, which he laid before the king to be signed, who, sus-
pecting no (uch deceit, subscribed it together with the reft,
and with-,ut knowing what it contained; that he had no other
n'otive, however, to this action, but zeal for his majesty's
service; and, by flattering the Roman catholics with hopes of
indulgence uder the king's gcvernnment, he imagined that he
was paving te way for his more easy acceflion to the Englifit
throne. The privy council of England entertained very dif-
ferent sentiments of the secretary's conduct. In their opinion,
not only the king's reputation had been exposed to reproach,
but his life to danger, by this raih impofrure ; they even im-
puted the gun-powder treason to the rage and disappointment
of the papists, upon finding that the hopes which this letter in-
spired were frustrated. The secretary was sent a prilbner in-
to Scotland, to be tried for high trealbn. His peers found
him guil:y; but, by the queen's intercelson, he obtained a
pardon *.

ACCORD N G to the account of other hifforians, James

hinlielf was no stranger to this ccrrefpondence with the pope;
ard, if we believe them, Elphingfton being intimidated by the
tirceats of the Englifl council, and deceived by the artifices
(,f the earl of Dunbar, concealed some circuniiitances in his
;:arranive of this transaCtion, and, faifiried others; and, at the
c.xp.nce of his own fame, and with the danger of his life,
e!,;avoured to draw a veil over this part of his maser's con-
duct t.

T, ie- t B UT whether we impute the writing of this letter to the
.a.' it .,ns secretary's officious zeal, or to the king's command, it is cer-
·, _: .i', tain, that, about this time, James was at the utmioft pains to
ttoii;i6. gain the filendlhiip of the Roman Catholic princes, as a necef-

hlry precaution towards filcilitating his accelfion to the Englilh
tl'r',ne. Lord lHome, who was himtilff a papilt, was entruled
v iii a f-ctet comniffion to the ppe ; the archbishop of
Glargow v ns an atRive inPflrunimet with there of his own reli-
g;,n ;. The p,,p express d such favournble fentinents both
of Ite ki;:g. and of his right to the crown of England, that
jal; cs tihsii;lt hinii.l' bound, foini years after, to acknow-
Ic' th. I.!iganon :n a public manner 1. Sir James Lirdflay
niadn.c grcat prrgrcfs in gaining the Englilli papifls to acknow-
I '.'- ::ji'tl')ys title. Of all there intri ues Elizabeth re-

u..:'.i L:'cu.'': hir:ts, froml different qualrtcrs. The nore im-

perfecly

* Snol'w. ,t6, ;O7. Johns. 44S. i Cald. vol. v. 312. vi. 1.7.
'.''il.v. M im. vol. ii. 57. Caid. vol. vi. 147. T Cald. vol. v.
o ..

perfetly fle knew, the more violently fle fiufpeted the king's B o
designs; and the natural jealousy of her temper increasing VIII.
with age, fie observed his conduct with greater tilicitude than --v-
ever.

T E questions with regard to the elcction and power of the I600o

representatives of the church, were finally decided this year, March.i
Ly the general assembly, which met at Montrose. That place ,ions with
was chosen, as niofi convenient for the iminiftcrs of the north, regard
among whom the king's influence chiefly lay. And although 'lie chali.
great numbers resorted ifonm the orthern provinces, and the
king employed his whole interefl, and the authority of his own
pretence, to gain a majorily, the follwing regulations were
with diflicuhy agreed on. 'IThat the general aftenibly fliall re-
cominend lix pellns to every vacant benefice, which gave a
title to a 1-lat in parliament, out of whom the king fiall nomi-
nate one ; that the person io cleaed, after obtaining his feat in
parliament, shall neither prcpofe, nor consent to any thing there,
that may aset the intercft of the church, without special in-
ftructions to that purpa ; that he flall be aniwerable for his
conduct to every general aflTnhly; and filbmit to its censure,
without appeal, upon pain of i::taniy and excommunication;
that he fliall discharge the duties of a partor, in a particular
congregation i that he thall not usurp any ecclesiastical jurif-
dition, superior to that of his other brethren ; that if the church
inflict on him t!:e censure of deprivation, he shall, thereby,
fonfeit his feat in parliament ; that he hall annually rcfign his
conmmilion to the general aftembly, which may be reitorcd to
him, or not, as the affelbly, with the king's approbation, flall
judge most expedient for the good of the church . Nothing
could be more repugnant to the idea of episcopal government,
than there regulations. It was'nol in consequence of rights
derived from their offic, but of powers conferred by a com-
million, that ecclesiastical persons were to be admitted to a feat
in parliament; they were the reprefeniatives, not te fupe-
riors of the clergy. Destitute of all spiritual authority, evn'
their civil jurifdltion was temporary. James, however, f:lt-
tercd hinifelf that they wo-,-l soon be able to hllvke off tlihfe
fetters, and gradually acquire all the privileges which belonged
to the episcopal order. The clergy dreaded the lliie hinii.
And he contended for, and they opposed the nomination f
thele commillioners, not so much on account of the powers
then velled in thein, as of those, to which it was believed they
would soon attn.;n .

DU RI N o this lumimer, the kingdom enjoyed an unufl;ll

tranquillity. The clergy, after n:ay ftiiggles, were blrought
under great ftibjection ; the popill earls were re(lored to their
cftates and honours, by the authority of parliainent, and with

the
* Spotw, 453, 457. Cld. vol. v. 363. -. SpotLw. 4.4

B o o K the consent of the church; the reft of the nobles were at
VIII. peace among themselves, and obedient to the royal authority;
'--v-' when, in the midtl of this security, the king's life was exposed

z600. to the utmost danger, by a conspiracy altogether unexpe6ted,

c^ni, c
y. and almost inexplicable. The authors of it where John Ruth-

ven earl of Gowny, and his brother Alexander, the sons of
that earl who was beheaded in the year 584. Nature had
adorned both these young men, especially the elder brother,
with many accompliihments, to which education had added its
most elegant improvements. More learned, than is usual a-
mong persons of their rank; more religious, than is common
at their age of iife; generous, brave, popular; their coun-
trymen, far from thinking them capable of any atrocious crime,
conceived the most sanguine hopes of their early virtues.
Notwithstanding all these noble qualities, ome unkown mo-
tive engaged them in a confpiiacy, which, if we adhere to the
account commonly received, must be transmitted to posterity,
as one of the most wicked, as well as one of the worst con-
certed, of which history makes any mention.

ON the fifth of August, as the king, who resided during

the hunting season in his palace of Falkland, was going out to
his sport early in the morning, he was accosted by Mr. Alex-
anderRuthven, who with an air of great importance, told the
king. that the evening before he had met an unknown man, of
a suspicious aspec. walking alone in a bye bath, near his bro-
ther's house at Perth ; and on searching him, had found, un-
der his cloak, a pot filled with a vaif quantity of foreign gold ;
that he had immediately seized both him and his treasure, and
withcut conmmunicating the matter to any person, had kept
him confined and bound in a solitary house; and that he
thcught it his duty to impart such a singular event, firif of all
to his majefly. lanies immediately filfpeaed this unknown
person to be a trafficking priest, supplied with foreign coin, in
order to excite new commotions in the kingdom ; and resolved
to impower the magistrates of Perth to call the person before
them, and inquire into all the circumstances of the story.
Ruthlen violently opposed this resolution, and with many ar-
guments urged the king to ride directly to Perth, and to ex-
aminc the matter with his own eyes. Mean while the chafe
began ; and James, notwithitanding his passion for that amuse-
ment, could not help ruminating on the fIrangenefs of the
tale, and on Ruthven's importunity. At lafl, he called lmin,
and promised when the sport was over, to set out for Perth.
The chafe, however, continued long; and Ruthven, who all
the while kept close by the king, was still calling on him to
make haste. At the death of the buck, lie would not allow
James to flay till a frefli horse was brought him ; and obferv-
ing the duke of Lcnox and the earl of Mar preparing to c-

conip:any

company the king, he entreated him to countermand them. B o o i
This James refuted, and though Ruthven's impatience and VIII.
anxiety, as well as the apparent perturbation in his whole be- -'-J
haviour, raised some suspicions in his mind; yet his own curio- I60X
fity, and Ruthven's solicitations, prevailed on him to set out
for Perth. When within a mile of the town, Ruthven rode
forward to inform his brother of the king's arrival, though he
had already dispatched two nelengers for that purpose. At
a little distance fiom the town, the earl attended by several of
the citizens, met the king, who had only twenty persons in his
train. No preparations were made for the king's entertain-
ment; the earl appeared pensive and embarrassed, and was at
no pains to atone, by his courtesy or hospitality, for the bad
fare with which he treated his guclls. When the king's repast
was over, his attendants were led to dine in another room,
and he being left almost alone, Ruthven whifp red him, that
now was the time to go to the chamber where the unknown
person was kept. James commanded him to bring fir Thomas
Erskine along with him; but, instead of that, Ruthven or-
dered him not to follow: and conduting the king up a stair-
cafe, and then through several apartments, the doors of which
he locked behind him, led him at last into a small fludy, in
which there flood a man clad in armour, and with a sword
and dagger by his fide. The king, who expeced to have
found one disarmed and bound, started at the fight, and en-
quired if this was the person ; but Ruthven snatching the dag-
ger from the girdle of the man in armour, and holding it to
the king's breat, " Remember, said he, how unjustly my fa-

ther fiffered by your command ; you are now my prisoner;
" ubmit to my disposal without resistance, or outcry, or this

dagger flaall infrantly avenge his blood." James expofiu-

lated with Ruthven, intreated, and flattered him. The man,
whom he found in the study, stood, all the while, trembling,
and dismayed, without courageeither to aid the king, or to
second his aggrefbor. Ruthven protested that if the king raised
no outcry, his life flould be safe; and moved by foine un-
known reason, retired in order to call his brother, leaving to
the man in armour the care of the king, whom he bound by
oath, not to make any noise during his absence.

WHI LE the king was in this dangerous situation, his at-

tendants growing impatient to know whither he had retired,
one of Gowry's attendants entered the room hastily, and told
them that the king had just rode away towards Faliland. All
of them ruffled out into the freet ; and the earl, in the urmoft
hurry, called for their horses. But, by this time, his brother
had returned to the king, and swearing that i:ow there was no
remedy; he behoved to die; offered to bind his hands. Un-
armed as Junes was, he scorned to submit to that indignity .

and

B o o K and closing with the afaflin, a fierce itruggle cnfued. The
VIII. nlan in armourflood as formerly, amazed and motionless; and
'--"" ' the king dragging Rutliven towards a window, which during

i63o- his ableice he had perluaded the person with whom he was

lefr, to open, cried, with a wild and affrighted voice, " Trea-
son! Trealon! litl! 1 am murdered !" His attendants heard,
and knew the voice ; and Ilaw, at the window, a hand which
gralped the king's neck with violence. They flew with preci-
pitation to his aiftance. Lenox and Mar with the greater
number, ran up the principal flair-cafe, where they found all
the doors fliut, which they battered with the tmoft fury, en-
deavouring to burst them open. But fir John Ramnfey, enter-
ing by a back-flair, which led to the apartment where the king
was, found the door open; and rulhing upon Ruthven, who
was till struggling with the king, struck him twice with his
dagger, and thruit him towards the stair-case, where fir Tho-
mas Erlkine and fir Hugh Herreis met, and killed him; he
crying with his last breath, " Alas ! I am not to blame for
this action." During this scuffle, the man, who had been
concealed in the fl'tdy, escaped uncbferved. Together with
Ramsey, Erikine, and HIerreis, one Wilson a footman entered
the room where the king was, and before they had time to
shut the door, Gowrie rushed in with a drawn sword in each
hand, followed by seven of his attendants well armed, and
with a loud voice threatened them all with infcanr death. They
immediately thrlft the king into the little study, and fliutting
the door upon him, encountered the earl. Notwithstanding
the inequality of numbers, fir John Ramsey pierced (iGwrie
through the heart, and he fell down dead without uttering a
word; his followers having received several wounds, imml:e-
diately fled. Three of the king's defenders were likewise hurt
in the conflit. A dreadful noise cont nued fti!l at the oppo-
site door, where many persons laboured in vain to force a pas-
fagc ; and the king being assured that they were Lenox, M.ir,
and his other friends, it was opened on the inside. They ran
to the king, whom they unexpectedly found safe, with tranf-
ports of congratulation , and he, falling on his knees, with all
his attendants around him, offered folenn thanks to God for
such a wonderful deliverance. The danger, however, was not
yet over. The inhabitants of the town, whose provost Gowiie
was, and by whom he was extremely beloved, hearing the
fate of the two brothers, ran to their arms, and surrounded
the house, threatening revenge, wilh many insolent and oppro-
brious fpeeclhs against the king. Jamles endeavoured to pacify
the enraged nmultitude, by speaking to them from the window,
he adnlirted their nlagiftrates into the houe ; related to then
the whole circumilalces of the fa ; and their ury subsiding
by degrees, they dilperfed. On searching the earl's pockets

for

papers, that might discover his designs and accomplices, B o o K
nothing was found but a finall parchment bag, full of magical VII .
characers, and words of enchantment; and if we may be-
lieve the account of the conspiracy published by the king, 6
" while these were about him, the wound of which he died,
"bled not; but as soon as they were taken away, the blood

guflied out in great abundance." After all the dangerous

adventures of this busy day, the king returned in the evening
to Falkland, having committed the dead bodies of the two
brothers to the cuttody of the magistrates of Perth.

NO T W IH T A N D I N G the minute detail which the king The motive

gave of all the circumstances of this conspiracy against his of the con.
life, the motives which induced the two brothers to attempt an iprors not
action so detetable, the end they had in view, and the accom- plained.
plices, on whose aid they depended, were altogether unknown.
The words of Ruthven to the king gave ome grounds to
think, that the desire of revenging their father's death had in-
ftigated them to this attempt. But, whatever injuries their fa-
ther had suffered, it is scarce probable that they could impute
them to the king, whose youth and fubjetion, at that time,
to the violence of a fation, exempted him from being the ob-
jec of resentment, on account of a&ions which were not done
by his command. James had even endeavoured to repair the
wrongs which the father had suffered, by benefits to his chil-
dren; and Gowrie himself, sensible of his favour, acknow-
ledged it with the warmest expreflions of gratitude. Three of
the earl's attendants, being convicted of assisting him in this
aflault on the king's servants, were executed at Perth; but
they could give no light into the motives, which had prompted
their master to an action so repugnant to these acknowledg-
ments. Diligent search was made for the person concealed in
the study, and from him great discoveries were expected. But
Andrew Henderson the earl's steward, who upon a promise of
pardon, confefled himself to be the man, was as much a
stranger to his master's designs as the reft; and tho' placed in
the Rfudy by Gowrie's command, he did not even know for
what end that station had been afligned him. The whole
tranfaEion remained as impenetrably dark as ever; and the two
brothers, it was concluded, had concerted their scheme with-
out either confidant or accomplice, with unexampled secrecy
as well as wickedness.

A N accident, no less strange than the other circumstances Sprot's dif

of the story, and which happened nine years after, discovered coverie.
that this opinion, however plausible, was ill founded ; and concerning
that the two brothers had not carried on their machinations all
alone. One Sprot, a notary, having whispered among several
persons that he knew Tome secrets relating to Gowrie's confpi-
racy, the privy council thought the matter worthy of their at-

V L. II. G tention,

o 0 ttntion, and ordered him to be seized. His confeflion was
V"l. partly voluntary, and pirtly forced from him by torture. Ac-

, cording to his account, Logan of Reftarling, a gentleman of

n'oo n opuTent fortune, but of diflolute morals, was privy to all
Gowrie's intentions, and an accomplice in his crimes. Mr.
Ruthven, he said, had frequent interviews with him, in order
to concert the plan of their operations, the earl had corref-
ponded with him to the fame purpose; and one Bour, Logan's
confidant, was trusted with the secret, and carried the letters
between them. Both L6gan and Bour were now dead. But
Sprot aflirmed that be had read letters written both by Gowrie
4nd Logan, on that occasion ; and in confirnation of his tefti-
anony, everal of Logan's letters, which a curiosity fatal to
bimfelf had prompted'Sprot to steal from among Bour's papers,
were produced .' These were compared, by the privy coun-
cil, with papers of Logan's hand writing, and the resemblance
was manifest. Persons of undoubted credit, and well qualified
to judge of the matter, examined them, and swore to their au-
thenticity. Death itself did not exempt Logan from profecu-
tion, his bones were dug up, and tried for high treason, and by
a sentence, equally odious and illegal t, his lands were forfeited,

and

? Logan's letters were si e in number. One to Boar, another to Gow-

rie, and three of them without any direEtion; nor could Sprot discover
hte name of the person to whom they were written. Logan gives him
the appilation of Right Hcn:urable. It appears from this, however, and.
?rorn'other Words in the letter, Cram. 95, hat there Were several perfdns
privy to the conspiracy. The date of the firfl letter is July si8h. Mr.
Ruthven had communicated the matter to Logan only five days before.
Ibid.' It appears from the original rummess of Forfaultu:e aginft Lo-
pan's heirs, that Bour, thoiuh he had letteri addrefred to him with iregar
to a conlpircy equaJly d2ngerous rid important, was so illiterate that he
could not read. " jacobus Bour, literarum prorrfil ignsrus, diKl GCorgii
" opera in legendis omnibus criptis ad eum miflis, vel peitinenlibus, ue-
batur." This is altogether firange; and'nothig but the capricious cha-
rafer of Logan can ccount for hischnoof:.g iuch a corfidant.

f By the Roman law'; ,erfonrs uiltv of the crirce of high treason

might be tried een after'death. This praEi ie was adopted 'by the Scont,
without any limitation, Parl. 1540. . 69. But the unlimited exercise of
this power was oon conceived to be dangerous;, ind the crowh was laid
under proper-refriaion, by a a A D. 154s. which has never been
pirilted. rhe words of it are, " And bcaufe thB said lrdc (i. e. the
lords of articles) think ththat the aid a (viz. in ts40) tob general, and
prejudicial to the barons in the realm, therefore ftatuoue and ordainr thna
the raid a I(hall have no place in time comirg, bt'againlt the heirs oi
them that hotorioufly commit or flall commit lele majeRy agaiilt ihe
king's person, againfl the realm for av'erting the fame, and againll themt
that Ihall happen to betray 'the king's asrny allenarly, and being notourly
known in their time and the heirs of these persons to be called and
judged within five years after the deceale of the lIid pcrfonil committrrs
of the aid crimes; and the said time being bypafl, the said heirs nvr
to be pursued for the ame." The 'entence 'againrR .oan violated tlis
fatute in two pariculair. He was not nntourly known drainlk lhis life
to be an accomplice in the crime or whith he wat tried , and his heirs.
were called in qeftion more than five years after ic lealth. It is rttialrk

and his posterity declared infamous. Sprot was condemned to B o q ik
be hanged for mifprfion of treason. He adhered to his con- VtIIL
fefion to the last, and having promised, on the fcafiold, to
give the fpetators a sign in confirmation of the truth of what 1660.
he had depoed, he thrice clapped his hands, after he was
thrown off the ladder by the executioner *.

B u T though it be thus unexpectedly discovered that Gowrie

did not at without aflociates, little additional light is thrown,
by this discovery, on the motives and intention of his coinduc.
It appears alnmof incredible that two young men of such dif-
tinguiflied virtue, ffiould revolt all at once, from their duty,
and attempt a crime so atrocious, as the murder of their fove-
reign. It appears still more improbable, that they Ihould have

G a concerted

able, that this statute seems not to have been attended to in.the parlii-
ment which forfeited Logan. Another singular circumtance deserves n-
tice. As it is a maxim of justice that no perron can be tried in ablence;
and as lawyers are always tenacious of their forms, and often abufrd ia
their devices for preserving them, they contrive that in any procei againit
a dead person, his corps or bones shall be presented at the bar. Eximplea
of this occur frequently in the Scottish hiltory. After the battle of Cor-
richie, the dead body of the earl of Huntly was presented in parliamenq,
before sentence of forfaulture was pronounced agaitn him. For the sale
reason the bodies of Gowrie and his brother were preserved, in order that
they might be produced in parliament. Logan's bones, in compliance with
the fame rule, were dug up. Mackent. Cim.'Lw. Book . Tit. 6.
§. 22.

* It appears that archbishop Spotfwood was.prefe't at the execution of

Sprot. Crm. 1l : nd yet he seems to have given no credit to his dif-
coveres. The manner in which he speaks of him is remarkable: " Whe-
" ther or not I hould mention the arraignment and execution of George
" Sprot, who suffered at Edinburgh, I am doubtful. His cbnfefioi,
" though voluntary and constant, carrying Imall probability. The man de-
' posed, &c. It seemed to be a very fiAion, and a mere invention of
" the man's own brain, for neither did he hew the letter, nor could any
" wife man think that Gowrie, who went about the treason so secretly,
" would have communicated the matter to such a man as Logan was known
" to be." p. So8. Spotfwood could not be ignorant of the solemnity with
which Logan had been tried, and of the proof. brought of the authenticity
of his letters. He himself was probably present in parliament at the
trial. The earl of Dunbar, of whom he always speaks with the highest
rcfpect, was the person who 'directed the process againit Logan. Such a
peremptory declaration againit the truth of Sprot's evidence, notwith-
standing all there circumlances, is surprising. Sir Thomas Hamilton, the
king's advocate at that time, and afterwards earl of Hadington, rprefents
the proof produced at Logan's trial as extremely convincing; and in an
original letter of his to the king lift of June 1609. (in Bibl. Facult.
Jurid.) after mentioning the manner in which the trial had been conduted,
he thus goes on

" When the probation of the summons was referred to the lords of

articles votes, they found uniformly, all in one voice, the laid fummonc
to be so clearly proved, that they seemed to contend who should be able
mot 'zealouny to express the fstlfaction of his heart, not only by the
maR pithy words, but by ters of joy ; divers of the bet rank consef-
ing, that that whereof they doubted at their entry into the house was now
so mrnifeft, that they behoved to esteem them traitor, who hould any Ion.
[ec refuse to declare their assured resolution of the truth of that trcafon,"

Bo o g concerted their undertaking with so little foresight and prudence
VIII. Js they intended that the deed fiould have remained conceal-
' "*. ed, they could not have choren a more improper scene for exc-
e .' cutipg t.than their own house. If they intended that Hender-

.son hould haye struck the blow, they could not have pitched
on a man more destitute of courage, that must direc the hand
of an aflafin ; not could they expect that he, unsolicited, and
unacquainted with their purpose, would enture on filch a def-
erate ation. If Ruthven meant to stab the king with his
own hand, why did he withdraw the dagger ater it was
pointed at his breaR ? How could he leave the king, after such
a plain declaration of his intention ? Was it not preposterous to
commit him to the keeping of such a timid and false aflociate,
as Henderson ? For what purpose did he waste time, in binding
.the hands of an unarmed man, whom he might easily have dif-
patched with his sword ? Had providence permitted them to
eanbrue their hands in the blood of their fdvereign, what ad-
'vantage could have accrued to them by his death ? And'what
claims or pretensions could they have opposed to the rights of
his children * ? Inevitable and instant vengeance, together with
perpetual infamy, were the only consequences they could ex-
pec to follow such a crime.

ON the'other hand, it is impoflible to believe that the king

had formed any design against the life of the two brothers.
They had not incurred his indignation, by any crime; and were
in no degree, the bjects of his jealousy or hatred t nor %vas

* .It has been asserted, .hat, in confrquence of the king's death, the

earl of Gowrie might have pretended to the crown of England, as the Con
of Dorothea Stewart daughter of lord Methven by Ma garec of England,
who after her divorce from the earl of Angus, took that nobleman for her
third husband. Burnet Hi., of his own times. But this aertion is ill
founded. It appears, from undoubted evidence thjt lord Methven had
only one child by queen: Margaret, which died in its infancy, and Doro-
thea lady Ruthven was not the daughter of queen Margaret, but'of Jannet
Stewart lord Methven:s second wife, a daughjer of John earl of athol.
Crawf. Peer. 39. And though Gowrie had really been delccnded from
the blood royal of England, the king had at-that time a on and a daugh-
ter; and besides them, lady Arabella Stewart daughter of Chrle earl of
Lenox had a preferable title to the crown of Engl:nd.

· Sir Henry Neville, in a letter to fir.Ralph Win.wood, impute; the

death of the two brother, to a cause not mentioned by any of our hiRo-
rianh. " Out of Scotland we hear that there i no good agreement,'bt
rather an open difference betwixt the king and his wife, and many are of
Opinion that the dilcovery of some affAetion between her and the earl of
Cowrie's brother (who wa. killed vwih him) was the trues cause and mo-
tive of that tragedy." V/inw. Mem. vol. i. '74. Whether the follow-
ing palages in Nicholson's letter be any confirmation of that suspicion, s
Submitted to the reader. In his letter Sept; , 6oa, be mentions the re-
torn of Gowrie's two younger brothers into Scotland, and add, " The
coming in of there two, and the queen of Scots dealing with them, and
fending away and furnilhing Mrs. Beatrix [their' ifler] with luch informa-
tion as fir Thomas Erfline hae given, hlth bred great suspicion in the Ring

of

he of a pirit so sanguinary, or Co noted for raf and desperate B o o K
valour, as to have attempted to murder them in their own VlII.
house, where they were surrounded with many domestics, he -
only with a slender and unarmed train ; here they could call 16o0.
to their afliftance the inhabitants of a city, at the devotion of
their family, while he was at a distance from all aid; and least
of all would he have chosen for his associates, in such an en-
terprize, the earl of Mar, and the duke of Lenox, the former
conneced in close friendihip with the house of Gowrie, and the
latter married to one of the earl's sifters.

W HICH SOE v i of thee opposite yftem s we embrace; A conjec-

whether we impute the intention of murder to Gowrie, or to ture con-
the king; insuperable difficulties atife, and we are involved in en, ,tigof
darkness, mystery, and contraditions. Perhaps the source ofthe confpi-
the whole conspiracy ought to be searched for deeper, and by rtors.
deriving it from a more remote cause, e may discover it to be
less criminal.

To keep the king of Scots in continual dependance, was one

great object of Elizabeth's policy. In order to this, she some-
times oothed him; and sometimes bribed his ministers and fa-
vourites; and when ite failed of attaining her end by there
means, She encouraged the clergy to render any adminilfration
ihe distrusted unpopular, by decrying it, or stirred up ome sac-
tion of the nobles to oppose, and to overturn it. They, un-
acquainted with the arts of undermining a miniffry by intrigues,
had recourse to the ruder pracice of rendering themselves ma-
ters of the king's person, that they might thereby obtain the di-
retion of his councils. Those nobles, who seized the king at
the Raid of Rutmhen, were infligated, and supported by her.
Bothwell, in all his wild attempts, enjoyed her protelcion, and
found a retreat in her dominions. The connecions which
James had been forming of late with the Roman Catholic
princes, his secret negotiations in England with her fubjecs, and
the maxims by which he governed his own kingdom, all con-
tributed to excite her jealousy. She dreaded some great re-
volution in Scotland to be approaching, and it was her interest
to prevent it. The earl of Gowrie was one of the mos power-
ful of the Scottish nobles, and descended from ancestors warm-
ly attached to the English interest. lHe had adopted the fame
system, and believed the welfare of his country to be infepara-
bly connected with the subsistence of the alliance between the

two

of Scots that they come not in but non roine dangerous .Iolt." In another
ietter, Janunay I, 1603. The ay of writing mry alt, Mrs. lieatrix
Ruthven was brought by the lady Pailly, and Mrs. of Angus, an one of
their gentlewomen into the court in theevening, and flowed in a ch..:nbcr
prepared for her by the ucn's direction, where the queen had nmuch time
adJ conference with her. Of this the Iing got notice, and flewed his dif-
like thereof to the queen, gently reproving her lor it, and examining
quietly of the queen's rervants of the ame, and of nther mattera thereunto
belonging with such discretion nd secrecy aa requirea such a matter.

Bo o two kingdoms. During his residence at Paris, he had con-
VIII. trated an intimate friendship with fir Henry Neville, the
v-q ueen's ambafiador there, and was recommended by him to his

court, as a person of whom great use might be made . Eli-
zabeth received him, as he passed through England, with dif-
tinguifhed marks of respect and favour. From all these cir-
curiRances, a suspicion may arise, that the plan of the cons-
piracyagainft the king was formed at that time, in concert
with her. Such a fulpicion prevailed in that age; and from
the letters of Nicholson, Elizabeth's agent in Scotland, it ap-
pears not to be destitute of foundation. An English ship was
observed hovering, for some time, in the mouth of the Firth of
Forth. The earl's two younger brothers fled into England,
after the ill success of the conspiracy, and were proteced by
Elizabeth. And James himself, though he prudently concealed
it, took great umbrage at her behaviour. None, however.
of Elizabeth's intrigues in Scotland tended to hurt the king's
person, but only to circumscribe his authority, and to thwart
his schemes. His life was the surest safe-guard of her own,
and restrained the popifl pretenders to her crown, and their
abettors, from desperate attempts, to which their impatience
and bigotry might, otherwise, have urged them on. To have
encouraged Gowrie to murder his sovereign, would, on her
part, have been an act of the utmost imprudence. Nor does
this teem to have been the intention of the two brothers. Mr.
Ruthven, first of all endeavoured to decoy the king to Perth,
without any attendants. When these proved more numerous
than was expected, the earl employed a stratagem in order to
separate them from the king, by pretending that he had rode
away towards Falkland, and by calling hastily for their horses,
that they might follow him. But flutting James up mean while
in a distant corer of the house, and by attempting to bind his
hands, their design seems to have been rather to seize, than to
aflaflinate him. And though Gowrie had not colleEted his fol-
lowers, so as to have been able to detain him long a prisoner, in
that part of the kingdom, by open force, he might oon have
been conveyed aboard the Englih fliip, which waited perhaps
to receive him, and he might have been landed at Faft-Caftle,
a house of Logan's, in which, according to many obscure hints
in his letters, onme rendezvous of the conspirators was to be
held. Amidst the furprize and terror, into which the king
must have been thrown by the violence offered to him, it was
extremely natural for hini to conclude that his life was fought.
It was the interest of all his followers to confirn him in this be-
lief, and to magnify his danger, in order to add to the impor-
tance and merit of their own services. And thus his fear, and
their vanity, aided by the credulity and wonder, which the

contemplation
*Winw, 1. 156.

contemplation of any great nd tragical event, when nt fully o o C
understood, is apt to inspire, augmented the whole tranfacion. VI,.
On the other hand, the extravagance and improbability of the -V *
circumstances, which were added, detracted from the credit of 1600
those, which really happened; and even furniflied pretences
for calling in queflion the truth of the whole conspiracy.

THE account of what had happened at Perth reached Manydir-

Edinburgh next morning. Theprivy council commanded the bic;couthe
ministers of that city instantly to assemble their people; and blined by
after relating to them the circumstances of the conspiracy form- he king.
ed against the king's life, to return public thanks to God, for
the protection which he had so visibly afforded hin. But as the
first accounts tranfinitted to Edinburgh, written in a hurry, and
the circumstances of the conspiracy were but imperfecly known;
and the paflions which it excited ftrohgly felt, were mdiftintt,
exaggerated, and contradietory, the ministers laid hold of this;
and though they offered to give public thanks to God for the
king's safety, they refused to enter into any detail of particu-
lars, or to utter from the chair of truth, what appeared to be
still dubious and uncertain.

A F E w days after, the king returned to Edinburgh; and

though Galloway, the minister of his own chapel, made an
harangue to the people at the public crots, in which he recited
all the circumstances of the conspiracy; though James himself,
in their hearing, confirmed his account; though he commanded
a narrative of the whole tranfaaion to be published; the mi-
nifters of that city, as well as many of their brethren, ill con-
tinued incredulous, and unconvinced. Their high esteem of
Gowrie, their jealousy of every part of the king's condut,
added to Come false and many improbable circumstances in the
narrative, not only led them to fufpeft the whole, but gave
their suspicions an air of credibility. 'But at length, the king,
partly by arguments, partly by threats, prevailed on all of
them, except Mr. Robert Bruce, to own that they were con-
vinced of the truth of the confpiratcy. He could be brought
no further than to declare, that he reverenced the king's ac-
count of the tranfation, but could not fay that he hinfelf
was persuaded of the truth of it. The (cruples or obstinacy
of a tingle man would have been little regarded, but as the
fame spirit of incredulity began to `pread among the people,
the example of one, in o high reputation for integrity and abi-
lities, was extremely dangerous. The king was at the utinoR
pains to convince and to gain Bruce, hut finding it ipoflible
to remove his doubts, he deprived hin of his benefice, and
after repeated delays, and many attempts towards a reconcile-
ment. banillied him the kingdom *.

THE
* Spotfv. 461, &c. Cald. . 389, &c.

B o o T proceedings of parliament were not retarded by any
VII. scruples of this fort. The dead bodies of the two brothers
^ -v-^ were produced there, according to law; an inditment for high

6oco. treason was preferred against them; witnesses were examined;

Proceedings
of prlia- and, by an unanimous sentence, their estates and honours were
ment a- forfeited; the puniihment due to traitors was inflicted on their
gainn the dead bodies, and as if the punilhment hitherto in use did not
confpirt- express fuficient detestation of their crimes, the parliament en-
to"' afted that the surname of Ruthven Thould be abolished; and

in order to preserve the memory of the king's miraculous es-
cape, and to declare the sense which the nation had of the di-
vine goodness, to all future ages, appointed the fifth of Au-
gust to be observed annually, as a day of public thankfgi-
ving t.

THOUGH

t A few weeks after the death of the two brothers, the king pub-

lifhed a difcsurfe of their vale and unnatural cenfpiracy agaifl/ his life.
In the year 1713, George earl of Cromertie publilhed an " Hiltorical
" account of the conspiracy by the earl of Gowrie, and Robert Logan of
' Reftalrig against king James VI." He seems not to have seen the
account which the king himself had given of that matter, and borrows the
whole hiforical part from Spotfwood, and other authors; but he has
extraced from the public records the depositions of the witnefe., pro-
duced by the king's council, in order to make good the charge against
the two brothers and Logan their Tociate. From these two treati'es our
knowledge of all the material circumtances of the conspiracy is derived.
The evidence which they contain, one would expe6t to be authentic and
decisive. An account of a fat, Itill recent, publilhed by royal authority,
and the original depositions of persons examined in pretence of the highest
court in the nation, ought to convey a degree f evidence seldom attain-
ed in historical relations, and to exclude all remaining doubt and uncer-
tainty. But as every thing with regard to this tranfiaion is dark and
problematical, the king's account and the depositions of the witnefres
not only vary but contradit each other in so many circumrlances, that
much room is ill left for hesitation, and hilorical fcepticilm. The
teltimony of Henderson is the fullel and most important, but in several
particulars the king's account and his are contradictory. I. According
to the king's account, while Mr. Ruthven was holding the dagger at his
breat, the fellow in the Rudy lood quaking and trembling." Disc.
7. But Henderson fays that he himfelt wrested the dagger out of Mr.
Ruthven's hand. Disc. 53. Crom. 50. Henderson likewise boalted to
his wife that he had that day twice saved the king from being abbed.
Disc. 54. Crom. 53. II The king asserts that Henderson opened the
window during Mr. Ruthven's ablence. Disc. 3. Henderson deposes
that he was only attempting to open it when Mr. Ruthven returned, and
that during the nruggle between the king and him, he opened it. Disc.
53, 54. Crom. 51, 5. III. If we may believe the king, the fellow in
the ludy flood, during the fruggle, behind the king's back inadive and
trembling all the time. Disc. 27. But Henderson affirms that he fnat-
ched away the garter ith which Mr. Ruthven attempted to bind the
king; that he pulled back Ruthven's hand while he was endeavouring to
ltop the king's mouth, and that he opened the window. Dice. 54. Crom.
5;. IV. By the king's account, Mr. Ruthven left him in the Iludy, and
went away in order to meet with his brother, and the earl came up the
rlairs for the fame purpofc. Disc. 3. Henderson deposes that when Mr.

Ruthlven

TH o v G Gowrie's conspiracy occasioned a sudden and a B 0 0 t

great alarm, it was followed by no consequences of impor- VIII.
tance; and having been concerted by the two brothers, either v
without any afrociates, or with such as were unknown, and '
chose to remain so, the danger was over, as soon as discovered.
But not long after, a conspiracy broke out in England againI
Elizabeth, which, though the firR danger was instantly dif-
pelled, produced tragical effets, and rendered the close of
that queen's reign dismal and unhappy. As James was
deeply interested in that event, it merits our particular notice.

THE

Ruthven left the king, " he believes that he did not pars from the door."
Crom. ;I. It is apparent both from the situation of the house, and
from other circumslances, that there could not possibly have been any
interview between the brothers at this time. Disc. 53.

Henderson was twice examined, firi at Falkland before the privy

council in Augull, and next at Edinburgh before the parliament in No-
vember. Not to mention some leser variations between there depofi-
tions, we shall point out two which are remarkable. 1. In his first depo-
fition Mr. Henderson relates the mout material circumlRance of the whole
in there words. Mr. Ruthven pulled out the deponent's dagger and
" held the fame to his majefly's breast, faying, rememberyou of myfa-
" ther's murder; you Jhall now die for it, and minting to his highness'&
" heart, with the dagger, the deponent threw the fame out of Mr.
" Ruthven's hands, and swore that as God (hall judge his foul, that if
" Mr. Ruthvcn had retained the dagger in his hand, the space a man
" may go fix teps, he would have firicken the king to the hilts with it."
Disc. So. But at his second examination he varied trom this in two ma-
terial circumstances. Firlt, the words which he at that time put in Mr.
Ruthven's mouth while he held the dagger at the king's brealt are,
'- Sir you mtuf be my prifner; remember on my father's detal." Se.
condly, when he threatened him with death, it waa only to deter him
from making any noile, " Hold your tongue, or by Ckrir you ball die."
a. In his firIt deposition, the words of Mr. Ruthven when he returned to
the chamber where he had left the king, are, " There is no remedy, by
God yo mu fUl Jie." But in his second deposition, " By God there is no
" remedy, and offered to bind his majesty's hands." Crom. st. The
material wordsyou must die are omitted. The firl deposition feema
plainly to intimate that it was Ruthven's intention to murder the king.
The second would lead us to conclude that he had no other design than
to detain him as a prisoner.

There are likewise fume remarkable contradiatinns in the tefimonies

of theotherwitneffes. t. In the discourse publilhed by authority it is
insinuated that the tumult of the inhabitants was raised againll the
king, and that it required ofme art to pacify them. Dire. 31. The
duke of Lenox confirms this in his depolition. Crom. 44. An a of
privy council summoning the magillrates of Perth to answer for that riot
is till extant. And yet Andrew Roy, one of the baillien of the town,
depofeb that he himself railed the people, and that they took arms in
order to affill the king. Crom. 66. . Henderson deposes that he gave
an evasive answer to Mr. John Muncrief, who enquired where he had been
that morning, because the earl had commanded him not to let any man
know that he had been at Falkland. Dife. 54. Moncrief deposes to the
fame purpose. Crom. 64. And yet George Hay, afterwards lord Kin-
noul, and chancellor of Scotland, and Peter Hay, depose that the earl,
in their prelence, aked Henderson, " Whom he found with the king at
Falkland " Crom. 70, 71. Which quet.ion feerm to prove that le did
not aim at keeping thit journey a fccret.

B o o Txa court of England was, at this time, divided between
VI l. two powerful fations, which contended for the supreme direc-
L^ ~' tion of affairs. The leader of the one was Robert D'Evereux,
,6on. earl of Eflex; fir Robert Cecil, the son of lord Treasurer

spir,,.y .- Burleigh, was at the head of the other. The former was the
g:ainil Eli- most accomplifed, and the most popular of all the EngliSh
·abcLb. nobles; brave, generous, affable though impetuous, yet wil-

ling to liften to the councils of those whom he loved; an
avowed, but not an implacable enemy; a friend no less con-
slant, than warm ; incapable of disguising his own entiments,
or of misrepresenting those of others; better fitted for a camp,
than for a court; and of a genius that qualified him for the
first place in the administration, with a spirit which fcomed the
second, as below his merit. He was oon diftinguifihed by the
queen, who, with a profusion uncommon to her, conferred on
him, even in his earliest youth, the highest honours. Nor did
this diminish theefteem and affeaion of his countrymen; but,
by a rare felicity, he was at once the favourite of his sovereign,
and the darling of the people. Cecil, on the other hand,
educated in a court, and trained under a father, deeply killed
in all its arts, was crafty, insinuating, induflrious: and though
possessed of talents, which fitted him for the highest offices, he
did not rely upon his merit alone for attaining them, but
availed himself of every advantage, which his own address, or
the mistakes of others afforded him. Two such men were formed
to be rivals, and enemies. Effex despised the arts of Cecil, as
low and bale. To Cecil, the Earl's magnanimity appeared to
be presumption and folly. All the military men, except Raleigh,
favoured Esex. Mofl of the courtiers adhered to Cecil, whose
manners more nearly resembled their own.

His corref- As Elizabeth advanced in years, the firuggle between there
poni.nce factions became more violent. Effex in order to strengthen
withl the hinlfelf, had early courted the friendfip of the king of Scots,
"', '.'
g for whofc right of fucceflion he was a zealous advocate, and

held a close correspondence both with him, and with his prin-
cipal inifters. Cecil, devoted to the queen alone, roe daily
to new honours, by the assiduity of his services, and the
patience, with which he expected the reward of them. While
the earl's high spirit and ipetuofity ometimes exposed him to
checks fron a iftrefs, who, though partial in her assec-
tion towards him, could not easily bear contradition, and
conferred favours often unwiliingly, and always fiowly. His
own solicitations, however, seconded nlalicioufly by his ene-
mies, who wilhed to remove him at a distance from court,
advanced him to the command of the army employed in Ire-
land, againtt Tyrone, and to the office of lord lieutenant of
that kingdom, with a commillon almost unlimited. His fuc-
ceti, in that expedition, did not equal either his own prolnifes,

or

or the expetations of Elizabeth. The queen, peevish from B o o
her disappointment, and exasperated against Eex by the ar- VIII.
tifices of his enemies, wrote him a harsh letter, full of ac- "
cufations and reproaches. These, his impatient pirit could 160'.
not bear, and, in the firfi transports of his resentment, he pro-
posed to carry over a part of his army into England, and by
driving his enemies from the queen's presence, to reinflate himl-
self in favour, and in power. But, upon more mature thoughts,
he abandoned this rall design, and setting fail with a few
officers, devoted to his person, landed in England, and posted
diretly to court. Elizabeth received him, without any fymp-
tom either of affection or of difpl[afure. By proper complian-
ces and acknowledgments, he might have regained his former
ascendant over the queen. But he tho'.ght hnfelf too deeply
injured to ubnit to there. Elizabeth, on the other hand, de-
termined to subdue his haughty temper; and though her fe-
verity drew from him the most humble letters, file confined
him to the lord keeper's house, and appointed commillToners to
try him, both for his condut during his government of Ireland,
and for leaving that kingdom without her permiflion. By their
sentence, he was suspended from all his offices, except that of
master of the horse, and continued a prisoner during the queen's
pleasure. Satisfied with having mortified his pride thus far,
Elizabeth did not susser the sentence to be recorded; and oon
after allowed him to retire to his own house. During there
tranfasions, which occupied several months, Effex Ructuated
between the allegiance he owed to his sovereign, and the desire
of revenge; and sometimes leaned to the one, and sometimes
to the other. In one of the intervals when the latter prevailed,
he ent a messenger into Scotland to encourage the king to
aflert his own right to the fucceflion by force of arms, and
to promise that, besides the afliftance of the earl and all his
friends in England, lord Mountjoy, now lord lieutenant of
Ireland, would join him with 5ooo men, from that kingdom.
But James did not choose to hazard the losing a kingdom, Jlmei'
which was just ready to fall into his hands, by a premnature c'u.i"
attempt to seize it. Mountjoy, too, declined the enterprize, and condLucl.
Effex adopted more dutiful schemes; all thoughts of ambition
appearing to be totally effaced out of his mind.

Tn s moderation, which was merely the effect of disgust The wild

and disappointment, was not of long continuance. And the a"tte"mrPt
queen, having not only refused to renew a lucrative grant, EtIr. .
which flhe had formerly bestowed, but to admit him into her
presence, that new injury drove a temper, naturally impatient,
and now much fretted, to absolute despair. Hi-s friends, in-
stead of oothing his rage, or restraining his impetuosity, ad-
ded to both, by their imprudent and interested zeal. After
many anxious consultations, e determined to atteirpt to re.

drtf

B o o K dref his wrongs by violence. And onfcious how unpopular
VII. fiuch an enterprize would be, if it appeared to proceed from
_t-.-v'- motives of private revenge alone, he endeavoured to give it the
160r. semblance of public utility, by mingling the king of Scotland's

interest with his own. He wrote to James, that the faction
which now predominated in the English court, had resolved to
support the pretensions of the Infanta of Spain to the crown;
that the places of the greatest importance in the kingdom
were put into the hands of his avowed enemies; and that un-
less he sent ambafadors, without delay, to insist on the im-
mediate declaration of his right of fucceflion, their measures
were so well concerted, that all his hopes would be desperate.
James, who knew how disagreeable such a proposal would be
to the queen of England, was not willing rashly to expose
himself to her displeasure. But Effex, blinded by relentment,
and impatient for revenge, abandoned himself to these atfions,
and aed like a man guided by frenzy or despair. With two
or three hundred followers, incompleatly armed, he attempted
to assault a throne, the best eftablihed in Europe. Sallying at
their head, out of his own house, he called on the citizens of
London, if they either valued his life, or wifled to preserve
the kingdom from the dominion of the Spaniards, to take
arms, and to follow his standard. He advanced towards the
palace, with an intention to drive Cecil and his faction out
of the queen's presence, and to obtain a declaration of the
Scottish king's right of succession*. But, though amnoft a-
dored by the citizens, not a man would join him in this wild
enterprize. Dispirited by their indifference, deserted by some of
his own attendants, and almost surrounded by the troops,
which marched under different leaders into the city, he re-
treated to his own house; and without any bold effort,
suitable to his present condition, or worthy of his former
reputation for courage, he surrendered to his enemies.

As oon as James heard of EIfex's ill success, he appointed

the earl of Mar, and the abbot of Kinlofs, to repair as his
ambassadors to the court of England. The sorner of these
was the person, by whose means Effex had carried on his cor-
refpondence with the king. He was a pailionate admirer of
the earl's character, and disposed to attempt every thing that
could contribute to his safety. Bruce, united in a close friend-
Ihip with Mar, was ready to second him with equal zeal. Nor
was the purpose of the enbaffy less fiiendly to Eflex, than the
choice of the ambassadors; they were commanded to Iblicit,
in the warmest manner, for the earl's life, and if they found
that the king, by avowing his friends, could either promlote
their designs, or contribute to their liafety, they were impower-
ed to lay aside all disguise, and to promise that he would put

himfclf
* Birc, Mrm. a. 477,

hhnfelf at their head, and claim what was due to him, by B o o K
force of arms t. But before the ambassadors could reach Lon- VIII.
don, Effex had suffered the punishment he merited by his trea-
son. Perhaps the fear of their interposing, in order to obtain . 1601.
his pardon, hastened his death. Elizabeth continued, for some Hi deab.
time, irresolute concerning his fate, and could not bring her-
seif to consign into the hands of the executioner, a man, who
had once pcfafffed her favour so intirely, without a painful
struggle between her resentment against his late mifcondut,
and her ancient affection towards him. The distress to which
he was now reduced tended naturally to soften the former,
while it revived the latter with new tenderness; and the in-
terceffion of one faithful friend, who had interest with the
queen, might perhaps have saved h;s life, and have procured
him a remiflion, which, of herself, she was aihamed to grant.
But this generous nobleman had at that time no such friend.
And Elizabeth, solicited incessantly by her ministers, and offend-
ed with the haughtiness of Eflex, who, as he imagined,
scorned to ue for pardon, at last commanded the sentence to
put in execution. No sooner was the blow struck, than the
repented of her own rashness, and bewailed his death with
the deepest sorrow. James alwaysconfidered him as one, who
had fallen a martyr to his service, and after his acceflion to the
English throne, restored his son to his honours, as well as al
his associates in the conspiracy, and diitinguifhed them with his * Cmd.
favour . SpoW.

464.

TH Scottish ambaflSdors, finding that they had arrived ames con-

too late to execute the chief business committed to their charge, tinues his
not only concealed that part of their inftrucions, with the ut- intrigues in
noft care, but congratulated the queen, in their matter's name, Esgland.
on her happy escape from such an audacious conspiracy. Eliza-
beth, though no stranger to the king's correspondence with
Eflex, or to that nobleman's intention of aferting James's right
lo the crown, was not willing that these should be known to
the people, and, for that reason, received the congratulations of
the Scottifi ambp.tadors with all poflible marks of credit and
good will; and in order to sooth James, and to preserve the
appearances of union between the two courts, increased the
subsidy which The paid him annually. The ambaffadort resided
for ome time in England, and were employed, with great fuc-
cess, in renewing and extending the intrigues, which Bruce
had formerly entered into with the English nobles. As Eliza-
beth advanced in years, the nglifh turned their eyes more
and more towards Scotland, and were eager to prevent each
other in courting the favour of their future monarch. Affu-
rances of attachment, profeflions of regard, and promises of
support, were offerpd to James from every corner of the king-

dom.

·t Johnft. 189. Birch, Mem, 1.
X o.

B o K dbm. Cecil himself, perceiving what hopes Eflex had found-

VIII. ed on the friendflip of the Scottish king, and what advantages
v-'-J he might have derived from it, thought it prudent to stand no
6o,. longer at a distance from a prince, who might so oon become

his master. But being sensible, at the fame time, how dange-
rous fitch an intercourie might prove, under a miRfrefs natu-
jealous, and whose jealousy grew Itronger with old age; though
he entered into a correspondence with him, he carried it on
with all the secrecy and caution necessary in his situation,
and peculiar to his chara&er. . And James, having gained the
man whole opposition and influence he had hitherto chiefly
dreaded, waited, in perfea security, till that event should hap-
pen, which would open his way to the throne of England. It
was, with some difficulty that he restrained, within proper
bounds, his adherents in that kingdom, who labouring to di-
flinguifh themselves by that officious zeal, with which a prince,
who has a near profpe& of mounting the throne, is always
served, urged him to allow a motion t be made in parliament
for declaring his right of fucceflion to the crown. James pru-
dently discouraged that design; but it was with'no fmail satis-
faction that he observed the ascendant he was acquiring in a
court, whose dicates he had been, so long, obliged to obey;
and which had either prescribed or thwarted every ftep he had
taken during the whole course of his reign *.

160o. NOTW THr STANDi NG the violent struggles of thepo-

Attempts litical factions which divided the court, and the frequent re-
t: civiize volutions which had happened there, since the king first took
'&le's. the reins of government into his own hands, Scotland

had enjoyed unusual tranquillity, being undisturbed by any
foreign enemy, and free from any intestine commotion of long
continuance. During this period, James endeavoured to civi-
lize the Highlanders and the Isles, a part of his dominions al-
most totally negleEted by former monarchs, though the refor-
nmaion of it was an objeEt highly worthy of their care. The
long peace with England had afforded an opportunity of sub-
duing the licentious spirit of the borderers, and of restraining
their depredations, often no less ruinous to their countrymen,
than to their enemies. The inhabitants of the low country be-
gan, gradually, to forget the use of arms, and to become at-
tentive to the arts of peace. But the Highlanders, retaining
their natural fiercenes, averse from labour, and inured to ra-
pine, infested their more industrious neighbours, by their con-
tinual incursions. James being tblicitous not only to repress
their inroads, but to render them useful fubjecs t, had at dif-
ferent times enated many wife laws extremely conducive to
theli ends. All landlords, or chiefs of clans, were enjoined to
permit no persons to reside in their estates, who could not find
futlicient surety for their good behaviour; they were required

to
* Spotfw.467, 471, Birch. Mem. . 514. 1 Basil. Dor. 59.

to make a lift of all suspicious persons under their jurirdietion, B o o c
to bind themselves to deliver them up to jutice, and to indemnify VIII.
those who hould susser by their robberies; and, in order to
ascertain the faithful performance of these articles, the chiefs 1602-
themfelyes were obliged to give hostages to the king, or to put
pledges in his hands. Three towns, which might serve as a
retreat for the industrious, and a nursery for arts and commerce,
were appointed to be built in different parts of the Highlands;
one in Cantyre, another in Lochabar, and a third in the isle of
Lewis; and, in order to draw the inhabitants thither; all the
privileges of royal boroughs were to be conferred upon them.
Finding it, however, to be no easy matter to inspire the inha-
bitants of those countries with the love of industry, a refolu-
tion was taken to plant among them, colonies of people from
the more industrious countries. The first experiment was made
in the isle of Lewis; and as it was advantageously situated for
the fishing trade, a source from which Scotland ought naturally
to derive great wealth, the colony transported thither was drawn
out of Fife, the inhabitants of which were well Ikilled in that
branch of commerce. But before they had remained there long
enough to manifest the good effecs of this inflitution, the
islanders, enraged at feeing their country occupied by those
intruders, took arms, and furprizing them in the night-time,
murdered some of them, and compelled the reft to abandon
the settlements. The king's attention being soon after turned to
other obje&s, we hear no more of this salutary projet. Though
James did not pursue the design, with that steady application
and perseverance, without which it is impoflible to change the
imanners of a whole people, he had the glory, however, not
only of having first conceived the thought, but of having first
pointed out the proper method of introducing the civil arts of
life into that part of the Island *.

AS T E R having long enjoyed a good fRate of health, the es- Elizbeth't

sea of a found constitution, and the reward of uncommon re- lat illnefu
gularity and temperance, Elizabeth began this winter to feel"and death.
her vigour decrease, and to be sensible of the infirmities of old
age. Having removed on a very Rormy day from Weftninter 60o3.
to Richmond, whither fie was impatient to retire, her coin- J1n 31'
plains increased. She had no formed fever; her pulse was
good; but flie eat little, and could not sleep. Her distemper
ieemed to proceed from a deep melancholy, which appeared
both in ler countenance and behaviour. She delighted in soli-
tude, flie fat confantly in the dark; and was often drowned
in tears.

No sooner was the queen's indisposition known, than per-

sons of all ranks, and of all different feets and parties, redou-
bled their applications to the king of Scots, and vied with each

other,
Parl. 1587, 1594, 1597. Spotfw. 468.

B o o K other, in profeflions of attachment to his person, and in promi-
VIII. fes of fubmiflion to his government. Even some of her own

' fcrvants, weary of the length of her reign, fond of novelty,
'63. impatient to get rid of the burden of gratitude for pals bene-

fits, and expecting to share in the liberality of a new prince,
began to deert her. And crowds of people hurried towards
Scotland, eager to pre-occupy the favour of the fuccefior, or
afraid of being too late in paying homage to him.

ME A SWHIL , the queen's disease increased, and her

melancholy appeared to be fettled and incurable. Various con-
je&ures were formed concerning the causes of a disorder, fron
which she seemed to be exempted by the natural cheerfulness of
her temper. Some imputed it to her being forced, contrary to
her inclination, to pardon the earl of Tyrone, whose rebellion
had for many years created her so much trouble. Others ima-
gined that it arose from observing the ingratitude of her courti-
ers, and the levity of her people, who beheld her health de-
clining with most indecent indifference, and looked forward to
the acceflion of the Scottish king, with an impatience which
they could not conceal. The most common opinion, at that
time, and perhaps the most probable, was that it flowed from
grief for the earl of Effex. She retained an extraordinary re-
gard for the memory of that unfortunate nobleman; and
though she often complained of his obstinacy, eldom mentio-
ned his name without tears*. An accident happened soon as-
ter her retiring to Richmond, which revived her affection with
new tenderness, and inibittered her sorrows. The countess of
Nottingham, being on her death-bed, desired to fee the queen,
in order to reveal something to her, without discovering which,
the could not die in peace.' When the queen came into her
chamber, fle told her, that while Effex lay under sentence of
death, he was desirous of irp'oring pardon in the manner
which the queen herself had prescribed, by returning a ring,
which during the height of his favour she had given him,
with a promise that, if in any future distress, he ent that back
to her as a token, it hould intitle him to her protection; that
lady Scroop was the person he intended to employ in order to
present it ; that by a mistake, it was put into her hands in-
stead of lady Scroop's ; and that he having communicated the
matter to her husband, one of Eflex's mos implacable enemies,
he had forbid her either to carry the ring to the queen, or to
return it to the earl. The countess, having thusdifclofed her
secret, begged the queen's forgiverefs; but Elizabeth, who
now saw both the malice of the earl's enemies, and how un.
jufily she lhd filfpected him of inflexible obstinacy, replied,

God ny forgive you, but I never can ;" and left the

room
* irch. Mem. . 5.

room in great emotion f. From that moment, her spirit funk B o o K
entirely; Ihe could scarce taste food; he refused all the me- VIII.
dicines prescribed by her physicians ; declaring that flle wiihed -'-
to die, and would live no longer. No intreaty could prevail on 1603.
her to go to bed; he fat on cuflhions, during ten days and
nights, pensive and silent, holding her finger almost continually
in her mouth, with her eyes open, and fixed on the ground.
The only thing to which flle eemed to give any attention,
were the acts ot devotion, periormed in her ap:rtnent, by the
archbiflop of Canterbury ; and in these ffie joined with great
appearance of fervour. Wated, at laef, as well by anguifli
of mnind, as by long abstinence, he expired without a ftrug-
gle, on Thursday te z4th day of March, in the 70th year
of her age, and in the 45th of her reign .amd

FOR E IG N ERS often accuse the Englilh of indifference irch.2

Mem. 2.

and disrespect towards their princes; but without reason ; no 506.
people are more grateful than they to those monarchs, who me- Birch.
rit iheir gratitude. The names of Edward II. and Henry V. Negoc.
are men.ioned by the English of this age, with the fame warmth 2o6.
as they were by thole, who hared in the blessings and splendors rY73'
ot their reigns. The memory of Elizabeth is still adored in
England. And the historians of that kingdom, after celebrat-
ing her love of her people; her fagaciry in discerning their
true interest ; her steadiness in pursuing it; her wisdom in the
choice of her ministers ; the glory he acquired by arms ; the
tranquillity she secured to her subjects; and the increase of
flane, of riches, and of commerce, which were the fruits of
all these, justly rank her aniongft the imoft illustrious princes.
Even the defects in her character, they observe, were not of a
kind pernicious to her people. Her excefive frugality was not
accompanied with the love of hoarding; and though it pre-

f This anecdote concerning Eizabeth was first publilhed by Ofbirne,

Mcm. f Eliz. p. 3; is confirmed by the tetimony of de Maurier, Mem.
260, ad by the tiaditional evidence of Lady Elizabeth Spolman publi(h-
ed by Dr. Birch. Negoc. o6. Cmden mentions the queen's grief for
L.lf . death as one ol the causes of ler melancholy. Sine original pa-
p. l einain which prove that this was commonly believed at the time.
B. 's Merm . o6. I.flx, however, had been beheaded two years
I r : h drath, and there lieems to have Lc"-: no other reason, but that
wn, h we have ffigned, why her l;firow luldl revive with so much
vl.,,tl I at so great a diltan.e of time. A thr d.iath of thc counters of
l'.,tllhamn happened about a Ibrtnight b e the queen's death, the
c,,inidence of theft events, together with ihe other evidence mentioned,
ad , Ifb much prob..oility to the tlor; related by Olbljine, r. will entitle
it to a place i hllutoy The only objeqaijo to thl. account we have given
o: I:lizatch's atacihmczt : o Ellcx, arlfe I'rom her great age. At the
age s1i 68, the amornou pafions are c:oi.molly abundantly cool, and the
violence of' all the pnlrions, excilet one, i mulch abated. But the force
of this objeaion is entirely remoaved by atn authur who has illullrated ma-
ny palTageb in the linglinl iltory, and adornel more. Cataloue of Roy.
and Nob. Authors. Article Eliex.

VOL. II. H vented

B o o K vented some great undertakings, and rendered the success of

VIII. others incompleat, it introduced economy into her adminiftra-
>^_v3 - tion, and exempted the nation from many burdens, which a

i603. monarch, more profuse, or more enterprising, must have i:n-

posed. Her slowness in rewarding her servants sometimes dif-
couraged useful merit ; but it prevented the undeferving fron,
acquiring power and wealth, to which they had no title. Her
extreme jealousy of those princes, who pretended to dispute
her right to the crown, led her to take such precautions, as
tended no less to the public safety, than to her own ; and to
court the affecions of her people, as the firmed support of her
throne. Such is the piaure the Englilh draw of this great
queen.

WHOEVER undertakes to write the history of Scotland,

finds himself obliged, frequently, to view her in a very differ-
ent, and in a less amiable light. Her authority in that king-
dom, during the greater part of her reign, was little inferior
to that, which he poflcffed in her own. But this authority,
acquired at sirs by a service of great importance to the nation,
fle exercised in a manner extremely pernicious to its happiness.
By her industry in fomenting the rage of the two contending
factions ; by supplying the one with partial aid ; by feeding the
other with false hopes; by balancing their power so artfully,
that each of them was able to distress, and neither of them to
subdue the other ; fle rendered Scotland long the. feat of dif-
cord, confusion, and bloodflsed: and her craft and intrigues,
affecting what the valour of her ancestors could not accomplifll,
reduced that kingdom to a state of dependance on England.
The maxims of policy, often little consonant to those of mora-
lity, may, perhaps, justify this conduc. But no apology can
be offered for her behaviour to queen Mary ; a scene of dilli-
mulation without necessity ; and of severity beyond example.
In almost all her other ations, Elizabeth is the objet of our
highest admiration; in this, we must allow that she not only
laid aide the magnanimity, which became a queen, but the
feelings, natural to a woman.

James pro- THOU G H Elizabeth would never permit the question con-
clim ed cerning the right of fucceflion to the crown to be determined
England. in parliament; nor declare her own sentiments concerning a

point, which ihe wiflied to remain an impenetrable mystery;
flhe had, however, formed no design of excluding the Scot-
tifll king from an inheritance, to which his title was undoubt-
ed. A hort time before her death, flie broke the filencc,
which flie had so long prefcrved on that fubjcet, and told Ce-
cil and the lord admiral, " That her throne, was the throne of
Iings ; that fle would have no mean person to acend it, and
that her cousin the king of Scots fliould be her successor."
This flic confirmed on her death-bed. And as soon as flie

breathed

breathed her last, the lords of the privy-council proclaimed B o X
James King of England. All the intrigues carried on by so V.
reigners, in favour of the Infanta, all the cabals formed with-
in the kingdom, to support the titles of lady Arabella, and the 63
earl of Hartford, disappeared in a moment; and nobles, and
people, forgetting their ancient hostilities with Scotland, and
their averfilon for the dominion of Itrangers, testified their satis-
faition with louder acclamations, than were usual at the ac-
cellion of their native princes. Aidlt this tumult of joy, a
motion made by a few patriots, who proposed to prescribe some
conditions to the fucceflor, and to exact from him the redress of
some grievances, before they called him to the throne, was
scarce heard; and Cecil, by (tifing it, added to his stock of
merit with his new master. Sir Charles Percy, brother of the
earl of Northumberland. and Thomas Somcrfet the earl of
Worcester's son, were dispatched to Scotland, with a letter to
the king, signed by all the peers and privy counsellors then in
London ; informing him of the queen's death, of his acceflion
to the throne, of their care to recognize his title, and of the
universal applause, with which the public proclamation of it
had been attended. They made the utmost haste to deliver
this welcome aleffage ; but were prevented by the zeal of Sir
Robert Carey, lord Hunfdane's youngest son, who setting out
a few hours after Elizabeth's death, arrived at Edinburgh on
Saturday night, just as the king had gone to bed. He was
immediately admitted into the royal apartment, and kneeling by
the king's bed, acquainted him with the death of Elizabeth,
saluted him King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland,
and as a token of the truth of the intelligence which he
brought, presented him a ring, which his filter lady Scroop had
taken from the queen's finger after her death. James heard
him with a decent composure. But as Carey was only a pri-
vate merenger, the information he brought, was not made
public, and the king kept his apartment till the arrival of Percy
and Somerset. Then his titles were solemnly proclaimed ; and
his own subjects exprefed no less joy, than the Englifl, at this
increase of his dignity. As his pretence was absolutely necef-
fary in England, where the people were extremely impatient
to fee their new sovereign, he prepared to set out for that
kingdom, without delay. He appointed his queen to follow
him within a few weeks. He committed the government of
Scotland to his privy council. He intrusted the care of his
children to different noblemen. On the Sunday before his de.
parture, he repaired to the church of St. Giles, and after hear-
ing a fernon, in which the preacher displayed the greatness of
the divine goodness in raising him to the throne of such a pow-
erful kingdom without opposition or bloodshed, and exhorted
him to express his gratitude, bypromoting to the utmost, the

h a hap-

B o o K happiness and prosperity of his fubjecs ; the king rote up, and
VIII. addrefling himlelf to the people, made many profelions of n-
tv--" alterable affection towards then ; promised frequently to visit

1603. Scotland; assured them that his Scottifli fubjeas, notwith-

fsanding his absence, flould feel that he was their native prince,
no less than when he resided among thenl; and might itiil
trust that his ears flhould be always open to their petitions,
which he would answer with the alacrity and love of a parerr.
His words were, often, interrupted by the tears of the whole
audience; who, though they exulted at the king's prosperity,

tJ SpoRfw. were melted into sorrow by there tender declarations t.
470. ON the fifth of April, he began his journey, with a fplcn-
poliefi;n did, but not a numerous train; and next day he entered Ber-
of the wick. Wherever he came, immelnfe multitudes were afierm-
throne. bled to welcome hin ; and the principal persons, in the differ-

ent counties through which he pared, dilplayed all their wealth
and magnificence in entertainments prepared for him, at their
houses. Elizabeth had reigned o long in England, that noft
of her fibjects remembered no other court but her's; and
their notions of the manners and decorum suitable to a prince
were formed upon what they had obfeived there. It was na-
tural to apply this standard to the behaviour and actions of their
new monarch, and to compare him. at firfl fight, with tile
queen, on whose throne he was to be placed. James, whole
manners were extremely diferent from her's, suffered by the
comparison. He had not that flowing affability, by which
Elizabeth captivated the hearts of her people; and though easy
among a few whom he loved, his indolence could not bear the
fatigue of re ndering himself agreeable to a mixed multitude.
He was no les a itranger to that dignity, with which Eliza-
beth tempered her familiarity. And instead of that well-jud-
ged frugality, with which flie conferred titles of honour, he
bestowed them with an undiftinguifliing profusion, that render-
ed them no longer marks of diftin.lion, or rewards of merit.
But there were the reflections of the few alone ; the multitude
continued their acclamations; and aidift these, aes en-
tered London on the 7th of May, and took peaceable poflelliorn
of the throne of England.
Conclusion. T- us were united two kingdoms, divided from the earliest

accounts of time, but destined, by their situation, to form one
great monarchy. And by this juntion of its whole native
force, Great Britain hath rilen to an emiinence and authority in
-Europe which England and Scotland could never have at
tained.

Tn r Scots had so long conilered their monarchs as next

heirs to the Englilli throne, that they had full leisure to reflect
on all the conlec uerces of their being advanced to that digni-
ty. But dazzled with the glory of giving a overeign to their

powerful

powerful enemy, relying on the partiality of their native prince, B 0 o r.
:.nd in iull expeEtation of liaring liberally in the wealth and VIII.
honours he would now be able to bellow, they attended little ~
to the noll obvious consequences of that great event, and re- A ^6,i3of
juiced at his accelion to the throne of England, as if it had th revolu.
been no lels beneficial to the kingdom, than honourable to the Lions in the
king. They soon had reafun, however, to adopt very different collitution

of Scotland

feltilnents; and fron that period, we may date a total altera,- since the
tion in the political constitution of Scotland. acceflion

TH feudal arlrocracy, which had been .subverted in moitof James

nations of Europe by the policy of their princes, or had been VI.
undermined by the progress of commerce, till fubfitted, with
full force in Scotland. Many causes had contributed gradually
to augment the power of the Scottifl nobles; and even the
reformation, which in every other country, where it prevailed,
added to the authority of the monarch, had increased their
wealth and influence. A king, possesscd of a small revenue,
with a prerogative extremely limited, and unsupported by a
sanding army, could not exercise much authority over such po-
tent subjects. He was obliged to govern by expedients ; and
the laws derived their force not from his power to execute
then, but from the voluntary fuhinifiion of the nobles. But
though this produced a species of government feeble and ir-
regular beyond example ; though .Scotland, under the name,
and with all the outward ensigns of a monarchy, was really
fubjeEt to an aristocracy, the people were not altogether un-
happy; and even in this wild form of a constitution, there
were principles, which tended to their security and advantage.
The king, checked and overawed by the nobles, durst ven-
ture upon no a of arbitrary power. The nobles, jealous of
the king, whose claims and pretenons were many, though his
power was finall, were afraid of irritating their dependants by
unreasonable exactions, and tempered the rigour of ariftocrati-
cal tyranny, with a mildness and equality to which it is natu-
rally a stranger And while the military genius of the feudal
government remained in vigour, the vassals both of the crown
and of the barons were not only free from oppreflion, but
courted by their superiors, whose power and inportance were
founded on their attachment and love.

B T, by his acceflion to the throne of England, James ac-

quired such an iminenfe accelTion of wealth, of power, and of
splendor, that the nobles, astonished and intimidated, thought
it vain to struggle for privileges which they were now unable
to defend. Nor was it froni fear alone that they fuhmitted to
the yoke ; James, partial to his countrymen, and willing that
they flould partake in his good fortune, loaded them with
riclies and honours ; and the hope of his favour concurred
with the dread of his power, in taming their fierce and inde-

pendent

B o o K pendent rpirits. The will of the prince became the upreme

Vii. law in Scotland ; and the nobles fdrove, with emulation, who
C---- Ihould loft implicitly obey commands, which they had for-

merly been accustomed to contemn. Satisfied with having sub-
jected the nobles to the crown, the king left them in full pof-
felfno of their antient jurificiion over their own vaflals. The
extensive rights, veiled in a feudal chief, became in their hands
dreadful instruments of oppreflion, and the military ideas on
which these rights were otunded, being gradually loft, or dif-
regarded, nothing remained to correct or to mitigate the rigour
with which they were exercised. The nobles, exhausting their
fortunes by the expence of frequent attendance upon the Eng-
lifh court, and by attempts to imitate the manners and luxury
of their more wealthy neighbours, multiplied exactions upon
the people, who durst scarce utter complaints which they knew
would never reach the ear of their overeign, nor move him to
grant them any redress. And from the union of the crowns,
to the revolution in 1688, Scotland was placed in a political
situation of all others the molt singular, and the mofR unhap-
py; subjected at once to the absolute will of a monarch, and
to the oppreflive jurifdition of an aristocracy, it suffered all
the miseries peculiar to both there forms of government. Its
kings were despotic ; its nobles were slaves and tyrants ; and
the people groaned under the rigorous domination of both.

DV RI NG this period, the nobles, it is true, made one es-

fort to shake off the yoke, and to regain their ancient indepen-
dency. After the death of James, the Scottifli nation was no
longer viewed by our monarchs with any partial affection.
Charles I. educated among the English, discovered no peculiar
attachment to the kingdom of which he was a native. And
the nobles, perceiving the sceptre to be now in hands less
friendly, and swayed by a prince with whom they had little
connection, and over whose councils they had little influence,
no longer ubmitted with the fame implicit obedience. Provo-
ked by some encroachments of the king on their order, and ap-
prehenfive of others, the remains of their ancient spirit began
to appear. They complained, and remonstrated. And the
people, being, at the Came time, violentlydifguffed at the in-
novations in religion, the nobles secretly heightened this difgut ;
and their artifices, together with the ill conduat of the court,
raised such a spirit, that the whole nation took arms againll
their sovereign, with an union and animosity of which there
had formerly been no example. Charles brought against theim
the forces of England, and notwithstanding their own union,
and the zeal of the people, the nobles muf have funk in the
ifruggle. But, the difaffecaion which was growing among his
Englifli fubjeEs, prevented the king from ating with vigour.
A civil war broke out in both kingdoms. And after many bat-

tles

tles and revolutions which are well known, the Scottifih nobles, B o o K
who firfl began the war, were involved in the fame ruin with VIII.
the throne. At the reltoration, Charles II. regained full posses- v
sion of the royal prerogative in Scotland; and the nobles,
whose estates were walled, or their spirits broken by the calami-
ties to which they had been exposed, were less able and less
willing than ever to resist the power of he crown. During
this reign, and that of James VII. the dicates of the mo-
narch were received in Scotland with the most abjeac fubmiffi-
on. The poverty to which many of the nobles were reduced,
rendered them meaner slaves, and more intolerable tyrants than
ever. The people, always negleted, were now odious, and
loaded with every injury, on account of their attachment to re-
ligious and political principles, extremely repugnant to those
adopted by their princes.

TH E revolution introduced other maxims into the govern-

ment of Scotland. To increase the authority of the prince,
or to secure the privileges of the nobles, had hitherto been
alnoft the sole object of our laws. The rights of the people
were scarce ever mentioned, were disregarded, or unknown.
Attention began, henceforward, to be paid to the welfare of
the people. By the claim of right, their liberties were secured.
And the number of their representatives being increased, they
gradually acquired new weight and consideration in parliament.
As they came to enjoy more security, and greater power, their
minds began to open, and to form more extensive plans of
commerce, of industry, and of police. But the ariftocratical
spirit, which still predominated, together with many other
accidents, retarded the improvement and happiness of the
nation.

AN o T It E R great event completed what the revolution had

begun. The political power of the nobles, already broken by
the union of the two crowns, was alnmot annihilated by the
union of the two kingdoms. Instead of making a part, as for-
merly, of the supreme afembly of the nation, instead of bear-
ing the molt considerable sway there, the Scottish nobles are
admitted into the Britifli parliament by their representatives
only, and form but an inconsiderable part of one of those bo-
dies in which the legislative authority is vested. They them-
selves are excluded absolutely from the house of commons,
and even their eldelt Cons are not permitted to represent their
countrymen in that august aflembly. Nor have their feudal
privileges remained, to compensate for this extin&ion of their
political authority. As commerce advanced in its progress,
and government attained nearer to perfeCtion, these were in-
sensibly circumscribed, and at last, by laws no less salutary to
the public, than fatal to the nobles, they have been almost
totally abolished. As the nobles were deprived of power, the

people

B o o K people acquired liberty. Exempted from burdens to which the)
VIII. were formerly subject, screened from opprcflion, to which they
.'^v' had been long exposed, and adopred into a constitution, wheti:

genius and laws were more liberal than their own, they have
extended their commerce, refined their manners, nlade in-
provements in the elegancies of life, and cultivated the arts ar:d
sciences.

THIs survey of the political itate of Scotland, in which

events and their causes have been mentioned rather than deve-
loped, enables us to point out three eras, from each of which
we may date some great alteration, in one or other of the three
different members of which the fuprenme legislative afembly in
our constitution is composed. At the Acceffon, the kings of
Scotland, once the most limited, became in an instant, the
molf absolute princes in Europe, and exercised a despotic au-
thority which their parlianents were unable to controul, or
their nobles to resist. At the Union, the feudal a iftocracy,
which had subsisted so many ages, and with power so exorbi-
tant, was cverturned, and the Scottish nobles voluntarily fur-
rendered rights and pre-eminences, peculiar to their rder, and
reduced themselves to a condition, which is no longer the ter-
ror and envy of other subje&s. Sirce the Ur.ion, the ccimoils,
anciertly neglected by their kings, and derpifed by the nobles,
have energed into digriry; ad being admitted to a partici-
pation of all the privileges, which the Eglifli had purchased
at the experce of so much blood, nuft now he efteelned a bo-
dy not cIls considerable in the one kingdom, than they have long
been in the other.

TH E church felt the efi .cts of the absolute power which

the king acquired by his accilion ; ard its revolutions too, are
worthyof notice. James, during tl.e laftttr years of his ad-
miniftlation in Scotlail, r:v:v d li e rn:e al (,ffice of biflnps.
But they pofnrct n eccl fi.r cnl

jui. iltifln or prc-cn!inerice;

their revenues were incor,;ft!i able, ard they w.re kcarce dillin-
guilhed by any thing, bul by their feat in parliallentl and by
being the object of ltie clerl:y's j.aloufy, nald the perple's ha-
tred. Tl-e king, delighted wti tilhe fp!cntdnr ard authority
which the Englill bii1.ps enj'.yed, ard eiger t effel. an ulli-
on in eccl(tiafrcal policy, which he had, in v;.in, aeuipted
in the civil goverrnlent, resolvcd to bring both churcles to
an exact confi'rity with each r ther. Three Scotfincen were
consecrated bfliops at Lcd!or. Fronl them, their rctlihrr.
were commanded to receivr c., 1rs Ccrcnlonis unknown in
Scotland werce imposed. And toug:i the clergy, lcs obfqui-
ous than the nobles, oldi;v oppoft.d thee innovations, Janies,
long praCtised and well skilled in the arts of nanaging them,
ohlined at length theii conpliaince. ltnt Charles I. a super-
ltitious prince, uacqlai!tliti with the genius of the Scots, im-

prudent

prudent and precipitant in all the measures he pursued in that B o o K
kingdom, preliing too eagerly the reception of the Englifli li- VIII.
turgy, and indilcreetly attenipting a resumption of church ' -
lands, kindled the flames of civil war; and the people being
left at liberty to indulge their own wishes, the cpifcopal church
was overturned, and the Presbyterian government and discipline
were re-eftabliihed with new vigour. Together with mon-
archy, episcopacy was restored in Scotland. A form of govern-
ment, so odicus to the people, required force to uphold it;
aid though the whole rigour of authority, and all the bar-
barity of persecution were employed in its support, the
aversion of the nation was insurmountable, and it fubfillcd
with diHficulty. At the revolution, the inclinations of the
people were thought worthy the attention of the legislature,
the Prefhyterian government w.s again eftablilied, and be-
ing ratified by the urion, is still niaintained in the kingdom.

NoR did the ifluence of the acceflibn extend to the civil

and ecclesiastical conttitutions alone; the genius of the nation,
its tafle and pi it, things of a nature fill more delicate, were
sensibly affect&-.d by that event. When learning revived in the
fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, all the modern languages were
in a slate equally barbarous, devoid of elegance, of vigour,
and even of perspicuity. No author thought of writing in
languages so ill adapted to express and cibelieii his fentiimenits,
or of ercling a work for imnortality, with uch rude and
perihing mr aterials. And as the spirit, which prevailed at that
time, did not owe its re to ary .lriinl effort of the human
mind, but was excited by adtnirati.n of the ancients, their
conipofitons were efleeined r:t oi-.ly the flandards of talle,
and of sentiment, but o ililc; and even the languages in
:;hich they v.rote w''IC tin,u.glt to be peculiar and alnimol con-
fecrated to learning and tic niu:;i. Not only the manner of
the ancients was i,itatc, Ilt tl:r:r ln ,l Ce copied; and
extravagant as the a'l, Jiipt :1y ;l :p':Ir to wlit: in a dead
tongue, in which men W'ciL not aceL.;.;I.i' o thliik, and which
thiy could not speak, or ev,:; fit( ,...u,;.', tlie lucce'I. ol it was
altoniihing. As thlc.v : ried theilr '. i L'til p mllod Is,
as they 'were uninlcctdi with thno: Il,;'ailius, which the in-
accuracy of f:anili;ar convcrlltsioni, t!hc e l'ttrion of cou.ts,
intercouri.' with ftr:tlig'es, a a !:,olu;:ti utIhtr culss intro-
duce into living languages, nmanr ninotirns h;Iv. attaiied to a
degree o elegance in tlhe:r Latin coinprlitinios, w!iich IlheRon rnL
tlihnfiiielvcs Icarc plrflr.d beyond IIl li,,iit of the Augutlan
age. Wlile this was ;llholl the olly species of ciompoitiiln,
and all authors, ly tuling one colmmon language, could be
brought to a nearer coiliparitln, the Scottilh writers were not
inferior to those of any other nation. The happy genius of
Buchanan, eqully formed to ezcel in prose and in verse, nore

variou.'

Bo o K various, mare original, and more elegant, than that of almol
VIII. any other modlern who writes in Latin, reflects, with regard to
'- -- this particular, the grcateft lustre on his country.

Bu T the labour attending the study of a dead tongue was

irksome; the unequal return for their industry which authors
met with, who could be read and admired only within the nar-
row circle of the clarncd, was mortifying; and men, instead
of wafting half their lives in learning the language of the
Romans, began to refine and to polilh their own. The modern
tongues were found to be susceptible of beauties and graces,
which, if not equal to those of the ancient ones, were at least
more attainable. And the Italians having first fct the ex-
ample, Latin was no longer used in the works of taste; it was
confined to books of fcicnce ; and the politer nations have ba-
niflied it even from there. The Scots, we nmy presume, would
have had no cause to regret this change in the public tafle,
and would frill have been able to maintain fiome equality with
other nations, in their pursuit of literary honour. The Eng-
lil and Scottifi languages, derived from the fame sources,
were, at the end of the sixteenth century, in a state nearly
similar, differing from one another somewhat in orthography,
though not only the words, hut the idioms, were much the
:ame. The letters of several Scotiill statesmen of that age
are not inferior in elegance, or in purity, to those of the Eng-
lins miiniter with whom they corrcfponded. Janies himself
s-as mafler of a stile far from contemptible ; and by his exam-
ple and encouragement, the Scottiih language might have kept
pice with the Englilh in refincment. Scotland might have
1:a.d a f-rics of authors in its own, as well as in the Latin lan-
guage, to boall of; and the improvements in taste, in the
arts, and in the fci-nces, which pread over the other po-
lilhed nations of Europe, would not have been unknown
there.

Bu T, at the very time when other nations were beginning to

drop the u of Latin in woi ks of tafe, and to n ake trial of the
trength and compass of their own languages, Scotland ceased
to be a kingdom. The transports of joy which the accession
at firif occasioned, were oon over ; and the Scots, being at
once deprived of all the objecs that refine or animate a peo-
ple, of the pretence of their prince, of the concourse of no-
bles, of the splendor and elegance of a court, an universal
lejcEtion of spirit eems to have seizcd the r.atisn. The court
being withdrawn, no domcftic ft..:dard of pr.priety and cor-
retn,:fs of speech remained ; te few cnnipof.tions that Scot-
lan.d produced were tried by the Englifli standard, and every
word or phrase that varied in the lealt from that, was con-
denlned as barbarous; whereas, if the two nations had conti-
r-ued diflina, each might have retained idioms and forms of

Ipeechl

speech peculiar to itself; and there, rendered fashionable by B o o
the example of a court, and supported by the authority of VIII.
writers of reputation, would have been confidered in the fame '-V J
light with the varieties occasioned by the different dialets in
the greek tongue, would have been marked as beauties, and,
in many cafes. used promifcuoufy by the authors of both na-
tions. But by the acceflion, the Engliih naturally became the
sole judges and lawgivers in language, and rejeaed as sole-
cifms, every form of speech to which their ear was not accuf-
romed. Nor did the Scots, while the intercourse between the
two nations was inconsiderable *, and ancient prejudices were
still so violent as to prevent imitation, possess the means of re-
fining their own tongue according to the purity of the Englifl
standard. On the contrary, new corruptions flowed into it
from every different source. The clergy of Scotland, in that
age, were more eminent for piety than for learning; and
though there did not arise many authors among them, yet be-
ing in poifflion of the privileges of discoursing publickly to the
people, and their sermons being ton long, and perhaps too fre-
quent, such hasty productions could not be elegant, and many
slovenly and incorrect modes of expression may be traced back
to that original. The pleadings of lawyers were equally loose
and inaccurate, and that profellion having furniffied more au-
thors, and the matters of which they treat mingling daily in
common discourse and business, many of those vitious forls
of speech, which are denominated Scotticisms, have been by
them introduced into the language. Nor did either the lan-
guage or public taste receive any improvement in parliament,
where a more liberal and more correct eloquence might have
been expeced. All business was tranfai ed there by the lords
of articles, and they were so servilely devoted to the court,
that few debates arose, and none were conduced with the spirit
and vigour natural to a popular afi'nibly.

THus, during the whole seventeenth century, the Englilli

were gradually refining their language, and their taste ; in
Scotland the fornler was much debased, and the latter almost
entirely loft. In the beginning of that period, both nations
were emerging out of barbarity; but the distance between

them,

A remarkable proof of the little intrrcourfe between the Englini and

Scots, befoei the union of the crwns, is to e f,,und in two curious
paper., one pubiiflwtl by Hyn)nes, the other by Strypc. In the year 1S67,
llizabeth commanded the Billop of London t take a firvey f all the
Itrangers within the cities of London an : Weltminilter. Iy his report,
which is very minute, it ppecars that the whole number of Scnts at that
time was 58. Hayncs 455. A survey of the fame kind waI made by fir
Thomas Row, lord mayor A. D. 1568. The number of Scnt%, had then
increcafll to 88. Strype . Supplement No. I On the Acceflion of James
a considerable number of Scots, epccially of the higher rank, resorted to
England; but it was not till the union hat the intercoure between the
two kingdoms became t;hc:t.

B o o r them, which was then inconGiderable, became, before the end
VIII. of it, immcnfe. Even after science had once dawned upon
^-V"- themn, the Scots seemed to be finking back into ignorance and

obscurity; and active and intelligent as they naturally are, they
continued, while other nations were eager in the purluit of
fame and knowledge. in a state of languor and ftupefacaion.
This, however, must be imputed to te unhappiness of their
political situation, not to any defiac of genius: for no sooner
was the one removed in any degree, than the other began to
display itself. The a abolillhig the power of the lords of
articles, and other salutary laws pafled at the revolution,
having introduced freedom of debate into the Scottish par-
liament, eloquence, with all the arts that accompany or per-
sea it, became immediate objecs of attention : and the ex-
ample of Fletcher of Saltan alone is sufficient to fliew that the
Scots were till capable of generous lfetinments, and, notwith-
sanding fore peculiar idioms, were able to express themselves
with energy, and with elegance.

Ai length the union having incorporated the two nations,

and rendered them one people, the distinctions which had sub-
ifted for many ages gradually wear away ; peculiarities difap-
pear; the lame manners prevail in both parts of the island; the
fame authors are read and admired ; the fame entertainments
are freqenrted by the elegant and polite; and the fame stand-
ard of taste, and of purity in language, is established. And
the Scots, after being placed during a whole century, in a
situation no less fatal to the liberty than to the taste and genius
of the nation, were at once put in possession of privileges
more valuable than thoie which their ancestors had formerly
enjoyed; and every obftrucion that had retarded their pursuit,
or prevented their acquisition of literary fame, was totally re-
moved.

APPENDIX

# APPENDIX TO THE FIRST VOLUME.

A P P E N D I X
APPENDIX

T 0 T H E
FIRST VOLUME.

No. . (Vol. I. p. i15.)
A MEMORIAL of certain points meetfor the refloring the realm

of Sc o r L A N D to the ancient wueale.

MP R M I S, it is to be noted, that the hefl worldly felicity sth A,lnat
thit Scotland can have, is either to continue in a perpetual '559, t-C'-

ton. Lb.

peace with the kingdom of England, or to be made one o11- Cal. . c.
narcy with England, as they both make but one illand, divid- s,,I. ,7
ed from the reft of the world. Frn'm

IP the firll is fought, that is to be in perpetual peace with copy i" re-
England, then muff it necessarily be provided, that Scotland cret'L

Cecl'$

be not so fubjeft to the appointments of France, as is presently, hand.
which, bing an antient enemy to England, feeketr always
to make Scotland an inltrument, to exercise, thereby, their
malice upon England, and to make a foot-stool thereof to look
over England as they may.

T H E E F o R E, when Scotland shall come into the hands of

a mere Scottiflh man in blood, then may there be hope of such
accord ; but as long as it is at the commandment of the French,
there is no hope to have accord long betwixt there two realms.

Tn E R E F R E feeing it is at the French king's conmmand-

ment by reason of his wife, it is to be confidered for the wcale
of Scotland, that until lie have children, and during her ab-
fence out of the realm, the next heirs to the crown, being the
house of the Hamiltons, should have regard hereto, and to fee
that neither the crown be inpofed nor wafted ; and on the other
fide, the nobility and clmmonalty ought to force that the laws
and the old cuffoms of the realm be not altered, neither that
the country be not ipoveriflid by taxes, enpreft, or new
imlpolis, after the manner of France ; for provifinn wherein,
both by the law of God and man, the French king and his wife

lay be imved to reforon their miliovernance of the !and.
A ' D for this purpose, it were good that the nobility and

coimmons joined with the next heir of the crown, to feck due
reformation of such great abuses as tend to the ruin of their
country, w lich mullt e done before the French grow too strong
atnd inlolent.

Si n s T, that it may be provided, by content of the three

'. atcs of the land, that the land may be free lfom all idolatry
like as England is, for jullification whereof, if any free gene-
al council may be had where the pope of Rome hath not the

1c'.

feat of judgment, they may offer to flew their cause to be moR
agreeable to Christ's religion.

NE x T, to provide that Scotland might be governed, in all

rules and offices, by the antient blood of the realm, without
either captains, lieutenants, or soldiers, as all other princes
govern their countries, and especially that the forts might be in
the hands of mere Scotti/lh men.

T H I R D . Y, that they might never be occasioned to enter into

wars against England, except England hould give the first cause
to Scotland.

F o U R T H L Y, that no nobleman of Scotland flould receive

pension of France, except it were whilfl he did serve in France,
for otherwise thereby the French would liortly corrupt many,
and betray their own country.

F F T H L.Y, that no office, abbey, living, or commodity, be

given to any but mere Scottifl men, by the aftent of the three
ellates of the realm.

SI x T H L Y, that there be a council in Scotland appointed in

the queen's absence, to govern the whole realm, and in those
cafes not to be directed by the French.

S E V E N T H L Y, that it be by the said three estates appointed

how the queen's revenue of the realm fliall be expended, how
much the queen flhall have for her portion and estate during
her absence, how much hall be limited to the governance and
defence of the realm, how much yearly appointed to be kept
in treasure.

IN these and such like points, if the French king and the

queen be found unwilling, and will withstand these provisions
for the weale of the land, then hath the three efftates of the
realm authority, forthwith to intimate to the said king and
queen their humble requests ; and if the fame be not effecually
granted, then humbly they may commit the governance thereof
to the next heir of the crown, binding the fame allb to observe
the laws and antient rights of the realm.

Fr N A L L Y, if the queen fliall be unwilling to this as it is

likely she will, in refpecl of the greedy and tyrannous affection
of France, then it is apparent that Almighty God is pleased to
transfer fromn her the rule of the kingdom for the weale of it,
and this time mufft be used with great circumfpeEtion, to avoid
the deceipts and tromperies of the French.

A N n then may the realm of Scotland confider, being once

made free ; what means may be devised by God's goodness, to
accord the two realms, to endure for time to come at the plea-
sure of Almighty God, in whose hands the hearts of all prin-
ces be.

No.

No. II. (Vol. I. p. 19.)

A letter of Maitland of Lethington's thus dircctcd.

To my loving friend James. Be this delivered at London.

UN D E R s T A N D by the last letter I received from yow, that oth Jante
discoursing with zour countrymen upon the nlatter of Scot- 60. cost.

land, and commoditeys may enfcw to that realm, hereafter giff Lib. Cal.
ze prelentlv aftlf ws with zour forces, ze find a nombre of the B. i.
contrary advise, douting that we fall not at length be found From the

original rn

trusty frends, nor mean to contynew in constant ametye, albeit his own
we promise, but only for avoyding the pre:ent danger make zow hand.
to serve our tur.e, and after being delivered, becum enemies as
of before. For prese quhareof, they allcdge things have palt
betwixt ws heretofore, and a few prefuniptiones tending to the
fain end, all grounded upon millruf ; quhilks, at the firif ficht,
have some lhewe of apparence, but gif men wey not the circum-
stances of the matter ; but gift they will confer the tyme past
with the present, confider the nature of this caus, and estate
of our contrcy, I doubt not but judgment fal be able to banifli
miftruit. And firt, I wad wiihx ze flioud examyne the causes
off the old inmitye betwixt the realms of England and Scot-
land, and quhat moved our anceftours to enter into ligue with
the Frenche; quhilks by our lforeys and regiftres off anti-
quiteys appear to be there. The princes of England, some
tyme, alledging a certain kynde of foveraintye over this realm ;
some tyme upon hye courage, or incited by incursions off our
bordourares, and femfable occasions, mony tymes enter-
prifed the conquest of ws, and fa far furth preift it by force
off armes, that we wer dryven to great extramiteys, by loss
of our princes, our noblemen, and a good part of our cun-
trey, fa that experience taught ws that our owne ftrcngth was
fcarfe sufficient to withstand the force of England. The
Frenche zour auncient enemyes, confidering well how nature
h.d fa placed ws in a iland with zow, that na nation was able
fa to annoye England as we being enemys, foucht to joine ws
to theyin in ligue, tending by that meane to detourne zour
arlnyes fioml the invasion off France, and occupy zow in the
defence off zour country at hame, offering for that effect to
beftowe some charges upon ws, and for compafling of theyr
purpos, choyfed a tyme to propone the matter, quhen the
fi'efche memory of injuris lately receaved at zour hands, was fa
depely prcnted on our hartes, that all our myndes were occupied
how to be revenged, and arme ourselfes with the powar off a
forayne prince against zour enterprises thereafter.

THl s was the beginning off our confederacy with France.
At quhilk tyme, our cronicles maks mention, that some off the

wyfefi

wyfefl foresaw the perril, and fimall frute should redound to
vs therefore at lentlh: zit had affetion fa blinded jugement,
that the advise of the maift part owercame the best. The maift
part of all querells betwixt ws since that tyme, at least quhen
lie provocation caine on our flyde, hes ever fallen out by theyr
procurement rather than any one caus off our selfes: and
qul'enatver we back the peace, it come partly by theyr in-
tvitenents, partly to elchew the conquest intended by that realm.
But now has God's providence fa altered the cafe, zea changed
it to the plat contrary, that how hes the Frenfche taken zour
place, and we, off very jugenent, becun defyrous to have zow
in tlevr rowire. Our eves are opened, we espy how uncare-
ful they have been of our weile at all tymes, how they made
ws ever to serve thevr turne, drew us in mails dangerous weys
tfr theyr conmmidite, and nevertheless wad not ftvck, oft
tvmes, against the natour of the ligue, to contrak pence,
leaving ws in wyr We fee that their support, off late zeres
v.'ls nct grantit tor any affction they bare to ws, for pytie they
had off our eate, for recompense of the lyke frirndllip
fchlawin to theyv'i in time off theyr affiicions, bu! 'or ailiib,
ard irfaciab cidite to reygne, and to mak Scoiland ne nc-
cel'-rv to the crowv.n of Fiance. This was na fi.'iriv oTice,
but 11 Hrcnary, craving Iyre sarre ex-eedirg the pr,.plrli.' of
theyr defiving ; a ;ie realin for the defence of a p:ii. We
fie theym manifanitlv atenipt the thing we fufpe&icd oft zov;
we si are ze nent the conquest off S dtlanc;. ard t!hev ;re
plantly fallen to that work; we Iartc. w ser d ubt .we !ad
ze ment cvill towards ws, and fall we I,.ve r!eyvil, u:'ks
bearing the name off fiiends, go about to bring ws ir mlaii' le
fervittde ? Gift by zour friendly filpprt at this tyin. . z i. '11
declare that not only fute ze not the ruyne off our cln r)Iy. but
will preserve tile libertie thereof from conqueff by ftianlgeairs,
fail not the occasion of all inimihie with zow. and ligue' rh
theymn, be taken away ? The caules beir removed, how lall
the ffactes reilane ? The fear of conouelf made ws to hte
zow and love theyin, the cais changed, c;uhen we fee theym
planely attempt conquefl, and zow fIcham ws friendflip, fall we
rot hate theymn, and favour tow ? Gif we have fchawne fa
great cnnfr.ice, continuing fia mony zeares in amity with theym,
off qiilionic we had fa ilnall coniimodite, quhat fall move u:; to
breake with '.o, rhlar off all nationes may do ws greatcft plefour?

Iur ze wll fiy, this mater may be reconcyled, and then

fiends as nol before. I think weill peace is the end of all weyr,
hut off this ze niay be allilred, we will never fa far trust that
reco:iciliation, that we wil be content to lfoego the anietye of
Einglandl, nr do any thing may bring ws in fulpicion with tow.
;.IF' we w.il, at any tyice to p!cale thc"r, break with zow,
lilntld we not, bclydcs th e loffe off eftimnation and discrediting
oli' ourlfti.t, perpetually expone our conininon weill to a

mailt

maic manifest danger, and becum a pray to theyr tyranny?
Quhais aid could we implore, being deflitute of zour friend-
flip, gif they off new wald attempt theyr formar enterprise ?
Quhat nation myght help ws giff they wald, or wald gitf they
uight ? and it is lyke eneuch, they will not flick hereafter to
tak theyr tyme off ws, quhen difplefour and grudge has taken
depe rute on baith fydes, feeing ambition has fa npyrit ower
theyr reason, that before we had ever done any thing myght
offend theym, but by the contrary pleased theym by right and
wrang, they did not stick to attempt the subversion of our
hale state. I wald ze should not elleeme ws fa barayne of
jugement, that we cannot foresee our awne perril, or fa
I'olifche, that we will not fludy by all gode means to enter-
tayne that thing may be our fafetye; quhilk confites all in
the relaying of zour friendships. I pray zow confider in lyke
cafe, when, in the days of zour princes off maift noble memo-
ry king Henry the VIII. and king Edward the VI. meanes wer
opened off amytye betwixt baith realms; was not at all tymes
the difference of religion the onley stay they wer not embraced?
Did not the craft of our clergy and power of theyr adherents
subvert the devises of the better fort ? But now has God off
his mercy removed that block furth off the way: now is not
theyr practise lyke to tak place any mare, when we ar comme
to a conformity off doctrine, and profes the fame religion with
zow, quhilk I take to be the ftrayteft knot off amitye can be
devised. Giff it may be alledged, that some off our country-
men, at ony tyme, violated theyr pronis ? giff ze liss to way
the circumstances, ze fall fynd the pronis is rather brought on
by neceffite, after a great owerthraw off our men, then comme
off fe will, and tending ever to our great incommodite and
decay off our haill slate, at leit fa taken. But in this cafe,
fall the preservation off our libertie be inf,.parably joined with
the keping off promieffe, and the violation off our fayth cafR
ws in maift miserable servitude. Sa that gifi neyther the feare
off God, reverence of man, religion, othc, proinife, nor waild-
ly honeftye wes fufficicnt to bynd ws, yet lill the zeal off our
native countrey, the maintenance cff our owne fate, the safety
of our wyffes and childrenc from slavery, compell ws to kepe
pronilife. I am affur(l, it is trewly and sincerely nmetl on our
part to continew in perpetual aeiye with zow ; it fall be ut-
tered by our proceedings. Giff ze be as dcelyrous of it as we
ar, aflurances may be devyied, uharLy all partycs will be out
of doubte. There be gode nje'!ces to do it, fit inftrunents
for the purpos, tyme lerves weill, the inhabitants of baith
realms wifl it, God hcs wrought in the peoples harts on bayth
parties a crtaine still agreement upon it, never did, at any
tyine, lb mony things concurre at ones to knyt it up, the dif-
plflition off a few, uhais harts are in Godis hands, may nlak up

Vo L. II I th

the hale. I hope he quha hes begun thi5 work, mainteyned it
quhile now, by the expectation of man, sale perfy-e it.

I pray zow, let not zour men dryve tyme in coniultation,

quhether ze fall support ws or no. Seying the mater fpeaketih
for itself, that ze mon take upon zow the defence off our caus,
giffze have any respect for zour awne weill. Their prcpare.-
tives in France, and levying of men in Germany (quheyriff I
am lately advertiscd) ar not altogydder ordeyned for us, ze ar
tile mark they fliote at; they feke our realnie, but for ane
entrey to zours. Gift they fliould directly fchaw hoftilitie to
7ow, they knaw zo wald inak redy for theyme; therefor they
do, by indereCt neanes, to blind 7ow, the thing, they dare not
as zit planely attenpte. They feme to invade us to th' e:d
that having afrlembled theyr hale forces fa nere zour bordour;,
they nay unlok it to attack zow: It is ane off theyr ald fetcli;;,
making a fchew to one place, to lyghton ane other. Remei:-
ber how covertly zour places about Boulougne were aliizcir,
and carryed away, ze being in peace as now. How the enter-
prile of Calais was fynely diflembled, I think ze have not fa
lone forgotten. Beware of the third, prevent theyr policy lby
prudence. Giff ze let not the lyke disposition presently in
theym, ze fe nathing. It is a grofie ignorance to mifk;aw,
uwhat all nations planely fpeks off. Tak hede ze zay not here-
after, " Had I wist ;" ane uncomely sentence to procede off a
wvfc nan's mouth. That is onwares chanced on to zw,
quhilk zow commonly wiffcd, that this countrey myght be di-
vorfed fromn the Frenlche, and is fa conllne to pass as was mailt
expedient for zow. For giff by your intyfenicnt we had taken
the mater in hand, ze nmvght have suspected we would have
been ontrufty frends, and na langer continued ftedfalic, then
perril had appeared. But now, quhen off our self we have
conceyved the hatered, provoked by private injuries, and that
theyr evil dealing with ws hes deierved our ninmilye, let no
man doubtc but they fall fynd ws enemyes in ernest, that fa
ungently hes demeyned our countrey, and at quhais hands we
can look for nathing but all extremnitye, gift ever they may get
the upper hand. L.et not this occasion, fa happey ntfrcd,
escape zow: gift ze do neglecting the prcfcnt opportunitic, anl
hoping to have ever gode luk comnne fleaping upon zow, it in
to be feared zour eneliy waxe to great, and fa ftrairg, th:i
afterwards quhen ze ald, ze fall not be able to put hii
down ; and then, to zour fiiart, after the tyme, zc w;ll ac-
knowledge zour error. Ze have felt, by experience, quhat ha rle
comieth off oversight, and trusting to zour enemys pronmelle.
We offer zow the occasion, quhcyrby zour sorner loflcs naly
be repayred. Qnhilk gif zc let over flyde, lufllring ws to
owerrun, quha then, spray zow, fall stay the Frcnfche ; that
they fall not invade zow in zour own bourndes, ick it is their lult
to rcygnc, that they can neythcr be content with theyr fortune

prefcn t,

present, nor reft and be satisfied when they have gode luck, but
will still follow on, having in theyr awne brayne conceaved the
image of fa great a conquest, quhat think ye fal be the end ?
Is ther any of fa small jugement, that he doth not foresee al-
ready, that theyr hail force fall then be bent against zow ?

IT fall not be amis, to confider in quhat cafe the Frenfche be

presently. Theyr estate is not always (lt calme at hame as
every man thinketh. And trewly it wes not theyr great redines
for wcyr made them to tak this mater on hand, at this tynie,
but rather a vayne trust in their awne policy, thinking to have
found na resistance, theyr opinion hes dcccaved theym, and
that makes them now amazed. The effates off the empire (as
I heare) has futed restitution off th' Ipcrial towns Metz,
Toull, and Verdun, quhilk may grow to some befynes; and
all thing is not a calme within theyr awne countrey, the les fit
they be presently for weyr, the mare opportune efteme ye the
time for zow. Giff the lyke occasion were offered to the
Frenfche against zow, wey, how gladly would they embrace it.
Are ze not efchamed of zour sleuth, to spare theynl that lies
already compassed zour deftruaion, gifF theym wer able ? Con-
fider with zour self quhilk is to be choyfed ? To weyr against
them cut with zour realme or within ? GifF quhill ze fieape,
we fal be overthrowne, then fall thcy not fayle to fute zow in
zour awne countrey, and use ws as a fote stole to overloke zow.
But fonie will fay, perhaps, they meane it not. It is foly to
think they wald not giff they wer able, quhen before hand they
flick not to giff zour armes, and ufurpz the ftvle ofzour crown.
Then quhat difference there is to canmp within zowr awne
bounds or without, it is nanifeft, GilS twa arnyes should
camp in zowr country, but a oneth ; albeit ye receaved na
other harme, zit fllould zowr ife be grcatar, nor all the charge
ze iill nede to bestow on our lilppoit will draw to, befydes the
dishonour.

LET not men, that cytler lack gode advil', or ar not foI

perticular respects weill alfecLcd to the caius, imove zow to sub-
tract zour helping hand, by alledging things not apparent,
for that they e poflible. It is not, I grant, unpofible that
,we may receave codliitioles o' puce ; but I le little likely-
llode that our etleitlycs will ol'itr ws lik aq will reilove all il
trult, and gilS we walkl I!ave iccUptCd othcrs, Ile matter had
bcne lang or now compounded. Lct z.,w nut be nmoedf fur
that they terlle w rbllcs, andl !'i!flunes lur jurr querell
with th1e 1il aime o r cnlpira.lcv i I':!l (i lvcr;ne It is
hir licynes ryght weu mancta)y;c I i; t!tc lilrty fs ir realine
we ftuldy to preserve, with the .:'ard ollf our lyves. We are
not (God knawetli) coilniie to this poyllt for waintlles, ts Inen
impacient us rewll, or A illing to Ich:ike off the zoke of go-
vernelnent, but ar drawnu to it by necdltic, to avoyde the ty-
Alinny of lIU'iigIe',Iru, lbaking to defraude ws of lawful govern-

1 2 ment,

ment. Giff we fliould susser frangeares to plant themfelffes
peaceably in all the ftrenthes of our realme, fortify the fey-
portes, and maift important places, as an entre to a plain con-
quest, now in the minorite of our foverane, beyng furth of the
realnie, flould we not be thought cncareful off the common
weill, berrayares of our native countrey, and evill subjects to
hir majefte ? Qullat other opinion could fche have of ws ?
Might fche not justly hereafter call ws to accompt, as negligent
ministeres ? Giff ftrangeares ihould be thus filffered to broke
the chefe offices, beare the hail rewll, alter and pervert our
lawes and liberty at theyrplefour; myght not the people efteein
our noblemen unworthy the place of counfalours ? We mean
na wyfe to fubtrak our obedience from our foverane, to defraud
hir heynes off her clew reverence, rents and revenues off hir
crown. We feke nathing but that Scotland may remane, as of
before, a fre realme, rewlit by hir hyenes and hir ininifteres
borne Inen of the fan ; and that the fuccelion of the crown
may remane with the lawful blode.

1 w A L D not ze fould not fa lyt:ill efteme the friendship of

Scotland, that ze juged it not worthy to be embraced. It fall
be na finall commodite for zow to be delivered off the anoyance
of so neir a nyghtbour, quhais ininlitye may more trouble zow,
then off any other nation albeit twyfs as puissant, not lyeng
dry marche with zow. Befydes that ze fall not nede to feare
the invasion off any prince lackyng the commodite to invade
zow by land, on our hand. Confider quhat superfluous charges
ze beftowe on the fortification and keeping of Barwick; quhilk
ze may reduce to a mean fowme, having ws to frendes.
The realme of Ireland being of natour a gode and fertill coun-
trey, by reason off the continewalld unquietnes and la of
policy, ze knaw to be rather a burthen unto zow then great
advantage; and giff it were peaceable may be very com-
nodious. For pacification quhayroff, it is not onknowne to
zow quhat fervlce we ar abill to do. Refuse not theyr con-
moditys, besides mony ma quhen they ar offerd. Quhilks
albeit I study not to amplify and dilate, yet it is na other coun-
trey able to offer zow the lyke, and are the rather to be em-
braced, for that zour ancestors, by all means maift erneftly
futed our amity, and yet it was not theyr hap to come by it.
The mater hes alnaift carryed me beyond the boundes off a
lettre, quharfor I will leave to trouble zow after I have given
you this note. I wald wiss that ze, and they that ar learned,
fould rede the twa former orations of Demoftlenes, called
Olynthiacma, and confidere quhat counfall that wyfe oratour
gave to the Athenians, his countrymen, in a lyke cafe; iuhlilk
hes so great affinite with this cause of ours, that every word
thereoff myght be applyed to our purpos. There may ze learne
of him quhat advilc is to followed, when zour nyghtbours

lours

hours is on fyre; Thus I bid zow hartely fareweill: From Sant
Andrews, the zoth of January, 1559.

No. III. (Vol. I. p. 124.)
Part of a letter from Tho. Randolph to firWilliam Cecil, from

the camp before Leith, 29th of April, 590.

W I L L only, for this time, discharge myself of my promise AnOrigi-
to the earl of Huntly, who o defireth to be recommended "al in the

to you, as one, who with all his heart favoureth this cause, to aper.
the uttermost of his power. Half the words that came out of his
mouth were able to persuade an unexperienced man to speak far-
ther in his behalf, than I dare be bold to write. I leave it to
your honour to judge of him, as of a man not unknown to you,
and will myself always measure my thoughts, as he shall deserve
to be spoken of. With much difficulty, and great persuasion,
he hath subscribed with the reft of the lords to join them in this
action; whatfomever he can invent to the furtherance of this
cause, he hath promised to do, with olemn protestation, and
many words; he truteth to adjoin many to this cause; and
faith surely that no man shall lie where he taketh part. He hath
this day subscribed a bond between England and this nation ; he
faith, that there was never thing that liked him better.

No. IV. (Vol. I. p. 131.)

Randolph to Cecil, oth August 1560. From Edinburgh.

I N C E the 29th of July, at what time I wrote last to your An Origi-
honour, I have heard of nothing worth the reporting. At nal inthe

this present it may please you to know, that the most part of the Paper o.
nobles are here arrived, as your honour shall receive their names
in writing. The earl of Huntly excufeth himself by an infirmity
in his leg. His lieutenant for this time is the lord of Lidington,
chosen speaker of the parliament, or harangue maker as thcfe men
term it. The first day of their fitting in parliament will be on
Thursday next. Hitherto, as many as have been present of the
lords have communed and devied of certain heads then to be
propounded, as, who flall be sent into France, who into Eng-
land. It is much easier to find them than the other. It feeemeth
almost to be resolved upon that for England the Mafterof Max-
well, and laird of Lidington. For France, Pitarrow and the jus-
tice Clerk. Also they have consulted whom they think meeteft to
name for the XXIV. of the which the XIT. cnunfellors mnuft be
chosen. They intend very hortly to fend away D:~gwall the he-
rald into France, with the names of those they aill chuf ; and
also to require the king and queen's consent unto this parliament.

They

They have devised how to have the contract with England con-
firmed by authority of parliament ; how also to have the articles
of the agreement between them and their king antl queen ratirird.
These things yet have only been had in communication. For t!e
confirmation of the contract with England I have nodoubt ; f.r
that I hear many men very like the lime, as the Earl of Athol,
the Earl of Sutherland, the L. Glamis, who dined yeflerday with
the L. James. The L. James requelled iice this prle;nt clay to
bring the contract unto him. I intend alo, this day, to peak un-
to the L. Gray, in our L. Gray's name, for t',- he promiled in
my hearing to filbfcribe, and then prcfently would have ldore i,
if the contract could have been had. For the more assurance
againfl all inconvenients, I would betides that, that I trust it
shall be ratifv'd in parliament, that every nobleman in Scotland
had put his hand and et his fcal, which may always remain as a
notable monument, tho' the at of parliament be hereafter dil-
annulled. Tf it night, therefore ifand with your advice, that the
lords might be written unto, now that they are here present to
that effect, or that I might receive fromn vour Honour flibe ear-
nest charge to travel herein, I doubt not but it would serve to
good purpose. Ifit might be also known with what fubitantial and
effecious words or charge you defre to have it confirmed, I think
no great difficulty would be made. The Earl Mvarfllal has oft been
moved to subscribe, he ufeth mo delays than the men judged he
would. His on told me yeflerday, that he would speak with me
at Icifure, bt did also Drunlanrick; I know not to what pur-
pose: I have caused I.. amnes to be the carrefterwith the L. Mar-
lial, for his autority's fake, when of late it was in consultation
by what means it might bewrought, that the amity between thele
two realmis might be perpetual; and amongdiverfe men's opinion,
one said that he knew of no olher, but by making theml both
one, and that in hope of that m1 things were done, than would
othcrwifc have ever been granted; tle earl oArgyll advised him
earnefilv to tlick unto that, tliat lh had pr-ll.nifcd, that it lfould
pas his power, and all the craf,:v kn;aes oi' his council, (I amn
bold to lfL unto )'our H. hi' c.v.': worl

, ) to break lo godly a pur-

pose. This talk liked well thie afilhrrs, howliblmcver it pleased
him tn whom it was (pokcl unio. Tiie nbarons, who i time pafi
have heen of rthe patl..miL'iet, hnr! v a

lc-ldy a convention among

themielves in the ithurch, in vrv honell ai quiet lItrt; they
thought it gocd to rerqi:irc to be;, ;orcd lito their ancient liberty,
to have voice in prlanint. '1'v p

n td

'rd

pr ied that daya bill unto

the lords to that crc%, a cop) wir.of' fliall be lent s oon as it
can be had. t \was ar.fv'cred ulnto gently and taken in good
pr.t. It was referral unto the lords of t articl:s, when thcy
.i,.' cho'ell to rcfiltv tertp rn. -- i

]er /ulltS a loi ,g
/. .dt,/)i ,o;;ii'rlilI t. 'ii/tiatioju 9/f Diar, . ----.

q'hi

This present morning, viz. the 9th, I understood, that the lords
intended to be at the parliament, which caused me somewhat to
flay my letter, to fee what I could hear or learn worth the report-
ig unto your Honr. The lords, at ten of the clock, assembled
thicinfelves at the palace, where the duke lieth ; fiom whence
th)ev departed towards the Talbooth, as they were in dignity.
lach one being ltt in his scat, in fuchorder as your H.fllall receive
tlhen in this scroll. The crown, the mace, the sword, were laid
in the qucn's feat. Silence being commnanded, the L. ofLiding-
ton beain his oration. He excused his insufficiency to occupy
that place. He made a brief discourse of things pall, and of what
r.cceflity men were forced unto for the defence of their country,
what remedy and support it pleased God to fend them in the time
of their necessity, how much he were bound heartily to acknow-
ledgc it and to requite it. He took away the persuasion that was
in many men's minds that lay back, that miideeiecd other things
to be meant than was attempted. He advised all estates to lay all
particulars apart, and to bend themselves wholly to the true ser-
vice of God and of their country. He willed them to remembcr
in what Rfate it had been of long time for lack of government,
and exercise ofjuftice. In the end, he exhorted themn to mutual
amity and hearty friendfip, and to live with one another as
members all of one body-He prayed God long to maintain this
peace and amity with all princes, especially betwixt the realms
of England and Scotland, in the fear of God, and so ended.
The clerk of register immediately stood up, and asked them to
what matter they would proceed: It was thought neccflary,
that the articles of the peace flhould be confirmed with the corn
mon conent, for that it was thought necessary to lnd them
away with speed into France, and to receive the ratification of
them as soon as might be. The articles being read, were i-
mediately agreed unto : A day was appointed t have crt:lin of
the noblesfubfcribeuntothem,and to put to their eals, to be lent
away by a herald, who flall also bring the ratificalion ana:i
with hin. The barons, of whom I have above written, re-
quired an answer to their requcft, fomnewhat was said unto the
contrary. The barons alledged for them cuflom and authority. It
was in the end resolved, that there should be chosen fix to join
with the lords of the articles, and that if they, after good ad-
vifement, flould find it right and neccflary for the common-
wealth, it should be ratified at this parliament for a perpetual
law. The lords proceeded immediately hereupon, to the chu-
sing of the lords of the articles. The order is, that the lords
spiritual chufe the temporal, and the temporal the piritual, and
the burgefles their own. They were chosen as in this other pa-
per I have written. This being done, the lords departed and
accompanied the duke, all as far as the Bow, (which is the gate

going

going out of the high street) and many down into the palace
where he lieth. The town all in armour, the trumpets founding,
and other mufick such as they have. Thus much I report unto
your honour of that I did both hear and fee. Other foleinnitics
have not been used aving in times long past the lords have had
parliament robes, which are now with them wholly out of use.

TH F names of as many earls and lords spiritual and temporal
as are assembled at this parliament.

The duke of Chatelherault.

Earls. Lords. Lords Spiritual.

Arran. Erlkine. St. Andrew's.
Argyll. Ruthven. Dunkell.
Athole. Lindsey. Athens.
Crawford. Somervill. The biffop of the Isles.
Caffils. Cathcart. Abbots and priors, I
Marflhall. Hume. know not how many.
Morton. Livingfron.
Glencairn. Innermeth.
Sutherland. Boyd.
Cathnefs. Ogilvy.
Rothes. Fleming.
Monteith. Glamis.

Gray.
Ochiltree.
Gordon.

The Lords of the Articles.
Spiritual. Temporal. Barons eleAed to be

of the articles.

Athens. The Duke. Maxwell.
Ines. Argyll. Tillibardine.
Lord James. Marihall. Cunninghanihead.
Arbroath. Athole. Lochenvar.
Newbottle. Morton. Pitarrow.
Lindoris. Glencairn Lundy.
Cpwpar. Ruthven. Ten provolts of the
Kinross. Erskine. chieftowns, which
Kilwinning. Boyd. also are of the ar-

Lindsay. tides.

So that with the lubprior of St. Andrews, the whole is 36.

IT were too long for me to rehearse particularly the difpo-
ition, and chiefly the affecions of thcle men, that are at this

time

time chosen lords of the articles. May it satisfy your Honr.
for this time, to know that, by the common opinion of men,
there was not a fubftantialler or more sufficient number of all
forts of men chosen in Scotland these many years, nor of whom
men had greater hope of good to infue. This present morning,
,viz. the loth, the L. of Lidington made me privy unto your
letter ; he intendeth, as much as may be, to follow your advice.
Some hard points there are. He himself is determined not to
go into France. He alledgeth many reasons, but fpeaketh least
of that, that moveth him most, which is the example of the
last, that went on a more grateful meflage than he liall carry,
and stood on other terms with their prince than he doth, and yet
your honour knoweth what the whole world judgeth.
Petition of the lesser barons to the parliament, held Aug. 56o.

Y lords, unto your lordships, humbly means and shows, Inclored in
we the barons and freeholders of this realm, your bre- Randolph'

thren in Christ, That whereas the causes of true religion, and letter to
common well of this realm, are, in this present parliament, to Aug. t6o.
be treated, ordered, and etablilhed, to the glory of God and
maintenance of the common wealth: and we being the greatef
number in proportion, where the said causes concern, and has
been, and yet are ready to bear the greatest part of the charges
thereuntil, as well in peace, as in war, both with our bodies,
and with our goods; and feeing there is no place where we may
do better service now than in general councils and parliaments,
in giving our best advice, and reason, vote and counfcll for the
furtherance thereof, for the maintenance of virtue, and punish-
ment of vice, as use and cutloin had been of old by ancient
aas of parliament observed in this reall ; and whereby we un-
derftand that we ought to be heard to ralfon, and vte in all
causes concerning the commnonwecilth, as well in counfells as in
parliaments; otherwise we think that wharlbfocver ordinances
and t(atutes be made concerning us and our estate, we not being
required and suffered to reason and vote at the making thereofr
that the fame should not oblige us to Rand thereto. Therefore
it will please your lordfllips to take consideration thereof, and of
the charge born, and to be born by us, since we are willing to
serve truly the common well of this realm, after our ellatcs.
that ye will, in this present parliament, and all counfells, where
the common well of the realm is to be treated, take our ad-
vice, counfell and vote, o that, without the falne, your lord-
flips would susser nothing to be npdted and concluded in parlia-
ment or counfells aforesaid and that all as of parliament
made, in times pall, concerning us for our place and estate.
and in our favour, be at this present parliament, confirmed,

approved,

approved, and ratificd, and act of parliament made thereupon.
And y)ur lordllip anrfwer humbly beseeches.

Of the /irre/ of tis t.'tition, t/ie following account is gi'en by

Ranmioph; ILetr. to Cecil, 19 Aug. 1560. The matters con-
ciudcd and pa:i by commnon consent on Saturday last, in such
solemn fort as the tirft day that they assembled, are these Firfl,
that the barons, accordilg to an old at of parliament, made
in the time of James I. in tie year of God 1427, flhail have
free voice in parliament, this at pased without any contradic-
tion.

No. V. (Vol. I. p. 137.)
A I'tter of Thomas Randolph, the Englifi resident, to the righ

v.olihipul fir William Cecil, knt. principal secretary to the
queen's majesty.

9 Ang. Have received your honour's letters of the first of this month
1561. written at Olies in EfTex, and also a letter unto the lord
Co:t. LUb. James, from hi:; kinlt;an St. Come out of France, in this they
1. iO f°' agrce both that the queen of Scotland is nothing changed of her

purpose in home coming. I aflure your honour that will be a
frout adventure for a sick crafed woman, that may be doubted as
well what may happen unto her upon the flas, as also how hear-
tily fle may be received when he cometh to land of a great
number, who are utterly persuaded that file intendeth their uiter
ruin, come when flie will ; the preparance is very finall wlen-
lcever that he arrive, tcarcely any nan can be periuaded that
fihe hath any such thiought in her head. I have hcwn your
hc-our's Ictter unto the lord Jnn)e, lord Morton, lord Leding-
ton, i:v v. :ihed as yoti hnlnour (dolh, that Ihe might be fiayed
\vtt ior a pace, nnt ; it werr not lfr theirobedience fake, fonie
o' them care not tho' ihcev never lf"w her face. They trave:l
what thev can to prevent the wicked devises of these Iiifchie-
voils purpol(s of her iinil'trs, but I fear that will always be
f(ind rh:il ii hi; js e ruli, theyd no hat they can to stand with
tlle rtliion, an;d o ni:int;iin anily with teir neigliburs ; they
lhve all nd to look itito tlie)lilelves, for th. ir hazard is great,
and that thev fee there is no reniedy nor fafiry for them nilvcs,
but to rcpole theinfelves upon the queen's niajefty, our fove-
rcign's tfieurs and support. Friends abroad they have noPe,
nr mlnv in wholm heyv may trust at home. There are in mirnd
flortly t o try what may be assured at the queen's maiefly, and
wil,,t they Inny affinedly perfoim of that thcv intend to offer for
tileir p.rties. This ;th. tucen of Scotland above all other things
dluleith ; this ihe Iciketh by all mneins to prevent; and hath
c.iild St. Conic, in her nlle, earniefly to write to charbe himi
that no filch things be nitlinpted before lier coming home ; for
that it is said, tlhat thlv no alrendy arrived here cut of England
f;r the purpose, wt l.iiibliant luonever' the nubleien do make,

that

that they are grieved with their queen's refusal that cometh far
from their hearts. They intend to expoft:late with me here-
upon. I have my answer ready enough for them. If he thruf
all Engliflmen out of this country, I doubt not but there will
be some of her own that will bear us ome kindness. Of me
ihe lhall be quit, so soon as it pleafeth the queen's majesty my
mistress no longer to use my service in this place. By such talk,
as I have of late had, with the lord James, and lord of Li-
dington, I perceive that they are of mind that immediately of
the next convention, I shall repair towards you with their de-
terminations, and resolutions, in all purposes, wherein your ho-
nour's advice is earneflly required, and fiortly looked for. What-
fomever I desire rmyfelf, I know my will ought to be subjeQ unto
the queen my sovereign's pleasure, but to content myself, would
God I were so happy as to serve her nmajelly in as mean a lfate as
ever poor gentleman did, to be quit of this place ; not that I do
in my heart wax weary of her inajefty's service, but because my
time and years require some place of more repose and quietness
than I find in this country. I doubt also my insufficience when
other troubles in this country arise, or ought fliall be required of
me to the advancement of her majesty's ervice, that either my
will is not able to conlpafs, or my credit fuficient to work to that
-effeet, as perchance flall be looked for at my hands. As your
honour hath been a means of my continuance in this room, so I
trust that I fliall find that continual favour at your hands, that so
soon as it liall stand with the queen's majelty's pleasure, I may
give this place unto some far worthier than I am myself, and in
the mean season, have my course directed by your good advice
how I may by my contrivance do ome such service, as may be
agreeable to her majesty's will and pleafirc.

Tn E S E few words, anm h;,ld to write unto your honour or

myself. For the reft, whi r that is willed that the lords will
stoutly continue yet fr one mnrnth, I assure yoi:r honour that
there is yet nothing omitted of their eld and acuftni:id manner
of doing, and feeing that they have brought that into i hii poinr,
and hould now prevail, they were ::n:;'rrl;y of Lhlii lives

I 1 I N D not that they are purpaOil- o to leave the matter. I

doubt more her money, than I do her air vords ; and yet can 1
not conceive what great things can be wrr.ught with fOrty thou-
find crowns, and treafiurc of her owil heri., I know llhrc is no
sure or ready means to get it. The lotd o' Li ingin . liaveth no-
thing at this time unwritten, that he thiikcili aiy b! hilIe lo fa-
tisfy your desire, in knowledge of the prelent Ilile of things
here. Whatfomevel cometh of that, he lindeth it ever bcl',
that fle come not; but if he do come, to let her know, at the
first, what fle flail find, which is due obedience, and willin:;
service, if he embrace Christ, and desire to live in peace with
her neighbours. By such letters as you have last received, your

honollr

honour somewhat underflandeth of Mr. Knox, himself, andalfo
of others, what is determined, he himself to abide the utter-
mos., and other never to leave him until God have taken his life,
and thus together with what comfort fomever it will please you
to give him by your letters, that the queen's majesty doth not
utterly condemn him, or at the least in that point, that he is o
fore charged with by his own queen, that her majesty will not
allow her doing. I doubt not but it will be a great comfort un-
to him, and will content many others; his daily prayer is for the
maintenance of unity with England, and that God will never
filffer men to be so ungrate, as by any perfuafton to run head-
long unto the deftruiion of them, that have saved their lives,
ard restored their country to liberty. I leave farther, at this
time, to trouble your honour, desiring God to fend such an amity
between these two realms that God may be glorified to them of
this world.-At Edinburgh the 9th of August, 1561.

No. VI. (Vol. I. p. 142.)

A letter of queen Elizabeth to queen Mary.
To the right excellent, right high and mighty princefle, our

right dear and well beloved filer and cousin the queen of
Scotland.

ri.h of TD IGHT excellent, right high, and mighty princefie, our
Aucg. J \, i anrightr and right well-beloved fiter and cousin, we greet

'r fice -yu well. The lord of St. Cofme brought to us your letters,
,,,, a dated the th of this present at Abbeville, whereby ye ftgnif,
u.-y. tha:t dalthough by the answer brought to you byMlonfieurDoyzeil,

ye i-lit have had occasion to have entered into some doubt of
ouran:;ity, yet after certain purpofies pafled betwixt you and our
ambassador, you would assure us ofyour good meaning to live with
us in amity, and for your purpose therein ye require us to give
credit t', the fid St. Cofmie. We have there-unto thought good
to infllwer as followeth. The fame St. Cosine hath made like dc-
ca ration unto us on your part, for your excuse in not ratifying
the treaty, as yourflf made to our abaflador, and we have
briefly anwlered to every the fame points, as he can shew you:
and if he ihnll not so do, yet least in the mean season you might
he induced to think that your reasons has satisficd us, fonmerally
we affurc you, that to our requests your answer cannot be reput-
rd for a litisfaslion. For we require no benefit of you, but
tlit you will perform yourpromife where-unto you are bound by
your llal and your hand, fr the refuifl whereof we fee no rea-
fln alledged can serve. Neither covet we any thing, but that
which is in your own power as queen of Scotland, that which
yourfclf in words and fpcech doth confess, that which your late

husband's

hulband's our good brother's ambassadors and you concluded,
that which your own nobility and people were made privy unto,
that which indeed made peace and quietness betwixt us, yea
that, without which, no perfect amity can continue betwixt us,
as if it be indifferently weighed, we doubt not but ye will per-
ceive, allow and accomplilh. Nevertheiels, perceiving by the
report of the bringer, that you mean furthwith upon your com-
ing home, to follow herein the advise of your council in Scot-
land, we are content to suspend our conceipt of all unkindness,
and do assure you that we be fully resolved, upon this being per-
formed, to unite a sure band cf amity, and to live in neigh-
bourhood with you as quietly, friendly, yea as assuredly in the
knot of friendship, as we be in the knot of nature and blood.
And herein we be so earnestly determined, that the world fiould
fee if the contrary should follow, (which God forbid) the
very occasion to be in you and not in us; as the flory witnef-
feth the like of the king your father, our uncle, with whom
our father fought to have knit a perpetual bond by inviting to
come in this realm to York, of which matter we know there
remain with us, and we think with you, sundry witnesses of
our father's earnet good meaning, and of the error whereunto
divers evil councillors induced your fa-.her; or finally where it
feemeth that report hath been mp.de unto you, that we had
sent our admiral to the seas with our navy to empeache your
passage, both your servants do well understand how false that is,
knowing for a truth that we have not any niore than two or three
finall barks upon the eas, to apprehend certain pirates, being
thereto entreated, and almost compelled, by the earnef com-
plaint of the ambassador of our good brother the king of Spain,
made of certain Scottiflnhen haunting our seas as pirates, under
pretence of letters of marque, of which matter also we ear-
neftly require you, at your coming to your reallm, to have ome
good consideration, and the rather l;fr rfpet that ought to be
betwixt your realne and the countries of us, of France, of
Spain, and of the house of Burgundy. And lo, right excellent,
right high and mighty princefie, we recommend us to you with
most earnest request, not to neglect tcfe our friendly anti fiicr-
ly offers of friendlhip, which, before God, we mean and intend
to accomplifli. Given under our signet at lHenynghan the 16th
of August, in the third year of our reign.

No. VIT. (Vol. 1. p. 160.)
A letter of Randolph to the right honourable fir William Cecil,

knight, principal secretary to the queen's najefty.

O F late, until the arrival of inonficur la Croch, I had nothing vsth of
J worth the writing unto your honour.-Before his coming, '"aY, ' 513
we had so little to hint upon, that we did nothing but pats our from 'the

tile oridia3bl.

time in feasts, banquetting, masking, and running at the ring,
and such like. He brought with him such a number of letters,
and such abundance of news, that for the space of three days,
we gave ourselves to nothing else but to reading of writings, and
hearing of tales many so truly reported, that they might be
compared to any that ever Luciane did write de veris narrationi-
bus. Among all his tidings, for the nolf assured, I fend this
unto your honour as an undoubted truth, which is, that the car-
dinal of Lorrain, at his being with the emperor, moved a mar-
riage betv.een his youngetl on, the duke of Auftruche, and this
queen ; wherein he hath so far travailed, that it hath already
coue unto this point, that if Ihe find it good, the said duke will
out of hand fend hither his ambaifador, and farther proceed to
the confumnmation hereof, with as convenient speed as may be;
and to the intent her mind may be the better known, la Croch
is font unto her with this melage from the cardinal, who hath
promied unto the emperor, to have word again before the end
of May ; and for this cau: !a Croch is ready for his departure,
and his letters writing both day and night. This queen being
before advertized ofhis towardnefs, by many means, hath fought
far off, to know my lord of Murray's mind herein, but would
never so plainly deal with him, that he could learn what her
neaning is, or how he is bent. She ufeth no man's council, but
only this man's that lafi arrived, and afluredly until the L. of
Lidington's return, fle will do what fle can to keep that secret,
and becaufc resolution in his absence cannot be taken, he will,
for this tile, return la Croch with request, to have longer time
to deviic ; and after, with the nioft speed he can, she fully pur-
pcetth to advertize hin, I mean her uncle the cardinal, of her
mind. Of this matter the L. of Lidington is made privy. I know
not whether by some intelli;,ence tlat he had before hisdeparture,
or fiocc his arrival in Filrce, divers letters have pafled between
her grace and him, whereof as much as it imported not greatly
the knowledge of, was communicated to one ; as much as was
,rittcn in vfphcr, is kept unto thenlelves. Whether also the L.
of L.idington hath had ccnfercncc with the Spanifil ambassador
in Egland of this Inatter, or any like, I leave it unto your ho-
nour's good means, to get true knowledge thereof Guesses or
ferilnizcs in so grave matters, I would be loth to write for verities.
I'bis all; your honour inm' take for truth, that the emperor
j:h rlli c;cd ith his son, for this queen's dower, the count), of
Tryvoll, .hich is filid to be worth 30,uoo fianks by year. Of
this nialtlr fi)o, the rhini rave wrote a letter unto this queen,
out of France not long since. This is all that presently I can
vw ile unto Vrul' hlinolr hereof; as I can conie by .iarther know-
}idcl, your !nrf' lh.l be informed.

I A v r. rci' ed your honour'swritings by the Scottiflnnan,
t lit al csn into these parts, he Liouglt alnf letters unto this

queen

queen from the L. of Lidington, their date was old, and con-
(aned only the news of France. 1 perceive, divers ways, that
N.twhaven is forre closed, but I am not o! ignorant of their na-
turi, but that I know they will fay as much as they dare do, I
will not fay as the proveib doth, ' canis timidus ti.rtius latrat.'
From hence I do aflule theml, what means fIblcver they make,
or how pitiful omlever their lone be, they are like to receive
but tmall comfort, for all their long al:ie. \Me tland daily in
doubt what fiiendfltip we llall need ourlelf, except we put bet-
ter order unto our misruled papilfs, than yet we do, or know
hcw to bring to pals, that we n.ns be void of their comber.

To morrow, tle 5th of this infta:t, the queen departeth of

this town, towards LEi le;:.orough. If n)y hap be good, you
fiall thoroughly hear Ificnie I:cry tidings of tile p. of St. An-
drews; upon \\cdncti:ay next he flita be arreignied, and five
other priells, f.r their ilnaling at EalCer last. IThus molt huli-
Lly I tlake my leave; at St. Andiews the 5th of May, 1563.

No. VIII. (Vol. I. p. 164.)
Letter of Randolph to the right honouralle fir William Cecil,

knight, principal fccrctary to the queen's majelly.
M yAY it picafe your honour, the 7th ofthis instant, Rowlet, loth of A-

this queen's fcretary, arrived here; he reporteth very 'pri', r'63

honefily of his good usage, he brought with hini many letters i.c from
unto the queen that came out of France, full of lamentatioln ihc originl
and sorrow. She received from the queen mother two letters, in his ow
the one contained only the rehearsal of her griefs, the otherhand
signify the state of Fiance as then it :;s, in what fort things
were accorded, and what farther v.wa intended fur the appeal-
ing of the dilcords there, not nliuirullPing but that if rcafon
could not be had at the quen of liEnland's hands, but that
the realm of France fliould find her ready and willing to lp-
port and defend the right thei cos, as by f icndfllip and old al-
liance between the two realmis Ilie i, liurd.

H o w well these words do agree wit h hcrdoings,yniur honour

can well col!lider, and by her wri iings in this li.rt io Ithiisquccen,
(which I assure your honour is true) y, u mnlay anrtiiedly kno,
that nothing flall he Itft undone of ier part. that ni v move de-
bate or controverfie h1tween this queen and our foverign.

IT was nmuch Imnuled at by the queen herlelf, how this new

kindness camie about, that at this tim :e i received two long
letters written all with her own hand, haying, all the time since
her return :ihe never received half so niany lines, as were in one
of the ltte-rs, which I can nmyfelf tetlily hy Ihe queen's own
faying, and other good affiurance, whele hilherto I have not
been deceived. I can also Ihrther airire )our Ihonour, tlht

this

this queen hath fayed that she knoweth now, that the friend-
Thip of the queen's majesty my sovereign may Rand her more in
Read, than that of her good mother in France, and as he is
desirous of them both, so will she not lose the one for the other.
I may also farther assure your honour, that whatfomever the oc-
cafion is, this queen hath some what in her heart that will burst
out in time, which will manifest that ome unkindness hath pas-
fed between them, that will not be easy forgotten. In talk
sometimes with nivfelf, flie faith that the queen mother might
have used the matter otherwise than flie hath lone, and doth
much doubt what shall be the success of her great desire to
govern alone, in all things to have her will. Seeing then that
presently they stand in such terms one with the other, I tho't it
better toconfirm her in that mind, (this queen I mean) than to
speak any word that might cause her to conceive better of the
other. And yet I am assured fie shall receive as friendly let-
ters, and as many good words from this queen, as the other did
write unto her. Whether the queen mother will speak any
thing unto the L. of Lidington of that purpose, Ihe did write
unto this queen of, I know not, but if flhe do, I think it hard
if your honour can get no favour thereof, at his return, or I
perchance by tome means here. It may, perchance, be writ-
ten only by that queen, to try what answer this queen will give,
or understand what mind flhe beareth unto the queen's majesty
our sovereign. The queen knoweth now that the earl Bothwell
is ent for to London. She caused a gentleman of hers to en-
quire the cause ; I answered, that I knew none other, but that
his takers were in controversy who took him, and that it ihould
be judgcd there. I know that The thinketh much that he is not
sent in:o Scotiland. It is yet greatly doubted that if he were
here, he would be reserved for an evil instrument. If the lord
of I.idington have not been plain with your honour herein, he
is in the wrong to those who are his friends here, but more of
11l to hilnfcifl There comes a vulture in this realm, if ever
that man come again into credit.

No. IX. (Vol. I. p. 169.)
The oration made Ib William Maitland of Lethington, younger

secretary fir the ti;ic, in the parliament holden by our fove-
reign the cirg's mother, queen of this realm for the time, the
time of the rcllitution of Unmquile Matthew earl of Lenox.

Y lords and others here convened. Albeit, be that :t has
pleaed her majelly mot graciously to utter unto yen, by

her own mouth, ye may have futficiently conceived the caulle of
this your prelent affenibly; yet having helr najefty's command-

I;cat

ment to supply my Lord Chancellor's place, being presently as
ye fee deceased, I am willed to express the fame somewhat more
at large.

N o T O U R it is, how, in her highness's minority, a process of

forfaltour was decreed against my lord of Lenox, for certain of-
fences alledged committed by him, specified in the dome and cen-
sement of Parliament given thereupon; by reason whereof he has
this long time been exiled, and absent forth of his native country,
how grievous the fame has been unto him, it has well appeared
by divers his suites, sundry ways brought unto her majey's
knowledge, not only containing ioft humble and due fubiiflion,
but always bearing witness of his good devotion to her Majesty
his natural princess, and earnest affetion he had to her Highness
most humble fervice,ifit should please her majesty of her clemen-
cy to make him able to enjoy the benefit of a ubjet; many
refpets might have moved herHighnefs favourably to incline to
his request, as the anciency of his house, and the firname he
bears, the honour he has to appertain to her majesty by affinity,
by reason of my Lady Margaret her highness's aunt, and divers
other his good considerations, as also the effeauous request of her
good sifter the Queen's Majesty of England, whose earnet com-
mendation was not of least moment, besides that of her own na-
tural, her majesty has a certain inclination to pity the decay of
noble houses, and as we heard, by her own report, has a great
deal more pleasure to be the instrument of the uphold, mainte-
nance, and advancement of the antient blood, thah to have mat-
ter miniftred of the decay or overthrow of any good race. Upon
this occasion, her Majesty the more tenderly looked upon his re-
quest, and her good sifter the Queen of England's favourable let-
ter, written for recommendation of his cause, in consideration
whereofnotonly has flie granted unto him herletter of retitution,
by way of grace, but also licensed him to pursue, by way of
reduction, the remedies provided by the law for such as think
themselves grieved by any judgment, unorderly led, and to have
the process reversed; for examination whereof, it has pleased her
Majesty presently to assemble you the three etates of this her
realme, by whose advice, deliberation, and decision at her Ma-
jefty's mind, to proceed forward upon his complaints, as the
merits of the caulf, laws of the realm, and pracice observed in
such cafes, will bear out. I might here end, if the matter we
have in hand give me not occasion to fay a few more words, not
far different from the fame fibjec, wherein I would extend the
circumstances more largely. If I feared not to offend her high-
ness, whose presence and modest nature abhors long speaking and
adulation, and so will compel me to speak such things, as may
seem to tend to any good and perfect point; and least it fliould be

V OL II. K compted

compted to me, as that I were oblivious, if I lhould onit to put
you in remembrance, in what part we may accept this, and the
like demonstrations of her gentill nature; whose gracious beha-
viour towards all her fubjeEts, in general, may serve for a good
proof of that felicity, we may look for under her happy govern-
ment, so long as it shall please God to grant her unto us; for a
good harmony to be had in the common weill, the offices be-
tween the prince and the fubjeats must be reciproque; as by her
Majesty's prudence we enjoy this present peace with all foreign na-
tions, and quietness among youriclves, in such fort, that I think
justly it may be affirmed Scotland, in no man's age that presently
lives, was in greater tranquillity ; so is it the duty of all us her
loving fubjets to acknowledge the fame as a most high benefit,
proceeding from the good government of her majesty, declaring
ourselves thankful for the fame, and rendering to her majesty
ftch due obedience, as ajuft prince may look for at the hands of
faithful and obedient fubjets. I mean no forced nor unwilling
obedience, which I know her nature does detest, but such as
proceeds from the contemplation of her modest kind of regiment,
will for love and duty fake produce the fruits thereof. A good
proof have we all in general had of her Majesty's benignity these
three years, that she has lived in the government over you, and
many of you have largely tafted of her large liberality and frank
dealing ; on the other part her highness has had large appear-
ance of your dutiful obedience, so it becomes you to continue,
as we have begun, in consideration of the many noble examples
of her clemency above others her good qualities, and to abhor
and detest all false bruites and rumours, which are the most pes-
tilerit evils that can be in any common weil, and the sowers and
inventors thereof. Then may we be well assured to have of her
an most gracious princefie, and flhe most faithful and loving sub-
jes s; and so both the head and the members, being encouraged
to maintain the harmony and accord of the politic bodies, where-
of I made mention before, as the glory thereof shall appertain
to her Majesty, so shall no finall praise and unspeakable commo-
dity redound therethrough to you all universally her fubjets.

No. X. (Vol. I. p. 175.)
The perils and troubles that may presently ensue, and in time to

come follow, to the queen's majesty of England, and the
tate of this realm, upon the marriage of the Queen of Scots
to the Lord Darnly.

I R S T, the minds of fich as be affeced to the queen of
Scotts, either for herself, or for the opinion of her pretence

to this crown, or for the desire to have charge of the forme of
religion in this realm, or for the difcontentaion they have of the

Queen's

Queen's majesty, or her fuccetfion, or of the fucceffidn of piih
betides the Queen of Scotts, shall be, by this marriage; credted,
comforted, and induced to devise and labour how to bring their
desires to pass; and to make ome estimate what perfdns thof
are, to the intent the quantity of the danger may be weighed
the fame may be compafled in those forts either within the realm
or without.

TH E first are such as are specially deVoted to the Queen 8f

Scotts, or to the LordDarnley, by bondof blood andallianlce; i's
first all the house of Lorrain and Guise for her part, and the Earl
of Lenox and his wife, all such in Scotland as be of teir blood
and have received difpleafutes by the Duke of Chatelheranlt and
the Hainiltons. The second are all manner of persons, both ih
this realm and other countries, that are devoted to the authority
of Rome, and mislike of the religion now received; aid in
these two forts are the substance of them comnpreheiided, thlt
shall take comfort in this marriage.

N x T therefore to be confidered what perils and irbtbles
these kind of men flhall intend to this realm.

SI R s T, the general scope ard mark of all their desires is, aid

always shall be, to bring the Queen of Scotts to h'ave the royal
crown of this realm ; and therefore, though tie devisees tnma
vary amongst themselves for the compafling hereof, according to
the accidents of the times, and according to the impediments
which they shall find by means of the queen's majesty's ations
and governments, yet all their purposes, drifts, devises, and prac-
tices, hall wholly and only tend to make the queen of Scotts
queen of this realm, and to deprive our sovereign lady thereof;
and in their proceedings, there are two manners to be confidered,
whereof the one is far worse than the other; the one is intended
by them, that either from malicious blindness in religion, or for
natural affection to the queen of Scotts, or the lord Darnlcy, do
persuade themselves that the said queen of Scotts hath presently
more right to the crown than our sovereign lady the queen, of
which fort be all their kindred on both fides, and all such as
are devoted to popery, either in England, Scotland, Ireland, or
elsewhere; the other is meant hy thei, which with less malice,
are persuaded that the queen of Scotts hath only right to be the
next heir to succeed the queen's majefy and her iffuc, of which
fort few are without the realm, but here within, and yet of them,
not so many as are of the contrary, and from there two forts
flhall the peril devises and practiccs proceed. From the rc, which
imagine the queen of Scotts to have perpetually right, are to be
looked for thece perils. Firif, it is to be doubted the devil Will
inset fomen of themn to imagine tlhe hurt of the life of our dear
sovereign lady, by such means as the devil shall suggest to them,
although it be assuredly hoped, that almighty God viltt, ds he
.ath hitherto, graciously protect andt preserve her from' fiiuc
dangers Secondly, there will e attempted, by persuasion, by

K bruites.

bruites, by rumours, and such like, to alienate the minds of good
subje&s from the queen's najefty, and to counciliate them to the
queen of Scotts, and on this behalf the frontiers of the north
will be much olicited and laboured. Thirdly, there will be at-
tempted causes of some tumults and rebellions, specially in the
north towards Scotland, so as thereupon may follow some open
enterprize set by violence. Fourthly, there will be, by the aid
queen's council and friends, a new league made with France, or
Spain, that shall be offensive to this realm, and a furtherance to
their title. And it is also very likely, that they will set a foot as
many practices asthey can, both upon the frontiersand in Ireland,
to occasion the queen's majesty to encreafe and continue her
charge thereby, to retain her from being mighty or potent, and
for the attempting of all these things, many devises will be ima-
gined, from time to time, and no negligence will therein appear.

F R o M the second fort, which mean no other favour to the

queen of Scotts, but that she hould succeed in title to thequeen's
majesty, is not much to be feared, but that they will content
themselves to fee not only the queen's majeffy not to marry, and
so impeach it, but to hope that the queen of Scotts fllall have
issue, which they will think to be more pleafible to all men, be-
cause thereby the crowns of England and Scotland hall be united
in one, and thereby the occasion of war shall cease; with which
persuasion many people may be reduced, and abused to incline
themselves to the part of the queen of Scotts.

T E remedies againit these perils.

A Duplicate.

4th June, A ummary of the consultation and advice given by the lords and
S65L. others of the privy council. Collected out of the sundry and
Cal. B. t'. several speeches of the said counsellors.

ol .
9o.

Lord Keeper, Mr Comptroller,
Lord Treasurer, Mr. Vice Chamberlain,

Derby, Mr. Secretary,
Earls of Bedford, Cave,

Leicester, Peter,

Lord Admiral, Mason.
Lord Chamberlain,

Questions propounded were these two.
I. F IRST, what perils might ensue to the queen's majesty, or

p this realm, of the marriage betwixt the queen of Scotts,
and the Lord Darnly.

2. What were meet to be done, to avoid or remedy the fame.

To the First.

The perils being sundry, and very many, were reduced by
some counsellors into only one.

i. FirfR,

1. First, that by this marriage, the Queen of Scotts, (being

not married) a great number in this realm, not of the worst sub-
jeCts, might be alienated in their minds from their natural duties
to her majesty, to depend upon the success of this marriage of
Scotland, as a mean to eabliih the fuccelion of both the
crowns, in the ifue of the fame marriage, and so favour all
devies and pracices, that should tend to the advancement of
the queen of Scotts.

2. Secondly, that confidering the chief foundation of them,

which furthered the marriage of the lord Darnley, was laid up-
on the trust of such as were papills, as the only means to restore
the religion of Rome, it was plainly to be seen, that both in
this realm and Scotland, the papists would most favour, main-
tain, and fortify this marriage of the lord Darnley, and would
for furtherance of facion in religion, devise all means and prac-
tices that could be within this realm, to disturb the estate of the
queen's iajefty, and the peace of the realm, and consequently
to atchieve their pupofes by force, rather than fail. By some
other, these perils having indeed many branches, were reduced,
though somewhat otherwise, into two forts, and these were in
nature such as they could not be easily fevered the one from the
other, but were knit and linked together, naturally for maintain-
ing the one with the other. The first of these fort of perils
was that, by this marriage with the lord Darnley, there was a
plain intention to further the pretended title of the queen of
Scotts, not only to succeed the Queen's majesty, as in her best
amity he had profefled, but that to occupy the queen's estate,
as when he was in power, she did manifestly declare.

T a E second was, that hereby the Romiih religion fllould be

ere/ted, and increased daily in this realm, and these two were
thus knit together, that the furtherance and maintenance of the
title staid, in furthering of thereligion of Rome within this realm;
and in like manner the furtherance of the fame religion stood by
the title, for otherwise the title had no foundation.

Proves of the firt.] And to prove that the intention to ad-

vance the title to disturb the queen's majesty, must needs ensue,
was confidered that always the intention and will of any person is
most manifest, when their power is greatest, and contrary when
power is finall, then the intention and will of every person is co-
vered and less seen. So as when the queen of Scotts power was
greatest, by her marriage with the dolphin of France, being as-
terwards French king, it manifestly appeared of what mind she,
and all her friends were, using then manifestly all the means that
could be devised to impeach and difpolefs the queen's majesty,
first by writing and publishing herfelfin all countries queen of
England by granting charters, patents, and commifions with
that stile, and with the arms of England, both the French and
Scotts, which charters remain still undcfaced ; and to prosecute

it

it with effec, it is known what preparations of war were nmlic.
aDd frt into Scotland; and what other force, were affemnblcd in
foeign countries; yea, in what manner a shameful peace was
made by the French with king Philip, to employ all the forces of
France, to pursue all the matters by force, which by God's pro-
vidence, and the queen's majesty contrary power, were repelled;
and afterwards, by her husband's death, her fortune and power
being changed, the intention began to Lide itfclf, and although by
the Scottifi queen's commissarys an accord was made at Eden-
brough, to reform all those titles, and'claims, and pretences, yet
to thisday, bydelays andcavillations, the ratificationof that treaty
bath been deferred. And so now, as oon as he fall feel her
power, she will set the fame again abroad, and by confidering of
fich errors as were committed in the firif, her friends and allieswill
amend the fame, and proceed substantially to her purpose. By son:e
it was thought plainly, that the peril was greater of this marriage
with the lord Darnley, being a subjet of this realm, than with
thie mightiest prince abroad; for by this, he being of this realm,
and haying for the caufe'of religion, and other refpeas, made a
partyhere; should encreafe byforce with diminution of the power
of the realm, in that whatsoever power he could makeby thefac-
tion of the papists, and other dilcontented persons here, hould
be as itwere deducted out of the power of this realm: and by the
marriage of a firanger, fle could not be alTured of any part here;
so as by this marriage 'he fiould have a portion of her own pow-
er to ferye her turn, and a iinall portion ofadverfaries at home in
our own bowels, always seen more dangerous than treble the like
abroad; whereof the examples are in our own fRories many, that
foreign powers never prevailed in this realm, but with the help
of some at home. It was also remembered, that feeing now be-
fore the attempt of marriage, it is found, and manifestly een,
that in every corner of the realim, the faction that mos favoureth
the Scottish title, is grown stout and bold, yea feen'manifeftly in
this court, both in hall and chamber, it could not be (but except
good heed were speedily given to it) by this marriage, and by
the pra&ice of the fautors thereof, the fame fatio'n would short-
ly encreafe, and grow so great and dangerois, as the redress
thereof would be almost dfperate. And to this purpose it was
remembered, how of late in perusing of the fubifance of the
justices of the peace, in all the counfrys of the realrp, scantly a
third was found fully assured to be, trusted in the matter of reli-
gion, upon which only string the queen of Scotts title doth hang,
and some doubt might be, that the friends of the earl of Lenox;
andhis had more kriwledge hereof than was thought, and there-
by made avant now in Scotland, and their party was so great in
England as the queen's majesty durfl not attempt to contrary his
marriage. And in this fort. was the um of the perils declared,

bein,

bing notwithftatding more larely and plainly set out, and made
ib apparent by many sure arguments, as no one of the council
could deny them to be but many, and very dangerous.

Second Question.

TH E question of this consultation was what were meet to be

dons to avoid these perills, or else to divert the force thereof
from hurting the reali ; wherein there were a great number of
particular devises propounded, and yet the more part of them
was reduced by some into three heads.

i. THE first thought necessary by all persons, as the only

thing of the inoft moment and efficacy, to remedy all these per,
rils, and many others, and such as without it, no other remedy
could be found sufficient, and that was to obtain that the queen's
majesty would marry, and make therein no long delay.

2. T H e second was to advance, establish and fortify indeed

the profession of religion, both in Scotland, and in England,
and to diminilh, weaken, and feeble the contrary.

3. TH third was, to proceed in sundry things, either to

disappoint and break this intended marriage, or, at the least,
thereby to procure the fame not to be so hurtful to this realm.
as otherwise it will be.

TH E first of these three hath no particular rights in it, but

an earnest and unfeigned desire and suite, with all humbleness,
by prayer to Almighty God, and advice and council to the
queen's majesty, that she would differ no more time from mar-
riage, whereby the good fubjets of the realm might stay their
hearts, to depend upon her majefly, and the issue of her body,
without which no surety can be devised to ascertain any person
of continuance of their families or pofterities, to enjoy that
which therwife fiould come to teni.

SE o9 N p, concerning the matters of religion, wherein both
truth and policy were joined together, hd these particulars.

F i PA T, whereas of late the adversaries of religion in the

realm have taken occasion to comfort and increase their faction,
both in ngland, Scotland, and abroad, with a rumour and
gjpf4iq.ation that the religion Rlall be lhortly changed in this
realm, by means that the bishops, by the queen's majesty's conm-
nmandment, have of late dealt ftreightly with ome persons of
good religion, because they had forborn to wear certain apparel,
and such like things, being more of sorn and accidents, than of
any fubftane, for that it is well known that her majesty had no
meaning to comfort the adversaries, but only to maintain an uni-
formity as well in things external, as in the substance, nor yet
hath any intention to make any change of the religion, as it is
established by laws. It was thought by all men very necessary,
for the fippreuipg of the pride and arrogancy of the adversaries,

indirectly

iniretly hereby to notify, by her special letters to the two
arthbifhops, thather former commandment was only to retain an
uniformity, and not to give any occasion to any person to mis.
judge of her majesty, in the change of any part of religion,
but that Sfhe did determine firmly to maintain the former ot her
religion, as it was eitablifhed, and to punilh such as did therein
violate her laws. And in these points, ome also wiihed that
it might please her archbishops, that if they hould fee that the
adversaries continued in taking occasion to fortify their faction,
that in that cafe they should use a moderation therein, until
the next parliament, at which time, rome good, uniform, and
decent order might be devised, and established, for such cere-
monies, so as both uniformity and gravity might be retained
amongst the clergy.

T n E second meanswas, thatthe quondam bihops,and others,

which had refused to acknowledge the queen's majesty's power
over them, according to the law, and were of late dispersed in
the plague time to sundry places abroad, where it is known they
cease not to advance their faction, might be returned to the tower,
or some other prison, where they might not have such liberty to
feduceandinveiglethequeen's majety's fubjecs, as they daily do.

TH E third means was, that where the bishops do complain

that they dare not execute the ecclesiastical laws, to the fur-
therence of religion, for fear of the premunire wherewith the
judges and lawyers of the realm, being not best asseted in re-
ligion, do threaten them, and in many cafes let not to pinch
and deface them, that upon such cafes opened, ome conve-
nient authority might be given them, from the queen's majesty,
to continue during her pleasure.

TH E fourth was, that there were daily lewd, injudicious

and unlawful books in Englifli brought from beyond eas, and
are boldly receivcd, read, and kept, and especially in the north,
seducing of great numbers of good ubjecs, the like boldness
whereof was never suffered in any other princess's time, that
ofme freight order mighi be given to avoid the fame, and that
it might be confidered by the judges, what manner of crime the
fame is, to maintain such books, made dirctly against her ma-
jefty's authority, and maintaining a foreign power, contrary to
the laws of the realm.

TH E fifth was, that where a great numberof monks, fryers,

and such lewd persons are fled out of Scotland, and do serve in
England, especially in the North, as curates of churches, and
all such of them as are not found honest and conformable, may
be banifled out of the realm, for that it appeareth they do
sow sedition in the realm, in many places, and now will increase
their doings.

Ti E sixth, where sundry having ecclesiastical livings, are on
the other fide the Ten, and from thence maintain fidition in the

realm;

realm; that livings may be better bestowed, to the commodity
of the realm, upon good fubjefts.

TH E seventh is, that the judges of the realm, having no

small authority in this realm in governance of all property of the
realm, might be sworn to the queen's majesty, according to the
laws of the realm, and so thereby they hould for conscience
fake maintain the queen's majesty's authority.

The particulars of the third intention, to break and avoid this
marriage, or to divert the perils.

Fl R s T to break this marriage, confidering nothing can likely

do it, but force, or fear of force, it is thought by one that
these means following might occasion the breach of the marriage.

I. TH A T the earl of Bedford repair to his charge.
2. TH A T the works at Berwick be more advanced.
3. T A T the garrison be there increased.
4. TH A T all the wardens put their frontiers in order with
speed, to be ready at an hour's warning.

5. Tn AT ome noble person, as the duke of Norfolk, or

the earl of Salop, or such other, be ent into Yorkshire, to be
lieutenant general in the North.

6. TH A T preparations be made of a power, to be in readi-
ness to serve, either at Berwick, or to invade Scotland.

7. TH A T presently lady Lenox be committed to some place,
where he may be kept from giving or receiving of intelligence.

9. TH A T the earl of Lenox and his son may be ent for, and

required to be ent home by the queen of Scots, according to
treaty; and if they shall not come, then to denounce to the
queen of Scotts the breach of the treaty, and thereupon to enter
with hostility; by which proceeding, hope is conceived (so the
fame be done in deeds and not in shews) that the marriage will
be avoided, or at the leaf that it may be qualified from many
perils; and whatsoever is to be done herein, is to be executed with
speed, whilst she has a party in Scotland that favoureth not the
marriage, and before any league be made by the queen of Scots
with France or Spain.

So ME others allow well of all there proceedings, saving of

proceeding to hostility, but all do agree in the reft, and also to
these particularities following.

lo. Tit AT the earl's lands upon his refusal, or hi: fuon's re-

fusing, should be seized, and bestowed in gift or cuilody, as
shall please her majefy, upin good fubjeis.

i . Tit AT all manifelt favourers of the carl, in the North

or elsewhere, be inquired for, and that they be by imdry
means, well looked to.

zs. TI A T inquiry be made in the North, who have te
ftewardfliip of the queen's majety's lands there, and that no

person,

peron, defeFving mifruft, be fuflcred to have governance or
rule of any of her ubjets or lands in the North, but only to
retain their fees, and more trusty person have rule of the fame
peoples lands.

13. TH A r all frequent paftages into this realm, to and from

Scotland, be eftrained to all Scottilh men, saving such as have
safe conduct, or to be epecially recommended from Mr. Ran-
dolph, as favourers of the realm.

14. Ti 4 T some intelligence be used with such in Scotland,

as favour not the marriage, and they comforted from time to
time.

15. TH A T the queen's najefty's houfhold, chamber and

penlioners, be better seen unto, to avoid broad and uncomely
(peech used by sundry against the fate of the realm.

16. T n . T the younger son of the earl ofLenox, Mr. Charles,
be removed to onme place where he may be forth coming.

17. TH A T confidering the fation and title of the queen of

Scotts, hath now, of long time received great favour, and con-
tinued, by the queen's niajefty's favour herein to the queen of
Scotts and her ministers, and the lady Catherine, whom the
said queen of Scotts accompted as a competitor unto her in pre-
tence of title, it may please the queen's majelty, by some ex-
terior ad, to ihew some reniffion of her displeasure to the lady,
and to the earl of Hartford, that the queen of Scotts thereby
iuay find some change, and her friends put in doubt of further
proceeding therein.

r8. Tn AT whosoever shall be lieutenant in the North, Sir
Ralph Sadler many accompany him.

19. TH A T with speed the realm of Ireland may be commit-
ted to a new governor.

20. SI! I A L L Y, thnt there advices being confidered by her

majcdly, it may please her to chufe which of them Ihe liketh,
and to put them in execution in deeds, and not to pass theml
over in consultations and speeches.

So R it is to be assured, that her adversaries will use all means

to put their intention in execution. Some by prafice, rome by
force, whenl timle flall serve, and no tiule can serve so well the
queen's mnajelv to interrupt the perils, as now at the first, be,
fore the queen of Scotts purpoles be fully fettled.

No.

No. XI. (Vol. . p. 18o.)
Randolph to the earl of Lcicefter, from Edinburgh the 31 t of

July, 1565.

A Y it please your lordship, I have received your lord- Cott. 1'j.
fliip's letter by my servant, sufficient testimony of your C.al. s.

lordhip's favour towards me, whereof I think myself always so AIn Oi.
allured, that what other mishap soever befall me, I have enough nal.
to comfort myself with; though I have not at this time received
neither according to the need I stand, nor the neceflity of the
fervife that I am imployed in, I will rather pass it, as I may with
patience, than trouble your lordship to be further futer for me,
when there is so little hope that any good will be done for me.
I doubt not but your lordlhip hath heard by such information,
as I have given from hence, what the present slate of this
country is, how this queen is now become a married wife, and
her husband, the self fame day of his marriage made a king. In
their desires, hitherto, they have found so much to their con-
tentment, that if the reft succeed and prosper accordingly, they
may think themselves much happier, than there is appearance
that they ihall be, so many discontented minds, so much mif-
liking of the subjects to have these matters thus ordered, and in
this fort to be brought to pass ; I never heard of any marriage,
so little hope, so little comfort as men do talk, was never seen,
at any time, when men hould most have fliewed themselves to
rejoice, if that consideration of her own honour and well of her
country had been as appertained in so weighty a cafe. This is
now their fear, the overthrow of religion, the breach of amitie
with the queen's najelty, and the deltruction of as many of the
nobility as flue hath nifliking of, or that he liketh to pitch a
cquarlle unto. To fee all theli; inconvelicn cys approaching, there
are a good number that may sooner lament with thenfelves. and
complain to their neighbours, than be able to find remedie to
help them, fciue atenlpt with all the force they have, but are
too weak to do any good, what is required otherways, or what
means there is nlade your lolrdiip knoweth; what will be an-
iweared, or what will be done, thcrcin, we are in great doubt,
and though yopr intent be never si grood unto us, yet do we fc
munch fear your delay, that our ruin llall prevent your sup-
port when council is onuc taken. Nothing fio neefCllfll, as fileely
execution. Upon the queen's iialnjely, we wholly depend, in
her majeRfy's hands it flandletl to save our lives, or to litler us
to perish; greater honour her majesty cannot have, than in
that which leth in her majesty's power to do ft;, us; the fums
are not great, the numbers of eilcn are not manny that we defile;
many will dayly be found, tho' this will be some charge; men
grow dayly, though, at this tiun, I tlink her najr fly 11hall lore

1 1
t),41~~~~~~~~c

but few ; her friends here being once taken away, where will her
ma jelly find the like; I speak least of that which I think is moR
earnestly intended by this queen, and her husband, when by hint
it was lately said, that he cared wore for the papists in England,
than he did for the protestants in Scotland; if therefore his
hopes be Co great in the papists of England; what may your lord-
flip believe that he thinketh of the protestants there; for his
birth, for his nurritour, for the honor he hath to be of kine to
the queen my mistress, if in preferring those that are the queen's
majesties worst fubjeets to those that are her belt, he declareth
what mind he beareth o the queen's majesties self, any man
may fay it is slenderly rewarded, and his duty evil forgotten;
he would now eem to be indifferent to both the religions, flie
to use her mass, and he to come fometines to the preaching
they were married with all the folemnities of the popish time,
flving that he heard not the mass ; his speech and talk argueth
his in:nd, and yet would he fain seem to the world that he were
of some religion; his words to all men, against whom he
conceiveth any displeasure how unjust soever it be, so proud and
spitefully, that rather he feereth a monarch of the world, than
he that, not long since, we have seen and known the lord
Darnley; he looketh now for reverence of many, that have lit-
tle will to give it hir. ; and some there are that do give it, that
think him little worth of it. All honor that may be attributed
unto any man by a wife, he hath it wholly and fully; all praises
that may be spoken of him, he lacketh not from herself; all
dignities that flie can indue him with, which are already given
a'nd gr.anned; no man pleafeth her that contenteth not him;
and what may I fay more, fle hath given over to him her whole
will, to be ruled and guided as himself best liketh; he can as
much prevail with him, in any thing that is against his will, as
your lordship may with me to perfwade that f hould hang my
self; this last dignity out of hand to have been proclaimed king,
ihe would have it deferred untill it were agreed by parliament,
or he had been himself of 21 years of age, that things done in
his paine might have the better authority. He would, in no
calf, have it deferred one day, and either then or never; where-
upon this doubt is risen amongst ourmen of law whether she be-
ing clad with a hulband, and her huliand not twenty one years,
any thing Vwitlout parliament can be of trength that is done
between them ; upon Saturday at afternoon, there matters
:;'e:rc long in dchatcing. And before they were well resolved
upon, nt nine hours at night, by three heralds, at found of the
ti luipet, lie was proclaimed king. This was the night before the
n;nrriage . this day, Monday at twelve of the clock, the lords,
ill that were in the tun, were present at the proclaiming of
him n;,ain, where no man fliid so much as amen, faving.his father
that cried cut aloud God save his queen. The manner of the
marriage wa: i this fbrt, upon Sunday in the morning between

five

five and fix, the was conveyed by divers of her nobles to the
chapell; ihe had upon her back the great mourning gown of
black, with the great wide mourning hood, not unlike unto that,
which he wore the doulfull day of the buriall of her hulband;
She was led into the chapell, by the earl of Lenox and Athol,
and there was he left untill her hulband came, who also was
conveyed by the fame lords, the minister priests, two, do there
receive them, the bands are aiked the third time, and an inftru-
ment taken by a Notour that no man said againRf them, or alledg-
ed any cause why the marriage might not proceed. The words
were spoken, the rings which were three, the middle a rich dia-
mond, were put upon her finger; they kneel together, and many
prayers said over them, file tarrieth out the mars, and he taketh
a kits, and leaveth her there, and went to her chamber, whither
within a space flie followeth; and being required according to
the folcmnity, to cast off her cares and leave aside those sorrow-
full garments, and give herself to a more pleasant life, after
some pretty refufall, more I believe for manner fake than grief
of heart, flie suffered them that flood by, every man that could
approach to take out a pin, and so being committed to her ladies,
changed her garments, but went not to bed, to fignifie to the
world, that it was not lust that moved them to marry, but only
the necefllty of her country, not, if God will, long to leave
it defiitute of an heir. Sulpicious men, or such as are given of
all things to make the wort:, would that it hould be believed,
that they knew each other before that they came there; I would
not your lordihip fliould so believe it, the likelihoods are so
great to the contrary, that if it were possible to fee such an ae
done, I would not believe it. After the marriage followeth com-
monly great cheer and dancing: to their dinner they were con-
veyed by the whole nobility; and trumpets found; a largess
cried; mony thrown about the houfein great abundance, tofuch
as were happy to get any part; they dine both at one table,
Ihe upon the upper hand, there serve her these earls Athole
fewer, Morton carver, Craufoord cup bearer; these fcrve him
in like offices, earls Eglington, Cassels, and Glencairn; after
dinner they danced a while, and then retired theiimfelves till the
hour of supper; and as they dined so do they sup, some dlanc-
ing there was, and so they go to bed; of all this I have writ-
ten to your lordlhip I am not Oculatus testis, to this, but of
the verity your lordfllip fliall not need to doubt, howroever
came by It; I was ent for to have been at the supper, but like
a curriil or uncourtly carle I refused to be there; and yet that
which your lordship may think might move me much, to have
had the ight of my mistress, of whom there eighteen days by
just account I got not a fight, I am my lord taken by all that
fort as a very evil person, which in my heart I do well allow,
and like of myself the better, foryet can I not find either honefl
or good that liketh their doings; I leave at this time further to

trouble

your lordihip, craving pardon for my long silence; I have more
ado than I am able to discharge; I walk now more abroad by
night than by day, and the day too little to discharge inyfelf of
that which I conceive, or receive in the night. As your lord-
ihip, I am sure; is partaken of such letters as I write to Mr.
Secretary, so I truss that he flall be to this, to save me of i
little labour, to write the fame again, most humbly I take my
leave at Edinburgh, the last day of July, x 565.

No. XII. (Vol. I. p. 8z.)
Letter of the earl of Bedford to the honourable Sir William

Cecil, knight, her majesty's principal secretary, and one of
her highness's privy council.

id of Sep. FTER my hearty commendations, this day at noon, cap-
'565. tain Brickwell came hither, who brought with him the
fPaper-O- queen's majesty's letters containing her full resolution, and plea-
'ne OriCi- sure for all things he had in charge to give information of, saving
ntl. that for the aid of the lords of the congregation, there is nothing

determined, or at the least expressed in the fame letters, and for
that purpose received I, this morning, a letter subscribed by the
duke, the earl of Murray, Glencarne, and others, craving to bi
holpen with 3o0 harquebufyers out of this garrifoh, for iheii
better defence. And albeit, I know right well the goodness of
the'ir cause, and tle queen's miajcfty our ove'reign's good ill,
and care towards them ; and do also understand that it were very
iequifit to have them holpen, fr that now their aufe is io be
in this manner decided, and that it now standeth upon their utter
overthrow and undoing, since the queen's part is at the least
5000, and they not much above ooo; besides, that the queen
bath harquebufyers, and they have none, and do yet want the
power that the earl of Argyle flould bring to then, who is
hot yet joined with theirs; I have thereupon thought good to
pray you to be a means to learn her majesty's pleasure in this be-
half, what, and how, I fIall answer them, or otherwise deal in
this matter, now at this their extreme neceflity. For on the one
fide, lyeth thereupon their utter ruin and overtlihrow, and the
miserable subversion of religion there; and, on the other fide,
to adventure bo great and weighty a matter as this is, (albeit it
be but of a few foldicrs, for a finall time) without good war-
raunte, and thereby to bring, peradventure, upon our heads
forme wilful warrs, and in the: nean time to leave the place un-
furnifled, (having in the whole but 800) witlhout any grant ol
new supply for the fame ; and by that imeans also to leave the
marches here the more fi;bjc&E to invasion, while in the mceai
fenfon new helps arc prcpnrirg; this know not I what to fdi
or how to do And o imuch more I marvel thereof, as that

haing

having so many times written touching this matter, no resolute
determination coineth. And so between the writing and looking
for answer, the occasion cannot pass, but uft needs proceed
ind have success. God turn it to his glory; but surely all mens
reason hath great cause to fear it. Such a pufli it is now come
unto, as this little supply would do much good to advance God's
honour, to continue her majesty's great and careful memory of
them, and to preserve a great many noblemen and gentlemen.
If it be not now helpen, it is gone for ever. Your good will
and affection that way, I do nothing mistrust, and herein fliall
take fich good advice, as by any means I can. 1 received fron
these lords two papers inclosed, the ecCt whereof hall appear
unto you. For those matters that captain Brickwell brought,
flall answer you by my next, and herewith fend you two letter
from Mr. Randolph, both received this day. By him you shall
hear that the protestants are retired from Edenborough further
off. So as I hope your resolution for their aid hall come in
time, if it come with speed, for that they will not now so pre-
fently need .them ; and lo with my hearty thanks commit you t6
God. From Berwick, this d of Sept. 1565.

No. XIII. (Vol. I. p. 182.)

The queen to the earl of Bedford.

P ON the advertizements lately received from you, with 12 stet.
such other things as came also from the lord Scrope and 565.

Thomas Randolph, and upon the whole matter well confidered, fice.
we have thus determined. We will, with all the speed that we
can, fend to you 3000 1. to be thus used. If you.fhall certainly
tindertland that the earl of Murray hath such want of money, as
the impresting to him of oool. might stand him in stead for the
help to defend himself, you hall presently let him secretly to un-
dertland, that you will as of yourself, let him have so much,
and so we will that you let him have, in the most secret fort
you can, when the (aid fum flall conme to you, or if you can,
by any good means, advance him some part thereof beforehand.

The other zoool. you shall cause to be kept whole, unspent,

if it be not that you lhall fee necessary cause to inpreft ome
part thereof to the now numbers of the 600 footmen, and oo
horsemen; or to the calling out of wages offuch workmen,as by
sickness, or otherwise, ought to bcdifcharged. And where weper-
ceive, by your sundry letters, the earnefl request of the said
earl of Murray and his associates, that they might have, at the
leatt, 300 of our soldiers, to aid them. And that you also
write, that tho' we would not command you to give them aid,
yet if we would but wink at your doing herein, and fecm to
blamle you for attempting such things, as you with the help of

others

others should bring about, you doubt not but things would do
well; you lhall underhand for a truth, that we have no inten-
tion, for many refpes, to maintain any other princes fubjets,
to take arms againit their sovereign; neither would we willingly
do any thing to give occasion to make wars betwixt us and that
prince, which has caused us to forbear, hitherto, to give you
any power to let them be aided with any men. But now, con-
fidering we take it, that they are pursued, notwithstanding their
humble fubmiflion, and offer to be ordered and tried by law and
justice, which being refused to them, they are retired to Don-
frefe, a place near our weft marches, as it feemeth there to de-
fend themselves, and adding thereunto the good intention that
presently the French king pretendeth, by fending one of his to
join with ome one of ours, and jointly to treat with that queen,
and to induce her to forbear this manner of violent and rigorous
proceeding against her subje&s, for which purpose, the French
ambassador here with us has lately written to that queen, where-
of answer is daily looked for, to the intent in the mean time the
said lords should not be oppressed and ruined for lack of some
help to defend them, we are content, and do authorize, if you
lhall fee it neceflary for their defence, to let them (as of your
own adventure, and without notifying that you have any direci-
on therein from us) to have the number of 300 soldiers, to be
taken either in whole bands, or to be drawn out of all your
bands, as you lhall fee cause. And to cover the matter the bet-
ter, you shall fend these numbers to Carlife, as to be laid there in
garrison, to defend that march, now in this time that such powers
are on theother part drawing to those fiontiers,and so from thence
as you shall fee cause to direc of, the fame numbers or any of
them may mos covertly repair to the said lords, when you flall
exprefly advertize, that you fend them that aid only for their de-
fence and not therewith to make war against the queen, or to do
any thing that may offend her person, wherein you shall so pre-
cifely deal with them, that they may perceive your care to be
such as if it should otherwise appear, your danger flhould be so
great, as all the friends you have could not be able to save you
towards us. And so we assure you our conscience moveth us to
charge you, so to proceed with them, for otherwise than to pre-
serve them from ruin, we do not yield to give them aid of mo-
ney or men: And yet we would not that either of these were
known to be our at, but rather to be covered with your own
desire and attempt.

No. XIV. (Vol. I. p. 187.)

Randolph to Cecil, from Edinburgh, 7th Feb. 565-6.

An origi.n Y humble duty confidered ; what to write of the present
nal. l tate of the country I am so uncertain, by reason of the

daily

daily alterations of mens minds, that it maketh me much flower
than otherwise I would. Within these few days, there was
some good hope, that this queen would have shewed some fa-
vour towards the lords, and that Robert Melvil should have re-
turned unto them with comfort, upon some conditions. Since
that time, there are come out of France Clernau by land, and
Thorneton by sea ; the one from the cardinal, the other from
the bilhop of Glasgow. Since whose arrival neither can there
be good word gotten, nor appearance of any good intended
them, except that they be able to perfwade the queen's majesty
our sovereign to make her heir apparent to the croun of Eng-
land. I write of this nothing less than I know, that she hath
spoken. And by all means that he thinketh the best doth tra-
vaile to bring it to pass. There is a band lately devised, in
which the late pope, the emperor, the king of Spain, the duke
of Savoy, with divers princes of Italy, and the queen mother
fulpeeed to be of the fame confederacy to maintain papistry
throughout Chriftiandom; this band was sent out of France by
Thorneton, and is subscribed by this queen, the copy thereof
remaining with her, and the principal to be returned very fhortlie
as I hear by Mr. Stephen Willfon, a fit minifterfor such a devi-
lifh devise; if the coppie hereof may be gotten, that shall be
sent as I conveniently Inay. Monsieur Rambollett came to this
toun upon Monday, he spoke that night to the queen and het
husband, but not long; the next day he had long conferences
with them both, but nothing came to the knowledge of any
whereof they intreated. I cannot speak with any that hath
any hope that there will be any good done for the lords by him,
though it is said that he hath very good will to do so to the ut.
termolt of his power. He is lodged near to the court, and liv-
eth upon the queen's charges. Upon Sunday the order is given,
whereat means made to many to be present that day at the mass.
Upon Candlemass day.there carried their candles, with the queen,
her husband, the earle of Lencx, and earle Athol; divers other
lords have been called together and required to be at the mars
that day, some have promised, as Caffuls, Mongomerie, Scton,
Cathnels. Others have rerufed, as Flenming, Levingfton, Lind-
fay, Huntley and Bothel; and of them all Bothell is the stoutest,
but worst thought of; it was moved in council that mass should
have been in St. Giles church, which I believe was rather to
tempt men's minds, than intended indeed; She was of late
minded again to fend Robert Melvin to negocinte with such as
she trusted in mongf the queen's nil:ljfty's fubjets, of whose
good will is this way I trul th thtthe bruit is greater than the
truth, but in these matters, her majesty is too wife not in time
to be ware, and provide for the worst; some in that country are
thought to be privie unto the bands and confederacie of which
I have written, whereof I am sure there is some things, tho'
perchance of all I have not heard the truth in this court divers

V L. II. I quarls,

quarles, contentions, and debates; nothing so much fought as
to maintain niifchief and disorder. David yet retaincth still his
place, not without heart grief to many, that fee their sovereign
guided chiefly by such a fellow; the queen hath utterly refutied
to do any good for my lord of Argyll, and it is aid that flall be
the first voyage that flie will make after flie is delivered of her
being with child; the bruit is common that flie is, but hardly
believed of many, and of this, I can aflure you, that there have
of late appeared ome tokens to the contrary.

No. XV. (Vol. I. p. 192.)
Part of a letter from the earl of Bedford and Mr. Tho. Randolph

to the lords of the council of England from Barwick, 27th
of March, 1566. An Original in the Cotton Library, Cali-
gula B. to. fol. 372.

May it please your Honours,

z7th Mar. T ERING of so maynie matters, as we do, and fyndinge
1566. such varietie in the reports, we have myche ado to de-

ceme the veritie: which maketh us the flower and loother to
put any thing in wrytinge, to the entente we wold not that your
honours, and by you the queen's majeftie, our fovereigne, should
not be advertised but of the verie trothe as we can posible. To
this end we thought good to fend up captain Carewe, who was
in Edinbourge at the tyme of the lalt attemptate, who spoke
there with diverse, and after that with the queen's self and her
husband conform to that, which we have learned by others, and
know by this reporte, we fend the fame, confirmed by the par-
ties self, that were there present and affyfters unto there that
were executors of the ae.

TH is we fynde for certain, that the queen's husband being

entered into a vehement fifpicion of David, that by hym tome
thynge was committed, which was mos agaynfte to the queen's
honour, and not to be borne of his perte, fyrfte communicated
his mynde to George Duglas, who fynding his sorrowes so gret
fought all the means he coulde to put some reniedie to his griefs;
and communicating the fame unto my lord Ruthen by the king's
commandment, no other waye coulde be found then that David
fliould be taken out of the waye. Wherein he was so earncet
and daylye prefled the fame, that no refe could be had untyll it
was put in execution. To this that was found good, that the
lord Morton and lord Lindfaye flould be made prcvic to th' in-
tente that theie might have theire friends at hande, yf neade re-
quired; which caused them to acmble so inayny, as thaic
thought sufficient againfl the tyme, that this detelination of
theirs fliould beput in cxecutione ; which was determined the

ixth

ixth of this inftante 3 daies afore the parliament flould begyne,
at which time the fayde lordes were atfured, that the eries Ar-
gyle, Morraye, Rothes, and their complyces fholde have been
torfeited, yf the king could not be persuaded through this means
to be their friends: who for the defyre he hade that this intent
should take effe& th' one waye, was content to yielde, without
all difficultie to t'other, with this condition, that thaie hould
give their contents, that he might have the crown matrimonial.

e was so impatient to fee these things he saw, and were daylye
brought to his eares, that he dayly pressed the said lord Ru-
then, that there might be no longer delaye; and to the intent
that myght manifefte unto the world, that he approved the
ace, was content to be at the doing of that himself.

UP o N Saturdaye at night neire unto v r i of the clock the

king conveyeth himself, the lord Ruthen, George Duglas, and
two others, throwe his own chamber by the privy stayers up to
the queen's chamber going to which there is a cabinet about
x I foot quare; in the fame a little low reposing bed and a
table, at the which theyr were fitting at supper the queen, the
lady Argyle, and David with his capp upon his head. Into the
cabinet there cometh in the king and lord Ruthen, who willed
David to come forth, faying, that was no place for him. The
queen said, that it was her will. Her howlband anfwerede,
that yt was againfl her honour. The lord Ruthen faide, that
he hould lerne better his deutie, and offering. to have taken
him by the arm, David took the queen by the blychtes of her
gown and put himself behind the queen who wolde gladlee have
saved him: but the king having loosed his hand, and holding
her in his arms, David was thrust out of the cabinet throw the
bed chamber into the chamber of prefens, whar were the lord
Morton, lord Lindsey, who intending that night to have re-
served hym, and the next day to hang him, ob mane being
about him, that bore him vill will, one thrust him into the bod-
die with a dagger, and after hymn a great many others, so that
he had in his body above wonds. It is told for certyne,
that the kinges own dagger was left ticking in him. Wheather
he tuck him or not we cannot be here certayn. He was not
flayne in the queen's prelns, as was laid, but going down the
flayres out of the chamber of prefns.

THE R remayned a long tynll with t queen her howlband

and the lord Ruthen. Se made, as we here, great intercefli-
on, that he fnold have no harm. She blamed greatlee her
howfband that was thee ator of so foul a deed. It is said, that
he did answer, that David had more cipanic of her boddie
then he for the space of two months ; and therefore for her ho-
nour and his own contentment he gave his consent that ho
should be taken away. " It is not" (laythe file) " the wo-
" man's part to reek the hufuand," and therefore in that the
fault was hit own. He said thiut when he caine, he either

L ,. wolld

wold not or made herself sick. " Well," faythe tie," you
" have taken your last of me and your farewell." Then were
pity fayth the lord Ruthen, he is your majesty's hulband and
must yield dutie to each other. " Why may I not," faythe
she, " leave him as well as your wife did her husband ?" Other
have done the like. The lord Ruthen aid that fle was law-
fully divorced from her husband, and for no such cause as the
king found himfelfgreve. Befydes this man was mean, baffe,
enemie to the nobility, hane to her, and deftrution to herself
and country. " Well," faythe lhe, "that lhall be dear blude
' to some of you. yf his be fpylt." God forbid, fayth the
lord Ruthen; for the more your grace owe yourself offended,
the world will judge the worse.

HER hubfand this tyine fpeaketh little, herself continually

weepeth. The lord Ruthen being ill at ease and weak calleth
for a drink, and faythe, " This I muff do with your majesties
" pardon," and perfuadeth her in the best fort he could, that
hle would pacify herself. Nothing that could be said, could
please her.

IN this mean time there rose a nombre in the court; to pa-

cify which there went down the lord Ruthen, who went ftrayt
to the erles Huntly, Bothwelland Atholl to quiet them, and to
assure them for the king that nothing was intend against them.
These notwithstanding taking fear, when theie heard that my
lord Murray would be there the next day, and Argyle meet
them, Huntly and Bothwell both get out of a window and so
depart. Atholl had leave of the king with Flyfl and Glandores
(who was lately called Deyfley the person of Owne) to go
where they wold, and bring concordie out of the court by the
lord of Lidington. Theie went that night to such places, where
they thought themselves in mot fauftie.

Be3 F o R E the king least talk with the queen, in the hering

of the lord Ruthen she was contents that he shold lie with her
that night. We know not how he * himself, but came not
at her, and excused hymfelf to his friends, that he was so
fleepie, that he could not wake in due season.

T H E r were in this companie two that came in with the

king; the one Andrewe Car of Fawdenfide, whom the queen
fayth would have ftroken her with a dagger, and one Patrick
Balentine, brother to the justice clerk, who also her grace fayth,
offered a dag against her belly with the cock down. We have
been earnefly in hand with the lord Ruthen to know the vari-
tie ; but he affoureth us of the contrarie. There were in the
queen's chamber the lord Robert, Arthur Arflkin, one or two
others. They at the first offering to make a defence, the lord
Ruthen drawd his dagger, and 4 mo weapons then, that were
not drawn nor seen in her prefens, as we are by this lord alfured.

[The

[The letter afterwards gives an account of the flight to Dun-

bar-caftle, whither resorted unto the lords Huntley and Both-
well; That the earl of Morton and lord Ruthven find themselves
left by the king for all his fair promises, bonds and subscriptions.
That he had protested before the council, that he was never
consenting to the death of David, and that it is fore against his
will: That of the great substance David had there is much

spoken, some fay in gold to the value of llm£. His ap-
parel was very good, as it is aid, 28 pair of velvet hole.
"-His chamber well furnilhed, armour, dagger, pyltoletts,
harquebuses, 22 swords. Of all this nothing fpoyld or
"lacked saving 2 or 3 daggers. He had the custody of all the

queen's letters, which all were delivered unlooked upon.
We hear of a juill, that he had hanging about his neck of
oome price, that cannot be heard of. He had upon his back,

' when he was layn, a night gown of damalk furred, with a
fatten doublet, a hose of uffet velvet."]

No. XVI. (Vol. I. p. 297.)

Part of a letter from Randolph to Cecil, Jan. 6, 565-6.
-- CA N N O T tell what miliking of lace there hath been

between her grace and her husband, he prefleth ear-

neftly for the matrimonial crown, which fle is loth hastily to
grant; but willing to keep foniewhat in store until flie know
how well he is worth to enjoy such a sovereignty: and therefore
it is thought that the parliament for a time Ihall be deferred,
but hereof I can write no certainty.

From Mr. Randolph's letter to secretary Cecil.

H E juftice-clerk in hard terms, more for his brother's 4 April,
cause than any desert, and as far as I can hear the king 1SS5 Pa'

of all other in wQrl, for neither hath the queen good opinion ofreomohce
him for attempting of any thing that was against her will, nor originl.
the people that he hath denied so manifest a matter, being proved
to be done by his commandment, and now himfclf to be the
accuser and pursuer of them that did as he willed them. This
Scott, that was executed, and Murry that was yesterday ar-
raigned, were both accused by him. It is written to me, for
certain, by one, that upon Monday last spoke with the queen,
that fle is determined the house of Lennox hall be as poor in
Scotland as ever it was. The earl continueth sick, fore trou-
bled in mind; he ftaith in the abby, his on has been once
with him, and he once with the queen, fnce fie came to the
castle. The queen hath now seen all the covenants and bands
that paired between the king and the lords, and now findeth
that his declaration, before her and council, of his innocency

of

of the death of David, was false ; and grievously offended tha:,
by their means, he should seek to come to the crown matrimonial
Part-of a letter from Rando!ph to Cecil from Berwick, 2;

April, 1566.
--. I' rIHERE is continually very much speech of te

I discord between the queen and her husband, so

far that, that, is commonly said and believed of hinfelf, that
Mr. James Thornton is gone to Rome to sue for a divorce be-
tween them. It is very certain that Malevafier had not fpokcn
with him within these three days. He is neither accompanyed
nor looked upon of any nobleman ; attended upon by certain of
his own servants, and fix or seven of the guard; at liberty to
do, and go where and what he will, there have no hope yet
among henmfelves of quietness.

- DA v I D's brother named Joseph, who came this way

with Malevafier, unknown to any man here, is become secretary
in his brother's place.

No. XVII. (Vol. I. p. 199.)

The earl of Bedford to Cecil, 3d August, 1566.

HE queen and her husband agree after the old manner,
or rather worse. She eateth but very seldom with him,

lieth not, nor keepeth company with him, nor loveth any such
as love him. He is so far out of her books, as at her going out
of the castle of Edinburgh, to remove abroad, he knew nothing
thereof. It cannot for nlodefty, nor with the honour of a
queen, be reported what She said of him. One Hickman, an
English merchant there, having a water spaniel which was ve-
ry good, gave him to Mr. James Melvil, who afterwards, for
the pleasure which he fiw the king have in such kind of dogs,
gave him to the king. The queen thereupon fell marvellously
out with Melvil, and called hin diffenbler and flatterer, and
laid he could not trust one, who would give any thing to such
one as she loved not.

The earl of Redford to Cecil, August 8.

HE difagreemcnt between the queen and her husband con-
tinucth or rather incrcaf'tlh. Robert Mclvil drawing

homewards, within twelve miles of Edinburgh, could not tell
where to find the queen ; firh which time lhe is come to Edin-
burgh, and had not twelve horles attending on her. There was
nor then, nor that I can hear of since, any lord baron, or other
nlobleman in her compan. 'The king her hulbanld is gone to

Duni-

Dumfermling, and paffeth his time as well as he may ; having
at his farewell, such countenance as would make a husband
heavy at the heart.

Sir John Forster to Cecil, 8 Sept. from Berwick.

HE queen hath her husband in filall estimation, and the

T earl of Lenox came not in the queen's fight since the
death of Davy.

Sir John Forfer to Cecil, i ith Dec.

HE earl of Bothwell is appointed to receive the ambafla-
dors, and all things for the christening are at his lord-

ship's appointment, and the fame is scarcely well liked of the
nobility, as is said. The king and queen is presently at Craig-
millar, but in little greater favour than he was all the while pail.

Advertisements out of Scotland from the earl of Bedford.
rTHAT the king and the queen agreed well together two Augutl

days, after her coming from --- , and after my lord 6 ffice

of Murray's coming to Edinburgh, ome new discord has hap- from the
pened. The queen hath declared to my lord of Murray that Original.
the king bears him evil will, and has aid to her that he is de-
termined to kill him, finding fault that he doth bear him o
nuch company: and in like manner, hath willed my lord of
Murray to fpiere it at the king, which he did a few nights since
in the queen's pretence, and in the hearing of divers. The king
confessed, that reports were made to him, that my lord of Mur-
ray was not his friend, which made him speak that thing he re-
pented ; and the queen affirmed, that the king hath spoken utich
words unto her, and confessed before the whole house, that flhe
could not be content that either he or any other flould be un-
friend to my lord of Murray. My lord of Murray enquired
the fame ttoutly, and used his speech very modestly, in the mean
time the king departed very grieved; he cannot bear that the
queen fliould use familiarity either with man or woman, and
especially the ladies of Arguile, Murray, and Marre, who keep
mos company with her. My lord of Mlurray andt Bothwell
have besen at evil words for the L. of Ledington, before the
queen, for he and fir James Balfoure had new come firom Leding-
ton, with his answer upon such heads or articles as Bothwell and
he should agree upon, which being reported to the said earl in
the queen's presence, made answer, that ere he parted with such
lands as was desired, he should part with his life. My lord of
Murray said toutly to him, that twenty as hones mlen as he
flould lose their lives ere he reafte Ledington. The queen spake

nothing,

netbmin, bt heard both; in there terms they parted, nad fineec
that I hear of, have not met. The queen after her hunting carne
to Edinburgh, and carryeth the prince thence to Stirling with
her. This last Saturday was executed a servant of the lord Ruth-
ven's, who confessed that e was in the cabinet, but not of
council of the faA. The queen hath also opened to my lord
of Murray, that money Was sent from the pope, how much it
ws, and by whom, and for v/hat purpose it was brought.

No. XVIII. (Vol. 1. p. 208.)
Part of a letter from Elizabeth to Mary, Feb. 20, 1569. A co-

py interlined by Cecil. It contains an answer to a complaining
letter of Mary's upon the imprisoning of the Bishop of Ross.

A FTER this [i. e. Mary's landing in Scotland] how
j7- patiently did I bear with many vain delays in not

ratifying the treaty accorded by your own commiflioners, where-
by I received no small unkindness, besides the manifold cause
of suspicion that I might not hereafter trust to any writings.
Then followed a hard manner of dealing with me, to entice my
subjed and near kinsman, the lord Darnley, under colour of pri-
vate suits for land, to come into the realm, to proceed in treaty
of marriage with him without my knowledge, yea to conclude
the fame without my aflent or liking. And how many unkind
parts accompany'd that sac by receiving of my subje&s that
were bale runnagates and offenders at home, and enhanfing
them to places of credit againfi my will with mlanv such like, I
will leave, for that the remembrance of the fame cannot but be
noyfome to you. And yet all thee did I as it were suppress
and overcome with my natural inclination of love towards you;
and did afterwards gladly, as you know, christen your son, the
child of my said kinsman, that had before o unloyally offended
me, both in marriage of you, and in other undutiful usages to-
wards me his foveregn. How friendly also dealt I by meflages
to reconcile him, being your hufLand, to you, when others nou-
riffed discord betwixt you, who as it seemed had more power
to work their purposes. being evil to you both, than I had to do
you good, in refpet of the evil I had received. Well I will ovcr-
pass your hard accidents that followed for lack of following my
council. And then in your most extremity, when you was a pri-
soner indeed, and in danger of your life from your notorious evil
willers, how far from my imind was the remeimbrance of any
former unkindness you lind flewed me. Nay how void was I of
refpc to the designs which the world had seen attempted by
you to my crown, and the fecuritv that might have ensued

to

to my state by your death, when I finding your calamity to be
great, that you were at the pit's brink to have miserably lot
your life, did not only intrcat for your life, but so threatened
some as were irritated against you, that I only may fay it, even
I was the principal cause to save your life.

No. XIX. (Vol. 1. p. z28.)
Letter of Q. Elizabeth to Q; of Scots. Thus marked on the

back with Cecil's hand.-Copia Literarum Regis Majeftatis
ad Reginam Scotorum. VIII . Aprilis.

A D A M E, vous ayant, trop moleftl par M. dc Crocq. Paper Of-
je n'euffe eu si peu de consideration de vous fafcher de ice.

cette lettre, si les liens de charite vers les ruinez, et les prieres
des miserables ne m'y contraignaffent. Je entens que un edit a
etc divulgue de par vous, madame, que ung chafcun, que veult
jultifier que ons este les meurtriers de votre feu mar, et mon feu
cousin, viennent a la faire le x i ime de ce mois. La quelle chose,
comme c'eft plus honourable et neceffaire, qui en tel cas fe pour-
ra faire, ne y eftant cache quelque miftere ou finefe, ainfi le
pere et amis du mort gentelhomme m'ont humblement requis,
que je vous priaffe de prolongue le jour, pource qu'ilz cognoilfent
que les iniques fe font combines par force de faire ceque par droif
ils ne pourront pas faire; partant, je ne puis mais finon pour
l'amoir de vous meme, a qui il touche le plus, et pour la confo-
lation des innocens, de vous exhorter le leur conceder cette re-
quetle, laquelle, si elle les feroit nie, vous tourneroit grandement
en foupyon, de plus que j'efpere ne pensez, et que ne voudriez
voluntiers ouyr. Pour 'amour de Dieu, madame, usez de telle
finceritd & prudence en ce cas qui vous touche de si pres, que
tout le monde aye raison, de vous livrer comnme innocente d'ung
crime si enorme, chose que si ne siftes, feriez dignement elbloyd
hors de rancz de princefNes, & non fans cause faite opprobre de
vulgaire, et plutot que cela vous avienne, je vous fouhaiterois
une sepulture honorable, qu'une vie maculee; vous voiez ma-
dame, que je vous traite comme ma fille, et vous promets, que
si j'en euffe, ne luy fouhaiterois mieulx, que je vous desire,
conme la Seigneur Dieu me porte tefinoignage, a qui je prie de
bon cceur de vous inspirer a faire ce qui vous era plus a honneur,
et a vos amis plus de consolation, avec mes tres cordialles re-
commendations commne a icelle a qui fe fouhaite le plus de bien,
qui vous pourra en ce monde avenir. De Weft. cc 8 jour de
Janvier* en halte.

No.

* A mistake in the date correctcd with Cecil's hand VIII°.
Aprilis.

No. XX. (Vol. I. p. 346.)
A letter from England concerning the murder of king Henry

Darnley.

E. of Mar. TAVING the commodity of this bearer Mr. Clark, I tho't
ton's Ar- JL[ good to write a few words unto you. I have recd. fonme
chicves- writs from you ; and some I have seen lately sent others from
Bundle B.
Nu. 5. you, as namely to the earl of Bedford of the 16th of May. I

have participat the contents thereof to such as I thought meet,
this mekle I can assure you ; the intelligence given hither by the
French was untrue, for there was not one papist nor protestant
which did not consent that justice flould be done, be the queen
my fovns. aid and support, against such as had committed ill
murder in your country; but to fay truth, the lack & coldness
did not rife from such as were called to council, but from such
as hould give life and execution thereunto. And further, I as-
sure you, I never knew no matter of estate proponed which had
Co many favourers of all forts of nations as this had: yea, I can
fay unto you, no man promoted the matter with greater affeAi-
on, than the Spanish ambassador. And sure I am, that no man
dare openly be of any other mind, but to affirm that whosoever
is guilty of this murder, handfasted with advoutre, is unworthy
to live. I flall not need to tell you, which be our letts and
stayes from all good things here. You are acquainted with them
as well as I. Neds I muff confess, that howsoever we omit oc-
cafions of benefit, honour and surety, it behoveth your whole
nobility, and namely luch as before, and after the murder, ware
deemed to allow of Bodwell, to proiecute with sword and jus-
tice the puniflment of those abominable as, though we lend
you but a cold aid, and albeit you, and divers others, both ho-
nourable and hones, be well known to me, and sundry others
here, to be justifiable in all their ations and doings ; yet think
not the contrary but your whole nation is blcmiihed and infamit
by there doings which lately passed among you. What we shall
do I know not, neither do I write unto you assuredly, for we
be fubjeEt unto many mutations, and yet I think we shall either
aid you, or continue in the defence and safeguard of your
prince, so as it appear to us that you mean his fateguard indeed,
and not to run the fortune of France, which will be your own
defuction, if you beunadvifed. I know not one, no not one
of any quality or ellate in this country, which does allow of
the qten your sovereign, but would gladly the world were
rid of her, so as the fiie were done without farther sander,
lTat is to sty by ordinary juflice. This I fend the 23d of

~},k~t~la ~v~.No.

No.

No. XXI. (Vol. I. p. 231.)
Fart of' a letter from fir Nicolas Throgmorton to Cccil, i ith

of July, 1567, from Berwick.

C ---R, Your letter of the 6th of July, I received the A Origi-
tS i oth at Berwick, I am sorry to fee that the queen's Paper Of-

Majesty's disposition altereth not towards the lords, for when all lice.
is done, it is they which must Rand her more in Read, than the
queen her cousin, and will be better instruments to work some
benefite and quietness to her majesty and her realm, than the
queen of Scotland which is void of good fame.
A letter from Sir Nicolas Throgmorton to Cecil fromFaftcaftle,

12th of July, 1567.

IR, as yow might perceive by my letter of the i th July, I F'Per rs-

S lodged at Faftcalle last night, acconmpanyed with the lord
Hume, the lord of Ledington, and James Melvin, where I was
intreated very well, according to the state of the place, which is
fitter to lodge prisoners than folks at liberty, as it is very little, so
it is very itrong. By the couference I have had with the lord of
Ledington I find the lords his associates and he hath left nothing
unthought of, which may be either to thir danger, or work them
fuerty, wherein they do not forget what good and harme France
may do them, and likewifc they confider the fame of England ;
but as farr as I can perceive, to be plain with yow, they find
more peril to grow unto them through the queen's Majesty's
dealing, than either they do by the French, or by any contrary
facion amongeft thenfelves, for they aure thuemfclvcs the
queen will leave them in the bryers if they run her fortoun, and
though they do acknowlcdge great benefit as well to them, as to
the realm of England by her Majesty's doings at Lcith whereof
they fy mutually her Majelly and both the realms have received
great fruit: yet upon other accidents which have chanced since.
they have obterved such things in her Miejcfly's doings, as have
ended to the danger of fiuch as Ille bath dealt withal, to the o-
vcrthrowof your own defignrients, and little to the fuerty of any
party; and upon thcec considerations and dilcourfes at length,
methinketi I find a 'ifpofition in them, that ither they mind to
mike their bargain with France, or eli to dcu'J neither with
France nor yow, but to do what they Ilihll think nmeti for tihei
fate and fuerty, and to use their remndys as occaton lhall move
them; meaning neither to irritate France nor Engliild, until)
luch time as they have made their bargain assuredly with one of
yow; for they think it convenient to proceed with yow borll
for a while pari paffu, for that vw.R my lord of I.edingro':,

terjnt

terms. I do perceave they take the matter very unkindly, that
no better anfweris made to the letter, which the lords did ;end
to her Majefly, and likewise that they hear nothing from yow to
their fatisfaclion, I have anlvcred as well as I can, and have al-
ledged their own proceedings so obfcurly with the queen, and
their uncertainty hath occatloned this that hath happened, and
therefore her Majety hath ent me to the end I may inform her
throughly of the state of the matters, and upon the declaration
of their minds and intents to uch purposes as fiall be by me
proposed on theirMajettys behaif unto them, they shall be Iea-
fonably and refolutcly answered. At these things the lord of
Ledington finiled and flook his head, and said it was better for
us yow wofld tel us alone, than neither to do us nor yourselves
good, as I fear me in the end that will prove; Sr if there be any
truth in Ledington, La Crocq is gone to procure Ramboilet his
coming hither or a man of like quality, and to deliver them of
their queen for ever, who ha'l lead her life in France in an abbay
rcclufed, the prince at the French devotion, the realm governed
by a council of their eletion of the Scottifl nation, the forts
committed to the custody of such as flall be chosen amongst
thenifelves, as yet I find no great likelihood that I flall have
access to the queen, it is objeQed they may not so displease the
French king, unless they were sure to sird the queen of England
a good friend; and when they once by my access to the queen
have offended the French, then they fay yow will make your
profit thereof to their undoing ; and as to the queen's liberty,
which was the firfl head that I proposed, they aid that thereby
they did perceive that the queen wants their undoing, for as for
the relt of the matters it was ut ftlly to talk of them the liber-
ty going before ; but aid they. if you will do us no good, do us
no harm, and we will provide for our selves. In the end they
said, we fliould refuse our own commodity, before they conclu-
des with any other, which I fiould hear of at my coming to
Edinr. by my next I hope to fend yow the band coucluded by
Hamiltons, Argyll, untly, and that facion, not so much to
to the prejudice of the lords of Edinr. as that which was ent
into France; thus having no more leasure but compell'd to leap
on horseback with the lords to go to Edinr. I humbly take my
leave offrom Fal-caftile the 12th of July 1567.
To Sir Nicolas Throgmorton being in Scotland. By the queen

the 14th July 1567.

R U S T Y and well beloved we greet you well, though

T vwe liiink that the caul s will often charge upon variety

ol act i!cnls, yet we think, ftr sundry refpets, not anii, that
as yow ihall deal ith the lords having charge of the young
price forr the ccir.nlitting cf hii into our realm, so flall yow

also

also do well, in treaty with the queen, to offer her that where
her realm appeareth to be subjet to sundry troubles from time
to time, and thereby (as it is manifest) her son cannot be free, if
fle shall be contented that her son may enjoy fuerty and quiet-
ness, within this our realm, being so near as die knows it is ; we
Ihall not faill to yield her as good fuerty therein for her child,
as can be devised for any that might be our child born of our own
body, and shall be glad to chew to her therein the trew effct of
nature ; and herein she may be by yow remembered how much
good may ensue to her son to be nourished and acquainted with
our country; and therefore, all things confidered, this occation
for her child, were rather to be fought by her and the friends of
him, than offered by us; and to this end, we mean that yow
iliall so deal with her, both to tlay her indeed from inclining to
the French prattife, which is to us notorious to convey her and
the prince into France, and also to avoid any just offence, that
he might hereafter conceive, if he mfould hear that we fliould
deal with the lords for the prince.
Sir Nicolas Throgmorton to queen Elizabeth, 4th July 1567,

from Edinburgh.

T may please your Majesty to be advertised, I did fignifie unto An Origi-

Mr. Secretary by my letters of the I th and i zth of July, paper f-

the day of mine entry into Scotland, the causes of my stay, my fice.
lodgings at Faftcaffle a place of the lord Humes, where I was
met by the said lord and by the lord Lidington, and what had
pafled in conference betwixt us, whileft I was at the said Fat-
caffle. Since which time, acconipanyed with the lords afore-
said, and with 400 horses by their appointment for my better
condut, I came to Edinr. the izrh of this present. The 13th
being Sunday appointed for a folemne connmunion in this town,
and also a folenin fast being published, I could not have confer-
ence with the lords which be assembled within this town as I
desired, that is to fay the earls of Athole and Morton, the lord
Hume, the lord of Lidington, Sir James Balfour captain of
the cafle, Mr. James Mc Gill and the president of the eflion.

N E a t H E L E S S I made means by the lord of Lidington

that they would use no protracte of time in mine audience, si
did I likewise to the earle of Morton, whom I met by chance;
I was answered by them both, that albeit the day were dellined
to sacred exercises, such as were there of the council would con-
fult upon any moyen touching my access unto them and my con-
ference with them, and said also that in the afternoon either
they would come to me, or I flould hear from them. About
4 of the clock in the afternoon the said 13th day the lord of
Lidington came to my lodgings, and declared unto me on the

behalf

behalf of the lords and others, that they required me to ha re
patience though they had defferred my conference with them,
which was grounded principally upon the abSence of the earls ot
Mar, and Glencairn, the lords Semplc, Crighton and others of
the council, faying also that they did confider the matter which
I was on your behalf to treate with them of, were of
great importance, as they could not satisfy nor conveniently
ireate with me, nor give me answer without the advice of the
lords, and others their aflociates; the lord of Lidington also
said unto me, that where he perceived, by his private confcr-
ence with me in my journey hitherwards, that I prelfed greatly
to have speedy access to the queen their sovereign, he perceived
by the lords and others which were here, that in that matter
there was great difficulty for many refpcEts, but pecially be-
cause they had refused to the French ambairador the like ac-
cess, which being granted unto me, might greatly offend the
French, a matter vhich they desired and intended to eschew;
for they did not find by your majestys dealings with them hither-
to, that it behoved them to irritate the French king, and to
loose his favour and good intelligence with him: I answered
that as to their refusal, made unto the French abaffador, mon-
ficur de Ville Roy was dispatched forth of France before these
accidents here happened, and his special errand was to impeach
the queens marriage with the earle of Bothel, (for so indeed
since iny coming hither I learned his commiifion tended to that
end, and to make offer to the queen of another marriage) and
as to nonfieur de Crocq, he could have no order forth of France
concerning there matters since they happened ; and therefore
they might very well hold themn fufpeted to have conference
with the queen, least they might treate of matters in this time
without inlructions and so rather do harm than good ; but
your majesty being advcrtized of all things which had chanced,
had ent me hither to treat with them, for the well of the realm,
for the conservation of their honors and credit, and for their
fre;ry; and I might boldly fay unto him, that your majefCy had
better deserved than the French had. He laid, Ior hils own
part, he was much bound unto your Malefty, and lad always
found great favour and courtesy in England, but to be plain
with you, Sir fayed he, there is not many of this aflimlbly that
have found o great obligation at the queen your :overcigns
h:ands, as at the French kings for the earles of Mrrton and
Glencairn be the only persons which took benefit by te queens
najefry's aid at Leith, the reft of the noblemen were rot in the
action, and we think, said he, the queens majesty your fove-
reign by the opinion of her own council, and all the world, took
as great benefit by that charge as the realm of Scot!anIl, or any
particular person ; and not to talk with yow as an anllafrador,
but with Sir Nicholas Tlirogrlortonl, my lord Morton, and flich

as

Is were in pain for the death of Davie, found but cold favour
at the queens majesty's hands, when they were banilhed forth
of their own country; but I would all our whole company were
as well willing to accomplilhl the queen your sovereign intents
and desires as I am, for mine own part, I am but one, and that
of themeaneft Ibrt, and they be many noblemen and such as
have great interest in the matter, mary yow lhall be assured I
will imploy myself to imploy my credit, and all that I may do,
to satisfy the queen your mittrels, as much as lyeth in me, and
for your own part you have a great many friends in this assem-
bly, with many other good words. But forconclufion I nuft
take this for an nnwier to stay untill the other lords were come,
and thereupon I thought meet to adverti.e your majesty what
had palted, and how far forth I have proceeded ; your expecta-
tion being great to hear from hence.

AN D now to advertize your majesty of the itate of all things;

as I have learned since my coming hither, it may please your
majesty to undertand as followeth.

THE queen of Scotland remaineth in good health in the caf-

tie of Lochleven, guarded by the lord Lindsay and Lochleven
the owner of the house ; for the lord Ruthven is imployed in
another commission, because he began to shew great favour to
the queen and to give her intelligence. She is waited on with
S or 6 ladys, 4 or 5 gentlewomen, and z chamberers, whereof
one is a French woman. The earle of Buchan, the earle of
Murray': b;other, hath also liberty to come to her at his plea-
lure; the lords aforesaid, which have her in guard, doe keep
her very straitly, and as far as I can perceive, their rigour pro-
ceedeth by their order from there men, because that the queen
will not by any means be induced to lend her authority to pro-
fecute the murder, nor will not consent by any perfwafion to
abandon the lord Bothell for her hluiband, but avoweth constant-
ly that lhe will live and die with him; and faith that if it were
put to her choice to relinquish her crown and kingdom, or the
lord Bothell, flie would leave her kingdom and dignity, to go
as a simple damfell with him, and that ihe will never content
that he Iliall fare worse, or have more harm than herself.

A D as far as I can perceive, the principall caute of her de-

tention is, for that these lords do fee the queen being of so
fervent affection towards the earle Bothell as flie is, and being
put at, as they fliould be compelled to be in continuall arms,
and to have occasion of many battles, he being with manifest
evidence notoriously detected to be the principall murderer, and
the lords meaning proflcution of justice againfl him according
to his merits.

TH e lords mean also a divorce betwixt the queen and him,
as a marriage not to be suffered for many refpcEts, which fepa-

ration

ration cannot take place if the queen be at liberty, and have
power in her hands.

TH E Y do not also forget their own perill, conjoined with

the danger of the prince, but as far as I can perceave, they in-
tend not either to touch the queen in fuerty or in honor, for
they do speak of her with relpect and reverence, and do affirm.
as I do learn, that the conditions aforesaid accomplished, they
will both put her to liberty, and restore her to her estate.

T H E a lords have for the guard of their town 450 Harqu-

buihers which be in very good order, for the entertainment of
which companys, until all matters be compounded, they did
sue unto your majesty, to aid them with such fun of mony, as
hath been mentioned by Mr. Secretary by the lord of Lidingtons
writing, amounting as I perceive to ten or twelve thousand
crouns of the

T H E Y were latly advertized that the French king doth mind

to fend hither monsieur de la Chapell dez Ursine, a knight of the
French order, and always well affectionate to the house of
Guyfe, and howsoever la Forest, Villaroy, and du Crocq have
used language in the queens favour and to these lords difadvan-
tage there, to your majesty; la Crocq doth carry with him
such matter as shall be little to the queen's advantage; so as it
is thought the French king, upon his coming to his presence,
will rather fatisfie the lords, than pleasure the queen; for they
have their party so well made, as the French will rather make
their profit by them, than any other way.

HE REWIT H I fend your majesty the las bond agreed on,

and signed by the Hamiltons, the earle of Argyll, Huntly, and
sundry others at Dumbarton.

N E R a

R H E L E S S, since my coming to this town, the

Hamiltons have ent unto me a gentleman of their surname na-
n;ed Robert Hamilton with a letter from the biflop of St. An-
drew's and the abbot of Arbroth, the copy whereof I fend
your majesty and mine answer unto them, referring to the bea-
ier the declaration of some things, as these did by him unto me.

T t £ earle of Argyll hath, in like manner, sent another ur-

to me with a letter and credit, I have used him as I did the
others, the coppy of both which letters I fend your majesty al-
so. The lord Harrys bath also ent unto me but not written,
and I have returned unto him in like fort.

AG A I N 'r the 2oth day of this month there is a general

assembly of all the churches, hfires, and boroughs towns of this
realm, namely of such as be contented to repair to these lords
to this town, where it is thought the whole state of this matter
will be handeled, and I fear me much to the queen's difadvan-
tage and danger unless the lord of Lidington and ome others
which be bett affe&ed unto her do provide some remedy ; fr I
perceave the great number, and in manner all, but chiefly the
common people, which have aflifted in thele doings, do greatly

diflhonour

dilhonour the queen, and mind seriously either her deprivation,
or her deftruftion ; I ucd the best means I can (confidering
the furie of the world here) to proroge this assembly, for that
appeareth to me to be the best remedy: I may not speak of dif-
tolution of it, for that may not be abiden, and I hould thereby
bring my self into great hatred and perril. The chiefeft of the
lords which be here present at this time dare not flow so much
lenity to the queen as I think they could be contented, for fear
of the rage of the people. The women be nmof furious and
impudent against the queen, andyet the men be mad enough ; so
as a stranger over bufie may soon be made a sacrifice amongeft
them.

TH E RE was a great bruit that the Hnmiltons with their

adherents would put their force into the fields against the z4th
of this month, but I do not find that intent so true, as the com-
mon bruit goeth.

TH E earle of Argyll is in the high lands, where there is trou-
ble among his own countrymen.

THE earle of Lennox is by there lords much desired here,

and I do believe your majesty may so ule him, and direct him,
as he flall be able to promote your purpofc with thee men.

T i E earle of Argyll, the Hainiltons and he be incompatible.

-I do find ainongft the Hamiltons, Argyll and the company
two strange and sundry humours.

HA M I L T O N s do make flh0w of the liberty of the queen,

and prosecute that with great camefnes,ne because they would
have these lords destroy her, rather than flic flould be recover-
ed from them by violence ; another tinle they feenl to desire her
liberty, and Bothell's def:ru ion, becaui tiey would compaC
a iiar, iage betwixt the quccn an! the lord of Arbroth.

TH E earle of Argyll doth arffc lher liberty, and Bothell's
detflrucion, because Ihe would marr)y tlh queen to his brother.

AN D yet neither oc thi.i, notwit!ltadilg tcilr open con-

currence, (as appearet': bv their bon!) doth Jilcovcr their minds
to each other, nor mind one cil ; Knox i:; not here, but in
the vest parts, he and the r.L!t of the Iniillfer. will be here at
the great aflilbly, whos aull.rily againll the queen I fear as
much as any man's.

BY tbniL conference wh!.' I had with toime of this councill,

me thinkcth that they have i:':ciligence tha there is a disposition
in the queen of Scorand, to leave this re:tlin and to retire her-
self either into England, or into France, but inmof willingly into
England, for such -- and ini.ik.-in as [lie knoweth hath
been, and is meant unto her F:lnce, l:aving the regiment ci-
ther to a number of persons d:I! :aULU, aiid authorized by her
or to bmne one or inore.

A N D it please your majelly, I thir.k it not anifs to put yow

in remembrance, that in cafe the ftiid queen colme into England
ty our ll nwance, without the French king's conent flie shall

\'oL I M loofi

loose her dowery in France, and have little or nothing front
hence to entertain her; and in cafe flie do go into France witt
the king's contentment, flhe may be an inltrument (if hle can
recover favour, as time will help to cancell her digrace) eirltr
by matching with fonme hulband of good quality, or by ibllie
other devise, to work new unquietness to her own country, ad
so consequently to your majesty's.

TH E a E F R E it may please your majesty to confider of this

matter, and to let me know your pleasure with convenient speed,
how I flall answer the fame, if it be propounded untl n;e, eitier
by the queen, or by the councill, as a piece of the end and coin-
position. For I am ure, of late, fle hath Icemned very desirous
to have the matter brought to pals. that hc might go into En-
gland, retaining her estate and jurildiclion in herfclf, though flle
do not exercise it; and likewise I understand that some of this
councill which be least aflctlcd to her fafetydo think there is no o-
ther way to save her Thus Almighty God preserve your majel y
in health, honor, and all felicity; at Edinr. the t4th July 567.
Sir Nicholas Throgmorton to queen Elisabeth the ISth of July

'567, fronm Edinburgh.

An Origi- TT may please your majesty, yow might perceave by my let-
ail. ters of the i6th, how far I had proceded with these lords,
Piper O.- and, what was their answer ; since which time I have fpokcn

particularly with the earle Morton, the lord of Lidington, and
Sir James Balfour captain of this cafle, at whose hands I can-
not perceave that as yet access to the queen to Lochleven will
be granted me, flaying themselves still by the absence of the
lords and others their associates, which (they fay) they look for
within two days; and for that I find, bylikelihood and apparent
prefumiptions, that mine access to the queen will hardly be
granted, I have thought good not to defer this dispatch untill
I have a resolute answer in that manner.

MAY it therefore please your majefly, to unlderftand Robert

Melvin returned fronl the queen in Lochleven, to this town, the
6th of July, and brought a letter from her written of her own
hand to there lords, which doth contain as I underfand matter
as followeth-A request unto thenl to have consideration of her
health, and if they will not put her to liberty, to change the
place of restraint to the castle of Stirling, to the ed file might
have the comfort and company of her on, and if they will
not change her fiom Lochleven, flie required to have foine o-
thergentlewomen about her, naming none.

To have her apothecary, to have fotie modest nminiftcr.-

To have an imbroiderer to draw, forth such work as file would
be occupied about, andto lhavea varletof the chamberl-Toulch-
ing the government of the realm lie nmaketh two offers, which
are but generally touched in her letter, the particularitvs be
not fpccified, but rfered to Robert Melvii's credit, the one

I'-.

is to coniiii it only and wholly to the earl of Murray ; the
other is to the lords whose names ensue, aflifted with such others,
as they fliall call unto them, that is to fay, the duke of Chat-
telrauir, the earls of Morton, Murray, Mar and Glencairn.

SH E hath written unto them that I might have access unto

her.-She requireth further, that if they will not treat her and
regard her as their queen, yet to use her as the king their fove-
ieign's daughter, (whom many of theml knew) and as their
prince's mother.-She will by no means yield to abandon Bothell
for her husband, nor relinquifi hint; which matter will do her
imoft harm of all, and hardeneth these lords to great severity
againfl: her.

SH E yieldeth in words to the prosecution of the murder.
I H A v E the means to let her know that your majesty hath
sent me hither for her relief.

I H A v E also perfwaded her to conform herself to renounce

Bothell for her hufl'and and to be contented to susser a divorce
to pass betwixt them ; he hath sent me word that fise will in no
ways consent unto that, but rather die ; grounding herself upon
this reason, taking herself to he seven weeks gone with child,
by renouncing Bothell, file hould acknowledge herself to be
v;ith child of a bastard, and to have forfeited her honour, which
ihe will not do to die for it; I have persuaded her, to save her
own life and her child, to choofi the least hard condition.

MR. Knox arrived here in this town the 6th of this month,

with whom I have had some conference, and with Mr. Craig
also, the other minister of this town.

I H A v E perfwaded with tihel to preach and perfwad lenity,

I find them both very austere, in this conference, what they
flall do hereafter I know not, they are furnished with many
arguments, some forth of the Ccripture, some forth of histories,
sone grounded (as they fay) upon the laws of this realm, some
upon practices used in thi reali, and fim:e upon the conditions
and oth niade by their prince at !1ir coronation.

TH E biflop of Galloway uncle to the earle of Huntley hath

sent hither to these lords, that his nephew the earle and some
others of that fide may, at Linlithgov. or at Stirling, have some
communication with some appointed on this fide, alfuring them
ti;it there is a good difp',,ffio in the lords of the other party to
concurre with these, aflrirlg, further tha they will not diflient
for trifles o unnecessary things, and (:; I amn given to under-
stand) they can be pleatsed the queen's refltraini be continu'd, un-
till the murder be purfite. in all pcr-:, whereby the fepara-
tion of the queen and l3oiliell is ilnp! .:!, the prcfervation of
the prince, the security fr ail men, :ind a good order taken for
tile governance of the riall in tranquility.

C A r I N Clerk, v'hici hatih o long servcd in Denmark and

ferncd at Newhaven, did the 6th of

i th is month (accompany-
rJ "'l!'t1 hi (I, Iii ldir, C. rthltr the soldier as the greater

;\i 2 fame

fame goeth) kill one Wilson a seaman, and such a one as had
great estimation with these lords both for his kill, his hardynels,
honefry and willingness in this aion ; whereupon Clerk hath
retired himself; their quarrel was about the ship which took
Blacketer, which hip was appointed by these lords to go to the
north of Scotland to impeach the paflage of the earle Bothell,
in cafe he went either to the isles, or to any other place; by
the death of this man this enterprize was daflied.

TH E bishop of Galloway.s come to Linlithgow, and doth
desire to speak with the lord of Lidington.

TH E abbot of Killwinning hath sent for fir James Balfour,
captin of the castle, to have conference with him.

As I wrote unto your nmajefty in my last, the Hamiltons now

find no matter to difever theie lords and them asunder, but would
concurr in all things (yea in any extremity against the queen) so
as they mightbe assured the prince of Scotland were crouned
king, and should die without iflue, that the earle of Lenox's
son living should not inherit the croun of this realm, as next
heir to his nephew.

AND although the lords and counselors speak reverently,

mildly, and charitably of their queen, so as I cannot gather by
their speech any intention to cruelty or violence, yet I do find
by intelligence, that the queen is in very great peril of her life,
by reason that the people aflembled at this convention do nind
vehemently the deftruaion of her.

IT is a public speech amongst all the people, and amongst all

estates, (saving of the counselors) that their queen hath no
more liberty nor priviledge to commit murder nor adultery,
than any other private person, neither by God's laws, nor by
the laws of the realm.

TH z earl Bothell, and all his adherents and associates, be

put to the horn by the ordinary justice of this town, named the
lords of the session ; and commandment given to all iirriffs, and
all other officers, to apprehend him, and all other his followers
and receiptors-The earl of Bothell's porter, and one of his
other servitors of his chamber, being apprehended, have con-
sessed such sundry circumiftances, as it appeareth evidently, that
:he the aid earl was one of the principal executors of the mur-
der, in his own person, accompanyed with sundry others, of
which number I cannot yet certainly learn the names but of three
of them, that is to fay, two of the Ormiftons of Tivotdall,
and one Hayborn of Bolton ; the lords would be glad that none
of the murderers flould have any favour or receipt in England,
and hereof their desire is, that the officers upon the border may
'be warned; Bothell doth still remain in the north parts, but the
lord Scaton and Fleming, which have been there, have utterly
abandoned him, and do repair hitherwards.-The intelligence
doth grow daily betwixt these lords, and those which held of;

and

and notwithstanding there lords have ent an hundred and fifty.
harqubuthers to Stirling, to keep the town and paflage from fur-
prize; and o have they done in like manner to St. JohnRfon,
which be the two passages from the north, and weft to this
town, I do underhand the captain of Dunbar is much busied in
fortifying that place, I do mervile the carriages be not inmpeach-
ed otherwise than they be.

O late this queen hath written a letter to the captain of the

said castle which hath been furprized; and thereby matter is
discovered which maketh little to the queen's advantage.

THUS, having none other matter worthy your majesty's

knowledge, I beseech God to prosper your majeity with lo.n.g
life, perfea health, and prosperous felicity. At Edinburgh the
18th of July, 1567.
Letter of fir Nicholas Throgmorton to the right honourable the

earl of Leicester, knt. of the order, and one of the lords of
her majesty's most honourable privy council.
BY my former dispatches lent to her majesty, and Mr. Secre- 24th of Ju.

tary, since the Izth of July, your lordflips might have ly '567.

perceived the state of this country, and to what end these mat- fiPapro'.
ters be like to come ; so as not to trouble your lordfllip with the original.
many words ; this queen is like very hortly to be deprived of
her royal estate, her on to be crowned king, and fle detained
in prison within this realm, and the fame to be governed, in the
young king's name, by a councel, consisting of certain of the
nobility, and other wife men of this realm; o as it is easy to
be seen that the power and ability to do any thing to the com-
modity of the queen's majesty, and the realm of England, will
chiefly, and in manner wholly, reft in the hands of there lords,
and others their afrociates, assembled at Edinburgh. Now if
the queen's majesty will till persist in her former opinion towards
the queen of Scotland, (unto whom he hall be able to do no
good) then I do plainly fee that there lords and all their accom-
plices will become as good French, as the French king can wifll,
to all intents and purposes. And as for the Hamiltons, the
earls of Arguile, Huntlyc, and that faCion, they be already so
far inchanted that way, as there needeth little devise to draw
them to the French devotion. Then this is the state of things
so come to pass of this country, that France has Scotland now
as much conjoined unto them, to all purposes, as ever it was;
and what an instrument the young prince will prove, to unquiet
England, I report me to your lordlhips wisdoms, and therefore
confidering the weight of the matter, and all the circumlftances,
I trut your lordflips will well bcthink you in time, (for 'tis
high lime) how to advise her najefty, to leave nothing undone
that may bring the prince of Scotland to be in her pofetffion,
or, at the leaf, to be at her devotion. And amongst other

things,

things, that I can imagine, for the firll degree, nolling is
more meet to bring this to effect, than to allure this company
here assembled, to bear her majelty their favour. Soie talk
hath pafred between the lord of l..iddingron and me, in certain
conferences, about this matter. By him I find, that when htr
majesty hall have won there men to her devotion, the principal
point that will make them conforiabile to deliver their prince
into England, will reft upon the queen, and the realms enalling
him to the fucceflion of the crown of England, for fault of issue
of the queen's majesty's body, ome other things will also be r-
quired, as the charge of the said prince and his train, to be at
the charge of England. I do well perceive that thele men wili
never be brought to deliver tneir prince into England, without
the former condition, for the luccellion of England ; for (titill
Liddington) that taking place, the priice fliall be as dear to the
people of England as to the people of Scotland; and the one
will be as careful of his preservation as the other. Otherwise,
he faith, all things confidered, it will be reported that the Scoc-
tilhmen have put their prince to be kept in safety, as those
which commit the iheep to be kcpt by the wolves. So as for
conclusion, your lordships may perceive here will be the scope
of this matter. As unto the delivering of him upon hostages,
he fayeth, let no man think, that the condition of the fuccefli-
on not being accomplifled, the nobility and gentry will never
consent to leave themselves destitute of their lbvereign, upon
any hostages, neither upon any pronifes, nor likelihood of good
to issue in time to come. It were not good for yourselves (faith
he) that the matterwere so handled ; for then you should adven--
ture all your goods in one hip, which might have a dangerous
effect confidering the unwillingners of the queen your lbvcreign
to consent to eftablifliing any fulcccffr to the crown. And then,
how unmete were it, that her najtil, having in her poffcnion
already all such perfins as do pretend to it, or be inheritable to
the crown, to have our prince al!b in her cuitodv. For so there
might follow, without good c.piriilanions, a lrange and dange
rous iffie, tho' tie queen yolur nmillrc do think that fch ii.
ginalions could nor proceed l.ut from !iutfy heaJs, as voll liha
uttered unto us on her behalf Whia is come to pafl ince my
lalf dilpatch, and how far forth t!:ings are proceeded, f rcfr
your lordship to be informed hb my lett-rs font unto her nni efy,
at this time. And so pray aiminghtr God, preserve your lord-
.hip in much hcicujr and ti!icity. At Edinburgh thlis z4th ol
July, 1567.

Ir maiypleafi vnor good lordhip tc make my lord Suaid
partncrof this !ctter

'T.e

The queen to fir Nicholas Throgmorton.

By the queen.

RUSTY and right well beloved, we greet you well, for 6th Aug.
as much as we do conlider that you have now a long time '567.

ielinincd in those parts, without expedition in the charge com-
mitted unto you, we think it not meet feeing there hath not
toll wed the good acceptation and fruit of our well meaning to-
kwards that f(ate, which good reason would have required, that
you lhould continue there any longer, our pleafiure, therefore,
iL, that you liall, immediately upon the receipt hereof, fend
y'our fi:rvant Middlemnore unto the lords and cftates ofthat realm,
that are aflemnbld together, willing him to declare unto them,
that it cannot but seem very ifrange unto us, that you having
been ent from us, of such good intent, to deal with them, in
matters tending so much to their own quiet, and to the benefit
of the whole estate of their country, they have so far forgotten
rhenfelves, and so slightly regarded us and our good meaning,
not only in delaying to hear you, and deferring your access to
the queen their sovereign, but also, which is itrangelt of all, in
not vouchsafing to make any answer unto us. And altho' there
dealings be luch, indeed, as were not to be looked for at their
hands, yet do we find their usage and proceedings towards
their sovereign and queen, to overpass all the reft, in so strange
a degree, as we tor our part, and we suppose the whole world
belides, cannot but think them to have therein gone so far be-
yond the duty of subjects, as must needs remain to their perpe-
tual tauche for ever. And therefore he hall fay, that we have
thought good, without consuming any longer time in vain to re-
voke you to our presence, requiring them to gran you lilcence
and pafport so to do, which when you hall la \iv obtained, we
will that you make your repair hither, unto us, 'with as conve-
nient speed as you may. Given, &c.

Indorfed 6th August, 1567.
Throgmorton to the right honourable fir William Cecil, knigin.

one of her ajefty's privy council and principal fecrctarv,
give these,

S I R,
WT HAT I have learned, since the arrival of my lord of iul Atlg.

Murray, and Mons de Linnerd, you fiall understand t167. a.

by my letter to her majiety, at this time. The French do, in P"r olie
their negotiations, as they do in their drink, put water to their o";^iia1
wine. As I am able to fee into their doings, they take it not
greatly to the heart how the queen sleep, whether lhe live
or die, whether ihe be at liberty or in prizon. The mark

they

they shoot at, is, to renew their old league ; and cn be as wc.:!
contented to take it of this little king, (howsoever his title ,
and the fame by the order of thele lords, as other:!ilf. I ye
roll came but yesterday, and me thinkeh he will not ta.rry nug
you may gucfs how the French will icek to displease thele loids,
when they changed the coming of La Chapelle des Ourfins for
this man, because they doubted that de la Chapelle ihould
not be grateful to them, being a papist. Sir, to speak more
plainly to you, than I will do othcrwlie, me thinketh the cart
of Murray will run the course that those p men do, and be par-
taker of their fortune. I hear no man speak more bitterly
againff the tragedy, and the players therein, than he, so little
like he hath to horrible fins. I hear an inkling that Lidington
is to go into France, which I do as much iflike, as any thing,
for our purpose. I can assure you the whole protestants of
France will live and die in thele mens quarrels ; and, where
there is bruit amongst you, that aid hould be ent to the ad-
verse party, and that Martigues fliould come hither with fonml
force; Mons Baudelot hath aured mne of his honour, that in-
jIead of Martigues coming againfl them, he will come with as
good a force to succour them : And if that be sent under mean-
er conduc, Robert Stuart fliall come with as many to fortify
them. But the constable hath assured there lords, that the
king meaneth no way to offend them. Sir, I pray you find my
revocation convenient, and speed you to further it, for I am
here now to no purpose, unless it be to kindle these lords more
against us. Thus I do humbly take my leave of you, ron
Edcnburgh the zth of August, 1567.

Yours to use and command.

The queen to Nicholas Throckmorton.
T RUSTY and well-heloved we greet you well. We

havewithin thee two days, received three sundry let-

ters of yours, of the zoth, 22d, and z3(, of this month, having
not before those received a.v seven days beforc; and do fir:n
by these your letters, that you have very diligently and largely
advertiecd us ofal,l the hasty and peremptory procee.dings there;
which as we nothing like, we trulf in time to li.e tlhemi wax
colder, and to receive fe creformation. For we cannot p -
ccive, that thlc-v wi whliom' ou have denit can aniv.:r the
doubts moved by the lainiltons, who howlbever tley may be
carried for their private refpes, yet thrfe things which they
niove, will be allowed by all lealonable persons. For if they
may not, being noblemen of the realm, be hulicrecd to hear the
queen their sovereign declare her Wiind concerning the reports
which are made of her, by such as keep her in captivity, how
fliould they believe the reports, or ob-y theml, wrl^!: do t-port it ?

aiid

and therefore our meaning is you shall let the Hamiltons plain-
ly underhland, that we do well allow of their proceedings, (as
far forth as the fame doth concern the queen their sovereign for
her relief) and in such things as flall appear reasonable tor us
therein to do, for the queen our filser, we will be ready to per-
form the fame. And where it is so required, that upon your
comling thence, the lord Scroope flould deal with the lord Her-
ris to impart their meanings to us, and ours to them, we are
well pleated therewith, and we require you to advertize the lord
Scroope hereof by your letters, and to will him to shew himself
favourable to them in their acions, that may appear plainly to
tend to the relief of the queen, and maintenance of her autho-
rity. And as we willed our secretary to write unto you, that
upon your meflage done to the earl of Murray, you might re-
turn, so our meaning is you shall. And if thee our letters shall
meet you on the way, yet we will have you advertise both the
lord Scroope, and the Hamiltons, of our meaning.

Indorfed z9 Aug. 1567.

No. XXII. (Vol.) I. p. 233.)
Sir Nicholas Throckioprton to the archbishop of St. Andrew's

and the abbot of Arbrothe.

F T E R my good commendations to your good lordships, 13th Aug.
this fliall be to advertize you, that the queen's majesty imy 567. PL-

fuvereign having sent me hither her ambassador to the queen her PerO ffCce,
fitler your overeign, to communicate unto her such matter as py which
the thought meet, confidering the good amity and intelligence lir Nicholas
betwixt them, who being detained in captivity (as your lord- lent to the
fliips know) contrary to the duty of all good fubjeEts, foi the qucen.
enlargemcnt of wholi person, and the refiitution of her to her
dignity, her niajelly gave ':. in charge to treat with there lords
aflenililcd at Edinburah oi'iering themu all reasonable conditions
and imc:ns as mnight be, for the fatIfguard of the young prince,
the punilhmnnt of the l;ate horrible murder, the dissolution of
the lmarriage betwixt the queen and the earl of Bodwell, and
!.iatly for their own ureties. In the negotiation of which mat-
ters I have (as your lordfliips well know) pent a long time to no
purpose, not being able to prevail in any thilg with those lords,
to the queen my f)velrign's fitistfaion. Of which Ilrange pro-
ceedings towards her ajeity, and undutiful behaviour towards
their sovereign, I have adveriCed the queen's maajefty ; ihe (not
being minded to bear this indignity) hath given lme in charge to
declare her further pleasure unto them, in such llt as they
may well perceive her majesty doth diftllow of their proceed-
ings, and thereupon hath revoked me. And frther hath given
me in charge to communicate the lsme unto your lordihips, re-
quiring you to let me know, before my depairture hioce, (which

flhll

niall he, God willing, as oon as I have received anl,-cr F;.:!
yr,;) vwhat you and your confederates will a!uredly do, to l::;
the queen your overeign at liberty, and to restore lihr to her
fornler dignity by force or otherwie ; feeing thei; lords hla'
refulet ai! other miediation, to the end tie queen's majesty ':;
fovcreipen may concur with your lordlliips in this honourL..
enterprize.

A N in cafe, through the dispersion of your associates, your

lordfTiips can neither commnunicate this matter amongfl you, nc.
icceive resolution of them all by that time, it may please you to
1end me the opinions of so many of you as may confer together,
within two or three days, so as may have your answer here in
this town by Monday or Tuesday next at the arthefl, being the
19th of this Auguf ; for I intend (God villing) to depart to-
wards England, upon Wednefdar following. Thus I moll
humbly take my leave of your lordilhips at Edenburgh, the 13th
of Aug. 1567.

Indorfed the 13th of Aug. 1567.

Sir Nicholas Throckmorton to the lord Herrys.

.4th Aug. Y OU R good lordfi;p's letter of the 3th ofAugufi I hare
is67. i- ] received the i9th of the fame. For answer whereunto it
per si my

liCe y ou lordihiip to understand, that I wiil igniy unto you

tromtI C)- may ike your t u
r' wli ii plainly, hw tar tinrth I nm alrcady thoroughly infcruc&ed of the
fir Niilulns qucen's ilnnjcft ny fovcrcign's pleasure, concerning the deten-
tcnt to tion cf the queen your vecrCrin, and concerning her relief

lLY r O the sirs her ninairfy hath given in charge, to use all kinds

ns perlilafion in her name, to move thee lords affenibled at
Edcer!lurgh to defilt from this violent and undutiful behaviour,
whiclih l " tife towards their Cfoereign. And in this part, bc-
ftles the lliew of y reons, and sundry per ons of ani-
cahble rent with themi, her niajeily hath willed me to use fonce
plain and levere speech unto lleri, tending so far forth, as if
they would nor be better advised, and reform these their outra-
geous proceedings exercised a air't their foveeign, that then
thevy might be afllied her IniijCily neither would nor could in-
d(urc fiuch an indignity to be done to the queen, licr good cousin
and neighbour.

A n notwithifanding test my proceedings with them, they

haive itade proof to he little moved theteby, for as yet neither
will tlhe conlclnt to ihe enlargement, neither filffTr me to speak
v ilth hlr. So as it emnietlh to me, it is filperlluous to treat any
i;.rc v.iith cm afie: this manner. \Wheieupon I have adver-
I.li'd the queen's na icitfy y v lovercign, expecting daily her ma-
;: '.;!s ft'u lerori r ; aLid as I iiall be adv'ertli il thercof, o will
i:.t fil to filnify the lilime to vour good lordlhip ; and in the
i ran lime will advertifu her Iliajefty alto, what your lordflip
Il tii .'i n
'ei unto ur 'Tlhus with ny due commeicndations to

your

0our good lordship, I commit the fame to almighty God, refing
a!ways to do you the pleasure and service that I can lawfully.
At Edenburgh.

Indorfed 24th of August, 1567.

No. XXILI. (Vol. I. p. 240.)
Account of lord Herries's behaviour in the parliament held

December 5, 1567.

H . lord Herrys made a notable harrangue, in the name Paper of-
of the duke and hinifelf their friends and adherents, (the fice.

duke himielf, the earl of Callilles, and the abbot of Kilwinning
being allb present) to persuade the union of the whole realm in
one mind. Wherein he did not spare to set forth solemnly the
great praise that part of this nobility did deserve, which in the
beginning took meanes for punifhnlent of the earl Bothwell,
as also feeing the queen's inordinate affection for that wicked
man, and that she could not be induced by their persuasion to
leave him, that in fequetrating her person within Lochlevin,
they did the duty of noblemen. That their honourable doings,
which had not spared to hazard their lives and lands, to avenge
their native country from the slanderous reports that were spoken
of it among other nations, had we 1 deserved that all their bre-
rhren Ihouldjoin them in so good a cause. That he and they
in whose names he did speak, would willingly, and without any
compulsion, enter thcfelves in the fainm yoke, and put their
lives and lands in the like hazard, for maintenance of our causes.
And if the queen herself were in Scotland, accompanied with
20,ooo men, they will be of the fame mind, and fight in our
quarrel. He hoped the remainder noblemen of their party,
Huntley, Arguiie, and others, which had not as yet acknow-
ledged the king, would cn;ce to the famne conlbrniity, where-
unto e would also earneflly move thelm. And if they will re-
main ohblinale, and refuse to qualify tl;cm!flves, then will the
duLe, he, and their friends, join with u. to corr:t them, that
o:hcrwife will not reform thcmfclvc.. So plausible an oration,
and more advantageous for our party, none of ourselves could
have mndlLL. He did not forget to tim rny lord regent, by the
name of regent, (there was no mention at all of the earl of.
MIvrray) and to call him grace at every word, when his fpeechcs
were directed at him, accompanying al his words with low
courtfices fter his manner

No XXIV

No. XXIV. (Vol. I. p. 251.)
Part of a letter from fir Francis Knollys to Cecil, 8th Augu;!

1568, fiom Bolton.

An orig- -- UT furcly this queen doth seem, outwardly, not o;-
r il. ) ly to favour the form, but also the chief article of
papcrItice. t:c religion of the gospel, namely, justification by faith only;

and flie heareth the faults of papeftry revealed, by preaching or
otherwise, with contented ears, and with gentle and weak re-
plies, and flie doth not seem to like the worse of religion throv

ile.
Part of a letter from fir Francis Knollys to Cecil, 21 Septem-

ber, 568, from Bolton.
.-- T came to this queen's ears of late that flie was bruited

j to be lately turned to the religion of the gofpell, to the

great disliking of the papists hereabouts, which thing file her-
self confessed unto me, and yesterday openly in the great cham-
ber, when the affelbly was full, and some papists present, lhe
took occasion to speak of religion, and then openly he profefled
he.rself to be of the papist religion, and took upon her to pa-
tronize the fame, more carnetlly than she had done a great while
afore, altho' her defences and arguments were so weak, that
the effcet of her speech was only to flew her zeal ; and after-
w.vuds to me alone, when I mifliked to fee her become so confi-
dently backward in religion, why, aid she, would you have
ime to lose France and Spain, and all my friends in other places.
by eeming to change my religion, and yet I am not assured the
quteen nmy good sifter will be mv assured friend, to the fatisfac-
tion of my honour and expectation.

No. XXV. (Vol. I .

p. 252.)

Queen Elizabcth to the earl of Murray.

rreroffice. )I G H T truay and right well beloved cousin, we greet
Fim a co. ^ you well. Where we hear fy, that certain reports are
ryreclc iatc In sundry parts of Scotlard, that whatsoever fliould fall
t, ;r tcr out now upon the hearing of the queen of Scotts cause, in any

proof to convince or to acquit the said queen concerning the
horrible murder of her late husband our cousin, we have detcr-
mined to reftoir hr to hr kingdoml and government, we do so
much Iniflike hereof, r.s we cannot indure the nime to receive
any credit : ad tlicrfolic .'e have thought good to aure you,
thl:t the fe is inllruly devired by the authors to our d(illo-
nour. For as we have been always certified ti on our said fiter,
both by her Ilettrs aned nielrages, that file is by no means

guilty

guilty or participant of that murder, which we wish to be true,
so surely if flie flould be found jutly to be guilty thereof as
hath been reported of her, whereof we would be very sorry,
then, indeed, it lhould behoove us to confider otherwise of her
cause than to satisfy her dfire in restitution of her to the go-
vernment of that kingdom. And so we would },2veyou and
all others think, that hould be disposed to conceive honourably
of us and our aflions.

Indorfed 20 Sept. 1568.

No. XXVI. (Vol. I. p. 256.)
Sir Francis Knollys to Cecil the 9th of October, 568, from

York.
-- TM/I Y lord's grace of Norfolk fending for me to Bolton, An orgiazl.

IVJi. to attend upon him here Thursday lars, I made my Pape o-

repair hither accordingly, meaning to stay here until Munday hce
next; as touching the matters of the commiflion, that his grace
and the reft have front her highness, his grace hath imparted
unto me of all things thereunto appertaining, and what hath
hitherto passed, and altho' the matters be too weighty for my
weak capacity, to prelilme to utter any opinion of mine own
thereof, yet I fee that my lord Herris for his parte laboureth a
reconciliation, to be had without the extremity of odious accu-
fations mny lord of Ledington also faith to me, that he could
will these matters to be ended in dulce mnaner, so that it might
be lone with safety ; of the reft you can conceive, by the ad-
vertifcments and writings, sent up by our commissioners.
A letter from the Bifliop of Rois to the queen of Scots, from

York, Oober 1568.

L E I S your majesty I conferred at length with A. ane cntt. I,.*
great part of a night, who affurit me that he had reason- Calig. C.

ed with B. this Saturday C. on the field, who determinate to t. a L;'Y.
him that it was the D. determinit purpose not to end your cause
at this time, but to hold the fame in fufpence, and did that was
in her power, to make the E. pursue extremity, to the effec F.
and his adherents might utter all they could to your diflionour,
to the effect to cause you come ia dif.lin with the hail fubjeets
of this realm, that ye may be the mair unable to attempt any
thing to her disadvantage. And to this cffcCt is all er intention,
and when they have produced all they can against you, D. will
not appoint the matter instantly, but transport you up in the
country, and retain you there till lie think time to fliew you fa-
vour, which is not likely to be hastily, because of your uncles
in France, and the fear ihe has of yourflf to be her unfiiend.

And

And therefore their counsel is, that ye write an writing to ti.-
D. meaning that e are informit that your subjects has offend:;
vY,, . This in effect that your majesty hearing the estate !
yiur rfairs as they proceed in York, was informed that hIc
,.ajcfty was informed of you, that you could not gudely ren.it
your ubjc6ts in such fort as they ight credit you hereaftci,
wvliich was a great cause of the flay of this controversy to be
ended. And therefore persuading her D. effectually not to trull
any who had made such narration. But like as ye had rendered
you in her hands, as miofi te der to you of any living, so prav:
her to take na opinion of you, but that ye wald use her counteli
in all your affairs, and wald prefer her fiendllip to all others,
as well uncles as others, and affuce her to keepl that thing e
wald promire to your fubjecs by her advice. And if D. dilire-
dit you, ye wald be glad to fatistf her in tha.t point Ly le inoving
within her realm in secret and quiet ni.nncr, where hr G
plcafed, until the time her G. were fully fafisficd, and all occa
sion of discredit removed from her. So that in the mean tlie
your realm were holden in quietness, and your true filjccls re-
ltored and maintained in their own elate, and sic other things
tending to this effect. And affirms that they believe that this
may be occasion to cause her credit you that ve offer so far;
and it may come that within two or three months fle may be-
conme better-mirded to your grace, for now nhe is not well
niinded,and willnot fliew you any ple sure for the cauf'safoiefaiid.

iA. B. The title of this paper is in Cccil's hand: the follow-
ing key is added in another hand.

A. The laird of Lethington.
B. The duke of Norfolk.
C. Was the dv lie wrote to Cawood.
D. The (Qeen of England.
E. The queen of Scots cominifioners.
F. The earl of Murray.

No. XXVII. (Vol. I. p. 262.)
Deliberation of Secretary Cccil's concerning Scotland, Dec. 2 .

1568.
Pirer O- | H E best way for E.'iland, but nor the eafreft, th:' the

. . J1 queen of Scots inilght rci::ain deprived of her c. wn,

and the itate continueas ir i.

T'l E fiecond way flr nlland prcfriablc, and not so ard

-- That the quccn of Scotts nm:ght be induced, hy foinr, ,r-
fwnafions, to agrce t::at lie: ' n nlit cntinue king, hecal . he
ic crowned, and hc'!:elt to r :::iu al; queen; nd that tl', go-

verl :iniefi

ermment of the realm might be committed to such persons as
the queen of England fliould name, so as for the nomination of
them it might be ordered, that a convenient number of perlbns
of Scotland hlould be firll namned to the qneen of England, in-
differently for tie queen of Scotis, and for her on, that is to
ly, the one half by the queen of Scotts, and the other by the
earle of Lennox and lady Lennox, parents to the child; and
out of those, the queen's iniajefly of England to make choice
for all the offices of the realm, that are, by the laws of Scot-
land, dilpofable by the king or queen thie land.

TH A T untiil this Inav be (lone by the queen's najefly. the

government remain in the hands of the carl of' Murray as it is,
providing he lhall not (tiipo'e of any olliccs or perpetuals to con-
tinue any longer but to thee offered of the prelnifes.

Tn . r a parliamient be fimnnontud in Scotland by tfeveral com-
mandments, both of the queen of Scotts and of the young king.

T n .A T hotiages be delivered unto England on the young

king's behalf, to the number of twelve pertuns of the earle of
Murray's part, as the queen of Scotts Ihall name; and likewise
on the queen's behalf to the like number as the earle of Murray
Ihall name ; the famle not to be any that have by inheritance or
office cause to be in this parliament, to remain fiom the begin-
ning of the fumiinons of that parliament, untill three months as-
ter the parliament; which hostages flall be pledges, that the
friends of either part shall keep the peace in all cafes, till by
this parliament it be concluded, that the ordinance which the
queen of England flhall deviie for the government of the realn,
(being not to the hurt of the crown of Scotland, nor contrary to
the laws of Scotland for any man's inheritance, as the fame was
before the parliament at Edinr. the Decemlbr. 567) fliail be
established to be kept and obeyed, under pain of high treason
for the breakers thereof.

- T H AT by the fame parliament also be cftablilhed all

executions and judgments given against any perfin to the death
of the late king.

---T I A '1 by the fame parliament, a remission be made

univcrfally fionl tie queen of Scotts to any her contrarys, anti
also from every one lubject to another, faying, that restitution,
be made of lands and houses, and all other things heritable,
that have been, by either fide, taken from them which were
the owners thereof at the committing of the queen of Scots to
Lochlevin.

Tn AT by the fane parliament it be declared who ihall be

fuccefolrs to the crown next after the Q. of Scots and her iffuc
or else, that fucl rights as the D. of Chatellhrault had, at the
marriage of the Q.of Scots with the lord Darnly, many be con-
served and not prejudiced.

'TH A T the Q. of Scots may have leave of the queen's majefly
of England, twulvc months after the laid parliiaument, and that

!i).

fie shall not depart out of England, without special licence of
the queen's majetty.

T A T the young king shall be nourished and brought up in
England, till he be years of age.

1T is to be confidered, that in this cause the composition be-

tween the queen and her fubjeEts may be made with certain ar-
ticles, outwardly to be seen to the world for her honour, as
though all the parts should come of her, and yet for the furcty
of contrarys, that certain betwixt her and the queen's inajeft
are to be concluded.

No. XXVIII. (Vol. I. p. 263.)

The queen to Sir Francis Knoileys, 22 Jan. 568-9.

Paper Of- x E greet yow well, we mean not, at this point, be any
ErC. V writing, to renew that which it hath pleased God to

make grevious to us and forryull to you: but frrbea!i:ng the
fame as unmeet at this point, having occasion to commnand you
in our service, and yow allb whilell yow are o 4:-rve us. We
require vow to confider of this that foiloweth i' h like confide-
ration and diligence, as hitherto vow have accuifTeoate in our
fervife ; at the time of our last letters vriren to yew the four-
teenth of this month for removing of tile queen of Scots, we
had undcrftanding out of Scotland of ccrrain writtings sent by
her from thence into Scotland, amongst the which ore is found
to contain great and manifet untruths touciing us and others
also, as hall and may plainly appear unto yow by the copy of
the fame, which likewise we lend yow, and 1,ecaufe at the fame
time we were advcrti'd, that it hould be i!hrrtiv proclaimed
in Scotland, though then it was not, we the. lght good first to
rc:::ove the (qncen, beforc e w would disclose tl.. lialie, and then
expeEt the iflie thereof; and now, this day by letters from our
cousin of Hunfdon we are alcertained, thatit ... that time the
hfaie r!anicrs contained in the writing, are pubilfhed in divcrfc
parts of Scotland, whereupon we have thoughi it very n;cet,
for the dilcharge of our honor, and to confour te falflnood
contained in that writing, not only to have the tlnie reproved
hy open proclamation upon our frontiers, the corv whereof vwe
do herewith fend vow, hut also in convenient fort ',i charge that
queen therewith, so as lhe may be moved to declar the authors
thereof, and peifuaders of her to write in such nderous fort
such untruths of us; and in the mean season, w h:!ve here
flayed her comnifilToncrs, knowing no other whoin e ay nmore
probably presume to be parties hereunto, than thi ,, untill the
lueen shall name I'one other, and acquit them ; wi:o being ge-
nerally charged, without cxprelling to tlhen any part.cularitv, do
life all manner of speeches to dilcharge tlhenfelves wherefore
our plenlure is, that y fitall, after ye have well penrurrl the coppy
of this witting cnt to vow, Icedily declare unto h:r, that we

have

have good underitanding given us ofdiverfe letters and writtings,
fCnt by her into Scotland, signed by her own hand, amongst
which, one such writting is sent with her commandment express-
ly as now it is already published, as we are much troubled in
mind that a princess as the is having a cause in our hands so
inplicated with difficulties and calamitys, flould either con-
ceave in her own mind, or allow of them that should devise such
false, untrue, and improbable matters against us, and our honor,
and specially to have the aventure to have the fane being known
so untrue to be published; and you shall also fiy, because we
will not think so ill of her, as that it should proceed of her self,
but rather she hath been counselled thereunto, or by abuse made
to think Come part thereof to be true, we require her, even as
lie may look for any favour at our hands, that fle will dijbur-
den herself as much as truly fie may herein, and name them
which have been the authors and perfwaders thereof, and so she
shall make as great amends to us as the cafe may require ; after
yow have thus far proceeded, and had some answer of her, whe-
ther he hall deny the writting absolutely, or name any that
have been the advisers thereof, yow shall fay unto her that we
have stayed her commissioners here, until we have some answer
hereof, because we cannot but impute to them some part of this,
evil dealing, untill by her answer the authors may be known;
and as oon as yow can have direct answers from her, we pray
yow to return us the fanme; for as the cafe standeth, we cannot
ut be much disquieted with it, having our honour so deeply
touched contrary to any intention in us, and for any thing we
know in our judgment, the earl of Murray and others named in
the fame writting void of thought for the matters, to them
therein imputed ; yow may impart to the queen of Scots either
the contents of the slanderous letter, or flew her the coppy to
read it, and yow may also impart this matter to the lord Scroop,
to join with yow ther' a you fllal! think meet
Sir Francis Knolleys to queen Elizabeth, fronl Wethelby the

2zSt January, i68
- TWV it. . suppress my own geffs, and pas them over An Origi-

1 with silence, for the present learning of your maiefty nal in the

- and for this queen's answer to the coppi of her fppofed clet- P'r
ter sent into Scotland, I must add his unto mIy brother's letter,
rent unto Mr. Secretary ycfternight late; in process of time, flie
did not deny but that tle firfl liies cct.inid in the fame coppie,
was agreeable to a letter that ilie I:aill I nt unto Scotland, which
touched nmy lord of Itlurra)' proilit;e to deliver her son into
your majelly's handls, and to avoid that the fame fliould not be
lone without her cortent, i n de her, he faith, to write in that
behalf; fl]e sith alIb that flie wrote that they hould cause a

V 1. II N pro-

proclamation to be made to stir her people to defend my lord of
Murray's intent and purpose, for delivering of her laid Ton, and
impunge his rebellious government, as fle termed it, but ihe
utterly iutnyeth to have written any of the other slanderous part
of the slid letter touching your majesty; he said also, that file
ftrfpcecd that a Frenchman, now in Scotland, might be the au-
thor of ollme Scotch letters devised in her name, but he would
not allow me to write this for any part of her answer.

No. XXIX. (Vol. I. p. 268.)
Sir Nicholas Tlirogiorton to the right honourable the lord of

Liddington.

2oth of 0 O U R letter of the 3d of July, I have received the 5th
July 569
From the9 of the fame. For anier whereunto you fliall underhand,
Original. that friends here to my lord regent and you do wifli such a con-

currence in all doings, as in matter and circunftances there arise
no diflention, or at the leaf, no more nor other than the dif-
ference of countries doth necessarily require. We here do think
convenient that as few delays be used as may be, for the con-
summation of the matter in hand, which principally to advance,
your allowance, prosecution, and fpcedy promotion in Scotland,
is most requisite, for you are so wife, and well acquainted withl
the slate of the world, and with all our hunours, as you know
that some do allow and disallow for reason, some for refpe of
multitude, omen for refpet of persons, and so the cause is to
go forward as men do like to set it forward. You are not to eeck
that some will use cautions, fomne neutrality, some delays, and
iome will plainly impunge it. And yet all and every of thete
forts will alter their doings, when they ffiall fee the regent and
his favourers accord with the best and greatest part there, and
agree with the wisest and strongest party here. Tho' the mat-
ter has taken its beginning here, upon deep and weighty con-
fiderations, for the weil of both the princes and their realms, as
well presently, as in time to come, yet it is thought most expe-
dient, that the regent and realm of Scotland, by you, fliould
propose the matter to the queen our overeign, if you like to
use convenience, good order, or be disposed to leave but a scar,
and no wound of the hurts past. I would be glad that this my
letter should come to your hands before the convention, whereat
it seems your queen's restoration and marriage to the Duke of
Norfolk flall be propounded, either to wynne in them both al-
lowance or rejecEton. To which proceedings, because you pray
me to write frankly, I fay and reason thus, me thinketh you use

a pro-

a propollerous order, to demand the consent of such pcrfons, in
such matters, as their minds to a good end hath rather been felt
or prepared, and therefore there must needs follow either a uni-
verfll rcfufal, or a fatious division amongst you, whereby a
bloultring intelligence must needs come to queen Elizabeth of the
intended marriage from thence, which ought to have been fe-
cretcly and adviledly propounded unto her highness; hereby
you fee then the meaning is, by this daling, her najcfty flall
be made inexorable and b bring the matter to fich pae, as this
vhich ihould have wrought Iurety, quietness, and a flay to both
queens and their realms, fliall augment your calamity, and
throw us your best friends into divorfe with you, and into unhappy
i;vilion aamnorgft ourselves ; for you may not conjeeture that the
matter is now in deliberation, but expeaeth good occasion for
executing: lure I am you do not judge so slenderly of the ma-
naging of this matter, as to think we have not cars the worst,
or to enter therein so far without the afliftance of the nobility,
tile ableIt, the wisest, and the nmightieft of this realm except
queen Eizabeth ; from whom it hath been concealed until you,
as the fittefl minister, might propound it to her, on the behalf
of the regent, and the nobility of Scotland. How far mafler
Woodes defamations do carry them of queen Elizabeth's assec-
tions, and master secretary's, to afilft the regent and to suppress
tie queen of Scots, I know not, nor it is not material; but I do
ali'uredly think, that her majelty will prefer her surety, the
tranquillity of her reign, and the conservation of her people,
before any device, which may proceed from vain discourse, or
intperlfeions of pafions, and inconsiderate affections. And as
for Mr. Secretary, you are'not to learn, that as he liketh not to
go too fast afore, so he coveteth not to tarry too far behind,
and specially when the reliques be of no great value or power.
If I could as well assure you of his magnanimity, and constancy,
as of his present conformity, I would fay confidently, you may
repose as well of him in this matter, as of the dukeof Norfolk,
the earls of Arundel, Pembroke, Leicester, Bedford, Shrews.
bury, and the ref of the nobility; all which do embrace and
proteite the accomplifllment of this cafe. I have, according to
your advice, written presently to my lord Regent, with the fame
zeal and cateof his well-doing that I owe to him, whom I love
and honour. Mr. Secretary hath assured unto him the queen
of Scotland's favour and good opinion, wherewith he feemeth
to be well fatisfy'd. If your credit be as I trust, haflen your
coming hither, for it is very neccfflty that you were here pre-
fently. Q Elizabeth both doth write to my lord Regent in such
fort, as he may perceive Mr. Wood's discourses of her majesty's
affection to be vain, and Mr. Secretary otherwise bent than he
conicdtrctet of hint, the elfeft of wlJich her majefly's Ictter ou

N , ^aU

shall understand, by my lord Leicester's letter unto you at this
dispatch. At the court, aoth July 1569.

No. XXX. (Vol. I. p. 269.)
Part of a letter from the earl of Murray to L. B. probably Lord

Burleigh.

1569. E C A U S E I fee that great advantage is taken on

Harl. Lib. J fiall occasions, and that the mention of the marriage,
37. B. 9. betwixt the queen my sovereign's mother, and the D. of Nor-
tO 43. folk, hath this while palt been very frequent in both the realms,

and then I myself to be Ipoken of as a motioner, which I per-
ceive is at the last come to her majesty's ears. I will, for satis-
faaion of her highnels, and the discharge of my duty towards
her majesty, manifef: unto you my interest, and inedling in that
miatter, from the very beginning, knowing whatsoever is preju-
dicial to her highness, cannot but be hurtful to the king nmy
sovereign, this his realm, and me. What conferrences was be-
twixt the duke of Norfolk, and any of them that were with me
within the realm of England, I am not able to declare; but I
am no wife forgetful of any thing that passed betwixt him and
me either at that time, or since. And to the end her majesty
may underifand how I have been dealt with, in this matter, I
am compelled to touch some circumstances, before there was
any mention of her marriage. In York, at the meeting of all the
coinflioners, I found very-and neutral dealing with the duke,
and others her highnes's comniflioners, in the beginning of the
cause, as in the making of the others to proceed sincerely, and
so further. During which time, I entered into general speech,
flicking at ourjuft defence in the matters that were ohjected
againit us, by the said queen's commiflioners, looking certainly
for no other thing, but funmnary cognition in the caulc of con-
ttoverfy, with a small declaration to have followed. Upon a
Certain day the lord Lithington's secretary rode with the duke to
I-oward, what purpose they had I cannot fay, but that night
Lithington returning, and entering in conferrence with me upon
the ftatc of our action, I was advised by him to pass to the
duke, and require familiar conferrence, by the which I might
have some feeling to what issue our matters would tend. Ac-
cording to which advice, having gotten time and place conve-
nient in the gallery of the house where the duke was lodged,
after renewing of our first acquaintance made at Berwlck, the
time before the assize of Leith, and ome fpeccles pffed be-
twixt us he began to fay to me, how he in England had fa-
vour and credit, and I in Scotland had will and friendship of

many.

many, it was to be tho't there could be none more fit Infru-
ments, to travel for the continuance of the amity betwixt the
realils, than we two. And so that difcourle upon the present state
of both, and how I was entered in that aftion tending so far to
the queen's dilllonour, I was willed by him to conllder how
matters ltood in this, what honour I had received of the queen,
and what inconveniences herdlefiiation in the matters laid to her
charge might breed to her pollerity. Her refpecl was not little
to the crown of England, there was but one heir. The Hamil-
tons my unfiiends had the next refpe&, and that I fliould esteem
the iflue of her body would be the more affectionate to me and
mine, than any other that could attain to that crown. And so
it flould be meeteft that flie affirmed herdifiliffion made in Loch-
levin, and we to abftrat the letters of her hand write, that he
Ihould not be defamed in England. My reply to that was, how
the matter had pafled in parliament, and the letters seen to ma-
ny, so that the abftracing of the fame could not then secure
her to any purpose, and yet should we, in that doing, bring
the ignominy upon us. Affirming it would not be fair for us
that way to proceed, feeing the queen's majesty of England was
not made privy to the matter as flei ought to be, to be in refpea
we were purposely come in England for that end, and for the
- of the grants of our cause. The duke's answer was, he
would take in hand to handle matters well enough at the court.
After this, on the occasion of certain articles, that were re-
quired to be resolved on, before we entered on the very declara-
tion of the very ground of our ation, we came up to the court;
where onme new commilfioners were adjoined to the former,
and the hearing of the matter ordained to be in the parliament
house at Wettlinfter, in pretence of which commilioners of
the said queen and- through the - rebuking of the
queen of England's own commillioners, we uttered the whole of
the action, and produced such evidences, letters and probations
as we had, which might move the queen's najcfty to think well
of our cause. Whereupon expecting her highness declaration,
and feeing no great likelihood of the fame to be suddenly given,
but daily motions then made to come to an accord with the said
queen, our matters in hand in Scotland, in the mean feafor,
flanding in hazard anddanger,wc were put to the utternloft point
of our wit, to imagine whereunto the matters would tend, tho'
albeit we had left nothing undone for jufification of our caulfc,
yet appeared no end, but continual motions made to come to
some accord with the queen, and restore her to whole or hall
reign. I had no other answer to give themi, but that I llould
neither do against conscience nor honour in that matter. Not-
withstanding feeing this my plain anfwecl wrought no end, not

dif

dispatch to us, and that I was informed that the duke began to
mislike of me, and to speak of me, as that I had reported of

probably the said queen irreverently, calling her - and murderer, I
Adultrer. was advised to pass to him, and give him god words and tI

purge myself of the things objced to me, that I lhoulll not
open the sudden entry of his evil grace, nor to have him our
enemy - confidering his greatness. It being therewithal
whispered, and ihewed to me, that if I departed, he ttaniirg
discontented and not satisfied, I might peradventure find such
trouble in my way, as my tlroat iiight be cut before I caine
to Berrick. And therefore since it light well enough app:lr
to her marriage I hould not put hin in utter despair, that y
good will could not be had therein. So few days before n.v
departing I came to the paik in Hampton court, where t.e
duke and I met together, and there I declared unto him that it
was come to my ears, how some mifireport filould be made of
me to him, as that I flould speak irrevercntly and raflily of the

Probably said queen my sovereign's mother, filch words as before ex-
fufpel. pressed, that he might -- thereby mly affection to be so

alienate from her, as that I could not love her, nor be content
of her preferment, howbeit he might persuade himself of the
contrary, for as fle once was the person in the world that I
loved best, having that honour to be so near unto her, and
having received such advancement and honour by her, I was
not so ungrate or so unnatural ever to wilt her body harm,
or to speak of her as was untruly reported of mue, (howsoever
the truth were in the seif) and as to the preservation of her Ton,
now my sovereign, had mIoved me to enter into this cause, and

Probably that her own prefling was the occasion of what was uttered to
d/jbinr-ur. her -- whensoever God fliould move her heart to re-

pent of her bypast behaviour and life, ar.d after her known re-
pentance, that file fliould be fCparlate fi'ou that ungodly and
unlawful marriage that fie was entered in, and then after were
joined with such a godly and honourabl a personage, as were
affeftioned to the true religion, and whom we night trull,
could find in my heart to rove her, and llcw to her as great
pleasure, favour, and goodwill, as ever I did i myl lif; ; ard in
cafe, he fiould be that personage, there was none whom I
could better like of, the queen- in -- of Engrlal:d
being made privy to the matter, and ihe allowing therert;
which being done, I niould labour in all thing; lhat could, to
her honour and pleasure, that ere notprciilicial to tlhe kin
my sovereign's ellatc, and prayed hill not to th:iL other. i: or
me, for my afcEtion v:as rther buried and hidden \wihilln me,
awaiting until God fliould direst hr o klow herielft thani ut-
terly alienated and iablr:.'t.,d tiom Ili; vi hcl e Ici ecnld to
accept in very good part, lilaing, Earl o .M-liim.y tIliou thinks of
Ie that thing, hereunto I will make nnic 1il !':-ll:nJ ni Scot

knd privy, and thou haft Norfolk's wife in the hands. So de-
parting, I came to my lodging, and by the way, and all night, I
was in continual thought and agitation of mind, how to behave
inyfelf in that weighty matter, firll, imagining whereunto this
should tend, if it were attempted without the queen's majesty
of England's knowledge and good will, this realm and I myself
in particular having received iuch fivour and comfort at her
highness's hands, and this whole isle such peace and quietness,
since God poieffled her majesty with her crown. And on the other
part, feeing the duke had disclosed him to me, protesting, none
other were or flould be privy to our speech, I thought I could
not find in my heart to utter any thing that might endanger him;
moved to the uttermost with these cogitations, and all desire of
seep then removed, I prayed God to fend me ome good relief
and outgate, to my discharge, and fatisfation of my troubled
mind, which I found indeed; for upon the morn, or within a
day or two thereafter, I entered in conversation with my lord
of Leicester, in his chamber at the court, where he began to
find strange with me, that in the matter I made so difficult to
himl, flanding so precisely on conference, and how when I had
in my communication with the duke, come o far - - and
there he made tome discourse with me, about that which was Probbl
talk betwixt us, I perceived that the duke had -- the ifclofed
matter to my lord of Leicester, and thinking me thereby dif-
charged at the duke's hands, therefore I repeated the fame
colmmunication in every point to my lord of Leicester, who de-
fired me to flew the fame to the queen's majesty, which I re-
fused to do, willing him if he tho't it might import her highness
any thing, that he as one -- by her majesty, and for many
benefits received at her highness's hands is obliged to wifl her
well, flould make declaration of the fanlc to her majesty, as I
underltand by some speech of her highness to me, he did. This
my declaration to the duke was the only catfe, that taid the
violence and trouble prepared for me unexecuted, as I have di-
vers ways understand. The faine declaration I was ohliged to
renew since in writings of - - ent to my servant John
Wood. The fun whereof, I trust, he fliewed the duke, and
something also I wrote to himself, for it vns tho't this flould
redeem onle time, that the duke fihould not tudd.enly declare
him our enenmy, for his grcatnrels was oft laid t:ef'le lme, and
what fiiendflip he had of the chief oi' the nobility in ELiglaidl,
so that it might appear to the queen's ,iai '*y of IEngl;nd - o
cold towards us, and doing nothing pubilcly tt might fccls
favourable for us, we had omen caule to llspect that her lighncle
should not be contrarious to the marriage when it ih,ild be pro-
posed to her. The fliarp meflage ent by her inajefty v:.itl the
lord Boyd, who had the like conmilion from te duke tel,d;ng

1«

so far to the laid queen's preferment, as it were propdofng or.;
rianrier of conditions from both, gave us to thirk that her high
ness had been foreseen in the duke's design, and that she nilly
be induced to allow thereof. But hnwbeir it was devised in
England, that the lord of Lethington should come as from nie,
dnd break the matter to her highness, as her majesty in a letter
declared that ihe looked for his coming, yet that devise proceed-
ed never of me, nor the noblemen at the convention could no
wife accord to his fending, nor allow of the matter motioneld,
but altogether mifliked it, as bringing with the fame great in-
conveniencies, to the surety and quletnels of this whole isle;
for our proceedings have declared our nifliking and disallowance
of the purpose from the beginning, and if we had pleased, he

Probably Was ready for the Journey. And in like wife it was devised to
d-arre. give consent, that the-- between the aid queen and Both-

well, liould be suffered to proceed in this realm, as it was de-
fired by the said lord Boyd, by rcafon we could not understand
what was the queen's majesty's pleasure, and allowance in that
behalf-And whereas ye mean, that her highness was not
made privy of any such intention, the fault was not in me. The
first motion being declared, as I have written, to my lord of
Leicester, and by him imparted to her nmajefty, o far as I could
perceive, by ome speech of her highness's to me, before my
departing. Thus I have plainly declared how I have been dealt
withal for this marriage, and how just neceflity moved me not
to require directly, that which the duke appeared so
unto. And for my threatings, to aent to the fame, I have
expressed the manner ; the persons, that laid the matter before
me, were of my own company But the Duke since hath spoken,
that it was his writing which aved my life at that time. In
conclusion I pray you persuade her majeRfy, that he let no
speeches nor any other thing passed cndi obj,.ted to my preju.
dice, move her majefly to alter her fa vor- towards me, or
any ways to doubt of my assured conflancv towards her higi-
ness; for in any thing which mnna tend to her honour andl sure-
ty, I will, while I live, bclow mrfcif, and all that will do for
mie, notwithilanding my hazard or danger, as proof. I1;:ll de-
clare, when her iinnjiev fids time to en'p!oy me

N'.. I

No I. (Vol. I. Book VI. p. 275.)
William MIaitland of Ledington, to my lord of Leicester, March

zoth, 1570, from Ledington.

' HE great desolation threatned to this whole realm, be An origi-
1 the division thereof in dangerous factions, doth press me nal.

to frame my letters to your lord hip, in other fort, than were
behovefull for me, if I had no other refpet, but only to main-
tain my private credit; therefore I am driven to furnish them
with matter, which I know not to be plausible, whereupon by
misconstruing my meaning, rome there mny take occasion of
offence, thinking that I rather utter my own palions, than go
about to inform your lordflip truly of the state; but I trust my
plain dealing hall bear record to the sincerity of my meaning
to make the fame fenfihle, I will lay before your lordfliip's eyes,
the plat of this country; which first is divided into two facti-
ons, the one pretending the maintenance of the king's reign,
the other alledging the queen to have been cruelly dealt withall,
and unjustly deprived of her state ; the former is composed of a
good number of nobility, gentlemen, and principal burroughs
of the realme, who fliall have, as Mr. Randolph beareth us in
hand, the queen's majesty your sovereign's allowance and pro-
tetion ; the other hath in it tome most principall of the nobility,
and therewithall, good numbers of the inferior fort, throughout
the whole realm, which also look afluredly that all kings do al-
low their quarrel and will aid them accordingly. What confe-
quence this division will draw after it, I leave it to your lord-
ihip's consideration; there is fallen out another division, acce-
dentally, by my lord regent's death, which is like to change
the tRate of the other two faEtions, to increase the one, and di-
minifli the other, which is grounded upon the regiment of the
realm. Some number of noblemen afpirc to the government,
pretending right thereto by reason of the queen's demillion of
the croun, and her corrmillinn granted at that time for the re-
giment during the king'; minority; another faction doth altoge-
ther repine against that livifion, thinking it neither fit nor tolerable,
that three or four of the meanest fort amiong the earls, flill
prefuine to challenge to themfclves a rule over the whole reahle,
the next of the blood, the first in rank, the grcatcft alway both
for the antientry of their houses, degree, and firces, being ne-
glecktcd; this order they they think prepofrerous, that the
meaner fort hall be placed in publick funCtion to command, and
the greater flhall continue as private men to obey; besides that,
'hey think if the cominiffon had in the beginnin!i been valew-

ahlr,

able, (which the moll part will not grant) yet can it not be ex-
tended to the present, for that the conditions thereunto annexed
are ceased, and o the effect of the whole void; the latter part
of this division hath many pretences, for bcfides the queen's
facion, which is wholly on that fide, a great number of these
that have heretofore profefled the king's obedience, do favour
the fame, and will not yield to the government of the other,
whose preferment for refpeas they mislike, when the queen's
faction hall be increased, with a part of the king's, and theli
not of least substance, and yow may judge what is like to infue;
another incident is like to move men to enter in further dil-
courses, it is given out here in Scotland that the queen's majetty
is setting forth ome forces towards the border, which flhall en-
ter this realm, to countenance these, that aspire to the regi-
ment, and suppress the contrary faction, and bruts are spread,
that the fame hall be here out of hand ; thele that think them-
selves of equal force with their contrary faction at home, or ra-
ther an over-match to them, yet not able to encounter with the
forces of another prince, rather than yield to their inferiors,
will, I fear, take advifeofneceffity, and evil councillors, and
seek also the maintenance of ome foreign prince, whereby her
majetty (altho no further inconvenient were to be feared) muff
be driven to excessive charges, and it would appear there were a
conspiracy of all the elements at one time to set us together by
the ears, for now when the rumour of your forces coming to-
wards the border is spread abroad, even at the fame time is ar-
rived at Dumbarton, a galzeon with a messenger ent exprefly
from the king of France, to that part of the nobility, that fa-
vours the queen, to learn the tate of the country, and what
support they lack or desire, either for furtherance of her afairs, or
for their own safety ; afluredly this nlelage will be well received,
and suffered accordingly, this is the present state of Scotland.
Now if your lordship would also know my opinion, how to choice
the best, as the cafe tandeth, I will in that also satisfy your
lordship; I am required from them to deal plainly, ad your
lordship shall judge wither I do so or not; for I think it plain
dealing, when I simply utter my judgement, and go not about
to disguise my intents. I trust the queen's injefty hath a desire
to retain at her devotion the realm of Scotland, which fle hath
gone about to purchase, with bestowing great charges, and the
loss of folne of her people; this desire is honourable for her
highness, profitable for both the countrys, and of none to be
diallowed; specially if it be (as I take it) to have the amity
of the whole realm, for it is not a portion of Scotland can fcrve
her turn, nor will it prove commodious for her to suit the friend-
flip of a faction of Scotland, for in so do;ng, in gaining the
heft, flie may lore the more, and the fame would bring all her
actions with us in fulfpicion, if Ile hould go about to nourish

suctions

facions amongil us, which meaning I am sure never entered
into her majelly's heart; then if it be the friendship of the
whole (le doth demand, let her not, for pleasure of one part,
go about to overthrow the remnant, which will not be so faifa-
b e, as toine may give her to undertand ; but rather, by way
of treaty, let her go about to pacify the whole state, bring
the parties to an acccrd, reduce us all by good means to an
unilurlitv, so Ihall he give us all occasion to think well of her
doings, that fle tendeth our wealth, and provoke us univcr-
sally to wish unto her majesty a most prosperous continuance;
by the contrary, if for the pleasure of a few, fie will fend
forces to filpprefs there whom they mislike, and so consequent-
ly offend nmaiy; men be not so faint-hearted, but they have
courage to provide for their own fafcly, and not only will em-
brace the leans partly offered, but will a!lb procure further, at
the hand of other princes. This for mine own part, I do ab-
hor, and protest I desire never to fee forces of strangers to set
foot within this land, yet I know not what point necellity may
drive men into, as if men in the middle of the sea were in a
flip, which suddenly hould be set on fire, the fear of burning
would make them to leap into the sea, and soon after the fear
of the water would drive them to cleive again to the fired ship,
so for avoiding present evil, men will many times be inforced to
have recourse to another no less dangerous. Trust me forces
will not bring forth any goed fiuit to her majesty's behove, it
nimuft be ome way of treaty fli serve the turn, wherein by my
former letters your lordlhip cloth know already what is my judge-
ment ; you fee how plainly I do write, without consideration
in what part my letters may be taken, yet my hope is that such
as will favourably interpret tlenl, fliall think that I mean as
well to her majcftv, a;d that r'iline, as there that will utter
other language. 1 wiili the continuance of the amity betwixt
the two conltlys, vwithout other rfpect, and will not con-
ceal fron her imajcft ny tanyt ting o nmy knowledge, tending to
the prejudice tilercot; it Illall p rreave her ma jefty taking
frank dealings in eil part, 1 Ill. ll firo thenceforth forbear;
in the mean feafonr I will not ce;!i to t.rowvle your lordflip, as
I Iliall have occafinr!, o wril', and f I take iny leave of your
lordihip.

No. IL

Nc. II. (Vol. 1. Book VI. p. 27S.)

A letter of queen Elifabethto theearleofSuffeks, July zd, 1 57S'

CaMlerw. I; 1-HT trusty and well beloved cousin we greet you well.
M. S. His- Ji this day we have received your letters of 28 the lafl
tory, V. 2. month, with all other letters, lent from Scotland, and menti-
:-- '8. oned in your letters, whereunto anfwver is desired to be given

before the tenth of this month ; which is a very hort time,
the weightiness of the matters, and the distance of the places
confidered; neverthclefs we have, as the shortness could sus-
ser it, resolved to give this anflier following, which we will,
that yow, by warrand hereof, flhall cause to be given in our
name to the ear! of Lennox and the reft of the noblemen con-
veened with him. Where it is by them, in their letters, and writ-
ings alledged, that for lack of our resolute answer, concerning
the effablihing of the regiment of the realm under their young
king, great inconveniencies have happned, and therefore they
have deferred now at their last convention to determine of the
famine, who fliall have the place of governour, until the 2ft
this month, befbre which tile they require to have our adviie,
in what person or persons the government of that realm liall be
eftabliflcd, we accept very thankfull the goodwill and reputa-
tion they have of us, in yielding Io frankly to require and fol-
low our advilf in a matcr, that tc'cheth the state of their
king. their fclves, and realm so near, wherein as we perceive,
that by our former forbcaring to intermeddle therein, they have
taken fonie dilcomnfort, as though that we would not have re-
gaid to tlleir safety and lutrty, fb on the other part, they of
their wilfois ought In thirk, that it might be by the whole
v.,crld vil iterpr-rcd in us to appoint them a form of govern-

e:cnt, or a govcrnour by na ie, or that howsoever we fiould

mean well if we ilioul.1 do so, yet it could not be without some
jealousy in the heads of the eflate, nobility, and community of
that realm, that the governinerr thereof hould be by me fpc-
cially named, and ord!iin'd: lo as finding difficulty on both
parts, and yet ntillkinv nolft l:at they nfould take any difcolm-
tbor by our forbcarii;g to tlicw our mind therein, we have
thought in this flrt rlo to proceed, confidering with ourselves
how now that realmn had been a good space of time ruled in the
naine of their king, n;ill by ralio of his bale ace, governed
heretofore y a very can ful and onourable person, the carle of
Murray ; uniill that y a ,iicrhivous perlfon, (an evil example)
lie ws miiirdcled, wherely great difoirdr andl cotilfion of
necefity had, nnd ill nlnre fIllow, if determininalion be not
m.ade of sole otihelr ftlciall icrlbn. or persons, to take the charge
of governor, or l'upcrku ruler fpeciall, tbr admiinistration of

law

law and juice, we cannot but very well allow the desire of
thelsi lords to have some fpeciall governour to be cholen ; and
therefore being well assured, that their own underflanding of
all others is bell to confider the state of that realm, and to dil-
cern the abilities and qualities of every person meet and capable
for such a charge, we Ilall better fatistie ourselves, whom they
by their common contnt llall first choose, and appoint to that
purpose, then of any to be by us aforehand uncertainly named,
and that because they fliall perceave that we have care of the
person of their king, who by nearness of blood, and in refpett
of his so young years, ought to be very tender and dear to us,
we lhall not hide our opinion from theim, hut if they fllall all
accord to name his grandfather, our cousin, the earl of Len-
nox, to be governor alone, or jointly with us, (whom we hear
to be in the mean time by their common consent appointed lieu-
tenant-general). reason moveth us to think that none can be
chosen in that whole realine, that fliall more desire the prefer-
vation of the king, and be more meet to have the government
for his safety, being next to him in blood of any nobleman of
that realm, or elsewhere ; and yet, hereby, we do not mean
to prefcrive to them this choice, except they hall ofthemfelves
fully and freely allow thereof; furthermore we would have them
well assured, that whatsoever reports of devises, are, or shall
be spread or invented, that we have already yielded our mind
to alter the slate of the king or government of that realm, the
fame are without cause or ground by us given, for as we have
already advertised them, that although we have yielded to
hear, which in honour we could not refute, what the queen of
Scots on her part fiall fay and offer, not only for her own affu-
rance, but for the wealth of that realm, yet not knowing what
the .fame will be, that shall be offered, we mean not to break
the order of law and justice, by advancing her cause, or pre-
judging her contrary, before we shall deliberately and assuredly
fee, upon the hearing of the whole, some place necessary, and
just cause to do; and therefore finding that realm ruled by a
king, and the fame affirmed by'laws of that realm, and thereof
inverted by coronation and other foleminities used and requisite
and generally so received by the whole cftates, we mean not,
by yielding to hear the complaints or informations of the queen
against her Ton, to do any aa whereby to make conclusion of
governments, but as we have found it, so to susser the fame to
continue, yea not to susser it to be altered by any means that
we may impefhe, as to our honor it cloth belong, as by your late
actions hath manileftly appeared, untill by ome just(ice, and
clear cause, we ihall be directly induced otherwise to declare
our opinion ; and this we would have them to know to be our
determination and course that we metn to hold, whereon we
trust they for their king may fee how plainly and honourably we
mean to proceed, and how little cause they have to doubt of

u1 ,

us, whatfoe'er to the contrary they have or fihall hear; and on
the other part, we pray them of their wisdoms to think how
unhonourable, and contrary to all human order it were for us
w.ien the queen of Scotland doth so many ways require to hear
her caule, and doth offer to be ordered by us in the fame, as
well for matters betwixt ourselves and her, as betwixt herself
and her son and his party of that realm, against which offers no
reason could move us to refilue to give ear, that we hiould a-
forehand openly and direcly, before the causes be heard and
confidered, as it were, give a judgment or entence either for
ourselves or for them, whon flie nnaketh to be her contraries.
Finally ye flall admonifl them, that they do not, by mnifcon-
ceiving our good meaning toward them, or by indirect afferti-
ons of their adversary grounded on untruths, hinder or weaken
their own cause, in such fort. that our good meaning towards
then fliall not take such effect towards them as they fiall dc-
fire, or themselves have need of. All this our answer ye ihall
cause be given them, and let them know, that for the shortness
of tile, this being the end of the econd of this month, we
neither could make any longer declaration of our mind, nor yet
write any several letters, as if time might have served we would
have done. 2 July, 1570.

No. III. (Vol. I. Book VI. p. 278.)

The biflop of Ross to secretary Lidington from Chattifworth.
,5th June I HAVE received your letters dated the 26th of May, here

'57° i at Chatilvworth, the loth of January, but on the receipt

therecf I had written to you at length, like as the queen did
with ily lord Levinglon, by the which you will be resolved of
marny points contained in your laid letter. I Wiii to you that I
received your letter and credit from Tho. Cowy at London, and
sent to Leicester to know the queen of England's mind whether
if you fliould come here or not. He ent me word, that ile
will no ways have you come as one of the comnmillioners, be-
caue flie is yet offended with you; and therefore it appears
good that ye conie not hither, but remain where you are, to
use your wildon and diligence, as may bes advance the queen's
affairs, for I perceive fyour weill and safety depends thereon, in
rclpeft of the great feid and ennimity born against you by your
Scots people, and the great heirllip taken of your father's
landis; both were ure dcmonftrations of their malice. Yet I
am encouraged by your flout and deliberate mind. Affuro your-
self no diligence shall be omitted to procure supports forth off
all parls where it may be had. We will not refute the aid nei-
ther of Pl':lilt, Jew, nor Gentil, after my advice ; and to this
end, during this treaty, let all things be well prepared. And
feeing ny luid Seato is dfirous to go into Slanders, the queen

thinks

thinks it very neceflary that he so do, for the duke D'Alva has
gotten express command of the king of Spain to give support,
and I am sure that there he fliall have aid both of Slanders and
the pope, for it abides only on the coming of ome men of
countenance, to procure and receive the fame. He must needs
tarry there, on the preparations thereof, during this treaty,
which will be a great furtherance to the fame here. The queen
has already written to the duke D'Alva for this effoc, adver-
tizing of his coming; there is certain fums of money coining
for support of the Engliflinen, as I wrote to you before, from
the pope. Whereupon I would he had a general conmiillion to
deal for them, and receive luch fums as hlall be given. The
means hall be found to cause you be anfuerit of the ruins you
writ for, to be difponit upon the lurniihing of the caille of
Edenburgh, so being ome oneft and true man were sent to
Slanders to receive it, as aid is, which I would you prepared
and sent. Orders fliall be taken for the metals as you writ of.
We have proponit your avyce in entring to treat with the queen
of England, for retiring of her forces puntyoally for lack of
aid. Your answers to the Engliihmen are tho't very good, but
above all keep you well out of their hands, in that cafe, eftote
prudentes ficut serpentes. You may take experience with the
hard dealing with me, how ye would be used if ye were here,
and yet I am not forth of danger, being in medio nationis pra-
VE ; alway no fear, with God's grace, shall make me shrink
from her majesty's service. Since the queen of England has re-
fused that you come here, it appears to me quod nondum eft
fedata malitia amorreorum, &c. and therefore if Athol or Ca-
thenes might by any means be procured to come, they were
the most fit for the purpose, Rothes were also meet, if he and
I were not both of one firname ; so the treaty would get the
less credit either in Scotland or here. Therefore avys, and fend
the best may serve the turn, and fail not Robert Melvil come
with them, whoever comes, for so is the queen's pleasure ; in
my last packet with James Fogo, to you, in the beginning of
May, I sent a letter of the queen's own hand writing to him,
which I trust ye received. I am orry ye come not for the
great relief I hoped to have had by your presence, for you
could well have handled the queen of England, after her hu-
mour, as you were wont to do. The reft refer to your good
wisdom, praying God to fend you health. From Chattifworth
the th of January.

No IV.

No. IV. (VoL 1. Book VI. p. 289.)
The declaration of John Cais to the lords of Grange and Le-

thington zoungare upon the 8th day of Qp. 571.

W HEREAS you desire to know the queen's majesty's
W peafure, what she will do for appeasing of these con-

troverfies, and therreith has offered yurfelves to be at her
coinmandment, touching the common tranquillity of the whote
isle, and the amity of both realms; her pleasure is in this be-
half, that ye fiould leave off the maintenance of this civil dif-
cord, and give your obedience to the king, whom he will
maintain to the utiuoft of her power.

A N D in this doing, fie will deal with the regent and the

king's party, to receive you into favour, upon reabnable condi-
tioas for feurity .of lite and livings.

A s o he fays that the queen of Scotts, for that flie has

praised l iith the pope and otherprinces, and al-so with her
own subje&s in ;ngland, great and dangerous treasons against
the slate of her own country, and also to the deftyuction of her
own person, that ihe shall never bear authority, nor have li-
berty while fe Jivyes.

IF ye rifufe she gentle offers, now offered unto -you, fle

will prcfeatly aid bte king's party, withinen, ammunition, and
al neceffaiy things to be had againti you.

Wt, m E o N her majelLy requires your an(wer with peed.
witlaoutaoy delay.

No. V. (Vol. I. Book VI p. 295.)
Articles nt by Knox to the general alenibly, Augu 5th,

1572.

Cal IC.lr. FIR ST, desiring a new at to be made ratifying all things
MS. H-r concerningthe king and his obedience that were enacted
tlry' Vl. of before without any change, and that the minifers who have

contravcend :the former as be correaed as accordeth.

T', A T fute bemuade to the regent's grace and nobility main-

taining the king's caufc, hat whatsoever proceederh in this
treaty of pea cc they be mindful the kirk be not prejudg'd there-
by, in any firt, and they Ipecially of the ninifters, that have
been robbed of their pffn'fior's within the kirk duing the time
of the troubles, or otherwise dung and injured, may he reflred.

To fute at the regent, that no gift of any biflioprick or

other benefice be given to any perfbn, contrary to th: tenor of
the as made in the time of the filft regent of good memory,
and they that are given contrar the said acis, or to anyv tlcqui-
lified pctfrln, may b re\vked and made ull be an act of fcret

couJncil,

council, and that all bifiopricks so vacand may be presented,
and qualified persons nominat thereunto, within a year after the
vaking thereof, according to the order taken in Leith be the
coimnilioners of the nobility and of the kirk in the month of
January last, and in special to complain upon the giving of
bifloprick of Ross to the lord Methven.

TH A T no pentions of benefices, great or finall, be given be

simple donation of any lord regent, without consent of the pof-
feffor of the said benefices having tittle thereto, and the ad-
nliffion of the superintendent or commilioners of the province
where this benefice lyeth, or of the bishops lawfully elected ac-
cording to the said order taken at Leith ; and desire an at of
council to be made thereupon, until the next parliament,
wherein the famine may be specially inaCted, with inhibition to
the lords of feflion to give any letters or decreets, upon such
simple gifts of benefices or pentions not being given in manner
above reherfed, and that the kirk presently assembled declare
all such gifts null so far as lyeth in their power.

TH AT the first form of presentation to benefices, which

were in the firfl and second regent's time be not changed as now
it is commonly; but that this clause be contained in the pre-
fentation, that if the persons presented make not residence, or
be flandrous or found unworthy either in life or doctrine be the
judgment of the kirk, (to which alwile he fiall be subjeCt) or
meet to be transported to another room at the fight of the kirk,
the aid presentation and all that flall fall thereon shall be null
and of no force nor effet ; and this to have place also in the
nomination of the biflops.

T H A T an at be made in this afembly that all things done

in prejudice of the kirk's assumption of the third, either be pa-
pilts or others, by giving of fews, liferents, or taks, or any
otherwise difponing the said aflumed thirds, be declared null
with a solemn protestation the whole kirk difafenteth thereto.

TH A T an at be made decerning and ordaining all bishops,

admitted to the order of the kirk now received, to give account
of their whole rents, and intromillions therewith once in the
year, as the kirk ffiall appoint, for fulch causes as the kirk may
easily confider the fame to be moll expedient and neceffar.

AN E N T the jurifdicion of the kirk, that the fame be de-

termined in this afembly, because this article hath been long
postponed to ake fute to the regent and council for remedy
against mefengers and excommunicate persons.

LA T that orders he taken anent the procurers of the kirk,

who procure againtl ninifters and iminiftry, and for luting of
justice of the kirk's actions in the lfeiion.

VOL. IT 0 No. VI.

No. VI. (Vol. I. BookVI. . 298.)
Declaration of Henry Killigrew, Efq; upon tile peace con-

cluded the z3d Feb. 1572.
D E it known to ,al men, by these presents, that I HTenry

Killigrew, Efq; ambassador for the queen's umajcOy of

England, Forafitiuch as, at the earnest motion and felicitation
being nmade to me, on her highness's behalf, there is accord ad
pacificaiion of the public troubles and civil war within this
realm of Scotland agreed and concluded, and the lalme favour-
ably extended towards the right honourable George earl of
Huntly, lord Gordon and Baidzenoch, and the lord John Ha-
milton, son to the duke's grace of Chaftellarault, and coinimen-
datour of the abby ofAbirbrothock, for the urcty of the lives,
livings, honours, and goods of them, their kintolks, friends,
servants, and partakers, now propelly depending on them ; in
treating of the which said pacification, the murders of the late
earl of Murray uncle, and the earl of Levenax grandfather, late
regent to the king's niajefty of Scotland his realu and lieges, as
alfb an article touching the discharge for the fruEtis or move-
able goods, which the said persons have taken fra perfonis pro-
fessing the king's obedience, or for the damages done or com-
nitted by theml, since the 5th day of Junij, 567, and before
the penult day of July last by passed, by reason of the common
caue or any thing depending thereupon, being thought by the
king's comlifaries niatteris of such wecht and importance, as
the king's present regent could not conveniently of hinfelf, re-
mit or discharge the fame. Yet in refpeEt of the necefity of
the present pacification, and for the weil of the king, and com-
mon quietnels of this realil and lieges, it is accorded, that the
matters of remililion of the said murderers, and of the discharge
of the said frultis, moveable goods, and other damages, mov-
ed by the persons desiring the said remifions and discharge to the
queen's ajefty y sovereign, as to the princess nearest both in
blood and habitation to the king of Scots. And whatsoever
her majesty shall advise and councel touching the aid remilion
and discharge, the said lord regent, for the well of the king
and univerfll quietness of the realm of Scotland, fliall perform,
observe, and fullfil the fame. And in likewise, the said earl
Huntly, and comillendatour of the Abirbrothock, being urged
to lhcve delivered pledges and hostages for observation us the
conditions of the said accord and pacification, hath required me
in place thereof in her najety's nnii, by virtue of my com-
million, to promise for themi that tlev fliall truly and faithfully
oblirve ani keep the said pacification, and all articles and con-
ditions tlereof, for their parts, and that it would please her
riajefty to interpose herllf, as furcty and cautioncr for them to

that

that eftect, to the king's majesty of Scotland their sovereign and
his said regent, which I have done, and promise to do, by vir-
tue of his iuajefty's coumnitlon, as by the honourable and plain
dealing of the said earl and lord, their intention to peace well
appears, the fame being most agreeable to the mind of the
queen's majesty my lbvereign, which so long byher ministers
harh travelled for the said pacification, and in the end, at her
motion and solicitation, the fame is accorded, knowing her ma-
jefty's desire, that the lame may continue unviolate, and that
the noblemen and others now returning to the king's obedience
fliall have fuficient surety for their lives, livings, honours and
goods. Therefore in her majesty's namne, and by virtue of my
commillion, I promise to the aforesaid earl Huntly and com-
mendator of Abirbrothcck, that by her majesty's good means,
the said remifion and dilcharge fliall be purchased and obtained
to them, their kinfolks, friends, servants, and partakers, now
prcperly depending upon them, (the persons pecified in the firit
abIlinence always excepted) as also that the said pacification
Ihall be truly observed to theim, and that her majesty fliall in-
terpGfe herself as confervatrix tereof, and endeavour herself
to cause the fame to be truly and sincerely kept in all points and
articles thereof accordingly. In witness whereof, I have to
this present subscribed with nly hand, and fealed the fame with
mine own eal the 3th day of Febry. Anno Domnini 1572.
And this to be performed by me, betwixt the date hereof, and
the parl;amient which nlall be appointed for their refitution, or
at the urtheft before the end of the laid parliament. Sic sub-
fcribitur
The bifliop of Glasgow's note corcerning the queen of

Scotland's Dowry.

H E queen of Scotland, dowager of France, had for 1576.
her dowry, beCtiles other poffclTions, the dukedom of COl' LB.

Turene, which was folemniv contac&ed and given to her by
the king and elales of parliament; wlich dukedom fle pof-
selfed peaceably till 1576, and then, i;p,n the pacification be-
twixt the king andl Mlonir. hii brother, to augment whose ap-
penage this dutcih wan given, to which the quee:i of Scotland
vielded upon acccui.t ot princes ho ''cre her near relations,
provided the equiva'it v.hich was plomlifcd her should be
faithfully perftolined. So lliat ye:ir, after : great many folli-
citations, in lieu of tlhat !dutchy, lie hd granted her the
county of Veriniu'ifO wiili rth lainds and bailiwicks of Seuley
and Vetry ; thli' 'tis known llhit couinly, and the other lands
were not of el va' v.'ir ii 'I urie, but was promised to
have.an addition ot lands ini lic neighbourhood to an equal
value. Upon tliis lettel patent were granted, which were
confirmed in the courts of parliament, chamber of accompts,
court of aids, chalber of the trenfury, and others necessary
upon which lie entered into polleflion of that county, &c.

0 a After-

Afterwards, by a valuation of the connmmiflioners of the cham-
bcr of accompts, it was found, that the revenue of that coun-
ty, &c. did not amount to those of Turene by 3000 livres.
But instead of making up this deficiency according to justice,
some of the privy council, viz. M. de Cheverny, the prefi-
dents of Bellievre, Nicocholay, and St. Bonet, in the name of
the king, notwithstanding of her aforesaid losses, did fell and
alienate the lands of Senlis, and the duchy of Eftampes, to
Madam de Monpenfier, from whom the king received money;
of which sale the councellors aforesaid obliged theinfelves to
be guarantees, which hath hindred the aforesaid queen to have
justice done her. So that Madam de Monpenfier hath been put in
poffeflion of thee lands of Senlis, contrary to all the declaration,
protestation, andaflurances of the king of France to queen Mary's
ambassadors. So that the queen of Scotland is difp^Tfleied of her
dowry, contrary to all equity, without any regard to herquality.

No. VII. (Vol. I. Book VI. p. 301.)

A letter from the lord of Lochlevin to the regent Mortoun.

jd March TT will please your grace, I receive your grace's letter, and
S577s M has confidered the fame. The parson of Camsey was here
E. of Mor-
ton's Ar- at me before the receit thereof, direced fra my lord of Mar,
chives. and the master anent my laftwritten, which was the answer of
Bund. B. the writing that the rmafter ent to ne, which I fend to your
No' 9 grace, desiring me to con:e to Sterling to confer with them. I

had given my aniwer before the receit of your grace's letter,
that I behuiffit to be besyd Sn. Androis, at ane friends t'ryt,
which I might not omit; I underfand by my laid cousin, that
the king's majcity is to write to divers of the nobility, to conle
there, anent your lordllip's trial, and that he had written before
his departing to my lord Monthrois. I understand, likewise, lie
will write to your grace to come there for tle fame effect, which
I tho't good to make your grace foreseen of the fame, praying
your grace for the love of God almighty, to look upon the best,
and not to seep in security, but to turn you with unfeigned
heart to God, and to confider with yourself, that when the king's
majesty was very young, God made him the initrument to divelt
his mother from her authority, who was natural princess, for
offending of his divine majesty, and that there ran no vice in her,
but that the fame is as largely in you, except to that your grace
condescended not to the deftruCion of your wife. For as to
harlotry and ambition, I think your grace has as far offended
God, and far more in avaritioufiefs, which vycis God never
left unplagued, except speedy reper:tar.ce, which I pray God
grant to your grace, for otherwifc your grace can never have
the love of God nor man. I pray your grace flatter not your-
self, for if your grace believes that ye have the good will of
them that are the king's good willers ye deceive yourself; for

surely

surely I fee perfefly that your own particulars are not content-
ed, lat by the reft, and that most principally for your hard
dealing. I pray your grace, beir with me that I am thus ham-
lie, for certainly it proceeds from no grudge, but from the very
affecion of my heart towards your grace, which has continued
since we were acquainted. And now I fee, because the mat-
ter stands in your grace's handling with the king's majesty, for
certainly, if your grace fall forth with him now, I fee not.how
ye shall meet hereafter ; pray I your grace to call to God, and
look on the best, and cast from your grace both your vices, to
wit, ambition and avaritioufnefs. I am riding this day to Sant
Androis, and trust to return on Wednesday at the farthest. If
your grace will command me in any offices that are honest, that
I may do your grace pleasure in at Sterling, advertise of your
grace's mind, and fliall do to my power and knowledge, and
this with my heartlie, &c. &c.

To our trusty cousin the lord Lochleven.
rT RUSTY cousin, after our most hearty commendations, From the

we received your letter of the 3d of March, and as we Or finlM.,

E. of Mor.

take your plainness therein in good part, as proceeding from a ton's Ar-
friend and kinfinan, in whose good affection toward us we ne- chieves.
ver doubted, so ye may not think it trange that we purge our- Bund. B.
self so far of your accusation, as in conscience we find not our- No. 3'-
self to have offended in. As touching our offence to God, we
intend not to excuse it, but to submit us to his mercy ; for am-
bition surely we think none can justly accuse us; for in our
private eate we could, and can live as well contented, as any
of our degree in Scotland, without further aspiring. The bear-
ing to the charge of the government of the realm, indeed, mon
lead us, or any other that shall occupy that place, not simply to
respect ourself, but his majesty's rowne which we supply, and
therein not transcending the bounds of measure, as, we trust,
it shall not be found we have done, it ought not to be attribut-
ed to any ambition in us. For as oon as ever his Inajefty hall
think himself ready and able for his own govcrnment, none hall
more willingly agree and advance the fame nor I, since I think
never to let my face againt him, whole honour, safety and pre-
servation has been so dear unto me, nor I will never believe to
find otherwise at his hand than favourl, altotougllallthe unfrienlds
I have in the earth were about hin, to perrfiade him to the
contrary. As we write unto you, our lritndly dealing anl con-
fidence in the house of Mar is not thankfully acquit, as we
trust yourself confiders ; but becaule the ambaiff:dors of En-
gland, my lord of Angus, the chancellor, treasurer, and fomet
noblemen rides wePt this clay to fee the king, we pray you hear.
tily address yourself to be there as soon a you can, and as ye

fll

ihall find the likelihood of all things, let us be advertizcd there-
6f, with your own advice, by Alexr. Hay, whoml we have tho't
good to fend weft, feeing my lord of Angus from Sterling rides
to Douglas. And ol we commityou in the protction of God.
At Holyroodhoufe, the 4th of March, 1577.

FoR the avaricioufrefs laid to our charge, indeed it lies not

in us f6 liberally to deal the king's geare, as to falisfy all cravers,
nor rever hiall any sovereign and native born prince, let be any
officer, eschew the disdains of such, as thinks them judges to
their owh rewards; in many causes I doubt not to sird the assist-
ance of my friends, but where my actions iliall appear unhcneft,
I will not crave their afliftance, but let me bear my own burden.

No. VIII. (Vol. I. Book VI. p. 326.)
The coppy of the king of France his directions sent to Scot-

land with Seineur de la Motte Fenelon. Translated out of
the French.

Calderw. F IRST, on their majestys most christian part, he flall make
M. S. His- the moif honourable salutation and visiting to the noft fe-
tr' P' V. rene king of Scotland, their good brother and little son, that

in him is poflible.

To give him their letters that are closed, such and such like

as they have written to him with their hands, and to show ex-
prefly the perfect friendfllip and singular affetion, that their
majestys bear to him, and to bring back the answer.

T o take heed to the things which touch near the most serene

king, to the effect that his perfcn may be in no danger, but
that it may be most surely preserved.

AND that he be not ilindred in the honel liberty that h:e

ought to have, and that no greaicr, or fraiter guards be about
him than he had before.

A N D luch like, that he be not inipcached in the authority,

that God hath given to him of king and p:ince sovereign above
his fubjecs, to the effect he nivy as freely ordain and commnand
in his affairs, and in the afiils of his rn;ntrv, with his oidina-
ry council, as he was usld to do of bIfoie.

T r . r his nobility, a n;ons and conionality of his country

may have their free libcrly to leforr to his ifrene majfily, with-
out suspicion of greater g:'irds cr niu arned men about Iis
person than the ule was, that they e not alfraid and hindered
to resort ; and further tnat the fegnicuiir de la Motte Fenclon fall
liberally and frcely fpcak to the i'ird i;trc king and council, rc-
ciring the rc-cftablliliing of that ti-at nay or hath been changed
'r altered.

.A\ n that he may know if the principalls of the nobility, and
other men of good behaviour of the towns and cnnmmonalitv of

the

the contry conveens, and are content with the form of govern-
nent prelrntly with the liaid .rene king, to the end that if their
be any micontent he n;ay travaile to agree them together, and
that he return not without the certainty of the famine.

A N D if he miay underfiand that there be any who have not

uied them so reverently towards the said serene king their fove-
reign lord, as the duty of their obedience required, that he may
pray on this behalf of his niajefy nmot christian the said serene.
king his good brother, giving him councill wholly to forget the
lame, and exhorting them to do their duty towards his majefly,
in time co:ing, in all -lrpea s with the obedience and true ub-
jedion they ought hin.

AN D if the laid fegnicur De la Motte, perceives the said

serene king to be in any manner confrained of his person, au-
thority, liberty, and diipofition of his affairs, than he used to
be, and not convenient for his royal dignity, or as the sovereign-
ty of a prince does require, that he use all moyen lawful and
lioncft to place him in the famine, and that he iploy as much
as the credit of his most christian majesty may do toward the no-
bility, and fubjeEts of that contry, and as much as may his
name, with the nane of his crown towards the Scottifli nation,
the which he loves and confides in as much as they were pro-
per Frenchmen.

A N D that he wittnefs to the said serene king, and his estates,

of his consent, and to all the nobility and principallperfona-
ges of the contry, that his most Christian majestic will continue
on his part the most ancient alliance and cnnfedracy, which he
hath had with the said serene king his good brother, praying his
nobility and contry, with his principall fubjeds, to persevere in
the famine, in all good underllanding and lfriendfliip with hit;
the which, on his part, he fliall do, obfcrving the fanline most
inviolable.

FU RTH E R his moIst chrillian tia:efqy undcliftanding that

the serene king his good brother was contented with the duke
of Lcnox, and his service, the said figneur De Ie Motte had
charged to pray his serene majesty that he might remaine beside
him to his contentment, believing that he should more wil-
lingly intertain the points of love and confcderace, betwixt
their majestys and their contrys, becauf e was a good fubijeCt
to thenm both; and if he ighlt not remain, without fonue alte-
ration of the tranquility of his efare, that he imight retire himi
to his own house in the said contry, in furenes, or if he pleased
to return to France that he mnight furely--aind if it pleafcs
his serene majesty, to cause ccale and stay the imipeachiments,
that are made of new upon the frontiers, to the citeEt that the
natural Frenchmen may enter as freely into the contry, as they
were wont to do of beforec

AN

AND that there may be nopurpofe of diffamation, nor no

speech but honourable of the moe Christian king, in that con-
try, but such like as is spoken nmol honourably of the serene king
of Scotland in France.

HE had another head to propone, which he concealed till a

little before his departure, to wit, that the queen, the king's
mother, was content to receive her son in association of the
kingdom.

APPENDIX

# APPENDIX TO THE SECOND VOLUME.

TO 0 T H E
SECOND VOLUME.

No. IX. (Vol. 2. p. 3.)
Lord Hunfdane to fir Francis Walsingham, the 14th of August.

1584, from Berwick.

S I R,

A CCORDING to my former letters, touching my nmeeting Caldcrw.
1 A with the earl of Arran upon Wedncfday lalt, there came M. S. Hit.
hither to me from the earle, the justice clerk, and fir William vol. 3. p.
Stuart, captain of Dumbarton, both of the king's p:iviecoun- 374
cil, to treat with me about the ordei of our meeting, referring
wholly to me to appoint the hour, and the number we flould
meet withal; so as we concluded the place to be Foulden, the
hour to be ten o'clock, and the number with ourselves to be
1 3 of a fide ; and the reft of our troops to stand each of them
a mile from the town; the one on the one fide, the other on
the other fide, so as our troops were two miles asunder; I was
not many horsemen, but I supplied it with footmen, where I
had oo flhot on horse, but they were very near 500 horse well
appointed: According to which appointment, we met yeller-
day, and after some congratulations, the carle fell in the like
protestations of his good will and readiness to serve the queen's
majetly, before any prince in the world, next his lbvereign, as
he had done herefore by his letters, and rather more; with
filch earnest vows, as unless he be worlc than a devil, her ma-
jelly maydifpofeof hiin at her pleaftre this being ended,
entered with him touching the cauf I had to deal with him, I.d(
so near as I could, left nothing unrehearti d, tl at I had to
charge the king or him with any unkin dealng toward her ma-
jelly, according to my inftlrl ionis, which without any delay he
answered presently, as ve fliall perceive by the said anfwcrs, sent
herewith; but I replying unto him, he amplified then with
many moe circumstances, but to this effcet. Then I dealt with
hil touching the point of her majesty's fttisficion, for the ut-
tering fch practices as had been lately et on foot for the dif-
quietng of her majesty and her estate, who thereof nade fun-
dry discourses, what marriages had been offered to his najefty
by fundrie princes, and by what means the earle has fought to
divert them, and for what causes ; the one, for that be marri-
age with Spain or France, he mul also alter his religion, which
as he is sure the king will never doe, o will he never fuffcr him to

hcarkea

hearken unto it, so long as he has any credit with him ; e de-
nys not but the king has been dealt withal be pr';lice; to (de!
againfl her niajefty, which he has So far denied and rfitiJ to
enter into, as they have left dealing therein, but whatlbcver
the king or he knoweth therein there fliall be noihing hidden
from her niajefty, as her majesty shall know very fllortl ; surely
it seems by his fpcechcs, that if the king v.ouJd hale yielded
thereunto there had been no finall company es French in Scot-
land ere now to disquiet her niajefty.- This being ended,
I dealt wilh him earnettly for the flay of this parliament, which
now approacheth ; or at the leatl that there may be nothing
done therein, to the prejudice of these noblemen and others
now in England, for the forfaultirg of their livings and goods,
hereupon he made a long discourse to me, first of the earl of
Angus dealing about the earl of Morton, then of his going out,
notwithstanding of furdrie gracious offers the king had made
him, then of the road of Ruthven, how that presently after
they had the king's majesty in their hands, they inprifoned him-
self, dealt with the king for putting of the duke out of the
realm, the king refused o to do, they told him plainly that if
he would not he should have the earl of Arran's bead in a dish ;
the king aked what offence the earl had made ? and they an-
fwered it niufi be o, and ihould be o ; hereupon for the safe-
guard of Arran's life, the king was content to fend away the
duke, and yet Arran afterwards fundre times in danger of his life;
I alledged unto him the king's letter to the queen's majesty, and
his ats in council, that they had done nothing but for his fervife,
and with his good liking and contentment, who answered me
he durfi do no othrnvife, nor could not do any thing but that
which pleaed them, with such a number of other theirdealings
with the king whileft he was in their hands as are too long to
be written, and too bad if they were true I said the king miight
have let the queen's iiajefty's ambaflador have known his mind
fecrelly, and her niajefiy would have relieved hiim ; he answer-
ed, that the king was not ignorant that the apprehensions in
that manner, proceeded fiom Mr. Bow's practice, and thereby
durlt not impart so much to him, and yet the king was con-
tent, and did give renmilion to as many, as would acknowledge
their faults, and alk remilfion, and such as would not, he tho't
fit to banish, to try their further loyalty, in which time they
conspired the king's second apprchenfion, and the killing of the
earle, and others, and fedtced the ministers to their fatlicn,
and yet not satisfied with there confpirncies, and treafonabie
dealings, (as he terms them) are entered into a third, being in
England under her niajefty's protection, to dilionour her ma-
jelfy as far as in them y2th, or at least to cause the king con-
ceive ome unkindness in Iier naj4ty, for harbouring of then ;
I wrote to yow what the conspiracy was, the taking of the
king, the killing of the earleof Arran., and ome others, the
taking of the cattle of Edinl. and bringing home the earles, to

take

take the charge of the king; all which (fays he) is hy Drum-
;lond conlfelfd, and by the provost of Glencudden not greatly
denied, and the conflable of the caflle thereupon fled ; the carl
brought Druinmond with him as far as .angton, where he lay
to have confiefed the conspiracy before me, but having at his
lighting, received a blow on his leg with a horse, so as he
could bring him no further, I replied that 1 thought verily they
would not work any such practices, in respect of the queen's
majesty, abiding within her realne, and if there be any such
practices, they have proceeded fiom others, and they not privie
unto them : and that if it be not apparently proved againfl them,
that it will be thought to be ome practice to aggravate the
fault, and to make them the more odious to the king. He an-
tvered me, that it should be proved so sufficiently, that they
Should not be able with truth to deny it, for their own hands is
to be flowed to part of it, and therefore concluded, that if her
majesty should so press the king for them at this time, that would
rather hinder this matter of the amity, nor further it, and that
since they eek chiefly his life, he c6uld not, in any reason, seek
to do them any good and besides he assured me, that if he
would, he dare not, this lafl matter being fallen out as it is;
and surely if this matter had not fallen out, I would not have
doubted the rettring of the earl of Marr very flortly, if her
majesty would have employed me therein, but for the earl of
Angus, I perceive the king is persuadcd that both he, and the
reft of the Douglafles, have conceived so mortall an hatred
againfl. him and the earl of Arran, about the death of the earl
of Morton, as if they were at hontme, to morrow next, they
would not leave to practice and conspire the death oftheni both,
and therefore a hard matter, to do any thing for him : finally,
he concluded and required me to afTure her mai.jcty from the
king, that there shall nothing bh I:id from her, nor any thing
left undone that may fatisfie her nimajiey with reason, and that
the king shall never do any thini, nr consent to have any thing
done in her pre judice, Ib long is l ie h:; anv credit wihli him,
or authority under him. Having thus fa.t proceded, he dcfired
to llowv me liis cmimiflon, which is under the great feal, to him-
self only, which is as large a may be, and yet fundrie of the
privie councel thl:e with him, hut not one in colmmilifion, nor
prcfent, nor near us l this tie ; having spent nnof five houlrs
in there matters ; he preferned to me the niller of Gray, who
delivered to me a letter front the king in his coinmend.ition,
whom I perceive the king means to fend to her ilajefty, and
therefore requires a safe condu&t for his pafThge, which I pray
yow procure, and to fend it so oon as you may. 1 let hillm n.-
derftand of the lord Scaton's negociation with the French king.
He swore to me, that Scaton was but a knave and that it was
partly against his will, that he should be sent thither. lBut his
cominiflion and inftrudtion being of no great import:ance, he

vieldld

yielded the sooner ; and if Seaton has gone beyond his inltruc-
tions, which Arran drew hinfelf, he will make Seaton smart for
it. Touching William Newgate, and Mark Golgan, he pro-
tested he never heard of any such; he fays there was a little
poor foul, with a black beard, conle thither a begging, who said
he was an enemy to Definond, to whom he gave a crown, but
never heard of him since, and for any Scots man going into
Ireland, he fays there is no such maitter; if there be, there may
be some few rafkals that he knows not of; and touching the
coming of any jesuits into Scotland, he fays it is but the flan-
derous devise of the king's enemy's, and luch as vould have the
world believe the king were ready to revolt in religion, who
the world hall well fee will continue as constant therein, as
what prince soever profefled it inoft; and the earle hinmfelf dos
protest to me, that, to his knowledge, he never saw a jesuit in
his life, and did afTure me if there was any in Scotland, they
Jhould not do so much harm in Scotland, as their niniticrs would
do, if they pleach such doctrine as they did in Scotland; and
touching one Ballanden, of whom I wrote to yow, I heard from
Mr. Colvil, the earle avows contlantly that he knows not, nor
Lath not heard of any such man, but he would enquire at the
justice clerk, and would inform me what he could learn of that;
thus I have made yow as llort a discourse as I can of so many
matters, so long discoursed upon, but there are the principal
points of all our talk, so near as I can remember, and for this
time I commit yow to the Almighty. At Berwick, the 14th of
August, 1584.

The king is very desirous to have

my son Robert Carrie to come to him.
I pray yow know her majesty's pleasure.
Arran's answers to the griefss or articles proponed to the lord

Hunfdane, set down in another form.
A S to the Itrait and evere persecution of all such, as have

been noted to have been well iffected to the queen's na-

jety, it cannot appear they were either for that cause puniffied,
or hardly dealt with, since his majesty of late has been so care-
ful and diligent to choice out good ir.frumcnts to deal betwixt
her ulajefty and him, as his majesty has done in electing of your
lordship and me ; befidcs that in all their accusations, their good
will and affetion born to her majesty was, at no time, laid to
their charge, but capital ations of treason many way tried now
be the whole three eates, and more than nianifeft to the
world.

A for his majesty inhibiting, by publick proclamation, such
as were banihed, not to repair in England; the bruits and

whisperings

whisperings that came to his majesty's ears, of their conspiracics
and treasons, which since fyn they accomplifled,. so far as in
them lay, moved his majesty to inhibit them to repair to any
place, so near his majelty's realm, left they Ilhould have atteimpt-
ed these things, which lhortly they did attempt, being farther
off, and more distant both by sea and land.

As for reception of jesuits, and others, her majefly's fugi-

tives, and not delivering them according to his promise, as your
lordflip propones, his majesty would be most glad that so it
might fall out by your ordllhp's travilcs, that no fugitive o ei-
ther realme hould be received of either, and when so fiall he,
it fliall not fail on his majesty's part, albeit in very deed this
time bygone his majefy has be:n constrained to receipt her ma-
jefty's mean rebells and fugitives, contrar his good naturall,
iince her majetly hath receipt, in effect, the whole and greatest
rebells and traitors his majesty in his own blood ever had ; as
for the agreement with his majesty's nmther anent their afioci-
ation, his majesty has commanded me, in 1,refence of your lord-
ship's servant, to assure her majety and your lordship, in his
majesty's name, that it is altogether false, and an untruth, nor
any such like matter done yet.

H s majesty has also commanded me to assure your lordfhlip,

that it is also false and untrue, that his majesty has, by any
means direct or indirec, sent any message to the pope, or re-
ceived any from him; or that his majesty has dealt with Spain
or any foreigners, to harm her majesty or her realm, which his
majesty could have no honour to do, this good intelligence ta-
king place, as I hope it Ilall.

As concerning the contemptuous usage of her majesty's mini-

ilers, sent unto his majesty, his majefy uscd none of them so;
and if his majesty had, sufficient caule was given by them, as
some of their own writs do yet testify ; as I more particularly
ilhewed your lordflip at Foulden at our late meeting.

No. X. (Vol. II. p. .)

Letter of Q ,Mary to Q. Eliiabeth.

Madam ma bonne Seur,

'Affeurant que vos avez eu communication d' une lettre Cott. Lib
de Gray que voftre honune Semner me livra hier fubz le C'lI. B.

nom de mon filz y recognoiant quasi de mot les mefines rai- V4.
sons, que le dit Gray m'efcrivit en chific eftant dernierement An origi-
pres de vous definontrant la ufliflnce & bonne intention du per- nal.
fonage je vous prieray feulemient fuivant cc que si dcvantje vous
ay vant inftantement importune que vous me premettiez de fclair-
cir librement & ouvertement ce point de 'aflociation d' entre moy
& mon filz & me deffier les mains pour proceder avec lui comme
je jugeray cftray requis pour son bien & Ic mien. Et j'entreprendz

quoy

quoy que 'on vous die & puifle en rapporter de faire mentir ce
petit brouillon qui persuade par aucuns de vos niniftres a entre-
pris cette leparation entre moy et mon enfant, & pour y coIm-
mencer je vous fupplie nl'o-royer queje puiffe parler a ceju'tice
clerk qui vous a elte nouvellenent envoys pout mnander par luy a
mon filz mon intention fur cela, ce queje me promisque ne rnc
refulerez, quant ce ne feroit que pour demnontrer en effec la bon-
ne intention que vous m'aves affeur6e avoir a 'accord & entre-
rien de natural devoirentre le mere & 'enfant qui dit en bonnes
tennes eftre empefche pour vous me tenant captive en un defcrt
ce que vous ne pourrez mnieux defilentir & faire paroitre voltre
bon defir a notre union que me donnant les movens d'y proceder,
& non ni'en retenir& emnpefc!?er comne aucunede vos nmiliftrcs
pretendent a fin de laifler teujours lieu a lieur rnauvais & finiS}res
praaiques entre nous. La lettre porte que 'aflbciaticn n'et pas
paiffe, aufli ne luy ai-je jallais dit, bienque mnon filz avoit ac-
c.,pte; & que nous en avions convenu enfenlble, connme 'ate
ings de fa main, & ees lettres tant a moy, que en France en font
soy, ayant donne ce menie ternoignage de fa bcuche propre a
plufieurs awibafladeurs & perfonne de credit, s'excufant de ne
I'ofer faire publier par craint de vous feulement, demandant
forces pour vous refifer d'avant de fa declarer si ouverternent
eltant journellement persuade au contraire par vos minifires qui
luy prometoyent avecque une entreire a York le faire declarer
vorre heretier. Au surplus Madame quand mon enfant feroit fe
malkleureux que de s'opiniaftrer en cette extreme impiete & ingra-
titude vers moy, j.e ie puis penser que vous non pins cu'aucun
aultre prince de la Chretient le voulifiez eu cela applaudir ou
nleintenir pour luy fayre acqucrir ma rnalediEion ains que plutos
introviendrez pour luy faire recognoitre la raison trop julfe &
evidant devant Dieu & les hommes. Helas & encores ne luy
vouloier j'en ofrer, nays donner avec droit cc qu'il tient par ufur-
pation. Je me fuis du tout coinife a vous, & fidelement faites
si il vous plef que je ne en foye pis qu'aupravant, & que le faul-
fete des u;;s ne prevale defvant la verite vers vous, pour bien re-
cevant mal, & la plus grande afflicion qui me fcaurroit arriver
a fcavoir la perte de mon fils. Je vous fupplie de mne mander en
cas qu'il perfifte en cette m'efconnoiffance de son devoir, que de
luy ou de moy il vous plaiflt advouer pour legittine roy ou rnyne
d'Eccre, & si vous aves agreable de pourfuivre avec nmoy a
parte la traite comnencó entre nous de quoy je vous requiers fans
plus attendre de response de ce inal gouverne enfant vous en re-
querrat avec autant d'affetion que je fens mon cur oppreiff
d'ennuy. Pour Dieu fouvenez vous de la proneflt que ni'avez
faites de mnc prendre en votre protection me raportant du tout a
vous, & ifur ce prain; Dieu qu'il vous viueille preserver de touts
vos ennemnys & diflimulez anmys, colnme jele desire de me cons,:-
ler & de me venger ce ceulz qui pourchfafflnt un tel malheur enti e
la ere & 'enfant. Jc ceflfray de vous troubler, nais non a

lIl'ClI-

m'ennuier q::e jc ne recoive quelque consolation de vous & de
Dicu encore un coup je le fupplic de vous garder de tout peril.
Futhbery x Mars.

Voftre fidelement vouce fceur

& obeiffantc coufine,

A la reyne d'Angletcrre M A R I E Q

madame ma bonne f(eur
& coufine.

No. XI. (Vol. II. p. .)

A Teftainent by Q. Mary.

N. B. The following paper was transcribed by the revd.
Mr. Crawford late regius profeifor of church hiflory in
the university of Edinburgh. Part of this paper, accord-
ing to him, is written by Nau,, Mary's secretary, the rcft
with the queen's own hand. What is marked " is in the
quecn's hand.
C Onfiderant par ma condition prefente I'efate de vie humaine,

si inccrtain, que perfonne ne s'en peuft, ou doibt assurer, Cott. lib.

finnon foubs la grande et infinie misericorde de Dieu. Et me Vefp:lf.
voulant prevaloir d'icelle contre tous les dangers et accidens, qui L. 6.
me pourroient in opinement furvenir en cette captivit, mefines p' 4i
a cause des grandes et longues maladies, ou j'ay etc detenue
jufques a present ; j'advise tandis que j'ay la commodite, ou rai-
son en jugement, de pourvoir apres ma la falut de mon ane, en-
terrement de mon corps, et disposition de mon bien, eftat,
& affaires, par ce present mon teftanent et ordonnance de nion
dernier volonte, qui s'enfuyt.

Au nom du Pere, du Filz, ct du henoife St. Esprit. Pre-

miererent, me recongnoiffant indigne pecherefle avec plus d'of-
fences envers mon Dieu, que de latisfaition par toutes les adver-
fites que j'ay fouffert ; dont je la loue fa bonte. Et mn'appuyant
fur la croix de mon Sauveur et redempteur efus Chrifte. Je
recommende on ame a la benoifte et individue Trinitc, et aux
prieres de la Glorieufe Vierge Mlaric, et de tous les anges faints
et fainaes de paradis, efpcrant par leur merites et intercefflon,
eftree aydee a obtcnir de ere fiaicte participante avec eulx de
felicite eternelle. Et pour m'y achemincr de cucur plus net et
entier, delpouillant des a present tout ressentiment des injures,
calonmnies, rebellions, et aultres offenses, qui me pourroient
avoir eft fctes durant ma vie, par ines fubjets rebelles ct aul-
tres ennemis ; J'en retrict la vengeance a Dicu, & Ic fupplie Icur
pardonner, de inefine affetion, que je luy requicrs pardon a
mes faultes, et a tous ceuls et celles que jc puis avoir offenf de
aits ou du parolles.

Je veulx et ordonne, &c. [The two folloming paragrap,;

contain diredions concurning the place and circujtflance of her
burial.

Pour ne contrevenir a la gloire, honncur, et conservation de

I'EFli fe carholique, apollolique et Romaine, en la quelle je
vculx vivre et nlourir, Ii Ic prince d'Efcofe mon filz y pueft etre
reduiet contre la niauvaie nourriture, qu'il a praise a mon tres
grand regret en l'herefie de Calvin entre mes rebelles, je le lail'e
feul et uniue heritier de nmon royaume d'Efcoifce, de droil ue
je pretende jurilenlit en la couronre d'Angleterre et pays que en
dependent, et generalleinent de tous et chacun nes meubles et
i nmitubles qui relteronts apres ma umort, et execution de ce pre-
e,4t teftanient.

Si non, et que mon dit filz continue a vivre en la dite herefie,
e cede, tranlpoite, et aicte don de touts et cacuns nes

droias, que je pretende et puis pretendre a la couronned'Ang-
leterre, et aultres iroiis, feigneuries, ou royaulies en depen-
dantz, au roy cathoique, ou aultre de fiens qu'il luy plaira,
avefques advis, conrfntentent de fafaintet'; tant pour la voyr

n anujourdliuy le feul furs ppui de la rcl:ion catholique, que
' pour reconoilflnce de gratuites faveurs lque ni)y, et les Ilins

reconnmandez par moy, ort avons receu de luy en mna plus
c' grande neceilit- ' et rguard aulli nu droid que luy niefine

pceut pretendre a ces ditz royaulnes et pays, ee fipplie qu'in

' reconipence il preign alliance, de.la nltifon de.Lorraine, et si ii
" ce pleut de celle de Guile, pour inemoir de la rac. ;elaquelle

je is sortie au coite dc M.:r., n'g yart tid celuy tie inon pere,
que mon cLul entlii t, lcquel etlcap C tlioliqluc j'ay tc.sjours
"vouc pour une ie fCs ilils, i il luy plailoit de l'accepter, ou

laillant une dc ts nicpces narice conrlle fa fille.
" le layfle Inon flz a la protition du roy, dc prince, ct ducs

" de Lorravne et de Guiic, ct du VMaync, aux cu:lz je recom-
" mende et son ellat en ElIctre, ct mon droit e'. Ang';tcirre,

si il eft catholique, et quelic Ic parli: dc ccle roync."
Je fautz don au " coinptc de Lenox' de csante de Lenox tenu

par feu son pere. et comnllande inon fi.z, cow!me mon heretier
ct fucceffeur, d'obeyr en ceft en droit a mon volont'.

Je voulx et ordonne toutes les fonnles et de-iers, qui fe tro-

veront par moy deucs, tien nis caulc dc doid cefre faits a
" Lohliven" etre prolmptement paye et .quitts, et tout tort et
griefs reparcs per lelitsexecuteurs dceli'ciz J'e chnarge la con-
science. Oultre, &c. [Follow two or tbree piragriphs (i ern-
ing particular legacys, and iteI is at//ie:l !F'aiS a innoir de
Sheffield en Anglcterre Ie jour de---- l cinql cens fuixant &
dix fcpt.

.Aft/er

/ftrr a bl/la. page follot's in the queen's hand.

Si nion filz irmurt, au conlte de Lenox, ou Claude Hamil-

" ton lequel fc inccntrcra lc plus fidel!c v.:rs Lmoy, et plus contlant
"en religion, au jugement de----Dues de Lorraine et de
" Guv, ou je le rapport fir ce de ceulx a iue j'auray donnay
I la charge de trayter avefque eux de par moy et ceulx, a con-
" dition dfeli inarrier ou allier en la dite mayfon ou par leur
" advis."

Follow near twzo pages f par!icar legacys.

Et le reinets ma tante de Lenox au droic2 quelle peut pre-

tendre a la contc dI'Ang;ns avant l'acort fait par mon conl-
inandement entre n!a iite ranre de Lenox et le comte de Mor-
t ten, vcu qu'il a este fait c& par It fu roy mon Mary et moy,
" fr la pronieffe de fa fidel anllillance, i luy & moy encouions

dangieret befoin d'ayde, ce !u'il romlpit, s'entendant fecre-
" telent au les nos ennenis rebeles, qu' atteint prient contre fa

vie, et pour cell effctt pri l armeis, et ont portI les ban-
nieres de!ploies, contre nous, je rvoquc auli toute autre don
' que je luy ay fait de contc' dle Morton fur promeffes de fcs
"bons services a advenir, et entends que la dite Conti foit reu-

nie a la couronnc, si ell fe trouve y partenir, comme fes tra-
hilbns tant en la mort tie mon fcu iMary, que en mon banitfe-

" ment, et pourfuit de la inien ne 'ont merite. Et defends a
" mon filz deje janays fivire de luv pour de luy pour la havne

qu'il aye fes parents, la quelle e crains ne s'eflende jufques
"a luy, le connoiffint du tout affectionn aux enneinis de mon

d roite en ce royaurnc, de quel il cli pcnconnaire.
' Je reconiiende n;on ncpveu Fancois Sturlt a mon filz, et
' luy conmmande dete'il prs dc luy e s'nifervir, et je luy laviTe

Ie bien du conte d1 Boduel son ocle, en rciplet qu'il et de

' nion fang, mon filcul, er ina eflc i'EI fc en: lutelle par son pere.

" Je declare que ilon 1'cri. bfllard Robert Abb de St. Croix
na'cn que par circonrivntioI Orkciyiav, et qut le nc futjamays
m non intention, conile il apret par i; revocation qucj'ay fayte

'depuis, et ete aulli ftitie d avant la .ill, de x x v. ans, ce que
"j'aitoisdelilerer f il ne in'cuflnt p;rcu::er p:r prison de fe de
" defayre aulx eftats je vulx donc que Orkenay it rune a 1a

ccuronne coinie une de plus netilc.il.iis pour non filz, t
" fans la nayfon ne pcurra tri lien ILtr..

" Lcs filles de Mon'a nc p:arvi-nt accelli leriter, ains revient

" la cont a la Couronnc, si il lty plelt luy donncr fa ou
" ille en Inarrialgc, et il nuilnc l'cl finniie ligne.'

V .. I P No, XII.

No. XII. (Vol. II. p. 18.)

A letter from Mr. Archibald Douglas to the queen of Scotns.
Aprl- Lb L E A SE your majesty, I received your letter of the date the

Bar. si. p 2th of Novr. and in like manner has seen some part of the
to. . 9' contents of one other of the fame date, dircted to Monfr. e

Mlovifir, abaffador for his aj;cftv the moll Chriltian king,
both which are agreeable to your princely dignity, as by the one
your highness desires to know true caule of my banilliment,
and offers unto me all favour if I hall be innocent of the hei-
nous fads committed in the perobn of your hulband of good me-
mory, so by the other the said anbaffador is willet to declare
unto me, if your hufand's imurder could be laid julily againit me,
that you could not fullicit in my cause, neither yet for any person
that was participant of that execrable faat, but would leek the
revenge thereof, when you hould have any mieans to do it;
your majesty's offer, if I be innocent of that crime, is nio fh-
vourable, and your desire to know the truth of the fame is moll
equitable; and therefore that I fliould with all my finplicitv.
sincerity and truth answer thereunto is mos reasonable, to tl e
end that your princely dignity may be my help, if my innocence
flall sufficiently appear, and procure ny condemnation, if I be
culpable in any matter, except in the knowledge of the evil dif-
posed minds of the moil part of your nobility against your said
hulband, and not revealing of it, which I am aured was fuffi-
ciently known to himself, and to all that had judgment never o
little in that realm ; which also I was constrained to undertand,
as he, that was specially employed betwixt the earl Morton,and
a good number of your nobility, that they might with all humi-
lity intercede at your majesty's hand for his relief, in such mat-
ters as are more specially contained in the declaration following,
which I am confrained for my own justification, by this letter
to call to your majesty's remembrance. Notwithstanding that
Iun allured to my grief, the reading thereof will not finally
offend your princely mind. It may please your majelty to re-
member, that in the year of God 1566, the aid earl of Morton,
with divers other nobility and gent. were declared rebels to your
majeftl, and baniihed your realm for insolent murder committed
in your najefly's own chamber, which they alledged was done
by command of your husband, who notwithltanding affirmed
that he was compelled by them to subscribe the warrant given
for that effet, howloever the truth of that matter remains
amongit them it apperlains not to me at this time to be curi-
ous; true it is that I was one of that numiber, that heavily of-
fended against your iimljefly, and paired in France the time ol
our baniihmcnt, at the desire of the reft, to humbly pray your
brother the most Chriltian king, to interceed that our offences

might

might be pardoned, and your majesty's clemeecy extehded to-
wards us, albeit divers of no finall reputation, in that realm, was
ot the opinion, that the said fact terited neither to be equifite
for, nor yet pardonel. Always such was the careful mind of
his illajely toWah.s tle quitnefs of that realm, that the dealing
in that canfe was comlmitted to Mohs. de Moviflr, who was di-
rcAted at that time to go into Scotland to congratulate the hap-
py birth of your son, whomli Almighty God of his goodness may
lolg preserve in happy efate and perpetual felicity ; the careful
travel of the said de Movifir was ih erfecual, and your majesty's
minid o inclined to mercy, that within hort space thereafter,
I was permitted to repair in Scotland, to deal with earls Mur-
ray, Athol, Bodvel, Artgil, and secretary Ledington, in the
name and behalf of the said earl Morton, lords Reven, Lindsay,
and rnanent complefis, that they might make offer in the names
of the said earl, of any matter that might satisfy your majesty's
wrath, and procure your clemency to be extended in their fa-
vours ; at my coming to them, after I had opened the effet of
mly nmelage, they declared that the marriage betwixt you and
your husband had been the occasion already of great evil in that
realm, and if your huband Ihould be suffered to Follow the ap-
petite and mind of such s was about him, that kind of dealing
might produce with t;nc v.orfe efect ; for helping of such i-
convenience that might fall out by that kind of dealing, they
had thought it convenient to join themselves in league anA
band with some other nobiemen, resolved to obey your majesty
as their natural sovereign. and have nothing to do with your
husband's command whatfoe er, if the said carl would for him-
self enter into that band and confcderacy with them, they could
be content to humbly rcquelt and travel by all means with youi
niajefty for his pardon, but before they could any farther pro-
ceed, they desired to know the slid earl's mind herein; when
had answered, that he nor his friends, at my departure, could
not know that any such like matter would be proponit, and
therefore was not inlh'uEtd what to answer therein, they de-
fired that I fliould l'etnn liflicicntly inllructed in this matter to
Sterling, before rthe b;,ptrniF your son, whom God might pre-
lrve ; this nmenffe W,,< fnilitfully delivered by me at Newcastle
in rEngland, where the said earl then remaincd, in presence of
his liiends and ctllpftny,, whIee they all condescended to have
rno farther dealings Q.iii your husband, and to enter into the
said band. With tli.s deliberation rcturned to Stirling, where
3t the rquelt of th! nift Chltliain kling aInd tie queen's majesty
of England by theit anibarfThdors Iri.lt:il, your nma jelly's gracious
pardon W\as granted urto thecl all, under condition always that
they flnuld ctliainl bani(lled forth the ralm, the space of
;vo yOnts ald ftrir duriilg your majeflty's pleafurc, which li-
!1iltionh wnas after itigdled at the hulnble request of your own
"otiilliv, so thlat iiltdiiirl.ly after the said earl of Morton re-

p*' 3 paired

paired into Scotland to Quhittingaime, where the earl Bedvell
and ecretary Ledington c ame to him ; what speech passed there
amongst them, as God fliall be my judge, I knew nothing at
that time, but at their departure I was requefled by the laid
earl Morton to accompany the earl Bodvel and secretary to
Edenburgh, and to return with such answer as they should ob-
tain of your majefry, which being given to me by the said per-
sons, as God hall be ny judge, was no other than there words,

Schaw to the earl Morton that the queen will hear no speech

" of that matter appointed unto him ;" when I crafit that the
answer might be made nmore fnfible, ecretary Lcdington said,
that the earl would sufficiently understand it, albeit few or norn
at that time underfland what pasTed amongst them. It is known
to all men, als veill be railling letters pall betwixt the laid ear!
and Ledington when they become in divers factions, as also ane
buck sett furtht by the ninitlers wherein they affirm that the
earl of Morton has confcifed to them, before his death, that
the earl Bodvell come to Quhittingainle to prepon the callin?
away off the king your husband, to the which proposition the
said earl of Morton affirms that he could give no answer unto
such time he might know your majesty's mind therein, which he
never received. As to the abominable murder, it is known too
by the depositions of many persons that were executed to the
death for the committing thereof, that the fame was executed
by them, and at the command of such of the nobility, as had
fubfcrivit band for that effet ; by this unpleasant declaration,
the molt part thereof known to yourself, and the remainder may
be understood by the aforesaid witnesses that was examined in
torture,and that are extant in the custody of the ordinary judges
in Scotland, my innocency so far as may concern any fact does
appear sufficiently to your ma jcfty. As for my dealing afore-
said, I can be no otherwise charged therein, but as what would
accuse the vessel that preserves the vine from harm, for the in-
temperancy of such as immoderately use the fame. As for the
special cause of my baniflnient, I think the fame has proceeded
upon ane opinion conceived, that I was able to accule the earl
of Morton of so much matters as they alledge hinifelf to have
confessed before he died, and would not be induced, for loss of
reputation, to perforn ary part thereof. If this be the occasion
of my trouble, as I suppose it is, what punilhmiment I hould
deserve, I remit me to your majesty's better judgment, who
well knows how careful ever ilk gentleman should be of his
fame, reputation, and honour, and how far ever ilk man (hould
abhor the name of a pultroun, and how indecent it would have
been to me to accuse the earl of Morton, being lb near of his
kin, notwithifanding all the injuries I was colnlrained to receive
nt his hands all the time of his government, and for no other
cause, but for flcwing of particular l'iendfl)ip to particula

friends

friends in the time of the last cruel troubles in Scotland. Sorry
I be now to accuse him in any matter being dead, and more
1ii-iv that being on lyff, be such kind of dealing obtained that
namle of Ingrate. Always for my own part I have been banish-
ed my native country thete three years and four months, living
in anxiety of nlind, my holl guds in Scotland, which were ot
finall, interniittit and dilponit upon, and has continually since
the time I was relieved out of my last troubles at the desire of
Monfr. do Movifir, attended to know your majesty's pleasure,
and to await upon what service it fliould please your majesty for
to colmmand. Upon the 8th of April inft. your good friend fecre-
tary Walfinghame has declared unto me, that her highness tho't
it expedient that I should retire myself where I pleased, I de-
clared unto him I had no means whereby I might perform that
desire, until filch time as I flould receive it from your majesty.
Neither knew I where it would please your highness to direct
me, until such time as I should have received further informa-
tion from you. Upon this occasion, and partly by perniffion, I
have taken the hardrefs to write this present letter, whereby
your majesty may understand any part of my troubles pall, and
strait present. As to my intention future, I will never deny
that I am fully resolved to spend the reft of may days in your ma-
jefty's service, and the king your son's, wheresoever I flall be
dire&ed by your majesty, and for the better performing thereof,
if so fliall be her majesty's pleasure, to recommend the tryal of
my innocency, and examination of the verity of the preceding
narration, to the king your son, with request that I may be
pardoned for such offences as concerned your majesty's service,
and var common to all men the time of his les aige and perdonit
to all, except to me, I hould be the bearer thereof myself, and
be directed in whatsoever service it should please your majesty
for to command. Most humble I beseech your majesty to con-
fider hereof, and to be so gracious as to give order, that I may
have means to erve your majefly according to the incerity of
my meaning, and so expeEting your majesty's answer, after the
killing your hand with all humility, I take leave from London,

No. XIII. (Vol. II. p. 29.)
Letter form the king of Scots to Mr. Archibald Douglas his am-

baffador in England, October 1586.

ES SERVE up yourself na lattgcrin the earnef dealing for Cot. Lib.
my mother, for ye have done it too long and think not Calig. C. 9.

that any your travellis can do goode if her lyse be takin, for then An O'i.'
adeu with my dealing with thaime that are the special inltru- in.,'
mentis thairof: And theirfore, gif ye looke for the continu- hand.
ance of my favour towartis you, fpair na pains nor plainnes in this

Cace,

cace, but reade my letter wrettir to Ail!ilk,:e cirlh, anl cnn.
form yourself quhollie to tile coltt-enis t iirof, a'id in this r--
queift let me reap the fruictis of youre grtat cedit there, athcr
now or never. Fairwcll. OEtober 15865.
Letter to flr William Keith, anibafador in England, poLau.lv

from fecretaiy Maiilard. Nov. 27, 1586.

A copy in D Y your letters ert by this bearer, (aibeit conceninig no
the collet. B pleasant fubjeet) his majeftv conceives well of your ean) .-
of fir A. ness and fidelity in your negotiations, as also of Mr. Archibald',
Dick. Vol.
A. fol ' activity and diligence, whcni vou so reatly praitic and recoin.
z19. mend. I wish the iuc corrgfpond to his ulajelly's opinion, yotr

care and travell, and his great diligence as you write. I-Ii na-
jefly takes this rigorous proceeding against his mother deeply in
heart, as a matter greatly concerning himi both in honour and
otherwise. His highnefles actions and behaviour utter plain!x
not only how far nature prevails, but also how he apprehends of
the sequel of that process, and of what moment he efteenis it.
There is an ambaflade hortly to be directly, wherein will :
employed an earl and two counsellors, on vhofe answer will de-
pend the continuance or difflution of the amity and good intel-
ligence between the princes of this isle. In the mean season, if
farther extremity be used, and his nlajefty's suit and requelf di-
dained, his highness will think bificlf difionloured and con-
temned, far besides his expecation and deserts. Ye iny per-
ceive his majesty's disposition by his letter to you, which yeu
shall impart to Mr. Archibald, and both deal according thereto.
I need not to recommend to you care, concernitg your after's
service both in weill and in honour. As you and your colleague
flall behave yourself in this behalf, so for my ownl part, will I
interpret your alftecion to your master. I am glad of that I
hear of yourself, and I do fully credit that you write of Mr.
Archibald, whose fiiends here make great accoqnlt of his pro-
sessed devotion to the queen, besides the duty he owes to lie
king's majelfy her on. Fartiher I am colltrained to remir to
next occasion, having scarce time to 'cribile thcl; ft"l' li'ic.,
(which of thcmnfelves nry bear witnes of py lhailc.) V\'ilh;:
you aprofpcrous ilfue of your negntiation, I coiiiit you, &c.
Halyrudhoufc, Nur. 27rt, 1586.

TH E people, anl ail eates here are so fr Iloved by t- ri-

gorous proceedings againil the q'.icn, that Ihis ilna 1', :nd :1!
that have credit are iiportuJcd, and Iray nt go alnbrna for ex-

riamatinns againlr tlilrit, d ,u

iprcc'tircis etailt

tie qleCn ct
Englnnd

No.

No. XIV. (Vol. II. p. 31.)

To the king's majesty, from Mr. Archibald Douglas.

L E A S E your majesty, I received your letter of the date 16 out.
the 28th of September, the 51h of October, which was 1586.
the fame day that I directed Win. Murray towards your high- From the

Original

ncs ; by such letters as he carried, and others of several dates, i, the co -
your majefy may perceive that I had omitted nothing so far as lea. of fir
mly travel might reach unto, anent tile performing of the two A. Dick.
chief points contained the laid letter before the receipt thereof, Vol. B.
which by there presents I muff repeat for answering the faidis. so. 34'
As to the firll, so far as may concern the interceeding for the
queen your majesty's mother her life, I have divers tinmes and in
every audience travelled with this queen in that matter, fpeci-
ally to know what her full determination must be in that point,
and could never bring her to any further answer, but that this
proceeding against her by order of justice was no less against
her mind than against their will that loved her best: As towards
her life The could give no answer thereunto, untill such time as
the law hath declared whether flie was innocent or guilty.
Herewithall it was her pleasure thus far to inform me, that it
was a number of the affociants that earnestly pressed her that
the law might proceed against her, giving reasons that so long
as fle was suffered to deal in matters, so long would never this
realm be in quiet, neither her life, neither this state in affu-
rance, and in the end they used this protestation that if The
would not in this matter follow their advice, that they flTould
remain without all blame whatsoever flould fall out; where-
upon fle had granted them liberty to proceed, left such as had
made the request, might hereafter have charged herself with
inconvenience if any Ihould happen.

AND by myself I know this her speech to be true, becauie

both papist and protestant has behaved thenl, as it hath been
her pleasure to declare, but upon divers refpedts, the one to
avoid suspicion that otherwise was conceived againll theni, the
other upon zeal, and care that they will be known to have for
prefcrvation of their sovereign's life and state in this perrilous
lime, upon consideration whereof, I have been constrained to
enter into omie dealing with both, wherewith I made her ma-
jefty acquainted; the protestants, and such as in other matters
will be known to bear no fiall favour unto your minjelly's ser-
vice, hath prayed that they may be excused fiom any dealing
in the contrary of that, which by their oath they have avowed,
and by their speech to their sovereign requested for, and that
before my coming in this country ; if they hould now otherwise
do, it would produce no better cffcEt but to make them fibjec e
to the accusation of their fovcrcign, when it flould pleale her

to

to do it, of their inconstancy, in giving councoc v! w:cre. !

.

might incur the danger of ill coiinfelli.. and h cnnltij.C.;
worthy of punishment. Such of the ppic ai Il dl.:,l ",i!,:
went immediately, and told her inma jefi wh'lt I lhid fp'.kn , ;
them, who albeit he undeillood the Iu.rl:-r ol l)forec, lil.t tfl
me and declared to me my own fpeLch that I hand uitterd ;.,
them, willing me for the weil of my iiiailter's fcrvicc to ablh;in
from dealing with fuich, as were not yet li!ficientiy imoved t'
think of my master as fli did. 1 craved leave of her ilnajely,
that I might inform them of your mlajelly's late belavi-ur to-
wards her, and the llate of this realin, whereunto with ome
difficulty file gave her conflitt. At my late departure fren
court, which was upon the th of this intlant, and the day as-
ter that the lords of this grand jury had aken their leaves of her
majesty to go northwad to Fothringhanl, it was her pleasure
to promifc to have further fpecch in this imatter at the returning
of the said lords, and to give full anlfwer according to your ma-
jefty's contentment to the rel:ainder matters. that I had propc;it
in name of your rmajcfty. As to the d part concerning the al-
fociation, and dcfire that the promise made to the niaft(r ot
Gray concerning your majesty's title may be fulfilled; it ap-
pears by the said letter, that the vely point, whereupon the
question that may bring your majefly's title in doubt hath not
been rightly at the writing of the said letter conridered, which
I take to have proceeded for lack of readingof the o.f ofparlia-
ment, wherein is fulfilled all the promiiif mnade hy the queen to
the aid nafter, and nothing may now cause any doubt to arise
against your said title, except that an opinion fliould be con-
ceived by thee lords of this parliament that are so vchenment at
this time against the queen your n:ajelt/'s mother, that v ur
majesty is, or may be proved hereafter arFcting to her pro,-
ceedings, and some that lox eyour riijeftv' ei. rvice w-'rc of that
opinion that too earnest rquelt niight move ground, v:!e.-c-
upon ifipicions might grow in men o ill alfi:ctrd in that matter
which I tho't miglht be helped by otaining of a declaration in
parlianlent of your maniefiv's innocence at this time, and by
reason that good nature and public honefly would colftl.rain you
to intercede for the queen your moother, which v,ouhil carry with
itlilf,; without any fuither, f:'nic suspicion tat nightr move ill
affccl(d nien to dout. In ny for:: .r lettitr I iiuiinliv crnved
of your ini.jeftv tl.al l Iiie earned men in lhe lai:', niglit :e
moved to advilt i h ilhe ol'ds of the aflocirion, and the iii-
tigation containLed I t!ne ictl of par!ianl;e!t, and .ilthi;ll to ad-
vic wliat ffpicilous ctic's ovrl r aiii.'flt.'' reiii f n, ight work
in theli cholerick imen at thii; time, and l w thcir n il:ds n,ilti
lie heft inovwd to recci rc;lh't ; ad uponl all th.!. c! , lirera-
;ions tt v inighlit 1have ti,;led tile words of a dec!aror of Vci;r
*.mjcllv' :iImo'.:::c': to 3c OO'.ii, d :;. :l'is p.,li. r t1 .
a- d tail-

ing

in. thereof, the very words of a protestation for the frme es-
ft't that might belt ltrve for your majecfy's iervice, and for my
better information. Albeit this way was ily simple opinion, I
ihall be contented to tfllow any direction it hall please your
Ilmajt'ty to ive ; I have already opened the liubltance hereof to
the queen of this realil, who eclins not to be offended herc-
xeitl, and hath granted liberty to dcal therein with uch of the
parliamlent as lmay rcmain in any doubt of mind. This being
the fulI of y proceedings in this niatter, besides the remainder
contained in other letters of several dates, am confraincd to
lay the whole open before your iiiajelty, and to humbly pray
that fill inflormaion may be ent unto me what further to do
helrin, in thi; middle tinie, while I lhall receive more ample
dirclion I fliali proceed and be doing according to such directi-
on as I have already received. And lo, moil gracious sovereign,
wilhing tr.to you! ilajelly all happy success in your affairs, I
humbly take my leave fron l.ondon, 16th of Otr. this 586.
Your niajetly's nioft humble fi)bjct and obedt. servant.

A memo ial from his majelty by the Master of Gray.
IT will please your majeily, I have tho't nmeeter to let down 1z Jan.

all things as they occur, and all advertifenients as they came 's86. An
to my ears, then jointly in a letter. O iginal

I came to Vare the z4th of Deer. and sent to Win. Keith, hand in

and Mr. Archibald Douglas to advertiz. the queen of it, like the col-
as they did at their audience. She prnmiild the queen your lee. of fir
majeily's mother's life flould be spared till we were heard. The A. Dick.
2-th, they calme to Vare to me, the which day Sir Robt. camle fVl. A.
to Vare, where they ihewed us how far they had already gone
in their negotiation, but for that t'ie dilcnurfe of it ii set down
in our general letter, I reinit Ine to it, only this far I will teRtify
unto your majelty that Vin. Kcitli l'ilh uld hihilelf right ho-
nett'v and jullly till our coming, reilcA'iin all ci'miiiltances,
a:-d chiefly his colleague his d'alillng, w'iclh indeed is not bettet
tha:n Vyir maljelty know already.

TlIl E 29t1 day of Dtccr. we camle to I.orndln, wlere wre were

no w;iys friendly Ieccivt'l , nora!it the innll lr In' it hlad plenfed
y)L:r innjlrl'y ule lic r ainbliilors, never :ani Ilent to wvtlcolne
or c:)i.vey :. 'I The ;llie d.ly 'e uni!('rl}ifd of Mi'. de [cll-
I-Kvrc his leave tnkiig, aid loi tli;'t the cutlim permitted not e c
frnt our cxculics bly VIIr. (;corel Yonllg.

'TI it it lday of lainry, Wi. Keilll antl !:i. cClleagli accorld-

iil to the culholi c'nil to crae our au iicnce. \Ve recciv l
Ili ariver contained in ti ginl lellcr, :1:i could not lhavl.
itlwvcr till tie 6th dny, what wa.s done th:,t dny your m;aj'!y

id .

has it in the general, yet we was not out of expectation at that
time albeit we received hard answers.

TH E 8th day we speak with tle earl of Leicester, where our

conferrence was, as is set down in the general. I remarked this,
that he that day said plainly the detaining of the queen of Scot-
land prisoner was for that fie pretended a fucceflion to this
crown. Judge then by this, what is tho't of your nanjelty as
ye shall hear a little after.

Tt E 9th day we spake with the French ambaflador, whom

we find very plain in making to us a wife discourse of all his
proceedings, and Mr. de Bellievre'we thanked him in your ima-
jefty's name and opened such things as we had treat with this
queen, save the last point, as more largely set down by our
general.

IT is tho't here, and ome friends of your majefy's advised

me, that Bellievre his negotiation was not efetual, and that
the resident was not privy to it, as indeed I think is rue, f(,r
since Bellievre his parting, there is a talk of this Chafeauneuf
his servants taken with his whole papers and pacquets, which he
was fending in France, for that they charge himn wit a confpi-
racy of late against the queen here her life. It is alledged his
servant has confefled the matter, but whom I liall trust I know
not, but till I fee proof I hall account him an honest man, for
indeed so he appears, and one (without doubt) who hath been
very instant in this matter. I iew him that the queen and earl
of Leicester had desired to speak with me in private, and craved
his opinion ; he gave it freely that he tho't it nceteft; I shew
him the reason why I communicate that to him, for that I had
been fufpe&ed by ome of her majesty's friends i France to
have done evil offices in her service, that he flsould be my wit-
ness that my earnest dealing in this flould be a sufficient tefti-
mony that all was lyes, and that this knave Nauc who now had
betrayed her, had in that done evil offices; he dcfired me, sec-
ing the saw only with other folks eyes, that I hflould no ways
impute it to her, for the like flie had done to himself by Naue
his persuasion, I answered he flould be my witnefi in that.

TH E 9th iay we sent to court to crave audience, which we

got the loth day; at the first, flie said a thing long looked for
Slould be welcome when it comes, I would now fee your ma-
fter's offers. I alnfl red, no man makes offers but for some
cause; we would, and like your majesty, first know the caule
to be extant for which we offer, and likewise that it be uxtant
till your mnnjcfty has heard us. I think it be extant, yet, but I
will not promise for an hour, but you think to flift in that fort.
I answered we mind not to IAift, but to offer from our sovereign
all things that with reason may be; and in fpeciall, we offered
as is flt d own in our general, all was refused and tho't nothing,
S.c called on the three that were in the hour;, the earl of l.ci-

cefter,

ritr. rmy lord admiral, and chamberlain, and very efrpite-
tul!y rtppcatcd all our offers in presence of them all. I opened
the iaft part and said, Madam for what respeCt is it that men
teal againi your person or estate for her cause ? She anlieled,
bccauft they think ilie lliall succeed to me, and for that he is
a papit ; appearingly said I both the causes may he removed,
she laid Ihe would be glad to understand it. If Madam, said I,
all that fle has of right of fuccetlion were in the king our fove-
reign's perlbn, were not all hope of papists removed ? She an-
fw.ered I hope so. Then Madam I think the queen his mother
llall willingly demit all her rights in his person. She answered
ile hath no light, for the is declared unable. Then I said, if
ilre have no right, appearingly the hope ceases already, so that
it is not to be feared that any man attempt tor her. The queen
answered, but the papilts allow not our declaration ; then let
it fall, fays I, in the king's person by her allignation. The earl
of Leicetler answered, She is a prilbner, how can ffie demit ?
I antivered the demilfion is to her son, by the advice of all the
si lends flie has in Europe, and in cafe, as God forbid, that any
a.ttempt conttit the queen here away, who shall party with her
to prove the demiflion or aflignation to be ineffetual her son,
being opposite party and having all the princes her friends for
him having bonded for the efficacy of it with his majesty of be-
fore ? The queen made as flie could net comprehend any mean-
ing, and fir Robt. opened the matter again, he yet nade as tho'
flie undertlood not. So the earl of Leicecfr answered that our
meaning was, that the king ihould be put in his mother's place.
Is it so, the queen answered, ten I put rnyfif in a worse cafe
than of before; by God's paflion, that were to cut my own
throat, and for a dutchy, or an earldomr to yourself, you or
such as you v.culd cause foime of your desperate knaves kill me.
No. by God, he liall never be in that piace. I anfrvcred he
craves nothing of your Imajeifv but only of his mother. The
earl of Leiccfter allverred that were r e

to ile hin party to the

queen my miltrels. I liidl, he v.';il ;Ic tar :lire partv, if he bc
in her place thro' her death. S!he wot!d ft: v no longer, but
laid lle would not have a worle in hli; :otier's place. And
frid, tell your king what good I have done for hinl; in holding
the criwn on his head fiic he was born, and that I mind tn
keep he league tat row lv lnd between us, ad if lie break it
lihall be a double flrult, and witlh tIis i'indtd to have biddcn
us a farewe !: but we efcl;euit. And I !f'pea craving of her
that ther lifie nlay be sp;aed ftr i g days; fle refilfed. Sir
Robt. craved ftr only eight days, ihe lilit! not foran hlour;
and so geid her away. Your niajcfty fees we have delivered all
we had for offers, but all is for nothling, for Ihe and her coun-
cel has laid a tetermination that thaey mind to follow forth, andl
I fee it comes rather of heici council that hcrfelf, which I like

the

the worse; for without doubt, fir, it fliall cut off all friendllip
ye had here. Altho' it were that once they had meaned well
to your najefly, yet remembring themselves, that they have
iledled with your mother's blood, good faith they cannot hope
great good of yourself, a thing in truth I am sorry for ; further
your majesty may perceive by this last discourse of that I pro-
ponit, if they had nmaned well to your lajelly, they had used
it otherwise than they have done, for realbn has bound them.
But I dare not write all. I mind something to speak in this
matter, because we look iurly our letters iliall be troucit by
the way.

So . that I fee private credit nor no means can alter their de-

termination, altho' the queen again and the earl of Leicester
has desired to speak with me in particular; I mind not to speak,
nor shall not; but assuredly fliall let all men fee that I in parti-
cular was no ways tyed to England, but for the rclpeca of your
majelty's service. So albeit,.at this time, I could not etfetuate
that I desircd, yet my upright dealing in it hall be manifeted
to the world. We are, God willing, then to crave audience,
where we mind to ue lharply our inftrutions, which hitherto
we have used very calmly, for we can, for your honour's cause,
fay no less for your majesty, than the French ambassador has
said for his master.

So I pray your majesty confider my upright dealing in your

ferv'ce, and not the etYect, for had it been double by any I
might have here had credit, but being I came only for that cause
I will not my credit shall serve here to any further purpose. I
pray God prcferve your nmajefty and fend you a true and sincere
friendlhip. From L.ondon this I 2th of Jan. 1586.

I U N R S TA ND the queen is to fend one of her own to

your majlfty.
To the right hon. my lord vice chancellor and secretary to his

niajely, firom the master of Gray.

xfih jan. / Y lord, I fend you these lines with this incloscd to his
iHh. an JL. majclly, whereby your lordlhip shall underfhand how

Orginal mattcrs goes here. And before all things I pray your lordship

Itc' n,, fir move his niajely to refpcEt my diligence, and net the effect in
A. i, k. this negotiation, for I swear if it had been for the crown of
Vel. A. England to niyfelf I could do no more, and let not unfriends
fou. i;9, have advanti;lge of me, for the world flall fee that I loved Eng-

land for his majesty's service only. I look fliortly to find your
lordfllip friend as ye made promise, and by God I hall be to you
if I can. Vin. Keith and I desired, if matters had gone well, to
have run a courle that your lordlhip might have here been in
credit and othcis disappointed, but now I will do for you as
fur yl:l'lt' which is to care for no credit here, for in confcienco

they

they mean not honestly to the king our sovereign, and if they
nay, he will go the get his mother is gone or shortly to go,
therefore my lord without all kind of cruple I pray you to ad-
vile him the best is not this way. They lay here, that it has
been said by one who heard it from you, that ye desired not the
king and England to agree, because it would rack the noblemen,
and gave an example of it by king James the fourt, I aniwered
in your name that I was assurcd you never had spoken it. Mr.
Archibald is the speaker of it, who I allure your lordship has
been a poilon in this matter, for they lean very inickle to his
opinion. He cares not, he fays, for at length the king will be
fain to deal this way, either by fair means or neccflity, so that
when he deals this course he is aftured to be welcome ; to set
down all that is pall of the like purposes, it would consume
more paper than I have here, so I defer it to meeting. There
is a new conspiracy alledged against the queen to have been in-
tended, for the French ambassador resident three of his men ta-
ken, but I think in the end it ffiall prove nothing. Mr. Staf-
ford, who is abaflador for this queen in France, is touched
with it, his brother is taken here, always it has done this harm
in our negotiation, that all this council would not move this
queen to meddle with the queen of Scotland's blood, till this in-
vention was found forth. I remit all other things to the in-
closed. We minded to have ent to his majesty a discourse,
which we have set down of all our proceedings since our hither
coming, but we are surely advertized that the bearer is to be
truffant by the way for our pacquets, so that we defer it till our
own coming ; this I have put in a privy part beside the pac-
quet. We ilall I think take leave on Fryday the 3th day,
where we mind exactly to follow the rigour of our inftruAions,
for it cannot stand with the king's honour that we fay less then
the French ainbaffador, which was, le roy mon maiftre ne peult
inoins fair que fe refentir. So that about the 24th I think we
flall, God willing, be at home, except that ome stay come
which we look not for. The queen and the earl of Leiceftcr
has desire to speak with me. I refused save in pretence of my
colleagues, by reason I fee a determination which particular cre-
dit cannot help, and I crave no credit but for that cause. It will
please your lordship retire the inclosed for his majesy and keep
it. So after my service commended to yourself and bedfellow, I
commit you to God. From London the i 2th of Jan. i 586.

zoth J,11
To the king's majesty, from fir Robert Melvill. 1586. An

Original in

T may pleare your majesty, since the direction of our former his own
letters, we had audience, and her majetly appeared to take ha"n(, in

the colled.

our overtures in good part in presence of her council ; albeit no of fir A
offence would take place with them, having taken rfolution to Dick. Vol.

proceed A. fol. 181.

proceed with extremity, not the less it picafed her na jely to de-
fire us to stay for two days on taking our ltave, until 'lie had
advised upon our propositions ; since which time, her iliajelty is
become lmre hard by oIbje letters (as we are inbformed) has
conie from Scotland, making omne hope to believe that your ma-
jelcy takes not this matter to heart, as we know the contrary in
cfftct, nnd had of before removed the like cpinion out of her
majeRy's mind, which by finilicr information was credited, their
reports has hindered our colnnillion, and abuled this queen,
fearing in like manner we lhall be stayed until anwer coine fliom
Scotland by such petion a the:v have intelligence of. And al-
beit that it will be .ell enough known to all men how heavily
your miajctly takes thlefi proceedings to heart, the truth is, that
lhey have by this occasion so prfuaded the queen, that it is like
ro hinder our negotiation. As allb Allynour Stewart is to he
(iircced in their party, by our knowledge, who has awantvt
more of his credit, than I believe he may perform, and we willed
him to defilt from this dealing, faying it docs harm, and he is
not meet for that purpoe, remitting to your majesty's good di-
rclion to take order herein as we ihall be answerable to yout
niajefty not to oii!il any point we have in charge, as the truth
is, the mailer of Grhaye has behaved hiiiflif very rightly and
silreetly in this chinrge, and evil tayne .ith be divers in their
parties who were of befole his friends. We have been behald-
ing to the menflrals who ha born us belt company, but has
not been troubled with others. Vyizcee Kethe hath left no-
thing undone that he had in charge. As for maftcr Archibald
lie has pronilied at all times to do his dewoyr, wherein ihe fl;ail
find true report made to your n!ajelly, craving pardon of ynur
nmajety that I have been so tedious, after I have kiied your ma-
jelfy's hanm I humbly take my leave. Praying Gd to grant
your majelty many good days and happy, in whole potecion I
comiMit your niajefty; at London, the 20th of Jan. 1 586.

S I R,

A L B E I T Master George has not been in comniifflon, he

is not inferior in his service to any of us, as well by his good ad-
vice and diligent care he takes for the advancement of )cur
service, wherein we have not been a little furthered.
To the king's najefy, from the master of Gray and fir Robert

Melvill.

A:l '1 In T LEA SE it your majelly in the lafl audience we had, ince

(ginilt In r ouil' t avettilinlent, by \Vm. Munray, we find her ln.a-
:tce col. jelly at the rellining ou offers fcnllthing mitigated. and inclined
iQa nrof r to coalhltl Rore doelly o' tiln:, btcaufe'we got 'ut !utre, at
A. Li(.V..
Vl. A. o
;.! 18e

our reasoning, certain of the council, namely my lord of Lei-
ccller, fir Christopher Haton, my lord Hunfdon, and my lord
Hawart being present in the chamber, gave little fliare of any
great contentment to have her front her former resolution, now
callin in perplexity what fle fould do, always we left her in
that state, and since have daily pressed conferrence with the
whole council which to this hour we have not yet obtained.
This day we have sent down to crave our leave. The greatest
hinder which our negotiation has found hitherto is a persuasion
they have here that either your majesty deals uperficially in this
matter, or that with time ye may be moved to digest it, which
when with great difficulty we had expugnit, we find anew that
certain letters written to them of late from Scotland has found
rome place of credit with them in our contrare. So that refolv-
ing now to clear them of that doubt by a special message, they
have made choice of Sir Alexander Stewart to try your highness's
meaning in it, and to persuade your allajefty to like of their pro-
ceedings, where from no terror we can fay out unto him is able
to divert him, he has given out that he has credit with your
majesty, and that he doubts not to help this matter, at your
highness's hand. If he come there that errand, we think your
majesty will not oversee the great disgrace that his attempts flall
give us here, if he be not tane order with before that he be fur-
ther heard, and if so be that any other be direced (as our in-
telligence gives us there fliall) our humble suit is to your majesty,
that it may please your highness to hear of us what we find
here, and at what point we leave this matter with her majesty,
before that they find accidence, the causes whereof remitting to
our private letters. We commit your majesty for the present
to God's eternal protection. From London this 2 ft of Jan.
1586.

ADDITIONAL

# ADDITIONAL APPENDIX.

A D D I T I O N A L

APPENDIX.
I/ ,al no opportiily .f /'eitg si eral of tie folloii'g pptr.s,

till /vl/(' ji.''t o t/e /'/ij;iy, to Wu/'/i,'L thley rc/ltc, 'zL te

rint'rli Off: for tlis rtI/Obn no rIeftrlries are nlie to to em
therc; but 1h,,ve J, ',Jlih/! tlhatt iSeJi. ,

bL mr'tingR tbhe ,zari-

cul,,' ptllges in t /ijl'/ 'i, /i e
tty v to i.!lJ,'r .

No. XXXI. (Vol. 1. p 236. line z9.)
Account of the sentence f a divorce betweer. the carl of Both

well and lady Jean Gordon his wifi. Froin a maniulcript
belonging to Mr. David Falconar, advocate. Fol. 455.
U POUN the 29 of Apryle 1567, betore the richt hon.

Mr. Rolert Ma;:itl:nie (can of A.be-dene, Mr. Edv.ard

-lcnryfon dottor in the ltv;:s, two of the fllnators of the
college of justice, Mr. Clelient Little, and ?lir. i.lexandet
Symle advocatis, comiinifers of Ediir. uomnperci Mr. Henry
Kinrofle, procurator for lean Gourdoune countcs of Botlhwell,
constitute he her for pulfcv.wi; g of ane proces of d;ivorcecnlt,
intendit by her contra amines carle Bothwell her husband fcr
adultry, coninitted be ilil with I3eeie Cr;itifurde, the purtlerl.
ferua:t for the time ; and ficklyke, for the ftid car!e, con;peIr-
ed Mr. Edmond Hay, who efier he had puriLed anid ca:,ed
the purfcwar's procuritor's oath de caluninia, if he had jull
caus to purfew the said ation, and obtained it, denvy the libell.
:;nd the said Mr. Harrie took the miorne, tie Ill 'aiV o fAni Ic,
ro prove the fime pro prima. Tl'e qiuhilk tldy, liaving producedi
ilile witnesses, he took ihe next day, being the of May, to
do farther diligence. Upon the quhilk of May, he pro-
duced lfbe iloe wirnefl.s, and renounced farther proatioune
After quhilk, he delired a term to be alligned to pro::ounce fen-
tence. To whom the fid cominfilars alligned S:tterdav ncx'.
t:e 3 of M;ay, to pronounce lientnce therein, licundunm ::!i-
zata et probata, (uiilk accordingly was given that day in ti-
vuur of the pilrfew:!.

A r the hfalle itile tlhere wvas another proces intendit be t!:e

earl of BJcthwell collta I l ld'y, lbr to have their marriage d;'-
ckl:rcd nuil, as being ontradtdcl againll the c.anons, without H
dt'!e'.atiut, ':nld hCe ti'd 'li'i ld y
b.rL:g withini dreite, !def.endand,

vizt'rdii

vizferdis a kin, and that wyfe for expeding of this proces, there
was a coiiiiuiluone grantit to the archbishop ofSt. Androis to
cognoce and determine it, and Rot bilhop of Dunkeld, William
bilop of Dunblane, Mr. Andro Craufurd chanon in Glasgow,
a".d parson of Egelflhalle, Mr. Alexander Creightoun, and Mr.
George C(,ok chancellor of Dunkeld and to Mr. Johne Mau-
derftoun chanon in Dunbar and prebend:a of Pcltoune, or any
ane of them. This colnimillione is darit 27 Aprile 1567, was
prelinted to two of the saids coniniliioners, viz. NMr. Andr.
Crawfurd and Mr. John lMardcrftoune on Satterday 3 May, by
Mlr. Thomns Hcphurl:e parlon of Auldhamftocks, procurator
for the erle of Bothwel, who accepted the delegatioune, and
gave out their citation by pr-cept, direced, Decano Chriftia-
nitates de Hadingtone, nec non vicano feu curato eccle. par-
rochie de Crechtoune, feu cuiqu(nq; alteri cappellano debite
requilitis, ser funilioning at the said erles instance, both of the
lady personally if he could be had, or otherways at the pa-
rofche kerk of Creichtoune the time of service, or at her dwel-
ling place before witnesses, primio, fecundo, tertio, et perem-
tone, unico taumen contextu protuplice edicto. And likeways
to be witneflies in the said matter, Alex. biflop of Galloway,
who did marry the fitid erle and his lady, in Halereud-houfe
kirk, in Feb. 1565, fir John Bannatyne of Auchnoule justice
clerk, Mr. Robert Creichtoun of Elliot the queen's advocate,
Mr. David Chalmers provot of Creichtoune and chancellor of
Ross, Michael -- abbot of Melrofs, and to compear before
the said judges, or any one of them in St. Geils kirk in Ednr.
on Monday the 5 of May. be thamfelves, or their procurators.
Upon the said 5 day, Mir. John Mauderftoun, one of the
juges delegat only being present compeared the fame procura-
tors for both the parties that were in the former proces, Mr.
Edinond Hay ( articulatlie ) and some Two word
of the witnesses umniloned produced, and received for proving renthefia
of the fame. The said procurator renounced farder probati- illegible.
oune, and the judge afligned the uorne, the 6th of May, ad pub-
licanduin produ&a, nenipe depositiones ipfbrum teftium. The
quhilk day, post publicatas depositiones pradieas, Mr. Hen.
Kinroife, procurater for the lady instanter objecit objeeiones
juris generaliter, contra pro duic, infuper renunciavit ulteri-
ori defenfioni ; proinde conclufa de confenfu procuratorum hinc
inde caufa, judex pradidtus Rfatuit craftinunl diem pro termina,
ad pronunciandani fuami fententiinm definitul:iin, ex deducis co-
ral eo, in prefenti caufa et procefia. Conform hereunto, on
Wednesday tle 7th of May, the said judge gave out his fen-
tence in favour of the erle, declaring tle marriage to be, and to
have been nl tfrom the beginning, in relfep of their contin-
gence in blood, which hindered teir lawful marriage without
a difpenfition obtained of beoir.

Vo 11 0 No. XXXII

No. XXXII. (Vol. 1. p. 251, line 29.)

Queen Mary to queen Elizabeth.

MV A D A M,

Cott. Lib. ALTHOUGH the necefityof iy cause (which maketh
Cl. i. A f lme to be importune to you) do make you to judge that
opy', bd I am out of the way ; yet such as have not my paflion, nor the
tranila- respects whereof you are persuaded, will think that I do as nm
tion. cause doth require. Madam, I have not accused you, neither

in words, nor in thought, to have used yourself evil towards me.
And I believe, that you have no want of good underflanding, to
keep you from perfwafion againfi your natural good inclination.
But in the mean time I can't chufe (having my fenies) but per-
ceive very evil furtherance in my matters, since my coming hi-
ther. I thought that I had sufficiently discoursed unto you the
difcommodities, which this delay bringeth unto me. And cfpe-
cially that they think in this next n;onth of August, to hold a
parliament against me and all my servants. And in the mean
time, I am stayed here, and yet will you, that I flould put ny-
self further into your country, (without feeing you) and remove
me further fioml mine; and there do me this dilhonour, at the
request of my rebels, as to fend commifioners to hear themn
againfi me, as you would do to a mere subject, and not hear nre
bymouth. Now, madam, I have promised you to come to
you, and having there made my moan and complaint of these
rebels, and, they coming thither, not as poffeflfrs, but as sub-
jeets, to answer, I would have besought you to hear my jufti-
fication of that which they have falfeiy set furth against mie,
and if I could not purge myself thereof, you miigh* then dif-
charge your hands of my causes, and let me go for luch as I am.
But to do as you fay, if I were culpable I would be better ad-
vised; but being not so, I can't accept this dishonour at their
hands, that being in pofflefion they will come and accuse me
before your commiflioncrs, whereof I can't like: And feeingyou
think it to be gainft your honour and confignage to do other-
wife, I beseech you that you will not be mine enemy, until you
may fee how I can discharge myself every way. And to susser
mDe to go into France, where I have a dowry to maintain me ;
or at the least to go into Scotland, with assurance that if there
come any strangers thither, I will bind myself for their return
without any prejudice to you, or if it pleis you not to do thus,
I protest that I will not impute it to falflood, if I receive ftran-
gers in my country, without making you any other discharge
tor it. Do with my body as you will, the honour or blame
ihall be yours. For I had rather die here, and that my faith-
ful servants nly be succourcd (tho' you wou'd not so) by ftran-

gers,

gert, than to fifler them to be utterly undone, upon hope to re-
ceive, in time to cone, particular commodity. There be many
things to move nle to fear thatl hall have to do, in this country,
with others, than with you. But forasmuch as nothing hath fol-
lowed upon my last moan, I hold my peace, happen what may

abide )
happ. I have as eef to my fortune, as to seek it, and

endrtie

not fid it. Further it pleated you to give licence to my sub-
jcds to go and come. This hath been rfufed by my lord
Scrocp ai.d Mr. KloUls (as they fly) by your commandment, be-
cauffe I would not depart hence to your charge, untill I had an-
fwer of this letter, tho' I l ewed them that you required my
anrfwir, upon the two points, contained in your letter.

TH F one is to let you briefly underfiand, I am come to you

to makc my mloan to you, the which being heard, I would de-
clare unto you mine innocency, and then require your aid, and
fLr lack thereof, I can't but make my noan and complaint to
God, that I am not heard in my jufi quarrel, and to appeal to
other princes to have refpeet thereunto, as my cafe requireth;
and to you, madam, firfl of all when you flhall have examined
your conscience before him, and have him for witness.-
And the other, which is to come further into your country, and
not to colme to your pretence, I will esteem that as no favour,
but will take it for the contrary, obeying it as a thing forced.
In the uean time, I beseech you, to return to me mylord Her-
ries, for I can't be without hhil, having none of my counsel
here, and also tQ susser nle, if it please you, without further
delay, to depart hence whithersoever it be out of this country.
I a sure you will not deny me this fmiple request for your ho-
nour's fake, eeing it doth not please you to use your natural
goodness towards me otherwise, and feeing that of mine own
accord, I am come hither, let me depart again, with yours.
And if Gcd permit my caults to succecd well, I ffiall be bound
to you for it; and happening otherwilie, yet I can't blame you.
As for my lord Fleming, feeing that upon my credit you have
fulfered him to go home to his house, I warrant you he flall
pal's no further, but fiall return when it fliall please you. In
that you trust min(, I will not (to die for it) deceive you. But
fi'omr Dumbarton I answer nor, when my L. Fleemling fliall be Per'hap
in the tower. For they which are within it, will not forbearer'
to receive succour, if don't allure them of yours; no, tho'
you would charge me withal, for I have left them in charge, to
have more refpct to my servants and to nlly cltate, than to my
life. Good filler be of another niind, win the heart, and all
flall be yours, and at your conulandment. I thought to satis-
fy you wholly, if I might have seen you. Alas I do not as the
lerpcnt, that floppeth hTis hearing, for I am no enchanter, but
your filerr, and nalllal coutfin. If Cafar had not disdained to

Q, 2 hear

hear or read the complaint of an advertiser, he had not so died;
why flould princes ears be stopped feeing that they are painted
so long ? Meaning that they flould hear all and be well ad-
vised, before they answer. I am not of the nature of the bali-
lifk, and less of the chanelion, to turn you to my likeness, and
tho' I lhould be so dangerous and curs'd as men fay, you are
fufliciently armed with constancy and with justice, which I re-
quire of God, who give you grace to use it well with long and
happy life. From Carlile, the 5thofJuly, 1568.

No. XXXIII. (Vol. I. p. 252. line 35)
A letter from my lord Herries to my lord Scroop, and fir F.

Knollis, September 3d, 1568.

Colt. Lib. I Y lords, pleafit your honourable lordlhips, I am infor-'
An 1orii- 1 V mit by James Borthwick, lately come from the queen's
nal in his majesty your foverane, that it is fchawin to her highness, I thuld
ovn haad. have ridden in Crawfurdmure, fen my last cumning into this

realm, upon the earl of Murray's dependants. And that I fuld
have caufit, or been of counfall to Scottifmen to have ridden in
Ingland, to flay or fpulzie her iiajefty's fubjeas.

MY lords, I thought it right needful because your lordfliips

is, be your foverane, commanded to attend upon the queen's
majesty my mmiftrefs, so having daily access in thir matters, to
declare upon the truth; humbly desiring that your lordfliip's
will, for God's cause, certificate the queen your foverane the
fame.

As God lives, I have neither confcntcd, nor any wife had

knowledge of ony Scottisman's ryding in England, to do the
fubjeEs thereof hurt in bodies or goods, fence the siege of
Leith; and as I understand it flall be fund true, that gif ony
sic open hurt be done, it is by the queen my sovereign's dif-
obedicnts, and that I have not ridden nor hurt no Scottifiman,
nor commanded any hurt to be done to them, fen my coming
from the queen's majesty of England, it is well kend, for that
never ane will complain of me.

I H A V E done more good to Crawfurdmure nor ever the

earl of Murray has done, and will be loatheft to do them any
harm than he will. Except the queen's majesty's your ove-
reign, command sic false reports to be tryit, quereof this is al-
togidder inventit leafing, her grace fall be trublit, and tyne the
hearts of true men here, quhom of ic report fall be made,
that haith would serve hir, and may, better than they unwor-
thy liars.

MY lords, I understand the queen's majesty your sovereign

is not contented of this bruit, that there fliould only Frenchman
come in this rcalnl, with the duke of Cattlerault. Truth it

is,

is, I am no manner of way the counfall of their cuming, nor
has no sic certainty thereof, as I hear by Borthwick's report
from the queen's majesty your overeign. And gif I might as
well fay it, as it is true indeed, her gracefelf is all the wyitt,
and the counfall that will never let her take order with my
naitrefs caute. For that our sovereign havand her majesty's
promise, be writing, of luff, friendship, and aflftance gif need
had so requirit, enterit that realm, upon the 16 day as May,
fin that tile the queen's majesty has commanded me diverse
times to declare fle would accept her cause, and do for her, and
to put her in peaceable possession of this realme, and when I
required of her majesty, in my maiftrefs name, that her high-
ness wold either do for her, (as her special trust was she wold)
according to her former promises, or otherwise gif her coun-
fal wold not content, as I flow her grace I sand diverse repug-
nant) then that flie would permit lar to pass in France, or to
some other prince to seek support, or failing hereof, (quhilk
was agains all reason) that fli; would permit her to'return in her
awin countrie, in sic fempil manner as file came out of it, and
said to her majesty an of thir, of her honour, would not be
refufit, fecand that he was coned in her realm upon her writ-
ings and promiles of fricndflip. And ficklike, I said to her
highness, gif my maiftrefs had the like promise of her nobility
and estates, as She had of herself, I should have reprovit them
highly, gifthay had not condefcendit to one of thir three, and
fol fay, and so I write, that in the world it hall be maift repre-
hendable, gif this promie taketh not other good effect, nor yet
it does. Notwithstanding, I get gud answer of thir promises
of friendship made to my overeign, and to put her grace in this
her awin countrie peaceably, we have fund the contrary work-
ing by Mr Middlemore, dircdit from her highness to taiy the
army that cruift down our houses. And alfua, in the preceding
of this late pretended parliament, promised twenty days before
the time to myself to have caused it been difchargit. And yet
contrary to this promise, have they made their pretendit manner
of forlaulture of 31 men of guid reputation, bishops, abbotis,
and barronies, obedient fubjeds to our sovereign, only for her
cause.

TH E Y have also difponit, fen our sovereign's caufie wns ta-

ken upon hand be the queen's majesty of that realm, an hun-
dred thouiand pounds Scots worth of her awin trtue lilbjerts
gier, under the color of their law, groundit upon their salt,
treasonable, stowing, authority.

TI E murders, the oppreflions, the burnings, the ravifling

of women, the dcferution of policy, both ecclcfiaflical ant
temporal, in this mean time, as in my former writings I aid it
was lamentable to ony christian man to hear of except God git
grace, the profellion of the vangile of efus Chrilt proflellit
be your prince, counfall and realme, be mair myndit, nor the

ga'le

auld mamity that has stand betwixt the realms, many of my
countrymen will doubt in this article, and their pioceedir.gs put
tis my self in fana ll.nmas belief.

No w, nly lords, gif the queen's n:aj.lfy of that realm. upon

quhais promile and honour my ainftrcs came there, as I have
said, will leave all the French writings, and French prases of
writings, quhilks amongis theni is over meikle on baith tile
fides unfit, and plainly, according to the auld true cuftoni cf
Ingland and Scotland, quherein be a word promilt truth was
obierved, promnife, in the name of the eternal God, and upon
the high honour of that nobill and princely blude of the kings
of Ingland, quhereof he is dcfcendit, and presently weals the
diadem, that fie will put my maiftrefs in her awin country, and
cause her as queen thereof in her authority and ftrengtr t, he
obeyit, and to do the fame will appoint an certain day within
two months, at the firtheft, as we undeiftand this to be our
weill, fua will we, or the maill part of us all, follow upon it,
leaving the Frenchmen, and their evil French phrases togiddcr.
And therefore, and for the true perpetual fricndfliip of that
realm, will condition, and four our part, with the grace of Al-
mighty God, keep sic heads and conditions of agreement, as
noble and wife men can condescend upon, for the weill of this
haill island. As I have been partlingc declaring to the queen
your fovcrcign, quhilk I llscw to your lordlhips felfis both in
religion, in the punihntent of the earl Bothwile, for the queen's
last hulband's slaughter, and for a mutual band of amity perpe-
tually to remain amangis us.

Do u T L F. s5, nmy lords, without that, we nay find sic

time and fiiendful working, as may gif us occasion baith to for-
gette Middlemorc and this late pcten(lit parliament, we will
turn the leaf, leaving our fovercign agains our will to relt where
she is, under the promnife of fiiendilip. As I have baith said,
and will ever affirm, made be your sovereign, quhilk was only
cause of her graces coming in that realine, and seek the help
and mnven of French, or Spanish, till expulfe this treafi;nable
and false pretendit authority, quhilk means to reign above us.

MY lords, I desire yourlordfliips confider, that it is he, that

maift desires th anily betwixt Ingland anl Sctlard to conti-
nue, and of a po!r man bell canult has, that writs this.

M Y brother, the laird of Skirling, fclhaws iie, that in your

lordihips communing with him, it appearit to him, your nind
vas we iold fuRfrr tilecarl of Murray to work, altho' it were
agains reason to us, and comiplain thereof to the queen's nmajley,
and her highness wald fee it reformit. M, lords, her majesty
will be over meiklr troublit to reform hlle wranges .we have
fufainit already For I am lire, gifreafon and juilice nyhave
place, our mailireti, and we her lbjeds, have received exprcfs
wrang, far above two hundred thoulhnd pounds sterling, in the
time of this unhappy governmcnt, eeing tie refonnation of fa

grea t

great causes, comes, now a days, so flowlie, and the ungodly
law of oblivion in sic matters o ineikle praEtis'd, I think, now-
ther for the queen's honour, nor our weill, your lordships would
fua mean, nor that it is good to us to follow it. And that ye
will give your sovereign lic advertisement thereof asyour good
wildomns hall find in this caule meet. It will be true and
friendfnl working for us, indeed, and nowther French phraes,
nor boast ng, and finding little other effeft, that will cause us
to hold away the Frenchmlen. This is plainly written, and I
desire your lordllhips plain answer, for in truth and plalnnefs
langeft continues gud friendillip, quhilk in this matter I pray
God may lang continue, and have your lordships in his keep-
ing. Off Dumfreis, the 3d day of September 568.

Your lordships at my power

to command leifully

H E R R I S.

Queen Mary to QL Elizabeth.

A DA M E ma bonne foeur. J'ay refceu de vos lettres, 27 Aug.

IM d'une mefine date; 'une, ou vous faites mention de 568.
I'excufe de Monfr. de Murra pour tenir son pretendu parlement, ott. Lib.
qui me feinble bien froid, pour obtenir plus de tollerance que je original.
m'eftois perfuadee n'avoir par vo(tre promefle, quant a n'ofer
donner commiflion de venir fans un parlement pour leur peu de
nombre de noblefle alors, je vous refpons, qu'ils n'ont que trois
ou quatre d'avantage, qui euffent autfi bien dit lcur opinion
hors de parlement, qui n'a este tenu tant pour cette effect,
mais pour fair ce qu' expreflement nous avions requis cftre em-
pefchcs, qui eft la forfalture de mes fubjefts pour m'avoir ctfes
fidelles, ce que je m'affurois, jufques a hier, avoir eu en pro-
niefie de vous, par la lettre ecrite a mi lord Scrupe Maiftre
Knoleis vous induire a ire contre eulx, voire, a les enfavre re-
fentir; toutefois je vois que je l'ay nial pris, j'en fuis plus mar.
rie, pour cc que fur votre lettre qu'il me niontrcrent, et leur pa-
role, je l'ay si divulguement afluray lue pour vengeance clue
j'en defiraffe, si non mettre difference entre leur faux deporte-
mens, et les miens inceres. Dans voftre lettre auli datde du
onme d'Aouft, vous mettie ccs mots. " I think your adverse
"party, upon my sundry former advices, will hold no parlia-
" ment, at all ; and if they do, it lhall be only in form of an
"assembly, to accord whom to fend into this realm and in
"what fort; for otherwise, if they hall proceed in manner of
"a parliament, with any at of judgment against any perfbr,

"I flall not, in any wife, allow thereof; and if they fliall b
" o overseen, then you may think the fame to be of no ohci

moment, than the former procedures : and by such their ra fl

"manner of proceeding, they shall most prejudice thenmfilves
" and be affurod to condemn them, in their oings." Sun

q1oy,

quoy, j'ay contremiande mes erviceurs, les fiifrint re!irer, Ioif-
frant felon oftre commnandelment d'etre faleTnilet noii.il.s
traitres, par ceulx, qui le font ie vra; ct encore d'etre pro-
voques par efcarnons dies, t par princes de nies gens et let-
tres, et au contraire vous etes infcrilec que nies iubj-cts ot
evahis les voltres, Madame qui a fait ce rapport n'est pas horn-
nie de bien, car laird Serford et son fils font et ont eftes mes re-
belles depuis le commencement; enquires vous, s'ils n'eftoient
a Donfris aveques eulx, j'avois ori refpondre de fa frontiere,
ce qui me fut refute ce qui in'eldevroit afies defcharger, near-
moins, pour vous faire pleuve de ma fidelit, et de leur falfite,
s'il vous me fayte donner le norl des coulpables, et me fortifier,
je commanderay mes fubjeRs les pour lilivre, ou si vous voules
clue ce foit les voflres, les miens leuraydleront; jc vous plie
m'en mander vofire volonti, au refte nies fibjes fidelles feront
refponlablcs a tout ce qti l Icur sera mis fu les contre vous, ni es
volires, ni les reIx( II.. cli-luis qule me confeillates les faihe re-
tirer. Quant aux l;rancois, j'elclrivis que l'on m'en fit nulle
pourfuite, car j'efperois ta;it n ou , ue jc n'en aulris he-
icign,-jc ne fceu si le diet aura en nies lcttres maic, je'vous
jure dcvant Dicu quc je ne fay chore du nonde de leur venue,
quc ce que m'en aves manday, ni n'en ai oui de France mot du
mondc, ct ne lc puis croire pour cect occasion, et si ils si font,
c'rt fans nion fccu ni confentement. Pourquoy je vous luipplie
re me condamner farns n'ouire, car je fuis prefl de tenir tout ce
que j'ay offert a Mclter Kncleis, et vous assure que voftre an:i-
t, u'il vous pleftt i'sErir, f-ra rescue avant toutes les choses
du nionde, quant France fervit nl pour prefrer leur rctour a
ctfce condition, que prenies ies affaires en inein, en foeur, et
lIonne ami, comnime nia France eft en vius; mais une chose
fcule me rende confufc, j'ay tant d'elinis qu'nnt votre oreille,
laquelle nc pouvant avoir par paiolle, toures ncs adions vous
l;nt d'efguifi'es, it falciicnt 'rprlrtees, pr quoi ii Iri'cft inipoi-
fihlc de mi'affurer tic vous, pour le' manteries qu'on vous a fait,
po:r derlmire vofire bolrne vlent de my ; par quloy e desire-
rois hien avir cc bicn vus faire entendre na finlere et honne
a:ffetion, laquclle je nc pis si bien de;rire, quc Ires enenm a
lort ne a decolor,. \M Ininc fceiir, Oni's iioy, ; eCnvov'
inoyV (qlerlr, ii'ctr!ri'. en .jc:. ufle pour fkiui rolts de cllc (qi
nie dfire que vi'trc b'I".nc r ce; je lmIe reICirlra y fur lMefer
Knnleis a liti j Ilme si ;, iletlient delcouv(crt,, et nipres vius
avair baisee Ics Inr.ii, j prieray Dicu vous dnner en Iar'te,
longue ct hculrulf if;. I)e Roron, ou je nouis promi't,
n'cpcre prtir, c(:;i';:vcli( vollire hiine ,mn grce, qunyque les
alenr:.urs entcn;: Cc (J, d' A1IIl.

Nc. X.V

No. XV. (Vol. I. . 316. line 25.)

Letter of Walfinghan's to Randolph, Feb. 3. 153o-i.

S R,
14 AV E received frmn inm lord lieutenant tle copy of your C t. .ib.
letter of thle 2th of the all dileted unto his lonruflip, con- Clisg. c, 6.

taining a report of vour negotiation with te king and his coun-
cil, in your second audience, wherewith having made her nia-
jelly acquainted. he feeined foincwhat to miilike, that you
Ihould so long dlefr io deal for the enlargemcnt of Elupedocles.
But I Inalde anlwer in your behalf, that I thought you were di-
rected by the advice of the said Emipedocles' frionds, in the fol-
liciting of that cause, who knew what time was firttel for you
to take to deal thlrein, with mroll elrct, and befl success, with
which answer, her majet)y did in the end reft very well satisfied,
touching that point.

Y ou t putting of us in hope that D'Auhignv iigt enily be

won at her iajefty's devotion. was at tirft interpreted to have
been ironie spoke by you. But since it l:emcth you infilt upon
it, I could wifl you were otherwile perli-ad(ed of the man, o,
at leaf kept that opinion to yourself. for confidering the end and
purpose ot his coining into Scotland, as may be many ways fiuf-
ficiently proved, was only to advance the queen's liberty, and
reception into that government, to overthrow religion, and to
procure a fireign match with Villenarius, wherein the inclosed
copy, which you may use to good purpose there, flall partly
give you fonle light; there is no mian here can be perfwv. ;ld
that he will change his purpose. fr so filall advantage, as he
is likely to find by it, and th:erfore yzu :hall do well to forhear
to harp any more upon that 'trini , as I .ve already writteli
to you. The prince of (r.inge elindiug, I (.qr will not be ;i
time that it may do any good: for be.ldes th:it thele prople
are in themselves flow in thir rclolutions, their own airs are,
at present, so great. their ttare bs co'uifcl, and the prince's
authiority so finall, that he c:lnnot fc i;,n tra.e orlr in it; and
vyt for mnine own part, I have not b:r?.n ncg!ig.nt (r carelef in
the matter, having, nlore than thr'.e v.,c-;.: p:.tt, flnt one about
it, fiom whom nLvcrtheles I do v.

1 1:car nothing. The let-

ters, y),u desire flould b written thi',ii :,v the Fle'ch ministers,
I have given order t Mr. Killingrew to procure, who, I doubt
not, will carefully p rfrimi it, so that, I hope, I fliall have them
to fend you by the next. And so I cnmmit you to God. At
Whitehall the third of February i 5sn.

Your very !ovilng cousin nd fcvnnr,

FRA. WALSINGHAM.
This letter s an or'igina /, and in fOuIne parts of it wrote in rcyphrs

and explained by another , and. Bv F.n'oedocles is uni/erJlood
Morton, by lVillcnaris tle ki, of co:.s, D'/liubigny is mnaredl
bsus o-l-o 3 Feb.

3 Fb. 58o.
Sundry notes gathered upon good diligence given, and in time

to be better manifested, being now thought mleet to b in
convenient fort used, and laid against D'Aubigny, to prove
him abusing the king, the nobility, and that Itate.

Cot. Lib. T IRS T, it hath been informed, by credible means, that
Calig. C. 6. D'Aubigny was privy and acquainted with la Naue the
An uigi- king's mother's secretary, coming into Scotland, and of his cr-

rand there, tending chiefly to persuade the king, to think and
esteem it an evil president for princes, that fubjeAs might have
power to deprive their lawful sovereigns, as they did his mother,
who was not minded, by any mean, to defeat him, either of the
present government of that realm, or yet of the poffefion of
the crown and inheritance thereof, but rather to assure the fame
to him ; and that for the accomplifliment of that assurance, the
king should have been advised and drawn to have governed, for
some hort time, as prince, calling D'Aubigny to rule as go-
vernor of the prince, by commission from the queen his mo-
ther, untill the king's enemies were suppressed; after which
time, D'Aubigny hould have power given to eftablilh and
resign that kingdom to the king, by his mother's voluntary
consent, whereby all such, as had before been in ation against
the queen or her authority, might be brought to stand in the
king's mercy. And for that the king might live in more surety,
D'Aubigny ihould be declared both second person in succession
of that crown, and also lieutenant-general of Scotland, and
that D'Aubigny, before his departure out of France, received
comminifion from the king's mother to the effets renembred,
or near the lame. That in this behalf he had conference with
the bifliops of Glasgow, and Ross, and with fir James Baford,
with which persons, and with the duke of Guile, he had and
bath frequent intelligence, and by fir James Baford he was ad-
vild to confer with the lord John Hamilton before his repair
into Scotland, whereunto he agreed, and yet afterwards he
tent one John Hamilton, to the said lord John, to excuse him
in this part, a!ledging, that he did forbear to conec to him, left
thereby he inould marr or hinder great-r effets to be executed
by him in Scotland.

I'l A r before his coming into that realm, the nobilirv nd

country were well quieted and united in good concord, with
great love betwixt the king and nobility, and amongst the no-
bleirc, but he hath both drawn the king against undry of the
chifet of his nobility, that have been most ready, and have ex-
pended their blood and pofrffions to prefcrve religion, and de-
tend the kin 's peron, his government and estate, and also hath
given occaions of great ufpicions and offence to be engen-

dered

titrtd betwixt the king and his nobility, and efpeciallywith such
i have ibeen in ation aginl the k;ng's mother, and her au-
t;lori:y, Vho by torce and mcans of the aid commiiTion And
practice, !houid have been brought into molt dangerous condi-
t:)n ; ad who aiio may lind th-nfclves in no finall perril, whiles
lie po:felcs the king's ear, abulcth his presence, and holdeth
fucn of the principal keys and ports of his realme, as he prc-
ILotly enjoyeth.

T H r lie hath drawn the king, not only to forget the great

benefits done to him and his realnm, by the queen's majesty of
England, but also to require the fame with sundry signs of great
unitnankfuincl's, an:d wounding therewith the honour of hernia-
jelly, and thereby hath adventured to flike the happy amity
long time continued betwixt those princes.

A N D whereas theli griefs were to be repaired by gentle let-

ters and good offers, to have passed, and been done betwixt
them in which refpet, the king and council having resolved
to write to her majeftv, for. her highness' better fatisfacion in
the late negotiation of Mr. Alexander Hume of Northberwick,
had given erder to the king's ftcrctary to fratile that letter : He
minding to break the bond of amity in funder, willed the fecre-
tary to be ure that nothing fliould be inerted in that letter,
whereby the king Ilould crave any thing at her hands, fecking
the:eby to cut oi' all loving courtifics hetw.ixt them, as by the
declaration of the (aid secretary iay be better learned, and
thereupon further approved.

TH AT under tle hope and encouragement of D'Aubigny's

protection, Alexander King prefinicd with that holdnefs to
make his lewd harangue, and by his nlnans hath hitherto cfcap-
ed chaltifemnent and correction, diu for his offence.

T H A 1 frl' Jlames lIaford, c.lIdcincd o:f the fn.lugh er of the

king's father, hath been called into thc rcal:n by I.einri;x, with-
out the privity of the king. And whcrc'; the laid fir James
found in a green velvet dicfk, Inte the earl of otliwell's, and
fiw, and hal ir his han ds the principa l b'rti of the conipira-
tors in that nut;r( r, adl can belt declarr aild witnts who were
authors and executors of the tlite ; lie is drawn by Lennox to
filpprefs the truth, and to accul;i such as he hinillc knoweth
to be innocent; and as hy order of la , will be so found, if
they may have due trial, which, contary to all juilice, is by
Lennox means dni-d.

This is the charse gainji D'.1'Vu/' ti, mentiorted in le fore-

sioing letter by WualJinghami; but /' B'r.l they nman ir Jamc
lBalfour.

No, XVI.

No. XVI. (Vol. II. p. 5. line 42.)
The Scottifl qucen's cffers upon the efrfe of her liberty.pro-

poundcd by her secretary Naw, November 15 84.

Coit. Lib. I-rHE queen my nliftrcfs being once well assured of your
Calig. C. 8. majesty's amily.
A copy. I
\ 1. L declare openly that flie will (as it is sincerely her

meaning) ftricly to join unto your niajelv, and to the faiie to
yield and bear the chief honour and relpeCt, before all other
kings and princes in Chriftendol:.

2. S i E will swear, and protest solemnly, a finccre forger-

fiillnes of all wrongs which ihe may pretend to have been done
unto her in this realm, and will never, in any fort or manner
whatsoever, hew offence for the fane.

3. SH E will avow and acknowledge, as well in her own

particularnalme, as also for her heirs, and others descending
of her for ever, your majesty for just, true, and lawful queen
of England.

4. AN D consequently, will renounce, as well for herself, as

for her said heirs, all rights and pretences which ihe may claim
to the crown of England, during your majesty's life, and other
prejudice.

5. S E will revoke all as and flews, by her heretofore

nmade, of pretcnce to this said crown, to the prejudice of your
Mnajety, as may be the taking of the arms and itile of queen of
England, by the colmmandment of king Francis her late lord
and hufhand.

6. SH E . will renounce the pope's bull, for so much as may

he expounded to turn i her fivour, and for her behoof, touch-
irn. the deprivation of your majesty, and will declare tihat lle
ill nrver help and llrvc hcrfclf with it.

SH F iil not prnfeccue, during your mnjc)y'. life, hy open

force or olherways, ary publick declaration of her rig!t in the
lf:cccflion of this rc;lhn, so as fcret affinancL be given unto
her, or at the least publick poniif, that no deciding thereof
lhall be n-ade in the prejudice of her, or of the king her son,
iuring ycur in:ajefy's life, nor after your deccare, untill fich
tline as lhey have been hcrcl thereupon, in pihlick, free, and
general aflenilhy of the por!ina:!enr of the fi:i r nm.

X. S F will not praltice, dilccilv or indiirectl, with nry of

'trur m.ijcfl v' fibjitl, ncitlir ithin nor out of your ralin,
ary th'n; c:ding to war, civil or Foreign, againfl ynur iajefly
an! vnirr e'!'atC hc it under pietext of riligion, or fur civil and
pk';tick govi.'rn ' :t.

H r
Sv will not naintain or support any of your fCihjcts de-
Clired rbeis, a::cd co;:victca o:' treason against vou.

to. SH

lo. S will enter into the aflociation, which was flewed

her at Winglicd for the tilrety of uur najefty's life, tb as there
be mended or right explicated tomec claufcs, which I will hew
to your majefly, when I ill-all have the cupy thereof, as I have
betore time reiniel.

11. SH will not treat with fureign kings and princes, for

any war or trouble againit this state, and will renounce, from
this time, all enterpriils made or to be made in her favour for
that refpet.

i . F u R HE R M R E, this realm being afifiled by any

civil or foreign war, he will take part with your mnjefty, and
assist you in your defence with all her forces and means, de-
pending of herself, and with all her friends in Christendom.

13. AN D to that effect, for the mutual defence and main-

tenance of your nlajeety and the two realms of this isle, he will
enter with your maaj'cfty in a leaguedefenfive, as Ihall be more
particularly advised, and will persuade as much as in her, the
king her son to do the like.

TH leagues with all parts abroad remaining firm, and es-

pecially the ancient league between France and Scotland, in
that which fiall not be against this present.

14. SH E will enter into a league offensive, having good at;

furance, or secret declaration and acknowledgment of her
right in the succession of this crown, and proullife, that hap-
pening any breach betwixt France and this realm, (which Ihe
prayeth God never to happen) the just value of her dowry
-fliall be placed for her in lands of the revenue of the crown.

5. F o R assurance of her promises and covenants, the doth

offer to abide herself in this realm for a certain time, (better
·hostage can fle not give than her own person) which, o as le
be kept in the liberty here before propounded, is not in cafe to
escape secretly out of this country, in the sickly state flie is in,
and with the good order which your majesty can take therein.

16. A N D in cafe your niajefty do agree to her full and whole

deliverance, to retire herself at her will out of this realm, the
laid queen of Scots fle will give llflicient hostage for such time
as will be advised.

17. I F lhe abide in this realm, lhe will promise not to de-

part out of it, without your licence, so as it be promised tuntr
her that her Itate, in such liberty as shall be accorded unto her,
fihall not be in any fort altered, untill after tryall to have at-
tempted against your life, or other trouble of your estate.

18. I Ihe go into Scotland, he will promise to alter no-

thing there in the religion which is now used there, file being
luffered to have free exercile of hers, for her and her houlhold,
as it was at her retlu'n out of France; and further, to pull out
every root of new division between the fubjecs, that none ot
the fubjeEts of Scotlandc fiall be lifted for his conciience, nor
confirained to go to the firvice of the contrary religiun.

19). S r

19. Sri v.:il grant a general abolition of all offences done

agaiit' her in Scotland, and things Illall remain there as they
are at this prelent, for that refpec, saving that which hatlh
been done againlt her honour, which Ile meaneth to have re-
voked and annulled.

20. S will travel to fettle a sure and general reconciliati-

on between te nobility of the country, and to cause to be ap-
pointed about the king her son, and in his council, such as fliall
be lit for the entertainmer.t of the peace and quiet of the coun-
try, and theamity of the realm.

2z. S E will do her bil to content your majesty, in favour

of the Scots lords baniflied and I-itgecd hither, upon their due
fubnliffion to their princes, and oui ijitjcey's prmuiifl to ailitt
the laid queen and king of Scotland againtl then, if they Ilp-
pen to fall into their frler laulis.

22. S will proceed to the ;mrriage of the king her son,
with the advice and good cuJci: of your nmjcfty.

23. As flie will pals i;othi:g without tie king her son, so

doth ile dtfirc that he intcrvenlt conjointly with her in this trea-
ty, for the greater and perlecter allurance thereof; for other-
wil: any thing can hardi be eflablifled to be fiound and continue.

24. TH E laid Scotch queen trufteth, that the French kilg

her good brotiher, according to the good affi:tion which he hath
always ihewed her, ard hath been afref tified unto rue by
Monfr. de Mannifficre for this said treaty, will very willingly in-
tervene, and wUill afiif her for the surety of her proilcs.

25. A N D so will the princes of te house of Lorrain follow-
ing the will of the s.lid king, will bind thnfiilves therc-nto.

26. FR other kings ard princes of Ch;iftendon:, flie will

assay to obtain the like of ten, if for greater solemnity and
approbation of tile treaty it b; found to be ncceflary.

27. S E dotl desire a speedy answer, and final conclusion

of the premifles, to the end to meet in time with all inconveni-
encles.

28. AN D in the mean time, the more to irengthen the siid

treaty, as made by her of a pure and frank will, file defireth
that demonstration be made of fonle releafement of her cap-
tivity.
Obje&ions againit the Scottifli queen, under secretary Walfmng-

ham's hand, November 1584.
T HE queen of Scots is arnbitious, and flandeth ill assetcd

to her uaijefty, and therefore it cannot be but that her
liberty fnould bring peril unto her majesty.

THnAT herenlargeOment will give comfort to papists, and o-

ther ill affeEted fubjets, and greatly advance the opinion had of
her title as fucceff9r.

THAT

Tn AT as long as ile hall be continued in hermajefty's

pofltlion, flie may serve as it were a gage of her majesty's
luitrty, for that her fiiends, for fear of the danger file may be
thrown into, in cafe any thing iliould be done in her favour,
dare not attempt any thing in the offence of her majcfty.
November. What cou.! i were fit to be taken with the queen

1584. S of Scots, -ither to be enlarged or not.

HE course to be taken with the aid queen may be confi-Cott. Lib.
dcred of in three degrees ; either, Cal. 8.

i. To continue her under custody in that state she now is.
2. To rcftrain her of the present liberty flie now hath.
3. OR to et her at liberty upon caution.
I. To U c H I N G the first, to continue her under custody un -

der that state fle now is; it is to be confidered, that the princes
that favour that queen, upon the complaint he maketh of hard
usage, are greatly moved with conmniferation towards her, and
promise to do their endeavour for her liberty, for which pur-
pose, her ministers follicit them daily.

AN D to move them the more to pity her cafe, she acquaint-

ed them with her offers made to her majesty, which appeared
to be no lets profitable than reasonable for her majesty, so as
the refusal and rejecting giveth her friends and favourers cause
to think her hardly dealt withal, and therefore may, with the
better ground and reason, attempt somewhat for the setting of
her at liberty

IT is also likely that the said queen, upon this refusal, find-

ing her cafe desperate, will continue her practice under hand,
both at home and abroad, not only for her delivery, but to at-
tain to the present poffefion of this crown upon her pretended
title, as she hath hitherto done, as appeareth, and is most ma-
nifeft by letters and plots intercepted, and chiefly by that late
alteration of Scotland, which hath proceeded altogether by her di-
rection, whereby a gap is laid open for the malice of all her
majesty's enemies, so as it appeareth that this manner of keep-
ing her, with such number of perfdhs as flec now hath, and
with liberty to write and receive letters (being duly confidered)
is offensive to the princes, the said queen's friends; rathel
chargeable, than profitable to her majesty; and subjec to all
such pratices as may peril her majesty's person or state, with-
out any provision for her majefly's ftafety, and therefore no way
to be liked of.

2. To u c H I N G te fccond, to restrain herina more traighter
degree of the liberty ihe hath hitherto enjoyed.

IT may, at firt fight, be thought a remedy very apt to fop

the course of the dangerous practices softered heretofore by her:
For, true it is, that this remedy might prove very profitable,

if

if the realm of Scotland flood in that fort devoted to her ma-
jefty, as few years past it did ; and if the king of that realn
were not likely, as well for the release of his mother, as for
the adva'rccinlct of both their pretenlded title, to attempt onme-
vw;iat againit this realm and her nmajelly, wherein he hould
neither lack foreign alfillance, nor a party here within this
realm : But the king and that realm llanding asseted as they
do, this reltraint, inllead of remedying, is like to breed thele
inconveniencies following:

Si K T. It will incrcafe the offerce both in him, and in the
relt of the princes her friendr. that niiiked of her reftrainl.

SE C O N D L Y, It will give them jtl cause to take lome way
of redress.

LASTLY, It is to be doubted that it may provoke sone

delperate ill disposed prfon, all hope of her liberty removed, to
attempt somewhat agninf her iia j-tiy's own person, (a matter
above all others to be weighed) which inconveniency being
duly confidered, it will appear manifestly, that the restraint, in
a straighter degree, is likely to plove a remedy fubjeft to very
hard events.

TH E latter degree whether 'twere fit to set the said queen

at liberty, miniftreth fme cause of doubt, touching the man-
ner of the liberty, in what fort the lalme is to be performed,
whether to be continued here within the realm, or to be reftor-
ed into her own country.

BUT first, this prcpcfition, before the pariicularities be
weighed, is to be confiu:red in generality.

So R it is very hard fr a well affetced subjet, that tendereth

her lnajefiy's surety, and weigheth eithel the nature oi the Scot-
till queen, Ijeing inclined to ambition and revenge, or her for-
mer actions, what practices ihe hath let on foot mofi dangerous
for her maefty and this realm, to allow of her liberty, being
not made acquainted with lich causes, as time hath wrought,
to make it less perilous than it hath been, nor with iuch cauti-
ons as may, in folne fort, be devised to prevent both her abi-
tion and malice ; and therefore to make this apparent,

IT is to be confidered, that the danger that was in the mo-

ther, is nw grown to be in the son. He pretendeth the fame
title she doth: Such as do affeEt her, both at home and abroad,
do aflEtA him ; (and he is the more dangerous for that he is
unmarried, which may greatly advance his fortune, and that he
is a man, whereby he may enter into ation in his own perlon)
where she is restrained, he is at liberty; his own realm is now
altogether at his devotion, and the party tffected to this crnwn
abated; so as the matter duly confidered, neither her liberty
nor retiraint doth greatly alter the cafe for perils towards her
n:ajefty, unless by such pruinifes as niny be nlade by way of

treaty

treaty with her, the danger likely to grow from the king her son
be provided for.

B u T in this behalf it may be objected, that so long as the

mother remains in her majesty's hands, the king will attempt
nothing for fear of his mother's peril.

To this objection it may be answered, first, That they hope

that her majesty, being a prince of justice, and inclined to
n-ercy, will not punish the mother for the son's offence, unless
fle Ihall be found, by good proof, culpable. Secondarily,
That men will not be over-hafty, confidering in what predica-
ment the king standeth touching his expectation of this crown,
to advise any thing that in time future may be dangerous to the
giver of such council as may reach to his mother's peril.

A N D lastly, the taking away of his mother, he being strong

in the field through both foreign alfiftance, and a party here
within the realm, will appear so weak a remedy, (which may
rather exasperate both him, and her party, to proceed with
more courage and heat to revenge, if any such hard measure
fliould be otfered unto her) as they will suppose for the reason
above specified, that no such extremity will be used.

IT may also be objected, that the setting of her at liberty

will greatly encourage the papists both at home and abroad;
but herein, if the provision be duly confidered, that may be
made by parliament both here and there, they hall rather find
cause of discomfort than otherwise.

TH E s E two doubts being resolved, and the perils that was

in the mother appearing mofl manifestly to be seen in the son,
accompanied with more danger, with due consideration had also
of such remedies as may be provided for the preventing of the
dangers, that her liberty may minister just cause to doubt of;
there will be good cause of hope found, that the fame will ra-
ther breed benefit than perils.

N o w it refteth, in what fort the said liberty hall be per-

formed; if it hall be thought meet fle shall be continued with-
.in the realm with ome limitation, especially in that place where
she now refideth, the country round about being so infected in re-
ligion as it is, it is greatly to be doubted that will very much in-
crease the corruption, and falling away in that behalf. Befidas
the should have commodity, with much more ease, and speed,
to entertain pratices within this realm, than'by being in her
own country.

IF abroad freely without limitation either in Scotland or

France, then lhall her majesty lose the gages of her safety, then
shall fle be at hand to give advice in turtherance of such prac-
tices, as have been laid for to stir trouble in this realm, where-
in he hath been a principal party.

Vo. IT. R Fox

So R the first, it is answered before, that the refpe6t of any

perils that may befal unto her, will in no fort restrain her son.
For the other, if it be confidered what harm her advice will
work unto herself, in refpec of the violation of the treaty, and
the provision that may be made in parliament here, it is to be
thought, that she will then be well advised, before fie attempt
any such matter, which now he may do without perill. Be-
fides such princes, as have interposed their faith and promise for
her, cannot without honour aflift her, wherein the French king
will not be found very forward, who, in most friendly fort, hath
lately rejected all such requests, propounded either by her, or
her on's iinifters, that might any way offend her majefy.
And so to conclude, feeing the cause of her grief ihall be ta-
ken away; the French king gratified, who is a mediator for
her, and will mislike, that, by any Spanish pratice, he hould
be drawn to violate her faith ; that the reft of the princes fliall
have no just cause of offence, but rather to think honourably
of her majesty confidering the Scottifli queen's carriage towards
her, which hath deserved no way any lich favour; the noble-
men of Scotland flall be restored, who will be a good flay of
fich counfells as may tend to the troubling of this realm, efpe-
cially having so good a ground of warrant as the parliament to
stand unto ; the charges and perills which her practices might
have bred to this realm fall be avoided ; and laffly, the hope
of the papiffs flall be taken away, by such good provisions, as
in both the realms may be made, whereby the perils that might
fall into her majesty's own person, (a matter of all others to be
weighed) fliall be avoided, when by the change that may grow
by any such wicked and ungodly practice, they fliall fee their
cafe no way relieved in point of religion.
Reasons to induce her majeffy to proceed in the treaty under

Secretary Walsingham's hand.

cott. Lib. H A T such plots as have of late years been devised
calig. C. (tending to the raising of trouble within this realm) have
8. grown from the Scots queen's ministers and favourers, not with-

out her allowance and seeking: Or,

T H A T the means used by the said ministers, to induce prin-

ces to give car'to the said plots, is principally grounded upon
some comminfration had of her refiraint.

Ti A T the flay, why the said plots have not been put in cx-

edution, hath proceeded, for that the said princes have, for
the most part, been entertained with home and domestic trou-
.bles.

Tii A T it is greatly to be doubted, that now their realms

.begin to be quiet, that somewhat will be attempted in her fa-
vours by the said princes.

T"'qI /T'

Tn AT it is also to be doubted, that fomnewhat may be at-

tempted by omei of her fautors in an extraordinary fort, to the
perill of her ilajefty.

TH AT for theprefervation thereof, it lhall ba convenient for

her majety to proceed to the finihling of the treaty, not long
fitlh nce begun between her and the said queen.

No. XVII. (Vol. II. p. 22. line 15.)

A letter from St. Amias Pawlet.

SIR,
D ID

I forbear, according to your direCtions signified in your Origin.

letters of the 4th of this present, to proceed to the execu- Cal. C. 9

tion of the contents of Mr. Waades letters untj you, for the
dilperfing of this lady's unneceflary servants, and for the seasing
of her money, wherein I was bold to write unto you my simple
opinion, (although in vain as it now falleth out) by my letters
of the 7th of this instant, which I doubt not are with you be-
fore this tine ; but upon the receipt of your letters of the Sth,
which came not unto my hands until the 8th in the evening, by
reason as did appear by indorfement, that they had been mifta-
ken, and were sent back to Windsor, after they were entered
into the way towards me, I confidered, that being accompanied
only with my own servants, it might be thought that they
would be intreated to fay as I would command them, and there-
fire I thought good, for my betterdifcharge in these money
matters, to crave the afliftance of Mr. Richard Bagott, who
repairing unto me the next morning, we had access to this
queen, whom we found in her bed, troubled after the old man-
ner with a defluxion, which was fallen down into the fide of
her neck, and had bereft her of the use of one of her hands,
unto whom I declared, that upon occasion of her former prac-
tifes, doubting left fle would perfil therein by corrupting un-
derhand sole bad members of this state, I was exprefly com-
manded o1 take her money into my hands, and to reft anfwera-
bir for it, when it fliall be required ; advising her to deliver the
said money unto me with quietness. After many denials, many
exclamations, and many bitter words against you, (I fay no-
thing of her railing against myself) with flat affirmation that
her majesty might have her body, but her heart fle flhould never
have, refuting to deliver the key of the cabinet, I called my ser-
vants, and ent for barrs to break open the door, whereupon fle
vielded and causing the door to he opened, I found there in the
cofir. mentioned in Mr. Waade's remelmlbrance, five rolls of can-
vas, contailinrg five thousand French crowns, and two leather
bagn:, wllc- f the one had, in gold, one hundred and four

R 7. pounds

pounds two fillings, and the otherhad three pounds in silver,
which bag of silver was left with her, affirming that she had no
more money in this house, and that she was indebted to her

Curle can servants for their wages. Mr. Waades note making mention
tell you the of 3 rolls left in Curie's chamber, wherein, no doubt, he was
matter. misreckoned, which is evident as well by the testimonies and

oaths of divers persons, as also by probable conjetures f o as
in truth we found only two rolls, every of which containeth one
thousand crowns, which was this queen's guifte to Curle's wife
at her marriage. There is found in Naw's chamber, in a ca-
binet, a chain worth by eltimation one hundred pounds, and in
money, in one bag nine hundred pounds, in a econd bag two
hundred fourscore and fix pounds eighteen hillings. All the
foresaid parcells of money are bestowed in bags, and fealed by
Mr. Richard Bagott, saving five hundred pounds of Naw's mo-
ney, which I reserve in my hands, for the use of this houlhold,
and may be repayed at London, where her majesty shall appoint
out of the money, received lately by one of my servants, out of
the Exchequer. I feared left the people might have dispersed
this money in all this time, or have hidden the fame in some fe-
cret corners, for doubt whereof, I had causcd all this queen's
family, from the highest to the lowest, to be guarded in the fe-
veral places where I found them, o as yff I had not found the
money, with quietness, I had been forced to have searched first
all their lodgings, an& then their own persons. I thank God
with all my heart, as for a singular blefling, that that falleth
out so well, fearing left a contrary success might have moved
some hard conceits in her majesty.

T o c H N G the dispersing of this queen's servants, I trust I

have done o much, as may furice to satisfy her majesty for the
time, wherein I could not take any absolute course, until I
heard again from you, partly because her majesty, by Mr.
Waade's letter, doth refer to your consideration to return uch
as (hall be discharged to their several dwellings and countries,
wherein, as it feemeth, you have forgotten to deliver your opi-
nion; partly, for that as yet, I have received no answer from
you, of your resolution, upon the view of the Scottih family
sent untoyou, what persons you will appoint to be difimift; on-
ly this I have done, I have beltowed all such, as are mentioned
in this bill inclosed, in three or four several rooms, as the fame

This lady may suffice to contain them, and that their meat and drink hall
hath good be brought unto them by my servants. It may please you, to

money at advertise me by your next letters, in what fort, and for what

present in course, I hall make their pafrports, as also, if they /hall fay
the French that they are unpaid of their wages, what I flall do therein.
ambtffr. t is said that they have been accustomed to be paid of their
dor' hands. wages at Clriftmas, for the whole year. Her majesty's charge

will

vill be omewhat diminiihed by the departure of this people,
and my charge by this occasion, will be the more easy. But
theperlons, all save Batlian, are such filly and simple fouls, as
there was no great caule to fear their pracices, and upon this
ground, J was of opinion, in my former letters, that all this
dilfiiffed train ihould have followed their mistress, until the
nextremove, and there to have been discharged upon the fud-
den, for doubt that the said remove might be delayed, yf he
did fear, or expeCt any hard neafure.

OT H R S hallexcufe their foolifli pity as they may; but for

n:y part, I renounce my part of the joys of heaven, yf in any
thing that I have said, written or done, I have had any other
refpeet than the furtherance of her majesty's service; and o I
flall mofi earneffly pray you to affirm for me, as likewise for
the not seasing of the money by Mr. Manners, the other com-
milioners and myself. I trust Mr. Waade hath answered, in
all humble duties, for the whole company, that no one of us
did so much as think that our commission reaching only to the
papers, we might be bold to touch the money, so as there was
no speech of that all to my knowledge, and as you know I was
no conimiffioner in this search, but had my hands full at Tyx-
hall, discreet servants are not hastily to deal in great matters,
without warrant, and especially where the cause is such as the
delay of it carrieth no danger.

Y o u advertisement of that happy remove hath been greatly

comfortable unto me. I will not fay, in respect of myself, be-
cause my private interest hath no measure of comparison with
her majetty's safety, and with the quiet of this realm. God
giant a happy and speedy yffue to these good and godly coun-
fels; and so I commit you to his merciful protection. From
Chartley the lothof September 1586.

No. XVIII. (Vol. II. p. 35. line 38.)
Copy of a letter from the earls of Shrewsbury and Kent, &c.

touching their proceedings with regard to the death of the
Scottish queen, to her majesty's council.

T may pleale your honble. good lordships to be advertised,
that, on Saturday the 4th of this prcfent, Robert Beale

came to the house of the earl of Kent in the county of
to whom yourlordfhip's letter and message was delivered, and
her majesty's comnillion hewn ; whereupon I the earl forth-
with sent precepts for the flaying of tlch hues and cries as had
troubled the country, requiring the officers to make fRay of
all such persons, as hould bring any such warrants without
names, as before had been done, and to bring them to the next
jufticc of peace, to the intent that upon their examination,

the

the occasion and causes of such seditious bruires might be boit-
ed out and known. It was also resolved that I tile liid earl
of Kent flould on the Monday following, come to I.y;ford to
Mr. Elmes, to be the nearer and readier to conter with my Inrcl
of Shrewsbury. Sunday at night, I Robert Beale came to ',,-
ther:ngay, where after the communicating the cominilic:n, &c.
unto us fir Amice Pawlet and fir Drue Drury, by reason that
fir A. Pawlet was but late recovered and not able to repair to
the earl of Shrewsbury, being then at Orton fix miles of; it
was thought good that we fir Drue Drury and Robert Beale
should go unto him, which we did on - orning; and
together with the delivery of her najcfty's commiflion, and
your lordihip's letter, imparted unto him wat both the earl of
Kent and we thought meet to be done in the cause, praying his
lordship hither the day following, to confer with me the said
earl, concerning the fame ; which his lordflip promised. And
for the better colouring of the matter, I the said earl of Shrew-
fbury sent to Mr. Beale, ajuftice of peace of the county of
Huntington next adjoining, to whom I communicated that war-
rant, which Robert Beale had under your lordlhip's hands, for
the flaying of the hues and cries, requiring him to give notice
thereof to the town of Peterborough, and especially unto the
justices of peace of Huntingdonihire, and to cause the pursuers
and bringers of such warrants to be flayed, and brought to the
next justice of peace; and to bring us word to Fotheringay caf-
tie on Wednesday morning what he had done, and what he
should in the mean time understand of the authors of such bruites.
Which like order I also fir Amias Pawlct had taken on Monday
morning in this town, and other places adjoining. The fame
night, the flieriff of the county of Northampton upon the re-
ceit of your lordlhip's letter came to Arundel, and letters were
sent to me the earl of Kent of the earl of Shrewlbury's intention
and meeting here on TuefUlsy hv neon ; and other letters were
aifo sent with their lordships afllnts to fir Edward Montague,
lir Richard Knightly, Mr. Tho. Brudcenell, &c. to be here on
Wedncfday by eight of the clock in the morning, at which
time it was thought meet that the execution flviuld be. So upon
'iuefday, we the carls came hither, where the !heritf mnet us;
and upon conference betwcen us it w:ts rclilvcd, that the care
for the fending for the fiurgeons, and other necefflhry provision
should be conmittcd unto him againlt the time. And we fnrth-
with repaired unto ler, and sirs: in the prelence of herself and
her folks, to the irent that they might fee and report herc-
after that fle was not otherwise proceeded with than according
to law, and the form of the fatude made in the 27th year or
her maiefty's reign, it was thought convenient that her majefy's
cutniniilion. should be read unto her, and afterwards fie wvas

br

by sundry peeches willed to prepare herself against the next
norning. She was also put in remembrance of her fault, the
honourable manner of proceeding with her, and the necelity
that was imposed upon her majesty to proceed to execution, for
that otherwise it was found that they could not both fland to-
gether; and however, fithence the lord Buckhurft's his being
here new conspiracys were attempted, and so would be lill;
wherefore since she had now a good while since warning, by the
said lord and Robert Beale, to think upon and prepare her-
self to die, we doubted not but that she was, before this, set-
tled, and therefore would accept this message in good part.
And to the effect that no christian duty might be aid to be
omitted, that might be for her comfort, and tend to the falva-
tion both of her body and foul in the world to come, we offered
unto her that if it would please her to confer with the bishop
and dean of Peterborough, she might; which dean, we had,
for that purpose, appointed to be lodged within one mile of
that place. Hereto Ihe replied, crofling herself in the name of
the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, faying that she was
ready to die in the catholic Roman faith, which her ancestors
had professed, from which hfe would not be removed. And
albeit we used many persuasions to the contrary, yet we pre-
vailed nothing; and therefore, when she demanded the admit-
tance of her priest, we utterly denied that unto her. Here-
upon, {he demanded to underfhand what answer we had touch-
ing her former petition to her majesty, concerning her papers of
accounts, and the bestowing of her body. To the firit we had
none other answer to make, but that we thought if they were
not sent before, the fame might be in Mr. Waade's custody
who was now in France, and feeing her papers could not any-
wife plcafure her majesty, we doubted not but that the fame
would be delivered unto such as fle flould appoint. For,
for our own parts, we undoubtedly thought that her majesty
would not make any profit of her things, and therefore (in our
opinions) fle might et down what she would have done,
and the fame hould be imparted unto her majesty, of whpno
both fle and others might expect all courtely. Touching her
body, we knew not her majesty's pleasure, and therefore could
neither fay that her petition ihould be deny'd, or granted. For
the practice of Babingron, fle utterly denied it, and would have
inferred it, that her death was for her religion; whereunto it
was eftsoons by us replied, that for many years she was not
touched for religion, norflould have been now, but that this
proceeding againt her was for treason, in that lhe was culpa-
bl of that horrible conspiracy for destroying her majesty's per.
son; which he again denied, adding furtlher, that albeit he
for herself forgave them that were the procurers of her death,
vet she doubted not but that God would take vengeance there.
of. And being charged with the depositions of Nali and Curle

.sl

to prove it against her, flie replied, that flhe accused none, but
that hereafter when fie flall be dead, and they remain alive.
it shall be seen how indifferently she had been dealt with, and
what measure had been used unto her; and aked whether
it had been heard before this, that servants had been pradil;-d
to accuse their mistress, and hereupon allb required what was
become of them, and where they remained.

UP ON our departure from her, for that it fecined by the

commiflion, that the charge of her was in the disposition of us
the earls, we required S. Amias Paulet and S. Drue Drurie to
receive, for that night, the charge, which thev had before, and
to cause the whole number of soldiers to watch that night, and
that her folks should be put tip, and take rder that only four
of them hould be at the execution, relnliring alcof of and
guarded with certain persons, to as they fliould not come near
unto her, which were MelIil her ftevard, the plyfician, fur-
geon, and apothecary.

W E D N E S n A Y morning,after that *'e the earls were repailed

unto the castle, and the fcrffhad prepared all things in the hall
for the execution, he was commanded to go into her chamber,
and to bring her down to the place where were present, we
which have signed this letter, Mr. Herry Talbot, efq; fir Ed-
ward Montague, knt. his son and heir apparent, and William
Montague, his brother, fir Richard Knichtly, Mr. Thomas
Brudenel, Mr. Beuill, Mr. Robert and John Wingefield, Mr.
Forest, and Rayner, Benjamin Piggot, Mr. Dean of Peterbo-
rough and others.

AT the ftairfold, he pawsed to speak to Melvil in our hear-

ing, which was to this etfec, " Melvil, as thou haft been an
honest servant to me, so I pray thee continue to Iny son, and
commend me unto him. I have not impugned his religion, nor
the religion of others, but wish him well. And as I forgive all
that have offended me in Scotland, so I would that he ihouli
.lfo ; and beseech God, that he would fend him his holy
spirit, and illuminate himn." Melvil's anfwel was, that he would
so do, and at that instant he would beseech God to alfitl hint
with his spirit. Then he demanded to speak with her priefl,
which was denied unto her, the rather for that lhe cane with a
fuperflitious pair of beads ard a crucifix. She then desired to
have her women to help her, anld uipn her earneit requell, and
faying that when other gentlewolnen wele i '.cc't,. Ihe had read
in chronicles that they had wlulcn allowed unto them, it was
pernitted that he should have two naimed by herl'clf, which
were Mrs Curie a d Kenredv. A.fter fie caine to the cafnold,
firfI, in presence of te:m :;l11 h: r iua;le ic's commifilion was open-
ly rad ; and afterwards N iMr. D)ea o Peterborough, accoiding
to a irll.:!, which he had reccived the night before trou us
t:jc earls, ou'd hiav made a godlyadmronition to her lo cepent

and

and dye well in the fear of God and charity to the world. But
at the first entry, file utterly refused it, faying that fie was I
would that he should also; and beseech God, that he catho-
lique, and that it were a folly to move her, being so resolutely
minded, and that our prayers would little avail her. Where-
upon, to the intent it mightappear that we, and the whole as-
flmbly, had a chritian desire to have her die well, a godly
prayer, conceived by Mr. Dean, was read and pronounced by
us all; " That it would please Almighty God to fend her his
holy spirit and grace, and also, if it were his will, to pardon
all her offences, and of his mercy to receive her into his heaven-
ly and everlasting kingdom, and finally to bless her majesty, and
confound all her enemies ;" whereof Mr. Dean, minding to re-
pair up shortly, can shew your lordflips a copy.

TH I s done, fie pronounced a prayer upon her knees to this

effet ; " To beseech God to fend her his holy spirit, and that
fle trusted to receive her alvation in his blood, and of his grace
to be received into his kingdom, besought God to forgive her
enemies, as ihe forgave them; and to turn his wrath from this
land, to bless the queen's majeftie, that fle might serve him.
Likewise to be merciful to her on, to have compafion of his
church, and altho' she was not worthy to be heard, yet he had
a confidence in his mercy, and prayed all the faints, to pray
unto her Saviour to receive her." After this (turning towards
her servants) flie desired them to pray for her, that her Saviour
would receive her. Then, upon petition made by the execu-
tioners, flhe pardoned them ; and said, he was glad that the
end of all her sorrows was so near. Then lie mifliked the
whinning and weeping of her wome:, faying, that ty rather
ought to thank God for her resolution, and kihtig theli, willed
theni to depart fiom the fcaffld, and i;,reell. And so rclb-
lutely kneel'd dowrn, and having a kercheff bandied aheut her
eyes, laid down her neck, wher;lpn! the ex.: cultioner proceeded.
Her servants were incontinentiy I:lov.'d, and rdlr taken that
none flould approach unto her cp':, iu:r iat it thouldi he en-
balned by the fiirgeon appointed. Ai u.rd ''ecrhercrotr, ap-
parell, and other things are rerai;id here. :nd not vielded unto
the executioner for inconveniences tat nig;tt follow, but he is
remitted to be rewarded by iiich a!; sent hinl hiher.

THI s hath been the manner of our idel;,il; in thi; fcrvice,

whereof we have thotii:t goted o a:ve::;;i your loiflips as
particularly as we could, for the t c,:ni lthr Ialt ve thoullht
good to signify unto youl lordflips bcfides, that fur the avoiiiln
of all finitlerand flandercus rports that imay be raised to the
contrary, we have caused a note thereof to Le conceiv'd to the
falme effect in writing, which we the si;dd Iulrds have fubfcribd,
with the hands o such other there the knights and gentlrhiier
above nained that were prefcnt at the aion. And so becfcech-
ing Almighty God long t ble: her ajelly with a most profpe-

rou

rous reign, and to confound all his, and her enemies, we take
our leaves. From Fotheringay-Caftle, the 8th of February
1586, in haft.

Your lordfliips at commandment.
N. B. This, as well as several other papers in this Appendix,

is taken from a colleetion made by MIr. Crawfurd of Drum-
soy, historiographer to QAnne, now in the library of the fa-
culty of Advocates. Mr. Crawfurd's transcriber has omitted
to mention the book in theCott. Lib.where it is to be found.

No. XIX. (Vol. II. p. 38. line 37.)
The objetions against Mr. Davison, in the cause of the late

Scottish queen, must concern things done either, i. Before
her trial at Fotheringay. 2. During that feflion. 3. After
the fame.

Cott. Lib. . EFORE her trial, he neither is, nor can be charged
Calig. C.i. D to have had ay hand at all in the cause of the said

queen, or done any thing whatsoever, concerning the fame di-
reCtly, or indirectly.

2. Du R IN G tat session, he remained at court, where the

onlyintereft he had therein, was as her majesty's secretary, to
receive the letters from the commifioners, impart them to her
highness, and return them her answers.

3. AS T E R the return thence, of the said commiflioners, it
is well known to all her council,

i. That he never was at any deliberation or meeting what-

soever, in parliament, or council, concerning the cause of the
said queen, till the fending down of her majcfty's warrant unto
the commiflioners, by the lords and others of her council.

2. T H AT he was no party in signing the sentence pased
against her.

3. T Hi A T he never penned either the proclamation publishing

the fame, the warrant after her death, nor any other letter, or
thing whatsoever concerning the fame. And,

T HA T the only thing, which can be specially and truly im-

puted to him, is the carrying up the said warrant unto her ma-
jetry to be signed. She fending a great counsellor unto him,
with her pleasure to that end, and carrying it to the great eal
of England, by her own special direction and commandment

So R the better clearing of which truth, it is evident,
i. TH AT the letter, being penned by the lord treasurer,

was delivered by him unto Mr. Davison, with her majesty's own
privity, to be ready for to sign, when ihe fiould be pleased to
call or it.

a. TnA^

a. TrH Ar being in his hands, he retained it at the least five or

fix weeks unprefented, nor once offering to carry it up, till ihe
sent a great counsellor unto him for the fame, and was fliarply
reproved therefore by a great peer, in her inajcfy's own presence.

3. TH. AT havingfigned it, flhe gave Iill an express com-

mandment to carry it to the eal, and being fealed to fend it im-
mediately awayuntothe comnilTioners, according unto thedirec-
tion. Hcrfelf appointing the hall of Fothcringay for the place
of execution, m:fliking the court-yard, in divers refpets, and
in conclusion absolutely sorbad him to trouble her any further,
or let her hear any more hereof till it was done. She for her
part, having(as he said) performid all that, in law or reason,
could be required of her.

4. WH c H dirctions notwithflanding, he kept the warrant

seal-d all that night, and the greatest part of the next day in
his hands, brought it back with him to the court, acquainted
her majeily withal, and finding her inajetly relblved to proceed
therein, according to her former direcaions, and yet desirous to
carry the matter lb, as flie might throw the burden fiom herfclf,
he absolutely resolved to quit his hands thereof.

5. AN D hereupon, went over unto the lord treasurer's chanm-

her, together with Mr. vice-chanibeilain atton, and in his
presence restored the fame into the hands of the said lord trea-
furer, of whom he had before received it, who from thenceforth
kept it, till himself and the reft of the council sent it away.

WH C H, in fubftancc and truth, is all the part and intcreft

the aid Davison had in this cause, whatsoever is, or may be pre-
tended to the contrary.

T o u c H N the fending down thereof unto tile commission-

ers, that it was the general act of ier majefy's council (as is
before mentioned) and not any prii ate act of his, may appear by,

i. T r own confiftion. :. Their own letters sent down

therewith to the conmmilnncrs.

. lThe testimonies of the

lords and others to whero they -ere direced. As also 4. of Mr.
Reale, by whom they were l.-t. 5. The tenor of her majel-
ty's first coniiffion for their calling to the ftar-chamber for the
fame, and private appearance ani fibillion aftcrvward instead
thereof, hetore the lord chancellor Broinilev. 6. The con-
fetlionof Mr. Attorney-general, in open court'cnnfirmcd. 7. By
the sentence itl'cf upon record. 8. Bidlcs a common at of
council, containing an answer to be vc:'buily delivered to the
Scottifil anibafridor then remaini:ng here, avowing and justify-
ing the fame.

Now where orne fluppofe hin to have given ome extraordi-

nary furtherance thcreunto, the contrary may evidently appear
by,

I. I-Iis

I. Hi s former absolute refusal to sign the band of aflbciaii-
on, being earnestly pressed thereunto by her majelty's felt

2. H i s excusing of himself from being used as a commission-

er, in the examination of Babington and his accomplices, al
avoiding the fame by a journey to the Bath.

3. H s being a mean to stay the cominiflioners from pro-

nouncing of the sentence at Fotheringay, and deferring it till
they flould return to her majesty's presence.

4. Hi s keeping the warrant in his hand fix weeks unprefent-

cd, without once offering to carry it up, till her majelty sent
exprefly for the fame to sign.

5. HI s deferring to fend it away after it was fealed unto the

commissioners, as he was specially commanded, flaying it all
that night, and the greatest part of the next day in his hands.

6. AN D finally, his restoring thereof into the hands of the
lord treasurer, of whom he had before received the fame.

WH I c H are clear and evident proofs, that the said Davison

did nothing in this cause whatsoever, contrary to the duty of
the place he then held in her majesty's service.

Cal. C. 9.

TH t s eens to be an original. On the back is this title,
TH E innocency of Mr. Davion in the cause of the late
Scottilh queen.

No. XX. (Vol. II. p. 94. line to.)

Letter from 9, Sir Robert Cecil, to His Majesty King James.

Frmm the f S T worthy prince, the depending dangers upon your
Bi Figi|at. IVL affcaionates have been such, as hath inforced silence in
J1il- E,. him, who, is faithfully devoted to your prfon, and in due time
A. 3,. of trial, will undergo all hazards of fortune, for the mainte-
No. 4. nance of the just regal rights, that, by the laws divine, of na-

ture, and of nations, is inverted in your royal person. Fall not
then, most noble and renowned prince, from him, whose pro-
vidence hath in many dangers preserved you, no doubt to be an
instrument of his glory, and the good of his people. Some fe-
crets, I find have been revealed to your prejudice, wich uiuft
proceed from sonic ambitious violent spirited person near your
mnajefty in council and favour; no man in particular will I ac-
cufe, but I am sure it hath no foundation from any, with whom,
for your service, I have held correspondence; otherwise, I had,
long since, been disabled from performance of thole duties, that
the thoughts of my heart endeavoureth; being only known to
this worthy nobleman bearer hereof, one noted in all parts of
Chriltendom for his fidelity to your person and state, and to Mr.
David Fowlis your most loyal servant, my first and faithful cor-
rclpondcnt; and unto James Hudfonc, whom I have found in

all

11 things that concern you, most secret and assured. It may,
therefore, please your niajefty, at the humble motion of o,
which jargon I desire to be the indorfement of your commands
unto me, that by omne token of your favour, he may undertand
in what terms you regard his fidelity, secrecy, and service. My
pallionate affection to your person, (not as you are a king, but
as you are a good king, and have juil title, after my sovereign,
to be a great king) doth transport me to presumption. Condemn
not, most noble prince, the motives of care and love, altho'
mixed with defecs in judgment.

1. I, T H E R E F O R E, first beseech your majesty, that for the

good of those, whom God, by divine Providence, hath destined
to your charge, that you will be pleased to have an extraordi-
nary care of all praCticers, or practices, against your person;
for it is not to be doubted, but that in both kingdomis, either
out of ambition, faction, or fear, there are many that desire
to have their sovereign in minority, whereby the fovercignty
and fate might be swayed by partiality of subalternate persons,
rather than by true rule of power and justice. Preserve your
person, and fear not the practices of man upon the point of
your right, which will be preserved and maintained against all
assaults of competition whatever. Thus I leave the protection
of your person, and royal posterity, to the Almighty God of
Heaven, who bless and preserve you and all yours, in all regal
happiness to his glory.

z. NE x T to the preservation of your person, is the conferva-

tion and secret keeping of your councells, which, as I have
said, are often betrayed and discovered, either out of pretend-
ed zeal in religion, turbulent fation, or base conception, the
which your majesty is to regard with all circumnfpetion, as a
matter noft dangerous to your person and state, and the only
means to ruin and destroy all those, that stand faithfully devoted
to your majesty's service. Some particulars, and persons of this
nature, I make no doubt have been discovered by the endea-
vours of this nobleman, the bearer hereof, of whom your ma-
jefty may be further informed

3. TH E 3d point considerable is that your maicly, by al!

means possible, secure yourself of the good affection of the
French king and States, by the negotiation of onime faithful fe-
cret confident ; the French naturally diftafting the union of the
Britifl Islands under one monarch. In Germany, I doubt not,
but you have many allies and friends, but by reason of their
remote fate, they do not so much import this affair, which
muff be guided by a quick and sudden motion.

4. Wit . N God, by whose providence, the period of all

persons and times is determined, flhall call to his kingdom ot
glory her majesty, (although I do afuredly hope that there will
not be any question in competition, yet for that I hold it not fit-

t:ng

ting to give any minute enterance into a cause of so high a na-
ture,) 1 do humbly beseech your majelty to design a secret,
faithful, and experienced confident servant of yours, being of
an approved fidelity and judgment, continually to be here refi-
dent, whose negotiation, it were convenient your majesty ihould
fortife, with such secret trust and powers, as there may not
need 14 days respite, to pft for authority, in a cause, that
cannot endure, o hours respite, without varieties of danger. In
the which it is to be confidered, that all such as pretend least
good to your eftabiiliihent, will not in publick oppung your
title, but out of their cunning ambition, will seek to gain time,
by alledging their pretence o colmmon good to the slate, in pro--
pounding of good conditions fcrdilburthening the common weale,
of divers hard laws, heavy impositions, corruptions, oppressions,
&c. which is a main point to lead the popular, who are much
difguited with many particulars of this nature. It were there-
fore convenient, that tfe motives, out of your malefty's pro-
vidence, fliould be prevented, by your free offer in these points
following, viz.

I. TH A T your ma jefty would be pleated to abolish purvaiors

and purvaiance, bcing a matter infinitely otfenfive to the colmmon
people, and the whole kingdoll, and not profitable to the prince.

2. THAT your najefty would be pleased to dissolve the

court of wards, being the ruin of all the noble and ancient fa-
milies of this realm, by base matches, and evil education of their
children, by which no revenue of the crown will be defrayed.

3. 'H E abrogating the multiplicity of penal laws, generally

repined againlt by the ubjet, in regard of their uncertair:y,
being many tines altered from their true meaining by variety of
interpretation.

4 TH AT your majesty will be pleated to admit free outpcrt

of the native commodities of this kingdom, now often restrained
by subalternate persons for private profit, being loft prejudi-
cial to the commerce of all merchants, and a plain dcftrucion
to the true industry and manufacure of all kingdoms, and againt
the profit of the crown.

T H ESE, being by your majcfty's confidents in the point of

time propounded, will assuredly confirm unto your majeftie the
hearts and affctions of the wholekingdom, andl absolutely pre-
vent all insinuations and devices of designed patriots, that, out
of pretext of common good, would seek to patronize themselves
in popular opinion and power, and thereby to derogate from
your majelfy's bounty and trec favour, by princely merit of
your moderation, judgment, andjuftice.

y o u i majefiy's favour, thus granted to the fubjeEt, will no

way impeach the pr fits of the crown, but advance the. The
difproportionable gain of some chequer officers, with the base
and mnercenary profits of the idle unnecefilry clerks and attcr-
dants, will only susser fume detriment but infinitc will be the

good

good unto the kingdom, which will confirm unto your majesty
the univePfal love and affe&tion of the people, and eftablilh your
renown in the highest esteem to all posterity.

TH E Lord preserve your majeftie, and make you triumphant
over all your enemies.

MY care over his person, whose letters pass in this pacquet,

and will die before he leave to be yours, ihall be no less then of
mine own life, and in like eftecm will I hold all your faithful
confidepts, notwithstanding I will hold my self reserved from
being known unto any of them, in my particular devoted assec-
tions unto your majesty, only this extraordinary worthy man,
whose associate I am in his misfortune, doth know my heart,
and we both will pray for you, and if we live you flall find us
together.

I B E S E E c your majesty burn this letter, and the others;
for altho' it be in an unusual hand, yet it may be discovered.

Your majesty's most devoted

and humble servant,

A CRITICAL
A CRITICAL

# A CRITICAL DISSERTATION CONCERNING The Murder of King HENRY, and the Genuineness of the Queen's Letters to Bothwell.

i 256 ]

A

CRIT I C AL
DISSERTATION

CONCERNING
The Murder of King HENRY, and the Genuiue-

ness of the Queen's Letters to Bothwell.

T is not my intention to engage in all the controversies, to
which the murder of King Henry, or the letters from Mary

to Bothwell, have given rile ; far less to appear as an adverfaiy
to any particular author, who hath treated of them. To re-
peat, and to expose all the ill founded assertions with regard to
theLe points, which have flowed from inattention, from preju-
dice, from partiality, from malevolence, and front difloncfty,
would be no less irklbme to niyfelf, than unacceptable to molt
of my readers. All I prlcofe, is to aflirt others in forming fcme
judgment concerning the sacs in dipute, by stating the proofs
produced on each fide, with as much brevity as the cafe will
admit, and with the fame attention and impartiality, which I
have endeavoured to exercise in examining other controverted
points in the Scottish hiltory.

IN order to account for the king's murder, two different yf-

tenis have been formed. The orn. luppofes Botliwll to have
contrived and executed this crime. The other imputes it to
the earls of Murray, Morton, and their party.

T H E decision of many controverted facts in history is a mat-

ter rather ofcuriofity than of use. They stand detached ; and
whatever we determine with regard to them, the fabric of the
story remains untouched. But the fa& under dispute in this
place is a fundamental and essential one, and according to the
opinion which an Historian adopts with regard to it, he mult
vary and dispose the whole of his subsequent narration. An
historical system may be tried in two different ways, whether it
be consistent with probability, and whether it be fiupported by
proper evidence.

'T H o s r.

TH o s who charge te King's murder upon Bothweli argue

:n the following manner; and though their reasonings have
Lcen mentioned already in different places of the narrative, it is
nccll.ry to repeat thelm here. Mary's love for Darnly, fay
they, was a fuddcn and youthful paflion. The beauty of his
person was his chief' merit. His capricious temper oon raised
in the Queen a disgust, which broke out on different occasions.
His engaging in the conspiracy againftRizio, converted this dif-
gust into an indignation, which fle was at no pains to conceal.
This breach was perhaps, in its own nature, irreparable; the
King certainly wanted that art and condescension which alone
could have repaired it. It widened every day, and a deep and
fettled hatred elfaced all remains of affeEtion. Bothwell ob-
served this, and vwas prompted by ambition, and perhaps by
love, to found on it a fcheile, which proved fatal both to the
Queen, and to hims.!s. He had served Mary at different times
with fidelity and uccefs. He insinuated himfelcf into her favour,
by address and by flattery. By degrees he gained her heart.
In order to gratify his love, at least his ambition, it was necef-
fary to get rid of the King. Mary had rejected the proposal
made to her for obtaining a divorce. The King was equally
hated by the partizans of the House of Hamilton, a confidera-
blk party in the kingdom ; by Murray, one of the most powerful
Aind popular persons in his country; by Morton and his aflo-
ciates, whom he had deceived ; and whom Bothwell had bound
to his interest by a recent favour. Aniong the people Darnly
was fallen under cxreleme coniempt. He expected, forall these
r(afons, that the murder of the king would pass without any
enquiry. And to Mary's love, and to his own address and good
fortune, he trulted for the accomnpliflnment of the reft of his
wifllies. What Bothwell expeted really came to pass. Mary,
it not privy herself to the design, connived at an action which
rid her of a man whom ihe had Iuch good reason to detest. A
few months after, flhe married the person who was both fu-
peced and accused of co:;nitting the murder.

TH o S E who charge the guilt upon Murray and his party

reason in this manner. Murray, fiiy they, was a man of bound-
Iltfs ambition. Notwirhfianding the illegitimacy of his birth, he
liad early formed a design of usurping the Crown. On the
Qureenl's return into Scotland, lie insinuated himself into her fa-
vour, and engrolted the whole power into his own hands. He
f-t iimrfelf against every propolal of marriage which was made
lt her, left his own chance of fucceeing to the Crown fliould
be destroyed. He hated Darnly, and wvas no less hated by him.
In order to be revenged on him, lhe entered into a sudden
frientldS ip with Butliwe!l, his ancient and mortal enemy. He
.ncounral,'d Ililn to perpetrate the clilnc, by giving him hopes

V t I. 1I S of

of marrying the Queen. All this was done with a design to
throw upon the Queen herself the imputation of bing ac-
ceffory to the murder, and under that pretext to destroy Both-
well, to depose and imprison her, and to seize the sceptre which
he had wrested out of her hands.

T H E former of these fyfteinms has an air of probability, is con-

fiftent with ittelf, and solves appearances. In the latter, some
assertions are falle, ome links are wanting in the chain, and
effects appear, of which no sufficient cause is produced. Mur-
ray, on the queen's return into Scotland, served her with great
fidelity, and by his prudent administration rendered her ib po-
pular, and so powerful, as enabled her with ease to quall a
formidable insurreCtion raised by himself in the year 1565.
What motive could induce Murray to murder a Prince without
capacity, without followers, without influence over the nobles,
whom the Queen, by her negle&, had reduced to the lowest
state of contempt, and who, after a long disgrace, had regained
(according to the most favourable fippofition) the precarious
possession of her favour only a few days before his death ? It is
difficult to conceive what Murray had to fear from the king's life.
It is no easy matter to guess what he could gain by his death.
If we suppose that the Queen had no previous attachment to
Bothwell, nothing can appear more chimerical than a scheme to
persuade her to marry a man, whose wife was till alive, and
who was not only fufpeced, but accused, of murdering her for-
mer husband. But that such a scheme ihould really succeed is still
more extraordinary.-If Murray had instigated Bothwell to com-
mit the crime, or had himself been accessory to the commission
of it, what hopes were there that Bothwell would silently bear
from a fellow criminal all the persecutions which he suffered,
without ever retorting upon him the accusation, or revealing
the whole scene of iniquity ? An ancient and deadly feud had
subsisted between Murray and Bothwell; the Queen with diffi-
culty had brought them to some terms of agreement. But is it
probable that Murray would choose an enemy, to whom he had
been so lately reconciled, for his confident in the commission of
such an atrocious crime ? Or, on the other hand, would it ever
enter into the imagination of a wife man, first to raise his rival
to supreme power, in hopes that afterwards he flould find ome
opportunity of depriving him of that power ? The most adven-
turous politician, never hazarded such a dangerous experiment.
The most credulous folly never trufed such an uncertain chance.

BUT however fcrong these general reasonings may be, we

must decide according to the particular evidence produced. This
we now proceed to examine.

TH A T Bothwell was guilty of the King's murder appears,
i. From the concurring testimony of all the cotemporary hifto-

rians.

rians. z. From the confession of those persons who suffered for
allitting at the conmiffion of the crime, and who enter into a.
uminute detail of all its circumlfances. Anders v. z. 165. 3.
From the acknowledgment of Mary's own commiflioners, who
allow Bothwell to have been one of those who were guilty of
this crime. Good. v. . z 3. 4. From the express testimony
of Lefley Billiop of Ross to the fame effctl with the former.
Def. of Q_ Mlary's Hon. And. 2. 76. Id. v. 3. p. 31. 5. Mor-
tou, at his deati, declared that Bthwell had solicited him, at
different times, to concur in the conspiracy formed against the
life of the King, and that he was informed by Archibald Dou-
gias, one of the conspirators, that Bothwell was prefentnt the
mlurder. Crawf. Mem. App. 4. The letter from Douglas to
the Queen, publiJhed in the Appendix to vol. II. No. 12. con-
firms Morton's teltimony. 6. Lord Herreis promises, in his
own name, and in the name of the nobles who adhered to the
Queen, that they would concur in punilhing Bothwell as the
murdererof the King. Append. vol. I. No. 23.

TH E noft direc charge ever brought against Murray is in

these words of Bilhop Lefley, " Is it unknown," addrefling him-
felfto the Earl of M/urray, " what the Lord Herreis said to your

face openly, even at your own table, a few days after the
"murder was committed? Did he not charge you with the
foreknowledge of the fame murder ? Did not he nulla circui-

"tione zJis, fltly and plainly burden you, that riding in Fife,

and coming with one of your noll assured and trusty servants
the fainc day whereon you departed from Edinburgh, said
to him, amo.g other talk, This night ere morning Lord
Darnlv fhlall lolc his life ?" Defence of Q: Mary, Andes v.

2. 75. But the allrlon of a mlan o heated with faction as
Lcnef-, unlcfs it weLre qlpported by proper evidence, is of little
weight. The rv.lit to whom Murray is said to have spoken
these words, is Iut named ; nor the manner in which this fe-
cret conversation was brought to light mentioned. Lord Her-
reis. was one of the nwol: zealous advocates for Mary, and it is
remarkable that in all his negotiation at the court of England,
he never once repeated this accusation of Murray. In answer-
ing the challenge given himl by Lord Lindsay, Herreis had a
fair opportunity of mentioning Murray's knowledge of the mur-
der, but though he openly accules of that crime omec of those
who adhered to himn, he induttlrioufly avoids any insinuation
against Murray hiliiilf. Keith, Pref. XII. Mary, herself, in
a conversation with Sir Francis Knolles, accused Morton and
Maitland of being privy to the mnuler, but does not mention
Murray. And. 4. 55. When the Bilhop of Ross and lord Her-
reis themselves appered before the Englilh council, January r,
156), 'hey dec:luart theinfelves ready, in obedience to the

S Queen's

Queen's command, to accuse Murray and his aflociates of being
accessory to the murder, but " they being also required, whe-
"ther they or any of them, as of themselves, would accuse the
" said Earl in special, or any of his adherents, or thought them
"guilty thereof;" they answered, " that they took God to
" witness that none of them did ever know any thing of the

conspiracy of that murder, orwere in councill and foreknow-

"ledge thereof; neither who were devisers, inventors, and
" executors of the fame, till it was publicly discovered long
"thereafter by oine of the aflaflins who suffered death o that
" account." Good. v. 2. 308. These words are taken out'of
a register kept by Ross and Herreis themselves, and seem to be
a diret confutation of the bishop's assertion. The biflop him-
self repeats the fame thing in still stronger terms. And. 3. 31.

TH E earls of Huntly and Argyll, in their Protejfation touching

the murder of the King of Scots, after mentioning the conference
at Craigmillar concerning a divorce, of which we have given
an account, vol. 1. 316. add, " So after thefepremiffes, the
"' murder of the King following, we judge in our consciences.
" and hold for certain and truth, that the Earl of Murray ad
" secretary Lethington were authors, inventors, couniellors

and causes of the fame murder, in what manner, or by

" whatfomever persons the fame was executed." Anders. v. 4.
188. But, . This is nothing more than the private opinion
or personal affirmation of these two noblemen. 2. The con-
clufion which they make has no conneEtion with the premisses on
which they, found it. Because Murray proposed to obtain for
the queen a divorce from her huffland with her own content, it
does not follow that therefore he committed the murder without
her knowledge. 3 Huntly and Argyll were at that time the
leaders of that party opposite to Murray, and animated with all
the rage of faction. 4. Both of thenl were Murray's personal
enemies. Huntly, on account of the treatment which his fa-
mily and clan had received from that nobleman. Argyll was
desirous of being divorced from his wife, with whom he lived
on no good terms, Knox 328. and by whom he had no children.
Crawf. Peer. 19. She was Murray's fitter, and by his interest
he had obstruCted that design. Keith 55 1. There circumstances
would go far towards invalidating a positive testimony; they
more than counterbalance an indeterminate suspicion. 5. It is
altogether uncertain whether Huntly and Argyll ever fubfcrib-
ed this protestation. A copy of such a protestation as the Queen
thought would be of advantage to her cause, was tranfimitted
to them by her. Anders. v. 4. 186. The protellation itself
publiflied by Anderson is taken fiomn an unlublcribed copy with

blanks

blanks for the date and place of fublcribing. On the back of
this copy is paRted a paper, which Cecil has marked " Answer

of the Earl of Murray to a writing of the Earls of Huntly
and Argyll." Anders. 194, 195. But it can scarce be efteerm-

ed a reply to the above-mentioned protetlation. Murray's an-
tiver bears date at London, January 19, 1568. The Queen's
letter, in which flie inclofd the copy of the protestation, bears
date at Bowton, Jan. 5. 1568. Now it is scarce to be sup-
posed that the copy could be font into Scotland, be subscribed
by the to Earls, and be seen and answered by Murray within
t1 fllort a time. Murray's reply fecims intended only to prevent
the ipreffion which the vague and uncertain accusations of
his enemies might make in his absence. Cecil had got the ori-
ginal of the Queen's letter into his cuitody. Anders. vol. 4. 86.
This naturally leads us to conjeEture that the letter itself, toge-
ther with the inclosed protestation, were intercepted before they
came to the hands of Huntl) and Argyll. Nor is this mere
conjecture alone. The letter to Huntly, in which the protef-
tation was inclosed, is to be found ; Cott. Lib. Cal. C. i. fol.
z80, and is an original subscribed by Mary, though not writ-
ten with her own hand, because flie seldom chose to write in the
Englifli language. The protestation is in the fame Volume,
fol. 282, and is manifestly written by the fame person who wrote
the Queen's letter. This is a clear proof that both were inter-
cepted. So that much has been founded on a paper not sub-
fcribed by the two Earls, and probably never seen by them.
Besides, this method which the Queen took of a fending a copy
to the two Earls, of what was proper for them to declare with
regard to a conference held in their own presence, appears
foimewhat fulpicious. It would have been more natural, and
not so liable to any inifinterpretation, to have desired them to
write the molt exact account, which they could recollec of
what had palled in the converlation at Craignillar.

T 1I Queen's conmlitlioners at the Conferences in England

accused Murray and his afmociates of having murdered the
King. Good. z. z81. But these accusations are nothing more
than loo1e and general affirmations, withoutdefcending to such
particular circuiiftances, as either ascertain their truth, or dif-
cover their falsehood. The fame accutation is repeated by the
nobles arftmbled at Dumbarton Sept. 1568. Good. . 359.
And the fame observation may be made concerning it.

A . L the Queen's advocates have endeavoured to account

for Murray's murdering of the King, by uppoling that it was
done on purpose, that he might have a pretence of disturbing
the Qeen's administration, and thereby rendering ineffectual

her

her general revocation of crown lands, which would have de-
prived him and his aflociates of the bes part of their estates.
Lefley Def. of Mary's Hon. p. 73. But whoever confiders the
limited powers of a Scottish monarch, will fee that such a re-
vocation could not be very formidable to the nobles. Every
king of Scotland began his reign ith ich a revocation ; and
as often as it was renewed, the power of the nobles rendered it
ineffectual. The best vindication of Mrunay and his party froum
this accusation, is that which they prelented to the queen of
England, and which ath never hitherto been publiflied.

Psper of- Answers to the objetlions and alledganre of te qrueen, alledging
fice. the earl of Murray lord regent, the rarl of Morton, Marr,

Glencairn, Hume, Rthen, -c. to have ccn moved to ar-
mourt, for that they abhorred and might no abide her revocation
of the alienation made of her property.

IT is answered, that is alledged but all appearance, and it

appears God has bereft, the alledgance of all vwit and good re-
iembrance, for thir reasons following.
IM P I M I s, as to my lord regent, he never had occasion to

grudge thereat, in refpet the queen made him privy to the
fame, and took resolution with him for the execution thereof,
letting his lordship know he would al'uredly in the famine ex-
cept all things fle had given to him, and ratefy them in the next
parliament, as The did indeed ; and for that cause wished my
lord to leave behind himn master John Wood, to attend upen
the fame, to whom ihe declared, that als well in that as in all
others her grants it should be provided, yea of free will did pro-
mise and offer before ever he demanded, as it came to pass with-
out any let or impediment, for all was ratified by her command,
and hand write, at the parliament, but any difficulty.

IT E M as to my lord of Morton, he could not grudge there-

at quha never had of her property worth twenty dollars that
ever I knew of.

Item the fame, may I fay of my lord Glencairn.
Item the fame, T may fay of my lord Hume.
Item the fame, I may fay of my'lord Ruthven.
Item the f ame, I may fay of my lord Lindsay.

O : L Y my lord of Marr, had ane little thing of the propelty

q)uilk alfua was gladly and liberaly confirnmec to him, in the
said parliament preceeding a er ; was never ane had any
cause of miscontent of that revocnaion, fir lerf to lIave put their
lives and heritage to so open and imnifel: ane dnger as they
drd forfic and fri vole caufi:.

G,;

GYF ever any did make evill countenance, and fiow any

milicontentnent of the said revocation, it was my lord of Argyll
in fpecinll, quha pak largely in the time of parliament their-
anents to the queen herself, and did complain of the manifest
corruption of ane act of parliament past upon her majesty's re-
turn, and fa did lett any revocation at that tinme; but the ar-
nlor for revenge of the king's deid was not till twa months as-
ter, att quhat time there was no occasion given thereof, nor
never a man had mind therer,f.

HA v I N c thus examined the evidence which has been pro

duced againt the earls of Murray and Bothwell; we llall next
proceed to enquire whether the queen herself was accefrory to
the murder of her hutband.

No Iboner was the violeut death of Darnly known, than

firong suspicions arose, among some of her subjeCts, that Mary
had given her consent to the commiflion of that crime. And. 2.

56. We are informed, by her own ambalfador in France, the
archbiflop of Glasgow, that the sentiments of foreigners, on
this head, were no less unfavourable to her. Keith. Pref. ix.
Many of her nobles loudly accused her of that crime, and a
great part of the nation, by Supporting them, seem to have al-
lowed the accusation to be well founded.

SOME crilnes, however, are of such a nature, that they

scarce admit of a positive or diret proof. Deeds of darkness
can seldom be brought perfetly to light. Where persons are
accused not of being Principals, but only of being Acceafries to
a crime; not of having committed it themselves, but only of
giving consent to the commillion of it by others; the proof be-
comes still more difficult; and unless when some accomplice
betrays the secret, a proof by circuniftances, or presumptive evi-
dence, is all that can be attained. Even in judicial trials, such
evidence is fometilies held to be fufficicnt for condemning cri-
minals. The degree of convition which such evidence carries
along with it, is often not inferior to that which arises from
positive teflinony ; and a concurring series of circumitances
satisfies the understanding no less than the express declaration
of witneles.

Ev D E N c E of both there kinds has been produced against

Mary. We fiall first confider that which is founded upon cir-
cumltances alone.

S o e of these suspicious circuuilances preceded the king's

death; others were subsequent to it. With regard to the for-
mer, we may observe that the queen's violent love of Darnly
was soon converted into an aversion to him no less violent; and
that his own ill conduct, and excesses of every kind were such
that if they did not juftfy, at least they account for this sudden
change of her dilpofition towards him. The rife and progress
of this domestic rupture, I have traced with great care in the
liiltory, and to the proofs of it which may be found in ppers

pubiifllcd

publilhed by other authors, I have added those containled in
App. No. XVI. and XVII. The earls of Murray, Morton.
Bothwell, Argyll, and Huntly conlidered the scheme of pro-
curing for the queen a divorce from her huifband, as one of the
moll flattering proposals they could make her, and employed it
as the most powerful inducement to prevail on her to conlenr to
a measure, which they had much at heart, but from which
they knew her to be extremely avcrfe. And. 4. p. 2. i8S.
Du Croc the French ambafiador, who v-as an cye-witlncis of
what he describes, not only represents her cdifgut at Darnly to
be extreme, but declares that there could be no hopes of a re-

December concilement between them. " The queen is in the hands of
2> 1566. physicians, and I do allure you is not at all well ; and do be-

lieve the principal part of her difcafc to confil in deep grief and
sorrow; nor does it eem potlible to make her forget the fame.
Still she repeats these words, I coul tl vis to be dead. You
know very well that the injury she has received is exceeding
great, and her majesty will never forget it.--To speak my
mind freely to you, I do not expet, upon several accounts, any
good understanding between them [i. e. the king and queenl
Dec. 23. unless God effectually put to his hand.- His bad deportment

is incurable, nor can there ever be any good expeced from him
for several reasons, which I might tell you vas I present with
you. I cannot pretend to foretel how all may turn, but I will
fay, that matters cannot subsist long as hey are, without being
accompanied with sundry bad consequences." Kith, Pref. vii.
Had Henry died a natural death, at this juncture, it inlif: have
been confidered as a very forlunate event to the queen, and as
a seasonable deliverance from a husband vwho had become nlho-
gether odious to her. Now as Hcnry was murdered a tew
weeks afterwards, and as nothing had happened to render the
queen's aversion to him less violent, the opinion of thoie wha
confider Mary as the author of an event, which was manifel'ly
so agreeable to her, will appear perhaps to fme of our readers
ro be neither unnatural nor over refined. If we add to this,
what has been observed in the hifiorv, that in proportion to the
incrcafe of Mary's hatred of her husband, Bothuell mide pr.-
grefs in her favour; and that he bec'imc the object not oniy of
her confidence hut of her atraichnent, that opinion acquires
new strength. It i cnfy to nhlerve i:ia;v ad"a tahges which
might redound to Mary as well s to Rlth. .-il firm, the king'
death; but excepting thein, o person, ad no party in rlt
kingdom could derive the lcall benefit fli'o thait event 1, h-
well, accordingly, murdererd the king, and it ,';, in rhal ag.,
thought no violent imputarinn on Mary's t holl.'l:!, to fuppulc
that flie had conl. e,:d to t!:c d-cd

'ui.T

'T I r. Ifeps which the queen took after her hulband's death

add ttrength to that ftippofition. I. Mclvil, who was in Edin-
burgh, at the time ot the king's death, aflerts that "'every
body fu!pected the earl of Bothwll ; and those who durst speak
freely to-others, said plainly that it was -le." p. 5 5. 2. Ma-
ry having ifllued a proclamation, on the 2th of February, offer-
ing a reward to any person who hould dilcover those who had
murdered her hulband ; And. . 36 a paper in answer to this
was affixed to the gates of the Tolbooth, Feb. 16, in which
Bothwell was named as the chief person guilty of that crime,
and the queen herfilf was accued of having given her content
to it. And. 2. 156. 3. Soon after, February zo, the earl
of Lenox, the king's father, wrote to Mary, conjuring her,
by every motive, to prosecute the murderers with the utmioft
rigour. HFe plainly declared his own suspicions of Bothwell,
and pointed out a method of proceeding againct him, and for
discovering the other authors of the crime, no lets obvious than
equitable. He advilcd her to seize, and to commit to sure cuf-
tody Bothwell himllelf, and thore wio were already named as
his accomplices ; to call an assembly of te nobles; to ilfue a
proclamation, inviting Bothweiis accusers to appear; and if
on that encouragement, no person appeared to ccufe them, to
hold them as innocent, and to difiifs them without farther
trial. And. . 40. 4. Archbiflop Beatoun, her ambalfador
in France, in a letter to Mary, March 9th, employs arguments
of the utmost weight to persuade her t prosecute the murder-
ers with the greatest severity. " I can conclude nathing, (fays
he) by quhat zour majesty writes to me zourfelf, that fen it has
plefit God to conserve zow to take a rigorous vcngeimce there-
of, that rather than it be not aCtual taine, it appears to me
better in this warld that ze iad loft iife and all. I ae your
majeltie pardon that I writ fa far, for I can heir nathing to zour
prejudife, but I man conftirlinly writ tie iunin, that all may m.7
conie to zour knawledge ; for the betrerte relil.dce inay be put
thereto. Heir it is needfil that z: iorll iliaw nowv rather than
ever of before, the greite vertue, miiianillilti, ali nd conilance
that God has grantit zow, b quiiais grace, I hopc zec fl
overcome this moll heavy envie and dillefir of tile conlmitting
thereof, and conserve that reputation n all gtdiiinefs, 7. have
c;nquill of lang, qubich can appear nn wayis miaire clearli,
tl:an that zow do ick juttIce that the hail/ wr:ld may decla.e f;rl., ;,:
zowr innocence, and give teftiniony l'brevr of' tliair trailon
that has coiilliittaed (,lt fear of God or man) f, cruel and n- .tl-.
goillie a miiurtlier, i.it,,lir of tere is fa ii.L',e' ill spoken, that I ,.
ami connlrailit to allk zow mercy, that neither can I or will I
make the rehearl'l thereof, which is couw odiou. But alas! .,
madline, all ovei lu'iope his day llere is nilptirpoi' in head i(t
firequent as of;'our nmajcllie, nind of Ilie p!':rcnt ilate ot zntl
reahII, (iulhilk is in tite t.'t part iterpr'it it finlileri,." Keith,

Pi f

Pref. ix. 5. Elizabeth, as appears from Append. Vol. I. No.
XIX. urged the fame thing in strong terms. 6. The circum-
fiances of the cafe irfelf, no less than these solicitations and re-
monstrances, called for the utmost vigour in her proceedings.
Her husband had been murdered in a cruel manner, alhoft in
her own presence. Her fubjets were filled with the utnoli
horror at that crime. Bothwell, one of her principal favou-
rites, had been publickly accused as the author of it. Reflec-
tions, extremely diflonourable to herself, had been thrown out.
If indignation, and the love of jutlice, did not prompt her to
pursue the murderers with ardour, decency, at least, and con-
cern for vindicating her own character, should have induced her
to avoid any appearance of remissness or want of zeal.

B u T instead of this, Mary continued to discover, in all her

actions, the utmolt partiality towards Bothwell. i. On the
i th of February, five days after the murder, he bestowed on
him the reversion of the superiority of the town of Leith, which
in the year 565 flie had mortgaged to the citizens of Edin-
burgh. This grant was of much importance, as it gave him
not only the command of the principal port in the kingdom, but
a great ascendant over the citizens of Edinburgh, who were
extremely desirous of keeping pofTelion of it *. 2. Bothwell
being extremely desirous to obtain the command of the castle of
* Copyfrom the original in the charter-house of the city of Edin-

burgh of an aflgnation to the rewerfion of the jfperiority of Leith
by queen Mary to the earl of Bothwell.
Maria Dei gratia Regina Scotorum, omnibus probis onlini-

bus fuis ad quos presentes litere pervenerint falutein. Sciatis,
quod nos ad memoriiia reducentes multiplex bonum verum et
fidele fervitium, non tantum quondam noftrae chariflimae inatri
Maria Reginae regni noftri pro tempore in notra minoritate
fa6tum et impeifulm, verum etiam nobifinet ipfig, tam intra
partes Gallie quam intra hoc nofcrum regnuill, ad extentionem
noftri honoris et auctoritatis in punitione furuin, malefaaorum,
et tranfgreffolum infra idem, per noftrun confifiun confangui-
neum et confiliarium Jacohuii comnitem Bothuile, dominuin
Halis, Creighon et Liddifc!ale, agnumi admirallum regni
noftri, coiliinionenm et oncrationeml ad hunc effetum haben-
tuin, per quns ipfe funun corpus et vitain in magno pcriculo pof-
cit; ac etiam, in perforniatone et extentione noftri dici fervi-
tii, fuam hareditatcm, fipra fumn.ni viginti nillium mercarum
hujus noftri regni, alienavit ac lnfit. Et nos cogitantes quod,
ex noftra principali honore et devnria, diEtum noftruln confifuln
confainguineum & conciliarium cum quodam accidente et grati-
tudine recompcnfairc et gratificare incunbit quie nos commode
fibi concedcre poterimus, unde ipfc magis habilis omnibus affu-

turis

Edinburgh, the queen, in order to prevail on the earl of Mar
to surrender the governnent of it, offered to commit the young
prince to his cutody. Mar consented ; and file instantly ap-
pointed Bothwell governor of the castle. And. . Pref. 64.
Keith, 379. 3. The inquiry into the murder, previous to
Bothwell's trial, seems to have been conducted with the utmloft
remnifsnefs. Buchanan exclaims loudlyagainltthis. And. 2.24.
Nor wasit without reason that he did so, as is evident from a
circumflance in the affidavit of Thomas Nelson, one of the
king's servants, who was in the house when his matter was
murdered, and was dug up alive out of the rubbilh. Being
examined on the Monday after the king's death, " This depo-
nar fchew that Bonkle had the key of the fellare, and the
Queenis fervandis the keyis of her flalnlir. Quhilk the laird
of Tillibardin hearing, said, Haid thair, here is ane ground.
Efter quhilk words fpokin, thai left of, and procedit na farther
in the inquisition." And. 4. p. 2. 167. Had there been any
intention to search into the bottom of the matter, a circunftance
of so much importance merited the molt careful enquiry. 4.
Notwithstanding Lenox's repeated solicitations, notwithfland-
ing the reasonableness of his demands, and the necessity of com-
plying with them, in order to encourage any accuser to appear
againit Bothwell, he not only refuscd to commit him to cuf-
tody, or even to remove him from her pretence and councils ;

And.

turis temporibus effe poterit, et ad hujufinoli pcrformandum
in omnibus caufis feu eventibus: In recoiiipenfittioncii quorum
prmmifiorum, ac pro diverfis aliis noftlis rationalibus caufis et
confiderationibus nos moventibus, Feciinus, &c. diclumn Jaco-
bum comitem orhuile, &c. ac uos hleredcs mafculos quofcurn-
que noftras legitimos, &c. alfigllatos in et ad literas reverfionis
facas, &c. per Symonelm Prelon de euiemll ilitem, prapofi-
tumn, balivos, consules, ct conmlunitate ljus noftri burgi de
Edinburgh, pro feiplis ac fuis filccelforibus, &c. nobis, nollrif-
que hredibus, lfccefbribus, et afllignatis pro redemptione,
&c. fuperioritatis totius ville de Leith, &c. impigncraa per
nos diclis prapofito, &c. sub revcrfinne alie.ata cortinentis
ulllllmall decemi niilliulni iercarum nioncte pclniptT nulilc-
randam ct calculandam in parochiali ecclesia de l.linburgh, fu-
per premonilione quadraginta dierum, ut moris el}, veluti in
ditlis reverfionis literis, &c. de data 8vo Oob. 1565, &c.
(The ret is form, and contains a clause of absolute warran-
dice.) IN J us R I TESTIMON IUM prctfe:tibus mag-
num figillum noflrum apponi fecimus. Apud Edinburglh, deci-
mo quinto die menfis Februarii, anno Domini nlillefino quin-
gentefimo fexagefmo fxto, et regni notlri vicelinlo quino.

The great frtal entire.

And. . 42, 48. but by the grants which we have mentioned,
and by other circumstances, difcovcred an incrcafe of attach-
ment to him. 5. She could not avoid bringing Bothwell to a
public trial; but ihe permitted him to fit as a member in that
meeting of the privy council, which dircted his own trial;
and the trial itself was carried on with such unnecessary preci-
pitancy, and with so many other suspicious circumlances, as
render his acquittal rather an argument of his guilt than a proof
of his innocence. These circumstances have all been mention-
ed at length, Vol. I. p. 214, &c. and therefore are net repeat-
ed in this place. 6. Two days after the trial, Mary gave a
public proof of her regard for Bothwell, by appointing him to
carry the sceptre before her at the meeting of parliament.
Keith, 378. 7. In that parliament, the granted him a ratiti-
cation of all the vast poffefions and honours, which file had
conferred upon him, in which was contained an ample enume-
ration of all the services he had performed. And. . 117. .
Though Melvil, who foretaw that her attachment to Bothwell
would at length induce her to marry him, warned her of the
infamy and danger which would attend that ation, she not on-
ly disregarded this salutary admonition, but discovered what had
passed between them to Bothwell, which exposed Melvil to his
indignation. Melv. 56 . 9 Bothwell seized Mary as he re-
turned from Stirling, April 24. If he had done this without
her knowlec'ge and content, such an insult could not have failed
to havc filled her with the imoft violent indignation. Butac-
cording to the accourt of an old M. S. " The friendly love was
so highly contratec; 'l;ween this great princess, and her enor-
mou ftubject, tlat thcre was no end thereof (for it was con-
flantly efrecn.ed by ail n:cr that either of them loved other car-
nally) so that she ffif rcr patiently to be led where the lover
lift, and all the way neither made obfiacle, impediment, cla-
mour or resistance, as in such accidents use to be, or that flie
might have done by her princely authority, being accompanied
with the noble earl of Huntly, and secretary Maitland of Le-
thington." Keith, 383. Melvil, who was present, confilrms
this account, and tells us that the officer, by whom he was
seized, informed hint that nothing was done without the queen's
consent. Melv. 58. to. On the 12th of May, a few days
before her marriage, Mary declared that file was then at full
liberty, and that though Bothwell had offended her by seizing
cr person, fle was so nmch satisficd with his dutiful behaviour
since that time, and so indebted to him for pat fcrvices, that
flic not only forgave that olfence, but resolved to promote hlimi
to higher honours. And. . 87. I. Even after the confe-
derate nobles had driven othwell from the queen's presence,
and though flie saw that she was confidered as the murderer of
her former husband by o great a part of her fubjees, her as-
fteion did not in the lealt abate, and fle continued to cxprefs

the

the most unalterable attachment to him. " I can perceive
(fays Sir N. Throgmlorton) that the rigour with which the
queen is kept, proceedeth by order from these men, because that
the queen will not, by any means, be induced to lend her au-
thority to prosecute the murder; nor will not consent by any
persuasion to abuidon the lord Bothwell for her hulband, bt
avoweth constantly that file will live and die with him; and
faith, that if it were put to her choice to rlinquifl her crown
and kingdom, or the lord Bothwell, flie would leave her king-
dom and dignity to go a fiinple damsel with him, and that he
will never consent that he ihall fare worse, or have more harm
than herself." App. p. 42. See ao p. 44 From this long
enumeration of circumstances, we may, without violence,draw
the following conclusion. Had Mary really been accessory to
the murder of her husband ; had Bothwell perpetrated the crime
with her consent, or at her command ; and had fle intended
to flifle the evidence against him, ann to prevent the discovery
of his guilt, fle could scarce have taken any other steps than
those fie took, nor could her conduct have been more repug-
nant to all the maxims of prudence and of decency.

TH E positive evidence produced againit Mary may be classed
under two heads.

i. TH P depositions of some persons who were employed in

committing the murder, particularly of Nicholas Hubert, who
in the writings of that age is called French Paris. This person,
who was Bothwell's servant and much trusted by himl, was
twice examined, and the original of one of his depositions, and
a copy of the other, are still extant. It is pretended that both
these are notorious forgeries. But they are remarkable for a
finplicity and naivette which it is almost impossible to imitate;
they abound with a number of minute faEs and particularities,
which the most dextrous forger could not have easily assembled,
and connected together with any appearance of probability;
and they are filled with circumstances, which can scarce be sup-
posed to have entered the imagination of any man, but one ot
Paris's profeifion and character. But, at the fame time, it
must be acknowledged that his depositions contain ome impro-
bable circumitances. He seems to have been a foolish talkative
fellow; the fear of death; the violence of torture; and the
desire of pleasing those in whose power he was, tempted him,
perhaps, to feign rome circumstances, and to exaggerate others.

T o fay that ome circumstances in an affidavit are improbable

or false, is very different from faying that the whole is forged.
I fufpeEt the former to be the cafe here ; but I fee no appear-
ance of the latter. Be that as it will, rome of the most mate-
rial facts in Paris's affidavits reft upon his single teftimnony: and
for that reason, I have not in the history, nor fliall I in this
place, lay any stress upon them.

-. THiE

2. TH E letters said to be written by Mary to Bothwell.

These have been frequently published. The accident, by
which the queen's enemies got them into their poeflion, is re-
lated Vol. I. 232. When the authenticity of any ancient paper
is dubious or contreted, it may be ascertained either by external
or internal evidence. Both these have been produced in the
present cafe.

I. Ex T E R N A L proofs of the genuinees of Mary's letters.

i. Murray and the nobles who adhered to him affirm, upon
their word and honour, that the letters were written with the
queen's own hand, with which they were well acquainted.
Good. 2, 64, 92. 2. The letters were publicly produced in
the parliament of Scotland, December 1567, Good. 2. 360;
and were so far confidered as genuine, that they are mentioned,
in the at against Mary, as one chief argument of her guilt.
Good. 2. 66. 3. They were shewn privately to the duke of
Norfolk, the earl of Suffex, and Sir Ralph Sadler, Elizabeth's
commiifioners at York. In the account which they give of
this matter to their mistress, they seem to confider the letters
as genuine, and express no ufpicion of any forgery ; they par-
ticularly observe, " that the matter contained in thei is such
that it could hardly be invented and devised by any other than
herself; for that they discourse of ome things, which were
unknown to any other than to herself and Bothwell; and as it
is hard to counterfeit so many, so the matter of them, and the
nlmaner how there men came by them is such, as it fecmeth
that God, in whose fight murder and bloodfied of the innocent
.is abominable, would not permit the fame to be hid or conceal-
ed." Good. a. 142. They feein to have made such an im-
pression on the duke of NorIolk, that in a fublequent letter to
Pembroke, Leiceller and Cecil, he has there words, " If the
matter lhall be thought as deteflable and manifest to you, as for
ought we can perceive it iellleth here to us." Good. 2. 154
4. After the conferences at York and Wefminfcr were finiil-
ed, Elizabeth resolved to call together the earls who were then
at court, and to lay before theme the whole proceedings againfl
the Scortifl queen, particularly that " the letters and writings
exhibited by the regent, as the queen of Scots letters and writ-
ings, flould also be fliewed, and conference [i. e. compari-
son] thereof made in their fight, with the letters of the laid
queen's being extant, and heretofore written with her own
hand, and lent to the queen's majcfty ; whereby may be
searched and examined what difference is betwixt them." Good.
2. 252. They aflfnbled, accordingly, at Hampton Court,
December 14 and 15, 1568; and the originals of the letters
supposed to be written with the qtuleen of Scots own hand,
were then also presently produced and perused ; and being read,
were duly conferred and cnOlparld, for the manner of writing.
and faflhion of orthography, with llndry other letters long since

here-

heretofore written, and sent by the said queen of Scots to the
queen's majesty.---- In collation whereof no difference was
found." Good. . 256. 5. Mary having written an apologeti-
cal letter for her condu&t to the countess of Lenox, July o,
1570 *, she transmitted it to her husband then in Scotland ;
and he returned to the countess the following adfwer: " Se-
ing you have remittit to me to answer the queen the king's
mother's letters sent to you, what can I fay but that I do not
marvell to fee hir writ the best he can for hirfelf, to feame to
purge hir of that, quhairof many befyde me are certainly per-
fuadit of the contrary, and I not only afiurit by my awin knaw-
ledge, but by her handwrit, the conicllionis of men gone to the

death,

* Mary's letter has never been published and ought to have

a place here, where evidence on all fides is fairly produced.
i Madam, if the wrang and fall reportis of rebellis, enemies
weill knawin for traitouris to zow, and alace to muche trusted
of me by zoure advice, had not so far fturrcd you againis my
innocency, (and I ntuit fay againis all kyndnels, that zow have
not onelie as it were condempnit me wrangfullie, bot so hated
me, as ome wordis and open deidis hes teftifeit to all the
warlde, a manyfet mifliking in zow againis zowr awn blude)
I would not have omittit thus lang my dewtie in wryting to zow
excusing me of thole untrew reporties made of me. But hoping
with Godis grace and tyme to have my innocency knawin to
zow, as I truit it is already to the maift pairt of all indifferent
perfonis, I tlocht it best not to trouble zow for a tyme till that
luch a matter is moved that tuichis us bayth, quhilk is the tran-
sporting zoure littil btn, and my only child in this countrey. To
the quhilg albeit I be never fa willing. I wald be glaid to have
zoure advyfe therein, as in all uther thingis tuiching him. I
have born him, and God knawis with quhlat danger to him and
me boith ; and of zow he is defcendit. So I meane not to for-
zet my dewtie to zow, in fchewing herein any unkyndness to
zow, how unkyndlie that ever e have dealt with me, hot will
love zow as my awnt, and refpet zow as my moder in law.
And gif ye pies to knaw farther of my mynd in that and all
uther thingis betwixt us, my ambafrador the bifliop of Ross fall
be ready to confer with zow. And so after my hairtlie com-
mendationis, remitting me to my faide ambassador, and zour
better confideratioun, I commit zow to the protetioun of Al-
myghty God, quhoin I pray to preserve zow and my brother
Charles, and caus zow to knaw my pairt better nor ze do.
From Chatifworth this x of July 1 570.

To my Ladie Lennox Your natural gude Nice
my moder in law. and lovynge dochter.

death, and uther infallibil experience. It wull belang tyrne
that is hable to put a mattir so notorious in oblivioun, to miak
black quhyte, or innocency to appear quhair the contrary is liL
weill knawin. The mnail indifferent, I trust, doubtis not of
the equitic of zoure and my cause, and of the just occafioun of
our mifliking. Her rich dewtie to zow and me, being the par-
teis interest, were hir trew confellioun and unfeyned repentance
of that lamentable fat, odious for hir to be reportit, and fir-
rowfull for us to think of. God is just, and will not in the end
be abuted; but as he has manifltled the trewth, so will he pu-
neife the iniquity. Lenmzx's Orji. Regisi. of Leters. In th!eirpub-
lic papers, the queen's enenies may be lulped.ed of advancing
what would be n:oft fiubfervicnt to their cause ; not what was
agreeable to truth, or what flowed fronm their own inward
convicion. But in a private letter to his own wife, Lenox had
no occasion to dirnelble; and it is plain, that he only thought
the queen guilty, but believed the authenticity of her letters to
Bothwell.

II. W I T ir regard to the internal proofs of the genuineness of

the queen's letters to Bothwell, we may observe, . That
whenever a paper is forged with a particular intention, the ea-
gernefs of the forger to eftablifl the point in view, his folici-
tude to cut off all doubts and cavils, and to avoid any appear-
ance of uncertainty, always prompt him to use exprelfions the
most explicit and full to his purpole. The passages foisted into
ancient authors by. Heretics in different ages; the legendary
miracles of the Rownii lini ; the liuppofiitious deeds in their
own f:avuur produced l,y mionalllries ; the false charters of ho-
inage mentioned Vol. 1. p. 8. are so many proofs of this as-
fertion. No maximi fcems to be more certain than this, that a
lorger i often apt to prove too much, but feldorl faiis into the
error of proving too little. The point which the queen's ere-
umies had to eftablifli, was " that as the earlof Botliv.ell was
chief executor of the horrible and unworthy murder perpetrat-
ed, &c. so was she of the foreknowledge, counsel, device, per-
fuader, and commiander of the said murder to be done." Good.
z. 207. But of this there are only imperfeEt hints, obscure in-
timations, and dark expreflions in the letters, which howevc
convincing evidence they might furnifli if found in real letters,
bear no refeniblance to that glare and superfluity of evdec:ce
which forgeries corvmonly contain. All the avocates for Ma-
ry's innocence in her own age, contend that th. re is notliirg in
the letters which can serve as a proof of her guilt. L.esey.
Blackwood, Turner, &c. abound with pafiages to this pur.
pose; nor are the sentiments of thole in the prefein age diftfr-
ent. " Yet still it night have been expected (iys her laitcl
defender) that some one or other of the points or artiek nto thi
accusation should be made out clearly by tile proof. But no-

thing,

thing of that is to be seen in the present cafe. There is nothing
in the letter that could plainly shew the writer to have been in
the foreknowledge, counsel, or device of any murder, far less
to have perluaded or commanded it; and as little is there about
maintaining or jultifying any murders." Good. . 76. How ill
advlfed were Mary's adversaries to contrat so much guilt, and
to pra&ise so many artifices in order to forge letters, which
are so ill contrived for eftablifling the conclusion they had in
view ? Had they been so base as to have recourse to forgery, is
it not natural to think that they would have produced some-
thing ilore explicit and decisive ? 2. As it is almost impoflible
to invent a long narration consisting of many circumstances, and
to connec it in such a manner with real fats, that no mark of
fraud shall appear; for this reason kilful forgers avoid any long
detail of circuniftances, especially of foreign and superfluous
ones, well knowing that the more there are multiplied the more
are the chances of detection increased. Now Mary's letters, es-
pecially the first, are filled with a multiplicity of circumstances,
extremely natural in a real correspondence, but altogether foreign
to the purpose of the queen's enemies, and which it would
have been extreme folly to have in erted if they had beed alto-
gether imaginary, and without foundation. 3. The truth and
reality of several circumstances in the letters, and there too of
no very public nature, are confirmed by undoubted collateral
evidence. Lett. i. Good . 2. p.. The queen is said to have
met one of Lenox's gentlemen, and to have ome conversation
with him. Thonlas Crawford, who was the person, appeared
before Elizabeth's commiiioners, and confirmed, upon oath,
the truth of this circumfiance. He likewise declared, that du-
ring the queen's fray at Glasgow, the king repeated to him,
every night, whatever had passed, through the day, between
her Majcfty and him, and that the account given of there con-
verttions in the first letter, is nearly the fame with what the
King communicated to him. Good. 245. According to
the iaiie letter there was much discourse between the King and
Qleen concerning Mynto, Hiegait, and Walcar. Good. 2. 8,
1o, i. What this might be, was altogether unknown, till a
letter of Mary's preserved in the Scottifli college at Paris, and
publiflhed. Keith, Pref. vii. discovered it to be an affair of so
much importance as merited all the attention she paid to it at
that time. It appears by a letter from the French ambassador,
that Mary was subjea to a violent pain in her fide. Keith,
ibid. This circuniftance is mentioned, Lett. . p. 30. in a
manner so natural as can scarce belong to any but a genuine
producioan. 4.. If we llall till think it probable to suppose that
so many real circumstances were artfully introduced into the
letters by the forgers, in order to give an air of authenticity to
their prodution it will scarce be poflible to hold the fame
opinion concerning tho following particular. Before the queen

V L. It. T began

began her firil letter to Bothwell, file, as is usual among those
who write long letters co..taining a variety of fiubje&s, made
notes or memorandums of the particulars he wiShed to renmen-
ber; but as The fat up writing during a great part of the night,
and after her attendants were afeep, her paper failed her, and
file continued herletter upon the fame fleet, on which fle had
formerly made her nemorandums. This fle herself takes no-
tice of, and makes an apology for it: " It is late; I desire never
to cease fiomn writing unto you, yet now after the kissing of your
hands, I will end my letter. Excuse my evil writing, and read
it twice over. Excuse that thing that is Icriblit, for I had na
paper zefterday, quhen I wrait that of the memorial." Good.
2. 28. These memorandums still appear in the middle of the
letter; and what we have said seems naturally to account for
the manner how they might find their way into a real letter. It
is scarce to be supposed, however, that any forger would think
of placing nimeorandums in the middle of a letter, where, at
first fight, they make so ablurd and To unnatural an appearance.
But if any shall fill carry their refinement so far, as to suppose
that the forgers were o artful as to throw in this circuinftance,
in order to preserve the appearance of genuineness, they nmuft
at least allow that the queen's enemies, who employed there
forgers, could not be ignorant of the design and meaning of
these hort notes and memorandums; but we find them miftak-
ing them so far as to imagine that they were the credit of the
bearer, i. e. points concerning which the queen had given him
verbal inftrucions. Good. 2. 152. This they cannot poflibly
be; for the queen herself writes with so much exa&nefs con-
cerning the different points in the memorandums, that there
was no need of giving any credit or inlfructions to the bearer
concerning them. The memorandums are indeed the contents
of the letter. 5. Mary, mentioning her conversations with the
king about the affair of Mynto, Hiegait, &c. fays, "The
morne, [i. e. to-morrow] I will fpeik to him upon that point ;"
and then adds, " As to the reft of Willic Hiegait's, he confeflit
it; but it was the morne [i. e. the morning] after my cumming
or he did it." Good. 2. 9. This addition, which could not
have been nade till after the conversation happened, seems ei-
ther to have been inserted by the queen into the body of the
letter, or, perhaps, flie having written it on the margin, it was
taken thence into the text. If we suppose the letter to be a
real one, and written at different times, as it plainly bears, this
circumstance appears to be very natural ; but no reason could
have induced a forger to have ventured upon such an anachro-
nifin, for which there was no necefliy. An addition, perfectly
similar to this, made to a genuine paper, may be found. Good.
2. 282.

BUT,

BuT, on the other hand, Mary herself, and the advocates

for her innocence have contended that there letters were forged
by her enemies, on purpose to blast her reputation, and to jus-
tify their own rebellion. It is not neceflary to take notice of
the arguments which were produced, in her own age, in sup-
port of this opinion; the observations which we have already
made, contain a full reply to them. An author, who has en-
qiired into the affairs of that period wilh great industry, and
who has acquired much knowledge of them, has lately publifli-
ed (as he affirms) a demonstration of the forgery of Mary's let-
ters. This denor.ftration he founds upon evidence both internal
and external. With regard to the former he observes, that
the French copy of the queen's letters is plainly a translation of
Buchanan's Latin copy ; which Latin copy is only a translation
of the Scottifl copy; and by consequence, the assertion of the
queen's enemies, that he wrote them originally in French, is
altogether groundless, and the whole letters are gross forgeries.
He accounts for this arange succession of translations, by sup-
posing that when the forgery was projected, no person could be
found capable of writing originally in the French language let-
ters which would pass for the queen's ; for that reason they
were sirs composed in Scottifl ; but unluckily the French in-
terpreter, it would feeli, did not understand that language;
and therefore Buchanan translated them into Latin, and from
his Latin they were rendered into French. Good. 1. 79, 80.

IT is scarce necessary to observe that no proof whatever is

produced of any of these suppositions. The manners of the
Scots, in that age, when ahloit every man of rank spent a part
of h;is ycuth in France, and the intercourse between the two
nations was great, render it altogether improbable that so many
complicated perations fliould be necessary, in order to procure
a few letters to be written in the French language.

B3 1 T without infifing farther on this, we may observe that

all this author's preli!es may be granted, and yet his conclu-
sion will not follow, unless he likewise prove that the French
letters, as we now have them, are a true copy of those which
were produced by MurIay and his party in the Scottifli parlia-
ment, and at York and \Wefltinfcr. But this he has not at-
tempted; and if we attend to the hiltory of the letters, such
an attempt, it is obvious, muff have been unsuccessful. The
letters were first publifled at the end of Buchanan's deteflion.
The first edition of this treatise was in Latin, in which lan-
guage three of the queen's letters were subjoined to it; this La-
tin edition was printed A. D. 1571. Soon after a Scottifll tran-
flation of it was publillcd, and at the end of it were printed,
likewise in Scotlilli, the three letters which had formperly ap- .
peared in Latin, and five other letters in Scottish, which were

T z not

not in the Latin edition. Next appeared a French translation
of the Dete&tion, and of seven of the letters ; this bears to have
been printed at Edinburgh by Thomas Waltem, 1572. The
name of the place, as well as of the piinrer, is allowed by all
parties to be a manifest imposture. Our author, from observing
the day of the month, on which the printing is said to have
been finilied, has asSerted that this edition was printed at Lon-
don; but no stress can be laid upon a date found in a book,
where every other circumstance with regard to the printing is
allowed to be false. Blackwood, who (next to Lellcy) was
the best informed of all Mary's advocates in that age, affirls
that the French edition of the Detecion was publiihed in France:
" 11 [Buchanan] a depuis adjouft a cclee declamation un pe-
tit libelle du pretendu mariage du Duc de Norfolk, et de la
facon de son proces, et la tout envoye aux freres a la Rochelle,
lefquels voyantes qu'il pouvoit fervir a la cause, l'ont traduit en
FranSois, et iceluy fut imprimee a Edinbourg, c'eft a dire a la
Rochelle, par Thomas Waltem, nom apoftc et fait a plaifir.
Martyre de Marie. Jebb. 2. 256." The author of the Inmo-
cence de Marie goes farther, and names the French translator of
the Dete&ion. Et iceluy premierement compose (comine il
femble) par George Buchanan Efcolroys, et depuis traduit en
langue Fran;oife par un Hugonot, Poitevin (advocat de voca-
tion) Camuz, soy difant gentilhome, et un de plus remarqucz
feditieux de France. Jeb. . 425, 443." The concurring
testimony of two cotemporary authors, whose residence in
France afforded them sufficient means of information, must out-
weigh a flight conje&ure. This French translator does not pre-
tend to publili the original French letters as written by the
queen herself: he exprefly declares that he translated them from
the Latin. Good. i. 103. Had our author attended to all
these circumstances, he might have saved himself the labour
of so many criticifims to prove that the present French copy of
the letters is a translation from the Latin. The French editor
himself acknowledges it, and so far as I know no person ever
denied it.

WE mayobferve that the French translator was so ignorant,

as to affirm that Mary had written there letters, partly inFrench,
partly in Scottifli." Good. . 103. Had this translation been
published at London by Cecil, or had it been made by his
direction, so gross an error would not have been admitted into
it. This error, however, was owing to an odd circumstance.
In the Scottifs translation of the Detetion two or three fen-
tences of the original French were prefixed to each letter,
which breaking off with an &c. the Scottifli translation of the
whole followed. This method of printing tranflatibns was not
uncommon in that age. The French editor observing this,
foolishly concluded that the letters had been written partly in
French, partly in Scottish.

IF

I F we carefully confider these few French sentences of each

letter which still remain, and apply to them that species of cri-
ticism, by which our author has examined the whole, a clear
proof will arise, that there was a French copy not translated
froml the Latin, but which was itself the origi-al from which
both the Latin and Scottillh have been translated. This mimlne
criticilil mruft necessarily be difagrc:abc to mary readers; but
luckily a few fentenccs only are to b exal:incd, which will
render it extremely flort.

IN the firfl letter, the French sentence prefixed to it ends

with these words, yfaioit bon. It is plain this expreflion, veu
ce que peut un corps fan caur, is by no means a translation of cutn
plane perinde effim atque corpus fine cordle. The whole sentence
has a spirit and elegance in the French, which neither the
Latin nor Scottilh have retained. 7Jutques a la dinee is not a
ktranflation of toto prandii tempore; the Scottiflh translation,
quhile denner-time, expresses the sense of the French more pro-
perly; for anciently quhile signified until as well as during. 7e
u' ay pas tenu grand propos is not juflly rendered neque contulerim
sermonem cur qzgoquam; the phrase used in the French copy, is
one peculiar to that language, and gives a more probableac-
count of her behaviour than the other. Jugeant bien qu'il n'y
faifoit bon, is not a tranfation of ut qui judicarent id non efe ex
tfu. The French sentence prefixed to Lett. 2. ends with ap-
prendre. It is evident that both the Latin and Scottish tranfla-
tions have omitted altogether these words, et toutefoisje ne puis
apprendre. The French sentence prefixed to Lett. 3. ends with
pirejenter. 7'aye veille plus tard la haut is plainly no translation
of diutius illic moratafum; the sense of the French is better ex-
pressed by the Scottifli I hqve alAkit later there-up. Again,
Pour excuser 'vofire affaire is very different from ad excufandun
no/lra negozia. The five remaining letters never appeared in
Latin ; nor is there any proof of their being ever translated into
that language. Four of them, however, are publifled in
French. This intirely overturns our author's hypothesis con-
cerning the necelfity of a translation into Latin.

IN the Scottish edition of the Detection the whole Sonnet is

printed in French as well as in Scottifi. It is not potfible to
believe that this Scottish copy could .be the original from which
the French was translated. The French consists of verses
which have both measure and rhyme, and which, in many places,
are far from being inelegant. The Scottifi consists of an equal
numberoflines, but without meafureor rhyme. Now no man
could ever think of a thing so absurd and impracicable, as to
require one to translate a certain given number of lines in prose
into an equal number of verses, where both nmeafure and rhyme
were to be observed. The Scottifll, on the contrary, appears
to be manifestly a translation of the French; the plrafcs, the

idioms,

idioms, andmany of the words are French, and not Scortifl.
Besides, the Scottilh translator has, in several illanccs, nilta-
ken the sense of the French, and in many more -.xpiefles the
sense imperfetly. Had the sonnet been forged, this could not
have happened. The directors of the fraud would have undcr-
stood their own work. I lliall satisfy niyfelf with one cxapipc,
in which there in a proof of both my assertions. Stanza viii.
ver. 9.

Pour luyj'attendz toute bonne fortune,
Pour luy je veux garder finte et vie
Pour luy tout vertu de fuivre j'ay envie.

For him I attend all gude fortune,
For him I will conserve helthe and lyse,
For him I desire to ensue courage.

Attend in the first line is not a Scottiffi but a French phrase;

the two other lines do not express the sense of the French, and
the last is absolute nonsense.

TH E eighth letter was never translated into French. It con-

tains much refined mysticism about devices, a folly of that age,
of which Mary was very fond, as appears from several other
circumtiances, particularly from a letter concerning imprefis
by Drummond of Hawthornden. If Mary's adversaries forged
her letters, they were certainly employed very idly when they
produced this.

F RO M these observations it feenms to be evident that there

was a French copy of Mary's letters, of which the Latin and
Scottifl were only translations. Nothing now remains of this
copy but those few sentences which are prefixed to the Scottill
translation. The French editor laid hold of these sentences, and
tacked his own translation to them, which, so far as it is his
work, is a servile and a very wretched translation of Buchanal;'s
Latin ; whereas in thoife introduEtory sentences, we have disco-
vered strong marks of their being originals, and certain proots
that they are not translated from the Latin.

IT isapparcnt, too, from comparing the Latin and Scottiill

translations with thife sentences, that the Scottilli translator has
nmore perfectly attained the sense and spirit of the French than
the Latin. And as it appears that the letters were very ear!)
translated into Scottilh, Good. 2. 76; it is probable that Bu-
chanan made his translation not from the French but from this
Scottifli copy. Were it necessary, several critical proofs of
this mig lt be produced. One that has been already mentioned
seems decisive. Diutiius illic mtorata fui Lears not the leall re-
felmblance to j'aye eillphlus tard Ia haut ; but if, inftcad of

I v.'all.i

I .walkit [i. e. watched] Inter there-up, we suppose that Bu-
chanan read I jwaitit, &c. this mistake, into which he might
lb easily have fallen, accounts for the error in his tranfla-
tion.

TH ES E criticifins, however minute, appear to be well

founded. But whatever opinion may be formed concerning
themn, the other arguments with regard to the internal evidence
remain in full force.

T E external proof of the forgery of the Queen's letters,

which our author has produced, is extremely spacious, but not
more foiid than that which we have already examined. Ac-
cording to Murray's diary, Mary set out froil Edinburgh to
Glasgow January z2, 1567; fle arrived there on the 3d;
left that place on the 27th ; he, together with the King, reach-
ed Linlithgow on the z8th, stayed in that town only one night,
and returned to Edinburgh before the end of the month. But
according to our author, the Queen did not leave Edinburgh
till Friday January z4th; as fle flayed a night at Callendar,
fle could not reach Glasgow sooner than the evening of Satur-
day the 25th, and she returned to Linlithgow on Tuesday the
28th. By consequence, the firfl letter which supposes the
Queen to have been at least four days in Glasgow, as well as the
second letter, which bears date at Glasgow Saturday morning,
whereas flhe did not arrive there till the evening, must be for-
geries. That the Queen did not set out from Edinburgh sooner
than the z2th of January, is evident (as he contends) from the
public records, which contain a Precept of confirmation of a life-
rent by James Boyd to Margaret Chalmers granted by the
Queen on the z4th of January at Edinburgh ; and likewise a
letter of the Queen's dated at Edinburgh on the fame day, ap-
pointing James Inglis taylor to the prince her son. That the
King and Queen had returned to Linlithgow on the z8th, ap-
pears from a deed in which they appoint Andrew Ferrier keeper
of their palace there, dated at Linlithgow January 28. Good.
1. 1i8.

TH s has been represented to be not onlya convincing, but

a legal proof of the forgery of the letters laid to be written by
Mary ; but how far it falls short of this, will appear from the
following considerations.

i. IT is evident from a declaration or confession made by the'

bilhop of Ross, that before the conferences at York, which
were opened in the beginning of October 1568, Mary had, by
an artifice of Maitland's, got into her hands a copy of those let-
ters which her fubjeets accused her of having written to Both-
well. Brown's trial of the duke of Norfolk, 31, 36. It is
highly probable that the biflhop of Ros had seen the letters be-
fore he wrote the defence of Queen Mary's honour, in the year
157o. They were publilhed to all the world together with

lluchnan'f

Buchanan's detection, A. D. 1571. Now if they had con-
tained any error so gross, and so obvious, at that time, to dif-
covery, as the supposing the queen to have pafli(c several days
at Glasgow, while he was really at Edinburgh ; hadl they con-
tained aletter dated at Glasgow Saturday morning, tho' flie dd
not arrive there till the evening ; is it poflibi that Ihc hcrfcif,
who knew herown motions, or the alle rnd zealous advoca:cs
who appeared for her in that age, fhr.ii not have puliifled
and exposed this contradiction, and, by lo doing, have liafted,
at once, the credit of such an ipuure ? In lilquifitions which
are naturallyabftrufe and intricate, the ingcnuily of the latelt
author may discover many things, wlih h iave cfcnpcd the at-
tention, or baffled the sagacity of those who have fra:erly
confidcred the fame subjet. But wvhen a riattcr of fast lay so
obvious to view, this circuuiftance of its being unobserved by
the queen herself, or by any of her adhercents, is almol a dc-
monfiration that there is some niftake or fallacy in our author's
arguments. And so far are any either of our historians, or of
Mary's defenders, from calling in queflion the commiion account
concerning the time of the queen's setting out to Glasgow and
her returning from it, that there is not the leaf appearance of
any difference among thcn with regard to this point. But
farther.

a. TH Os E papers in the public records, on which our au-

thor refts the proof of his assertions, concerning the queen's
motions, are not the originals subscribed by the queen, but
copies only, or translations of copies of those originals. It is
not necefiary, nor would it be very easy to render this intelligi-
ble to persons unacquainted with the forms of law in Scotland;
but every Scotsman conversant in business will understand me,
when I fay that the precept of confirmation of the life-rent to
Boyd is only a Latin copy or note of a precept, which was scalcd
with the privy feal, on a warrant finm the fignet-office, pro-
ceeding on a signature which bore date at Edinburgh the 24th
of January; and that the deed in favour of James Inglis is tle
copy of a letter, fealed with the privy £eal, proceeding on a
signature which bore date at Edinburgh January 24. Froml
all this we may argue with fomen degree of reafor, that a proof
founded on papers, which are so niany removes distant from
the originals, cannot be but very lanc and nncerlain

3. AT that time all public papers were issued in the name

both of the king and queen; hy law, the king's fuillfcriprion

as no le's requlfite to any paper than the quecn's ; and there-
fore uncefs the original signatures be produced in order to ar-
certain the particular day when each of thcm signed, or to
prove that itwas signed only hiv one of thenl, the legal proof
,r-ising froml elf papers would be, tiiat both the king

and

and queen signed them at Edinburgh, on the 24th of Ja-
nuary.

4. T E dates of the warrants nr precepts issued by the
overeign, in that age, seem to have been in a great meafire ar-
bitrary, and affixed at the pleasure of the writer; and of con-
sequence, these dates were seldom accurnre, are often false,
and can never be relied upon. This abuse became so frequent,
and was found to be Co pernicious, that an at of parliament,
A. D. 59z, declared the affixing a falfc date to a ignature to
be high treason.

5. TH E R still remain, in the public records, a great - .n-

berof papers, which prove the neceflity of this law, as well as
the weakness and fallacy of our authors arguments. And
though it be no easy matter, at the distance of two centuries, to
prove any particular date to be false, yet furprizing instances of
this kind Ihall be produced. Nothing is more certain from his-
tory than that the king was at Glasgow 2.th January 1567 ;
and yet therecord of signatures from 56 to 158z, Fol. 6th,
contains the copy of a signature to Archibald Edmonfton said
io have been subscribed by our Sovereigns, i. e. the king and
queen at Edinburgh, January 24th 1567 ; so that if we were
to trust implicitly the dates in the records of that age, or to hold
our author's argument to be good, it would prove that not only
the queen, but the king too, was at Edinburgh on the 24th of
January.

IT appears from an original letter of the biflop of Ross, that

on the 25th of October 1566, Mary lay at the point of death;
Keith, App. 134; and yet a deed is to be found in the publick
records, which bears that it was signed by the queen that day.
Privy-lal, Lib. 35. fol. 89. Ouclherl/oy *.

Bo r w E . . cized the queen as flie returned frotm Stirling,

April 2tlh 567, and (according to her own account) carried
her to Dunhb:r with all diligence. And. i. 95. Bnt our au-
thor, relvilg on the dates ot fonme papcrs ;wic l he found in
the recotd, fpllpnls that Bothwe ll allnvwed her to flop at Edin-
burgh, aInd to tan c bufnlers the'r:. )othing can he more
iiiprolibl)l than this supposition. We iay therefore rank the

* N. 1. In the former editions, another inflance of the fame

nature with those which go before and follow was mentioned;
but that, as has since been discovered, was founded on a mif-
take of tile prfon employed to search the records, and is there-
fore omitted in this edition. The rcafoning, however, in the
diirertation tands still in full force, notwithstanding this
omuilion.

date

date of the deed to Wright, Privy feal, Lib. 36. fol. 43 and
which is mentioned by our author, Vol. . 124. among the in-
stances of the false dates of papers which were issued in tle or-
dinary course of business in that age. Our author has niltaken
the date of the other paper to Sorbes, ibid. it is signed April
14th, not April 24th.

IF there be any point agreed upon in Mary's history, it is,

that he remained a Dunbar from the time that Bothwell car-
ried her thither, till he returned to Edinburgh along with him
in the beginning of May. Our author hinimtf allows that he
resided twelve days there, Vol. . 367. Now though there are
deeds in the records which bear that they were signed by the
Queen at Dunbar during that time, yet there are others which
bear that they were signed at Edinburgh, e. g. there is one at
Edinburgh, April 27th, Privy feal, Lib. 36. fol 97. There
are others said to be signed at Dunbar on that day. Lib. 31.
Chart. No. 524, 526. Ib. lib. 32. No. 154, 157. There are
fonie signed at Dunbar April z8th. Others at Edinburgh April
3oth, Lib. 32. Chart. No. 492. Others at Dunbar May it.
Id. ibid. No. 158. These different charters suppose the Queen
to have made so many unknown, improbable, and inconsistent
journeys, that they afford the clearest demonstration that the
dates in these records ought not to be depended on.

TH s becomes more evident from the date of the charter

said to be signed April 27th, which happened that year to be
a Sunday, which was not, at that time, a day of business in
Scotland, as appears from the books of federunt, then kept by
the Lords of session.

F R o M this ihort review of our author's proof of the forgery

of the letters to Bothwell, it is evident that his arguments are
far from amounting to denontration.

A N o T H E R argument againtl the genuineness of these letters

is founded on the tlile and conmpofition, which are aid to be al-
together unworthy of the Queen, and unlike her real produc-,
tions. It is plain, both fromn the great accuracy of compo-
fition in most of Mary's letters, and even fromi her solicitude
to write them in a fair hand, that file valued herself on those
accomplifihnents, and was desirous of being elleenled an ele-
gant writer. But when he wrote at any time in a hurry, then
many marks of inaccuracy appear. A remarkable irlance of
this may be found in a paper publifled, Good. 2. 301. Ma-
ry's letters to Bothwell were written in the utmost hurry; and
yet under all the disadvantages of a translation, they are not de-
ftitute either of spirit or of energy. The manner in which lie
expretfs her love to Bothwell hath been pronounced indecent
and even flocking But Mary's temper led her to warn cx-
prefions of her regard ; those refinements of delicacy, which

now

now appear in all the commerce between the fetes, were, In
that age, but little known, even among persons of the highest
rank. Among Lord Royfton's papers there is a ferics of letters,
from Mary to the Duke of Norfolk, copied from the Harleian
Libraiy, P. 37. B. 9. fol. 88, in which Mary declares her
love to that nobleman in language, which would now be rec-
koned extremely indelicate.

THE fornncts and some of Mary's letters to Bothwell were

written beibre the murder of her husband ; fonie of them after
that event, and before her marriage to Bothwell. Those which
are prior to the death of her husband abound with the fondest
expressions of her love to Bothwell, and plainly discover that
their familiarity had been extremely criminal. We si.id in
them, too, ome dark expressions, which her enemies employed
to prove that flie was no ftrangcr to the schemes which wer
forming against her husband's life. Of this kind are the -
lowing paflages, " Alace! I nevir difl'ivit ony body; bot I re-
mit me altogidder to zourwill. Send me avert;fti,!ent qullat
I fall do, and quhatfaever thing come thereof, I fall obey zow.
Advise too with zourfelf, gif ze can find out ony mair secret il-
ventioun by medicine, for he fuld tak medecine and the btli
at Craigmillar." Good. 2 2. " See not hir quhais fenzeit teiris
fuld not be a meikle prailit and eftemit, as the trew and tfa'li-
full travellis quhilk I fuftene fr to nierite bir place. For ob-
taining of the quhilk, aganis my natural, I betrayis thame h'at
mayimpefche me. God forgive me," &c. ibid. 27 " I have
walkit later thair-up, then I wald have done, gif it had ,- berr
to draw something out of him, quhilk this berer will fchaw
zow, quhilk is the fairest comnodity that can be htrf.rit to ex-
cufe zour affairs." Ibid. 32. From the letters plterior to the
death of her hufbiand, it is evident tli-t the ILhclne of B13thweil's
seizing Ma,y by force, and carrving hler nlong wi!h him, was
contrived in concert with herself, and w'ith her app:h.ition *.

HAVING

* T H letters of so much importance as those of Mary's to

Bothwell hould have been intirely loft, appears to many alto-
gether unaccountable. Alier beiitg pruduced in England be-
tore Elizabeth's comniilliolners, they were delivcred hack by
them to the Earl of Murray. Good. 2. 35. H-Ic f-ens to
have kept them in his poll'elion during his 1;le. After his death,
they fell into the hands of Lenox his fuccl;e'r, who reftnred
them to the Earl of Morion. Gond. 2. 91. ''houglhit benor
necclrarily coneeted with any of the quellions which gave oc.
carion to this Dirertation, it imay perhaps satisfy the curi.,fity
of floIu of my readers to inform thein, that after a very dili-

gent

HA v N G thus Ltated the proof on both fides ; having exa-

mined at so great length the different fyltems with regard to the
fads in controvcrfy; it may be expeced that I flould now

pronounce

gent search, which has lately been made, no copy of Mary's
letters to Bothwell can be found in any of the publick libraries
in Great Britain. The only certain intelligence concerning them,
since the time of their being delivered to Morton, was coIImmnu-
nicated by the accurate Dr. Birch.

E x T r C T of the letters of Robert Bowes, Efq; ambafa-dor

from Queen Elizabeth to the king of Scotland, written to Sir
Francis Walsingham, fecretaiy of State, from the original re-
gifter-book of Mr. Bowes's letters, from 5th of Augult 582,
to zSth September 1583, in the poflelion of Christopher Hun-
ter, M. D. of Durham.

1582, 8th November, from Edinburgh.

AL B E IT I have been born in hand, That the coffer where-

in were the originals of letters between the Scottifli Queen and
the earl of Bothwell, had been delivered to sundry hands, and
thereby was at present wanting, and unknown where it refted,
yet I have learned certainly by the Prior of Plufcardyne's means,
that both the coffer and also the writings are come, and now
remain with the Earl of Gowrie, who, I perceive, will be hard-
ly intreated to make delivery to her Majesty according to her
Majefly's desire.

TH s time past I have expended in earching where the cos-

ser and writings were, wherein without the help of the Prior I
should have found great difficulty; now I will essay Gowrie,
and of my success you fiall be flortly advertised.

izth of November 1 58, fiom Edinburgh.

BEC A SE I had both lea ned, that the calket and letters

mentioned in my laft,before therewere come to the poffeflion of
the E. of Gowrie, and also found that no mean might prevail to
win the fame out of his hands without his own consent and pri-
vity; in which behalf I had employed fit inftrumlents, that ne-
verthelefs profited nothing; therefore I attempted to efhy him-
self, lettin him know that the laid casket and letters Ihould
have been rought to her Majetly by the offer and good means
of good friends, proniifing to have delivered them to her ma-
jelly before they came into his hands and custody, and knowing
that he did bear the like affction, and was ready to pleasure
her Majesty in all things, and chiefly in this that had been thus
far tendered to her Mla.jefty, and which thereby flould be well
accepted, and with princely thanks and gratuity be requited to

his

pronounce sentence. In my opinion, there are only two con-
clufions, which can be drawn from the faas which have been
enumerated.

ONE,

his comfort and contentment; I moved him that they might be
a present to be lent to her Majesty from him, and that I might
cause the fame to be conveyed to her Majesty, adding here-
unto such words and arguments as might both stir up a hope
of liberality, and also best effect the purpose. At the first
he was loth to agree that they were in his poffeflion ; but I
let him plainly know that I was certainly informed, that
they were delivered to him by Sanders Jardin; whereupon
he prefled to know who did so inform me, enquiring whe-
ther the sons of the Earl of Morton had done it or no. I
did not otherways in plain terms deny or answer thereunto,
but that he might think that he had told me, as the prior is
ready to avouch, and well pleased that I fliall give him to be
the author thereof; after he had said [though] all there letters
were in his keeping (which he would neither grant nor deny)
yet he might not deliver them to any person without the con-
sents and privities, as well of the king, that had interest there-
in, as also of the reft of the noblemen enterprisers of the action
against the King's mother, and that would have them kept as an
evidence to warrant and make good that ation. And albeit I
replied, that their aCtion in that part touching the assignation of
the crown to the King by his mother, had received such efta-
blilhmient, confirmation, and strength, by ats of parliament
and other publick authority and instruments, as neither hould
that cafe be suffered to come in debate or question, nor such
scrolls and papers ought to be shewed for the strengthening
thereof, so as these might well be left and be rendered to the
hands of her Majesty, to whom they were destined before they
fell in his keeping ; yet he would not be removed or satisfied;
concluding, after Inuch reasonings, that the Earl of Morton,
nor any other that had the charge and keeping thereof, durst at
any time make delivery; and because it was the first time that
I had moved him therein, and that he would gladly both answer
her Majesty's good expectation in him, and also perform hi.s
duty due to his sovereign and aociates in the ation aforesaid
therefore he would seek out the said casket and letters, at his
return to his house, which he thought flould be within a hort
time ; and upon finding of the fame and better advice, and con-
fideration had of the cause, he would give further answer.
This resolution I have received as to the thing; and for the
present I could not better, leaving him to give her Majesty such

testimony

ON E, that Bothwcll, prompted by his ambition or love, en-

couraged by the Queen's known aversion to her husband, and
presuming on her attachment to himself, struck the blow with-

out

testimony of his good will towards her, by his frank dealing
herein, as fie may have cause to confirm her highlnefes good
opinion conceived already of him, and be thereby drawn to
greater goodness towards hin. I flall flill labour him both by
nmyfelf and also by all other means; but I greatly dinruft the de-
ired success herein.

24th of November 1582, from Edinburgh.

So R the recovery of the letters in the coffer, come to the

hands of the Earle of Gowrie, I have lately moved hinm earnest-
ly therein, letting him know the purpolc ol the Scottifil Quleen,
Loth giving out that the letters are counterfeited by her rebels,
and also seeking thereon to have them delivered to her or de-
faced, and that the means which fle will make in this behalf
flall be so great and effeiual, as these writings cannot be sale-
ly kept in that realn without dangerous offence of him that hath
the cuftocly thereof, neither fllal he that is once known to
have them be suffered to hold themi in his ha:ds. Herewith I
have at large opened the perils likely to fail to that aton, and
the parties therein, and particularly to hinifilf that is now
openly known to have the poflifion of these writings, and I
have Icttin him fee hat uirety it llall bring to the laid cause
and all the parties therein, and to hill:ielf, tht thlcie writings
mnny be with fccrecy and good order comnlitted to te keeping
of her Majesty, t:at will have them ready whenfcever an ule
iliall be for them, and by her Highnefies countenance defend
them and the parties fiom 1lch wrongfull ob jctions as fliall be
laid against them, offering at length to hli, that if he be not
fillly satisfied herein, or doubt that the rcft of the aflociatcs
shall not like of the delivery of them to her imajefty in this good
manner, and for the interest rehcarfed, that I ilial readily, up-
on meeting and conference with thcl:l, procure their assent in
this part; (a matter more easy to offer than to perform) and
lastly, moving him that (for the fIcrecy and benefit of the cause,
and that her Majesty's good opinion towards himnflf may be
firmly fettled and confirned by his acceptable so rwardincf here-
in) he would, without needlies fcruplc, fiankly ccil:mit thcfe
writings to her Majefly's good cufldv for the good u'es received.
After long debate he refol ed, an.i i.fid, that he would unfeign-
edly flhew and do to lhr i:;jefty :11 the plenfure that he n,iglt
without offence to the Kinig his Sovercign, and prejudice to
the afrociates in the n;cion, and therifiore ih wou lid fir!i irkc
search and view the said letters, and hereti tkc auvice w.iat i'e

l!:itg!:l

out having concerted with her the manner or circumstances of
perpetrating that crime. That Mary, instead of testifying
much indignation at the deed, or discovering any resentment
against Bothwell, who was accused of aving committed it,

continued

might do, and how far he might satisfy and content her Ma-
jeffv; promising thereon to give more resolute anvwer; and he
concluded flatly, that after he had found and fecn the writings,
that he might not make delivery of them without the privity
of the King. Albeit I food long with him against his refolu-
tion in this point, to acquaint the King with this matter before
the letters were in the hands of her Majesty, letting him fee
that his doings there hould admit great danger to the cause;
yet I could not remove him from it. It may be that he mean-
eth to put over the matter from himself to the King, upon fight
whereof I flall travel effeEtually to obtain the King's conent,
that the letters may be comnmitted to her Majesty's keep-
ing, thinking it more easy to prevail herein with the King,
in the present love and affection that he beareth to her Highness,
than to win any thing at the hands of the associates in the aion.
whereof fonme principal of them now come and remain at the
devotion of the King's mother; in this I hlall still call on Gow-
rie to search out the coffer, according to his promise; and as
I flall find him minded to do therein, so shall I do my bes and
whole endeavour to effct the success to her Majesty's best con-
tentment.

2d December 1582, from Edinburgh.

B E C A U S E I aw good opportunity offered to renew the mat-

ter to the Earl of Gowrie for recovery of the letters in the cos-
ser in his hands, therefore I put him in mind thereof; where-
upon he told me, that the Duke of Lenox had fought earnestly
to have bad those letters, and that the King did know where
they were, o as they could not be delivered to her VMajefty
without the King's privity and content, and he pretended to be
fill willing to pleasure her Mlajefty in the fame, so far as he
may with his duty to the King and to the reft of the afrbciates
in that ation ; but I greatly difiruft to effect this to her Ma-
jefty's pleasure, wherein, nevertheless, I lhall do my uttermost
endeavours.

WH E T H E R James VI. who put the Earl of Gowrie to death,

A. D. t 584, and teized all his effets, took care to deltroy his
mother's letters, for whofc honour he was at that tile ex-
tremely zealous; whether they have perilled by tome unknown
accident; or whether they may not fill remain unobserved
among the archives of fbme of our great families, it is ipoll-
ble to determine.

continued to load him with marksof herregard, conduacd his trial
in such a manner as rendered it impoflible to discover his guilt,
and soon after, in opposition to all the maxims of decency or of
prudence, voluntarily agreed to a marriage with him, which
every consideration should have induced her to detest. By this
verdit, Mary is not pronounced guilty of having contrived the
murder of her husband, or even of having previously given her
content to his death; but flie is not acquitted of having dilio-
vered her apt robation of the deed, by her behaviour towards
him who was the author of it.

T E other conclusion is that which Murray and his adhe-

rents laboured to cftablifh, " That as James, liimtyine erle of
Bothewile, was the chiefe executor of the horribili and unwor-
thy murder, perpetrat in the person of umquhile king Henry
of gude memory, fader to our foveraine lord, and the queeris
lauchfull husband; fa was fle of the foreknowlcdge, counfall,
devise, perfwadar and comnandar of the said murder to be
done." Good. 2. 207.

WHICH of these conclusions is moRs agreenble to the evi-

dence, that has been produced, I leave my readers to deter-
mine.

INDEX

# INDEX.

I N DE X.
V. B. The Numerical Letters refer to the Vo-

lume, and the Figures to the Pages.

A.
A DAMSO 0 , archbifiop of St. Andrews, is excommu-

nicated by the fynod of Fife, II. 6. He excommuni-

cated his opponents, ib. is restored by the general assembly
upon conditions, ib. His mean submission to the general
aflembly, - - ib.
Albany, Alexander, duke of, cabals with his nobles against his

brother K. James III. I. 3, is made prisoner but escapes to
France, 32, concludes a treaty with Edw. IV. of England,
ib. procures aliftance to invade Scotland on mean condi-
tions, ib. returns to Scotland, and is restored to favour, 33.
cabals again, but is forced to fly to France - ib.

duke of, made regent during the minority of K. James V.

I. 20, 35, after several unficcefsful struggles with the nobi-
lity, he is forced to retire to France - ib.
Alencon, duke of, Q Elizabeth long ainufes the court of France,

by carrying on a treaty of marriage with him I. 310.
Allen, cardinal, published a book proving the lawfulness of kill-

ing excommunicated princes - II. 9.
Alva, duke of, his intrigues, in favour of Q. Mary, I. 288,

290, 296, is recalled from his government of the Nether-
lands - - - 301

Amba/jadors, their office - - . 48
Andrews St. the archbishop of, remarkably cured of a dange-

rous diitemper, I. 74, the motives of his opposition to the
Q regent, 86, his great influence on the bench of biflops
and weight in parliament, 89, governed the church with
great moderation, go, persecutes the reformers, ib. per-
forms great service to the congregation against the French,
120, is imprisoned for celebrating Mass, 162, ruins Q Ma-
ry's affairs by his imprudent conduct, 243, & seq. is taken
prisoner in Dumbarton castle, and hanged - 283

--- the castle of, deniolifled by the French 1. 63
·--- the prior of, promotes a treaty between the Q. regent

and the reformers, 1. 97, is provoked to leave the court,
VOL. IT 98,

98, is one of the chief promoters of the reformation, o,
omen account and a character of him, ib. artful endea-
vours used to undermine him, ib. presumption of his inno-
cence of the designs charged on him, ib. is sent by the con-
vention to inyite the queen to Scotland, 137, is received by
her with confidence and affetion, ib. restrains the turbu-
lent spirit of the people against popery, 144, is sent to re-
strain the licentious practices of the borderers, 147, executes
his commiflion with vigour and prudence, 148, a conlpiracy
against him discovered, 152, is created earl of Mar, 154,
becomes obnoxious to the earl of Huntly, ib. fee Mar and
Murray.
Angus, earl of, was the only man who aflerted the indepen-

dency of his country, I. 6, 7, assumes the regency during
the minority of K. James V. 35, is unable to gain his assec-
tions, ib. is attainted and flies into England - 36
- --obtains leave to return into Scotland, I. 323, fur-

renders himself to K. Jamles VI. 329, he with several others
seize the castle of Stirling to oppose Arran, 331, they are
forced to fly into England on the approach of the king with
an army, ib. he is attainted and his estate forfeited, II. 3. is
concerned in a plot in favour of Spain, 54, is seized and com-
mitted prisoner to the cattle of Edinburgh, 55, escapes and
flies to the mountains, ib. offers to submit to a trial, 57,
sentence is pronounced against him, 58, he refuses to sub-
mit ib.
Anjou, duke of, a marriage proposed between him and Q Eli-

zabeth -- 1. 287
Anne, a princess of Denmark, married to K. James VI. II. 49,

her arrival in Scotland and coronation, 51, heads a party
that opposes the chancellor -- 5
Archblifops, bi/hops, deeans, and chapters revived in Scotland

during the king's minority, I. 295, 296, this gives great
offence to many of the clergy, ib. an a& ofaflembly against
these offices, 320, bilhops made fubje& to prelbyteries and
assemblies, II. 16, a great stroke given to their authority,
4 1. None of them present at the queen's coronation 51
Argyl, earl of, is appointed to carry the crown matrimonial to

the dauphin of France, I. 89, uses his interest with the
reformers to make a treaty with the queen regent, 97, leaves
her court in resentment of her treachery, 98, refuses to ac-
cede to a treaty with Murray the regent, 264, is soon after
forced to fubmiit, ib. ats as lieutenant to the queen after
the regent's nurder, 276, is prevailed on to join the king's
party, 285, quarrels with Athole, 303, confederates with
him againt Morton the regent, for their mutual defence, ib.
they remcntrate against him to the king, 306, theyraife

forces

forces against him, 308, negotiates a treaty with him by the
mediation of Q Elizabeth, ib. is promoted to the office of
chancellor, 309, the king's authority delegated to him and
lord Sorbes against the popifl lords, II. 60, his forcesare
defeated in an engagement with them 6

Arifiotacy, predominant in Scotland I. 128
Armada, Spanilh, preparations for it, II. 4 , it is defeated 46
Arran, earl, is appointed regent during the minority of Q. Ma-

ry, I. 54, his character, ib. consents to the schemes of Eng-
land which disgusts the public, 55, becomes suspicious of
the earl of Lenox, 56, is forced to renounce the friendflip
with England and declare for France, 57, and to persecute
the reformers, ib. publickly abjures the doctrine of the re-
formers, ib. is contemned by one half and little trusted by the
other part of the nation, 58, heads the partizans of France
and defenders of popery, ib. attempts in vain to seize the
murderers of cardinal Beatoun, 62, is forced to make a truce
with the conspirators, ib. his eldest son is conditionally ex-
cluded all right of fuccellion, 64, his mean conceflion to the
courtof France, 68, gets the title of Chatelherault, ib. is
undermined by the queen dowager, 72, 73, propofalsand
arguments for his resignation, ib. he contentsto it, 74, re-
tradts by the influence of the archbiffhop of St. Andrews, ib.
is at last prevailed on and gets advantageous terms, 75. See
Chatelherault.
Arran, eldest son of the duke of Chatelherault, joins in an as-

fociation with the reformers, I. io5, narrowly escapes in-
tended ruin at the court of France, ib. is full ofrefentment
against the French on that account, ib. the congregation so-
licit Q Elizabeth to marry him, 134, his great imprudence
with regard to Mary, 148, discovers a conspiracy against
the queen's favourites, 152, loes his reason, 309, 310, is
impriboned by Morton - - ib.

- late capt. Stewart, gets that title and estate, . 317, is

appointed to conduct Morton from Dumbarton to Edinburgh,
ib. tortures several of his servants cruelly, ib. his infa-
mous marriage with the countess of March, 318, his vari-
ance with Lenox, 319, is frustrated in an attempt to refcuc
the king atRuthven, 323, is confined prisoner to the catle
of Stirling. ib. regains his liberty and the king's regard, 327,
resumes his power and arrogance, ib. gets the Ruthven con-
fpirators declared guilty of high treason, 329, is detested as
author of a persecution against the clergy, 33z, is gained
over to queen Elizabeth's interest, II. 2, 3, gets several for-
feited estates, ib. his corruption and insolence, 7, is made
chancellor and has unlimited power, ib. his venality is imitated
by his wife, ib his monfrous tyranny and oppreflion, 8.

.U his

his power undermined by Wotton the English envoy, 14, is
confined in the catle of St. Andrews but oon recovers fa-
vour, ib. his interest finks much, ib. is ripped of his honours
and spoils, and reduced to his original station 1 5
Articles, Lords of, their origin and business, I. 45, 46, by

whom chosen, ib. the subsequent variations and political use
made of this institution 47
Arundel, Earl of, is appointed a commilioner to the conference

at WeRfminfter I. 259
Aj/by, ambaflador from Q. Elizabeth to Scotland, II. 45, his

great promiies to King James, ibid. his promises are soon
forgot, 47, he is afliamed and withdraws privately from
Scotland - - ibid.
Affafination, the frequency of it in Scotland, how accounted

for, I. 194, & seq. several instances of it in France, 296, a
stop put to it there and in Scotland, ibid. several great men
approved of it, ib. prevailed greatly afterwards II. 5
Alferbly of the church of Scotland, the first but feeble and ir-

regular, I. 136, another aflembty, their demands from the
convention, 149, two other aflemblies in vain solicit an aug-
mentation of their revenues, 159, they address Q. Mary in
high frains of complaints, 184, an assembly proceeds at Glaf-
gow notwithstanding the King's interdiCtion, 320, two as-
femblies yield many of the privileges of the church to the
King, 71, declare it lawful for ministers to fit in parliament,
ib. & seq. See Clergy.
Afociation, formed in defence of Q Elizabeth against Q Mary

II. 5
Athole, Earl of, the occasion of his quarrel with the Earl of

Argyll, I. 303. joins with him in opposing Morton the re-
gent, ibid. dies soon after an entertainment at Morton's, 309,
suspicions of his being poisoned - ibid.
Aubigne, Lord de, second Ton of the Earl of Lenox, arrives in

Scotland from France, I. 311, becomes oon a great favou-
rite of K. James, ibid. high titles and pofls bestowed on him,
ibid. notes againt him, appendix 34. See Lenox
Auflrian family, their origin and power - I. 48

B.

B ABINGTON, Anthony, rome account of him, II. 18,
B the rife of his conspiracy againfl: Q. Elizabeth, ibid. the

names and scheme of operations of his associates, 19, they
are betrayed, seized and executed - 20
Bacon, Sir Nicholas, appointed one of the commifioners to the

conference at Westminster - I. 259
Baliol, John, his claim to the crown of Scotland, I. 6, is re-

ferred by Edw. I. 7, oon forced by him to resign iid.

Ballard,

Ballard, a trafficking priest, solicits an invasion of England

from Spain, II. 18, joins in a conspiracy to murder Q Eli-
zabeth, 19, is discovered and taken into custody, ao, and
executed - - ibid.
Barons, their jurifdi6tion very extensive, I. 12, the difference

between the greater and lesser whence, 43, three hundred of
them remionflrate against the conduct of the Q. Dowager,
83. the lesser admitted by their representatives into parlia-
ment, II. 42, petition of the lefflr barons to parliament,
app. i 2i. See Aoles.
Bajilicon Doron, a book publifled by K. James VI. strengthens

his interest in England - I. 74
Beatoun, cardinal, made use of by K. James V. to mortify the

nobles, I. 38, his pretensions to the regency on the death
of that prince, 52, forges a testament of the late King, ibid.
his views how disappointed, 53, his charater, 55, opposes
the Earl of Arran regent, ibid. excites mos of the nation
against the Englifl, 55, 56, seizes the young Queen and her
mother, ibid. cajoles the Earl of Lenox, ibid. obliges the
regent to renounce England and declare for France, ibid. and
to persecute the reformers, 57, engrosses the chief direcion
of affairs, 58, his double dealing with the Earl of Lenox re-
sented, ibid. is murdered, 61,62. his death fatal to the Ca-
tholics, ib. a vain attempt to revenge it, ib. scandalous re-
ports concerning him - 80
Bedford, Earl of, comes as ambassador from Q. Elizabeth to

witness the baptism of James VI. I. 207, his inftrutions,
ibid. 208, his letters to Sir W. Cecil, appendix 142, 144,

150
Bell ndon, Sir Lewis, jutice clerk, K. James's resident at Lon-

don, II. 13, joins in promoting Q. Elizabeth's interest in
Scotland, ibid. is ent with her envoy into that country

ibid.
Black, Mr. David, minister at St. Andrews, his ridiculous and

seditious expreffionsin the pulpit, II. 65, 66, being support-
ed by the clergy, he declines the civil jurifdiAtion, 67, is
condemned by the privy council, ib. is sentenced by the
King to reside beyond Spey - ibid.
Blackader, captain, and three others executed for the murder of

Darnly - - . 232

Boelhies, Hector, his history of Scotland, ome account of, I. 3.
Bollon Catile, Q, Mary confined a prisoner there I. 251
Bonot, a foreigner, made governor of Orkney, I. 8z
Borderers, an attempt to restrain their licentious pracices, 1. 147,

Q. Mary visits them, 202, a cuffle there in which the Eng-
lifl warden, &c. are made prisoners - 3oz
,Borthwick, Lord, aflifts the Queen Regent in defending Leith

U 3 t6

Bot'well,

BothIell, Earl of, intercepts a fum of money from England to

the congregation, I. 115, favours the Queen Regent, but
resides at his own house, 1 16, his resentment against the prior
of St. Andrews, 153, is by him, when Earl of Murray and
Regent, summoned to a public trial, 176, prevents it by
leaving the kingdom, ibid. a sentence of outlawry against
him prevented by the Queen, ibib. is permitted to return,
181, escapes with her afterthe murderof Rizio, 193, fonle
account of his former behaviour, 98, commences a favou-
rite of the Queen, ibid. he reconciles him to several
lords, with whom he was at variance, 199, he increases
in favour with her, zoo, circunifances concurring in this,
ibid. he is wounded in attempting to seize one of the bor-
derers, zo2, the Queen's extraordinary regard for him on
this occasion, ibid. to secure adherents he obtains a pardon
forMorton and his associates, 29, proposes the restoration
of the popish ecclefiafcicaljurifdicion, ibid. his views in this,
ibid. is fufpeaed to be the author of Darnly's murder, 214,
is charged with it by Lenox, 216, but till favoured by the
Queen, ibid. appointed governor of Edinburgh Castle, ibid.
his trial is hurried on, ibid. remarkable partiality in his fa-
vour, ibid. Lenox accuses him openly, 217, comnes to his
trial with a great retinue, 218, is acquitted by a jury, ibid.
the trial universally censured, 219, challenges any that would
accuse him, ibid. several ats of parliament passed in his fa-
vour, ibid. he procures an ac in favour of the reformation,
2zo, prevails on several of the nobles to recommend him as a
hulband to the Queen, 221, seizes the Queen on a jour-
ney from Stirling, and carries her to Dunbar, 223, his
view in this, ib. & seq. obtains a pardon under the great feal,
ibid. procures a divorce from his wife, ibid. carries the
Queen to the castle of Edinburgh, ibid. is created duke of
Orkney, 225, and married to the Qcen, ibid. is not allow-
ed the title of King, ibid. he watches the Queen very clofcly,
ibid. endeavours to get the prince into his custody, 226, is
alarmed with an association of the nobles against the Qleen
and him, 227, carries the Queen to the cafle of Borthwick,
ibid. raises forces against the confederate lords, 228, he
marches against them, ibid. proposes a single combat, ibid.
this how prevented, ibid. takes his last farewell of the Qulen,
and is forced to fly, ibid. fends fora cafk-t of letters fromn Q
Mary to him, 232, they are intercepted by the Earl of MVr-
ton, ibid. his miserable fate, 2 38, 239, reflacion on his
conduct, ibid. copy of his divorce from Lady Jean Gordon,
appendix - 224.

-late Francis Stewart, created earl of Bothwell, I. 47,
is imprisoned for conlulling witcles, 52, efcnpes an'

attccp

attempts to break into the King's presence, ibid. retires to
the north, ibid. he and his adherents are attainted, 54,
fails in an attempt to seize the King, ibid. is taken under pro-
teflion of Q. Elizabeth, who solicits for him, 55, seizes the
King's person, 56, forces him to difniifs the chancellor
and his other favourites, 57, and to grant him a remiflion,
ibid. his bold and insolent behaviour afterwards, ib. is en-
couraged by the Engliih abaffador 59, makes another at-
tempt to come at the King, ib. is repulsed and obliged to
fly to the nrth of England, ibid. is abandoned by Queen
Elizabeth, and forced to fly into Spain and Italy, 6a, re-
mains in indigent obscurity, and is never after reconciled to
the King - - - ibid.
Bothiell, Adam, bishop of Orkney, performs the ceremony of

marriage of Q. Mary to the Earl of Bothwell I. 225

Bothwellhaugh. See Hamilton.
Boulogne, wretted by the French out of the hands of the Eng-

lifh, . 68, they content to restore it and its dependencies to
the French - - 69
Bowes, Envoy from Queen Elizabeth, accuses Lenox of disturb-

ing the peace, I. 313, is refused an audience ibid, is ent to
encourage the conspirators at Ruthven, 323, to enquire about
K. ames's correspondence with the pope 11. 75
Boyd, Lord, his ambitious views in the time of K. James III.

frustrated - - - I. 20
--- is prevailed on to join the King's party against Q Ma-
ry, . 285, joins the Ruthven conspirators - 32Z
Brienne, Count de, comes as anbaffador from France to wit-

ness the baptifin of K. James VI. - I. 207
.Bruce, Robert, his claim to the crown of Scotland, I. 6, his

grandson asserts his right and vindicates the honour of his
country, 7, he attempts to reduce the power of the nobles

26

a priest, employed by the King of Spain to seduce the

Scots nobles - - II. 47
- Mr. Robert, a presbyterian minister, performs the ce-
remony of the coronation of K. James's Queen II. 5
- Edward, abbot of Kinlefs, acquits himself with ad-
dress and reputation as anibaflador at the court of England

II. 74
·-- Mr. Robert, a minister, his resolution in refusing to

publish the King's account of Gowrie's conspiracy, IT. 87,
is deprived and banished on that account - ibid.
Buchlanan, George, his history of Scotland, rome account of,

I. 3, remarks on his dialogue de jure Regni, oo, alone
accufcs Q. Mary of a criminal correspondence with Rizio,
191, approved of affflination 196, his partiality in over-
looking an a"t of Parliament in favour of the reformation,

U4

z2o. attends the Regent into England when called on to
accuse Q, Mary, 253. was one of the preceptors of K.
James VI. 304. commended for his great genius, II. o 5, 0o6

Burleigh, fee Cecil.
Burroughs, when first represented in parliament I. 128 & seq.

C.
C IS, John, a declaration of his in name of Q Elizabeth

to the Lords of Grainge and Lethingron, app. - 192
Caithness, Earl of, his protest at the trial of Bothweil for the mur-

der of Darnly - - I. 219
Calvin, the patron and refrorer of presbyterian church govern-

ment - - I. 135

Camden, some mistakes of his - I. 208. 222
Canongate, near Edinburgh, a Parliament held there I. 283
Cardan, some account of him, I. 74. his remarkable cure of

the bishop of St. Andrews - - ibid.
Carey, Sir George, sent ambafTador from Q. Elizabeth to en-

courage the conspirators at Ruthven - I. 323
- Robert, sent by Q Elizabeth to ooth K. James after the

death of his mother, II. 38, is not penmitted to enter Scot-
land, 39, was the first that brought K. James intelligence
of the death of Q Elizabeth - - 99
Caket of letters from Q Mary to Bothwell seized by the Earl

of Morton, I. 232, her enemies avail themselves much of
them - - ibid.

Cafils, Earl of, joins the King's party - - . 2S5
Caftlenau, the French ambaflador, is employed to procure the

consent of his court to her marriage with Darnly, I. 172, he
endeavours to make up the differences between the Queen
and him, 199, his intercellion in behalf of Queen Mary

II. o
Catharine of Medicis, assumes the government after the death of

Francis II. her son, I. 133 & seq. her harsh treatment of Q
Mary, ibid. her views in behaving more friendly to her, 164,
bends her whole endeavours to delfroy the Protestants, 287.
her artful conduc with that view - ibid.
Cecil, his great capacity as a minister, I. 126, 139, is employ-

ed to negotiate a peace with France, ibid. over-reaches the
French ambassador in the treaty of Edinburgh, ibid. is ap-
pointed a commifioner to the conference at Weftminftcr, 2 9,
sent by Q. Elizabeth with propolals to Q< Mary, 279, has
an interview with her which excites Q. Elizabeth's jealousy,
302, is treated harfliy by Q. Elizabeth for consenting to Q
Mary's death - - II. 38
*-- Sir Robert, son to the former, heads the party against

S.iex, II. 90, his character, ibid. his great afiduity, ibid.

enters

enters into a private correspondence with K. James, 94, a
letter from him to his Ma jefty, app. - zS2
Celibav of the pcpifh clergy, a chief engine of their policy

1. 79
Charles V. Emperor, his great power, I. 48, and unlimited

ambition, 49, is checked by Francis I. - ibid.

K-ing of France makes a league with Q Elizbeh, I. 29o
Chattelherault, Duke of, that title conferred on the Earl of Arran,

Regent of Scotland, I. 68, his right of fucceflion to the
crown of Scotland maintained, 86, enters a protestation to
save his right, 88, joins in association with the reformers,
o16, is looked on as the head of the congregation, ib.
joins them in endeavouring to expel the French army, ibid.
his pufillnanimiry, 114, becomes obnoxious to Q. Mary, 148,
his jealousy of the prior of St. Andrews, 52, 1 53, deprived
of his French pension, 164, is alarmed at the Earl of Lenox's
return to Scotland, 169, an accommodation brought about
by the Queen's influence ib. adheres to Murray in oppo-
sing the Queen's marriage, 182, is pardoned on his hulmble
application, but forced to reside in France, 183, his parti-
zans grumble at Murray's being advanced to the Regency,
240, 241, returns from France and heads the Queen's adher-
ents, 263, is made her lieutenant-general, ibid. his resolution
wavering, the Regent commits him prisoner to the castle of
Edinburgh, 264, is et at liberty by Kirkaldy and joins the
Queen's party, 275, is proclaimed traitor by Lenox the new
Regent, 278, is reconciled to Morton the Regent, 298, ar-
ticles of a treaty between them, ibid. his death. - 30o
Church of Scotland, revolutions in it after the union of ttle

crowns, II. 4o., fee ajfenl'ly, cl-g,y.

Church Lands annexed to the crown by Parlianmelt IT. 41
Clans, the initutirn and nat ure of - 1. 5
Clergy, popifl, their great riches and power, I. 37, 77, were

inade ue of by K. James V. to Ilpprefs the nobles, 3S,
miade a considerable body in Pair'inlint, 78, their great in-
fluence over the laity, ib. thev cngrolled learning, ib. and
held many of the chief eniplonviiients, ibid. their power
encreafed by Celibacy, ibid. thev seized the e(tates ns the i-
testate, 79, and tried all inairinionial and testamentary
causes, ibid. become obiiuxiius to the laiiv, So, thelir great
corruption, whence, ibid. tliec of Scotland particulally
dilirlute, ib. their weak' defence of their tenets, 81, try
in vain to iipo(e false i iracls, ibid. their ipolitic conduc
to the reformers 91

- reformed, try in vain to recover the revenues of the
church, I. 136, & fccq. cause a!l relict of popery to be
decloyed, 138. a new regulation concerning their rcvenues,
149. 151, they are no giners by it ibid. their tipends

what

what in those days, ibid. are offended at the moderation of
their leaders, 163, occasion a tumult among the people,
ibid. mre complaints of their poverty, 169, 20o, are jea-
lous of Q Mary, ibid. the small allowance appointed to fiip-
port them all, ib. their application for payment of their
stipends of little effeEt, z40, frelh complaints of the defici-
ency of little funds for their maintenance, 271, are put
off with fair words and promises, ib. archbilhops, &c. in-
troduced among them by Morton, 294, 295, their grie-
vances under his adminiltration, 301, they approve of the
Ruthlven conspirators, 324, by favouring them they provoke
the King, 329, feverallaws made againfit them, 331, 332,
they of Edinburgh fly into England, ibid. as do several others
that were noft eminent, ibid. more vigorous measures againlt
them, II. 3, they obtain no address on the restoration of the
exiled Lords, 16, represent their grievances to Parliament,
40, a maintenance provided for them by Parliament, 42,
they prevail to get Pre(byterian government etablilhed by
law, 53, their zeal against the Popish Lords, 57, the
rash proceedings, 63, they erect a tianding Council of the
the Church, 64, 65, vindicate one of their numberwho de-
clined the civil jurifdiCfion, 66, their ifanding Council or-
dered to leave Edinburgh, 67, this occasions a violent tu-
mult there, ib. they use their utmost efforts to spirit the
people, 69, are deferred and fly to England, 70, their
power greatly reduced, ibid. are prevailed on to give up
many of their privileges, 71, are restored to a feat in
Parliament, 72, this violently opposed by many of thenm,
73, but carried in their general Afembly, ibid. those en-
titled to this privilege are laid under many regulations and
reftritions, 77, they are brought under great lubjetion,
ib. the revolutions among themn since the Union of the
crowns --4, 05
Clinton, Lord, appointed a commifioner at the conference at

Westminster - - I. 259
Coclburn of Orimifton, receives a supply of money from the
English to the congregation, I, 15, is intercepted and rob-
bed of it -- - ibid.

Coin in Scotland, some account of - I. 112, 301
CnmmiJries appointed to try causes in place of the Spiritual

Court, I. 130, theyaredeprived of all authority -- 210
C:bofeffon of faith y the 'Retrmers, consented to by Parlia-

ment - I. 30
ConrFrcrtion, the Protestants distinguished by that nanme, I.

95, their leaders enter into an association, ib. are involved
tn difficulties, 14, ppply to Q Elizabeth for affillance, ib.
Inoney (ent thon b Iar intercepted, 115, nmake a ralli
and deipltrate attempt on Leith and are repulsed, 116, are

110

no les unfortunate in a second ikirmifli, ibid. are quite di{-
pirited and retreat to Stirling, ibid. are joined by the body
of the nobles, ib. their army dwindles away, 117, are ani-
mated by Knox, ibid. they apply again to Q Elizabeth, ib.
their parties harals the French, 2zo, are aifted by a fleet
from England, 121, conclude a treaty at Berwick with the
D. of Norfolk, ib. the design and substance of this treaty,
i22, negotiate a peace, with France, 126, articles of the
treaty, ib. they reap many advantages from it, 128, fee
Reformation.
Ccvenant, National, framed in defence of the King and Go-

vernment, II. 45, the nature and reasonableness of it, 46,
the progress of it since ibid.

Courtejj of Scotland, what - I. 8
Craig, a minister, boldly testifies againit Q Mary's marriage

with Bothwell --- I. 224
Cra'wford, Capt. of Jordan Hill, furprizes Dumbarton Castle,

I. 281, the difficulties of that enterprize - ib.

·- -Earl of, one of the heads of the Spanish faction, IL

44, 47, offers his service to the K. of Spain, ibid. joins in
rebellion against the King, 48, is forced to submit to him,
49, and imprisoned a hort time. ib.
Crichton, Regent during the minority of K. James II. his bar-

barous policy - I. 29
--- a jesuit, a plot against Q Elizabeth discovered by his
means - - - I. 4
Criminals, a remarkable initance of the lifficulty of bringing

them to justice - - I. i1
Croc, du, the French Anibaffador, refuses to countenance Q

Mary's n:aniage with Bothwell, I. zzj, attempts in vain a
reconciliation between the Queen and the confederate Lords,
228, lediates a truce between the King's and Queen's party
in Scotland - 291
Crown matrimonial of Scotland granted by Parliament to the

Dauphin of France, I. 88, deputies appointed to carry it,
but are prevented - - 89
Cuningham, Robert, appears at the trial of Bothwell in name of

the Earl of Lenox, I. 218, demands a delay, whlich is re-
fused -- ibid.
Curle, one of Q Marv'q secretaries, is sized and carried pri-

(oner to L.onon, II. 22, is produced an evidce . *.itiilt
her - -

D.

D RIVL , Henry, Lord, proposi:d as a hulband to Q

Mary I. 167, his right of' fuccellion confidered, ibid.
168, is permitted to visit the court of Scotland, 17o, arrives

there

there and quickly gains the Queen's heart, 171, his charac-
ter, 172, disgusts several of the nobles, particularly Mur-
ray, ibid. cultivates a familiarity with David Rizio, 173, is
despised on that account, ib. grows intolerably insolent and
haughty, 177, schemes to alfaffinate Murray, 178, a plot
to seize and fend him to England prevented by the queen,
ibid. evidences of this, ib. & seq. his marriage with the
queen celebrated, 180, is honoured with the title of King
of Scotland, ibid. is implacable with refpet to the exiled
nobles, 185, loses the Queen's affection by his untoward beha-
viour, 188, demands the Crown matrimonial, 189, becomes
suspicious of Rizio's ill offices with the queen, ib. his refo-
lution to be avenged of him encouraged by the nobles, 90o,
articles agreed on between them for that purpose, 191,
heads the conspirators who perpetrate the murder, 192,
confines the Queen after it is committed, 193, prohibits the
meeting of the parliament, ib. makes his escape with the
queen, ibid, her hatred to him increases, 197, is negleced
by her and treated with little refpea by the nobles, 199,
refclves to leave Scotland, 201, his wayward and capricious
behaviour, ibid. he writes the reason of his conduc to the
queen, ibid. his strange behaviour at the baptifin of the
prince, 207, a false reason alledged for this confuted, 2o8,
retires to his father at Glasgow, 209, falls sick there, 211,
conjectures concerning his distemper, ibid. is neglected by
the queen, ib. he afterwards visits and expresses affection
for him, 212, he is prevailed on by her to come to Edin-
burgh, 213. is lodged in a separate house, ib. he is murder-
ed there, 214, his character, ibid. a proclamation iffuled for dif-
covering the murderers, ib. & seq. a remiss enquiry made into
it, ib. 218, Capt. Blackader, and three others executed on
that account, 240, the confeflion of Morton the re-
gent at his death concerning the murder, 317, paper
of objections of the Court of England against his marriage
with Q. Mary, App. a dissertation concerning his murder, at
the end of vol. II.

Da'vid I. K. of Scotland, his profusion to the church I. 77
---- II. troubles during his minority - . 19
Davison, sent into Scotland by Q Elizaheth, as a spy on the

French Ainbaffador, I. 325, is sent to gain Arran's interest
to Q Elizabcth, II. 3. th.s he soon accomplilhes, ib. brings
the warrant for Q. Mary's death at Q Elizabeth's desire,
32, is charged by her with disobeying her orders, 38, is iii-
prisoned, tried and fined, and lofesall favour, ibid. objecions
against himl in the cause of the late Scottilh Qeen, App. 250
Defe, Monsieur, is sent with a supply of forces to allift the

French against the Englifli in Scotland, I. 67, his fucccis
there - ibid.

Discipline,

Discipline, in the Church, the sirs book of, compoed, I. 136,

why objected against in a convention of the States, ibid. an-
other attempt in favour of Church discipline frustrated, 319
Douglas, the power and property of that family, I. 19, they

aspire to independency, 29, Will. Earl of, murdered by K.
James II. ib. his son endeavours to relent it, 30, is forced to
fly into England, - - - ibid.
----- William, Q Mary committed a prisoner to his castle of

Lochlevin I . 231
------ George, brother to the above, aflifts the queen in ma-

king her escape - - - I. 24
-- Archibald, one of Darnly's murderers, II. 17, under-

goes a mock trial for that crime and is acquitted, 18, is sent
ambasSador to England, ib. letter from him to the Q of Scots,
210, app. to the King - - - 215
Drury, Sir Wil. enters Scotland with an army to support the

King's party, I. 277, they join with him and drive off the
Queen's, ib. he procures a truce between the King's and
Queen'sparties, 291, comes with forces to assist Morton in
besieging the catle of Edinburgh, 299, which is forced to
surrender - - - - ibid.
----- Sir Drue, is appointed one of Q Mary's keepers

II. 6
Dudley, Lord Robert, recommended by Q Elizabeth as a hus-

band to Q Mary, I. 65, why a favourite of Q. Eliza-
beth's, ib. is highly promoted by her, ib. his situation ex-
tremely delicate, 166, becomes suspicious of Cecil ibid.
Dumbarton Castle, furprized and taken in the King's name by

the Regent - I. 281
Dury, a minister of Edinburgh, baniflied from his charge by

K. James, for his free invectives against the courtiers, I. 320,
after being restored he is driven from it a second time for ap-
proving the Raid of Ruthven 329 & seq.

E.

D INBURGH, is taken and burnt by the Englifl, . 59,

E a great fray there between the French and Scots, 70, is
seized by the Reformers, 1ot, its inhabitants are terribly
alarmed by the French, 116, a treaty here with the French
and English, 1z6, a loan demanded of it by Q. Mary,
184, which is granted for the superiority of Ieith, ib. the
treaty of, insisted on by Q. Elizabeth, 208, is possessed by
the Queen's party, 275, and fortified by them, 283, the
city and Castle hold out againf the king's forces, 289, is re-
duced to great fraits by famine, 290, is relieved by a truce,
ibid. the citizen's take up arms to promote the King's marri-
age, II. 50, they rife again and insult the King and his mi-

niftcrs

nifters on the murder of the earl of Murray, 53, aflift
the King against Huntly, 59, a violent tumult there on ac-
count of the clergy, 67, 68, they are severely punished for
it by the King, 70, their Ininifters return to their charges,
72, divided into parishes and number of ministers increased,
ib. they decline publishing the account of Gowrie's confpi-
racy, 87, all, except one who is banished, are persuaded by
the King to do it - - ibid.
Edlward I. of England, destroyed the public archives of Scot-

land, I. z, is made umpire between Bruce and Baliol, 6, his
art to acquire the superiority of Scotland, ibid. his wars with
the Scots under R. Bruce, - - 7, 25
Eglington, Earl of, is prevailed on to join the King's party,

.... i 285
Elizabeth, her peaceable accession to the Crown of England,

I. 89, supports the congregation in Scotland, 115, is spar-
ing in her supplies, ib. resolves to support them on a second
application, 118, her good condut in matters of import-
ance, 119, motives that determined her to alTfif them, ibid.
her deliberate and resolute conduct, 12, fends a trong fleet
to their aflitance, ib. concludes a treaty with them, ibid.
her right to the crown of Engiand, aflerted by Francis and
Mary in France, 127, obtains advantageous terms for the
Scots, ib. is solicited by the parliament of Scotland to mar-
ry the Earl of Arran, 134, this he declines, 135, the feeds
of her discontent with Queen Mary, 138, 139, her jea-
lousy of the succession, ib. 141, her exceflive vanity and
jealousy of Mary's beauty, ib. her dissimulation to her, ib.
refuses her a safe conduc, 142, fends to congratulate her
arrival in Scotland, 146, refues a confession made by Queen
Mary, ib. her jcalouty of her right betrayed her into mean
actions, ib. her resemblance to Henry VII. ib. a personal in-
terview with Q Mary proposed, 158, flie artfully declines
it, ib. her views in regard to Q Mary's marriage, 161, as-
fumes a disagreeable authority, b. names one for a husband
to Q. Mary, 165, the different qualifications of her ministers
and favourites, ib. diflembles with Q Mary about her mar-
riage, 166, and likewise with regard to lord Darnly, 167,
affronts Q.Mary, by her insinuation concerning Lenox, 168,
is perplexed about the arriiige of the Scotlih queen, 170,
permits Darnly to visit the Court of Scotland, ib. affects to
declare against Q. Mary's marriage to him, 174, her reasons
for this condut, ib. her great dilfinulation in that affair, 177,
her harlh and deceitful behaviour to Murray and his affoci-
ates who had fled to her, 183, is Itruck at hearing of the
birth of James VI. 119, consents to sand godmother to him,
ib. the Parliament address her to fettle the fuccellon, 203,
this greatly embarrasses her, ib. file sooths and gains her par-

liarnent,

liament, 204, endeavours to accommodate her differences
with Mary, 208, writes to her to delay the trial of Darnly's
murderers, 218, interposes in her behalf when a prisoner,
233, her ambassador is refused access to Queen Mary, ibid.
fle offers aliftance to the other nobles, ibid, her deliberati-
ons concerning the disposal of Q Mlary on her arrival in Eng-
land, 245, 246, resolves to detain her there, 247, her mo-
tives to this conduct, ibid. fends her letlers of condolence
and gives orders to watch her conduct, ib. file gladly ac-
cepts the office of umpire between her and her subje&s, 248,
receives a very prefling letter from Q Mary, 250, her pre-
cautions against her ibid. appoints commillinoners to hear Q.
Mary and her accusers, 253, her important situation on that
occasion, b. her views in this affair, z54, receives the Re-
gent's demands, 257, removes the Contrence to Weftmin-
fter, ib. her mean artifices to get the evidences of Q. Mary's
guilt from the Regent, 261, treats her with greater rigour,
ib. writes a harll letter to Q. Mary, ib. fle diifinifes the
Regent without approving or condemning him, 262, but fe-
cretly supports his party, 263, makes proposals to the Re-
gent in her favour, 265, Norfolk's project concealed from
her, 266, & seq. discovers and defeats a rebellion in Q.
Mary's favour, 269, & fcq. resolves to deliver her up to
the Regent, 27 , her great concern at his death, 274, con-
tinues to encourage facions in Scotland, 275, her political
conduc with regard to Lenox, 277, is excommunicated and
deprived of her kingdom, &c. by the Pope, ib. supports the
King's party in Scotland, and names Lenox to be Regent,
278, propofcs a treaty of accommodation between Q. Mary
and her fubjcs, ib. procures a cessation of hostilities, 279,
fends proposals to Queen Mary, ib. her artifices in the con-
duc of this affair, 28, appoints commissioners to frame a
treaty, ib. finds a pretence to render their meeting fruitless,
281, a marriage propoedl betwe n her and the Duke of An-
Jou, 287, declares openly against the Qeen'sparty, 289,
concludes a rreaty with France, 290, her motives for nego-
tiating a peace between the two parties in Scotland, 296,
is jealous of Cecil's interview with Q. Mary, 300, negoti-
ates a treaty between Morton and his adversaries, 308, her
answer to K. James's demand of a poflelfion of an ellate
in England, 309, a marriage between her and the D. of
Alencon proposed, 310, interpoles in behalf of Morton,
313, her neafiures in order to save him, 315, countenances
the conspirators at Rutliven, 323, is alarmed at a conspiracy
against her, II. 1, the designs of Q. Mary's adherents a-
gainls her, 2, endeavours to recover her interefi in Scotland
and gains Arran to her interest, 3, aniufes Q.Mary wiih a
fruitless negotiation, 4, a new conspiracy againll her, i. an
association formed for her defence, 5, her filfpici(ns of Q

Maiy,

Mary, ib. her life endangered by a conspiracy, 9, this how
dilcovered and preventcd, ibid. occasions an extraordinary
lature for her preservation, ib. is in a dangerous situation
from the progrefi of the holy league, 1i, endeavours to
form a confederacy of the Protestant Princes, ib. and to pro-
ceed with rigour against Q: Mary, ibid. & seq. advances her
interest in Scotland, and proposes a league with it, 13, set-
tls a pension upon K. James, 14, concludes a treaty with
Scotland, 17, account of Babington's conspiracy against her,
19, & fiq. her diflimulation after Q Mary's conviction, 8,
her answer to King James's intercelion for hr, 30, her far-
ther dilsltmulation and anxiety, 31, signs the warrant for her
execution, 32, her speech toDavifon on that occafion,ibid. as-
stets to lament Q. Mary's death, 37, several marks of her
artifice in that affair, ibid. & eq. flie e:deavours to ooth
K. Jamnes, 38, provocations given by her to Spain, 44, pre-
pares to meet its resentment, ibid. endeavours to secure Scot-
la:d. ibid. & e-q. tries to prcvent K. James's marriage, 49,
fol!cits him to treat confpiratcrs against him with rigour, 55,
evades the decision of K. James's right of fuccetlion to the
Crr.wn of England, 74, & seq. is disgusted at several of his
proceedings, 75, discovers his correfpordence with the Pope,
ibid. freh grounds of her fuft,icion, 9x, her conduc with re-
gard to the Earl of Esex, ib. & seq her irresolution concern-
ing his death, 93, ad great concern after it, ibid. receives
arbaftacdors from K. Jmes with regard, and increases his sub-
fidy, ib. her las illness, 95, conjecures concerning the causes
of her melancholy, 96, her death, 97, ad char?.ter, ibid.
& fcq declared the K. of Scots her successor. 98, sone of
her )-rters, app. 124, 143, 152, 153, 156, 167, 68, 172,
188.
Elphinflon, ecretary to K. Janes VI. deceives him into a cor-

refpondence with the Pope, II. 75 & eq. is tried and found
guilty of high treaon, ib. and pardoned on the Queen's in-
tercefion - ibid.
Englnmd, the English seize and detain K. James I. of Scotland

forg aprifoner, I. 19, the nobles there humbled, 21, had
early two houses of Parliament, 44, they invade Scotland,
59, their depredations there, ib. a peace between England,
France, and Scotland, 60 & seq. invade Scotland again,
64, gain a great victory, 65, it proves of little advantage
to them, 66, they force the Scots into a closer union with
France, 67, conclude a peace, 69, an Englifli fleet arrives
in Scotland to aflift the congregation, iz1, a peace con-
cluded between them, ib. they enter Scotland and besiege
the French in Lcith, 122, are several times repulsed, z 3,
causes of their bad fuccFls, ibid. articles of a treaty of

peace,

peace, 126, they quit Scotland, 128, reflecions on the
right of fucceflion to their Crown, 140, the Parliament
favours Q Mary's right of fuccefion, 203, a league be-
tween England and France, 290, between England and Scot-
land, II. 17. the national covenant adopted in England

__
- 45

Entails with what view introduced - z1
E1piscopal government in the Church, ome account of, I. 135,

an attempt to revive it, 294 & seq. it is abolished by the
Afflembly, , zojurifdiEtion aboliihed, 11. 5 1, fee Archbi/hops.
Errol, Earl of, one of the heads of the Spaniih facion, II. 44,

his offers of service to the K. of Spain, 47, appears in re-
bellion, 48, is forced to ubmit to the King, 49, impri-
soned for a hort time, ib. joins in another conspiracy, 54,
is summoned by the King to surrender, ibid. offers to submit
to a trial, 57, & seq. sentence pronouncedagainft him ib.
Erfine of Dun, is employed by the Queen-Regent to deceive

the Proteltants, I. 95, his refentnent of this usage 96
- Lord governor of Edinburgh Castle, as a neutral part

between the Queen-Regent and the Congregation, I. i 6,
receives the Queen-Regent into the Castle, 123, is created
Earl of Mar, 156, fee Mar.
- - Alexander, has the chief directions of the education of

K. James VI. I. 304, admits some of the nobles to nmake
complants to him againif Morton the Regent, 306, is turned
out of Stirling Castle by his nephew the Earl of Mar 307
Ejfneval, the French Envoy, endeavours to obftru& a treaty be-

tween England and Scotland - II. 7
Eex, Earl of, et up by the Englifli Papi{s as a candidate for

the Crown, II. 61, heads a party in England, 90, his
charaer, ibid. is greatly diftinguifled by the Queen, ib.
favours the K. of Scots, ibid. obtains the offices of Lord
Lieutenant and Commander in Chief in Ireland, ibid. is un-
successful in that expedition, ibid. receives a harfli letter fron
the Queen, 9. returns to England and is confined, ib.
is tried and censured, ibid. endeavours to spirit up King
James, ibid. his harfli and fiantic conduCt, ib. & 9z, is again
taken into cuffody, ib. his death, 93, his son and affoci-
ates are restored to the honours after the accelfion of King
James - - ib.
Europe, the state of, at the beginning of the Sixteenth Century

I. 47
Exconmmunication, a terrible engine of the Popifl Clergy, I. 79

F.
F ELTO N, an Englishman, fixes the Pope's excommuni-

cation of Q Elizabeth, on the gates of the Bilhop ,f

London's palace - - 1 277
VOL. [I. X Fenelon,

Feielda, M. de la Motte, sent by the French King to interpose

for King James when confined by the Ruthven conspirators.
I. 325, is forced to return without success - 326
Feudalgovernment, its origin'and ari{tocratical genius, I. 8, 9,

causes which limited the power of feudal monarchs, ib.
feudal vassals liable to few taxes, o, -a remarkable infance
of the feebleness of feudal government, , the most perfect
idea of the feudal'fyftem, how attained, 24, 25, state of it
in Engl'and, 42, 43, and in Scotland - 44
fife, a populous and-powerful county-much devoted to the con-

gregation, I. i20, is deftrdyed andplundered by the French,
ibid. the fynod of, excommunicates the archbiflop of St.
Andrews for contumacy, II. 16, they excommunicate the
popish Lords 57
Sorbes, Lord, with the Earl of Argyl, is sent againt the popifi

Lords, II. 60, are defeated by them - - 61

Fordun, John de, his history of Scotland when wrote 1. 3
ForJler, Sir John, warden of the Englilh border, a scuffle be-

tween him and the Scots - - II. 4
Fotheringay Castle, Q. Mary's imprisonment, trial and death

there - - - II. 22, 35
France, the consequences of the subversion of the feudal go-

vernment there, I. 47, a body of -French arrive in Scotland
tb'fipport the Catholics, 63, they.redtuce the castle of St.
'Andrews, ibid. another party of them arrive there, 67,
their transaCtions there, 68, conclude a peace with Eng-
land, 69, their politic condut, ibid. they leave Scotland,
ibid. their artifices in a treaty of marriage between the
Dauphin and the Q, of Scots, 86, endeavours to expel the
'Frnch army out of Scotland, 103, another party of them
arrive there and fortify Leith, o18, they exasperate the
people by their insolence, ibid. they are sent against the
congregation, 120, they destroy and plunder Fife, and are
much harassed by parties of the congregation, ib. are greatly
alarmed by the arrival of the English fleet, 121, they re-
turn to Leith greatly harassed and exhausted ib. are be-
'fieged:there by the English and the congregation, 123, they
gain several advantages, ibid. their motives for conclud-
ing a peace, 125, negotiations for that purpose, 126, ar-
ticles of the treaty, ib. & seq. they leave Scotland, 128,
'the French advise Q 'Mary to moderate ineafures, 137,
their proposals by an ambassador rejeted, ibid. & seq. they
agree to'qeen Mary's marriage with Lord Dmly, ri-7, .the
licentiousness of their morals - 212
France, King of, a copy of his direcions sent to Scotland, app.

198
'Francis I. -gies-a check 'to theamibitious projeft of Charles .

I. 49, is'fidelity to the Sots, 6. -his-death 63

Francis

Francis II. comes to the crown of France, I. o15, his ha-

raaer, ibid. 135, is guided by the Duke of Guise and car-
dinal of Lorrain, 105, he treats the Protestants with great
rigour, 125, his death 35

G.

I FS 0 R D S, Dotor and Gilbert, their notion concern-
ing the lawfulness of killing heretical excommunicated

Princes, II. 18, they join in a conspiracy to kill Q. Eliza-
beth, ibid. Gilbert being gained by Walsingham betrays his
aflociates, 19, employed to carry on a foreign correrpon-
dence with Q.Mary - - 20

Glamis, Lady, is Condemned to be burnt for witchcraft I. 3,
--- Lord, chancellor, intimates the King's order to Mor-

ton to surrender the Regency, I. 306, is killed in a rencoun-
ter at Stirling - 307
-- the tutor of, joins the conspirators of Ruthven, 1. 322.

his bold speech to King James, ib. he with the other con-
fpirators seize the cafle of Stirling and ere& their standard,
331, he is attained and his estate forfeited - II.
Gtafgaw, biihop of, a note of his concerning the Queen of Scot-

land's dowry, app. 1-95

Glencarin, Earl of, joins the Ruthven conspirators, I. 322
Glenlivat, the.battle of .- .II. 6o
Gordon, Sir John, a scuffle in the streets of Edinburgh between

him and Lord Ogilvy, I. 154, being confined for it, he
makes his escape, 155, when ordered by the Queen to.fur-
render himself he takes up arms against her, 155 & seq,
is defeated, and together with his brother made prisoners,
L5.7., he is. beheaded and his brother pardoned ibid.
Gordon, Lord, set at liberty I. t81

.Sir Adam, exerts himself for the Queen's interest in te
north, 1. 289, his characer and good condut as a soldier,

29
Gowrie,. Earl of, joins in a conspiracy to seize the King at

Ruthven, I. 322, is. visited and pardoned by the King after
his. escape, 327,. becomes fufpeced and is ordered for France,
330, & seq. delays his voyage, and is'taken into custody, ibid.
he is tried.and executed ib.
lGowrie, John and Alexander, ons of the above, their charac-

ter..and conspiracy, II. 78, the furpriing circumstances of
that remarkable. tranfa&ion, ib. everal different conjec-
t.urs concerning it, 81,. 87, their dead bodies brought into
.Parliament.and condemned, 88, their estates anad onours
forfeited,. and .name abolished for ever, ibid. different ac-
,. counts. of this. affair publilhad, but not fatishaó1ory,. 9, fee

rRumten.X Gr

Grahba, Sir David of Fintry, accused of a conspiracy with the

popih lords in favour of Spain, II. 54, 55. is convicted and
beheaded - ib.
Gray, matier of, rome account of him, II. 6, he becomes a

favourite of king James VI. ib. is gained to Q. Elizabeth's
interest, 7, betrays Q. Mary, ib. persuades K. James to
write a harlh and undutiful letter to her, o, i , joins with
others in promoting Q. Elizabeth's interest in Scotland, 13
his treachery when sent to intercede for Q; Mary, 31, his
baseness discovered, he is disgraced, 40, his vain attempt
against secretary Maitland, ib. as in Italy as a spy from
the court of England, 75, a memorial of his for his majesty,
app. 217, 222, to the secretary of slate - 220
Guise, duke of, his violent counsels with regard to the Scots,

I. oS, is murdered at the siege of Orleans - 160
- his intrigues against Q Elizabeth, H. 2, is a principal

promoterof the holy league, 12, 43, drives the French king
out of his capital - - - ib.

H.
HjADDINGTOUT, seized and fortified by the English,

I. 67, is relieved by the French - 68
Hamilton, the rife of that family, I. o2, arbitrary proceedings

of Morton the regent against it, I. 309, & seq. See Cha-
telhbralt.
-- of Bothwellhalgh, taken prisoner at the battle of Lang-
fide, I. 251, is tried and condemned for rebellion, ib. ob-
tains a pardon from Murray the regent by the intercession
ofKnox, ib. an account of his murdering Murray, 272,
makes his escape, ib. & seq. is received in triumph at Ha-
milton - 274
Hamilton, Mr. Patrick, the firil who suffered in Scotland for the

protestant religion - - I. 90
Hartford, earl of, invades Scotland with an English army,

I 59, burns Edinburgh and Leith, ib. is made duke of So-
merfet, and protector of England, 64. See Somerset.
Hatton, vice-chamberlain of England, the argument by which

he prevailed on Q. Mary to plead at her trial - II. 24
Henry II. of France, fends forces to aft the Scots, I. 63, a

marriage proposed between his son the dauphin and the young
queen of Scots, 67, excites the Scots to invade England, 84,
his infamous imposition on queen Mary in the treaty of mar-
riage, 92, persuades his son and queen Mary to assume the
titles of king and queen of England, 93, his death 104
--- III. degenerates greatly on his acceflon to the crown

of France, II. i, enters into a private negotiation with Q.
Elizabeth, 28, 29, interposes feebly in behalf of Q. Mary ib.

Henry

Henry VIII. of England, by his fytem of reformation becomes

formidable both to papiRs and protestants, I. 38, proposes
an interview with K. James V. 39, is disappointed by him
and declares war againfi Scotland, 40, invades it but is forced
to retreat, ib. his importance as to the balance of power in
Europe, 49, his influence in Scotland how obtained, 50, his
Ichemes with regard to iton the death of James V. 54, were
ill-conduCted by himself and odious to the Scots, ib. at-
tempts to gain the regent by great promises, 56, invades
Scotland, 59, this being ill-conducted turns to no account,
ib. receives and rewards the earl of Lenox, ib. & seq. en-
courages the murderers of cardinal Beatoun, 62, his death
and character, ib. 63, hisinconfifent conduct, 92, excluded'
the Scots line by his testament - 209
H'erreis, lord, joins Chatelherault in opposing the regent, I.

263, comes to a treaty with him, 264, he and the duke are
committed prisoners to the catle of Edinburgh, ib. intimates
the kings order to Morton to resign the regency, 306, ac-
count of his behaviour in parliament, app. 171, a letter from
him to lord Scroop and Sir F. Knollis - app. 228
Hickford, secretary to the duke of Norfolk, betrays him by

discovering his intrigues with queen Mary - I. 288
Highlands and Isles, an attempt to civilize them by K. James

VI. II. 94, regulation for that purpose, ib. & seq. three
towns endued with the privileges of royal boroughs ordered to
be built there - - 9
Hodgson, a priest at Rheims, maintained the lawfulness of kil-

ling heretical excommunicated princes - II. 8
Homre, lord, ent by K. James VI. with a secret embatfy to the

pope - -. 76

Howard, fee Norfolk.
Hunfdane, lord, governor of Berwick, his interview with Ar-

ran - 11. 3
Huntly, earl, tho' a catholic, joins the reformers in opposing the

French army, I. 104, afifts them only with fair promises,
116, his further concurrence with them, 124, ome account
of that family, 153, his enmity againit the young queen's
ministers, ib. his resentment inflamed by an accident, 154,
appears in open rebellion againfl the queen, 156, his plot
againf her ministers disappointed, ib. breaks out into open
rebellion, ib. is trodden to death in a battle, 157, his fa-
mily prosecuted with the utmost rigour, ib. several anec-
dotes and conjetures concerning his plot, ib. is attainted
by parliament, 162, the attainder repealed and the family
restored to the .etate and honours - 21
- his attachment to Bothwell, 217, 221, refutes to fibmuit

to the regent, 264, is forced to do it, ib. acts as lieutenant

X 3 to

to the queeh after the regent's murder, 276, is proclaimed
i traitor y Lenox the new regent, 278, receives some mo-
iiey nd promises of afliftance from Spain, ib. agrees to a
treaty ith Morton ihe regent, 298, is one of the heads of
the Spanish faction, II. 44, engages to the prince of Parma
to fetve the king of Spain, 47, is imprisoned for a short time,
48, erets a standard of rebellion, 49, but forced to sub-
mitto the kihg, ib. is again imprisoned, ib. is soon set at
liberty, ib. receives a comniillion from the king, 53, his
barbarous murder of the eari of Murray, ib. is umltloned to
furteid to justice, 55, flies to the mountains, ib. offers
to fubiit to a trial, 5, & seq. fntence pronounced against
him; ib. refifes to submit, ib. makes nother desperate at-
tempt, but is forced to fly - 6

I.
J.AMES I. was detained a prisonet in England, 1. 19,

'troubles in Scotland, during that time, ib. was much im-
proved by an Englifl eduication, 6, his policy on his return
to Sotland, 27, his charater, ib. & teq. suppresses the
'power of the nobles, ib. they being exasperated cnfpire
agiinR aid mrurder him - - 28
-- 11i. trout1les in Scotland during his minority, I. i1, &
q. his attempts gainft the nobles, 29, murders the earl of
Douglas, ib. procures several good laws to be paTed, 30,
ieucek the power'of the nobles, ib. & fcq. his death ib.
o .- III. the state of Scotland during his minority, I. 2o,

his iRip61itic conduEt, 3, kills one of his brothers, and is
inVaded by another, 32, is greatly infulred by his nobles,
33, his despicable minions, ib. was the first that appointed
aftanding guard to his person, ib. the nobles are provoked to
lake arms against hin, ib. is killed in a battle against them,
ib. '& seq. his chiarter - - -
-:--'IV. his character, 1. 34, is killed in a battle againlt

the English at Floudeh - ib.
- V. his mrin6rity long and turbuteht, I. 2o, tran:faci-
ons during that'time, 35, trunems the governinen't while
very yoUitg, 36, his chitrater, ib. his fcheie for'hunfbling
the nobles, 37,'& seq. is diverted frdm it by tile clergy,
39, tkes ahns for the dafence bs his kingdom, 40, his no-
*blts refifing to follow him, throws him I'rto a deep mnlan-
chbly, ib. 41, hich bs increased by'a furpfifihg dtfe t of his
forces, ib. his dth, ib. rfleRcions on his conduct, lb. he
refused an alliance with Charles V. cmnperor - 50

7Jancs

Dames VI. his birth, I. 199, his baptism, 207, the car of

him committed to the earl of Mar, Zt6, is by him preserved
from falling into the hands of Bothwell, 226, is crowned,
235, the nobles oppressed by Morton the regent, turn their
eyes to him for redress, 303, & seq. his education and dif-
positions, ib. he becomes suspicious of the regent's power,
ib. discovers early a great attachment to favourites, y3 r,
adopts two of different dispositions, ib. enters Edinburgh
with great solemnity, 312, is by his favourites engaged in
unpopular measures, 32z, is seized by. a party ofnobles at
Ruthven, 322, and forced to receive complaints againfb his
favourites, ib. dissembles with them and banishes Lenox,
323, is brought to Stirling and Holyroodhoufe, 324, his
concern at Lenox's death, and regard for his menory, ib.
receives the French ambassador with great refpeit, 35,
makes his escape fiom the conspirators, 326, resolves to
treat them with moderation, 3z7, visits Gowrie and grants
him a pardon, ib. renews his fondness for Arran, ib. is by
him persuaded to violent measures against the conspirators,
ib. his answer to a haughty letter from Q. Elizabeth on their
behalf, 328, is by her interposition rendered more violent
against them, 329, is provoked by the clergy, ib. his steps
to humble them, 331 & seq. his profusion to Arran, II. 3,
fends a new favourite to England against the banished lords,
6, devolves the whole regal authority on Arran, 7, writes
an undutiful letter to his mother, 11, is threatened to be dif-
inherited by her, ib. receives a pension from Q Elizabeth,
14, is reconciled to the exiled lords, 15, becomes popular
by concluding a treaty with England, 17, his scandalous
behaviour with regard to Archd. Douglas, ib. his endea-
vours to save his mother's life after her condemnation, 29,
is greatly incensed at her death, 38 & seq. arguments
used by the Englih ministers to pacify him, ib. is forced
to stifle his resentment, ib. attempts to unite the nobles,
40 & seq. is courted both by Spain and England, 44,
resolves vigorously to adhere to the latter, 45, takes
several fReps with that view, ib. his kill in the popifi
controversy, 48, wrote a commentary on the revelations,
ib. his maxims with regard to popery, ib. his excefive leni-
ty to conspirators against him, ib. resolves to marry
the princes of Denmark, 49, arts ued to prevent it,
ib. the marriage is confuminated in Norway, o5, paifes
several months in Denmark, ib. refletions on his con-
dut there, ib. his arrival in Scotland with the queen,
51, indulges the Presbyterians, ib. the ill consequences
of his lenlty, 5z, his zeal againlt witchcraft, ib. is soli-
cited by Q. Elizabeth to treat the conspirators against him
with rigour, 55, is fulpe&ted of conniving with thenm

X 4 56

56, is furprized and seized by Bothwell, ib. and forced to
comply with his terms, ibid. his lenity to Bothwell abused,
57, is suspecting of favouring the popish Lords, ibid. is in
new danger from them, 60, delegates his authority to Argyl
and Sorbes against them, ib. goes in person against them,
61, waftes their lands and garrisons their castles, ibid. his
right of the fucceflion to the crown of England opposed by
the papists, ib. his lenity to them incenses the clergy and
people, ib. is much provoked by the obstinacy of the cler-
gy, 65, gives orders against them, 66, is much insulted
and in great dangerat Edinburgh, 68, leaves Edinburgh and
proceeds with severity against the citizens, ibid. acquires ab-
solute dominion in ecclesiastical affairs, 7 1, frengthens his
in parliament by restoring the feats of the ecclesiastics, 72,
endeavours with success to gain a party in England, 74,
increases his reputation by publishing his Bafilicon Doron,
ib. is accused by Q. Elizabeth of corresponding with the
Pope, 75, this he denies and how accounted for, 76, other
reports concerning this, ibid. is at great pains to gain the
Roman Catholics, ib. his regulations with regard to the
church, 77, the mysterious affairs of Gowry's conspiracy,
88, his cautious behaviour in regard to the Earl of Efiex,
91, fends ambassadors to save him, 92, they arrive too late,
93, he restores his son and associates to their honours after
his acceflion, ib. continues his intrigues in England, ibid.
his inteieft greatly strengthened there, ib. & seq. endeavours
to civilize the highlands and isles, ib. is proclaimed King in
England after the death of Q. Elizabeth, 98, is proclaimed
likewise in Scotland and prepares for his journey to England,
99, enters London and takes poffeflion of the throne, oo,
his character hpw different from that of Q Elizabeth, ib. a
letter from him to Mr. Archd. Douglas, app. - 213
Inverness Castle, refuses to urrender to Q Mary, I. 156, it is

forced, and the governor punifled - ibid.
Italy, the liberty ot, hbw preserved I. 47

K.

E I TH, Sir William, ent to intercede for Q, Maly when
under sentence, II. 29. letter to him from secretary

Maitland, app. 14
Kent, Earl of, appointed to fee the sentence against Q Mary

executed .- 33
Ker of Fcrniherft, ravages England on the murder of Murray

the Regent, I. 274. his design, 276, has a culHlc with the
Englilh - II. 14

Ker.

Ker, George, brother to L. Newbottle, is discovered, when

ready to fail to promote a plot in Spain, II. 54, his scheme
opened, ib. escapes out of pnfot - 56
Killigreev, Henry, his declaration on the peace, I. 298, app.

194
Kings, feudal, the motl limited of all Princes, I. 8, general

causes bs this, 9. their revenues were but finall, ibid. o,
had no (landing armies, ibid. and jurifdieion limited 1.
means used to extend the royal authority, 22, theirjurifdic-
tion enlarged 23, the extraordinary influence of the Scottifi
Kings in Parliament, 42, the reason of this ibid. & seq.
Kikaldy of Grange, one of the murderers of Beatoun, is e-

called by the QO Dowager, I. 85, his attainder reversed in'
Parliament, 97, offers to fight Bothwell in single combat, 229.'
his interview with Q_ Mary, in name of the confederate
Lords, ibid. rescues Maitland from confinement, 269, la.
bours to support the King's authority and restore harmbny
after the murder of the Regent, 275, accedes to the Queen's
party, ibid. provides for a siege by increasing his garrifoi
and fortifying Edinburgh, 283, proclaims Lenox's authority
unlawful and usurped, ib. attempts in vain to prevent a
meeting of the Parliament, ibid. forms a scheme for fur-
prifing the King's party, 85, is at fircf successful but after-
wards defeated, 286, comes near to an agreement with Mar
the Regent, 293, a treaty with Morton, breaks it off, 297,
fires upon Edinburgh from the castle, ib. is besieged by the
Regent assisted by Englifl forces, z99, is forced by a mutiny
of the garrison to capitulate, ibid. surrenders to Drury the
English general, ibid. is by order of Q. Elizabeth delivered
up to the Regent, 300, he and his brother are executed, ib.
Knollys, Sir Francis, ent by Q. Elizabeth with letters of con-

dolance to Q. Mary on her arrivai in England, I. 247, some
of his letters, app. - 73, 177
Knox, John, a famous reformer, his characer, I. 71, after

being tome rime abroad he is recalled by the persecuted Pro-
teftants, 96. inflames the multitude at Perth with rage
against the papists, ibid. his notion concerning the govern-
plent of women whence, 99, & fcq. his refidcnce fixed in
Edinburgh, oz, complains of the lukewarmness of the re-
formers, l o, his opinion to tie convention of reformers
that it is lawful to resist and deprive tyrannical Princes, ib.
animates and revives the desponding congregation, 117,
complains of the neglct of the reformers in providing main-
tenance for their preachers, 131, recommends the Geneva
model of the church government, 5, propores fuperinten-
dants in the church, 136, coipofes the first book of difci-
pline, ib. renounces friendship with the Earl of Murray for
is moderatioln, 163, is tried for encouraging a mutiny

among

amongthe people and acquitted, 164, popish judges concur
in this de.cision ibid. is publickly accuSed by Maitland of
preaching seditious doctrine concerning refitance, 170,
char~es of the two disputants, ibid. approved of several
instances of afafination, 196 & seq. agrees to some regula..
tions concerning the election of Bilhops, 95, his death and
chaa4ter, ib. his eulogimuu by Morton the Regent, 296,
articles snt by him to the general assembly, app. - 1.9z

L.

d NG S rtDE, the battle of I. 243
Laureau., cardinal, is sent as Nuncio from the Pope with

t present to Q MnIary of Scotland, I. 20z, is fopped at Pa-
ris - zo6
League, holy, a confederacy of Roman catholics so called, II.

12, was universally agreed to by them all over Europe

ibid.

Learning, the revival of, promotes the reformation, I. 76
Leicefler, Earl of, appointed a commissioner to the conference at

Weftminiter - - I. 259
Leith, burnt by the English, I. 59, fortified by the French,

o08, besieged by the Engliih, 1zz, Q. Mary lands there
from France, 14z, the superiority of it granted by her to
Edinburgh, 184, is seized and fortified by Morton and the
Regent - - 283
Lenax, Earl of, arrives in Scotland from France, I. 56, is much

courted by cardinal Beatoun, ibid. his pretensions to the
succession how founded, 58, resents eatoun's deceitfulness
to him, ib. heads the reformers and the advocates for the
Englifl alliance, ibid. furprizes the Regent and cardinal, ib,
is outwitted by the cardinal, ibid. continues alone in the in-
terest of England, 59, is forced to fly to that court, where
he is rewarded, ibid. is married to a niece of King Henry's,
by which he became father to a race of Kings, ibid. his
claim to the succession, 167, is imprisoned for a secret cor-
refpondence with Q. Mary, ib. is invited secretly by her to
return to Scotland, ibid. arrives in Scotland, and is received
with great familiarity by her, 168, his forfeiture is repealed,
and he is restored to his estate and honours by the Parliament,
169, his lady sent prisoner to the tower of London, 175, and
treated with rigour, 177, he insists on the prosecution of his
son Darnly's murderers, 21 5, charges Bothwell with it, z16,
the prosecution is hurried, ib. he craves a delay which is
refused, 217, he is left alone in it, ibid. solicits Q. Eliza-
beth's interest to obtain a delay, 218, insists on it by proxy
at the trial, but is over-ruled, ib. being apprehensive of
dangers he flies towards England, 219, llis countess accuses

Q Mary

QL Mary of the murder to Q. Elizabeth, 249, he appears
at the conference at Westminster and accuses Q Mary of the
murder upon oath, 260, returns to Scotland protected by an
Englill army, 277, is ele&ted Regent, 278, his progress
against the Queen's party, ibid. appoints commTilrioners to
frame a treaty with those of the Qucen, 280, furprizes Dum-
barton castle, 281, joins the earl of Mart3n at Leith, 283,
holds a parliament in the Canongate, ibid. another at Stir-
ling, 285, he is furprized and killed there ibid. 286
Lenox, late Aubigne, his character, I. 311, joins with the

King's other new favourite to undermine Morton, 312, re-
nounces popery, 313, Q. Elizabeth demands him to be re-
moved from the privy council, ib. is accused by her ambaf-
fador, 315, Arran tries in vain to supplant him, 319, is com-
manded by K. James at the request of the nobles to leave
the kingdom, 323, puts off his departure on various pre-
tences, 324, returns unwillingly to France where he oon
dies, ibid. his memory vindicated and much regarded by the
King, ibid. died a Protestant - ibid & seq.
- Earl of, left as the King's lieutenant in the north afterdif-

perfing the popi/h Lords -- - II. 6z
Lejiie, Norman, murders cardinal Beatoun, . 6, he and his

aflociates keep poieilTion of the castle of St. Andrews, 62,
makes a truce with the Regent, ib. are encouraged by
Henry VIII. - - _ ibid.
- biflop of Ross, is sent by the catholics in Scotland to en-

gage Q. Mary in their interest, I. 1 37, his proposals to her
rejected, ibid. his negotiations in England in favour of Q.
Mary, 287, is confined long in the tower and afterwards is
banfihed England - - 289
Linlfay, Lord, carries the proposals from the confederates to

Q, Mary, that fne ililuod relign the government, I. 235.
joins the Ruthven conspirators - 322
Lochlevin calflc, Q. Mary commnitted, a prisoner there, I. 231,

her escape from thence 241
- Lord, letters to and from him, appendix 196, & seq.
Logan of Refialrig, an alledged accomplice in Gowric's confpi-

racy, II. 82, is tried, and his deate forfeited long after his
death - b. & seq.
Lords, confederate, aflociate ngainft Bothwell and Q.Mary,

I. zz6, & seq. raises forces against them, 227, publish the
motives of their conduEt, ibid. prevail on the Queen to fur-
render to them, 229, assume thc title of Lords of the secret
council and the royal authority - - 232
- - popihi, conspire againfi K. James, II. 47, are treated

by him with great lenity, 48, form a new conspiracy, 4,
the King proceeds against them, 55, more of his lenity to
them, 57, & seq. frenf danger from them, 60, they receive
money from Spain, ibid. zeal o the clergy against the, ib.

arc.

are declared guilty of trealbn and their estates forfeited, ib.
defeat the King's army, 61, are dispersed on the King's ap-
proach, ib. go abroad and give fecurlty tokeep the peace,
ibid. return to Scotland, and petition for leave to reside in
their own houses, 64, this granted by a convention of es-
tates, ib. recant their errors and are absolved from excommu-
nication, 71, & seq. relapse, and are again recohciled to
the church of Rome, 72, are restored to their estates and
honours - - ibid.
Lorrain, cardinal, gets some of the best benefices in Scotland,

I. 89

Princes of, their ambitious views, I. 92, instigate the

Dauphin and Q. Mary to take the titles of King and Queen
of England, ib. & fcq. resolve to invade England, 93, and
to check the reformation in Scotland, ib. the cardinal's great
influence over the young King, o15, drives the Queen Re-
gent of Scotland to violent measures, log, their violences
occasion a conspiracy against them, l z & seq. are forced to
withdraw their troops from Scotland, ib. they insult the
Scottilh ambaflador, 132, have great power over the young
King and Queen, 133, are forced to contract their views on
the death of the King - - 134
Luther, a bold and principal promoter of the reformation, I. 76,

the rapid progress of his doctrine - 77

M.
M AO R, John, his history of Scotland, some account

of - - - I.
Maitland of Lethington, secretary to Mary Queen Regent,

leaves her service and joins the congregation, I. 6, hi~
charater, ib. & seq. is ent by them ambaflador to Q Eli-
zabeth, 117, fends them aurances of her protection, 120,
is sent by Q. Mary to the court of England, 146, makes a
conceflion to Q. Elizabeth, ib. accompanies Q Mary in a
progress to the north, 155, he is employed by Q, Mary to
desire a personal interview with Q. Elizabeth, 158, publickly
accuses Knox of preaching seditious doctrine concerning re-
fitance, 170, intimates to Q. Elizabeth the intention of Q
Mary to marry Darnly, 173, prudently conceals her reent-
nient from Q Elizabeth, 175, proposes moderate measures
with regard to Q Mary when imprisoned, 234, attends the
Regent when called on to accuse her in England, 253, he
disapproves of this measure, ib. his intrigue with the duke
of Norfolk, 255 & seq. is imprisoned by the Regent, 269,
is relieved by Kirkaldy and secured in the castle, ib. proposs
a coalition of the two parties after the murder of the Regent,
275, accedes to the Queen's party, ib. is deprived of his
office of secretary, and roclaimed traitor, 278, is attainted

in

in a parliament of the King's party, 284, agrees with Mar,
293, his views in refusing a reconciliation with Morton the
Regent, 297, rejects overtures of a treaty with him, ib. is
besieged by him in the catle of Edinburgh, 299, is forced
to capitulate and surrenders to the English general, ib. to a-
void the Regent's resentment he dispatches himself, 300, fe-
veral of. his letters, app. -- II. 185, 214.
Mailand, Sir John, is made secretary for Scotland, II. 13, con-

curs with others in promoting Q. Elizabeth's interests there,
ib. attempts against him by capt. James Stewart, late Ar-
ran, 40, they prove abortive, and he is advanced to be chan-
cellor, ib. an attempt to remove him from that office, fruf-
trated, 48, his death, 62, a copy of verses in honour of
him wrote by the King, - - ibid.
Mar, Earl of, that title conferred on the prior of St. Andrew's,

I. 154, accompanies the Queen in a progress to the north,
155, he and his associates narrowly escape aflaflination, 156,
he is created Earl of Murray, ib. See Murray.
--- the title is conferred on L. Erikine, ibid. the person of

theyoung prince put into his hands, 216, his resolution in
preserving him from Bothwell, 226, is chosen Regent, z86,
labours to bring about a general peace, 93, is thwarted by
Morton and his aflociates, ibid. dies of melancholy, ib. his
character, ibid. his merit and integrity was acknowledged by
both parties - - - ibid.
-- the younger Earl, being imposed on by Morton, turns

out his uncle from the castle of Stirling, I. 307, joins the
Ruthven conspirators, 322, he with the others seize Stirling
castle, and eret their standard, 331, is attainted and his es-
tate forfeited, II. 3, is pardoned and restored to estate and
honours - - - 15
March, countess of, her infamous marriage with the Earl of

Arran - - II. 318
Mary of Guise, Q. Dowager of Scotland, takes a considerable

Ihare in the government, I. 67, is much addicted to the
French interest, ibid. projects a marriage of her daughter to
the Dauphin of France, ib. becomes instrumental in promo-
ting the reformation, 72, aspires to the office of regent, ib.
promotes difaffecion to the present one and favours the re-
formers, 73, visits the court of France, ib. returns to Scot-
land to take porfeflion of the Regency, 74, after some op-
position fle obtains it, 75, confers several offices of trust
upon strangers, 82, proposes to lay a tax upon land, 83, is
forced to drop it, ib. tries in vain to excite a war with Eng-
land, ib. the nobles vigorously oppose the measures, 84,
treats the reformers with great refpec, ib. obtains a conceeli-
on from the Parliament in favour of the Dauphin, 88, her
artful management of the reformers, ib. 89, bestows the va-
cant benefices on foreigners, ib, le alters her conduca to the

reforllers,

reformers, 91, remonstrates againt the. iolent measures of the
Princes cf Lorrain, 93 & seq. is persuaded by them to per-
fecute the reformers, 94, her rafi answer to their remon-
firance, 95, summons their preachers to appear before her,
ib. breaks a promise ife had made them, ibid. marches with
an army againif them, 97, concludes a treaty with thenm,ib.
this.flie again brcaks, 98, her feveri'y at Perth, ibid. her
schemes discovered, ib he goes to attack them, ib. has a-
gain:recourfe to negotiation, 99, fle is startled at their de-
niands and gets tine to answer them, oo, violates.another
treaty, ib. lofesPerth, and forced to abandon Stirling and
Edinburgh, fihe retires with precipitation .to Dunbar, 1ot,
marches to attack the reformers .at Edinburgll, 103, gains
time by her artifice, ib. makes another treaty with them, ib.
herartifices to undermine the prior of St. Andrews, 107, the
absurdity of her ichcmre, ib. gets a reinforcement ofFrench
trocps who fortify Leith, ib. Ihe disregards a relnonfirance
r,s the reformers, 1o8, is influenced by French counsellors
and persuaded to violent .measures, ib. -& seq. retires to
Leithon the approach .of the:reformers army, 10o, her pru-
ent and artful con.dtc'S there, ib. her haughty and imperious
answer to a frefli.remnoftrance.froni them, ib. is by a con-
vention of them deprived of her office of Regent, 112, &
fc.. the foundation of this.fentence,.ib. .foments differences
aslung them, 114, is.deferted by her principal secretary,
116, fends French troops against the reformers, 120,
retires into the caflte of Edilaurgh on the approach of
the. Eglifh, 122, her death and charaeter, 124, reSented
of her violent nieaifres, z25, lifened to the inifrutions of
a reforned preacher - - ibid.
l-jfary, Queen. of England, her persecuting reign, 75, . her death

89
-- Q2een of Scots, born,.I. 52, a proposal to marry her to

Edward VI. 54, he is demandedby Henry VIII, ib. her
narriage to. the Dauphin of France proposed, 67, .a treaty
for that purpose concluded,6.8, he is lent ta be educated
in France, ibid. the fatal consequences of this, ib. is impo-
fed on..by the artifices of the French in the. treaty of-marri-
age, 86, her marriage celebrated with great pomp, ibid.
they take the title of-Kingand Queen of Elgard, .9,: fle
makes concellions to the congregation, 16, declares Queen
Elizabeth's right to, the crown ot. Engladd, 1.27, dhe .acquires
areaire; ascendant over her husband, 133, dl isQocrwholm-
.edwith,.greattaflition .on his death and retires:.to:.Rheims,
1134, she is invitedby. the.convention to reltin to Sco.tlnd.
137, an eniifalry fiomn the.catholics in Scotland propoesa.vio-
ilent:meafures: to her,. ib., lle is. determined to ato.dero.tion by

the

the French and the prior of St. Andrew's, ib. is prevailed on
to prepare for her return to Scotland, 138, the origin of the
discord between her and Q. Elizabeth, ib. & seq. her preten-
sions to the crown of England, ib. is envied on account of
her beauty, 141, demands a safe conduCt from Q Elizabeth,
which is refused, 142, leaves France with great relucance,
ib. lards at Leith, ib. is much asseted by the change of her
situation, 143, several difadvantagcs attending her accefion,
ib. some circumltances to her advantage, ib. & seq. her ac-
compliflments of body and mind, ib. the servants of her
chapel infuited, ib. procures the free exercise of her religion,
145, issues a proclamation in favour of the Protestants, ib.
employs them only in the administration, ib. attempts to gain
Q Elizabeth's favour, 146, makes a conceflion to her, ib.
which is rejeced, ib. flie makes her public entry into Edin-
burgh, 147, an insult offered to her religion on that occasion,
ib. discourages the attempts of thepapifts to gain her favour,
148, her aversion to the falmily of Hamilton, ib. makes a
progress into the north, 155, her ministers narrowly escape as-
faflination, 1 56, is refused access to the castle of Inverness,
ib. when in the utmolt conternation is relieved by the Mon-
ros and other clans, ib. her forces defeat Huntly's rebellion,
157, he desires an interview with Q. Elizabeth, 158, ne-
gotiations concerning her marriage, 259, is olicited by dif-
serent Princes, ib. & seq. her deliberations concerning it,
ib. is forced to bear the authoritative behaviour of Q. Eliza-
beth, 161, to please her subje&s determines againt a foreign
alliance, 162, determines not to ratify the treaty of Edin-
burgh, ib. further negotiations for her marriage, 164, disco-
vers the views of Catharine of Medicis, ib. Lord Robert
Dudley recommended to her as a hulband by Q. Elizabeth,
165, fle is highly offended at this, ib. dissembles with Q.
Elizabeth, ib. entertains thoughts of marrying Lord Darnly,
167, fie recalls Lenox, ib. is affronted at a letter of Q
Elizabeth's, 168, her indifference as to the reformed, and
zeal for the catholic religion, 169, is taken with Darnly
at first fight, 171, is greatly moved at Q Elizabeth's in-
fulting crafiinefs, ib. negotiates with the court of Rome for
a dispensation to marry Darnly, ib. and the content of the
court of France, 172, inpofes on Randolph, but applies to
Q. Elizabeth for conent to her marriage, 173 & seq. which
she assets to refue, ib. in resentment he proposes to fend
an angry message to Q.Elizabeth, which Maitland prevents,
175, justifies her conduct to the Engliff ambaflador, ib. en-
deavours to get Murray's content, r76, courts'the pope's
protecion, and receives a rubfidy from him, ibid. her great

address

addrcfs in gaining the conent of her fubjcts, 177, pre-
vents a plot against Darnly, 178, summons her vassals to take
arms against Murray, 179, and him to appear before her, 180,
her marriage with Darnly celebrated, he confers the title of
King of Scots upon him, ib. this ftep cernfured, ib. her re-
fentment against the malecontents, , 181, ie marches againtl
them, ib. rejects the intercefion of Q_ Elizabeth, -in their
behalf, ib. continues her march against the rebels, ib. her
conduct and courage on that occasion, ib. drives them out
of Scotland, ib. her further resentment against them, 184,
has recourse to several devices to raise money, ib. her profpe-
rity promotes her religion, ib. her deliberations concerning
the exiled Lords, 185, determines to treat them with lenity,
186, is diverted from this by her religion and French influ-
ence, ib. & seq. this the source of her after misfortunes, 188,
intention to restore popery, ib. is disgusted with Darnly's in-
solent behaviour, ib. her familiarity with Rizio offends the
King, 189, vindicated from any criminal correspondence
with Rizio, 291, uses her utmost endeavours to prevent his
murder, t92, he is confined by the conspirators, 193, she
gains the King, and escapes from them, ib. is reconciled to
the exiled nobles, ib. her hatred to Darnly encreafes, 197,
and favour for Bothwell commences, 198, extinguiihes some
domestic feuds among the nobles, 99, is delivered of her son
James VI. in the castle of Edinburgh, ib. invites several so-
reign princes to his baprifm, ib. continues to treat Damly
with neglect, ib. her attachment to Bothwell encreafes, zoo,
prevents Darnly's intended flight, 201, visits the borders,
202, an instance of her regard for Bothwell on that occafi-
on, ib. how Ihe rivalled Q Elizabeth, 203, her right of
fuccellion favoured by the Englilh parliament, ib. ihe endea-
vours to avail herself of that opportunity, .204, she takes an
extraordinary ftep in favour of popery, zo5, receives a pre-
sent from the pope, but flops his nuncio at Paris, ib. & seq.
endeavours to procure a better subsistence for the reformed
clergy, ib. her aversion to the King excelive, ib. becomes me-
lancholy, ib. he declines a divorce from him, 207, goes to
Stirling to celebrate her son's baptifin, ib. is greatly offended
at the King's behaviour on that occasion, ib. & seq. restores
the popish ecclesiastical jurifdition, z0o, her neglet of the
King during his sickness, 2z 1, the breach between them be-
comes irreparable, ib. flhe visits him at Glasgow, z12, the
motives of herdillimulation on that occasion, ib. prevails on
him to come to Edinburgh, 13, her suspicious behaviour to
him there, ib 214, iflues a proclamation for discovering his
.murderers, ib. & seq. is supposed to have been accessory to it,
,ib. is charged with it abroad as well as at home, ib. goes to

visit

visit her (on at Stirling, 223, is met on her return by Both,
well, who seizes and carries her to Dunbar, ib. this uppo-
!id with her consent, ib. is conduced to Edinburgh, 224,
and married to Bothwell, 25, fends an apology to the
Courts of France and England, ib. her conduc causes a ge-
neral indignation against her abroad, 226, is alarmed at a
coimbinition of the nobles against her, 227, flie publishes a
manifelto to vindicate her condut, ib. is conduted to the
clle of Borthwick, ib. marches with Bothwell's forces
againlt the confederate Lords, 228, an attempt of accom-
modation proves vain, ib. & seq. is forced to surrender to the
confederates, 229, is insulted by the soldiers and mob, 230,
is carried to Edinburgh, where many abuses are offered her,
ib. ent a prisoner to Lochlevin Castle, 231, QElizabeth in-
terpofes in her behalf, 233, the English ambassador is refused
access to her, ib. various proposals among the confederates
concerning her, ib. they oblige her to resign the Govern-
ment, 234, different reasonings on this measure, 236 &
seq. is much moved with the freedom of the Earl of Murray,
238, her party among the nobles becomes dispirited, 239,
her resignation of the Crown accepted by the Parliament,
and her imprisonment declared lawful, 240, her letters to
Bothwell read, and fie declared accessory to the King's
murder, ib. escapes from Lochlevin, 241, arrives at Ha-
milton, ib. is attended by many nobles and a numerous army,
242, an association signed in her defence, ib. her imprudence
in hazarding a battle, 243, her army defeated by the con-
federates, 244, her precipitate flight into Galloway, ib.
rashly determines to retire to England, ib. goes thither a-
gainit the advice of her attendants, 245, arrives at Carlife,
ib. writes to Q. Elizabeth, imploring her good offices, ibid.
receives letters of condolence from her, and demands ad-
mittance into her presence, 247 & seq. this refused and why,
ib. offers to ubmit her cause to Queen Elizabeth, ibid. is
much deceived in her expe&ation from this, 249 & seq and
offended on discovering the artifices of QElizabeth, ibid.
earnestly solicits to be admitted into her presence, ibid. he
is carried to Bolton Castle, 251, chagrined at finding her-
self a prisoner, ib agrees to an enquiry into her conduct, ib.
herdiflimulation with regard to religion, 252, commiflioners
appointed to appear in her name, 253, her chief view in
this affair, 254, consents to moving the conference to Weft-
ninfler, 257, flme is carried to Tuthbury in Staffordlhire,
258, is much offended at the regard flewn the Regent, and
recalls her consent to the conference, ib. & seq. the accu-
satin a ainft her produced by the Regent, 59, is accused
lil:cwifeby the Earl of Lenox, 260, hercommiffioners refuse to
answer, and demand a personal interview, ib. they protest

Vo L. . Y againlt

against future proceedings, ibid. a suspicious circumstance
against her, ibid. & seq. her commiiioners withdraw from the
meeting, 261, her resolute answer to a harsh proposal of Q.
Elizabeth, 262, avoids any farther progress in the inquiry,
ibid. is enraged at the proceedings, and proposes desperate
nieafures, 263, spreads chimerical conjetures with that
view, ibid. proposes a divorce from Bothwell, 26;. is in-
fluenced by the D. of Norfolk's schemes, ibid. exchanges
many letters and love tokens with him, ib. consents to pro-
pofals from the English nobles, 266, their views in this
transaction, ib. & seq. a rebellion by her adherents against
Q. Elizabeth, 269, is removed to Coventry, 270, Q. Eliza-
beth thinks of delivering her np to the Regent, 271, this
projet how disappointed, 272, accetfion of several to
her party after the murder of the Regent, 275, they en-
deavour to foment a war with England, 276, her authority
proclaimed at Linlithgow, ib. her parties defeated by the
new Regent, 278, flle answers proposals by Q. Eliza-
beth, ibid. & seq. attempts in vain to get foreign afliftance,
ibid. appoints commiifoners to frame a treaty for her libera-
tion, 280, this proving fruitless, lhe is more tritly confined,
281, the invalidity of her resignation declared in a Parliament
held by her adherents, 284, ac of parliament in England to
curb her and her party, 286, she looks for protection from
the King of Spain, 287, is denied the privilege of an ambaf-
fador at the court of England, 289, is more close confined
and watched, ibid. proceedings againit her in England, 291,
her interest neglected by the French, ib. is hurt by the maf-
sacre at Paris, 292, her adherents divided into two factions,
296 & seq. one of them joins with Morton the Regent, 298,
review of the. characters of her adherents and opponents, 299,
her forlorn situation, 300, is carried to Buxton Wells, ib.
loses several of her friends by death, 302, fends a letter arrd
presents to her son, 310, her messenger why difiiffed without
feeing him, ibid. her uneasiness at his confinement by the
Ruthven conspirators, 325, complains to Q. Elizabeth of her
hard usage, ibid. and begs her intercession for the King her
son, ibid. Throgmorton's conspiracy in her favour, II. , 4,
a fruitless negotiation with Q. Elizabeth, 4, is alarmed at an
aflociation in defence of Q Elizabeth, 5, is committed to
more revere keepers, 6. betrayed by Lord Gray the Scots
ambassador, 7, a statute for the preservation of QL Eliza-
beth proves atal to her, 9, is more rigorously treated, to,
her complaints to Q. Elizabeth disregarded, ibid. is, by the
French ambassador's interest, removed to Tuthbury, ib.
is undutifully treated by the KIing her son, ibid. & seq. her
paflionate complaint to the French ambaflador on that oc-
cafion, ii, threatens to disinherit him, ibid. several disco-
veries alledged against her, 20, & seq. fli is guarded with

unusual

unusual vigilance, 21, her domestics, papers, &c. are eiz-
ed, 22, she is conveyed to Fotheringay Castle, ib. deli-
berations concerning the method of proceeding against her,
ibid. is suspicious of poison or private murder, 23, vindi-
cates herself to the D. of Guise, ibid. the commiflioners for
trying her arrive at Fotheringay Castle, ibid. her spirited
fpeechl when refuting to plead, ibid. is at length pre-
vailed on, 24, fihe protests againfi the authority of the
court, ib. the accusation againlt her, ib. her defence, 25,
her fcntence, 26, irregularities in her trial, ibid. the
sentence is confirmed by parliament, 27, who demand the
execution of it, ibid. France interposes feebly in her be-
half, 28, & seq. the sentence against her publifled, 30,
fle is treated with the utmost rigour, ibid. her last request to
Q. Elizabeth, ib. refuses the aflilance of a Protestant
Bilhop or Dean, 31, artifices used to inflame the people
againlt her 32, her behaviour at her death, 33, senti-
mnents of hitlorians concerning her, 35, her character, 36,
her person described, 37, buried, first at Peterborough and
afterwards at Weftminfter-Abbey, ib. letters from her, app.
205, 226, her will, app. 207, objetions against her by
Walsingham, app. 238, what course to b taken with her,
ibid. a diflertation on the genuineness of her letters to Both-
well. End of Vol. II.
Maxwell, Lord, arrives from Spain and prepares forces to join

them, II. 44, his followers dispersed, he is taken prisoner,

45
AMelvil is ent by the French King to observe the motions of the

Queen-Regent and her adversarics, I. io5, ent to make
up a difference between Elizabeth and Mary, 168, brings
about an appearance of fricndflip between them, ibid. is
lent to inform Q Elizabeth of the birth of K. James VI.
199, puts a letter into the Queen's hand against her mar-
riage with Bothwell, 222, is forced to fly from court, 223,
advises K. James to moderate measures upon his escape from
the Ruthven conspirators - I. 327
--- Mr. Andrew, a clergyman, his character, I. 302, zea-

loufly opposes episcopacy, 303, declines the civil jurildiition
in ecclesiastical matters, 330, is forced to fly into England to
avoid persecution - ibid.
r---- Sir Robert, ent by K. James to intercede with QO Eli-

zabeth for Q Mary when under fenrcnce, II. 31, executes
his commiflion with fidelity and zeal, ib. a memorial of his
to the King, app. 221
--- Mafler of the houlhold to Q. Mary, takes his last fare-

well of her, II. 34, her parting fpech to him - ibid.
Mildmay, Sir Walter, ent by QL Elizabeth with proposals to

Q. Mary -- I. 279

Y
Mr Monluc,

Monluc, lgilhop of Valence, employed by the French to con-

clude a peace with England and Scotland, 1. 126, terms
agreed to by him - - ib. & eq.
Montgomery appointed Archbiflop of Glasgow, 1. 320. is re-

fused and excommunicated by the general Aftcmbly for his
immoral life - - ibid.
Montmorency Confiable of France, endeavours to prevent the

Dauphin's marriage with Q Mary, I. 85, his prudent
advice to Henry II. 104, makes a slender appearance in fa-
vour of Q. Mary - 191, & seq.
4Iorton, Earl of, his irresolute condut as to the Reformation,

I. 1 6, accompanies Q. Mary in a progress to the North,
155, instigates Darnly to be avenged of Rizio, 19o, takes
the direction of that enterprize, 192, is admitted into the
Queen's presence, who promises him a pardon, 193, is forced
to fly into England, 194, obtains his pardon on Bothwell's
interceflion, 2og, seizes a calket with letters from Q Mary
to Bothwell, 232, he is, by Q. Elizabeth's interposition,
in favour with the King's party after the murder of the
Regent, 275, appointed one of the conmiffioners to treat
with the Queen's party, 280 his demands frustrate the meet-
ing, ibid. & seq. is entirely influenced by the Court of Eng-
land, 284, commands the King's forces at Leith, 289, has
several tkirmnilles with the Queen's forces, 290, closely be-
sieges Edinburgh, and commits great cruelties, ibid. a fut-
pension procured by the Englifhl and French ambassadors, 291,
a coalition of parties prevented by him, 293, he is chosen
Regent, ibid. & seq. his mercenary ingratitude to the Earl of
Northumberland, 294, obtains the temporalities of the Arch-
bifloprick of St. Andrew's, ibid. labours to procure a peace
between the two parties, 296, attempts in vain to gain Mait-
land and Kirkaldy, 297, makes a treaty with Chatelherault
and Huntly, 298, gets poffetflon of the Castle of Edinburgh,
299, his severity to Kirkaldy and his brother, 300, his ad-
ministration becomes odious, 301, his various methods of
gratifying his avarice, ibid. connives at the difputcs of the
Clergy, 303, he irritates the nobles, ibid. Argyl and Athol
refuse to anlwer his fumnmons, ibid. makes a vain attclnpt a-
gainft Lord Claude Hamilton, ib. discovers the designs of the
nobles against him, and proposes to resign' his office, 305,
his resignation accepted by the King gives universal joy, 306,
obtains an approbation of his conduct and a pardon in ample
form, ib. continues to watch the motions of his adversaries,
ibid. is forced to surrender the Castle of Edinburgh, ibid. re-
fumes his authority, 307, gains the Castle of Stirling and a
feat in the Privy Council, ib. procures a meeting of the
Parliament at Stirling, 308, his security ratified in it, ibid.
forces are raised tor and againlt him, ibid. he is reconciled
to his adversaries by the intercetlion of Q; Elizabeth, ib.

is

is ufpeted of foul play at an entertainment in his own house,
309, his illegal proceedings against the family of Hamilton,
ibid. & seq. the King's new favourites undermine him, 312,
he endeavours to prevent them, ib. Q Elizabeth inter-
poses i his favour, 313, is charged with being accessary to
the l1ae King's death, 314, he is confined in different prisons,
ib. discourages an attempt to rescue him, ibid. all his friends
are turned out of office, 316, he is tried and condemned,
317, his resolute calm behaviour and confeflion before and at
his death, ib. & seq. his body is treated with ignominy, ibid.

llMurray, Earl of, late prior of St. Andrew's, goes with a hand-

ful of men against Huntly, I. 157, by his great skill and
courage he gains a complete victory, ib. his grant is con-
firned by Parliament, 162, cabalsagainft him byLenox and
Darnly, 172, his aversion to Darnly and other court favou-
rites, 175, calls Bothwell to fland a trial, 176, his reasons
for opposing Darnly's marriage with the Queen, ib. he and
his alfociates are made the dupes of Q. Elizabeth's policy,
177, concerts to seize Darnly and carry him to England,
178, this prevented by the Queen, ibid. avoids affaflination
intended him by Darnly, ibid. evidences of there plots,
ib. & seq. the Queen's vassals are called to arms against him,
179, he is summoned to appear before her, 180 is again fum-
moned and outlawed on his non-appearance, 18i, is forced
to fly with his afrociates into Argyflihire, ib. they are in-
terceded for by Q Elizabeth, ibid. are pursued by the
Queen, and obliged to fly into England, 82, they meet with
unexpected ill treatment from Q Elizabeth, ibid. & seq.
courts .izio to intercede with the Queen for hin, 85, ma-
nv of his friends solicit fbr him, 86, the Queen's favour how
intercepted, ib. a Parliament is called to attaint them, 188,
this how prevented, ib. he and his afrociates arrive at
Edinburgh, 193, are graciously received by the King and
Queen, ibid. are alarmed at the Queen's escape, but oon
reconciled to her, ib. & seq. he is appointed Regent during
theminority of King James VI. 237, his harfli behaviour in a
visit to the Queen, 238, the success of his wife adminiftra-
tion, 239, procures many of the Queen's prty to join him,
ibid. gets the places of strength into his hands, ib. his of-
fice of Regent confirmed by Parliament, 240, his severe and
haughty behaviour disgusts several, 241, his adherents in
great consternation at the Queen's escape fiom 'Lochlevin,
242, his prudent conduct on that occasion, ib. defeats the
Queen's army at Langfide, 243, he improves this victory,
250 & seq. his lenity to the prioners, ibid. he calls a par-
liannent, 25z, is called upon by Q Elizabeth to vindicate
Iis conduct, ib. hearrives at York, 254, his views in this affair,
.b. complaints oftthe Queen's commiflioners againfi him z2,

Y 3 he

he behives with great reserve on this occasion, ib. this part
of his conduct accounted for, ib. & seq. intrigues with
the duke of Norfolk, ib. his demands from the Englifli com-
miifioners, 256, answers the complaints of the queen's corn-
miflioners without touching on the murder, 27, agrees to
have the conference moved to W\eftmirftcr, ib. is zafcction-
ately received by Q.Elizabeth, which offends Q M-ary, 258,
is prevailed on by Elizabeth to accuse Mary of the murder,
259, produces his evidences, 261, is difiniffed by queen
Elizabeth without approving or condemning his conduct,
262, his party is secretly supported by her, 263, returns to
Scotland, and by his vigorous conduc breaks the queen's
party, ib. & seq. he receives proposals both from queen
Elizabeth and queen Mary, 264, he disappoints Norfolk, 268,
an account of his murder, 272, his character, 273, his
death much lamented by Q. Elizabeth and the king's party,
274, much anarchy the consequence of it, ib. part of a
letter of his, app. 186, his heir murdered by the earl of
Huntly - - 53

N.
NAue, secretary to Q.Mary, is sent by her with a letter

and presents to her son, I. 3o1, why difmifled without

feeing him, ib. is sent with offcrs of humble resignation to
QElizabeth, II. 5, is seized and sent prisoner to London,
22, is produced as an evidence against her - 26
Nevil discovers and prevents Parry's design to murder Q. Eliza-

beth - - II. 9
Nobles, their extensive power, . 12, become turbulent and

formidable, 13, their power greater in Scotland than in any
other kingdom, 14, the causes of this, ib. 17, their
power of long duration, 21, it becomes intolerable to the
princes, ib. they are humbled in France and England, ib.
but continue rigorous in Scotland, 22, discords among them
encouraged, ib. their jurifdition circuifcrlibed, 23, are
greatly mortified by king James V. 36, 38, are disappointcd
in a scheme to ihew their refentnent, 40, refuse to attend
the king into England, ib. they seize the revenues of the
church, 13 , refuse to part withl them to the reformied cler-
gy, ib. 136, 137, dissentions namong them, 152, a conven-
rion of them approve the queen's mlurriage to Darnly, 176
& seq. several of them recommnend Bothwell as a husband to
her, 220 & eq. a firange colmbination of them on this oc-
cafion, 221, a body of thenl afTrcinte againfl her and Both-
well, 226 & eq. their diflerent views in this, ib. a party ol
them favours the queen, 232, they are miuch difpiriteii bI,
the good conduct of Murray, 2 9, they are muclh provoker
by Morton the regent, oj, think (:f rctlres roni the kin.,

J( ,

304, infuli fiufpicion of the regent's power into him, 305,
a meeting of them called by him, ib. a party of them con-
spire againf the king's favourites, 32l, they seize his per-
son and drive them off, 322, their neglect of, and ingra-
titude to the clergy, II. 16, the king attempts to reconcile
the.' feuds and unite them, 41. Sec Lords.
Norfolk, duke of, appointed a commifipner to hear a cause

between queen Mary and his accusers, I. 253, forms a
fchemle of mounting the throne of Scotland, 255, intrigues
with the regent and Maitland with that view, ib. he repre-
sents the demands of the Scots to Q Elizabeth, 257, his
farther negotiations with refpeEt to Q. Mary, 265, endea-
vours to conceal his designs from Q. Elizabeth, 266, is im-
posed on by the artifice of theregent, ib. gets the consent
of many of the Englifl nobles, ib. his projet approved at
foreign courts, 267, is discovered and defeated by Q Eliza-
beth, 268, flies to Norfolk, 269, he surrenders on a second
funlmons, and is ent prisoner to the tower, ib. is set at li-
berty, and continues his intrigues with Q Mary, 287, is
betrayed by his secretary, 288, is seized with his depen-
dants, and accused by them, ib. is executed - 289
Northumberland, earl of, attempts a rebellion in favour of Q.

Mary, I. 269 & seq. his fchene defeated, 270, he is seized
by theregent, 271, is delivered up to the governor of Ber-
wick, and put to death at York - - 294
Nottinghamn, countess of, some account of the tranfation con-

cerning the earl of Essex's ring - - II. 96

0.

CTAVIANS, their inflitution and extenfve powers, II.
62, they undermine the king's niillers, 63, become

odious, and a combination is formed agaiinft thenl, ib. being
split into factions, and envied by the courtiers, theyrefign
their commission 73
Ogilvie, lord, has a cuffle with Sir John Gordon in the freets

of Edinburgh - I. 154

Oliphant, master of, joins the Ruthven conspirators I. 322
Orange, prince of, fends an agent into Scotland, I. 316, his

inftrutions, ib. is afnil-linatrd - - II.
D'Oyfel, commander of the French troops in Scotland, endea-

vours to promote a war with England, I. 84, his design fiu-
firated, ib. the number of troops under his command, 98,
inltigates the queen regent to violent measures againl the
reformers, ib. is sent by Q. Mary to demand a fate conduft
fiom Q Elizabeth, during her voyage to Scotland 142

Y 4 P. PAISLEr,

P.
P AI S L E r, Abbot of, arrives in Scotland, I. 56, creates a

suspicion of the Earl of Lenox in the Earl of Arran, Re-

gent, ib. is made Archbilhop of St. Andrew's , 63
Paris, the massacre of, I. 292, rejoicings of the Popilli party

on account of it, ib. the consternation and horror of the
Protestants - - - ibid.
Parliament, the nature of their original constitution, I. 42 &

seq. particularly that of Scotland, 44 & seq. a parliament
held on an extraordinary occasion, 8, a difficulty start-
ed and answered, 129, their proceedings with regard to re-
ligion, ib. condemn the Popifli and approve the Reformed
Docrines, 130, several other regulations of the fame ten-
dency, 131, their validity called in question, ib. exceed their
powers, 132, their proceedings laid before the King and
Queen, ib. a parliament in favour of Bothwell, zig, pars
an aa in favour of the Reformation, 220, confirm the pro-
ceedings of the confederates, 240, parliaments held both
by the King's and Queen's parties, z83 & seq. the Queen's
adherents attaint upwards of 2oo of their opponents, 285,
a parliament at Stirling by the King's party, ib. furprized by
the Queen's adherents, ib. another at Stirling, oS08, one at
Edinburgh, 31 , and on the King's being of age, II. 40 &
seq. several new laws made there, 42, the lesser Barons ad-
mitted into parliament, - ibid.
Parry, Doctor, undertakes to murder Q_ Elizabeth, II. 9, is

encouraged by and gets absolution from the Pope, ib. his de-
sign bow prevented, ib. is executed, - ib.
Parsons, a Jesuit, publishes a book in favour of the Infanta of

Spain's right of succession to the Crown of England, II. 6z
PJfquinades and Picures, accusing Bothwell of Darnly's mur-

der, I. 215, 220, a law made against them - ibid.
Patten, William, his account of the Scottilh ancient military

discipline --. 65
Paulet, Sir Amias, is appointed one of Queen Mary's keepers,

II. 6, his rigid severity to her, to, discovers her foreign cor-
refpondence, o2, his rude treatment of her, 30, refuses to
be concerned in privately affaflinating her, 32, a letter from
him - pp. 243
Pelleve, Bishop of Amiens, is appointed to support the popiih

interest in Scotland, 109, drives the Quecn Regent to vio-
lent measures against the Protefltants - ibid.
Perth, an infiurrealon of the Reformers there against the Papists,

I. 96, its inhabitants are fevcrely treated by the Queen Re-
gent, 98, a French garrison placed there, ibid. i bLfigc

and

arnd taken by the protetants, ol, a great tumult there on ac-
count of Gowrie's conspiracy -- 11. 79 & seq.
Plilip II. of Spain, niarri, d to Mary Qncen of England, I. 75,

reinforces his army with her troops, 83, his great power, 11.
12, joins in the holy league, ib. resolves to invade and con-
qutr England, 44, his preparations for it dilatory, 45, his
dclign rullrated, ib meditates an invasion of England
through Scotland, 47, intrigues with fonme Scots Lords with
that view, ib. remits money to them - 6o

Pinkey, the battle of I. 65
Pirs V. Pope, excomnmunicates QI Elizabeth to deprive her of

her kingdom, and absolves her lubjets II. 277
Polly, one of Babington's conspirators against Q. Elizabeth, 1.

19, discovers the plot - ibid.
Poltrot, the frantic zealot, affaflinates the Duke of Guise at

the siege of Orleans - - . 160
Pont, Mr. Robert, a Minister, and one of the Lords of Seflion,

protests against laws opprelsive to the Church I. 3 ;
Piery, where nmof flourishing, I. 77, what kind prevailed in

Scotland, ib. was partly grafted on [Icathenifin, lo1, is much
hurt by the congregation, 1 29, theirldoCtrines condemned by
parliament, 130, the jurifdiaion of their courts abolified,
ib. their worlip prolibited, ib. attempt in vain to gain
Q_ Mary's favour, 148, the great influence of Popery, 187
Povjer, the balance of, the great conlcquence of preserving it

I. 47 & seq.
Prefhyterian church government eflablililcd in Scotland, . 134,

is confirmed by King Janes VI. - II. 53
Froteflans, in France, violently persecuted, I. o16, are mode-

rate on Q. Mary's arrival fiolm France, 1.5, are employed
by her in the adminiltration, ib. a :hemin for ulipprelling
thcmn all over Europe, 187, a lcagu tf:inmcd for that ptirpole
11. 12,--. fee Rifomaw:ior.

R.
D /MS r, a favourite of K. James 1ITT narrnwiv cecapes

tile fate of his aflociats, I. 3 . ;' npointed Captain of ht

King's guard, and created Earl of Ioitl';w'll, 33, fee Botluwell.
Randa,, Sieur de, employed by the French to negotiate a peace

with England and Scotland, I 126, teilrs greed on by
him, - - - 127
Rati/olph, fenx to encourage the congregation, . 115, (fee app.

109,) congratulates Q. Mary's arrival in Scotland, 16, r-
ges the ratification of the treaty of' Edinbiigh, il. is inipofcd
on by Q( Vary in the alFair of her marriage with Darn lv
J73, font into Scotland on the murder of MVlurray, 27, , in-

tcrlpot's

terpofes for Morton, 315, flies from Scotland in the night,
316, is ent again there, and concludes a treaty with Eng-
land, II. 17, several of his letters, app. 117, 1zz, 127,
139, 144, 149, 15o.

Ratclif, fee Ssex.
Reformation, its progress in Scotland, I. 70, account of its

firt preachers, 71, is much influenced byEngland, ib. two
remarkable instruments of promoting it, 72, it makes great
progress, 75, causes contributing to promote it, 76, its ad-
vantages over popery, 81, is favoured by the queen regent,
84, an instance of regard for it in Scotland, 85, the whole
party not chargeable with cardinal Beatoun's nlurder, 90,
a priest burnt for embracing it, ib. the reformers violently
persecuted by the archbishop of St. Andrew's, ib. are pro-
teaed by the queen regent, 91, apply in vain to the popifhl
clergy, ib. a persecution against them pufied on by the
French interest, 94, the preachers summoned before the re-
gent, 95, they are deceived and declared out-laws by her,
96, a riotous infurretion of them at Perth against the pa-
pifts, ib. prepare to defend themselves against the queen,
97, conclude a treaty with her which she presently breaks,
98, they take arms against the queen, ib. insist on redressing
civil as well as religious grievances, 99, the influence of the
reformation on liberty, ib. they besiege and take Perth, 1o1,
they seize Stirling and Edinburgh, ib. commit great violence
on churches and monasteries, ib. their conduct how account-
ed for, ib. an inifance of their moderation, 0oz, fix their
residence at Edinburgh, ib. the queen prepares to attack
them, ib. make another treaty with her, 103, are forced
to abandon Edinburgh, &c. but allowed the exercise of their
religion, ib. demand the expulsion of the French army, ib.
are aware of their danger from France, 105, their party
ftrengthercd, 1o6, remonstrate against the French fortifying
Leith, 108, take arms in their own defence, 1og, remon-
ftrate again to the regent, to, are highly incenfied at her
imperious answer, i1 i , by advice of a convention deprive
the queen dowager of the office of regent, 1I 2, the foun-
dations of this condut, ib. the growth of it encouraged by
parliament, 240. See Congregation.

Regalilies, the ample jurisdiction of - - I. 2
Repledging, the privilege of, to whom belonging - ib.
Revenge, encouraged both by custom and law - I. 22
Revenues of the church, proceedings of parliament concerning

them - - . 131
Ridolphi, an agent for the pope at London negotiates for queen

May, I. 287, his arguments with the duke of Norfolk,

R28i8
Rizio,

Ric.io, David, foine account of him and his rife, I. 172 & eq.

Darnlly's c.nnetion with him, ib. his good offices courted
by Murray, 185, his great interest and familiarity with the
queen, 189, incurs the hatred of Darnly, ib. and of the
friends of the exiled lords, ib. several concurring causes of
tlt's, 190, a combination formed to murder him, ib. he is
murdered in the queen's palace - 191 & fcq.
Romans invade Britain, I. , 2, give the earliest accounts of

the Scots - - - ib.
Ross, biflhop of, zealously promotes Q. Mary's interef at Lon-

don, I. 288 & seq. is confined to the Tower and threatened
with capital punifnnlent, 289, is set at liberty and banilled
the kingdom, ib. some letters of his app. 173, 190
Rubay, a oreigner, made keeper of the great feal of Scotland,

- - - - I. 8z
,Ruthlven, lord, the murder of Rizio proposed to him by Darn-

ly, I. 190, heads the conspirators against him, 192, his
part in that tranaition, ib. is admitted into the queen's pre-
fence who promises him a pardon, 193, did not repent of it
at his death - - - 197
_- created earl of Gowrie, he and his associates seize the

king, and remonifrate against :his favourites, I. 32zz, drive
them from him, ibid. their conduEt approved in an assembly
of the states, 324, the king cfcapcs trom them, 327, by
Arran's influence violent meafurcs are determined against
them, ib. Q Elizabeth intercedes in thcir behalf, 328, are
declared guilty of high trealon, 329, take retuge in foreign
countrie4, ib. arc harlhly trcai;cd y Q Elizabeth, II. 7,
reconciliation with her brought about, ,1, return to Scot-
land and ar. reconciled to the l:ing, i , thcir moderation
on being retlored to their ef.ltes and honours, ib. their ne-
glct ot their friends the (l l,.)y -- 16
- hat name abolillhcd by pt !iieicnt, [I. S8. See Cor2wrie.
h';.tlen raiid, what' - - 1. 322

S.

ADL ER, Sir Ralph, appoin,!:.I a coniniifiioncr to hear the
caule between Q Ml;ly and her accuciers 1. 253
Saililand of Calder, lord St. John, fert to lay the proceeding

of the congrcgational p'Lai-.melt blobre the king and queen
in France, [. 132, is coiuly received and diliniircd without
a ratilication by tem - - ib
Sanare, a Spaniih officer, his dellpeate resolution to kill Q

Elizabeth - - - II. 18
Scollild, its ancient hiltory fabulous, I. , the origin of the

Scots, ib. their history why rciinakalihly obscure, 2, ronic ac-
count of the writers of it, 3, is divided into four periods.

4,

4, a review of the third era, ib. ome account of the con-
trovcrfy concerning its independency, ibid.- & fcq. this the
cause of great animofities and much bloodfled, S, the ltate
of Scotland when Brucc began his reign, ib. it begins to
have an influence on the fate of dillant nations 5, in-
fluence as to tle balance of power, ib. state of Scotlaid at
the birth of Q. Mary, 52, is invaded by the Englifli, and
several places burnt and plundered, 59, mnuch alienated fiomn
the Engliflh, ibid. a peace concluded betvween England,
France and Scotland, 60 & seq. computation of damages
done by the Englifhl in Scotland, ib. a new breach with Eng-
land 63, is invaded by an Englifl army, 64, the Scots are
defeated with great slaughter, 65, their manner of fight-
ing at that time, ib. a marriage agreed of their young
Queen and the Dauphin of France, 68, they oon repent
this ftep, 69, a fray at Edinburgh occasions their utter avcr-
lion to the French, 70, this inflamed by another incident,
82, they decline a war with England, 83, fend repre-
fcntatives to witness Q. Mary's marriage, 85, their care as
to the niarriage articles, ibid. & seq. they refuse consent to
the demands of the French, 87, four of their deputies sts-
pecred to be poisoned, ib. which much increases the aversion,
88, grant the crown matrimonial to the Dauphin, ibid.
they apply to the Englill for assistance againfl the French,
114, 117, an English fleet arrives for that purpose, 121,
conclude a peace with England and receive an English army,
12, & seq. all parties agree in resenting the French, 124, a
treaty between England, France and Scotland, 126, both
Englil and French armies leave Scotland, 28, they rejoice
Imuch at the death of the young King of France, 134, fend
to invite the Queen to Scotland, 137, rejea proposals of
an anlbaflador from France, 138, tate of Scotland on Q.
Mary's return fiom France, 143, the great zeal of the na-
tion against popery, 144, the Scots brought into contempt by
Q_ Mary's conduct, 16.4, in a miserable condition after the
murder of Murray the Regent, 284, slate of factions at that
time in it, ibid. a league concluded between Scotland and
England, II. 17, a view of the revolutions of Scotland since
the accellion of James VI. oo, & seq. of the policy of
the ttatc, ib and of the church, 104, of the genius and
taite as to learning - - lo0, & seq.
Sco!t, of Bucclecugh, enters and ravages England after the nmur-

der of Murray the Regent, I. 274, the dcfign of this 276.
Srclop , ord, ent to condole with, and watch Q. Mary on her

arrival in England - - 1. 247.
6'c.cn, Lords and Court of, by whom firfl appointed, 1. 24, the
President and one half of their nuniber of the Clergy 78, & sieq.

S.t! .':

Seton, Lord, assists the Queen Regent in defending Leith, I. 116
ShrewvJbutry, Earl of, the charge of Q Mary's person com-

mitted to him, I. 258, why removed from that office, 11. 6.
is appointed to fee the fcntencc againtt her executed, 33. let-
ter from him and the Earl of Kent concerning her death,
Appendix - 45
Sinc4-ir, Bi flop of Ross, a zealous Papist, concurs as president

of the felfion in acquitting Knox of a charge of treason,

1. 164
Somerset, Duke of, enters Scotland with a powerfui army, I. 64,

is reduced to a very critical situation, ibid. defeats the Scots
with great slaughter, 65, this viQory why of little advan-
tage, 66, cabals against him, at the Couit of England, force
him to return, ibid. is ruined by his enemies - 69
Spain, great warlike preparations there, II. 44. Sec Armada-

the Infanta of, ftt up as candidate for the Crown of Eng-
land - -- 62
Spanibh anlbafador is ordered to leave England, for intriguing-

in favour of Q. Mary -- . 89
Sprot, his discoveries concerning Gowrie's conspiracy, 8 & ieq.

is executed 83
Stewart, James, prior of St. Andrew's, is appointed to carry

the Crown matrimonial to the Dauphin of France, I. 89.
See St. AndIrew's.
-- Efinm, Lord Aubigne, his arrival in Scotland, I. 311.
See Aubigne.
---Capt. James, his characer, 1. 311 & seq. becomes a
favourite of King James, ibid. accuses Morton of the murder
of the late King, 31 4, is created Earl of Arran. See Arran.
--- Col. William, commander of the King's guard, con-

tributes to his escape from the Ruthven conspirators, I. 3z6,
seizes the Earl of Gowrie - 331
-- Francis, created Earl of Bothwell, II. 47, joins in a

treasonable correspondence with the Popifl lords, ib. See
Both'well.
--- all of that name combine in opposing the Chancellor,

II. 56
Stirling seized by the Reformers, I. lot, a parliament there

by the King's party, 285, is furprized by the Queen's ad-
herents, and a great fray ensues - - ib.
Strozzi, Leon, commands a body of French ent into Scot-

land, I. 63, reduces and demolifles the Castle of St. An-
drew's, ibid. See France.

Succeifon, a remarkable statute concerning it 1. 64
Superintentldnts proposed in the Church of Scotland, I. 136

their bulinefs - - ibid.
Sittex, Earl of, one of the commiflioncrs to hear the cause

between

between Q Mary and her accusers, I. 253, assembles a
powerful army on the borders, 275, he and Scroop enter,
and ravage Scotland - - 276

T.
T 4X upon land, first proposed in Scotland I. 83

Throgmorton, Sir Nicholas, sent ambassador extraordinary

from Q. Elizabeth, to oppose Q Mary's marriage with
Darnly, I. 175, his interceflion for the exiled lords is much
regarded, 186, his enmity to Cecil, ibid. is sent to nego-
tiate Q. Mary's liberation, 233, is refused access to her by
the confederates, ibid. some letters of his, App. 155, &

seq. ad 170,-178

F--- Francis, is charged with a conspiracy against Q, Eli-
zabeth, II. , at first he denies, but afterwards confeflcs it,
ibid. 2, refletions on his confeflion, executed, ibid.

Tichbourne designs to aflaflinate Q. Elizabeth II. 19
Treason, persons guilty of it, tried after their death by the law

of Scotland - - II. 82

U.

V ILMORT, a foreigner, made comptroller of Scotland
V I. 8Z
Union of Scotland and England, the advantages of, II. 103

W.

W AL LACE, Sir William, bravely afterted the liberty of
W/ his country - . 7
alfinghbam, secretary to Q_ Elizabeth, sent anlbafador to K.
James VI. I. 328, returns without success, ibid. makes a
favourable report to her concerning James, ibid. interposes in
favour of Q Mary, II. 5, discovers Babington's conlpiracy,
19, why a determined and inveterate enemy to Q_ Mary,
21, a letter from him, Append. - 23
Warvick, Earl of, fuccceds Somerset in the government of

England - . 69
Weflndnfler, the conferences concerning Q Mary there,

I. 257
Weflinorland, Earl of, attempts a rebellion in favour of Q

Mary, I. z69 & seq. his schemes discovered and defeated,
ib. 271, he escapes to the Netherlands ibid.
WYhithorn, the prior of, iprifoned forcclebrating mass T. 162

Willox,

tillox, a minister, declares for resistance and deprivation of

tyrannical rulers, . 1 I , is called to attend the Q Dow-
ager on her death-bed 125

iifnbart, George, his illegal execution, revenged I. 6r
II'itchcraft, vigorously prosecuted in Scotland II. 5z
Ilotton, dean of Canterbury, employed to negotiate a peace

with France -- I. 126

Sir Edward, Cent by Q. Elizabeth into Scotland, IT.

13, his character, ibid. oon gets into high favour with king
James, ibid. procures a league between the two kingdoms,
ibid. undermines Arran's power, 14, forms a plot on King
James, and forced to withdraw without taking leave 15

Y.
OR K, the conferences there concerning Queen Mary,

I. 253

Z.

70OUCHE, Lord, ent ambassador by Q Elizabeth, to
L remonstrate against King James's lenity to the popiih lords,
II. 59, his treachery on that occasion ibid.

F I A I .
