T H E
'-H I S i 0 R Y

1) F
S C O TL AND.

V O I. II.

T HE
H I S T O R Y

ty . /^ ov ^>^^

S C 0 T L A N D
SCOTLAND

DURING THE REIGNS OF
QUEEN MARY and of KING JAMES VI.

T I L L
TILL
His ACCESSION to the Crown of ENGLAND.

WITH A
REVIEW of the SCOTTISH HISTORY previous to that Period;

And an APPENDIX containing ORIGINAL PAPERS.

IN TWO VOLUMES.
IJBy WILLIAM ROBERTSON, D.D.

PRINCIPAL OF THE UNIVERSITY OF nEDlIIBURCII, ANT)

IIlbTORIOGRAPrHER TO HIS MAJISTY rOK SCOTLANI,

V O L U MA E 1I.
'T II E , EVENTH EDITION,

WITHI EMENDATIONS AND ADDITIONS.

, O N DO N:
PRINTED FOR T. CADELL, IN THE STRAND,

M DCC LXXXVII.

# BOOK VI.

T H E
S I S T O R Y

oF
S C O T L A N D.

BOOK VI.
I H IIE unexpected blow, by which the Re- B 0 0 ,

gent was cut off, ftrucl the King's party VI.
with the utmost conflernation. Eliza- 7.

beth bewailccl his death as the nmoft fatal di falter Diror',,'
which could have befallen her kingdom; and was by tic iRe-
inconlblablc to a degree that little lilited her dig-
nity. Mary's adhcrents exulted, as if, now, her
restoration were not only certain, but ncar at
hand. lThe infa.lmy of the crime naturally ifll on
tliofe who.exprcpeld fucli indecent joy at the
coiiniflion of it; and as the afll'fiin made his
(IcIapc on a liorll whichl belonged to [,ord Claud
1 ;lailton, and fd lddirectly to 11amilron, whcil
lie was received in triumph, it was concluded
that the Regent hadl fallen a sacrifice to the re-
fentment of the Qucen's party, rather than to the
revenge of a private man. On the day after the

VOL. , I. B murIder,

B 0 0 K mnurder, Scott of Buccleugh, and Ker of Ferni-
i_ ._c hherft, both zealous abettors of the Queen's cau-e,

5 entered England in an hostile manner, and plun-

dered and burnt the country, the inhabitants of
which expected no such outrage. If the Regent
had been alive, they would scarce have ventured
on such an irregular incursion, nor could it well
have happened so soon after his death, unless
they had been privy to the crime.

Tilis was not the only irregularity to which

the anarchy that followed the Regent's death gave
occasion. During such general confutfon, men
hoped for universal impunity, and broke out into
excefies of every kind. As it was impofiible to
reltrain there, without a fettled form of govern-

Stepstaken ment, a Convention of the nobles was held, in
towards
etaringd order to deliberate concerning the election of a
2nother Regent. The Queen's adherents refused to be
Feb. iz. prefcnt at the meeting, and protested against its

proceedings. The King's own party was irrelb-
lute, and divided in opinion. Maitland, whom
Kirkally had set at liberty, and who obtained
fiom the nobles then affrlebled a declaration ac-
quitting him of the crime which had been laid
to his charge, endeavoured to bring about a
coalition of the two parties, by proposing to admit
the Queen to the joint adminilhration of govern-
ment with her son. Elizabeth adhering to her
ancient Lyflem with regard to Scottifl affairs,
laboured, notwithitanding the solicitations of
Mary's friends', to multiply, and to perpetuate

a Sec Appendix, No. I.

the.

bhe fLuions, which tore in pieces the kingdom. B OO iK
Randolph, whoin the diflpatched into Scotland '-
on the firl: news of the Regent's death, and who 1570
was heri usual agent fur luch services, found all
parties !o exasperated by mutual injuries, and so
full of irreconcilable rancour, that it colt him
little trouble to-inflame their animosity. The
Convention broke up without coming to any
agreement; and a new meeting, to which the
nobles of all par:ies were invited, was appointed
on the first of Mayb.

MEANTIME, Maitland and Kirkaldy, who still A c0oaliicn

continued to acknowledge the King's authority, Oftmp'p
were at the utmoit pains to restore lome degree of '" "'ai
harmony among their countrymen. They pro-
cured for this purpose, an amicable conference
among the leaders of the two factions. But while
the one demanded the restoration of the Queen,
as the only thing which could re-eftablifll the
ipublic tranquillity; while the other esteemed the
King's authority to be to sacred, that it was, or
no account, to be called in question or impaired;
and neither of them would recede in the least
point from their opinions, they separated without
any profpet of concord. Both were rendered
more averse from reconcilement, by the hope of
foreign aid. An envoy arrived from France with
promires of powerful succour to the Queen's ad-
herents; and as the civil wars in that kingdom
Ieerned to be on the point of terminating in peace,
it was expected that Charles would Ioon be at

Craw-f. Merc. 131. Calderw. i;. 157.

B 2 liberty

B nvo K liberty to fulfil what he promised. On the other

VI.
__V J l hand, the Earl of Suffex was affermbling a power-

5j7o. ful ariny on the borders, and its operations could

not fail of adding spirit and itrength to the King's
party '.

Queen's THl-OUGH the attempt towards a coalition of the
par:v in
roleliron of factions proved ineffectual, it contributed some-
Einburgh. what to moderate, or itifpend their rage; but

they soon began to atr with their usual violence.
Morton, the moll vigilant and able leader on the
King's fidte, solicited 1 lizabeth to interpose, with-
out delay, for the safety of a party, so devoted to
her interest, and which stood so much in need
April r,,, of lher assistance. The Chiefs of the Queen's

faction, assembling atLinlithgow, marched thence
to Edinburgh; and Kirkaldy, who was both Go-
vernor of the Caflle and Provost of the town,
prevailed on the citizens, though with iome diffi-
culty, to admit them within the gates. Together
with Kirkaldy, the Earl of Athole, and Mait-
land, acceded almost openly to their party; and
the Duke and Lord HIerries, having rccovcred
liberty by Kirkaldy's favour, resumed the places
which they had formerly held in their councils.
Encouraged by the acquisition of persons, so
illullrious by their birth, or so eminent for their
abilities, they publi shed a proclamation, declaring
their intention to fulport the Qleen's authority,
and teemed resolved not to leave the city before
the meeting of the applroaching Convention, in
which, by their numbers and influence, they did

C Clnwf. Mcm. 134.

not

not doubt of fecluring a majority of voices on B 0 0 K
their fde . id-----'

1570.

ATr tle fame time, they had formed a dcfign of ' . ,,,,,,

k:indlinig war between the two king dos. If ,f',','v'
they could enagle them in hoflilities, and revive il'" ,"'.i:h

r_, c, Englaid.

thc ir ancient nemulation iandc antipathy, they hoped,
not only to diTulvc ;e conlfederacy of great advan-
tae to the King's c.iufe, but to reconcile their
countryml, en to thle QCjeen, l;'.liz;aetl'.s n.atural
anld motl dangerous rival. With this view, tley
had, imnediately after the murder of the cegerI,
promipted Scott and Ker to co;mmence( hofiilities,
andlt had L fnce infligated them to continue and
extend their depredations. As Elizabcth forel;w,
on the one hand, the dangerous confcquen!ces of
rendering tlihis a national quarrel; and resolved,
on the other, not to fuffeir ifuch an insult on her
governrment to pals with implunity; sic iil Led a
procllamation, declaring tlhat fie imputed the
outrages which had been committed on the bor-

lers, not to the Scottish nation, but to a few de-
Jiperate and ill-l-defigning perfilns; that, with the
formler, fie was rclolved to Imaintain an inviolable
friindfhlip,l whereas the duty which she owed to
her own uLIl)jedts obliged her to cliaflile the liccn-
tiouficlks of tle latter'. SufiT:x and Scrooi), ac-
cordlillly, enItered Scotland, the one oil tlie c(:t,
the other on the wefl borders, and laid wale tlhe
ad!jacnt countries with fire and sword'. Fame
magnl si ed tlhe n umlllber and progress of their tiroops,
iind Mary's adldhrcents, not tliinking tlemfclvcs

' C'ri:iw . M ,'n. 137. (.i..lT'r . ii. 176.
c £';, crw.ii . jii. iY . t L'Cib.dl , 17..e

B 3 fare

B V 0 K safe in Edinburgh, the inhabitants whereof were

VI.

...--.I ill affested to their cause, retired to Linlithgow.
Ap'z;°' There, by a public proclamation, they aflnrted

the Queen's authority, and sorbad giving obedi-
ence to any, but the Duke, or the Earls of Ar-
gvll and Huntly, whom flhe had confiitited her
Lieutenants in the kingdom.

K;ne'snatty TIIE nobles who continued faithful to the King,
trte'. Edi,-
b'rh. though considerably weakened by the defetion of
M"a'Y' ib many of their friends, afnembled at Edinburgh

on the day appointed. They ifiued a counter-
proclamation, declaring such as appeared for the
Q een, enemies of their country; and charging
them with the murder both of the late King and
of the Regent. They could not, however, pre-
fume so much on their own firength as to ven-
ture either to elect a Regent, or to take the field
againfi the Queen's party; but the assistance
which they received from Elizabeth, enabled
them to do both. By her order, Sir William
Drury marched into Scotland, with a thousand
foot adcl three hundred horse; the King's ad-
herents joined him with a confidcrable body of
troops, and advancing towards Glasgow, where
the adverse party had already begun hostilities by
attacking the caffle, they forced them to retire,
plundered the neighbouring country, which be-
longed to the Hamiltons, and, after leizing some
of their castles, and raling others, recurned to
Edinburgh.

Mixtivrt ot UNDER Drury's protefion, the Earl ofLennox
c,.,,l,, returned into Scotland. It was natural to com-
to''Ih'r". mit the government of the kingdom to him,

^~~~~T ~during

dctring the minority of his grandson. His illus- B o 0 K
trious birth, and alliance with the royal family of --... --
England, as well as of Scotland, rendlered hinm '570
worthy of that honour. I:lis rec'ntmc.t a-inft
Mary being implacable, and his estate lyin- in
England, and his fainily rcfidinlr there, liza-
beth coinfidered himi as a man who, ,bthl from
inclination and from intereil, woul(l adl in con-
cert with her, and a'-dently wii ed t!hai he inr,;!lt
iucccd Mlurray in the office of Rcgcnc. BuIl, an
many accounts, fbe did not think it pruient to
iilKover her own tentiments, or to favour lis pre-
tensions too openly. The civil wars i In- .tce,
which had been excited by a prctended zea;l fbr
religion, and carried on with a fierceness t[Iat did
it real dishonour, appeared now to be on the p.oint
of coming to an irlue; and after flieddling the befi:
blood, and wafting the richest provinces in the
kingdom, both parties delired peace with an ar-
dour that facilitated the negotiations which were
carrying on for that purpolfe. Charles IX. was
known to be a paflionate admirer of Mary's
beauty. Nor could lie, in honour, fuller a Quleen
of France, and the molf ancient ally of his crown,
to langui l in her p)resent cruel situation, without
attempting to procure her rclief lIe had, i-
tlierto, been obliged to satisfy hinmfelf with rc-
monlirating, by his amlbafadiorls, againt the in-
dignity with which fle had been treated. But if
lie were once at full liberty to purli-c Ihis incli-
nations, Ellizabeth would have every tlilng to
dread fiom the impetuosity of his temlper, and
the power of his arms. It therefore becalme ne-

B 4 ccffary

B 0°V K ccfllry for her to a&t with some rel'r(vc, and not

Vi.

--.-- to appear, avowedly, to coun tenance the choice
'70"' of a Rcgcnt, in contempt oi' M:llv's authorit.

The j aloiufy antd pre juidice' oi the cools re (]ired
no lels managemen t. Iad 11e openllv I' portc
Lennox's claiml; hadl fhle rcoilllnll ncd1 him to
the Convention, as the can;l l.iac of wolil flhe
apprl'ovcd; this mili llt iiave rolfletl tl: inl dcpendtI'n
spirit of the noble's, and by too plaiii a (dilcovery
of her intention, l1eic might have ldefe(,ted its ifuc-
cels. lor thlefl reaIons, tle hesitated long, and
returned anlbi)ilnols ani;\vcirs to all the meiltgcs
\lwhichl llt Iriceived frol tle King's party. A
more explicit declaration of her litiiments was
at laftl obtained,i and an event of an extraordinary
nature tcems to have been the occasion of it.
Pope Pius V. having ifliled a bull, whereby he
exconllnunicatCtd l'lizabeth, deprived her of lier
kingdomn, and ablblved her ifubjes fiorm their
oath of allegiance, 'clton, an Englifllman, had
the boldnclIs to fix it on the gates of the Billhop
of London's palace. In former ages, a Pope,
moved by his own ambition, or pride, or bi-
gotry, denounced this fatal fe'ntenee againfll the
moit : owerful monarchs; but as tlie authority of
the court of Romc was now lels regaldel, its
proceedings were more cautious; and it was only
when they were routld( by iomel powvcrfill Prince,
that the thunders of the church were evcr heard.
Elizabeth, therefore, imputed this Ilep, which
the Pope had taken, to a combination of the
Roman Catholic Princes a;gainfl: ler, and itil-
rpeted that tnme plot was formed in favour of

tihe

the Scottilhl Queen. In tllh.t eve lr, flh k; lw that 0 K;
the fid.ty of lcr. own liinigdom dcpc(.lcd(c onl p('- ---
ie'' rving lr influence in Scotlaind, aid

; ill o(itlr to '57'

i:rcnll';thnl tlis, fle ren cw,\ hr [prIm, ii s of pro-
teftinlli tihe King's adhel cts, iencol'ra.;,ed them to
procecd to the c!Ce'ion of a lRclr, ;andIl even
vcntuired to poi nt out lie 1' ;rl of 1 ',cnno i, as tlhe
prlon- \who l.(ad the belt title. 'l'hat honol r was
aiccoirli; l ,nl co;afl-'rrcd( upon him, in a Convellcliol
ofi the wholc party, held on the 2th of July"'.

Till ReCLcint's -iilft care was to prevent the i.l..oIY

cl 'lted Rc-

meeting ot (ithe iParliallen, which the Q(-C(n's s..t.

lartt had l u1:nmoneol to colnvene at I.inlit.lhow.

1 l.vinll i'clt(l thll:t, lie marlch(ed a a iinl: the Iarl
ol 1 linitls't, M.lrv's Lieitenant in the North, and
forci'd tlhe l ri('; ilon v.lliich e

l (ad placed in Brc-

chin, to l;rlillicri at (illreution. So lon after, he
ililtc hiliifelf .ialer of iolme other c:lfills. }i'.i-
boldented livy lhis -fu

ccelIinil blc.inliiin of lis ad-

inli!l-ration, as well as b1 thle oaps},'.rancc of a

conlildrable arvny , withl which the F':1; of' S.iflex
hovered on the bordlcl , hc deprivld M\ .;il.llnd of
Ilis oi'ice of Set cti.rl iy, an11 lpr'c l.ii llme liill, tlhe
])hlk, 1 untlv, and otllcr ltladers of 'til' Qjeen's
;party, traitors and enllcnlie of toheir c'ni,;rrv 1.
I x tllis dclip ratc fittlatio of their aifl'i. r;, tlhe Mar'n ai!-

here ll ne.

Q een' s adhclrents hiad reccourll t the King of lr:r1i.c
Spain', with whom IMlary had

l held( a clol cor- wi''li"'
relpondence ever since lier confinemelnt in l.ng-

r. S lpol w. 24.0. C. ii. . ii. . ,', i ,^T !. N\. 11.
h C' i:'l l

c. j , Cal.

i ( .i i. 9ii .

i
i cc A.ppend. No. I11.

land.

B 0 0 K land. They prevailed on the Duke of Alva to

V1. w_--_») fend two of his officers to take a view of tile
1570. country, and to examine its coasts and harbours;

and obtained fiom him a small supply of money
and arms, which were sent to the Earl of Huntly k.
But this aid, so dilfproportionate to their exi-

.lia',l gencies, would have availed them little. They
t"'atv ' were indebted for their safety to a treaty, which
d',(7''i Elizabeth was carrying on, under colour of re-
t ,trn ia. floring the captive Queen to her throne. The
rv and her
uuijcils. firftl steps in this negotiation had been taken in

the month of May; but hitherto little progrcfs
was made in it. The peace concluded between
the Roman Catholics and Hugonots in France,
and her apprehensions that Charles would inter-
pose with vigour in behallf of his filler-in-law,
quickened Elizabeth's motions. She asseted to
treat her prisoner with more indulgence, she
listened more graciously to the solicitations of
foreign ambassadors in her favour, and feemecd
fully determined to replace her on the throne of
her anceflors. As a proof of her sincerity, flhe
laboured to procure a ceflation of arms between
the two contending factions in Scotland. Len-
nox, elated with the good fortune which had
hitherto attended his adminilitration, and flatter-
ing himcflf with an easy triumph over enemies
whose eflates were wafted, and their forces difpi-
rited, refused, for some time, to come into this
mealure. It was not safe for him, however, to
if)pute the will of his protcl-refs. A cessation of

4 Antcrr. iii, 122. Craw. Mcm. . 153.

hostilities

bofilities during two months, to commence on B ° 0 K
the third of September, was agreed upon; and, _
being renewed froni time to time, it continued '570
till the lirfl of April next year'.

Soo: after, Elizabeth dispatched Cecil and Sir

Wallter Mildrn.y to the Qteen of Scots. The
d igni ty of thlile anballlduors, the fbrmner her prime
Miiniler, the lattcr Chancellor of the Exchequer,
.ind one of her ablcf't countlillors, convinced all
parties that the negotiation was serious, and that
the hour of Mary's liberty was now approaching.
The propositions which they made to her, were
advantageous to Elizabeth, but such as a Prince,
in Mary's situation, had reason to cxpe&. T he
ratification of the treaty of Edinburgh; the re-
nouncing any pretensions to the Englifl Crown,
during E lizabeth's own life, or that of her pofte-
rity; the adhering to the alliance between the
two kingdoms; the pardoning her fubjeót&s who
ladl taken arms againfi her; and her promising
to hold no correlpondence, and to countenance
no enterprise, that might disturb Elizabeth's go-
vernment; were among the chief articles. By
wvay of ficcurity for the accomplillhment of there,
they demanded that some persons of rank should
be given as holtages, that the Prince her son
flould rcfide in England, and that a few castles
on the border filould be put into Elizabeth's
hands. To some of there propositions Mary con-
sented; some fle endeavoured to mitigate; and
pthers fie attempted to evade. In the mean time,

! Spotfv,', 2.13.

Ihe

B o 0 K fiCe tr anfiitted copies of tlhem to th I'olp, to the

;-...- Kings of France and Spain, and to the Duke of
i5 0. Alva. She infiluated, that wnithlout iomc tiimcly

and vigorous interposition in her behalf, tlhe would
be obliged to accept of thele' hard conditions, and
to pr-chafe libertv at ally price. But the Pope
was a dilitant and fecble ;al , and by his grcat
clibrts at this time againfl the 'Iurks, his trealury
wvas entirely cxhlautlld. Carlles had already
begun to mediitate that coipiri' y against the
IuIgonots, which Imarks hiis reign with i'uchl in-
1faniy; and it required m1uch leilure, and p1eri-fl
tranquillity, to bring that execra..ble plan to ma-
turity. Philip was employed in fitting out that
fl'et which acquired lo much renown to the
Chriflian arms, by the viCory over the infidels
at Lepanto; the Moors in Spain threatened an
inlurreclion ; and his fubLjecs in the Netherlands,
provoked by much oppretlion and nmalny indig-
nities, were breaking, out into open urbellion.
All of them, for theclt dififrenlt reaoils, adviied
Mary, without depending on thlill aid, to con-
clude the treaty on the bctl terms lihe could
procure ".

Fl;7aheth'l M1iARY, accordinoly, contlntcd to many of
the; conducI Elizabeth's demands, andl dilcovered a facility of
of it. Cdifpoiition, which promiled itill further concef-

lions. But no conccllion slic could have made,
would have iatisfied Elizabeth, wlio, in flite of
her repeated profcflions of sincerity to foreign
ambaf'adorss and notwithllanding the tf]lmnity

' Andlcrf. vol. iii. 119, 120.

with

with which file carried on tle treaty, hal no B 0 0 K
other olbjc(i in it, than to anufe Mlary's allies, '----v
and t i

to ain ti ". After having Jo long treated '57o'

a Qlcen, who fled to her for refuge, in lo un-
generous a manncer, fihe could not now difili-s
herl with trcty. Under all the diatvantages
of a rigorous confinement, Mary had found means
to excite commotions in England, which were
extrem ely formidable. What defpcrate efi'eels of
]er ijull rclentinlllt rmightl b, expeed, if (ile were
!et at liberty, anad recovered lier former power
\\hat engagements could bind her, not to re-
veno.e the wronl s wvhiclh he had fuL elred, nor to
take adv.antage of the favourable conjuncdures
that might prclnit theimlves ? Was it pofiible
for lher to give filch Ifecurity for her behaviour,
in times to come, as mlight remove all suspicions
and fears ? And was there not good caule to
conclude, that no future benefits could ever ob-
literate the mlmorllry ol pall injuries? It was thus
Illlizabeth realbnccd; though she continued to ad
as if her views hadl been entirely cliflecnt. She
:ippointecd fcven of hel privy counillors to be
commiflioners for letitling the articles of the
treaty; and, as Mary liad already naamed the
Biffhops of lols and Galloway, and Lorde Leving-
Ilon, for her am;hall;adors, flie required the Regent
to impower proper )perlons to aplpear in behalf of
the King. Tlhe Farl of Morton, I'itcairn abbot ,,
of' Dunlfrmling, and Si - James Macgill were the
persons cholfn by the Regent. They prepared

D)iggcs. Ctiompl. Anil. ,8.

for

B 0O K forotheirjourneyasflowlyasElizabethherfelfcould
I--,-. have wished. At length they arrived at London,

1571I and met the commiffloners of the two Queens.
Fb,. 19. Mary's ambaitidors discovered the firongeff in-

clination to comply with every thing that would
remove the obstacles which flood in the way of
their mistress's liberty. But when Morton and
his associates were called upon to vindicate their
conduct, and to explain the sentiments of their
party, they began, in justification of their treat-
ment of the QCueen, to advance such maxims con-
cerning the limited powers of Princes, and the
natural right of fubjeds to refill and to controul
them, as were extremely shocking to Elizabeth,
whose notions of regal prerogative, as has been
formerly observcd, were very exalted. With
regard to the authority which the King now pof-
fesed, they declared that they neither had, nor
could poflibly receive inftrutions, to content to
any treaty, that tended to subvert, or even to
impair it in the leaIt degree". Nothing could
be more trifling and ridiculous, than such a
reply from the conmifnioners of the King of
Scots to tle Queen of England. His party de-
pended absolutely on her protection, her hand
had feated him on the throne, and to her power
he owed the continuance of his reign. With the
utmof'c ease fle could have brought them to hold
very different language; and whatever conditions
she might have thought fit to prescribe, they
would have had no other cloice but to submit.

C Culd. ii. 234. Digges, 5. I-Iayncs, 523, 524.

This

This declaration, however, she affected to confider 3 o o K

vi.

as an infu)pcrable difficulty; and finding that there -
was no reason to dread any danger from the It pro7.
French King, who had not discovered that eager- fruitlcfs.
ncefs in support of Mary, which was expected; the
reply nmade by Morton furnished her with a pre-
tence for putting a fiop to tlhe negotiation, until March 24.
the Regent flould fend ambafiadors with more
ample powers. Thus, after being amused for ten
months with the hopes of liberty, the unhappy
(Qlecn of Scots rem-cained under flrider custody
than ever, and without any profpe& of elcaping
from it; while those lfubjeas, who fiill adhered to
her, were exposcd, without ally or protector, to
tle ra,;g of enemies, whom their success in this
ne',otiation rendered flill more insolent,.

ON the day after the expiration of the truce, Dinbarton

which had been observed with little cxac&ncfs on sild' fur-
either fide, Captain Crawford of Jordan-lill, a Rl"'cnt
gallant and enterpriling officer, perforlned a
service of great inmportance to the Regent, by
liurpriing the castle of Dunbarton. This was
the only fortified place in the kingdom, of which
tle Queen had kept pofi-flion, ever since the
conmlencclment of the civil wars. Its situation
on the top of an high and alinofl inaccessible
rock, which rifes in tlhe middle of a plain, ren-
dered it extremely firong, and, in the opinion of
that age, impregnable; as it commanded the
river Clyde, it was of great consequence, and
was deemed the mofl- proper place in the kingdom

P And. iii. 91, &C.

for

B o0 K for landing any foreign troops that might coime
---. . to Mary's aid. The fircn!gth of the place ren-
J'/1- Cdered L.oid I leing, the governor, irore Jecure

than 1he ot;ghlt to hIive beoen, confiderii!g its iim-
portance. A fIldiecr, who had lerved in the gar-
rilon, and lad been dilgtiilc'd by ltme ill usage;
propotcd tle ficheni to thle Regent, cndeavoured
to demontllrate that it was practicable, and osiered
himself to go the foremols' man on tile enterprise.
It was thought prudent to riik any danger for 1t)
great a prize. Scaling-ladders, and whatever ell:
might ibe neccefilry, were prepared with the ut-
most fccrccv and diipatch. All the avenues to
the calle were seized, that no intelligence of the
design might reach the governor. Towards
evening, Crawford marched from GlafTgow, with
a finall but determined band. By inidlio-ght,
they arrived at the bottom of the rock. The
moon was ftt, and the flky, which hithertQ had
been extremely clear, was covered with a thick
fog. It was where the rock was highel'-, that the
alfailants made their attempt, becaulf in that
place there were few centinels, and they hoped
to fiind them leI.lt alert. 'The firfI ladder was
scarcely fixed, when the weight and eagerness of
tliofe whv mounted, brought it to the ground.
None of the anlfilants were huit by the fall, and
none of the garrilron alarmed at the noile. Their
guide and Crawford scrambled up the rock, and
fafitened tle ladder to tle roots of a tree which
grew in a clef. This place they all reached with
the utmost difficulty, but were ltill at a great
dif-ance from the foot of the wall. Their ladder

was

was made fall a second time; but in the middle B 00 K
of the ascent, they met with an unforelfen diffi- ---
culty. One of their companions was seized with '17'
tome sudden fir, and clung, seemingly without
life, to the ladder. All were at a stand. It was
impoflible to pais him. To tunible him head-
long was cruel; and might occasion a discovery.
But Crawford's pretence of mind did not forsake
himn. 1le ordered the soldier to be bound faif to
the ladder, that he might not f.ll when the fit
was over: and turning the other fide of the
ladder, they mounted, with ease, over his belly.
Day now began to break, and there still remained
a high wall to scale; but after furmQunting so
many great difficulties, this was toon accom-
plifed. A sentry observed the first man who
appeared on the parapet, and had just time to
give the alarm, before he was knocked on the
head. The officers and soldiers of the garrison
ran out naked, unarmed, and more solicitous
about their own safety, than capable of making
resistance. The assailants rufled forwards, with
repeated flouts, and with the utmost fury; took
poffefion of the magazine; seized the cannon i
and turned them againfl their enemies. Lord
Fleming got into a finall boat, and fled all alone
into Argyleflire. Crawford, in reward of his
valour and good condu&, remained matter of the
caffle; and as he did not lose a tingle man in the
enterprise, he enjoyed his success with unmixed
pleasure. Lady Fleming, Verac the French En-
voy, and Hamilton Archbishop of St. Andrews,
were the prisoners of greatest diftindionq.

1 Duch. 394.
VOL. II. C VERAC'S

B 0 0 K VERAC'S character protected him from the

vi.
A_-- uufage which he merited by his activity in stirring
Archbishop up enemies against the King. The Regent treated
of St. An- the lady with great politeness and humanity. But
drew's put
to death by a very different fate awaited the Archbishop; he
him,

was carried under a strong guard to Stirling;
and as he had formerly been attainted by a& of
Parliament, he was, without any formal trial,
condemned to be hanged; and on the fourth day
after he was taken, the lentence was executed.
An attempt was made to conviEt him of being
accessary to the murder both of the King and Re-
gent, but these accusations were supported by no
proof. Our historians observe, that he was the first
Biflop in Scotland who died by the hands of the
executioner. The high offices he had enjoyed,
both in church and slate, ought to have exempted
him from a puniflhment infli&ed only on the lowest
criminals. But his zeal for the Queen, his abi-
lities, and his profession, rendered him odious and
formidable to the King's adherents. Lennox
hated him as the person by whole counsels the
reputation and power of the house of Hamilton
were supported. Party rage, and personal en-
mity, dictated that indecent sentence, for which
fomic colour was fought, by imputing to him such
odious crimesr.

Ti'e: loss of Dunbarton, and the revere treat-

r.,nle of ment of the Archbishop, perplexed no less than
i ^the they enraged the Queen's parry; and hofltilities
'n)llc" were renewed with all. the fierceness which dif-

appointment and indignation can infplre. Kirk-

.r Spoll\ . 2 iz.

aldy,

aldy, who, during the truce, had taken care to B ° o K
increase the number of his garrison, and to pro- '-
vide every thing necessary for his defence, issued '7-
a proclamation declaring Lennox's authority to
be unlawful and usurped; commanded all who
favoured his cause to leave the town within fix
hours; seized the arms belonging to the citizens;
planted a battery on the steeple of St Giles, re-
paired the walls, and fortified the gates of the
city; and, though the afc&tions of the inhabitants
leaned a different way, held out the metropolis
against the Regent. The Duke, Huntly, Home,
Herries, and other chiefs of that facion, repaired
to Edinburgh with their followers; and having
received a finall furn of money, and some ammu-
nition from France, formed no contemptible
army within the walls. On the other fide, Mor-
ton seized Leith, and fortified it; and the Regent
joined him with a considerable body of men.
While the armies lay so near each other, daily
fkirmifles happened, and with various success.
The Queen's party was not strong enough to
take the field against the Regent, nor was his
superiority so great as to undertake the siege of
the castle, or of the town'.

SOME time before Edinburgh fell into the hands noth p.r-

tIes hold

of his enemies, the Regent had summoned a par- riaihmnl.
liament to meet in that place. In order to pre- ry 14.
vent any objection against the lawfulness of the
meeting, the members obeyed the proclamation
as exactly as possible; and assembled in a house

£ C;,ld, ii. 233, &C.

C 2 at

B OO K at tle head of the Canongate, which, though
i-_--- without the walls, lies within the liberties of the

'137' city. Kirkaldy exerted himself to the utmoit - to

interrupt their meeting; but they were lb strongly
guarded, that all efforts were vain. They passed
an at attainting Maitland and a ft'w others, and
then adjourned to tie 2Sth of' Augutv,'

THE other party, in order that their proceed-

ings might be countenanced by the fame filew of
legal authority, held a meeting of parliament
soon after. There'was produced in this allimbly
a declaration by the Qleen, of the invalidity of
that deed whereby fle hadl rctigned the Crown,
and conlinted to the coronation of her son. Con-
formable to this declaration, an at was passld,
pronounicing the resignation to have been extorted
by fear; to be null in itself, and in all its confe-
quences; and enjoining all good fubjets to ac-
knowledge the Qt ueen alone to be their lawful
Sovereign, and to support thole who aced in her
name. ''The prrcent ellablifhlent of the Pro-
teftant religion was conf-irmed by another Itatute;
and, in imitation of the adverse party, a new
meeting was appointed on the 26th of Augufl".

Mi:.aI' MEANWI ILE, all the mireries of civil war defo-

tl'e king- latcd the kingdom. Fellowv-citizens, fiiends, bro-
d!lo.1. thers, took different fides, and ranged themfellves

under the llandards of the contending fadlions.
In every county, and almofl: in every town and
village, King's men and .c,,en's men were names of'
(liitinilion. Political hatred dilFolved all natural

' Cratwf\. Mume. 177, rd. Iid..

ties,

ties, and extinguilfhcd tile reciprocal good-will B O0 K
and confidence which hold nmankind together in -
society. Religious zeal mlingled itself with these '57T
civil ditlbindions, and contributed not a little to
I eightcnl and to intl.lane them.

'I'lE flItionl, which (diivided the ];kinmdom we re, St.lp or

in appearance, only two. But, in bothl thel:,
theire wCre perlons withi views and principles 1t
different from each otlier, that they ought to be
di ltingui ifh.. \Vit h iomie, confiderarions of re-
li ion were predom:inant, and they either adhered
to the Quleen, becaule they hoped, by her means,
to re-ellablilfhi Popery, or they defended the
King's authority, as the heft support of the Pro-
teftant fiith. Among theie the opposition was
violent and irreconcilable. Others were influ-
enced by political motives only, or allured by
views of inte-rest; the Regent aimed at uniting
these, and did not dcfpair of gaining, by gentle
arts, many of Mary's adherents to acknowledge
the King's authority. Maitland and Kirkaldy
had formied the lla:le dcfign of a coalition, but
on such terms, that the Qteen might be rcllored
to some hlare in the government, and the king-
dom flake ol' its dependence upon England.
Morton, the ablefl, the imoft ambitious, and the
molt powerful man of the King's party, held a
larticular courle; ;nd moving only as he was
prompted by the court of England, thwarted
every mecafure that tended towards a reconcile-
ment of the factions; and as he served Elizabeth
with much fidelity, he derived both power and
credit from her avowed proteaion.

C 3 TlE

B o0 K TIIE time appointed by both parties for the

VI.
A-_--( meeting of their parliaments now approached.
1571. Only three peers and two bishops appeared in

that which was held in the Queen's name at
Edinburgh. But, contemptible as their numbers
were, they pased an aEt for attainting upwards
of two hundred of the adverse faction. The
meeting at Stirling was numerous and splendid.
The Regent had prevailed on the Earls of Ar-
gyll, Eglinton, Caffils, and Lord Boyd, to ac-
knowledge the King's authority. The three
Earls were among the most powerful noblemen
in the kingdom, and had hitherto been zealous
in the Queen's cause. Lord Boyd had been one
of Mary's commiflioners at York and Weft-
mincer, and, since that time, had been admitted
into all her most secret councils. But, during
that turbulent period, the conduct of individuals,
as well as the principles of factions, varied so
often, that the sense of honour, a chief prefirvative
of confitence in characer, was entirely loft; and,
without any regard to decorum, men suddenly
abandoned one party, and adopted all the violent
passions of the other. The dcfection, however,
of so many persons of diftincl-ion not only weak-
ened the Qucen's party, but added reputation to
her aclverfaries.

The King's AFTER the example of the parliament at Edin-
'i",1 in burgh, that at Stirling began with framing acds
stilig. ag'ainst the opposite faction. But in the midst of

all the security, which confidence in their own
numbers, or distance from danger could inspire,
they were awakened, early one morning, by the

filouts

shouts of the enemy in the heart of the town. In B °0 K

VI,

a moment the houtes of every person of diftinc-
tion were surrounded, and before they knew what sefrt',
to think of so firange an event, the Regent, the
Earls of Argyll, Morton, Glencairn, Caflils, Eg-
linton, Montrole, Buchan, the Lords Sempil,
Cathcart, Ogilvir, were all made prisoners, and
mounted behind troopers, who were ready to carry
them to Edinburgh. Kirkaldy was the author of
this daring enterprise; and if he had not been in-
duced by the ill-timed solicitude of his friends
about his safety, not to hazard his own person in
condu&ing it, that day might have terminated the
contest between the two factions, and have re-
frored peace to his country. By his diretion,
four hundred men, under the command of Hunt-
ly, Lord Claud Hamilton, and Scott of Buc-
cleugh, let out firom Edinburgh, and, the better to
conceal their design, marched towards the south.
But they soon wheeled to the right, and horses
having been provided for the infantry, rode
firaight to Stirling. By four in the morning,
they arrived there; not one sentry was posted on
the wal's, not a single man was awake about the
place. They met with no resistance from any per-
son whom they attempted to seize, except Mor-
ton. He defending his house with obstinate va-
lour, they were obliged to set it on fire, and he
did not surrender till forced out of it by the
flames. In performing this, rome time was con-
fumed; and the private men, unaccustomed to
regular discipline, left their colours, and began
to rifle the houles and flhops of the citizens. The

C 4 noie

B 0 0 K noise and uproar of tle town reached the castle.

VI.

The Earl of Mar sallied out with thirty 1oldiers;
J5T'1 fired brifklv upon the enemy, of whom almolt

none but the ollicers kept together in a body.
The towniiinei toolk arms to alliit their go-
vernor; a sudden panic firuck the afa:ilants;
some fled, omne fllrrendered theifelves to their
own pril;ncrs; and had not the bolderers, who
followed Scott, prevented a purfiilir, by carrying
off all the horles within the place, not a man
would have cfcaped. If the Regent had not un-
fortunately been killed, the lols on the King's lide
would have been as inconsiderable, as tle alar;n
was great. 7Tin7i' thie .4' , hbiJhcp of St. .;,,:h*ci's,
was the word among the Quieen's ibldicrs ; and

The Re Lennox fell a facriice to his memory. The of-
gcntiid. sicer, to wholm he lilrrendered,, cndeavouring to

protec' him, loftl his own life in his defence. He
was slain, according to the general opinion, by
command of Lord Claud Il amilton. Kirkaldv
had the glory of concertin,, this plan with gleat
secrecy and prudence; but Morton's fortunate
obstinacy, and the want of dliilipline among- his
own trools, dcllrived hi m of fucccls, tle only
thing wanting to render thlis equal to tile molt ap-
plauded military entcrp rilks of the kind'.

,Marchofn As so many of tlie nobles were afiembled, they
se ,.'
"' proceeded, without delay, to the elecion of a Re-

gent. Argyll, Morton, and Mar, were candidates
for the oflice. Mar was choftln by a ma;ority of
voices. Amidit all tlie fierce di(enfions which

Mclv. 226. CL;r\.i;. M,1Om1. 204.

had

had prevailed i; long in Scotland, he had diftin- B O 0 K
(tuihted himself by his moderation, his humannity, -
and his dilintcrclted nis. As his power was far '57 '
inferior to \rgy ll's, and his abilities not so great
as Morton's, he was, for these rcafons, lets for-
mlidable to the other nobles. Iis mCiit, too, in
having to lately ricutled the leaders of the party
from i11mmilnent ldeltru.L:ion, contributetd not a little
to Ilis p'rcf'crenlclnlt.

W\ IL.E theil things were clarryinl on1 ill SCOt- Prrececl'ing

in I 11'.la,,d

land, the translations in 'lngl;ad we\re no lets Ailn lNla-
interelting to Mary, and still more fatal to her t'
can]fe. The parliament of that kin ldomn, which
met in April, pa.lVd an act, by which it was de-
clared to be high trealob to claim lany right to
the Crown duri:ng the life of the Qlcen t' ; to atlirll
that the title of any other person was better than
hiers, or to maintain that the paili.ament had not
power to feittle alid to liilit the order of sic-
cetlion. This remnarkable tLatute was intended
not only for the security of their own Sovereign,
but to curb the refilelts and intriguing l)irit of the
Scottifih Queen, and her adherents y.

AT thils time, a treaty of marriage between Marrigc

Elizabeth and the Duke of Anlou, the French bec.eenlli-
Kinig's brother, was well advanced. Both courts :, ll'cof
seemed to denrir it with equal ardour, and gave Aijou.
out, with the uttmolt confidence, that it could
not fail of taking place. Neither of' them, how-
ever, vwi(fed it success; and they encouraged it
for no other end, but because it fervec to cover

Y CmidM. 1,36.

or

o0 yK or to promote their particular designs. The whole

V1,
_--., policy of Catherine of Medicis was bent towards

the acconmplifihment of her detestable project for
the deftrucllion of the lHugonot chiefs; and by
carrying on a negotiation for the marriage of her
son witih a Princess who was justly esteemed the
protecEtrs of that party, by yielding tome things
in point of religion, and b)y discovering an indif-
ference with regard to others, Ihe hoped to amuse
all the ProteRants in Europe, and to lull asleep
the jealousy even of the llugonots themfelvcs.
Elizabeth flattered herself with reaping advantages
of another kind. During the dependence of the
negotiation, the French could not with decency
give any open afiftance to the Scottifl Qucen; if
they conceived any hopes of success in the treaty
of marriage, they would, of course, interest them-
selves but coldly in her concerns ; Mary herrelf
must be dejcc&cd at losing an ally, whom fie had
hitherto reckoned her morl powerful protedtor;
and by interrupting her correspondence with
France, one source, at least, of the cabals and
intrigues which dilturbed the kingdom, would be
itopr. Both iQueens succeeded in their schemes.
Catherine's artificcs imposed on Elizabeth, and
blinded the Fltugonots. The Frcnch discovered
the uitinofl indifference about the interefl- of the
Scottifli Oleen; and Mary, confidering that
court as already united with her rival, turned for
protecion, witih more eagerness than ever, to-
wards the King of Spain'. Philip, wihole dark

' ):gc';, -l-l- r4S. Catmd. 43..

and

:and thoughtful mind delighted in the mystery of B O O K
intrigue, had held a secret correspondence with v
Mary, for some time, by means of the Biflop of Norsk,
Ross, and had supplied both herself and her ad- conrnfrcy
herents in Scotland with fimall fums of money. of Mary.
Ridolphi, a Florentine gentleman, who resided
at London under the character of a banker, and
who acted privately as an agent for the Pope,
was the person whom the Bithop intrusted with
this negotiation. Mary thought it necessary, like-
wife, to communicate the secret to the Duke of
Norfolk, whom Elizabeth had lately restored to
liberty, upon his solemn promise to have no fur-
ther intercourse with the Queen of Scots. This
promise, however, he regarded so little, that he
continued to keep a conflant correspondence with
the captive Queen ; while flie laboured to nourish
his ambitious hopes, and to itrengthen his amo-
rous attachment by letters written in the fondest
caresing strain. Some of these he murf have re-
ceived at the very time when he made that so-
lemn promise of holding no farther intercourse
with her, in confelquence of which Elizabeth re-
stored him to liberty. Mary, still confidering
him as her future hufbland, took no itcp in any
matter of moment without lhis advice. She
early communicated to him her negociations
with Ridolphi; and in a long letter, which flle
wrote to him in cyphers', after complaining of
the baseness with which the French court had
abandoned her intercfl-, flie declared her inten-

a H;tylls, 597, 598. I:lardw. Stite P;lpcrs, i. 190, &c.
Diggcs Coinplc;at Amin:t. 147.

4 tion

B 0 0 K tion of imploring the afiftance of tle Spanifl

vi.
,_-ir Monarch, which was now her only resource;
1571. and recommended Ridolphi to his confidence,

as a person capable both of explaining and ad-
vancing the icheme. The Duke commanded
Hickford, his ftcretary, to decypher, and then
to burn this letter; but whether he had been
already gained by the court, or relolved at that
time to betray his maRter, he disobeyed the latter
part of the order, and hid the letter, together
with other treasonable papers, under the Duke's
own bed.

RIDOLPHI, in a conference with Norfolk, omit-

ted none of those arguments, and sparcd none of
those promises, which are the usual incentives to
rebellion. The Pope, he told him, had a great
fum in readiness to bcetow in so good a cause.
The Duke of Alva had undertaken to land ten
thoofand men not far from London. The Ca-
tholics to a man would rife in arms. Many of
the nobles were ripe for a revolt, and wanted only
a leader. I-Half the nation had turned their eyes
towards him, and c.lled on him to revenge the
unmerited injuries which he himself had suffered;
and to rescue an unfortunate Qiceen, who offered
him her hand, and her crown, as the reward of
his fuccels. Norfolk approved of the design, and
though lie rcrfufed to give Ridolphi any letter of
credit, allowed him to use his name in negotiating
with the Pope and Alva '. The Bilhop of Ross,
who, from the violence of his temper, and irn-

b'~ And:l.kp iiia
16C.

paticn'cc

patience to procure relief for his mistress, was apt B 0 0 K
to run into rath and dcfperate designs, advised the -
I)uke to afl`enble secretly a few of his followers, 1571'
and at once to seize Elizabeth's person. But this
the Duke rejected as a fchcne equally wild and
hazardous. Meanwhile, the Engilh court had Dinr'vrcd

by vEliza-

received ibme iinprfel- informnation of the plot, bcth.
by intercepting one of Ridolphi's agents; and Autu!,
an accident happened, which brought to light all
the circtimiitances of it. The Duke had em-
ployed I-lickford to tranfinic to Lord I-errics,
Iobme money, which was to be diflributed among
Mary's friends in Scotland. A person not in the
lecret was intrusted with conveying it to the
borders, and he, fufpeting it fiom the weight to
be gold, whereas he had been told that it was
silver, carried it directly to the Privy Council.
The Duke, his domestics, and all who were privy,
or could be suspected of being privy to the design,
were taken into cufody. Never did the accom- Sept..
plices in a conspiracy difcovcr less firmnels, or
servants betray an indulgent mailer with greater
balenefs. Every one confefTed the whole of what
he knew. H-ickford gave directions how to find
the papers which he had hidden. The Duke
himself, relying at first on the fidelity of his as-
fociates, and believing all dangerous papers to
have been deltroyed, confidently asserted his own
innocence; but when their dcpofitions and the
papers thecmielves were produced, aflonifhled at
their treachery, he acknowledged his guilt, and
implored the Queen's mercy. His offence was too
heinous, and too often repeated, to obtain pardon;

and

B O0 K and Elizabeth thought it necessary to deter her
_ subjects, by his puninlienlt, from holding corre-
1571. fpondence with the Queen of Scots, cr her emif-

saries. Being tried by his Peers, he was found
guilty of high treason, and, after several delays,
suffered death for the crime c.

THE discovery of this conspiracy produced

many effects, extremely detrimental to Mary's
interest. The Bishop of Ross, who appeared by
the confession of all concerned, to be the prime
mover in every cabal against Elizabeth, was
taken into custody, his papers searched, himself
committed to the Tower, treated with the utmost
rigour, threatened with capital punishment, and,
after a long confinement, set at liberty, on condi-
tion that he should leave the kingdom. Mary
was not only deprived of a servant, equally emi-
nent for his zeal and his abilities, but was denied
from that time the privilege of having an ambaf-
fador at the English court. The Spanish ambaf-
fador, whom the power and dignity of the prince
he represented exempted froim fich insults as Ross
had suffered, was commanded to leave England d.
As there was now the clearest evidence that
Mary, from resentment of the wrongs she had
suffered, and impatience of the captivity in
which flie was held, would not scruple to en-
gage in the most holtile and desperate enterprizes
againlt the elfablifled government and religion,
The began to be regarded as a public enemy, and
was kept under a ftrióter guard than formerly,

c Andcrf. iii. 1,19. State Trials, 185. d Digges, 163,

the

[the number of her domeffics abridged, and no n °o ° I
perlbn permitted to fee her, but in presence of _-
her keepers. '57'1

AT the fame time, Elizabeth, foreseeing tie Eliibcth

florm which was gathering on the continent pc.,iy a-
,;gainlt lher kingdom, began to wifl that tran- c
quilliry were restored in Scotland; and irritated l"'Y
by Mary's late attempt against her government,
flhe determined to a&, without dilguife or ambi-
guity, in favour of the King's party. This re-
solution lhe intimated to the leaders of both sac-
tions. Mary, the told them, had held flich a 0a.23.
criminal correspondence with her avowed ene-
mies, and had excited such dangerous confpi-
racies both against her crown and her life, that
fie would henceforth confider her as unworthy of
protecEion, and would never content to reltore
her to liberty, far lels to replace her on her
throne. She exhorted them, therefore, to unite
in acknowledging the King's authority. She
prorifed to procure by her mediation equitable
terms for those who had hitherto opposed it.
But if they still continued refiraaory, fihe threat-
ened to employ her utnuift power to compel thein
to submit'. Though this declaration did not
produce an immediate efire ; though hostilities
continued in the neighbourhood of Edinburgh;
though Huntly's brother, Sir Adam Gordon, by
his bravery and good condu&l-, had routed the
King's adherents in the North in many en-
counters; yet such an explicit discovery of Eli-

.Strypc, Ann. ii. so. 'r See Append. No. IV.

z;btllh's

B 0 0 K zabeth's sentiments contributed not a little to

VI.
o._ - animate one party, and to depress the spirit and

I57L hopes of the other .

T-lnliiics e s Morton, who commanded the Regent's
~f.1 red C( C3
h.C cen: forces, lay at Leith, and Kirkaldy 1lill held out

` c the town and cattle of Edinburgh, scarce a day

pafied without a fkirmilh; and while both
avoided any dccifive action, they harafied each
other by attacking 1small parties, beating up
quarters, and intercepting convoys. These ope-
rations, though little memorable in themselves,
kept the pallions of both factions in perpetual
exercile and agitation, and wrought them up, at
last, to a degree of fury, which rendered them re-
g.ardlefs not only of the laws of war, but of the
principles of humanity. Nor was it in the field
alone, and during the heat of combat, that this
implacable rage appeared; both parties hanged
the prilbners they took, of whatever rank or qua-
lity, without mercy, and without trial. Great
numbers ifufiered in this flocking manner; the
unhappy vicLims were led, by fifties at a time, to
execution; and it was not till both fides had
smartcd severely, that they discontinued this. bar-
barous praCtice, fb reproachful to the characer of
the nation 1. Mcanwhile, those in the town and
castle, though they had received a supply of
money from1 the Duke of Alva', began to susser
for want of provisions. As Morton had destroyed
all the mills in the neighbourhood of the city,
and had planted Inmall garrisons in all the houses

g C;ald. ; i. A9. 294. ,r'ypc, ii. 7s.
' Cia.wt'. Mcm. 21;.. 220. I C.dl., ii. 315' .

of strength around it, scarcity daily increased. B °o K

VI.

At lalt all the miseries of famine were felt, and
they muit have been loon reduced to such extre- 1572'
mities, as would have forced them to capitulate,
if tie English and French ambassadors had not
procured a fufpenlion of hostilities between the
two parties k

T'Houror the negotiation for a marriage be- League e-

tween Elizabeth and the Duke of Anjou had iandand"
been fruitless, both Charles and fle were desirous France
of concluding a dcefenive alliance between the
two Crowns. He confidered such a treaty, not
only as the best device for blinding the Pro-
teftants, against whom the conlpiracyt was now
almost ripe for execution; but as a good pre-
caution, likewise, against the dangerous confe-
quences to which that atrocious measure might
expose him. Elizabeth, who had hitherto reigned
without a single ally, now fawv her kingdom so
threatened with intelfine commotions, or expoled
to invasions fiom abroad, that fle was extremely
solicitous to secure the afillance of so powerful
a neighbour. The difficulties arising from the
situation of the Scottiflh Qteen, were the chief
occasions of any delay. Charles demanded some
terms of advantage for Mary and her party.
Elizabeth refused to liften to any proposition of
that kind. Her obltinacy overcame the faint
efforts of the French Monarch. Mary's nam,
was not so much as mentioned in the treaty; and
with regard to Scottish affairs, a short article was

k Cald. ii. 346.
VOL. II. D inserted,

B o0 K inserted, in general and ambiguous terms, to this

- --- purpose, " That the parties contracing fiall
A ^^2. make no innovations in Scotland ; nor fufier any

firanger to enter, and to foment the factions there;
but it flall be lawful for the Queen of England
to chastise, by force of arms, those Scots who
shall continue to harbour the Englifl rebels now
in Scotland'." In conecluence of this treaty,
France and England affTeted to at in concert
with regard to Scotland, and Le Croc, and Sir
VWilliam Drury, a)ppered there, in name of their
refpetive Sovereigns. By their mediation, a
truce for two months was agreed upon, and
during tlat time conferences were to be held
between the leaders of the opposite factions, in
order to accommodate their differences, and re-
store peace to the kingdom. This truce afforded
a seasonable interval of tranquillity to the Queen's
adherents in the South; but in the North it
proved fatal to her interest. Sir Adam Gordon
had still maintained his reputation and superiority
there. Several parties, under different officers,
were sent againll him. Some of them he at-
tacked in the field; against others he employed
Itratageml and as his courage and conduEt were
equal, none of his enterpriles failed of success.
He made war, too, with the humanity which be-
came so gallant a man, and gained ground by
that, no less than by the terror of his arms. If
he had not been obliged, by the truce, to suspend
his operations, he would, in all probability, have

Di gg)i-es, 170. 191. Camd. 44}4.

brought

broutght that part of the kin dorlO to f!lbmit en- B io K
tircly to the Queen's authority ''

NOTW\;THSTA NDI N Gordon's bravery and fuc- i'roCp.n.C.

in E, ' ,d

ceRs, Mary's intercll was on the decline, not only an^,
ni her own kingdom, but amnolng the Englilh. 'r.
Nothing could be more o(F.nfive to that nation,
;ealous of frceigncrs, and terrified at the pro-
(peet of the Spaniifh yoke, tiian her negotiations
with the Duke of Alva. The parliament, which
met in May, proceeded against her as the most
dangerous eneny of the kingdonm; and afcer a
solemn confcercnce between the Lords and Com-
mons, both houses agreed in bringing in a bill
to declare her guilty of high treason, and to de-
prive her of all right of succession to the Crown.
This great carfg, as it was then called, occupied
them during the whole fe'Efon, and was carried
on with much unanimity. Eli1zabeth, though
fie applauded their zeal, and approved greatly
of the courie they were taling, was satisfied withi
shewing Mary what fie might expee fiom the
resentment of the nation ; but as fle did not yet
think it time to proceed to the inof: violent ex-
tremity againti her, fie prorogued the parlia-
ment "

'1'iESE revere proceedings of thle I.rnglilh par- Tic French

liament were not more mortifying to Mary, than rnicn.he'
the coldness and neglect of her allies the French.
The Duke of Montmorency, indeed, nho came
over to ratify the league with Elizabeth, made a
Ihew of interesting hilnfelf in favour of the Scot-

Crawf. Mlclr, " D'Evcs Journ. 206, S.c.

D 2 tih

E 0 0 K tif1h Queen; but, instead of soliciting for her li-

----' berty, or her relloration to her throne, all that
51'li he demanded was a flight mitigation of the rigour

of her iip-ifolibn nt. Even this finall requfl-,
he urged with il little warmth or importunity,
that no regard was paid to ito.

The' mnla. T'IIE alliance with France afltrded Elizabeth
Ire of Paris.

much Iiatisf'ation, and ihe exlpccted from it a
great increase of itcuritv. She now turned her
whole attention tolwards Scotland, where thc ani-
mofities of the two fa.lions were flill so high , and
lo many1 interfringl intercltls to be ad juled, that
a general pacitication ilcincd to be at a great dili
t;nce. But while the labourled to bring t them to
folme a.(,rcemcnt, an

even, t happened which filled

a great part of Europe with aflonifliment and
with horror. This was the nmailhtcre of Paris;
an attempt to which there is no parallel in the
hillory of mankind, either for the long train of
craft and difimulation with which it was con,
trived, or for the cruelty and barbarity with
which it was carried into execution. By the
moll solemn promilcs of liafety and of favour, the
leaders of the Protellants were drawn to court;
and though doomed to delt'rution, they were
received with careles, loaded with honours, and
treated, for fcvcn months, with every posirble
mark of familiarity and of confidence. In the
midl of their Ifcurity, the warrant for their de-
Ai^,n z4. ilru&cion was issued by their Sovereign, on whose

.word they had relied; and, in obedience to it,

° Jcbb, ii, 512.

their

theirccotuntry)'en, tiheir fellow-citizens, and corn- B °° K
panions, imbrued their hands in their blood. Ten > _
thousand Protcll-ants, without diftinEtion of age, '5;Z
or tex, or coiinirion, were murdered in Paris
alone. The fAlme barbarous orders were elnt to
other parts of the kingdom, and a like carnage
ensued. This deed, which no Popish writer, in
the preflnt an-e, nentions without deteflation,
was, at that time, applaludd in Spain; and at
Rome Iblemn thanksgivings were offered to God
for its fucccfs. 1ut among the Proteflints, it
excited incredible horror; a firiking pidure of
which is drawn by the French Ambanlador at the
court of England, in his account of his first au-
dience after the maiacre. " A gloomy sorrow,
lays he, lat on every face; silence, as in the dead
of night, reigned through all the chambers of
the royal apartment; the ladies and courtiers
were ranged on each fide, all clad in deep mourn-
ing, and as I pai'ed through them, not one be-
flowed on me a civil look, or made the lecal re-
turn to my salutes "."

BUT horror was not the only passion with which Dctrimenta.

this event inspired the Proteldants; it filled them i ,crt;i'y
with fear. They confidered it as the prelude to
some greater blow, and believed, not without
much probability, that all the Popifli Princes had
conspired the deftrudtion of their set. This opi-
nion was of no linall diffcrvice to Mary's affairs
in Scotland. Many of her adherents were Pro-
tetnants; and, though they wifled her restoration,

P Carte, iii, 522.

D 3 were

B 0 OC K were not willing, on that account, to sacrifice the
. .-_. faith which they professed. Thcv dreaded her

5-ri attachment to a religion, which allowed its vo-

taries to violate the mofo ftlemn engagcinwents,
and prompted them to perpetrate thle Inof bar-
barous crimes. A general confederacy of the
Protestants t-emed to them the only thing that
could uphold the Reformation againfl: the league
which was formed to overturn it. Nor could
the prelent eftablillihent of religion be long
inl:intained in Britain, but by a strict union with
Elizabeth, and by the concurrence of both na-
tions, in elpoufing the defence of it, as a com-
mon caunIe

ENCOURAGED by this general difpofirion to

place confidence in her, Elizabeth refulned a
scheme wliicli 1he had turrmed

sduring the regency

of the Earl of Murray, of fending Mary as a
priloner into Scotland. Bi..t her ts'ntiments and
lituation were now vercy difei'r lt from what they
had been ducring her negotiation with Murray.
Her aniinofity againfl tle Queen of Scots was
greatly augmented, by recent experience of her
inclination as well as power not only to dillurb
the tranquillity of her reign, but to wrelt from
her the crown; the party in Scotland favourable
to Mary, was almost entirely broken; there was
no rcafon to dread any danger fiom France,
which still continued to court her friendship.
She aimed, accordingly, at something very dif-
ferent from that which fli had in view three

l Dirgcs, 244. 267.

years

ecars before. Then flie dilcovcrcd a laudable B 0 o K
iblicitude not only for thie lafety of Mary's life, .-,-
but for Iccuring to her, treatment Ifited to her '
rank. Now Ihe required, as an express condi-
tion, that, iimmediately after Mary's arrival in
Scotland, fle should be brought to public trial;
and having no doubt that fecntence would be
palTed according to her delferts, Ihe infitted that,
for the good of both kingdoms, it Ihould be exe-
cuted without delay'. No translation, perhaps,
in Elizabeth's reign, merits more fcvere censure.
1ager to cut Ihort the days of a rival, the object
both of her hatred and dread, and no less anxious
to avoid the blame to which such adeed of violence
might expose her, fle laboured, with timid and
ungenerous artifice, to transfer the odium of it
from herlelf to Mary's own fubhjecs. The Earl
of Mar, happily for the honour of his country,
had more virtue than to liften to such an igno-
minious proposal; and Elizabeth did not venture
to renew it.

WHILE she was engaged in pursuing this in- The Rerti'

0 0 1 ° ende. vour n
fidious measure, the Regent was more honourably to Il;itr

borh par.

employed in endeavouring to negotiate a general ,'i.
peace among his countrymen. As lie laboured
for this purpose with the utmost zeal, and the
adverle facion placed entire confidence in his
integrity, his endeavours could hardly have failed
of being successful. Maitland and Kirkaldy
came to near to an agreement with him, that
scarce any thing remained, except the formality

' Mlrdin, 22..

D 4 of

B 0o K of signing the treaty. But Morton had not for-
<-y» gotten the disappointment he met with in his

's52 pretensions to the Regency; his abilities, his

wealth, and the patronage of the court of Eng-
land, gave him greater sway with the party, than
even the Regent himself; and he took plealure
in thwarting every measure pursued by him. He
was afraid that, if Maitland and his afrociates
recovered any lhare in the administration, his
own influence would be considerably diminished;
and the Regent, by their means, would regain
that ascendant which belonged to his station.
With him concurred all thole who were in pof-
fefTion of the lands which belonged to any of the
Queen's party. His ambition, and their avarice,
frustrated the Regent's pious intentions, and re-
tarded a b!lTisng so necefilry to the kingdom, as
the establishment of peace.
His drcat. SUCH a difcoverv of the lelilhlnels and anbition

which reigned among his party, made a deep im-
preflion on the Regent, who loved his country,
and wished for peace with much ardour. This
inward grief broke his fpiiri, and by degrees
brought on a fettled melancholy, that ended in a
distemper, of which he lied on the twenty-ninth
of October. He was, perhaps, the only perlon
in the kingdom who could have enjoyed the
office of Regent without envy, and have left it
without loss of reputation. Notwithflanding their
mutual animofities, both faeions acknowledged
his views to be honourable, and his integrity to
be uncorrupted'.

' Mclv, 33. Crawf. Mern. :37. d.
' i. 1.

NoI

No competitor now appeared against Morton. B 0 o K.

The Queen of England powerfully supported his ---,
claim, and notwithltanding the fears of the peo- ,,:,52
pie, and thejealoul, of tlhe nobles, he was elected cholcn Re-

gent.

Regent; the fourth, who, in the space of five Novnm.
years, had held that dangerous office.

As the truce had been prolonged to the first of

January, this gave him an opportunity of con-
tinuing the negotiations with the opposite party,
which had been set on foot by his predecessor.
They produced no effecs, however, till the be-
ginning of the next year.

BEFORE we proceed to thef', obn;e events, hi-
therto untouched, delerve our notice.

THE Earl of Northumberland, who lh.dc been

kept prisoner in Lochlevin ever since his tiight
into Scotland in the year one thousand five hun-
dred and fixty-nine, was given up to Lo:-d HIunf-
don, governor of Berwick; and being carried to
York, suffered there the puniifhment of his're-
bellion. The King's party were so sensible of
their dependence on Elizabeth's protection, that
it was scarcely possible for them to refule putting
into her hands a person who had taken up ar:ns
against her. But as a fum of money was p.tid on
that account, and Ihared between Morton and
Douglas of Lochlevin, the former of whom, dur-
ing his exile in England, had been much indebted
to Northumberland's friendship, the abandoning
this unhappy nobleman, in such a manner, to cer-
tain leftruEtion, was univerfallv condemnaed as a
inoft ungrateful and mercenary aCtion".

u Cr.\iw. Mcm. 5;. 222. C;and. 445.

TJIIs

B 0 O K T'HIS year was remiarkatie fr a cor, fiie; bl

VI. r
~---_- innovation in the grovernti;eit ,f t!.e Ch.rch.
Tn'; Zo. Soon after the Recfotinatiol, the Ji';p:h bih-ops
t.t,.ccuch. hlad been. co;:i: -;r.cc:d law in prLof:.:i an ors prt

of their beneicces; but the ipri:tual j'urii.c'ion,
'which belonged to thiier order, .'._c s cxercijecl by
fi:perintendancts, though *vwh:i; rvore moderate au'-
tiuritri. On the deaI: of the Acb op o S:.
And:trews, Morton ubtainedl froml the Crowvn a
grant of the tempo-r:.l ties of that fce. But as it
was :ho'io;: indecent for a la;'nn to hoid a be-
nefice to -v.iich the cure of ioulss annexed,
he procured Douglas, rector of the ULniverfity of
St. Andrews, to bc chosen A:chb;ifop; and aliot-
ting him a finail penlion ou of he revenues of
the fee, retained the rerlaili:c'r ;n his own hands.
The nobles, who sa-w the advanl; ages they mirht
reap from such pracice, ' pp ored him in the
execution of his plan. It gave great of:cnce,
however, to the clerg-, v;h,o, iniread of perpe:u-
a:ing an order whose n.a'm an power was oiious
to them, wished that the revenues whicl h.i;. be-
longed to it might be emilo'c1: i:; ifu'p:i,:,,-r
such parifhcs as we. fT l:il t:i;:l; .!c w.h ftr:led

.paslors. J;ut, on ti.c one hon a, it would have
been rarh in the Cle rg to h.tle irritaced too
1lmuch no' lemcn, on xhoiem the verv t. ;ilcrncc of
tile I'rotes.ant Church 1i Scoti ;.t depe;ied; and
Morton, on the ot;ier, coniducted his Ictc'me with
lfuch dextcrity, andl Il:anaged tihem n 'nh -'o much
art, that it was, at lai}, agreed, in a convention
compoled of the leailing i.;cn anmong the Clergy,
together wv:"h a committee us lpi iv council,

"that

that the name and oF-ce of Archbifiop, and p 00 K

Bishop, should be contii.L;ed during the King's
minority, and these dignities be conferred upon 15s'7
the best qualified amror-g the Protceftnt Mlinitters;
but that, with regard to their ip:ritual jurif-
dic^ions, they ihould be fubj&,e to the gcneral as-
fembly of the Church." The rules to be observed
in their election; and th:e perions who were to
supply the place, and eniov the privileges, which
belonged to the Dean and Cihater in times of
Popery, were likev'.li particularly specified .
The whole being laid before the General Aircsm-
biy, after tome exceptions to the name of -1i:,''-
lif)op, Dean, Capter, &c. and a protecatorun th.t
i frnould be confidered only a, a temlrora;ry con-
ftitution, until one more p:crfect could be intro-
duced, it obtained the approbation of that court'.
Even Knox, who was prevented from attenJing
the AfTembly by the ill state of his health, though
he declaimed loudly again: the fimoniacal pac-
tion to which Douglas owedl his preferment,
and blamed the nomination of a pcrlon worn
out with age and infirmities, to an office which
required unimpaired vigour both of body and
mind, seems not to have condemned the proceed-
ings of the Convention; and, in a letter to the
Aflcmbly, approved of fomen of their regulations
with refpe&t to the election of Bifliops, as worthy
of being carefully observed. In confequcnce of
the AfTembly's content to the plan agreed upon
in the Convention, Douglas was inllalled in lis

1 C.ld. ii. 3c0. Y Id. 354. z Sec Appcn li., No. V.

of ce,

B ( ) K office, and at the fame time, an Archbishop of

..----_ Glasgow, and a Bishop of Dunkeld, were chosen
1572. from among the Protellant Clergy. They were

all admitted to the place in Parliament, which
belonged to the eccleefiafical order. But, in
imitation of the example set by Morton, such
bargains were made with them by different noble-
men, as gave them pofieliion only of a very finall
part of the revenues belonging to their fees'.

Nov. 27. SOON after the dissolution of this Assembly,
h.,c i',l'of Knox, the prime instrument of spreading and

'x dteflablifhing the Reformed religion in Scotland,

ended his life, in the fixty-feventh year of his
age. Zeal, intrepidity, disinterestedness, were
virtues which lhe poffefled in an eminent degree.
tle was acquainted, too, with the learning culti-
vated among divines in that age; and excelled
in that species of eloquence which is calculated
to route and to inflame. His maxims, however,
were often too severe, and thc iml'tetuofity of his
temper excessive. Rigid and iunconpl)ying him-
Ielf, he shewed no indulgence to the infirmities
of others. Reg'lrdlefs of the diftin(tions of rank
ancd charalert, lie uttered his admonitions with
an acrimony and vehemence, more apt to irritate
than to reclaim. This often betrayed him into
indecent and undutiful exlrfflions with respect
to thle Queen's person and condu(t&. Those very
qualities, however, which now renlcr his cha-
racrcr lets amisalei, fitted him to be the inltru-
mncnt of Providence for advancing the Reform-

a :',ieof. :6i.

ation

ation among a fierce people, and enabled llim B Ov h

V].

to face dangers, and to surmount opi)OiitiOn, fromill -
which a perlon of a more gentle Ipirit would )3'Z,
have been apt to l-ilink back. By an unwearied
application to ftudly and to bufincis, as well as )y
the fiequency and fervour of is public c ii-ouri-cs,
he had worn out a conflitution naturally robuli.
During a lingering illncfs, le dilcovered the ut-
most fortitude; and met the approaches of death
with a magnanimity inffeparahble fiom his cha-
rac er. He was conflantly employed in acts of
devotion, and comforted himself with tlolfe pro-
specs of immortality, which not only preserve
good men from delponding, but fill them with
exultation in their last mom nts. The IEiarl of
Morton, who was present at his funeral, pro-
nounced his eulogium in a few words, the more
honourable for Knox as they came fron one
whoin lie had often cenlfured with peculiar Ie-
verity, "' There lies I-le, who never feared the
face of man"."

THOucii Morton did not (licfe pea ce friom

The 14.%,ent

such generous motives as tle lb1rme- r Regent, he ,r,.,i~ ,,,
laboured, however, in good earnell o c ll-ablifli ph,'.''
it. The public confusions and calamities, to
which he owed his power and importance when
he was only the lecond pcrlon in the nation,
were extremely detrimental to him, now that lie
was railedt to be the firtl. While b mnany of the
nobles continued in arms agaiinfl him, his autho-
rity as Regent was partial, feeble, and preca-

b SpoiC . 266. Cald, ii. 2-3.

rious.

B O) 0 K rious. Elizabeth was no less dcfirous of extin-

Vs.
Lu-- i ai.;ihling the flame which fime had kindled andi

]72' kpt2t io lo!g .live in Scotlandi. She had disco-

Vered the alliance with France, fromnl which flde
had expected fich advantages, to be no founda-
tion of Ilcuriitv. Though app:.'irances of friend-
ili:-o still fubilld between her and that court,
and Ciuarles d.ail renewcd his protestations of
inviolable aldhe;e:nce t tOtle tr'-at, she was con-
Avnced, by a fi.t.nl c.-x;,nc, lhow. little flhe ought
to rely on thle piom',niics or o.atil ofr that perfidious
Monarch. Her ambaisdor warned her that
the French held lecr-et corrlcfpondence with Mary's
adherents in Scotla.nd, and encouraged rhem in
their obitinacy !. The Duke of Alva carried on
his intrigues in that kingdom with lelf difguiie.
She was perftaded that tley would embrace the
firll serene interval, which the commotions in
France and in the Netherlands would allow
them, and openly attempt to land a body of men
in Scotland. Sh.e rcllved, therefore, to prevent
their getting any footing in the island, and to cut
oft' all their hopes of finding any afliftance there,
by uniting the two parties.

iisover. 'rTHE situation of Mary's adherents enabled the
jr'edh y ReLKcnnr to carry on his negotiations with them to
AMndikila great advantage. 'They were now divided into
and Kirk- b 0.
aldy. two flations. At the head of the one, were Cha-

tcllhlrault and H-untly. Maitland and Kirkaldy
were the leaders of the other. Their high rank,
their extensive property, and the numbers of their

Digges, 299. d Id. 296. 312.

followers,

iollowers, rendered the former confiderabi:. The n o oK
latter were indebted for their importance to their _
personal abilities, and to the strength of the ca:ile 1--'
of Edinburgh, wh ich w as in their po!c!-Ton. The
Regent had no intention to comprehend both in
the iame treaty; but as he crcaded that the
Queen's party, if it remained entire, would be
able to thwart and nembarraifs his administration,
he resolved to divide and weaken it, by a fiparate
ilegotiation. He made the firfr overture to Kirk-
aldy and his afTociates, and endeavourcd to renew
the negotiation with them, which, during the lif'
of his predecessor, had been broken off by his
own artifices. But Kirkaldy knew Morton's
views, and fyeftem of government, to be very
different from those of the former Regent. Mait-
land confidered him as a personal and implacable
enemy. They received repeated affirances of
protecion from France; and thotugh the sie:e of
Rochelle employed the French arms at that time,
the fame hopes, which had ob often deceived the
party, still anmufed them, and they expected that
the obftinacv of the Iugonot wonuld soon be
lfubdued, and that Charles vwould then be at
liberty to a&l with vigour in Scotland. Mlean-
while, a supply of money was lenr, and if the
cafile could be held out till \Vhitfunday, efFcc-
tual aid was promiscd' . Maitland's genius de-
lighted in forming ifhemes that were dangerous;
and Kirkaldy potflclcd the intrepidity nccel]ary
for putting them in execution. The catfle, they

D ggci , 314.

6 knew,

n oo 0 K knew, was so situated, that it might dcfy all the
--^-- Regent's poicer. Elizabeth, they hoped, would

13 not violate the treaty with lrance, by fendiicg

forces to his aiftitance; and if tie French flhould
be able to land any considerable body of men, it
mi glit be poltible to deliver the Q.ueen from cap-
tivity, or at lealt to balance the influence of France
and England in ifch a manner, as to rescue Scot-
land s-orn the diflonourab!e dcpendance upon the
latter, under which it had fallen. This splendid,
but chimerical proijet, they prefcrred to the
fri-endflip of Morton. They encouraged the
negotiation, however, becaufc it served to gain
time; they propoled, for the fame purpose, that
the whole of the Queen's party should be com-
prelhended in it, and that Kirkaldy fliould retain
the command of the caltle fix months after the
treaty was signed. His interest prompted the
Regent to rejet the former; his penetration dif-
covered the danger of complying with the latter;
and all hopes of accommodation vanished.

As soon as the truce expired, Kirkaldy began to

fire on the city of ldinburgh, which, by the re-
turn of the inhabitants whom he had expelled, was
devoted as zealously as ever to the King's cause.
But as the Regent had now set on foot a treaty
with Chatclherault and Huntly, tile cessation of
arms still continued with them.

Arcrpted by THEY were less scrupulous than the other party,
Ch 1

clhe-

ra.It ani and listened eagerly to his overtures. The Duke
"ntLl. was naturally unready, and the approach of old

Mclv. 235, &c.

age

age increased his irresolution, and aversion to ac- B O O K
tion. The miseries of civil discord had affliced a
Scotland almost five years, a length of time far '573.
beyond the duration of any former contest. The
war, instead of doing service, had been detri-
mental to the Queen; and more ruinous than any
foreign invasion to the kingdom. In prosecuting
it, neither party had gained much honour; both
had sufFered great losses; and had exhausted their
own estates, in walling thole of their adversaries.
The commons were in the utmost misery, and
longed ardently for a peace, which might ter-
minate this fruitless but deftrudive quarrel.

A GREAT ftep was taken towards this deGfrable Articls of,

event, by the treaty concluded at Perth, between Fb.23tr,
the Regent on one hand, and Chatelherault and
l Huntly on the other, under the mediation of Kil-
legrew, Elizabeth's Ambaffadorg. The chief
articles in it were there; that all the parties com-
prehended in the treaty ihould declare their ap-
probation of the Reformed religion, now elta-
blilhed in the kingdom; that they should submit
to the King's government, and own Morton's
authority as Regent; that they fiould acknow-
ledge every thing done in opposition to the King,
since his coronation, to be illegal; that on both
fides the prisoners who had been taken should be
set at liberty, and the lands restored to their
proper owners; that the aft of attainder passed
against the Queen's adherents should be repealed,
and indemnity granted for all the crimes of which

z See Append. No. VI.
VOL, II. E ¶hey

B O o K they had been guilty since the fifteenth of June,
h-.- one thousand five hundred and fixty-feven; and

1573. that the treaty (hould be ratified by the common

consent of both parties in parliamenth.

Siege of the KIRKALUY, though abandoned by his aflociates,
cafile of
Zdinbirgh. who neither discovered solicitude nor made provi-

sion for his safety, did not lore courage, nor en-
tertain any thoughts of accommodation'. And
though all Scotland had now submitted to the
King, he still resolved to defend the castle in the
Queen's name; and to wait the arrival of the pro-
mifed succours. The Regent was in want of every
thing necessary for carrying on a siege. But Eli-
zabeth, who determined, at any rate, to bring
the dissensions in Scotland to a period, before the
French could find leifulre to take part in the
quarrel, soon afforded him sufficient supplies.
Sir William Drury marched into Scotland with

h Crawf. ime. 251.
' Mclvil, whoóe brother, Sir Robert, was one of those ilho

joined w.ith Kirkaldy in the defnce of the catllc, and who w.as
himnt'e' Ihongly attached to their party, afTerts tlha;t Kirkaldy
offered to acccpt of any reasonable tcrnls of coiltihlition, hut
that all his ofitrs were rejeecd bv the Rgcent. Mdv. 2.0.
But as Ellizabeth vwa, at that time, extremely lciirous of re-
Atoring pcace in Scotland, and her Ambafltador Killegrcw, as
well as the Earl of Rothcs, ulicd their utinolt cndeinours to
perflade Kirkaldy to accede to the trcaty of Pcrth, it fieius
more credible to impute t hc continualnce of hollilitics to
Kirkaldy's obtlinacy, his dillruft (if McitCo1, or his holp of
forcign aii, than to any other c.tiuc.

'li.lt this x;as.rcilly tlie cafe, is eviden' ;'! :: the poutlive

tcllilUim y of Spttlw. 269, 2,0. Ca':m . ,;. l'hnl l lil.
3, 4. Digc'., 334. Cr,.itw rd's ;s a',', n ,1ic. , ':' tltc le.tin,
witil lleitii, llcln. 263.

fiftecn

fftccen hundred foot, and a considerable train of B 0o K
artillery. The Regent joined hinl with all his l
forces; and trenches were opened, and approaches Aprl =i.
regularly carried on against the caRle. Kirkaldy,
though discouragcd by the lols of a great fumr of
money, remitted to him from France, and which
fell into the Regent's hands through the treachery
of Sir James Balfour, the most corrupt man of
that age, defended himself with bravery, aug-
mented by despair. Three and thirty days he
refitted all the efforts of the Scotch and Englifi,

lwho pushed on their attacks with courage, and
v.ith emulation. Nor did he demand a parly,
till the fortifications were battered down, and one
of' the wells in the castle dried up, and the other
choaked with rubbish. Even then, his spirit was
untlbdued, and he determined rather to fall glo-
rioufly behind the last intrenchment, than to yield
to his inveterate enemies. But his garrison was
not animated with the fame heroic or dcfperate
rclblution, and, a rising in a mutiny, forced him to
capitulate. lie fuirendered hinfelf to Drury, 3Mio.
who promised, in the name of his mifirefs, that
lie should be favourably treated. Together wvitrl
him, James Kirkaldy his brother, Lord 1Iome,
Maitland, Sir Robert Melvil, a few citizens of
Edlinburgh, and about one hundred and sixty
lolidiers, were made prilonersk.

SLVERAL of the officers, who had been kept in

pay during tle war, prevailed on their men to ac-
company them into the Low-countries, and cntcr-

k Caid. ii. 408. lclv. 2'0. Cr.Lwf. Mn. n;j.

2 ing

B 0 0 K ing into the service of the States, added, by their

VI.

gallant behaviour, to the reputation for military
1573. virtue, which has always been the characteristic of

the Scottish nation.

Review of THUS by the treaty with Chatelherault and
the charac-
ter ofboth Huntly, and the surrender of the caffle, the civil
ptties. wars in Scotland were brought to a period.

When we review the state of the nation, and
compare the strength of the two factions, Mary's
partisans among the nobles appear, manifestly, to
have been superior both in numbers and in
power. But these advantages were more than
counterbalanced by others, which their antago-
nifts enjoyed. Political abilities, military kill,
and all the talents which times of aftion form,
or call forth, appeared chielly on the King's fide.
Nor could their enemies boast of any man, who
equalled the intrepidity of Murray, tempered
with wvif;om; the profound sagacity of Morton;
the subtle genius, and insinuating address, of
Maitland; or the fucccfsful valour of Kirkaldy;
all of which were, at first, employed in laying
the foundations of the King's authority. On the
one lide, mealures were concerted with prudence,
and executed with vigour; on the other, their
relolutions were rash, and their condua feeble.
T'1he people, animated with zeal for religion,
and prompted by indignation againll the Queen,
warllly supportcd the King's caulc. The Clergy
tihrew the whole weight of their popularity into
the fame fcalc. By means of tlcefc, as well as by
the powerful intcr1pofition of lEnlland, the King's
government was finally cfiablillhcd. Mary loft

even

even that shadow of sovereignty, which, amidst B O O K
all her sufferings, the had hitherto retained among '-,y-
part of her own fubjets. As fie was no longer 73'
permitted to have an Ambassador at the court of
]England, the only mark of dignity which fhl
had, for some time, enjoyed there, she mufr
henceforth be confidered as an exile stripped of
all the ensigns of royalty; guarded with anxiety
in the one kingdom, and totally deserted or for-
gotten in the other.

KIRKALDY and his aflociates remained in Dru- K;rkaldy

ry's custody, and were treated by him with great 'tath.
humanity, until the Qtieen of England, whose
prisoners they were, should determine their fate.
Morton insisted that they should susser the punifll-
ment due to their rebellion and obstinacy; and
declared that, so long as they were allowed to
live, he did not reckon his own person or au-
thority secure; and Elizabeth, without regarding
l)rury's honour, or his promises in her name,
gave them up to the Regent's disposal. I-He firlf
confined them to separate prisons; and, soon after,
with Elizabeth's content, condemned Kirkaldy, Augulf .
and his brother, to be hanged at the cross of
Edinburgh. Maitland, who did not expe&t to be
treated more favourably, prevented the ignominy
of a public execution, by a voluntary death, and
" ended his dlays, fays Melvil, after the old Ro-
man fashion'."

WH ILE the Regent was wreaking his vengeance
on the remains of her party in Scotland, Mary,

Melv. 242.

f 3 incapable

B °I0 K incapable of affording them any relief, bewailed
t- iJ their misfortunes in the solitude of her prison. At

1573' the faile time, her health began to be much im-

paired by confinement, and want of exercise. At
the entreaty of the French AmbalTador, Lord
Sirewfbury her keeper was permitted to carry
her to Buxton-wells, not far fi-om Tuthbury, the
place of her imprilfonment. Cecil, who lately
had been created Baron of Burleigh, and Lord
High Treasurer of England, happened to be
there at the lame time. Though no niinifter
ever entered more warmly into the views of a
Sovereign, or gave flronger proofs of his fidelity
and attachment, than this great man, yet such
was Elizabeth's distrust of every person who ap-
proached the Queen of Scots, that her suspicions,
in consequence of this interview, seem to have
extended even to him; and, while Mary justly
ceckoned him her molt dangerous enemy, lhe
found some difficulty in persuading his own
miilrefs that he was not partial to tliat unhappy
-eeI1.'"

Tl'E Duke of Alva was this year recalled fiomn

the government of the Netherlands, where his
haughty and opprefive adminitration roused a
fpilit, in attempting to subdue which, Spain ex-
hauled its treasures, ruined its armies, and loft
its glory. Requelens, who fucceeede him, was
of a milder temper, and of a lets enterprising ge-
nius. This cvcnt delivered Elizabeth from the
perpetual dilquietudc, occasioned by Alva's ne-

o ~itrypl , ii. 248. 288.

gotiations

gotiations with the Scottiih Queen, and his zeal B ° 1 K.
for her interest. -

'574.

THOUGH the kingdom was now fettled in pro- The' R-

found peace, many of the evils which accompany gmi,irado
civil war were still felt. The restraints of law, become,
which, in times of public confusion, are little re-
gardeed even by civilized nations, were totally de-
lififed by a fierce people, unaccustomed to a re-
gular adminifiration ofjuftice. The disorders in
every corner of the kingdom were become intole-
rable; and, under the protection of the one or the
otlier faction, crimesofevery kind were committed
with impunity. The Regent set himself to redress
thefc, and, by his industry and vigour, order and
security were re.efRablifled in the kingdom. But
he loft the reputation due to this important ser-
vice, by the avarice, which he discovered, in per-
forming it; and his own exations became more
pernicious to ite nation than all the irregularities
which he re(trained". Spies and informers were
every where employed; the remembrance of old
ofcnces was revived; imaginary crimes were in-
vented; petty trespasses were aggravated; and
delinquents were forced to compound for their
lives, by thl payment of exorbitant fines. At
the fame time, the current coin was debased";

licences

n Sec Append. No. VII.

The corrlllitu11 of the co;l, (It' ing Mornon'i amJini.

ifrl:ion, wvs very great. Althoulgh lhe qu( tlty ofe ctrrnt
lloney coilncd ol;t (.;' a poulnd of hullliol, wais gradua;lly in.
crlcaifcel by fonincr princes; the f(l;:iutln d or iiinefs liiflcrccd
li!tlc iltcraiticil, '1.l the miixtiur of alloy was ncatrly the .intmC
wiLh wlhat is now uicd. Bt. Morto niixedl fourth p';i. of'

E + alloy

B 00 K licences were fold for carrying on prohibited

Vil ^--.i branches of commerce, unusual taxes were im-
1574. posed on commodities; and all the refinements

in oppression, from which nations so imperfectly
polished as the Scots are usually exempted, were
put in practice. None of there were complained
of more loudly, or with greater reason, than his
injuflice towards the Church. The thirds of be-
nefices, out of which the Clergy received their
subsistence, had always been slowly and irregu-
larly paid to collectors, appointed by the General
Assembly; and, during the civil wars, no pay-
ment could be obtained in lcveral parts of the
kingdom. Under colour of redressing this griev-
ance, and upon a promise of assigning every Mi-
nifier a stipend within his own parifn, the Regent
extorted from the Church the thirds to which they
had right by law. But the Clergy, instead of
reaping any advantage from this alteration, found
that payments became more irregular and dilatory
than ever, One Minister was commonly bur-
dened with the care of four or five parishes, a
pitiful salary was allotted him, and the Regent's
insatiable avarice seized on the reft of the fund P.

THE death of Charles IX. which happened

this year, was a new misfortune to the Scottifl
Queen. Henry III. who succeeded him, had

alloy with every pound of fillcr, and funk, by confcqucenc,
the value of coin in proportion. In the year ij58, all the
money coined by hin was callcd in, and appointcd to he
rccoiiicd. The (a.ndiarl was rcftorcd to the lhme purity as
formerly. Ruddim. Prxf. to Anders. Diplom. p. 74.

P Cr.l.f. Mcm. 27. S7pots. 27. C ad. ii, 420. 427.

nOt

not the fame attachment to her person; and his B °0 K

VI.

jcaloufy of the house of Guise, and obsequiousness A
to the Queen Mother, greatly alienated him from 57
her interest.

TrHE death of the Duke of Chatelherault muff 5s7.s

likewite be confidered as some loss to Mary. As
the Parliament had frequently declared him next
heir to the Crown, this entitled him to great re-
spect among his countrymen, and enabled him,
more than any other person in the kingdom, to
counterbalance the Regent's power.

SOON after, at one of the usual interviews be-

tween the wardens of the Scottifl and English
marches, a scuffle happened, in which the Englilh
were worfied; a few killed on the spot; and Sir
James Forrester, the warden, with several gentle-
men who attended him, taken prisoners. But both
Elizabeth and the Regent were too sensible of the
advantage which resulted from the good under-
Itanding that filbifted between the two kingdoms,
to allow this flight accident to interrupt ir.

TIHE domestic tranquillity of the kingdom was Attmpt, of

thle C'lerpy

in some danger of being diiturbed by another agait(lihe
cause. Though the persons raised to the dignity ordP."
of Bifflops pofleffed very finall revenues, and a
very moderate degree of power, the Clergy, to
whom the Regent and all his measures were be-
come extremely odious, began to be jealous of
that order. Knowing that corruptions Iteal into
the Church gradually, under honourable names,
and upon decent pretences, they were afraid that,
from such finall beginnings, the hierarchy might
oow in time, to be as powerful and opprefllve

as

U orO K as ever-. 'ITh c tits author of these sus'picions was
.- ---.-_ Mr. Andrew Mlcli'il, a man, difcinguilhed by his

'57n' uncolmmon erudition, by tilc lievcrity' of his nan-

ners, and the intrepidity of his mind. But, bred
io) in the retircement of a college, lie was unac-
qctinted with the arts of lifc; and b:ing mIuoic
attentive to the ends which he pursued, than to
tlhe mieans which lie employed for promotillg
thellm, h:e often defeated laudable designs, by the
impetuolity and imprudence with which lie car-
riled them on. A queflion was moved by him in
the affcinbly, " whether the office of Bishop, as
now exerciled in the kingdoin, were agreeable to
tie word of God ?" In the ecclefiallical judica-
tories, continual complaints were made of the
Biflhops for neglect of duty, many of which their
known remifTncfls too well juftliied. The Bilhop
of Duilkeld, being accused of dilapidating his
benefice, was found guilty by the assembly. The
Regent, instead of checking, connived at thlele
difputcs about ecccleliaftical government, as they
(tivei-ted the zeal of the Clergy from attending to
his daily encroachmlents on tie patrimony of the
Church q.

1576. THE weight of the Regent's opprefive admi-

1]: 11111.itCi
on, i.,l she nifla'ion hadl, hlitherto, f.illcn chiefly on those in
iJilc. the lower and middle rank ; but he began now to

take ecih ftleps, as convinced the nobles, that
their dignity would not long exempt them from
feeling the efl'eds of his power. An accident,
which was a frequent caule of dilrenfion among

q CIldJ. AUinlblics, 15-qt, &c. Johnt. Ilil, 15.

tlle

the Scottish nobles, occasioned a difference be- B °0 K
tw'een the Earls of Argyll and Athol. A vafhl .-,--
of the former had made some depredations on the 5
lands of the latter. Athol took arms to punifli
the of'cender; Argyll, to protec him ; and this
ignoble quarrel they wevre ready to decide in the
fiel(e, when the Regent, by interposing his autho-
rity, obliged them to dilLf;nd their forces. Both
of them had been guilty of irregularities, which,
though common, were contrary to the letter of
the law. Of these the Regent took advantage,
and rclolved to found on them a charge oftreafon.
This design was revealed to the two Earls by one
of Morton's retainers. The common danger, to
which they were exposed, compelled them to
forget old quarrels, and to unite in a close con-
federacy, for their mutual defence. Their junc-
tion rendered them formidable; they delfpifed
the summons which the Regent gave them to
appear before a court of jufticc; and he was
obliged to desist from any firther prosecution.
But the injury he intended made a deep impref-
sion on their minds, and drew upon him revere
vengeance r.

NoR was lhe more successful in an attempt,

which he made, to load Lord Claud Hamilton
with the guilt of having formed a conspiracy
againflt his life. Though those, who were flip-
posed to be his accomplices, were fcized, and
tortured, no evidence of any thing criminal ap-
peared; but, on the contrary, many circum-

' Craw^f Mcm. 285.

tlances

B 0^ K stances discovered his innocence, as well as the
_-_ Regent's lecret views, in imputinr to hinim ucl

'"' an odious derfgn'.

!ivtl;rn l r'i Scottifl "Nobles, who were altioft equal
to,,.;'tlic ro their Mlonarchs in po'.cer, and treated by them

w v.'.; nm:much (diiliclion, oblirvcd thefli arbitrary
p:ocecdin;gs of a Regent with the utmolt indig-
nation. The people, who, under a form of go-
vcr-nnent extremely simple, had been little ac-
culomned to the burden of taxes, complained
loudly of the Regent's rapacity. And all began
to turn their eyes towards the young King, fron
whom thei expected the red-efl of all tleir griev-
ances, and the return of a more gentle and more
equal adminitrration.

James's JlAMES was now in the twelfth year of his age.
c ,], -,)3 . n * '
.. de,,iti- The Qteen, loon after his birth, had committed

him to the care of the Earl of Mar, and during the
civil wars he had resided securely in the catle of
Stirling. Alexander Erskine, that nobleman's
brother, had the chief direction of his education.
Under him, the famous Buchanan aIted as pre-
ceptor, together with three other iafters, the
mnoft eminent the nation aflsorded for flill in thole
iciences which were deemed necessary for a prince.
As the young King fiewed an uncommon pafion
for learning, and made great progress in it; the
Scots fancied that they already discovered in him,
all those virtues which the fondness or credulity
of fubjcel-s usually ascribe to princes during their
minority. But as James was still far from that

' Cr.x.f, 1iMcn. 287.

age

age at which the law permitted him to assume the B o o K

VI.

reins of government, the Regent did not fuffi- -,
ciently attend to the sentiments of the people, 157
nor reiea, how naturally thcfe prejudices in his
favour might encourage the King to anticipate
that period. He not only neglcL'ed to secure
the friendflip of those who were about the King's
person, and who pofilfTed his ear, but had even
cxafperateld ome of them by personal injuries.
Their resentment concurred with the ambition Heii fpi.
of others, in inufiing into the King early fu pi- Cios, oftl'
cions of Morton's power and designs. A King, rocr.
they told him, had often reason to fear, seldom
to love, a Regent. Prompted by ambition, and
by intcrelt, he would endeavour to keep the
Prince in perpetual infancy, at a distance from
his fubjels, and unacquainted with business. A
finall degree of vigour, however, was sufficient
to break the yoke. Subjects naturally reverence
their Sovereign, and become impatient of the
telmporary and delegated jnrifdiction of a Rcgent.
Morton hadl governed with rigour, unknown to
tle ancient Monarchs of Scotland. The nation
groaned under his opprelions ; and would wel-
come tle firnt profpe&( of a milder adminifration.
At prclent the King's name was hardly men-
tioned in Scotland, his friends were without in-
fluence, and his favourites without honour. But
one effort would dilcover Morton's power to be
as feeble, as it was arbitrary. The fame attempc
would put himself in pcflncfflon of his juRf a:hiio-
rity, and refcuc tle nation from intoler,hlb:: ty-
ranny. If he did not regard his own rigl1.: s as

King,

B oV1° K King, let him liflen, at leatl, to the cries of his
L----- people'.

1577.

A plt7 THESE frugefstions made a deep imprelion on
formed 3- Z
'ini the the young King, who was trained up in an opi-
Recnt. nion that lie was born to command. His appro-

bation of the design, however, was of fmiall con-
sequence, without the concurrence of the nobles,
The Earls of Argyll and Athol, two of the molt
powerful of that body, were animated with im-
placable resentment against the Regent. To
them the Cabal in Stirling-caftle communicated
the plot which was on foot; and they entering
warmly into it, Alexander Erskine, wlo, since
the death of his brother, and during the minority
of his nephew, had the commandos tliac fort, andl
the custody of the King's person, admitted them
secretly into the King's presence. They gave
him the fame account of the misery of his sub-
jecLs, under the Regent's arbitrary adminiftra-
tion; they complained loudly of the injustice
with which themselves had ben treated, and be-
fought the King, as the only means for redrefling
the grievances of the nation, to call a council of
all the nobles. James consented, and letters were
ifrued, in his name, for that purpose ; but the two
Earls took care that they should be sent only to
fuich as were known to bear no good will to
Morton .

TIIE number of there was, however, so confi-

derable, that, on the' day appointed, far the
greater part of the nobles assembled at Stirling;

Mclvil, 249. Spots. 278.

and

and so highly w'cre they incensed againfl MIorton, B 0o K

L - ) VI.

that although, on receiving intelligence of Argyll - -
and Athol's interview with the King, he had M:cl .
macde a feint as if he would resign the Regency,
they advised the King, w.ithout regarding this
offer, to deprive him of his office, and to take the
adlnminiltration of government into his own hands.
L.ord Glamis the Chancellor, and tierries, were
appointed to signify tiis rlfolution to MIorton,
. ho was, at that time, in Dalkeith, his usual
place of residence. Nothing could equal the joy me r.;lll,
with which this unexpeLted resolution filled the and lcircs
nation, but the surprise occasioned by the ieeming
alacrity with which the Regent descendcd from so
high a itation. 1-le neither wanted f.igacity to
foresee the danger of resigning, nor inclination to
keep pofiletion of an officc, for the expiration of
which the law had fixed so distant a term. But
all tle sources, whence the fation of which he
was head, derived their fircnlgth, had either
f.lilcd, or now lfipplied his adverft-ries with the
means of humbling him. The Commons, the
city of dinburgi, the Clergy, were all totally
alienated from him, by his multiplied opprelf
lions. rlizabeth, having lately bound herl;lf by
treaty, to fend a considerable body of troops to
the anifltance of the inhabitants of the Nether-
lan(ls, who were struggling for liberty, had little
Irilfire to attend to the afFairs of Scotland ; and
as flie had nothing to dread from F:rance, in
\hofc councils the Princes of rorrain had not, ar
that time, much influence, flie was not dilfleafrd,
perhaps, at the birth of new factions in tec

9 k inldo11.

B OO K kingdom. Even those nobles, who had lone
_,-j been joined with Morton in faction, or whom he
'57' had attached to his perorn by benefits, Glamis,

Lindsay, Ruthven, Pitcairn the Secretary, Mur-
ray of Tillibardin Comptroller, all deserted his
falling fortunes, and appeared in the council at
Stirling. So many concurring circumfiances
convinced Morton of his own weakness, and
determined him to give way to a torrent, which
Arch rz, was too impetuous to be refitted. He attended

the Chancellor and Herries to Edinburgh; was
present when the King's acceptance of the go-
vernment was proclaimed; and, in the presence
of the people, surrendered to the King all the
authority to which he had any claim in virtue of
his office. This ceremony was accompanied with
such excessive joy and acclamations of the mul-
titude, as added, no doubt, to the anguish which
an ambitious spirit muff feel when compelled to
renounce supreme power; and convinced Morton
how entirely he had loft the affections of his coun-
trymen. He obtained, however, from the King,
an a&t, containing the approbation of every thing
done by him in the exercise of his office, and a
pardon, in the most ample form that his fear or
caution could devise, of all past offences, crimes,
and treasons. The nobles, who adhered to the
King, bound themselves, under a great penalty,
to procure the ratification of this aft, in the firlt
parliament .

SFotf. 278. Crav.-. MeLn. ?89. Cald. . Z.5z.

A COUNCIL

A cotrscir of twelve Peers was appointed to B co Kr

afPiit the King in the admlniit:ration of affairs. -
M\Ioron, deterred by his own party, and unable c'~*::
to t1ruggle with the facion, nhich governed ab- t"'
fliutely at court, retired to one of his i ars, and ,-, : -.:-

e:need to enjoy the t-nq;:ili;., anl to be oc-
,-.pied only in the a!ullcents, of a country life.

iis mind, however, was dceplv clilquited wvi:
:il the uneali relcKtions which acconapany dil-
appointed ambition, and incen. on l'l emes ft;:
rccovering his form-er grandeur. Even in this
r;Ircat, which the people called the Z.Li:'s-i/..',
his wealth and abilities rendered him formidable;
and the new Counsellors were so imprudent as to
rouse him, by the precipitancy with which they
hastened to strip him of all the remainsof power.
They required him to surrender the caille of
Edinburgh, which was ftilLin his pofeffion. -le
-::fuifd at firlf to do so, and began to prepare for
its defence; but the citizens of Edinburgh having
taken arms, and repulsed part of the garrilon,
w\hich was sent out to guard a convoy of provi-
sons, he was obliged to give up that important
furtrefs, without refitance. This encouraged his
adverlfries to call a parliament to meet at Edin-
burgh, and to multiply their demands upon him,
in Iulch a manner, as convinced hin that nothing
lc-s than his utter ruin would flaisfy their inve-
terate hatred.

T'HEIR power and popularity, however, began

alrcady to decline. The Chancellor, the ablelt
and molt moderate man in the party, having been
killed at Stirling, in an accidental rcncountcr be-

'VoL, II, F tw'ern

B o° c tween his fo'lowers and those of the Earl of

VI.
t.c - Crawford; Athol, who was appointed his fuc-

F,,7 Cceffor in that high office, the Earls of Eglin-

ton, Cathnefs, and Lord Ogilvie, all the prime
favourites at court, were either avowed Papists,
or fufpe oed of leaning to the opinions of that
seCt. In an age, when the return of popery was
so much and so juitly dreaded, this gave uni-
versal alarm. As Morton had always treated the
Papilts with rigour, this unseasonable favour to
persons of that religion made all zealous Pro-
teftants remember that circumitance in his admi-
niftration with great praise Y.

Reumes his MORTON, to whom none of these particulars
hi:y."a were unknown, thought this the properjuncture

for setting to work the instruments which he had
been preparing. Having gained the confidence
of the Earl of Mar, and of the Countess his mo-
ther, he in finuated to them, that Alexander Erskine
had formed a plot to deprive his nephew of the
government of Stirling-caftle, and the custody of
the King's person; and easily induced an ambi-
tious woman, and a youth of twenty, to employ
force to prevent this supposed injury. The Earl
repairing suddenly to Stirling, and being admit-
ted, as usual, into the castle with his attendants,
APtii a6. seized the gates early in the morning, and turned

out his Uncle, who dreaded no danger from his
hands. The soldiers of the garrison lubmitted to
him as their governor, and, with little danger
and no efllufion of blood, he became matler both
of the King's person, and of the fortress z.

Y SOts. 283. Cald. ii. 53

AN

AN: event so unexpcced occafloned great con- B o) 0 K

flernation. Though Morton's hand did not ap- -,-
pear in the execution, he was universally be- '578'
lieved to be the author of the attempt. The new
Counsellors saw it to be necessary, for their own
ifafety, to change their measures, and, instead of
pursuing him with such implacable refcntmcnt, to
enter into terms of accommodation with an ad-
verfary, still io capable of creating them trouble.
Four were named, on each fide, to adjust their
differences. They met not far from Dalkeith ;
and When they had brought matters near a con-
clufion, Morton, who was too sagacious not to
improve the advantage which their security and
their attention to the treaty alForded him, set out
in the night-time for Stirling, and having gained May 24
Murray of Tillibardin, Mar's uncle, was admit-
ted by him into'the catfle; and managing matters
there with his usual dexterity, he soon had more
entirely the command of the fort, than the Earl
himfclf. He was likewise admitted to a feat in
the privy council, and acquired the fame ascend-
ant in it .

As the time appointed for tle meeting of par-

liament at Edinburgh now approached, this gave
him some anxiety. He was afraid of conducting
the young King to a city, whose inhabitants were
so much at the devotion of the adverse faction.
He -yas no less unwilling to leave James behind
at Stirling. In order to avoid this dilemma,
he issued a proclamation, in the King's name,

Cald. ii. 536.
F 2 changing

B OO K changing the place of meeting from Edinburgh

- to Stirling-caftle. This Athol and his party re..
,57S- presented as a ftep altogether unconstitutional.

The King, iaid they, is Morton's prisoner; the
pretended counsellors are his slaves; a parliament,
to which all the nobles may repair without fear,
and where they may deliberate with freedom, is
absolutely necessary for fettling the nation, after
disorders of such long continuance. But in an
assembly, called contrary to all form, held within
the walls of a garrison, and overawed by armed
men, what safety could members expect? what
liberty could prevail in debate? or what benefit
July 25. result to the public ? The parliament met, how-

ever, on the day appointed, and, notwithstanding
the protcilation of the Earl of Montrose and Lord
Lindsay, in name of their party, proceeded to
l)iufhes. The King's acceptance of the govern-
mncnt was confirmed; the ad& granted to Morton,
ior his security, ratified; some regulations, with
regard to the numbers and authority of the privy
counlcl, were agreed upon; and a pension for
iifc ,ranted to the Countels of Mar, who had
been lb inflrulmental in bringing about the late

revo l tion t.

A .. MS aNWIIri.E, Argyil, Atlol, and their follow-
.iI. ollgInit ers, took arnms, upon the specious pretence of re-
') m" Ifcuinl the King from captivity, and the kingdom

from opprenfion. J. mes hi ml.llf, impatient of the
flirvitude in wh icli he was held, by a man whom lie
hadl lolng been t;aught to hate, secretly encouraged

C',,! ii.; -.
i .t 'P l I. 5 J.a. VI.

theirh

their enterprise; though, at the fame time, he was B o0 K
obliged not only to disavow them in public, but ---
to levy forces againfl them, and even to declare,
by proclamation, that he was pcrfc'lly siee from
any constraint, either upon his perlbn, or his will.
Both fides quickly took the field. Argyll and
Athol were at the head of seven thousand men;
the Earl of Angus, Morton's nelphew, met themi Angig'. i.
with an army five thousand strong; neither party,
however, was eager to engage. Morton distrusted
the fidelity of his own troops. The two Earls
were fcnlible that a tingle vi'lory, however com-
plete, would not be decisive; and as they were
in no condition to undertake the siege of Stirling-
caltle, where the King was kept, their strength
would soon be exhausted, while Morton's own
wealth, and the patronage of the Queen of En-
gland, might furnifih him with endless resources.
By the mediation of Bowes, whom Elizabeth had
lent into Scotland to negotiate an accommo-
dation between the two factions, a treaty was E.i.tl.eth
concluded, in consequence of which, Argyll and ngo.ct'r,:
Athol were admitted into the King's presence; bt':,d^"
iome of their party were added to the Privy 'h"m.
Council; and a Convention of nobles called, in
order to b'ing all remaining differenc.es to an
amicable ifLiec.

As soon as James assumed the government into

his own hands, lie dispatched the Abbot of Dun-
fermling to inform Elizabeth of that event; to
offer to renew the alliance between the two king-

C Crawlv Mmcln. 307.

F 3 doms;

B 0 0 K doms; and to demand poffellion of the estate,

VI.

A,^- which had lately fallen to him by the death of
1578 his grandmother, the Countess of Lennox. That

Lady's second son had left one daughter, Ara-
bella Stewart, who was born in England. And
as the chief objection against the preenfions of
the Scottifl line to the Crown of England, was
that maxim of Englilh law, which excludes aliens
from any right of inheritance within the king-
dom, Elizabeth, by granting this demand, would
have eil-ablifned a precedent in James's favour,
that might have been deemed decilive, with re-
gard to a point, which it had been her constant
care to keep undecided. Without suffering this
delicate question to be tried, or allowing any new
light to be thrown on that, which she confidered
as the great mystery of her reign, lhe commanded
Lord Burleigh, Matter of the Wards, to sequester
the rents of the estate; and by this method of
proceeding, gave the Scottish King early warn-
ing how neceflary it would be to court her
favour, if ever he hoped for success in claims of
greater importance, but equally liable to bc
controverted .
;,57. AFTER many delays, and with much difficulty,

the contending nobles were at last brought to some
agreement. But it was followed by a tragical
event. Morton, in token of reconcilement, hav-
ing invited the leaders of the opposite party to a
Apr;l,4. great entertainment, Athol the Chancellor was,

soon after, taken ill, and died within a few dlays.

Camd. 46j.
S The

The fym4rtoms and violence of the disease gave B ° 0 K
rife to strong suspicions of his being poisoned; and -.-
though the physicians, who opened his body, dif- '" '
sered in opinion as to the cause of the diflemper,
the Chancellor's relations publicly accused Mor-
ton of that odious crime. The advantage which
visibly accrued to him, by the removal of a man
of great abilities, and averfi fiom all his meafurcs,
was sufficient proof of his guilt to tile people, who
are ever fond of imputing the death of eminent
persons to extraordinary caufesc.

THE office of Chancellor was becfowed upon Amtoon's il

legal] pro.

Argyll, whom this preferment reconciled, in a celdings
great measure, to Morton's administration. FIe gin1 te
had now recovered all the authority he possessed l"amalto,.
during his Regency, and had entirely broken, or
baffled, the power and cabals of his enemies.
None of the great families remained to be the
objets of his jealousy, or to obstruct his designs,
but tnat of Hamilton. The Earl of Arran, the
eldest brother, had never recovered the shock
which he received from the ill success of his
lpaffon for the Queen, and had now altogether
loft his reason. Lord John, the second brother,
was in possession of the family estate. Lord Claud
was Commendator of Pailley; both of them
young men, ambitious, and enterprising. Mor-
ton dreaded their influence in the kingdom; the
courtiers hoped to filare their spoils among them;
and as all Princes naturally view their successors
with jealousy and hatred, it was easy to infu(e

e Spotfw. 306,

F 4 theft

B1O K these passions into the mind of the young King.

yJ_, A pretence was at hand tojufify the nmof violent
-1579. proceedings. The pardon, flipulated in the

treaty of Pcrrth, did not extend to iuch as were
aIccffary to the murdcr of the Regents Murray
or Lennox. Lord John and his brother were
fulpeetcel of being the authors of both theife
crimes, and liad been included in a (eneral acl
of attainder on that account. Without summon-
ing them to trial, or examining a tingle witncfs
to prove the cllarge, tils attainder was now
tilought fui.icient to ulbjc& them to all the pe-
nalties which they would have incurred by being
formally convidctd. The Earls of Morton, Mar,
and Lg.,linton, together with the Lords Ruthven,
Boyd, and Catlicart, received a commifloo n to
leize thleir plerons and ellates. On a few hours
warning, a confideralhle body of troops was
ie;dy, and marched towarcd s i lamilton in lioftile
array. IIalppily the 'two brothers made their
ciCape, though with great difficulty. But their
lands were conliiFatedl; the castles of HIamilton
ald I)ralin bciilegcd; thiol;e who letenlled themn
puniifhilccl. The Farl of Arran, though incapable,
from his situation, of committing any crime, was
involved, by a flilmeful abufi of law, in the
common ruin of his family; and as if he, too,
could have been guilty of rebellion, he was con-
fined a close prisoner. These proceedings, lb
contrary to the fundamental principles ofjulice,
were all ratiiicd in the fubfequcnt parliaments.

r Cr.nxf. Mem. 311 . Stpfw. 3c6.

73 SLtq. 3c3AoU.

7 0 our

ABOUT this time Mary sent, by Nau6 her fecre- ° ° K.

tary a letter to her lbn, together with some jewels '-
of value, and a veit embroidered with her own s59'
lhands. But as she gave hin only the title of
Prince of Scotland, the mefencger was difiniffed,
without being admitted into his prefencel.

1THOUGIi Elizabeth had, at this time, no parti-

cular reason to fear any attempt of the Popifli
Princes in Mary's favour, ihe ilill continued to
guard her with the fame anxious care. The ac-
quifition of Portugal, on the one hand, and the
defence of the Netherlands, on the other, fully
employed the councils and arms of Spain. lrance,
torn in pieces by intefline commotions, and under
a weak and capricious Prince, despiscd and dif-
trusted by his own fubjeds, was in no condition
to disturb its neighbours. Elizabeth had long Ncgotia-
ainufed that court by carrying on a treaty of ,,,i";,1o
marriage with the Duke of Alcncon, the King's c1's,,h
brother. But whether, at the age of forty-five, "n1 tl'

I)irke tf

flie really intended to marry a Prince of twenty ? Alcn:,n.
whether the pleasure of being flattered and
courted, made her liflten to the addresses of fe
young a lover, whom fle allowed to visit her at
two difierent times, and treated with the mos:
diflinguifhing refpc&c? or whether considerations
of interest predominated in this, as well as in
every other tranfaftion of her reign, are problems
in history which we are not concerned to rclblve.
During the progress of this negotiation, which
was drawn out to an extraordinary length, Mary

e Clrawf Mcm. 314.

could

o o0 K could exper no afliftance from the French court,
^_ j and icemns to have held little corrc(lfondcnce with

'9. hit; and there was no period in her reign, wherein

Eliqiaberh enjoycd Imore perfe'lc lfecanriv.

- fa. MNRoxON ICC11ns a.t this tilmel to hve been

g.'l:,' - eca', iccure; Iiut lh is tfcurity was not to well
L * snt; found;,ed. Ie had lweather( out one iform, had

cru!hed his adverlfarics, and was again in pof-
lfi'eion of the lole dirc<tion of afi'airs. But as the
King was now of an age when the characer and
difpioiitions of the mind bcin to unfol-d them-
Iflvcs, and to become visible, the fialleft atten-
tion to these mi;ht have convinced him, that
trci'c was rca.on to cxpe('t new and more dan-
gerous attacks on his ;ower. Jailes early dif-
covercd that exceflive attachment to favourites,
whlich accompanied him through his whole life.
This patfion, which naturally arifcs from inexpe-
rience, and youthful warmth of heart, was, at his
age, f.ir f-om beingl culpable; nor could it well
be cxpecLcd that the choice of the olbjc&s, on
whom he placed his aftietions, should be made
with great Ikill. 'ihe motl considerable of them
was Eline Stewart, ; native of France, and son
of a second brother of the Earl of Lennox. I-Ie
was diltinlguislhcd by thc title of Lord D'Aubigne,
an ellare in France, which dcfccended to himl fiom1
liis ancefiors, on wliom it had been conferred, in
reward of their valour and fcrvices to the French
;ir. s. Crown. Ile arrivcd in Scotland about this time,

on purpole to demland the eltate and title of Len-
nox, to whicli he prctendcd a legal right. He
was rcccivid, at firll, by the King wyith the

re Ica

rcf.cl- d.uc to lto near a relation. The

'' raceful- B O K

nels of his person, the elceiance of his dricls, and -
Iiis courtly bchavilour, imade ; great imiprflion on 579'
,lmes, who, Cveln in his morC mature years, was
litile ahle to re-Cill tlheif fli volous chall'r s; .nl(d his
:ilt'cioln flowed with its ultual rapidity andi p:o-
fillion. W\ithin a fCw (days alfter it.Sw.rir'is i) -
I',aranl: at court, lie was created Lord Al)i -
brothlock, loon after ' arl, and thcan il )l.. of
Lennox, (Governor of ])ulnbarton calllc, C.itaini
of tll( guard, firllt l.ord oF the bed-clhamlber, and
Lord I i-gh Clhamberlaiin. At the fame tiin(,
and without any of the envy or emulation whichli
is usual among candidates for favour, Calltin
James Stewart, the fccond lon of I .ord 0i llilttrc,
1grew into g-'eat confidence. But notwi \tllliandiitg
tils union, Lennox and Captain Stewart were
lerbnols of very opposite c.l aattlrs. Th1e former
was naturally gentle, hlimalne, candid; burtl n-
.acquainted with the [tate of the country, arid
miilled, or niilitnflormel d by thlo ole l

wio ie tlullted ;

no)t un.wolrtly to he the comllanion of the yoiouli
Ki,g in his amnulcnents, but utterly diii.l.lilicd
Ior aling as a M inill r in (irc^tin; s

lii:; aiti'ilr,.

Tlic latter was reimalrkable for all tl''- \ice's vilich
renlder a man formidable to his coulntry, arid :
pernicious coIunf'llor to his Prince; nor dit heI
poftrfs any one virtue to countlcb ,lance rlithl
vices, unlels dexterity in conlduLting hlis o\nl de-
signs, and an enterprising courage, lupcrio:- to the
ftnfe of danger, may pals by that namtle. Unre-
firained by religion, rcgardlcfs of decency, and
undlilf)ayed by opposition, hi aimed at olbjects

lcmingly

B o0 K seemingly unattainable; but under a Prince void

- ) of experience, and blind to all the defecAs of

S thofi who had gained his favour, his audacity

was fucccifful; and honours, wealth, and power,
were the reward of his crimes.

Ths I.lour BOTH the favourites concurred in employing
to t"n r- their whole address to under mine Morton's credit,
nirne Mor-
.,e s au:ho. which alone obftruced their full poffeflion of

power. As James had been bred up with an
aversion for that nobleman, who endeavoured
rather to maintain the authority of a tutor, than
to a4t with the obfequioufilefs of a minister, they
found it no difficult matter to accomplith their
oa~b$ . design. Morton, who could no longer keep the

King shut up within the walls of Stirling-caftle,
having called a parliament to meet at Edinburgh,
brought him thither. James made his entry into
the capital with great solemnity; the citizens re-
ceived him with the loudest acclamations of joy,
and with many expensive pageants, according to
the mode of that age. After a long period of
thirty-feven years, during which, Scotland had
been fubjeJtcdl to the dclegated power of Regents,
or to tle feeble govcrnment of a woman; after
having fitflercd all the mifeies of civil war, and
felt the infblence of foreign armies, the nation
reqoiced to fee the sceptre once more in the hands
of a King. Fond even of that shadow of autho-
rity, which a Prince of fifteen could poflefs, the
Scots flattcred themselves, that union, order, and
tranquillity would now be restored to the kingdom.
James opened the parliament with extraordinary
pomp, but nothing remarkable parffed in it.

'l's Is

THESE demonlfrations, however, ofthepeople's B o°, K

love and attachment to their Sovereign, encou- ---
raged the favourites to continue their insinuations 5
raainft Morton; and as the King now resided in
the palace of Holy-rood-houfe, to which all his
fubjeEts had access, the cabal against the Earl
grew daily stronger, and the intrigue, which oc-
cafioned his fall, ripened gradually.

MORTON began to be sensible of his danger, Morton c-

and endeavoured to put a stop to the career of deavours t
Lennox's preferment, by reprefcnting him as a them.
formidable enemy to the Reformed religion, a
secret agent in favour of Popery, and a known
emifary of the house of Guise. The clergy, apt
to believe every rumour of this kind, spread the
alarm among the people. But Lennox, either
out of complaisance to his mafler, or convinced
by the arguments of some learned Divines, whom
the King appointed to instruCt him in the prin-
ciples of the Protestant religion, publicly re-
nounced the errors of Popery, in the Church of
St. Giles, and declared himself a melmber of the
Church of Scotland, by signing her Confeflion
of Faith. This, though it did not remove all
lufpicions, nor silence tome zealous preachers,
abated, in a great degree, the force of the ac-
cuf ation ".

ON the other hand, a rumour prevailed that

Morton was preparing to seize the King's perlbn,
and to carry him into England. Whether delfpai
of maintaining his power by any other means,

' Cr:wf. Merem. 319. Spoif. 3:, ..

had

B °0 K had driven him to make any overture of that

VI.
_--_ kind to the EnglilA court, or whether it was a
1580* calumny invented by his adversaries to render

him odious, cannot now be determined with cer-
tainty. As he declared at his death that such a
design had never entered into his thoughts, the
latter seems to be most probable. It afforded a
pretence, however, for reviving the office of
Lord Chamberlain, which had been for some time
diblued. That honour was conferred on Lennox.
Alexander Erflkine, Morton's capital enemy, was
his deputy; they had under them a band of gen-
tlemen, who were appointed constantly to attend
the King, and to guard his person'.

teiztbeth MORTON was not ignorant of what his enemies
Intrcpoles in
his behai! intended to insinuate by such unusual precautions-

for the King's safety; and as his last resource,
applied to Elizabeth, whose protection had often
flood him in stead in his greatest difficulties. In
consequence of this application, Bowes her En-
Voy accused Lennox of pratices against the
peace of the two kingdoms, and infifled, in her
name, that he fliould instantly be removed from
the Privy Council. Such an unprecedented de-
mand was confilered by the Counlfllors as an
nffront to the King, and an encroachment on the
independence of tie kingdom. They affected to
call in queflion the l.Envoy's powers, and upon
that pretence recflferd him farther audience; and
he retiring in diCguft, and without taking leave,
Sir Alexander -lome was sent to expoflulate with

Crawl.. A.inm. 320.

Elizabeth

Elizabeth on the subjet. After the treatment B 0 0 K
which her Envoy liad received, Elizabeth thought
it below her dignity to admit I-ome into her pre- S.
fence. Burleigh, to whom he was commlanded
'to impart his commiflion, reproached him with
his master's ingratitude towards a benefalri-efs,
who had placed the Crown on his head, and re-
quired him to advise the King to beware of fa-
crificing the friendlhip of so nece,:r:-y an ally to
the giddy humours of a young man, without ex-
perience, and firongly fufpeaed of principles,
and attachments, incompatible with the happilleSf
of the Scottifl nation.

THIS accusation of'Lennox hafrened, in allpro- Morttnjc-

bability, Morton's fall. The ac of indemnity, murderof
which he had obtained when he resigned the Re- 'th lac
gency, was worded with such scrupulous exact-
ness, as almost screened him from any legal pro-
fecution. The murder of the late King was the
only crime which could not, with decency, be
inserted in a pardon granted by his son. eIcre
Morton still lay open to the penalties of the law;
and Captain Stewart, who fiunned no ation,
however defperatc, if it led to power or to favour,
entered the council-chamber while the King and
nobles were assembled, and falling on his knees,
accused Morton of being accessary, or according Decrm, o30
to the language of the Scottish law, art and par/,
in the conspiracy againit the life of his Ma:jefiy's
father, and offered, under the usual penalties, to
verify this charge by legal evidence. Morton,
who was present, heard this accusation with firm-
heisi and replied with a difdaintful finile, pro-

ceeding

1 0 0 K cecding either from contempt of the infamous

-,-_i character of his accuser, or from consciousness of
1580. his own innocence, " that his known zeal in pu-

nifhing those who were fulpectcd of that detestable
crime, might well exempt himc-lfI from any sus-
picion of being acceflcary to it; nevertheless, he
would cheerfully submit to a trial, either in that
place, or in any other court; and doubted not
but his own innocence, and the malice of his ene-
mies, would then appear in the clearest light."
Stewart, who was frill on his knees, began to en-
quire how he would reconcile his bellowing so
many honours on Archibald Douglas, whom he
certainly knew to be one of the murderers, with
his pretended zeal againfl that crime. Morton
was ready to answer. But the King commanded

5Sr. both to be removed. The Earl was confined,
J1nury - firfl- of all, to his own house, and then committed

to the castle of Edinburgh, of which Alexander
Erifkine was Governor; and as if it had not been
a sufficient indignity to ful) jec: him to the power
of one of his enemies, he was, loon after, carried
to Dunbarton, of which Lennox had the com-
J-,,. g, mand. A warrant was likewile issued for appre-

hending Archibald Douglas; but he, having re-
ceived timely intelligence of the approaching
danger, fled into Englandk.

TiE'i Earl of Angus, who imputed there violent

proceedings not to hatred againlt Morton alone,
but to the ancient enmity between the houses 'of
Stewart and of Douglas, and who believed that

k C'raw.l' i n.cm 3.3.

a con.

a confl)iracy was now formed for the desruclion 1B o0 K
of all wlio bore that name, was ready to take arims
in order to rcfcue his kinfrian. But Morlton ',~0
ablolutcly sorbad any I'clic attempt, and declared
th;at lie would ratlier 1Ul;l'er ten thoulalnl deaths,
than bring an implication upon Ilis own chlaradcr
by 1tccmling to decline a trial'.

] ,l ZiEA TL-l didl not fail to interpose, with li;.ljh's

warmth, illn blealf of a man who had contributed o'r"" I'os "'
i, mnuch to preserve her influence over Scotland. f' """'
'lie late tranflaions in that kingdom had given
her great unceafinefs. The power which Lennox
had acquired independent of her was dangerous;
the treatment her Ambanfldors had met with
difiered greatly from the refped with which the
Scots were in use to receive her Ministers; and
the attack now made on Morton fully convinced
her that there was an intention to sow the feeds of
discord between the two nations, and to seduce
James into a new alliance with IFrance, or int(s a
marriage with some Popifl Princess. Full of
these apprehensions, she ordered a considerable
body of troops to be assembled on the borders of
Scotland, and dispatched Randolph as her Am-
bafTador into that kingdom. He addrcired him-
self not only to James, and to his council, but to
a convention of estates, met at that time. Ie
began with enumerating the extraordinary be-
nefits which Elizabeth had conferred on the Scot-
tifh nation: That without demanding a tingle
foot of land for herself, without encroaching on

Jolhnft. 64. Spotfw. 311.
VOL. II. G the

B o° K; the liberties of the kingdom in the finalleft article,
t-.- ihie had, at the expence of the blood of her sub-

' ict s, and the treal.ures of her Crown, rescued the

Scots fr-om the dominion of France, eflablifhed
anlong thlicl true religion, and put them in pof-
,c[,ion of their ancient rights: That from the
bL .i nniln; of civil dissensions in the kin gdomn, file
had protectcd thoie who espoused the King's cause,
and by her affitance alone, the Crown had been
preserved on his head, and all the attempts of the
adverse faction baffled: That an union, unknown
to their anceltors, but equally beneficial to both
kingdoms, had subsisted for a long period of
years; and though so many Popifl Princes had
combined to disturb this happy state of things,
her care, and their constancy, had hitherto de-
feated all there efforts: That file had observed,
of late, an unusual coldness, distrust, and estrange-
ment in the Scottish Council, which she could
impute to none but to Lennox, a subjed of
France, a retainer to the house of Guise, bred up
in the errors of Popery, and ilill suspected of fa-
vouring that superstition. Not satisfied with
having mIounted Ib fast to an uncommon height
of power, which he exercised with all the rashness
of youth, and all the ignorance of a stranger; nor
thinking it cnouth to have deprived the Earl of
Morton ol the authorlity due to his abilities and
experience, lie had con)lired the ruin of that no-
blenman, wlio had often exposed his life in the
lilng's catlle, vwho had contributed more than
any other Ifutjcsl to pil:ce him on the throne, to
rcli ll thlc cnciu;tcllincnis of PIopery, and to pre-

flerve

fcrve the union between the two kingdoms. If B o°, K
any zeal for religion remained among the nobles - -
in Scotland, if they wished for the continuance of 15,s'
amity with England, if they valued the privileges
of their own order, he called upon them, in the
name of his Mistress, to remove such a pernicious
counsellor as Lennox fiom the pretence of the
young King, to rescue Morton out of the hands
of his avowed enemy, and secure to him the be-
nefit of a fair and impartial trial: And if force
were necessary towards acconplifiing a design so
salutary to the King and kingdom, he promised
them the proteCtion of his Mistress in the enter-
prise, and whatever assistance they should demand
either of men or money'"

BUT these extraordinary remonstrances, accom-

panied with such an unusual appeal from the King
to his fubjeds, were not the only means employed
by Elizabeth in favour of Morton, and againfl
Lennox. She persuaded the Prince of Orange to
fend an agent into Scotland, and under colour of
complimenting James on account of the valour
which many of his subjects had displayed in the
service of the States, to enter into a long detail of
the restless enterprises of the Popifl Princes against
the Protestant Religion; to beseech him to ad-
here inviolably to the alliance with England, the
only barrier which secured his kingdom against
their dangerous cabals; and above all things, to
diftru(t the insinuations of those who endeavoured
to weaken or to dissolve that union between the

C' Cail. iii. 6. Strype, ii. 621.

G 2 Britiflh

B o0 K British nations, which all the Proreftants in Eud

_ rope beheld with so much pleasure".

Jamre de- JAMES'S Counsellors were too intent upon the
term;ns, to dcftruction of their enemy to liften to these re-
proceedl a-
gainit him. mnonftrances. The officious interposition of the

Prince of Orange, the haughty tone of Eliza-
beth's meflage, and her avowed attempt to ex-
cite Iubje's to rebel against their Sovereign, were
confdered as unexampled insults on the majesty
and independence of a crowned head. A ge-
neral and evasive answer was given to Randolph.
James prepared to assert his own dignity with
ipirit. All those fufpecred of favouring Morton
were turned out of office, rome of them were
required to surrender themselves prisoners; the
men capable of bearing arms throughout the
kingdoml were commanded to be in readiness to
take the field; and troops were levied, and polled
on the borders. The English Ambassador, find-
ing that neitler the public manifesto which he
had delivered to the Convention, nor his private
cabals with the nobles, could excite them to
arms, fled in the night-time out of Scotland,
where libels against him had been daily pub-
li fled, and even attempts made upon his life.
In both kingdoms every thing wore an hostile
alp)c&. But Elizabeth, though lie wifled to
have intimidated the Scottilfl King by her prepa-
ratiois, hl ad no inclination to enter into a war with
him, and the troops on the borders, which had
given fuchi umbrage, were soon dif)crfedo.

Cild. iii. 9. See Appendix, No. VIII.
* Cral', Mcni. 328. St)lyp, ii. App. 138,

Tir

THE greater solicitude Elizabeth discovered for n 0' K

Morton's safety, the more eagerly did his ene- --.
mies drive on their schemes for his dcilrumtion.
Captain Stewart, his accuser, was firfl appointed
iTutor to the Earl of Arran, and soon after both
the title and efate of his unhappy ward, to
which he advanced -some frivolous claim, were
conferred upon him. The new-made Peer was
commanded to conduct Morton from Dunbarton
to Edinburgh; and, by that choice, the Earl
was not only warned what fate he might expe&,
but had the cruel mortification of feeing his
deadly enemy already loaded with honours, in
reward of the malice which he had contributed
to his ruin.

THE records of the Court of ufiLiciarv at this He ;s tried

period are loft. The account which our hiltorians demned.
give of Morton's trial is inaccurate and unfatif-
factory. The proceedings against him seem to
have been carried on with violence. During the
trial, great bodies of armed men were drawn up
in different parts of the city. The jury was
composed of the Earl's known enemies; and
though he challenged several of them, his objec-
tions were over-ruled. After a short consultation,
his Peers found him guilty of concealing, and of
being art and part in the conspiracy against the
life of the late King. The firlt part of the ver-
dic did not surprise him, but he twice repeated
the words art and part with tbme vehemence, and
added, " God knows it is not so." The doom,
which the law decrees against a Traitor, was pro-
nounced, The King, however, remitted the cruel

G 3 and

B 0 0 K and ignominious part of the sentence, and ap-

pointed that lie fiould lufFer death next day, by

'I-s. being beheaded P.
hii:s eth. DU'RING, that awful interval, Morron pofiefled

the urmolt compolfre of mind. He llupped cheer-
fully; flepc a part of the night in his usual man-
ner, and employed the reft of his time in religious
conferences, and in a'ts of devotion, with tbone
Ministers of the city. The Clergyman who at-
tended him, dealt freely with his conscience, and
prcfied his crimes home upon himn. What he
confefeld with regard to the crime for which he
fisered, is remarkable, and ifpplies, in tome
mnca.ure, the imperfedltion of our records. He
acknowledged , that on his return from England
after the death of Rizio, Bothwell had informed
him of the conspiracy againit the King, which
the Queen, as he told him, knew of and ap-
proved; that he solicited him to concur in the
execution of it, which, at that time, he absolutely
declined; that loon after, Bothwell himself, and
Archibald Douglas, in his name, renewing their
iolicitations to the fame purpose, he had required
a warrant under the Queen's hand, authorising
the attempt, and as that had never been produced,
he had refused to be any farther concerned in the
matter. "But, continued he, as I neither con-
" tnted to this treasonable act, nor aflifted in

the committing of it, so it was impofTible for me
to reveal, or to prevent it. To whom could
I make the discovery? The Queen was the
r Spots.314. Johnfl. i;5. Cra-f. Mcm. 332. Cald. iii.45.
Arnot's Crimiu. Trials, 3S8.

" author

t author of the entelrprile. Darnly was such a B 0 0 K
(changeling, that no lecret could be fafcly COr-

co -

<( municated to him. Huntly and Bothtwcll. whlo '5''
( bore the chief sway in the kingdom, were them-
( selves the perpetrators of the crime'." Thele
circumillances, it nmutt be confceled, go olme
length towards extenuating, M\orton's guilt; and
though his apology for the favour he had (lhewn
to Archibald Douglas, whom lie knew to be one
of the conspirators, be far leis fltisfactory, no un-
ealf reflecqtions ieem to have di(lluieted his o\vn
mind on that accountq. TWhen his lkeepers told
him that the guards were attending, and all things
in readiness, " I prailf my God, laid lie, I am
(" ready likewise." Arran commanded these
guard(s; and even in thole moments, when the
most implacable hatred is apt to relent, the ma-
lice of his enemies could not forbear this insult.
On the scaffold, his behaviour was calm; his
countenance and voice unaltered; and after some
time ipent in devotion, he suffered death with the
intrepidity which became the name of Douglas.
His head was placed on the public gaol of Edin-
burgh; and his body, after lying till sun-set on the
fcafTold, covered with a beggarly cloak, was car-
ried by common porters to the usual burial-place
of criminals. None of his friends durll accom-
pany it to the grave, or discover their gratitude
and res)pect by any symptoms of sorrow'.

ARRAN, no leis profligate in private life, than Odtino on.
audacious in his public conduct, soon after drew Arran,

q Caiw;l.. AMct pp. iii.

Crai. Mei .

em 34.

3 S
f, ,,' 314.

G 4 thel

B o0 K the attention of his countrynen, by lhis infamous

VI, .--,--i- marriai,e with the Countess of March. Before
s'5 1 he Frtw, into favour at court, he had been often

entertailned in her husband's house, and without
rceartding tile laws of hospitality or of gratitude,
carried on a criminal intrigue with the wife of hIis
beniefali-or, a woman young and beautiful, but,
according to the dcefription of a cotemporary
J-iiorian, (' intolerable in all the imperfections
incident to her sex." Impatient of any retlraint
upon their mutual desires, they, with equal ar-
dour, wiflied to avow their union publicly, and
to legitimate, by a marriage,. the offspring of their
unlawful paflon. The Countess petitioned to be
divorced from her husband, for a reason which
no modest woman will ever plead. The judges,
over-awed by Arran, paifed lentence without de-
july 6. lay. This infamous scene was concluded by a

marriage, solemnized with great pomp, and be-
held by all ranks of men with the utmost horror".
Otob. 24. A PARLIAMEN'I was held this year, at the open-

ing of which some disputes arose between Arran
and the Earl now created Duke of Lennox. Ar-
ran, haughty by nature, and pushed on by his
wife's ambition, began to asse&t an equality with
the Duke, under whose protection he had hitherto
been contented to place himself. After various
attempts to form a party in the council againfl-
Lennox, he found him fixed so firmly in the
King's affetions, that it was impoflible to Jhake
him, and rather than lose all interest at court,

Sjpoitw. 315.

friom

from which he was banished, he m;ade the moil: B °o1 K
hulmble fubimi sions to the favourite, and again ,
recovered his former credit. This ruptiure con- 5
tributed, however, to render the Duke l[ill more
odious co the nation. During the continuance
of it, Arran alIcfted to court the clergy, pre-
tended an extraordinary zeal for the Proteflant
religion, and laboured to confirm the fiifpicions,
which were entertained of his rival, as an emiffalry
of the houlc of Guile, and a favourer of Popery.
As he was supposed to be acquainted with the
Duke's most secret dcefgns, his calumnies were
liftcned to with greater credit than was due to
ilis c;haracter. To this rivalfhip between I ,clnnox
and Arran, during the continuance of which,
each endeavoured to conciliate the good-will of
the clergy, we must ascribe fcvcral adcs of this
)arliament uncommonly favourable to the Church,
particularly one, which abolifled the piral ice,
introduced by Morton, of appointirng but one
minister to several pariries.

No notice hath been taken for fcvcral years of r.cl

' ini-

Fcclefiafical affairs. While the civil govern- cl...
nient underwent lo many extraordiiary' revolu-
tions, the Church was not free from convulsions.
Two objects, chiefly, engroircd tile attention of
the Clergy. The one was the forming a fyflem
of discipline, or Ecclefiaflical polity. After lolln
labour, and many difficulties, this fyflemn was at
Iafr brought to some degree of perfCclion. TIhe
Assembly Ioleminly approved of it, and appointed
it to be laid before the Privy Council, in order to
obtain the ratification of it in Parliament. But

Morton,

t 0o K Morton, during his adminiifration, and those
»---j who, after his fall, governed the King, were

' equally unwilling to fee it carried into execution;

and by starting difficulties, and throwing in ob-
jections, prevented it from receiving a legal fanc-
Eion. The other point in view was the abolition
of the Episcopal order. The Biflops were so
devoted to the King, to whom they owed their
promotion, that the funtion itself was by some
reckoned dangerous to civil liberty. Being al-
lowed a feat in Parliament, and diftinguifled by
titles of honour, there not only occasioned many
avocations from their spiritual employments, but
soon rendered their- charaRer and manners ex-
tremely different from those of the Clergy in that
age. The nobles viewed their power with jea-
jouvf'; the populace confidered their lives as pro-
fane; and both wished their downfal with equal
ardour. The personal emulation between Melvil
and Adamson, a man of learning, and eminent
,or his popular eloquence, who was promoted, on
the death of Douglas, to be Archlbifhop of St.
Andrew's, mingled itel!f with the paflions on each
fide, and heightened them. Attacks were made,
in every assembl;y, on the order of Bishops; their
privileges were gradually circumscribed; and at
last an aE was pall'ed, declaring the office of
Binlop, as it was then exercised within the realm,
to have neither foundation nor warrant in the
word of God ; and reqtiring, under pain of ex-
comlllunlication, all who now poffefled chat office,
inf-antly to resign it, and to abflain fiom preach-
ing or adminilflering the fac'amnents, until they

floultl

I!lould receive permifflon from the General AT- B ° 0 K-

V1.

fembly. The court did not acquiesce in this --_s
decree. A vacancy happening soon after in the '5s'
fee of Glasgow, Montgomery minister at Stir-
ling, a man vain, fickle, presumptuous, and
more apt, by the blemihces in his character, to
have alienated the people from an order already
beloved, than to reconcile them to one which
was the object of their hatred, made an infamous
fitoniacal bargaiin with Lennox, and on his re-
commendation was chosen Archbiflop. The
Presbytery of Stirling, of which he was a mem-
ber, the Presbytery of Glasgow, whither he was
to be translated, the General Assembly, vied with
each other in prosecuting him on that account.
In order to screen Montgomery, James made s5s
trial both of gentle and of rigorous measures, and
both were equally ineffectual. The General
Assembly was just ready to pronounce againfl
him the sentence of excommunication, when an
Herald entered, and commanded them, in the
King's name, and under pain of rebellion, to (top
further proceedings. Even this injuntion they
dlefpifed; and though Montgomery, by his tears,
and seeming penitence, procured a short respite,
the sentence was at last issued by their appoint-
ment, and published in all the churches through-
out the kingdom.

THE firmness of the Clergy in a collective body

was not greater than the boldness of some indi-
viduals, particularly of the Ministers of Edin-
burgh. They inveighed daily against the cor-
ruptions in the administration, and, with the free-

dom

E 0 v K dom of speech admitted into the pulpit in thli:

vI.
s----. age, namiled Lennox and Arran as thle chicf au-

52 thors of' tole grievanccs under which tile chltrch

an( kingdom groaned. lile (ourtiers, in their
turn, complalined to the K., ,g f rhc inlolent andt

iec'itiou's simirit of thie Cicr:\ . 1[ ,,,Jer t check

the holkllclS of their (il'- ili ., J,,ja.w iffled a
proclamation, colmmlnitillg l)(i, c(,nef of the
most popular Minliliers, not olniv to leave tile
town, but to abilain frlom preach inr in any other
place. Dury complained to the judicatories (,t
tiis encroachment upon the iimmunitites of his
ofice. They approved of the docitrine which he
hadl ',;i- ivt; .iiil he determined to ldii'egardl
the royal proclamation. But the magistrates be-
ing detcrm-iined to compel him to leave the city,
according to the King's orders, he was obliged to
abandon his charge, after protefiling publicly, at
the cross of Edinbtlrgh, againit the violence
which was put upon him. The peop'e accom-
panied him to the gates with tears and lament-
ations; and the Clergy denounced the vengeance
of Hleaven againfl the authors of this outrage'.

IN tiis perilous situation flood the Clhurch; tile

autlority ofitsjudicatories called in queflion, and
tle liberty of the pulpit restrained, when a sudden
revolution of the civil government procured theim
unexpectecd relief.

4i, Fav.nr. TIIE two favourites, by their ascendant over tlie
':r s'gn Kinig, poffcfled luncontrouled power in the king-

,un ..r dom, and exercilcd it with the utmnloft wantonness.
miralur Ir .

tCuld.
Cald cnl.
A 1. I76~-158z. S$pcl,. 277, &c.

,Jlamcs

lmlcs ufulally refidedl at Dalkcith, or Kinneil, the n o0 K

i .cats of Lennox and of Arran, and was attended ,_
I by such company, and employed in sUch amulft- '''"

' ments, as did not luit his ditgnity. The frvices

of tlhofe who had contributed molt to place the
('ICown on his hiad, were but little remembered.
Many who had oppoled him with the greatell- vi-
rulence, enjoyed the rewards and honours to
which the others were entitled. Elxalted notions
of regal prerogative, utterly inconliltlent with the
conititution of Scotland, being inlillllld by his fl1-
vourites into the mind of the young Monarch,
unfortunately made, at that early age, a deep im-
prellion there, and became the source of almofl
all his subsequent errors in the government ol
both kingdoms". Courts ofjuflicc were held in
almost every county, the proprietors of land were
called before them, and upon the slightest neglect
of any of the numerous forms, which are peculiar
to feudal holdings, they were fined with unusual
and intolerable rigour. The Lord Chamberlain
revived the oblolete jurisdiction of his office
over the Boroughs, and they were subjected to
exatlions no less grievous. A dcfign seemed,
likewise, to have been formed to exasperate
Ilizabeth, and to diflolve the alliance with her,
which all good Proteflants cfteeced the chief
security of their religion in Scotland. A close
corr-efondence was carried on between the King
and his mother, and considerable progrcrs made
towards uniting their titles to the Crown, by

" Cald. iii. 1St.

such

B 0 0 K fich a treaty of association, as Maitland had pro,

VI. ._ jected; which could not fail of endangering or
5S2* diminishing his authority, and mull have pF.oved

fatal to those who had acted agaildf her with
greatest vigour'.

The nobles ALL these circumstances irritated the impatient
tgaonit spirit of the Scottish nobles, who resolved to to-
them. lerate no longer the insolence of the two minions,

or to itand by, while their presumption and in-
experience ruined both the King and kingdom,
Elizabeth, who, duriing the adminiltration of the
four Regents, had the entire direction of the
affairs of Scotland, felt herself deprived of all
influence in that kingdom ever since the death of
Morton, and was ready to countenance any at.
tempt to rescue the King out of the hands of
favourites, who were leading him into measures
so repugnant to all her views. The Earls of
Mar and Glencairn, Lord Ruthven, lately created
Earl of Gowrie, Lord Lindsay, Lord Boyd, the
Tutor of Glamis, the eldest son of Lord Oliphant,
with fcveral Barons and gentlemen of diftindion,
entered into a combination for that purpose; and
as changes in adminiltration, which, among po-
li sied nations, are brought about slowly and
silently, by artifice and intrigue, were in that
rude age effe-ced suddenly and by violence, the
King's situation, and the security of the favourites,
encouraged the conspirators to have immediate
recourse to force.

' C ldd. iii. I5,.

JAMES,

JAhts, after having resided for some time in B 0 oK

Athol, where he enjoyed his favourite amusement t, -.
|es hunting, was now returning towards F din- sil.l'
butrgh, with a frnall train. He was invited to "in'ser.-
IRllxuthven cattle, which lay in his way; and as ihe Rutivcn.
ItllpeLed no danger, he went thither in hopes of
if lrther ifort. The multitude of strangers whom Augu,n .
he found there gave him iome uneasiness; and as
thole wvho were in the lecret arrived every moment
ifi-oI different parts, the appearance of to many
i'ncw faces increased l'is fears. He concealed his
u!ieaifinefs, however, with the utmoll care; and
next morning prepared for the field, expccting to
| find there some opportunity of making his cicape.
jBut jilt as he was ready to depart, the Nobles
i entered his bed-chamber in a body, and presented
aj memorial against the illegal and oppressive ac-
tions of his two favourites, whom they represented
as mnoft dangerous enemies to the religion and li-
berties of the nation. James, though he received
this remonttrance with the complaisance which
was necefliay in his prelent situation, was ex-
trelnely impatient to be gone; but as he ap-
proached the door of his apartment, the Tutor of
Glamis rudely stopped him. The King com-
plained, expoftulaied, threatened, and finding all
tliefe without effect, burlt into tears: " No mat-
ter," said Glamis fiercely, " better children weep
thlan bearded men." These words made a deep
imlprcflion on the King's mind, and were never
torgotten. The conspirators, without regarding
hiis tears or indignation, difinilted fucl of Iis
followers as they fufpeted; allowed none but

8 pcrlbns

BO o K persons of their own party to have access to hini;
i-- - and though they treated him with great refpe&,

J582z guarded his person with the utmost care. This

enterprise is usually called, by our historians,
T/Lhe rid cf IRuhvcn Y.

Co:nmit LENNOX and Arran were aftonifhled to the lafl
,,r1?, degree at an event so unexpected, and so fatal to

their powcr. The former endeavoured, but with-
out fuccels, to excite the inhabitants of Edin-
burgh to take arms in order to rescue their Sove-
reign fiom captivity. The latter, with his usual
impetuosity, mounted on horseback the moment
he heard what had befallen the King, and with a
few followers, rode towards Ruthven-caftle; and
as a conliderable body of the conspirators, under
the. command of the Earl of Mar, lay in his way
ready to oppose him, he separated himself from
his companions, and with two attendants arrived
at the gate of the castle. At the fight of a man
ol odious to his country, the indignation of the
conspirators rose, and instant death must have
been the punifhinent of his raflhnefs, if the fiiend,
Ihip of Gowrie, or omne other cause not explained
by our hillorians, had not saved a life so perni-
cious to the kingdom. He was confined, how-
ever, to the caltle of Stirling, without being ad-
mitted into the King's presence.
Com-nanli TIIE King, though really the prisoner of his

Ln to owvn subjects, with whose conduct he could nor
kinjvtni hlelp difeovering many fymptolms of disgust, was

obliged to publifl a proclamation, signifying his

y Cald. iii. 134. Spotfw. 320. Mc1\. 357.

appro-

approbation of their enterprise, declaring that he B 0 0 K
was at full liberty, without any restraint or vio- _
lence offered to his person; and forbidding any 5S''
attempt againif those concerned in the Raid of
Rulthven, under pretence of rescuing him out of
their hands. At the fame time, he commanded Augua 2=.
Lennox to leave Scotland before the twentieth of
September '.

SOON after, Sir George Carey, and Robert The cnn

Bowes, arrived as ambassadors fi-om Elizabethi. coun'e
The pretext of their embassy was to inquire after .. zbebh
the King's safety; to encourage and countenance
the conspirators was the real motive of it. By
their intercession, the Earl of Angus, who, ever
since the death of his uncle Morton, had lived
in exile, obtained leave to return. And the ac-
cession of a nobleman so powerful and so popular
strengthened the faction".

LENNOX, whose amiable and gentle qualities

had procured him many friends, and who received
private assurances that the King's favour towards
him was in no degree abated, seemed resolved,
at firfl, to pay no regard to a command extorted
by violence, and no less disagreeable to James,
than it was rigorous with regard to himself. But
the power of his enemies, who were matters of
the King's person, who were secretly supported
by Elizabeth, and openly applauded by the
Clergy, deterred him from any enterprise, the
success of which was dubious, and the danger
certain, both to himself and to his Sovereign,

z Cald. iii. 135. 13a. a CGld. iii. 152.
VOL. II. H He

B ovo K lie put off the time of his departure, however,
L---j by various artifices, in expectation either that

J5Sz. James might make his escape from the conspirators,

or that fortune might present some more favour-
able opportunity of taking arms for his relief.

Their con- ON the other hand, the conspirators were ex-
dud ap-
proved by tremely solicitous not only to secure the appro.
^andamblY bation of their countrymen, but to obtain some
vetion of legal fantion of their enterprise. For this pur-
eftatces,

pole they published a long declaration, containing
the motives which had induced them to venture
on such an irregular flep, and endeavoured to
heighten the public indignation against the fa-
vourites, by representing, in the firongeft colours,
their inexperience and insolence, their contempt
of the nobles, their violation of the privileges of
the Church, and their oppression of the people.
They obliged the King, who could not with
safety refuse any of their demands, to grant them
a reiniffion in the most ample form; and not
satisfied with that, they applied to the Assembly
of the Church, and easily procured an aEt, de-
a.3. claring, " that they had done good and accept-

able service to God, to their Sovereign, and to
their native country;" and requiring all sincere
Protestants to concur with them in carrying for-
ward such a laudable enterprise. In order to
add the greater weight to this aft, every Minifler
was enjoined to read it, in his own pulpit, and to
inflict the censures of the Church on those who
set themselves in opposition to so good a cause.
A Convention of estates affeibled a few clays
after, pased an aft to the fame eifect, and granted

full

full indemnity to the conspirators for every thing B OO K,
they had done b.

JAMEs was conduced by them, first to Stirling, ie,,sr;z5

and afterwards to the palace of Holy-rood-houfe; dpart"rot
and though he was received every where with the Lnd.
external marks of respect due to his dignity, his
motions were carefully observed, and he was under
a restraint no less firif than at the first moment
when he was seized by the conspirators. Lennox,
after eluding many commands to depart out of
the kingdom, was at last obliged to begin his
journey. He lingered, however, for some time
in the neighbourhood of Edinburgh, as if he had
frill intended to make some effort towards re-
floring the King to liberty. But either from the
gentleness of his own disposition, averse to blood-
hced and the disorders of civil war, or from some
other cause unknown to us, he abandoned the
design, and set out for France, by the way of Dec. 3o.
England. The King issued the order for his de-
parture with no less reluctance, than the Duke
obeyed it; and both mourned a reparation, which
neither of them had power to prevent. Soon
after his arrival in France, the fatigue of the
journey, or the anguifl of his mind, threw him
into a fever. In his last moments he dilcovered
such a firm adherence to the Protestant faith, as
fully vindicates his memory fiom the imputation
of an attachment to Popery, with which he had
been uncharitably loaded in Scotland'. As he
was the earliefl, and belf beloved, he was, per-

b Cald. iii. 177. 187. 200. Spotfsv. 322.
' Sptliv. 324 Cald. iii. r72.

IH 2 haps,

B O o; haps, the most deserving, though not the mofe

--- able, of all James's favourites. The warmth and
'58' ttendernefs of his Master's affetion for him was

not abated by death itself. By many ats of kind-
ness and generosity towards his posterity, the King
not only did great honour to the memory of Len-
nox, but set his own character in one of its most
favourable points of view.

Mary's THE success of the conspiracy, which deprived
anxiety
about hcr James of liberty, made great noise over all Eu-

rope; and at last reached the ears of Mary in the
prison to which lhe was confined. As her own
experience had taught her what injuries a captive
Prince is exposed to tuffer; and as many of those
who were now concerned in the enterprise against
her son, were the fame persons whom ihe con-
fidered as the chief authors of her own misfortunes,
it was natural for the tenderness of a mother to
apprehend that the fame calamities were ready to
fall on his head; and such a profped did not fail
of adding to the distress and horror of her own
situation. In the anguish of her heart, fie wrotZ
to Elizabeth, complaining in the bitterest terms
of the unprecedented rigour with which fle her-
self had been treated, and beleeching her not to
abandon her son to the mercy of his rebellious
fubjeds; nor permit him to be involved in the
fame misfortunes under which fie had lb long
groaned. The peculiar vigour and acrimony of
Ityle, for which this letter is remarkable, discover
both the high spirit of the Scottifli Queen, un-
subducd by her sufferings, and the violence of her
indignation at Elizabeth's artifices and severity.

But

But it was ill adapted to gain the end flue had. in B O°0 K
view, and accordingly it neither procured any -y
mitigation of the rigour of her own confinement, 5
nor any interposition in favour of the King'`.

IENRY III. who, though lle fteared and hated ';T-

. , ° .7~~~~~ Amh rati-
the Princes of Guile, was often obliged to court d.rs.r;ve

ZZ

- . . s~l-JIn' m Fianlce

their favour, inter)poftld with warmth, in order to anj Ene-
extricate James out of the hands of a party tb l'"d
intirely devoted to the l1nglifh interefl. IHe
commanded M. de la Motte Flcnelon, his ambaf-
fador at the court of England, to repair to Edin-
burgh, and to contribute his utmolt endeavours
towards placing James in a situation more suit-
able to his dignity. As Elizabeth could not,
with decency, refuse him liberty to execute this
commiflion, Ihe appointed Davison to attend hin-
into Scotland as her Envoy, under colour of con-
curring with him in the negotiation, but in
reality to be a spy upon his motions, and to
obstruCt his success. James, whose title to the
Crown had not hitherto been recognised by any of
the Princes on the continent, was extremely fond
of such an honourable embassy from the French
Monarch; and, on that account, as well as for the
fake of the errand on which lie came, received Fe-
nelon with great refp)et. The nobles, in whose Jan. 7.
power the King was, did not relifli this interposition
of the French court, which had long loft its an-
cient influence over the aftairs of Scotland. The
Clergy were alarmed at the danger to which re-
ligion would be exposcd, if the Princes of Guise

' Caind. 4,.9,

$ nflould

B °O C fliould recover any ascendant over the public

_-. councils. Though the King tried every method
J5S3- for restraining them within the bounds of decency,

they declaimed againfl tle court of Francc,
against the Princes of Guise, against the Ambaf-
fador, against entering into any alliance with fulch
notorious persecutors of the Church of God, with
a vehemence which no regular government would
now tolerate, but which was then extremely com-
mon. The Ambassador, watched by Davison,
distrusted by the nobles, and exposed to the in-
fults of the Clergy and of the people, returned
into England without procuring any change in
the King's situation, or receiving any answer to
a proposal which he made, that the government
lhould be carried on in the joint names of James
and the Queen his mother".

J-,n1cg t- MEANWHILE, James, though he dissemblcd with
( , tcs .ott of
th hand3 great art, became every day more uneasy under
of the ron- his confinement; his uneasiness rendered him con-
$p/rarors.

tinually attentive to find out a proper opportunity
for making his escape; and to this attention he
at last owed his liberty, which the King of France
was not able, nor the Queen of England willing,
to procure for him. As the conspirators had
forced Lennox out of the kingdom, and kept
Arran at a distance from court, they grew secure;
and imagining that time had rcconcilcd the King
to them, and to his situation, they watched him
with little care. Some occasions of discord had
arisen among themselves; and the French Ambaf-

e C;ill. iii. 207. Spoltfw. 324. MllU'lin, 372, &c. SL-
Appcnd. ilo. IX.

faldor,

fador, by fomenting these during the time of his B c, ° K
residence in Scotland, had weakened the union, ---
in which alone their safety confifled'. Colonel '583'
William Stewart, the commander of the band of
gentlemen who guarded the King's person, being
gained by James, had the principal merit in the
icheme for reflorilng his Maller to liberty. Under JuneC 7.
pretence of paying a visit to the Earl of March
his grand uncle, James was permitted to go f-omn
Falkland to St. Andrew's. That he might not
create any suspicion, he lodged at firit in an open
defenceless house in the town, but pretending a
curiosity to fee the castle, no sooner was he en-
tered with some of his attendants whom he could
trust, than Colonel Stewart commanded the gates
to be shut, and excluded all the refl of his train.
Next morning the Earls of Argyll, Huntly, Craw-
ford, Montrose, Rothes, with others to whom the
secret had been communicated, entered the town
with their followers; and though Mar, with fe-
vcral of the leaders of the fadtion, appeared in
arms, they found themselves so far out- numbered,
that it was in vain to think of recovering posses-
sion of the King's person, which had been in their
power somewhat longer than ten months. James
was naturally of so soft and ducile a temper, that
those who were near his person commonly made a
deep imprellion on his heart, which was formed
to be under the sway of favourites. As he re-
mained implacable and unreconciled to the con-
fpirators, during so long a time, and at a period

Camel. 42.

-H 4 of

o o0 K of life when resentments are rather violent than

VI.

- lafling, they mupt either have improved the op-
g83-' portunities of insinuating theinfelves into favour

with little dexterity, or the indignation with which
this first insult to his person and authority filled
him, must have been very great.

Reftilve, His joy at his escape was youthful and excessive,
to trat' He relulved, however, by the advice of Sir James
ohemrwi vth Melvil, and his wisest counfellois, to aL with the

utmost moderation. Having called into his pre-
fence the leaders of both factions, the neighbour-
ing gentry, the deputies of the adjacent boroughs,
the Ministers, and the heads of colleges, he de-
clared, that although he had been held under re-
firaint for Tome time by violence, he would not
impute that as a crime to any man, but, without
remembering the irregularities which had been
so fiequent during his minority, would pass a ge-
neral act of oblivion, and govern all his fubjeats
with undiftinguifhing and equal affection. As an
evidence of his sincerity, he visited the Earl of
Gowrie at Ruthven-caflle, and granted him a full
pardon of any guilt he had contracted, by the
crime committed in that very place-.

Eut Arran BUT James did not adhere long to this prudent
'icdas tI and nmoderate plan. His former favourite, the
over liln; Earl of Arran, had been pecrmiitted for some time

to relide at Kinneil, one of his country feats. As
soon as the King felt himself at liberty, his love
for him began to revive, and he expressed a strong
dSlctfc to fee him. The courtiers violently opposed

z Mclv. 2;2.

the

:r the return of a minion, whose insolent and over- B O O K

bearing temper they dreaded, as much as the na-
tion detefled his crimes. James, however, con- ,s3,
tinued his importunity, and promising that he
should continue with him no longer than one day,
they were obliged to yield. This interview re-
kindled ancient afflction; the King forgot his pro-
mise; Arran regained his alcendant over him; and
within a few days refumned the exercise of power,
with all the arrogance of an undeferving favourite,
and all the rashness peculiar to himfelfh

THE first effeLt of his inluence was a proclama- and the

tion with regard to those concerned in the Raid of frtigother
Ruthven. They were required to acknowledge plan.
their crime in the humbleflt uanner; and the
King promised to grant them a full pardon, pro-
vided their future conduct were such as did not
oblige him to remember past miscarriages. The
tenourof this proclamation was extremely different
from the aft of oblivion which the conspirators
had been encouraged to expect. Nor did any of
them reckon it safe to rely on a promise clogged
with such an equivocal condition, and granted
by a young Prince under the dominion of a mi-
nifter void of faith, regardless of decency, and
transported by the desire of revenge even beyond
the usual ferocity of his temper. Many of the
leaders, who had at first appeared openly at court,
retired to their own houses; and, foreseeing the
dangerous florm which was gathering, began to
look out for a retreat in foreign countries .
u hclv. 27'. Id. 278. Spotfw. 326. C;ld. iii. 330.

ELIZA E''TIl

B 0 K c ELIZABETH, who had all along proteled the
v_>- conspirators, was extremely disgusted with nca-
ie83h' fures which tended so visibly to their dcftruation,
Yllzabeth s
filicitations and wrote to the King a harfli and haughty letter,
in behalf of
the confpi- reproaching him in a flyle very uncommon among
AuEgft . Princes, with breach of faith in recalling Arran to

court, and with imprudence in proceeding so ri-
goroufly againit his best and mofl faithful subje&s.
James, with a becoming dignity, replied, that
promises extorted by violence, and conditions
yielded out of fear, were no longer binding, when
these were removed; that it belonged to him alone
to chufe what miniilers he would employ in his
service; and that though he relolved to treat the
confpiratorsatRuth ven with the utlmott clemency,
it was necelar-y, for the support of his authority,
that such an insult on his person should not pass
altogether uncenfured'.

Sept. . ELIZABETH'S letter was quickly followed by
w finrg WValfinglham her secretary, whom the appointed
liarm i em- 0
baty into her Ambafiador to Ja.ics, and who appeared at

the Scottish court with a splendour and magni-
ficence wall calculated to please and dazzle a young
Prince. Walfinghaim was admitted to leveral con-
ferences with James himself, in which he infilfed
on the fame topics contained in the letter, and the
King repeated his former answers.

AFTER suffering several indignities from the ar-

rogance of Arran and his creatures, he rtcurnidl
to England, without concluding any new treaty
with the King. Walsingham was, next to Bur-

k Mcl. 279.

leigh,

leigh, the Minifler on whom the chief weight of e o o K
the EInglifh administration refted; and when a
person of his rank ftept so far out of the ordinary 's58
road of business, as to undertake a long journey
in his old age, and under a declininrg state of
health, foine aftair of consequence was supposed
to be the cause, or iinme important event was ex-
pected to be the effeEt of this measure. But as
nothing conspicuous either occasioned, or fol-
lowed this embassy, it is probable that Elizabeth
had no other intention in employing this sagacious
Minitter, than to discover, with exactness, the ca-
pacity and disposition of the Scottiih King, who
was now arrived at a time of life, when, with
sone degree of certainty, conjectures might be
formed concerning his character and future con-
duct. As James poieflfed talents of that kind,
which make a better figure in conversation than
in action, he gained a great deal by this interview
with the Englifn secretary, who, notwithflanding
the cold reception which he met with, gave such
an advantageous representation of his abilities, as
determined Elizabeth to treat him, henceforward,
with greater decency and refpeLt'.

E.LIZABLTH'S eagerness to proteCt the confpira-

tors rendered James more violent in his proceed-
ings against them. As they had all rcfuted to ac-
cept of pardon upon the terms which he had of-
sered, they were required, by a new proclamation,
to surrender thelmfelves priboners. The Earl of
Angus alone complied; the reft either fled into

MRlv. 293. Cald, iii. 258. Jcbb, ii. 536.

93^~~~~ England,

3B OO K England, or obtained the King's licence to retire
a _into foreign parts. A Convention of estates was
1s c583.; held, the members of which, deceived by an un-

worthy artifice of Arran's, declared those con-
cerned in the Raid of Ruthven to have been guilty
of high treason; appointed the aft pafled last year
approving of their conduct to be expunged out of
the records; and engaged to support the King in
prosecuting the fugitives with the utmost rigour
of law.

THE conspirators, though far firom having done

any thing that was uncommon in a barbarous age,
among mutinous nobles, and under an unsettled
fiate of government, must be acknowledged to
have been guilty of an aEt of treason againit their
Sovereign; and James, who confidered their
conduct in this light, had good reason to boast
of his clemency, when he offered to pardon them
upon their confessing their crime. But, on the
other hand, it must be allowed that, after the
King's voluntary promise of a general oblivion,
they had some reason to complain of breach of
faith, and, without the most unpardonable im-
prudence, could not have put their lives in Ar-
ran's power.

T154. THE interest of the Church was considerably

fvour thil affected by these contrary revolutions. While the
Confpir- conspirators kept poffefion of power, the Clergy
tors, and
irrtate the not only recovered, but extended their privileges.

As they had formerly declared the hierarchy to be
unlawful, they took some bold measures towards
exterminating the Episcopal order out of the
Church; and it was owing more to Adamson's

~~~~~~~I ~dexterity

dexterity in perplexing and lengthening out the B o°°

r

process for that purpose, than to their own want '-
of zeal, that they did not deprive, and perhaps '5s4'
excommunicate all the Biflops in Scotland.
Whcn the King recovered his liberty, things put
on a very different aspec:. The favour bestowed
upon Arran, the enemy of every thing decent and
licred, and the rigorous prosecution of those no-
bles who had been the most zealous defenders of
the Protestant cause, were confidered as Hire pre-
fages of the approaching ruin of the Church.
The Clergy could not conceal their apprehensions,
nor view this impending danger in silence. Drury,
who had been restored to his office as one of the
Ministers of Edinburgh, openly applauded the
Raid of Ru/h-venL in the pulpit, at which the King
was so enraged, that, notwithitanding some fymp-
toms of his fubmillion, he commanded him to
resign his charge in the city. Mr. Andrew Mel-
vil, being summoned before the Privy Council
to answer for the doclrine which he had uttered
in a sermon at St. Andrew's, and accutid of
comparing the present grievances of the nation
with those under James III. and of intimnatrng
obliquely that they ought to be redrelred in the
famne manner, thought it incumbent on him to
behave with greater firmness. He declined the
jurifdicion of a Civil court, in a caulc which he
maintained to be purely Ecclefiaflical; the Pref-
bytcry, of which he was a member, had, as he
contended, tie sole right to call himi to account
for words spoken in the pulpit; lanld r itrher the
King nor council could judge, in the firil illlance,

of

B o0 K of the do&rine delivered by Preachers, without

VI.
-_ _> violating the immunities of the Church. This

4 exemption from civil jurisdiction was a privilege

which the Popish Ecclefiattics, admirable judges
of whatever contributed to increase the lustre or
power of their body, had long itruggled for, and
had at last obtained. If the fame plea had now
been admitted, the Protestant clergy would have
become independent on the civil Magistrate; and
an order of men extremely useful to society while
they inculcate those duties which tend to promuote
its happiness and tranquillity, might have become
no less pernicious, by teaching, without fear or
controul, the most dangerous principles, or by
exciting their hearers to the imoft desperate and
lawless ations. The King, jealous to excess of
his prerogative, was alarmed at this daring en-
croachment on it; and as Melvil, by his learning
and zeal, had acquired the reputation and autho-
rity of head of the party, he resolved to punish
him with the rigour which that pre-eminence ren-
dered necessary, and to discourage, by a timely
severity, the revival of such a dangerous claim.
Melvil, however, avoided his rage, by fying
into England; and the pulpits resounded with
complaints that the King had extinguished the
light of learning in the kingdom, and deprived
the Church of the ablef and nmoft faithful
guardian of its liberties and discipline.

THESE violent declamations of the Clergy
againit the measures of the court were extremely

, Spotfw. 330. Cald, iii, 304.

accept-

acceptable to the people. The conspirators, B OO K
though driven out of the kingdom, still poffefled
great influence there; and as they had every thing r5S4
to fear from the resentment of a young Prince,
irritated by the furious counsels of Arran, they
never ceased soliciting their adherents to take
arms in their defence. Gowrie, the only person
among them who had submitted to the King, and
accepted of a pardon, soon repented of a ftep
which loft him the efteemn of one party, without
gaining the confidence of the other; and, after
suffering many mortifications from the King's
neglec, and the haughtiness of Arran, he was at
last commanded to leave Scotland, and to reside
in France. While he waited at Dundee for an op-
portunity to embark, he was informed that the
Earls of Angus, Mar, and the Tutor of Glamis,
had concerted a scheme for surprising the cattle
of Stirling. In his situation, little persuasion was
necessary to draw him to engage in it. Under.
various pretexts, he put off his voyage, and lay
ready to take arms on the day fixed by the con-
fpirators for the execution of their enterprise.
His lingering so long at Dundee, without any
apparent reason, awakened the fnfrpicion of the
court, proved fatal to himself, and dil'l)apointcd
the success of the conspiracy. Colonel William
Stewart surrounded the houfewherc lie lodged with
a body of soldiers, and, in spite of his rcfillance,
rook him prisoner. Two days after, Angus,
Mar, and Glamis, fcized the caflle of Stirling,
and ercaing their Ilandard there, publishcd a
manifcfto, declaring that they took arms for no

other

B °0 K other rearon but to remove from the King's prec

VI.
- _-- fence a minion who had acquired power by the
1584. imoft unworthy actions, and who exercised it with

the most intolerable insolence. The account of
Gowrie's imprisonment struck a damp upon their
spirits. They imputed it to treachery on his part,
and fufpeEted, that as he had formerly deserted,
he had now betrayed them. At the fame time,
Elizabeth having neglc6ted to supply them, in
due time, with a fum of money, which ihe had
promired to them, and their fiiends and vafials
coming in slowly, they appeared irresolute and
diiheartened; and as the King, who acted with
great vigour, advanced towards them at the head
of twenty thousand men, they fled precipitately
towards England, and with difficulty made their
escape". This rafhl and feeble attempt produced
such effects as usually follow disappointed con-
fpiracies. It not only hurt the cause for which it
was undertaken, but added strength and reputation
to the King; confirmed Arran's power; and
enabled them to pursue their measures with more
boldness, and greater success. Gowrie was the
first victim of their resentment. After a very in-
formal trial, a jury of Peers found him guilty of
treason, and he was publicly beheaded at Stirling.
may 2. To humble the Church was the King's next

"Acln ^~ ftep. But as it became necessary, for this purpose,

to call in the aid of the legislative authority, a
Parliament was hastily summoned: and while so
many of the nobles were baniflled out of the

" Iomc's Hist. ns IIoufc of Dotgl. 376. Spotfw. 3}',
Caldcrw. iii. 324, &c.

kingdom,

kingdom, or forbidden to appear in the King's B °oo° K
prectnce; while Arran's haiughtinefs kept some at
a distance, and intimidated others; the meeting g s4'
conlifted only of those who were abfblutely at the
devotion of the court. In order to conceal the Severelawn

againfi the

laws which were framing from the knowledge Cnurch.
of the Clergy, the Lords of the Articles were
wvorn to secrecy; and when rome of the Minilters,
who either fuilp)eed, or were informed of the
danger, deputed one of their number to declare
their apprehensions to the King, he was seized at
the palace-gate, and carried to a distant prison.
Others, attempting to enter the Parliament-houfe,
were refifed admittance"; and such laws were Nfay 2,
pasTed, as totally overturned the constitution and
discipline of the Church. The refusing to ac-
knowledge the jurifdition of the Privy Council;
the pretending an exemption from the authority
of the civil courts; the attempting to diminifli
the rights and privileges of any of the three estates
in parliament, were declared to be high treason.
The holding assemblies, whether Civil or Eccle-
fiaftical, without the King's permission or appoint-
ment; the uttering, either privately or publicly,
in sermons or in declamations, any false and scan-
dalous reports against the King, his ancestors, or
mihifters, were pronounced capital crimesp.

WHEN these laws were published at the cross

of Edinburgh, according to the ancient custom,
Mr. Robert Pont, Minister of St. Cuthbert's,
and one of the Lords of Sefion, solemnly pro-

o Cald, iii. 365, P 'lirl. J;c. VT.
VOL. II. I tefled

B o0 K teflted againlf them, in the name of his brethren,

_ because they had been passed without the know-
584.- ledge or consent of the Church. Ever since the

Reformation, the pulpits and ecclesiastical judi-
catories had both been esteemed sacred. In the
former, the Clergy had been accustomed to cen-
sure, and admonilh with unbounded liberty. In
the latter, they exercised an uncontrouled and in-
dependentjurifdiaion. The blow was now aimed
at both these privileges. These new statutes were
calculated to render churchmen as inconsiderable
as they were indigent; and as the avarice of the
nobles had [tripped them of the wealth, the King's
ambition was about to deprive them of the power
which once belonged to their order. No wonder
the alarm was universal, and the complaints loud.
All the Ministers of Edinburgh forsook their
charge, and fled into England. The most emi-
nent Clergymen throughout the kingdom imitated
their example. Desolation and astonishment ap-
peared in every part of the Scottish Church; the
people bewailed the loss of Pastors, whom they
esteemed; and full of conltcrnation at an event
so unexpected, openly expressed their rage against
Arran, and began to fufpeC the King himself to
be an enemy to the Reformed Religions.

' Spotfw. 33.

# BOOK VII.

TH E
H I S T O RY

o F

S C 0 T L A N Do
SCOTLAND.

B O OK VII.
W hHILE Scotland was torn by intestine sac- B o o K

tions, Elizabeth was alarmed with the ru- v.
mour of a proje&t in agitation for setting Mary at 1584

Throkmor-

liberty. Francis Throkmorton, a Chelhire gen- ton',,con-
tleman, was fufpefed of being deeply concerned (fir'cy
in the design, and on that suspicion he was taken zibth.
into cuffody. Among his papers were found two
lifts, one of the principal harbours in the king-
domn, with an account of their situation, and of
the depth of water in each; the other, of all the
mninent Roman Catholics in England. This cir-
cumliance confirmed the suspicion against him,
and some dark and desperate conspiracy was sup-
posed just ready to break out. At first he boldly
avowed his innocence, and declared that the two
papers were forged by the Qieen's Ministers, in
order to intimidate or insnare him; and he even

I 2 endured

B o 0 K endu-red the rack with the utmost fortitude. But
---v1 being brought a second time to the place of tor-

- ture, his relitlution failed him, and he not only

acknowlcd(ged that hle had held a secret corre-
fponclence with the Qteen of Scots, but dif-
covered a (dcfgn that was forlned to invade Eng-
land. The I)ukle of Guise, lhe fid, undertook
to furnift troops, and to conducct the enterprilc.
The Pope and King of Spain lwere to iulpply the
money necceffry for carrying it on; all the iEng-
lifh exiles were eager to take arms; many of the
Catholics at home would be ready to join them at
their landing; Mendoza, the Spanilih Ambaf-
fador, who was the life of the conlsiracy, spared
no pains in fomenting the f)irit of difarrection
among the English, or in hastening the prepara-
tions on the Continent; and by his command, he
made the two lifts, the copies whereof had been
found in his poffefion. This confefTion he re-
traEted at his trial; returned to it again after fen-
tence was passed upon him; and retraEted it once
more at the place of execution ..

To us in the present age, who are aflfl'cd in

forming our opinion of this matter by the light
which time and hiflory have thrown upon the
designs and characters of the Princes of Guise,
many circumflances of TI'hrokmnorton's confenion
appear to be extremely remote from truth, or
even fiom probability. The Duke of Guise was,
at that juncure, far from being in a situation to
undertake foreign conquests. Without either

1 0oiingnicui, 1370Qs

ipower

power or office at court; hated by the King', and B o0 K
percTicuteCd by the favourites, he had no leisure for
any thoughts of disturbing the quiet of neigh- 15's'
bouringI flttes; his vallt and ambitious mind was
wholly occupied in laying the foundation of that
famious league, which fhookl tlhe throne of France.
But at the time when Ellizabeth deccced this
conipiracy, the close union between the house of
Guiie and Philip was remarkable to ail Europe;
and as their great enrerprife ngaint: IIenryy III.
wvas not yet disclosed, as they cnl(l:avoured to
conceal that under their threatenilgs to invade
E:ngland, Throkmorton's dilcoverv appeared to
be extremely probable; and Elizabeth, who knew
how ardently all the parties mentioned by him
willied her downfal, thought that the could not
guard her kingdom with too much care. The Degns of
indiclreet zeal of the Fnglihi exiles incre.ifed her heL,"-
fears. Not fatisi-ed with incell'ant outcries againlf gA.^hEI li
her severity towarrds the Scottifhl Q(een, and her
cruel persecution of her catholic subjects, not
thinking it enough that onec P'ope had threatened
her with the fentcnce of excommnlication, and
another had actually pronounced it, they now
beg-n to disperse books and writing,, in which
they endeavoured to perf-lade their dicil iles, that
it would be a meritorious a-ion to t;ike away her
life; they openly exhorted the maids of honour
to treat her as Judith d 1Iolofci nes, and, by
such an illufirious deed, to rncder thelir own
names honournble and iacred in the Church
throughout all future ages!. I'or all thiec rea-

I Cand. ),

I 3 sons,

B 0 0 K sons, Elizabeth not only inRiited the punishment

v-- sos a traitor on Throkmorton, but commanded the
J5sq' Spanish ambassador instantly to leave England;

and that she might be in no danger of being at-
tacked within the island, she determined to use
her utmost efforts, in order to recover that in-
fluence over the Scottish councils, which she had
for some time entirely loft.

She endea- THERE were three different methods, by which
yours to re-
efablifh her Elizabeth might hope to accomplilh this; either
Snlandiby by furnishing such effetual aid to the banished
Faining .r- nobles, as would enable them to resume the chief
ran.

diretion of affairs; or by entering into such a
treaty with Mary, as might intimidate her son,
who being now accustomed to govern, would be
apt to agree to any terms rather than resign the
sceptre, or admit an associate in the throne; or
by gaining the Earl of Arran, to secure the di-
retion of the King his master. The last was not
only the easiest and fpeedieft, but mot likely to
be successful. This Elizabeth resolved to purfuei
but without laying the other two altogether
aside. With this view she sent Davison, one of
her principal secretaries, a man of abilities and
address, into Scotland. A Minister so venal as
Arran, hated by his own countrymen, and holding
his power by the nmof precarious of all tenures,
the favour of a young Prince, accepted Eliza-
beth's offers without hesitation, and deemed the
acquisition of her protecion to be the most solid
Aogun 13, foundation of his own grcatnefs. Soon after he

consented to an interview with Lord Hunfdon the
Governor of Berwick, and being honoured with
the 1pompous title of Lieutenant General for tho

King,

King, he appeared at the place appointed with a B 00o K
splendid train. In Hunfdon's presence he re- A
newed his promises of an inviolable and faithful 15s4
attachment to the English interest, and assured
him that James should enter into no negotiation
which might tend to interrupt the peace between
the two kingdoms; and as Elizabeth began to
entertain the fame fears andjealoufies concerning
the King's marriage, which had formerly dif-
quieted her with regard to his mother's, he un-
dertook to prevent James from listening to any
overture of that kind, until he had previously ob-
tained the Quseen of England's consent .

THE banished Lords and their adherents soon seere pro.

felt the effects of Arran's friendship with England. lgn the
AsElizabech had permitted them to take refuge in Lord,,ij
her dominions, and several of her Ministers were
of opinion that fle ought to employ her arms in
defence of their cause, the fear of this was the
only thing which reitrained James and his favour-
ite, fiom proceeding to such extremities against
them, as might have excited the pity or indig-
nation of the English, and have prompted them
to exert themselves with vigour in their behalf.
But every apprehension of this kind being now Augustz.
removed, they ventured to call a parliament, in
which an act was passed, attainting Angus, Mar,
Glamis, and a great number of their followers.
Their estates devolved to the Crown, and accord-
ing to the practice of the Scottish Monarchs, who
were obliged to reward the facion which adhered

C Cald. iii. 49t. Mhclv. 3i5. See Appncid. No. X.

I 4 to

* °0 K to them, by dividing with it the spoils of the
L-a__ vanquished, James dealt out the greater part of

l'54' these to Arran and his associates'.

againi the NOR was the treatment of the Clergy less ri-
Clergy. gorous. All Ministers, readers, and profeflors in

Colleges were enjoined to subscribe, within forty
days, a paper testifying their approbation of the
laws concerning the Church enacted in last par-
liament. Many, overawed or corrupted by the
Court, yielded obedience; others flood out. The
stipends of the latter were sequestered, some of the
more aEtive committed to prison, and numbers
compelled to fly the kingdom. Those who com-
plied, fell under the suspicion of acting from mer-
cenary or ambitious motives. Those who iuffered
acquired high reputation, by giving such con-
vincing evidence of their firmness and sincerity,
The judicatories of the Church were almost en-
tirely suppressed. In fonme places, scarce as many
Ministers remained, as to perform t,he duties of
religious worship; they soon funk in reputation
among the people, and being prohibited not only
from discoursing of public affairs, but obliged,
by the jealousy of the administration, to frame
every sentiment and expression in such a manner,
as to give the court no offence, their sermons
were deemed languid, insipid, and contemptible;
and it became the general opinion, that together
with the mofl virtuous of the nobles, and the most
faithful of the Clergy, the power and vigour of re-
ligion were now banished out of the kingdomre

d Caldl iii. 57. c Ibid. iii. 589.

FIEANV

MEANW^H:LE, Elizabeth was carrying on one B 0 0 K

of tlofe fi-uitlefs negotiations with the QLIccn of t -,-
Scots, which it had become alimoft matter of fortm '5s:
to renew every year. They ierved not only to
amuse that unhappy Princess with rome profpe&t
of liberty; but furnished an apology for eluding
the solicitations of foreign powers in. her behalf;
and were of ulc to overawe J ames, by shewing him
that fle could, at any time, set free a dangerous
rival to dispute his authority. These treaties ihe
fufFcred to proceed to what length the pleased,
and never wanted a pretence for breakin.r them
off, when they became no longer necessary. The
treaty now on foot was not, perhaps, more sincere
than many which preceded it; the reasons, how-
ever, which rendered it ineffc'tual were far from
being frivolous.

As Crichton ajefuit was failing from Slanders New can.

towards Scotland, the ship on board of which he gP;iyEli.
was a pafengcr happened to be chased by pirates, abeth.
who, in that age, often infested the narrow Teas,
Crichton, in great confusion, tore in pieces some
papers in his custody, and threw them away; but,
by a very extraordinary accident, the wind blew
them back into the ship, and they were imnmedi-
iatcly taken up by some of the passengers, who
carried them to Wade, the Clerk of the privy
council. He, with great indufry and patience,
joined them together, and they were found to
contain the account of a plot said to have been
formed by the King of Spain, and the Duke of
Guise, for invading England. The people were
not yet recovered from the fear and anxiety occa-

firoec

B 0 0 K rioned by the conspiracy in which Throkmorton

Vil. l^__- had been engaged, and as his discoveries appeared

js now to be confirmed by additional evidence, not

only all their former apprehensions recurred, but
the conlternation became general and exceflive.
As all the dangers, with which England had been
threatened for some years, flowed either immedi-
ately from Mary herself, or from such as made
use of her name to justify their infurrefions and
conspiracies, this gradually diminished the com-
passion due to her situation, and the English, in-
Hiead of pitying, began to fear and to hate her.
Elizabeth, under whose wife and pacific reign the
English enjoyed tranquillity, and had opened
sources of wealth unknown to their ancestors,
was extremely beloved by all her people; and re-
gard to her safety, not leTs than to their own in-
terest, animated them against the ScottiJh Queen.

occasion In order to discourage her adherents, it was
an afocia- thought necessary to convince them, by some
(ion in op-
poition to public deed, of the attachment of the English to

their own Sovereign, and that any attempt against
her life would prove fatal to her rival. With this
OL.ober 9i. view, an A4focialion was framed, the subscribers of

which bound themselves by the moi: solemn oaths,
" to defend the QLeen against all her enemies,
" foreign and domestic; and if violence ihould

be offered to her life, in order to favour the

" title of any pretender to the Crown, they not
" only engaged never to allow or acknowledge
" the person or perfbns by whom, or for whom,
( such a deteltable aft should be committed, but
( vowed, in the presence of the eternal God, to

" prosecute

cc pro-ccute such person or persons to the death, RB 0, K
;' aLel to pursue them, with their utmost venge- .---
c ance, to their utter overthrow and extirpa- "'
, rtion." Perlons of all ranks subscribed this
comllbination with the greatest eagerncls and
unatlnimlity g

MARY conCfidcred this combination, not only as wticb

an avowed design to exclude her from all right of l',^,al,
succession, but as the certain and iminmediate fore-
runner of her cleftrucLion. In order to avert this,
fihe imade such feeble efforts as were still in her
power, and lent Naue her secretary to court, witlh
offers of more entire resignation to the will of
Elizabeth, in every point, which had been the
occasion of their long enmity, than all her fuiilFr-
ilngs hitherto lad been able to extort'. But whe-
ther Mary adhered inflexibly to her privileges as
an independent Sovereign, or yielding to the ne-
ceffiy of her situation, endeavoured, by concef-
sions, to fooch her rival, she was equally unfuc-
cefsful. Her firmness was imputed to obstinacy,
or to the secret hope of foreign affiflance; her
concefflons were either believed to be insincere,
or to flow from the fear of some imminent danger.
Icr present willingness, however, to comply witl
any terms was so great, that Walsingham warmly
urged his mistress to come to a final agreemelnt
with her'. But Elizabeth was perfuadced, that it
was the spirit raised by tlle association which had
rendered her so paflive and compliant. She always
imagined that there was something yyfltrious

Slate Tria;ls, I. 122. g Calmd. 499.
' Camd. ibid. Sec Appendix, No. XI.

and

B o0 K and deceitful in all Mary's actions, and fufpelcd

--. h her of carrying on a dangerous correspondence
1514. with the Englifl Catholics, both within and with.

out the kingdom. Nor were her suSpicions alto.
gether void of foundation. Mary had, about this
time, written a letter to Sir Francis Inglelieeld,
urging him to haftcn the execution of what file
calls the Great plot or Designment, without hefitat.
ing on account of any danger in which it might
involve her life, which file would most willingly
part with, if, by that sacrifice, fle could procure
relief for to great a number of the oppresscd

She i treat. children of the ChurchL. Instead, therefore, of
greer ri- hearkening to the overtures which the Scottifli
;our. (Queen made, or granting any mitigation of the

hardfllips of which the complained, Elizabeth re-
solvcd to take her out of the hands of the Earl of
Shrewlbury, and to appoint Sir Amias Paulet and
Sir Drue Drury to be her keepers. ShrewfbLrv
had discharged his trutl with great fidelity, during
fifteen years, but, at the fame time, had treated
Mary with gentleness and respect, and had always
sweetened harfl commands by the humanity with
which he put them in execution. The fame po-
iLtcnefs was not to be expeced from men of an
inferior rank, whose revere vigilance, perhaps,
was their chief recommendation to that employ-
ment, and the only merit by which they could
pretend to gain favour or preferment'.

Cray a new As James was no lets eager, than ever, to de-
favourile of
hlKi'si.f prive the banithed Nobles of Elizabeth's protec-

' 5tr)ypc, iii. Z:6. J Cgimd. 500.

tion,

irion, he appointed the MalRer of Gray his Am- B O o K
. l) lidor to the court of lnglannd, and intrusted -
himi with thle conduEt of a negotiation for that 'S84'
tuirpolZ. lor this honour lie was indebted to the
envy and jealotly of the larl of Arran. Gray
*ioFi.tf^d all thec talents of a Courticr; a graceful
p)rioun, an in fii u.!ti ng add re , bo und less anil irion,
aind a rcftlfcs an!i ilntriguinig tfpiit. I)uring his
refidcnce in France, he had been admitted into
tle most intimate familiarity with the Duke of
(;uife, and, in order to gain his favour, had re-
nounccd the lProteilant Religion, and proffi:ed
tlhe utmoti z:al for the calptive (Qieen, who car-
ried on a fcciet correfpondcnce with hinm, fioin
which flc expcesllcd great advantages. On his
return into Scotl;nd, he paid court to James with
extraordinary afliduity, and his accompliffments
did not fail to make their ulfual impreflion on the
King's heart. Arran, who had introduced him,
began quickly to dread his growing favour; and'
flattering himself, that ablence would efface any
sentiments of tenderness firom the mind of a young
Prince, pointed him out, by his malicious prailts,
as the moll proper person in the kingdom, fr ian
cmibafl of fucli importance; and contributed to.
raiie hIim to that high dignity, in order to h11,il1tr
hlis fall. Elizabeth, who had an admirable dex-
terity in dlilfovering the proper inrtrumlents lor
carrying on her designs, endeavoured, by caretti-.,
and by lprclents, to fticure Gray to her i itcrcl.
'Ihe former flattered his vanity, which was great;
tile latter fuplplied his profulienefs, which was still
grcater. 'le abandoined hiimfelf without Irf.Ct'rvc

I to

B o O to Elizabeth's direction, and not only undertook

,--.. to retain tile King under the influence of England,
"3a4 but aEed as a spy upon the Scottiflh Qieen, andl

betrayed to her rival every secret that hie could
draw fi-om her by his high pretensions of zeal in
her service"'.

Ki,;ntereft GRAY'S credit witlh the Engliff court was ex-

wthte tremncly galling to the banifned nobles, Elizabeth
England. no longer thought of employing her power to re-

store them; the found it easier to govern Scot-
land by corrupting the King's favourites; and,
Deccm. ;. in compliance with Gray's filicitations, fle com-

manded the exiles to leave the north of England,
and to remove into the heart of the kingdom.
This rendered it difficult for them to hold any
corr-eftondence with their partisans in Scotland,
and alinolt imnpofible to return thither without
her permciflion. Gray, by gaining a point which
James had so much at heart, rivetted hirnfelf
miore firmly than ever in his favour; and by ac-
quiring greater reputation, became capable of
serving Elizabeth with greater success".

1s5. A xRRAN had now poflieffed, for some time, all

Ao"nranpn tle power, the riches, and the honours, that his
and iio- ilmmoderate ambition could desire, or the fond-
Iencc.

ness of a Prince, who set no limits to his liberality
towards his favourites, could beflow. The of-
fice of Lord Chancellor, the highest and most im-
portant in the kingdom, was conferred upon him,
even during the life of the Earl of Argyll, who
succeeded Athol in that dignity"; and the public
rn Siryec, iii. 302. McIl;. 316. Cald. iii 643.

C'ri.l.\l Olic. of State, A pp. 447.

beheld,

'beheld, with astonishment and indignation, a man B o o K
teducated as a soldier of fortune, ignorant of law, _
'and a contemner of justice, appointed to preside '5S'
in parliament, in the privy council, in the court
of felrion, and intrufled with the supreme dif-
i pofoal of the property of his fellow-fubjecs. He
was, at the fame time, governor of the cafiles of
Stirling and Edinburgh, the two principal forts
in Scotland; Provost of the city of Edinburgh;
a nd as if by all these accumulated dignities his
merits were not fufficicntly recompenfed, he had
been created Lieutenant General over the whole
kingdomrn. No person was admitted into the
t King's presence without his perni:ilon; no fa-

vour could be obtained but byv his mediation.
James, occupied with youthful amnufeiments, de-
volved upon him the whole regal authority.
Such unmerited elevation increascd his natural
arrogance, and rendered it intolerable. H-e was
no longer content with the condition of a subje&c,
but pretended to derive his pedigree from Murdo
Duke of Albany; and boasted, openly, that his
title to the Crown was preferable to that of the
King himself. But, together with these thoughts
of royalty, he retained the meanness suitable to
his primitive indigence. His venality as a judge
was scandalous, and was exceeded only by that
of his wife, who, in defiance of decency, made
herself a party in almost every qucetion which
came to be decided, employed her influence to
corrupt or to overawe the judges, and almolt
openly diAated their decifionsP. His rapacious-

P Cald. iii. 331. Scotftarvet's Staggering Stat:, 7.

ness

B 0 0 K ness as a Minifrer was insatiable. Not satisfied

--.- with the revenues of so many ofices; with tile
'585' eflate and honours which belonged to tile family

of Hamnilton ; or witl the greater part of Gowric's
lands, which had fallen to his share; he grafpedl
at the pofTcffions of several of the nobles. IHe
required Lord Maxwell to exchange part of his
eflate, for tile forf-iced lands of Kinneil; and be-
cause l;e was unwilling to quit an ancient inherir-
ancc for a pioffcfion so precarious, he itirreed up
againfl- him his hereditary rival, tle Laird of
Johnston, and involved that corner of the king-
dom in a civil war. lie committed to prison
the Earl of Athol, Lord Tlonie, and the Matier
of Cafils; the firit, because he would not divorce
his wife, the daughter of the Earl of Gowrie, anl
entail his ellate on him; the second, because he
was unwilling to part with some lands adjacent
to one of his estates; and the third, for refuting
to lend him money. His spies and inforincrs
filled the whole country, and intruded themfelvcs
into every company. The nearest neighbours
distrusted and feared each other. All familiar so-
cicty was at an end. Even the common inter-
courses of humanity were interrupted, no man
knowing in whom to confide, or where to utter
his complaints. There is not perhaps in history
an example of a Minister so universally detcltal)lc
to a nation, or who InorC justly deserved its de-
teftation '.

ARRAN, notwithstanding, regardless of the ftn-
timents, and despising the murmurs of the people,

9 Spotfw. 337, 338,

gave

n ,ve a loose to his natural temper, and proceeded B ° O K
to afts fill more violent. David Home of Ar- -
"gay, and Patrick his brother, having received 'IS5s
letters firom one of the banished Lords, about
private business, were condemned and put to
:leath, for holding correspondence with rebels.
Cunninghame of Drurnwhafel, and Douglas of
Mains, two gentlemen of honour and reputation,
wvere accused of having conspired, with the exiled
nobles, to seize the King's person. A tingle wit-
; neds only appeared; the evidence they produced

of their innocence was unanswerable; their ac-
curer himself not long after acknowledged that he
had been suborned by Arran; and all men be-
lievcd the charge against them to be groundless:
' They were found guilty, notwithflanding, and Feb. g
f ufti red the death of traitorsr.

ABOUT the fame time that there gentlemen Parry's con.
: were punished for a pretended conspiracy, Eliza- g^,n'YE; li

beth's life was endangered by a real one. Parry, zabth.
a D)ocor of laws, and a Member of the 1-louse of
Conmmlons, a man vain and fantastic, but of a re-
f Ilute spirit, had lately been reconciled to the
Church of Rome; and fraught with the zeal of
a; new convert, he offere'd to demonfirate the fin;
cerity of his attachment to the religion which ie
hlad embraced, by killing Elizabeth. Cardinal
Allen had published a book, to prove the murdcr
of an excommunicated Prince to be not only law-
ful, but a meritorious action. The Pope'5 NtInio
i Ve\nice, the Jesuits both there and at Paris, the

p^)otwf\R. 3. C. C il. 79..
VOL. II. K Fnglill

B o 1 K Fnglili exiles, all approved of the lefign. Tie

1Pope himlelf exhorted him to persevere; and
'5 . granted him, for his encouragement, a plenarn

ijndulgence, and remiifuon of his fins. Cardini,
li Ccino wrote to him a letter to the fame pur.
pole. But thoutgh he ofrcn got access to tie
t cl en, sc'ar, or folm lclaialinig fInfe of duty, re.
itrained him from perpetrating the crime. Hap.
pili, Iiis intention was at lafi- discovered by Nc.
vil, the only person in Fngland to whom he ha;
comunilunicatud it; and lie himfeilf having volun.

anI,; .
i. t laily cinf'elf'id his guilt, he 1fulecred tile punifli

ici v. ) iic!h ic dtel:rvcd'

/\ :r ...c 'c rl l SiI rcpelated conllpiracics against- their Sove.
Ill ,', tll hr

r"r' ,1 gn

e awakened the indignation oftheEnglifi par'
t= "'1'Y.' jliaineiit, andl produced a vcry extraordinary statute,

vhich, in the end, proved fatal to the Queen of
;cots. By this law the afiociation in defence of
I lizalbcl 's l ife was ratified, and it was ftrther en-
atedl, ': '1hat if any rebellion fiall be excited iii
" the kingdom, or any thing attempted to the
"( hurt of 1icr LMajeily's pIliri , ,i'1 or for alny per.
: In prctre din lg a title to thle Crowin, the Qucn

i" iall empower twenty-fouri perlons, by a corn.

" miflioln

! ml tcr the (;rcat Seal, to examine into,

< and palIs fentenec U011 1, 'ich of lcnlces; and after
"; judg' pi-it
i i vi eil, a proclamation fil all be iflic',

de
t hl.ii ing tie perlons whoim they find guilt)!

" c:Xil(!c(d fIrom any right to the Crown ; ani
<ler Majelly's fubijels may lawfullypurfuteevcr

one of' them to the death, wtith all their ai(cir

S.b ita 'l'i.iAl, vol. i. 1I3.
S '( ;"i'

' andl abettors: And if nny dl(fign againfh tlhe life n ° ''
" of the Qieen takl ecT}c:, the pcrlins, y of) rs, --
, ( \hom iitch a cctelllable at.t is exccuttci, andi '5s

Ii /.cr ifucs, beinlg in any will: aIllnting or privy
to the fai!, flhall be di fabled for ever from
)(( ietending to the Crown, and be purfiedld to
(c death in the lie

l manner'." This a&e was

plainly levelled at the Queen of Scots; and whc-
thieri we confider it as a voluntary exprcfTion of
tlhe ze;l and concern of the nation for Elizabcth',
;safety, or whether we impute it to the influence
which that artful Princess prefcrved over lier par-
liamcnts, it is no ealy natter to reconcile it- wvirh
, the general principles of justice or hunmanitv.

A Mary was thereby rendered accountable not only
i 1(o her own actions, but for thole of others; in
consequence of which, hle might forfeit her righlt
\ of fucceflion, and even her life itself.

MARY jufRly confidered this aft as a warning Ti-.;,1or

to prepare for the worPf extremities. ''lizabeth's .,,, ..''
, Ininilers, it is probable, had resolved, by this '"a' ili,
I time, to take away her life; and flftlred book's

to be publiffied, in order to persuade the nation,
that this cruel and unprecedented meaftlre was
not only necessary, but just ". lEven that flio-t:
period of her days which remained, they rendered
uncomfortable, by every hard ship and indignity
wlich it was in their power to inii&t. Alimof all
hler servants were dcifinlilld(, fle was treated no
longer with the refpe&t due to a Queen; and
tlhough the rigou)r of seventeen years imprison-
nient had broken her conflitution, fle was con-

' Stttc l ill, u i. 13. "t Stlr!lc, iii. 29f9.

iK 2 fined

B 0 K fined to two ruinous chambers, scarcely habitable,

A -_ even in the middle of summer, by reason of cold.
'^55 Notwithstanding the scantiness of her revenue,

she had been accustomed to difiribute regularly
some alms among the poor in the village adjoin-
ing to the castle. Paulet now refused her liberty
to perform this pious and humane office, which
had afforded her great consolation, amidst her
own sufferings. The cattle in which ihe resided
was converted into a common prison; and a
voung man, fuipe&ed of Popery, was confined
there, and treated under her eye with such rigour,
that he died of the ill usage. She often com-
plained to Elizabeth of these multiplied injuries,
and expoftulated as became a woman and a
Queen; but as no political reason now obliged
that Princess to amuse her any longer with falla-
cious hopes, far from granting her any redress,
hfe did not even deign to give her any answer.
The King of France, closely allied to Elizabeth,
on whom he depended for assistance against his
rebellious fubjefts, was afraid of espousing Mary's
cause with any warmth; and all his solicitations
in her behalf were feeble, formal, and ineffica-
cious. But Caftlenau, the French Ambassador,
whose compassion and zeal for the unhappy Queen
supplied the defects in his inftru6tions, remon-
ftrated with such vigour against the indignities
to which (he was exposed, that, by his impor-
tunity, lie prevailed at length to have her re-
moved to Tuthbury ; though fie was confined,
the greater part of another winter, in her prclcnt
wretched habitation".

. Jcbb, v. ii. 576-S98.

NEIT..ER

NELITHER the insults of her enemies, nor the B °o K

n('le& of her friends, made such an imprefflon ,-,
onr Mary, as the ingratitude of her son. James A brch
lhad hitherto treated his mother with filial respect, l'tw"en

;.'~~~~~

" - r ' l~~~~~Mary and

acd had even entered into negotiations with her, her ion.
vwliich gave umbrage to Elizabeth. But as it
was not her interest that his good correspondence
Ihould continue, Gray, who, on his return into
Scotland, found his favour with the King greatly
increased by the success of his embassy, perliladed
himn to write a harfi and undutiful letter to his
mother, in which he expressly refused to acknow-
ledge her to be Queen of Scotland, or to confider
his affairs as connected, in any wife, with hers.
This cruel requital of her maternal tenderness
overwhelmed Mary with sorrow and despair.

Was it for this, said The, in a letter to the March24.

"French Ambassador, that I have endured so
" nmuch, in order to preserve for him the inherit-
" ance, to which I have a just right? I am far
" from envying his authority in Scotland. I

desire no power there; nor wish to let my foot

"in that kingdom, if it were not for the pleasure
" of once embracing a son, whom I have hitherto
"loved with too tender affection. Whatever
" he either enjoys or expects, he derived it fiom

me. From him I never received assistance,

" supply, or benefit of any kind. Let not my
" allies treat him any longer as a King; he holds
" that dignity by my content; and if a speedy
"repentance do not ippeafe mny just: resent-
" ment, I will load him with a parent's curse,
"and surrender my Crown, with all my pre-

jK "t tcnfions,

0; 0( o ' 'c tciiis':', to one who will receive tlihei witii
.--.--- " I.iarirtlude, and defend elicm with vigour."'

J'1' LThe lovc v.!ich Jamles bore to hIis mother, whom

lie had never known, and whom he had becn
eualy tauhtlt to coniidlcr as one of the most aban-
!tdond perllns of her sex, cannot be supposed
cvc'r to have been ardent; and he did not now
t.auk any pains to regain her favour. But whe-
ther her indignation at his undutiful behaviour,
added to her bigoted attachment to Popery,
prompted Mary at any time to think seriously of
disinheriting her son; or whether there threaten-
ings were uttered in a sudden £ally of disappointed
affeation, it is now no ealy matter to determine.
Some papers which are still extant seem to render
the forimer not improbables.

Dangero,,, CARES of another kind, and no less disquieting,
l''.zlbetiF occupied Elizabeth's thoughts. The calm wliich

she had long enjoyed, seemed now to be at an end;
and fuclh florms were gathering in every quarter,
as filled her with jultl alarm. All the neighbour-
ing nations had undlcrone revolutions extremely
to her difladvantage. 'The great qualities which
-Henry Ill. had diliplayed in his youth, and which
raised the expec&ations of his subje&s so high, va-
nilffed on his afccndingl the throne; and his ac-
quiring fplreme p)ower :Icims not only to have
corrupted his iheart, but to have impaiied his un-
dcrflanding. -le sbon loft the efleen and assec-
tion of the nation; and a life divided between the
aulferities of a fuplerftitious devotion, and the ex-

Y Mtlrdin, 56s. Jcll>, ii. 571. Se Append. No. X[I.
' Scc Arppuid. No. XIII.

travaganciec

travagancies of the mnoul dillolute debauchclry, l'I ()° K
rendered him as contemnlptible as lie was odious --... -
on account of hlis rapacioufliels, llis plrofufon, '
and the fondnetl with which he doatcd on mnl!lv
unworthy minions. On the death of his only bro-
ther, those sentiments of the people buill ort with
violence. H-enry had no children, and t';uiig
but thirty-two years of age, the fucceilion of the
Crown was already confidered as open. The King
of Navarre, a diJtant descendant of tle royal fa-
mily, buc the undoubted heir to the Crown, was a
zealous Protestant. The prolfpec of an event to rom ie
fatal to their religion, as his al-endlin the throne

t '""'oe lL.

of France, alarmed all til Catholics in Europe,
and the Duke of Guise, countenanced by the Pope,
and aided by the King of Spain, appeared as the
defender of the Romish faith, and the aflerter of
the Cardinal of Bourbon's right to the Crown. In
order to unite the party, a bond of confederacy
was formed, diftinguifihed by the name of thie cLo
League. All ralnks of men joined in it with emu-
lation. The spirit spread with the irrefiRlible ra-
pidiity which was natural to religious pallons in
that age. Thedcftr-uc-ion of the Reformation, not
only in France, but all over Europe, femncd to. be
the objec&t and wifl of the whole party; and the
Dukle of G(uile, the head of this mighty and zeal-
ous body, acquired authority in the kingdom, far
Iuperior to that which tle King himlelf £pofTefid.
Philip II. by the conquefl- of Portugal, had greatly from tlh
increased the naval power of Spain, and had at lafll \.';,,ir
reduced under his dominion all that portion of the
Continent, which lies beyond the Pyrencan moun-

K 4 tarins,

B °o K tains, and which Nature seems to have destined to

I--.-. form one great monarchy. William, Prince of

Orange, who firit encouraged the inhabitants of
the Netherlands to assert their liberties, and whole
wildom and valour formed and proteced the rising
commonwealth, had fallen by the hands of an as-
faffin. T he superior genius of the Prince of Parma
had given an entire turn to the fate of the war in
the Low Countries; all his enterprises, concerted
with consummate skill, and executed with equal
bravery, had been attended with success; and the
Dutch, reduced to the lafi extremity, were on
the point of falling under the dominion of their
ancient master.

Hr ,wire NONE of those circumnfances, to which Eliza-
sandua." beth had hitherto owed her security, exifled any

longer. She could derive no advantage from the
jealousy which had subsisted between France and
Spain; Philip, by means of his confederacy with
theDukle of Guise, had an equal sway in the coun-
cils of both kingdoms. The Hugonots were
unable to contend with the power of the League;
and little could be expected from any diversion
they might create. Nor was it probable that the
Netherlands could long employ the arms, or di-
vide the lltength, of Spain. In this situation of
the affairs of Europe, it became necessary for Eli-
zabeth to form a new plan of conduc&; and her
wisdom in forming it was not greater than thl
vigour with which fle carried it on. Tle mea-
fures, most suitable to her natural temper, and
which fie had hitherto pursued, were cautious
and fafei 0loseC whvlich lie now adopted, were en-

·14^~~~~~ terprifing

terprifing and hazardous. She preferred peace, B 0 0 K
but was not afraid of war; and was capable, when _---..-
compelled by ncceffity, not only of defending 5SS
herfclf with spirit, but of attacking her enemies
with a boldness which averted danger from her
own dominions. She immediately furnifihed the
-Hugonots with a considerable ifupplv in money.
She carried on a private negotiation with hIcnry
III. who, though compelled to join the League,
hated the leaders of it, and wished for their de-
ftruction. She openly undertook the protection
of the Dutch comlmonwealth, and sent a powerful
army to its afliftance, She endeavoured to form
a general confederacy of the Proteflant Princes,
in opposition to the Popish iLcague. She deter- Ref,,'ve to
minedl to procced with the utmoln rigour againit tlni^flil'.
thle ueen of Scots, whose sufferings and rights '"'l"hc

^' C.

. Kinllg.

aflbrded her enemies a specious pretence for in-
vading her domiinions. She resolved to redouble
her cndeavours, in order to effe&t a closer union
with Scotlaandnd to extend and perpetuate her
influence over the councils of that nation.

Siue found it no difficult matter to induce molt

ortlhcScottifh courtiers to promote all her designs.
Gray, Sir John Maitland, who had been advanced
to the oflice of Secretary, which his brother for-
llerly held, Sir I.ewis Bellendlcn, the Justice Clerk,
who liad succeeded Gray as the King's. resident at
I.,ondon, were the perlons in whom she chiefly
conlidleu. In order to direcl and quicken their
mi(Vtiolns, fie difplatched Sir E.dward WVotton along Ma. 29.
m ith Bellenden into Scotland. This man was gay,
well-bred, and entertaining;l he cxcllc(d in all

tlie

B 0) K the exercises for which Jiames had a pafiui ;
«-v- Lnand amulied the young King by relating the ad-

'5 ventures which lie had melt with, and the ob-

servations lhe had made, dcluring a long refidcnce
in foreign countries; but under the veil of thncl
fupcrficial qualities,. he conceal(dl a dangerous adlld
intririuin ifPirit. I Ie icon ' ticw into hli'hg favour
with James, and .while lie v.al fCl'i ingllly attentive
only to plealure and diverfiols, he acquired in-
fluence over the public councils, to a degree
which was indccant for a firanger to poflls'".

Proipots a NOTr-IING, however, could be more acceptable
Sclt ,lid. to the nation, than the proposal lie made of a ilrit

alliance between the two kingdoms, in d(efelcc of
the leformed Religion. The rapid and alarm-
ing progress of the Popillb League feenmed to call
on all Protestant Princes to unite for the preflir-
1]3 ". vation of their coimmon faith. James embraced

the overture with warmth, and a Convention of
ctnates empowered him to conclude such a trc:aty,
and engaged to ratify it in parliament'. 'T'ie
alacrity with which James concurred in this mea-
lure nmuft not be wholly afcribdc eithler to his
own zeal, or to Wotton's addrcls; it was owi!ln
il pa:lrt to Elizabeth's liberality. As a mark of
her motherly af-fecion for the young King, Ihe
iettled on him an annual pension of five thoullind
pounds; the fame lum which her father had al-
lotted her before fie alcended the throne. This
circumstance, which fle took care to mention,
rendered a fum1, which in that age was far from

·' M .lM .,'1. 1. SPmtfi'. 339.

bcil'p

b,:ij~,; inconsiderable, a very 'accelptable p'efent rB K

I z

To [th King, whoie revenues, duriing a long ---
i0inoritv, had been almotllo totally diflip;tt'ed. '15S.

BUr the chiefobjc& of ' Worton's intrigues, was U,:d, l.ines

to ruill Arrlan. Yiiile a min ion io odious to the pwA r.
jlition continued to govern the King, his allil-
ance could be of little advantage to Iliz;lbceh.
And tioughl A iran, ever since his interview with
1-iun fdon, had appeared extremely for her interelf-,
ilie could place no great confidence in a man
vi ofe condult was io capricious and irregular,
and who, notwithfianlding his proteflations to the
contrary, Rlill continued a secret correfpondlcnce
botcl with Mary and with the Duke of' Guili.
The banished Lords were attached to England
firom aflction, as well as principle, and were the
only perlons among the Scots whom, in any dan-
gerous exigency, she could thoroughly trult. Be-
fore Bellenden left London, they had been fum-
moned thither, under colour of vindicating them-
ielves from his accusations, but, in reality, to
concert with him the most proper meafilres for're-
loring them to their country. Wotton 1pursued
tiis plan, and endeavoured to ripen it for exe-
cution; and it was greatly facilitated by an event
neither uncommon nor considerable. Sir John
Forller, and Ker of Ferniherfl, tlhe l'nglifl and
Scottish wardens of the middle marches, having
met, according to the cufltoin of the borders,
about midnifummer, a fray arofie, and Lord Ruffel,
the Earl of Bedford's cidefl: son, happened to be

' C iald. iii. 505.

killed.

B ( K killed. This scuffle was purely accidental, but

VII.
I--_. Elizabeth chose to confider it as a design formed

'05-. by Ker, at the initigation of Arran, to involve

the two kingdoms in war. Sle infifled that both
should be delivered up to her; and though James
eluded that demand, he was obliged to confine
Arran in St. Andrew's, and Ker in Aberdeen.

Afmfs he During his absence fiom court, Wotton and his
b.iinflwd
nobli. associates carried on their intrigues without inter-

ruption. By tleir advice, the banished nobles
endeavoured to accommodate their differences
with Lord John and Lord Claud, the Duke of
Chatelherault's two sons, whom Morton's vio-
oa. t6. lence had driven out of the kingdom. Their

common sufferings, and common interest, induced
both parties to bury in oblivion the ancient dif-
cord which had fubfifled between the houses of
Hamilton and Douglas. By Elizabeth's per-
mifilon, they returned in a body to the borders
of Scotland. Arran, who had again recovered
favour, insisted on putting the kingdom in a pof*
ture of defence. But Gray, Bellenden, and Mait-
land .'cretly thwarted all his measures. Some
neceflary orders they prevented from being issued;
others they rendered ineffectual, by the manner of
execution; and all of them were obeyed slowly, and
with reluccance'.

WOTTON'S fertile brain was, at the fame time,

big with another and more dangerous plot. He
had contrived to feizc the King, and to carry him
by force into England. But the design was hap-

d Spotlf. 340,

pily

pily discovered; and, in order to avoid the pu- B °,° K
nifhlment his treachery merited, he departed with- ---
out taling leavec. i5 .

MEANwVHIr.E the baniflied Lords haltened the They return

execution of their enterprise; and as their fi-ends lnd, and
and vafials were now ready to join them, they en- leto the
tered Scotland. Wherever they came, they were K"in.
welcomed as the deliverers of their country, and
the molt fervent prayers were addrefled to Heaven
for the fuccels of their arms. They advanced,
without losing a moment, towards Stirling, at the
head of ten thousand men. The King, though he
had assembled ;n army superior in number, coull
not venture to meet them in the field, with troops
whose loyalty was extremely dubious, and who, at
best, were far from being hearty in the cause; nor
was either the town or cafile provided for a siege.
The gates, however, of both were hurt, and the
nobles encamped at St. Ninian's. 'That ille Nv. ,.
night they surprised the town, or mcre probably
it was betrayed into their hands; and Arran, who
had undertaken to defend it, was obliged to save
himself by a precipitate flight. Next morning
they invested the castle, in which there were not
provisions for twenty-four hours; and James was
neceflitated immediately to hearken to terms of
accommodation. They were not to elated will
success, as to urge extravagant demands, nor was
the King unwilling to make every realonable con-
cefion. They obtained a pardon in tlec mol:
ample form, of all the offences which they had

. lclv. $33.

comrmitted

B o o K committed; the principal forts in the kingdom

Vii.
-M-_. were, by way of lecurity, put into their hands;
';S5' Crawford, Montrose, and Colonel Stewart were

removed from the King's pretence; and a parlia-
ment was called, in order to eitablifl tranquillity
il the nationl'.

AP.,,,ii. .TliOUGH a great majority in this parliament:
''"'"' consisted of the confederate nobles and their ad-

herents, they were fir fiomn dilcovering a vindic-
tive il)irit. Satisfied with procuring an aft, re-
floring them to their ancicnt honours andc estates,
and ratifying the pardon granted by the Ki:]n ,
they ieemed willing to forget all past errors in thil
adnminiftration, and t)fpred James the mIortifica-
tion of feeing his Ministers branded with any
public note of infamy. Arran alone, deprived
of all his honours, tfripped of his borrowed ipoils,
and declared an enemy to his country by public
proclamation, funk back into obfcurlity, and nufl-,
henceforth, be mentioned by his primitive title of
Captain James Stewart. As he had been, during
his unmnerited prosperity, the objecL of the hatred
and indignation of his countrymen, they beheld
his fall without pity, nor did all his l -uferings mi-
tigate their reftntment in the leall degree.

Clrdh as- a'TII Clergy were the only body of men who
fa'"' obtaincd no redrcefs of their grievances by this re-

volution. The confederate nobles had, all along,
afTcdt(l to be confidered as guardians of the privi-
leges and dilcipline of the Church. In all their
nmallnilcos they had declared their relolution to

r C.tll. iii. 79 .o

reflore

-cftiore these, and by that popular pretence had B °0 K
crained many friends. It was now natural to ex- -
jpet lbine fruit of theic promises, and some re- ,s5-
rtrrns of gratitude towar.ds many of the most emi-
nent preachers who had fufiered in their cause, and
who demanded the repeal of the laws paffedl the
preceding year. The King, however, was re-
iolute to maintain thelf laws in full authority;
and as the nobles were extremely solicitous not to
(ilgull himn, by infifing on any di -igreeable re-
quest, the claims of the Church in this, as well as
in many former inflances, were sacrificed to tll
intereCt of the laity. The Ministers gave vent to
their indignation in the pulpit, and their impa-
tience under thediSappointment broke out in rome
expressions extremely difi-efpelfull even towards
the King himifelf'.

THE Archbishop of St. Andrew's, too, felt the '536-

effic's of their anger. The Provincial Synod of
Fife summoned him to appear, and to anlfwer for
h is contempt of the decrees of former A fiemblics,
in prefiuming to exercile the f[undlion of a Bilhop.
Though he refuled to acknowledge the jurifdic-
tion of the court, and appealed from it to the
King, a sentence of excommunication, equally in-
decent and irregular, was pronounced agailnfl him.
Adanfon, with no less indclcciy, tunllderl d his
nrchielifcopal exconmmuniication atainll Mlelvil,
and lome other of his op)ponents.

SOON after, a General Afniembly was lihel, in A1;il i
which the K ing, with fomle iifficulty, obtaincd ;!1

CE Slwl '.. 3.1J

aCd,

n o o K ac, permitting the name and office of Bishop iill
\_ tOCto continue in the Church. The power of the

5S6-. order, however, was considerably retrenched.

The exercise of dicipline, and the inspection of
the life and do(trine of the Clergy, were com-
mitted to Prefbyteries, in which Biflops Thould
be allowed no other pre-eminence, but that of
presiding as perpetual nioderators. They them-
selves were declared to be fubjcót, in the fame
manner as other pafRors, to the jurifdicion of
the General Assembly. As the discussion of the
Archbiflop's appeal might have kindled unusual
heats in the Airembly, that affair was terminated
by a coiprromilfe. -le renounced any claim of
fipreniacy over the Church, and promised to de-
mean himnllcf suitably to the charaEter of a Bishop,
as dcfcribed by St. Paul. The Assembly, with-
out exanining the foundations of the sentence of
excomiTmunication, declared that it flould be held
of no effect, and restored him to all the privileges
which he enjoyed before it was pronounced. Not-
withstanding the extraordinary tenderness flewn
for the honour of the fynod, and the delicacy and
refipect with which its jurifdition was treated,
several imembers were so zealous as to protest
ag.ainlt this decision h

I i,.n,,c '1 r E court of Scotland was now filled with per-
wih dnfl- sons fb warmly attached to Elizabeth, that the
didlli ]league be(twcen the two kingdoms, which had been

proposcd lait year, Iect with no interruption, but
from l)'l]fneval the lFrench envoy. James lim-

CA' (C.tl. iii t4.o" Spotl.sw.v 346.

fells

self first offered to renew the negotiation. Eliza- B o o K
beth did not susser such a favourable opportunity --
to flip, and inltantly dispatched Randolph to con- 1386.
clude a treaty, Which flhe so much desired. The July s.
danger to which the Protestant religion was ex-
posed, by the late combination of the Popifi
powers for its destruction, and the necessity of a
strict confederacy among those who had embraced
the Reformation, in order to obftru&t their per-
nicious designs, were mentioned as the founda-
tion of the league. The chief articles in it were,
that both parties should bind themselves to defend
the Evangelic Religion; that the league should
be offensive and defensive against all who shall
endeavour to disturb the exercise of religion in
either kingdom; that if one of the two parties be
invaded, the other, notwithstanding any former
alliance, Ihould not, directly or indirectly, assist
tie invader; that if England be invaded in any
part remote from Scotland, James should assist
the Queen with two thousand horse and five
thousand foot; that if the enemy landed or ap-
proached within sixty miles of Scotland, the
King should take the field with his whole forces,
in the fame manner as he would do in defence of
his own kingdom. Elizabeth, in return, under-
took to at in defence of Scotland, if it should be
invaded. At the fame time ihe assured the King
that no flep should be taken, which might dero-
gate in any degree fiom his pretensions to the
lEnglilh Crown'. Elizabeth expressed great fa-
tisfaaion with a treaty, which rendered Scotland

V 'So. I 351.
VOL. II , L, an

B O O K an useful ally, inltcad of a dangerous neighbour,

_-_ and afforded her a degree of security on that fide,
x586. which all her ancestors had alined at, but none of

them had been able to obtain. Zeal for religion,
together with tle blessings of peace, which both
kingdoms lhad enjoyed during a considerable pe-
riod, had so far abated the violence of national
antipathy, that the King's conduct was univerially
acceptable to his own peoplek.

THE acquittal of Archibald Douglas, at this

time, exposed James to much and deserved ccn-
sure. This man was deeply engaged in the con-
fpiracy against thelifeof theKing his father. Both
Morton and Binny one of his own servants, who
suffered for that crime, had accused him of being
present at the murder'. He had escaped punii-l-
ment by flying into England, and James had
often required Elizabeth to deliver up a person so
unworthy of her protetion. He now obtained a
licence, from the King himself, to return into
Scotland; and after undergoing a mock-trial,
calculated to conceal, rather than to detect his
guilt, he was not only taken into favour by the
King, but sent back to the court of England,
with the honourable character of his ambaidltlor.
James was now of fi'ch an age, that his youth andl(
inexperience cannot be pleaded in excuse for this
indecent tranfiaion. It mufl be imputed to the
excessive facility of his temper, which often le!
him to gratify his courtiers at the expence of his
own dignity and reputation ".

k Canidl. 513. See Alppend. No. XIV. Ainot CIii
Trials, 7, &c. ." Spotl'. 348. Cald.1 iii. 917.

No r

NoTr long after, the inconfid.r:.te aficc ction of n o K

the [nozlilh Catholics towards Mary, and thellir -
iipl. .cabie relbntrnent against: s 5Elizabeth, gave pr'i-
rie to a conpT)lilracy which proved 1ltal to the l .;ic'
lle Q een), left r an iind liilcl filain on tlhe r' utlt - :1.,,ll Lli-

. :l)cth.

tion of' the other, and prcre-ned 1

a lpclacle to

I! tirope, of which there hIad been hiei lrto n cex-
:nroplc in thle hiiiory of ' mankindl.

IDOCrTOr Cilflord, Gilbert (Gii-rd, anld l odl-

fin, pr-icils edLucated in the feininary at Rheinis,
had adopted an extravag.ant and entlhlrfi.lltic no-
tioi, that the Bull of Pius V. againtl Elizabeth,
was dict;ated immnediately by the 1Ioly Ghofll
lThis wild opinion they instilled into Savage, an
ofiiccr in the Spanli army, noted for his furious
zeal and daring courage; and persuaded hinm that
no service could be io acceptable to leavcn, as
to take away the life of an excommunicated lec-
rctic. Savage, eager to obtain the crown of
llartyrdom, bound himfellf by a lolemn vow to npril :G.
kill Elizabeth. Ballard, a pragiatical pricfl oi
that seminary, had at tlhat time come over to
Plaris, and lolicited Mendoza, the Spanifi am-
baflfador there, to procure an invasion of EL:n g-
land, while the aflirs of the I:ague were lo
lprOlilrous, and the kinlgdom left nalked by fend-
illg lb many of the Qcee(n's berfl troops into the
Netherlands. Paget and the lnglih exiles dc-
nonl ltrated the fruitlcllmcl Is of lficli an attempt.
unlels E1lizabethl were sirs- cut ofF, or the invaders
ILcured of a powerful concurrence on their land-
i ng. If it could be hoped tihat citl:er of tlicl :
ev 'nts woul .d happ1n, cle,'l al aid was p'romi ls,

L 2 and

B 0 0 K and in the mean time Ballard was sent back to

VII.

I renew his intrigucs.
ay '5,.' -E communicated his designs to Anthony Ba.

bingcon, a young gentleman in Derbfllire, of a
large fortune, and many amiable qualities, who
having contratRed, during his residence in France,
a familiarity with the Archbiihop of Glasgow,
had been recommended by him to the Queen of
Scots. IIe concurred witl Paget, in confidering
the death of Elizabeth as a necessary preli-
minary to any invasion. Ballard gave him hopes
that an end would soon be put to her days, and
imparted to him Savage's vow, who was now in
London waiting for an opportunity to strike the
blow. But Babington thought the attempt of
too much importance, to rely on a single hand
for the execution of it, and propoled that five re-
solute gentlemen ihould be joined with Savage,
in an enterprise, the success of which was the
foundation of all tlheir hopes. He offered to find
out persons willing to undertake the service,
whose honour, iecrecy, and courage they might
safely trust. He accordingly opened the matter
to Edward Windlor, Thomas Salisbury, Charles
Tilney, Chidioc Tichbourne, Robert Gage, John
Travers, Robert Barnwell, John Charnock, Henry
Dun, John Jones, and Robert Polly, all of them,
except Polly, wlofe bultling forward zeal intro-
duced him into their society, gentlemen of good
families, united together in the bonds of private
friendship, ftrcngthened by the more powerful
tie of religious zeal. Many consultations were
iune, held; their plan of operations was at last fettled;

and

atnd their different parts assigned. Babington B 0 0 K
himself was appointed to rescue the Queen of .--
Scots; Salisbury, with some others, undertook to T;rehhcmc
excite several counties to take arms; the murder "fth' coa.

fpirators.

of the Queen, the most dangerous and important
service of all, fell to Tichbourne and Savage,
with four associates. So totally had their bigoted
prejudices extinguifned the principles of honour,
and the sentiments of humanity suitable to their
rank, that, without scruple or compuntion, they
undertook an action which is viewed with horror,
even when committed by the meanest and molt
profligate of mankind. This attempt, on the
contrary, appeared to them no less honourable
than it was desperate; and in order to perpetuate
the memory of it, they had a picture drawn con-
taining the portraits of the fix assassins, with tlat
of Babington in the middle, and a motto inti-
mlating that they were jointly embarked in some
hazardous design,

THE conspirators, as appears by this wanton fifcovercd

and imprudent inflance of vanity, seem to have hYn.
thought a diicovery fctarccly poltible, and neither
diflrufted the fidclity of their companions, nor
doubted tle success of their undertaking. But
while they believed that their machinations were
carried on with the most profound and impene-
t.rable secrecy, every flep they took was fully
known to W\alsingham. Polly was one of his
Ipies, and had cntered into the conll)iracy with
noi other dclign than to betray his affciates. Gil-
bert Gilflord too, having been sent over to Eng-
ind to (eilcken the motions of tlhe conspirators,

1-, 3 had

B 0 0 K il:ll [een gained by \,.lfingham, and gave hili
t -,-.- ;',":{' intellig c'noe oof' all their pr;cjc.t[s. That vi-

J5".' g';li;ant Miinifler imnll;diatccly il m:arted the difico-

vcries which he had nade to Ealizabeth; and witl-
out commilnicati;n the matter to any other ot
tlic Counlclorlrs, tihey agc(ed, in order to under-
Il.!nd the piot monr perl-cctly, to wait until it w.',
ile'nced into Ibmne ftbr- , a;nd brought near the
point of execution.

Thre .re AT l aft, Elizabeth tliought: it dangerous and
jc,.-zt ,

'd r d3

rifii. 1 criminal to expose her own life, and to tempt
AugJifl, pIrovidence any farther. Ballard, the priine

mover in the: whole conspiracy, was arre-sted. ITis
a.i!ci.iats, (dilfoncerted and struck witih allonifil-
inent, endeavoured to lave themselves by fligit.
Biut, withil a few days, all of them, except
Windlor, were seizcd in difrerent places of the
kinigdom, and committed to the Tower. Though
they had! undertaken the part, they wanted the
firmi and determined fi)irii of alfTafins; and, in-
fluilnce. lby fear or by hope, at once confiT'chd all
that tlhey knew. The indignation of the peol)e,
and tl.. ;i ii)patience to revenge such an execrable
coinbin.ition againlft tlle lifi of their Sovereiirn,
ha lenc.i d [licir trial, and all of thmcl fiullfered the

s'pt2. 0 . dic lil l

of traitors".

M.ri ''iiu-s far 1'lizabeth's condutit may be pro-
,,,lcd r nountcdt both prutdent andi laudable, nor can f1:c
...|,miit, bie accull : of' violating any; law of llumaniiity, or
i,, he cql_-
li'.rjny. of t aking ak ly })Crcaiu]tions b)eyond what wc're n1(c-

ccfllj ' lor (her O\Vn fa'tey. Butt a traegical feni.

* C.l!11. r t . ',i *;' i Ti','hl! 'o. i. . ,::,.

follu'ved,

followed, with regard to which posterity will pass B co K
a very ldiferent judgment. -

Trilr frantic zeal of a few ral young men ac-

counts ilfficiently for all the wild and wicked de-
{ir>Ti which they had forined. But this was not
the light in which :. ixabeth an(d her Ministers
cliof: to liace the conlhilracv. 'ihey winlied to
pc-('l'acdl tie nation, thatl .,abinlton and his aflb-
ci .t' lhoulld be confidcred merely as infl-ruments
c!nlsloyed( by thel Qelcen of Scots, the real though
icer-t author of lo many attempts against the life
of l:liz;abeit, andi the peace of her kingdoms.
lThey produced letters, wlich they ascribed to
lier, in support of this charge. Thelc, as they
gave out, had come into their hands by the fol-
lowing fiingular and miyfterious inethod of con-
veyance. (Gifford, on his return into England,
had been trufled by tome of tie exiles with
letters to Mary; but in order to make a trial of
his fi.eliry and addrels, they were only blank
pllpers made up in that form. These being safely
delivered by him, lie was afterwards employed
without farther scruple. Waltfnghamn having
found means to gain this man, lhe, by the per-
niffion of that Miniflter and the connivance of
Paulet, bribed a tradelfan in the neighbourhood
of Chartley, whither Mary had been conveyed,
who depolited the letters in a hole in the wall of
the callIe, covered with a loolf ltone. Thence
they were taken by tile Queen, and in the fame
manner her answers returned. All thele were
(:crried to Walsingham,, opened by him, decy-
pIhrcdc, fealed again lo dexterously that the fraud

L 4 could

B 0 0 K coCuld not be perceived, and then transmitted to

VII.
_I - tthe persons to whom they were directed. Two
)Jjb. letters to Babington, with several to Mendoza,

Paget, Englefeld, and the Englifl fugitives,
were procured by this artifice. It was given out,
that jn these letters Mary approved of the con-
fpiracy, and even of the affairination; that fle di-
reaced them to proceed with the utmoat circum-
fpection, and not to take arms until foreign auxi-
liaries were ready to join them; that she recom-
mended the Earl of Arundel, his brothers, and
the young Earl of Northumberland, as proper
persons to conduc& and to add reputation to their
enterprise; that she advised them, if poflible, to
excite at the fame time fomle commotion in Ire-
land; and above all, befouglht them to concert
with care the means of her own escape, suggesting
to them several expedients for that purpose.

Thr indig. ALL there circumstances were opened at the
nation "Es trial of the conspirators; and while the nation
The Elglitflh
sg.inn her was under the influence of thole terrors which the
on that ac-
toun., association had railed, and the late danger had

augmented, they were believed without hesitation
or inquiry, and spread a general alarm. Mary's
zeal for her religion was well known; and in that
age, examples of the violent aldt sanguinary fp.iric
which it inspired vwre numerous. All the ca-
bals againfl the peace of the kingdom for many
years had been carried on in her nalme; and it
nlow appears evidently, said the Engliff, that the
safety of the one .Queen is incompatible with that
of the other. Why then, added they, flould
the tranquillity of England be sacrificcd for the

il;
{

fake of a firanger? Why is a life so dear to the " °o K
nation exposed to the repeated alfaults of an ex-
afperated rival ? The cael ftuppofed in the affo- 5S6s
ciation has now happened, the sac-red person of
our Sovcreign has been threatened, and why
flould not an injured people execute that jufi
vengeance which they had vowed ?

No sentiments could be more agreeable than El;,ith

there to Elizabeth and( her Miniflers. They them- p1Old t
lilvcs had at firfle propagated them among the thirnofot

-C \ ) "" ^ exitrmiti¢*

people, and they now served both as an apology agliiR her.
and a motive for their proceeding to Lich extre-
mities againfl the Scottish Q(2een as they had
long meditated. The more numerous the injuries
were which Elizabeth had heaped on Mary, the
more she feared and hated that unhappy Queen,
and came at lall to be persuaded that there could
be no other security for her own life, but the
death of her rival. Burleigh and Walfinghanl
]had promoted lb zealously all her mieafures with
regard to Scottish affairs; and had adcd, with ib
little reserve, in opposition to Mary, that they
had reason to dread the most violent efea's of her
resentment, if ever fie should mount the thllone
of England. From this additional consideration
they endeavoured, with the utimofl: arneftneis,
to hinder an event bo fatal to themfelvcs, by con-
firming their Mistress's fear and harred of the
S I-otilh Q;eeIn.

MII:\N VI-IILE, Mary was guarded with unusual Trr do-

y igilance, and great care was taken to keep her ,'r'.'c"
ignorant of the discovery of the confpil;rai. Sir {'iZ.d.
4Ilold (iorgocs was iS ljat llent froil coil r to ac-

(qtI.int

C (I o K qcluaint licit both of it, ;and of tlc iimpultation wit
t ui-which ithe was loaded as accceiary to that crime;
J5;6' and he furpriedl her \itih the accounit iurli as-lte

;hadt got oil horfebackl to ride out along with her
k,:cc':')'-s. ilc was liruck with alloniifimcnt, andl
would 1iiav returl-ncd to her ;i );;rt!l(cntl, but flh
w as 1not pIrnltitted; anld in hcl al)icelcc, 3her pri-
vate clolL't was broke olien, 1cr cabinet and pa-

Cpers were se\ized, if:aled, a1il sent up to court.
i Tlr l)inici)pl dolmcelics too werCe arrefld, and
cton;l-llir'd to difl'rent llkeepers. Nat and Curile,
herl t.wo jiLcreltari, the one a native of lFrance,
tie otilr of Scotilad, were c.arried pr lnlers to
i.ondon. All the mloney in lher clufi ly, anounlt-
iiir LtO little mlore than two tho)lalnd poudls, w:is
lecurci-ed. And after leading hera about, for foiice
days, floil one gcntile an's hoult to anorlter, flh
was conveyed to I'othcringiay,r a Ilrol-o cafie in
N orth Laptonlii re '.
)l :!,rt.ts No fartl'er evidenc could now be exipe(!e

rn tl d ag aiI lN Vrai y, a nd not hilngl n'in: but to dc ci de
' r"dh- wilt filould be hcr f'ate. With re';ard to this,

Eliizabet;l, ; 1n(1 tlioleMinil lcrs in wlholm fle chiefly
confided, ftee c to have taken lheir rielb )liol; ) blt
there was ilill great varicty of l('etillcnts among
her other Counfillurs. Soime tliourglt it lifTicicil
to dilis ifs all Mary's attendanlts, alnd to keep Ihcr
under ftcll dcol ) rellraint, as wouIId cut off all )jol-
fibility of corrtilpoltdii'gi; with tlc c'Inc'iicC of t[lc
L:ilngtdolm ; andl as hler conliitutioll, broken by
lot)g conllinli lic'ilt, anlll hel r
l iirit (lcje 'ctd with 1f)

CL" 'i;L' Aijlnli, Nu, X\. Caiel. 5i7.

Inanyi

lilany cares, could not long support such an addi- B o0 K
ional load, the Q(2een and nation would lbon be -
teclivered fiom all their fears. But though it '5t '
iljight be easy to secure Mary's own person, it
:,'as mpofnible to diniinifhl the reverence which
the Roman Catholics had for her name, or to cx-
linruifhl the compassion with which tlhey viewed
her fuffcrings; while such fcntiments continued,
insurrections and invasions would never be want-
ing for her relief, and the only effct of any new
rigour would be to render tihee attempts more
frequent and more dangerous. For this reason
the expedient was rejeced.

A PUBLIc and legal trial, though the mot: un- D:tetmines

examlled , was judged the most: unexceptionable ° t"yhir
ietliod of proceeding; arn' it liad, at the fiame
time, a semblance of juflice, accompanied with
an air of dignity. It was in vain to fcarch the
:acient records for any statute or precedent to
juliify such an uncomnmon ftep, as the trial of a
forcign Prince, who had not entered the kingdom
in arms, but had fled thither for refuge. The
proceedings against her were founded on the aEt
of last Parliament, and by applying it in this
manner, the intention of those who had fiamed
that revere ilatute became more apparentq.

ILIZABErTH resolved that no circunmflance of

polil) or solemnity fliould be wanting, which
could render this transaCtion such as became the
dignity of' the perlon to be tried. She appointed,
hy a coinliflion under the great leal, forty per-

'q Carid. 519. Johns1 . I-lii. 113.

so 1S,

1n o o K sons, the nmolt illuflrious in the kingdom by their

I -^ birth or offices, together with five of the judges,
J5S6. to hear and decide this great cause. Many diffi-

culties were flarted by the lawyers about the name
and title by which Mary should be arraigned;
and while the essentials ofjuRice were so grossly
violated, the empty forms of it were the objcIts
of their care. They at length agreed that she
flould be styled "c Mary, daughter and heir of
" James V. late King of Scots, commonly called
( Quteen of Scots, and Dowager of France'."

AFTER the many indignities which flhe had

lately suffered, Mary could no longer doubt but
that her deftruEtion was determined. She ex-
peEted, every moment, to end her days by poison,
or by some of those fiecret means usually employed
against captive Princes. Left the malice of her
enemies, at the fame time that it deprived her of
life, flhould endeavour likewile to blast her re-
putation, flbe wrote to the Duke of Guile, and
vindicated herself, in the firongeft terms, from
the imputation of encouraging or of being accef-
tfry to the conlpiracy for aflallinating Elizabeth'.
In the solitude of her prilboi, the fIrange refolu-
tion of bringing her to a public trial had not
reached her ears, nor did the idea of any thing so
unprecedented, and so repugnant to regal Ma-
jcly, once enter into her thoughts.

rh. tt,;,I at ON the eleventh of Otober, the Commissioners
:, hli ii-

,appointed by Elizabeth arrived at Fotheringay.
Next morning they delivered a letter from their

Stryp¢, iii. ~362, Jcbb, ii. 283.

Sovereign

Sovereign to Mary, in which, after the bitterest B 10 K
reproaches and accusations, she informed her, -
that regard for the happiness of tle nation had, 5
at last, rendered it neccffary to make a public
inquiry into her conduct, and therefore required
her, as she had lived so long under the protetion
of the laws of England, to iubmit now to the
trial, which they ordained to be taken of her
crimes. Mary, though surprised at this meffge, Miry r-
was neither appalled at the danger, nor unmind- to plfid.n
fill of her own dignity. She protested, in the most
solemn manner, that she was innocent of the
crime laid to her charge, and had never counte-
nanced any attempt against the life of the Queen
of England; but, at the fame time, refuscd to
acknowledge the j uri fdiEtion of her commilfioners.

I came into the kingdom," laid fle, " an in-

"dependent Sovereign, to implore the Queen's
" afiftance, not to futjet mnyfelf to her authority.
" Nor is my spirit so broken by its past misfor-
"tunes, or so intimidated by present dangers, as
" to stoop to any thing unbecoming the Mjecftv
"of a crowned head, or that will disgrace tlie
" ancestors from whom I am descended, and the
" son to whom I ihall leave my throne. If I
"must be tried, Princes alone can be my Peers.
" The Queen of England's fubjcts, however
"noble their birth may be, are of a rank inferior
"to mine. Ever since my arrival in this king-
" dom, I have been confined as a priioner. Its
"laws never afforded me any protre&ion. I.ec
"them not now be perverted, in ordecr to t:.lc¢
"away my life."

r,

B OO K THE Commiffiioners employed arguments and

Vil. P
i^-k j intrcatics to overcome Mary's resolution. They

596-. even threatened to proceed accccordin to the forms

of law, and to pass sentence against her on ac-
count of her contumacy in refuting to plead; fil
perfifled, however, for two days to decline their
jurifdicion. An argument lied by Ilatton, the
Vice-Chamlberla.in, at lait prevailed. I-Te told
her, that, by avoiding a trial, fle injured her owni
reputration, and deprivled herfllf of the only op-
portunit)' of 1ttirng her innocence in a clear li ht;
and thac nothlingr would be more arOreeable t
them, or morc acceptIble to the Q(uen thci'
Miiltlefs, than to be convinced, by undoubted
evidence, that flie had bcn unjultly loaded with
foul aspersions.

cc.nrenti No wonder pretexts so plaulible flould impose
houver to. on the unwary Q1jeen, or that fnie, un.;fifted, at

that time, by any friend or counifllor, fiould not
be able to dete& and elude all the artifices of Eli-
zabeth's ablefl Minif'ers. In a ficuation equally
melan choly, and uCnder circuml-lanccs nearcly fimi-
lar, her Grandefn, Cliarles I. refilled, with the
utmofo firmness, to acklowledgc the usurped ju-
rifdiction of the -High Court of Juslice; and pol-
terity has approved his conlduct, as luitable to the
dignity of a King. If Mary was lcls constant in
her rcfolu tion, it lmufl be) imilputed lolcly to her
anxious desire of vindlicatings lier own honour.
o0. ,4. AT her appearance bcforc the Judges, who werc

feated in the great hall of the caflle, where they
received her with much ceremony, Tfle took care
to protcilt, tha:t, by condelclnding to hear and ro(

9 give

give an anw;ver to the accuifations whic!h fmou blc

D 0 K

brougRht a.'ainlsi her, 111e neither ackino .vledged --.---
rlte jimriidiction of the court, nor adlnitted of the Is'
validity and juliice of those acts by wuichl they
pretended to try her.

TrHE Chancellor, by a countcr-protcfla:ion, en-
deavoured to vindicate the authority of thle c)ourt.

TI-EN E"lizabeth's Attorney and Solicitor Th'lcr ..

opened the charge againlt her, with all the cir- gr.ili her.
cuiimfances of the late conspi)racy. Copies of
M.iry-'s letters to Mendoza, B abington, F.ng l iield,
and Paget were produced. Babington's collfcelion,
tholse of Ballard, Savage, and the other c:)nipira-
tors, togetlier with the declarations of Nau and
Curile her secretaries, were read, and the whole
ranged in the noft l)peciuus order, which the art
of the lawyers could devile, and heightened by;
every colour their eloquence could add.

/'lA RY liitened to their hlarangues attentively,

;ntd vitout emotion. But it the mentii,)n of the
1L;rl of Arunclel's name, who was then confined
in the Tower, lie broke (ut into this tender and
gecnerous exclamation: "Alas! how mucih has

the noble lloul' of H11oward fiiliered for my

V IrEN the (Qicen's cou ns cll !:;1d finii Ched, Mary l¢er lt-

llood up,

; and; with great Imagnanimitity, and e(qual

prelc'nce of mind, began ler tdefence. She 1e-
\\'.led the ulhappincfs of her own situation, that
alter a captivity of niinet'enI y.'.ars, durilng wi ich
ile had ILlfi 'rcd treatinent no IcIs cruel lltni
wnimerited, fle wa;s at lall: loadedl wvit!h an 1ar
cuiltion, which tenllded nuo only to iob ltIr of

Ii cr

B 00 K her right of fuccef'ion, and to deprive her of

c - life itself, but to tranfinit her name with in-
1!8i6 famy to future ages: That, without regarding

tile sacred rights of Sovereignty, she was now
ifubljecd to laws fi-amned against private persons;
thou!gh an anointed Qeen, commanded to ap.
pear brfore the tribunal of subjects; and, like a
coIilmmon criminal, her honour exposed to the pe-
tulant tongues of lawyers, capable of wrefringl
her words, and of nifieprefenting her actions:
That, even in this dishonourable situation, flle
was denied the privileges usually granted to cri-
minals, and obliged to undertake her own de-
fence, without the pretence of any fiiend with
whom to advise, without the aid of counsel, and
without the use of her own papers.

SHJE then proceeded to the particular articles in

the accusation. She absolutely denied any corre-
fpondcnce with Babington or Ballard: Copies
only of her pretended letters to them were pro-
duced; though nothing less than her hand-writ-
ing or subscription was sufficient to conviEt her
of fulch an odious crime: No proof could be
brought that thle letters were delivered into her
hands, or that any answer was returned by her
clirction: 'The confefflons of wretches condemned
and executed for such a detcftable action, were of
li ttle weight; fear or hope might extort from them
m-any tlings iicoiilifl-ent with truth, nor ought
the honour of a Q(iccn to be slained by such vile
teflimony. The declaration of her secretaries was
not more coiiclufive: Promises and threats might
cafily overconme the resolution of two strangers;

in

in order to screen themselves, they might throw B 0o K
the blame on her; but they could discover nothing
to her prejudice, without violating, in the sirs ,5t6.
place, the oath of fidelity which they had sworn
to her; and their perjury, in one instance, ren-
dered them unworthy of credit in another: The
lecters to the Spanish AmbafiSdor were either no-
tl!ing more than copies, or contained only what
was perfetly innocent: " I have often," con-
tiued fle, " made such efforts for the recovery

o of my liberty, as are natural to a human crea-
"ture. Convinced, by the fad experience of ft
" many years, that it was vain to expect it from

the justice or generosity of the Queen of Eng-
' land, I have frequently solicited foreign Princes,

and called upon all Iny friends to employ their
whole interest for my relief. I have, likewise,
endeavoured to procure for the Englith Catho-
"lics tome mitigation of the rigour with which
"they are now treated; and if I could hope, by

my death, to deliver them fiom opprefflon, I
" an willing to die for their fake. I wish, how-

ever, to imitate the example of Esther, not of
" Judith, and would rather make intercession for
" my people, than flied the blood of the meanest
"creature, in order to save them. I have often
"checked the intemperate zeal of my adherents,
"when either the severity of their own perse-
"cutions, or indignation at the unheard-of in-
"juries which I have endured, were apt to pre-
" cipitate them into violent councils. I have
"even warned the Q2ecn of dangers to which
"there harlh proceedings expoifd herself. And

Vol,. IIo M " wor

B1 0O0 K Ic worn out, as I now am, with cares and sus-

VII.

ferings, the proflpe& of a Crown is not so in-
6- viting, that I fllould ruin my foul in order to

" obtain it. I am no firanger to the feelings of

lhumalnity, nor unacquainted with the duties of

" reli!_ion, and abhor the detcilable crime of
c' af.l!nination, as equally repugnant to both.
tC And, if ever I have given confcnt by ny
" words, or even by my thoughts, to any at-

teimpt againil the life of the Qulcen of 1'ng-

( land, far from declininig the judgment of inen,
(' I lhall not even pray for the mercy of God'."

Two difierent days did Mary appear before the

Judges, and in every part of her behaviour main-
tained the magnanimity of a Queen, tempered
with the gentleness and modesty of a woman.

Srntrncca. TlaE Commifnioners, by Elizabeth's express
Ocob, ,',. command, adjourned, without pronouncing any

sentence, to the Star-Chamber in Veflminfter.
When assembled in that place, Nau and Curie
were brought into court, and confirmed their
former declaration upon oath ; and after review-
?ng all their proceedings, the CommifTioners
unanimously declared Mary " To be accefllry
sc to Babington's conspiracy, and to have inia.
(C gincd diverse matters, tending to the hurt,
"c death, and destruction of Elizabeth, contrary
( to the express words of the statute, made for
( the security of the Queen's life"."

,irtiJi-. IT is no ealy matter to determine whether the
wtali.c injultice in appointing this trial, or the irrcgu-

larity in condudling it, were greatefl and molt

Ca;md. 5z2, &c. " Id. 525.

flagrant.

fi-grant. By what right did Elizabeth claim au- nB ° K.
thoricy over an independent Queen? Was Mary
bound to comply with the laws of a foreign 156'
kingdomx? H-low could the subjects of another
I'rince become her judges? or if such an insult
on royalty were allowed, ought not the common
forms of jutlice to have been obifervcd ? If the
telt:iiony of Babington and his aflociates were
Jo explicit, why did not Elizabeth fi)pre them
for a few weeks, and, by confionting them with
MlIary, overwhelm her with the full conviction of
lher crimes ? Nau and Curie were both alive,
\wherefore did not they appear at Fotheringay,
and for what reason were they produced in the
Surr-Chamber, where Mary was not present to
hear what they deposed? Was this fuij)icious
evidence enough to condemn a Queen? Ought
the meanest criminal to have been found guilty
upon such feeble and inconclusive proofs?

Ir was not, however, on the evidence pro-

duced at her trial, that the ifntence agailnf
Mary was founded. That served as a pretence to
iullify, but was not the cause of the violent steps
taken by Elizabeth and her Ministers towards her
dcfl.ruaion; and was employed to give some ap-
pearance of juitice to what was the offspring of
icaloufy and fear. The nation, blinded with re-
lcntment against Mary, and solicitous to secure
the life of its own Sovereign from every danger,
oblcrved no irregularities in the proceedings, and
attended to no defeecs in the proof, but grasped
at suspicions and probabilities, as if they had
been irrefragable dcmonfirations.

M 2 TIIE

BO ( K Ti-HE parliament met a few days after sentence

»-- was pronounced againtf Mary. In that illustrious

Th' 6;- assembly more temper and discernment than are
,,nt con- to bc found ainong the prople, might have been

firm the Ca r
ienelnc, expcqcd. Both L.ords and Commons, however,

were equally under tle dominion of popular pre-
judices and paflions, and the fame cxceffeS of
zeal or of fear, which prevailed in the nation,
are apparent in all their proceedings. They en-
tered with impatience upon an enquiry into the
conspiracy, and the danger which threatened the
Queen's life as well as the peace of the kingdom.
All the papers which had been produced at
FIotheringay, were laid before them; and after
many violent invesives againfl the Queen of
Scots, both Hloufes, unanimously, ratified the
proceedings of the Commiliioners by whom she
had been tried, and declared the sentence againn:

.,.',!'fld her to be just and well founded. Not satisfied
::lo, t-" with this, they presented a joint address to the

QOteen, beseeching her, as she regarded her own
safety, the preservation of the Protef-ant religion,
the welfare and wishes of her people, to publish
the sentence; and without farther delay to infli&
on a rival, no less irreclaimable than dangerous,
the puniiiilment which she had Inerited by ol many
crimes. This request, dicated by fears unworthy
of that grelat Ancf bly, was enforced by reasons
llill more unworthy. They were drawn not from
juLilic, but from conveniency. The niofl rigorous
conl-illciicntr, it was pretended, could not curb
Mary's intriguing spirit her address was found,
by lung elxperience, to be an overnmatch for the

vigilance

vigilance and jealousy of all her keepers: The B 0 0 K
ieverelt penal lavs could not reflrain her ad- ---.-
hcrents, who, while they believed her perSon to :s56'
be tlcred, would delfpite any danger to which
themselves alone were exposcd: Several foreign
Princes were ready to second their atermpts, and
uwaited only a proper opportunity for invadin g the
kiingdom, and afierting the Scottill Queen's title
to the Crown. Her life, they contended, was,
for tliefe reasons, incompatible with Elizabeth's
lftFcy; and if she were fparled out of a false cle-
mency, the Qu.een's person, the religion and liber-
ties of the kingdom, could not be one moment
i;cure. Necellity required that s(he should be fa-
crificed in order to preserve these; and to prove
this sacrifice to be no lefsjufi than neceTfary, fe-
veral examples in history were produced, and
many texts of scripture quoted; but both the one
and the other were misapplied, and distorted from
their true meaning.

NOTHING, however, could be more acceptable Eliz.beth',

to Elizabeth, than an address in this fi-ain. It dilnulo.
extricated her out of a situation extremely embar-
rafling; and without depriving her of the power
of fl)aring, it enabled her to punifl her rival with
lets appearance of blame. If' fe chore the for-
mer, the whole honour would redound to her owe
clemency. If ile determined on the latter, what-
ever was rigorous might now seem to be extorted
by the solicitations of her people, rather than to
flow from her own inclination. 1-ler answer, how-
ever, was in a (tyle which she often used, ambi-
guous and evasive, unn4er the appearance of open..

'M 3 nfrs

B 0 0 K ness and candour; ful of such profcffions of rc-

v".

gard for her people, as served to heighten theil
i j^6. loyalty; of such complaints of Mary's ingratitude,

as were calculated to excite their indignation;
and of fulch insinuations that her own life was in
danger, as could not fail to keep alive their fears.
In the cnd, fle bl-ought them to save her the
infamy and the pain of delivering up a Quccn,
her nearclt kin lwvolman, to puniflien t; and to
confidcr whether it might not fRill be possible to
provide for the public security, without forcing
her to imbrue her hands in royal blood.

TfiE true meaningof this reply was easily under-

flood. The Lords and Commons renewed their
forimer request, with additional importunity, which
was far from being either unexpecaed or offensive.
Elizabeth did not return any answer more explicit;
and having obtained such a public fanrion of her
proceedings, there was no longer any reason for
protrac'ling this scene of diflmnulation; there was
even Ibme canger that her feigned difficulties
Inilt at tlalt be treated as real ones; the therefore
adjouined the parliament, and reserved in her own
hands the file disposal of her rival's fate".
F,.nncin- AL.L tie Princes in Europe observed the pro-

''i ,,n ccedings againfti Mary with astonishment and hor-

ur'' "Us ror; and even ilenry III. notwithstanding his

known aversion to the hou fe of Gu il, was obliged
to intcrpole in her behalf, and to appear in de-
fence of' the common rights of royalty. Aube-
fii: liis relident Anibaffador, and Bellievre, who

" C(;ilni. 526. D'Ewes, 375.

was

was Cent with an extraordinary commiifion to the B 00 K
f;ui:ic purpose, interceded for Mary with great '--.--.

'cirance of warnth. They employed all the No156'.

;ariimcnts whichI the cause naturally suggested;
the'y pleaded from justice, from generoficy, and
,humlanity; they intermingled reproaches and
threats. But to all there Elizabeth continued
deaif and inexorable; and having received some
i!ntilmation of -Ienry's real unconcern about the
fate of the Scottish Queen, and knowing his
antipathy to all the race of Guise, flhe trusted,
that these loud remonstrances would be followed
by no violent refentmenty.

SHE paid no greater regard to the solicitations Jmes en-

1- 1 r- -n T7- 1 * I 1 J deavosU~ to

of the Scottish King, which, as they were urged ravehismo
with greater sincerity, merited more attention. ther's lif
Though her commissioners had been extremely
careful to sooth James, by publiffing a declara-
tion that their sentence against Mary did, in no
degree, derogate from his honour, or invalidate
any title which he formerly possessed ; he beheld
the indignities to which his mother had been ex-
posed, with filial concern, and with the sentiments
which became a King, The pride of the Scottifli
nation was routed, by the insult offered to the
blood of their Monarchs, and called upon him to
employ the most vigorous efforts, in order to
prevent or to revenge the Queen's death.

AT fitft, he could hardly believe that Elizabeth

would venture upon an ation so unprecedented,
which tended so visibly to render the persons of

Y Carmd. 53 1

M + Princes

B O 0 K Princes less sacred in the eves of the people, arn,

-.
-- which degraded the regal dignity, of which, at
35S° other times, flhe was so remarkably jealous. But

as soon as the extraordinary fleps which Ihe took
difcoverecd her intention, he dispatched Sir Wil-
liam Keith to London; who, together with
Douglas his Ambassador in ordinary, remon-
firated, in the strongest terms, against the in-
jury done to an independent QjQecn, in subject-
ing her to be tried like a private person, and by
laws to which she oed no obedience; and be-
fought Elizabeth not to add to this iljury, by
suffering a sentence unjuff in itself, as well as
dishonourable to the King of Scots, to be put
into execution.

ELIZABETH returning no answer to these re-

monfirances of his ambaflador, James wrote to
her with his own hand, complaining in the bitterest
terms of ler conduct, not without threats that
both his duty and his honour would oblige him to
renounce her fiicnlfhip, and to act as became a
Ion when called to ervenie his mother's wrongs'.
At the tim; l time he afnembled the nobles, who
promlif(l to Itand by him in Ib good a cause. He
app!)intc:d am balTadors to France, Spain, and Dcn-
m1ark, in oridlcr to implore the aid of thele courts;
and took ocilcr Ileps towards executing his threats
with viour. IThe high llrain of his letter en-
ragedl Elizabeth to such a degree, that Tfle was
ready to dilinifs his ambafllalorswitliout any reply.
But his preparations alarmed and embarranfed her

;i'cC Aippicnliix, 'o. XVI. Mtiltlin, 573, &c. BUicli.
....11. i.j ,t, l. irc1l. M CXIc . i. 52.

Minill.rs,

Ministers, and at their intreaty fle returned a soft B O O K
and evasive answer, promising to lilten to any -,
overture from the King, that tended to his mo- '5S6.
ther's safety; and to fulfpend the execution of the
lfntence, until the arrival of new ambassadors
firom Scotland b.

IMnANWIHILI, she commanded the sentence Decem.6.

agarinl Mlary to be publifhied, and forgot not to Then.¢i
irform the people, that this was extorted firom her Mary pub-
by tlhe repeated intreaty of both houses of Plarlia-
ment. At the fame time fle dispatched Lord
huckhurtl and Beale to acquaint Mary with the
sentence, and how importunately the nation de-
manded the execution of it; and though fie had
not hitherto yielded to these solicitations, she
advised her to prepare for an event which might
become necessary for securing the Proteliant reli-
gion, as well as quieting the minds of the people.
Mary received the message not only without fymp-
toms of fear, but with expreflions of triumph.
" No wonder, faild the, the English fiould now

thirlt for the blood of a foreign Prince, they

" have often offired violence to their own Mo-
"narchs. But after lb many fuflerings, death
" comes to me as a welcome deliverer. I am

proud to think that my life is deemed of im-

"portance to the Catholic religion, and as a
" martyr for it I am now willing to die'."

AFTER the publication of the sentence, Mary Sii,, trat.

was fIripped of' every remaining mark of royalty. t withthe
Thle canopy of Irate in her apartment was pulled g""ur
down; Pau let entered her chamiber, and ap-

': lw. .1. CA.tl. iv. 5 ctiC C. ed. jz2. Jcli. , 291.

proached

B 0O K proached her person without any ceremony; and

VII.

.--.-.i een appeared covered in her presence. Shocked
,586. with these indignities, and offended at this grots

familiarity, to which she had never been accuf-
Decem. i9. tomed, Mary once more complained to Elizabeth;

and at the filme time, as her last requef-, intreated
that she would permit her servants to carry her
dead body into France, to be laid among her an-
ceftors in hallowed ground that some of her
domestics might be present at her death, to be;i
witness of' her innocence, and firm adherence to
the Catholic faith; that all her servants might
be suffered to leave the kingdom, and to enjoy
those finall legacies which she flould bestow on
them, as testimonies of her affecion; and that,
in the mean time, her almoner, or some other
Catholic Priest, might be allowed to attend her,
and to assist her in preparing for an eternal world.
She befcught her, in the name of J'fius, by the
foul and memory of 1Ienry VII. their common
progenitor, by their near conianguinity, and the
royal dignity with which they were both inverted,
to gratify her in these particulars, and to indulge
her lb far as to signify her compliance by a letter
under her own hand. Whether Mary's letter was
ever delivered to Elizabeth is uncertain. No
answer was returned, and no regard paid to her
rcqucfls. She was ofl'ired a Proteflant Bishop or
Dean to attend her. Themn ihe rejeted, and
without any clergyman to direct her devotions,
flic prepared, in great tranquillity, for the ap-
proach of death, which ihe now believed to be at
no great dillance ,.

d C;IainL 528. Jcbb, ii. 295.

J AMES,

JAMES, without losing a moment, sent new am- B 0 0 K

VII.

iafladors to London. These were the Master of --
Gray, and Sir Robert Mclvil. In order to remove J,,1,r-
Elizabeth's fears, they offered that their Master "-ih,'r1.
would become bound that no conspiracy should be hr behalf.

january s.

undertaken against her person, or the peace of the
kingdlom, with Mary's content; and for the faith-
ful performance of this, would deliver some of
the most considerable of the Scottish nobles as
hoflages. If this were not thought sufficient, they
proposed that Mary should resign all her rights
and pretensions to her son, from whom nothing
injurious to the Protestant religion, or inconfitent
with Elizabeth's safety, could be feared. The
former proposal Elizabeth reje&ed as insecure;
the latter, as dangerous. The Ambassadors were
then inftrusted to talk in a higher tone; and Mel-
vil executed the commission with fidelity and with
zeal. But Gray, with his usual perfidy, deceived
his Malter, who trusted him with a negotiation of
so much importance, and betrayed the Queen
whom he was employed to save. He encouraged
and urged Elizabeth to execute the sentence against
her rival. -le often repeated the old proverbial
lentence, " The dead cannot bite." And what-
ever should happen, he undertook to pacify the
King's rage, or at least to prevent any violent
elfects of his resentment".

ELIZABETH, meanwhile, discovered all the Elizateth'

f)yniptoms of the most violent agitation and dif- '",i :,.^d
quietude of mind. She flunned society, she was 'ti'"

Spotfw. 352. Murdin, 568. See Appcnd. No. XVII.

ofteR

B 00 K often found in a melancholy and muting pof{ure,
.-.v-' and repeating with much emphasis these fentenccs

I587' which she borrowed from so;ne of the devices then

in vogue; dutfer aut feri; neferiare, fcri. Much,
no doubt, of this apparent uneasiness must be im-
puted to dissimulation; itwas impolinble, however,
that a Princess, naturally so caltious as Elizabeth,
should venture on an action, which might expohc
her memory to infamy, and her life and kingdom
to danger, without refleting deeply, and hesitating
long. The people waited her determination in sus-
penfe and anxiety; and left their fear or their zeal
ihould subside, rumours of danger were artfully
invented, and propagated with the utmost indu ftry;
Aubefpine, the French Ambassador, was accufel
of having suborned an affafin to murder the
Queen. The Spanifl fleet was said by some to be
alreadyarrived at Milford-haven. Others affirmed
that the Duke of Guise had landed with a strong
army in Suffex. Now, it was reported that the
Northern counties were up in arms; next day, that
the Scots had entered England with all theirforces;
and a conspiracy, it was whispered, was on foot
for seizing the Queen, and burning the city. The
panic grewevery day more violent; and the people,
aflonifhed and enraged, called for the execution
of the sentence againt Mary, as the only thing
which could restore tranquillity to tle kingdoln'

Warrant for WHILE these sentiments prevailed among her
MyJn',tln subjects, Elizabeth thought Ihe might safely ven-
d' ture to ltrike the blow, which fie had so long mc-
Fcbrual(' h,

f C n.tll. 33, 534.

dlitatcd.

(litated. She commanded Davison, one of the fe- 1n o o K

Vii.

cretaries of fate, to bring to her the fatal warrant; -
:intl her behaviour on that occasion plainly ffiewcd 15S7.
thlat it is not to humanity that we nmull ascribe
her forbearance hitherto. At the very moment fie
was signing the writ which gave up a woman,
:1 Queen, and her own nearefl relation, into the
lhandls of the executioner, lie was capable of jefl:-
ing. " Go, lays she to Davison, and tell Walfing-
hain what I have now done, though I am afraid he
will die for grief when he hears it." Her chief
anxiety was how to secure the advantages which
would arire from Mary's death, without appearing
to have given her content to a deed so odious.
She often hinted to Paulct and Drury, as well as
to some other courtiers, that now was the time
to discover the sincerity of their concern for her
fifety, and that file expected their zeal would ex-
tricate her out of her preelnt perplexity. But
they were wife enough to seem not to understand
her meaning. Even after the warrant was signed,
lhe commanded a letter to be written to Paulet,
in leTs ambiguous terms, complaining of his re-
miifnefs in sparing so long the life of her capital
enclny, and begging him to remember at last
whalt was incumbent on himl as an affetionate
fulject, as well as what lie was bound to do by
the oath of af'ociation, and to deliver his Sove-
reign froim continual star and danger, by fiort-
ening the days of his priloner. Paulet, though
rigorous and harfl, and often brutal in the dilf
chlrge of what he tloughlt his dury, as M:'I 's
keeper, was nevcriiclcls ;i imn ol honI':: I;I I .:.tt-

C : ', !/,

O O K tegrity. He rejected the proposal with disdain;
L _ ~and lamenting that he ihould ever have bnll
I5s7. deemed ci)apable of acting the part of an afflain,

he declared that the Qieen might dispose of his
life at her pleasure, but that he would never stain
his own honour, nor leave an everlasting mark
of infamy on his posterity, by lending his hand to
perpetrate so foul a crime. On the receipt of this
answer, Elizabeth became extremely peevifl; anri
calling him a dailty and prec, c fell/ow, who would
promise much, but perform nothing, fie propol'cl
to employ one Wingfield, who had both courage
and inclination to strike the blBow. But Davison
renonftrating againfi this, as a deed dillonotu-able
in itrtlf, arid of dangerous example, the again
declared her intention that the sentence pro-
nounced by the commissioners should be executed
according to law; and as she had already signed
the warrant, file begged that no farther applica-
tion might be made to her on that head. By
this the privy counsellors thought themselves
fufliciently authorised to proceed; and promnpted,
as they pretended, by zeal for the Qucen's safety,
or instigated, as is more probable, by the appre-
henfion of the danger to which they would thein-
fclves be exposed, if the life of the Quieen of Scots
were spared, they assembled in the Council Cham-
ber; and, by a letter under all their hands, em-
powered the arl]s of Slrewfl)ury and Kent, to-
gether with the I ligl Sheriff of the county, to Ice
she Ilntence put in execution '.

*: .,1i! i;. B:'iLt:i, A, itcl Dw'ifosn.
:' C.t 3
li. . 3!^ 5trvy c, iii. 361. 36('

ON

ON Tuesday dhe seventh of February, the two B o o

Earls arrived at Fotheringay, and demanded ac- ..-,-
ceis to the ueccn, read in her presence the war- ,,M''sb7e
rant for execution, and required her to prepare hivi.ur at
to dic next morning. Mary heard them to the
end without emotion, and crossing herself in the
name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost, " That foul," said fle, " is not
worthy the joys of Heaven, which repines because
the body must endure the stroke of the executi-
oner; and though I did not expe& that the Queen
of England would set the first example of violat-
ing the sacred person of a Sovereign Prince, I
willingly submit to that which Providence has
decreed to be my lot." And laying her hand on
a Bible, which happened to be near her-, she so-
lemnly protested that she was innocent of that
conspiracy which Babington had carried on againif
Elizabeth's lifei. She then mentioned the re-
quests contained in her letter to Elizabeth, but
obtained no fatisfaftory answer. She entreated
with particular earnestness, that now in her Lift
moments her Almoner might be suffered to attend
her, and that she might enjoy the consolation of
thole pious inl-itutions prcfcribced by her religion.
Even this favour, which is ulially granted to the
vilest criminal, was absolutely denied.

H-ER attendants, during this conversation, were

bathed in tears, and though overawed by the pre-
fence of the two Earls, with ldificulty suppresSid
their anguifi; but no looner did Kent and Shlcwf-

1 Jcbb, ii. 301.

3 [)i.ry

B O0 K bury withdraw, than they ran to rlrlr- Mifiref-,
i_, -- and burst o',r irto the mull paI.v,;i...st exprflions

'j"7. of tenderr,- :' ', Mary, however, not

only retained perfe&t compu, .,;- of mind herself,
but endeavoured to moderate their excelfive grief;
and falling on her knees, wi.it all her domcflics
round her, she thanked IHeaven that her sufferings
were now io near an en,, and prayed that she
milght be enabled to endure what fill remained
with decency an1d ihll fortitude. The greater
part of the evening fle employed in fettling her
worldly aftairs. She wrote her te(lament with
her own hand. Hter money, her jewels, and her
clothes, fie difiributed among her iervants, ac-
cording to their rank or merit. She wrote a
short letter to the King of France, and another
to the Duke of Guile, full of tender but magna-
nimous fentiients, and rtcommended her foul to
their prayers, and her afsi'cted servants to their
protection. At supper, she eat temperately, as
usual, and converted not only with eale, but with
cheecrfilne;s; she drank to every one of her ser-
vanrs, and alkeld their Forgiveneles if ever ihe had
failk(l in any parto fherdity towards them. At her
wonted time hie v ient to bed, and slept calmly .1
few hours. F.arly in the morning fie retired
into her clotn,, ;:dl enlployed a considerable
timne in devotion. At eight o'clock the IIigh
SheriT'and his officers enitered her chamber, and
foild lher 11ill kneeling at the altar. She itmmie-
iliarely finlr.cd ulp, antd wvirh a majncltic mien, and
.a coiunten llire uil l1i inayed(, arnd even cheerful,
advaqnced towards the place of execution, leaning.;

911i

on! t-wo of Pautlet's attendants. She was dressed B O K
in a mourning habit, but with an elegance and -.- -
il]endlour which she had long laid aside, except
on a f fte fival days. An A/gnl s Dei hung by a
lnomrantder chain at her neck,; her beads at her
iirdie; and in her hand file carrlied a crucifix of
vo-ry. At the bottom of the flai:s the two Saris,
attended by levcrall gentlemen from tcle neig h-
oluringl counties, received her; and there Sir
A ndrelw iMelvil, the Mailer of her Houfhold, who
hiad been lecluded l for nme w.eels from1 her pre-
in ce, was pernlitted to take his lafl: farewel. At
r',e fight of a Miflrels whom lie tenderly loved, in
i:'h1 a i u:.ation, le melted into tears; and as he
V,.as bewailing lier condition, and complaininng of
his owvn hard fate in being appointed to carry the
a:ccount of fuich a mournful event into Scotland,
'rIirv replied, "' Weep nor, good Melvil, there is
,t present greater caul'e for rejoicing. Thou fnalt
tiiis day fee Mary Stewart delivered fiom all her
'irel;, and fuich an end put to her tedious filfTr-
ings, as fie has long expecEed. Bear witnels that
I die conllant in mly religion; filr in mly fidelity
towlards Scotland; and unchanged in mly aafI(cl ion
to l'rance. Commend me to my ion. Tell hlim
I have done nothing il jurious to his lkingdo)m, to
his honour, or to his rights ; and God forgive all
!liofc who have thiridll , without cause, for my
!.loo(d. "

WVITHrl mnucI difleiculty, and after many ilnrrca-

lids, she prevailed on the two F'arls to allow Mecl-
vil, together with three of hCIr men fervInts, alnd
two of her maidss, to attend her to the i:a;lold. Ir

VOL. II, N w;as

B o was i

t,
c'c ;cdl in the lilue hall where she had been

VI.
,..- trllited, railed a little above the floor, and covered,

5 as v. al chair, the cuflion, and block, with
bla.ik clolth. M'ary mounted the lieps with ala-
crity, beheld all this apparatus of death with an
unaltered colunrntlncc, andl signing herlelf witil
the crol-, flie : o.

t down in the chair. Beale read tic

V-arrant for execution \wilt a loud voice, to which
flie ]iltened with a carelel, air, and like one occu-
pied in other thoughts. lThen the Dean of Pc-
te-rborour'll began a devout dir-ourfe, f;itable to
her lprefilnt condition, and ofycred up prayers to
Itclveon in her behalf; but file declared that she
could not in conscience hearken to the one, nor
join with the other; and kneeling down, repeated
a Latin prayer. When the Dean had finished his
devotions, fie, with an audible voice, and in the
Englith tongue, recommended unto God the as-
flictd tatre of the Church, and prayed for profpe-
rity to her lbn, and for a long life and peaceable
reign to 'lizabeth. She declared that she hoped
for mercy onlv tliirou)llh tihc deati of C'hril}, at the
foot of w\lolse illlln Ihe now willingly thed her
blood; tand lifting up, and kiling tile cr!ci.ix, l;e
tlhus addrellcd it, "' As tlih armls, 0 Tehis, were
Cetendedl on the Cross; lo wit'l the outlirct hrd
arniis of thv mercy receive me, and for(iv;c ;'v
tins."

Sinle then lrepared for the block, by takin; o'

her veil, and uppl r garments; and one of the ex-
ecuitoners rudely endeavouring to allillt, she gently
chclickd him, lind , wdiid, ith a finile, that lhe had
not been accullomcd to undrels before lo many

spCcdttorS j

fi;;ct.ctors, nor to be Ikrved by such valets. Wit;h IB o, I
c.tin but undaunted fortitude, she laid her neck l---.-
in tie block, and while one executioner held her
hands, the other, at the second stroke, cut off her
/le.;d, which falling out of its attire, discovered her
lailr already grown quite grey with cares and for-
rows. The executioner held it up still ftreamnin!
v iilh blood, and the Dean crying out, " So perilh
ill Queen Elizabeth's enemies," the Earl of Kent
alone aniwered Amen. The reit of the spectators
continued silent, and drowned in tears; being in-
capr ble, at that moment, of any other fentilnents
but those of pity or admiration.

SuCH was the tragical death of Mary Queen of s-.;n ..,

Scots, after a life of forty-four years and two ¢' C-rl'
months, almost nineteen years of which she paired her.
in captivity. The political parties which were
formed in the kingdom, during her reign, have
ilblifted, under various denominations, ever since
tlait time. The rancour, with which they were at
fir:t animated, hath descended to succeeding ages,
aidi their prejudices, as well as their rage, have
been perpetuated, and even augmented. Among
iiltrians, who were under the dominion of all
t:.ele passions, and who have either ascribed to her
everv virtuous and amiable quality, or have im-
puted to her all the vices, of which the human
heart is susceptible, we search in vain for Mary's
real character. She neither merited the exag-
gerated praises of the one, nor the undiftinguifhing
cenlifre of the other.

C' cmdJ.554. Spotlw. 355. JcbL, ii. 3j0. Strypc, iii.383.
- - 'ppiiNdix, No. XVIII.

'N; To

O K To all the charms of beauty, and the utmof
vI.

L _- I
- elegance of external form, fle added those accom-

,Hcj ti pliflments, which render their imprefflon irrcfif.-

racr. ible. Polite, affable,
as insinuating, sprightly, and ca-

pable of speaking and of writing with equal ease
and dignity. Sudden, however, and violent in all
her attachments; becaulc her heart was warm and
unfufpicious. Impatient of contradiction; because
(he had been accutlomed from her infancy to be
treated as a Qleen. No flranger, on some occa-
lions, to difimulation; which, in that perfidious
court where she received her education, was rec-
koned among the necessary arts of government.
Not insensible of flattery, or unconscious of that
pleasure, with which alimot every woman beholds
the influence of her own beauty. Formed with
the qualities which we love, not with the talents
that we admire; she was an agreeable woman, ra-
ther than an illultrious Queen. The vivacity of
her spirit not futficiently tempered with foun(l
judgment, and the warmth of her heart, whichl
was not, at all times, under the restraint of
discretion, betrayed her both into errors, and
into crimes. To fay that fle was always unfor-
tunate, will not account for that long and alimofl
uninterrupted fuccefion of calamities which be-
fcl her; we mull- likewise add, that the was often
imprudent. Her palffon for Darnly was rash,
youthful, and exceftlve; and though the fudlden
transition to the opposite extreme was the natural
effect of her ill-requited love, and of his ingrati-
tude, insolence, and brutality; yet neither thele,
nor Bothwell's artful address and important ser-

viceC,

vices, can justify her attachmient to that noble- R °0 K
man. Even the manners of the age, licentious -
as they were, are no apology for this unhappy '53s'
i;L!Eion; nor can they induce us to look on that
ur igical and infamous fccne which followed upon
it with less abhorrence. Humanity will draw a
veil over this part of her character which it can-
not approve, and may, perhaps, prompt toime to
iinlute some of her aCtions to her situation, more
than to her dispositions; and to lament the un-
h:ppinefs of the former, rather than accuse the
perverfenels of the latter. Mary's sufferings ex-
ceed, both in degree and in duration, thole tra-
(,ical diliteffes which fancy has feigned to excite
furrow and comminiration; and while we survey
them, we are apt altogether to forget her frailties,
we think of her faults with less indignation, and
approve of our tears, as if they were fibed for a
person who had attained much nearer to pure
virtue.

WITH regard to tie QiLeen's person, a circum-
ilance not to be omitted in writing the hifiory of
a female reign, all contemporary authors agree in
a!cribing to Mary the utmnof: bcauty of counte-
nance, and elegance of flape, of which ihe human
form is capable. IHer hair was black, though,
.iccording to the fafhiion of that age, ihe frequently
wore borrowed lockcs, and of difflernt colours.
1 lcr eyes were a dark grey; her complexion was
exquisitely fine; and her hands and arms remnark-
ably delicate, both as to lial)e and colour. H-er
lltature was of an height that rose to the niajeltic.
Slhe danced, lhe walked, and rode with equal

N 3 grace,

0 K rCrace. Her taste for music was jull, and Ihe bothi
V ,

r -o
,--,- lulng and played upon the lute with uncommon

7')7. fskill. Towards the end of her life, long confine-

ment, and the coldness of the houfcs in which she
had been imprisoned, brought on a rheumatifil,
which often deprived her of the ufc of her limbs.
No man, fays Brantome, ever beheld her person
without admiration and love, or will read lhe
hittory without lbrrow.

NONE of her women were fuffRred to come near

her dead body, which was carried into a room ad-
joining to the place of execution, where it lay, fur
jbine days, covered with a coarle cloth torn from nt
billiard table. The block, the fcafllold, the aplro:s
of the executioners, and every thing flalind with
her blood, were reduced to ashes. Not long afttr,
lIlizabeth appointed her body to be buried in tlI
Cathedral of Peterborough with royal magnifi-
cence. But tlis vulgar artifice was employed in
vaili; the pageantry of a pompous funeral didl
not efface the meimory of those injuries which
laid Mary iln Ler grave. James, soon after his
accefion to the English throne, ordered her body
to be removed to Wefl-infter-abbey, and to be
depolited among the Monarchs of England.
F:l: hth FLIZAETHI-t afFctl-ed to receive the accounts of

1,*llt1t',l- Mary's death with the mofl violent emotions of
' .caTl. furprile and of concern. Sighs, tears, lamenta-

tions and mourning, were all employed to difliday
the reality and greatness of her sorrow. Evidelnt
marks of difiiniulation and artifice may be traced
through every period of E.lizabeth's proceedings
againfll the life of the Scottif Qieen. The con,-

8 1mIilETon

mifRion for bringing Mary to a public trial was B

1 3 K

;Iceingly extorted fiom her by the intreaties of --,.
her privy counsellors. She delayed publifl-in g 5g7'
tlie sentence against her till fihe was twice tolicirte
by both I-Ioules of Parliament. Nor did fle
sign the warrant for execution without the utimnon
apparent reluctance. One scene more of the
boldest and -moni folemin deceit remained to be
exhibited. She undertook to make the world
believe that Mary had been put to (leath without
her knowledge, and against her will. Davison,
who neither fufpectedl her intention, nor his own
danger, was her inflrumcnt in carrying on this
artifice, and fell a victim to it.

IT was his duty, as Secretary of State, to lay

before her the warrant for execution, in order to
be signed; and, by her command, he carried it
to the Great Seal. She pretended, however, that
fie had charged him not to communicate what
hec had done to any perlon, nor to susser the war-
rant to go out of his hands, without her cxplrcl
permission; that, in contempt of this olcrde, lie
had not only revealed the matter to ievcr,l of her
Minifiers, but had, in concert with them, alfneii-
bled her Privy Counsellors, by whom, without
her conlcnt or knowledge, the warrant was ilrficdl,
and the Earls of Shrewsbury and Kent impowered
to put it in execution. Though Davilon denied
all this, and with circumtialnces which bear the
Itrongefl marks of truth and credibility; thougli
it can scarcely be conceived that her Privy Cotul-
cil, composed of the persons in whom file ilmol-
confided, of her Miniflers and favouritcs, wouild

N 't afcinmbl)

B Vi), K aflinlble within the walls of her palace, and vi-n.
L- ttture to tranfat a matter of so much importance

without her privity, and contrary to her inclina-
tion; yet so far ldid she carry her dlifimulatioa,
that, with all the signs of ditpilcafure and of rag,
fin baLnifeld most of her Counfeclors out of her
presence; anc treated Burleigh, in particular, so
harflily, and with such malrks of dilgufr, tlhat li
grave up hinmelf for lofi', and in the deepest as-
il.cion wrote to the Queen, bc ginl leave to re-
fil n all his places, that hcelmii'l t retire to his owli
citae. Davison The iiflantly dep(iived of his of-
fice, atnd committed him a clole prilncr to the
Martc. a'Tower. I-eI was loon aft'er brotllt to a f1 lcmn

tri.al in the Star Chamber, condel(ltln(ed to pay a
fine of ten thouiand pounds, andl to be iln)prlioned
during the (Cueen's pleasure. lie languished fe-
vieral years in confinement, and never recovered
any degree of favour or of power. As her jea-
oluniy and fear had bereaved the (Quen of Scot,
of life, in order to palliate this parit of her con-
dLuft, Elizabcth made no fcruplle of licriificingr thil
reputation and lhappinefs of one of the mlloft vir-
tuous and able men in her kingdom.

'Eliizbeih Tirls fOleln11 farce, for it dclcrves no better
en"'eatvou"s aie, furniflted Elizabeth, however, with an apo-

to tbot: .l
ju...s. logy to the King of Scots. As the prospect of

his mother's d(anger had excitied the Kiii;'s fili.il
care and coincern, the account of hcr dlcleh filled
him with grief and rIefennlient. lis lubjels felt
the difhionollor tdone to lill), ad1( to tie lnationl.

C."mil. 53 . Str't\ , ii. 37, cc A; ppc'd Ni

i . N X'
C;ib,.l., 229, &c.

9 Il

In order to sooth both, Elizabeth inflantly dif- B 0 10 K
patched Robert Carey, one of Lord I-Hunfdon's ..-,-
ions, with a letter expressing her extreme afflic- 57
tion on account of that milerable accident, whic-:,
as he pretended, had happened far contrary to her
appointmnent or intention. James would not per-
Isit her mefltnger to enter Scotland; and with
folne (dificulty received a memorial which he
icnt fi-om Berwick. It contained the tale con-
cerning Davilon, dressed up with all the circum-
tLinces which tended to exculpate Elizabeth, and
to throw the whole blame on his raflnefs or
treachery. Such a defence gave little fatisfaócion,
nlnd was confidered as mockery added to insult;
;i;d many of the nobles, as well as the King,
breathed nothing but revenge. Elizabeth was
cxirecnely solicitous to pacify them, and fhle
wanted neither able infilruments, nor plausible
reaolns, in order to accomplifll this. Leicefier
wrote to the King, and Walfinghlam to Secretary
Maitland. They repelelcnted lthe certain de-
flrutioLn to which James would expose hinimelf,
if; with the forces of Scotland alone, he flould
venture to attack a kingdom To so r superior in
l)werC; that the hitfory of past ages, as well as
liis mother's fad experience, might convince him,
thlit nothing could be more dangerous, or de-
ceitful, than dtplendance on foreign aid; that the
Kling of France would never wilh to fee the Bri-
till kingdoms united under one Monarch, nor
contribute to invell: a Prince so nearly allied to
the -Ioufe of Guile witl such formidable power;
hat lPhilip might be a more acSive ally, but

would

B oK would certainly prove a more dangerous one,
.--. and, under pretence of aflifting him, would afferc

j7· Ihis own right to the English Crown, which lh

already began openly to claim; that the jfam
!tatute, on which the sentence of death againlt
his mother ] adl been founded, would ujtiflify the
excl udling him from the llucellion to the Crown;
tha.t the i.:nglijh, naturally averse fromn the do-
iniinion of Itrangers, would not fail, if cxafper;tcd
by his iofii ties, to apply it in that manner; tha:
JElizabcth was disposed to repair the wronts
whilch the mother had fuilTered, by her tendernels
and: aCflStion towards the fonl; and that, by en-
-a:(ing i: aa fruitless war, lie would deprive him-
icl' of a noble inheritance, which, by cultivating
her fi'iendfhipl, iec mult infallibly obtain. The c;
rep-rescsnt.;tions, adcded to the confcioulnefs of his
own weaknets, to the Iinallnefs of his reven tes, to
tihe mutinous spirit of lome of the nobles, to the
dubious fidelity of others, and to the influence of
tlat faction which was entirely at Ilizabeth's (Ic-
votion, convinced James thiit a war with Il'ngland,
however just, would in tile present juncure be
altogcther inpolitical. All clhce considerations
incuced lim to ftiilc his resentment; to appea:'
satisfied with the punifihmnt inflicted on Davifoll;
and to prcfc:rvc all the lemblances of fi-iendlthipl
with tlhe lnglilf court"'. In this manner did the
cloud which threatened fucich a flolrm )als a\way.
.Marly's death, like that of a common criminal,
CcLnailnd unavenged by any PI'ince; and what-

" ,Q)ItJb\v. lf>r, 2 .lj i.

1'

3(. |h.
CS, r.\ lp , iii. 3 ,7

C~11~1~ i .
I?- vsr

ever inframy Elizabeth might incur, filc \. s - r o ) i
puold to no new danger on that account.

PvIMAR's death, however, proved fatall to the i,'.'

Master of Gray, and loft him the King's flavour, tL:Ni1i c
which he had for Ibme time poiTeied. I le was
become as odious to the nation as favourites, who
acquire power without merit, and cxercile it
without dilfcretion, usually are. The treaciherous
part which he had acted during his late embaiffy)',
v.as no Itcret, and filled James, who at length
came to the knowledge of it, with alloniliment.
Tic courtiers obfeivcd the )ymptomns of diltuft
arlifilg in the King's mind, his enemies ICized the
opportunity, and Sir W illialn Stewart, in revenge
of the perfidy with which Gray had betralvi hiis
brother Captain James, publicly accused him be- M.y 13.
fore a Convention of nobles, not only of having
contributed, by his advice and suggestions, to
take away the life of the Queen, but of holding
rcorrfpondence with Popifl Princes, in order to
Iiubvert the religion established in the kingdoln.
;iray, unfluppoirtCL by the King, dlcirrted by all,
;anld conscious of his own guilt, niade a f;eeble dc-
fence. I-I was cundemned to perpetuatl banifl-

icrit, a puniflimcnit very unequal to lis crimes.
But the King was unwilling to abandon one, whomn
lie hiad once favoured lo highly, to the rigour of
ullice; and Lord 1 Iamilton, his near relation, and
tlie other nobles who had lately returned froill
exile, in gratitude for the zeal with which he lhad
ierved them, interceded warmly in his behalf.

1AVI NC thus acconmlilledi tle defltiru(ion of
one of Iris enemies, Captain .amells Stewlart

tlhougltl

BOO

° K thought tlh junaure rfavo!rable for profecutingr
L-'- his revenge on them all. I--e singled out Secre-

I5S7. tary Maitland, the molt eminent both for abilities

and enmity to himi; and Oitc-red to prove that he
was no leis accelfary thlan Gray to tile Queen's
death, and had even Formed a CdefJgn of deliverinl;
up the King hinmIlf into the lands of tle Engliih.
But time and abflence had, in a great mealfrc,
extinuiflede the King's afLT'tion for a minion
wNho 1l little deserved it. All the courtiers com-
bined agiinf: him as a common enemy; and, in-
stead of gaining his point, he had the mortifica-
tion to i'e the office of Chancellor confelrcr,
upon Maitland, who, together with that dignity-,
enjoyed all the power and influence of a prinll
minifler.

IN the Assembly of the Church, which met thil

year, the fame hatred to the order of Biflops, and
the Lfme jealousy and fear of their encroachments,
appeared. But as the King was now of full age,
and a pailiament was finmmloncd on that occa-
sion, the Clergy remaincd fltisficd with appoint-
in, tome of their number to represent their
grievances to that court, firon which great things
were cxpectetd.

The King PItEVIOUS to this meeting of Parliament, Janmes
nitetl,' attempted a work worthy of a King. The dceatly
Dobis. feuds which fubflifted between many of the great

families, and which were tranlinitted cf'ron one ge-
neration to another, weakened the ft cngth of thel
kingdom; contributed, more than any other cir-
cuilillnce, to prclfrve a

fircv e and barbarous spirit
amonig the nobles ; and proved ilc occasion of

m;i nt'

m;any disasters to themfclvcs, and to their coun- n 00 K

'

,\.. After many preparatory negotiations, he in-
.ircdl the contelndin g parti(s to a royal entertain- is7'
n11cnt in the palace of I loly-rood-loule; and
partly by Ihis autholity, partly by his entreaties,
obtained their proniile to bury their dissensions in
perpetual oblivion. From thence he conducled
tlhem, in fulemln proccffion, througlh the ltrets of
!:din burgh, marching by pairs, each hand in hand
with his enemy. A collation of wine and sweet-
meats was prepared at the public Cross, and
there they drank to each other, with all the signs
of reciprocal forgivenels, and of future fiiendflip.
The people, who were present at a fpeOEacle Co
uiiniual, conceived the inolt sanguine hopes of
secing concord and tranquillity eftabliihed in
every part of tle kingdom, and teltified their fa-
tisfa6tion by repeated acclamations". Unhappily
the eftf'es of this reconciliation were not corre-
Ipondent either to the pious endeavours of the
King, or the fond wishes of the people.

Ti- E firfl: care of the parliament was the fccuriity

of the Proteflant religion. All the laws pafled in
its favour, since the Reformation, were ratified;
and a new and severe one was enated algainnl fe-
minary Priests and Jesuits, wiofe rcfllels indufnry
in making proselytes brought many of them into
Scotland about this time. Two a&s of this
parliament defcrve more parlicular notice, on
account of the confcqueinccs witl wvlich they
'.'ere follovwed.

* u
.q)p i\v. 1".'1. j C.d, . i,. t.,.

'i!T :

n io. K Trr: one rclpetccd the lands of the Churchl. As
»_..,- the public revenues were not sufficient for defray-
C5'T. ing the King's ordinary charges; as the admini-
nnx.l ion fl-raioln of the government became more compli-
' Ch(urdh-
ndus. cated and more expensive; as James was natu-

rally profule, and a firanger to ceconomy; it was
neceiTary, on all thele accountsj to provide Ibme
fund proportioned to his exigencies. But no con-
fiderable fum could be levied on the Commons,
who did not enjoy the benefit of an extensive
commerce. The nobles were unaccustomed to
bear the burden of heavy taxes. The revenues
of the Church were the only source whence a
proper iupply could be drawn. Notwithfltand-
ing all the depredations of the laity since tle Re-
formation, and the various devices which they
had employed to seize the Church lands, fonme
considerable portion of them remained fill unali-
enated, and were held either by the Bishops who
pofTcfled the benefices, or were granted to laymen
during plcafurc. All there lands were, in this
parlialment, annexed, by one general law", to the
Crown, and the King was imnpowered to apply the
rents of them to his own use. The tithes alone
were reserved for the maintenance of the persons
who served the cure, and tle principal mansion-
house, with a few acres of land, by way of glebe,
allotted for their residence. By this great accession
of property, it is natural to conclude that the King
rmtt: hlave acquired a vast incrcafe of power, and
the influence of the nobles have. fulTrcld a propor-

1P;iJ. 11 .

[ .

V .
V c. ,0.

tiohili

*!onal diminution. The very revcre of tils feenis, n o 0 K
ibo:ever, to have been the cafe. AlmonP all grlans '----,
or Church-lnnds, prior to this act, were thlcciby '
conirl!ecl; and titles, which were foiinerly rec-
koned precarious, derived from thence thle sanction
of parliamentary authority. James was ikcwilr
.autlihorited, during a limited time, to make nes
.ilcnations; and such was the facility of his teil-
}ler, ever ready to yield to the solicitations of his
IJrvants, and to gratify their mofi ext;av agant de-
mands, that not only during the time limited, but
throughout his whole reign, he was continually
employed in belfowing, and his parliament in ra-
tifying grants of this kind to his nobles; hence
little advantage accrued to the Crown from tliat
-which might have been so valuable an addition to
its revenues. The Bishops, however, were great
iifferers by the law. But at this junture neither
the King nor his Ministers were folicitois about
tei interefl-s of an order of men, odious to the
people, and persecuted by the Clergy. Their
enemies promoted the law witl the utmost zeal.
The prospect of sharing in their spoils induced(
all parties to content to it; and after a ftep so
f.tal to the wealth and power of the dignified
Clergy, it was no difficult matter to introduce
thiat change in the government of the Church
vwhich loon after took placeP.

TIl-r change which the other Statute produced Lemfr Rs-

in the civil conflitution was oo less remarkable. Itop.d .
Under the Feudal fyfl-cm, every Freeholder or h'rrepre
va(fsTl of tle Crown had a right to be prefcnt in Ccnt..ivcs,

P Sjpotfw. 365.

P.ir.

B 0 0 K Parliament. These Freeholders were, originally,
.--_ - few in number, but possessed of great and extensive

'5i7. property. By degrees, these vafl poffefions were

divided by the proprietors themfc lves, orparcclled
out by the Prince, or ;plit by other accidents. Tic
number of l-reehoiders became greater, and their
condition more unequal: betides the ancient Ba-
rons, who preserved their estates and their power
unimpaired, there arose another order, whose rights
were the iame, though their wealth and influence
were far inferior. But, in rude ages when the art
of government was extremely i mperfedc, when
parliaments were feldorn airembled, and delibe-
rated on matters little inteelting to a martial
people, few of the LeJer Barons took their feats,
and the whole parliamentary jurisdiCtion was cx-
ercifed by tile Greater Barons, in conjunction wit'i
the Ecclefiallical order. James I. fond of imitat-
ing the forms of the English conflitution, to which
he had been long accul'lomed, and desirous of
providing a counterpoise to tile power of the grl';!t
nobles, procured an a&5 in the year one thoulan
four hulndred and twcnty-f ven, dilfenfing with
the perfolbal attendance of the Lesser Barons, and
impowering thoftc in each county to chufe two
Conmifioners to rel)rclint them in Parliament.
This law, like many other regulations of that wifil
Prince, produced little effect. All the King's
valTals continued, as forinely, poi'flfed of a riglht
to be prelent in Parli.amcnt; but, unless in sonic
extraordinary conljunclures, the Greater Barons
alone attended. But, by means of the Reform;a-
tion, the conllittiton had undergone a gre.at

clhangce

change. The -jcratical power of the nobles B 0 o K
ihad been mirc:i increalfd, and the influence of -
thie cclefiaftical order, which the Crown ulually '5s7
emnployed to check their ulturpations, and to ba-
lance their authority, had diminished in propor-
tion. Many of the Abbies and Priories had been
erected into temporal peerages; and the Protestant
Jilho)ps, an indigent race of men, and odious to
tlch nation, were far from poffefling the weight
and credit which their predeccffors derived from
their own exorbitant wealth, and the superstitious
reverence of the people. In this situation, the
King had rccourfe to the expedient employed by
James I. and obtained a law reviving the statute
ufone thouland four hundred and twenty-feven;
and fr-om that time the Commnons of Scotland
have lent their representatives to parliament. An
a&t, which tended so visibly to abridge their au-
thority, did not pass without opposition from
many of the nobles. But as the King had a right
to summon the Lefcer Barons to attend in person,
others were apprehenlive of feeing the houfc
tilled with a multitude of his dependants, and
.:onfented the more willingly to a law which laid
trlln under the restriction of appearing only by
their representatives.

THIE year one thoutfand five hundred and si8t

The ap-

eighty-eight began with an universal expc'-ation proach of
thrIoughout all luropje, that it was to be diftin- nhes,-O"'t
tuJilhed by wondcrfull events and revolutions.
Several astrologers, according to the accounts of
contemporary historians, had predieced this; and
lhe situation of affaiirs in the two principal king-
VOL. II. O clutIs

B O 0 K domns of Europe was such, that a sagacious ob-

VI'.
.--- 2 server, without any supernatural intelligence,

'J5S' might have hazarded the prediction, and have

foreseen the approach of some grand crisis. In
France, it was evident from the aftonifhiing pro.
grefs of the league, conducted by a leader whole
ambition was relirained by no scruples, and whole
genius had hitherto fulrmounted all difficulties;
as well as from the timid, variable, and impolitic
councils of Henry III. that either that Monarch
must submit to abandon the throne, of which he
was unworthy; or by tome sudden and daring
blow cut off his formidable rival. Accordingly,
in the beginning of the year, the Duke of Guile
drove his Matter out of his capital city, and
forced him to conclude a peace, which left him
only the fladow of royalty; and before the year
expired, he himnfelf fell a vidcim to the resentment
and fear of Henry, and to his own security. In
Spain, the operations were such as promised
something tfill more uncommon. During three
years, Plilip had employed all the power of hij
European dominions, and exhausted the treasures
of the Indies, in vast preparations for war. A
fleet, the greatcfl that had ever appeared in the
ocean, was ready to fail fromn Lilbon, and a nu-
merous land army was assembled to embark on
board of it. Its detRination was frill unknown,
though many circumlnanccs made it probable that
the blow was aimed, in the firll place, againll
England. Elizabeth had long given secret aiJ
to the revolted provinces in the Low Countries,
and now openly af'orded them her protedion. A

num eroIS

r.l merols body of her troops was in their service; B 0,0 K
the Earl of Leicester commanded their armnies;
Ihe had great sway in the civil government of the '5s.
Republic; and some of its most considerable
towns were in her 1)oferfion. I-ler fleets had in-
fulted the coatss of Spain, intercepted the galleons
tfiom the Wrefi Indies, and threatened the colonies
trhere. Roused by lo many injuries, allured by
views of ambition, and animated by a fuperiitious
7cal for propagating the Romrifh religion, Philip
rclolved not only to invade, bui to conquer Eng-
land, to which his descent from the house of Lan-
caster, and the donation of Pope Sixtus V. gave
him, in his own opinion, a double title.

ELIZABETH saw the danger approach, and pre- Condua o

pared to encounter it. The measures for the de- tJh ,occa
fence of her kingdom were concerted and carried flon.
on with the wisdom and vigour which diftin-
guifhed her reign. IHer chief care was to secure
the friendship of the King of Scots. She had
treated the Queen his mother with a rigour un-
known among Princes; fle had often uscd him-
ftlf harfily, and with contempt; ant though 1ie
had hitherto prudently fupprleled his resentment
of there injuries, Ihe did not believe it to be alto-
gether extinguilled, and was afraid that, in her
present situation, it might burlt out with a fatal
violence. Philip, sensible how much an alliance
with Scotland would facilitate his enterprile,
courted James witl the utmiolt afliduity. -He
excited him to revenge his Mother's wrong; lie
flattered him with the hopes of fliaring Iis con-
quelfls and ofTered him in marriage his daughter

0) 2 tlr

B ( 0 K the Infanta Isabella. At the fame time, Scotlanli

_--- -<- swarmed with priests, his emissarics, who seduced
Iss'B some of the nobles to Popery, and corrupted

others with bribes and promises. Huntly, Errol,
Crawford, were the hleads of a fation, which
openly clpouCed the interest of Spain. Lord Max-
well, arrivinrg from tliat court, began to aflnihblei
his followers, and to take arms, that he might he
ready to join the Spaniards. In order to coun-
terbalance all these, Elizabeth made the warmefl
profcfilons of' firiendlhip to the King; and Aflhby
her Ambafiador, entertained him with magni-
licent hopes and promises. I-e assured him that
his right of fucceflion to the Crown should be
publicly acknowledged in England; that he should
be created a D iile in that kingdom; that lie flould
be admitted to iome share in the government;
and receive a considerable pension annually.
Jamnes, it is probable, was too well acquainted
with Elizabeth's arts, to rely entirely on these pro-
ilnifs. Buit he understood his own interest in the
pre-lbntjuncture, and pursued it with much feadi-
nels. 1-He rejct.cd an alliance with Spain, as dan-
gerous. lie refused to admit into his prese-nce an
ambaiTador from the Pope. l-le seized Colonel
Scllple, an agent of the Prince of Parma. 1:1
drove many of the fieminary Priests out of the
kingdomn . -le marched fiiddenly to Dumfries,
dit)cri-d Ma;xwcll's followers, and took 1him pri-
ioncr. In a Convention of the nobles he declared
his rclolution to adllere inviolably to the lealgue
with EIngland; and, without listening to the l's
gcltiouns of revenge, determined to act in conc(:r

wMitlI

with E.lizabeth, againcn tlhe common enemy of B 0 0 K
tile Proteltant faith. lie put the kingdom in a _
uolturc of defence, and levied troops to obftrut 5Sg.
the la.nding of the Spaniards. IIe offered to
jtnd an army to E:lizabeth's aTillance, and told
lher nmbaff.idor, that he expeSced no other favour
ftomi the King of Spain, but that which Poly-
,phmus hald promil ed to Ulyfles, that wlicn l-
hlid devoured all his companions, he would make
hi!m his lalit morlel'.

'IHE zeal of the people, on this occasion, was A n.lt.in;

not inferior to that of the King; and the extraor- '.ine,..t
;ii;;arv danger, with which they were threatened, 't':;lc '
IuLngefled to them an extraordinary expedient for
tlicir security. A bond was framed for the main-
tenance of true religion, as well as the defence of
the King's person and government, in opposition
to all enemies, foreign and domefitic. This con-
tained a confeflion of the Protestant faith, a parti-
culb,. renunciation of the errors of Popery, and
the most solemn promises, in the name, and
through the strength of God, of adhering to each
other in supporting the former, and contending
a(gainst the latter, to the utmofi of their power'.
'Ilhe King, the Nobles, the Clergy and the people
liubfcribed with equal alacrity. Strange or un-
common as such a combination may now appear,
many circunftances contributed, at that time, to
iccomimend it, and to render the idea familiar to
tlh Scots. When roused by any extraordinary
\'vent, or alarmed by any public danger, the

i C;im(d. S-1S4 J. inIl. 13(. Spoitf. 36C).
)' nlihp' s Cll.lc. (t'hC sic . vl.
'ii. l ii 8.

0 3 pople

B °o1 K people of Israel were accuflomed to bind thenm.

-.,-- ilves, by a solemn covenant, to adhere to that
5'sS. religion which the Almighty had eflablilhed

amnong them i tlis the Scots confidered as a fa-
cred precedent, which it becalne them to imitate.
In that age no considerable enterprise was under-
taken in Scotland, without a bond of mutual de-
fence, which all concerned reckoned neceifary for
their security. The form of this religious con-
federacy is plainly borrowed fiom those political
ones, of which so many instances have occurred;
the articles, itipulations, and peculiar modes of
expression, are exactly the fame in both. Almost
all the considerable Popifl Princes were then
joined in a league for extirpating the Reformed
Religion, and nothing could be more natural, or
seemed more efficacious, than to enter into a
counter-affociation, in order to oppose the pro-
grefs of that formidable conspiracy. To these
cauies did the Covenai;t, which is become so
famous in history, owe its origin. It was renewed
at different times during the reign of Jamess. It
was revived with great solemnity, though with
considerable alterations, in the year one thousand
fix hundred and thirty-eight. It was adopted by
the Englih in the year one thousand fix hundred
and forry-three, and enforced by the civil and
ecclefialtical authority of both kingdoms. The
political p)uipofes to which it was then made lifb-
servient, and the violent and unconstitutional
measures which it was then employed to promote,
4c is not our province to explain. But at the

° C:ld.,. iv. ju9.

junture

jtuncure in which it was firt introduccd, we may B ' KC
pronounce it to have been a prudent and laudabl, ..-..
device for the defence of the religionl and liberties
of the nation; nor were the terms in which it was
conceived, other than might have been cexpctcd
from men alarned with :the impending dangr of
Popery, and threatenred with an in vafion by the Imoi
bigoted and most powerful Prince in Europe.

PHILIP'S eagerness to conquer England did not

inspire him either with the vigour or dlilp. t.ch ne-
ceil'ary to enfllre the ficcefs of fb mighty an en-
terprilc. His fleer, which ought to have failed in
April, did not enter the Englifl channel till the
middle of Julv. It hovered many davs on the
coalt, in expec'tation of being joined by the Prince
,)f Pairma, who was blocked up in the ports of
'land-erCs by a Dutch squadron. Continual dif- The Ama-
alters puiftied the Spaniards during that time; d"d''tltcd
lucceffive itorms and battles, whirch are well
known, conspired with their own ill conduct to
disappoint their .ccrerprife. And, by the blefi-
ing of Providence, which watched with remark-
able care over the Protest-ant Religion and the
liberties of Britain, the Englilrh valour fcattereci
and destroyed the Armado, on which Philip had
arrogantly bestowed lthe name of Invincible.
After being driven out of the Englifl Ileas, their
fliattered fliips were forccd to llee'r tlieir courfC
towards Spain, round Scotlandl and Ireland.
Many of them uLllircld flilpwreck on thellc dan-
gerous and unknown coalls. Though James
Jkept his fubjeCds under arms, to watch the mo-
tions ofthcSpan iardl, anl to prevent tleir landing

0 4 il)

B1 o o K in an hostile manner, le received with great hu-

vI. .-..-.i inanity seven hundred who were forced afhorc

'is'. by a tempefl, and after supplying them with nc-

cefTarics, permitted them to return into thlicr own
country.

ON; the' retreat of tie Spaniards, E.lizabeth sent

an ambassador to congratulate with James, and to
compliment him on the firmness and generofiry
le had discovered during a conjun'.ure lb dan-
gerous. But none of Afhby's promises were any
longer remenmbered; that Minifler was even ac-
cufed of having exceeded his powers, by his too
liberal offers; and conscious of his own falsehood,
or ashamed of being disowned by his court, he
withdrew fecrctly out of Scotland'.
T".,. PHILIP, convinced by fatal experience of his

in-

.h,; ',' -own rashness in attempting the conquest of Eng.
':"":"¢' land, by a naval armament, equipped at so great

a dittancc, and fubjeted,] in all its operations, to
the delays, and dangers, and uncertainties, arising
from teas and winds, resolved to make his attack
in another form, and to adopt the plan which the
Princes of Lorrain had long meditated, of invad-
ing England throulgh Scotland. A body of his
troops, he imagined, might be easily wafted over
froml the Iow Countries to that kingdom, and if
lthey could once obtain footing, or procure aflifl-
ance there, the fiontier of England was open and
dclfnclcldL, and the northern counties full of Ro-
nman Catholics, who would receive themi with open
.-rms. Macnwhile, a descent migiht be threat-
(e'llCe on tile lbutllrn coa;l, which would divide

s.,1iia l. .1tnd. 5.1.2^ . Murdini, 635. 788.

the

the English army, distract their councils, and B °o° K
throw the wholekingdom into terrible corvulfions. --
In order to prepare the way for the execution of 5iS9'
this design, he remitted a considerable fum of
mioney to Bruce, a seminary priest in Scotland,
and employed him, together with Hay, Creigh-
ton, and ''yrie, Scottish Jesuits, to gain over as
many perions of diftincion as poflible to his in-
tcrcfc. Zeal for Popery, and the'artful infinua- rpi;ni no-
tions of these cmifraries, induced-feveral noble- tjlRCo_

pitre agaiifi:

men to favour a measure which tended so mani- thc KiSg.
fcflly to the deftruftion of their country. Huntly,
though the King had lately given him in marriage
the daughter of his favourite the Duke of Lennox,
continued warmly attached to the Romilh Church.
Crawford and Errol were animated with the zeal
of new converts. They all engaged in a corre-
flondence with the Prince of Parma, and, in
their letters to him, offered their service to the
King of Spain, and undertook, with the aid of fix
thousand men, to render him mafler of Scotland,
and to bring so many of their vassals into the field,
that he should be able to enter England with a
numerous army. Francis Stewart, grandson of
James Y.", whom the King had created Earl of
Bothwell, though influenced by no motive of re-
ligion, for lie flill adhered to the Protestant faith,
was prompted merely by caprice, and the reftleft-
ness of his nature, to join in this treasonable
correspondence.

" e w.t; thle rfo of John Prior, of C ,',id ;:i:m, one of'
J mcis's l n;ttur;l childrcn.

ALL

B 0 0 K ALL these letters were intercepted in England.

-- Elizabeth, alarmed at the danger which threat-
Fcb5s.9 ened her own kingdom, sent them inmmdiately to

the King, and reproaching him with his former
lenity towards the Popifi party, called upon him
to check this formidable conspiracy by a proper

Tlhe King's severity. But James, though firmly attached to
mixth!egard the Protestant religion, though profoundly versed
9 Popelry. in the theological controversies between the Re-

formers and the Church of Rome, though he had
employed himself, at that early period of life, in
writing a Commentary on the Revelations, in
-which he laboured to prove the Pope to be An-
tichrift, had nevertheless adopted, already, those
maxims concerning the treatment of the Roman
Catholics, to which he adhered through the reft
of his life. The Roman Catholics were at that
time a powerful and active party in England; they
were far from being an inconsiderable faRion inl
his own kingdom. The Pope and King of Spain
were ready to take part in all their machinations,
and to second every effort of their bigotry. Tic
opposition of such a body to his succession to the
Crown of England, added to the averseness of
the English from the government of strangers,
might create him many difficulties. In order to
avoid these, he thought it necefary to tooth, ra-
ther than to irritate the Roman Catholics, and to
reconcile them to his fuccefTion, by the hopes of
gentler treatment, and tome mitigation of the
rigour of those laws, which were now in force
against them. This attempt to gain one party by
promises of indulgence and acts of clemency,

while

while he aldheredc with all the obllinacy of a dif- B o 0 K
putant to the dotrines and tenets of the other, --,-
has given an air of myflery, and even of contra-
dition, to this part of the King's charaEer. The
Papists, with the credulity of a fe&L struggling to
obtain power, believed his heart to be wholly
theirs; and the Protestants, with the jealousy in-
lIparable from those who are already in poffcffion
of power, viewed every at of lenity as a mark
of indifference, or a fvmptom of apol-acy. In
order to please both, James often aimed at an
excessive refinement, mingled with diffinulation,
in which he imagined the perfeEtion of govern-
ment and of king craft to consist.

His behaviour on tlis occasion was agreeable wisexceCf

to these general maxims. Notwithstanding the ftoh'Iet-
solicitations of the Qieen of England, enforced ll:rators.
by the zealous remonfirances of his own Clergy,
a short imprifonnent was the only punifilment
ie innicted upon Huntly and his afl;ciates. But
he soon had reason to repent an act of clemency so
inconfifl-ent with the dignity of government. The
first use which the conspirators made of their
liberty, was to afnTmble their followers, and, un-
der pretence of removing Chancellor Maitland,
an able Miniser, but warmly devoted to the
l'.nglifl interefl, from the King's councils and
prelence, they attempted to seize James himfclf.
This attempt being defeated, partly by Mait-
land's vigilance, and partly by their own ill-con-
duCt they were forced to retire to the Nortlh,
where they openly ereLced the standard of rebel-
lion. But as the King's govcrnment was not

generally

B 0 0 K generally unpopular, or his miniflers odious, their
i^--.~.. own vassals joined them slowly, and discovered no

'59' zeal in the cause. The King, in person, advan-

cing against them with such forces as he could
fuddcnly levy, they durst not rely so much on the
fidelity of the troops, which, though superior in
number, followed them with relu&ance, as to ha-
zard a battle; but ifuflering them to disperse, they
surrendered to the King, and threw themcelves on
his mercy. I-Tuntly, Errol, Crawford, and Both-
well, were all brought to a public trial. Repeated
atds of treason were easily proved against them.
The King, however, did not permit any sentence
to be pronounced; and, after keeping them a few
months in confinement, he took occasion, amidst
the public fettivity and rejoicings at the approach
of hlis marriage, to set them at libertyx.

rT-ic ,in3': As James was the only descendant of the an-
,,i'h.ne cient Monarclis of Scotland, in the direct line;
c.-Den. as all hopes of uniting the crowns of the two

kingdomns would have expired with him; as the
Earl of Arran, the prefunmptive lieir to the throne,
was lunatic; the King's marringe was, on all
tihcf accounts, an event which the nation wilhed
for with the utmost ardour. I-Ic himself was no
less desirous of accompliifling it; and lhad made
overtures, for that purpofle, to the eldefl daughter
of Frederick II. King of Denmark. But Eliza-
beth, jealous of every thing that would render the
accelrion of the houl:C of Stewart more acceptable
1o the E:nglifli, endeavoured to perplex James,

S[)tl'\. . ,7. (;ild. iv. i-3-130.

3..~~~
, ^~~~~i)

in the fame manner Rhe had done Mary, and em- B o 0 K
ployed as many artifices to defeat or to retard his *--.
marriage. His ministers, gained by bribes and 'i9
promises, seconded her intention; and though
several different ambassadors were sent from
Scotland to Denmark, they produced powers so
limited, or infilted on conditions so extravagant,
that Frederick could not believe the Kingi to be in
carnel:; and suspecting that there vas iome design
to deceive or amuse him, gave his daughter in
marriage to the Duke of Brunswick. Not dif-
couraged by this disappointment, which lie im-
puted entirely to the conduc of his own minillers,
James made addresses to the Princess Anne, Fre-
derick's second daughter. Though Elizabeth
endeavoured to divert him from this, by recom-
mending Catherine the King of Navarre's sifter,
as a more advantageous match; though she pre-
vailed on the privy council of Scotland to declare
against the alliance with Denmark, he perfifect
in his choice; and despairing of overcoming the
obstinacy of his own ministers in any other man-
ner, he secretly encouraged the citizens of Edin-
burgh to take arms. They threatened to tear in
pieces the Chancellor, whom they accused as the
person whose artifices had hitherto disappointed
the wishes of the King, and the expectations of
hlis people. In consequence of tils, the Earl
Marifchal was sent into Denmark at the head of
a splendid embasSy. lie received ample powers
and inltrudtions, drawn with the King's own hand.
1The marriage articles were quickly agreed upon,
idil the young Q(ueen let lail towards Scotland.

J.lMlcs

B o V K James made great preparations for her receptioni

_-^ and waited her landing with all the impatience of

' a lover; when the unwelcome account arrived,

that a violent tempest had arisen, which drove
back her fleet to Norway, in a condition so flat-
tered, that there was little hope of its putting
again to sea before the spring. This unexpected
difappointmlcnt he felt with the utmost sensibility.
He inflantly fitted out some flips, and, without
communicating his intention to any of his coun-
cil, failed in person, attended by the Chancellor,
several noblemen, and a train of three hundred
on. 2z. persons, in quest of his bride. He arrived safely

in a small harbour near Upflo, where the Queen
Nov. 24. then resided. There the marriage was solemnized,

and as it would have been raflh to trust those
boil-erous seas in the winter season, James ac-
cepted the invitation of the court of Denmark,
and repairing to Copenhagen, passed several
months there, amidst continual feaRting and
amulements, in which both the Quleen and him-
self had great delightl.

No event in the King's life appears to be a

wider deviation frorn his general character, than
this sudden rally. I-is son Charles I. was capable
of that excessive admiration of the other sex, which
arilcs fiom great sensibility of heart, heightened
by elegance of taste; and the romantic air of his
journey to Spain suited such a disposition. But
James was not fulceptible of any refined gal-
lantry, and always exprlefcd that contempt for

Y MdIlil, 352. Spolfw. 377. Murdlin, 637.

the

the female character which a pedantic erudition, B 0 1 K
unacquainted with politeness, is apt to inspire. -
1-Ie was exasperated, however, and rendered im- 15 9-
patient by the many obstacles which had been
laid in his way. li e was anxious to secure the
political advantages which he expe&ced from
marriage; and fearing that a delay might afford
Elizabeth, and his own ministers, an opportunity
of thwarting him by new intrigues, he suddenly
took the resolution of preventing them, by a
voyage from which he expected to return in a
few weeks. The nation feermed to applaud his
conduct, and to be pleased with this appearance
of amorous ardour in a young Prince. Notwith-
standing his absence so long beyond the time he
cxpected, the nobles, the clergy and the people
vied with one another in loyalty and obedience;
and no period in the King's reign was more
remnarkable for tranquillity, or more free from
lany eruption of those factions, which so often
dlilurbed the kingdom.

# BOOK VIII.

T H E

H I S T 0 R Y
SCOTLAND.

BOO K VIII.

OO K N the first of May the King and Queen ar-
V 111. rived at Leith, and were received by their
so. fubjeEts with every pofflble expreflion of joy

a, ogen The lolemnity of the Queen's coronation was
arrieand' concidulcd with great magnificence; but so low

had the order of Biffiops fallen in the opinion of
the public, that none of themn were present on
that occasion, and Mr. Robert Bruce, a l'reiby
terian Minister of great reputation, set tlhe Crown;
on her head, adminifterecd the sacred unStion, and
performed the other customary cercmonies.

TH-i zeal and success with which many of the

clergy liad contributed towards )prelcrving peace
and order in the kingdom, during his absence, rc-
conciled James, in a great degree, to their per-
sons, and even to the P'relbytcrian form of g0.
Au,0a }4 vernmnenr. In prelence of n ;n aftmbly, wliich.

1ncr (.

nlet this year, he made high encomiums on the B °0 O K
dificipline as well as the doctrine of the church, -
pronifcd to adhere inviolably to both, and per- '°J9
niitted the alfenbly to fiame such afts as gra-
dually abolished all the remains of episcopal ju.
ritfitiion, and paved the way for a full and legal
cltablillment of the Presbyterian model a.

AN event happened soon after, which afforded is9'

the Clergy no finall triumtph. Archbishop Adam-
son, their ancient opponent, having fallen under
the King's displeasure, having been deprived of
the revenues of his fee in consequence of the aft
of annexation, and being oppressed with age, with
poverty, and diseases, made the meaneftfubmillion
to the Clergy, and delivered to the assembly a
formal recantation of all his opinions concerning
Church government, which had been matter of
offence to the Presbyterians. Such a conferfion,
from the most learned person of the Episcopal
order, was confidered as a testimony which the
force of truth had extorted from an adverfaryb.

MEANWHILE, the King's excessive clemency Disord,,er

towards offenders multiplied crimes of all kinds, th klin.
and encouraged such aEts of violence, as brought
his government under contempt, and proved fatal
to many of his subje&s. The history of several
years, about this time, is filled with accounts of
the deadly quarrels between the great families,
and of murders and affaffnations perpetrated in
the most audacious manner, and with circum-
stances of the utmofl barbarity. All the defects

" Cald. iv. 204. b Spolfw. 385. Cald. iv. 214.
VOL. II. P in

o (i1 0 K in the feudal arif-ocracy were now felt more fen.-
d-^-- f[tibly, perlhapls, than at any other period in the

J"'9' history of Scotland, and universal licence and

anarclhy prevailed to a degrce Ic:,.ce coniillen:
'iuii the preITfvation of l;bclct. \'Vilk the KinL
too gentle to tiuifh, or too feeble to ad v itr
vigouL-, ftill-trcd all these enormities to pals wit h
inpu n it}' .
Ana:n rmpt BUT thloUg;lh a;ncs connived at real crimes,

ri'sth'- wVitchcrif-t, which is commtonly an illginary on1',
.in.n'llie clenlgroiTed lis at;LCntion, a1nd tholf fnfpecc(ed of i

felt the whole weight of his authority. Many
perlons, neither extremnly old nor wretchedly
poor, whicli were uiually held to be certain indi-
cations of this crime, but mailers of families, and
matrons of a decent rank, and in the middle age
of life, were seized and tortured. Though thei:
confeflions contained the 1most absurd and incre-
dible circumtitances, the King's prejudices, thole
of the clergy and of the people, confi)ii-r in be-
lieving their extravagancies, without hesitation,
andt in punliling their perlons without mercy.
Some of thele unha;i)py furi:rers accuedtl Bothwcli
of having confulltcd them, in order to know the
time of the King's death, and of having employed
their art, to tail : he florms which liad endlanglereI
-the Qc'iCin's life, and had detained James so long
in Denmark. Upon this evidence, that nohlc-
man was committed to prilon. Ilis turbulent
and hIaughty fliirit could neither flubmit to lhe
reflrai-ut, nor brook fuchl an indignity. J-laving
gained lis c rs, mae

is ci

mae i cal)p, and ini-
,utiing thc acclufation to the arlilices of Ilis lneml',

L1lc

!iic ihancellor, hc afil'enbled his folllowers, under a 0,0 o
:cretncC ot driving hlinii frroi the Kin,'s c;)nn- '-/--
cils. Being favourd b!y iome of the }iin',, t- ''at-
tt llantts, lie was ad niitred ), a fecl-rc( paila e,
liuner- cll(oud of n i, 1

ir, iio tlhe: ,CoI' of tlc pr.hl.,;

01 . Il.ly-rood-ho.-ll'!i lie Incv.Inccd dlin-ll to-
v a Irds the royal I)p: tni 1i. r, l'.!t h:1 p[1)ly, bc(t)ie
i,: c lnti'ed, tle al-r:' t'.' is taken, and the s idoors
,ti. '; ii];: ic :ittleinptcd to burfi opien fume of Dc. 27.
;Incm, a.nd to let fire to o-liers, tllh citizens of
I ,1nl)U-rIh lii.d time to rtll co their arm.s, and he
cl*apc1d, with the utimoft difiiculty; owing hiis
.'itly to the dairknefs of the night, and the pre-
ijpitancy with which he fled'.

1IE retired towards the north, and the King i59.,

hI;ving unadvifcdly given a conmilimon to the
T.arl of -luntly, to purfiue himi and his followers,
with fire and sword, he, under colour of cxecut-
ifl that commission, gratified his private revenge,'
and filrrounded the houfi of the Earl of Muirray,
luirnt it to the ground, and few Mulrral hl mflf. v s.
'I'lie mlurder .of a youngll nole,]cl:in ofr liuli pro-
nilfing virtues, and the heir of tlhi Rc cnt Mlur-
ri,', the dalrling of tlie pcoplh, excitcdl univerl.al
in(lignation. IThe citizens of' Edinburgh rolf in
;I rinniluiioiius ianner; and though they were re-
ll;ainlcd, by the care of' the niagiflrates, from any
:iLa of violence, they threw aflde all rtefpcc- for tlhe
Kinl; aind lis min iiliers, and openly infilted and
liir -tcned both. While this muitinous liriri con-
tinLIced, James thought it prudent to withdraw

c Mclv. 388. Spotfw. 386.

i' 2 from

B O O K fiom the city, and fixed his residence for some time

ViII.
- , at (;lafgow. There Huntly surrendered himlelf

59 to jufticc; and, notwithlianding the attrociouf-

nels of his crime, and the clamours of the people,
the power of tle Chancellor, with whom he was
now cloflly confederated, and the King's regard
for the leinemory of the 1)uke of Lennox, whose
daughter he had married, not only protected him
from the sentence which such an odious acion
merited, but exempted him even from tle forma.
lity of a public trial''.

Pien.' t- A STLP of much importance was taken, soon
rianl Church
goernment after, with regard to the government of the
,,yl'wi.lc church. The Clergy had long complained of

the encroachments made upon their privileges and
jurifi.itision by the acts of the parliament one
thouland five hundred and eighty-four, and
though thefc laws had now loft much of their
force, they resolved to petition the parliament,
which was approaching, to repeal them in form.
The j uniture for pushing such a measure was well
cholen. The King had loft much of the public
favour by his lenity towards the Popish fation,
and still more by his remissness in pursuing the
murderers of the l:arl of Murray. The Chan-
cellor had not only a powerful party of the
courtiers combined against him, but was become
odious to the people, who imputed to him every
ifale ftep in tle King's conduct. Bothwell flill
lurked in the kingdom, and being fccrctly ftp-
ported by all the enemies of Maitland's adllini-

" SpotLw. 387.

fltiiltion,

ftration, was ready, every moment, to renew his B 0 o K
audacious enterprises. James, for all these rea- -
sons, was extremely willing to indulge the Clergy j591
in their request, and not only consented to a law,
whereby the aas of one thousand five hundred
and eighty-four were rescinded or explained, but
he carried his complaisance still further, and per-
mitted the Parliament to eltablifn the Presbyterian
government, its General Afremblies, Provincial
synods, Prefbyteries, and Kirk felTions, with all
the different branches of their discipline and jurif-
di&tion, in the most ample manner. All the zeal
and authority of the Clergy, even under the ad-
miniltratiron of Regents, fiom whom they might
have expeEted the moot partial favour, could not
obtain the fanEtion of law, in confirmation of
their mode of Ecclesiastical government. No
lrince was ever less disposed than Jaines to ap-
prove a system, whose republican genius infpiredl
a passion for liberty, so repugnant to his exalted
notions of royal prerogative. Nor could any
avcrfion be more inveterate than his, to the au-
flere and uncomplying character of the Prefbytc-
rian Clergy in that age; who, nmre eminent for
zeal than for policy, often contradifted his opi-
nions, and censured his condutl-, with a freedom
equally offensive to his logmatifin as aTheologian,
anl to his pride as a King. I is lituation, how-
ever, obliged him fi-equently to conceal, or to dif-
I;mlble his sentiments; and as he often disgustcd
his subje&s, by indulging the Popifl faction more
than they approved, he endeavoured to atone for
this by concellions to the Presbyterian Clergy,

P 3 more

B 0 O K lmore liberal than he himifelf would otherwise 1have
L--^-^ chlofen to grant'.

:'9" IN this Parliament, Bothvwell and all his ad-

herents were attainted. But he loor. made a new
attcmpt to seize the King art aIl;and ; a(l
James, betrayed by obme of his coulrtiers, and
feebly defended by others, who wilicd well to
Bothwell, as the Clhancellor's avowed eneniy,
owed his safety to the fidelity ;nd vigilance of
Sir Robert Mclvil, and to the irrcolb(ition of
Botl wvell's aflociates .

A ew con- SCARCELY was t!is danger over, when the na-
tfi,,p'i'h tion was alarmed with the discovery of a new and
Lords, m-nore formidable conlipiracy. George K.er, t'ei

Lord Newbattle's brothcr, beinig fcized as le was
ready to set fail for Spain, many tliupicious p)apers
were found in his custody, and among thclc,
several blanks signed by the Elarls of Angus,
IIuntly, and Errol. By this extraolrdinary pre-
caution tlhey hoped to ceape Iany danger of dilf
covery. But Kcr's (ifolution fl-rinking whien
torture was threatened, he confe:fLd that lie was
employed by these noblemen,, to carry on a ncgo-
tiation with the'King of Spain ; that the blanks
fubfclribed with their names were to be filled up
by Crichton and Tyrie; that they were inflllicted
to ofil'r the faithiful service of the three Earls to
that Monarch; and to solicit hiiin to land a body
of his troops, either in Galloway, or at the i)outil
of Clyde, with whichl they underltook, in the li1 l
place, to etalbliflh the lRolma;in Catlholic l.cligii

C(;,:ll. ij. 2,j8. 252. I'j (ll','. ''

. . f M.I.
1..''"

in

i: Scotland, and then to invade England with P' °I K
tli' whole forces of c!e kingdlom. David Graham -
of' Fintry, and Barclay ofi Lady land, whom he i59Z'
a:cCIifc of beinllt privy to the conspiracy, were
ta.ken into cullody, and con rinmed all the cir-
ctllmt(;nccs of his conricfElon :.

'I'iE nation havini been l'kept for some time in r:3.

rntinll Lerrorlol anll agitat.lion by so many luccelfive pz.i ,t Lh
(! D,!i ralcies, thlc dilcoverv of this new dalnger com -
pnttd tihe panic. All rnks of men, as if the
enemy had alecady been at their gates, thought
tieTielves called upon to stand forth in defence
of their country. The Ministers of Edinburgh,
without waiting for any warrant from the King,
whio happened at that time to be absent from the
capital, and without having received any legal
cammillion, alil'iibled a considerable number of
lPeers and Barons, in order to provide an instant
remedy against the impending danger. They
.fcized the Earl of Angus, and committed him to
the cattle; they examined Ker; and prepared a
remonlirance to be laid before the King, concern-
ing the itate of the nation; and thle neccfity of
prolfcuting the consp)irators with becoming vi-
g(oUr. James, though jealous of every encroach- ind pro-
iment on his prerogative, and offended with tubb- I'he Ki; fig
jects, wlo, iniecad of petitioning, seemed to pre- ,'~in
lcribc to him, found it neccefTay, during the vio-
lence of the ferment, not only to adopt theirplan,
but even to declare that no consideration flould
ever induce him to pardon those who had bcen

E Rymrcr, xvi. 190.

P 4 guiliy

B o o K guilty of tb odious a treason, He summoned the
I - .-. Earls of Huntly and E:'rrol to surrender thern-

J'-':" selves to j ftice. Graham of Fintry, whom his

peers pronounced to be guilty of treason, he coin-
mandcd to be publicly beheaded; and marching
into the North at the head of an army, the two
Earls, together with Angus, who had escaped out
of prison, retired to the mountains. He placed
garrisons in the caltles which belonged to them;
compelled their vassals, and the Barons in the ad-
jacent counties, to subscribe a bond containing
profeflions of their loyalty towards him, and of
their firn adherence to the Protest-ant faith; and,
the better to secure the tranquillity of that part of
the kingdom, constituted the Earls of Athol and
Marifchal his Lieutenants thereh.

Ma3rch1s. HAVING finifihed this expedition, Jaines re-
Efojctshirn turned to Edinburgh, where he found Lord Bor-
to t.i it rough, an extraordinary amLb.:flador from the
tihem with
rigdur. court of England. Elizabeth, alarmed at the

discovery of a conspiracy which she confidered as
no less formidable to her own kingdom than to
Scotland, reproached James with his former re-
mnilTnefs, and urged him;, al he regarded the pre-
servation of the Protrefant rel. ion, or the dignity
of his own Crown, to punifi this rcicated treason
with rigor; and if he could not apprehend the
pcrfons, ai least to confilcatc the ellates, of fucl
aulacious rebels. She weakened however the
force of rhlle rcquclts, by interceding at the liame
time in behalf of Botliwell, whom, according to

' .Sptfw. 301. Ca.ld. i. 291.

her

l:er ufu-a policy in nourifbing a factious spirit n 1° K;
amionl the Scottish nobles, fle had takcn under --
her pruoeftion. James abfoluccly refuled to liften 1593
to any interceflion in favour of one, who had so
often, and with lb much outrage, insulted both
his government and his person. With regard to
tile Popifhl conipirators, he declared his resolution
to prosecute them with vigour; but that he might
be the better able to do so, he demanded a small
fum of money from Elizabeth, whici tihe, dif-
trustful perhaps of the manner in which he mIight
apply it, shewed no inclination to grant. The
zeal, however, and importunity of his own sub-
jets obliged him to call a Parliament, in order
to pass an aEt of attainder againfl the three I- arls.
But before it met, Ker made his efcnpe out of
prison, and, on pretence that legal evidence of
their guilt could not be produced, nothing was
concluded against them. The King himself was
universally fufpeced of having contrived this
artifice, on purpose to elude the requefcs of the
Queen of England, and to disappoint the wishes of
his own people; and therefore, in order to tooth
the Clergy, who exclaimed loudly againit his con-
Cldu, he gave way to the pafling of an a&, which
ordained thole who obtlinately contemned the
censures of the Church to be declared out-lawvs'.

WHILE the terror excited by the Iopifl con- n. w,,,,E

fpiracy poffefedl the nation, the court had been f',,cif,
divided by two rival factions, which contended
for the chief direction of aftilirs. At the head of

a .
34ld 3. Spots\ . 393. Pr.l. 13 J;.i. VT. c, iC,.

one,

I' o ( I; one, V;ws the Chancellor, in whom the King rc-
· _.-, --. oi'ed entire confidence. For that very rcalon,

'"'-' er l.!aps,' lie had fallen early under the Queen's

difpleai'ure. The Duke of Lennox, the Elarl of
Athol, Lord Ochiltree, and all the lnamie of
St(ewairt cfi)oticfd her quarrel, and widened t-he
bi-each, James, fond no less of domeflic tran-
quillity, than of public peace, adviled his fa.-
vourire to retire, for loine time, in hopes that the
t.;lec.i's Iclk'ntmnlllt would lubfide. But as lie
htood i;l nccee, in the preient juiinlture, of the afillt-
.-nce of an able Miniller, lie had recalled him to
ciurt. In orler to prevent himi from recovering
lhi formelr powcr, the Stewarts hlad recourse to an
expedient 1n lc' ; illegal than defp)rate. Having
comb.ined with Bothwell, wiil, was of the fame
>l'y :4. i'li-il.iae, thl-y brought him back secretly into

Scotland; and seizing the gates of thle palace, in-
tioducecd him into the royal apartment with a nu-
ilerous train of arniedl folioters. James, though
clelcrteld by all his couiticrs, and incapable of re-
tillanrce, dill'covered more indignation than fear,
and reproaching them for their treachery, called
on the Earl to linili hlis tlrea(ins, by piercing his
Sovereign to the heart. 3But Bothwell fell on llis
knees, and implored pardon. The King was not
in a condition to Irfule his demands. A few
(lays after lie ligncd a capitulation with this fuc-
celful traitor, to whom lie was really a prisoner,
whereby he bound hii iifelf to grant him a remil-
sion for all pail- oli'nces, and to procure the rati-
lic;itilan of it in 1'arli tilenti; iand in the mean
time to dilfmifs the Chancellor, the maf-cr of Gla-

mis,

mis, Lord Home, and Sir George Home, from rn o ( K
his councils and presence. Butivell, on his part, ---..
consented to remove from court, tholugh he lef'r i5'3.
there as many of his atlociates as lhc thouiv-lt tlf-
ficient to prevent the return of the advcrfe if lioi.

BuT it was now no ealf maLtctr to keep t: .' T'.2 .

"i:

King under the fimne kind of bondage, to wvil;'' : _'
he liad been often fubjcct during ;is milnoritv.
I-He discovered so much impatience to flakL (,;'
his fccters, that thole',who had impoled, (l.rlll n -
continue, the restraint. They pcrlnittc(i :: ti
call a Convention of the nobles at Stirliri , ::
to repair thitler himself. All 'Aohw' 'e -
mies, and all viho were desirous cos' '! .!,. t:':-
King's favour by appearing to be I', o!, '

, t

-

,,

summons. Tlhey pronounced the iniiut o'tr-c
to the King's person and aurllor-iy to be. hi-hl
treason, and declared him ablflvcd f'ro:n any
obl igation to oblf ;ve conditions exro -cd by orc c,
ani whicli violated lb eIlnntially hlis roval pclrro-
gative. James, however, l2iil prof-lered hinm t
pardon, provided he would sue for it as an at of
mercy, and promiie to retire out of the kingdom.
These conditions Bothwell rejeEted wicl dil;iain,
and betaking himfeif once more to arms, at-
tempted to lurprile the Kingt; but finding himl
on his guard, 1led to the borders'-.

TH-iE King's ardour ainfl: Brothwcel1, com;I;pared sul prCltor

with his flow and cvtlilve proceedings agaillil tile t'i t",n,
Iopi)fi Lords, occaflncd a g:ene ral dif ufl: among Lt"d'.
hlis fibji(l's; and was imputed either to an cx-

' (2.ILd. iv. 326. Splt f\v. 3 5'.

ccflvc

B o o K ceilve attachmient to the persons of those corn-

Vl I.
t,-_ fpirators, or to a secret partiality towards thrir

1593 opinions; both ,hich gave rife to no unreason-
Se~t. 25, able fears. The Clergy, as the immediate guar-

di.ans of the Protcftant Religion, thought themn-
ladves bound, in f!chl a iuncitue, to take extraor-
di:,ary steps for its preservation. The provincial
f!niod of Fife happening to meet at that time,
a motion was made to excommunicate all con-
cerned in the late confiiracy, as obstinate and
irreclaimable Ppifci's; and though none of the
confpirato.s resided within the bounds of the
ij1yodl, or were iubje&t to its juri lfiction, such was
the zeal of the members, that, overlooking this
irregular-ity, they pronounced againll them the
lentcencc of excomlmunication, to which the aft
of lalt parliament added new terrors. Left -this
1lfould be imputed to a few men, and accounted
the a- of a small part of the church, deputies
were appointed to attend the adjacent jinods, and
to delir- their approbation and concurrence.
C:.r~.,;iy AN event happened, a few weeks after, which

increareld the people's Itlfpicions of the King. As
t-) 7. ihe was marching on an expedition againfll the bor-

deters, the three Popifl Earls coming suddenly
into his pretence, offered to submit tlhemfelves to
a legal trial; and James, without committing
them to culfody, appointed a (lay for that pur-
pose. They prepared to appear with a tormidable
train of their friendsand valllals. But, in the mean
time, the Clergy, together with many Peers ant
Barons, aalirn bling at Edinburgh, rcnlonfilrated
ag.iinft the King's extrcnme indulgence with great

bold tri;,

boldness, and demanded of him, according to the °

0 K

regular courfeofjuftice, to com-mit to urie custody
persons charged with the highest acts of treason, '5i'.
who could not be brought to a legal trial, until
tiey were absolved from the cenfurcs ofthc Church;
and to call a Convention of eflatcs, to dcliberare
concerningthe method of proceeding against thcn.
At the fame time they offered to accompany him
in arms to the place of trial, left such audacious
and powerful criminals should overawe jullice,
and di&ate to thejudges to whom they pretended
to submit. James, though extremely offended
both with the irregularity of their proceedings,
and the presumption of their demands, found it
expedient to put off the day of trial, and to call
a Convention ofeftates, in order to quiet the fears
and jealousies of the people. By being humoured
in this point, their suspicions began gradually to
abate, and the Chancellor managed the Conven-
tion so artfully, that he himself, together with a
few other members, was impowered to pronounce
a final sentence upon the conspirators. After much Nov, .
deliberation, they ordained, that the three Earls,
and their associates, mlould be exempted fiom all
further inquiry or prosecution, on accountof their
correspondence with Spain; that, before the first
day of February, they flould either submit to the
Church, and publicly renounce the errors of Po-
pery, or remove out of the kingedom; that, be-
fore the first of January, they fiould declare which
of these alternatives they would embrace; that
they flould find surety for their peaceable de-
meanor for the future; and that if they failed to

aU flfignify

B, o : - signify their choice in due time, they fhoutl lou;I:
t_--. the benefit of this ad of abolitiozl, and remain

1593 ex(posed to all the pains of lavw'.
.gX':4. 13Y this lenity towards the conspirators, Jan'-::

incurr-ed much rIC)roach, and gained no advantage.
Devoted to tie Popiih fuperfi ition, flibiniffive to
l11 ite dictates of tiheir priefls, and buoyed u)
witrh ho-nes and promiles of foreilgn aid, the three

iarls refused to accept of' the conditions, and
cor.rinued their trcalbnabie corrlfpondence with
, ,. . the court of Spain. A Convention of'cllatcs pro-

nounceil tlhem to have forfeited the benefit of the
articl.s whics h erce or'cc(7!; and the King re-
quired them, by i l'o'.' lan;it , to f!(:; n 'i,..r theIr n -
Jelves to justice. T'!e preifcice of ilc Lteliti
a.mblafador concr!ibutcd: ;.li;i'ips, to tho e vigour
of these proceedings. ;'li- zibcth, ever attentive
to lames's motions, anld li-,,1iin his rcluCfanee
ro puni if the Popish Lords to a icret approba-
tion of their dcfigns, had .C';t Ford Zouche to
rIprcfent, once more, ;ile di;ane;, to which Ihe ex-
puolcd himflclf, by thii f'lae !imoderation ; and to
require Iiiim to exercii' tiiat ri;oir, xwliich tlheir
cri'mes, as well as the ifl a'c (Cf afsfairsi, lrendered
nccctilary. 'Thotlgh tile fleps now taken by the
King iilcincd all compl)la.ints on that hcad, (yet
Zoiuche, forgetful of his character an a inbaidat-
dor, entered into private negotiatiotis with fluch of
the Scottish nobles as dilapproved of the King's
imcafures, and held almofl- an open co.)rrlcfondcncc
with Bothwcll, wlo, according to the usual arti-

Cald. iv, 330. Spbtfw. 397.

lice

f'cr of m.iccontents, plretenlded much solicitude B ° 0 K
fur reforming the dilorders of tile commonwealth ; '--v--.
and covered liis own anibition with the specious ,','.c .
veil of zeal againit thoic Counsellors w io re-
lirlained the King firom pursuing the avowed ene-
mtics of thle 'Protelant faith. Zouche encouiraIel
hlinm, in the name of his Miibtrfs, to take arims
a.'iii;i his Sovereiin.

M^EANWHILE, the King and the Clergv w-ere An at-

filled witlh mutiual dilltruf of each other. They 13,chw^l's
were jealous, perhaps, to excess, that Jamnes's
aiecLtions leaned too muchl towards the Popish
faccion; he fufpeeted them, without good rleatn,
of prompting Bothwell to rebellion, and even of
iluplyinghim wvitih money forthat purpole. Little
iitiigation, indeed, was wanting to rouse filch a
turbulent flirit as Bothwell's, to any daring en-
terprife. Iie appeared suddenly within a mile of
lKdinburgh, at the head of four hundred horse.

ile pretences, by which he endeavoured to
jullify this infurrefion, were extremely popular;
z7eal for religion, enmity to Popery, concern fr(
tie King's honour, and for the liberties of the
nation. James was totally unprovided for his
own defence; he had no infantry, and was accom-
panlied only with a few hOrtlclmen of 1 ,old Home's
train. In this extremlity, he implored the aid of
the citizens of ledinburgh, and, in order to en-
courage them to act with zeal, he promniled to
proceed againit the Popifli Lords with the utmtofl
rigour of law. Animated by their Minlteirs, the
cirizens ran cheerfully to thir arms, ;ad1 ad-
vanced, with the King at their head, aI.iirlll

6 Boltwell;

B io K Bothwell; but he, notwithstanding his success in

VIII.

putting to flight Lord Home, who had rafhily
':94' charged him with a far inferior number of ca.

valry, retired to Dalkeith without daring to
attack the King. His followers abandoned him
loon after, and, discouraged by so many fucceflevc
disappointments, could never afterwards be
brought to venture into the field. He betook
himself to his usual lurking-places in the North
of England; but Elizabeth, in compliance with
the King's remonfrrances, obliged him to quit
that retreat".

Frceh dan. No sooner was the King delivered from one
the i', danger, than he was called to attend to another.
L.r;is. The Popish Lords, in consequence of their nego-

tiations with Spain, received, in the spring, a
supply of money from Philip. What bold designs
this might inspire, it was no easy matter to con-
jedEure. From men under the dominion of bi-
gotry, and whom indulgence could not reclaim,
the nmolt desperate actions were to be dreaded.
The afiembly of the Church immediately took the
alarm; remonflrated against them with more bit-
ternefs than ever; and unaninoufly ratified the
sentence of excommunication pronounced by the
fynod of Fife. James himself, provoked by their
obstinacy and ingratitude, and afraid that his long
forbearance would not only be generally dilpleaf-
ing to his own subjects, but give rife to unfavour-
able suspicions among the Englifl, exerted hiifelf
June 8. with unusual vigour. -Ie called a Parliament;

' ,qS)otl\\. 403. Caill. iv. 359.

laid

laid before it all the circumst.ances and aggrava- v ,l K
touns of the conlpirac)y; and though there were L--,-
bu)t few members prelent, and leveral of tlhefe
.cnn1ected with tilc coinl)irators by bylo l)d or friend-
]liil), he prevailed. on them, by his influence and
ijmorltu liry, to p:-on/oulicc the Imof rigorous fin-
tencet' wliCc tlhe lavw cal in i lict. They were de-
cli -red to be guilLy of' high tireafon, and their
cl:ltces and honours fArf(it.'d. At tle -iicme time,
1;.,uties, mole levere than ever, ve crc enacedl
,:5.'inlit h tile ptrof I fl, r s of tile 'Po ifti religioon.

ilow to put this fcntence in executiotl, was a Rattle of

Gltnlivat.

iattCer of great diificulty. Three p]owcrfil Ba-
ru;s, cantoned in a part of the country of difficult
;,;iclu, surrounded with numerous vassals, and
l',iported by aid from a foreign Prince, were
i; ure than an overmatch for a Scottifi Monarch.
No intreaty could prevail on Elizabeth to advance
the mnoney, necefil'ry for defraying the expences of
;in expedition against them. To attack them in
perlon, with his own forces alone, might expose
hiimi both to disgrace and to danger. He had re-
coulirc to the only expedient which remained in
such a situation, for aiding the impotence of So-
vereign authority; he delegated his authority to
tlhe Earl of Argyll and Lord Sorbes, the leaders
of two clans at enmity with the conspirators; and
gave them a conmiflion to invade their lands,
and to seize the castles which belonged to them.
uotilwell, notwithfiandting all his high prctcnfions
of zeal for the Protcftant religion, having now
entered into a dole confederacy with them, tie
danger became every day more urging. Argyll,

VOL. 11. Q( solicited

B o o K solicited by the King, and routled by the Clergy,

took the field at the head of seven thousand inme
594' H-untly and Errol met hin at Glenlivat, with an

army far inferior in number, but compoLed cli icly
of gentlemen of the low countries, mounted oii
horleback, and who brought along with thenm a
oa. 3. train of field-p.ieces. They encountered achc

other with all the fury which hereditary enmit'
and ancient rivalfhip add to undifcrplined courage.
2395. But the Highlanders, disconcertcd by the firlt

discharge of the cannon, to which they were little
accustomed, and unable to resist the imprelTion of
cavalry, were soon put to flight; and Argyll, a
gallant young man of eighteen, was carried by his
friends out of the field, weeping with indignation
at their disgrace, and calling on them to stand,
and to vindicate the honour of their name".

ON the firfl intelligence of this defeat, James,

though obliged to pawn his jewels in order to raifi:
money0, assembled a finall body of troops, and
marched towards the North. He was joined by
the Irvines, Keiths, Leflys, Forbeses, and othcr
clans at enmity with Huntly and Errol, wlo hav-
ing loft: fveral of their principal followers at Glen-
livar, and others refuting to bear arms againfl the
King in person, were obliged to retire to the moun-
tains. James walled their lands; put garrilfos in
some of their castles; burnt others; and left thic
Duke of Lennox as his Lieutenant in that part of
the kingdom, with a body of men sufficient to rc-
flrain them fiom gathering to any head there, oi

" C.ild, iv. 4cS. " Birch, Mein. i., 8'6.

fi'oID

'r,;oi in felling the low country. Reduced at last B 0 0 Ic
,) cxtreme ditlrels by the rigour of the season, _
;!n'l the d(cIertion of their followers, they obtained '95'
tlc King's permiflion to go beyond tfas, and gave
k turity that they flould neither return without p
liis licence, nor engage in any new intrigues L.rdsdriven

o ut of the

a;ainft the Proteltant religion, or the peace of kingdun.
the kingdom ' .

BY their exile, tranquillity was re-eflablifihed in

the North of Scotland ; and the firinctefs and vi-
gour which James had displayed in his last pro-
cccdings agailtt them, regained him, in a great
degree, the confidence of his Protellant fubje ts.
But he funk, in the fame proportion, and for the The Roman
lame reason, in the esteem of the Roman Catholics. in'enhf
They had asserted his mother's right to the Crown :g"ili
of England with so much warmth, that they could
not, with any decency, rejeEt his; and the indul-
gence, with which he affected to treat the pro-
fcfors of that religion, inspired them with such
hopes, that they viewed his acceflion to the throne
as no undesirable event. But the rigour with
which the King had lately pursued the confpira-
tors, and the severe statutes against Popery to
which he had given his consent, convinced them
that these hopes were visionary; and they began
to look about in quest of fomne new successor,
whose rights they might oppose to his. The Pa-
pifls who resided in England turned their eyes
towards the Earl of Effex, whose generous mind,
though firmly established in the Protestant faith,

P Spotfw. 404. Cald. 373, &c.

Q 2 abhorred

B oI K abhorred the severities infliaed in that age on ac.

--' count of religious opinions. Thole of the famc
'595- fe&, who were in exile, formed a bolder scheme,

and one more suitable to their situation. They
advanced the claim of the Infanta of Spain; ant!
Parsons the Jesuit published a book, in which, b1
fltfe quotations from hiflory, by fabulous genea-
logies, and ablfurd arguments, intermingled with
bitter invectives against the King of Scots, he en-
deavotired to prove the Infanta's title to the Eng-
lifl Crown to be preferable to his. Philip, though
involved already in a war both with France and
inguland, and scarce able to defend the remains
oL the Blurgiundian provinces against the Dutch
comllnllnwealth, eagerly grasp)cd at this airy pro-
ecl-. The dread of a Spanill Pretender to tlih
Crown, and thle oppoolition which thePapilts began
to form agaiill- the King's ifuccefion, contributcd
not a little to remove the prejudices of the Pro-
tefitnts, and to prepare the way for that event.

,thw.i Borrw iiLL. L, whole name has been so often mcn-
to(' tn'fy tioncll as Lte dilturber of the King's tranquillity

and of the peace of the kingdom, was now in a
wrctched condition. Abandoned by the Qeecn of
Englalnd, on account of his confederacy with the
Popihl Lords; excommunicated by the Church for
tlhe fame reason; and delerted, in his diilrefs, by
his own followers; he was obliged to fly for facfty
to France, and thence to Spain and Italy, where,
after renouncing the Proteflant faith, he led many
years an obscure and indigent life, remarkable only
for a low and infamous debauchery. The King,
though extrelmely ready to facri ice the ftrongelt re-

fcntmcnt

iitllcit, to the fiightclt ackno!ledgments, could n ° 0° C
ler be lc ftencd by his l-ubmiffion, nor be induced l
to lilten to any intercellion in his bclialf'. K595s

Tirrs year the King loft Chancellor Maitland,
:!n able Miniller, on whom he had long devolved
rhe whole weight of public afiairs. As James
loved him while alive, he wrote, in honour of his
memory, a copy of verles, which, when comn-
pared with the compositions of that age, are far
roin bein inlgg inlant.

SOON after his death, a considerable change A h,apin

w.as made in the adminitlration. At that time, Q1,io'"ni
tlie annual charges of government far exceeded
the King's revenues. The QVeen was fond of
(xclenfive ain-ufements. James himself was a
llranger to oeconomy. It became necessary, for
all these reasons, to levy the public revenues with
greater order and rigour, and to husband them
w\ith more care. This important trust was com-
mitted to eight gentlemen of the law", who,
from their number, were called Onavians. The
powers velted in them were ample, and almost
unlimited. The King bound himself neither to
aldd to their number, nor to supply any vacancy
that might happen, without their content: And
knowing the facility of his own temper, agreed
that no alienation of his revenue, no grant of a

'V Winw. Me. i. Spotif'. 410. r I. 4 1.

Ale\xandcr Sc:ton Prcfident of the Sftlion, Walter Stc.wart

(-C' iiicnlator of l';intyre Lord Privy Scall, I);vid Carncgy,
Jhii' Lindlihy, Janicis lplinlgilojin, Thomi:Ls IHIunilton, John
*.kcnl; Clerk Rcgillcr, and lcler Young Elcnl)l nlar.

Q(j3 ' pension,

B 0 0 K pension, or order on the treasury, should be held

-,-.--i valid, unless it were ratified by the subscription
'595s of five of the cominiflioners; all their afts and

decisions were declared to be of equal force with
the sentence of judges in civil courts; and il
consequence of them, and without any other
warrant, any person might be arrested, or their
goods seized. Such extensive juriTfdiion, toge-
ther with the absolute disposal of the public mo-
ney, drew the whole executive part of the go-
vernment into their hands. United .lnong them-
selves, they gradually undermined the reft of the
King's Ministers, and seized on eve-ry lucrative
or honourable office. The ancient servants of
the Crown repined at being obliged to quit their
59¢, fl'ations to new men. The favourices and young

courtiers murmulred at secing the King's liberality
stinted by their prescriptions. And the Clergy
exclaimed against loine of them as known apo-
states to Popery, and fufpeted others of secretly
favouring it. They retained their power, how-
ever, notwitlhflanding this general combination
against them; and they owed it entirely to the
order and oaconomy which they introduced inro
the administration of the finances, by which the
neceliary expences of government were more
easily defrayed than in any other period of the
King's reign'.

violene rof TI'r rumour of vast preparations which Philip
'a ini'sih was said to be carrying on at this time, )iledl both
Popini' lEngland and Scotland with the dread of a new iiin-

vafion. James took prolper ncaflurcs for the de-

Spotlw.. 1 13 '135,

fence

fence of hlis kingdom. But thefc did not satisfy B °o K
the zeal of the Clergy, whose suspicions of the
K-ing s sincerity began to revive; and as he had 1596.
prlnitted the wives of the banilled Peers to levy
the rents of their ellates, and to live in their
houlfs, they charged him with rendering the aat
offorfeitlre ineffectual, by iupporting the avowed
eniemies of the Protefttnt faith. The assembly March 2.
of the Church tooli undler consideration the state
of the kingdoil, and having appointed a day of
public fasting, they solemnly renewed the Co-
venant, by which the nation was bound to adhere
to the Protcftant faith, and to defend it against
all aggreflirs. A committee, consisting of the
nioft eminent Clergymen, and of many Barons
andl gentlemlen of diftincrion, waited on the King,
and laid before hiln a plan for the security of the
kingdom, and the preservation of religion. They
urged him to appropriate the estates of the ba-
iilhcd Lords as a fund for the maintenance of
follicrs; to take the strictest precautions for pre-
venting the return of such turbulent sub ic'ts into
the country; and to pursue all who were suspected
of being their adherents with the utmost rigour.

NOTHIING could be more repugnant to the TheKing'i

King's schemes, or more disagreeable to his in- wr'iritIrcr
clination, than these propositions. Averse, through to Oicm.
his whole life, to any course where he cxpected
oppolition or danger; and fond of attaining his
ends with the characer of moderation, and by
the arts of policy, he observed with concern the
prejudices again him

hi wich were growing among
the Roman Catholics, and resolved to make tome

Q-4 atonement

B 0 O K atonement for that part of his conduo& which had

_L -,- drawn upon him their indignation. Elizabeth was
3596. now well advanced in years; her life had lately

been in danger; if any Popish competitor Ihould
arise to dispute his right of succession, a fation lo
powerful as that of the banished Lords night be
extremely formidable; and any division among
his own subje&s might prove fatal at a junEture
which would require their united and mIoft vigo-
rous efforts. Instead, therefore, of the additional
severities which the Afiilmbly proposed, James
had thoughts of mitigating the punishment which
they already suffered. And as they were fur-
rounded, during their residence in foreign parts,
by Philip's emilaries ; as resentment might dif-
pole them to liften more favourably than ever ro
their suggestions; as despair might drive them to
still more atrocious aStions; he relblved to recall
them, under certain conditions, into their native
country. En:couraged by these ftntiments of the
King in tleir favour, of which they did not want
intelligence, and wearied alreatdy of the dependant
and anxious life of exiles, they ventured to return
secretly into Scotland. Soon after, they prelcntud
a petition to the King, begging his permillion to
rcfide at tlheir own houlies, and olloiring to give
fectirit y for their peaceable and du tiful behaviour.
James called a Convention of eflaLes to deliberate
on a matlter of llfucl ilmlportamice, and by their
advice lie grlanted the petition.

r-> rta, As lbon asi tlhey wcrc infollrmed of this, the

'it

p ',':
r ' lel lb r;s O f a committee, a)poiliteCd by the 1.ll

''., li, 11Crral A:Xll'imbly, met at l'dinbulirghi and wirlh

a;ll

:,1 tile precipitancy of fear, and of zeal, took n o 1 K
luchl rcfolutions as they thought nece'lL,-y fulo the
I'lfhtiv (of the kingdom. T'hey wrote circular let-

l S"'.

t'rs to all tie Prcfbyteries in Scotland; theyl
warned them of the approaching danger tl;ey
exhorted thcn to flir up their people to the dc-
fence of their ju!t rights; they commanded them
to publish, in all their pulpits, the adl- exconi-
municating the Popifl Lords; and enjoinedl themll
to lay all those who were fulpteled of favouring
Popery under the fame centil-e by a lfuimary
fentencc, and without oblerving the i rint forina-
litie:, of trial. As the danger seemed too 1rc-1f-
ilng to wait for the flated nIietillns of tlihe ji.ica-
tolics of the Chlilrch, they mrade choice of the
molt cemiinclet Clergymen in dilfierent corners of
the kingdom, apointed thll to re sic couflantly
at Edillburgh, and to imee(t every day withl tihe
Minitliers of that city, unt1der the nlllila of the
'landiiig Cnc;il tf the C;hurch, and veile(i in tllis
body the fupremie authority, by en jiling It, in
imitation of the ancient Roman forl, to to ake carc
that the Church filould receive no detrilncnt.

''-IESI; proceedings, no lels unconit litutioinll

than unprecedented, were inaniftelt: cncro achmencts
on the royal prerogative, and bold lleps towards
open rebellion. The King's conduct, however,
jiit:iiced in some degree such excefl;s. I lis leni ty
towards the Papists, so repuiagnant to tlie princi-
lles of that age; his ;pardoning the coflr)irlators,
notwitlh iand ing repeated promlii les to tle contrary;
tlhe rcjpeci he paid to Lady 1 Juntly, wlio was at-
Ltahed to the Romlilh rcligion no lels tlih. her

lufI)and;l

B 0 0 K hlifanld his committing the care of his daugh-

VIII, _.---. ter, the Princess Elizabeth, to Lady Levingfton,
'506. who was inseted1 with the fiame ifupcrltion ; the

contempt with whvich he talked, on all occasions,
both of the character of Miniflers, and of their
fu!ncion; were circumfitances which might have
filled nmincls, not prone by nature to jealoulf,
with some fulfpicio ns; and might have precipitated
into rash councils tlihoe who were far removed
friom intelnperate zeal. But, however powerful
the lmotives might be which influenced the Clergy,
or however laudable the end they had in view,
they condulcd their mealiures with no address,
and even with little prudence. James difcovcrcd
a llrong inclination to avoid a rupture with the
Church, and, jealous as he was of his prerogative,
would willingly have made many concessions for
the fake of peace. By his command, some of the
Privy Counsellors had an interview with the more
lnodlerate among the Clergy, and inquired whe-
ther [Iuntly and his alfociates might not, upon
nlaking proper acknowledgments, be again re-
ceived into the bosom of the Church, and be ex-
empted froim any fulrther puniihment on account
of their past apollacy and treasons. They replied,
that though the gate of mercy stood always open
for tholle who repented and returned, yet as thele
noblemen had been guilty of idolatry, a crime
delerving death both by the law of God and of
man, the civil nagiflrate could not legally grant
them a pardon; and even though the Chtlrch
fliould ablllve tiicm, it was his duty to infli&ft pu-
nilhincnt tipon thcnm. T his inflexibility in those

wlio

vwho were reckoned the mofl: compliant of the or- °

o K

dcr, filled the King with indignation, which tlhei l,
in prudence and o!ltinacy of a private Clergyman I,'b.
heightened into rage.

MR. DAVID BLCACK, Minifler at St. Andrew's, S%,lii;,iI

difcourling in one of his rcrmons, according to ,rig'by
custom, concerning the ftatc of the nation, as- T"l"k.
firmed that the King had permitted tle Popifl,
Lords to return into Scotland, and by that ation
had discovered the treachery of his own lc.art;
that all Kings were the Devil's children ; thac
Satan had now the guidance of the court; that
the Queen of England was an atheist; that the
judges were miscreants and bribers; the nobility
godless and degenerate; the Privy Counsellors
cormorants, and men of no religion ; and in his
prayer for the Queen he tfed these words, we
mnuft pray for her for faflhion-fake, but we have no N:,v. io.
cause, fle will never do us good. James coin- l'1,l'ir
manded him to be summoned before the Privy d:c"nic.
Council, to answer for such seditious exprfTions;
and the Clergy, instead of abandoning him to the
punishment which such a petulant and criminal at-
tack on his superiors deserved, were so imprudent
as to espouse his cause, as if it had been the com-
mon one of the whole order. The controversy
concerning the immunities of the pulpit, and the
rights of the Clergy to testify against vices of
every kind, which had been agitated in one thou-
sand five hundred and eighty-four, was now re-
vived. It was pretended that, with regard to
their sacred funaion, Minillers were lilijccl to
the Church alone that it belonged onl! to their

c;'clcrI-

B 0 Oc C ccciefiaflical superiors to judge of the truth or

.-~,--._ t'alJhooud of dodlrincs delivered in the pulpit;
'3"'. thal if, upon any p'rtence whatever, the Kilnr

iiu:r-ped tihisjurilidislion, tlhe Chlurch would, fioml
that moment, fink under servitude to the civil
iiigifltr'.tc; that, infread of reproving vice with
that honefic boldnlefs which had often been of ad-
v'ancage to iindividuals, and falutarv to the king-
doim, the Clergy would learn to flatter the pas-
iions of the Prince, and to connive at the vices
of others; that the King's eagernels to punlilh the
indiscretion of a Proteflant Mini:l-er, while he was
to ready to pardon the crimes of Popish confpi-
rators, called on them to 1t-ad upon their guard,
and that now was the time to contend for their
privileges, and to prevent any encroachment on
those rights, of which the Church had been in
poffelion ever since the iR eformiation. Influenced
by these conlfideratiols, the Council of the Church
enjoined Black to decline tile jurifdiclion of the
Privy Council. Prould of IfchI an opportunity to
display his zeal, hlie presented a paper to that pur-
pole, and witllthe utmofR fl rmncfs refused to plead,
or to anlwer the questions which were put to hin.
In order to add greater weight to thele proceed-
ings, tile Council of the Church tranfinitted the
tiinclnlntrc to all the Preibytcries througholut the
kingdom, and enjoined every Miniller to filb-
Icribe it in tellimony of his approbation.

JAMI;S defended his righlts with no less vigour

than they were attacked. Seniible of the con-
tempt under which his autlority mult fall, if tile
Clergy should be permitted publicly, and with

6 imp nit),

impunity, to calumniate his MlinirCers, and cven er 0. K0
to censure himifelf; and knowing, by f;toimc (:- .--. -
amnples, what unequal reparation for fuh onfl'enccs 6
he might expecSt fr-oml the judicatolr'e of the
Church, he urged on the inquiry into Black's con-
duct, and iflledt a proclamation, coinmandli(l;i c
the Members of the Council of the (Church to
leave Edinburgh, and to return to their own p:I-
rililes. Black, intlead of fibmilittirng, rencwedc
llis dccliailture; and the Council, in defiance of
the proclamation, declared, tl:.t as thely lmet by
the authority of the Church, obedience to it w.s
a duty still more sacred than that which they ow.dt
to the King himself. 'I'lhe Privy Council, nur-
withltanding Black's refuting to plead, proceeded
in the trial; and, after a lulcinn inquiry, pro-
nounced himn guilty of the crinmes of which li l i.d1
been accused; but referred it to the King to ap-
point what punifliment he liould ltiflelr.

MEANWHILE, many endeavours were used to

bring matters to accommodation. Almloll every
clay produced tome new fcheine of reconcile-
ment; but through the King's fickleiiefs, the
obstinacy of the Clergy, or the intriguics of the
courtiers, they all proved i!l'efful. 1Both par-
ties appealed to the people, antd [,y reciprocal and
exaggerated acculations elndletvtonred to render
each other odious. Insolence, IcFlition, rreafon,
were the crimes with which James charged the
Clergy; while they made the pulpits refuoLnd with
complaints of his cxceffive lenityv rowards Papills,
and of the no lels excefcive rigour with which lie
opprclfed the efablifllcd Church, Exasperated

by

B
V o K by their bold invectives, he, at last, sentenced

.-,--_ Black to retire beyond the river Spey, and to
159' Ilrefide there during his pleasure; and once more

commanding the rnembers of the tfanding Coun-
cil to depart fiom Edinburgh, he required all the
Ministers in the kingdom to subscribe a bond,
obliging thenifelves to submit, in the fame nan-
ner as other flbjedl-s, to the jurifdiftion of the
civil courts in natters of a civil nature.
A ,tmul in THIS decisive measure excited all the violent

"iburih. paflions which possess disappointed factions; ande

deeds no lels violent immediately followed. Thecfe
nmut be imputed in part to the artifices of tonme
courtiers, who expelced to reap advantage fiom
the calamities of their country, or who hoped to
lessen the authority of the Otavians, by engaging
them in hostilities with the church. On one
hand, they informed the King that the citizens of
Edinburgh were under arms every night, and had
planted a strong guard round the houses of their
ministers. James, in order to put a flop to this
imaginary insult on his government, ifilled a pro-
clamation, commanding twenty-four of the prin-
cipal citizens to leave the town within fix hours.
On the other hand, they wrote to the Ministers,
adviling them to look to their own fifety, as
HFuntly had been secretly admitted to an inter-
view with the King, and had been the author of
the levere proclamation against the citizens of
rdinburgh". They doubted no more of the truth

of'

,' Tllnugh mn.ttcrs cwere indliiflioiigfly aggavated by persons,

who swili l
h both pIartics to purfie violcnt i cafurcs; neither c f'

thefic

of this intelligence, than the King had done of B ( o K

Viii.

that which he received, and fell as blindly into .--
the Inare. The letter cane to their hands just as "s'
one of their number was going to mount the
pulpit. They resolved that he flould acquaint
the people of their danger: and he painted it with D.ccm. ,7
all the strong colours which men naturally employ
in describing any dreadful and instant calamity.
WVhen the fermion was over, lie desired the nobles
and gentlemen to atfernble in the Little Cl,'Iurc,.
The whole multitude, ter!if-ied at v hatthey had
heard, crowded thither; they promil'd and vowed
to stand by the Clergy; they drew np a petition
to the King, craving the redress of those griev-
ances, of which the Church complained, and be-
feeching him to deliver them fiomn all future ap-
prehensions of danger, by removing such of his
Counsellors as were known to be enemies of the
Protestant religion. Two Peers, two Gentlemen,
two BurgefTes, and two Ministers, were appointed
to prelcnt it. The King happened to be in the The Kinr
great hall of the Tolbooth, where the court of in da
1eflion was fitting. The manner in which tle
petition was delivered, as well as its contents,
ofFendcd him. 1-le gave an haughty reply; the
petitioners insistcd with warmth; and a proinil-
cuous multitude prefling into the roomi, James

ihlifc reports \v;is ai ogitclich r (ldclitnttc of l',tii l.ti(ion. As til,:ir
Milliiitcl'; \were fll)ppol'cd to 1)e iln d:iigc, IllIc' ol' tile nmlor
zcalous cilizecns had dectcrniiict l to tlcinl Lllcnl y

I h'))r' ot

;'llns. Birch. Mer. ii. 250. Hu tiy hli:d ii ,:1t1 pIliv;tlv il
Edinburgh, where lie had an interview, i not withl tlhe ,iinIl,
at lcal with bmre of his Minillcr;. Birch. Ibid. 230.

retired

L o (o K retir ed abruptly into another apartment, ani

,-.--- cuommanded the tates to be folut bchind him. 'Tii.
'' c denpties returned to tile imuiltitulde, wvho vwre l iT!]

afiTerblcd, andi to whom a Mlinifrcr had been r'-:'
ing, in their absence, tihc l'ory of I ailna \'ain
they reported that the Kint had refinled to 1i'. '
to tlleir etitions, the Chul-rCh was filled in a i.,-
ment with noire, thi-catenings, exccrati,,ns, ai:
all the outrage and confusion of a popular cui:,;ii:,
Sonie called for their arms, fonm to b;iigt out t.;,
*wicked IHamnaln; others cried, The l\'o;rd of ti,,
Lord and of' Gideon ; and, rushing outt Xvwil thi
io0fn fturious inpeltuofity, surrounded the Tol-
booth, thliratcningl the King hlimlielf, andl delmiaand.
ing ionme of his Counsellors, wvhoin tiley named,
that they might tear them in pieces. I'lle ma-
giftrates of the city, partly by autlority, partly
by force, endeavoured to quell the tumult; the
King attempted to Ioothe the m-alecontents, by
promising to receive their petitions, when ipre-
sented in a regular manner; the Mlinillers, finfiblc
of their own rafhiefs in kindling such a flamc, le-
conelcd both; and the rage of the populace -fb-
fiding as lltddenly as it had risen, they alldifpcrfcid,
and the King returned to the palace; happy in
having. c'lcaped fiom an infiilrecilion, whicll,
though the inftlantancous and unconcerted cfcd&
of popular fury, had cxpofed his life to immincnt
danger, and was confidered by him as an ulipar-
donable affront to his authorityY.

x Spotlf. qi 7,& ;. C.ild.v. .4,&c. Birch.l.Mcrn. i.2z

As

As soon as he retired, the leaders of the male- B °

contents afernbled, in order to prepare their peti- -
tion. lThe punishment of the Popilh Lords; the 5 6.
removal of those Counsellors who were fulpe&ed
of favouring tleir persons or opinions; the repeal
of all the late a&s of council, fubv(rlive of the
authority of the Church; together with an ac-
approving the proceedings of the standing coun-
cil; were the chief of their demands. But the
King's indignation was fill so hilh, that the de-
puties, chosen for this purpofi, durfi not venture
that night to present requefls which could not fail
of kindling his rage anew. Before next morning,
James, with all his attendants, withdrew to Lin- He leives
lithgow; the feilon, and other courts of juitice, an^,l rga
Vwere required to leave a city where it was no ,ity,<init
longer confident either with their safety, or their thecitizens.
dignity to remain; and the noblemen and barons
were commanded to return to their own houfcs,
and not to reassemble without the King's permif-
sion. The vigour with which the King atcld,
firuck a damp upon the spirits of his adversaries.
'l'le citizens, l1nfiIble how much they would susser
by his abfcnce, and the reioval of tle courts of
iltice, repented already of their condAf. The
Minilters alone rel;,lvced to maintain the contceft.
''lhley endlcavoured to prevent the nobles from dif-
pering ; they inflamedll the people by violcnt in-
vcClives againll the King; they labouredl to pro-
cure fuiblcriptions to an afllbciation for tIl i 11I mu-
tual defence ; and conlcious wllat lullre and
iower the junLction of folme of the greater nlolhlcs
would add to their caule, tlhe Minilters of I"diii-

VOL. II, 1 burIg

n3 ( o K burgh wrote to Lord LHamilton, that the peol'l,
tL-- --n moVved by the word of God, and provoked by t(h

'e7' inijuries of-l-red to the Church, had taken arms;

that many of the nobles had determined to pro-
tre the 'rotelant religion, which owed its efla-
blifl me-nt to the piety and valour of their anccl-
tors; that they wanted only a leader to unite thelm,
and to inlpire themi with vigour; that his zeal slr
the goodo caule, no leis than his noble birch, en-
ttiled him to that honour: They conjured him,
thcre fore, not to dtllrppoint their hopes and wifsics,
nor to reftie tlih fidlc:ring Church that aid which
fle ib much needed. Iord Hamilton, inleadi of
complying .'i:h tlheir desire, carried the letter di-
retly to the King, lwhom this new insult irritated
to such a degree, that he commanded the magill
trates of Edinburgh instantly to seize their Mi-
niflers, as manifest incendiaries, and encouragers
of rebellion. The magiflrates, in order to regain
the King's favour, were preparing to obey anm!
the Ministers, who law no other hope of safely,
fled towards Englandl/.

Thc K i,. 'I' Isl unsuccessful in rrei'ion, infllad o over-
J w..I.rI tlurnlin i , efl-ablinfhe the King's authority. T'l olc

conc1iened in it were confoundedl and dili)eti'Il.
'Tlie rell- of Jaines's l;.ibjetts, in order to avoid
sil)cpiorn, or to gain hils Favour, contended who

oIlull be Inoflt forward to execute l is venreance.

A C()llnvclntion ofC (efi tes being called, prol)tl onccd(
tih' l].it inlitrrl'el ion to lie hig Ch treafo n; oirdiiili('l
cvel)y Jliniflle to lfubftcribe ai declaratioi l of his

Y 5l)(¢)t\W.- 5 Cal. V^ . 126.

l'ubi ,inofil

fib;miion to the King's jurifdi&ion, in all mat- (B a K
rcrs civil and criminal; inpowered magifl-rates to
commit, infiantly, to prii;n any Minister, who, 1s97'
in his sermons, should utter any indecent reflcc-
tions on the King's conduct; prohibited any Fc-
clcfiaftical judicatory to meet without thie King's
licence; commanded that no person flould be
clected a inagiflrate of Edinburgh, for the future,
';itihout the King's approbation; and that, in the
n'c.il time, the present magistrates fiouldl either
dilcover and inflict condign punishment on the

lutihors of the late tumult, or the city itself should
be fubjeEted to all tle penalties of that treasonable
aftion'

ARMED with the authority of these decrees, Abridges

James relolved to crush entirely the mutinous fpi- cgeP of the
ritof hisfubjets. As the Clergy had, hitherto, de- 'Edibur.
rived their chief credit and itrength fiomn the fa-
vour and zealof the citizensofEdinburgh, his first
care was to humble them. Though themagiftrates
i.ibmitted to him in the most abject terms; though
they vindicated themselves, and their fellow-citi-
zens, fiom the most distant intention of violating
his royal person or authority; though, after the
ftisclt scrutiny, no circumstances that could fix
on them the suspicion of premcditated rebellion
had been discovered; though many of the nobles,
andl fucli of the clergy as still retained any degree
of favour, interceded in their behalf; neither ac-
knowledgments, nor interceflions, were of the
lcat avail'. The King continued inexorable, the Frcb, ia

0 Cald. v. 147. a Cald. Y. 149.

R 2 city

B o0 K city was declared to have forfeited its privileges at

AI --- a corporation, and to be liable to all the penalties
'597' of treason. The capital of the kingdom, de-

prived of magistrates, deserted by its ministers,
abandoned by the courts of justice, and proscribed
by the King, remained in desolation and despair.
The courtiers even threatened to rase the city to
the foundation, and to eret a pillar where it
flood, as an everlasting monument of the King's
vengeance, and of the guilt of its inhabitants.
At last, in compliance with Elizabeth, who inter-
posed in their favour, and moved by the continual
March ii. solicitations of the nobles, James absolved the ci-

tizens from the penalties of law, but at the fame
time he friipped them of their most important pri-
vileges; they were neither allowed to eleft their
own magistrates, nor their own ministers; many
new burdens were imposed on them; and a great
fum of money was exacted by way of peace-of.
feringb.

New ru- JAMES was, meanwhile, equally assiduous, and
laions ''ith nolefsfuccefsful, in circumifribingthejurifdiction
regad to
the Church. of the Church. Experience had discovered that to

attempt this, by aas of parliament, and sentences
of privy council, was both ineffecual and odious.
He had recourse now to an expedient more artfil,
and better calculated for obtaining his end. The
Ecclefiaitical judicatories were composed of many
members; the majority of the Clergy were ex-
tremely indigent, and unprovided of legal stipends;
i(be nminifters in the neighbourhood ofEdinburgh,

" tpotfw. 434. 444.

notwith-

notwithstanding the parity established by the Pref- B 0 0 K-

·D v III.

byterian governlnent, had afilm^l .' 1s I'.iin in -_
the Church, which filled their brethren wiLi.; ivy ; 1597.
every numerous body of men is susceptible of fud-
den and (trong impreflions, and liable to be influ-
enced, corrupted, or overawed. Induced by these
considerations, James thought it polible to gain
the Clergy, whomn he had in vain attempted to
subdue. Proper agents were set to work all over
the kingdom; promises, flattery, and threats were
employed; the usurpations of the brethren near
the capital were aggravated thejealoufy of their
power, which was growing in the distant pror
vinces, was augmented; and two dilferent Ge-
neral Assemblies were held, in both which, not-
withfanding the zeal and boldness wherewith a
few leading Clergymen defended the privileges of
the Church, a majority declared in favour of those
measures which were agreeable to the King.
Many praatices, which had continued fnce the Re-
formation, were condemned; many points of dif-
cipline, which had hitherto been reckoned sacred
and uncontroverted, were given up; the license,
with which ministers discoursed of political mat-
tcrs, was reltrained; the freedom with which they
inveighed against particular persons, ccnfuredi
sentences of fuiinmary excommunication declared
unlawful; the convoking a General Assembly,
without the King's permiflion, prohibited ; and
the right of nominating minilters to the principal
towns, vested in the Crown. Thus, the Clergy
thenfelves furrendcred privileges, which it would
have been dangerous to invade, and voluntarily

R 3 riibinirttd

B , 1) K fibmitted to a yoke more intolerable than any

James would have ventured to impose by force;
' 97 h while such as continued to oppose his ineafures,

inltead of tleir former popular topic of the King's
violent encroachments on a jurisdiction which didl
not belong to him, were obliged to turn their out.
cries againit the corruptionsof their own ordelr'.
p pinl. rig BY the authiority of these General Afeimblie<,

the Popifli Earls were allowed to make a puh'ic
recantation of their errors ; were ablolved fro:
the I nitence of exconmunication; and received
into the bololii of the Church. But, not many
years after, they relplfcd into th-ir former errors,
were again reconciled to the church of Rome,
and by their apoftacy jultified, in some degree,
the sea;s and icruples of the Clergy with regard
to their ablflution.

'T r-i Ministers of Edinburgh owed to the intei-

celiion of these aflemblies the liberty of returniiig
to their charges in the city. But this liberty wvI,
clogged in such a manner as greatly abrid(gcil
their power. Thle city was divided into (diftiil
parrilhcs; the number of Minilclers doubled; pcr-
Ibuns on wlole fidelity the King could rely were
sicCd in the new pariflies; and thcfe circuiilltian!ccs
a;ldded to the autllrity of the late d(ecrces of the
Church, contributed to confirm tihat abfbl0ute do-
minion in 1',cclefia;lical affaiirs, which James pols
lelrd lduring tlhe remainder of hlis reign.

Tr-ll: King was if intent on1 new modelling tlie
Chlurch, that the other traiinlftions of this period

Spot Fw. 4,1 3 , l. v. J8. . 233.

fIcarce

scarce deserve to be remembered. The OctQvi- r, 0 1 tK
ans, envied by the other courtiers, and splitting --
into factions among thenlifvces, rcfigncd their ' '7'
comiifrion ; and the adliiniltration of the reve-
nue returning into its foirmer channel, both the
King and the nation were deprived of the benefit
ot tilei r regular and rfrugal ccconoml.

TOWARDS the end of the year, a parliament D.,. !,

was held in order to restore I-Iuntly and his afib-
ciates to their ellates and honours, by repealing
the aSt of forfitiure pafied aginit them. T'he a -
thiorityofthis fupremie court was likewsi em ployedi
to introdluce a farther innovation into the C ilhurc;
but, conflormlable to the system which the Kin g had
now adopted, the motion for this purpole took
its rife from the Clergy themselves. As tie act .Ec--I;:.,!.
of general annexation, and that efcablifhing the '.

l. 'I"

Prdebyterian government, had reduced the few l'"a.:.n.
Bilhops, who itill survived, to poverty and con-
tempt ; as those who poffelfid the Abbeys and
Priories were mere laymen, and many of themi
temporal Peers, few or none of the lcclcfiaflical
otlrdr remained to vote in parliament, andl, by
means of that, the inifcnce of the Crown wa,
(olidcrably cdimiilhcd there, and a proper ba-
lance to the power and numiber of the nobles was
wanilng. But the prejudices the nation had con-
ccived againfl the name and character of Biflops
were tb violent, that James was obliged, with the
utinoll care, to avoid the appearance of a design
to revive that order. He prevailed therefore oRn
the Coinilnlion appointed by the lafi General
All'embly to complain to the Parliamcnt, that the

R 4. Church

B o 0° K Church was the only body in the kingdom defli.
L.-.-,- tute of its representatives in that supreme court,

159S' where it so nearly concerned every order to have

some, who were bound to defend its rights; anil
to crave that a competent number of the Clergy
should be admitted, according to ancient cuifom7,
to a feat rhere. In compliance with this requer,
an aft was passed, by which thole Ministers, on
whom the King should confer the vacant Bithop.
rics and Abbeys, were intitled to a vote in Par-
liament; and that the Clergy might conceive no
jealouly of any encroachment upon their privi-
leges, it was remitted to the General Assembly,
to determine what spiritual jurificition or autho-
rity in the government of the Church these per-
sons should pofTefs".

THE King, however, found it no easy matter to

obtain the concurrence of the Ecclesiastical judi-
catories, in which the act of Parliament met with
a fierce opposition. Though the Clergy perceived
how much luifre this new privilege would refleCt
upon their order; though they were not insensible
of the great acceflion of personal power and dig-
nity, which many of them would acquire, by be-
ing admitted into the supreme council of the na-
tion, their abhorrence of episcopacy was extreme;
and to that they lacrificed every consideration of
intcrcll or ambition. All the King's profelEions of
regard for the present constitution of the Church
did not convince them of his sincerity; all the
devices that could be invented for restraining and

' .Spotfw. 450. Pril. 15 th Jc., V. c. 235.

circum-

circumicribing the jurifdition of such as were 13 0 K
to be raiied to this new honour, did not diminish -.,
tleir jealouly and fear. Their own experience 159S.
had taught them, with what insinuating progress
the hierarchy advances, and though admitted at
iirlt with moderate authority, and under specious
pretences, how rapidly it extends its dominion.

V ';irnifh over this scheme, said one of the lead-

ing Clergymen, with what colours you pleale;
ldeck the intruder with the utnoft art; under all
this dillguifl, I fee the horns of his mitre." The
amic fentinents prevailed among many of his
brethren, and induced them to reject power and
lhonours,. with as much zeal as ever those of their
order courted them. Many, however, were al-
lured by the hopes of preferment; the King him-
fcif and his Ministers employed the fame arts,
which they had tried lo successfully last year; and
after long debates, and much opposition, the Ge- Mlrch 7.
neral Afferbly declared that it was lawful for Mi-
niiers to accept of a feat in Parliament; that it
would be highly beneficial to the Church, to have
its representatives in that iu.prene court; and
that fifty-one persons, a number nearly equal to
that of the Ecclefiallics, who were anciently
called to Parliament, should be chosen firom
ainong the Clergy for that putrpofe. The manner
of their election, together with the powers to be
veficd in them, were left undecided for the tprelent,
ntil furnifnled matter of future deliberation .

, SpOi.fw. 450. C;i1,l. v. 27,.

A.,

B 0 0 K As the profped of succeeding to the Crown oC
. --_v England drew nearer, James mnultiplied precau-

s. 9- tions in order to render it certain. As lie was

dav urs allied to many of the Princes of Germany by his
"iih sue-
r.c.to giin mnarriage, lie lent ambassadors extraordinary ra

,glnd. their fevcral courts, in order to explain the jul-

ness of his title to the English throne, and to (de-
fire their afiftance, if any competitor should arilc
to dispute his undoubted rights. Tlhee i'rinccs
readily acknowledged the equity of his claiml;
but the aid which they could afford him was
distant and feeble. At the famle time, lEdward
Bruce, abbot of Kinlofs, his ambaffalor at the
E nglifl court, solicitec Elizabeth, with the utmuif
warmth, to recognize his title by some public
deed, and to deliver her own subjects from the
calamities which are occasioned by an uncertain
or disputed fuccenion. But age had lrt( ngthencll
all the paflions which had hitherto indluced Eli-
zabeth to keep this great question obllure anl
undecided; and a general and evasive annwer was
all that James could obtain. As no impreflion
could be made on the Queen, the amlibafl(ldor was
commanded to found the difpolition of her ll!)-
jects, and to try what progrcfs le could make in
gaining them. Bruce pollkiled all the talents of
Iicrccy, judgment, and address, requisite for con-
ducting a negotiation no lels delicate than im-
portant. A Minifler of this charaaer was intill(ed
to the confidence of the Englif. Many of rlie
highest rank unbofomen(d tilemlllves to hilm with-
out relerve, and gave him repeated afl'iiranccs of
their rcfolution to afi'ert his mailer's rililt, in lp-

3 po si tion

pofitioh to every pretender'. As several pam- B o0I Vo
phlets were dispersed, at this time, in England, I-_
containing objeEtions to his title, Jaines employed s59'
some learned men in his kingdom to answer thcle
cavillers, and to explain the advantages which
would result to both kingdoms by the union of
the Crowns. These books were eagerly read, and
contributed not a little to reconcile the Englifi to
that event. A book published this year by the
King himself, produced an effeJct fill more fa-
vourable. It was intitled Bafilicon Dorcn, and
contained precepts concerning the art of govern-
ment, addressed to Prince Henry his Ton. Not-
withstanding the great alterations and refinements
in national taste since that time, we must allow
this to be no contemptible performance, and not
to be inferior to the works of molf contemporary
writers, either in purity of style or jultnels of
composition. Even the vain parade of erudition
with which it abounds, and which now difgiufl
us, raised the admiration of that age; and as it
was filled with thole general rules which fpecu-
lative authorsdeliver for rendering a nation happy,
and of which James could dilcourfe with great
plaufbility, though often incapable of putting
them in practice, the Englifl conceived an high
opinion of his abilities, and expected an incrcafc
of national honour and prosperity, under a Prince
lo profoundly skilled in politics, and who gave
ltclh a specimen both of his wisdom and of his love
to his people .

r Jul1fl. 242. g Caiii. SpoItf . 457.

IliE

B 0 K TfIE Queen of England's sentiments concern-

Vill. ~
t .--- ing James, were very diflf'rent from those of her

15 9 subjects. His excessive indulgence towards the

P'opifhl Lords; the ficility with whiclh he pardoned
their repeated treasons; his restoring Bearon, the
Popish Archbillop of Glasgow, who had fled out
of Scotland at the time of the Reformation, to the
poViTclTon of the tempor.lities of that benefice;
the a.)iintinilg himn his Ambassador at the court of
Fl ranc!i; the lap, laute he beflowed, in the Bafili-
con Dloron, on thlofe who adhered to the Queen
his mnother, Elizabeth confidered as l'b many indi-
cations of a mindi alienated fro.i the Proteflant
religion; andln Iufpe&cd that he would loon revolt
from the profelion of it. These lfulpicions seen;ed
to be fully confirmed by a discovery which ca:ne

Ac'es.i.n froml the Master of Gray, who resided at that time
pdtn,, in Italy, and who, rather than susser his intriguing
wh ithe spirit to be idle, demeaned himself so far as to act

as a spy for the English court. fIe conveyed to
Elizabeth the copy of a letter, written by James
to Pope Clement VIII. in which the King, after
many exprelfions of regard for that pontiff, and of
gratitude for his favours, declared his firm reln-
lution to treat the Roman Catholics with indu}l-
gence ; and, in order to render the intercouril
between the court of Rome and Scotland moic
fiequent and familiar, he solicited the Pope to
promote lrummond, Bishop of Vaifon, a Scots-
man, to the dignity of a Cardinal. Elizabeth,
who had received by another channel', folcme im-

1 C;all. 333. I W1inw\ . Mciu. Vu. i3. 37 5'

perfcl

perfet intelligence of this correspondence, was B 0 1 K
filled with juftl furlpril, and immcdiatcly dii- _-.-
patched Bowes into Scotland, to inquire more 1599.
fully into the truth of the matter, and to reproach
James for an action so unbecoming a Protctlant
Prince. lie was altonifhed at tlie accutia'ion,
and with a confidence, vwhi1c norliing but the
confcioufiels of innocence could In'irr, afrlned
the whole to be a mere calumny, and the lc;ter
itlelf to be forged by his enemies, on ;iuri,:ic to
bring his sincerity in religion to be suspectld.
Elphingifon the Secretary of State denied the
rmatter with equal solemnity. It came to be
known by a very singular accident, which hap-
pened some years after, that the information
which Elizabeth had received was well founded,
though at the fame time the King's declarations
of his own innocence were perfectly consistent
with truth. Cardinal Bellarmine, in a reply
which he published to a controversial treatire, of
which the King was the author, accused himn of
having abandoned the favourable sentiments which
he had once entertained of the Roman Catholic
religion, and, as a proof of this, quoted his letter
to Clement VIII. It was impossible, any longer,
to believe this to be a fiction; and it was a mat-
ter too delicate to be pafied over without fIrit
inquiry. James immediately examined Elphing-
lion, and his confcffion unravelled the whole
iyllery. 1-le aclsknowledgedc that he had fluffed
in this letter among other papers, which lie laid
before the King to be signed, who fufipec'ing no
such deceit, fuLbfcribced it together with the rell,

a1nd

B 0 0 K and without knowing what it contained; tlat he

C-L-- _ lhad no other motive, however, to this aEtion,

' but zeal for his Majeify's service; and, by flat-

tering the Roman Catholics with hopes of in-
tlulgence under the King's government, he ima-
gined that he was paving the way for his more
ealy accefcion to tlhe En-lifh throne. The Privy
Council of England entertained very d iffrent fen-
LimInets of the Secretary's conduct. In their opi-
nion, not only the King's reputation had been
cxpofed to reproach, but his life to danger, by
this rash iipofture; they even imputed the gun-
powder treason to the rage and disappointment of
the Papills, upon finding that the hopes which
this letter inspired were fiuftrated. TheSecretary
was lent a prisoner into Scotland, to be tried for
high treason. His peers found him guilty, but, by
the Queen's interceflion, he obtained a pardonk.

ACCORDING to the account of other historians,

James himself was no stranger to this correspond-
ence with the Pope; and, if we believe them, El-
phingfton, being intimidated by the threats of the
English council, and deceived by the artifices of
the Earl of Dunbar, concealed bome circum-
flances in his narrative of this tranfatlion, and
falfilied others; and at the expenceof his own fame,
and with the dangr ofhislife, endeavoured todraw
a veil over this part of his Inafter's conduct'.

m~,.l ,t BBUT whether we impute the writingof this letter
to in hc to t the Secretary's officious zeal, or to the King's
Catolien, lconmmand, itiscertain, that, about this timne, James

k S:litcq'ri;l'i,vl', i.,.29. Sputfr\'.5. , 507. Jhil. llt. 4.l S.
1 (';1d. \vo(. v. 322. vi. 117.

tV tS

was at tile utmost pains to gain the friend(flip of n ° ° K
thel Roman Catholic Princes, as a necessary pre- J
caution towards facilitating his acceflion to the '599.
I:nrrifli throne. Lord Home, who was himself
a a',l;if, was entrusted with a secret commilfion
to the l'ope'"; the Archbiflhop of Glasgow was
an active instrument with those of his own reli-
gion". 'The Pope exprefifd such favourable fen-
timents both of the King, and of his right to the
Crown of England, that James thought himf,1lf
bound, some years after, to acknowledge the
obligation in a public manner0. Sir James Lind-
lay made great progress in gaining the EngliflT
Papists to acknowledge his Majesty's title. Of
all these intrigues Elizabeth received obscure
lints fi-om different quarters. The more imper-
fcetly she knew, the more violently fie fufpeted
the King's designs; and the natural jealousy of
her temper incrcafing with age, Ihe observed his
conduct with greater iolicitude than ever.

THE questions with regard to the elecion and ,6oo.

power of the representatives of the Church, were His regu'a
finally decided this year by the General AfTm!nbly, tin. with

rcgard to

whichi met at Montrole. That place was cholen thc Church.
as inoft convenient for the Ministers of the North,
amnong whoin the King's influence chiefly lay.
Although great numbers resorted fiom the north-
cln provinces, and the King employed his whole
inrereft, and the authority of his own pretence, to
tain a majority, the following regulations were
withl difficulty agreed on. That the General

"' \inv. Merm. vol. ii. 57. CA.Ll. vcOL vi. 147.
(C'.1i1. vo v. 6coA.

Aillimbly

i oK A lffc-ribly shall recommend fix pcrfons to every
~^--,- va(cant Lbenefice, which gave a title to a feat in

t'arliarlmenlr, out of whom the King should nori-
naLc oec; tlat tthe person fr! ert-ced, after obtain-
il 1i:,n ) ieat in tJarliamnicl, 1i.rill neither prop!s:,-
nor conrfnt to any thrig there, that may affect
the intercft of the Church, without special in-
lrulltion:, to that pur1)pr c; that he Ihall be an-
fwcrablc flr his concldut to every General Assem-
bly; and fubinit to its censure, witliout appeal,
ulpon pain of iifainy and excommunication; that
he shall difchargc the duties of a Paltor, in a parti-
cular congregation ; that he shall not usurp any
ccclcfiafiical juritlli&'ion, superior to that of his
oi.lIcr bretlhrcn; that if the Church infliEt on him
the cenfuire of del)irivation, ihe hall thereby for-
feir his sca;t in Parliamennt; that he shall annually
rclin hlis commili ion to the General Affenibly,
which may be rcllored to hill, or not, as the As-
leill)ly, with the King's approbation, flall judge
mnol expedient for the good of the Church '.
Nothing could bc more repugnant to the idea of
cp)ifcopal; government, than these regulations. It
was not in conecquence of rights derived froil
their oflice, but of powers conferred by a conl-
miflion, that the ecclefiaflical persons were to be
adlnirttel to a scat in Parliament; they were the
repreln.iitatives, not the superiors of the Clergy.
)Dc'litute of all sp)iritual authority, even their civil
jurifliciion was temporary. James, however, flat-
tered Iinilcf that they would loon be able to fllakl

P *^Itfv. 15 .
.) 5f - (. 1lJ vol, v. 368.

I o1f'

off these fetters, and gradually acquire all the B o' <
privileges which belonged to the episcopal order. ---
The Clergy dreaded the fame thing; and of course 1600
he contended for the nomination of there com-
niffioners, and they opposed it, not so much on
account of the powers then vested in them, as
of those to which it was believed they would
soon attainq.

DURING this summer, the kingdom enjoyed civ.r'cs

an unusual tranquillity. The Clergy, after many "cofir'acy
l'iuggles, were brought under great fuljection;
tie Popish Earls were rePRored to their eftatcs and
honours, by the authority of Parliament, and
with the consent of the Church ; the reft of tlhe
nobles were at peace among themselves, and obe-
dient to the royal authority; when, in the midst
of this security, the King's life was exposcd to the
iltmoft danger, by a conspiracy altogether unex-
pe&ecl, and almolt inexplicable. The authors of
it were John Ruthven, Earl of Gowrie, and his
brother Alexander, the sons of that Earl who
was beheaded in the year one thousand five hun-
tcred and eighty-four. Nature had adorned both
tliefc young men, elpccially the elder brother,
with many acconmpililhmlcnts, to which education
had added its most elegant improvements. More
learned than is usual among pcrlons of their
rank; more religious than is coinmon at their
age of life; generous, brave, popular; their coun-
trymen, far fromu thinking them capable of any
atrocious crime, conceived the nioli sanguine
hopes of their early virtues. Notwiltfltanding

q 'porf. 454.
VOL. II, S

B1 o o K all these noble qualities, some unknown motive
»--- engaged them in a conspiracy, which, if we ad.
16o0. here to the account commonly received, must be

tranfi-litted to posterity, as one of the mofl
wicked, as well as one of the worst concerted, of
which hiil-ory makes any mention.

0,O the fifth of August, as the King, who rc-

fided during the hunting season il his palace of
Falkland, was going out to his sport early in the
morning, he was accosted by Mr. Alexander
Ruthven, who, with an air of great imnportance,
told the King, that the evening before he had nmet
an unknlown man, of a fulfpicious aspec, walking
alone in a by-path, near his brother's house at
Perth ; and on f-arching him, had found, under
his cloak, a pot filled with a vast quantity of so-
reign gold; that he had immediately seized both
him and his treasure, and, without communicating
the matter to any person, had kept him confined
and bound in a solitary house; and that he thought
it his duty to impart such a singular event, firls of
all to his Majesty. James immediately futpeceed
this unknown person to be a seminary priefl, i-lp-
plied with foreign coin, in order to excite new
commotions in the kingdom; and relolved to in-
power the Magif-rates of Perth to call the perlon
before them, and. inquire into all the circumstances
of the flory. Ruthven violently opposed this rc-
solution, and with many arguments urged the King
to ride dircctly to Perth, and to examine the nat-
ter with hlis own eyes. Meanwhile the chace be-
gin ; andl James, noiwitlhanlding his pafion for
Lil;t aintlicmlenr, could not help ruminating upon

tile

tle firangenefs of the tale, and on Ruthven's im - r' ° I K
portunity. At last, he called him, and promifld, ----
whenl the sport was over, to set out for Perth.
The chace, however, continued long; and Ruth-
ven, who all tie while kept close by the King, was
still urging him to make haste. At the death of
the buck lie would not allow James to flay till a
fi-efh horse was brought him; and obl-crving the
Duke of Lennox and the Earl of Mar preparing
to accompany the King, he intreated hinil to coun-
termand them. This Jaames refuted; and though
Ruthven's impatience and anxiety, as well as the
apparent perturbation in his whole behaviour,
railed lfome ffpicions in his mind; yet his own
curiosity, and Ruthven's solicitations, prevailed on
him to set out for Perth. When within a mile of
the town, Rutiven rode forward to inform his bro-
ther of the King's arrival, though he lhad already
disp)atched two menrengers for that purpole. At a
little distance from the town, theF.arl, attended by
tfveral of the citizens, met the King, who had
only twenty persons in his train. No preparations
were made for the King's entertainment; the Elarl
appeared pensive and cmbarrafnld, and was at no
pains to atone, by his courtesy or holititality, for
the bad fare with which he treatctl his gtitls. When
the K<ing's repail was over, his attendants were led
to dine in another room, and he being left allnoft
ulonc, luthvcn whilfpred him, that now was thl
lime to go to the chamiber where the unknown
pl)rlon was kept. James colmillallded himl to bringl
sir T1Ihoma;s ]'.rfkine along with them; but, in lc.ia
of Lhat, Rut eordered him not to follow: Andl

S . cond ulc inig

B 0 0 K conduting the King up a flair-cafe, and then

.,~..i through fevcral apartments, the doors of which he
600'- locked behind him, led him at last into a fnall

study, in which there stood a man clad in ar-
mour, with a sword and dagger by his fide. The
King, who expeted to have found one diifarmed
and bound, startcd at the fight, and inquired if
this was the person ; but Ruthven snatching the
dagger from the girdle of the man in armour, and
holding it to the King's breast, "Remember, said
t he, how unjufily my father suffered by your

command ; you are now my prisoner; submit
"l to my diflpof-l without resistance, or outcry;

or this dagger flmall infrantly avenge his blood."

James expoltulatdl with Ruthven, intreated, and
flattered him. The man whom he found in the
study flood, all the while, trembling, and dif-
mayed, without courage either to aid the King, or
to second his aggrcffor. Ruthven protested, that if
the King rairedl no outcry, his life fliould be safe;
and, moved by some unknown reason, retired in
order to call his brother, leaving to the man in
armour the care of the King, whom he bound by
oath not to make any noise during his absence.

XVWTLE thle King was in this dangerous fitua-

tion, his attendants growing impatient to know
whithcr lh had retired, one of Gowrie's attend-
ants entered the room haltily, and told them that
the King had j uil rode away towards Falkland. All
of themn rulhed out into the fireet; and the Earl,
in the utmofl hulrry, called for their horses. But
by tills time his brother had returned to the King,
and fwvciring that now there was no remedy, he

lmulf

must die, offered to bind his hands. Unarmed B o0 K
as James was, he scorned to rubmiit to that in- --.---
dignity; and closing with the aifaffin, a fierce
struggle ensued. The man in armour flood, as
formerly, amazed and motionless; and the King
dragging Ruthven towards a window, which dur-
ing his absence he had persuaded the person with
whom he was left to open, cried, with a wild and
affrighted voice, " Treason! Treaion! Help! I
am murdered !" His attendants heard, and knew
the voice; and saw, at the window, a hand which
grasped the King's neck with violence. They
flew with precipitation to his affitance. Lennox
and Mar, with the greater number, ran up the
principal flair-cafe, where they found all the doors
slut, which they battered with the utmost fury,
endeavouring to burst them open. B lt Sir John
Ramsey, entering by a back-ftair, which led to
the apartment where the King was, found the
door open; and rufling upon Ruthven, who was
still struggling with the King, flruck him twice
with his dagger, and thrust him towards the stair-
cafe, where Sir Thomas Erskine and Sir Hugh
Herries met, and.killed him; he crying with his
lafc breath, " Alas! I am not to blame for this
acion." During this scuffle, the man who had
been concealed in the study escaped unobserved.
Together with Rainsey, Erfline, and Herries, one
WilTon, a footman, entered the room where the
King was, and before they had time to fliut the
door, Gowrie rushed in with a drawn wvord in each
hand, followed by seven of his attendants well
:!rmed, and with a loud voice threatened them all

S 3 with

B 0 O K with inifant death. They immediately thrufi the
t---~ King into the little fludy, and flutting the door

'6 1 upon hiim, encountered the Earl. Notwithftand-

ing the inequality of numbers, Sir John Ramsey
pierced Gowrie through the heart, and he fell
down dead without uttering a word; his followers
ha ving received several wounds, immediately fled.
Three of the King's defenders were likewise hurt
in the conflict. A dreadful noise continued still at
the opposite door, where many persons laboured
in vain to force a passage; and the King being
alfrred that they were Lennox, Mar, and his other
fiiends, it was opened on the inside. They ran to
the King, whom they unexpectedly found safe,
with tralnfports of congratulation; and he, falling
on his knees, with all his attendants around him,
o]Iered folemnn thanks to God for such a wondelrfll
delivcrancc. IThe danger, however, was not ycc
over. 'l' inhabitants of the town, whose Pro-
'oll (G;oric was, and by whom he was extremely
beloved, he.ringi the fate of the two brothers, ran
ro their arms, and surrounded the lhoutl, tllhretcnl-
i!gl revenge, with manly insolent and ol>probrious
frrcchclss -gains: the K ing. James endeavoured to
;.toify lte enraged mulLitude, by speaking to tlhem
forlom llt window; he admitted their magiflratltc
into the lIoulc; related to telim all tlhe circum-
Iltanlcs of tile sac; and, their fury liubiding by
tlt.cc'tr",, tlcey ldifp rei, d. On cat;llcling the 1 ,rl:,
poc kets for p.ipcrs tl at lmight dliicovcl his dlcliiu'
\iad ;accoip'lices, nothing was found but a lilall
j.irelllctent bag, full of magical charaiqers ;and
s'v.lrtlIs of cncli n tlmcn t; and if we may believe lthe

acconuL'

account of the conflpiracy published by the King, B 11° K-
(' while these were about hiin, the wound of ---.

W( hich he died, bled not; but as tbon as they 12C'

(( were taken away, the blood gushnd out in great
,c abundance." After all the dangerous adven-
tures of this busy day, the King returned in the
evening to Falkland, having comnnitted the dead
bolies of the two brothers to the cuflody of the
Ma igtlrates of Perth.

NOTWITHSTANDING the minutedetail which the The mrrtive

King gave of all the circumltances of this confpi - Ip,.,,, n t
racy againtt his life, the motives which induced the 'l'iyx''
two brothers to attempt an ation lo detellablc, the
end they had in view, and the accomplices on
whose aid they depended, were altogether un-
known. The words of Ruthven to the King gave
tome grounds to think tha ththe dfire of revenging
their father's death had infligated them to this
attempt. But, wlatever injuries their father had
suffered, it is scarcely probable that they could
impute them to the King, whose youth, as well
as his fubje&ion at that time to the violence of a
faction, exempted himl from being the obijcc of
resentment, on account of actions which were not
done by his comimand. James had even endea-
voured to repair the wrongs which the father h(ad
liffcired, by benefits to his children; and Gowrie
himself, sensible of his favour, had ackn-owledged(
it with the warmelt expreflions of gratitude.
Three of the Earl's attendants, being convilctd
of afifting him in this anfault on the Kingt's flr-
vants, were executed at Perth ; but they could give . ,
no light into the motives which had prompted

S . their

B 0 0 K their maiter to an action so repugnant to there

--^ acknowledgments. Diligent search was made for
'6°°' the person concealed in the study, and from him

great discoveries were expected. But AndrewHen-
derfon the Earl's steward, who, upon a promise of
pardon, confeifed himself to be the man, was as
Iuch a stranger to his matter's design as the reft;
and though placed in the study by Gowrie's com-
iand, he did not even know for what end that fta-
tion had been assigned him. The whole tranfaftion
remuained as impenetrably dark as ever; and the
two brothers, it was concluded, had concerted their
c:heme without either confident or accomplice,
with unexampled secrecy as well as wickednels.

s,' .dif. AN accident, no less strange than the other cir-
..¢',:g cumflances of the story, and which happened nine

years after, discovered that this opinion, howeve,
plaulible, was ill-founded; and that the two bro-
thers had not carried on their machinations all
alone. One Sprot, a notary, having whispered
amrong several persons that he knew some secrets
relating to Gowrie's conspiracy, the privy council
thought the matter worthy of their attention, and
ordered him to be seized. His confeltion was
partly voluntary, and partly forced fi-om him by
torture. According to his account, Logan of
Ridtairig, a gentleman of an opulent fortune, but
of difiblute morals, was privy to all Gowrie's in-
tentions, and an accomplice in his crimes. Mr.
Rutlven, he said, had frequent interviews withl
Logan) in order to concert the plan of their ope-
rations; the Earl had corresponded with him to
the fame purpose; and one Bour, Logan's confi-

dent,

dent, was tr!'.ed with the secret, and carried the B o,0 K
letters between Jhicrn. Both Logan and Bour
were no'- dead. But Sprot affirmed that he had o
read lette.s vrit,!;.l both by Gowrie and Logan
on that occasion; and, in confirmation of his
testimony, Icvei al "f Logan's letters, which a cu-
riofity fatal to hl..lcl/' had prompted Sprot to
fleal from among Blur's papers, were produced',
Thlei were coilp:trced, by the privy council, with
papers of Loran's hand-writing, and the reliem-
blance was maniftcf. Ferfonsof undoubted credit,
and well qualified tojudgeof the matter, examined
thein, and wvore to their authenticity. I)eath
itself did not exempt Logan from prolecution;
his bones were dug up and tried for High Trealon,
and by a sentence, equally odious and illegals,

Ilis

r Iogan's letters were five in nimher. One to Bour, another

to Gowr ie, and three (,fthcmi wiithout anly d.irc lio; nor con l

iSIro dij'lover the n:anic tllthe pcrfon to vwhomL they were writ-
ten. Logan gives himl thle appellation of Rigbt llonourabl.e
It aippea;'s fromn tlis, hovwever, -and Irfom other wordis in thei
letter, Cron. 95. tll;at there were several persons Irivy to the.
coliipira;cy. The datecofllie fit-l letter is July i8th. MIr. IRnlh-
ven l.had cominiculicated the lmttlr t)o Iogi:n only five da;ys )c-
lO'c. Ibid. It appe:ars froim the originltl Jfummon of for.
Jfuliiire ;gainlt Logan's heirs, thia Bloulr, thlough he h1,I let-
lers adidrileid to him with regard ti ;I conlfiirlacy cqti;lly
Il.llgeroous and important, was lib illiterate that lie cotnld noL
read. ' Ja;co(us Bor' , lil C:rumI prorfiu i n;aL.rs, dic i Geor-

" ';ii opeln in legendis oml ibuls fl ript is :1.l clln millis, vcl
" i)rtinentilmits, utcl,;itur."' T i is altogctc r

[ t ll. c; a11d

I litiig 1but tlhc c:illitic;I;r cI;l'.nlCUr of L,(gan;l caln ;acolnt
i,, lii:; cliiting fuchi h
;i I (o lident.

'y Ihe Roman law, peiilis glil y oft he crime of Ilil;h
'I rc.lii.tl nlillt lbe tlried cvcit af'tl.r dth.ill. 'lThis )l'tliceL wa.

;ildol)te.l

B O 0 K his lands were forfeited, and his posterity declared
c-_, infamous. Sprot was condemned to be hanged

i6co, for mifp rifion of treason. FIe adhered to his con-

fffion to the last, and having promised, on tile

lad roptd 1b the Scots, wit1hout ny ] ii)tl i ,.on, P;ar. 1540. C.
569. But lithe unlimited cx:rcit f' this powelr was ion cf-n-
ccivcd to be .lngerols; ;and the Clrown was laid uinder propl r
eflridtions, l)y an atdt :. 1). 1542. whichhas never been priiteo.
The word-,L of it arc, " A nd becatufe the laid Lords (i. c. tli:
Lords ofArticles) t hink the l.iil ;ait (viz, in 154o) too gcicnr.i!,
,cld preCjulicial to tlei Bal3rotls in the realmll, therefore fI;'.tli
Xnd ordaiiistl.iit the hC lai:tcl (h;1l have no place in time conil:],
but igiigllt the lieirs of them that notoriofily commit or l!i.!
comminit Icle M:jcilt agaiil the King's pcrifn, againlit tIIC
realm bfr averting thle hmc,,; aid :l;g:in tlhen) tlhit lhall hap.li.tn
to hctr;av the iiiig'.s tIrmy a!l:1narly, and being notoorly ki.,',!
in their tinme; nll the heirs o)! thelle persons to he called a:nd
judged w-ithin five ycIars ailitr the deccafi: of' the sLid picrL;in
conmilittcrs of the flidl crimes; iand the 'lid time leingl l yp,:g''
the laid h eirs never to be tptrfiid for the flame." The l:.i:-
teuce againlt Logan violated this ftatioe in two partic!l.i

·

HIe was notnotourly known during hislife to be an accomplice
in the crime fior which he was tried; and his heir was called inl

t]ueftion imor- than five ycars after his death. It is remanlk:tl)!c

that this Ilatiut feenis nt to have beens attendedr to ill the 1pr'-
liamnct vwhich forfited Logan. A nother i guiulat circutllll:irl
delcirves antmice. As it is a maxin ofl jofllice that no pcr1.1
c;lll e tried iln albence ;and as la:wyers arc:lwa:ys tenacsios ll
tlleir forlims, and often abfitrd in their devices (or pr1cli.'vil.,
thlem, tlicy contrived that, in any procels ngainit l dc:tead pcl-
I;n1, Ilis colrpf or hones ;hall Ihe prefcnted ;t thle bar. lEx;:tm-

pies iof

this occtur frequent lI in the Scottisll hillory. After lic

l;attle of' C'orrichie, the dead body of the Earl of IIhuntll \:t,
]prlelrednc in pa;t.li:tlament, bclbolr fentrence of fofrIturir' \.1t
1pi'(nn)ncd ;iinf il hlil. For 1lie thine realon tilc btodii,

l ,f

Go'ic'ie ;andi lii, brother we're preferred, ill order that tely
milight )e protduced in p:arliaIent. Log;an's hiones, in cin-
l)iai:ce willth thle slime rule, were dolg 1i). Mackcnz. Crin.
.Lawt, Btook i, Tit. 6. . 22.

fcuwffoile,

scaffold, to give the fpetators a sign in confirm- B o11 K
ation of the truth of what he had deposed, he
thrice clapped his hands after he was thrown off e600'
the ladder by the executioner'.

t It :appears tlhit A-chlilhiop Spotfwood wi.s pr-.e: ;it at th

cxcculticon of Sprot, Cromn. I f . a;li vet 1ie IJ'cms to l;it\ c r iven
n-) credit to his difcovcrics. Thic Inln!ler in which he lielaks of
hini is renmark:ble, " \WheXl thelr r not t I !iould icntiol t he :ir-
" r;ignlment and execution of Gorge .Sprot, who fIui'ercd at
'" Einburgh, I am doubtful. I-is conefllion, tliolgii vol un-
" tary ;nd confllunt, carrying finall ltpo',lilit)-. r['le man de-
" pixl(c, &c. It feenmed to le a vervy fi"ioni, and a nierc in-
" \vention of the man:'s own bra.in, for ncither did

li ec lehcw the

' letter, nor could any wile ian think lthat Gos\ric, w^]io w\-cnt
" about the trcaion si) icrctlyv, v, ould lhave coiiiiiuiiic;tcd tlic
"matter to fiuch a min as ILogan waS s known to be." p. o5S.
Spolt lood could not be ignoral n t of the tblcmnity with which
1Logan had been tried, and of the proof brought of the authen-
iicity of hils letters. He himlfi w:ts ipob:ibly present in p):r-
litmcnt at the trial. The Earl of l)unbar, of whom lie always
lc:atks wilt the highlefl reltpict, iwas the perllon who dicrcatd the
proccbf againfil Logan. Such apermpl)tory dcclaration ;tg:in{f
tlic truth of Sprot'.sevidencc, notwitlhll:nding all thlel ci icliim-
Ihullcos, is lirp)ril i ng. Sir Thomas Hamilton, t lie King's :advo-
cllc at hat tilme, and aifterwards lEirl of IHadingtoni, rc)ple-
I.lits tie

i pooaf produced at Logian's tr ial ais cxilrcmcly c(on-
i1cCing; :1nd in ani or1igillnal letterfi' is to Kinllir, tlhe 21fl of
Juinc 1609, (inBibl.l acuIt.Jurid.) after menicniioning the m1:n-
ilr ill which the trial lad lbeeccn colndfutd, lie tiils goes o(l:

helicn tlie prob:t ion of lie 11mc i ons was refl-red to t lie

.lrds of Articls votes, they I.'ill(d nil lllllv, all i one
voice, the liitil iiinniiilO sl to I)C l)C clc:lrly proved, ll;i:t lhey
flemedl to contend who Illould he :le nioll zlc: lfliy loc(1 prL'
I lie iftisefa ion of llis llc;rt, not only by I lie miofll pilly h wori' lis,
burt by tears of joy ; diversel of tile bell rank cilelliing, tll.t
ltht wvlicrcof tlhcy Llolubted at their entry into tlic lioilc w;is
nov l( I:ilnif ll, thlat tle)y belc oved to ellecinl tlicii lr;iit rs
(who Iioild any lonIcr rcfi o dclarc their a;s'ircd ircllittion
of) lle trtlh of th;t treason,'

7 Bur

B o o K BUT though it be thus unexpetedly discovered
_ -,-\. that Gowric did not aLt without afolciates, little
4 *C· additional light is thrown, by this discovery, on

the motives and intention of his conduIt. It ap-
pears almost incredible that two young men
of such diltinguified virtue fiould revolt all at
once from their duty, and attempt a crime so
atrocious, as the murder of their Sovereign. It
appears dill more inprobable, that they ihould
have concerted their undelrtaking with so little
forcfiSlit and prudInc.. If they intended that the
deed ihould have remained concealed, they could
not have chosen a more improper scene for execut-
1ln ( it, than their own house. If they intended
that IHendcrfon Ihould have firuclk the blow,
they could not have pitched on a man more defti-
tute of the courage that must direct the hand of
an afaftin; nor could they expe&t that he, un-
solicited, and unacquainted with their purpose,
would venture on such a desperate acRion. If
Ruthven meant to stab the King with his own
hand, why did he withdraw the dagger, after it
was poinced at his breast ? How could he leave
the King, aftelr Lch a p)lain declaration of his in-
tention ? Was it not plepoflerous to commit lim
to the keeping of fIiIch a timid and fallez associate,
as Hendcrlon ? For what purpose did he waste
time, in bindin the handls of an unarmed man,
whom he migl; cafily have dirfpatched with his
i\vord ? lad PIrovidence permitted thein to cm-
brue their hands in the blood of their Sovereign,
what advantiage could have accrued to them by
his de.ath ? and what claims or pretensions could

8 they

they have opposed to the rights of his children u B O o K
Inevitable and instant vengeance, together with
pcrpetual infamy, were the only confcquences '600.
they could expef to follow such a crime.

ON the other hand, it is iinpofible to believe

that the King had formed any deiign againfl the
life of the two brothers. They had not incurred
his indignation by any crime; and were in no
degree the objects of his jealousy or hatred"; nor

was

u It has been afftcred, tlhat, in ccn-,rcqucnce of the K1ing'

death, til Earl ofGo'.vric mnigiht h:ave pretended to the Crown
iIf England, as the son ,f Dorothlna Stwc-art (:daughter of Lord.
Metlivn by MLargarect of England, who, after er divorce
firlcn the Earl of Angus, tool.k thi nbleman for her third
inil:;nd. lBurcnet Hil. of lis owin ''iines. Bntu this al,'rtion is
ill-founded. IT appears, frcm ullndoun)tedl evidence, that Lord
Methven had only one child by ()lean Mar-igaret, w-hicl died
n its itnfancy, and DoroLe:t ]L;idLly Itlihvn v':is not tlie
daughter of Qcelln Margaret, b't ii' J.inct S:v','alt, Lord
Methven's fcond v,ise, :a d til.ltCl o!' J.l]il Eairl of A.thol.
Cranwf. Peer. 3z9. And lthu,;uh CI r lIe h-d rel:clv been dc-
fccudcd froin the blood-rIoyal of EnIland, the ]in', at titat
timle hlid ; ioll and a d;. Li' llr; and lcnli.c'; thlem, Lady Ara-
bella Stewart, dtlultiltr - ol Chtrll les l of Lennox, had a prc-
fcrable title to the Crown of Engl;nd.

x Sir Henry Neville, in a letter to Sitl Ralpli WinVwod,

imputes the death of the two broichrs to a catfe noL menti-
oned by any of our historians. " Out of Scotland we hear that
there is no good agreement, but rather an open dinfidence be-
twixt the King and his wile, and many are of opinion thlat
the discovery of some afi',cion between her and the Ear] of
Gowrie's brother (who was killed witl hint) was the trueC:
cause and motive of that tragedy." Win w. Mem. vol. i. 274.
Whether the following puffages in Nicholson's letter bc any
confirmation of that suspicion, is fubnlitted to the reader. rn
hislettcr Sept. 22, 1602, he mentions the return of Cowrie's
two younger brothers into Scotland, and adds, " The coining

int

B 0 0 K was he of a spirit so sanguinary, or so noted for

-,--' rath and desperate valour, as to have attempted
1600. to murder them in their own house, where they

were surrounded with many domeflics, he only
with a slender and unarmed train; where they
could call to their assistance the inhabitants of a
city, at the devotion of their family, while he was
at a distance from all aid; and least of all would
he have chosen for his afbociates, in such an enter-
prize, the Earl of Mar, and the Duke of Len-
nox, the former connected in close friendship with
the house of Gowrie, and the latter married to
one of the Earl's fltiers.

A co!;,,c- WIHICHSOEVER ofthefe opposite systems we em-
;'-iinthe brace; whether we impute the intention ofmurdcr
-t,,niion of to Gowrie, or to the King; insuperable difficulties
-ti"'. arlife, and we are involved in darkness, mystery,

and contradictions. Perhaps the source of the
vwhole conli)iracy ought to be searched for deeper,
and by deriving it from a more remote cause, we
may dilfover it to be less criminal.
inl oi thlief two, a:ld I hc QLjccnl of Scots d.c:lil willi thlicin,

d rfclnding l.tway and Ifllrii linig Mrs. Beatirix [their (illeuj

x it 1 fucli iiilii tlioii :; Sir 'lho aiiiis lErikilnc li.s given, Iatl h
bred grcailc ifplici on ill the King of Scots th:t Lcey collnic i1I
ill])il ut)11 r lomlc dl;ilrilrous plot.' Il ;anothcr l.ttc'l,l llll;l:'y

, 1603. " Thlie dy of writing my

ilill , Mrs. Bc1:tri .;

l iilli -

vyen was ronghlit hy the li ady ;)Paincy, anti Mrs. ofl lAngus, ; .
(iec of( llcil I c niitlc\\')iicii iiito till court i ll ie cevcnilng, ln1
llowedl iln clh.iilitr prlc);-cd .l bier by tliLeQ..cn's il.dieiei,,

lcihere' liec (O)1cc' had IhiLeCli tile t;inl c nfcrcncll it

\ lli I'r.

()' this tlie King got niotiCt, and;ti hcw d his disikc thlcrcol 1i-
the Queien, gently reprovillg ier for it, a1nl cexail-iniig <|i-
cily) (of thc tO c n'is fcivants of tile fiite, a:lil. ol 'olic r inlltcrl;
tl, iciciio

l liclotiging, wilth 1uclh lifrcliotun atnd Icclccy i I' rc-
t irlces ilch ;t Iln; ttcr."

'1'O

To keep the King of Scots in continual depend- B ° ° K

ance, was one great objet of Elizabeth's policy.
In order to this, she sometimes soothed him; and 1600.
sometimes bribed his Ministers and favourites;
and when the failed of attaining her end by these
means, fle encouraged the Clergy to render any
adminiltration which flhe diftruited unpopular, by
decrying it, or flirred up toime faaion of the no-
bles to oppose and to overturn it. In that fierce
age, men little acquainted with the arts of under-
miniing a Minist-ry by intrigue, had recourse to
the ruder pratice of rendering themselves masters
of the King's person, that they might thereby ob-
tain the directions of his councils. Tlofe nobles,
vwho seized the King at the Raid of RiisltveCJ,, were
infligated and supported by Elizabeth. Both-
well, in all his wild attempts, cjloyed her pro-
tction, and when they miscarried, he was secure
of retreat in her dominions. The connexions
which James had been fornming of late with the
Roman Catholic Princes, his secret negotiations
in England with her subjects, and the maxims by
which he governed his own kingdom, all contri-
buted to excite her jealoulty. She dreaded fomc
great revolution in Scotland to be approaching,
and it was her interest to prevent it. The Earl
of Gowrie was one of the most powei ful of the
Scottifhl nobles, and defccndced fiom ancestors
warmly attached to the Engliflx inttrelft. Ile had
adopted the fame ly-flcmi, and believed the welfare
of his country to be inftparably connected with
the fubfifcince of the alliance between the two
kingdoms. During his rclilence at Paris, lie .had

con tra'ctd

B 0 0 K contrated an intimate friendship with Sir Henry
.---,. Noeville the Queen's ambassador there, and was

2600. recommended by him to his court, as a perlon of

'whom great use might be macid. Elizabeth re-
ceived him, as he passed through England, with
tiftinguifhed marks ofrefpe& and favour. From
all these circuimfances a suspicion may arise, that
the plan of the conspiracy againit the King was
formed at that time, in concert with her. Such
a suspicion pievailed in rhat age, and from the
letters of Nicholson, Elizabeth's agent in Scot-
land, it appears not to be defitute of foundation.
An Englilh ship was observed hovering, for some
time, in the mouth of the frith of Forth. The
Earl's two younger brothers fled into England
after the ill fuccels of the conspiracy, and were
proteEted by Elizabeth. James himself, though
he prudently concealed it, took great umbrage at
her behaviour. None, however, of Elizabeth's
intrigues in Scotland tended to huit the King's
perfori, but only to circumscribe his authority,
and to thwart his schemes. His life was the
surest safe-guard of her own, and restrained the
Popish pretenders to her Crown, ant their abet-
tors, froml desperate attempts, to which their im-
patience and bigotry might, otherwise, have
urged them on. To have encouraged Gowric
to murder his Sovereign, would, on her part,
have been an aft of the utmost imprudence.
Nor does this seem to have been the intention of
the two brothers. Mr. Ruthven, first of all, en-
deavoured to decoy the.King to Perth, without

Y Winwr. i. 156,

any

any attendants. When these proved more nu- B O o K
merous than was expeEted, the Earl employed a --
stratagem in order to separate them firom the King, 16CO.
by pretending that he had rode away towards
Falkland, and by calling hastily for their horses,
that they might follow him. By their Ihutting
James up, meanwhile, in a ditlant corner of the
house, and by attempting to bind his hands, their
dcfign fcemss to have been rather to Peize, than to
afijallinate him. 'Ihough Gowrie had not col-
lcted his followers in such numbers as to have
been able to detain him long a prisoner, in that
part of the kingdom, by open force, he might
:bon have been conveyed aboard the Englifni ship,
which waited perhaps to receive him, and lie
might have been landed at Faft-Caftle, a house
of Logan's, in which, according to many obscure
hints in his letters, rome rendezvous of the con-
fpirators was to be held. Amidst the surprise
and terror, into which the King must have been
thrown by the violence offered to him, it was ex-
tremely natural for him to conclude that his life
was fought. It was the interefl: of all his follow-
ers to confirm him in this belief, and to magnify
his danger,- in order to add to the importance and
merit of their own services. Thus his fear, and
their vanity, aided by the credulity and wonder
which the contemplation of any great and tragical
event, when not fully undcrftood, is apt to in-
tpire, augmented the whole tranfaEtion. On the
other hand, the extravagance and improbabiljty
of the circumfi-ances which were added, detractd
firom the credit of thole which really happep '.d;

VOL. II. '1' and

V0 0 K and even furnished pretences for calling in

v-- _J question the truth of the whole conspiracy.
,6oo.

Many dif THE account of what had happened at Pertl
bctiecthe reached Edinburgh next morning. The privy
account pub- O
lilfed by the council commanded the Ministers of that city in-

n flantly to assemble their people; and after relating

to thein the circurnftances of the conspiracy formed
against the King's life, to return public thanks
to God, for the protection which he had so visibly
afforded him. But as the first accounts tranf-
nitted to Edinburgh, written in a hurry, and
while the circumstances of the conspiracy were
but imperfectly known, and the passions which it
excited strongly felt, were indiftinc, exaggerated,
and contradictory, the Ministers laid hold of this;
and though they offered to give public thanks to
God for the King's safety, they refused to enter
into any detail of particulars, or to utter from the
chair of truth, what appeared to be still dubious
and uncertain.

A FEW days after, the King returned to Edin-

burgh; and though Galloway, the Minifterof his
own chapel, made an harangue to the people at
the public cross, in which he recited all the cir-
culnftances of the con fpiracy; though James hiim-
lelf, in their hearing, confirmed his account;
though he commanded a narrative of the whole
tranfation to be publiffied; the Ministers of that
city, as well as many of their brethren, still con-
tinued incredulous and unconvinced. Their high
esteem of Gowrie, their jealousy of every part of
the King's conduct, added to some false and'many
inlprobable circumstances in the narrative, not

only

only led them to fuflpec the whole, but gave their B o Io K
fifpieiuns an air of credibility. But at length,
the King, partly by arguments, partly by threats, *600'
prevailed on all of them, except Mr. Robert Brucc,
to own that they were convinced of the truth of
the conspiracy. He could be brought no further
than to declare, that lie reverenced the King's ac-
count of the tranlaction, but could not fay that he
himself was persuaded of the truth of it. The
scruples or obflinacy of a tingle man would have
been little regarded; but as the famne spirit of in-
credulity began to spread among the people, the
example of one in so high reputation for integrity
and abilities, was extremely dangerous. The King
was at the utmost pains to convince and to gain
Bruce, but finding it impossible to remove his
doubts, he deprived him of his benefice, and after
repeated delays, and many attempts towards a re-.
concilement, banished him the kingdomz.

THE proceedings of Parliament were not re- Proceedinig

tarded by any scruples of this fort. The dead of ntrla,-
bodies of the two brothers were produced tlere, the LQr.ri-

- ' r~ltors.

according to law; an indictment for High Treason
was preferred against them; witnefTes were ex-
amined ; and, by an unanimous sentence, their
eflates and honours were forfeited,; the punishment
due to traitors was inflied on their dead bodies;
and, as if the punii.lment hitherto in ule did not
exprels sufficient detcftation of their crinmes, the
Parliament enaced that the surname of Ruthven
fliould be abolished; and in order to preserve the

' Spotfw. 461, &c. Cald. v. 389, &c.

T 2 memory

B o o ir merory of the King's miraculous escape, and to

L' jdeclare the sense which the nation had of the di-
600'' vine good neis, to all future ages, appointed the

fifth of August to be observed, annually, as a day
of public thanksgiving'.

THOUGH

A fcv w-eeks after the death of the two brothers, thc King

pulblifhld a dijiourfe of their 'vile and unnatural con/piracy againJ
bis lii. In the year 1713, George Earl of Cromertic puli-
lithed an " Hifiorica! account of the conspiracy by the Earl us
" owrie, and Robert Logan of Reltalrig, against King Jalmc
" VI." He seems not to have seen the account which the
King himself had given of that matter, and borrows the
whole historical part from Spotfwood and other authors; but
he has cxtractcl from the public records the depositions of the
wvintflcs produced by the King's Council, in order to make
good the charge againlt the two brothers, and Logan their
affociatc. From thfee two treatises our knowledge of all the
material circumltances of the conspiracy is derived. The evi-
dence which they contain, one would expect to be authentic
and dccifive. An account of a fat, still recent, publilhed by
royal authority, and the original depositions of persons exa-
mined in presence of the highest court in the nation, ought to
convey a degree of evidence fcldom attained in hiflorical re-
lations, and to exclude all rema;iing doubt and uncertainty.
But as every thing with regard to this tranf;lctilin is ldark a;dl
problematical, the King's account and the dcplitions oftlhe
witnetfes not only vary, but contradict each other in so JiIany
dCircumftances, that nmuch room is (till left for hfliitation a;id
hiltorical fcepticifin. The tcflinlony of Hcnderfon is the fullcll
and moll important, but iln lcvcral :particulars the Kini's ;I-
count and his are coaltli;tliit(ory. 1. According to the 1K inl',
accouin,, whlilc .Mr. Rutliven was holding the ,aIge;I l IliI

rlc:;t, " lthe fc llo(v in tile lliudy (loi (Iakigald ; tre'cimli ig.''
Di)sc. 17. BItll Ilenderfoli sys, tlat e lilfciifl wrclledl lli
dliggre out of Mir. ultlliven'ss lands. Disc. 53. Crorn. 5'.
-lqenderfon likc\wifc li;lllted to his wife, tiat lie had 1:ital d.iy
twice fivcd tilh Kilig frlom being (labbcd. D)ili.. 54. Crolin. 5

l[. 'lTh:

THOUGH Gowrie's conspiracy occasioned a fud- B °o K

den and a great alarm, it was followed by no con fe- -. -
quences of importance; and having been concerted Ex6°cOn-
by the two brothers, either without any afTociates, fpacy a-

gainft Eli.

Or zabeth.

1II. The King acTrts that Henderson opened the window
during Mr. Rulihvcn's abl)lncc. Dilc. 23. Henderfbn depofcs
th:tt lhe was only attempting to opcn it when Mr. Ruthven
returned, and th:it during the 11ruggle between the King and
him, he opened it. Dilc. 53, 54. Crom. 51, 52. III. If we
may believe the King, the fellow in the study stood, during
:he struggle, behind the King's back, inactive ;Id trembling
all the time. lifc. 27. But Henderson aflirins, that lhe
snatched away the garter with which Mr. Ruthvcen aitcneptedl
t. bind the King; that he pulled back Ruthven's hand, while
he was endc;eavouring to flop the King's mouth, and that h
opened the window. il.

i 54. Crorn. 52. IV. By the King'.

account, Mr. Ruthven left him in the f.udy, and went av.ay
in order to meet witlh his brother, and the Earl came up the
ft;lirs for the itale purpose. Dilci. 23. Hcnderfon dmjpofct,
that when Mr. Rutliven left the King, " he believes that he
did not pass from the door." Crom. 5 1. It is apparent both
from the lituati(Hl of the honTc, and from otiler circumltances,
that there coild not pollibly have been any interview between
the brothers at this time. Disc. 23.

Henderson was tvwicc cxamined, firi at Falkland before the

privy council in Aulgtl, and next t i Edinburgh before the
parliament in November. Not to mention oinc lesser vari-
tinrls between thelf delpofit ions, we li:all point out two whlich
arc remarkable. In his firlf dcpolfiion Mr. Hendcrlon relates
thec molt mat icri;l circunlt;incc of tihe whole in these words:
" Mr. Ruthven pulled out the deponent's dagger, and
" eld the farme to his Mlajctly's breast, faying, rrmember
" you of my fsllter's murder ; you Jhall tnou die for it, and
" mimitiing to his H-Iighnefs's heart, with the dagger, the
" dcllnnelt thlrew the fame out of Mr. Rutilven's hands, and
"' \vore that as God lhall judge his foul, that if Mr. Ruth-
" vcn Itad retained the dagger in his hand, the fpacc a ipan
"may go lix fleps, he would have ltrickcn the King to the

T3 " hilts

B O K or with such as were unknown, and chose to rernaij
t_ - f- o, the danger was over, as soon asdifcovered. But

*60'' not long after, a confpir4cy broke out in England

against

" hilts with it." Disc. 52. Btut at his second cx;ii:ini:iii,;,
he varied fro1n this in two material circrllnltaces. L n
th]e words which he at t tht time put in Mr. Ruthven's Illlill
while he held the dagger at the King's breant are, " Sir, )a.
"L m:/q be my prisoner; remember on nty father's death." SI;
condly, wheicn he threatened him with death, it was only In
deter him ftron making any noise, " IHold)yor tongue, or li
" Clh(riJycu F rall aie." 2. In his filft dcpofition, the worods,
of Mr. Ruthycn, wvhen he returned to the chamber whein
he had left thc Kling, are, " 7Tere is no remcdy, hy God )you

m unl die." But in hiis second deposition, " By God there

" is no remedy, and offercd to bind his Ma;jcfy's hands."
Cr nm. 51 . The mn;tcrial wordsyozu mzu die arc omitted. The
first depotlitiol i-ccmls 'plainlly to intimate that it was RuthIvcn's
intention to mlurder the King. The Lecond would lead us to
conclude that he had no other design than to detain him as ;a
prioner.

There are liikewife some remarkable contlradik'tions in the

tefliionics of the other witneffcs. I. In the dilcotulle pui.
liihed by authority, it is insinuatcd that the tumult of thlle
inhabitants wats raised againfl: the king, and that it recuii'ed
folmlc ;rt to paicify them. Di. 32. The Dtke of Lcnmox
confirms this in his dcpofition. Crom. 44. A.n a;i of privy
council fiummoning tile Magil:rattcsof Pelrthto ;antli'e fr th
riot is flill extant. And yet Andrew Roy, one of' tlie baillics
r)s the town, depoIfes, that lie himfilf raled thc people, ;ild
that they took :IInis inl order to aflill thle King. Crom. 66.
2. 1-Ilellndellrf LIcpolcs, that he gave an cvalive anfwrc to Mr.
John Monerief, who enqulired wlhere he J;ad been that. morln-
ing, I)cc:lufc the Earl ;lad1 comman; dedLl him not to let ;a

;manl know tlhatt hc had been at Falkland. D)il. 54. No
cries' *del)ofis to thle lame piirpofe. Crom. 64. And yet
.corgc Iiay1 ;fiter\:irls Lotld Kinlnoul, andt Chianellor
Sclotlalld, and Pe ter Hay, depole,

e thai thle 1;al, in their
pjucli:llncc, afk;ncd Ieloil, '* Whom ie found witl Ithe

Kl~','

agaainft Elizabeth, which, though the first danger B o° K
was instantly dispelled, produced tragical effects, l -
that rendered the clofeof that Queen's reign dismal I60'.
and unhappy. As James was deeply interested in
that event, it merits our particular notice.

THE court of England was at this time divided

between two powerful fations, which contended
for the supreme direCtion of affairs. The leader
of the one was Robert D'Evreux, Earl of Effex;
Sir Robert Cecil, the son of Lord Treasurer Bur-
leigh, was at the head of the other. The former
was the most accomplished and the most popular
of all the English nobles; brave, generous, as-
fable; though impetuous, yet willing to liften to
the counsels of those whom he loved; an avowed,
but not an implacable enemy; a friend no less
conRtant than warm; incapable of disguising his
own fentinents, or of misrepresenting those of
others; better fitted for a camp than for a court;
and of a genius that qualified him for the first
place in the administration, with a spirit which
scorned the second as below his merit. He was
soon distinguished by the Queen, who, with a pro-
fifion uncommon to her, conferred on him, even
in his earliest youth, the highest honours. Nor
did this diminish the esteem and affection of his
countrymen; but, by a rare felicity, he was at
once the favourite of his Sovereign, and the

King at Falkland ?" Crom. 70, 71. Which question fecm',
to prove that he did not aim at keeping tllht journey a fccrer.
In the CollecAion of Crimin;il Trials, publifhctl by Mr. Arnot:
in 1785, the evidence against the two brothers has been con-
fidlerIl witlh great attention. P. 20, &c.

T 4 darling

B ovn K darling of the people. Cecil, on the other hand,
t -.-- educated in a court, and trained under a father

1601, deeply skilled in all its arts, was crafty, infinuat.

ing, industrious; and though pofihffed of talents
which fitted him for the highest offices, he did
not rely upon his merit alone for attaining them,
but availed himfcl,; of every advantage, which his
own address, or the mit;ilkes of others, afforded
hin. Tvo fuclh men wcre formed to be rivals and
enemies. EfTex despise(d the arts of Cecil as low
and bare. To Cecil, the Earl's magnanimity ap.
peared to be presumption and folly. All the mi-
litary men, except Raleigh, favoured Effex. Most
of the courtiers adhered to Cecil, whose manners
more nearly refitcrbled their own.

ii, co-re. As Elizabeth advanced in years, the struggle be-
'.ipthce tween thele fa(tions'bccanm-e more violent. Effex,
,'ti in order to ftl-engthen hirnfelf, had early courted

the fi-iendfhip of the King of Scots, for whofl
right of fuccefilon he was a zealous advocate, and
held a close correfpondcnce both with him and
with his principal Ministers. Cecil, devoted to
the Queen alone, rolse daily to new honours by the
assiduity of his services, and the patience with
which he cxpctlcd the reward of them; while
the Earl's high spirit alnd iinetuofity sometimes
cxpofed hi}il to checks fioml a Miftlrefs, who,
though partial in her afi-ediion toward him, could
not easily bear cont radid ion, and who conferred
favours often unwillingly, and always slowly. H-is
own solicitations, however, fecondled maliciously
by his enemies, who wishld to remove him at a
di.lance from court, advnccd him to the comrn

mand

mand of the army employed in Ireland againit B °° K
Tyronne, and to the office of Lord Lieutenant of
that kingdom, with a commission almost unli- '6.
mited. His success in that expedition did not
equal either his own promises, or the expectations
of Elizabeth. The Queen, peevilh from her dif-
appointment, and exasperated against Effex by the
artifices of his enemies, wrote him a harsh- letter,
full of accusations and reproaches. These his
impatient spirit could not bear, and, in the first
transports of his resentment, he proposed to carry
over a part of his army into England, and, by
driving his enemies from the Queen's pretence, to
reinflate himself in favour and in power. But
upon more mature thoughts he abandoned this
rafhl design, and, setting fail with a few officers
devoted to his person, landed in England, and
poted directly to court. Elizabeth received him
without any symptom either of affection or of dif-
plc;afire. By proper compliances and acknow-
ledginents, he might have regained his former as-
ccndant over the Queen. But he thought himself
too deeply injured to submit to these. Elizabeth,
on the other hand, determined to subdue his
laugllty temper; and though her severity drew
froml him the most humble letters, she confined
liin to the Lord Keeper's house, and appointed
conmifinioners to try him, both for his conduct
during his government of Ireland, and for leaving
that kingdom without her permniflion. By their
sentence, he was suspended from all his offices, ex-
cept that of Malter of the horse, and continuedc
a prilbner during the Qucen's pleafulre. Satisfied

7 with

B 0 0 K with having mortified his pride thus far, Elizabeth
k- did not susser the sentence to be recorded, and
l60". soon after allowed him to retire to his own house.

During these tranfafions, which occupied several
months, Effex fluEtuated between the allegiance
he owed to his Sovereign, and the desire of re-
venge; and sometimes leaned to the one, and
bometimes to the other. In one of the intervals
when the latter prevailed, he sent a messenger into
Scotland, to encourage the King to assert his own
right to the ifucceffion by force of arms, and to
proinife that, betides the assistance of the Earl and
all his friends in England, Lord Mountjoy, now
Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, would join him with
five thousand men from that kingdom. But

Jlaim'C James did not chute to hazard the losing a king-
I[.Ie). 011 dom, of which he was just about to obtain pof-

feflion, by a premature attempt to seize it.
Mountjoy, too, declined the enterprise, and Es-
sex adopted more dutiful schemes; all thoughts
of ambition appearing to be totally effaced out of
his mind.

Tril wild TH IS moderation, which was merely the effedt of
3lAll Il l Of
Eis'. disgust and disappointment, was not of long conti-

nuance; and the Queen, having not only refused
to renew a lucrative grant which flie had formerly
bestowed, but even to admit him into her pre-
ience, that new injury drove a temper, naturally
impatient, and now much fretted, to absolute
despair. His friends, instead of soothing his rage,
or restraining his impetuosity, added to both by
their imprudent and interested zeal. After many
anxious consultations, he determined to attempt

to

to redress his wrongs by violence. But being B o° K
conscious how unpopular luch an enterprise would ----
be, if it appeared to proceed from motives of 16
private revenge alone, he endeavoured to give it
the semblance of public utility, by mingling the
King of Scotland's interest with his own. He
wrote to James, that the faction which now pre-
do!ninated in the English court had rebflved to
support the pretcnfions of the Infanta of Spain to
the crown; that the places of the greatelt im-
portance in the kingdom were put into the hands
of his avowed enemies; and that unless lie sent
ambassadors, without delay, to infiflc on the irn-
mediate declaration of his right of fucceflion, thlei:
measures were so well concerted, that all his hopes
would be desperate. James, who knew how dif-
agreeable such a proposal would be to the Q een
of England, was not willing raflly to expose him1-
fclf to her displeasure. Eflex, nevertheless, blinded
by resentment, and impatient for revenge, aban-
doned himself to these palfions, and acted like a
man guided by frenzy or despair. With two or
three hundred followers incompletely armed, he
attempted to assault a throne the belt eftabliflced
in Europe. Sallying at their head out of his owii
houl', he called on the citizens of London, if they
either valued his life, or wiflhed to preserve the
iiigdoin from the dominion of the Spaniards, to
tale arms, and to follow his standard. -Ie ad-
v.nced towards the palace with an intention to
drive Cecil and his fac~-ion out of the Qiuecn's
prelence, and to obtain a declaration of the Scot-
tilh King's right of fucccflionh, But, though

b Birch, 1M 1. ii , 77.
3 altofl

B ( ° K almost adored by the citizens, not a man would

VIII.
L- ., join him in this wild enterprise. Dispirited by

i'. rtheir indifference, deserted by tome of his own

attendants, and alnioft surrounded by the troops,
which marched under different leaders into the
city, he retreated to his own houle; and without
any bold efurt, suitable to his present condition,
or worthy of his former reputation for courage,
he surrendered to his enemies.

As soon as James heard of Essex's ill filccefs,

he appointed the Earl of Mar, and Bruce, Abbot
of Kinlofs, to repair as his Ambassadors to the
Court of England. The former of these was the
perlon by whole means Effex had carried on his
correipondence with the King. He was a pafli-
onate admirer of the Earl's character, and disposed
to attempt every thing that could contribute to
his safety. Bruce, united in a close friendlhip
with Mar, was ready to second him with equal
zeal. Nor was the purpose of the embafly less
friendly to Eikcx, than the choice of his Ambaffa-
dors; they were commanded to folicir, in the
warmest manner, for the Earl's life, and if they
found that tle King, by avowing his friends,
could either promote their defgns, or contribute
to their safety, they were imnpowered to lay aside
all disguise, and to promise that he would put
limfelf at their head, and claim what was due to
him by force of arms'. But before the Ambal-
: ~d&~.h. fadors could reach London, Effex had fuflfired

the puniihmcnt which he merited by his trcafiln.
Perhaps the fear of their interposing, in order to

C JoLnfl. 289. Birch. Mem. ii, 510.

obtlin

obtain his pardon, hastened his death. Elizabeth B 0°° K
continued, for some time, irresolute concerning -/
his fate, and could not bring herself to consign c 6r'-
into the hands of the executioner, a man who had
once possessed her favour so entirely, without a
painful struggle between her resentment against
his late misconduct, and her ancient affeFion to-
wards him. The distress to which he was now
reduced, tended naturally to soften the former,
while it revived the latter with new tenderness;
and the intercession of one faithful friend, who
had interest with the Queen, might perhaps have
saved his life, and have procured him a remission,
which, of herself, fie was ashamed to grant. But
this generous nobleman had at that time no such
friend. Elizabeth, solicited incefTantly by her
Ministers, and offended with the haughtiness of
Effex, who, as fle imagined, scorned to sue for
pardon, at last commanded the sentence to be put
in execution. No sooner was the blow struck,
than she repented of her own rafinefs, and be-
wailed his death with the deepest sorrow. James
always confidered him as one who had fallen a
martyr to his service, and after his acceflion to the
English throne, restored his son to his honours, as
well as all his associates in the confiiracy, and
diftinguilled them with his favour'.

THE Scottifli Ambassadors, finding that they JamirP-n-

had arrived too late to execute the chief bufinels ',',' h;',
committed to their charge, not only concealed inla'"'n.
that part of their instructions with the utmolt

d Carmd. Spotfw. 464.

care;

B 0 ° K care; but congratulated the Queen, in their

Vill.
-V_. Malter's name, on her happy escape from such
x6"C. an audacious conspiracy. Elizabeth, though no

itranger to the King's correspondence with Effex,
or to that nobleman's intentions of alerting
James's right to the Crown, was not willing that
these flould be known to the people, and, for
that reason, received the congratulations of the
Scottish Ambassadors with all possible marks of
credit and good will; and in order to sooth James,
and to preserve the appearances of union between
the two courts, increased the subsidy which she
paid him annually. The Ambassadors resided for
some time in England, and were employed, with
great success, in renewing and extending the in-
trigues, which Bruce had formerly entered into
with the Englifl nobles. As Elizabeth advanced
in years, the English turned their eyes more and
more towards Scotland, and were eager to prevent
each other in courting the favour of their future
Monarch. Assurances of attachment, professions
of regard, and promises of fupporr, were offered
to James from every corner of the kingdom.
Cecil himself, perceiving what hopes Effex had
founded on the fi-iendfhip of the Scottifli King,
and what advantages he might have derived from
it, thought it prudent to stand no longer at a
distance from a Prince, who might so soon be-
come his mafler. But being sensible at the fame
time how dangerous such an intercourse might
prove, under a Miltrefs naturally jealous, and
whofejealoufy grew isronger with old age; though
lie entered into a correspondence with him, he

carried

carried it on with all the secrecy and caution ne- n 0° K
ceffary in his situation, and peculiar to his charac- _
ter. James having gained the man whose oppo- '6'
fition and influence he had hitherto chiefly dreaded,
waited, in perfect security, till that event should
happen, which would open his way to the throne
of England . It was with some difficulty that
he restrained within proper bounds his adherents
in that kingdom, who, labouring to distinguish
themselves by that officious zeal, with which a
Prince, who has a near profpe& of mounting the
throne, is always served, urged him to allow a
motion to be made in Parliament for declaring
his right of fuccefflon to the Crown. James
prudently discouraged that design; but it was
with no small fatisfation that he observed the
ascendant he was acquiring in a court, the di&ates
of which he had been so long obliged to obey;
and which had either prescribed or thwarted every
ftep he had taken during the whole course of his
reign r.

Dr. Birch, in his life of Prince Henry, p. 232, has given

some account of the mysterious mode in which this corrc-
fon)dlcnce was carried on, and how the letters were conveyed
ironl London to Dublin, and from thence to Scotland. Not-
WtithllfLnding the solicitude which Cecil repeatedly difcovcrs,
tlilt; his letters should be destroyed as soon as the King had
rcad; them, ;t conliderable number of them has been pre-
Ilrved, and published by Sir IDavid Dalrymple in the
Year 1766. They were written by Lord Henry Howard,
tu"ldc the inifpeaion of Cecil, in a style affectedly obfceurc.
L'he whole corrcfpondcnce is more curious than inflru4tivc,

Spotfw. 467. 47L., ]3B.ch, Mem. ii. 514.

NOT-

B : OE K NOTWITHSTANDING the violent struggles of the
A-- political fastions which divided the court, and the
,Att62s; frequent revolutions which had happened there,
tociviize since the King first took the reins of government
the High-
hinds,. into his own hands, Scotland had enjoyed unusual

tranquillity, being undifiurbed by any foreign
enemy, and free from any intestine coimmotion of
long continuance. During this period, James
endeavoured to civilize the Highlands and the
Isles, a part of his dominions too much negletctd
by former Monarchs, though the reformation of
it was an objecl highly worthy of their care. The
long peace with England had afforded an oppor-
tunity of subduing the licentious fpiritof the bor-
derers, and of restraining their depredations,
often no less ruinous to their countrymen than
to their enemies. The inhabitants of the Low
Country began, gradually, to forget the use of
arms, and to become attentive to the arts of peace.
But the Highlanders, retaining their natural
fierceness, averse from labour, and inured to ra-
pine, infefled their more industrious neighbours
by their continual incursions. James, being so-
licitous not only to repress their inroads, but to
render them ufiful fubjetsg, had at different
times enaded many wile laws extremely con-
ducive to there ends. All landlords, or chiefs of
Clans, were enjoined to permit no persons to rc-
fide in their eflates, who could not find sufficient
ftircty for their good behaviour; they were re-
quired to make a lift of all suspicious persons

K Basil. Dotr. T39.

lnilcr

ander theirjurifdistion, to bind themfclves to de- n o

v K

liver them tojutice, and to indemnify those who -
should susser by their robberies; and, in order to I60o
ascertain the faithful performance of these arti-
cles,. the chiefs themselves were obliged to give
hIoftages to the King, or to put pledges in his
hands. Three towns, which might serve as a
retreat for the industrious, and a nursery for arts
and commerce, were appointed to be built in
dliferent parts of the Highlands; one in Cantire,
another in Lochaber, and a third in the isle of
Lewis; and in order to draw the inhabitants
thither, all the privileges of Royal Boroughs were
to be conferred upon them. Finding it, how-
ever, to be no easy matter to inspire the inhabit-
ants of those countries with the love of industry,
a resolution was taken to plant among them co-
lonies of people from the more industrious coun-
ties. The first experiment was made in the isle
of Lewis; and as it was advantageofly situated
for the fishing trade, a source from which Scot-
land ought naturally to derive great wealth, the
colony transported thither was drawn out of Fife,
the inhabitants of which were well skilled in that
branch of commerce. But before they had re..
mained there long enough to manifest the good
tflceds of this inltitution, the islanders, enraged
at feeing their country occupied by those intruders,
took arms, and surprising them in the night-time,
murdered fomne of them, and compelled the reft
to abandon the settlement. The King's attention
being soon after turned to other objects, we hear
'o more of this salutary projet. Though James

VOL, II. U did

B o0 K did not pursue the design with that iteady appli-
-,-. eation and perseverance, without which it is im-

6'Z. possible to change the manners of a whole peo-

pie, he had the glory, however, not only of having
first conceived the thoughts, but of having first
pointed out the proper method of introducing r'-e
civil arts of life into that part of the island'.

tlizabeth's AFTER having long enjoyed a good state of
nd dath. health, the effect of a found confitution, and the

meward of uncommon regularity and temperance,
Elizabeth began this winter to feel her vigour de-
crease, and to be sensible of the infirmities of old
age. Having removed on a very stormy day from
Weflrinfter to Richmond, whither fne was impa-

16c. tient to retire, her complaints increased. She had
JrsnurY 3, no formed fever; her pulse was good; but she eat

little, and could not sleep. Her distemper seemed
to proceed from a deep melancholy, which ap-
peared both in her countenance and behaviour.
She delighted in solitude, she fat conitantly in the
dark; and was often drowned in tears.

No sooner was the Queen's indisposition known,

than persons of all ranks, and of all different fedc
and parties, redoubled their applications to the
King of Scots, and vied with each other in pro-
sessions of attachment to his person, and in pro-
mises of submission to his government. Even
forne of Elizabeth's own servants, weary of the
length of her reign, fond of novelty, impatient
to get rid of the burthen of gratitude for past be-
nefits, and expecting to Ihare in the liberality of

Parli. 187. ;.594. 1597. potiwv. 468.

a new

a new Prince, began to desert her. And crowds B O°l
of people hurried towards Scotland, eager to pre- .--.
occupy the favour of the successor, or afraid of X63'
being too late in paying homage to him.

MEANWHILE, the Queen's disease increased,

and her melancholy appeared to be fettled and
incurable. Various conjecures were formed con-
cerning the causes of a disorder, fiom which she
seemed to be exempted by the natural cheerful-
ness of her temper. Some imputed it to her be-
ing forced, contrary to her inclination, to pardon
the Earl of Tyronne, whole rebellion had for
many years created her much trouble. Others
imagined that it arofi from observing the ingrati-
tude of her courtiers, and the levity of her peo-
ple, who beheld her health declining with most
indecent indifference, and looked forward to the
accefllon of the Scottish King, with an impa-
tience which they could not conceal. The mofb-
common opinion, at that time, and perhaps the
most probable, was, that it flowed from grief for
the Earl of Effex. She retained an extraordinary
regard for the memory of that unfortunate noble-
man; and though she often complained of his
obllinacy, feldonr mentioned his name without
tears'. An accident happened loon after her re-
tiring to Richmond, which revived her affeaion
with new tenderness, and embittered her forrowt.
The Countess of Nottingham, being on her death-
bed, desired to fee the Queen, in order to reveal
loniething to het, without dilcovering which, ihe

13itche. M4ti. il. 50s.

U a could

B 0 0 KT could not die in peace. When the Queen came

--- into her chamber, Ihe told her, that while Effex
1603. lay under sentence of death, he was desirous of

imploring pardon in the manner which the Queen
herself had prescribed, by returning a ring, which
during the height of his favour The had given him,
witl a promise that if, in any future ditrefs, he
sent that back to her as a token, it should intitle
him to her proteEtion; that Lady Scroop was the
person he intended to employ in order to present
it; that, by a mistake, it was put into her hands
instead of Lady Scroop's; and that she having
communicated the matter to her husband, one of
Essex's most implacable enemies, he had forbid
her either to carry the ring to the Queen, or to
return it to the Earl. The Countess, having thus
disclosed her secret, begged the Queen's forgivc-
ness; but Elizabeth, who now saw both the ma-
lice of the Earl's enemies, and how unjultly fle
had fufpeL&ed him of inflexible obltinacy, replied,
(( God may forgive you, but I never can ;" an(l
left the room in great emotion k. From thai

moment,

'!'his :inccclote concerning Elizabeth was first publillicl 1,,

O()boroc, Mcll. of Eliz. p. 23; is confirmcd by the tclliii(,
1* .lc M.ilricr, Mcm. 260, and by the traditional cvidcucrc I
Lady Eliz;labcth Spelmnan pullilhed by Dr. Birch, Ncg'c. io/.
C(.1aden mentions the cQucnc's grief for Elflcx's death :as Onc oi
tlhc ca:iles olf her melancholy. Sonic original papers rcImalil
which prove that this was commonly believcd at tlic lince
Birch. Micm. ii. 506. Effex, howcvcr, had beeln lIchil;l!
two years before her dealth, and there seems to have been l
other realiol, but that wliclh w have afligned, ywhy her lbr
r Iws'llhould revive with ib ninuch v iolenlce at so great a diflliicc
4,1 ticCe. As the dc.ath of the Countess ol Nottinghll;m 11.I'-

perilo

moment, her spirit funk entirely; fle could scarce B °10 K
taste food; (he refused all the medicines prescribcd --
by her plyficians; declaring tlat she wished to 603'
die, and would live no longer. No intreaty could
prevail on her to go to bed; fle far on cuffions,
during ten days and nights, pensive and silent,
holding her finger almnoft continually in her
lnouth, with her eyes open, and fixed on the
ground. The only thing to which she seemed to
give any attention, were the actIs of devotion per-
formed in her apartment by the Archbishop of
Canterbury; and in thele fie joined with great
appearance of fervour. Wafted, at last, as well
by anguith of mind, as by long abstinence, she
expired, without a struggle, on Thursday the
twenty-fourth day of March, in the seventieth
year of her age, and in the forty-fifth of her
reign'.

FOREIGNERS often accuse the English ofindif- Herchi-

ference and difi-efpeEt towards their Princes. But 'la""
without reason; no people are more grateful than

pencd about a fortnight before the Queen's death, the coin-
ridcncc of these events, together with the other cvidence mcn-
tioiicd, adds so mucl probability to the ilory rclaited by 01-
/Irlc, Ias will entitle it to a place in hiflory. The only oh-
jCt'i(io to tihe account we Iave given of Elizabeth's attachment
to Ellcx, arises fiom her great age. At the age of 68, the
aiimr1oiio ptaffiolis arc commorllnly l)labullndllatly cool, and the
violence of .all the paflions, except one, is muchl abated. But
the Ifrce ilf this objection is entirely removed by ain authlor
whlo ihas illuflrated many palhages in the Enlilih Hlltory, and
itilorlncd more. Cat;doguc of Royal and Noble Authors,
Article El'ex.

Camd. Birch. Mem. ii. 5o6, Birch. Negoc. o26.
Stiype, iv. 373.

U 3 they

B l o K they to those Monarchs who merit their grati-
x-_-_- tude. The names of Edward III. and Henry V.

o603- are mentioned by the Englifl of this age with

the fame warmth as they were by those who
shared in the blessings and splendour of their
reigns. The memory of Elizabeth is frill adored
in England. The historians of that kingdom,
after celebrating her love of her people; her fa-
gacity in discerning their true interest; her fleadi-
ness in pursuing it; her wisdom in the choice of
her Miniflers; the glory she acquired by arms;
the tranquillity flhe secured to her fubjets; and
the increase of fame, of riches, and of commerce,
which were the fruits of all there; justly rank
her among the most illustrious Princes. Even
the defets in her charalcer, they observe, were
not of a kind pernicious to her people. Her ex-
ceflive frugality was not accompanied with the
love of hoarding; and though it prevented some
great undertakings, and rendered the success of
others incomplete, it introduced ceconomy into
her administration, and exempted the nation from
many burdens, which a Monarch, more profuse
or more enterprising, must have imposed. Her
slowness in rewarding her servants sometimes dif-
couraged useful merit; but it prevented the un-
deserving from acquiring power and wealth, to
which they had no title. Her extreme jealousy
of those Princes who pretended to dispute her
right to the Crown, led her to take such precau-
tions, as tended no less to the public safety, than
to her own; and to court the affecions of her
people, as the firmest support of her throne.

3 Such

Such is the piEcure which the Englifi draw of B o° K
this great Queen. -

WHOEVER undertakes to write the History of 6

Scotland, finds himself obliged, frequently, to
view her in a very different, and in a less amiable
light. Her authority in that kingdom, during
the greater part of her reign, was little inferior
to that which she possessed in her own. But thil
authority, acquired at first by a service of great
importance to the nation, she exercised in a man-
ner extremely pernicious to its happiness. By
her industry in fomenting the rage of the two
contending factions; by supplying the one with
partial aid; by feeding the other with false hopes;
by balancing their power so artfully, that each of
them was able to distress, and neither of them to
subdue the other; Ihe rendered Scotland long tlh
feat of discord, confusion, and bloodshed: And
her craft and intrigues, effecting what the valour
of her ancestors could not accomplish, reduced
that kingdom to a Rate of dependance on Eng-
land. The maxims of policy, often little confo-.
nant to thole of morality, may, perhaps, juif
tify this conduct. But no apology can be offered
for her behaviour to Queen Mary; a scene of
diflimulation without neceflity and of severity
beyond example. In almost all her other a&ions,
Elizabeth is the object of our highest admiration;
in this we must allow that she not only laid aside
the magnanimity which became a Queen, but the
feelings natural to a woman.

TIOUcH Elizabeth would never permit the Jamee proc
question concerning the right. of fuccefion to the 'Kin ds

U 4 Crown England;

B 0O0 K Crown to be determined in parliament; nor de-
._-_ c dare her own sentiments concerning a point

itCj3 which she wished to remain an impenetrable myf-

tery; she had, however, formed no design of ex-
cluding the Scottifi King from an inheritance to
which his title was undoubted. A ihort time be-
fore her death, fle broke the silence which fie
had so long preserved on that fubjc:t, and told
Cecil and the Lord Admiral, " That her throne
was the throne of Kings; that she would have no
mean person to ascend it, and that her cousin the
King of Scots should be her successor." This she
confirmed on her death-bed. As soon as she
breathed her last, the lords of the Privy Council
proclaimed James King of England. All the in-
trigues carried on by foreigners in favour of the
Infanta, all the cabals formed within the kingdom
to support the titles of Lady Arabella and the
Earl of Hartford, disappeared in a moment; the
nobles, and people, forgetting their ancient hof-
tilities with Scotland, and their aversion for the
dominion of strangers, testified their fatisfa&ion
with louder acclamations than were usual at the
accession of their native princes. Amidfit this
tumult ofjoy, a motion made by a few patriots,
who proposed to prescribe some conditions to the
successor, and to exaft from him the redress of
some grievances, before they called him to the
throne, was scarcely heard ; and Cecil, by fifling
it, added to his ftockof merit wiih his new inafecr.
Sir Charles Percy, brother of the Earl of Nortll-
umberland, and Thomas Somerset, the Earl of
Worcester's son, were dispatched to Scotland,

with

with a letter to the King, signed by all the Peers Rn 0 0 K
and Privy Counsellors then in London; inform- -
ing him of the Queen's death, of his accefflon to i6G3,
the throne, of their care to recognize his title,
and of the universal applause with which the
public proclamation of it had been attended. They
made the uttmot hafle to deliver this welcome
ieffage; but were prevented by the zeal of Sir
Robert Carey, Lord Hutnfdon's youngest son,
who setting out a few hours after Elizabeth's.
death, arrived at Edinburgh on Saturday night,
juftastheKing had gone to bed. lie was immedi-
ately admitted into the royal apartment, and kneel-
ing by the King's bed, acquainted llim with the
death of Elizabeth, saluted hinm king of England,
Scotland, France, and Ireland, and as a token of
the truth of the intelligence which he brought,
presented him a ring, which his fitter Lady Scroop
had taken fi-om the Queen's finger after ihr death.
James heard him with a decent conpoiire. But
as Carey was only a private neffenger, the infor-
mation which he brought was not made public,
and the King kept his apartment till the arrival
of Percy and Somerset. Then his titles were
solemnly proclaimed; and his own fubjeds ex-
pressed no less joy, than the Englilh, at this in-
crease of his dignity. As his prelence was abfo-
lutely necessary in England, where the people
were extremely impatient to fie their new Sove-
reign, he prepared to set out for that kingdom
without delay. He aplpointed his Qticen to fol-
low him within a few weeks. Ile commlitted the
t'ovcrnmelt of Scotland to his Privy Council.

l-Je

B 0 0 K He intrusted the care of his children to different

,__^ noblemen. On the Sunday before his departure,
z6o3. he repaired to the church of St. Giles, and after

hearing a sermon, in which the preacher display.
ed the greatness of the divine goodness in raising
him to the throne of such a powerful kingdom
without opposition or bloodshed, and exhorted
him to express his gratitude, by promoting, to the
utmost, the happiness and prosperity of his sub-
jets; the King rose up, and addressing himself
to the people, made many professions of unal-
terable affection towards them ; promised fre-
quently to visit Scotland; assured them that his
Scottifi fubjeas, notwithstanding his absence,
should feel that he was their native Prince, no
less than when he resided among them; and might
still trust that his ears should be always open to
their petitions, which he would answer with the
alacrity and love of a parent. His words were
often interrupted by the tears of the whole audi-
ence; who, though they exulted at the King's
prosperity, were melted into sorrow by there
tender declarations m

Takes poi- ON the fifth of April he began his journey, with
felTion of
the throne. a splendid, but not a numerous train; and next

day he entered Berwick. Wherever he came, im-
mense multitudes were assembled to welcome him;
and the principal persons in the different counties
through which he passed, displayed all their wealth
and magnificence in entertainments prepared for
him at their houses. Elizabeth had reigned so
long in England, that most of her fubjets rc-

m Spotfw. 476.

membcrcd

membered no other court but hers; and their B O O K
notions of the manners and decorums suitable to _
a prince were formed upon what they had observed 1603.
there. It was natural to apply this standard to
the behaviour and actions of their new Monarch,
and to compare him, at firftfight, with the Queen,
on whose throne he was to be placed. Jaines,
vwhofe manners were extremely different from
hers, suffered by the comparison. He had not
that flowing affability, by which Elizabeth cap-
tivated the hearts of her people; and, though easy
among a few whom he loved, his indolence could
not bear the fatigue of rendering himself agree-
able to a mixed multitude. He was no less a
stranger to that dignity with, which Elizabeth
tempered her familiarity. And, instead of that
well-judged frugality with which the conferred
titles of honour, he bestowed them with an un-
diftinguilhed profusion, that rendered them no
longer marks of diftin4ion, or rewards of merit.
But these were the reflecions of the few alone;
the multitude continued their acclamations; and,
amidst these, James entered London on the 7th
of May, and took peaceable possession of the
throne of England.

THUS were united two kingdoms, divided from conclurol,.

the earliest accounts of time, but deftined,by their
situation, to form one great monarchy. By
this jun&ion of its whole native force, Grent Bri-
tain hath risen to an eminence and authority in
Europe, which England and Scotland could
never have attained,

THi

B o0 K THE Scots had so long confidered their mo-

VIII. --.- narchs as next heirs to the Englifl throne, that

A ,6cv f they had full leisure to reflect on all the confe-
the Revc- quences of their being advanced to that dignity.
lu:,ons in * .'1
the confi- But, dazzled with the glory of giving a Sovereign
Scotland to their powerful enemy, relying on the partiality
c ^e'Rbin of their native Prince, and in full expe&ation of
Jamnes i. Ifharing liberally in the wealth and honours which

he would now be able to bestow, they attended
little to the most obvious consequences of that
great event, and rejoiced at his accefifon to the
throne of England, as if it had been no less bene-
ficial to the kingdom, than honourable to the
King. They soon had reason, however, to adopt
very different sentiments ; and from that period
we may date a total alteration in the political
constitution of Scotland.

THE feudal Aristocracy, which had been sub-

verted in most nations of Europe by the policy of
their Princes, or had been undermined by the
progress of commerce, frill subsisted with full
force in Scotland. Many causes had contributed
gradually to augment the power of the Scottish
nobles; and even the Reformation, which in
every other country where it prevailed added to
the authority of the Monarch, had increased their
wealth and influence. A Kingpoffeffed of a finall
revenue, with a prerogative extremely limited,
and unsupported by a standing army, could not
exercise much authority over such potent fubjeRss.
Hle was obliged to govern by expedients; and
the laws derived their force not froir his power
to execute them, but from the voluntary fubmif-

flion

sion of the nobles. But though this produced a B o 0 K
species of government extremely feeble and ir- v
regular; though Scotland, under the name, and
with all the outward enligns of a monarchy, was
really fubje& to an Aristocracy, the people were
not altogether unhappy ; and even in this wild
form of a constitution, there were principles,
which tended to their security and advantage.
The King, checked and overawed by the nobles,
tlurif venture upon no a& of arbitrary power.
The nobles, jealous of the King, whose claims
and pretensions were many, though his power
was small, were afraid of irritating their depend-
ants by unreasonable exactions, and tempered the
rigour of ariftocratical tyranny, with a mildness
and equality to which it is naturally a stranger.
As long as the military genius of the feudal go-
vernment remained in vigour, the vassals both of
the Crown and of the Barons were generally not
only free from opprefion, but were courted by
their superiors, whose power and importance
were founded on their attachment and love.

BUT, by his accellion to the throne of Eng-

land, James acquired such an immcnie accellion
of wealth, of power, and offplendour, that the
nobles, aftonifled and intimidated, thought it vain
to flruggle for privileges which they were now
unable to defend. Nor was it from fear alone
that they fubinitted to the yoke; James, partial
to his countrymen, and willing that they flould
partake in his good fortune, loaded them with
riches and honours; and the hope of his favour
concurred with the dread of his power, in taming

thcir

B o0 K their fierce and independent spirits. The will of

Vill.

the Prince became the supreme law in Scotland;
and the nobles strove, with emulation, who should
most implicitly obey commands, which they had
formerly been accustomed to contemn. Satisfied
with having fubjeeed the nobles to the Crown,
the King left them in full possession of their an-
cient jurifdiEtion over their own vassals. The
extensive rights, vested in a feudal Chief, became
in their hands dreadful infsruments of opprelffon,
and the military ideas, on which there rights were
founded, being gradually loft or disregarded,
nothing remained to correct or to mitigate the
rigour with which they were exercised. The
nobles, exhauffing their fortunes by the expence
of frequent attendance upon the Englilh court,
and by attempts to imitate the manners and luxury
of their more wealthy neighbours, multiplied ex-
aftions upon the people, who durst hardly utter
complaints which they knew would never reach
the ear of their Sovereign, nor move him to grant
them any redress. From the union of the
Crowns to the revolution in 1688, Scotland was
placed in a political situation, of all others the
most singular, and the most unhappy; fubje6ted
at once to the absolute will of a Monarch, and to
the oppressive jurisdiction of an Aristocracy, it
suffered all the miseries peculiar to both there
forms of government. Its Kings were despotic;
its nobles were llaves and tyrants; and the people
groaned under the rigorous domination of both.

DURING this period, the nobles, it is true, made
one effort to flake of the yoke, and to regain their

ancient

ancient independency. After the death of James, B O ,, K
the Scottiflh nation was no longer viewed by our .---J
Monarchs with any partial affection. Charles I.
educated among the English, discovered no pe-
culiar attachment to the kingdom of which he was
a native. The nobles, perceiving the sceptre
to be now in hands less friendly, and swayed by a
Prince with whom they had little connexion, and
over whose councils they had little influence, no
longerfubmitted with the fame implicit obedience.
Provoked by some encroachments of the King on
their order, and apprehensive of others, the re-
mains of their ancient spirit began to appear.
They complained and remonstrated. The
people being, at the fame time, violently dif-
gusted at the innovations in religion, the nobles
secretly heightened this disgust; and their arti-
sices, together with the ill-conduCt of the court,
raised such a spirit, that the whole nation took
arms against their Sovereign, with an union and
animosity of which there had formerly been no ex.
ample. Charles brought against them the forces
of England, and notwithfianding their own union,
and the zeal of the people, the nobles must
have funk in the struggle. But the disaffection
which was growing among his English fubjeats,
prevented the King from acting with vigour. A
civil war broke out in both kingdoms; and after
many battles and revolutions, which are well
known, the Scottilh nobles, who first. began the
war, were involved in the fame ruin with the
throne. At the Reltoration, Charles II. regain-
ed full poffelion of the royal prerogative in Scot-

land;

B o K land ; and th, nol:les, w !ofc ellatcs were v';aKi.,

V¥11.
t--_- ' or thlitr spirit broken, by the caliaities to whicl

tl;cy 1ha,( been (cploli l, were lcds able and lel
v.i il1l- thaln ever to r clit: the power of the Crownt ,
D)uring his ici n, and tli:it of Jamies VII. the
(dc.rtcs of the NMoinarch vere received in Scot-
i;ian witii mnoll: ;tL;ict li.ibm-ifTion. The poverty
to Wvhici minany of the nobles were reduced, ren-
cdecd tlhem malilner slaves, and more intolerable
tyrants, thin evcr. The people, always ncglcl-
ed, were now odious, and loaded with every in-
iurv, on account of their attachment to religious
and poliic;al principles, extremely repugnant to
th'ose adopted by their Princes.

T1H: Revolution introduced other maxims into

the governienlt of Scotland. To increase the au-
thority of the Prince, or to secure the privileges of
the nobles, had hitherto been almost the sole objetr
of our laws. The rights of the people were hardly
ever mentioned, were dilregarded, or unknown.
Attention began, henceforward, to be paid to the
welfarc of the people. By the claim of right, their
iiberties were ecured ;; and the number of their
rcprefentatives being increased, they gradually
acquired new weight and consideration in parlia-
ment. As they came to enjoy more security and
greater power, their minds began to open, and
to form more extenfivc plans of commerce, of
indlultry, and of police. But the arillocratical
spir-t, lwhich flill predolinated, together with
many other accidents, retarded the imiprovement
and happinels of the nation.

ANOTH IR

v'oTriER grcat event completed what the Re- B 0 0 K

;',!uation had begun. The politicnl ipower of the v-
;n,,blecs, already broken by the union of the two
. rowns, wa s almolf annihila:ted by tle union of
;,c two kingldoms. InItead of mnaki: :l part, as
fr,: ,icrlv, of the fulprem ac ;T-crinbly off- !ic n: tion,
iiiltead of bearing the motll colnfide.ralie iwvay
t-hcr, the Peers of Scotland are aldmitted into the
;iitpilh parliament by their reprefetnt:tives only,
iand si rm but an inconsiderable part ofoneof thoft
bodies in which the legiflativc authority is vested.
'Tlh tihemnfelves are excluded abfol utely from the
lioule of Commons, and even their cldelt sons are
!eit permitted to represent their countrymen in
1' ilt a;!1 lt aiembly. Nor hlave their feudal pri-
v i:cc.; remained, to compenflat for this extinc-
tion of their political authority. As commerce
a 'vanced in its progrcfs, and government attainedl
l;a Cer to perfe(tion, these were inflnribly circurm-
icrebed, and at l;ft, lby laws no Ic'ls salutary to
t;ic' !nltlic, than fatal to the nobl:c;, tlhey 1have
!be;un aliioft totally abolilhed. As the nobles
were dCeprived of power, the Ipopllc ;ac1lired li-
)cl ry. I''xempted frolm burdtllen, to ,wh icll they
',crel f(lormerly lisll jift, fercclnet froli ol)l)ircfioll,
to which they 1hd been lon) g

c' porel, and

ao)ptedtl into a conllitrioun wlihorf .enius and
l.w\s were more libceral than theirt own, tlcy lhave
Sttendled their conlltmerce, reficned their illianners,
iade ilmprovernents in the clerancies of lilf, and
'litivated tlhe arts and 1(icnccs.

1 l1s lfrvey of the political slate of Scotland,
; whiich events and their caulces hIave been men-

Vo1-. I1 X tionedL

B o0 K tioned rather than developed, enables us to puint
----i out three a:ras, fi-om each of which we may date

lome great alteration in one or other of the tll ce
different members of which the \supreme legifa-
tive affermbly in our confitution is composed. At
their .ccej/ion to the throne of E ngland, te
Kings of Scotland, once the Inoft limited, be-
came, in an instant, the mobt abfllute Princes in
Europe, and exercised a dlepotic authority, whicl
their parliaments were unable to controul, or
their nobles to refil. At the Union of the two
kingdoms, the feudal aristocracy, which had sub-
filled so many ages, and with power so exorbi-
tant, was overturned, and the Scottifla nobles
having surrendered rights and pre-eminences
peculiar to their order, reduced themielves to a
condition which is no longer the terror and envy
of other fubjets. Since thie U,iio, the Colm-
mons, anciently neglected by their Kings, ani
feldonm courted by the nobles, have emerged into
dignity; and, being admitted to a participation
of all the privileges whicll rlie l]nglifh had pur-
chalced at the expcnce of so much blood, mull
now be efteemred a body not le ls confi(crable in
the one kingdom, than they hiave long bcrn in
the other.

T IE church felt the efi'lssof the ablfl out power

which tlie King acquired by hi i acceflioni; alUid its
revolutions, too, are worthy of'notice. Jamci, du-
ring the latter years of his adllinifltrati on in Scot-
landc, had revived thc nlamle and oflice of lBillhol)p
But they poffcffed no c(clcfiatllcal j lritdli§lion or
Prc-clninncce their revenues wereincon fidlc;rlal

3 al!",

.iti they were scarcely distinguished by any thing nB

o K

but by tlcir feat in parliament, and by being the y
ohject of the clergy's jealouly, and the people's ha-
;-cd. Tlie King, delighted with the splendour and
utilhuri y which the Englifi Biflhops enioved, and
cager to eflict an union in eccleriaflical poticy,
:.liichl he had1, in vain, attempted in the civil go-
\vrnment, refulved to bring both Churches to an
,xact conformity with each other. Three Scots-
!lon were consecrated Bifliops at London. From
thein, their brethren were commanded to receive
oriers. Ceremonies unknown in Scotland were
n:i;o)leld ; and though the Clergy, less oblfcquioOsl
'han the nobles, boldly opposed thcle innovation:;,
J.i;,es, longr practised and wcell- skilled in the arts
,Js matiaging tliem, obtained at length their co;n-
pliance. But Charles I. a fuipelrfitious Prince,
iunacquaintcd with the genius of the Scots, im-
prudent and precipitant in all the mcafures he
iurfied in that kingdom, preing too eagerly the
reception of the Engliih liturgy, and intdifcreetly
attempting a refumiption of Church lands, kindlcd
the flanes of civil war; and the people being left
at liberty to indulge their own wiflhs, the lpif-
cop)al church was overturned, and the Prefbyte-
riangovernment and di lcipline were re-eftablihfed
witl new vigour. Together with Monarchy, Epif-
copacy was relt-ored in Scotland. A form of go-
vernment, so odious to the people, required force
to uipoldt it; and though not only the whole ri-
gour of authority, but all the barbarity of perl-
cution were employed in its support, the aversion
of the nation was infurmountablc, and it 'ifubfifl(c

X 2 itth

B o 1 K with difficulty. At the Revolution, the inclina.

---- tions of the people were thought worthy the atten-

tion of the legislature, thePrefbyterian government
was again eftabliihed, and, being ratified by the
Union, is itill maintained in the kingdom.

NOR did the influence of the Acceflion extend

to the civil and ecclesiastical constitutions alone;
the genius of the nation, its taste and spirit,
things of a'nature still more delicate, were fen-
sibly affeated by that event. When learning re-
vived in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, all
the modern languages were in a state equally
barbarous, devoid of elegance, of vigour, and
even of perspicuity. No author thought of writ-
ing in languages so ill adapted to express and
embellish his sentiments, or of ereeting a work
for immiortality, with such rude and perishing ma-
terials. As the spirit, which prevailed at that
time, did not owe its rife to any original effort of
the human mind, but was excited by admiration
of the ancients, their compositions were deemed
not only the standards of taste and of sentiment,
but of ifyle; and even the languages in which
they wrote were thought to be peculiar, and almost
consecrated to learning and the muses. Not only
the manner of the ancients was imitated, but
their language copied: and, extravagant as the
attempt may appear, to write in a dead tongue,
in which men were not accustomed to think, and
which they could not speak, or even proiounce,
the success of it was aftonifling. As they formed
their style upon the purefc models; as they were
uninfeted with those barbarisms, which the in-

~I'~~~~ ' ~accuracy

accuracy of familiar conversation, the afiestation B 00 K
of courts, intercourse with strangers, and a thou- _.,
fltnd other causes introduce into living languages;
many moderns have attained to a degree of ele-
gance in their Latin compofirions, which the Ro-
mnans themselves scarce possessed beyond the iillits
of the Augustan age. While this was altiofl- t;i
only species of composition, and all authors, L.y
using one commnon languaage, could hL bhrou-ht
to a nearer comparison, the Scottifi w!,, s were
not inferior to those of any other nation. '1he
happy genius of Buchanan, equally formed to
excel in prose and in verse, more various, more
original, and more elegant, than that of almost
any other modern who writes in Latin, refleais,
with regard to this particular, the greate-st luilre
on his country.

BUT the labour attending the fcudy of a dead

tongue was irksome; the unequal return for their
indultry which authors met with, who could be
read and admired only within the narrow circle
of the learned, was mortifying; and men, in-
flead of wafting half their lives in learning the
language of the Romans, began to refine and to
polifl their own. The modern tongues were
fbund to be susceptible of beauties and graces,
which, if not equal to those of the ancient ones,
were at least more attainable. The Italians hav-
ing sirs- set the example, Latin was no longer
utled in the works of talte; it was confined to
books of science; and the politer nations have
baniflled it even from these. The Scots, we may
presume, would hlave had no cause to regret this

X 3 change

B oIo. K chlnge in the public taste, and would lRill hi;

_1-- - been able to maiintain Iome equality with orthi

nations, in their purluit of literary honour. TL
i.nglifh and Scottifn languages, dcrived Cf'o:
the f.ime Fol]rces, were, at the end of the fixtec'nEt
century, in a Rate nearly similar, differing fro;l
one another iomcwhat in orthography, thl;':!,?
not only the words, but the idioms were j,(c.,
the l]amne. The letters of 1cveral Scottish Ilat{.l
nmen of that age are not inferior in elegance, rr
in purity, to those of the Englifi Ministers vwth
whom they corresponded. James himself a;i,
malter of a itlyle fai from contemptible; and, bv
his examplle and encouragement, the Scottifl
language might have kept pace with the Englinl
;n refinement. Scotland might have had a series
of authors in its own, as well as in the Latin lan-
guage, to boast of; and the improvements in talte,
in the arts, and in the sciences, which spread over
the other polished nations of Europe, would not
have been unknown there.

B13u, at the very time when other nations were

bc-' - ': 1to(, drop the use of Latin in works of
taltt, .iii to lmal:e trial of the fli-ength and con-
pals of their own languages, Scotland ceaald to
be a kinlgdom. The transports of joy, which the
.Accc-nion at sirs: occafionecd, were soon ovenl
and the Scots, being at once deprived of all the
objcrts that refine or animate a people; of the
prelence of tleir lrince, of the concourse of no-
bles, of the liclcndour and elegance of a court, an
tuivcrfal ldjeclion of spirit seems to have seizcd
the nation. 'Ilic Court being withdrawn, no do-

ZD~ ~~Iei

menic standard of propriety and corredtnefs of BR o0VI
Ipcech remained; the few compositions that -
Scotland produced were tried by the English
flandard, and every word or phrase that varied in
tie kIaft from that, was condemned as barbarous;

'vhcreas, if the two nations had continued diflin:t,

Cea( might have retained idioms and forms of
l-ptch pecutliar to itself; and tlcefe, rendered
ftlalionable by the example of a court, and sup-
ptorted by the authority of writers of reputation,
niiglht have been confidered in the fame light
w!th the varieties occasioned by the diflerent di-
ale's in the Greek tongue; might have been
confldered as beauties; and, in many cafes, might
iitivc been used proinifcuoufly by the authors of
both nations. But, by the Accefion, the English
natuirally became the sole judges and lawgivers
in language, and rejeced as solecisms, every form
of iPeech to which their ear was not accustomed.
Nor did the Scots, while the intercourse between
tlie two nations was inconsiderable", and ancient

" A riem;rk:alel proof of the litle intrccourfe between the

l'igli!li :;ndi Scot!; beflre the union of the Crowns, is to
1c Itunld ill two curious p:pcrs, onle pulllifilld by ITaynes,
lte ntilir by Strypc. In the ye:;r 1567, .'lialicth Coin-
m1inied the Bititop of Lonilon to take a fiurvey of' all thic
It 1.t11c1. witl hinl the cities of loIndlon ;:nd \Velllrlinflcr. By
ilils leport, wilhich is very Iininte, it. atppears thalt the whole
riiniir of 'Scots att th;t t ime was s8. HI:ynes, 455 . A liirvcy
il Ilic lfhtne kind was inade byv Sir 'l'lhoil:s Pow, Lord M:iyor,
A. 1). i56 lI The numiber of Sonts had t IlKn iucIr.:II(.d to

t.. NStryp,

is. nl

lOcnt, N.

I. nil tlle ;iccclllonii o

Jlomns a, a eolilideilrale nu1mberl of Scot's, clpecia.ll) ( c1 the
hi l, lraink, Ircl;'ti c to li'nghl l ;

i lut it was.s nlI till IliC

I10ion that the iniLcrilluri bLl wLIc the
l two kigqdonm. lic bLIICllc

X 4 prejudices

B 0li K prejudices were still so violent as to prevent imi-
;_-_3 tation, possess the means of refining their own

tongue according to the purity of the Englii
standard. On the contrary, new corruptions flowed
into it from every different source. The Clergy
of Scotland, in that age, were more eminent for
piety than for learning; and though there did not
arise many authors among them, yet being in pof-
fefeon of the privilege of discoursing publicly to
the people, and their sermons being too long,
and-perhaps too frequent, such hasty productions
could not be elegant, and many slovenly and in-
correct modes of expreiflon may be traced back
to that original. The pleadings of lawyers were
equally loose and inaccurate, and that profeflion
having furnished more authors, and the matters
of which they treat mingling daily in common
discourse and business, many of those vicious
forms of speech, which are denominated Scotti.
cifms, have been introduced by them into the lan-
guage. Nor did either the language or public
taste receive any improvement in Parliament,
where a more liberal and more correct eloquence
might have been expected. All business was
tranfated there by the Lords of Articles, and
they were so servilely devoted to the Court, that
few debates arose, and, prior to the Revolution,
none were condut-cd wiih the spirit and vigour
natural to a popular affemrbly.

THus, during the whole seventeenth century,

the Englith were gradually refining their language
and their taste; in Scotland the former was much
debated, and the latter almost entirely loft. In
She beginning of that period, both nations were

emerging

emerging out of barbarity; but the distance be- B o Io K
tween them, which was then inconsiderable, be- -
came, before the end of it, immenie. Even after
science had once dawned upon them, the Scots
seemed to be finking back into ignorance and ob-
fcurity; and, active and intelligent as they natu-
rally are, they continued, while other nations were
ea'yr in the pursuit of fame and knowledge, in a
I2ate of languor. This, however, muf: be im-
puted to the unhappiness of their political situ-
ation, not to any defeEt of genius; for no iboner
was the one removed in any degree, than the
other began to difplav itself. The aa abolish-
ing the power of the Lords of Articles, and other
salutary laws passed at the Revolution, having
introduced fieedom of debate into the Scottish
Parliament, eloquence, with all the arts that ac-
company or perfelt it, became immediate objects
of attention; and the example of Fletcher of
Salton alone is sufficient to ihew that the Scots
were still capable of generous sentiments, and,
notwithflancing some peculiar idioms, were able
to express themtelves with energy, and with ele-
gance.

AT length the Union having incorporated the
two nations, and rendered them one people, the
diltinEtions which had fubfited for many ages
gradually wear away; peculiarities disappear; the
laine manners prevail in both parts of the island;
tlie fame authors are read and admired ; the lfame
entertainments are fiequented by the elegant and
polite; and the fame standard of tafle, and of pu-
rity in language, is eltablificd. The Scots, after

bcinlg

B t 0 K < being placc-d, tduring a whole century, in a situ.
i-- aplatioi no lets fital to the liberty than to the tafie

and g'nius of the nation, were at once put in
polficfli ln of plIlivilc(es more valuable than thufe
which their anceflors had forlii'rl/y enjoyed; and
every olilruit-ion that had retairled: their purlirt,
or preventeld their aicqui iftion of literary fame,
was totally rcllovcd.

A C'1-

# A CRITICAL DISSERTATION CONCERNING The Murder of King HENRY, and the Genuineness of the Queen's Letters to Bothwell.

A CRITICAL
DISSERTAT ON

CO NCERNING
The Miurder of King HENRY, and the Gentu-

ineneis of the (Qccn's Letters to BothwelI.
1T is not my intention to engage in all the con-

troverfies to which the murder of King Henry,

.r the letters from Qteen Mary to Bothwell,
have given rif; far lets to appear as an adversary
to any particular author, who hath treated of
them. To repeat, and to expose all the ill-
founded assertions with regard to these points,
wvhich have flowed from inattention, from preju-
dice, from partiality, from malevolence, and from
dilhonefty, would be no less irlkri-oe to myself,
than unacceptable to most of my readers. All I
propose, is to ailfti others in forming some j udg-
nnent concerning the fads in dispute, by stating
the proofs produced on each fide, with as much
brevity as the cafe will admit, and with the fame
attention and inmpartiality which I have endea-
voured to exercise in examining other contro-
verted points in the Scottish history.

IN order to account for the King's murder, two

dlifftrent fyltems have been formed. The one
!iupofcs Bothwell to have contrived and executed

this

this crimne. Thle other imputes it to tlic arl
Murray, Morton, and their party.

TrE decision of many controverted falCs in hil-

tory, is a matter rather of curiofiry than of ulf.
They ftland detachedl; and vwhtever we determinw
with ire 'ard to them, the fabric of the flory re..
mains u:ntouched . 3But the f.a under dispute i,:
tiis place is a f:ndamental a;jd efTntial one, alt
according to the opinion whiich an hisPoriai,
dopis Vwith regard to it, hc mudi vary and di:Fpol,
the whole or lhis fil)b-itlqcnt nalratioln. 1An hi'io-
rical Ivtl'lln Imay be tried in two diflCerent wavys
whether it be confillent with probability, and
vwhether it be supported by proper evidence.

TH-OSE who charge the King's murder upon

Bothwell, argl.le in the following mainner; and
though their relfoningi have been mentioned
already in difiereint placcs of the narrative, it :;
necefflry to repeat them here. Mary's love fbo
Darnly, .ly they, was a sudden and youthful pal:
sion. The beauty of hils person, set ofn by 1-bmo,
external frivolous accomplifhmcnlts, was his clli(.f
merit. 1lis c;apriciols tempnerl loon rnilcd in the
Queen a difgwull, wilich broke our on diffi-'lnt
occasions. H-is engaing in the confpjiracy aga;inlm
Rizio, converted this dil gus' into an indignation,
which file was at no pains to conceal. T i:,
breach was prhaps in its own nature, irrepara-
ble; tile King certainly wanted that art and con-
(cl-cenlio 'li which alone could iave repaired i;r
It widened every day, and a deep and fettlEl(
hatrcd ell-liccd all rem ains of alleion. Botihwvll
oblervcd this, and was prompted by aimbition,

altl1

..:;d icrhaps by love, to found upon it a cliceme,
v.iiCic Iproved faital both to the Q2ieen and to
' :,!ilf- Ic lblad Ic'rvcl Mary at (1dilrent timels
'.'ia '5Ji',:elity and fitccelC-, ie nfinuatred hIiilnclf
:;) lt.r fi.avur, by address and by flattery. By

:.; es lhe 5.!inled tr' hBc'arrt:. In o rder to gratify

,; love, or at Ic:il IcsL alnbition, it was neccfi;-ry

:) -t -ridl of thle ' ilr. .l, ad r,; e

I Cjcftld tlie

(:':,)l al madle to her for obtlaiiiil^ a divorce.
!. ,;i !(in:1 waISC eq:!lly hated by thc pardtillans of

;.:c l]ot.l of lamilton, ; conltl.crabl)c party in tihe
i.i L,;l(lil; by Nt Ii try, one of the in1oll ipoweriul
...,1 I,,l l;lr pertlbns in his counltry; by Morton
,:]i'l lii afObciattc;, whomi lie had deceived; and
V. ,0;io lothv'el] lad boiund to llis interclt by a

c. iillt favour. Among the people 1Danl)y was

i .ll, untler extreme conttcmpnl. Bothwell might

';iLcir, s r all theLft relan s, that tie murder of
t;i; King would pais vitlout any inquiry, and
i;.i.;ht trull to Mary's love, and to hiis own a;ddlrcfs
.::d sIoo(d fdortunc, for the accomplifliment of rlih
::'i- of his w i llcs. \' ;l t Botlwell expe lc really
(.:a!e to pals. M ary, ilf not privy lierl'elf to tlie
.'icli C, conniived at n ;Itlion whicll rid lier of a
11;ii. wilionl fnie hd lifcli goo(d rIca;On to dctell.
A Ifw moliths after the muirder of her Ihui l)ablnd,
fie married tile i)('rllb whVo was both fisl)pectcd
:i;1il acculfel tof haviln perpetrated that. odio
( I 111IC.

''l1loSE who charge ti c guil c upon N]l rra)y and
llis party realun in tils in:iiiner. Murray, tlhy Ihv,
.1s a man of boudlcll kii ambition. Notwiril-
llandiny the illogitiinacy of hlis birch, he hai c.irly

r so:
t ,(

formed a design of usurping the Crown. On the
Queen's return into Scotland, he insinuated hii-
self into her favour, and engrossed the whole power
into his own hands. He fct himlelf againfi every
proposal of marriage which was made to her, lelt
his own chance of succeeding to the Crown should
be destroyed. He hated Darnly, and was no leis
hated by him. In order to be revenged on him,
he entered into a sudden friendship with Bothwcll,
his ancient and mortal enemy. lie encouraged
him to assassinate Henry, by giving him hopes of
marrying the Queen. All this was done with a
design to throw upon the Queen herself the impu-
tation of being accessary to the murder, and under
that pretext, to destroy Bothwell, to depose and
imprilon her, and to seize the sceptre which he
had wreffed out of her hands.

THE former ofthefe systems has an air of proba-

bility, is consistent with itself, and solves appear-
ances. In the latter, some assertions are false, tome
links are wanting in the chain, and effects appear,
of which no sufficient cause is produced. Murray,
on the Queen's return into Scotland, served her
with great fidelity, and by his prudent adminiftra-
tion rendered her so popular, and so powerful, as
enabled her with ease to quash a formidable infur-
recion raised by the party of which he was the
leader in the year I565. What motive could
induce Murray to murder a Prince without ca-
pacity, without followers, without influence over
the nobles, whom the Queen, by her neglet, had
reduced to the lowest state of contempt, and who,
after a long disgrace, had regained (according to

the

the moRt favourable supposition) the precarious
poflclion of her favour only a few days before
1iis death? It is difficult to conceive what Mur-
ray had to fear from the King's life. It is fill a
more difficult matter to guels what he could gain
by his death. If we lfuppofe that the Queen had
no previous attachment to Bothwell, nothing can
appear more chimerical than a scheme to perfluade
her to marry a man, whose wife was still alive,
and who was not only fufpe&ed, but accused, of
murdering her former husband. But that such a
cheine should really lucceed is frill more extra-
ordinary.--If Murray had infligated Bothwell to
commit the crime, or had himself been accessary
to the comnmilion of it, what hopes were there that
Bothwell would silently bear from a fellow-crini-
nil all the persecutions which he suffered, without
ever retorting upon him the accusation, or reveal-
ing the whole scene of iniquity ? An ancient and
deadly feud had subsisted between Murray and
Bothwell; the Queen with difficulty had brought
them to some terms of agreement. But is it pro-
bable that Murray would chufean enemy, to whom
lie had been To lately reconciled, for his confident
in the commifiion of such an atrocious crime? Or,
on dhe other hand, would it ever enter into the
imagination of a wife man, firfi to raise his rival
to upircme power, in hopes that afterwards he
fliould render him odious, by accusing him of
ciimcs which he had not committed, and, in
conllcqlence of this unjult charge, flould be
enablecd to deprive him of that power? The moot
advcntrouis politician never hazarded such a daii-

gerous

gerous experiment. The moit credulous folly
never trusted such an uncertain chance.

How strong soever there general reasonings

may appear to be, it is not upon them alone that
we rmufl decide, but according to the particu-
lar evidence that is produced. This we n1w
proceed to examine.

THAT Bothwell was guilty of the King's mur-

der, appears, i. From the concurring teffimony
of all the contemporary historians. 2i From the
confession of those persons who suffered for affill-
ing at the commission of the crime, and whoenter
into a minute detail of all its circumstances. An-
derf. ii. I65. 3. From the acknowledgment
of Mary's own commiffloners, who allow Both-
well to have been oneofthofe whowhere guilty of
this crime. Good. ii. 213. 4. From the ex-
press testimony of Lefly Bishop of Ross, to the
fame effet with the former. Def. of Q Mary's
Hon. And. i. 76. Id. iii. p. 31. 5. Morton,
at his death, declared that Bothwell had solicited
him, at different times, to concur in the confpi-
racy formed against the life of the King; and that
he was informed by Archibald Douglas, one of
the conspirators, that Bothwell was present at the
murder. Crawf. Merm. App. 4. The letter from
Douglas to the Queen, published in the Appendix
to Vol. II. No. I4. confirms Morton's teflilnony.
6. Lord Herries promises, in his own name, arid
in the name of the nobles who adhered to the
Queen, that they would concur in punishing
Bothwell as the murderer of the King. Append;
Vol. I. No. 24,

THE

THE moes direc charge ever brought against

Murray is in these words of Bishop Lefly. "Is
t it unknown," addrefling himself to the Earl of
Murray, " what the Lord Herries said to your

face openly, even at your own table, a few
cl days after the murder was committed? Did he
(: not charge you with the foreknowledge of the

fame murder; did he not, nulla circutione itus,
( flatly and plainly burden you, that riding in

Fife, and coming with one of your most afTured

.( and rrufty servants the fame day whereon you
c departed fron Edinburgh, said to him, among
*other talk, This night ere morning Lord
( Darnly fiall lose his life ?" Defence of Q.
Mary, Anderr. ii. 75, But the assertion of a
man so heated with faction as Lefly, unless it were
ifplported by proper evidence, is of little weight.
T'he servant to whom Murray is said to have

l toklen there words, is not named; nor the man-

ner in wliicli this secret conversation was brought
to light mentioned. Lord Herries was one of the
mofil zealous advocates for Mary, and it is re-
markable that, in all his negociation at the court
off ngland, he never once repeated this accusation
1o Murray. In answering the challenge given
}iim by Lord Lindsay, H-erries had a fair oppor-
;unity of mentioning Murray's knowledge of the
Inumler; but though he openly accuses of that
'rine forne of those who adhered to Murray, he
!nduftrioufly avoids any insinuation again(t Mur-
ray hinfelf. Keith, Pref. xii. Mary herself, in
conversation with Sir Francis Knolles, acculfel
Morton and Maitland of being privy to the mur-
(dlr, but does not mention Murray. And. iv. 55S'
Wien the Biflop of Ross and I.,ord I-Ierries

VoL, II. Y appearelt

appearied before the English council, Jai,,-
ary I i, [5,9, tihey declared themit:llves read'.
in obedience to the Queen's command, to accui!
Murr ay :andl is aloci.aes of being acccf'ur)y ti
the murder, but " they being a)Co required, wi,
' i le'r tlhey, oranyv of th:m, asofthclillvces, woutl.

accule thic lield L'arl in fpccia), or any of his ;'.i

';' hlcretIs, or tl(ouiht them guilty thereof;" tic,
anfvcrcd, " ilia. they took God to witiulcs t!i:

: none of them did ever know any thing of dic

"conlj)iracy of that murder, or were in coui,
tc cil and foreknowledge thereof; neither wiic
" were devisers, inventors, and executors of tl,
ó( fame, till it was publicly discovered long there-
:- after by some of the aiCifi ns, vwho fullirc.!
¢ death on that account." Good. ii. 308. IThl
words are taken out of a regi ler kept by RIo)
and I lerries themnelves, and icemi to be a dli:;:
.on utation of tie l3ifhop's afTertion.

'IIr Eajrls ofi I ntliy and Ary.l, in their .'.

';,?/litic iijich

/ ;.in /,',' ,//,/; - (,' /, e J/,Ki of ,'.':..

;a;'er rt'ctioni';Ii, thle co[If:'clcc at Cralinmiil..
rol ccri.l;:i ; a li !lrc,:

di , : , So after thcle 'lrc

tt 11iil-, t .

lcthe r of tilt: Kini g followin:i,

':K

:' ;tied e in cutr '.,lll i(cl ic , and hold fur ct;:.::
( itld tilrut, tli.1t tle El.1-1 of M urray and l.'1e1,
':'t 1.1y I .ctliirgjton were authors, inventors , ',-) l .

·' i Illors; ,a!.! ci ai;f'rs of tle fame llllmurderl , ill
6 lmanner, o)r l)' whattilbmever te'rlbns rl,' lt:i..-
' was cxcuted." Andes. iv. i';8. li, 1.
'llhis is inv ilrn, mlre than the plivate olii,:'
or pe'l.lI .d.i;rll'.ttihtn of tlielc two nouillcmn.
'lI .. coe.lulionvlie lhl they make lla;s no(:onll.'d'L.:
x l li the l rcl emif]; s on wlich they fuldlll it. l'(:.i''
nMu i r,y rpol)lc(kd to obtain for tlie (...C l .
e !'-

?:

v,urcc fiom her hullband with herC own conllent, it
,o((S, nor follow t.hat t;erefore lh conmitc'kld the
,-mirer without h:r kInovwlcedc. 3. 1 ll;ndl andi
:?r!svill were at tl;:t til:e thel leaders of t:ht par'
ulFi o2tc to M uLrray, a rnianlhated , itih all the
; ,' of fiicCi-ll. 4. Luth .i L' .cin v.-crc M'urrav s
I.(loirlnal clcin-ics. i -luni:ly, on accout; tof thic tri';t-
mci'n w liclh hlis ilmily and clim had rcct'ivcd.l flont
;,;st noblcni-ian. A\r,-11 w\';lasuill'O o' i?;.'K;1

ti-

vol(cdi from nlis wifll, with whom hI livec on no
'(oIl tc'rms, Knox,) 13. and by wsho\ l he had no
,hlden. Craw. Pee.

C wf. Sli c ^a:, I, arr.!!v's

lifitr, and by his intercil e h cic lti

i'.ad i ti:

(ideidn. Keith, 55I. Thclei CilCuatillltallccs would
;/o far towards invalidatlin a pofitivc tctilimon ;,
illcy Inll'c than counterbalance an indlceterminate
ue)i)icion. 5. It is altogether uncertain whletlher
] lunitly and Argyll ever lubfcribed tils protcf-ta-
tion. A copy of' ilch a proteflation as tie (Qcen
tlioullh t would be of anlv antrace to ler can i', was
;:;inlinittedi to them 1by her. A\ilderf. iv. b. ii. i C(.
'!'Ic protcf'ation irtelf; ptubliilcl lby A dlcrlin, i
rt.llcn from an un libtlcribcd col)y xwith bl:anks for
the dlate and pllace of lblcriibiL. () tlh I):;'
.i tliis copy is lailcle a paper, winlch C ceil ii.i,
, :rlhe(1t '( A iwver oft' (lle I '. of lrr1.t,' 10 ;i \V. i i
"1tin! oftlic i " arls of llintlyn l a !

a ;, !." An-

'.,i il. l1.l-, 1 ). 13 t ir can) h.; i'. ! '. :. I ;i.
l,'iil, to llh :il zovc -lntnrio e:d [r, lcir r.11,;li(';. hi.i:)'-
F.'.' ll)II*\VCI b..' S

I httv i(t -.,tl:ett4i11 i .

I i 1 ,' a

I 'S'. 'Il'ie ( neell'.s letttcr, il ^ ', i, i ;

li e '

iil<'t).t i

rinc c~,' ' )' thc [~l' p ot ilati; ,,;, !,. .i~ . !.; l l

,I t !"'v. !( '",:,

J".: . 5, 56a. N ow it i-, ,1 I I'

.l, 1, ,;i,'. j i1 t

tl,-: ,) I ('oi I otlI1 l e n

t
l) rinl' (, itl.t!,.,,

ll ,; ,'

1!., rI 1

iv t}(c cLVo ' .arl:,, :t 1) I. I: .;,'
1. < by

'2 ,,' '*'' I ,

rMurray within so fiort a time. Murray's rtl,
ie:cins intended only to prevent the iml:rt ilrl:;
which the vague and uncertain accusations of i;;
enemies might mnakle in his absence. Ctcci
had got the original of the )Queen's letter iiu0
his cultody. Anders. iv. I8j. 'This naturall;
leads us to coljcc3ur-e that the letter itself; to,;.
tiler with the inclosed proteltation, were in:c'-
(i tied before they came to the hands of IIuni,
anld Argyll. Nor is this mere conjecure aloue,

'ihe letter to Hluntly, in which the protciati.)iu
-vas inclofid, is to be found; Cott. Lib. C.i.

1',. fol. 28o, and is an original ilfubribcd b'

i-:iry, thoulgh not written with her own h:in;,
!)ccaui le id lcloml chole to write in the 1:
iifil language. The protel-ation is in the ;:i.
voliuie, fol. 8 n-, antd is manifefHly writtci-n l''
:le i-ime person who wrote the Queen's l-i,'
'lli'i lt'erns to render it highly probable tha;t ,::
;.vre intercepted. So that much ha:s been lfOL:!'.
o)1n a paper not fibfcribed by the twvo Farl-;, .:
p)r(oabijy never seen by them. B]elides, thii li'
lioeld wvlich the Queen tool of lfelding a cnop, : '
tilc t\o Earls, of what was proper for tlhemn r ti
clare withl regard to a conference hlell inl tlic
owvn presence, al)ppars foimew ihat flpicio ,' I
w'ould have been more natural, andi not 1;f li.i!''
to any nlifilnterlpretation, to have defirld lb ',' 1 I
write tle 1mofll exad account, which lic(y ( .
recollct', of wliat Illad pafled at the convcrl 'ii o:
Crailmilnlar. 6. 1But even if all thisrealoniwrsll',"lll
be set aside, and thc;aullllhenticity of tlle P/'./ '' ".
{iould be admitted in its full extent, it ;i l'a 11:
be a quefion, what degree of credit iliould "
given to the aficrltion of tile two Earls, 1who w\'cC

9 1n

,iot only present in the firfft Parliament, held by
Murray as Regent in December 1567, in which
tiic one carried the iceptre, and the other the sword
of- slate, Spotfwv. .14. but were both memberls of
*l,c Commnittee of Lords of Articles, and in
that capacity allifled in framing all the adts bv
wliich the Q2Lcen was deprived of the crown, and
iicl' Ion feactd on the throne; and in particular
tl:cilrred in the act by which it was declared,
th!ltt v.';tcvel had befallen the Queen, " was in her
a\win dccfaulr, in l;. far as, bcdivers liir previc let-
ters written lialelie with hir awin hand, and fend
by hir to James fometyrne Erle of Bothwell,
cicitf exccutour of the said horribill murthour,
a', weill befoir the committing thairof as thair-
afrir: And be hir ungodlie and difhonourabill
proceding to ane pretendit marriage with him,
lillldaindlic and unprovifitlie lhairefrir, it is
iraillt certane that fche was previe, airt and pairt,
of the actual devili and deid of the foirnamit
!iiirthour of the King her lauchfull husband, and
t!lairfoir jufllie defirvis quhatfumever hles bene
clole to hir in ony tyme bygaine, or that fal be
ufit towards hir, for the said cauet."' AInderf. ii.

22 1.

'I'lT: Qecn's commiflioners at tle Confcr-

eilrcs in l:ngland accused Murray and his as-
lucittcs of haviing murdered the King. Good.
ii. r I1. But this charge is to be confidered
as a recrimination, extorted by the acculation
prcfcrred againll the Queen, and contains no-
thinn mlore than loofc and( general aflirmations,
vwiiliuit dclccnding to furi( articular circum-

Y 3 flances

1lanccs as either aftertain their truth, or difcove:
their fallfihood. Tile fline acculation is repeated
by the nobles aiTembled at Dumbarton Sept,
1568. Good. ii. 359. And the fame observation
may be made concerning it.

ALL the Q(ueen's advocates have endeavoured

to account for Murray's murderi ngof the King, by
fuIppofing that it was done on purpoei that lhe
inij:,;ht have the pretence of diiur-bilng the (Qeen's
adzinin:la'::,i):'i, and tlhereby rendering inell'ieiual
Lc;: ge neral l ,

:voca.lion of Crown lands, which

\would ihve d(ci;eivcd 11iin and his alfociates of tle
bcfit ipr: c t.!cir cfLatcs. I,-fly Def. of Mary'
r.on. 11. 7|5'- Atdi'l. iv. IPa!t ii. 130. !But
'.\hoevr con)iders the limited powers of a
-:cottilh .\1ona-cih, will f[e that lich a revocation
crould :i,)t be vclr iOnl'nidable to thic nobles.
':vCry I .i;il of' cr ria: ld Iean h's rein with fulc

b 0

I-D

a reviC.ltion ;1 nd is ofCItn a;I it nas renewed,
ie p:' \vwer of tile nobl:s rentdlred it inefleclual.
'lie lbe i. v ndlication ofi i u rrav and hlis party fr'om
this :;Iccttioln, is th;it wl hieht tliy presented to
tlic (Qeei of I' al:ml, and which haLh never lli-
tlcrto been puillild
i.,, r

ti!'.... ..! ,'e . /,' . 'r
h - ,/'i// ciH /a[ r ' ' /i./ ', ,''>',

'ii / (l ia

'
' . ,

I /

' 11;'

, / i ' u !'-

.','/' ', c. i; ' /"':'U' /

'

1''/ f /l/:'t':, to

. ' [. ;C/1 , 'ui, *. '

/1',;' I'.'/ 'ó/:':,v ,iii, (; / ci;,:t

u '/

a /id' he;r i', ..

-

I' / Zl' cl

,' J/.;'. i ii,.'i,. ;c i f lcr p;-i'u'de i'rl.

\ l is a'!F,'ered, tl;hat is ;iluledgd but [i. e. witih-
it)t] all ilipeailranct and it appl'ars God has )e-

'rCf

:,,ft the alledgance of all wit andi good rcncin-
i)ranrce, for thir reasons followin :

IMrlr iMl,s, as to my Lord Regent, lie never had

occalion to grudge therea:t, iln rIefe' tle Qjl 'ee
i.made him privy to the flme, and took relolution
with himl for the exccution tlerclof, letting Ilis
Iorldflip know she would aflullcdlv in the faif.ine
except all things flhe hI:l gaiven to him, and rtircfe
tefm in tlhi next pa-liamert as fiie ldid indeed;
and for that caufei v/i lhld my Lord to lcave lbehind
hiil Ma;ller John Wood, to attend u]on the fnit'ne
r( whiom flie dcclarcd, that als wcll in that as in all;
,Ellr:cs ller grants it should [-l c provided, yea of Iree
.. 1l did promise and offer before ever he dcmand-
c., as it came to pa's without any lett or impe-
tliment, for all was rariicid by her conmllqnd, and
h'i;ild v'rite, at the parlilamenlt, but [i. . without]
:auy difliculty.

lI-rr. as to my Lord of Morton, lie could noc
ru i, ec tlherecat qlulla neoverl hadl of her property
x.ortlh twenty dollar:, that vecr I knew (ol.

Itcln the iamec, may I lty of my lI(ord (Ci.n;Cairlni
Il'e tle linlc e, I ll;il;i' lV of ml' 1 .(rc1 llull-c.
it lle the 1

. ;i,

I I' lsy .' my 1

vord i

vu tlle n 1.

lilm the 1 1ine, I il;y lay of' my Iord t .indllaly.
O()x. v my I ord of Marr, Ilad anc little thiing
'. i .Le propjer( y ctiilk alfi; was !,lldlv and lilbe-

'.ily conlirmed to Liltl, in the llidl lparliameln

i'ltc (lillng a

)'a ; V/Ia IeverI' l i had ny

c:; i!!'

,l' iilc(nite'nt 0f lthiat I(vo(aJ(.ol ,

'ar lel; to ia\.

I'lil their lives and lherili lo ho op11en1 i ll

: i -11

cll ;net dttgcer ;as tlicy d(id for li- alne fiivole
auk:.

Y . ;'r

GYF ever any did make evill countenance, ai,,

show any miscontentment of the laid revocatio:,
it was my Lord of Argyll in fpeciall, quha i:.);:
largely in the time of Parliament thairanents r,
the Queen hecrf-f, and did complain of the m;1-
nifc[ft corruption ofaneaclof parlialment palR ipo,
her Majrcfy's return, and fa did lett any revoc.i.
tion at that timne; but the armour for revene of
the King's deid was not till twa months after, a:;
quhat time there was no occasion given tlhre-(f,
nor never a man had mind thereof.

HIAVING. thus examined the evidence vwhiclh l:::

been produced against the Earls of Murray a1;;!
Bothwell; we flIall next proceed to inquire \w;e-
ther the Q:teen herself was acceffbry to the 1aiir-
der of her husband.

No sooner was the violent death of Diir.'l

known, than strong fufi)iclons nrolt', amongig lI(il';
of her libjels, that Mary had givcii her eC(onflli:
to the commifTion of that crime. And. ii. 15ó.
Wte are inrformed, by her own ambafl(ldor 3.
France, the Archlbilliop of Glasgow, that tlie fun-
timents of foreigners, on this head, were io Ic1.
iunfavourable to her. Keith, I'res. ix. Man.v cf
her nobles loudly acculed her of that crinl(, a::
a great part of the nation, by fulpporting thile',
seem to have allowed the accusation to be \Nl1
founded.

SONME crimes, however, are of fucli a natllrc,

that they hardly admit of a poli i\e or dl ji rr ,rol
Deeds of darknels can lildoin be brought I"'r-
fceily to light. 'Where lerIlons are accutled not (,

bcil'i:

being Principals, but only of being AcceJaries in
the commission of a crime; not of having perpe-
trated it themselves, but only of giving content
to the commission of it by others; the proof be-
comes frill more difficult: and unless when some
acco-nplice betrays the secret, a proofby circum-
fiances, or presumptive evidence, is all that can
be attained. Even in judicial trials, such evi-
dence is sometimes held to be sufficient for con-
demnling criminals. The degree of conviction
which such evidence carries along with it, is of-
ten not inferior to that which arises from positive
tcetinmony; and a concurring series of circum-
stances satisfies the understanding no less than the
cxprels declaration of witnefiPs.

E1VIDENCE of both there kinds has been pro-
luccd against Mary. We flall firfi confider that
which is founded upon circumstances alone.

SO.ME of there suspicious circumstances preceded

the King's death; others were subsequent to it.
W'ith regard to the former, we may observe that
the Q(cen's violent love ofDarnly was soon con-
verted into an aversion to him no less violent; and
that his own ill condut, and exceffcs of every
ki nd, were fuich, thatif they did not justify, at least
thcy account for tils sudden change of her dif-
)ofition towards him. The rife and progress of
this domnefic rupture, I have traced with great
care in the history, and to the proofs of it which
nmay be found in papers publifled by other au-
thlrs, I havc added tholf contained in App. No.
XVI. and XVII. Le Croc, the French ambaf-
1 ilo, whlo was an eve-witnefs of what he de-

fcri bes,

icribes, not only reprefients her aversion to IDarn.
ly to be extreme, but declares that there coul.
be no hopes of a reconcilement between thlrn.
Dec. 12, - The OQjleen is in the ]lands of physicians, and

I do assure you is not at all well ; and do believe
the principal part of her difcafe to consist in deep
grief and sorrow; nor does it seem poffibe to
make her forget the fame. Still fle repeats tliefl'
words, [ could ivij to be dead. You know very)
well that the injury fle has received is exceedinllg
great, and her majesty will never forget it-To
fpealc my mind fi-eely to you, I do not expec-,
upon several accounts, any good undelrfandincg
between them [i. e. the King and Queen], un-
Dec, 23. less God effectually put to his hand.--lJis bad

deportment is incurable; nor can there ever be
any good expected from him, for several reasons,
which I might tell you was I prcfent with you. I
cannot pretend to foretell how all may turn, lbu
1 will fay, that matters cannot I-ubfif- long as thlt!
arc, without being accompanied with sundry b.,ld
consequences." Keith, P'rcf. vii. lad I c

I11i

died a natural death, at this jullitlrc, it n11ll hali'
been conlfidered as a ve'ry rtun:lte event to !',c
Q(jecen, anld as a f(;afonable deliveranlce firoini ;
htlll.llll who h1lad 1b)coinle alltothr o(dious 1,
lher. Now as I 1 iry was nllrderied a few \vccx!
afterw'ards, and as nolthinc lhd llnplell l tocllc rl(
the (. (Icn's aversion to hllin l f Viol('ent , the!( o'i-
nion of thlol whlo conlfidrl M .ry as tlh' anilii'r h I
an event whici was ln.llifi' ly lo ;i;L'irc.llhle 10 li
will appleal c e-rhals to ;0j ei e l o1r Ic .".!"l:,

ol I*, '

nitiher unnattiil nr ovcr-refid((l. I f w ad I ro
thiS, what lias been ubli'rvcd in tl' liillor', tl,.t

.11

il proportion to tile increase of Mary's hatred of
her hlufband, Bothwell made progrcfs in her fa-
y\our, and that he became the object not only of
!,cr confidence but her attachment, that opinion
acquires newftrcngrth. It is easy to obfl)rvemiany
atvntiagcs which might redound to Mary as well
;. to Bothwell from the King's death; but ex-
,cplting thlem, no person, and no party in the
k;i:irelum could derive the leall bcnefit from that:
;,v'.I1t. Bothwell, accordingly, murdclrel the
t:(c King, and it was, in that age, thought no
.inwarranted imputation on Mary's charadctr, to
i-'ippol that she had consented to the cldc!.

'Tlh: freps which the Queen took after Iicr hus-

band's death add ftrengti to tlhat ftppofition. i.
Melvil, vwho was in Edinburgh at the time of the
K'ingE's death, afterts, that " every body flfpcted
t!c l'arl of Eothwell; and thole who ldulrC' Ij :ak
frcnly to others, said plainly that it was i 1t," p.
15i; . .Mary hlaving ifll-iu a J'rocl: atilon, oa
t:it I 2th oi l"cbruari', olt'rin': ,i ir t:'a !i' to any

: rljn vvho fliould dilcovcr thoi ioC wlo !;ica l i r-
uivlcid hier husband; And. i. 6. a ptapr in (:on-
!;fqtclncc of tclis was aflixd rto rlt gates of the
IOl ioot.l, c bruiary I, ,

in \h iliC Bot hwll wIas

-'m.mcd as the chicfl perfoln gtilty of thliat criinc,
:l1 tlie iQueen herlc f

- \'i as amcc fi'dl of lhain-

I'C'i'n hli conilllt to it. iAi. 156. 3. uoll
;'(li,) i ( thr1 iry 20, t!'C 1.;lil of i l., ilnno , til

il!'e, ' latherl' , Iwrote lt o i' :n'', (JnOil'ilrg cr,

lc y
. I .lo tlo ii.c, to iprofct(ic lt e ic i mtilcr'i s \x iil

W11
tll lll ri o cur 11 I' ,itlly dccl.'ed hliIowvl

litljicmiols of B3othwell, andi p)ointcl out a n .ll'!i)d
A1 iulcccdilng ag;ain( hlini, anL fblr dilLovyeIinlg

tliic

the other authors of that crime, no lets obviou:
than equitable. I Ie adviled her to seize, andl o
commit to lure c uflody Bothwell him self, and !:;,
as were already named as his accomplics; !,
call an aflembly of the noblecs; to iflue ; a l;rJ-C
ration, inviting Bothwell's accuilrs to ai,!:;:
and if, on that encouragement, no perilno aplr:;:-
ed to accuse them, to hold them as innocent, ;i;,;
to dif llifs them without farther trial. And. i. .
4. Archbifilop Beatoun, ler ambalTador in I ranr,',
in a letter to Mary, March 9th, employs :rll.-
ments of the utnmon weight to persuade her tu
prosecute the murderers with thegreateft feveritv.
" I can conclude nathing (fays he) by qulri
zour Majesty vrites to me zourfelf, that fcn i:
has plefit God to conserve zow to make a rigo-
rous vengeance thereof, that rather than it Lbie .'ij
actually taine, it appears to me better in ti.
warld that ze had loft life and all. I afl.: v.o:i
Majeftie pardon that I writ fa far, for I can i-:.
-,1 nathing to zour prejudife, but I man conifaiiniili

writ the famin, that all may come to zour kna v,
lege; for the better remede mavl be put thelt.

-leir it is needfull that ze forth shaw now rlrli-u:
than ever of before, the greitc vertue, niagniiii-
mitie, and conflance that God has grantit z(.w,
be quhais grace, I hope ze fall overcome this l(;1'
heavyenvie and difplefir of the committing tlhicr-
of, and conserve that reputation in all godlint:,
ze have conquift oflang, quhich can appear i:

;n" wwayis mair clearlie, than that zow dojick jilticc
wI:'o that the haill world may declare zour innoc(riL'

and give tel'imony forever of thair trealon tlilt
vsou^e has committed (btt fear of God or man) f1 crtrl

i/I],[

,t un-odlie a lmuri:cr, qullairof there is fa.
. ;'kl ill ifpoklen, that I a:l conltrainit to als zu\v ruc,
;:'rcv, that neither can I or will I make the re-
ilier!al tierof, which is czr odious. But alas!

,talane, all over Europe this dlay there is na
::.;;-pole in head fa firequent as of zour Majelbie,
,:, of the pirtient sl-ate of zour realml, quhill is
;a :ite Inoit part interpretit filritcrly." Keith,
!','. ix. 5. E'5.lizabetli, as appears from Append.
\'',1. I. No. XIX. urged the fame thing in strong
.erns. 6. TIhe circumstances of the cafe itself,
!, llis than these solicitations and rcmonflrances,
. .i1cd for the utmolo vigour in lier proccedings.
i !cr lhufland had been mlurdered in a cruel maii-
:e-, almoit in her oxvn presence. Iler flbjets
:"er filled with the utmost lhorror at that crime.
ltnhv'cl, one of her principal favourites, had
!.'''! ])lbll'ly accul'd a's the author of it. Re-
1 :' i'o!;s, extremcli,' l .ii!h!;mnoiirabll e to ilterfclf, hcad
,;et' rthrown Ott. It' idi.:ltioil, and thle love
' f,'.illire(, did not ,;:! t o[; her to purlue the 1mur-
: rc l \\ itli ;arcldum, (d.' c'rnI, at leal, and coin-

i'tll )r \'illdi(:!tlii. lher own'll cl.il aclcr, Ihoild

i.Lvc iiduced Ilacr r, .tvoil .tilv alp)L)C.iracc of 1c-
;lil'lnl2, or \Vlit (Oi O.c. i,

1 ,I I

i illcad ol li.;, M t.I1 '. .' iiinued t)o (iicovc l,

!iI all ier aC't' i. : , t}K

i ; 1 i-

ul' t .l ti.lli '.' *

II\, :rd _'

;Iths'elOl. (O i[!)lt i :- lcr l.l , fiv 'e

lay. alter

i.,c illurd. r, iilt lI)iie'...l,' oil liii Ilic Irevlelio 1 0f
:h iis)t'iorit)y oi thle to'wn ol 1J .itll, wlhiLh ill tlc
\''.r1 155 ihe hlad mor1g1igcltg to the citizens of'
1' rlinl-, . Thlis ,.rant was f'niti hi iii)ort:cc,('

: ; ;;.tvc linm o)t Oi;!v i )i: cj nuia;il[ (si slt'piin)
:1i l p'ort in tlci' h i,.ei .;,), but a rlcat abicc'idIit

OT'CI'

over the citizens of Edinburgh, who wifled much
to keep poffcffion of ita. 2. Bothwell being ex-

tremely
a Copy frou the original in the Charter-house of the city ofEdin-.

lurgih of an Ajlignation to the reversion of the fiperiority of Leiil
by iuccn Iary, to the Earl of Bothwcll.

Maria Dei gratia Regina Scotorum, omnibus probis homi-

nibus fuis ad quos pr.feentes litcrel pervenerint falutem. Sci-
atis, quod nos ad nemoriam reducentes multiplex bonum re-
rum et fidelc fcrvitiull, non tantimln quondam nioftr chariffi
mne matri Mal-ia Rcgilln regni noftri pro tempore in noira. n!i-
noritate faitum et impenfum, verunm etiamn nobiflnet ipfis, taam
intra partes G allic quam intra hoc nostrum regnlum, ad exten-
tionemn noftri honoris et au&oritatis in punitione furlm, malec-
facloruuil, et trainfgrclforuni infra idem, per noflrum confilibn
confanguincum et confili;trium Jaeobun comitcm Bothuile,
domiiuunI H-alis, Creighton ct Liddil'alc, magnuml admiiral-
luI1 reIni nofiri, commrifioncm et oncrationem ad Ilunc
cffeduin habentem, per quas ipfc fuum corpus ct vit;am in
niagno periculo poluit; ac etiam, iln per orlnatione ct cxt en-
tionc nociitri ii fcrvitii, fualr helreditatcm, fmpra; fumnimlml
viginti niillium mercarum h1ujus noi.:ri regni, alicnavit ac l.flir.
Et nos cogitantcs quod, cx norl'a principali honorc et dcvii:t
diiurn noflrum confifum coinfanguinleum & confiliariull cill
quodani:L accidente ct gratitudclne recompcnflre ct gratilic: r
incunlmbit (Jqu nlo; coinmodt fibi conccdere poterilus, , ulnld
ip)l' iliagis hlabilis omnilbus afl'uuris temporibus crec potcrIti,
et ad hlljuilinodi performlnlandum in omnibus claulis fu C vc!I-
tibus: In rcconlpenliationcni quorum plrmiilTorum, ac plo
liverli.s aliis noftris rationabilibus ca;lils ct confidrclatriolil)tls
Ios inovcntibus, Fccilnus, &c. diiulll Jacobuin co(llitel'
B]othulile, &c. ac lfos hIrzedcl. mI;tlulos quol'cunlque lonl.r.
legittimos, &c. afnignatos in ct ad litecrls revclriions ll1;st&
&c. per Symonlcnll reillln de codem aiiilitcin, pr.cpoflitli,
balivos, cunflllcs, ct colmnnll itatsel hlujts 1noltri b,1)gi i'.
Edinblurgh, pro clpflis ac lis;s licccllori lbJls, &c. nobis, noillii-
que he rtcdibus, fi.iccfl ii'tilhs, ct :;ll lgnaiis pro rlclmpltione,
&c. fupcri'itit:tis totius villa': ldc Iil.ll, &c. inipirgnorall ' ipA
nos ldiOis i)inapllilho, &c. uiib r'vcrIllone ;alicniati, contilncit[i
fumnllrta Jccrln iiillium ni rlcirC;.lm lllnctm: pr;lfc ipt. ntt-

. mnicL.tlldUli

trernely desirous to obtain the command of the
cal:le of Edinburgh, the Queen, in order to prevail
on the Earl of Mar to surrender the government
of it, offered to commit the young Prince to his
custody. Mar consented; and file instantly ap-
pointed Bothwell governor of the catle. And. i.
Pref. 64. Keith, 379. note (d). 3. The inquiry
into the murder, previous to Bothwell's trial,
seems to have been conducted with the uimoft
remissness. Buchanan exclaims loudly against
this. And. ii. 24. Nor was it without reason that
he did so, as is evident from a circumitance in the
affidavit of Thomas Nelson, one of the King's
ftrvants, who was in the house when his master
was murdered, and was dug up alive out of the
rubbish. Being examined on the Monday after the
King's death, "' This deponar fchew that Bonkle
had the key of the cellare, and the Qyeenis ser-
vandis the keyis of her fhalmir. Quhilk the Laird
of Tillibardin hearing, said, Hald thair, here is
ane ground. Efter quhilk words tfokin, thai left
of, and procedit na farther in the inquisition."
And. iv. p. a. 167. Hlad there been any intention
to fcarch into the bottom of the matter, a circum-
1l,;ncc of lo much importance merited the most
caelful enquiry. 4. Notwithstanding Lcnnox's

Il.l rt lilunli ct lculiandlllu inparochi:lli ccclcfri dc IdLlinbu rgh,
I;i ,cr plcmonitionl qi: iiginta dilicrtum, llt lno ris cl', vcltiti
ill Jid>is revrflionis literis, &c. ide dt;lta Svo Ool). 1565,
&c. (Tllh rcft is fobrm, ;nd contains a clakufc of ';il)lo]lutc war-
r:iiidicc) IN CUJus RtE TlSTIrMOIUMl I pIrtlcilIblS 111:1 t.g111
I ;,illt11 noftluin apponi fecihnus. A.pul LJdli )Llrgh, LIccir.o
(11lilllC dire mnils Flbru;trii, ;nnn Dornlmii niillcfimo quingen-
t,.limlo licxagcf'ilo fcxto, ct regni noliri vice'iiii') quinto.

The ' great fcal cltire.

repeated

repeated solicitations, notwithstanding the realui
ablenefs of his demands, and the necessity of coiln
plying with them, in order to encourage any ac-
cufer to appear against Bothwell, flie not only re-
fused to commit him to custody, or even to remove
him from her presence and councils; And. i. .2.4s.
but by the grants which we have mentioned, and
by other circumstances, diecovered an increase of
attachment to him. 5. She could not avoid bring-
ing Bothwell to a public trial; but fle permitted
him to fit as a member in that meeting ofthe Privy
Council which directed his own trial; and the trial
itself was carried on with such unneccifary preci-
pitancy, and with so many other fulficious cir-
cumftances, as render his acquittal rather an ar-
gument of his guilt than a proof of his innocence,
These circumstances have all been mentioned at
length, Vol. I. p. 416, &c. and therefore are not
repeated in this place. 6. Two days after tli:
trial, Mary gave a public proof of her regard for
Bothwell, by appointing him to carry the fcel)tie
before her at the meetingof'Parliament. Keith, 37 .
7. In that Parliament, ihe granted him a ratifica-
Lion of all the vast possessions and honours wliicl
flhe had conferred upon him, in which was con-
tained an ample enumeration of all the ferviccs lie
had performed. And. i. i 17. 8. T'hough Mel-
vil, who foresaw that her attachment to Botiwell
would at length induce her to marry him, warned
her of the infamy and danger which woulld attend
that action, fie not only difiegarded this failutlry
admonition, but discovered what had lpaflnd be-
tween them to Bothwcll, which exposed Melvil to
his rcfentment. Melv. 156. 9. Bothwell fcie'd

M.lrv

?!r'y as fle returned frona Stirling, April 24. If
; had dlone this without her knowledge and con-
!;nt, I;chl an intult could not have failed to have
ii!lId her witl the nmof violent indignation. But
;:c'ording to tile account of an old MS. (' The
Iniclltly love was lb highly contracted between
li'li great Princess and her enormous iubje't, that
;!'c;-e was no end thereof (for it was conltantly
cii.'lccmd by all men, that either of them loved
i;i!ci- car-nally), so that she suffered patiently to
lh led where the lover lift, and all the way nei-
ther made obstacle, impediment, clamour, or re-
ilihnce, as in such accidents use to be, or that lie
Miigih have cone by her princely authority, being
accompanied with the noble Earl of Iluntly and
Secretary Maitland of Lethington." Keith, 383.
Mclvil, who was present, confirms this account,
and tells us that the officer, by whom he was
[cized, informed him that nothing was done with-
oiat the Queen's consent. Melv. i58. io. On
!ile i :tli of May, a few clays before her marriage,
Mlary declared that file was then at full liberty,
311( that though Bothwell had offended her by
Ic'izing her person, ihe was so much satisfied witli
hi, dutifill behaviour since that time, and so in-
(lebted to him for paftl iivices, that fie not only
iurgave that offence, but relilved to promote
!;ir to higher honours. A nd i. i87. .

7 . . en

afrer the confederate nobles had driven Bothwell
fr'on the QcCen's prefencc, and though fihe saw
that lie was con fiderel as the murderer of her
lulrmer hufhbancl by so great a part of lier Ifubjec's,
11e: antló(ion tdid not ini tile leail abate, and fnlh
tCnliinued to cxprces the molt unalterable attach-

VoL. I. Z mcnt

ment to him. " I can perceive (fays Sir hN
Throkmorton) that the rigour Wvith which th!c
Quelen is kept, proceedeth by order fiom tlidb
llmen, becau e that the Queen will not by an,
erians be induced to ]end iher authority to profc-

cute the murderer; nor will not conlent by, an
p;erfualion to abandon the Lord Bothwell fur ler
husband, but avoweth const-antly that fie wiii
live and die with him; and faith, that if it werl
put to her choice to rclinquifh her crown ani
kingldom, or the Lord. Bothwell, she would lc'av
her kingdom and dignity to go a simple cdan:ll
with him, and that ihe will never consent tliat l:c
Ihall fare worse, or have more harmi than hercilf.
Append. to Vol. I. No. XXII. In all their nc-
gociations with Throkmorton, the Confederates
mention this unalterable attachment of the Qiecte
to Bothwell, as a sufficient reason for rejedili:r
his proposals of an accommodation with tlh'i,r
Sovcreign. Keith, 4I9. 4.49. This affertcion trhet
renewed in the conferences at York. Ander. iiv
part ii. p. 66. Murl';', in his interview witl
IMan, in ILochlevin, chargecd her with pefiillinl
i;: i,!er inoldilnat ailil. ion to Bothwell . Keitih,
t.'6). 1All tirl:, however, imnay be conrldcrc(d
'nere Cly as accullatiolls brulOLilt by the Coniitlcl-
.'-5, il oi'rl'i[ to Villdicat theCil' rigour tow.lrJ,
tile (' .'c;) Bz . T T'lirokmuorton, w ho, by his rc-
1ilnctc in l'diniburghl, and by lis intercolil'1
witll the ().tclcn's [ :rtizanls, as Vcll as with hcr
(iieiiE(', htad inaiy ol.il)olrlit iLiCS of (diliv (i'r-
illM whethCl or lnot Mary lind cxprefcld hiCr-
trlf in I(chl termls, alnd wlio was (liliolid( to vieC\
IerC altions in the iollo favourahlIc light, ap'crCl.s,
by tle pal; agc whichl 1 have qtuotcd fruion
si

I iL['r

letter of the 14th of July, to be pel-fulded tliht
the Confedclratcs had nut miliel'relented 1h.er iZn-
tinments. ie had loon an oplporlunitc of being
confirmedc with greater cLrrtilnty in this op)'nion.
XAlcough tile Confederates had refuTced him ac-
ce1; to the captive Queen, lei found means of
holdinlg a secret correlpondcnc with her, and
clecavourdi- to pelrilade her to give her consent
to have her marriage with Bothwell dinjlv'ed by
a lcntence of divorce, as the moi. probable means
of reg iining her liberty. She hath sent me word
:hat fie will in no wife consent unto that, but
rather die. Append. to Vol. I. No. XXII.
iThere is evidence of the continuance of Mary's
attachment still more explicit. Lord Herries,
in the Parliament held the iSth of December
i 567, acknowledged the Queen's inordinate aftic-
tion to that wicked man, and that fle could not
be induced by perluafion to leave him; and that
in fequeliering her within Lochlevin, the Confe-
(eraies had done the duty of noblemen. Aptp,
to Vol. I. No. XXIV. In tile year 1 571 a
(clference was held by some deputies from :a
t(Convention of Clergy, with the IDulke of C'1::!l-
ir;ailrt, Secretary Maitland, Sir Janies l -aliour,
an!ld Kirkaldy; and an account of it writtel by
ilr. Craig, one of the Miniiters of Edlinburgl, ,1 is
c:tant inl Calderlwood MSS. Ililt. ii. ^4.. li
1 Icfence of all thle Lc perlbn s, mioll of whloml w'vc
it l'idinbu rgl when the Qjeen was taken at Ca.r-
Iheryr Maitland, who was now an avowed paLrti-
7a;1 of Ma;ry, declares, that on the fIme nigtii lc
wis brought to ld:linrburgh, he llilfifelff ha ollt ire
h)at if lie would abandon lBothwellc, flie fliould

Z 2 Jlu1v

have as thankful obedience as ever file had fiic
fhc came to Scotland. But no wife woulld fln
conTenr to leave Bothwell. According to S'j
James Melvil, tlie Qtueenl foulnd mecans of writ-
iig a Icttcr to Bothwlell on the evening o'
lthat day when fie was conlducted as a pribfoncr
;o Ldinburgh, in which fie declared her aflcc.
tion to himn in tlhe iioft tender exprcniions, and
jicr resolution never to abandon him. Thlis
cltter, lie fays, was intercepted by the Confcde-
jatcs, and determined them to confine Mars i;;
the caftie of Lochlevin. But as neither Buchananl
nor Knox, both abundantly dilfpofed to avaii
themselves of every fact and report that could be
employed in order to represent Mary's condii?
as improper and criminal, mention this Ictte:'
and as the Confederates themselves, in their nc-
gociations with Throkmorton, as well as in thli,
accusations oftlhe Queen before the English Conm
iiilnioncrs at York and Wellininfter, maint.ii!:
the fame silence with regard to it, I am fatibf.c'
that lMlvil, who wrote ills memoirs for the in-
formation of his son, in his old age, and lo:n,
after tile events which he records happened, li;1.
been millalkcn with regard to this pariici;l.
IFrom this long enumeration of circumfiances, v'c
,nay, without violence, draw the following con-
clulion. Had Mary really been acccflary to tll(
mnurder of her hufbandl; liad Bothwel l )pcrpetratcdi
the crime with Iher contient, or at her cominlaltl];
and had she intended to flile tlie evidence againlt
limi, and to prevent the discovery of his guilt
she could scarcely have taken any other fn(cp
than thole wlhich 11ic took, nor could her coindilu'

Ihavc,

i.ivc been more rep)gnant to all the 1maxilms oi
pr'udence and of decency.

'Ifi: positive evidence produced againfl Mary
nm',- be claflcd under two heads.

i. TFrsi deporitions of some persons who were

employed in committing the murder, particularly
of 'Nicholas HIubert, who, in the writings of that
ae, is called ]'rel ich Paris. This person, who was
Blothwell's servant, and much trusted by him, was
twice examined, and the original of one of his de-
positions, and a copy of the other, are still extant.
It is pretended that both these are notorious forge-
ries. But they are remarkable for a simplicity and
iai,:'etl which it is almost impoiible to imitate;
they abound with a number of minute facts and
particularities, which the most dextrous forger
could not have easily aflembled, and connecled
together with any appearance of probability;
a.I,1 they are filled with circumltances, which cnn
icarcely be suppos(ed to have entered the imiagina-
tion of any man but one of Paris's rank and
chiaratcr. But, ;!t tile -ne tinme, it mufi be
acknowledged, that his depositions contain lmile
improbable circumllancvs. -le leems to have
lben a foolish talkative fellow; the fear of death,

ati- violence of torture, and the d elire of plealilln
tiole in wlofe power he was, tempted hIim, per-
latps, to feign some circuimltnccs, and to exal;-
;crte others. To fay thlac lobm eircu iall [ncc

a an laflidavit are improbable or falle, is; vry

'dil'(rcnt from layilng that the Wlhole is f(I.'l'Il.
I lilet)C( tile former to be the cafe here; bllt I fee
11o lapl)arance of the latter. Be that as it. will,
1lienc of the molt material fads in Panris's a;ikl,t-

7 3 vict

vits r-cft upon his single testimony; and for tli,
reao;i,I have not in the Iliflory, nor falall in tiiL:
place, lay any rcles upon them.

2. '1;c l'tters laid to be written by Mary to

Bothw1li. Thel- have ben frequently publlilhcdl,
The accicldnt by whichi the (_Qeeln's en-emies i ,t
thein into their poffefnion, is related Vol. I. 449
\Yhlen the authenticity of any ancient paper is du-
bious or contelted, it may be ascertained either
by external or internal evidence. Both thefie have
been produced in the present cale.

I. EXTERNAL prOOfS of the genuineness of M.i-

ry's letters. i. Murray, and the nobles who ad-
hered to him, affirm upon their word and honour,
that the letters were written with the Queen's own
hand, with whiich they were well acquainted.
Good. ii. 64. 92. 2. The letters were publicly
produced in the parliament of Scotland, Decem-
ba'r i567 ; and were so far confidered as genuine,
that they are mentioned in the act againll
Mary, as one chief argument of her guilt. Good.
ii. 66, 67. 3. They were flhewn privately to
the I)Duke of Norfolk, the Earl of Suffex, and Sir
Ralph Sadler, I'liz.abtli's commiflioners at York.
in ithe account whichl they give of this matter to
thrir tililtrcls, they ftcml to con rider the letters
as genuinc, and cxpreflc no suspicion of any for-
ge(i y th icy parricularly observe, ' that the matter
cont ainc(e iin them is fuchl that it could hardly be
irivented and devised by any other than hlclelf;
for that they difcolurre of fbme things, which wect
uniknownl to any other tltan to herself and 3Bo1i-
vell ; anld as it is hard to counterfeit lb many,

I l
tril matttel of tlhcm, and tie man;nner how tl[ele

2 ie11ll

mnen came by them, is fiich, as it feemeth that
,;odl, in wholfe fight murder and bloodshcd of the
innocent is abominable, would not )permit the
!,ae to be hid or concealed." Good. ii. 142.
T'heyt Iem to have made 1iuch an impreflion on
tie IDulir of Norfolk, that in a lillfqueent letter
,j PeL-mbroke, Leiceller, and Cecil, lie has thelf
'vorci: " If the matter fhiall be thought as de-
:lllable and Inanifefl to you, as for ought we can
icrceive it feemeth here to us." Good. ii. i15.
Nor did Norfolk declare thetfe to be his senti-
ients only in publick official letters, he exprell:.
ed himfilf in the fame manner to his moss confi-
dential friends. In a secret conference with the
Bilh)op of Ross at York, the Duke .iifortned him.
that he had leen the letters, &-c. which tile Re
gTnt had to produce againi: the Qtieen, whereby
tlere would be such matter proved against her,
as would dishonour her for ever. State Trials,
I.dition of H-Iargrave, i. 91. Murdin, 52. Tlie
1iillol)p or Rol's, if' lie had l n lwn lie letters to ,.
:I notorious forl-r!!, 5iiml I;Ive L)cbn Inatir.illy Irl>d
in conftl uiet nce of tilis di'.lrlitalii!, to iimlde-ciV;t
llie Duke, and to cxpol; ihe iimpcoltire. i,,1
inlcad of tlhis, the Dukec alnl hle :lni 1 .etliiil ron:
alter con1 ul ting tog( ilier( ,

: ;]-itel, tl)i tl,;. . illio1.,

Illuld write to Mary, tllhn at B olron, anlit iin-
filruc her to make -lchl a ,-optofil to 'li ith)erli a-
imighlit p) re Vent the 1

ublic. 1)()dIa ion of t

) i

C

| I[i

and (other evidence. S rale 'ria;ls, i. 9).. Mi lrlin, .
Illtccd, tile wliole of this feI:rct- (tonlci ci,: ille :
to ililply, that Lethingion, Roft;, ain Norfoll:;
w'vre conlcious of fomc tile' l in Ma:iv'. :1il;,

Z .I l1,I

and therefore exerted all their ingenuity in order
to avoid a public accusation. Murdin, 52, 5,
To Banister, wlom the Duke feemns to have truit-
ed more entirely than any other of his servants,
he exprefied himself in finilar terms with refpct
to the Queen of Scots. State Trials, i. 9S. The
words of Banil-er's evidence are remarkable:
( I confess that I, waiting of my Lord and
Master, when the Earl of SufTex and Mr. Chan-
cellor of the Dutchv that now is, were in coin-
mitrion at York, did hear his Grace fay, that u)-
on examination of the matter of the murder, it
did appear that the Queen of Scots was guilt.
and privy to the murder of Lord Darnly, whereby
I verily thought that his Grace would never oin
in marriage with her. Murdin, 134. Elizabeth,
in her inftruoions to the Earl of Shrewsbury ati,!
Beale in 1583, asserts, that both the Duke and
Earl of Arundel did declare to herself, thait the
proof, by the view of her letters, did fall out l'uin-
cient against the Queen of Scots; however, they
were after drawn to cover her faults and pro-
nounce her innocency. MS. Advoc. Library.
A. iii. 28. p. 34. firom Cot. Lib. Calig. 9.
4. A similar impreflion was made upon other con-
temporaries of Mary by the production oftlch
letters, which implies a full belief of their beingl
genuine. Cecil, in his correspondence with Sir
-lenry Norris, the Englifl Amibaflado in 'France,
relates this tranal'ltion in terms which leavenc
room to doubt with refpeft to his own private
opinion. In his letter, Decem. 4thl, 568, tlt
very day on which the letters, &c. were laid be-

t(ite

fore the meeting of Privy Counsellors and Peers,
he informs him, " that the Regent was driven, for
his defence, to disclose a full fardel of the naughty

attLer, tending to convince the Queen as devilir
of the murther, and the Earl of Bolthwell as her
cxecutour; and now the Queen's party, to great,
rcfufe to make any answeR, and prels that their
Nifirefs may come in person to anfevcr the matter
herlclf, before the Queen's Majesty, which is
thought not fit to be granted until the great blot
of the marriage with her hutfband's murtheirer, and
tle evident charges, by letters of her own, to be
deviser of the murther, be somewhat razed out or
recovered; for that as the matters are exhibited
against her, it is far unseemly for any Prince,
or for chaste ears, to be annoyed with the filthy
noise thereof; and yet, as being a Cowrmiflioner,
I must and will forbear to pronounce any tliing
herein certainly, though as a private perlon I
cannot but with horror and trembling think
thereof." Cabala, i56. 5. From the corrcfpon-
(lence of Bowes, the Englifli Resident in Scot-
land, with Walsingham in the yea.r i58, pub-
lified towards the close of this Dinlertation, it
is manifest that both in :ngland and S(coland,
ooth by llizabeth and James, both lby the D luke
of Lennox and Earl of Gowrie, the Ileters \vcre
deeimed to be genuine. The eagcrnc s, on uon
lidle to obtain, and on the other to klee;p cIo'-
I(llion of the caiket and letters, implics thli.i tliis
vas tile belief of botl. ''lhicle I.'tilmc)lts of
ctotcllporaries, who were in a fitutiaionll t be
lLhorlughly informled, ;,and who had tab ilitics to

judgc
7

jiudge witth difccriiir:ent, will, in the opinion oi
mnariy of rmy readers, fair outweigh thleoric,,

ispporitions, and cGonjctures, formed at the dil-
ta1:cc of t'wo cl tlnle:, . The letters were Lf!b.
jcCied to a foCle'i- and jtidicial exaimination with
refpct to their authleintic.ty, as far as that c-ot:j (c
afcertainecd by refiemiilatlce of characler and fa-
fhion of writing: For after t!ie con;fercniccs a,
York and \Weftminller were finished, llizhbeih,
as I have related, aifembled her Privy Counfil-
lors, and, joining to them several of the nio!i
eiminent 'nl>tnen in lher kingdom, laid be-
fore them all the proceedings againif the Scottifl
Queen, and Iarticularly ordered, that " the let-
ters and writings exhibitCd by the Regent, as the
Queen of Scots letters and writings, should allo
be shewed, and conference [i. e. comparilbn]
thereof made in their fight, with the letters of
the said Queen's, being extant, and heretofore
written with her own hand, and sent to the
Cueen's Iajelty ; whereby may be fiarched and
examined what diflerence is betwixtthem.' Good.
ii. 252. They afcnblcd accordlingly, at i lalmp-
ton Court, December 14 and i5, 1568; amd,
" lic orihne oin ls f the letters fuplofed to be writ-
ten with tlli Quen of Scots' own hand, were then
ilso vprclcntly Iproduceld anidpcruild and beingl
read, were duly conferred and compared, for the
manner of writing, and ftalhion of orthogralphy,
with flundriy other letters long since hIrettolfr
written, and Cent by tihe fatid QQeen of Scots to the
(lleccl's M;aielly. In collatrion whereof no (difl'i-
ence was found."C Good. ii. 256. 7. Mary having

writtell

written aln apologetical letter for her condu& to the
Countess of Lennox, July 1o, iro", flt tranf-
nittcd it to her hufbland then in Scotland; and
hie returned to the Counters the following answer:

1:::v 's letterl h:i s never been

l tp!iblicl, and ot-11it to lhaiv
.! l'l.ci 'icrc, ,\\lhcrc i(lIlnCe 0n ai l itiL ; is l irl\ l -i'i tliccd.

"M.tlam, iif tl'

s v :': g :e1t(! itlle tO rc:'is ol rIche! llis,cenemies

V.... l .: i

h: ' io ;r trai ii'i-. : )t to ;, itl al.

;t. ) to r'. clic trull-

*.t cI' 11 , .' i.otirc ;ti ' i ;, li: hOl t

i )

1i; fiar tt vt!' rL ;tgani. i.

11i- it!l'ccInc), (.Ild i niul fay :lgalis ill ky IIIncfI , llat
/,.w l.lVC not o(llcliC :IS it VCrI colitnlc l):iir itme vc'ranlglullic,
't i 1.Lhateld ile, a- 'inc \'iw tdlis :1nIL olipcic kidilci', l.s telli-

io .)ll the I..cl ld, a )lmt:CivU I 11if1) kin; in .:ow ;galltis
/owr .'vn 1 bludlc) I wold not have omitilit thls 11in my.
(!.x\ tie iln 'rvtiiT to /vow excisliig' mte oft tIholC iiit rew rpIor-
;it., :ii;.le olf te.

i i Lut liopi.iiL witl C( 'Cljsi ;I'ace ;indl IllIC

;a 1ive nt inincc'clx Il:nawiti to vO\W, ;:i [ trPli it is al-
i':!t(lv to theC malit, lirt oi ;ill iiii'Fcr.t! peli ni' , I

tlioclit

it l iLt not to troulil .owv, f(t a il tv ic till l t iltl :t mattter
s nllovcd that tuichis Ius lv;! i, y(dtilk is the t nfliorlinig
/ liui i n, : lly onelic child ill this collitI cv. Tol the
Ythil; albeit I le never ltl willing', I wald be glaid t.1 hev
.'. i::'c ; h.vye h rell cin, as in all uilher tlliii'L is t'ii('liig lhiiu.
! i..i' l.:'n him., inil God ka!n;is with (ot.ti ti].tllcr to
i:, . .; !me bi oiih ; and (Ti ().vw lie is (dci!ctlit. So I 1iucatll
...I ;t ic.,t ml d ltii to zYov, iln fcll'\hxin hir1cint :a1in |l]-
[.iJ!t lc to :o\v, w)\ ltikynlli tlihl: cvcI zc i.have ill xx iil
:ic, 1, tl w;1l love '.wc as my awi\t, alnd reftlecl Y(,\ ai n)y

o,, :,... i;l i.: -v. And 3'il'e lil'c s to kn:iv Ihr-t licr ofimy 1iny)M
it ti.l a. nd ill iuthie I hin is bl) tx ic t

i l l, my an: ballidol r

t llc

lil11 .( (

l (fsj;hill ble readly to coitl'ier with I, \. At(nd 1i :i-

!1 1 y hItirtli c Cit ()initlld.

l it n1i, reirlittilg ime to te' ltide(i

,*iiul:l|,tli.-l( tid zii(l y.l) t )ctcr c nlldciittitliu, I corm ini! /ow
*' liht
t pl'tetiol ('A:lilniglyCt (id, jih]lll I pra.y lo pr,'li'r\c

t* a .lild1 jiy I'rotIlerCll.iIrhI,, ;int catls ,u\vw to kni;iw iTly' p:lil t
i t !r intI ' 7/c dlo. FlroI CKlt il\v'IloI this of July i 57

10 I'ly lai(lic 1.nnox Yo,'rc n:lttral giude Nice

iy,) moider in tw\v. ;iJd lovyntc dochltcr."

" Seeing

Seeing you have remittit to nlc, to anlwcr tic

(Q.een the King's mother's et:crs sent to you, what
can I ifay but' that I do not rI-a:vcll to ice lhir Vrit
the bcel can for hirfelf, to Ifeane to purge lcr ci
that, quhairof many bel'edc me are clertainr ! c.
iluadit of the contrary, and I not only afiri:t /;.
ny awin knawledge, but by her hand w irit, thie co,
fcflionis of men gone to the death, and uther- in-
fallibil experience. It wull be lange tymc that i,
hable to put a mattir so notorious in oblivionl,
to mak black quhlyte, or innoccncy to apljla.
quhair the contrary is fia \Neill knawin. Ti.c
inlai b indlic-ercnt, I trust, dcoubtis not of tlc
(-quite of zour and my cautl , and of the jull
occafioun of our miflyking. IIir richt dlewic
to zow and me, being the partcis interest, werc
hir trew confefroun and unfe)ynd repentance (
that lamentable faci, odious for hir to be repor-
tit, and iorrowfull for us to think of. God is
juLt, and will not in the end be abulcel; but a.
lie has manifetlecd the trewth, so will lie punci'
the iniquity." I.ennz.x's OrXi. R',r/i. of l ,'i//,'
In their Ipublic patlprs, the (Qjen's en ellties 1nIll
he ftufpeOletd of advancing vwhat vwol hl be nm10
I;ibfcrvient to tlieir cause; not wliat was agree-
..ble to tO tilth, or wlat flowed firom thcii ova'i
intward con)vitioii. B3!t in a private letter to
Iiis ov'.i wife, L.(IXnnox Ihad no occasion to dil-

iulile ;, andl it is plaiin, tliht he not only tholuglll

tlie Q-een l g. uilty, but

b believed tle autlhnticiiti

or Ielr lettets to Bothwell . 8. Inl ol)poftioli la
a1lt tlhe- reasons f(or believing the letters, &c. to
be authentic, the condlut of the Nobles confc-
ileratecd againi- Miary, il not lproducilng them

dlir-ectly

,i rct ly as evidence against her, has been reprefe:t--
cd as an irrefragable proof of their being frorged.
A ccording t to the account of the Con fedcrates theml -
,lees, the callkct containiing the clecters was !ci,.cd
i\ them on thie twenltieth of Junec oic thou!ilanid five
ltinJl red and si ty-fivcn ; but t!e tii: lt tilIc th!i; t ll;
Wvcr jIulicially Itatcd as eviliene ccaainll tlhc Quccn
'ws in a meetinLr of the Regent's Privv Council,
lceimbler fourth, and they afterward;s trvcxi1 ;
ilic Cfundation of the a.s nmade againfil her i;i
the Parliament, held on the fiftecnth of the 1nicC
mnonth. If the letters had been genuine, it i'
concltended, that the obtaining pofilion of rthl:n
ni:Cft have aoltrded luch manttcr of triumlph to tch
Confederates, that they would inftantlxy Iavc
Iroclaimied it to the whole world ; and in their
negociations with the Englif and F'rench Miini-
llers, or witlh lfchof their fellow-flubijecs as con-
demnned their proceedings, tlhcv would havr
Pilciced, at once, every Advocate for the (.ece.
by cl hibicingl tliis convincing proooF f her guilt.
IBut in thlis rcaloning fuifficicnit att'ention is no;.
paid to the delicate and perilous situation of
the Confederates at that iun<lslurc. 'ley had
r;lacn arms againfi their Sovereign, hiad lei.';c
her person at Car-bcrry-hlill, .and hael confinedl ler
a p)riloner in Lochlevin. A confideral:ie nun-
bcr, however, of their fellow fu)jeCts, llcad; d by
Ionic of the molf powerful noblemen in the kinlg-
dloin was combinecl against them. lihis combi-
nation, they lbon perceived, they could not hope
to break or to vanquifli without aid either from
lFrance or England. In the fbrner kingdon,
Mary's uncles the Duke of Guilf and Cardinal

of

of Lorrain were, at that period, all po\vrful.
and the King himielf was devotedly attached to
her. If the Confederates confined their views
to the difiolution of the marriage of tic QuCeen
with Bothwell, and to the exclusion of him for
ever from her prtfence, they night hope, per.
haSs, to be countenanced by Charles IX. and his
M inifters, who had sent an envoy into Scot-
land of purpose to difiilade Mary fromt that ill-
fated match; Appcnd. No. XXII. whereas tl;e
loading her publicly with the iilputation of be-
ing accefibry to the murder of her hulband,
would be deemed such an inexpiable crime by
the court ofl' rance, as must cut off every hope
of countenance or aid from that quarter. From
England, with which the principal Confederates
had been long and intimately conne&ted, they
had many reasons to expect more eftFtual fiup-
port; but, to their aftonilhment, Elizabeth con-
demned their proceedings with asperity, warmly
efpoficd the calile of the captive Queen, and
was extremely tollicitous to obtain her relcal:
and reftoratioli. N;or was this one of the arti-
sices which Il'lizabeit often employed in lher
tranlfiCtions with Scotland. Though her rnoP li-
gacious Ministers confidered it as the wilfl: po-
licy to fipl)port tlhe cons cderate Lords rather thlina
the Q3cellC of Scots, Elizabeth ldi f-crardcd tleii
counMl l. 1Icr li-gl no1tions of royal autlornitv,

aill

c 'Illis \',..- I fr t'it li.j ] i |' ', l l riil to n, as ;lpc;t:rs i]pp

.,all cxtl' it ,; li, it cllL )l' July illt , lublililid inl the i)l'rii
No,. X \il. 'l'c li:'_ \t'. ':: it' leIntilllnt ol C'cci, il
his Idllcr ,l' -\nt i{. ~li, 1j',-, It ii'r 1i-llu ry Nuiri', l':li/'''

bIt'Li

and of the fubinl'ion duc by ftiubj es, induced
her, on this occasion, to exert herteif in behalflof
Marx, not only with finccrity but with zeal; hle
;nc'ociated, fe Ibllicitetl, thie threatened. Fin d-(
in(:l the Confederates inflexible, she end(aVotured
1to irocure Mary's rlcatk by )iiciis of that party
ial Scotland which contl i nucd fithful to her, and
ijilturit:c(l Tlirol.inortoii to corrclpi-ond with the
lcaders of ir, and to mll:ke o vcrtures to that cffetac.
Keith. 45 .

45, .

Ai o. .' .l1I1. She even wenlt

t() far as K;) cii:. - hcier liba!T'lor at: - !;'i',
ri concert lnealr.;;cs with the i''-rch ;' inl:;h ,.vr
:}it'}, by their i(.) nt cfs orrs, inif'ht p, r !Ll.i'!e i
Mcipc1 the Scot:; wo ;( ackno.':.v,:,' :e' ( icc"'i
iicr good fi1ter to be their SOVl'irC: - _;1 .id,') ni'i
(.Leen, and renounce their obedience to her itni.
Keith. 462, 3, 4. lroiai all these circunmiaicc>.
the Confederates had every reacon to appri-hc nl
that Mary woulktl oon obrnai i liberty, :!.ld by l;.:':;
accommodation be rtfiored to the whole, or :at
leafl to a conrideriable lortion of lher aittl-iiori ;',
Sovereign. In that event trhe forcltv, ttlit if
they fhoulcl venture to accult her publicly of a
(riime f arrocious as the miurder of her hultbi:d,
hlly must not only be e:iclluded for ever frol-

I,,'' /]X\ibl hi;tdl tlOl' l~ ' I.LIiic', " "', , tl;il pcr, i ; .', !.'. ' ?.',
I 1: t. ()~ ecT'.l s let ( r to yili, .it i ' :ir'; ' , .,v (V.!;''1."'
''., ,, bcnt in lv\'otll' ut' the Qdjucn (I' So)!% ::.id trul'. I . ...'

i,. l },c: .iml ii ll . li.c hit h , ccll ) r'. ; l ll 1i i.cdI v;. ILI

l<: 1 .(,

.

ild, h,',l;c\''L'r ]L',' M:I jclly , ni iih C ni:tk(I r

1 I',I h i|t I !, l:' .. -'

'I'Ut11xl h ilc 1,iLl'i', n

l tili .,IL'tiiil, d'it tl o ,n!;

' l c.n It.'. ; r

Il}Uilly l fom,,,m In:t ilL'llin );h ie'riiltlil.in!;Il thci." C':,l.,.l.,

N t. Anl id l his lette r

t l. (i' pt. 3d1 1, "' , (ThlC),. M..,', :.,

tqll. . ot.r Lig l, rcilin .lctl il ill oll'c(ld:] l \ ,th t le l..tt1i

['r

'1: .'.tlcc ll; tJic cx:lllplC m )vclth bur." ll. i1.. l)I':er-';
'L-',I:I. A ab.i 14.

p)vowcr

powevcr and favour, but fi-om any hope of personal
iafe'ty. On tlis account they long confined them-
selves to that vwhich was originally declared to
be tlh realon of their taking arms; the avenr-
:;n' tile .Kin's death, the dissolving the mna--
ri.i_,ue \xith Bothwell, the inflicing on him con-
; -,n lpuinilhllenct, or banifling him for ever fromn
t;ie Queen's prelence. It appears from the let
tcrs ofThrokimorton, published by Bifilop Keitll,
and ii :ny Appendix, that his sagacity early dif-
coveredi that this would be the tenor of their con-
Jucd. lil his letter, July i4th, from Edinbur1gh,
' thle- do not forget their own peril conjoined
witlh ihe danger of tle Prince, but, as far as 1
perceive, they intend not to touch the QIccn
'ither il surety or in honour; for they fpeal ou
her with rcfpect and reverence, and do affirm,
as I do learn, that, the condition aforcfaiid ac-
complified, [i. e. the separation from Bothwell
'hicy will both put him to liberty, and rcllorc
her to her estate." Append. No. XXII. 11Il
letcer of August 2ld, contains a declaration
maide to him by Lethington, in name and in pre-
fIrnce of his aficiates, that they never meant
harm neither to the Queen's person nor to lher
honour-that they have been contented hitlicto
to be condemlned, as it were, of all Princes, flran-
gers, and, namely, of the Queen of England,
being charged of grievous and infamous tiLlC3:
as to be noted rebels, traitors, seditious, ingratll
and cruel, all which they ufflcr and bear utpol
their backs, because they will not justify theim-
fclves, nor proceed in any thing that maytouch
their Sovereign's honour. But in cafe they be

with

\; n theflc d(lfl;natio;s coni iLu.itilv Otpprcffed, or
v.'iti tllhe force, aid, iani practices of oier 'Ti icc s,

i:i namely oi the (l)Iee: of En L.and, put in

t.inl;ci., or to an e-xtrenit', they shall be comln. l-
ito dea.l othlcr'e;ie v.'itii tile (QOccn than t!hey

:!itrcni, (ol th an tii c (Ic 'rc- ; for, acidci lie, )'ou

; .ibc lure V'. will ilot loi' our iives, hlave our

;. !:(i, rjrfcitcid, and le rep utedl rbels thlrough the
\. l,;ij, l'cing c he ave ti;e means to jtil ify our-
it 'i -s." Keith, 4-13. From this view of tlie fli)-
icr', 1 lotil:od on which they flood at thac tinlic,
;l:cir c:;nitil in nt ) prioducing tlie letters for
.. i.;il Il.Ontils, appears not only to have been
pr. idcnt Lbut e cntiial to iheir own lafetr.

ibUT, at a fb!ibleqfenr period, when the Confe-

ctIcrites found it necciiihr to have the form of
i,'venl'nmcnt, wllich the:y had; ciablifited, confirm-
ci by authority of Parliament, a different mode
(,i proceeding became rcquifite. All tihat had
iitlierto been done with lrfctjC to the Queen's
ililnil.on, tihe lfenting the young King uplon the
liiroie, and the applointrnimPt of a Iegcnr, Vwas
inl reality nothing moret than the dccd of private
lil1. it trcquired Ionic exhbiition of Folle Icgal
c "lidncc to procuire a conllitrtiolnal act ,-;iviing
t11n fln-,llnion of its approbation to flich vio lit
nl'(iltires, and to obtain "ia perf't d' l;w alld fc ril-cty
Icr all tliem that citlher 1by dcedJc, counl ,or ltil'-
1t I i)tion, had cntrcld into rliat caille since tle I)-h
!. i:ririj. " jIlaynl ,s 45j). This prevail(e with tih

l" 'i.t ;and his iccret c(ouninel, after1 long dtlibc-

!.!ion to agrte to lroducc all the evictllet of
V\ iicl they were pol(fTcid ; and ullponi t1 lt pr'o-
.liii ioln lariliamllint paied the actS whicil \t re

VOL. 11, A a; rcq(illred.

required. Such a change had happened in the
Itate of the kingdom as induced the Confederates
to venture upon this change in their condud.
In June, a powerful combination was forming
again ll themn, under the leading of the Hamiltons.
In December, that combination was broken;
most of the members of it had acknowledged the
King as their lawful Sovereign, and had submit.
ted to the Regent's government. Huntly, Argyll,
I erries, the most powerful noblemen of that party,
were present in the Parliament, and concurred
in all its ats. Edinburgh, Dunbar, Dunbarton,
and all the chief strong holds in the kingdom,
were now in the hands of the Regent; the arms of
France had full occupation in its civil war with the
Hlugonots. The ardour of Elizabeth's zeal in
behalf of the captive Queen seems to have aba-
ted. A ftep that would have been followed with
ruin to the Confederates in June, was attended
with little danger in December. From thislong
(dcdulion it appears, that no proof of the letters
being forged can be drawn from the circuil-
ilance of their not having been produced imme-
diately aser the ttwentieth of June; but though no
public accufaition was brought inftantlyagainfttht
Q(ueen, in conl quence of seizing the casket, hints
were given by the Confederates, that they poffelfed
evidence sufficient to convi& her. This is plain-
ly implied in a letter of Thlrokmorton, July 2 f1l,
Keith, Pref. p. xii. and more clearly in the
p;ifflTge which I have quoted from his letter
of AugulRt 12. In hIls letter of July 25, the ip,-
pers contained in the casket are tlill more plainly
pointed ollt. " They [i. e. the Confedcraites] silt,
thlt lhey halve as apparent proof againlt J1(

;i S

ns may be, as vell by the teflimony of her o;'n
hand-writing, v hich they lave recovercd, as allj
1wv fuffTicient witnef'es." Keith, 4.26.

If. WITrt regrard to the internal proofs ns the

genuiinencis of tile Q2teen's letters to Borhw ell, wc
ina', oblberve, . 'Ihat whenever a pape'; is forged
^I,!ti a particular intention, the eagerncrfs of the
lurger to eflablifi the poilnt in view, his iolicitudie
,o cJit ofF all doubts and cavils, and to avoid any
aIpearance of uncertainty, always prompt him to
ulc cxprlef5ons the most explicit and full to his pu--
pose. ThIe passages foifled into ancient authors by
Heretics in different ages; the legendary miracles
of the Roniifhl faints; the supposititious deeds in
thlir own favour produced by monafleries; the
!alfc charters of homage mentioned, Vol. I. p. 13,
nr! so many proofs of this afertion. No maxim
!cC;i;: to be more certain than this, that a forger is
ftecn apt to prove too much, but seldom falls into
the error ofproving too little. The point which
the (ceen's enemies had to eftablifi, was, " that
:s. the IEarl of Bothwell was chief executor of the
iorlrible and unworthy nlirde-prperpetrated, &-c. so
'.va Ihc of the foreknowledge, counsel, device, per-
lilladr, and commander of the said murder to be
lone." ;Goodl. ii. o7;. But of this there arconly
';l'pcrfc: hi nts, obfcti re in ti mations, and dark c x-
I;'C-nions ill he letters, which, however convincinr
.\idcnice they night furnish if found in real let-
'i s, bear no rcflemblance to that glare andc fulier-
ltlily of evidence which forgeries commonly con-
Iain. All (leadvocatcs for Mary's innoccnccinlier
O1wn agce,' c(nltelnd tliattlicre is nothi gin tli l CttCer
'lwich cn se'rve as a proof of her guilt. I cnv,

q a i Black-

Blackwood, Turner, &c. abound with paffTges to
this puri)ole; nor- are the :entilments of' thlole i;'
the present age diferent. " Yet fl-ill it mi(rl-
have been expeced (fays her latclet defender) thir
lomc one or other of the points or articles of thii
accusation fliotld be imade out clearly by the
proof:. But nothing of that is to be Ieen in tll!
preient cast. There is nothin/g in the letters tlih;
could plainly shew the writer to have been i ini..
foreklinowledle, co unfi el, or device of any inurdcr.
far lels to have perlfuaded or commanded it; aji
as little is there about maintaining or juftifyin;:
any nmurderers." Good. i. 76. liow ill advilHil
were Mary's adversaries, to contra ct loI much guilr,
and to pracilfe so many artifices, in order to forg(
letters, which are so ill contrived for elfablilling
the conclusion they had in view r Ilad they been
so base as to have recourse to forgery, is it nor
natural to think that they would have produced
something more explicit antd dlcifive ? It is al-
iioft impofible to invent a long narration of ic-
titious events, con fifling of various minute par-
ticullars, alnd to cunncli thel in such a man-
ner with real facts, that no mark of fraud l.hll
appear. For this lrealon, fliilf'ul foirgers avoil
any long detail of circumiflanlces, eljecia;ll (,1
foreign and lilperfiuous ones, well kniowing tli;
tlie miore thele are multil)lited, thle more al:e
the chances ofdt(etction increafled. Now M.ir \'s
letters, (cpecially the lirfl , arc filled withl it nl'l-
til)licity ofcircumflanllcs, extrelmely nlatural in .1
real corre flondenl bcc, but al togetheri foreign to thel
pt1rl)ofl of the Qulcen's ene'lies, and wiiclih i
would Iiave been extreme folly to hIave infclrted,
if they had been altocgether illginary, and with-

out

o ti foutnd(tion. 3. The truth and reality of fc-
vcr;l ci!-cumtlances in the letters, and thclc, too,
of no very public nature, are confirmed bv un-
doubted collateral evidence. Lett. i. Good. ii
. I. 'l'lie Qlueen is laid to have imet one (,f
Lt'nnox'>. gentlemien, and tohlave had fomne conver-
i.ti on with hlim. Thomas Crawford, who was the
pr-rlon, appeared before Ilizabcth's colnmiinion-
trs, and confi-rmed, upon oath, the truth of tiis
i rcuinf:lnnce. I .e likelwife declared, that duiringi
lie (Queen',, It-ay at Glasgow, the King repeated to
liin,, every night, whatever had pafned through
hie clay, between her VMajefly and hi ; and that
ihe account given of these conversations in the
riril letter, is nearly the -fame with what the Kin
coinmunicated to himi Good. ii. 245. Accord-
inlgto tihe iame letter there was much discourse be-
tween the King and QLjeen concerning Mynto,
I-lic ait, and Walcar. Good. ii.

i . o, I . lWhat

thi s migihlt be, was altogethler unknown, untilalet-
ter of Mary's, prelerved in the Scottilh college at
I 'aris, and praublflied, lKeith, I 'rhf. vii. difovered
it to be an aftair of to m-luch ilmportance as lmrcrited
all tlie attention Ilie )pid to it at tlhat time. It
ap'ears by a letter fromll the French amba(ldo)r,
that Mary was l'ub jc.t to a violent pain in her iide.
Keith, ibid. 'l'his circtilmllance is mnc itioled,
l ett. 1 . p). 0 in a mannelr to na.tl.ral as can lcarce-
ly belong to any but a genuine plrolcliion. If we
]11:111 lill think it probable to il'lpole that so many
real (ircumllanI;llccs 'wre artfully introduced into
tlic lettcrs by tle forgers, in ordelr to give a;1 ;air
oratithclnticity to their ,produclion ; it will iharldly

:e pufible to hold the ltlace opinion conccrnigi. ,

A ;a 3 tlie

the following particular. Before the Q(een bc:-,,
her firit letter to Bothwell, le, le, as ul;ial aion:
ihofe who write long letters containing a variety
orS iubl jes, made >/c!ts or smc;ic;

r.-! :.l;.'i'. of tle par.

ticulars The wiihed to remem ber ; but as the frit 1i.
wUriting during a great part of the night, and :2fter
her attendants were asleep, her paper failed hier,
ard !Tie continued her letter upon the lfame lhec:
on which fle had formerly made her nmenoran-
dums. This she herflif takes notice of, and m:lakes
an apology for it: " It is late; I desire never to
ceafi firom writing unto you, yet now, after the
kifing of your hands, I will end my letter. Ex-
cufe my evil writing, and read it twric over. lEx-
cuie that thing that is fcriblit, for I had na patcr
zefterday, quhen I wrait that of the menorial.'
Good. ii. 28. These meimorandumns fill appear
in the middle of the letter; and what we have taiil
feerns naturally to account for the manner lhow
they might find their way into a real letter. It is
scarce to be supposed, however, that any forger
would think of placing nmemoranduims in the
middle of a letter, vwhere, at firfit ight, tlie\ IlnakC
ob absurd and lb unnatural an appearance. But if
any shall fill carry their relinement lo far, a; to
suppose that the forgers were lo artfiul as to tlhrow
in this circiimlrance, in order to preflrve the ap-
pearance of genuincnels, they nIuf- at Icafl allow
that the Qu een's cnemies, who employed thcile
forgers, could not be ignorant of the delign and
meaning of these lhort notes and memorandums;
but we tind them miflaking them lb far as to ilna-
gine that they were the credit of the bearer, i. e.
points concerning which the Queen had given him

,verbal

vcrbal intllr&itons. Good. ii. 12. This they
cannot poflibly be; for the Q(ecn hcrl;-lf writes
with so much exaflnels concerning the di!iercnt
points in the memorandums, that there was no
need of giving any credit or inifruEtions to tih
bearerconcerning thein. The memorandtiums are
indeed the colnents of the letter. 5. Mary, men-
tioning her conversation with the King, about the
affair of Mynto, Hiegait, &c. fays, (' The morne
[i. e. to-morrow] I will fpeik to him upon that
point;" and then adds, " As to the reft of Wille
H-liegait's, he confeffit it; but it was the morne
[i. e. the morning] after my coming or he did
it." Good. ii. 9. This addition, which could not
have been made till after the conversation hap-
pened, seems either to have been inserted by the
Qjeen into the body of the letter, or, perhaps,
the having written it on the margin, it was taken
thence into the text. If we suppose the letter to
be a real one, and written at different times, as
it plainly bears, this circumstance appears to be
very natural; burno reason could have induced
a forger to have ventured upon fuchll an anachro-
nifih, for which there was no neceflity. An addi-
tion perfectly similar to this made to a genuine
paper, may be found, Good. ii. 282.

BUT, on the other hand, Mary herself, and the

a(dvocates forher innocence have contended, that
thele letters were forged by her enemies, on 0pur-
p(le to blast her reputation, and to juflify their
own rebellion. It is not necessary to take notice
of the arguments which were produced, in hel
own age, in fiupport of this opinion; the oblerv-
ations which we lhave already made, contain a
fi{ll reply to them. An author, who has inquired

A a 4 into

into ! -e' :;f-!iirs; of tlit Ie'rioci with great in (d fli.r'
ani! v.'!.o h.l.s

: icct j r' d much Ililov,-l j'C' oU tl.; iX,

1h:', ].t_'lv p!hi ubiel,.d (as llc affirms) ia i.l:nonilti-
tionl; orihl t:-r'err of Mairv'., lr.trs. 'This di.
I-;,')l .! L 'r!.'l.'t . h eso s

OD-.
t ',;.:' C both iilrt l-

3] a1] ! 'f:tr-T.'ll. V\it!l lh rL' i;-ci tO[ tihe e( !e'- r, 1c'

obic)l!'V(', that the FIr'lnch c' ,pv of thlf ()ln' 'n
lctLc! s is 1.; iuinly a tiranl.tion of Buchia.nilan'.i i ;ii:
copy; which Latin coy is onl y atranllflation o! al,-

c:,i'tit'h coLy; an;J, bh co:lllutlcc, tdie aIlhtit ,
of the .icec , s cnis, ti.;t flC vrot the oill'i
nally in lI renc'll, is altorether ru uindilcl, and
whole lettlers are C'roi tOI rgcrie S. 1ie accounts fk!
this fitrang l.ccc-lion of t-ranfiation., by IIi ilov-
in that e forgery wa.s pt'C rietncd, no 1,crlfu
ct(uld be fl)und capable of wV-itin, o1riginally i";
the French ll i.nl.a letters which vwould p)as fou
tihe QC _.Cilc's; i for that realbn they werc first coni-

loir' in Scottifli; but unllucily the French in1-
i-rtceter, as hce conjcctures, diel not underfland

that l.ian l

gua and therefore Butchanan traniil-

ited(. tiheml iinto iatin, and flrom his Latin ticy
wrTe tiC'llcred ii;Lo lFirencl. Good. i. 79, '.

[r is hardly neceillry to o bfe rve, tlhat nio p)r')f

W11ateve r is p)i odiceCd of any oft[hel' tl)lepofitiLlli.
'[1 le liltners of the Scots, in that age, wien lil-
inull every 1ilan of rank fpcnt a p)art of his youtli
ill Francc, and tile intercourfll between the two
,nation.s was great, render it altogether impltO-
bable that lo aininy comp)licated operations J11oulil
be neceliary in order to procurc a few letters to
be written in the French liangtage.

Bu'r without infilling fartiher on this, we miay

ol)ervye, that all this author's premilics may bc
,ra'nted, and yet Ilis conclusion will not follow,

iunlcI's

i:nlefs he likewise prove that the French letters,
:;s we now have them, are a true copy of thole
. hi, ii were produced by Murrav and his party in
tlie S omnifh Parliament, and at York and W\'cl--
lninitn r. 1But this he has not atteminpted ; and if
wvc attend to the iitforv of the letters, such an at-
relmptr, it is obvious, n1ti ut liave beeln unnliIccC'-
'l. ''The letters w.er firflt pulinfcd at tile end
cf l'3 chanan's Det.'li/i!. 'ie fiir: cldition ofth is
trc.ttile: was in l atinin n which language three of
tl c u)leen's letters were f'ulbjoined to it; this

natin edition was printed l . 1).571. Soon as-

'cr, a Scottish tranflarioni o it vwas p ubiiulael, and
ait tle cnd of it were p )iin :ed, liiiewil: in Scott Ill,
tlie tlree letters whiich had furmerly aplpeared in
i,:atin, and live (,her clttcrs in S:ottifiL, vwhich
;vwre rot in the Latin ediiion. ?i\ext appeared a
IFrcncl tr:niilation of tle Iletet:ion, andl of leven
of tlhe letters ; this bears to have been printed at
I'd:inbulli-h by Thomal;s \'ValteCm, 1572. The
name of the place, as Vwell as the printcr, is al-
lo\xced by all partics to be a lmanifel: imil)iltrc.
Our author, from obllervinlg the day of tihe ilollnii,
h'ol whitich the lriitiangis ltid to have b'een cllin ilh.l'l,
la;s ail'rtc that this eiteitioni was printted at Loll-
Jlon; but no fIrcls can be laid ulpon a date soutld
i; a book, where evcry otliercilrculllance with rc-
;:(ud to the printingit is ,llowve( to bc lllc. B51;(ck -
woo(l, \who (next to Le.fly) was the bellt itFor l(d
of 1l 11 M ary's advocates in tlhat a;.(, allirli s11 ilat
the I'reicli edition of thel Deted ion was 1),,l ilie
i l France: " 11 [1uchlanan] at (lei.s adjotll ;i
'llce d(le(lamation un petit libelle dn lretetl l
anir'iagge du Duc de Norfolk, etde la 1faon ld I;on

i]truOcs,

proces, et la tout envoyS aux freres ala Rochetlc,
]efquels voyants qu'il pouvoit fervir a la cause,
P'ont traduit en Francois, et iccluy futt ilpril,('e a
Edinbo.urg,, c'cft a dire a la Rochellc, par Tho-
mas \Valteni, nom apofl' et f;it a plaiir. Mr[
tyre de Marie. Iebb. ii. 256." The author o;
rlhe :',:Otic'!;" ie 'ri goes farther, and names tlhc
FIrench tranfnator of the DIetetion. "' t icclni
preliierement co;nympoP (coilnl e il f(emble) pI;-
George Buchanan I.fcoibvys, et lepuis tracluit en
iangue Fr.Lncoil'c pnr tn li u1onoot, Poitevin (ad!-
vocat de vocation) Calunlnl , Ioy difant gentillhon-
!ne, et un de plus rc!narql-eiz Icditeuz de France.
Jebb, i. 425. 443." Thle concurring tefiiinon'
of two contenlmporary authors, whose residence in
France a tor'd!ci tlhein fufiicient means of inforn-
ation, rmuft outweigh a flight conjecture. This
French translator does not pretend to publih the
original French letters as written by the QCten
hericlf; lec e:1p-efsly declares that lhe tranllaitctl
rhelin fromn the latin. Good. . io. Ilad olr
author attended to all thele circumiraances, he
;:miht lhiave aved hienl ls the labour of lob ;any
criticillis to preve that the present French coly
of the letters is a translation f-om the Latin. The
F'rcnicil elditor hillfeclf acknovwledges it, and, lb flr
as I knovw, no pcrfon ever denied it.

WXV: may obl;lrve that the JFrench tranfnitor

was so ignorant, asto affirm th at Mary had writtcn
thlcl letters, p)arly in French, partly in Scottil.
Good. i. o,. lad this translation been pub-
lilhled at I. ,don by Cecil, or had it been mnade
by his dirct ion, To gross an error would not have
been atlimitted into it. This error, lowever, was

owinig

awing to an odd circnumtllnce. In the Scotti'f
trafnnation of the l)te&iion, two or three feln-
tcnccs of the original 'rench were prefitxcd to
each letter, which breaking off with : an &.c. the
'cottifh translation of the whole ltts:r followed.
'This ,methol of printin s tranfli.tions w.i;, nocr u
c;)iolmn in that age. 'he Freincll ci iror obli-'v-
ilr tills, foolilhly concluded that the letters had
been written partly in French, partly in Scottifll.

li, we carefully confider those few French fcen-

rtc.i:s of e:ch letter, which still remain, and ap-
ipl to them that species of criticillin, by which
our author has exanmined the whole, a clcar proof
w-ill aritc, that there was a French col,,y not tranl-
Lited from the Latin, but which was itlcilf the ori-
ginal from which both the Latin and Scottish
have been translated. This minute criticifin
niull neceflarily be disagreeable to many readers;
hut luckily a few sentences only are to be exa-
:iined, wlicli will render it extremely lhort.

IN the firif letter, the French fcnrencc prefixcd

to it ends with these words, yJfi/oit /o. It is, P !ri
i]:is exlprenfion, veu cc que cpen un coirs Jp.i : :, '/,i, is
hy no means a tranlation of cu/i pla,'e PcLi.:;'(,.'/',I¥
i/que corpus fine

J cord. The whole finellcc hi.l. ;t

lpiric anti elegance in the e'irnclh, w!il ncli licr-
t11e ILatin nor Scottilh have reta;lilled. '/y) ri la
i';uce is not a translation of lo/o pranil t/,!'/.iport'; the
ScQtti l tranlllation, qlblile dni'fcr- i /i, cx ) ('ll;sb lie
fi'nfc of the French more properly; fbr anciently
quile signified untilas well as durinr. '/ .'ay pr
lI,,n graridfpropos is not j u (lI y rendlcdctl ;,'qu' c6/-
1trim fCer ;moile) cum quo oquam the phralc ul f '( in lie

French

F'rench copy is one peculiar to that languae, an,

(rives a morce pro!able account of her bclh:lvi(oil

than Ihc other. ','cr.n//,itC qlii/ v fif.z /,;., I,
)Ot aL ti :-:'niLio)n of

/.'l i ,'. ! .; i./:t'' clt it l

l i'O, r'/ol I

ZJ/?,. 'i!'e Irec zcl'itenente 'icii:cid to Lett. 2. trn !i

vith a ,,;c; ':,/ ,'c. l/ t

. i is ;'it nt th:it brtli L!) c i : ,;i

and f-;curritii tranflnions Iia]vc oinittcl; alto(Cth{tl.
th-k[ wI)rtls, ct t// 'c'/; :.

5 j, c :' is;:'s t',/)Jii'c. 'I Iic

i'rc!;ch f'ntenci c prt-li:-;c..i r Lctt. 3. enclll. \U i'
p-'Il/t.',t';-. j7',ye .: 'cz*'.. '/.,/.r /.:.¥/

/,' /.?-iz,/ i.s pl.p li

i

0no l';-Infll;ton Oi Jiui//,is J/il;/i.,;D', / s(i/; thle r'llc
of the French is hcttcr c x)1rcl:cl ly the ScotiiH1
1 have

b ,:i:, /..:!l r I.iec' ,r). Ag, i n, P.,;' c.\x' i

,ft''e hs //a'e is very (l[l0crcn t t'roni ia, c:ci{/':;,':.'(.,:
;JfihW i;e.'gc.ic. . 'lic five rcJ.,aiing letters nct ( 1r
apcpar'cc in Latin; nur- is there alny pIroof oftlh;r
Lb:in1jr ever translatcd ;l11o thatr ILIng:tag. 1o()ir
of tlici, lhowever, are put! li sie.l in lrencl. 'l

i-

cn tircly overturns our auilolr's hyljotlhclis coi -
ceCi niG tile nccci:.cy, of a tranflatioll inlto Latiln.

IN the Sco(Jri, eCdition of the I)etctioll tih

\whol.( :,..d ,! i; I)'it(d in French as well as ill
Scottifl . i1 is liC:i )olibl)lC to )elieve that tin:;
Sctmtiih (opyl" c(ull be the original lfrom \vlli'h
tiic l 'i' (

iin was t'-a;ill, tct . I 'lic F'r nclihc (c lili:

of \vc;'1 s xv hli:l Ihave bothl inie;ilire and rllylln,
a (1 \vi i i'!i, i I lr
; y i)places, areC Ar fr om being i1 -

Uc:;_:l t. 'I li:e S'c ttifll conlills of'an equai;l n11111

ber of litse, hilt wirllouL iea.lire ol rhll'lci.
Now \ i') n'.111 coul.d ever think of a thling lo aI)-
j'rd ;tml( i clp} r'Lia 1l) C, a:, to re(qtl jir one to t t.il^-
.late ; c r(Ltait l ivc.; niumllltb r of' liles i i roli ilu
;ai ('(tl,. I111lll)('.1 (o \V( I (s, V\\'lCIe both Illt 'lll'i
and iliy 'Ilc were to be oblcirve. Tlie Scottilh,

O.i

,m ; he coinlrary, appears maniffetly to be a tranf-

!,,.!):o:: thle 1irencl ; tilc pl h

1,ies, the i(liuils,

,:nd iiiany of the oord ls aire 'r cic), and not Scot-
r'1. tlihIcs, the Sc'ttifhl trl:11i]ator has, in I'c-
v.:':.si illl'inccs, i-ii'tln 'lL- !e I;lni of tlie Frelnch,
.r,1J i I nnl;i Iy Iiorc et ' trcitl' Itie nset iiliper-

i'.il.\'. It ;ad ti;he hnciL

Lbjci. i;rcid, this could

'!u h.vc h pprini!. 'i'h 1di re- ors of the fraud
.'.(ouid li.tvc t:il.'ood t:lic'r own work. I
il il lih.ify myh'ilt vi. h on'e cxiemple, in wixich
h(ilrc is a proof of 1)oti il' aflertions. Stanz.a
',1il, vC'. 9.

Pour luy j'attendz toute bonne fortune,
Pour !uy je vcu x oarder lfnt et vie,
Pour luy tout vcrtu de fiiivre j'ay envie.

lFor him I attend all o;ood fortune,
For him I will coilicrve helthe and lyfc,
FIor llim I deli:e to clltile courage.

A!/endr il the fiir Iline is not a Scottiffi, but a

I' rnch phrafl ; tlie two other lines do not cx prcls
tle finfe of the Ilrecnch, and tlie las: is ablolute

moillcille.

'I'll eiglitlh letter was never tranflatcdl into

I':rncl. It contains mluch refined myllicil ll ahotilt
: .':tcs, a folly of thatr ;a,, of wliicll M1ary w\v,
vcry fi)nd, as appl)ars from leveral othler (-irlin-
liiincs, l),irtielarly - m(,ln a lettetr concerninl' i;;i-

',I:.,- lDy l.)rlnrinnold sos i lax tliol(rnden. Js MI,1 's

aIlv\ri.t;lic, oligtl lher lc ttrers, ll v were ccrr.iinly
1 llO>y'd v,'y idly whenll they 1rodtuced tli>.

lxOM thc elc oblclrv;atil(os it lteem(iis to Ib evide.nt
tat iL tIcr was 1a F'lenCch Copy of ll. y's k'tticr;,

UJ

of which the Latin and Scottish were only tranf-
lations. Nothing now remains of this copy lut
those few ientences which are prefixed o tOih
Scottilh tranaiation. The French editor laid hol!
of thlile k;-ntcnces, and tacked his own tranflatiun
to them, which, lo far as it is his work, is a ser-
vile and at very wretched translation ofBuchanan>'
Latin; whereas, in those introductory sentences,
we have dilcover-d strong marks of their being
originals, and certain proofs that they are not
translated from the Latin.

IT is apparent, too, from comparing the Latin

and Scottiih translations with these sentences, that
the Scottish tranflaror has more perfectly attained
the sense and spirit of the French than the Latin,
And as it appears that the letters were very early
translated into Scottifl, Good. ii. 76; it is pro-
bable that Buchanan made his translation not
from the French, but fiom the Scottish coij'
Were it neceflary, several critical proofs of tlih.
nmight be produced. One that has been alrcal,'
mentioned seens decisive. DiDiuis illic moral.'
l!:m bears not the leans rlfemiblance toj'ay v'ei,.'
pllis tard la /.Int ; Lt if, inflead of I walkit Li. c.
watched] I!iter th/'re ap, we suppose that Bu-
clianran read Iz c'ivi/, &c. this mitaltke into whlicli
h2c nlilt so ealily have fallen, accounts for the
error in hi's tr;ilallation.

Tili'Rse criticilins, however minute, appear to

be well founded. But whatever opinion may be
formied conc.erning thein, the other arguments,
with regard to the incernal evidence, remain iln
full force,

'I'1E

Tir-E external proofs of the forgery of the

()leen's letters, which our author has produced,
appear at firl- fight to be specious, but are rot
nrore sOlid than that whichi we have already exan:-
ned. These proofs may be claifed under two heads.
i. The erroneous and contraditory accounts
which are said to be given of the letters, upon the
I;r-: judicial producion of them. In the Secret
Council held Decem. 4, I 567, they are described
( as Iher privie letters written and fubfcrivit with
her awin hand." IHaynes, 4-54. Good. ii. 64. In
the ad of parliament, pawed on the I5tli of the
fame month, they are described as " her privie
letters writrin halelie with hir awin hand." Good.
ib. 67. This divcrfity of description has been
confidered as a strong presumption of forgery,
Thle manner in which IMlr. Hume accounts for
this is natural and plausible, vol. v. p. 498. And
several ingenious remarks, tending to confirm his
obftrvations, are made in a pamphlet lately pub-
lilhed, intitled, Mifcellaneois Remarks on the n-
q.'iiry into the Evidence against Mary °ue'en of Scots.
To what they have oblirved it may be added,
that the original ad of Secret Council does not
low exist; we have only a copy of it found
among Cecil's papers, and the transcriber has
been manifestly so ignorant, or so careless, that
an argumenlt founded entirely upon thefuppofition
of his accuracy is of little force. Several errors
into which he has fallen, we are enabled to point
out, by comparing his copy of the ad of Secret
Council with the adl of Parliament palsed in
(cnfetquen.ce of it. The former contains a pe-
titlio to Parliament; in the latter the real peti-

8 tion

tion is refurmed vcrbaiti, and converted into
law. In the copy, the Queen's marriage whiI
B3othwell is called " a priveit marriage," whichl
it certainly was not; for it was celebrated, after
proclamation of banns, in St. Giles's church thrc:.
fcveral days, and witlh public solemnity, but in
the act it is denominated " ane pretendit n1r-
riage," which is the proper description of it ;c-
cordingc to the ideas of the party. In the copy, ti '
Queen is said " to be so thrall and bluudy aficc-
tionat to the privat appetite of that tyran," wh!ich
is nonlenfe, but in the a&t it is " blindly aflc(-
tionat." In the copy, it is said, " all nobill an,
virtuous men abhorring their traine and com:-
pany." In the adt, " their tyrannie and coin-
panie, which is evidently tie true reading, ;1
the other has either no meaning, or is a mere tal-
tology. 2. The other proof of the forgery o:
the letters, is founded upon the impossibility o(
reconciling the account, given of the time whes,
and the places fiom which, the letters are fuptol-
edl to have becn written, with what is ccrrtini'
known concerning the Queen's motions. Ac-
cording to the paper publifled, Anders. ii. '2"9.
which has been called Murray's Diary, and wvliic i
is formed upon the authority of the letters, M.r!n
set out from 1.Edinburlgh to Glasgow, January ;1,
J 5s7; lle arrived tlhre on tlhe 23d; left that I,l.u'c
on the 27th; flic, togethcr-wi hi the King, rc1.(:hcil
LIinlitllgow on the 28tl, flayed in that town only
one night, andt returned to ':dinburgh befUre tli
end of the month. But, according to Mr. (oo(l.l,
the Q2jeen did not leave ]Edinburgh until I' il.iy
January 24th ; as fle Ilayed a night at Callcn.dr,

2 nfli

n,-i cotld not reach Glasgow sooner than the
t..ening of Saturday tile 25th, and she returned to
Inlithgowv on Tuesday the Sthl. By confe-
,uicnce, the firfl letter, which fuppofcs the Queen
o Ihave been at leafI four days in Glafglov, as
.3cl ;as the licond letter, lwhich bears date a;:
(;lt)sow S$/r:'iii.'v ;*ior;lzig, whereas fle did not
i:iVe thlere until the eveningl, Inutc be forgeries.
i I:,it thle Q(ulen di( not fct out from Edinburlgh
,);i.r thlan the :'q.th of January, is evident (as
;.. contends) froml the public records, which con-

i 'a P;'c'ep/l f a. cc';iifr'a/t/is; f ? l./- freiit b\
!:c's Loyvd to M'arguret Chalmers, granted by
. .c O'.Ien, on the .J' th of Tanuarv, at L'diin-
i':!' , ;. :!l llikew'ile: a letter of the Que.en's dated

it ! tlnbghl ron tlhe fl-ie clay,; appointing James

IJi l.s taylor to the Prince er
h on. 'h tile

'*:ig and Q(een lhad returncd to Linlithgowt on

ic .',th, appeiars firom a deed, in which tiey ap-
ji:r Andre w Ferrrier ! keepe r of their lpalace there.
'..edl at ,inlilthgow Janiuaryiv . Good. i. 113.

'I' is has

l been repre ftnted to be not only a con -

:';,;C.'g, but a legal pro(f ((of the f)1rg'ry of the
1 ':, f1tid to be written by Ma1ry; but how ftr ir
'. i, lior of trlis v. ill at'l.'.ar from the folloWing

r. I' is evidenlt, frc;n :t(ccl,'ratio; or c.n f;. ion

'.. d by' te B1 lilop of Rol;,, tlilat bef1re tlhe con-
1 lce1(`s at York, which vwere opelned in tlhe be-
!'i';:: : o.f ()°ioelr 1568, Mary had, by anl ati-
!*': ,)( Mai'iCl.alid's,S got into her lands; a copy of
I:(;Ie lt'[!-rs wllichl her lfulijec,.s accluhd hcr of

i "'v,; c

i ten to Bothmwell. Browi's t ill of' tie

V .' [. 01 )
. !< c

Duke of Norfolk, 3. 56. It is highly probable
that the Billhop of Rols had lken the letters blfore
he wrote the defence of Q(2een Mary's honour in
the year I57o. They were publiffied to all t1;
world, togcther with BIuchllanan's I)etecion, A. 1).
1571. Now, if they had contained an error lU
grois, and, at tlat time, to obvious to di!covcrv,
as the Ifuppofing the Queen to have paTsed fevclr
days at Glasgow, while fle was really at 1Ein-
burgh ; had they contained a letter dared at GCla.
rowv S atu lrd-a morn 'ing, thourgh flie didr1 no! ti \; :
there till tlie evninl , i' it ,po0frbl that tiL her.
fclf, who ;knew her ovwn I!otions, or tile ;:lc ;ii,
zealous advocatcs who ali,eared for her in that
age, fniould not have publiicfdl ancd exlpuoll thi,
contradiction, and, by so doing., have bl;aiCJ, ;a
once(, the credit of such an imlpoi'ltre ? In iil-
quifitions which are naturally abliriufe and intri-
cate, the ingenuity of the latest author nmlay iii
cover many things which have escaped the aiti'n-
tion, or balled tle I-;c acity of ti]ole who h.i\c
formerly confidered thl e in1ic frubt. cl. But ;wtii :a
matter of fact lay b obvious to view, [his ci rcut1-
flance of its being unobfcrved by the Q. iccn 11cr-
]Ilf; or by any of her adllcrenLvs, is aii.olt :; tic-
mlonlfrat: '. that there is iinie nil lake or (ii:

.,tr

ill o1ur aluthor's ar;ients. So flr :i' a..:,
citlier of our hifloriians, or of Mal;y':s efi n!cinTc ,
fromn callingl in (qtucflion the coininoe ;n.coi..';
concerningl tle tiilC of the (jiieeCn's titii; (,ul.'"
(;lalgowv and hlir lcttilrniln firo it,

'a that ti

not the lea;all a)c;larnce of any' dillc;cie I::llui'l:
tlhem withi rLg;iird to liliSl point.1, Jut .iul ur b,

3 .2. 'j.'it1 0~,

.. ''lOSE ;papers in the publio records: on which

,ur author rcfts tle lIr(f' of hlis a:.'nrion con-
crn:in g the QCtecn's lotiotns, are not the originals
IftlJlcri bed )y the Qi.uc c, but copies only, or tran--
laiiins of copies of' thole originals. It is not n'-
ceiary, nor would it be v'ery easy to rlnder tlis
i:it(ll i ible to person.S 1.1 na1(q u .

i i t C t

with It:l.,for s

,oi' law in Scoland ; butt every Scotiil n.n convc:i-
J.irit in bu)finels will iunllerfil;l mi, when I ;1
t!.it tlhe precept of confirmation of the liic-rcnt
:i! L'oyd is only a .atin copy or note ofa prcccrt.
wliich was l-aled wl illh the Privy-f'c;], on a war-
r:talt fromn the fignet-ofFie, proceeding on a fig-
,raitilc xl hich bore date at 1E:dinburgh the 2z.^
(f J.:; .nu:ry; mand that the deed in favour of J amles
inl-is is tie cupy of a letter, Iealed with the Privv-
,cal, procced ing on a signature which bore ldae at
I diilburgh January 24. From all this we may
:::tICe with some degree of reacibn, that a p!()s
!;,t!d!.t on pipers, which are f o many r:cmlouvis

niirit fro.11 tlie oiginals, cannot but be very
I..ie a;fil IuncCrtailn.

3. AT that tilic all publlic paplrs were iJhlc' d

'a tlienaine both of the Kil ng an1d QCeen ; by
Iv, tie King's fiibliscriptiol was l;i less rqcl iufitir
t ;laly ;aper tlhan the Qccen's ; and tllcrefore un-
l,-: tlie original lignaturcs )Le produice(, in order
rO .llcertin rlthe i)articular clay wlltn each of thenl
Iil'gcd, or to prove that it was lfigncd only b7
one of thcm, the legal proof alifing fromn thlcic
papers would be, that botl tdie King and Q(.[cCi
it'tincd tlhem at

l dinburgh on the 24th of Jla-
ua ry'.

1B b 2 4. I'l F

4. T E dates of the warrants or precepts ifflecd

by the sovereign, in that age, feern to have beer,
in a great measure arbitrary, and affixed at tie
pleafuire of the writer; and, of confcqucncc,
there dates were seldom accurate, are often salic,
and can never be relied upon. This abuse be-
carne so frequent, and was found to be so per.
nicious, that an acet of parliament, A.D. Io. ,
declared the fixing a falib date to a fignaturie [t
be Iligh Trcafon.

5. Tr-;RE still remnain, in the public recort:

a great number of papers, which prove the nic-
cerfity of this law, as well as the fallacy of oui:
author's argu ments. And t!ough it be no eai:.
matter, at the distance of two centuries, to pro',c
any particular date to be false, yet furpriling in-
fRances of this kind fiall be produced. N'o
thing is more certain fiom hi-story, than thal tlih
King was at Glasgow 24th January 1567; an;;
yet the record of iignatures fiom 1565 to i5S:
Fol. i6th, contains the copy of a signature i,.
Archibald E1dmoniton, said to have been fibl'(ri-
bed by our Sovcrcigris, i. . the King and (,Qic'n
at Edinburgh, January 24-, 1567; Ib that if \\'
were to rely impllicitly upon tlh dates iln [l'
recorld3 of that age, or to hold our authlior's a;1 I
ment to be good, it wo1uld prove tlht not oi.
the Qnccn, but the King too, was at Edi nbtir
on the 24.tll of January.

IJr apl: ars fiomn an original lItt('r of tic 1i!1:;I

of Ro!s, tllht on the 25 5t of October 566, nM.i'
lay at the point of elath ; Keitli, App. i;- ;.lll
yct a deed is to b: lfound in the public rcc,((l'()

., ' 1

,hJich bears that it was signed by the QCeen that
,,. P-rivy-feal, lib. 35. fol, 89. Ochte1rloy ".

BOTH-WELL seized the Qceen as ffe returned
oiom Stirling, April 24th, 1567, andl (according
to herown account) conduted hler to Dunbar with
all diligence. And. i. 95. But our author, re-
lying on the dates of some papers which he found
11 tIc records, supposes that Bothwell allowed
lKr to flop at P'dinburgh, and to tranfa& bufinels
r;~'-. Nothing can be more improbable than
tl:is iluppofition. We mlay therefore rank the
.itc of the deed to ;Wr'ight, Privy-feal, lib. 36.
foii. 43. and which is mentioned by our author,
.(ol. i. 24. aniong the inflances of the falfc date:
of papers which were ifued in the ordinary course
of business in that age. Our author has nmiltakcn
tihe date of the other paper to Sorbes, ibid. it is
fignccl April t4th, not April 24th.

Ir there be any point agreed upon in Mary's
,lilory, it is, that flie reminlied at Dunbar from
ilIe time that Bothwell carried her thither, till
!lie returned to lEdinburgh along with him in the
!'Li lnning of May. (ur aiitholr himiclf allows
th.t Iie retidlcld twelve days there, vol. i. 3670
;',)\ tlivuhl. tihere re e cieds in the records which
! t)ar that they were signed by the QLeen at Dun-

x. i. In 11 l l lit i c.irly c(.litiols if ilis Diifcrltatio,ri

1"11' ,:,1 Iillltt.l cc il' 11 tI 11[Ic 11, 11I'.;C I. ilh l l thol \\ lii. II , I(,I lc-

!1., :;1!,l 1fili,.'. \\.t', Iml ti llC I ; 1uti tl,il, :I, las i ic
l,.::n ({,l} ,v,\' r , \\:;,r; J;.imilded (,i ; 1 lmilL.tikc i,. thIe ] rliu*
'' 't, il ic1. 1 ncI th 1C rc,.'dj,,, ;tilld 15 tl Ii''lcl;: I.' (IlIIilCt[ i,;
',l,:'. ,',il: ,n!. 'I'll. rc,,:,iui n h, j. \'c'.,'r , in llt e [)illilt.iti l

l''ail,. 15!p ! ia

u11 'C not. itllltt
i iiin ti Ili illi1it .

l) b 3 bar

bar during that time, yet there are others whicl
bear that they were signed at Icdinturgh; e. r
there is one at Edinburgh, April 27th, I'1iv',
fcal, lib. 36. fol. 97. There are others -lid et:
be signed at Dunbar on tla;t day. Lib. ,.
Chart. No. 524. 5"6. lb. 3N. No.

6. b.

'57. There are some signed at Dunbar ApliI
.S'th. Oth1ers at Edinburgh April oth1 , lil.
22. Chart. No. 492. Other at DnL.- ;a\ si,
Id. ibid. No. i 5. ' hie i diffil(cnt ci;lrtc!i
filul?'oft th'e uceen to have !liC3d lb Inany Ul'-
!nw!, mrobble, and inconfitent journng:,
that rhey afford the cic;areil denoliofirration til:
thie d,.tc in these records ought not to be ci:-
pended on.

THIS becomes more evilent fromn the daite es

the charter tfail to be signed April 27th, wlhich
happened that year to he a Sunday, whicl was
Iot, at that time, a day of bifinefs in Scotland,
as appears from the books of J/ldcrtlu, then ke!:
by the Lords of Sefiiin.

FROM\ this flior reviewc of our author's pro¢(

of thie forgery of the letters to Bot llwell, it is evi-
dent that his arguments are far fronl aon(mullin.
to dlemonfiration.

ANOTIIHR l argumIenit againel the gen uinenfls (u

thele letters is founded on the fiylc and corn pofl tili,
wliich are said to be altogether unworthy oif tll,
(_1ce.i, ;in!d tl liike her real piodlfl ions. It
;lalii, I)()t; frl ;nt hIrc Ct 11,1 cyv of io)l o ipoli }:'
!1 Illll o)f M arv'.s letri'rs, :tn,'l eve un jloIll 1hc ' 1l:'
cit~ud' to wriic tlaciam l: , f.iil hand1 1t l .t flic vale i

i c 1!

.,.s i fclfon tlrofe accompliflmnents, and was def rous
C, i bcing elleemcd an cleaant writer. But when she
v'otc ;at aany time in a hurry, then many in;!rl:k of
i::,:i;curiacy appear. A remiarl-kable inlance of' this
jm,. Ie lfoicld in a paper publifihed, Good. ii. or.
Mar y's letters to Bothwell were wi:tcn in the ut-
:nofb hur-ry; and yet under all the diifadvantages of
a tranfiation, they are not deflitute eitlhr of firit
or of energy. The manner in which Ihe exl])treftF
her love to Bothwell has been pronounced indecent
;ind even fiocking. But Mary's temper led her to
w.arm expreflions of her regard; those refinclncnts
ufd(telic,lcy. whiclh now appear in all the commllerce
betwecn thei sexs, were, in that age, but little
known, even among persons of the lighefi rank.
Among the Earl of -Iardwicke's papers there is a
series of letters, from Mary to the Duke of Nor-
folk, copied from the Harleian Library, P. 37.
B. 9. Fol. 88. in which Mary declares her love
to that nobleman in language which would now
ie reckoned extremely indelicate; I ardw. State
Papers, i. 189, &c.

So.I of Mary's letters to Bothwell were writ-

tenl before the mtiurder of her utifbanid; foiC e of
them after that event, and before her marriage
to Bothwell. T1hose which are p)rior to the icaith
o(f her hulba.nd aboullnd \ithl tile fondell cxlpl-
lions of icr love to Bothwell, and .excite fomc-

n11 ig; more than a suspicion that tlheir famjiliari-ity

1ad beCI extremely criinal. We id il thLem),
moo, lfome dark cxprelnions, which eicr cnlenics
employed to prove that fle was 11o frlangl r to tile
,hciIncs Wlhic wveCIe forliig againflli er lhu--

B b 4 bi;l(l's

band's life. Of this kind are the following
passages, "c Alace! I nevir diffavit ony body;
hot I remit me altogidder to zour will. Send
me advertisement quhat I fall do, and quhat-a-
ever thing come thereof, I fall obey zow. Ad-
vise to with zourfelf, gif ze can find out ony
rnair secret inventioun by medicine, for he fuld
tak medicine and the bath at Craigmillar."
Good. ii. 22. " See not hir quhais fenzeit teiris
fuld not be fa meikle praifit and eftemit, as the
trew and faithfull travellis quhilk I fufcene for to
merit hir place. For obtaining of the quhilk,
aganis my natural, I betrayis thame that may
impefche me. God forgive me," &c. Ibid. 27.
" I have walkit later thairup, than I wald have
done, gif it had not been to draw something out
of him, quhilk this berer will fchaw zow, quhilk
is the fairest commodity that can be offerit to
excuse zour affairis." Ibid. 32. From the let-
ters posterior to the death of her husband, it is
evident that the scheme of Bothwell's seizing
Mary by force, and carrying her along with him,
was contrived in concert with herself, and witlh
her approbation c.

c THAT letters of so much impoltnance as thole of Mary to
Bothwell should have been entirely loft, appears to many alto-
gether unaccountable. After being produced in England bceforc
Elizabeth's commnflioners, they were delivered back by thlcn
to the Earl of Murray. Good. ii. 235. H-efeems to have kclrt
them in his possession during life. Aftcr his death, they fell
into the hands of Lcnnox his successor, who reltored them to
the Earl of Morton. Good. ii. 91. Though it be not necell.t-
rily connccld with any of thel qucflions which gave occalion

6*

WITH refpet to the Sonnets, Sir David
Dalrymple has proved clearly, that they must

have

to this DiiTertation, It may perhaps satisfy the curiosity of rome
ot mv readers to inform them, that, after a vcry diligent search,
whlich has lately been made, no copy of Mary's ltters to Both-
w-cl can be sonnd in any of Lhc public libraries in Great Bri-
tain. The only certain intelligence concerning thein, lince
the time of their being delivered to Morton, was communi-
cated by the accurate Dr. Birch.

EXTRACT of the letters of Robert Bowes, Efq; ambassador

from Q(een Elizabeth to the King of Scotland, written to
Sir Francis Walsingham, secretary of llate, friom the original
ricritcer book of Mr. Bowes's letters, from Isth of August
: 82, to 2Slrh September 15$3, in the pollcliion ofChriftophcr
ihunter, M. D. of Durham.

1582, Sth November, from Edinburgh.

ALBEIT I have been borne in hand, That the coffer where-

in were the originals of letters between the Scottli (Queen and
the Earl of Bothwell, had been delivered to sundry hands,
and thereby was at present wanting, and unknown wIChere it
relced, yet I have learned certainly by the Prior of Pluscar-
dyne's means, that both the coffer and llfo the writings are
come, and now remain with the Earl of Gowric, who, I per-
ceive, will be hardly intreated to make delivery to her Ma-
jclly according to her Majcfty's dcfire.

Tils time plaR I have .xpcnded in fearcching where the cos-

ser and writings were, wherein without the help of the Prior I
llould have found great difficulty; now I will clEfy Gowrie,
and of my fucccfs you Ihall be flhortly advertised.

i2th of November r582, from Edinburgh.

BECAUSE I had both learned, that the cafkrct and letters

mentioned in my last, before theef were come to the pol'cflion
of the Earl of Gowrie, and -ilfo found that no mean milght pre-
vail to win the fame out of his hands without his ownv connlint
and privity in whicl behalf I had employed fit inflruments,

that

haive been as't'ttcr) after the murder of tl,e
K-ing, and 1iior to Mary's marn age with Both-

well.

cii Ii\ 11:;!, 1:i IC : p;'iicd ;I'M,~.liin I ;! ilci'ChrC,~]; :I11 1~cii1!

t~,c~iii li'~.ilisc, l! ii·' huh kl~n" v
i.· h~.r IC slijJ~ ( cull:e lti V.

'0 1] 1 Cl i 1 ]l I C

1 1 , iii l inL to1

1 c i 11152 't I C1
1

'It. iiiC\'~~~~t 1c.o

tiis; , Isiici. Li~t he l pcic·J tit io I~n n \~hiC k IlislC ii, lit~i~ :II,

A'ic 9i:;c~rl osi:.iM l IC i i ' Ibi'J i Ill ,il e

if 1 I tI cliii}ie :ILI k

[rvoil inn ,

l I t tI t oI idI I Cii Il Ic e: 102

k in it, C
ll, A iI

ill allit1 111( llh IC

)llh 1 !!w11M1 tli il SVC IC tle, ivcrcd t Iii b

i)S(il(
_ il k hlldri>,

diii; S~ ii~i~iip tlicLu prsbd a kin vi i ojlleli U

iliiji ti iijS'il, hind tiC~l 1(1 C tilci con Oil \lie '

ii toi ho Ct~iiI\t

'Ii 7liii. 1 OIT)11 111 tlici aI C ia

JIODL terl il d (IcllV (I c
.e

j):i'cu it', lii: bittlic sirlno hl lii ink hwa it K hind i'

Js1iw i

IiI.L I 11l)li~l pihi. i nhi v
p io x\t liii Ith t'v i-

C' ICI 111 lilil~iF ~it~ u9; :siildivered1( hod i hoii li 1 l iii
Jit n CI ~l2incl~l his kcpig w licw wh did liitio oili LI'

viiL.iI the1IiXiCI 1 scdI ose iKr I~ing Morto11 slt donici

T ICWtl l did1100 lio C rcll lill: tierCilCh cilimpioi.
Li:I ii blgit:Illat i etu K11' thilh thr, dlelia 11 55M 1 hIc iI~!

sIP l .;o 1iiI iI to andiCC ht w5Inilui itch sll ikC good ihl

lco ic htilse iiii licii i f il Ciil 'c I. il had'~ I) i iii ii ii

Cci. y ie '.l 1)15t hwi dlu' ii icgi n

5 tho I1)C plest Wit hIthIlittt
r~i- th iiit' s hic KLII.ijts1 , tlu s crna 11 thayw lt wltildc im.

11,k-111 kc pt :l,, ;Ill ,,,lclulicc to warrallt :111(1 111A .C "ootl tli~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~jt al -1

well. But as hardly any part of my narra-
tive is founded upon what is contained in the

Sonnets,
i';rc tIhicy fell in li' kecplin; ; t); ili would no' lic rcl''vlec,'X

f.' i:tliiiicd ; cotlctltuding, . mol' mIU'icI lrC;e(ilri':l;:s, ti:;tl tilte

'' ,It 1 cd M ollron, l('; ;iiiv (,i'l Irht :[lll t i cli;rl:c :i!"d kci 'p-

i~ t]: : t' , dLtrilt a1t in . tjinc 1,1.ike deli vren ; ind .c ull: :':t
v, , .

! f 'il: tie IC ll t I f hid mll o d liii tt e :

ll , n, nd t iiiat lii

.I ! .l :,.lKily i,'.tl 1nl\vI.'lr hilr MNI;jcl)': , g,)idl t.C.i, ;.u'i .l ilt

i.,::, ;rld ;ili j it','firiilit i d.!ty l lili to lh ., l; ct' ci;i:lianl ;tlih)-

' ,.t'. , i: tli ' 1

: lio l til>.Li'itl; ilherclloI-c In ,

e ,/ii!.l l,: (illt til:

i.i..i (.'t;I'el.'! ; tili (leL te.rs, :;tt lls ltii1u n to i.s lI 'l"', 'hicll 11 _

'I"t1 lioh 1(lhould )c \v';lhi a1 limit tillic; ianld lp

1.l) ii ding o(I

:l! t 1ii!t', iild l)clteL r a ti c ;i't d coiellliL lcr:ttiI i ii(l (c l lii.
t-.iit e w', Ie v would mive l'itli,.t' lIllWc-. I ltli., rcl'ilitioil 1 li;v.'
i tc ci cdit :' to t 1l tIlinlr ; n il tr tIe p1

1 f elnt. [ c'uildl n1>t heL-

Icr, l';l.il1; lihil to 'i\ li er Ma.jelly ficlh tcliilioiy of' ills
`g,,id will tow'.idis her, by 1s

I' r.iik (Icallig Cli-rcinll, a'. ilc

ilnv hl.Lvc c;tilfc to conliirmll her I liglilf s

gncfl d

o oiidii con-

CC'..d ;ill A.nilaV (.f ilmls, atlid be thlcreby dr(l.ii to grel;tcr good-

ci', towatv;rdls 111i1. 1 lih;ll till litI)our li Iill lbot y

l lv l ll'a lnd

.Ilfb by all otiler nicali.s ; blutl I greatly dillill thIL dI:lired
lLtceccl'S Ihc'cih.

24th of NovemnIlbir I 52, from l'diihll.lrg

IoR tile rcovelry (of the lett cir in t lie coller, co(me to tlhe

h;lmdlusl IIC .;i l

f ll (;ln\i ric, I Iivc ltlvv loved llini ci;rnllflly

'th '1 il, lit Iing hlii know tic l : 'irpole' t lie .Scotilli (2ile'il,

})llt I Piivilg olit tli;lt tIhe lettelrs.re ountiiilcrfitei'l i' 1)\ r er le'ls,
ind 1l.ll) l

s king tllcrcoll to lhave ilc11m deliveircd li 'r (l d!C-

(1, 1;11(nl thlt tlc i. l 'llin. whiich flic will millkc iill' ti . blcl.ll'

i1.,i1 1,cli ,

I glcitt :t d ncsl' t .t, l, a1:; llici rilins (*:tlIotI lie

lill I)' kept in tllat r1.ill withi l ilt d. ingc isolfli.'ncc(le lii tl.t
(t.11ii tile ciltlody tllcr Ic(,', Oi.citlir l:itll lie t1 ht i 1; is Oo

i ,'ntx'n o(

I tich hil 1e l lfl'clcd to hold tlliel in ll is h nll.ads. 1 lel'cxitil I
li- c at la.llr ope. ctld the perils likcly to aill tl i lilt :illisnl,

: ild

·lIe l;iarlits 1llcilnI , ati.l prilicul;trl y f lilinll l l{ilh is nli \x'W
" "'nlly kili\vi 1 :0 h .v t Ic liil ll.li i ,l '

t licc wi \ ilili'., iand L

{ l *c til Ii,,in ltce v.lh;t Iircty ilt l11i:l iirn ii li, t c I id.t c.illC
,"id ;,ll t.h,, p;arl ic, llth rc ill, ;tlltil d t i il llll J', l .ll ell'w{;\':f ril;1!,s
il.t' be with li.cr'ccy ti.1 oi.Id or.lctr cin mi li tt 1 tile kc pit).

(cf

Sonnets, and as in this Dissertation I have been
confllained to dwell longer upon minute and ver-

bal

of her M;nj.Ia v, that w-';l ! :

hie t In re:tcady n1enfnever nny) ;i.

fiaill be f(ir1 tlcl , ;:'dl i. l I'l r I1 li

-h cfiks coulntcnanl.- detIlii ;,{

thien a ld ltl par ic:s J'ir) ilch w r.i t ''tl (ol)jc liolln, .is i.ii
be .lidt a.tintl tLheni, oIC1.'rig at le Inith to hi.m, thalt 11 he .-
lt f,,ll)' I a l ii'd hl'lti: , or doubrt at tlhe reit (,i lthe aii,.
cilltes lill notl c ('ke of' ti ec of

th!ir othne to licr I\mij.l,- '.

this goodl 1.:ntliiLcl, ;iil.i It' till iterill rci]eairiLEJ, tliLat ] ii.1i

readily, dupon

iaCCtitig ;tIJ c('nicr'nce with thirn, jri');c:rc

tlhirl al'nt il tiis p1ar (a liitatcr ml' ore cly tl ofFt r ctha: t
tpcLrfrii); andI lail',, l;ov;ing liii that (for the Icrccy a;ll
Lccit' (iof the cauif, and tir:it lher MLjeily's good opiniom tc-
\'v.lii. Jhiinilf may be firmiy tItled and confirmed by hi; ;c-
Ccpti)i t: 011 fiwrar\dlnes£$ hCrei;n) he would, wthout icL(dl)f'
f.rii}tl, frlnkly coin.;ii t!.:fc writin ; to ;hr t rajcfl'. ;' .1
cat;lli)J ' "'':r il ' o tc ul.s t. c c'cti. Aftl. ],,i _rg i(!;I :it 1 c i. -
i. ,lved , :\','

l di, t: . "'*' *.:Ji.d un's:ig;cdti!v li ' ;1 la id o t,

lher M:tiily all the l'iL;d.ic that e imigit wiiout ol''ni;:
to the hiaig his S;overcin, and prcju.dice to the afibocitcs i;
the : 2tiol:, ;and th:elrei'i. e wt.iuld fi;l make se;ch a;il \ic'
the fti(il l-j tt ', and h rciil t;Ikc advice whatlt lie rnillt do, a:
howt' far lie milht fl i.'f anI conternt her Maijellty; v i' itiiiti:
thercon L, give niorc rel/u i e anl;cr: and lie condnldeid llat 'i,
ta.Jlt al' ' hlie hbad fOund and JIl'en

b the ritill)gs, tlit ]ie miigh'

not llake; delivery of iJlaiti without the priuily (T the Kii.h
.A !)e'it I lood long witi, h ! an aiganilt his rcl' l i Alt l in i n.i

)o;1ti,t , ;iC(]talittIll the K!i'' wvijm this matter l)cfrlc tlie kit:.
wcrl iln tihlands (!' her Majflty, lictlil, 1ini f.ee li.l : .
doings there nlouli{ .tdiuit n,,-:nt d;angt:r lo the

c.IL: ; yelt I1

Clitild nlit reLluove lil I'froi: it. It lny' be thilt lic nit;ai'!

oI pult oiver the nilttir it'ton hiimflf ti tho e King, Uji11 i; ,Iil
-vlil'(oi"' I Ihall I'rav1 ' cilhai'C tally [l.o Obt:inli lh c Kiug's coi'ili?,

: hat til. letter; uii;ly le comiiittced to her Majefly's icctl'iin:,
ihin kiiiog it inrc eaiy to 1() pi'cval'il lircin with ithe lK ing, ill l,

prcfc'Int lo(c ;lnid afle'tion 1t;llt he baltreth to her lligihncif,
1l:han to win ;iny I ling ;tl 1 li hanlds of the ;affkciatc= in t li
;ls(tion, whi<'irct'Ol (oc' iriuilip;il of tlhemn now come and rcii'lili
at. thJc devotion oj' tJJc Uij}g's notJicr; in this 1 ilhil iUll c,1

t'l

bia criticifmls, than may be interesting or agree-
able to many of my readers, I shall rcll flitisfied
v ith referring, for information concerning (very
particular relative to the Sonnets, to RLi;i/. i on
:,': lifoly of Scotland, Chap. XI.

-lAVING thus (-ated the proof on both fides

i, ving examined at lb great a length the di l;eeni.
:v-fienms vwith regard to the saP:;s in contloverfl V
': imay be expected that I (hould now pr1)onounc'
i'cntence. In my opinion, there are only two con.
:lusions, which can be drawn from the facts which
have been e numncrated.

ONE, thalt Bothwcll, Ironmpt:'-I by lii, ainbitii()n

or love, cncot'rased by thie Q: (ccn's known avcr-

. , o'; .' iJC, to fc:arch oii! the coflI', ;m'.3i l', ;, i

' ll is proi) ' ;

,']d ;ts I li1l finld In

lli iI, L di.!lJ t

;) Li cin, io l];,ll [ :I i ;y9

i t :i l tId w IIoI cn ldc:vu(L ur- to cl!c t I L I) ,h :' .' *j.i l 's.
,it I coIntlntncnii.

2 J D cc m})cv l q ' ,-,s, ii')!T1 l' .i: l':)i:';;h.

E!' C.t! r I

r:l. l m' goo cI ml n

1 oii'_rl '. )

r, .:

:l.v

ll 1 il I 't t-

!h. ' : hi.: h a|]ndi.., l i. l

ll T r tt Jzin, in ii;.;:..l th.!'cI ;

* :i ; k\l];ci ,-

i 'Il t! 1!1 t ' l K

| 11 ,)lL t I ;W I. '

. I i > l c cos!-

.iRCC tc Oitul, Ic, tltt Ithe iDut, '..1 , .! |.r ,-,,
;'d /ly v,, t.c

h d.: ic

i.'r ,: :: "t'

ti o{' l : T

; ''r

Ivlc r i, t 1, he were., 1;, i.- lhi 1.".*l,l. ;1 .: J 'l'.I r 1 ()l..,!

nitol., t,, i,c' 1ilill v ,

il1ir' I, l] .:li.', .

1h ' r

'-, ,:tj"-l) iln l lic J1 In -,

IJ fa r ;rs hKt 11!;',' \' i;11 Ih . nt!!t to1 ! il,: i{:n , ' ;lidtl th) l c 1 .?I ,,

thlll ,fl(t.i.llcS i 1 ll .ll all5' l ;

t'!, r ; ;

Ir C t iT I l ')

:(, 1.T. I .

'1n^h1t I( hLe M . ijcll)" S 1,l .i t'rc, \h l cn'.: ,. li':'' !irl'..' ,!, I !.

l!
'.It)'iy iltL' IT tl ll (':it'lct (oulIrs.

\' ill

. J.,Iniis V . v. lio) p '.' i E rl, l ii

C;irh. ' ; >

ITL 1!1 1c

1 1A ll[ lt's \; u I l ', ' (I*

A. 1). ] x , 1 :-| ,' ji/c, i ..l ,!l i',

c.' ,::; , l.. ,i. .

." :

i, dz;,

,,

v.1

1,,l- 7.iIus; ,

hlCe tic ' ','

1].: . ' |):' illc',l 1)y l;,:!.'" i-

~.I1(\T'II l ,t' i Til Tl ; ()1' ,vh g'llh't lit ''y 1i l I'' l')' il, i[l 1'111li :') UIt-

,ItI'lr'vIj .i]]ii), '

, tlc ar'cii\ s '.|

;I TJJ ' :1 ",; ' . .

', ,". il- ,

it 1, impj)4J!illul t : to dtC
rin-'t.

o/j..i

lion to her husband, and preiuiming on ler attach.
ment to hiimfelf, struck the blow without having
concerted with herthe manner or circuinmfances of
perpetrating that crime. That Mary, inflead ci
teflifying much indignation at the deed, or disco-
vering any relcntment againfl Bothwell, who was
accused of having committed it, continued toload'
him with marks of her regard, conldu.ed his tria
in fich a manner as rendered it impofilble to dil-
cover his guilt, and toon after, in opposition to
all the maxims of decency or of prudence, volun-
tarily agreed to a arr-i;:ge with him, which every
consideration should hlave induced her to detei.
By this verdict, Mary is not pronounced guilty of
having contrived the murder of her husband,
or even of having previoully given her conic;l.
to his death; but file is not acquitted of hav-
ing discovered her approbation of the deed, b',
her behaviour towards him who was the author
of it.

THE other conclusion is tlat which Murray

and his adherents laboured to eflabli fl, "' That
James, fonetymme lI rle of Botihwile, was the
chiefe executor of the horribil! and unwortiy
nmurder, perpetrat in the icrlfn of umquhilc
King IlTnry of gude imc:iol y, fader to our
Soveraine Lord, and tlih (Icc'nis liauchful
hutband ; 1'I was sic of' the foreknowledge,
co*unltl, dcviscll , e pci, lv.'ita;' and commander olf
the s.lid inlrderl to be d(nol.." (ood. ii. o-07

WHciIeI of thc te unli()io., i'; molt agreeablleI

to the evidence tl:t Ih:ti ibeen produced, I I;avc
nmy readers to cLltcriti'c,

# APPENDIX.

A P P E N D I X.

No. I. (Vol. I. p. -6.
-A ME, LNMORIALT.t , of cclitl. paiin 's imet

for refloring the realm of S c c'l . A N ) 1
the anticnt we;.le.
I ?.lI.Rll..S, it is to be nlotctl, tlat. tie ,-c ,f v orill,' .i '

C ity that Scotland Cn havell , is Cthiici to Catit.i;r ,U ;1
;c'rpctu:l pie ic With thec lkin.jln of 1 -"and,

: ,

!;tl,( .. ;' ?;

it; m:tlc one mn ah li with ' ii'.'.: t,, , ;Is t'. , luIth make ' -,'- .,
biut one ifl;iand, divided fruo:i the rcl: t i !the \vu; l.l. ic e',

I1- the i;-fi is fboght, that i*, to hec in pc petiuni p|acc . l'.i.rn,

w'itih iI'nlliland, tllhen innifl it InI'cc li l'ily' bC. t'ilv\ d, thl:tt
Scotland be Jnt tfb (flijctc to thile apl[))nt in!tS ot lr .lin.e,
a's is prceintllv, y which!, kciL, an :il antlci't eIn\ to ELI.i ';.:.i,
Ice'kcth ialw; ys to in.ike Scotll.,l i :i in:,lru;lnt:, to ('.'r-
(icl, tllher-b th .'ir ma;lice tj])tni J' n :i!I .;.l n ]nd to .ikc.' ..
t,(;t-flool tic. of
to oo: <jVcr l .; I as th iiiaiv.

TI1 ERRFb(j. o -R:, i iwl(ei Scotllanld fla;ll cGlle it : ,t thell h.!).

l .1 1nc c C itttil( mla:n ill blI)od)I, ti. :1 111.!)l ;:1 Ic ' li mp,.

f1 11in hl .Icco l ; tlint s

1 oI;5 ( i ;tS .; ' i t ti.:: Cti: I 11inaiiilicllt

([l lilC t1}" I1), tlhercl is no hotJI, tO I,; tc .Ci.t;dJ ()

o 1)bt-
tV,'i.t thcl i;, two It. rlis.

tl'.dln r '

i 'i y r,'. o

ji; i it iw , it tl, ': ,

l ,

c: :

,.; .t t :v -

:ii: dilr ii l its y i),o Il lii

1 ilr, I s1i.: l ' 1; ' i,: ).' ; ..l 1,:

ti. w cile o( Scotlalll, i l, .t ii ilil i\..: hi : i, ,i i l. ;, I 1
'.1i' 11W ', } l' ..'I)fiicCC ullt ( I t ic ,l it , (lit he lic'.x l] '!] , ,
Iltl dts

( i i, , lci.i , toIe }fiiu I of
l it !,, i,;l :.;, , It,,li ul, li..

r w' .,fl .d ; :]|iil, oil tlic othc', li d , thc n !,, ii ;!1.1 C0 ,-

m onul,, 'l). o ii, llt 1tI )| cc (il.t tll,. 1 \w - :lli'l (i., i;l.t i-u l 'l;i";
D,1 tL, 1ic.ll1m bc Inot A ltcleidl , il :itl ).l ill.',t it,: . ,,i,,l i/y 1,. ,, t
.ll ,,t,'ttll,: J bly tlb.\', ciijj'lclt , ot O I:V I',',.H!l ,, ,'li i ll'

I !..il I

manner of France ; for provision wherein, both by the:^.;
of God and man, the French king and his wife may i,
moved to reform their mifgovernancc of the iand.

AND for this purpole, it were good that the nobi! t;

and comnmons joined with the next heir c.f the crown, t;
seek due reformation of such great abules as tend to t!,.
ruin of their country, which muff be done before ti,
French grow too strong and insolent.

FIRST, 'I'hat it may be ,providd, by confrnt of tl

three estates of the land, that the land iim:i be free from :..
idolatry like as England is; for julii;cation whereof,
any free general council may be hliid where the Pope e
Rome have not the feat of judgmentit, they may oc'rr t.
shew their cause to be most agreeable to Chrifi's rcligi:

Nr.x'r, to provide that Scotland might be governed, i::

a11 iulvs and officers, by the antient blood of the reC.i.
without either captaii;s, lieutenants, or soldiers, ;:s
other Princes govern their countries, and efpeci.l)} v' .
the forts might be in'the hands of mere Scottish rnin.

3' HIRDLY, that they might never be occasioncd t':

enter into wars against England, except England fhol.'
give the firfl cause to Scotland.

FOURTHLY, that no noblemanl of Scotland should re-

ceive peiifion of Flrance, except it were whilst he did fcrv
in France, for otherwilf thereby the French would fiortl:
corrupit many to betray their own country.

rIFiTIiI.Y, that no office, abbey, living, or commoiit'.,

be civen to :iin but mere Scottish men, by the aflent ol ti:,
thl!:c c'-flates or t;;c realm.

(ixi ii, that there be a cn.incil in Scotla:d appoin)'!i

in the queen's ablelnce, to g'overi the whole reacln, amild
thiol ca(.is not to he direited 1i)) th French,

IE£v.E'rnHLv, that it be by thle lIid three cilitex ;:1'-

poiltcd liow tl;e(: (iiec 's reveniilc (of the ica ll ill li (e '
Ipeilicd, how munch the lueen fihall have for r lpcrl, ;
aind ( l.te durill helr ih;ll nce, how much llill be liirit.'
to tlic geovCenance ;ind Idefence of the realmn, how m11l!
y.c l ly .ppoi;itcl to be kept inl tr ,: 'e.

IN tlefie, and( f[( lik11 e poits, i;f thle Frie clh ki' :i .1

the quleen ble fo)ull unwillilln,, ;and will withiflanld Ith':
provillolis for the weaile of thel ii, then ha:h thle fll,
Cfl.ltes of the realm aitthoi it)', frtlwith, to inltimnlte I,
tlhi sa(id king antld ilecn their htilible reluclls; ;1 a if t1"
Imlnle be niiuot cft.ialy graiited, theil hiumbly they n1:i

eommlu

n'nmmitt the govcli; l ire thereof to the next heir of the
w

r i( \n, bitnding the farie alfl to observe tlie laws and an-
tcl nt rights of the realin.

lIXNALLY, Iftlie (Iuen fhiall be unlw;iiint to this, as it is

:;eclv fli' will, in rcl)pei of the i.ieeiy' alnd tylrannll)b if-
i tion o(f irance, then it is tppan c'nt tlha Alminit.y
( ;cd is l lcnf.l to tran.fcr frcon he1r tle i uie of the king-
*;. *n for the wealc of it, ati, thins tiic mnil be uscd with
.....at circumlpc'il.io'l, to avoid the dcccipts and trompcries
i, t } Frcilcll.

ANJ then may the realm of Scotland confider, hecing
i.crc MIade free, what means may be devised by God's
: t,.ticl¢, to accord the two realms, to endure tor tilme
;l) (lnce at the pleafire of Almighty Gud, in whose hands
ti,. I:c.Lrts of all pl inces be.

No. II. (Vol. I. p. 226.)
,\ letter of Maitland of Lethington's, thus di-

re&ed:
To my loving friend James. Be this delivered

at London.

U --NDERSTAND by the las: letter I received from yow, ,oti Jio
thiat dilcourfiltn with zour countryminc upon the mat- ,uary
t: r of Scotland, and commoditeys mayiy cnlew to that '559-6'.

tw',t. ti1b.

;c.Ilm hereafter, giff ze prlefntly afiftl \ws with zour forces, (:., I. ,ix
'C find a nombre of tlie contrary

: .lvife, doulting that we fall I'

l.

rit at lenrtll tbe foutn( trullly trictds, 11nor 1;ean to conty- origiil ,
newv ill conltant anlctye, albeit we prollili, but only for irnd.
.ivoydlinig the prClinlt dlger m;ake zow to Ierve our tlurlc,
.t1d alter being leliveitd, becuttm enemies as ol before. For
proce quharcof, they alledge things that hlivc pall: betwixt
ws hleretofore, and a few preltillmptiolisS tenldin to the la ll
endl, all grounded lIpoti mill tI ll; clullillks, at tlte firll ficlt,

f:.:.c oile shewe ol apparance, gil srcn wey not the cil ctin-

llianccs of the niatter; but gil they will conller til tyme
Itllt with the present, conlider the ilature of this CUlls,
:.ttd ellate of our contrye, 1 doubt not but juiLgeent fil be
1ale to banifl miln' iftuns. And firlt, I wal wish zc tlioltlJ
cxamyllc the causes off the old inmityc betwixt the
(terlins of England lltnd Scotland, aind quhat moved our

VOL. II. C c anccflunrs

anceflours to enter into ligute with the Frcnche; qiii;i':
by our i!oreys and regifirc-s ofF antilquiteys apear to :i:
thefl. The princes of England, (Imc tyme, allCd'ii'l .'
ccrtain kynucd of foveraintye over this realm ; lo;c tr,'i.
rpon bye courage, or incited by incursions off oti11 bor-
dourarc, and fiembhlablc occasions, mony tymes eciterpIi-
fed the conqueflt of ws, and fa fnr furth plreift it b! forc"
ofF armlres th:it we wer dryvcn to (rrcat cxtramitevs, !,.
'of' of our princes, our Inoblemcl, and a good part of o1.
run li'cn, ra that expe)riience tauight ws that our owne rten: i}
was Itarfe I'luricicnt to witlitanal the force of Elg;!:!! i.
''bec Frcnche zour auncicnt cncmies, confidering wull] ho..
nature had fa placed ws in a island with zow, that na n;i-
tion was a:ble li to aIIioy) Elnglarnd as we being enenmyi;,
louchlt to joiiic ws to thecym in ligue, tending by ti,'
;'c:;le to (cttourne zour a;rniycs froin the invaion ,lll
ij'r:ncc, andI occupy zow in the defence of zour coutit!.
at h.i!ne, ofl-Ciig fur tihat cllr'& to be'fowc foie chiarn -
lpon ws, and for compaffilg off theyr purpos, choy'lcd .
tmne to propone the matter, qulien the frefche mcmory i.,
injuiris lately receavcd at zour hanids, was fa depely preni-
ted on our hartes, that all our myndes were occupied how
to be revenged, and a rnc ourselfes with the powar of
Ibravon prince against zour entcrprifcs thereaftcr.

''llls wes the beginnilg uss otr coifederacy with France.

At quhilk tymc, our cronicles maks mention, that frne o.,i'
she w)yffc torcfaw the perril, and finall frute ihould re-
douUdc to us threof at lenth: zit had affection fia blimIkd
jugcienlt, that the advilc of the maift part overcame the
leflt. 'l'he aIaift part of all qucrells betwixt ws lince
ih.at tyme, at ]calt quhen the provocation came on ou-r
tydc, hes ever fallen out by theyr procurement r;tthc;
than .ny one cans off oulr selfeA: and quhenilever we brack
the peace, it come paitly by theyr intyfements, partl)' to
'lchcw the conqieflt intended by that rcalm. But lnow lie;
God's providence la altercd tle cafe, zea changed it to
tlie plat contrary, that now hes the FI'enfche taken zlour
place, and we, off' very jugement becum defyrous to Ihavc
z.ow in theyr rowme. Our eyes are opened, we cliPy how
uncalrefu ul thy have been of our weilc at all tymes, IIh\
they made ws ever to Ierve theyr turne, drew us il niail
dangerous weys for theyce commoditc, and neverthlci
wad not flyck, oft tynes, agaift the natour of the lillc,
to contrak peace, Icaving ws in wcyr, WVe sac that thci.

~5 su'"'1~hppirt )

! ,-it, off late zeres, wes not grantit for any aftcil;on

.: ', ue to ws, for pytic they had oft our eftatc, tOr re-

.* cnfi: of the l yke friendclli ; fchawin to thcyin in tyme
thclvr afflictliones, but for amnb;,'io:r, and infliciable cu-

pi.iict r) reygne, aind to m.ik ;co;!:I id a:ic a::ccllry to the
c;.',ii f 11 F.1nce. Tlhis w.is ni. fi'Indly office, but mcrI
ciih.!rV, cr.l\illr hire tfarre ixcc.cdii:l the proportion of
I!; I,' irving; a I ale re,.lml for the defince of a part.
W L

(2(; thcyin inanifeflly attempt tlhe thing we fuit'plced

t( i- ncw; we feared ze mcnt the conqutelt ofil Scotland,
ail il;cv are planely fallcn to that work; we hated zo7o
i;.r ,ti'bt we I.ld ze .cnrt cviil towards ws, and Lall we
!, ..: ti,.:n, quhiilk learili ! the lname oft ftrends, go about
thr blnl.- ws in ma it vile firvitude ? Gif by zour frendly
fliiport at this tymc, 7.e fall declare that not only leek ze
not the ruyne of our counr y, buat will prcferve the libcr-
t:e thereof fiom conquel t by ftrangcares, fIll not the oc-
cation off all inmiite with zow, and ligue with tiheym,
b1" tak.Ln away ? ' lie catlies being ilemoved, how fall thl:
efclctes remane? The fear of conquelt made us to lirte
zo7: anid love theym, the cals changed, quhen we fee theym
planely attempt conqucft, and zow fcnaw ws friendflilp,
fall we not hate theym, and favour zow ? (Gif we have
fci :aawne fa great conl ,anice, continuing fa mony zcares in
amity with theym, off quhome we had fa finall commo-
dite, quhat fall move us to breake with zow, that off all
natiliis may do ws grcatcit plelbur ?

BIn1 ze will fixy, this matter may be reconcyled, and

theln frends as oft'before. I think weill Ipeace is the end
ol all wcyr, hut off- this ze lltay be assured, we will never
I far ltruit that reconciliation, that we wil be content to
Iorl', tlre amIctye of }1:ngil;ind, nor do nily thling may bring
ws in lfifpicioll with .ow. GifF we wold, at any tyme
lo plicle theym, bl(.ik w\ith z.owv, should we not, hbeides
tl I ole oi fs eftiniatioll and dilcrcliting off ourfellct, )cr-
lp(tually expone our colimmonl wei,1l tl,) l lilit nIllcalltdl.ll-
!'ir, and hb nIII a 1preI) to teyr tlC yran ny ? Q(.ls aid
coultl we implore, beinig dcllitute of tzor fricndltip, gif
thie oil' new wald atte(.Iihpt theyr formar cnterprif ? (Quhat
;ltiri1 niyglit help ws gift they wald, or wald gift they
llight ? iand( it is lyke ciicuch, tlhay will not Itick lerea,-
ter to tak theyr tymc oft ws, qulicln dti)lclbur aind grudge
hles takcl dlclp rute on baith fydes, Icinig anmbition has la
inillyrit ower theyr rcalon, that beforc wC had cvcr done

C c 2 any

any thing mnyght ofiend thicm, but by the contrary ])!c: -
fed them by right and wrang, they did not flick to;
telpte the fubvcrltion of otir hale fate. I wald zec f.l,
not etlccic e ws si baraiyne of' jugtmcnit, that we ciann c
fotiefle our awne pcrril; or a tfoolilcchc, that we will i:,,t
fludy by all gonic means to entcrtavn! that thint z m:i:) h
our fifctyc ; (uhilk conrifles in all the relayi;g of t:our
ficlndfil ps. 1 pI ay zow confider in like ca; ', when, in thi
da)ys of ,our princes off maift noble nimmor) kinL Il

-..

the VIII. and king Edward the VI. mcanei3 were openic
off anlytyc betwixt baitli realms; was not at all ts nl. th'
t!iftereice of religion the onlev flay they ,wre not cim-
bracced? Did not the craft of our clergy anld Ipowr.i (
thlcvr adherents subvert the deviles of the bctttcr sci :
3But now has (od off his mercy removed that block tiirt'.
off the way ; now is not theyr practice lyke to t.lk ,!,-.
any mare, when we ar comime to a conformiity c(ii' duc-
trine, and profes the fame religion with zow, cullhilk
take to be the flrayte{f knot of anitye can be devised. ; i.
it may be alledgcd, that tome of our countrlymen, at (o11.
tyme, violated thevr protis? giffze liss to way the c, -
cumltances, ze fall find the promis is rather brought o.
by neceflite, after a great overthraw off our men, then
co(mmc oft fre will, and tending ever to our areat in-
commodite and decay ofl our haill tate, at t leiil ti taken.
But in this c:(cf, fall the prelfrvation of our libertic b.
inrfeparably joined with the keping off promcrle, and the
violation of our favth calt ws in maift minierable frvi-
tude. So that gil' ilc!ther the fear off God, reverence oi
ma111, reli ion, oilic, ipomiie, nor warldly honeflfye w(.
Iiii.icient to lbv\d ius, vet fall the zealC of oulr nati'.
toinolltly. telC Ie .ilitL'n;latcC of our own estate, thle s1l-;:tv
.tli' (ur \ li;s and chlildrelic from slavery, compell ws tl
k.x' p r t1millc. I am all fircd, it is trewly and finccr-(lv
nlclit ott ourl part to ColtillteCW ill perpetual a:uetl'e wii)
/. W; It l.iil lhe Ilttcld b, (our proceedings. GiHt y.e In:
;i, del'fyroua of it as we ;ilr, ailtrances nitmy be d evvlcl,
tiili:iril)y :ill pltl\ ., w ll 1 ib olt of dotibte. T''h ret l :
,Yodet: te.e: to iJo) iI, fit inllli lilsuClts for the ptirpos, tyit
(te. ies wveill thle inhlabit. lts of ba:ithl realms wih il, (';t"

wrios wrotuht ii) the ptelle', hliates ol bhayth )arties a cit -

t ;ie Ilill li retnettl IUlI) il, C er d(lid, I at any tynte, lv

;tii,0t thillgs COllCeirl .t oitllt: to kilt t it up, the ilnpoli-
.Oui0 uI a
, cw, qiUjlihs harts arc ill G(otis halnds, nlity nmaik

"Ip

pt le llae!. I hope he ( clha hcs begun his work, and
i v.iintetvl d it quhile now, Iby the expectation of man,
,ill (erlf te it.

i'r..Y ovvow, let not zour men dryve tynmc in coniiiltrn-

Li.;, tlluhietlr z.e bfa.ll ftipport v.'s or no. scv iil. the mater
iceltakth [Or itelF, that ,ze eno t;lake iupItn ow the dc -
i'i;Cc ol our caus, gift' Ze hatve ;'' rel)c,:1t for 'zour aw,nc
.'.;illI. h'I eir preparativcs ill I raice, ant i levyini of incii
;1 (,Ciellb;1in, (qtlicyroff I ;in lately adv\crtifdc() ar nota!-

ito'vddec ordcynedl for us, 7.c a; the i -,i k thiley shote at;

I.,' f;:kc ouir rcalmnc, but lor ,ic eintr'y to 'outrs. G t It:
tile fihoull dlirectly fchaw hotillite ti zox7 , they kiintv
/i) wv;li iak redy for theynie, therc;for they do, by ii-
,l;iet mneines, to blind zoxv, tice thintg, they dare not as
c. t tl.ofl y attenipte. They ffivme t() illadc us to th' (etn
h!1:t haviing afiemnblcd the;'r lha)le forces fa nlre 'zour
ii-rours, they may unilok it to att.lack ruw: It is ane of
ilcl','r aid flcliCs, imakillg a Ic he to one llae, to

oi ha

o(n ;I)e other. Remember how covertly z.our places about
lBotlolui^c were aifletizeit, and carry'ed a, av', zy being in
pe :cc as now. Hlow the enterpriile of C;l'ais was fylnely
iiliiiLmled, I thliink ze have not li (one forgotten. 13c.
w\;are of the third, prevent theyr policy by prudence.
(jilF ze. e lnot the lyke dilfpofitiol prceLentltl in tlievm, 7.c
l: nathiliin. It is a groile i llnornce to mifkimv, walt atll
inationls planely fPeks offR 'Iak hede ze .zay not hereafter,
' lladi I vwif. ;" ane uincomely fentlence to Iprocede off' ;
'ysil mall's milouth. Tl'hat is onwars chaliced oil to o/.(wu
'tiinlk .vow colmliloly Wiflted, that this counltrcy' m\'l1;

(ie divoreId from the i'relellc, ;and is s1i comilme iilo ilI p ;is
W;as nailft exlc iel:nt lor zow. ",'or Lif' by yolur inl vfi-
ileilt \ c h;a t;ik tile wmater in hand, ze nliylt li.ll
ljtl clt'di wc would have belcC uiltr(llly freCids, ;and n1
;.er col ititiil flcdflllc, thlcl perril h1;i a:;I))uare . I'l. ,
now, (lulicn off our fell, we li;ve collcc)'vcd the hanlt'cld,
pI'roked by private iljuries, and that theyr evil idealig
with ws hcs deaerved o'll inilnityc, let nlo Iliall d(obte butt
thel'y Lil flynld ws cnncmyecs in el left, tlhat fIIt ingellt

lv hcs deCme\'Ind our cotUItrey, and at jqu11;is I;mi-
we can look for nlathing but all extrcnitye, gif' (\ i'r
they 11may get the tipper hand. Let inot this occ:i(n,
.1 hI.ippely ofl'ercd, efcaIc .w ow: gif t'.e C , neglectinl t ih
Plcl ent opportunitic, and hoping to have ever 'ode liik
'oJilnlic fleapingt upon zow, it is to be feared zoul cretnyer

( c 3 Vv.It

V ,c t ^f.) :i l-at, andtl f.. nr:o. , th't .i.r cr w..J-; (1 : ,.
.A.did3, zc fall not be able to ,ut him down ; ;:i!l tl::,

i

,z;.ur im:;irl, alter the ty)':e, 7.x will ;:ki( v;.i'
error. '.e have felt, by ex:j:'licille, quin:t h1'!mtC c, ,i.. i
ut o'.'crf, git, and trufing to zcu.11 enenl)cs proinefi \,
(ofler zow the occasion, qiilcyelby ,u, i' forller llii. ii',
ic c;r,)t:ed. QulIilk gitf ,e le't over fliJ, (if;cri;i. \.
t'o bie overrun, ljuha then, I pray z(Jw, v ll 1,.i, ;',:
i trcnfche, that they fall not invade zow in z'!;r ':, ;i
IhU!,dCS, sick it is their lust to rcygti-, that thcy c:n. 1i;.
ther Fe content with theyr fortluic prcfl;.tl', i, r ieCf :lil,i i
fatisf'cd whc'n they have gode luck, but will fi,:i ,,,
on, having in theyr avwie brayne conceaved the ii'.i"e r!
fa great a conqlucl, quhat think ye 1-ll hc the c:.' i;
ther any of fa finall jugement, thlt lie id:h nut f::ruL ..

ai:aciy, that theyr hail force fall then be bcnt :c.:;,it

i'r fall not be amis, to confider in qul;ht c- ti!,.

1" rcniche be presently. Theyr cflate is not al\. :as'
c.lnie at hame as every man thinkctli. And treCi', v 1
'yes liot theyr great redines for weyr made thley.il r: :.
liei, mater on hand, at this tynie, but rathcr a viy;, ,:'.
ai ti,eir awne policy, thinking to have tfontd la il:!;-
aice, their opinion hce deceaved thcym, and that n-:;^.,
them now amafled. The ellates off the empire (;s 1
heare) has futed rellitution off the' Imperial towns M.1. ,
Toull, and Verduin, quhilk may grow to tome l:el\. ;
..i.d all thing is not a calme within theyr awnic cou::t;:,.,
ril: lels fit they be preently for wcyr, the mare opportiii:e
ftieme ye the time lor zow. Giiff the lyke occalion v.;.c
oliered to tie Frenfehe againit zow, wey, ho\v wlaly.
would they embrace it. Are ze not fclchnled of z'(All
sleuth, to fi)are theym that hes already compaflied z'lur
ilellrutlion, giilF theym wer able? Confider with zoitl
l::If (tIlinlks is to be choyfed ? T'o veyr agailnf thlen out
with Z.otr iealinec or within ? C(ifFl quill ze fleapce, w'
ial beC vcrtllrownte, the1n fll they not fayle to fute '.oW in
, our' awle colll'Ctr'y, and ulc ws as a fote Ilolc to ov, loke
i.ow. But olnic will tiy, peiltaps, they nmanll it nut.
It is toly to tllink they wald not gifl' they wer able, (qt]lln
lh!'ote li;nd they flick not to gift zour armes, and Luil'llipc
eic flyle of zour crown. Thelln q(uhat dirflicence there i to
camp within zowr awne bounlds or without, it is Im ilicl.
G il' twa armyes Iliould campn with in zowr coiuntry, btll 1

Anwicth,

annicth; alhcit yc reccavcd na other harme, vit flioiil
.yzVowr lollc be greatar, nor all the charge ze will nede to
!below on our support will draw to, befyydes tle difilo-
11oI r.

L.:'r not men, that cyrthr Lack iodle advirc, or ar no;
f' pIarticilar refplCLts wei!l ariced to the c:la, move zow

i flubtrait ztour helping hand, by alcrtinn tlhingls not ap-

pIarent, it tlhat they he pofliblc. It is not, [ grant, It-
pi fiile tha;t we na!i reccave conditionec of peacec; lut
ic littii, likclyhode that our cnncmycs will ofm'r ws fik :l;
wviil remove all nifr-tiuft, :.nd giftwe v wald have accepted
,.:hcrs, the in:itcr had bone aing' or now COmlpoi ilecd.

.: t tow not he moved for that they terine wvs cbcilc,
,!i tld lilmcs our juift qlicrcll w-ith the namle of conlliipniacv
; tiiit ouir fovcrayne. It is hir liveines ri'lht we.' nial.c-
i!iic, l isi the liberty ofl hir realm \we lldy to irc-
I;i.\', w iih the hazard of our Ivvc. \ c arc nllo (t

,J/

lna;iw\Vcth) corninc to this iprvnt for w.'anioie., il;

men impatieilt of rewll, or xvilii to fIliake ot tieC
roke o g(ovcrinment, but ar dr.:itv n to it by ncccl-
site, to avoyde the ty t:llny of {frangeares, rcakiii to

;.u'lande ws of lawful government. (jiff' we fhiloL

i'!t{ir firanlgeares to l;i:int thicmfcifis peaceably in all
the fircithes of our realnic, fortify tihe fvoortes, and
maift important places, as ale Cllntr to a pl)ainl conq(uest,
now in the niinoritic of our foxvcraiwi, bevi: fiurth of the
rc;alme, should we not be thought oncarcful of!' tle corn--
mon wcill, betrayarcs of our native coillntrcy, anld cvill
fubjccts to hir n;ajcftc ? Quilhat other opinilon could l I'l:
have off ws ? Might fie not jifily l'rlcalfter call ws to
acconipt, as inegligent mnilircrcs ? (Gi il rallgcarcs fiould
bc thus filfiLrcd to broke tile chrcf offices, bcare the hail
ie', 11, alter alnd pervert our law es and liibel t) at thcyr ple-
i-llr; myglit not the people esteem our noblemen utwor-
tli) the place of countfil ours ? WVe mcanll a wvyTe to filb-
l1 Ik iolr oliedience frtm our lovcralle, to (dci a;nd ilr

i yc-

!1' , li- h'er dew reve

r recerents ind rev(l.l(cs ol' hit'
i viwn. \V.e fcke ntitlin, I, buit that Scotland may remlnne,

o,, oIl hrfore, a fre rea Illi, rewlit by liir h'yiiy s and liti

i'iriiilcres hoi ne men of tie a im ; and that the fucceflioln o
tilrt crown mlily remanic with tihe lawfll bllode.

I wVAL ) not /.e fould Mnt fai lyttil cltcine the fl ieIdflliip

<'' Scntlhiind, that '.z jigedt it lot worthy to Ie ermbraced.
it lall be n; fliniil cotuniodlite for zow to be dclliv'erd (,f

Cc 4 tihe

tlhe anoyance of so neir a ny htbour, lqhai' i iniithye i.n,.
1ore trouble zow, then off any other nation alibeit t;v!..
:as p!ii I:it, not ]veC!1r drs, marche with zo:'. BI, r.s t!!::t
7.:' 7::! not node to scare th'c' iV:!vaIon off an'. prince l,( k-
j:,, the colnlmoli:e to inivadie 7ow by land, on our I,',
Counii.t r qiiuhat f)pcrflilois charge ye bellowX on

O ;X ' s',r-

ttiicati,.oi and keping of Barv.wick; quhilkze may reih:,:
(t) -' m 'i:L io;\;vmc, li1viir: \v's to frcildes. ' le rcealim ,;
Irc!anld bcio, of ii:'tour a gode and fertill counitrei, , .
ic;foen of t(le coniniewall unqiitictnes and l.k of' 1[):!|c,
ze knai.v to be r:ilhcr a burthen unto zow thln gIc,;: :.j-
v.lmtgc ; :i;(ld ,'fS it were pcace:ible may be very coiii!i,)-
(dious. - or pacific:tionl quhl:aro, it is not otikol,,viin t',
zow quhat fcrvice we ar a.lill to do. Reful i not il .r
conmmnoditevs, belides mony ma quhlii tlicy ar of!Frl.
(iliilks albeit I itudy not to amp-lify and dlil.tc, yet i inI
other countrey able to ofler zowv hk l'kc, alid arc ti,
rather to be emnbriced, for that zour aullceltors, by) ;i!
meanes, maifi erneftly luted our amity, and vet it w:;s
not thcyr hap to come by it. 1 'be mater hes Ilmaill
carryed mne beyond the boundes of a lattre, quharfbr i will
leave to trouble zow after I have geven you this note. I
wald wiis that ze,and they that ar learned, fould rede the
twa former oratiols of D)emoltheles, called ()lynthiiac;,
and confidere quhat counfall that wyfe oratour gave lo
the Athenians, his countrymen, in a lyke cafe; quiiilk
hes lo great affinite with this cause of otirs, that every
word therof nmyght be applyed to our purpos. Thete may
ze learne of Ihni qluhat a dvif is to be followed, when
7zo;r nyghtbours h .us is on fyre: iThus 1 hid zow Ihertily
faleweiil. Flroni Sant Andlrcws, the 20th of Jantua\,
r559'

No. III. (Vul. I. p. 234.)
.Part of a letter firom Tlo. Randolph to Sir WiI-

liini C(ecil, fiorno the camp befior Leith, 29th
of Ap iil 56o.

A.,OiiT;la,: I
l V I [I,, only, for this time, discharge myself of il'

lm 't a,'er 1 1)pr(o!i.tf to the carl of' lIuntly, \vlio so defyrctlh l(

be reco1toit llnded to you, as O(le, Wh w ith all his hlltlt
favoiureth this c;auit, to the uttermlft of his power. 1;alt
the words tha;t comc outt of his nmouth were able to lpi'-
(.I lad an uInexpncjlic ced m;an to lipcak .lurthcr in his I,'-

2 h, ill

;:.ii,, than I dare ble bold to write. I leave it to your ho-
i;,, rr t') judLc (Cf hin, is of a lmn iln it u,;i'owIl to you,
,:i wi ll mrn'f alW:lavs nlcifiurc m th iitl ts, as hl illlii

:,';.'rve to;) fpokCi; of. \ it h much dii .'ut, and great

*'ruil,.!10:: , }he ! 'h 'tff;criter l with t';( rfi oi f tile lords
to jyi] \nith theml ini this :aetiio ; wh.rtie'ricLclr lhe can in-

, .t to the tfrthcrira:n o this c:ttiS, he hil:ti )ru(Jilcd t,

d ,i S ih

flLL': lm protci:- t : rt , .ilit )Iac

;i \' c;r;-, ; he tiUir-

;ii to a:ijoin m ilny to tlis carlL:; aml i( ii ih Iliely tihat no
IT , ln Thall lie where he tak tith part. 1 l h.l l tiis ilayl ftil-
I ':.'i.'l a bonrd betweei n 'II1i:id andl tlis naltioil; lie
;,:ii, that there was lncver thing that liked him better.

No. IV. (Vol. I. p. 24-P.)
1',ir.,idolpl to Cecil, loth Augltll 1 56o. From

Edinburgh.
, I N C E the 29th of TIlly, at wl.at time I wrote lafl A Orii;ria

. to vo)lr 1hiollor, I have heard of nothiil.: worth tle in T1 I'Pr

r:pil;rtirn. At this preferntit tmy p''als )you to know, th: i.
the m!t

o parat of the nobles are here arrived, as y'our ho-

: '

iir llall receive their names in writing. 1 hec carl of

!Ilintly cxculcth hinilicll by an inf-rmity in his leg. lis
li .iiriUnant for this tinme is the lord of L, ilinioton, chofin
flc.ikecr of the jilaliamnlitr, or Iharaniiitc ill:kcr as :hlic 1imen
teri it. 'The firli day of thelir litti in ar.:linrcrt will
be o) n 'T'hu:(lday next. Hitherto as maniy a;l ha\e becn

1'r'!ent of the lords have com lmulled and dll vitLd ol certaill
iC.tds then to be propoiundced, :, whio fl(all he f. lit iiito
t1rance, who into iKiLtlard. It is much eaticr to iirod tihe
th:i the other. It eenicetil al;noll to be relolv\ed 1i)po
tli.it for I'idglald tlie Nt.li'r ol l;l:cwcIll, ; a ld lair-d i,
lildiiton. For lriilncc, l'itarrow .mt the Jultice Cleik.
AIlo they have consultcd whom thcv think illt'ci'ft to
1.ill)c lor thle XXIV. of the lwhich thlic 1l. coiincllors
rnulU be chofeli. ''hcv intend vcly fliortly to iendl ;away
l)il",wall the herald into, Irance, with the iniaLc, ' tllofc(
they lhall chule; and all i to Ietliiire the kinll. a;ill q(len's
(c'nlclt unto this parliament. They hlive ec\ilcd I low to
rlrac the contracLt with England conliritnd by atithorit y
of lirlia;llnlet; how allo to have thle article- of the agrec-
Illert between them and their ki"ir ; ind queen r.tified.

T'hese

'Iii.c'c tihiis vet hhiJc .i);:!y been h1:d in comimulic.iti,,;.
"For tilhe cc'lir'mat!om (;f the contlra t with Jl.ngand I[ ki;.
no ,loubt; (r lthat I i;c.:r milanl i,.l very nrticlh like ti;,
fate, .'s thle J.1l1 of A'l, !,

t he I'..t cf o t ill'i.rL;lu,

(i.

I . (; la:alt-,:, w':l) : dillned ." i r. ].:' \vinl J . 1,t:I;K . ']':
iorld .J .;ll' r( i n(i - 'c d '(] l!''. . It'c'ilt da.v to ii, ti.;
(ontr.r i t

;mll hi) m. I i: d

:(! i ), thlis (l;', to lj,.tk 1;..

to t!;, 1.. (..;:v.', io (utr 1,. (;ray's niam, for thait hle p)-:,-
)iif.l:, itn ] v }l c.arinr to i)a luribL, and then p)rctlu; ',
vwouli ii:v dve c it, if the contracJT could ih:vc becLn i...
For the Imore ail lrncc noaiiilt all inlcoivcinicllts, I v':,i; .
behcdes that, that 1 trust it ihall be ratified in I.t li:!i'i:r,
that every n)lem;n in Scotland 11:had put his land ;',ul
Ict his feal, w\hiich niay al\w: v;s reiaii as a nlotable Itno::!I-
mentt, tho' the alc: of parlia;llciit be iereaflter diimnlll'ilc:.
If it niilit, tlcc, 1therc ,l d withll )'uir ladice, tlh;:t ti:
lords ni-ht be writtcn unto, now that tiey arc hcri prc-
sent to tI. t e'fi'ct, or that I might rcceive fronl youtr I or.
linme carliiet charge to ti;tvel hcrein, I doubt not bI; ':
would fi-rve to good purpofc. If it mih-nit be also kia'.i
with1 what fublitantial and cficdllious words or char. e v:ii
lcefire to have it confiiimcd, I think no great difiictl!;L
wotuld be nimiadc.The 1 'arl Ma rfhal has oft been Iloved ti)
fllh ic ibhc he iufth mo delays then men judgcdt he wot;.!.
Hiis fil toll me yeflcrdav, that he would speak with ni.
at !ciltre, so did alob Drunlanrick; 1 know not to v.-1).t

purpofc: 1 have caun(i:d l,. James to be the carnilclr with
The I. Ilarfh!ll, for his authority's fake, when of lltc
il was in co)nliltation by what means it might be wrooughl,
thlat the amility between ithc( tVwo realmls Illigt l
( cr;pctu;al; and among diverse men's opinion, one

O il l

that he knew of no other, but by nlakilg thcm Ibtll
c'0e, ;itnd tha:t in hope of that 1io thingls were dolin.,
til!ll \n v l otl-(r'vife have Cver beeIn granted; the c.tl
o i\r'.r.vll :ilvisti(l himi cirn-iic ly to flick unto tlh t, thl:t li
1i.d( p:ir i(ftd, ith:t it fliotil(d pal's is I lower . and all tI},
cr.lfty kirlvc of hIis coullit:l (I aln lIold to lIf; utlto your
1I. lii--, ! words, s) to li lak lo godly a ;tt[oi)l.
I'l'i' lk 11l.,(1 well the ;llilicrs, howfblnivcr it
1it.,k'ld ihiln to whlim it av:s l1)okeii unto. Ilie ba;on
wlho ill tinil p)all 1at 1 ccleen of (ie pal.liamlcnt, ;li'l
yeltlei.ty ;t coivelntioll ;ailong tlhcifIelves ill the chli'clh,
inl v(r lloe ;ll.1i]d u(int lot; tiey tho tlughlt it good ti)
acqilc tu be irllt.ocd ulnto Lilcir ancient liberty, to I;I\t

V '.'C,

,-c iin par'liamncnet. ''hc( v preCi ntCd t h:t (da a bil
:!;l til: lo:ds to that cft'ct, a colpy whereoi filh.ll bc-

i it: .1 ,)tl it :
1 Caii be hat . It wt.B' anI'wereid ni r

; ,' .'; ,l t.liL l in ,(,ool 1part. It was referred u;:tn t.!e

; tsot tie articles, when the'y are eholcn to rl;!) l q<

i , *i:jvil).----]'{t. Jt'/.'s;tis /i lw^ /n9;(;ip ,'l',l C i:, 'l.'.v:.,-
',', r,, l ''l ' ,i',:, is of 7/ill'it?,l'& . - lT'his prl;cnt lino l
' li; ,

'. .. t!ct I uid, rf{ol, tIh::t tic hlorIrd iiitc;i'tlc to 't(-

' t l ' l.~ili.tinlt, which cu{i(dl i'c to'ilwll.tt to flay nmy
!.:, r, to si.'c wh.t 1 coulIl 1'j;:ll or learn w rtlh thel rc-
l,,r'tint unt,) your llolln. 'he lords, at ten ol the clock,
,,hii'.! i thicni(cl\l s at lthe ptl':.ILC, Wvhcrc t!le

! I kC lihtei ;

jli,'i whllenceI thy)' de;;lrted tow,;-!d tIhic TI oilbuioot, .,
i!;:;' V Ier ill dli' ity. E;ach one lci;i , ct in Ilis re it, in
I'i, irieicr ;as youir PI. fl,11'l receive' themi ill this I-'roll.
'j'he ' :IWi, tlhe mnacC, the f'wotir, were La.l in the qjcen's
lit. hilcc btcinl connlil:ld.(ld, tlhe L. of Lidlin- ton
lg:; li',. (i :ti lon. I lc xcii'i liins in(ufficicncy to occupy
tiit place. lie in:iue a; brief lii(:ourfe of things pafi, and
i \whi:it uiLccelii nven were forced unto for the defence of
lIthir Ccnll ury, whlat remedy aind support it pleascd God
to fILld thiem in the time of their neccflity, how muchl he

nwcre lound heartily to acknowledge it, and to requite it.

IJe tuk away the pcrfuaLion that was in many men's
n;ind that lay back, that nif(leenied other things to be
lmeant than was attempted. [re advifced all eflates to lay
1ll parti'culas apart, and to bend thcinfelves wholly to
tie true (ervice of God and of their country. He willed
them to remember in what liate it had been of long tilme
(i, lack, of government, and exercific of jiilice. 1in the
indl, he exhorted them to mitii;al amity and Iheacty fricltl-
flilp, and to live with one another as members all of one
Ioily.-l-le prayed Godt lonll tomaita this peace alld
amlity with all princes, elipecially betwixt tile cralms of
I'.ingiIlll and Scotland, inl the fear of (God, land lb celCed.

'li( clerk of rcgillcr immediaterly flood tip, and askcd
thlie to wiat nmatter they would proceeed: It was thought
Il'cclllry, tliiht tihe articl:sol tlhe peace mhould he conllrinicil
w\vtii thle colnlion coenitil , for thiat it was tlotiullt 11,ci i-
liY')' to 1beill thllcn away with fIpeed into l'rance, land to re-
rcive tile ratific.;tion of thein as si0on as mighlt be. 'lic'
article., being read, were immediately agrccd unto: A (diy
was appointed to have certain of tile noble) lubllcriblc unlto
licni, and to put their fcals, to be fnct awav by t

hcerald,

herald, who flall als ibring the ratiflcation again iv.
himl. Ihe barons, of whom I have a1oue wri'ten, r-
qclired an arn'cr to their ricqri:fl-, fCmew.vhat w.Is i..
unlto the cortr.l l .'. 'l'!; b.'r:l s llcel fr ti;el cu ,

1

and authoiity. Tt v'.,s i:: ti,'e : l cld cd, t!);'t tL; i' ii;o '
be liofein fix to j)oin it: ti l:I ,

1I l!- oi the ' tic -, ..

that if the' , a ;f'.cl' ?/';' ! a! riiln. '

i o,!t; , iol d

u!.d lil i. r:

andt ncceill!'y tflr the ( !,ri'. ;1';i .v.'Ilthl it iili ld L r.:,:
nr this parliamenlt f1 , .)-. :

; ';) til.'] ! ,'. 'i c l-ord'

ed im1mi11t1 i.lat ' l '.';2c i ,j n;, to t.' cl otl i (it o1f t}-o ' I 'l,1 , (,i ,
articlis. 'i hc oldcr is, tlil; t tihe lo-is iihd ilit.dl rlii ;:,
temproral, and thetlc iir t itil, ; and t'ru blur' ;

. i::

their own. I

h ier r.' wre ch!loiir as in this otihe p.'l|,: I

hlave written. 'I his bcii-r (,une, the lords departed : i
accompanii d tlec duke, all as lir as the Bow (whicth
the hi-eh Itrcct), aosd man i ,vi. Il
into the palace vwhcru hce lictli. 'lh town all in :ti;'i(:.- ,
lhe trumpets foilrid ii ., and other imufic such ils t:.,,
lhave. r] hus lnlch i report llito cur lhollo-i of th.: !
did both hear d r

al sic! l.

thr miitiis have irot .

.

iiled far\ili;g, in times l.mrir ).fl t ile lrOIs have had })'.'
incnt robes, which arc inuv with th eni wholiolv out of i:..

''rE names of a.s ma.ny carls and lords spiritual ai:.
temporals as arc ail:mbled at this parliament.

The duke of Chatclherault.

ELalls. Iords Iords Spiritual.

Arran. S

rl.iile. St. Andritvs.

Arityl . RI uthllci. D])ukell.
A thole. Li1 ndCf'. A tiins.
Crawford. Soinervill. '1 lic bilhop of the Iltes.
Caflils. C(ithlc:rt. Almbots and P'riois, I
Mariialll. 1 Il ml. know not lho\w many'.
Morton. Livilltlion.
Glencairn. I nncr1 cth.
Suitherland, B]oyd.
Cathncfs. ( )'ilvy.
Rotlics. FIlecmiig.
Monteith. Glimi is.

( ray.
Ochiltrec.
Gordon.

The Lords of the Articles.
;',,i*tn.l. 'Temporal. B1arons c oi!rd to ic

of the Articles.

\1 t'.S, c. 1\':1c tk. I;l t.Maxwl.

! . :, .I \ 1e1ll. IT illi'li rdine.

.,,:.j1 i the Si a l io of Stll. Andiilews, th
hilll .lei

wre too

.on for m lo

to r char. prticularlth

:;tie chol lords of tve articles. la, it fti.fy
!.. .iil-liS. (]lCI1Cai'1 1

n.ll;d .

.','i r. for this tin

to know l'thi, byf tti he

m

',: :,:'(,|'s }1' sl:i;: . -.chie f li\\ I-:, \wlhlich
,*i.'..i ;;i ng. . 1;i.,d. ;allb arL (,t t"'c .\r-

Liiiiii

of men, v.

tie was t a clts. oe

: ;nit ithmb thre Sll iorts of St. Adiewsa tIh, whole

IT were too lon

r for me to rehearse trairtr uolarly the

.!C 'itio hi, an r chiefly the

aftieions of othe , that .rc

At Iidisi n atimC el of

e privy utoar oticlettr; ay it tind-fy

.;ir ton.u for this m ti me to knowlthat, by tle csio.mon
',:iliio <ntsme there was ot a ftiibfitiifll r o mtormied no

a,· ittto France. e illeith runy rath

li:i'ot limber of all lorts of meni clot in iScoilnd which is

r ~ii·t~·;ule of thle lasi, tlieit wenit onl a 111more gratcl~ul
r:iny yCiear, an r ofe fhWll cal', ald ood oate r tI'

'c ,fn g

lit li pin2ton thane 1 p dth unto you r leonttr; ure itd-
kl, ;lb nichl as may be, to fi'Wlw our l',dieg. tSome

i':.it oin o there arIe lr Baimoins to tihe Pearinicd not

l o inlto i'Irancc .

f 56

all 0.th l ra ut

l]i'k lcorl t uof tiyat, that mor(lils, hium robly, wliich I

is

tt x;nI)lws,le ofw the la rons

tla tl

\ fli cet o fn

a nie gratc l . 1ul

1111le lh rthlan en hall carill, and thood ee the r

tclms

'. ill ll |ii i

tleir pi nceta

,.lith , and yc

'or lhonocur

k(iicith what thc wlole wellld ji lhs

ctlh A.
l'ttition o[ tlhe lefstr Barons to tlhe Parliaimcnt,

ludl Aug. 1560.
M> Y lords, ,into your lordships, humbly means and Inclolu, ir1

(hows, wc tlhe barons ;Ald ficcholdeis ~1' tins R.inl lph'a

r".& ilm, your lbrcthi.n in Clhril, Tlhat whic'C;It th ca;uli}:5 ' ;- It,,(_',:
I ,Le zl'li^ioIN, ant1d com mon well oftllis relrnl, arc, in this ^,G. i5,(>,
l, Iclitit |,ilii.itiielit, to be treated, ordered, and e .il h'lle ,

to

to the glory of GoJ, and m:aintcrnnec of thil corii.r ,
wealth; and we being the srceateift numbilcr iln pI'lr .;i;:
where the said caufcs concern, aind has Lbecc, aild 'L :.:,
rcady to bear the grcatcit: piart of the charges the'r ,:,'
as well in peace as in v:ar, both with our I,,dl:o( :

, .i

with onli goods; and L'cciln l there is no place ;.'h' ,:
may do better service now than in cicnr:l cotmcil.. ,:i
parliaments, in giving our best advice and rcle, m,...
anid couniccll for tle furtherance thereof, ft r the in;!:,.
nance of virtue, and puLiiflamenit of vice, as us i and c it, !
had heen of old by ancient acils of parliament oi!;.:.l
in this realm; and whereby we undcrft;lnd tiat v.'c Or!;,
to be heard to rcafin and vote in all c;iiifs c,'nct!.'.
the commlonwcaltlb, as well in councils as in pallil';li ,
ot,:erwife we think that wlitliimever ordilnanices aidl -.
tutcs be made conccrning: us and our eflate, we inot 1. i:.
required and suffercd to realbn and vote at tlie makii.
thereof, that the lame should not oblige us to fland th;: :-
to. 'I hcrcfore it will please your lordihips to take cC,:.-
fideration thereof, and of the charge born, and to be bu:li
by us, since we are willing to serve truly to the comniibiii
well of this realm, after our estate, that ye will, in il;,
prelent parliament, and all counfells, where the commnii
well of the realm is to be treated, take our advice, ctilEi-
fell and votc, ib that, without the iame, your lordnllh:;
would susser nothing to be pafred and concluded in p;:i-
liament or councils aforesaid; and that all ad}s of )pr-
liament made, in times pai', concerning us for our 1lde:
and elfate, and in our favour, be at this prcfcnt parlia-
ment confirmed, approved and ratified, anid aCt omf p-
lianent made thereupon. And your l.ordfliips aul,ir
humbly befecches.

Of tle si ccs of this Petition, thefollowing account if :i;'l,

by kI anlolph; L]ctt. to Cecil, 19 Aug. 1560. The i.ii,
tcrs conc tided and past by common conlilnt on Saitail iy
last, in such folcmni fbrt as the stirs day that they ,ci ln-
bled, are thefl . FIirft, that the barons according il ..l
old act of parliament, made in the timle of Jani.1' I. ii
the year of God 1427, shall have free voice in p.lll:-
nicnt, this acl palled without aniy contr.iadition.

No. V. (Vol. I. p. 259.)
A letter of l'ihorn:s Rinldolpih, tlhe Englini refi-

(I,n-, to tle ri!hlt vi/rrfhlilftl Sir \illiam Cecil,
J lit. principal fccrtcary to tle queen's ajtllly.

7 II.\,v, received you rV hon!our's lect.crs of tlc frfl of
thie 9i AQ:.

I :Oj. 'ot

i, month, writte cn it () ' ; ill 'i! '.':; ;!: i; a ii a

ii licr I.:',, ;

!":it, the huld Jt anl is, froim li !:iili,! i t. I'lnie

olt ,o . 3Z.

I'/l,|(, C ill thlis tl ny ;i: cc bl- tl.: t tilc (iu'i: n ( if Scot;nd
j c~t Il;j, r t icii bcclit't-<| t(.ct ii 1 ;)

I r' tiik h I-,', c. ( l ii l

i~-:: !?';i;i^g /;l :iir - ,1 rls

h , 'r ),ui';'(,:U in h,,t:;,,z ( m'siil7. 1

. ..':, \ol\ r

huill ' i ihit \ 'iii ic lil t ii : i \ itltre for a

] ' .: :l '.u(ud m(.11:le thiit iv'.' !'L l'.l d , 1s well >'h:it m;ay
'!;.:ii n ti) l 'cr u pri! ih: ,

\ heartili)y fl c

lll.hi be rIcci\'c i tl ' l ,vi'c f l c(iiT 'i to l.inl ;:f a , rcat il nm-
I:r!, who a iC tthr'll ' pcrli's;ldl thrl t fil iltenilcth their
llltUlr rui!, Cm when xV}iCll' vsh !l ; the preji)rnallec is very
ia'l;til wVlilhctnll cr that fcl arriv-c fitlli ,

;': ! I'

ni :l caln b

i.jri:ldcd that file hath any uchi thl ht ! helr head. I
li:r (l fovown your honour's l't.c; s unto thi: I.'i .[anlics, lord
\ ortoin, lord Lidlington; they y .'iftl, : u

you nour doth,

t;,t

l he

might ie Prayed yet !')r ;i f- ':, : '.l if it were

lnot fj.r thcir obredieicc fkct, some f th: carle llot thil
tic'y never f.iw lier face. 'I'h ; tlrl(l :\!l t tlu' ci lio

'iwcnt tle wicked devices o(,

. fc ili. hli ,'' pu', .l I s

1l her nillifer%, but I fe:l. tihat th..t :,il! .''.v ) ble f, In;l
thi at illij hiujis f.:cui , tlicy {i, \ ' tl i t i i,; c . :. t ') 11 1 1 vii\rl
tllc,, r(;l ii) , ;ui1l to laillt i:i ;mii: '. \.

t!h l!; ir I eli',, t r ;;

t'' h:ive a;if; iculd to looik u toitctii l',-., fin tilh'. hl.-
.iril is gre.it, d that t he y fi:e thurc i'. n) i 'l rCicd' ,
h;if'ty l'r thlcnifelves, but to rc1pose tlici:;if!v's up1ln the
(ileLCII'S nlmajefly, our fbv)'rCiin's :i\,o ; i lii llt i ull)pOlt.
I lielels abhroad they have inone, nor rl;ily ill whont theiy
nmay truili at ihoime. 'lherc arei irn mindh si, ily to ry vwh.L t
liwy may be afit(red nt of thle (quc n's rnij 'if,', ;il(l 'i.it
they may allihredly perrorm of that they intelid t) fti}cr for
thclir parties. 'h'lis tihe (1it'cai of Scotla;id :I)ov( all (,ihlr

si'i~I tIlcibtctli; thlis lie f(ckiuth hly iall ali(il to pl -
'litt; aiid iathl cauld St. Come, ill her n1iuc, c.iiiii'ly

t" \ilite to chartge him thl;t nlo sich tl;ii;,,s he atttn)t dl

it'si.'i her coming home ; for that it is (id, th:t thliy too
:iliicaiy arrived here out of En!;l:nd for tilh pirliofi', whit
fItimblant Ifomievcr the noblemen do ik;tk, lhat tlihev 1c

r Icv e vd
4Agttx

grieved wvith their queen's refusal, that conieth far.-;
their hearts. 'I lhy intertl to expoituli:te with mei i..:
tipon. I have my anlfwcr ready enough for them. li!!.
thrulft all olulifi lCen out of this country, I doubt r .
but :hcre , ill bhe lome of her own that \vill bear us .'.,
kiillticis. O( mc ce lu i11 be (ciit, (b soon :is it ! '.!.:
tilc tuIrte's mInjecf llv ', llilrll, no longer to tulc me ..
toiae ,i, . mv;~
t'ce in tins pliue . 1)By lici t.lk, ;ias I halve of i!C l..i 1,

I.;

tilhe ]h'1( J.itnc :,1nd lold <f I.idingtonl, I perccie t.
thie; :il

c t' Iilui t.it itli .cj; aitcly) of tlhe next culiv t.Clt,

I fiiall repair towards you wvth their detcrnliitltiNi. :

:

rclo!ulti,lo s, i ill I ii'potl its, \Vhlcirin your honour', :~.i,:.,
is c:ir-lelly rcqtli;ctl, and ih!) tly lookced fcr. V

Ii.lt!:.

ever 1 tilc

( e

; . nlitl , I kn;' '.v nv! will (ouglit to be Il! i;,.

untit tilc niicn 11:v liVri'',i;ii's p)l ;ilure, but to coiiti,'
irinylf, would ( id I wcr .t)

l ii iippy ;i s to serve her ,a.ii; i!'.'

in a;s nc.t a flai as

c v cer peor gtcnllem.li did, to lie (lit

ot this )place; not that I do i in ny liart wax wear. tf
her m.jcily's klivice, lut bccaulc iny time and years re.
quire lmni( place of more re)ofc and quictnecf tlian I fiii
in this country. 1 doubt also my in t fufficicllce wlien othi
troubles in this country arifi, or ought (hall be reqlired
of ime to the adv:acemenlit of her mInnjcty's ferivice, th..t
cither Iy will is not able to coni)pafs, or Iny credit liH-
cicnt to work to that cflfcI, as perchance fliall be loolk.,l
for at nly h1ands. As your honour hath been a inc.U:I f
my continuance in this room, lo I trult that I i.!l il:
that continual favour at your hands, that so soon as it Ii..li
fland with the qlucen's mnajcily's pleaiire, I may ,givc il.
place unto olnic far wortli.cr lh1a I a1 niyfclf, aled il li:
menl.l f.:fon, have lly cotlrfe dirCeled by your poiil .t.!
vice how 1 may by my contrivance do foinic flich ftr\ !.
as may be agrcable to her in;ijcfy's will and plcafill(.

'I'lil. :: few words, I aml bold to write unto )oiir 1'.,-

noir of iytlclf. For tlhe reft, where thai is wilhcld tl,.:
tie tli(Ils will floully continue yet for one nmolth, 1 ,11',c
your honoui that there is ),t nothing omitted of theciI 'Ii
and ;iccu(lliit'd inalnner of doing, and ficinig tlhat 111('
I.Ihav bsolul it tlh:t 1nto) lltis point, andl liould n(w 'l.-
vail, tlery wvec unwovrty ol
t hlcit live:..

i I tND) not tli;1t they arc purposetd so to leave th1e 111it-

tcr. 1 doubt more hcr monei y Lthan 1 do her fair wvordi;
and yet CaIn I not conceive what great things ca.iii
wIought with lorty thuulalll crowns, and trcalurc of h1Ir

oh' 11

, w: here I know there is no sure or ready means to get

I. lhe lord of l idington lcavcth nothing at this time

it:nwiittci, that he thinkcth may be able to fitisfy your
d. liic, in knowledge of the prelent state of things here.
\Vhliatfmevcr cometh of that, lhe findeth it ever best, that
she conme not; hut if she do come, to let her know, at
i.' firfln, what lie shall find, which is due obedience,
i.1ld willing fervicc, if fhie nembrace Chrilf, and desire to
!'. In licicc with her ncilghbouirs. y filch letters as you
i.!ve ls1- rcccived, vour honour fomeiwhlat iindcrflandcth
,i Mr. Knox hiifelf, and also of others, what is detcr-
,il; ,i. he himself to abide the uttermofl, and other never
'7 Ic.!ve him until God have taken his life, and thus to-
·,tli(r with what comfort fomcvcr it will please you to
yl'e him by your letters, that the queen's majefly doth nor
Itt,.'rly condemn him, or at the leafi in that point, that he
Io fore charged with by his own queen, that her majofty

wi!l not allow her doing. I doubt not but it will be a

.leat comfort unto him, and will content many others;
i,1 daily prayer is for the mTltilntcilincc of unity with Eng -
liin, and that God will ncx er fiilelr mcnl to be lb riigrarte,
a l)byy any pcrlf;lfion to run !he:nlloll unIlto the de truittio

tI, thcll, that have saved tlheir lives, anld restor(e their

ointry to liberty. I leaxe flrther, at this time, to trou ble
vo'ur honour, deliring ( od to fend fuclh ni amit) between
:!clc two realns that God may be glorified to thein of thli'
, i!J.- At Edciibur;l the 9th cl A\uu(ft 1561.

No. VI. (Vol . p. 269.)

A letter of Qojeen Elizabeth to (Qulcn Mary.
i; til. i i'liht excellent, right hihl a1 d millty princcfle,

our ligt ldeair aind well-beloved lifler aind couflll the
Il'.cc i ol Scotliild.
R. (IG II ' excellent, right hilh, and mighty prinicefn, r, h ,f

'iu righit dear and right well-beloved rifler :id col-

nol 1 s'

, we grerct yotu well. I lhe lord of 't. Coline brotght

-,t i r,,,t

' s yo)'r lett(rs, dated the lthi of this prcl'nitt at Al- c, iy.
lI:iile, wliercby ye g,,nify, tlit a;tlhough by tle :inf'wcr
'rouiilht to you by IMonfieur l)oy.tzll, ye nmigh t have lad

lis in tirhescmnilcc pi !er )'l whlich t i luh(! riis nn-l impa.rluI c>l,' -[
'", Ilop Ktitil, hi.it ptulifled a iat.1 menil, frun) %i.it hc tills hi (iiall iircd

' 1. 1i,1 )note
(j) iti.

Vot.. II. 1D d o ccasion

ore;,ion 1to have entered into fonme doubt of our n;.', . ..
;.!:- Ccl'rtai;i p:rpol)i" p;,iflcd betwixt you anil ncu .:ni
,'".(',.u, O11 w',lld ainle tlS of your good

mlealii'y t

;'

.

with ;a. ill a:ity, and for yourl pturpof therein , !('i.,
I:s It Liv cr edit to the Caid St. Cosine. \Ve Ihave tci..
u;ito tlhol! ht rood to anifer as followeth. h'i !.:.,
Sr. C(Il' c ii;itli made like declaration unto us on your Iy:;
for vour c.cufe in not ratifying the treaty, as 'ouli:
11mae to our ambaildor, and we have briefly anfwrcr o:
eve'tvi the fame points, as he can f{ew you: and ii ' e

:li:il i rvt To dio, yet leau: in the mean season you mi.i::t
in:c!iced to thiink that your reafols has satisfied us, fIln[l .
;!1!v ;\e allure you, that to our rcquefts your answer c;.i.
l ot ble iepu;ted for a fatisfaition. For we require no- fr-
iulit of )ou, but that you xvill )cprform your prom ii fwhe-r-
unto you are bound by your feal and your hand, for li.'
rcclif.l \ ihcleof we fee no rcafon alledled can serve. N1:-
tiher c,:.,ct we any ti ing, but that which is in vour ov:
l)u .x C a;s (Iq1en of Scotland, that which yourfell' in uor,'
.Ii,d fpei(.c' dotlh cons fs, that which your late hufb;:;ih'
ic;r o, d brothcler s aibsilai dors and you concluded, i...
t'li( c ii)y(ur own nobility anld people were made privy t:I;-
to, tliit lx iich iiiad(cl miade peace and quictnefs betwixt :i.
\ca ti:.t, without which no perfett amity can conltiur:-
i'(tw\::,.t u, ;:s if it be indiiflcrently weighed, ve do(!
ciit t,!: !\x \'. ill perci\ve, allow and accomplilhl . Nc..c:-
,!:. 1:-, ";n .. si in\li': by) t! rcport of the bringe r, tli.:t \t,.
'" c ,n11 itl\'it!h iut()on yo't1 (m"i, i¶ lmline, to follow clu;. :
'! ' :'tx\ :. 1,1 ) lyur . :i:lt'] illn SC(tlan , xwe are cinoltllt '
~':l!. ;'( i ;il c' n i, i i l ,i'll uii ki tiielk, and do all ilrc t \
l!;l vi he f il' i rcl l\'tl, ujion this bh in 1eiliitrllit'i, !
i..;:. .: !':'!' and, i I .;'. it y i, and to live in nei: . h h !,'

1i), Vol is i, u t>ii', li;tleily, ve: ais :tflircdly ill it' ki,'!

i ,1 I iill t

iii p .1,. we bC i1 l te k(mi( t of n;ature anl li ( ..i

/\:! 1 :, in v.' he !o e.l!ctsil. v dcterlinted, that the xwv':
t! ,,;,; .l u isl mllxi .l,tl.'l> (o)ll( 1l tlohwi (Xw liClleh ( I

. -

I''. ), tll;t ' l \ 0t .,! )n1 to b l' in Vyot .l11( not in 11 ; ,:

o1 ."

1 , ,' w\ l it: ill I . ol the killn

' voii; l tlt'Ie., olll Ut111.,

,'i;!, \ .',)i , ,,i' tll tcr

. ioi l n il to { :have knit :1 ,i',i xl,:, 1

L1,.. i 1' ix t

l i , to C)i ule inl t1il,. r-Aimn to Yo I, , (I v. ii'11:

l:;itl t'er we klnow there ieiain vx itli us, andl we l
wi- y(loi, lli'lv xvitincliCs ol jilur I.ither's eaic fl !sto i
Inl".nllilg, an:1 ol the error w\\heiucilto divers vil c ii,.'i':
iul' induced youir l.lthier; or finally where it lectenit il. l

r1ch;'t

..';i,i, ill et £

h si'1s with , i-mr nlavy tlo ,n] rc

¢ voUl' pi.:ll-

l .,', bt,th ) our kI v.l. t s it ) w l.l

U l hl.'

idio;t.

c- '. I W t:! "]

x: ,, i' , ,Iii l ll' li',l ' ,.

Libisil liiht

a W ha,tv ' llot ::'v :!':,t >'
,;, .; , 1.O l' till' r' si ail ball s Lip:>nl tihe la1;I , tO ;I l ircl,'i;;.

[ !,,i'- pirates, 'cii;: tl,:l- 't(

c -it- .,i til-, and al co;,:li; m-

" I by) tih Co;! 'iLc!l C p!]i[ laiiii of tlit: a' l:a/li.di;r o:
;,,i: i :,, lIot hcr thic kir ; ot if . iil:, mi lcoi' certaiin Sclli t.

,.i:i,,,.,, }l,. tii, (,ilr (i-';: l' a 1s iir.i '., inllcr prto 1 L' i (,2 ot
.. :. . 01 ni:,i'(s l ', Oi whih.l ll;itt('r ;'il') we c:til eii !v ,'citjlirt:

,,,: .i, \OIIr COlnill, tO \V'(oUr lc';ll'., tO l]i\'c fO)c it' ",1 ooi

. I.':"; ti\ 'l

. li, a l l lt rl cr

t

oL l rfiL c't

L thilat ouLl it tto bh

i Wv.',t )'1 r Irc'lilc anid tile C(l o ltlis ( it I' ir it rauicc,

,; .iii, i;,,ii of thei huofc of Aotdrind\'. IAnd so, rilht

i c.e! ,

lill, igoht 1ighb and ml lighty plrilci', Wt rccomii'n d

,' t', V(Ou w\ih nof.I cairnc't ri.qtuef, Ui() Ito nc"lvtr the. '
,,i, l i'.'iillv anul fifll',, y of ti'rs ol' friLt iiIip, \'hich, l)io f:.
i;,1\, ': m1a111n anl1 iln)ciel to accco )llli. (

, iix c!1 Uc'11'

1i1 ii al,ct it l ni-clii h ll.itin l. c i6thl of AIii::'.i, i it:l.ti) 4
I.i. ol' (ur rcill, .

No. VII. (Vol. I. p. 304.)
\ lIttcr' oFf R andlolph to the figiht honotl rablc Sir

\\Vi!ii,itm Cecil, knighti, principral iccrci:u'ry to
tlhc nI n(tl's m ilajcily.
F ! l.Ite, until the arrival of monficu-r Lc Croc, I hidu ' 'h
,

li',tlvll thg

w trlc

the Xritiieng unto your horlor.-JBc- i'ir ',i,

.i,; ili, I(oli 11n we had tl( little to think upon, tlhat wec , ...ll '
I,.l iiuoliin but pill our time in L :alls, b. itntltCiln ,
: t''

,(.lii,

-: i

',, ;l rl1uintr : at the h ili, and such like. lie

{,,,,,i1,lt wi lit lim l icli aitnuli r ol letters, and fuich abun-
i!.:rCc o. new.., tliat, t.)r t.' Ip);acc of thr cc days, we gave

i',i 'i. tlo 11lothliin, c*fie bitl to 'eliaing of writings, and

I', :iu^os' t, lcs, many o

b trdl rClported, that they might

1 coi),11,r1t1 t .tl) thlalt e\evr Iuciiic tdid write de veiis
ii.i i,.'.iiiil)iS. Allmollg; all Ilis tidilng , for the moil: as-
il,, l, 1 iend this unto youl honour as anl undoubted truth,
wvit hi is, that the cardina;Il of Lorraine, at his being with
Ile illpelror, moved a nlr:lriae between Ilis youli telt ion,
tle dulcke of Aflirlche, and this qiueen wlhercin hIe hath
1, I.t travelled, tlhat it hath already come unto this pollr,

it.4t il Ihc lind it hood, thle licid duke will out of hl.uid fend

) d 2 hither

hither his emibaffador, and farther proceed to the corsf.i:
ination hereof, with as convenient speed as may be; ;in.!
to the intent her mind may be the better known, Iec Crol
is fcnt unto her with this message from the cardinal, who
hath promised unto the emperor, to have word again be-
sure tice end of May ; and for this cause Le Croc is readv
fii his departure, and his letters writing both day ;':l
niaht. This queen being before advertized of his tow;vr;-
nels, by many means hath fought far off, to know t:i,.
iord, of IrMurray's mind herein, but would never so plain':'
deal with himn, that he could learn what her meaningi i.,
or how flie is bent. She ufeth no man's council, but oi;e
thiis man's that last arrived, and assuredly until the I,. i'
L idiigton's return, flie will do what fihe can to kee)
that fccrct ; and bccauic resolution in his abfenc cannot ie
iake, flhe will, for this time, return Le Croc with reqielt,
to have longer time to devize; and after, with the mu'i
;peed she can, file fully purpofeth to advertize him, I nca:,
her uncle the cardinal, of her mind. Of this matter the
L. of ,idiington is made privy. I know not whether b.
tome intelligence that he had before his departure, or finct
his arrival in lFrance, divers letters have paflcd between
her grace and him, whereof as much as it imported n:,t
grcatly the knowlcdge of, was communicated to fImc,
ais much sas ws written in sypher, is kept unto tlheinfifvl.
Whethcr ;all the L. of Lidingtoll hath had confcr-c'
with the Spanifli ambtaflidor in England of this ni;ttt:,
or any like, I leave it unto )our honour's good ircail:.,
to get true knowledge thereof. (}uefles or furmizc, n
io grave matters, I would be loath to write for veriti-.
'I'his also your honour may take for truth, that the tem-
peror hath ofliced with his oni, for this queen's dower,
the county of 'lyroll, which is said to be worth 3o,oc0

Ir.:,sis by year. ()f this matter also the rhinigrave wr,('r

a letter unto this queen, out of F'rance not long fiiic.
'['h,i is all that prclclntly I can write unto your honjlo
hereof, ; s I can come by flrther knowledge, your holu
iji:ll lc iniformed.

I iA vi received your honour's writinigs by the Scot-

tilh.iln l that last came into thice parts ; he brought ll all
ietli s uinto this queen from the L. of Lidington ; tluii
KIIte was old, ;and contained only the news of' lFraIr.
I perceive divers ways, that Newhaven is foric (Iil';
but 1 ail not lh ignuraint of their nature, but that 1 k;i' '

sli''

,.)cy will fay as much as they dare do, I will not fay as
tlhe proverh d(tth, ' canis timidus fortius latrat.' Front
itnice I do aflire them, what means fomcvcr they miake,
or how pitiful fomeever their mone be, they arc like to re-
'-i vc but finall comfort for all their long allic. '\Ve
;i.;,id daily in doubt what fricndflip we shall need our-
: x!t, except we put better order unto our misrulcd papills,
than vet we do, or know how to bring to pass that we
m:;iy (e void of their comber.

'|o- MolR ROW, the I5th of this inflant, the queen de-

partcth of this town, towards Edeibnruh. It iny hap
i)c o(dl, you fliall thoroughly iear folne merry tidings
{,I tie BpI. of St. Andrws ; upon vi\ncflll dal y next he
fiiill le arraigned, and five other prieffs, fur their maililin
It l:alfer lall. ''hits most humbly I take iny leave ; lt.
St. Aidrews the 15th of iMay, 1563.

No. VIII. (Vol. I. p. ,31.)
1 ,tter of Randolph to the right honourable Sir

V illia-r Cecil, knight, principal fccrctary to
tlhe queen's majefly.
7v /j A Y it please your honour, the 7th of this infranit, ioth of

Rowlet, this queen's fccrctary, arrived here; he April Ib,.

rcportcth very honefily of his good ufbge, he brought 'f',erOfic,'
with li in nialny letters unto the queen that came out of (Oiginal in
I'rancer , uill of lamentation and lbrrow. She received his" wn
froiii tle queen mother two letters, the one contained ha'J"'
oly tlhe rchearfal of her griefs, the other signify the
slate of France as then it was, as in what fort things were
accorded, and what farther was intended for the appeasing
of the discords there, not mitirufling but that if reason
could not be had at the queen of E.nglanld's hands, but
thalt the realm of France fliould find her ready and will-
if, to filpport and defend the right thereof, as by friend-
/lip and old alliance between the two realms (he is
houid.

Hfow well these words do agree with her doings, your

lir onour can well confider, and by her writings in this fort
ullitothis queen, (which I aflure your honour is trtec) you
;tay alluredly know, that nothing shall be left unidoli

Dd3 of

n 'her part, that may move deiate or conll tl, \lfe 'I

C lc
Vli' (luCen and our lbvcrci.ln.

I'r .? as much mulled at bi.' tihe qiicrn eli eilf, lo,:. t!;..

i'v'.\ kil,.d(!!2f came about, that :t this time fl" i,' i...\
two l(Im letters writtsin ali with her owix lhihld, flir ,,

: 1

the 0 ir her return ie never recc'ivied Ih:df ;n lD, :
};inI,, as were in one 1o the letter%, w ,iei! f cn -in'
tcliiy by theC (liq en's ow \n sivinr' inl oa l r

i ,),l

h,:r: ..

rance, \wh;arc hitherto I ha\ve not eeIn dcccivc'J. I ( .:,
:li'o iirte'r a.liure voiir hionoir, tlihit this itc(-ciN hl t i;
tiat fie klnowcth nnow, tliht the fricnhiptfl l '

of tc ..

majei cy mv (lver ciin na, y '.nd hel r mo. e in IL.,dC

M ::t

th.uat or helr rn.d i ol h. r in Flraincl :.iu1 ;: l it' ('.

-

ous of theim both, f xi will file lIct lIof te: (1i;c i,' :
other. I m:y alib farther aiTire vonlr hc'c;'!l, !: . \

;.'

fonile\-tr the occ'lnfon is, this qCni!C l l ni ., .!, . .
hcart ti;it will blii11 out ill tiime, .which v.i':! n;:ll .
iba'e ul!kiglhiec's1l haith p;,icd between hellin, till .

':i

be c;:f'} srcrott'c: . In talk ;nit't.t

, S W if l i

h , 1 .1', ' i ,

tlnh t tlhe q;lc(r n r ;.)i;cr nii;it i ,:'c tiicd the n.litlu i :, ,-
v;Ie thin ll ie b;l ii c!() lc, "rand 1)h lichl Jounlt wh l.i !..
he the 'si'ci( is oF her 'orcit rdclice to goverln ;i!.,i', i0
thiin.,s tto ha! ve he-C w1il. >Seingi then that jp] cli.1il'i. .
ftandl illn iinlh cl nr one with the other, [ tli,'t it ei;: '
to colil,;r:n hr in tlhat 1lordi (this (iqucel [ nn-lin), ti

'

to fpcak ;:nv word lhat nmi'ht caule her to coi:'ic !
!er of the other. A nd yet 1 am ;;lijrtld ie ii.il icr ,-.'
as fricleldy letter;, uad as m;aily goold ;o\;-s iirin i:.

- en, as te

th e oilier d(;d vwi ite untu her. \Vieir

queen mollher will fic'ak any thing unto the I.. (,1 . -
dinii'ton of that 1)>nipoIe flic did write unto

U iuis lir .'1li

of, I know not t; ut it si h do, I think it hard it)'on i h.-
nour can (ct no faxvour thereof, at his return, or 1 per-
chani ce hIy tlome ni canis ihere. It nay; , p)Irlcli;. e , he :' it-
ten only by that (ciicnl, to try what anlwclr tliid iilen
will give, or niIuli flaiIl what mind flic bearCtih unt(o ti:c
qiieen's mi;raeflty our {(xvcreitn. Th''e iircn k .oxwvili iltv
that the cail Bo(thlwcl is lent f'or to London. ' <.'i-
kcl a gitentl(;man of hers to enquire tlici Cfe ; [ 51ilr

l,

thalt I knewc none otiher, but tlilat his takers v,(re inr i"n-
trovcrly vwho took him, and that it Ihould be jcl, 'I
there. I knoxv th;t fhle thinkcth much that lie is, iiot Ilit
into Scotland. It is yet greatly doubted th;it if Ih \siti'
hicc, lie would be rcfcrvc' for an evil inltrunicnt. I!

li '

-A oFThinto a'' ocnt bcen pziv. 'v,

>:i, he illi the 'ci to tiil(,Ie xe i.
~:, heie , but 1most- of- oIl to h In)li . 'Vr' .

UK M this renim, it ever that ro111n CLI1IC omer-)

N~o. IX. Vl .p3.

oro~tinnr m~ade by, \VIim1 a-i c-
I~iri~tosl, y·ountiec r iccrcr rv lur the e:e
p ~hiIU'iL oiten hy omr 1)VIici~ .

uihe uceln of this ramfor theti. .Le

ie,;ee Of' the reslitultion of UN;!uilc M::wew
L.mri of Lenox.

Y 1 u' i],d ri~l othcrs hrrc e~ rp''

I~_:i

I con cixed the U Ii~e of tihil en Volt W

iciercr m~ii'eti' oli,:,e i pe[s

' Chanii i licellor's placc, 11ie. siix S C U .cc

Ii of aniiit \OU[ Vc'- toC I cpr.2siiii L1II1 1I o

r 1tit ,c i Ui
K,·ll l Hic Certin ose Iici· islcl a ledpej CcmIIItrjI( liv\1~. liii,

in, the :i
ili (leYiICS cool lI lelt of xi. nIii I Clvi

hiio y, rearoll wleeo ie 11ii, thl be tineC
liiib ll, ;lid it lclltit rt Ill hs l Iic- cotioti- e ho

S the ( :s l l kiiito loi1, it yllls . lL I

eoo Is Utites, fntilidrekay Iii'litoui liii1 Ali-
joe uihiiiifluiuil, but :1W:i v 110,. 1 11 ilO I w uiiikc of i' [iO' I

h

; iile hi:ul1 to hel ihil u. ubeI ~

pi'iilcasii icr. Abjllyhs~ of lie (c iiei- to u 1k: lii

e Pu c]] -oy thi e nei of hit iji ;110) 1:J i

11uo-l1 hanve miovedlhe hcluieb faivoiirably to lliciclue to)
ho, n uitueft, as thle iuneceiicy osI Ills IholIC, iilid Ille fir'-
1~lane he hears, the hiniour lie lois to lhihl)cert~ijlto sivi (

bs.1 ;il jiy, by rubz of' myl) siuty, irit er

I h~'Iii~s~s Iitult, ;iti(l (livets uithle his ii uishi
oti, s also thu clsl~ll ions eqil of' her. good filler tile

D d en

Qieen's Majesty of England, whose carnefl commendation
was not of least moment, betides that of her own natu-
ral, her Majesty has a certain inclination to pity the rId-
cay of noble houfcs, and as we heard, by her own report,
has a (reat deal more pleasure to be the inflrument o(
the uphold, maintenance, and advancement of the alicien
blood, than to have matter miniitred of the decay oc
overthrow of any good race. Upon this occasion, h1'r
Majefly the more tenderly looked ulpon his requefi, anl
her good sifter the Qtcen of England's favourable lettc:,
written for recommendation of his caurc, in confideratin,,
whereof not only has fle granted unto him her lettci ol
rellitution, by way of grace, but also licenfld him to pur-
sue, by way of reduc.ion, the remedies provided by the
law for such as think themselves grieved by anyjudgmenct,
unorderly led, and to have the process reverfded; for cxt-
mination whereof, it has pleafced her Majesty presently to
aleimb!e you the three estates of this her realce, hv
whose advice, deliberation, and decision at her Majelsv's
mind, to proceed forward upon his complaints, ;.s the
merits of the ciufe, laws of the realme, and praLtice ob-
fervedl in such cafes, will bear out. The fum of all your
proceedings at this time, being by that we have heard, thus
as it were poilted out, I migiht here end, if the nmatter
we have in hand gave me not occasion to fay a few more
word,, not far diticrent from tle fame subjeCt, wherein
I would extend the circumnlnances more largely. If I
feared not to offend her highnecs, whose prci-cice anJ
modelt nature abhors long freaking and adulation, aun'
so will compel me to speak such things, as may t(cm to
tend to any good and perfe&t point ; and les t Ilt ould
be conptcd to me, as that I were oblivious, if 1 fliould
omit to put you in remembrance, in what part we miayae-
cept this, and the like demonitratioii.s of her gentill nt-
turc; whose gracious behaviour towards all her fiihjcl,
in general, may serve for a good proof of that felicit,
we may lool for under her happy government, so lon"i
as it shall please God to gant 1icr' ullto us ; lor a goIo
harmony to be had in tile commoni weill, the ofiiccs bc-
twern the prince and(l the flbjcCils mult ble lccip)rn.c;
as by her Ma:ljefty's prudence we cnjoy this preilt peace
witl all foicign nations, and (quiictllies among yourfclvcs,
in lfch lilt, that I think juflly it nmaiy he aflirini'd Scot-
land, in no man's age, that prcfcntly livCes was il grc itr

tr..n-

i,: ,quillity; so is it the duty of all us her loving fuilbjcS;

t,,1.ci;lowicdgc the fame as a most high benefit, Iproceed-
,1_ roml the good government of her Majelty, declairin,
,;:;-cl've thankful for the fame, and rendering to herMlta-

tv ICunch dIue obedience, as a just prince may look for
:;. the hillds of fiithful and obedient fulhjits. I mean
Il,) oreed nor unwillingl obedience, which I know her
:.l tti'c (lors dtetcl,, but Ilich as procceds from tie con-
t1ii);ltii (! of her molest kindl of riegilenit, will for love
;!ldl ditlt sIlke produce the fruits thereof. A good proof
i:,i\x wc all in gencra; l had of l1er M;ajcflv's benignitX
thli l tlhrcc earsc , that flie las lived in the government
,i'. cor nu, and many of you lhave largely tailed of her large
'l.bIcility :;ld trank dealing ; on the oilir part her lighl-
(cl, lhas 1ad large appearance of your dutiful obclilnce,
I,, it lbeeonies votll to continue, as we have bcgull, in coln-
':!.t;1):ll of( tile many notable examples of her clemency
.:lie )c)tihers her good qualities, and to abhor and1 deteit:
all Il.:l1; biuitces anld rtimours, which are the noll pestilent
(\ '!, tl.lt can be in any common weill, and tle sowers and
i: \clilo, Ithercof. Then may we be well allired to have
(.1 hIr ,in lnoft r I'.cioLu princefle, and file most faithful and
!l.i;ei filh!jci's ; ai:d so both the head andl the members,
.L.;ll (i:iicmrilu: to maintain the harmonl ) and accord of
t'- jliiltic b,!dies, whereof I madeniction before, as
'!ic iory t.chreof flh 1 partly appertain to her Majesty,
:i> shall no small )praifif and unspeakable commodity re-
,',l;il therethroughl to you all uiniverfally lier fibjclq.

No. X. (Vol. 1. p. 33,.)

I le p-riils an(i troubles that may pref cntly enftie,
.itnd in tiimec to coilie follow, to tlic QLicn 's m1a-
Iflly of l ngland, and fIt.re of thlis realill, tp-
on the nimariage of the Qt jccn of Scots to thII
I .ori )arlcy.
I RS'I, the minds of fuclh as Ihe :afFccl to tihe Q(icn

of Scots, either for hcerellf or for tle op ion (it

her picetence to this crown, oJr for llie dlfir Ir hlve
' htell of the for'ne of religion in this rcealm, or lora tihe
,IillCOItciitxtioi thOy have of the (Qieen's n: )sll v,

(; r her
l'.cecflioo, or of the fucccfrion ot any other bclile tile

( .cn

Qiecn of Siotis, :I1!l be, by tiiis r?:i;i.,,: , (ur. ,
comforted, :nd inJl d uceC(i

to ieriltc and I',!li'ii\ }li\' to .;

their Ji'lrcs to pi': ; ind to make lom c'il ;; v.. ;
persons thofr are, to the ilntent the (itia!ititv oi' l :;'. ,;

crer may bC weighed; tihe [hmei m:\v '' co!njlii;d 1': ;.',

forts cither within the rcin' o'r w
h ithoit.

T'i[H l .ric ire fi.h as :irc fpcciai, :iv(.t'l, to ih' (i)t.i

of Scott%, or t(o teh e ,Lord I):.' x', byv ,;(; t [i(ini:i

;,, i :,-

li;ance; ' si all thi: hol|' o>f Mos 'r'.r- l .aln (;i'i .' I r j
p;ilrt. i !nd the

i l r

' of'

( f- ,i rix :; i) his '
if', a:t 1'1, ,

:..':t;iidll "S ' l'e of thil", o'l, (iod, n1d11ii :1 * d (.:i;,,,- .

i' cs )I

!' : )uik o'f ( iChatclliihrLiit :i::d 1h 1 i t;'i'lii,,i,.

i') h '

ll ; (: ! .ui' e :.i '111 n t o

.) t i;

I 1 ':, bloth ill i!"n ,

. 1 .:.,,:

.-'1(; .. i(, ir ('t( Inltri'-', t .hat ;!1r (iC\d'Vo toI the ;lii'(tl.' !,' ! '
R.n;lc', ;;, l mnli. ik; of the rc:i.;'ion no1,'.' Ic'civc'l ;:'e'i,
!: th.-!t tx , fIn 'i anre tlhei fPi!ih ca ofi th'l ! cor'npi : ! _1..;
,..* ir !' "t;',c 'omfort in tlhis Ill'arri;"' ? .

N r'AiJ tlcr t' orc to be i ; \;;t per ii ,!:;. "'

'a .s t!. 1 L .' of

r c-ln
me ali i; 'l:.-i to this rc.ni'n.

I.t .sr, tUhe ocer''.al scope ;?.id mark of a;l :'J:'" .

.., .:;id ai\ways hill ibe, to bring the (<nccn los

( o ,tt'-. 1t1

.'.ec tihe ro\

( . crown. cf this r'caini ; ;:;d: t':',i;' .',

!ti':'i h thie de;CfCrs may vary amnon f_

thirm.iv'1, sl :it .

<o np.'.f[in I her 'of, accordinl to tlhe accidellts of tile ti.!,
e .

aIi co ;iccoiin' to ti:c impediments which theV [i! f.;.:...

.lc !.:1S t)l to lc ( el,!'It's Ii C/sl x it' Cion ;a!d

,x'. t' r;I'1. ,

vet ;:i t iir ;,j'! I'(Olk d'i, i (,o 'ivlL', n dl

[ !:i'.- ci. Il.;

-lo'i : 1;i'.'o; :,lv' tCnll, o ni.i) 1 . the ( m iitc'n oi SC(ott'S [i, t': i.t

i}1}s i ;l'irti, ;ilo l o (t, 'pi'riic oir 'oie.ie'l ii l;2 I'' tili',,(; :.:. i
in thelir 1 }i' cLe dill;,g , t;tiici ie tw o nIall:.1'5 to.. bec ':i .
cd, )'li r o'si till' i1. i'., 1.lr wvorf{;. t!ha: tl;.' ;hcr; !:.'

('r

is il'itcrd lv thcn', tlhat citl lr from lni.iicih.u !.x:.
]e'iS in rili ioi), or for lI:!tii .l s)ito the (noi n

ti

$(o!(s, (r tlc 1,,1(1r I):rhy, dlo pT[-lii:ildc thcrml!vs ll,'e ii.:*

,1itid (^ii'cci of Scotts ;:ith )i se rltly)' no'rc ri lht to i ' ct

h '.

i

)li;ll ')tl' /;)\'('lc ij l.' l\'

Illd
i r(..'lle' , l \!iich t

I ::'

s " i'

th -ir kindri d

o.l ()Il i,t i i ,ks, ; lnd dl nlilh :is :iCe' i'i,'i'., ,I t

|i"'lciy ', citlh r in Iuii[,.liilx, .S*h'oll.il, lr,'l.ild, l (l'-

''lc're': tile o lt'r iS in'.it bi' tl inl, which, wix h I'

al:lliLce :ir1( l ciir/:i dl - lh:,it!it l! (' )ir!n ol (f Su(i s hlhl>

h 'it

ighlt to , til(: iiiext hie'ir lo fii'ti' d tilt' (]lut'i' I.ici'llv
:lil her ifhlit, ()o Vi it i '

f ew
( v :c w ithiiil l lit l '

c .j Hn,

liut hi'l( Vi 'ir li n, ild li e ( til1'Ill, lr lot I n11.tM ' ;;S ,11t' ':
l1)e conti.'y, ;un1 d11 ll

tIL l,'l u :
two brts fh.:11 ;ie 1' l 'I, ,!-

. I '

9 ^.r1ld prntiLccs proceed. Frolm t'i fr, wi '; i:i-

! ; r (i IC' !n o Scot ts to :avec rl-cwt :i-:.'

;!!

:y im 3

i. c!,,iiok d for thefi pe rils. FIir-f, is it to hc (Itioi't'1,d I;,1
,I'.! l vill infc 1t roine o' tilh m to, ilin gilne thu hlrto i ;IIo

f,; (.f ouir d:;: fox cr(i'_Zn j l ! y lb

yici.c h in l. as tilc i -

x i! hi.;li fu trc(fl to tlheim , : it'o; '' it is to b :'l.!:' ','x
h:','. (l, th.i t A m ': r' ( od :il. , ;, lC e

l a.iih 1 ith r

t o,

c.I toi-

'.,!':.:'.',' (l<int t :iL i ) l('rv\c ..- from 'l t, h di.ti cr1 ' ' St'-
,ti" ;. th'iieil' w ill ble nttelillztC(, !9y 1", ! (||;|ioI !I, 'x\

! r:l to,

ir"' :;;'. ]'' il'l, ;'ll l ' I like,

I l tf

1 : 1(tul;natc l l '-i it' '",,l,

!;;'u i .1 . C. i tllc (eqiLicll' s mt.jci y, andl tc c('nciliajtciht;t i
1C,, : l 1' ( ,t'.II *.f S.ic,ttS, anld o() this wieL.l tte frli 'Ltii S

:.' h I in:!i vw :ii bc llm uch f(licitc(t an: ll 1 i,')!tti . '1 Jlid-

i , t' ,u v,'i! tl ;t' t' :t mlir',t'd t i ;.tlucf ol' li;';e tt'.it l [!Ls ,ll.l

i ; i. ( i', c('i ' ( .

:;;, ' ill thie I(;tl tO va.'r i Sq 'it' l , Li)

' \i

:'.. ': : i' 1

.11 ow' f :'ov : o(pen

1 1 ntI(

i ,';l l, t !. v Xvio-
!. ='. I (,t lil)', thlcrie x iil i e', hv the ii ('i,'!d i'z C I(tli-

i

;' . ,: ! ric:!, ;

i new ; uc :widic w ith I r:':,cc, or ':.'i),

i't l ',:1l be olicnfi\e to tl.is rc'ilm, ii , ! :a i:tt!i' , ,icu
t t cii ti'.l. A nd as it is !ill) \'1Cv li;,!:',
tii;.ti ;l- , w\ ill

f.t :l foot .s manly praclicc ais th'ilv ciln, lihtih i,i tlhe

.'.,: (Irs tndl iin [;'I aind, to oc li;(il thec'' !C:I'S liitjiiy

;t , and C n

i tinic icr ch liarl' tlihre b , to lrtt; li l,;'

i iln I r y tlii tt), or p !i'en, and f)or tlhe i jt' titin;p of

. '.. t':

l, ii:v.,', m a;x;v dcv f'. s w ill

lbe i ..i.iiilv, sr(nl tim e
I' , i v:. , nlo ii .<'li''nct ' wi!l thel ei n all i'lp.e .

]1'o'..ll ti' (,'rCol{d li0t, .'li]) inr;llI no ,>lll(l ' r. i(:lr to

i'" |Ilile' o' l

, ScottS, b1t that }ll sthilll

fli .V ,'d ill title

K,) ;i: e

ij tn's nix.ij il , is not iii.-l to hi I ..nir , bI l

it ll.l

I 'V \will ("oiit'nt ttll 'ilSl\'s t t (, t

se i li\ tile <1i; ii's

i:l h.}(!y nI)t to 1i1 i )y, ;nd ;lo to i.[IpI., h i t, hitit t()o i'c,
lt 1 il l(' (]i 'tl (I,' S tc itts fliall i x:l\( ilm.i , xlli(.' tl 'v \' ill
t~lliik to bI, IlirIl. '

'., 'c' to a.ll ltcil, I 'C,tiliic til: r''- t

h liet

"I(\Vi1,'- | J'' ]l']l? tI !

i ll( Sco-,tl.. :ld (l::ll 1b :lil:l: I

11 1 ,!i, ',

.:i, tln(iltly thel occ.iolli ol wA r l1 .Ill

- c .:l ; \\ilil whichl

' .I l.;li')i1 Ilh.lily l (c lc' ii\'
pI :' i(' iiv'r l, :::),l .,:hu tl to

·1 Ill( th iiiulcl s to tr llll it oli o 1
' t| (ile ,t .

A I lDu-

A Duplicat.

4t r j.inc A fiinmmary of the confultationr and advice _i\xc,.
156. C1. bvy thle lords and others of the privy crttnil;],
i. ; tf..1, Colleted ou: tof the f uidlryi antd :.tcral ft c(e!ieK'

: -" 'of the faidl counfdllors.

,or(l Keeper, IMlr. Comiptr(oller,
Lorld LTrafVnrer, i\Vlr. \'i' ' C('h:nbelli.-,

DeI)crby, IIr. Siccrtrry,
Earls of 3edlord, Ca.ve,

t J.ciccltcr, Peter,

Lord Amnir.iil, ilafn,
Lord Chainbcrlaill,

()tcflioins propounded were theec twov.
I. T-IRS T, what perils might enluc to the (QC'c,'

J1 majefiy, or this realm, of the marriage betwi\t
the Qceen of Scotts, ndl the lord Darnlcy.

2. XVIIAT were nmect to be done, to avoid or rcmed.
the fame.

To the First.

Tn1 perils beinrg sundry, and very many, were reduccd
by fomc counfeltlors into only one.

1. l 1:nirJ that by this mt;iriag;i, tile Q()lec of Scotl,

(being not narriel) a great lnumberb in tlis realm not ol
the wollt fllbjei.s might be alicnated iln eilr nlinlls Iron(
their natural duties to her majefly, to deplndl tponl tih:
filccc(., of this marriage of Scotland, as a mcilan to Cell;ablifl
the firccnflion of both the crowns in the iflue of the I.r1111
mnarrilge, andl o favour all dlcvifes and Ipraticcs, thai
fliould tend to the advancemnct of the queen of Scotts.

2. SECONDLY, that confidering the chief foudlationl 0o

them, which furtlehrcd the niarriage of the Lord J),arnlcs,
was Iaid up)on the trunft of such as were papills, as tlle
only meancs left to reflore the religion of Romnc, it w^
plainly to be fbelI, that both in this realmn and Sc itl.ird,
the pa;pifis would most f.ivour, miaintain, and fortify tlih
marriage of the Lord la irlcy, andtl would, for fU rtherailco
ot fautionl ill rcligiol, Jcvili a1ll mcalis .ul pI.nd iccs ta1.L

COll I

cn;ld be vwithin this realm, to difl1rb the cftatc of the
(quci's n':jcfly, and the peace of tilh realm, alln con!fc-
q(Iientl' to atchicve their purpofcs by force, rather than
sii. l y frome other, these perils having indeed many
l!:mnc!:cs, were reduced, though fomewiat otherwieb, in-
to two forts, and these were in nature fIlch as they could
;:ot be cafilv fevered the one from the other, but were
k;i;t and linricked together, naturally for maintainin the
,one with the other. The i ftR of thef fort of perils was
tii;t, by this marriage with the Lord Darnley, there was a
pl:iil intention to further the pretended title of tile qjucen
(,' Scotts, not only to fuccced the (IQeen's maI jet', as in
lhr heft amity she had profflcd, but that to) occupy the
quceen's eflate, as when she was in power, fhle did lmani-
cll'flv declare.

'I 'HE second was, that hereby the Romilht religioni

f{hnldd be crelced, and increased daily in this reallm, and
'hcfe two were thus knit together, that the furtherance
:::( maintenance of the title Itaid, in furthering of the
rci-,iion of R.omen within this realm i and in like manner
the firthlcrnce of the fame religion itood by the title, for
othlicrwii the title had no foundation.

'i'.ooFS of tle first. ) And to prove that the intention to

adv;ance the title to diflurh the Queen's majcftl, mufl-
tii'.i'Cl lnfe, was confidered tliat always the iiinttion and
*.vi! ot :il an l)erlon is molt mniailfelt, whein their power ij
.::c'.tlc'll, and contrary when power is finall, tihen th- in-
t( ition a:Id will of every peronl is covered and lets Ick'n.
'. ;is when tlhe queen of Scotts power was greatcff, lIb
i; . ar i;,ie with the dauphin of France, being aftcl-
w.irls I' rclch king,, it maniscitly appeared of what mind
llte, ;ad all her I iends w\ere, using thcln nl:tiiifeftly a!l
tile Illtc;lm that c(old he devieidc to rmp.leach amn diilrles
ttl queein':; m:ijclly, firflt by writilnig and publlithilnl h1r-
I'l in all coriuntries qIeICn of ]'iigland ; by i,iaitiing chair-
ter, pan;llts, and comimillions, with that Ityle, and wrilli
thle mils of' l(,.i':lal(n, bolth the l^i rclichi and .Scoltt, W-1i!
chlirtcis reini lii l lill uidelf:ced ; and to l

pi il, tc it w\ .

cfi.tl, it is knlown what psil)araitinis ,l ',;V.r w.lT nil.':,.
and 1lznt in1o .S,.otluiti,l; arild what otllvr !i;; a:s wer'I' tls'ri -
bled in l ei ci,1 Ccoulntries ; ye.l,i nl wlii.t i !ii:',r :i i}!i.t[;ci .l
pI'ecc was madle by the French withil :i., l'ilj) 'o

li :i

1ploy all the forces of lFrnce to puil'r !1 :I ',nittc.l I'
I',,ce vwhiic by ;(J'od prI)vidjcr.; :,.: ' i': :''
1 -

9 *:i

A Duplicat.

4t Jinc A fItnmiarv of the consultation anid advice "!\c
LCal." by the lordls and others of the privy COii0iJl,
B. 13 ft.. Collected out of the sundry and ifcvcral si£ 'e (c'.

='"'' of the said counsellors.

Lord Keeper, MiTr. Comptroller,
Iord Treasurer, iMr. Vi
': h:mibrlai.-

Derby, Mir. Secretlry,
Earls of Bcdord, Cave,

r i.eiccilcr, Peter,

Lord A(dm'ir;l, Malbon
Lord Chamberlain,

(Qicefions propounded were thefc tw\o.
I. IIRS T, what perils might ensue to the (ycLnn's

T majefiy, or this realm, of the marriage betw\ix
the Qicen of Scotts, and the Lord Darnlcy.

2. XVllAT were ncet to be done, to avoid or remld.'
the fame.

To the First.

THE perils being sundry, and very manv, were reduccd
by rome counsellors into only one.

1 a. IIsTr, that by this ma! riage, thle Quen of Siott,

(being not married) a rgiat number in this realm n ot of
thle wol t lRiLjedls might be alienated in their mninds froml
their natural duties to her majefly, to depend lj)pon tli:
liiccc, of this marriage of Scotland, as a mcan to celiablifi
the fiicceffion of both the crowns ill the illiie of thie lainl
manrri'ge, and of favour all dcvifes and pratiices, th.,
liould tend to the advancement of the queen of Scott'.

2. SECONDLY, that confidering the chief founldationl o*

them, which furthcred the marriage of the Lord DI)arilce,
was lail upon the tru f of such as were papills, as tihe
only means left to reflore the religion of Rome, it w.i'
plainly to be seen, that both in this realm and Scotllanl,
tile ppi!fs would mofl favour, maintain, and fortify this
marriage of the Lord l)arllcy, alltn wouldh, for further,aili
ot faction in rcligion, dcvic all mcans a;n practices tlhl

CUotll

coi.il be within this realm, to difltirb tile elitte of the
(Icc:n's mnljcfty, and the peace of tile realm, and conlc-
(]etitly to atchieve their purpofcs by force, rather than
.il. 1By some other, these perils having indeed many
branches, were reduced, though somewhat othcrwile, in-
to two forts, and these were in nature such as they could
rtit be easily fevered the one from the other, but wcre
k: ;t ;:nd lincked together, naturally for maintaining the
one with the other. The fii ft of these fort of perils was
hiat, by this marriage with the Lord Darnley, there was a
Ihain intention to further the pretended title of the queen
of Scotts, not only to liLcceed the (Qeen's nmajcflt', as in
llr best amity fle had profllcid, but that to occupy the
queen's eflate, as when the was in power, fle did niani-
ififlv declare.

' HE second was, that hereby the Romifl religion

f1.oild be erecled, and increased daily in this rc;lm, and
!ticfe two were thus knit together, that the furtherance
::id maintenance of the title ltaid, in furthering of the
rcl!i'oi) of Rome within this realm; and in like manner
the furtherance of the fame religion flood by the title, for
othcrwif the title had no foundation.

J'ilooF. of the first.) And to prove that the intention to

advance the title to diftiurb the Qucen's rnajefty, niu t
Irccdis clfiie, was confidered that always the intention and
'.vili o' any person is rnult niaiiifeft, when their power ic
*:'-c.tclI, and contrary when power is finall, tihen tit- iln-
ttlltiol alnd will of every pcrlon is covered and ltcs lion.
'o :is when the queen of Scotts power was greatest, by
I a: In;lilri;,c withthe dauphin of France, being aftcl-
Vw.rds Frcinch king, it manilcf[tly appeared of what miind
fh(r, and all her liiends were, using then niaiiifeftly ail
tilc me;iis that could he d(eviitd to imlpeach ;ia)d dliftoilcfs
tic quceen':; linajelly, Rllt by writing and publiflhing iher-
Li.t in all countries q eincLII of' l'ngland ; by graniting cli.r--
tc,', i;rints, and conmlillions, witih tlhat f'yle, and with
tlie ar; n s of' '.ni!lai o, hothl tile F'reinch Iand ,( t';) , w'iliil
cliarteis remin ii, itill ut lcfl:iced ; and It l)i .i'cutlc it ',:'
CflLI', it is kviwn what poisnearatiyis w(f

v;..r wcrc n1.:'t.

:1dl lent int'o St.otl:iil ; ai(d what oth'ir t'); ,:s weim ..'1, -
bled ill ft ici'i c(L ountries ; ye. , illn wi .t

w 1 i1 ''i 1 :i

: !.0rrul.l

pe,.cc was made by the French witlh i: .:. I'!:lp '(, ,'-
Ily aill tle forces of I'ranlce to purlrF' ll '' ni.itl' 1>,v
I'-ce whilicl by (u.od' lpr vidc ll ', 'ir,. :1: '1'; ' -11-

9 l

jcfty contrary power, were repelled ; and afterwards, b,
her hupband's death, her fortune and power being chan-
ged, the intention began to hide itself, and although by
the Scotti li queen's commifilaries an accord was niade at
Edciibrotih, to reform all those titles, and claims, and
prctences, yet to this day, by delays and cavillationj
the ratification of that treaty hath been deferred. And
ol now, as soon as she shIll feel her power, she will Ict
the fame a ain abroad, and by confidering of such errors
as were committed in the firlt, her friends and allies will
amcind the fame, and proceed substantially to her purpofr.
ELy fume it was thought plainly, that the peril was greater
of this marriage with the lord Darnley, being a subject of
this realm, than with the mightiest prince abroad; for
by this, he beilng of this realm, and having for the cause
of religion, and other respects, made a party here, flhould
encrcafe by force with diminution of the power of the
realm ; in that wliatfoever power he could make by the
faction of the papist, and other discontented persons here,
should be as it were deducted out of the power of this
ieal n; and by the marriage of a firanger, the could not
be aflured of any, part heire; so as by this marriage fie
hfiould have a portion of her own power to serve her turn,
and a finill portiill of adversaries at home in our owI
bowels, always feein more dangerous than treble the like
abroad ; whereof the examples arc in our own flories
many, that foreign powers never prevailed in this realmi,
buti with the help of tonme at home. It was allo remem-
bered, that feciing now before this attempt of marriage, it
is found, and nianliefllv fccn, that in every corner of tile
realm-l, the flation that moll favoureth the Scottish titlc,
is gi)win llout alnd bold, yea seen manifestly in this court,
both il l lill ald chamber, it could not be but (except
good heed wv.ere speedily given to it) by this marriai;,
and by the practice of the fautors thereof, the fame tac-
tion would fl-ortlv encreafe, and grow so great and danger-
Otis, as the ticls thereof would be almoit dcfperate. Anl
to this purpole it was remembered, how of late in per-
ufiing of the lubiltace of the juslices of the peace, in all
the countries of the realm, Icalitily a third was found fully
allured to be truflcd in the matter of religion, upon which
ouly llring the Queen of Scotts title doth hang, and fomc
doubt might be, that the friends of the Earl of Lcnnox,
and his had more klnowledge hercof than was thought, and

8 thereby

t4ercby made avant now in Scotland, and their party was
lb 1rc:tt in ;nglaind as the Qleen's majctly di!rft not at-
tc;e'pt to contrary his marriage. And in this fort, was
the tiirn of the perils declared, bciil2, nnotwittlh fandlil more
lar>gi' and planly) fitr out, a ;:d md;i Cfo apparent by many
tnure alrgument% as no one of the coulcil could dCeny tlhenr
t( be but manyv and very danglrous.

Second Queflion.

'iiHE quefion of this consultation was what wcre meet

;.o be done to avoid thefi perils, or else to divert the
iorce thereof from hurting the realm; wherein there were
i grcat number of particular devises propounded, and yet
th Inmore part of them was reduced by Come into three
licads.

i. TH-IE first thought neccfFary by all persons, as the

nily thing of the most moment and efficacy, to remedy
all these perils, and many others, and fitch as without it,
no other remedy could be found fufficicnt, and that was
to obtain that the queen's majcfty would marry, and makd
therciin no long delay.

a. 'l'rE fccond was to advance, establish, and fortify

indeed the profclion of religion, both in Scotland and in
J:niland, and to diinilh, weaken, and feeble the cdn-
trl.ilry.

3. TiHE third was, to proceed on sundry things, cither

to dilillppoint and break this intended marriagc, or, at the
i,;lt, thereby to procure the fhme not to be so hurtful to
tlis; reallm, as otherwise it will be.

'I'HE lirit of thre three hath no particular rights in it
t111 a;m caernCt and unfeigned dcfire and suite, with all
h)iiuiilelnes, by prayer to Almighty God, and advice and
council to the queen's majcfty, that file would defer no
Inore time from marriage, whereby the good lubjects of
!i' realm might flay their hearts, to depend upon her
il.jcfly, and the iflue of her body, without which no surety
cinI be devised to ascertain any person of continuance of
'hiir Families or pofieritics, to enjoy that which othcrwife
flouild come to them.

StcoND, concerning the matters of religion, wherein

both truth and policy were joined togethcr, had thete
Iprticulars,

FIRST,

FrsT, whereas of late the adversaries of religion, in

the realm, have taken occasion to comfort andl -iicrc-.i
their faction, both in England, Scotland, and abroad, \wih
a rumour and expectation that the religion shall he fih(c,j.
changed in this realm, by mcans that the bishops, h ,.
the queen's majesty commandment, have of late .,:;!,
fireightly with some persons of good religion, bcc;iilf til.:
had forborn to wear certain apparel, and such like th li-.,
being more of form and accidents, than of any f'tbfn,;iln,
for that it is well known that her majesty had no nlea.ili
to comfort the adversaries, but only to maintain ,n ut!;r-
bormity as well in things external, as in the liibft,:.!.
nor yet hath any intention to make any change of th: it
ligion, as it is eftablifled by laws. it was thoullir it
all men very necessary, for the fupprcffing of the pride all,
arrogancy of the adversaries, indiretly hereby to notil\,
by her special letters to the two archbishops, that hc,
former commandment was only to retain an unifolill';,.
and not to give any occasion to any person to misjudge .;
her najefty, in the change of any part of religion, but tha!
file did determine firmly to maintain the form of her I'i,
gion, as it was established, and to punifl ftch as (..i
therein violate her laws. And in there points, some all,
lvified that it might please her archbiflops, tha:t if ti;c.

'ould fee that the adversaries ccntinued in taking ocrcc.

sion to fortify their faction, that in that cafe they fli?,id
use a moderation therein, until the next parlialmciit, at
which time, some good, uniform, and decent order mi i:i
be devised, and eflabliflled, for fiuth ccremonic%, lo !'
both uniformity and gravity might be rttained ;tlin;'
the clergy.

THE second means was, that the quondanm hLbi'ln,

and others, which had refused to acknowledge the ()pl''.''
majesty's power over them, according to the l.wv, a'li
were of late difpcrlCd in the plague time to fimndry pl:rc'
abroad, where it is known they cease not to advance ilihci
faction, might be returned to the tower, or lomie o(licr
prison, where they might not have such liberty to (edilic'
and inveigle the queen's majclty's fulbjeSts, as thly datily
do.

''Il-. third means was, that where the bifsops do coi-

plain that they dare not execute the cclecfiafic;al laIs, to
the furtherance of religion, for fear of the Ipre)rtlmirc
whcrewith the judges ani la)wyers of the realm, bcilng it"

be,..

:,'It :fT ccd in religion, do threaten thcni, ant in many
..!c lett llot to pinch Iand deface thecm, t;hat utpoln fIch
.*iS (I)Cllpe , inllic convenienlt althloritv miiillt ber iven
ti:c!, from the queen's m jelly, to continne cdurillng her

'... litre.

lite foiurth wa, tlhat thorC w-cr (d:ilv h\(l , injildi-

otls :ni(1 ;iiilawful books in :l',, if'i !hrouLtht from hcv<;id

.Lt,, and are 1),ldly receiv((, rea(i, and klpt, and ,-l'-
It,:lly in tie >.urth, f osducint: of 'rcat numilers ,of goodl
ut i~jljts, the like hldnCis whereof \x/a< n1(;I'liett ,v(d ill

..;ny otlier princriCs': tiime, tihat foii e firci iit (l ti; mi : i hbe
ti'.cii to avoid the Li mc, anin that it milht he confiei-crd
ly tIhe judges, what mari:cer of crime the ILmin is, to
nriiliti;in fluch books, nmad(l diretly againflt her m;tjcf-y's
authority, and maintaining a foreign power, contrary to
the laws of the realm.

'iiHE fifth was, that where a great number of monks,

tfrryrs, and such lewd persons arc fled out of Scotland,
: ld do lcrve in England, eflecially in the North, as curates
of churches, and all such of them as are not found honest
.rit conformable, may be banilihed out of the realin, for
that it appearetli they do sow f(dition in the realm, in
mnillty plices, and now will increafC their doings.

'I iE sixth, where sundry havinig eccleiafiical livingr,

are on the other fide the lea, and from tihece in;aintlliill
fdtlition ill the realm ; that liv\ings niry bIe better hflowcd,
t( the commodity of the realm, uipo)l good fuij.': is.

I 'lII: vcnlthl is, tlhat tlie judges of the rt:1ii), I i "rg

J) sliiotti! authority in this realrm i ;o\ crni.nc of .ill j'(o-
I.c'ty (, tht. realm, night be l\voin to the ;jiitcc ' s 11at-
j'ss l, according to the laws of tlhe Ic.lltm, a:ltl fio tiletlby
tltiv f tild for conficince Iike naint;ti the queen's lia-
j: ll,'s autlhlrity.

l'I particiulars of the third intention, to break anid
ivil r(Ilbis m:irriage, or to divert the ij.rils.

I"tI r'T to ibrea;k this m;lrrii:r, conlidlerin, riohliin c.1n

il ' lv(! il, hut orcc, olr f;ear ot for(e, it is littuiliht by
llte rh.t hlte nir meanls followirng miglhL ccatiton lltcl hIr(. li
(.'I ilite I.'tg'i:i;!ge.

1 I'IA I thle earl of eldford repair to llis cl.tr;ec.
2 .

'r.x' the wot)ks at lc.'ewik be mtI adIl .t(J; i.icJ

'. 1 l,'r ic t rriUnl be thell. ,icealetd,
VUL II1 . L- c- 4. A

4. THAT all the wardens put their frontiers in orler
with speed, to be ready at an hour's warning.

5. IHAT some noble person, as the duke of Norfolk,

or the earl of Salop, or such other, be font into Youk-
fhilre, to be lieutenant-general in the North.

6. THAT preparations be made of a power, to be in

readiness to serve, either at Berwick, or to invade Scot.
Ind.

7. THAT presently lady Lennox be committed to fonm

place, where she may be kept from giving or rcceivinm ot
intelligence.

9. THAT the earl of Lennox and his son may be fcn;

for, and required to be sent home by the queen of Scot,,
according to the treaty; and if they Ihall not conm, then
to denounce to the queen of Scots the breach of the tre:i-
ty, and thereupon to enter with hoflility; by which pro-
ceeding, hope is conceived (so the fame be done in decld
and not in ihews) that the marriage will be avoided, ,r
at the least that it may be qualified from many perils; ari;
whatsoever is to be done herein, is to be executed w;ti
speed, whilst she has a party in Scotland that favoure!:
not the marriage, and before any league made by tl.e
queen of Scots with France or Spain.

SO-ME other allows well of all these proceedings, favi;:

of proceeding to hostility, but all do agree in the rcft.
and also to there particularities following.

10. THAT the call's lands upon his refusal, or his son'.

refuting, should be liized, and bcftowed in giftorcultody,
as shall please her majcfly, upon good fubjeets.

I . 'I HAT all manif'ft favourers of the earl, in the

North, or elfcwhere, be inquired for, and that they be,
by sundry means, well looked to.

12. 'THAT enquiry be made in the North, who have

the Itfwardfhip of the luccen's nmajcfty's lands there, andi
that no person, deserving mistrust, be fiuffered to havc
governance or rule of any of her fiujecls or lands in the
North, but only to retain their fles, and more trufy per-
son have rule of the fame people's lands.

13. TIHAT all frequent pafliigcs into this realm, to and

from Scotland, he rcftrained to all Scottih mnen, laving
such as have fafc-conduct, or be cfiPecially reconimcnded
Jrom Mr. Randolph, as favourers of the realm.

14. THAT some intelligence be uicd with fitch if

2 Scot-

: cotl;ini, as f;ivour not the m ,rria;e, and thlCy cofiif;rted
f) lo timei to time.

15. 'ITHAT the queen's nlnjcfl't's lii lhold, clh:,r;lbe

:.iji pcnfiuonerS, be better t'I rii nt, to avoid bro:ad ;:ail
u iiiroicly fipcccl ultld b,' !:unrvy ag..ilt thle i.ate of tlhe
reialm.

1i". THl .T t11e yv),in.(r {on r nof t!e eal of Lennox, ,Tr.

'l.l-!cs, be iIernem!c re.l z:o fulnc place wlhre ih may bic

[t ull O
I O .t}ll 1,

i 7. '1 A, !' c'nU!;rlrinr the lc fl ioln and title of the queen

(.1 hI'.otls, hlhll nw of long tline received great favour,
;n.l contiinled, by the qc .(len'is mljelf)' 's fatvour herein to
lile qiueen of Scotts ;anl lijr miilii!ecrs, and the lady Ca-
thalinnc, whom the slid qlueen of Scotis accompted as a
colnipetor unto her in pretence of title, it may plcafe the
qtl!Un's manijcfty, by lome cxterior ad', to shew forne re-
inllion of ier dili)leafiire to the lady, and to the earl of
Hartford, that tie queen of Scotts thereby may find some
change, and her friends put in doubt of further proceeding
therein.

I8. THAT whofocvcr shall be lieutenant in the North,
Sir Ralph Sadler may accompany him.

J9. THAT with seced the re.lin of Ireland may be
committed to a new governor.

20. FINALLY, that there advices being confidered by

lier majclty, it may please her to choofl which of them
the liketh, and to put them in execution ill dceds, and
not to Ipafs them over ill confultatiolns and lilceclics.

IFoR it is to be aflured, that her :adlverflics will use

a!! Illeans to put their intention in execution. Sonme by
practice, loine by) forc, whlen time lIall Ilr1 , ;led io
iinlie can fecrve lo well tile queen's majcltv to litll riupt tlhe
pcrils, as now :,t ti: firlt, before tile (lueeCCll ol Scotts ]pill-
iuol(, be fully ft ttled.

No. XI. (Vol. I. p. 349.)
l.n1(1lol11li to the carl of l.cicdcfllcr, from 'liln-

burgh thel 3 'l of July 1565.

AY it pleafl your lordflhip, I have received your Cot. lib,
lordship's letter by my servant, fuflicicnt teflimony Cl. 1. .
ro your 1ordnlip's favour towards me, whereof I think f ,l;,6.

Jt^~ c~ 2~~An riy ,1 -
; c 2 mIly itl.

rv fel always so aflured, that what other miflhap fcevc,-
biefal me, I have enough to comfort imvfelf with; tli!ir!
I have not at this time received ncither accordin g to th;
need I Itl :l, nor the necefity of the service that I anm
enlorp!o'ed in, I will rather pass it, as I may with pa-
ti 'itce, than trouble your lordfhi) to be further filter for
me, whien t!;ere is io little hope that any g too(l will .b
done flr me. I doubt iiot but your lordship hath hea;n
by luch i rformation as I have tiv\e from hence, wh..t
the prctfnt slate of this country is, how this (lquecc is a(o;
become a n:irlicd v.is, ard her husband, the relf-f; mc (,;
of his marriame, made a kini . In their deftres, hitherto.
they have found f1; mnuch to their contcntment, that is'tle:
F-e} fiucceed and profp, r accordingly, they may think tiicnl-
jelves much happier, than there is appearance that the:
i1hall be; so many dil'conltcltet min ds, so much millikil:;
of the lfibjecrs to have these matters thus ordered, and ::t
this fort to be brought to pass I never heard of a"
marriage ; b little hope, so little comfort as men do t':,
was never seen, at any time, when men fliould moil 1.::
flicwed themselves to rejoice, if that consideration e ri
uiwn honour and well of ler country had been had a; ,:-
pertained in so weighty a cafe. This is nov.' their i..',
the overthrow of religion, the breach of amitie with ti:
queen's majefiy, and the deflruition of as many of the; !l-
bility as Ihe hath milliking of; or that he liketh to . itl::
:; quarrel unto. To fee all these inconvcenicncs aplprl .-
ing, thele are a good numbeler that mav si oiner la;l.'
with themfelvues, ilan conmplain to their ncilibours, tli:
be able to find r'nmtlie tu help tlhen, f'omec attelmpt witi
;1ll the force they have, but are too weak to do ;aly li'!,
wlhat is reluired otlhrway)s, or what means tlhere is Ill.;i
v;u¢ir lordfllip knowetil; what will be :allwvcred, or vh.:
V ill he doine, therein, we are in great ldoubt, anl thlio"'
yo01r inlllllt te neveIr l' g)ood unto tus, yet (do we (io Ilii
tear your d

r.i ,, that our ri in hll all

: preve't votur fIll|;i.):

v. hs;t (c',uerril is onee taken. Notlhing lo) eed(ul, l flpci .

.( ii ' i.

I. ')Im th(e (ieen's m ; flv, we wlollv !

I I'dl in lcr t ;Iajel! y', hiai;nl it t;lam ethl to live oir li(
.r I .1 ;,il' iits to pscrlI ; i recater honour her marjeilv c.r,
i( 1,1 f)i.e t tin 1ll tt I tioI which Ive li in her Imaj'l )' p11 ,I
nI' to foi' Is ; the utllu' are nrot gte.it, the iillmlbeis (] is1ir
;r i, t

I t anl ll tl t w\ delire ; miall\ will d.ailv be tuitllill,t
Tli, will be iluic chalire ; inen grow daiyl, tluugh, .

^r "

U,;i, tilme, I think her m:ijefly fi.uil nI(-, but few; lier
I','ieids here being once takenl away, vwhere vill her im1-
ifti fiind the like; [ lic:tk le.ilt of tihat vwhii(h 1 think
is nioft c;areflcy intelnded by tils queen, :iid her huflb.rd,
when liy himi it w'as lately laid, tlhat ihe c.red more for
I:ec pap'llis in fngland, than lie did for the protctliants ill
Scotland ; if thercfore, his hopes be so grceat in the p;apist
of' Englaiid what may your lordfili believe\ th;at lie tliink-
e;!i of the protetlanls there ; for his birth, for his nlirri-
ti;,!, for the honour lie hath to be ol kine to the qliieen

mni' iltiref, if iln preferrii)nt thole that are the queen's ma-
i'liC \'o(Il It eljetSls to those th;lt arc her bhelt, Ie deci aretil
,s..t_ niild lie 1)ce;tartli to the uIeeCn'sI nitajeiies tfelf, lanV
ii ..i m:i\v li\ it is itlndeirly rewarded, arid his duty evil
t;,r')t;l; ;he would t ow Icm: t to be indifie;rcnt to both
;': rcliions , hle to ule licer n;at[, and lie to conlic onic-
:.,is to ihle preachinit; they eic Tmarrieid w\itlh all the
!,,leiniitics of( the popihil tilmi, i;t.iiig that lie heard iot
thle 11m.1 ; his lileeh and t. lk alrieth his mll(d, alid vet
\oulld he fain fcnlm to the world that he were of sonic ic-
ii; ion; his words to all men, anailll fl whom he concuiv.
clh any difllleatfre how utijuit toevcr it be, i;o proud ;a!1
llJtfull, that r;:ther h fIeenieth a monacli.C of the world,
till.1 lie tlhat, not lon'g filnce, we huve 'CeIn iand kiio'Ait
1lih lorld )ariley ; he lookctli nlow lor reverence of irl:luv
iiit hia\e little vwill to give it tlimn; and lbnic theire re
{i.it ito tive it, that thiin k lim little worth of it. All ho-
I,(iI tilhat n;y be attributed unto ;lny mita by a wil, Ihe
.litlh it wholly alnd ltillx ; all )pratils thait ma1y be 1l(oke of
}.ini, tie l icketh not from hlerlfc!l; all cli nities thit file

indue lUn1 with, which are already given and ptlaint-

r1

; no in:n itlea;ifel her that cOlitclttlh niot hlirt ; a;id

wlilt llilay I ;'ay mllore, lihe hlath t'ive over to hlitn her
v.lI ol will, to be nuled and 'tuidd :Is hirimfef l>et likehi;
lhe carn as 1uirclh prevail witil hrim, in :1an tlilny. that is
i*.ittifl fits will, as your loidfip ma11), witll e to petl Uidi(L
I.it I flmoild hlilng mye11 clt ; tlls lill (dignity (olt (tf i.lltn
i, li,.te rben proclaimcd king, flit would hatI il dtt'cicd

,' 11 it were agreed by par'liamtlett, or' ie li.d hlice. 1111-

Ilti 21 )'ears of aCe, that things dlon il his 11.11ime ,ittlit
li,.t thi better atuthorit y. lie would, i no n.i' , hive
11 delc vic(d one d1;y, and either tihun or invi.er; wliC lti I,,11
hiNs loiuibt is rilell illlollngfl our m'eii o( laiw w\litllei lt' I1e-
il;, el..d wilth a Ilbii'dll, aid her liuftiatid rlot twenity-

. c 3 eutic

one years, any thinl without parliament c;'n be of
fircngth, that is done between them ; upon Saltiuriv at
afternoon, there matters were long in (lebatilng. And be-
fore they were well resolved upon, at nine hours at ni!ght,
by three heralds, it foiund of rthe tumpet he was proclaim-
ed kin. T his w as the nilght before the mar'riage this
day, MIlonday at twelve of the clock, the lords, all that
were in the toun, were present at the proclaiming of hi m
again, wlcre no man li:id so much as Amen, saving his fla
ther, that cried out aloud God save his queen. The manl-
ner of the marriage was in this fort, upon Sunday in the
morning between five and fix, she was conveyed by (livers
of her nobles to the chapell; she had upon her back the
great mourning gown of black,with the great wide mourn-
ing hood, not unlike unto that, which she wore the doil
full day of the burial of her hulband : he was led into
the chapell, by the carle of Lenox and Athol, and theic
was fle left untill her husband came, who also was con-
veyed by the fame lords, the minister prieis, two, do
there receive them, the bands are asked the third time, and
an infirument taken by a Notour that no man (aid against
them, or alledged any cause wliv the marriage might nt
proceed. ''he words were spoken, the rings which were
th;-ce, the middle a rich diamond, were put upon her fin.
ger ; they kneel tocgther, and many prayers Iaid over
them, file tarricth out the inims, and he taketh a kils, ;ia,!
leavell her there, ainT: went to her chamllber, whither witlh
ill a s1':lce fl(' follo>vth ; :id being required, acco'lii,
to the h(')inltniy, to calt ol': her cares and leave aride thrllc
i'ru' owfii il ;:iarin enit:, :iiild ive her-self to a mort'e plc,i(.ii[t
life, ;ll(r fori,n pretty rl'ulatll, mole I believe 11,r mn.iiin
s.ike tli,:ii gri - of lieart, file fufi' red tlic l l thlolml
by, every nl)ll: thi;t could approach, to take out a Iiil,
aInd so leinRi commilitted to hlcr ladies, changed her g;:n-
rimets, but went not to bed, to firnifie to the world, thiat
it wis not lult tliat moved hrini to nmarr)', hut only tilh
riccelitly of her country, not, if (;od will, long to lea e it
dlefitulte of ,11 heir. Suipic iolls enl, or such as arc givni
of all thinls to make the worl-, would that it floulil lc
believed, that they knew each other before that they canme
there ; I would not your lordfhilp hould so believe it, the
likelilloods are so great to the contrary, that il it wcle
Infilile to fee (ucli ;in ;1.' doi(l, 1 would not believe it.
/\ftcr the m:rri.ie followcth cuiiinonly great cheer ail

dancil :

.ancing : to their dinner they were conveyed by the whole
nobility; the trumpcl)s found ; a largess cried ; mony
tiirnr about the hotufi in great abundance, to such as
w ,i:r happy to get any part; they dine both at one table,
fle1 u pon the upper hand, there lerve her these earls Athole
Sewer, lMorton Carver, Cratiford Cup-bearer; these frve
him in like offices, earls Eglinigton, Cafiels, and Glen-
cair ; after dinner they danced a while, and then retired
tilcniiclves till the hour of fulpper ; and as they dined lo
doi tlhey sup, fbine dancing there was, and so they go to
i:d; of all this I have written to your lordship I ami not
()Lulatus testis, to this, but of the verity your lordflip
Ila!l not need to doubt, hovwfoever I camne by it; I was
i;lit for to have been at the filupcr, but like a currish or
miicourtlv carle I rcinfecl to he there ; and yet that whic!i
your lordillip may think might move me much, to have
had the fight of my miitlrcl's, of whom there eighteen days
by just account I got not a light, I am my lord taken by
ali tihat fort as a very evil person, which in my heart I
do well allow, and like of myself the better, for yet can
I not find either honest or good that likcth their doings.
I leave at this time further to trouble your lordship, crav-
ing pardon for my long silence, I have more ado than I
am able to difchargl, I walk now more abroad by night
tha:n by day, and the day too little to dilicharge myself of
that which I coliceivc, or receive in the night. As your
l rdilllip, I am luric, is partaker of such letters as I write
to Mr. Secret.ary, t;) tlht t rtift that he thall be to this,
ito I.ve IeC of a littl' labour, to write the fmlec a!ain, molt
humillbly I take imy l; lve at Edilburgh, the last day us
lily 1565.

No. XII . 1( . I . 349. )
Letter of tlih earl of Bdclfior to the honourable

Sir William Cecil knt. her Maj.elty's principal

clcrer;ry, and one of lher highnicis's privy
council.
A I 'l' R my hearty commendations, this day at noon ,oit Scpt.

captainl Brickwell came hither, who brought with 565.

1hu1 the queen's lmajl;t.y's letters containing her' lull re- PFpcr'rithe
oliution, and plcafure for all things he had in charge to Ori^inal.
give information of, saving that lor the aid of the lords

; c 4 of

of the conyreitilon there is nothing determined, r -;
the lc;ai exprefldti I;i the fame letters, and for that pu-
pole r ccived I, thi, nmorlitlrg, a letter subscribcd by1 thl
duke, the earl of \l'urrav, Glelncarne, and others, cra\vn;.-
to be holpcni with 300 h;r:ilricbufers out of this (.irri-
son, for their better defence. And albeit, I know r,; -'t
well the goodiess of their caule, and the queen's n ;ajefii
our sovereign's good will, and care towards them ; :alld
do allo underfiand that it vwere very requisite to have then
holpen, for that now their c:iule is to be in this nm rlic
decided, and that it nlov fit:ndeth upon their utter ovv--
throw and undoing, fincc the queen's party is at the Ic::!
50oo, adJ they 1n..t much above IOOC; betides, thi:it th,
1U. u li h:th harlqutebuficrs, and they have none, ;ind d
t.t \at nt te pIower that tihe carl of Argil iv fllu)'.
I:rint to the'm, who is not yct joinedl with theirs; I hat \
thereupon thlitrniltlt goo.l to pray you to be a nit.ics ()t
'.::. n :her in:i'jci 's |p'.Iia.irL in this beha.i, W'hit, .ii.l
hiow, I fI:ll ali'\cr tli,'tn, or othcrwiie d(.il in thlis in.tt-
ter, now at thiis th!eir c:,trcim neceelHt. For, on thl-

i..

fide, Iv et thieruiuip their' utter ruin and ovcrihro;'.,
ain.i the mii.trah!e !'ublcrfion ,'(f rliilonl there; a!.;, (.;i
the otiler ide, to adventure to re.at ;aild wciiity a

; , ;-

ter as this is, (I.d eit it bc but ol a few foldiinrs, for at ti :'1
tilm)

. w\itlhot i:t:d w.lrr'aiute, and thereb' to rill, i"-
liC l

e tilti'e, t111 tll ouilr 1h ads fime w h'il'll \\ar ,

: and in t:'-

me:in time to .cave the l:i:,ce iluirnilcdt, (hat.ini; t: ';
\v'! e bitt Son) with,- ut .an' r.nit of new fi'u 15' r(

, :

i t

f.ineC; a:;tl b' tilat Imnlls lilb. to lea c tile ll areitii ci ,
tlhe 1l,olc fit.iCecl to inv:t rion, while in the ulmeal L..ll;
iew hIelps l.re (eparin;t to this know not 1 wl.t to 1.:
'rm liow to do. And so much ntoric I marvel tll.'ol, t
t.hat havi: to ma:tnv times written tolching thlis mli;
tot reloluel (leteri:tt.titii co ic'el. Andl to lItev.'ct :

iitiigr, ;rahdl loi,'ig io'

t iul. iver, the occallion e:lllllt r:

bIut tii!tl tneds pre.'d and have tiiccets. (o(d linl it ti
his rFi l ; lilt li elIc all mic s r(al f i hath gcat e(. iI

',

let.r il. SLzIct :ia p[iil it is now come (llt(il, as tilts hiI!'

i ,';'p ' \\(it;! d .li h tllit l ,i o d to divance otd's liolltt ii, it

<co ) l:, te

1 hl r m. 1,cIll \'s ,.tlear and

.sc; iel'l imemol ry ' I Ilrh ll',

;lit tio ptlc'ic 'e a I'le'.tt ni,. 11A 1 lob tlc e( tll tid ' elt lll(itt.
II it Ic 11n'It 01(\.' cli)elcn, it is

t iz w I or i e r. \t<,Il I.nlt

v. i11 illl ., llit'd iqil that waly 1 do noisili , imililul, .:l ,,l
liCltti l:.,il ti.e i'eli gued' .dvice as by any mt:c.ans lI (.t1.

1 I'

1 xeccived from thcfe lords two papers inciofed, the cftc.&
whereotf shall appear unto you. For thoile matters that
capltaiin Brickwell brought, I shall ail'wcr you by my
Jext, and herewith eind you two letters fron MIr. Ran-
dolph, both received this day. By himn you filall hear
tlhat the proteltants are retiredl tromi E;lienborouirh, fur-
ther off. So I hope your refolutioui for their aid shall
come in time, if it come with ltieed, fur that they will
lnct now so presently ineed them; and so with my hearty
th;::ks commit you to God. From Berwick, this 2d of
Sept. 1565.

No. XIII. (Vol. I. p. 34.)

The queen to the earl of UBedIc rd.
r PION the advcrtifemcnts l.tclv reccived frcom you, , se'.

! \ith i ch other thil)ns a:s cameC ;:ilo l1Ol thie lord i 6.

; I'.t- i

and Th'loimas a.*.andolpih, and upon the whole :l t- l;.cr

t- .aIcll conlidered, we have thlls (dtcrniii:d. \\ec will,
\:'a! all the lpecd that we caii, fend to yul 3o0ol. to be

I l'.:S le . If you flhall certaiiily tinderl a illi that the carl
it X1lirray hali such want of moiiey, as tle ini pcllingi to
lnlan of i,:c'l. might fiand him iil ltei:dl fi(r the help) to

I.,
(i' : liiilCii;f, you ifl:ll p ireflcil lIet I1iml fecretl ' to t111-

d1 slilnd1, that )oul will, as of yourfelt, let hlim' have ib
onlitlh, ;ild so we will that you let him 1have, in the nioll

t (tc fort thiat you can, when the said liin Ihall come to

\"1, (r if you caill, by aIly good means, advance himl
1,),1u part there leforehand.

1 'I11 other 2, ool. you flall cause to be kept whole,

loljin,'ut, if it be not that you fliall lelc ncceflilry e;tianf to
iMl ri.t lfolie part thcreol to the now nuinbers of the
(,:'o Iotiem ll ;atil 100 horltiein ; ort t tle cailf iL.t oIt ot
V'.. I;Rs o( 1lich wuorkimei, as by licktelsL;, r1- ortl'r i<,
<,t:lil to be difclia rgedl. Alnd wherel''' we
, . 're , l.y

*' ,ir lifl;ry le]tters, thle eareil reqiiel

, (1 the fittl e.ii l .f

,, r' i l.

) alnd his .ifr')ci;ltes, thaIt they m ii'l t lial\ , :;t tl,t:
I ..It, o0 of ol or foliers, to aid thlicm. And that )- :11i)

,111', that tlIo' we would lnot ot COllil1(d \'out to give tI!.
1':[, ett it we woulil but wink at )our doing liCcicm, ;tiIl
1Ctt to, blamie you i

fcr atthemting fucli thligs, a. o(tt
.llt the he1lp of others Ihould brlilg about, )'yo doubt

Uiot

not but things vvou!, do xveil; you filall underfilid i.
a truth, th.it we i,'v: 110no ilntentiun, for min:nv relJri st , !,
ia':nriit.din . ny other 'lii.'.c s'ulbjc ts, to tabk arrs :: . :;
thcii'f lox , re ,ri ; I ItL'1tl ., .'

.! diili

,:,1 (!do v

a l ii, i!

1to g nive ,i. ai l); to !n :'. : '' .;:i tii tix is anrU tl:,t l ''in.
v'hich hl. ,s c i tf, L.;

t( f ;' ''. l,

i!i ! ,

to t i\' ,',u ;(,U '

po\vwer to hI.t them i :I i,h.1 with any innrcL. litL nuii,
coi,.dcrin v.'c ta!"- it, th:r t!

i .'' at l tl, piifue, ii ,it !it,.

Jl.acl'iin, their huiible- ,iii i ii' I, 'ld o(i er to he (,!' lI
a.id tricd by l a 'll "lt', ,v ! ICI J-Ii:]'' rclhufid to; t.'l ,
they arc rc tired to Ji)t lo !t.!k', :L jpl.:(.t nCi r o; :'
nurl ihes

cr , Iti f:'e'u I..' tI. 1, in, d l'ml th -f'1, - .:::

;a iin tl r ii r t)

t!ih' ;"('. liit' iltiui11 that p c -'.e l 1 tu

French k':,r) [prct-ili. ti, by i' il.gii o:1e si i.; t.) ;t.-
wit) lbom(- oilc

0 ft . ul i, auld jointly to treat wllth t.Lit

q,:C(l, ni(l to inhltCC her to forbear thi'i minner (f vi )-
lent and rigorous proceeding a'aiiift her fuhjUct, l,;
which pIr po!f th. Frencil aunba;il.hdor here with us hii
lately written to tl:ht queen, whereof anfwcr is d:ti:
l-.okcd for; to the intent in the mcan time the fid l(,:;i;
11iould not be opprefled and ruined, for lack of fomec lih.
to defend thenl, lwe are content and do authorize, if y'ii
filall fee it neccfii ry for their defence, to let them (:is of
lour own adventure, and without notifying that you hr.ac'
any direction therein from us) to have thie number of 3s3
oldiers, to be taken either in whole bands, or to lie
drawn out of all your bands, as you shall fee cauif. And
to cover the matter the better, you flall flind thefi num-
bers to Carlisle, as to be !aid there in garnifon, to deendil
iii;t nmarch, now in this time that such powers are on the
otlhelr part d(il.wing to tliofe frontiers, airid so Irom thence
;is v i, fldl se:c cause to direcLt of, the fimne niiliiillrs lir
;i!I olf them', may moilt covertly repair to the fliid I,1,
V1'h:li \o fnill c.(r,' k ly :tdvcrti'.c, that ,oil f1end thein ll ht
.O,,i t(,n1l I,;' tl.;ir (1f'lccc, an0d luit therewith to imake v. r
a;' :lii thu tl i:in, to t 'o

;i l ny thing that mllay ofl;'leie

peClt)ll, \'h,'l i, .'

j lyotl fli.ll so) pi . ii ly d(eal w ithl tlieii, tIl.,t

they)' I:ly ' ; .,ltv. 'otI (:;,I c to be fluch li; if it tilotiltl
otiierwl'ie , ij'c . r, y'i iln.t ' rr f(1iuoI ld be so ,gr.t, ;s ill
the i icIlds yoU hl; ': (,il ll ll ie ubie to li;vc youl towv.ll 's
us. And s(o

1 (; . hi.UI v i, l 1 ir

l (olicCielietc illov( i us I1

cl).ir1c '(iki, io to pltcuced witl i thllm; for oticerwife thlin
to irtelcrvct ti'ill 11'oll rIlill, wvc di) not yield to give (tlitl
Aicd of money or ilmen: Lndi vet we would not that cilther

ul

f there werc known to he our act, but rather to be co-
vcrcd with your own diire and attemnpt.

No. XIV. (Vol I. p. 3j'.)
iRani'.olph to Cecil, from Edinburgh,, th 1;)b.

156 -6.
'"' / y hutilblc duty confidered ; what 1) \w 1ir' oi tli Al, n':-

'. H. pruienlt f;.te of the country 1 am; iob uiccrt.iil iy na".

c.clon of the ldaily alterations of melns minds, thlt it
:[v.kcth me much flower than otherwile I would. \Within
:!rle' few days, there was some good hope, that this quee
\',vuli have hewed fonie favour towards the lords, and
tiiat Robert Mclvin ihould have returned unto them with
t mlbiort, upon iome conditions. Since that tince, thi:le

c':e come cut of France Clernau by land, and Iliorncte
h. ' (;:t; the one from the cardinal, the other tromi the
ulipit) of Glasgow. Since whose arrival neither caiii there
i .(od w(;ord dgotten, nor appearance of alny ood in-
t:.n.re1d hcm, except that they be able to pcerlfv.i tie
li, .in's nimajcfty our lovereign to make her heiri app:rlnt
;.. the croun (,f Enliand. I write of this n;)tiihlI. h:is
t.,;in I know, that fih hath spoken. And bhy all n ans
t".iat she thinketrh the best doth travaile to bring it to pl;.ii
'i lcre is a band lately deviled, in which the late pope, the
cliperi'r, the kinrg of Sp, in, the duke of S.tvov, w\ ilt dli-

.'rs princes (s' Italy, :ilnd the q Illr mothctr l tli.. d to,

oI '

o the fitme counf'ccr.lcy to mait ii: i. piifilr lii t .tl ,\l-

,)!.t lllriltinl llonl; this hand was silt Out of l'l,!.lCe by.
'I'lornetoni, andl is fiii'fribcd by ti!s qLuiitce , tiie c.])
tlhereof remaiting with her, aind the plincipal t, hlc ict-
turned very fhortlic as I hear 1\ Mr. Stephen \Vliollon, a
tit Iinifif f or rfuech a (!cvilith devise ; it the coppie hl r 'i, f
ni.y be gotten, th.lt ih.ll l)e lent ;is I conxenic-lly s:.
.lotcfieur ltninamhllet camne to this totill tlltioln MNnd:il, le
l|Ike that night to the queen and her hILcfiall)

u il t inot

1or';; the next day lie held long confercnces witli thllil
both, but nothing came to the knowledge of aiIv \vihicltf
they intrc:tcdl. I cannot ipcakl with any tli:lt 11itil any
hope that there will be ;liay good (lone lor tihe lords Ihy
him, though it is id tllhat he hath very good will to do Io
t, thle uttcrilnolt of his power. 1 Ic is lodged lnear to the
i( Cit, anld livetlh upon tlle qelCe's charges. LIponl Sun-

iday

day the order is givei, whereat means made to ian' ,
be present that day at the nials. UTpon Landlein;is 'iy
there carried tleir candles, with the queen, her lit111li,
the earl of Lennox, and earl Athol; divers other lo!,
have been called together :nd required to be at the 1d.;',
that day, fime have promli'd, as Caftiels, NMIonnlnlic,
Seton, Cathnel. ()thers have rcfuled, as Fleming, Lc-
vingsion, Lindifav, Fluntly andl Bothel ; and of them ,ll!
Bothel is the itouteft, )but worl[ thought of; it \
movedi in council that mass should have been in St. (; L
church, which I believe was rather to tempt men's miii:.,
than intended indeed: She was of late mindedli ai;n lI
fend Robcrt Melvin to negotiate with fich as flte tiullic
in amongif- the queen's miijcfty's fubljects, of whole. r:!:
willis this way I trust that the bruit is greater lthin ti:'
trutl, but in these matters, her majicIy is too \ ile i ,
in time to be ware, and provide for the worflt; f( dic 1i
that country are thought to be privie unto the bairl s .:i:
confedcracie of whicl 1 have written, where of I an f;,'ir
there is tome things, tho' perchance of all I have ,;
heard the truth; in this court divers quarles, contentio ,,0,
and debates; nothing lo much fought as to maintalin nl:!-
chief and dilorder. David yet retaineth still his l!.ti',
not without heart grief to many, that Iee their Ibuxc!; i
guritdd chiefly by such a fellow; the queen hath iit;'t .
rcfufldl to do liany r)ood( to ny lord of Argyll, nd t :l
laid that 1(all be tihe firtl voyage that (he will make i;l;i;
she is delivered of being with child ; the bruit is COInllni,:
that the is, but hardly bllieve(l of many, and ot this, l
c.im aflilre you, that theci have of late appeared fumoe i;-
kecjs to the contrary.

No. XV. (Vol. I p. 369.)

IPart of a letter fromil the cearl of Bedlforl and MI:'.

Tho. Ra ndollph to thel lords of the council :
]lnglanl, f'rom ;arwick, 27111 of M:tIcl' 1 5;.!
An Original in the Cotton l.ibruary, C(,li',ill 11
o1. ful. '72.

A it' /i p/,,si'' ycLur 11 o5zn( 1s,

17h MllJh :

, EAl N( of To In; ay\ie matters ;s we (d, :
66. jjl fynilinge fit1ch varietie in tle report,, 'x,, t

lyclil adol to dcccrlln thle vtilic whiclh n:iLcth i' t

1k .

;, ,'0r andl lonther to put anv thii r in wrvrtinl ,, to the

t( :itc ; c we old ciot that 'voi;l I]Ioli'i ;a11d i ' ,' youtl ie10

lq!CIen's inajeliCe, oulr lu'ereCilge, filould llnt he ;;dv\rtifed
lint of thc vcric trothc as we c,.n pofliblc. ITo this Cnd
v\,: tlholght good to tfelld uip c:aptl'ai C:iacwec, xw!o w:s ill
idlinboliire ait the tymi of tliz l1.it attcmrpt:ite, xwho sp!oke
the!-re witl diverte, : ndi alter that \\ith the eji''cn's fil]s
;and1l ecr huflband conforle to tfhalt, w\hich we h.ave learied
!iy o!herr, and knil.w by ti tis trcportc, we Icndl the Ifine,
Cronlinnmd by the partics felt, that were there p!c'e.e lt llnd
all'tlcrs unto these that were executors of the acic.

'I'IS we fynde for certain, that the qluen's hulband

bAciii entered into a vehement filfpicioni of David, that by
hviii folCie thlynge was comnmitted,iwhich was nmot ;g aynfle
tie tiiiecn's honour, and inot to be borne of his perte,
tiflc comrnnmunicated his mynde to Gcorge D)uglas, who
:it'.'nlii his sorrows so great fought all the means he
couldc to put fomrc remedie to his griefi'; and communi-
atilig the fame unto my lord Ruthen by the king's con-
nnndment, no other waye coulde be found then that
I)avid should be taken out of tlce wayc. Wherein he
v'.;s to earnest and daylye prcfilil l the Lie, that:t io rcile
c(;l!(l be 11had untyll it \w'1as put in exectition. 'i thi
t':.:r wv., f)ound good, tl:at tle lord v o;'roii, at lll id JLind-
.t'r liould iCe Inade privi t to tl' intent' 'I t .

t tliee l ii ;lIt

A1. e tiheir friieds at hlanld, yf nelde re(i;ireli ; vlwicih
( .:;;ldl t ihem to allemlble to 'niaviy, as thicie tliou.,ht 'tf-

si lit l; ]i; t

;i int l t

t r; c,

thl a t

t' l t his dic li ination l t !r'i i;

li;:!j li Ic ' lit ill eC.Xcii: :ii()i ; wvhirI l \ 1.

I', (1 . I'n11 111(d 1th

i',tifl ti; s iltt:llite 3 dI.ie's :ilt-rc i ;d' ;1 : :li.imn. t thiiil,
1' 1*\ , :t whiich ti.:c t uie \d' l .

1 ,ld
i . cr. /ifl"'.d thlit

I;' A' 3

i \l-' ). le, l'; i;raye'l't, toI el(I ; 1iiia l t}l'eir c itii lvcl('s

I'l,'1 1h;:e 1eei fte lorited, yf tle kill< could not ie 1per-
l'..l 1l tllI I iliS ,hllnl this o i tiethci f'ice( dsi ; w

'l( f(,r

't' .( flr, r lice hadt thiat this intecnt si ould lake cl tl t 1'
c: w.i y, .:was content to yielde, witiho t all dilhlicultii

'," t''tilsi, with this colidition, that thliec f1liiulI ji.'c

:I'1 t'iilciilts, that lie nlight lave the ctrwin.i 1.iilllii()-

I .

. 11t was li imipatient to ie lthci tliti s tie atw, .11u,

.-rc di1 cl'e lr()itbliuht to Ilis cares, tlhit hie ti a

yly picelle
)11u' I.t! Ird t l'ithetl, that thele l might be no I 11,ct de-

; ;tld It) tile intent thai t

y lint ma tii(iefle i to) t!itr' w'( l,

Th.t ie approved tile ;ice, was contentt to be al the i,:,
QI thIIt hilt ililt,

J') L: .-,::

UpON Siturdaye at night neire unto virr of the clo, .

th" khing conmc!yeth hinitfef, the lord Ruthen, (]eCUl,
1)ul las-, aid two otherC, throwe his own chamber ir
the lrivy !.i ycrs up1 to ti:e queen's chamber going t,
which iicr'! is a cabinet abount x>: foot fquarc; in the
(C!me :1 'ltie low repoli ,l bo-d anl d a table, at the whliii
t!.ev:' s'c fitting at i.'pper the (jl'etne, the lad)y A-
'i!:, ani Da.tvid with his, capp upon his head. Ini, tih
c(thliitt ll re conieth in the king and lord R]urh:.n,

: 'i,

ild(l l); .i.l to come forthl, laying, that was no pla^

f'.r liim. '1 C1 qlCen 1 id, that it was hr will. lice
hrwfl;bian ali(n\cerCde, that y' was a ait i her honour.
'l'iti lo!d Ruthen laid, th.it he fl'cultl Irrne better ltIr
deuti(, and oftcring to have tiken hill by thi; arm, D);lid
took the queen by the hlyIl2tes ui Iizr gown .nd prit
hiiiiflt behindl tile quele wxvhl vodie gladlee have (ixed
hiirn: iut the kini haviii looted liis hand, and hril-
ing her in his arms, David was thruitf out of the c:ihi-
net throw the bed chamber into the chamber of pre.
fcns, whar were the lord Morton, lord Lindsey, who in-
tending that night to have rcferved hym, and the next day
to hang himl, lo manne bcing about him, that bore him
evil will, one thrufl himi into the Loddie with a d&gier,
:tid aft(rl hyin a great I .oi others, lb that he had in Ilis
boedie ;tlovt wonds. I. i; told for certayne, that
the kinil'h own Ja;ggcr was lfit ilicking in him. Whica-
t!e;- he !lick l imn or not we cannot be here certayn. lc
was :-, t Iall yn in the queen's prefens, as was laid, but
liiiVl; dnv.own the fi;a res o:it of the chliiamber of prefens.

'I I'. P' f ;:i:n0ed a )l'_, tynme with the queen her hows-

buiitd .ind the 1loid Rutlien. She made, as we here, grcat
inltcrcc!iici, th:it lie lhold ihave no htrin. She blamed

reatiee (hr hIw( f.hd that was thl( c'ator of lo ftiol a
iedl. it ii fiil, that lie did all'wer, that Davil h.1l
lin'r (t'p.2ic ,,i' her bodldie than lie for the space: of two
moiilthli; .irl !!C.C)lore lohr Ih e our and his own con-
telitni t',( ' *'..' lIis e.'ll.it ihiat lie fluoih be taikct
:iwayi. [lr. ....' (a!'ivtl ie: ) 't i "thl,:wosil;'s part tofick
l thIe }tbdnd,"' ad ttIC ill

t hatt the fault MwaS Ill

owln. !Ie 1lidtl itht wi ; lie caIme, file itlher woll niot
or mal,> i' s'ls 1ik. " \\' ell," fayl he fle, "' you haxe

take ln ; , : I li ,of ll. .,nd your fuLaewell." Thein vwee

pity, 1.l) n . 1 I.crd P tithlln, he is your majefly's lhtf-
banl ar1l Irn l. yicld dutic to each other. ' Why may

' 1 o10t,"'

,' I not,' fIalthc Ihc, " Ic-ve h im as Sell as your wile
L did her huflandl ?" ()llthcrhave doiln the like. T'he lord
Rlithen said that file was lawfully divorced froml hcr hInI-
b.illd, and for no fhcli clause as the Iing found hlinilc'(
grevc. IJ>Bcydes this mall was mean, bahil, cnemie to tlih
;.,l:ility, fname to her, and dclth'uti ion to r!';.'' ,ii..l
Cutilitry. ' XVeil,'" faith flie, " ts:.!t .{ .il b d.'a i)..

t o fme, of' you, yf his 1 ic>vlt." Vo'i; v- l'1.

i;'.'::

ti e lord Rutlhen; t;,r the nme: yo:-lr :i-r.t-- liii \:v. \ u:'"lJi'
cefn(ided, the worldl will judite lih xv,,ir .

i!fER .iiab:nd thi;ss vtllt fieaicti: , lt.. ;.i),;' r' l"oi i-

r: ali>v weepcth. T''he lord RuthIC l' bt.', il ;t c.i * ,> i
w\C:ea callcth for a drilik, an:d fIvtlhi, ' '

- ! i it (,

" with vour 1iiaijCtics )::rdonii, a !;lt ; :" i';:i. .1 i.cr it'
,i ., i'-f iort lie could, that she w('li s';cVe, .::i';: '. 1-
tthilio !~iat coulld e likld, could! J; ; l.cr.

IN tiis itnc;in time there ro(f: a :i(. ';!re it: t,' (--;':rt;

t,) i)tci fv which there went down tihe h1,;,' J' ili): , \ho
','t:t:t firayt to the eries llulinll, lottintctl ,tid Atloll it
<'.l t tiltl, ;and to aflure theiln f-onil tlc l: ;;l'; !'11:t 11 --
tuini' w is int ,ild ; ainl iilt . 'I l'l;. lo.w

tl:.

t killg fear, whenl theic hc:iJ tlhat imy lord A\t':'r,,,-
wold be there the next (lay, a:td ArgilC n.'t rhilC, i iliut-
lv and I',tlhwell bo,th (cit Otit iof ;it windowv' and lo (dcitrt.
Atloll had leave of tie kinliL v.itl 1F 1fll and Gl:,Jorcs
(viho was lately c;illed I), ylcy tie perifon of rvwnc) to
Lu where they wolll, ;lid bi tin co,)nc .

l.l ot rs the court

hy the lord ot' iditiii, . 'll.'iir went ctt :lia ht to such

;ltc<e-, whicle tlicy thought thlc!ni!;. x in mole tIuftie.
lIEFolE. the king leali talk with the queen, in ti,e her-

it' of the lord Ruthen flie was conltent thtat he fhululd lie
with her that niight. We know not how li ** himilcil,
ttit ca.me not at her, and cxxulfcd hymlcif to-) his fri'cnd,,
tliat he was so fleepie, tlat lie could not vwake in due
tli:lofn.

I'ITlRE were in tlis (ompl)an;ic two tliht c::am in with

tlc king; the one Aldlcwe Car of F w;l enI.':(rl', xvil(i
tihe qucn fayth would have flroiken Ier v li a dai cr, auld
onec Patrick Balcrtiec, broter to t) tlc jiliicc clerk, who
allo hicr grace fayth, oHflred d

a d. ai tlll tir be. lly with

the cock down. Ve have beeni cr ulcftly in hall wvill
the lord Ruthen to know the varitic; but lie ;flbiotlrtls us
(01 the contrarie. 'I here wvec itn the (luccn's clih:ibicr
the lord Robcrt, Arthur Arfkii, one or two otilts.

' Ihey
,(i:

They at the first offering to make a defence, the lord Rti;
ven drawd his dagger, and 4 mo weapons then, that wc(,
not drawn nor Ien in her prefcns, as we arc by this IcrlJ
aiflured.

[The letter afterwards gives an account of til(: 1.hli

to Dinbar Cattle, whither resorted the lords Ilil;..,
and lBothwell: 'Ihat the earl of Morton and lord Ruh.
veil find themselves left by the king for all his fair lo-.
rn1;i, bonds, and subscriptions. That he had protc!ici
before the council, that le was never consenting to the
death of David, and that it is fore against his will: "'I'i tit
" of the grcit substance David had there is much (jIol:(1r
"' foie lay in gold to the value of i"'"f. His appir-!
" was very good, as it is said, 28 pair of velvet hll.
" lis chamber well furnifiled, armour, dagger, p1llu-
" letts, har(uclbules, 22 swords. Of all this notlin_
'" fipold or lacked saving 2 or 3 daggers. He 1had ti)
" custody of all the queen's letters, which all were dcli-
" vred uilooked upon. Ve hear of a juill, that lie hi;i
" hanging about his neck of fume price, that cannot [Ir
" heard ol. Iie had upon his back, when he was flay.,
" a niihlt gown of dam;fk furred, with a fatten doubict,
" a hole of ruflct velvet."]

No. XVI. (Vol. I. p. 379.)
Part of a Letter from Randolph to Cecil, Jan 16,

1:65 6.
--- C CANNOT tell what mifliking of late thrre h.ilh

j been between her grace and her huflannl, li:

prcfetth car-nefily lor the matrimonial crown, wlhicll fhi
is loth hiafily to grant; but willing to keep foinewli.t il
ftior, until file know how well lie is worth to enijoy 1hit1
a fIoereignt)y: ;id( tlierCforr it is tholugllt that the p1ir-
limnoent for a time fliall be deferred, but liereof I c.;:
write Ino CCrta.i nty.

From Mr. Randolph's letter to secretary Cceil.
4 April, TI. E jiTflic-clerk in hard terms, more for ii l''0ii

'.6 ''- ,. thler's c;luife than an:Ily dl ;rt, and as far as I c.ln lit 1

.'.i.i. h' the king of all otler in xvuoifl, fr neithelr h.th tlhc' tlti'l
Origin.l. l.1

*t:od opinion of him for attempting of any thin; that
-,;s agaiiftl her will, nor the people that hle hl.lh de:ied
Iu miriifeft a matter, being proved to be done b' his com-
mnudment, and now himlllf to be the acculer and pur-
suer of them that did as he willed them. This Scott, that
wss executed, and Murray that was yefierdly arraigncd,
svcie both accused by him. It is written to me, for cer-
t..in, by one, that upon Monday last spoke with the
(uCCn, that (he is determined that the houie of Lennox
fliall be as poor in Scotland as ever it was. The earl
c(irit;nueth tick, fore troubled in mi d ; he flaith in the
a.'i,, lis son hath been once with him, and he once
wvith the queen, since she came to the caltle. The (ltclei
h.ih lnow fecin all the covenants and bands til t p,,fcth be-
tv..cln the king and the lords, and now filnldth that his
I!tclratiull, before lher and council, of his ininocncv of
iric dcath of l)avid was falre; and grievously ofi.ndel'
that, by their means, he flould eeck to come to the
crown matrimonial.
Parte of a letter fiom Randolpl to Cecil from Bcr-

wick, -5 April 1566.
-- ' "HiERE is continually very much feeech of the

T. ditord between the cueen and her Ihulban;d,

} for that, that is commonly said and believcd of him-
,!', t hat Mr. James Thornton is gone to Runic to fie
:,r a ivorce between them. It is very certain that M.a-
.'.illc.r had not fpokcn with Iiim within thee tllncc dai\s.
! is neither accomp.iiiiniid nor looked upon of any noL[ c

y

:i": 1attenlded )upon by certain of his own frrvalits, .and
' 01r iCven of the guard ; at liberty to do, and go where
'd Vhat Ii he will, they hiave no hope 'yet almonli thilel-

,'cs of (luictiicrfs.

-- AVIID's brother ipaniedi Jofe'li, who came ltis
viy \Ailth ;\:l(:v;fier, tlklown t,) anv lan hlic, i b.-
.-.uu ;:- 1C 'I). iii his b.,.'.:;r' i - tce.

XiO. IJ. i f ';. :.'. 1..

No. XVII. (Vol. I. p. 3S4.)
The earl of Bedford to Cecil, 3d Auguflt is6;.

H E queen and her huflsand agree after the old man;
ncr, or rather worlc. She cateth but very fcldin,I

with him, licth not, nor kecpeth company with him, 1:,
lovcth any such as love him. He is so far out of lhe;
books, as at her going out of the Ca;fle of Edinburih,
to rcno'.c abroad, he knew nothing thereof. It c:iiini
for modefly, nor with the honour of a queen, be rc;port(,i
what file said of him. One Hickman, an Engrlifl me'-
chant there, having a water fpanicl which was verv [j:l,
gave him to \/4r. James Mclvill, who afterwards, ftr i!,.
pleasure, which he saw the king have in such kind,
dogs, gave him to the king. The queen thereupon f;
narvelloufly out with Melvill, and called him difiemlckr
and flatterer, and said fhc could not trust one, who wo:,'
give any thing to such one as she loved not.

The earl of Bedford to Cecil, Aug. 8.

H E difagrecment between the queen and her liiil-
hband continueth, or rather increafetl. Robic

MIclvill drawing homewards, within twelve niles
Edinburgh, could not tell where to find the queen; fit.
which time Ihe is come to Edinburgh, and had not t;w'l\
horses attending on her. There was not then, nor ti,:
I can hear offincc, any lord baron, or other rnoblcl.iii
in her company. The king her htufland is gone to l)unl-
ferniling, anid paflcth his time as well as he may; hil'.!;
at his farewell, such countenance as would make a hit!
band heavy at the heart.
Sir John Forfler to Cecil, 8 Sept. from Berwic!.

T l 1 . qtieC hIat her hfr iandl in fllmill efliimntiii

T :11d tllIe cal of Lcnnox c.ame o110t in the (inICt'ii
fight iince the deatli of Davy.

Sir John Fortler to Cecil, i Itl Dec.

r- I I cearl of Bothwell is appointed to receive the am-

I baffildors, and all tlings for the chrifllninl arc 3t
i; lordflli;,'s alppointment, a id the fame is carecly well
l;c(d if the nobility, as is s.iid. The king and queen is
j.tl njtly at Craigmillar, but in little greater familiarity
:;.:n e w.Is all tl!e while palt.
A'ivlcrtilfcnents out of Scotland from the earl of

Bedford.
r 1-" II A 'I' the king and the queen agreed well together :\,gu

two day), after her coming from -, and after J1,66, Paper

::iv lxrd of Murray's coming to Edinburgh, fume ncew "fceifrom
:ili-,rl ; has happened. The queen hath declared to my theuriginal.
uisd; of Mlurray that the king bears him evil will, and
'il, lClid to her, that he is determined to kill him, find-
In;, fauilt that fih: doth bear himn so much company : and
in like manner liath willed mIy lord of Mulray to fpiere
'hr king, which he did a lew nighits since in the
(c',c I's nlprellncc, and in the hearing of divers. The
.<:n1 conlllcld, that reports were made to him, that
rni lid of Murray was not his friend, which made himn
1;i'.,k that tiling lie repented; and the queen affirmied,
t.:at the kilng; had fpokcn uich words unto her, and con-
tf ei-d before the whole house, that fle could not be con-
lent tlht either lie or any other liould be ulfrield to my

d of \Murlray. Mly lord of MIurray encquired the famni

lirimtl, :and ulied his ipeech very mo leflly, in the mcan

nllc thle king departed very grieved ; lie cannot bear tlih.
the1 (licert lhould use familiarity either with man or wo-
1,111, and eflccially the ladies of Arguile, Murray, aiid
M lel, who keelp nioft company with her. Mly lord of
Ml'lrly, ;ll d

I Botlhwell have beeln at evil words for tile L.

,ol ledingltonl, befiore the queen, for hleand Sir JalmcL 1Bal-
li1e hi.id necw conie fruoll Lediniton, witi iis ;il\v'er up-
on lic!ih heads or articles as BLuthwell anld lie lhouild .igrce
tiI)l1, wIiIcl beil reported to the s;lid earl in th: quIeen's
1pi'lt'1Ce, mlde anfwtr, that r (e le parted with luich
liiJ, !,as ws45 dC'ircd, he fhlould part with his lile. AMy

1' t 2 loid

lord of Murray. said stoutly to him, that twenty as honcff
men as lhe flould lose their lives ere he reafte Lednp-
ton. 'The queen spake nothing, but lheard both; in thwc::
terms :hey parted, and since, that 1 hear of, have not met.
TIhe 9.c:en after her hunting came to Edinburgh, anM
carrvyc(i the prince thence to Stirling with her. 'lhis
i.ft .Sturdlay wia execuctd a servant of the lord Rtllh-
venl's, who cons I;:d that he was in the cabinet, but not
of cou;noil of the falS. The queen liath also opened to
my lordl of Miurray, th;at money was sent from the pope,
how much it was, and bv whom, and for what purpl).1
it was brot':rht.

No. XVIII. (Vol. I. p. 4co.)
P'art of a letter from lE liz.deth to Mary, Fecl. 2,

i r69. A copy intlerinec' by Cecil. It conlai;i

an eanlsvwe

to n com)!:1:ninng letter oF Mi'al'

upon the itnpriiniii, of' tile Bifiop ,f i' Ro's

--

' i FTI'.ER this [i.. 'a
. y's h:1i in So':

~-\ how paLtiCntly did I he.ar ,';tili manyi \''i!t '-

lavs ill not ra ti lefying tlihe i' a ordcd by your o\'.:i c0i.
mil in1r's, lwhch: tly I lccci, 'ci (dtin,1 l

tc 'kiCii:','(, n k:

sidLes d c imal ld cauAL's (,t ('l ici,, thI t I ndii t .;
hlcrcater triu, to ;:'.v writiii'.. ' i';iT n l-tllowed a }i il
n11air. r of( dcalin:.r '.''il 12-u,

c it.) e'ntice it,' (fibje i .L.i ,d',.:

kinlin',il n, the lo id ,.u' i ,)t i:;!.cr col 1i O1 pri i.,: .
for l.ild, to COllo ' iit tlie Irealit, ti )it:cc''d iln tirc',' ''
nl ,l'ria:l \\'t' :

, im . it k.) t

r i ;..vl /.(x,.'!. , yea toc(i

: -;

Clilh' 1ic' am: i' \

i..',td 1.t ',' :)':; it (.r I|l. ',. . ' ,i

'il,'i

I [ai

' u i , { :r ; t;u , :, .i;'ti t>. i;.1I |';;...l Iby

(';t :' , :

nI ' li1 .I".j l

th: r 1. . i'. .i; I

:,n;'..,.;:.'s :itll (ti '.' :.', t"

..

lionle, 111dl t' lilll ;1

i i ll :,)

' ,) 1'. (L;

' 1 I f'lit :

',l.i.., ,','*'

A n d \; i i.\ il t'

i ;; ':i l I ;, 1 v. : ii |; .' ,

1 .

wiwit h

:

'h :i il, l , !',.1.

:',i:

A I.='

i'-

vithi > ;' iittli].d! i

v rlin::t.> ,,1 1.. t(,wv; d'; ! '

m ' *

dill ;;f!'. O;i ll l'.,,l,,, ; i*';(. \v"

I.n(-,v, t'.., .' ,

tl . ( )i ',l ol n \:V I,,I;, k ::ilnil:(', ih'.!i had{ [,,.*I'li: i '., U ' /

,tfs.' l,,!'.i ' ' ,i r .l l

i( l i

n li n 11 iri a, . I;, ;tnl( ! i; (lii',', -

d tithlll Ill. !, s l(' tv. i.d"' I' li'is 'i \( lr i.n. I lovl 1:;
a;lso ,dcal I by nt'l,.; '
ig' t ' lec;'i i' l: ;in, b 'jl)'. >'it: I,.

) ,

Siid,j to you, when others noirifict d discord l'Ietwivct

w,,.,, who as it ficmed had more povwtcr to work tl;ier lur-

pi,1i., biing evil to you lmotl, lthi. 1 h.1tl to do \',;c ooi,
in rerfl'et of the evil I h.ad ryccivcid. \. e!l I \will over-
pans your hard accidents that followed for 1 ick of rolllv-
ing my council. And then in )our inolt cxtrc(micx, when
,u'o was a prisoner indeed, aln in da(n!,i r of Youlr lii i froll
your notorious evil xvillers, liow far from In v min li \v;iw
.i: rcmembrance of any fiormer uvikinll'cfs you hia flihcxd
iuc. Nay how void was I of r-cllpet to lhe dcligns whVicli
t:e. world liad teen attemptc'd by )'out to im clo ow, :Cid
the feruciiry rtliat niillht li\,ti\ cfiCdl to inll1V iitc by your
i' inti, wheni 1 filditnii your calamity t') be g'reaIt, thi! t
\inu werce at tile pit's brink to have mi'lrtblv lot y.''r
itel, did not srly intreat for your life, but ({ ti;:''te.ilud
omine as w-rc irritated ngaainfl you, t} .i oL

.. l.i y f(v
it, eve.n I was the principal cantif to la'.'c yui' I ItC.

No. XIX. (Vl. .

I p. 419)
Letter of Q_ Eliz)iberh to Q( of Scotts. Thi:s

marked on the back with Cecil's liand.-Copia
Ii e'iriu7ii Relirs . Aciy'ejiais ad Reginam Scotorlum.
VI 1 °. .pi/is.
M AI)AD MI,, voiis nvant trop miol.'l. par rMI. de ;..cr,:Te

Crocq,je n'eufI lc t ft peu de collfidcration de vous

f.ilc'lcr dc cctte lettrc, si Ics liens du charite vcrs Ics ruinc.,
ct Ics pricrcs des mnillrablci.s in: 'y cortraigafliLnt. Jcc n-
tci:. (iic un edit a cit divulu c lde ,pr om, rladalle, que
1:ii.' t.llcl , (iuc \'c'tult jutlilicr qucOi S

o els el lcis curtrirs

tlc \x,)tnlc.s. I tlll'i, ct 11l1on fetl COufill, viclincll t :1 Ic ;airc
I1. :me de cc ili

.

'. (. (1cllc chofc, commoe c'clft pIlus

h I ,.!i'..ct nccll lir e, ui en tcl caS ( poturri .l-lire, ini
y i.(i.l t c.,lc!;i. iiic.'lie ut ilicrlC ou fililcfl , ;illi Ic lrc ct
:;,iii (t i 111.t1it ,,i utCillO mlllti c 1nl'o t liullibleiiciC t lrcilis,
<inl: it' \',it,. p i:id!c d it l)o llo ,i: c Ic j r,

Ip, lcc (p,.'l,'

t',I):, ,iL ,I, (liUe Ics il(iques (fC loOit con.'ili'ts par lfo(i, dc
s.,i' i. ue1i. '

pi lr ,il[ ils in poturlon [,:is lai; p llat.l t,

j3' 11t" j)ii; u i .is finon pour l'ainour dec Vou'is nu,::e,

o iiui il

t:i'licl e

Ilc s, ct pour la colnflatioln d(t; ::1:lc..is, de

*,Ius c !lXhortl. le Ic cur concedcr cette requi'llc, l[.lii' , li
t t' ). :-'''101l ni»',yV(olt' tolUriicroit gl ,lll. ltut

c ;, {.il,' ,;,,
d(c plus ;ec j'clpc 1t c lt'e nlz, Ut ql,,c 1nc ;et(t ' : '' 11-

y f 3 i,.t i

tiers ouyr. Pour 'arnour de Dieu, madame, Iuf-C' dc tC'li.
fincerite & prudence en cc cas qui vos tou' hc dc si pr.-,
que tout le monde aye raison, de vous livrcr coinlic ill-
nocente d'ung criime si enorme, chose que ii n fillcs,fci i./.
digncmenI't cfbloyi hors de rancz de princelrcs, & n111 l.i;
caule latitc opprobre de vulgaire, ct plutot que ccla vo: \I
avinnlc, je vous fouhaiterois uine fepultu c holor,il,
qu'une vie icaculec ; vous voiez madame, quee jvou stiai
corme ma fillc, et vous promets, que h1 j'en cufti, ne lu,
fouhaiterois mieulz, qui ie vous defirc, cominre lI Seilesll
l)icu me porte tfciioignagc, a qui ie pric de boil cteuil
vous irifirer a fii re cc qui vous fcra plus a honilcur, (
a vos amis p!us de consolation, avec mcs ters t-ordiiil!V,
rccommcndations comnme a icelle ; qui Ic fouihaite Ic pli-
dc licn, qui vous potrra cn cc monide avelir. I )c \V\.t.
cc 8 jour de Janvicr 1 en halte.

No. XX. (Vol. I. p. 43-,)
Account of the sentence of divorce Ietw- : en ric

earl of B thwell and lady Jean Gordon hiswi:;.
;'ronl a manulcript belonging to Mr. David
Falconer, advocate Fol. 455.
TU POUN the 29 of Apryle 1567, before the ric:;;

hon. Mr. Robert Maitland dean of Ahcul:cv.

Mr. Eclwaid Henryson doclor in the l.iws, two of tii,
senators of the college of justice, Mr. Clement l ill,,
and Mr. Alexander Sy)ne advocattis, comnmillers of L.lir:;
comnpeered Mlr. I-lenry Kinronc, procitratorfor Jcan (;r l-
dotiic countes of Bothwell, confilttite e her for purfi'w-
ing of ane proces of divorcement intendit by her cnnti.i
J[ames erlc 1lothwel her ihutif;iil fr .tduliry , coin mitcl hI
him with Bclie Crawfurde tlie pirfuers cirvalit (or lit'
tinic ; and f-cklykc, for the i;liid cle, comnil)c'.rd l\ r. l d-
monud Hay, wlo cftcr he had; pu rlfed and craved thli plrr-
liltr's prociur;u to'ls ;oath de c;ilulri i;i, if he hald jull c:t;:
to p)irl'ew tile laid adtioln, and ol)tained it, denyed the h-
bell, and the said Mr. 5 arrie took the miiornr, the :A;(li ..
of Apr)'Ic, tl prove the lia epro prina. 'lIhe (pililik.
haviin prIodlced lione wit'fliets, he took the nlext I.i\,
being the I of ¥/L.ly, to do farther diligence. Upon ilt1
quhillik of .May), lie piluditeed lionie 10 witintics, ;a;:

! A tmif il h
in the (tle cuirc it cd witl Cccil'a hI nd Vill' . A.l,11: .

(.''

.:clluncc(l farther probaticunc. After quhliik, lhe desired
.1 term to be afi':ncd to pronounce centence. 'I'o whom
th!e fatid commiflairs afigiiind Satterdav next, tlhe ? of May,
,: rono:l;icc Ientcince tiherein, fccuilum .li :ilcr:at ct I.ro-
i.t;i, c1 ilk accord ingly was given that day inl t;.vour of
:}'],' Iprll'lC w
iat .

AT i the famne time there was another preces intcndiit be

I!he cl *,f IBotlhw1ll contra his lads., tor to h:lve iceir nlmr-

.I.'c declarecd nul, as being contlai.tc! a rainllt the canons,

wliit :i (lilpienfatioii, aniid e and his liad le-i,: within
di' r'cus dfceiila1nd viz, ferdiis a kinll :, ;!':: l t v,'yf(ci io, cx-
pedii:li: of tilis proces, there was ;. cunoniliiuluc Crantit
t: tlie; :chlhiflopl of St. Andi ,i-. t coeniiofcc and det!er niel
it, anld [\o'. bishop of Dunkeld, 'e/illiin bliliop of' Dun-
bl!,r, .Ar. Andro Craulflrd chanon in (;lafC'ow, and
'; iifll of l:ini;fh:a, , \'lr. A-lex::.icr Crcichtoiln, andi Alr.
(;cor-g eCooke chl:inccllo: of l)u kcld, and to. .\ir. Jolile
A.l;iiderflto in chan ou in DIunbar and prcbendar of BeIl-
!to)il", or anI ;.illC oft theli. 'I'lis coinmililiolie is datit
2, Al''rie 156', x' as pilclntcd to two of

t he I;:ids coin-

in1iEi:Icrs, \iz. rI r. And' Crawfiird and Mr. juhn Ma,-
dcrll.ul,hc on Satterday 3 May, 'by . Ir. 'I'homas Hcipburic
paxrl(ll of tul lihanlflltoc k, proctiurator foi tlie rcI of Botll-
:\'ll, who accepted t:e dclcgatiouine, ai;d :lgav out their
cit;atiol by precept, direlted, D)ccano Cliriftia;iiitatis de
i l.d1i 'toneC, niec ,ion vicario fiu cuilato ecclc, p;irocili. de
iKe. ichli:.ulc, (lci c uictinq l altcri ca.ppel;ia io dcbite rcqtilfi-
ti,, Icr lii:imnoinii, at the sIid erlcs iiit.nmce, botli of the
l.!i1!v Icr;il.dlly il itlic could be had, or othcr:wayv, at tie
Ir.uorlcl krk of C'rcichtounIe til time <)i

t ltovi c, or at lir

dI'lllin' i '-lacc bcfore witncflls, prinio, iccunido,, tcrtio ct
it'rcilt(lric, tni:cii talllCIn contCxti Ir<:t;pli.iep cdidCo.
,\:,d1 likeways to be witilellcs i tlhe ,d ma;tter, Alex.
bl ',,p ol (;allown;y, v,,'lo did marry tile L'l cl eIc and his
lIld), 111 I lalcrud- holc kirk, in Fecb. 1565, iri johin llat-
iit.\-i-(I of Auclimnulc jullicc clerk, ilr. Rohitt Crecichl-
{t1111 ol l'lii,k thlie qU(In'S :dvocate, r11. I)Dlvid Chi.Ilirs
p'lo'ovut (,I '

C iciltouli and (.ci nIcllor ool tl's, .\d111.t. -

.('li,(,t ,l Mnclrofl, ani to coinplear l)eore tl I;lid judges
or 'lil osc of them ill St. (jcils kitk in I'Si' 1t AlMonday
(I: 5 ,1 i Ai\'la, be thami:{tlc, or their procui;tois. L'puil
tdi laid 5 day, l/1r. Johlni, iatuliltoun, one ol' the judges
dicl;eg. at n(ly beimig pricfelt, coui iicaitd the lame proclir;t-
mlb for butli tlie partics that were il the loinicr iprocci,

1I f 4. Mlr.

Tw'. ,l:r.'s r.r Edmund Tay ( articulatlie ) ,

j,1.,!? s.; fine of the witneffies futnrnmncd produced, and received
i: gi',h :. or proving of the fame. The said procurator renounc:l

fririer prolhatioune, and the judge alfigned the inornc, ti,
6th of May, ad publicandum producta, iernepe ..rpfi-
tirne iplo(ruin tefliuin. The qilhilk day, polt puhlicart.s
d,:p.,;,it::r:e pr.dictaas, Mr. Ilir. Kiniroil', procurator f(r
tihe lady infl :nlter oljucit oi jt liones juris gcnie.alit;
cuntra producEa, infi.lpcr renuncial it ulteriori (Icfciifiii ,
irroiide conclufa de conlfnfu procuratorur hinc iij'
c:nFil, jrdex praeditctus ftatuit cratirinurn diem pro tern ii,
ad pronunciandam fuarn fententiain dcfillitivani, c e!d.
du.tdis coram eo, in prieCenti caufa et 1proc(efll. L'!..
forni hereunto, on WVedrlifday the 7th of /Ma4y, thie (f
judge gave out his sentence in favour of tlhe erle, deti.i-
ing the ma3rriacge to be, and to have beenI null troli tne
irgi nnrin' in refpedt of their contingence in blood, wrlitil
hi inered their lawful marriage without a diifpcilation uo.
tained of befoir,

No. XXI. (Vol. I. p. 438.)
A letter from England concerning the murder of

king Henry Darnley.

. ns Mor- AVING the commodity of this bearer Mr. Claik,

hl, b' 1r- I tho't good to wr;te a few words unto you. I hlac
Btll. R. rcc". foine writs from you; and fione I have leen latcl'
N-. 25. font to others from you, as namely to the earl of Bedfordl o

the i6th of May. I have participat the contents thcrcrf t
such as L thoulght meet, this mekle I canl aflur y)u ; ti:c
intclligence given hithcr by the FIreach was untrue, lr
there was not one papist nor proteflant which did not Cro-
sent that jultice Ihouled be done, be thle qticcn my lov'. i!
and support, againlft such as had commintted that ahori.
nable ill murder in your country ; but to fay truth, thi: ll i
arid coldiilc's did not rife from such as were called to cc;i:-
cil, hut from filch as (hould give life and :.:cctlri!lr
thereunto. And fulrther, I aflire you, I never kl!ev ,11
matter of cflate proposled which had so many l'avolilcsi
all fiorts of nations as this had: yea, I can shy uilo

yr,,
no man promoted the matter with greater afliction, thI'

thel

rir Spanish amblaftfdor. And (ure I am tlat no man id:ire
on,)lily be of any other inid, but to affirm that wiolo-
cvcr is rruilty of this munrder hlandfiafted with a!vout;e,
is unworthy to live. I hiall not need to tell you, wlilch
i)' our letts, and llayes froml all good tiliings here. Yuu
are acculainlted with them wl as

wel as I. Needs [ mniit con-

tih', ti:it liowliover we omit occ.l.iolis of benefit, ho-
:li:r, aul litrety; it helloveth your whole lnoi!ltv, ;i1n
iiliiinly fuich( as before and after the mItrdler were L i '.lid
to allow of Bo(dwell, to plrolcciltz with Iword an.1l jui ice
tihn punillmenl t *Co thoflt ab;oninable ai:s, thln.i'i cvi lendi
yrl but a cold aid, and albeit you, ;1ad diveits oilierht, 'I':h
hulnmuraile ;id hioneft, be well known to mc, :i i !in-
dryv tllers hecrC, to be juilt,fi. ile n all tla'll .itli i) s and
(lillh's; yet thlilnk not tile colitrt.rv but )your 'vhol.'

! tl,' io

. i'i'niff}iel and infamit by these doin l. whilch ill, y '1 ill,'>I
.!1)'= ot,)L. WVhat we flh.ll do I know not, lc;t ler di, i
v;i!tc uiito you afluredly, for we be fIlljce't unto .a!l y Ini-
.itionl, and yet I think we shall cith' r :id vriu, or coiiti-
nu' in tilc defence and faf'efua;'id of \oulI' p *'n(, I' Is it
ai;petar to us that you meiin his i.if;'i; 'd , ' Led, 1land ;lot
tl. run the fo,iune of I"r;ance, whicli wvli i)e s,;ti o)wn
d:.'iituctioii, if) yu be unadviCcd. I knvow ;ot ,i:, ino ,ot
on1, ol any quality or c[ilte in tllis country, v.litcn td.cs
:aliow of tlhe qulicet y. uIr Ioverc 1l, hit would J l.:!, l;e
wolrlJ were rid of her, lb as tih le wam le

w ,:i l;i;: \;,ut

flrthir dnld.tlmer, tihat is to l;y by ordinary jul't:ce. 'fii L
I lsed the 23,1 of M.iy.

No. XXII. (Vol. I. p. 448.)
Part of a letter from Sir Nicolas Ir'!rokiroiton

to ( ceil, I th of July 1(67, firon; BIci wc:.
*--ó I R, your letter of tlhe 6th of July, 1 iec ivo!
k the '" °,;Bi-

k i lih ;it li( rw.lck. I ;1i 1(liy to i a li. 1 ,,r

,.:'rn'n's i.dlj"y's dliiufiittn ailtei'lt.' ntlsd tw'V.,lios tlihel
I"l: l, si r w i ',, . 11 1 do c11, it is 1l.'y C. :tI i Itll ltl.ll td
I 11i (ore in lte;,u , Ill;1i tint ¢t l l It (I

e niiii,, :ind 11 ill

1' Iateli ili hls 11ri'l l s to i,( k ( inec 1heu.n lleIt

l i l

.l litll(eIs

tl lr ll:t ijlt\ aitd

, ei ,ilni1, lthai ll iLicc ihUlUI l bctlud
w:iuch i', voidl Uo good ;falc.

A let-

A letter from Sir Nicolas Throkmorton to Cci;!.

from Faftcaftle, i2th of July 1567.
' e C, I R, as you night perceive hby my letter of tlhe i tii

. 1y, I lodged at F f catfil tlait niiht, accompi;i;\

with the lord Hunic, the lord of Ledinltton, and llamr;
.Ielvin, where I was intreatCd very well, accordin r :;to !
slate of th lt place, which is fitter to lod e c pri'illie-s !;..:
folks at liberty, as it is very little, so it is very t,;i,;,
Liy the conference I hive had with the lord of Ledi i) i;
I find the lords his aflbciatces ;nd he hath left inothil;? ;!:-
thought of, which may be either to thir danger, (r v,.:
ihem firctv, wherein they cro not forget what go(l :.;
Iarmre Iran;ce may do them, and likewiic theyc ec,,l :.,
the fame of England; ; but as farr as I caln pleic.i, I;
be plain with yow, they f ind more perril to r'ro\v it:;!
thlem throulgh tile quCeens imajefys dleai tling thn eitr tl,,',
do by thc French, or by any contrary factiotl ;.;;,;:.;:
themfelvcr, for they allure tlhemfelvcs the lqueen wsill lci
them in the bryers if they ruin her fortoun, and thlu!;
they do acknowlledge reat bencJit as well to thelii, ;,. t
the realm of lEngland by her ni?.je(y's (d(ing's at I..i:l

lwhereof they fiay mutually lher nmlajfly and boih thie l:li;;

have received l reat fruit: yet uponl other aceidenl s \lnhi,
have chanced liice, they hlave obfcrved liuch thiiiL' it he.
majcfiy's doings, as h;ave enled to the (dainer ot lich :
he liath dealt withal, to the overthlrov of your ow iidli l'.-
mencts, a;nd little to tle fit;ety of any p,-t : a; ld 1up:ll li:'.
corlidehrations a1nd dicourfi s at lncgthi, niethiluak th I ll
a dll position in them, that

e ither

t hey mind to .I;ilk thc :r

barg-ain with Fratnc, or ell'c to deal neither wilth 'ri .
nor yow, hbut tt do wha t they fhlll think meet hfr lli!
1t:;te and futret, attd to uife their remedy as ocea;liis I ,;fli!
move tlhem ; neatli.iiL neithelir to irritalte LFrance or Ii
land, untill Ilech tilme is they l; vc malde their ba ;,:, i ti. l-
fuiedlyl with o (, of yo\w; for they think it co'tetil t it,
procedt with xow both for a wlulc i ).rli pilii, lr lt'11;
was mly lord( ofi l.edintto's terms. I do 1peit;1i' illc
take the imatter very tikindly, tilit no better .ltvti i
mlade to the letter, which the lords did fe:nd to her m.ijt il.
;ldl i kewie tlhat t they hear l otli l .', frot )I yow to thLir
til,.alinlt, I hliave al'wcredl as wti aIs I can,

; llnl talti.l-
lodged their own pt ocCCeedi)t, lIt ublcurely wllth the qtli 1;.

9 ;111

.(d tlieir uncertainty hath occationcd this that i vyet hnp-
pi.in'd, and therefore her Maijicty lhath fen! me to the eCd
I may informn her throituhlv (if the (.it': o! tiih maitcr, :ind

i:'n ; t!he dclaration ol their milns and int.ets to fI.ii
ri po!cs ;is shall he by tme propnlcd nl t( hir lin cl v'A ; [ -
:,ilf unto th.-ni, they Ih;;ll be ;re ;n:ioiilv rii d ir.-lb!i tc! v :al...
!wcrced. /At thel.c tlinl: the l 1 1' l. edn 'ton { liii: ;in il
!,iook li u !:,i!, and fhld it \weie het!r lI''r us

yo\w \(nd

i ieis a( li)' , ltl n;1 i the r to do, l' in r y) r rl. 1v. ', r .!, ;s.
I t:. ic1 i: the end tl.hat wlil prove; S' if t;,c i' lieu .II
l i ii l l I.illdil ton, Ic Lroceq is ,one ti o p1;: urc l.:e il-
i,)J| lt his con'iiing hither or ;l ian oi- like . :,li'. '1, t,)

i;' vr thuln, of tleir quueen for e v

c c , x\l (lhof 1-. ! ;i

i ';

I;i'-h

in lir:;ce, in abby reclikle, the prince at :h.' 1',c:!C;I
i. otioln, the rI'alim overned Kb '\ coluncil e t otf . ',L:r :-
t!u:, otf the Scottiflil ntion, the torts comiiittcdtl t, i r.. '
eiifio,\v o[ 'lich as fhaill be chofin : ',ni:oilt thcirilf'i]cv, as
\t I liikd no gcieat likclihootl that I fliil h1ave

);t c tIc . tih

Ciji-n, it is obj ectedl tle, may not in diiilifiCaf'c the il'elncil
k!)'j, ltnlcgs they were lure to hsid the (qilc.11 of' in;l'ld
; d tricnd ; and when they once by l'i\y a-cctf to lii
(q|ei) have o(} l(ftidel the I'reilnch, tlhen thle)y f.) )'ov '.rili
ina.lk y,'i r profit tlirecof to thlicir uiiloii'; ard .is to t;i"

.'Ls' liSi'',', vi whlilh was the lillt: head that i pruop''i'd.,

lliiy l.idl tilat thereby tlhey did |pr'ei\-e tiit tile q(1 -'cl
w nlit; thel'ir l ill(lin , for a:, for th i' eft of te ilic ttvrs it
v''.., hut folly to ta;lk of thicn the liberty' oiong blloi;
hnt [Sl tlhey, if )'you will do us in, :,ood, tdo us o li.ilrm,
:ild we will providce lor our selves. In thse cnd tlihy ltild,

r. fliho!lld refhtle our own cmnliodit)', bfore tiCu\' coiil-
tidd with ;ily otiler, vllchl I fl(lnil hea1c.i of ;it niy
(*lni;i, to) Edill'; by my nllxt I loli)c to (end )'o til t
I iLoid coIIC I ude 1)' i aniilto s, A rl;''!l, li ntly', .nud tIlit
!...ulioi, tot l. iinutili to tlhe precj tlilc of the hlid'- oft lditl',
' il thl: \hiicil w as (Clt inlt( 1';i te ; tlt li, .ivit , lio Ii, ol
'Iillc but cuipelllled to elil) on hioriehack with thel 1]its
', !,o tt) I'ldin', I iinibil)' ta.ke my leiavc of froiu la'.'-
li' lil'_' 12th uof July i s 7.

To

To Sir Nicolas Thro'krorton being in Scotland

By the queien, the i4th July 1567.
T RUSTY and well beloved we greet you well, tlinl j

we think that the c;ufies vill often chan e upn vi-

riety of accidents, yet we think fir (Indry retp%.'e, I,.
anlils, that as y)o\ iLhall deal wi;h the I )rds haviii c'i.rc
of the young prince fur the committing of hi'n iitlo .-
realm, to fill yow lfo do w-il, i i re try vic! t'ie q:; ;i,
to ofF'r '; r t'. t . lhe:e h'-r re " e -...eth t,.) he i,:,j ,

t,'.:'i i 1) I;c: f n caIi."

, . - ;:

.: 1' IlI

bc. c ntit,':

tI: tt W -' i IJ V ,:;. t'.ljy "" * ' ..' . i 'ti lc , withiin ti'.

C ".11:.^.. '. ", i s) near :: '- :. i )tw it is; we lall n,)

Ls 'l to. -l l ; ri is )... l . r;;v t.:rtAin for h r ch;il, .:s
cai be J:- v.lPe' i 'o A i

t 'iii;h!t he our child hoin ,'

ouit owvl h b v, a:,d ho. .i b; ?,..'l to siew to Jicr t.ircii:.
the t!Cw ti.': t of nat Ir. ; iiI ! ii'recin filC may be by, )o',v
rc:nc'Tll'rct ll onv im lh :)od nl.iLy Cle'tle to her l)1ii tO be
nLir..'ii.J .!l:i :cqL iiiaeL witii n:r' coinltlry; andi tillucr-
torc .1ll t!i.ngs coli;iJ-rcd, this occalion for her clil',
were r.., r to he foutht bv her annd the fricinds ol him,
than off,.red by us; and to ti,,is emn, we mean tli.it y.)i
lhaill io ui.,l with her, both to ftliy her indeed from l:.:-
clinin t to he Frcench pra.llicc, wh;ch is to lls iotorin -,
to COll\'V her and the Iiilice into Ftrance, and ai: :
avoid ai;y jult ofience, 1,ha. ile riiillht hereafterC coii '..c,
if flic fIulld hear that we f:ould deal with the loud to:
the prilcc.
Sir Nicol.s Tlrokimorton to queen Iliz.ihcthl.

i.t.l JJuly i567, from Edinburgh.

An Oii. 'I may plelae your nmajrfl v to he aivertiled, I di s.i
'".'In. t e unto IMr. Sec'retarv by y letters of tlhe 1 li

th

.
Ptl'aoe' T27' I ' Il', tlhe (lv of mniIe enry illtr to Scotlanll, tli

tallies i;f liy fla), my lodl_ ini ;i at t'.illc.file, a place ol t!i:
lord I Imiie's, where I was ieri by tihe fitid lord and by tlik
lord Lidiigildont, aiil what had paillid ill cojillincC Iyc.
twsixt uI, wllilelt I .w s at the said Faflcilfl'. bSti'
whicll im, accolnli).liny with tlhe lords aforeiaid, ;!, l
with 4 0o tlul(h;. Iy thieir alrpoiiilnlcnit lor my better c .-

U ^*

!i1', T came to Edinr the i2th of this present. The i3th
i'tll , Sunday appointed for a fi;lemne corn!lrunion in this
onvii, rand ;lfo a folemnic fast being published, I could
:nt !;;e conference with the lords which he anfimblcd
vi:hin this town as I deftred, that is to fay the earls of
A.:,! o!, and M/orton, the lord Hniue, the lord of ,iding-
,;,, Sir J;iincs Balfour captain of the cafH1c, Mr. James
'.I(;:il, and the president of the icfotln.

NIl-VEIRTHI-LESS I made means by the lord of Idinigl-

'.l,: llt they would use no protracte of time in mine au--
.lcer'c, fb did I likewise to the earle of Morton, whom i
1:1 t lv! chance ; I was answered by them both, that albeit
riih t.:y were Idefinled to sacred exercises, such as were
.::r.: of the council would consult upon any moycni touch-
;;: nmy acccfs unto them and my conference with them,
l., i;liid a!so, that in the afternoon either they would comenr
i, hie, or i lhould hear from them. About 4 of the clock
in tihe afternoon, tile f;id 13th day, the lord of JIiding-.
toll crlec to niy lodgings, and declared unto me on the
'il'-l:l of the lo:ds a;nd others, tliat they required me to
1.v c ip:.ielcc, though they had deffcrrcd my conference witil
','':i, 'whtich w\as grounded prilncip;'lly uponl the abfnc;
(.1 t.e carles of Mar and Glencairn, the lords Scimple,
i': i li:(,, and others of the council, faying also thit !hey

I. :',riiidor the natrers which I was on your L,!..di
t, lt.;it with them of, were of great importancc, as they
.)lilj nlot sati.sfy nor colvenieitly treato witlh nce, nor
! I, c IlnC alw;Tr ewithout the advice of the lordl,: and .ti ,!iis
tlcir tiill)ciates ; the lord of Lidington ;tltO sitiid unto Ire,
:. .t v.uwhlee lie perceivcd, by his private conference wcilil
I;1. il1 iv jo L ncv hlitl W.lvds, tli;:t I prenfl'( greatly to

vl .c (l|tt l .1' c-(. I' tih e (ueen tl].lr fi(vcrcign, )lie )er-

(: i'.i, v1, the ltrdl, ;i;d )lt 'l's wiiti w 'erc hel ', thi, t irl
i' ,.:ti n.ttit r t!elii't: ( \ .' r'(.ht (iti.i. Iulty fitl ,n.ulv i c Ijc 't -, h:.:t
li'.. '.-I y lI 'c.ui(il. tiK ' 1i.d( refLiild tlo t li' Il` I

i ci :lti ,!c.ti-
,.' :' a'lcl'l -.c .'(s, !:it!l b'ti. :' ! r..iicd i llto lit', ,ni]'rlt

.*.i ,r;.'ll ,,1 .. r;l l

tc>

. di tl lll l ,,ol(, l i ir:t-

it ti, ,' ii'e I lt i

'It i Ix 1 ,

,s . ' rc.i .,

tit.. t i.;

a ,

( h,;

s'oi l

r l r,>I

n,.,.l, t1 l,) t '. lrel c

h : l b: .

ll;, nt iol, tIr lJl<l ;t I it i,1, e
' .', v. :'; hilj,.:;tl,.'c flilh (,{' PIr:lioC tt'l,,'iL ll,.'(l ;!( , -

I

'1"5 ! :C,: ,iT :.- ,*d 1,'1;

A:i i.:l .,.;J

1, ... ttu i:',
1rlic

I.lJC
)~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~(

the queen's marli:lge with the carle of lotliel (for f, ,.
dcid lince my colilinl, Ilither I leanlid his comnlii:,,n!
t:nded to that Clin, land to make olier to the queen ll .:::.
other marriage), and as to monlicur de Crocql, he 'i,!i
ha;ve no order torth of ';rance conlerlnlii.' thi'le Illattcl,
since they happened ; and therefore they ili hEt veryv tl
hoiid ltlile:il fulpecled t<) oh:iav confclec) .'ith the quc:5,
](call llhey niiht tre.Tte o(t n:tters in tills tini wit hll, il-
(riitlions, :nld ti ra:ltlher dlo li;tirn then i.ood ; but your i,:-
c)l boeil:?4 :(ldvcrti/.(i of ill tl]i whlic liad ohl;mlt,,

Sl .!

c'ent 1ne litllr to tre:t with tlhem, tlr ll' Nvcli of tilc ie.l:ii,
for the coinlcrva:tioti ol thelir hlino()is ;lid cledit, ntd l,,i
thecir lilrty; :and 1 milit lboldly ay unlilto lin, thli:t \e,:
miajcfty h1ld better (Ilc .rv.c thlan l th I'l cncl 1.lil. i!
lid, fuIr his oIwn pa):rt, he wxas nili lbou(l n( 11111, y! -
jily, and ,11;1 d ld\v.iy d

ft1 ,id grc.lt favotir :111(1 C()oirl. ! "!

l'',n lald, hIut to hb' pl;:ii with voll, Sir, f1V\(dlIc, td 'w.
Inot mIt.ny ol ithi atllmlbly tliat lhave' IonIIId lo

I r::it el'..

tio( i at tile ileen

' loti ( il-1,nh :1, :tiiii' Vt

i .
;'

,:1ll"-, feoe the e:rl' 'ol ()l

M torll and Glelncii;' n ie ltih,.e .

1'urhiIs 'which took bic'fit by tilhe quccl's nIlljcl;'s aiil ..:
I.eitll, the IeLft of the ilo(ilClilCl'e werC not ill thie a,1li,.i.
:ini weC tllillln, aidli, he, the (jtil'tl Ijcljtll)' vor

' lotVe':'.1,

I.\ tie (opiinnl f lher own co( cil, and all thie Loel , to(,.,
:i'. ; rc:.:t li'cilit by thal t ch;are :is til' realm olt Sottl:lim!,

,r :anl\ partictular perion ; and not to talk \with v\'o ..

.e:lli.eilldeor, ibut with Sir Nicol:ls 'l'llrokmortoo!N, ln\ 11!
MJll itol, and lilich s w lr

(I pain flir Ite ilC.a( l ,l iJ.\I 'c

s.i) ild bult cold fa (iv - of the (; itccils mi;lj flys li ]i.!', '.'II'
tilLhe \'w'c1 e li i (ied lirtl o thil ovI ',11 colliltly; litl 1
VwoulId all our whole cl'o i)t,)' wcue ,is well wlilit" tl a'-
c'omll)li{li tilt' (iutiell y ur bverie i t iu t'ilits 1111d (1l .ti

l

I amt1 ; for IlillCe (w ln' part, I .111 hl t (le(', :ld1 t t

,: 1

t'1

lMlealeft fort, ;llld they be Inaal)y inoll(ciiii :alii ic(l .I1
h:ave irc;it interell ill thie iattte, mry )yow Iiall he .,!l r '
I will imphloy mvfeIf to illoll my t.r(dil, and all ilil!
rmay dto, to l.li/liC tlhe (1tiu'ul your nilil'l.s, ais inutil ..
lye'tll ill ilme, a;dtl lo 'ot ownl pailt )'e1e ll'' a ,1;
mDilany Iliium s ill ilids alii'll)' , witlh mi.IIV otu!l ,i';"1
w o' ti!-. iltll fll' c(,le tliili I liitfl take thili litu :L .lllviw i
to (l':)' tiltil tile otlier loe dls were c(oliri , :iid tlceielilicn I

tllotu.ht uteet to , your what

tli. t lll)i

and liow illr foil til I hi:tie C pi eeded ; vlui cxl)pCtl.ltiloi
being great to liear fio li hcitlc,

,A I'

'hin.s, Ias I have IleV;u nd Itice ml y om iiu hi}llii i-, it n.*y
', .li ,ouir 1;ijcl (1 to iu&1( . lial i;s tllhowcth.

I i'1i ueIicel of Scoltland Ircmiilceth il td)(1l heAilli ill tle

i f ,iIchl l,

; cllc ici, ;rl f the lord Li'la;, . i,1t u.1,ch-

! xic ) the ii)orlcle o tlhe holtl; so1 thil I (ld RuilivcII iP, ill-
,.:,.l in;i al nth'er ctimvll illi)!on, )cic; nl ,'c cI' oi.n [ low

.,i l.ivour to the (uiccll, t[ndl t, V'ivc l i.r

1 iilL i'

L ciincc

-. . w.iiti(l onl with 5 or 06 1.inly, 4 (r1 5 '[it!iw{lmicIi,

,i 2. chCliiilcrcrs, whlereof (oei is ;1 re rciel W(o111:i11. 1'lhe
(.1;': of Jlluchal , tilhe carl of '\./lll ys l)b )tloti, hlitli all'
li':;t to colle tt) hic r ,it Ilis plcili'1- ; the l,) i(s :iforclll d,

.!l'l. 1i l e lcr i'

inl r ll:', doc keep her very

c lryiitl), 1in:d

.i. ., ;is 1 cal puerceiv', thuie.i Ii.',o

ir priceedlelth by their

ur.ti' tiron thele l nicl>, bcciuliU tI:lit the lqueen will nlot by
.:i'll- iils hl c iidtlcedi to lenil 1er

1 uthlority to 1proLcute

t:lii murd(ier, nor vwill not conlfent by iany l)rlivwilio( to
: .ii.lui the lord Itl ll ;or lher thflind, but aivowvet
u n:lliutlyl that filc will live ;andl die witil him

1 ; anld t1 itii

ti.:t i( it werc put to her choice to rclilnuifh hier crown
.t:d kIlunj;doni, or the lur:d Botlicil, flic would leave licr

',l(oinl aIII dign itgyi , to go ais a timple dam fell witil
'ln, ;iiid that tllc will iliever conniit that lie flhal fie
,vJ!'l or have more hlarln than herlelf.

AM ) as far a; I can pciccivc, tile l)rincilpal caull of- her

; t'itioii is, for that Illice lordsI do fLe the quc(:n bl)cil
t l, tlI vent ;ifle.ltion towards the carle liotliell :is [li' i.,
:itl lieiii)" plut at, ;is they filould l)e compelled to lie in
* i)1tJllall arms, and to have occ.fiioin ofi1ii\' hl : ltlC': hie

m 1i1 v,'itl) ninifeftl cvidence niotorioully idetected to he

dt' liiricial)l iImurderer, anild tihe lolds me111C.1rlig profecu-
h1 )11 (ti julilice ;iLlllft h!im aIccordll.( i t)o lims tiellts.

I 'i] lords mcian alo a; divorce betwixt tihe (]tiuen and

lli, 'is a iiiiiii;l:e )ot to he 'ull;rcd for riniiy ietj)ctls,
v! )eli epl)ailittioll c.imiiuot take pl.lc il tliCe ueeIn lie at li-

1ity, and havc power in lier hiald.s.

lll.y do n1l(t .il' iorlet thllir own prill, coojoil'i1

'vilil the dainger of the piiinlre, but as fir .is I ;uan p.'r-
'"t' , ithel ilti'il uot ti thier

l o to)i(eli thle lt( eil il1 illtu lty

(I iI Iluuh1olr, lr i tlley do i(1 i.ak 'l 1i' r with Jii '

. l

:o 1(d

uil -

;'t',cie ;51, 1an dtX iflirll , ;is 1 d()o l(c.irn, (ll.il tili colndi-
''i)-, .ulorefaid ;icc(iolnpi ll)cd, tli ) y will bth lli p t hiei t
b",'t, *alld lcltuCe liel to her elatc.

II!I'SI?

THFSE lords have for the guard of their town 450 I-lr.

qubulhcrs which be in every good order, for the enter.
tainment of which companys, until all matters be com-
pounded, they did sue unto your mrjcflv, to aid them witb
such lum of money as hath been mentioned to Mr. S.-
cretary by the lord of Lydington's writing, amounti!n as
I perceive to ten or twelve thoulhnd crowns of the

TI'HEY were lately advertized that the French Ki::>

doth mind to fend hither monlicur de la Chapell dcs Ur.
fine, a knight of the Flcnch order, and always well :Tic-
tionate to the house of Guyfe, and howsoever la foci!,
Villaroy, and du Crocq have used language in the quecls
favour and to these lords disadvantage there, to your n],-
je(y ; la Crocq doth carry with him such matter as fiha:
be little to the queen's advantage; so as it is thought tic
French King, upon his coming to his presence, will r.i-
ther fatisfie the lords, than pleasure the queen; for the,
have their party so well made, as the French will ratiii,
make their profit by them, than any other way.

HEREWITH I fend your majesty the last bond d!rcrt

on, and signed by the Hamiltons, the earl of Ar.:,
Huntly, and sundry others at Dumbarton.

NEVERTHELESS, since my coming to this town, tL:

Hamiltons have sent unto me a gentleman of their lU!-
name named Robert Hamilton, with a letter from ti:
biflop of St. Andrews and the abbot of Arbroth, lti:
copy whareof I fend your majeity and mine anlfv'r Unit!
them, referring to the bearer the declaration of fun;;
things, as there did by him unto me.

illr ceirle of Argyll hath, in like manner, fient n.i

other unto IlC with a letter and credit, I have ulti'd l li
as I did the others, the copy of both which letters I (.it
your- m:jelty also. The lord Harrys hath ;ill Ilclt U.l :
ine hut nott wiitten, and I have returned unto him ill I:
lort.

At;.X\IN:i'r the 20t11 day of this month llhere is a ti:r..'

afili.' blv (of all thi cliurt.lics, flilies, and boiroui'!ji '" :,
ol til, i c.lin, Ii:iii.l)' o( :

lhich as be contented to rcp.l), :

thc( Ir is t, this tlii, , vhlicre it is thoiughit lthi. A.'
ItiLte ol this il;ltt.r will le lianl .lled, and l1 le.ar ic .
to lthe luc i 's1 (lil';:'vilu;l:, ;11ld dituller; unlcls Iw 1, '
l.,idin. :ou :teil s(int' oilicrs which be lbeft i( flctied tu '
do p;ivdt' liile icedu) ; (r' 1 1 p;.rc.ve the r1''.1 " '
ber, ;id il Illitilner all, but chielly thel conirmon l '"

\v;..t1

v,-. ich have aflifled in tlhefc doinLgs, do greatly viifhonour

it. (jiclt' , and tl ind ferioutly ither herl dIepliv;itic,, (r

i
. ('lti' -uclio:l; I us'ed the bhcf mcansl 1 c;n (conf.i;, ini.
i;: uiic of the world here) to prnroliuc this alien i v, for
!;i.:t a;iLppc.rcth to ie to be the beit remedyl: I ni. not

. .; o(if diiiloiition of it, for that may11 n1ot abidenl, an

. l:,;::;.i thicicl- hlri, vfyfl into h- rea;il hatrd' and peril.
I ;.t- chicivitl oi the lords which be here prlefeitt t this time
,.:: not tl:.)w ilo much lenit to tthe quteeil as I iliink tlicy
. .i'i e coiiented, for f ear of the ra-.e of the people.
I, ; n women be nmoli furious and impudent a,;iiinft tlhe
:t! ''ii, ,! nd yet the men be mad enough ; so as a firangcr
i,,.." !'u2c mla'y ibon be made a fl'crificc amoonlft them.

' liR.E w.is a (reat bruit thlat the H']a niiltonis with

:;:i' ,r :lhrent would put their force into the lidlds nagainlL
t. 24th of this month, but i do not llnd th tt intent lo
: i:, ;s the common bruit goeth.

I'IIE carlc of Argvll is in the Highil.ils, where there

. irii'.blec among his own countr)ymen.

'I II earle of Lcnnox is by tlihef lords much delired

i;ri'r.', nnd I do believe your majesty may so ule him, and
{; i,.A: him, as he thall be able to promote your purpole
v,.: I th ilf men.

'II. ecarle of Argyll, the Hamiltons and he be in1om-

p.,ti!'e.---I do find amongli the Haniltons, Argyll and
th.' company two fir:inge and flindry huliours.

I I.A\ iL'roNS do make show of the li berty of lhc (uiccin,

:.(nd Iprocute that with great carnetiiefilc; becaiule tilev
/,''( 1;if have thele lords del'roy her, rather thaln l(he fliould
,C: Iccovered from them by xiolence; an;otlr time t hey
l .!'l to delire her liberty, and BothLwell': dcfiructiou,
n-1e.. 1(t tlhev would conipa;iis a marriage betwi.xt (the qlLu
;,ild the lori of Arbroth.

'I'tl.: earle of Argyll dotli aflcc her libert y, and 1,oth-

\\,1' e dcllueluclii , because he would nl:lrry tile lc lien tu
,i- brother.

ANn yet neitlher of them, notwiithfl;rindii' their oIn

((1iCiillt nIe (;is aplipcareth by tlleir htin ), d(tI dili'llI\Vt
ILc liriulnds to each other, nor miind one ein! ; [-Kl o. is
:ut lirc, but in the well parts, tie alnd the iell iof the
miiinilteis will be here at the great asllcLibly, wsiih alile-
lrty ;ilainift: the qti(ecn I lear as m1lli.h s ;iany Illlt.i'.

I;Y tluie cllonere-lce which I had with fm.e of1 tl'is
ci ncLill, mic Uiikct tlhlat theiy lave int jlliicnc lltht therr

VL. I. (Jgis

is a diflofition in the queen of Scotland to leave this rcalim.
:ind to retire herself into either England or into Frinc,
but moot willingly into England, for fiich --- and mil-
likeinirs as file knoweth hath heen, and is meant unto h.r
in France, leaving the regiment ciler to a number ut
pei so;s dcleagued, and authorized by her, or to iome oic
1' niole.

ANaD it please your rnajefty, I think it not amirs to pl!:

vow in remembrance, that in cafe the said queen comli
into England by your allowance, without the French
king's consent, fle shall loose her dowery in France, ;li,!
have little or nothing from hence to entertain her; anli
ill cafe file do go into France with the king's content.
incit, file may be an infirument (if she can recover li-
vour, as time will help to cancell her difgracc) either by
matching with some husband of good quality, or by lforn
other devise, to work new unquietners to her own co:-
try, and so consequently to your majesty's.

THEREFORE it may pleale your majesty to confider of

this matter, and to let me know your pleasure with coo-
venient speed, how I shall answer the fame, if it Le
propounded unto me, either by the queen, or by the coun-
cill, as a piece of the end and compolition. For I am lire,
of late, Ihe hath seemed very desirous to have the mattli
brought to pals that flhe might go into England, rctaill-
ing her eflate and jurifdiotion in herself, though ihe do
not excrcife it; and likewise I underifand that foumc i
this council which be least aflfcied to her safety do think
there is no other way to save her. Thus Almight) (;od
preserve your majesty in health, honour, and all tclchit!
at Edin' the i4th July 15b7.
Sir Nicholas Throkmorton to queen Elizabeth, the

i8th of July 1367, fromll E.dinburgh.

A., o i- 1 T may please your majefly, yow might perceave liy

h '
btiiJiL 8 lettcrs of the 16th, how far 1 had proceeded withl thli

,I. hl)I', all nd what was their answer; since whichl tinic

li;ive l ioken particularly with the carle Morton, thc h(Id
of Ilidington, and Sir James lBalfour captain of tltis cd111c,
at wllol hands I cannot perccave that as yet acccfs to t'l;
queen to Lochlcven will be granted me, flayiln tlcnilt'l'rc
ltill by the al)fencc of the lords and others thlcir alloci.tti
which (they fiay) they look fur withinl two days; iand tlr

9 Ith.:

:iit I find, by likelihood and apparent presumptions, that
nie access to the queen will hardly be granted, I have
tlought good not to defer this dilpatch untill I have a rc-
efoite anflwer ill that matter.

\ I.\ it therefore plcafe your majefly, to underfland Ro.

bert iMlclvin returned from the queen in Lochlcvin, to this
t llw the 6th of July, and brought a letter fiom her writ-
1.11 of her own hand to thele lords, which doth contain as
I iiderlciand matter as followeth-A requcft unto them

it nave consideration of her health, and if they will not
iput ihr to liberty, to change the place of restraint to the
',il!c of Stirling, to the end fie might have the comfort
.:[tl company of her son, and if they will not change her
ii.in I.o hleven, fie required to have rome other gentlc-
'iiietn about her, naming none.
'II havle her Apothecary, to have some modest minifi'er.
---To have an imbroidcrr to draw forth such work as

ili: woul(d be occupied about, and to have a varlet of the
.!,.:rnbcr.---Touching the government of the realm fle
:ii;!k:th two offers, which are but generally touched in
ther letter, the particularitys be not specificd, but referred
to Kobcert Melvin's credit, the one is to commit it only
ild wholly to the earle of Murray, the other is to the lords
;horfc names cnfue, aflifted with such others as thc) fliall
.'ll unto them, that is to fay, the duke of Chattclr-atlt,
ilhc ct Is of Morton, Murray, Marr, and Glencairn.

SinE hath written unto them that I might have acccfs
iitu hlcr--- She requircth further, that if they will not
trcat her and regard her as their queen, yet to ufc her as
,ic king their fovcreign's daughter (whom many of them
h rc) :alld as tlwir prince's mother.-Shc will by no mcans
t-ld to abandon Uothell for her husb)and, nor rclinquifli
:.n; which matter will do her most harm of all, and

Ii dci:tih thhcl lords to great icvcrity againIt her.
SI:S yicldcth ill words to the prolecution of the nur..

i tIAVrE the means to let her know that your majefly
:;tl It nl, me hither for her relief.

! HAlvl also lpcrfladed her to conform hefclf to rc-
'I ic iutliell for licr hitfl)and, and to be contented to
''ir. idivorce to pais hctwixt them; Ihe hath sent nc
' i t hat flie will in no \ways consent unto that, but ra-

!: lie; groundilg hierfelf upon this rcafon taking her-
", b'' tccs:n weeks gone with chlild ; by recnouncing

G g 2 1otulicll,

Bothell, she should acknowledge herself to be with c:.
of a bastard, and to have forfeited her honour, ,i;,
the will not do to die for it; I have pcrfw;nadcl lcr
save her own life and her child, to clhoc(e the leafl I;,
condition.

MR. KNOX arrived here in this town the Gth of ti:

month, with whom I have had some co!lfercnce ::;
with Mr. Craig also, the other minifler of this town.

I HAVE lpcrfwade d with them to preach- pai'..d

lenity, I find them both very austere in thli coiilc'!'
what they shall do hereafter I know not, the)y ae ti:-
nifhed with many arguments, some forth of the fcii::,
some forth of histories, tbme grounded (as they favy up):!
the laws of this realm, fume upon practices ulfcd ill tl!'
realm, and tome upon the conditions and oath niaJ i .
their prince at her coronation.

Tirl bishop of Galloway, uncle to the carle of IlT:miitJ:

hath sent hither to these lords, that his nephew t!,, :;':'
and some others of that fide may, at Linlithgow or ;:
Stirling, have some communication with rome airppointile
on this fide, assuring them that there is a good dlilpo!i-
tion in the lords of the other party to concurre with tlie!,
afluring further that they will not dilefnt for tritffis Or
unnecefrary things, and (as I am given to unlcrlilin
they can be pleased the queen's reifraint be contiinuiedi, ul-
till the murder be piurfued in all persons, whereby tl:.
separation of the queen anld Bothell is impilyed, the plc-
cervation of the prince, the security for all menc, andl a
good orderi taken for the ,overnance of the realm i trii-
(Juillitv.

CAI^'TAIN Clerk, which hatli so long served in I).ln-

Iilalk and felrvc-e at Ncwha:v' ii, did tle roth of this iirli'i;
(alcco!rlp:inyed with one of liis soldiei s, or rather the lo!li.:l
as the greater fame goetli) kill one W\ illn a fc;inti.iii, .i
fUiLh a Oli as hald great cfliiation with thef:' li'i:, ,'i!'
for his (kill, his liardyncels, honefly, and willinpiils i, :
this a'lion ; whereupon Clerk hath retired hliifcll; il111:
quiarrel was about the flip which took lIl.ickctcl, \rhllc ;
llilp was appolinted lby tlhcl: lords to go to 1.the n)'1 i'
Scotlaind to illmpach the p.iilIge of tile e;ile li, I, ..
cale he went either to the illcs, or to anyl otilir 1.;. , i'
the death of' (lis man (his cltclrprize was (dallicd.

T"'Fu hifliol of (Galloway is coiie to Liillhgow, .',!
doth dcf'irc to ileak with tlhe lord of LidlitoV i.

1 T--~~~~~~~~~`!

FiliE abbot of Kilwinning hath sent for Sir James Bal-
c,ir, captain of the cafile, to have conference with him.
As I wrote unto your lmajcfti in my tait, the Hlamniltlils
;o;: find no matter to di(ever thefic lords aid tlieln afun-

b:"!, hut would concur in ail tllinz. S (Cyea in any extremity

. it

:l! tlhe quecn) so as tilat the..y migl;t Ipe alfircd the

;:.;nce of Scotland were croui ced kii', aid fi[oid die

wvithout ifiln , that the e.arie Cf c, o'Ic: fio lis iving flouild
in,: inherit the croun of this real, as next heir to his

w..p!;.'w .

,\';) althourgh the lords and coi:icci.': ; liceak rcvercnt-
', T,11 v, and charitably (of their qii. en,

: o is I c il iot

..;i lby theiLr fpeeli anl) intenition to crui It)' or xiolcnicc,
.'t I do find by iiitlli 'iitcc', th. it tlic (lU en is in very
: .- Cperil of lrl' life, by ci.tb I tliat thr people aiill-

I';i'd at this con:vcntionl do minid \clheinmently the defiric-
¶,i l hit ller.

ir is a public speech amongst all the people, and

rmn )i:ft all estates, (saving of the coultiellors) that their
;,!icnI h:ath no more lilhci tv nor priviledt..e to commit mur-
..'r 10r adultery, thain alny other priv.tte prlon, neither

Gy (i Id's laws, nor by the laws of tie re:lln.
T'lie carl of Bothwell, and all his ;alhcrents and afib-

ciatce, be put to the hornl by the ordinlary jullice of this
!own, named the loids of the ferion ; and commandment
:i.'c to all fhirriftsF, and all other officers, to apprehend
:., and all other his followers and reciptors-- I'he earl
. Bothell's porter, and one of his other servitors ol his
(l.imibcr, being apprehended, have confellcd fich funllery
ci-cirflitailces, as it appcarcth evidently, that lie the laid
c.irl was one of the principal executors of the murlder, in
li own

L p.rfonl accomlpanyed withll si ry others, of which

rl;:iber I cannot yet certainly learn the names but of three
" Ithlm, that is to fay, two of the ()rmif.tois of 'I ivot-
i!l, atnd one IHayhorn of l'uloll ; the lords would he
"''I that nolne of thie mnnlrdI'iers should have any favour

li Icccipt in E;nglaid, and h1Ileof their dlefire is, that the
'lic.l- ti uponl the border lmay le warned ; lIothell doth fiill

Lil;linii nl the north parts, but the lord Scaton and Ile-
inll-, wlicli have been there, have utterly abandoned
n)1n, andl do repair hitlerwards.--''lhe intelligence (dotll
:I.w daily betwixt thef lords, adl tliof whichi held of;
·" 1t lt withfl lit.iidllin the fe lords have cent an hundred ;nd
tl:ny hrqiibufilcrs to Stirling, to keep the town and pa;s.

(; . 3 lig;e

sage from furprize; and so have they done in like man-
ner to St. Johnston, which be the two palfages firo'm tlhe
north, and weft to this town, I do underfland the rcptain
of Dunbar is much busied in fortifying that place, I do
nervile the carriages be not impeached othcrwifc tl;:::
they be.

OF late this cueen hath written a letter to the cnpt. 'I

of the said castle, which hath been furprized; and therec
by matter is discovered which maketh little to the queen's
advantage.

ITHUS, having none other matter worthy your m:,c-

sty's knowledge, I beseech God to prosper your maijdiv
with long life, perfect health, and prosperous ftlicit\.
At Edinburgh the 18th of July 1567.
Letter of Sir Nicholas Throkmorton to the rilit

honourable the earl of Leicester, knt. of the or-
der, and one of the lords of her majcily's iiolt
honourable Privy Council.

24th of Ju!v Y my former dispatches sent to her majefls, and l Mir
'pcr67riceD B Secretary, since the Izth of July, your lordllim ,
from the might have perceived the ilate of this country, anid ti
Original, what end these matters be like to come: so ;is not t.

trouble your lordfllip with many words; this queen i. liu.'
very shortly to be deprived of her royal eflatc, her lon :,'
be crowned king, and flTe detained in prison within Ill-
realm, and the fame to be governed, in the young kini,
name, by a councel, conrfiling of certain of the inhility,
and other wife men of this realm; so as it is eaCl\ to 1(
seen that the power and ability to do any thing to the'
commodity of the queen's majesty, and the realm of i'1-
land, will chiefly, and in manner wholly, Icf in the
hands of there lords, and others their aofciaitcs, annfbllll
at Edinburgh. Now if the queen's majcfly will Jlill per-
lif in her former opinion towards tle (iiccil of Scut-
Lindi, (unto whom flic shall he able to d o o good) then
I do plainly fee that thele lords and all their acconlmplie.
will become as good French, as the French king cal wiill
to all intents and purpolcs. And as for the I la;nlltoll,
the 'arls of Arguilc, Huntlyc, and that failtioI, they 'I,
already lo sari inclimntedl that way, as there nccdelC ittll
dcvifi to (iaw them to the French devotion. ' hltn lli
is tilc slate of tlingis so comle to pass of this country, tli.

l 'r;i1IC

, nce has Scotland now as much conjoined unto them,
:, all purposes, as ever it was; and what an inflrument,
thle young prince will prove, to unquiet .England, I report
nmc to your lordships wilfoms, and therefore confidering
the weight of the matter, and all the circumstances, 1
irulf your lordfiipls will well bethink you in time, (for 'tis
hh h ti ni) how to advilCe her majcfty, to leave nothing un-
,leic that may bring the prince of Scotland to be in her
pllllnion, or, at the lealt, to be at her devotion. And
.inrringtf other things, that I can imaginc, for the first
it.lrce nothilg is more meet to bring this to ctlc, than
to allure this company here aflnmbled, to bear her maIefyt
t:'lr- tivour. Some talk hath paflld between the lord of
Ii.ldingtoni and me, in certain conferences, about 'this
matter. By him I find, that when her majesty shall have
wtvn thece men to her devotion, the principal point that
ill make them conformable to deliver their prince into
llinland(, will reft upon the q(ueen, and the realms en-
;biing him to the fucccflio of the crown of England,
far fault of illue of the qucen's majelly's body, some other
tlinois will also be required, as the charge of the laIid prince
aiid his train to be at the charge of England. 1 do well
pirccive that these men will never be brought to deliver
tiieir prince into England, without the former condition,
lnr the fucceflion of England ; for (laith Liddington) that
t~ki ng placc, the prince shall be as dear to the people of
I'.nglaid as to the people of Scotland ; and the one will
it,:s careful of his prelfervation as the other. Othcrwife,
ie li.ith, all things conlidcred, it will be reported that the
co)ttiflmenc have put their prince to be kept in lhfety, as
hlolc which commit tie fhccp to be kept by the wolves,
S,; as lor conclusion, your lordfiips may perceive here
wxill he the scope of this matter. As unto the delivering
,1I him upon hollages, he faiyeth, let no man tlink, that
'lic coldition of the lficccllion not being acconplifled,
the nobhility a;nd the gentry will never content to leave
tIhcmllves deltitutc of their fovercign, upon any hostages,
"cither upon any promilfes, nor likelihood of good to ilue
11 tiime to conic. It were not good for yourselves (laith

.r

) thalt the matter were lo handled ; for then you should
iihl\ctire all your goods in one flip, which might hiave
.a dangerous effe(t, confidering the unwillingncfs of the
'ItleClc your fovercign to content to eftablifhling any sic-
tclfor to the crown. And then, how unmcte were it, tliat

G g 4 her

her majesty having in her poRcflion already all fi¢ch per-
sons as do pretend to it, or be inhtritable to tih crom,
to have our priiiie also in her cfi.ldcly . For f;> ii'i
milrht follow, without good capitulations, a rail.Lc ;iii
danglerous iflue, tho' the qucei yoiur miltlrcfs do tliz :
that uch imagillna:tions couldl not proceed hut f'oimi b:lss
heads, as you hnav uttered unto us onl her lie;;lf. \\"hr
is come to pa:'s Ifnce 1my la t difpaltch, and lhow f;ar so:(
thinls ar;! procecdcd, I refer your lordlhip to hb i forrmn
by my letters 'cint unto her nm.jefly, at this time. Ai!,
so I pray Alminihty (Cod, preserve your lordlhip in mnilch
honour and lelic!ty. At JEdinburgh this 24th of Jul/
1567.

Tr may pleafle your good lordlhip to make my lord
Stuard partner of this letter.

The QO een to Sir Nicholas Throkmorton.

By the Queen.

6th Aug. R U S T Y and right well beloved, we greet ri
J567. T well, for as much as we do confider that you hI\x e

now a long time remainel in those parts, without cxpl-
dition in the charge committed unto y ou, we think it nrt
meet feeing thcre hath not followed the good acceptation
and fluit of our well meaning towards that {alte, whic
oood rc(;ion would hIave required, that you flhoild coliti-
nilC there aly longer, our pleafrirc, therefore, is, that yout
flh.ll, ilmmndllately uponll the Ieceipt hereof, seind lyour I'r-
;lant Mi\iddlemriore iito the lords and cftatcs of th:it rc.ll,
th.it ;Ire all(dlillc together, willing hini to declare 11110
thcn, that it cannot hut fcein very Hfirin ( unto us, ili.t
you haiiving been fIcnt from us, of' futcl good intcent, to deal
with them, in muatters ternling lo imucl to their own
quiet, allnd to the henefit of tile whole ellate of their coul-
try, tlhey have Ii, Ilr forgotten thenimflves, and1i o lighily
recar(ded uts and our ocdl nimeaniing, not only in l((I.)'-
ing to hear you, and deferrin, your access to the (tiCtea
their foiveiein, hut alfb, which is itrangcft of all, in IIt
v(oieblafilg' tto make arny answer unto us. Aidl al1)'
therFe d1.el1ngs be flicll, indeed, ;ls were not to be looked
for at their" hands, yet do we find thcir uf;ge alul pro-

Cecd itlo

ccciinrl toward th.ir Soverai n and queen, to overpnfs
.:1 tlic rclt in so it-.irae ai de-cee, ab vwe lol our part, and
.'c tlpplofe thle whole world belal's, cannot hbu1 mtink
theIll to havC thereill Rone lb f:ir It:\ ,l~d the duty o! .ub-
i,-ts, :;s 1ull lels reni11 tl

iil to thei i."r;etal ti!,ihc tfr

tv.:;. And tihlefore ye e liall sav, thl 1 .ve have ihu't .ho .'r ,
wvitholut CO)nfTlin' iiy

a lo(iier tiime ill \v.i, to , evoke y,',tt

to our prtcllncc, rcquii inl, them to lr.nlt vlo licence altd
1I'lipolt so to do, which when You ih!l liive obtacil, we
will that you make 'our re'pairi liriticr, ut us, witli .s
ullvnciicnt ipeeLd as yo)u I111m . Givcn, &S.

Indorfcd 6th AuniiltI, 1567.
1l'rolkmoiton to the right honourable Sir WVil-

liam Cecil, lcklihlt, o o of her rin,

1c'! s privy

council andl princi)atl fccrctaiy, give tl)lc.
SIR,

11 AT' I have learned, firicc the arrival es my ,zt!!. u.

1W lord of Murray, and Mi ifl. tc l.ic(]rol, 'min 7o.

fliull uidcritalnd by my letter to her majclly, at this tilme. it '' i,':e
'Tlie Frcnch do, in their negotiations, ;;s they do in thlir uiO;nal.
diink, put water to their wine. As I am able to fce inlto
their doin s, they take it not greatlv to t he lica.rt how
the queen flee , whether flhe li've or dic, Mwhether l11C be
at liberty or in pli zont. Tlhe mark- they lloot at, is, to
renew their old league ; and can be is wvell coititentd to
t.ike it of ttis little kinii, (, owloevcr his title bh) and the
L nie by the order of thele lords, as othcrwilf. Iyncrell
calnme but yeflerd: i, and ie(tlinkctlh hlie will not tairry
iln:i; you mlay gt cis, how tlhe ' renlch will I(ck to dif-
pleif l th('efi lords, when they ch;iiiaged the coniil:g i() I
(C Ii'lle tides (Oi)tuins for this man, hecautiL tlhey ionlbied
tli:it de la Chatiplle floull(l not lie "l.Iteltlt t h tlem,
hii '. a papilt. Sir, to speak nmorc Il.iilVy to you, th in
1 will do otherwil(, me tllinktitli the ca il l Miiirr.ly
;ill runl the course that tlitof m ien do, ;anli be , i -
t.ikcr of their firtulle. I hear: no n f k more li t-
tlly ati;ilift tlhe trie((ly, and the lplie s thr iein 11tl.1l
he, if little like he hath to horiiblue lii,. I hlear ;n ilk-
lig that ,.cedilpton is to go into l'ru;ic(', \'hMXiil I 1do as
muclh imiflike, as any tiling, fol ou iii)ilpol . 1 (.in a ll ii
)'you the whole proteltaits of l'ranicc will live ;llld tie ill

tlit lu

there men's quarrels ; and, where thlrc is lbruit amllony
you, that aid fihould be ient to tihe advcrl, party, an,!
that Martigues houild crimic hither with rome force
lMonrl. Baudclot hath allirred In of his honour, that in-
stead of Martigues comting a:trlinit thlcn, he will co1ic
with as good a force to fticcuir theml : and if tli.t b
feint utnder meaner cond(itit, lohcrt Stullirt Ihall conic with
as niianv to fortify them. But the coniilable hath aillire;!
thefc lord(., that the kiniig ncaneth no way to otflhen thein.
Sir, I pray you find my revocation convenient, andl Ilscci1
vou to further it, for 1 am lihcre now to no purpo{l, s11-
i(fs it he to kindle thef lords more ainl us. '1 hi 1
dio hutmbly) take my leave of you, from Edcenburpll tlh
12th of August, 1567.

Yours to ufc and corinm:ri:n.

The Queen to Nicholas Th rokmorton.
RU S T Y and well-beloved we greet you wci.

Vc have, within these two days, reccivld thiec

tlnidr) letters of yours, of the 20th, 22d, and 23d, of
tllis month, having not before thole lecciv'ed a ny fec\n
days before ; and (10 find, by there your letters, that )n,,
have very dilircntly ailt largely advcrtified us of all tlr,
halty and peremlltory pccedin:s there; which as x:
nothing like, so wc trufi. in tinie to fee theni wax colil,
and to receCiv fe r ome ref)latlion. 'or we Cannot p1i-
ccive, that they with whom yon have dlcali can ncfwcr si'
doubts moved by the Hlamiiltons, who howfoevcr the)' nIm.i
be carried fior their private refpei.ls, yet thoCe things cvlitii
they move, will be allowed by all reIalonable pcrfoi,.. I,,r
if they n may not, being noblerien of the realm, be fiflc'rc4i
to hear the queeni their fovircriin declare her miin coiI-
cerning the reports which ;are made of her, by filch .1s
keep her in captivity, how filuld they believe the rclports
or obey them, which do report it? and ticrie Iec )111
mIleaniig is, you fhlall let the I lamiltolls plaillvy Inlder-
(lsnd, tihat we do well allow of their procedingls, (;as far
fortlh as the fImni doth concern the (lueen their lovcrcl:ii
for her relief) and in such things as fliall appear it.lillo-
able for us therein to do, for the (queen our (filter, w'c
will be rc;idy to perform the I;lnl. And, where it is 1,
required, that upon your comiintIl thnce, tlhe lord Scroopl

fli( ,llik

fin,,uld deal with the lord FIcrris to impart their meaiiing s
to u;, and ours to them, we are well pleated therewith,
:;ul we require you to advertize the lord Scroope hereof
by your letters, and to will him to shew himlflf tfavour-
:ilc to them in their actions, that may appear plainly to
teni to the relief of the queen, and rmailtenance of hcr
:ililhority. And as we willed our iecretary to write unto

ntl, that upon your mcilige done to the earl of Alurray,
)on migtht return, so our meaning is you shall. AndI if
thle' our letters sh;all meet vou oil the way, yet we will
h.lnc you advcrtile both the lord Scroope, and the 11a-
nmiltons, of our meaninil.

lndorfed 29 Aug. 1567.

No. XXIII. (Vol. 1. p. 454.)
;ir Nicholas Tllroclrnorton to the arclhbifoop of

St. Andrew's and the abbot of Arbrothe.
A FTER my .ood commendations to your ood lord- Vh A\i,.

A fil;ps, this shall be to advertize you, that the queen's 1.'7,7.e

i:lijcfiy my sovereign having sent me hither her anmballi- trot colpy
irl. to the queen her fifler your foverein, to commnnri- wMhi h Sir
-;iec unto her fiich mlatter ;is (he thought meet, confider- l,, ,^l
ill, the Sgod amity and iiitelligeiice betwixt them, who q,,:c, .
eI (I dctainedt in caplti'vity (as your lordihips know) con-
triry to the duty of all [,old Iuibje&ts, for the enlalricement
(f) whose pcrfoi, and tihe re llittiotion of her to he(r di glitv,
l'r niajefly gave me in clllre to treat with thefi lords
iflcimblied at l'dcitllurghl, ofllring them all realonable con-
ilitions and means ;s might be, for the fafleguard of the
oiiiig prince, the punifhnient of the late horrible murder,
thle difliut ion (of the nma l i;t betwixl the queien and tlhe
c.al of Bodlwell, and lallly for tl C(t I own fiirtie . n11 tIhe
Iitgnciation of 'whlich matters i have (as yo)ur lordihips
wc'll know) spent a long tiluC to llo pirpofe, not beinl
.-ihl to prevail ill any thing with th,;is', lords, to the tqueen

1i)y O'uvreigin's

fitisfat.tion. Of wNich itlranie procced-

IW'Is towlards her m;jefly, a;ld Ilndutiiul lel;laviotr tow.rds
tileir loveiign , I have advertlild tile qtuell's majefly; lhe
(liot being minded to bear this illdi(i.iiity) hiath given men
"1 tclarge to declare her fuirther plcafiurc unto theim, il
1'1il fort as they may well perceive her majerfy doth lifal-

low

low of their procccdings, and thereupon hath revoked re
And fuithcr hath . iven eic in cluar-te to communicate tCh

ltltne unto Sour lordlhips, requiring yol to let mec know,

before in ,' departiire hence, (which fihall Ic, (;od willi in-
as fooln a; I hay'v received anfwcr trom yon) what yoe
:'nd your colflcdcraits will aflluredly do, to fct the queen
your ol'cregCign at libe rt, ;and to rcltorc her to Icr foirmcr
iiiLnity by force or othcrwile ; fecilng these lords haIvc re-
£uled all other mecdi.,ion, to the end the queen's in;jcflyt
rily 'vcerei n 11)' conIcur with vour lordllilps in this lo-
lnon(r;Ili cliterprize.

A,,D ill ca.Le, tlhroulgh the (lirpcrfion of your afloci;:tcs,

vnour loiltlfiIps can neither coinullinicitte this Ilatte:r
.uiiio;igl 'you, nor receive resolution of tlhem all ly lti.t
time, it rn.ly l!efiLL you to fend nle the opinions of so
imany of you as m:ly confer together, witlii two or tli!J c
ilays, .o Is I ;lY have your a:mfwer here in this town Ib
Mollday or I' ucfday next at the farthefr, bi:ill the gtiq
of this Au^till; for 1 intend ((od willing) to depart to-
wards Engl .:,, upoin Vl dncefly followingr. 'I'h', i
molt hu:nbly take my leave of your lordflliis at LEdI!,-
bun'rii, tlie J tll of iAus . 1567.

IlndoltId Lie 13th of Aug. 1567.

Sir Nicholas Trockmorton to the lord Ilcrrys.
1. A ' '\ 7 OUR Io ood lulrdfliip's letter of tle 13th of A!siial

I h:ave received the i9th of t!he faml. Flor aiilwt,

, ,' ,1', ' mpl( wheriunto it may like your lordship to undierfind, tliat I
v.'u.h ~,r will Iigl.ily u nto you pl.ainly, how far lorli I am i: ;ad/
'' )"; lliiihro,,!,cly iSiilri[leCd of the (ltiCCn' m:ajfly my lovcrci:i: S

fIl, v ll'iiur- cocllcrCing the detcntion of tlie queen your lo-
.':l. ercii, i, and concelrnin tll her relief.

T'o the tilll h"r nl:ijcefy hath given in charge, to life all

ki;ds ol p lr-luitllo ill h(er name, to nlove tlefe lords afllri-
lCted ;t i (cliblirg- to dto ell l flroml tills violent and i it] dttiilld
bc).lvill, vwhic l tlhey tiled tow.ard tlhcir sovereign. A ni,
inll tli, ).lil, belhdcs til' llew of many realols, and lull-
ldry piltiiofills ofi ailica;lle treaty with them, her ll.ij-
tfy li.ith willed me to tlie lone plain land severe ixccchl un-
to tl(lin, tendinil' li) i;lr hhli, as if they would not he bet-
ter .odvil'l, and lcloril thlefe tlheir outrageous proceedlugi
cxercicd .ain ilt: lcir uverCigi that
ithe tt he y ii: 1it

W C> 1,c

a:.lllrcd her majes'ty icitheir would nor could indu:irc ruch

::i inlignity to be done to ihe queen, her good coulin and
,,i ihbour.

ANDu iiotwitlhfnndintr thcfe my proceediclgs with them,

;:.,have h made proof to he little moved thercby, for as
c. rncither will they colnf(nt to the enliargement, neither
l'ldcr me to speak with her. So as it feemeth to me, it
Is
, lupfluous to treat any more with them flter tils

a:cliner. \Vhiereupon I have atvertihfd the queen's ma-
i, tv my fovcrei'r, expcCting daily her rajeCtl's i:lrthcr
(,;(lr ; and as I shall be advcrtitfd thereof, io \vill not
tail to signify the fime to your eood lordfiip ; alnd in the
rnc;ln time will advcrtile her ni.ijclly alfb, what vour lord-
il.ip hath written unto me. l hus vith my dlue coin-
inendations to your oodl lordfnip, I conmmit ithe filme to
almighty God, rcii l, a!ways to do

. ou the iic.ifre andi
Ifi:,icc that I cian lav,'tlilv. At '.denbuicch.

Indorcfed 24th of Aii:ii'i, 1507.

No. XXIV. (Vol. I. p. 465.)
Account of lord Herrcis's Behaviour in lte P.ua-

liament cheld leccmUbcr 15 , 1567.

II E lord Hcrrys made a ni.italilt. r.in;c, in tilc rO:lc.
nalme of the duke and lIhiln:i ,f thlcir friclin.,! ;.!-

hcrent%; (the duke ilncfll, the c. ri ,o' C;:!.iic::, .r:d the
;ibhot of Kilu iniig bii inxcs

hem l prctI't) io pc,' :L,"d tlih'

mldni,,l of the wv.hole -realm ill oc:" nlii d. \' . :-',II !.e

cii.

nitl Ijpare to fct forth foleci;n!y l the grrce.t [lr;i!': I'i;it I 'ct (!
this nobility did delervc. w.lichl ill t: ic "L: ::,;. ',;L
nil';:cc-'s folr p)lilifimlcnt ,l t! he e.l

C ,,i ;

: ',;

..r . , ;

c,1 i:

lice ct cc.ee 's inl cl'tilii.t .:ll'.' ic ,t t,[ t

Il1 ;'ic;' . i

t :. ,!,: 1. .

thal t she c ul l o t

bc i c r

i !'

t ii

.;,,

iu

l . 1

cI ': . :

him, that in I'q 1mellill', 1 c1 r iep'r[l'l v, ir!t i 1,, ,".':.
tIi'y did tihe duty ot ilc...i;c c. '1 I 11:l ti.s:r }, .'

, ,l.)'c,

!oi.i,, , w i l ic i.h d

1. '.

'l ',.' i i I, , i .: ' d tl'r I, ,' ...1 ,2

l.cic s, ( -Ivt : Ivc e ileir li;' ' ,.; r

, ' !,!' c

Ill i1: :' i! ...

'li 'cbs tlIat w ere l i cil;c :1 (,i it = r= !: (1' !, . u,': ,;. , l..,,l
w i ll detf. i ed t!l;;t ;i11 tli( ic ii *:,c .'' illi: !

. , i l ,ic , t., ri

111 o goodi ( .lil.'. 'l'h.it I. ;ic l !1,",', i x !.!,'\ . ', l.: .,
hle did lpeak, would i

,illi tily, :cc:: \\x :i. l.1 :i'y c,

,,ii,
liUn,1 clteh ' tlhemilclv'; iri t!:. :.l;. ' ',k '. ; j,,d h,1 l'r

I j,' .. .

lives and lands in the like hazard, for maintenance of our
caufc. And if the queen herself were in Scotland, ac-
companied with 20,000 imen, they will be of the fn,m,
mind, and fight in our quarrel. He hoped the remainder
noblemen of their party, Huntly, Arguile, and others,
which had not as yet acknowledged the king, would come
to the liame contormity, whereunto he would also earnest-
jv move them. And if they will remain obitinate, and
refute to qualify themselves, then will the duke, he, and
their friends, join with us to correct them, that other-
wife will not reform thcmfelves. So plaufiblean oration,
and more advantageous for our party, none of ourf/lvcs
could have made. IIe did not forget to term my lord re-
gent, by lhle name of regent, (there was no mention at 1!;
of the Earl of Murray) and to call him gracc at every wuJl.;
when his l)eeches were directed to him, accompanyin'lr ai
his words with low courtelies after this manner.

No. XXV. (Vol. I. p. 488.)
Q2een Mary to Queen Elizabeth.

M A D A M,

Ctt. Li, / Lthough the neceflity of my cause (which makctlll,,,
Cal. i. to be importune to you) do make you to judge th.ii
Apr Cral)' I aml out of the yway; yet flch as havc not my palflill,
'rnll.t:.,n. nor the rcfjleets whrceof you are pcrfuaded, will think tl:;h

I do as my cause doth require. Madam, I have not nccu-
fcd you, neither in words, nor in thought, to have In;L,
yourlcif cvil towards me. And I believe, that )ou hI.I
no wv;t of good undcrfilanding, to keep you from pcr-
fwafion againit your natural good inclination. lBut in the
mean time I can't chtle (havibng my ferfncs) bitt pcrccive
very cvil f'ulthcrancc in my matters, since my coming hi
ther. 1 thought tl at I had fuflicicntly dilrouirlcd tUlt
you the ldifconlmodlitics, which this delay bringeltl unli
me. And cl'eciailly that they think in this nlcxl motilti cul
Auguf, to hold a parliament againrf mc

agni ;Ill 1my1 IL-

v;Sits. And ill the mean time, I iam Itayed here, awil )yt
will you, that I fliould put imylfef forthcr into your coti.i
try, (without secing you) and remove me further floti
mtine; ;and there do me this diflhonour at Ihe reiqu( o(fL ni)
rebels, as to Iflid comiiitionllrs to hear themlc ;Igainilt 11tc

;15

:o you wold do to a mere fuibject, and not hear me by
moilth. Now, madam, 1 have promiled you to come to
.nou, and having thcrc made my moiii arid complaint of
tihe; rebels, and they coming thither, not as pofhflbrs,
but as subjects, to answer. I would have besought you
o licar my jufiification of that which they have sally set
!u:rth against me, and if I could not purge myself thereof,
vou might then discharge your lhainds ot Iny causes, and
ict me go for such as I am. But to do as you fay, if I
Vwrc culpable I would be better advii ed; but beilng not
si, I can't accept this diflhonour at their hands, that be-
inl in ipofTeffion they will conic and accuflc me before your
cormilifioners, whereof I can't like : And secing you think
it to be against your honour and con figiage to do other-
wifc, I beftech you that you will not be mine enemy, un-
till you may fee how I can discharge myself every way,
,,td to ibiser me go into France, where I have a dowry
to1 maintain me; or at least to go into Scotland, with
liiutlrice that if there come any strangers thither, I will
bind myifelf for their return without any prejudice to you,
or if it plics you not to do thus, I protcft that I will lnot
mpultle it to falfhood, If I receive firangers in my country,
wirhout making you any other discharge fur it. Do with
nlv bndy as you will, the honour or blame fliall be yours.
Pl:r I had rather die here, and that mly f'aithful 1 fcrvants
l;lay be flccoured (tho' you would not lo) by ftralngers,
tllim to luffer them to be utterly undone, upon hope to
receivc, in time to come, particular commodity. There
be nlanty things to move me to fear that I lhall have to
di., in this country, with others than with you. But for-
ifirnuch as nothing hath followed upon my l:ft moan, I
i:uld rm peace, happen what may hap. I have as lecf to
,.,l,,rc nliy fortune, as to lfeckit, and not lnd it. Further,
it picaled you to give licenCll to my llijL'ct.s to go and
cinii. ''lhis has been rclulid by mIry lord Scroop and
Mr. lKiullg (;s they (iy) by your coiniiiaidmenlt, becairt:
I would not depart henlce to y'()tr chI.rge, untill I Ih:ia
.1iltwi of this letter, tliu' I fhcwed thlL ilthat yoru reti ilir c

)'y ;Iilfwcr, UpOll the two ploits, collt.lilncd inl your lIl-
let .

'I ii: one is to let )yol briefly iridcrltniiid, I amn con"

:, )oul to make my iloii1; to you, the \wlich being

ill erd,
1 t ' l Id adcl;itc ullto 'vu1, mil¢ i ltCi-yiv, ;tld thlnl nc',inir

y u1'

ynur aid, and for lack thereof, I can't but make my mcn..
and complnl)lilt to (God, that I am not hearl inl

d ni jl

tquarrel, and to alppeil to other princes to haveii;);',.
tliereunto, as ny caie requireth ; and to you, mad'm,, si:'!
of all, when !otu lhall lhav, examinted o'ur confcl(nc, :,,
fore hi'l ;and have himi for witni:ef.-- nd.\l c

i )t i:.

.which i:s to come fur'ther into your coulit', a:tl i,,t I
coime to your pr zfcncc, I wi11 ellccri tha:.t as 1 t'.0.,',:
but will take it for the conltrary, obe'ing it a;s ; ti'',
forced. In meanci time, I belitcjc you, to rctu:n ! ,
me ny Lord Hellrries, fur I can't be without him, lia :i;
none of my counfal here, and allo to filfter nie, if it pi;-.:-
you, withiit fiurther dclay, to dep:r't hence whiti'.cll)-
ever it be out of this country. 1 am fiirc you v.ill ] ,
.CI:vy nie this simple requleil for your honour's .ikc, (.ei:
it do'!h not please you to use your natural gooclnei t ..
wards nme othcrwife, and feeing that of mine own ac, e:
I ::m come hither, let me depart anain, with yours. ,.;
if (od permnit my causes to succeed weil, I liall Ii.
bound to you for it; and happening otherwile, yet I c.;I,',
blamec yotu. As for my Lord Fleeming, secing that upj:n
mv credit you havc sIftered him to go home to his ho(:'.;
I warrant you he ihall pals no further, but flall retui:.
whien it shall please you. In that you ti ul nie, 1 \vil 111 t
r.- 4..'Snr. (to die for it) deceive you. But from Dumnharton I ;:,-

i:wcr not, wlihcn my L. IIleeming' hall be in the T'lo,..
For they which are within it, will not forbear to rcci-.:
fiiccour, If I don't aflure them of yours ; no, tho' \il.
would chanre me withal, for I have left thlic in char:",
to halve nmor refpc1 to my Iervants and to my cftate, ti!. ,
tI my life. Good rifler, be of another mind, wnillthI li-.:I,
. i :l all liall be yours, and at your coimmandmlilcnt.
thought to fltitfy you wholly, if I 1might have fcen y,'o
Al.is! do not its tlic fcrpent, tliat ftop1)cpth his hic;ai:'t.
for I ai no nchllc nter, but your fitler, and natuinl coulicl.
If C:ilir hil not lifdaincd to hear or read the conli)1ti'
of an a;dvrtiler, he had not lo died ; why iloiuld 11pii)1,
c;as be Itiloped ct eing that they are painted lb loni!:; ,M .(i
ing tihat they should lihe.r all and lie will advilcd, et(,-i
they anIIIVC'r. 1 anm not of tile lintue of the hliilifk, ;i1tI
Icls of the claiumllinil, to turn you to 11my likeriels, ;1! '
tli ,' 1 (hould be lb ldalLerous and curs'd as men lay, !

y

aitr ffli'cicntly ail'd with conflalny and with jnilti'
wiht li I requinie c'f' God, who give you grace tu ulc it l'1

\M0:.

.., lh ong and happy life. From Carlific, the sth of July,

No. (XXV . Vo 1. p. .)

I'.!Lt ofa lettIe rom Sir oi
L'rcis Knoilys to Cecil,

Stll Aug. 156,Y, frollm B13 on.
_- UT fitrcly this queen doth l cir, outwardly, not AnOrig:na'.

.) oily to favour thie (l1 il, but al i; the chlief ;:r- i.''l-rU!.Sc

I' i. f th!c Lcligi,.,n of the rgotjcl, inarciy iilhtilc;itiuii by
;!;l onlv: and flie hca;cth tlic fiulis of papistry rc-
*;.i!,J, b )i pracl ilg or othcrlwi :, \it! ConIltclltel c.ars,
.:!i with gentle and wc.!k repIcls, and file doth nlot I'ciln
i.1 ie the worfi of rcliioUil throw mc.
Pirt of a lItter froin fir Francis Knoirlvs to Cccii

21 Sept. i563, fromn Bolton.
-- J T came to this queen's cars of lite that ,e w\:

bruited to be lately turied to tlie x'! gicn of tic

(I',.11, to tie great diflikinl 1of the papilts hcrcabou:ts ,
.'h.i-! thing seC he ritif co:ltfcl!eil uto min', and yeftclrel;,

t i';lv il the great chamber, w\h en thel a!i,, l)y .i-. itl,
.', f'.imc papitls prefcint, fil t took occaficl to icak (o
:, li",on, anll tihen opelliv Ihc prolzilcbd herilt to l; of the

.Ilt iiion, anll t(,okupon helr to patronize hli fitn

::in' t'i;(l'nclly tilan flic 11ha dollc ;a greait wvlile allurc, al-
t:,' !'or Ifecinttes aldt( .it ntL'its wt re £o wc:.tLk, that tli:

o

;i',' II her Ij)ccch was otly to fihCw Ilcr zc:l ; ;i:ld alt;r-
;;'.,:!s tto inc alolln, lwhen mifhkcd to lce her lbcoime

1 t liiLitl ) backwaird in relidiut, \V"it:, ftid Ihe, woutld

'i ha'.cie I to lcfi. l'ri ic atnd .' i).)ti , ;.tl all my t'lietndl
1 (!iher pl.aces, by fi'cnillng to chaIng myl rcligrion, ;a1
'It 1 ;i n t aillillred the qu leen lily 'l o(od l!ilr v

w ll Ibe

:* :tl1itl-cd f'icind, to [le flitisfltdcion of Iny lionllir .1nd cx-
'.11:0, 1l.

No. XXVII. (Vol. I. p. 490.)

l Ietter fromn mto y
lor crris o y Scroop

andi si i. Knullys, Scp)tclleber 3, 563.5
.M,/ Y lerds, ple.liit you)r Il11u1iinrable loidflil), I a11 cot'. L.b.

i t lsormi;dl by f.arnes 13otlivi(ck, litcly c e 110111 Cl. C.
t:. '-l'c7L' r.ijitflty 5jaI urlvcrlal, that ib hllzawii to, her ACa^ i i^

1 i
"I" it., own

lihr.lhnt [, I fiihld have ridden ill Crifiirdnlurc, fen Im'
Lit riiulii! into this realm, upol thL (;ll of Miurray''s ,l.
pi;;:'lalt. A II tl that 1 sild have c.ulifir, or -llcn of coun-
[,ill to Sico)ttilincji to have ridden in Ihiland, to flay or
i ul','i,': hlir ni; ii),", ' .sfilj.1_'ts.

\ ;' lordsl, tltlu:hlit it ri- ht lneedful bcc;lufe vour ](,r:-
filiis i' by y'our fn' I n111, conm)ll)ndcd to attend uion tlhe

itj('.'n's m:lljcfiy n' v m iltL'-c , I( ;'vin ;l ' l cc ti- i t!

i,

I':lt ''r , tr) t iC.icll re' i po) thI' truth ; i n1lil v

i l''i:i;! : tii,:

\ .'r lo. '.pis w

i , fir G

od'is c

eill ccr'Li2! a t'. ' 'h:' ..i
) ur' ci.'. ci ;ie the fame.

,\s C;.o li'ves, [ h:l c neitlher cniif'iitc, J,

:':: .1:'' \:'

ha:d !;.\.',ledizc otf :uy Scotti(..,na'.s ridi;;' :t '.: 1,! iR' , (,
(ld the sUtl'J thrcof hurt in bodie or (, co'J, 1.: ! .
ficc rot' Icitl ; anld :'s I underfiand it flliil be si:! ;d tr.',
t'it ,t Ci Oy sic opten hiirt be done,l it is b)' tIh )uIl.,n mi
si)' -v,_.rc 's difolacd iints, and thiat I lra\'c nut 1 iuddn tr
l :'t no Scottifliman, nor conman ided no hurt t'o ie J,,nc
to themt fel li ClV coming tfouim the qu(C''s in:i;.:!l .,' t.:: '
l;LdC, it is well kCndI, for that :;c':' , itC wi .lin Ci;...!:e .
of n-mc.

I HAV;E done more good to Crawfid tll nure lnolr c i. :i
ecrl of MJlurrav has d(nne, am:n will be loather to do, ti.c:i

hv ha rm thalin 1u will. }Ixceept the queeil's n-l:milt vo :iu

i'\( r'ci l, ni

c r'i l;i nl it f i

i' r, l'polts to be trvll-vi l

, l hC'

thi, is allo-'idtl r ,;!l ii,.cntit lcdliiu , her i:;ce .ll :".*
t:iublit, .and tyn. tlhe hc;:its *of true i,'.:n lictc, Itihciln ;
hic ieport : .l he madic, that baicth would fervc lii;, .lid
nrel^, bttti-t thn: tlhty uuvorth) liiars.

.IY hlols, I uildrf'uilld the <ulicL's mijfly'c t ytir (-

V''rt· i'ui is iit cointntelil d of this bruliite, t thert tlic liun!i
,i V I 'iricliiil.ii conim in tils ri;lln, with tlle (llk "'
( .itt cller iilt ''. Iluth it is,

I a in 110 o 11ni:11n (<1 w:.y

; !'"

S:' :i]lu:ll of thcir ciiiiniii r, ni 'r hlis 1no lic cert;intl ) ti n 1' .1
,' I licar by' Io)tlh 'i( k's repoit from' thie lt'ts'l' i 'l,'
', 1.1 livul.ci . . A1,I l l t I m ight is well y it , . ',

' 11. ' i d(I cd, h( . r

i r.l I 'IC ' It' is' ill ti ' w \ itt ;1 l 1

i tl' co' '1i

1!:! t vill never let hcr t.ikcoedcr wti, ll) m iiiiltrels :iul.'
li''r tilt uur ( o\ reI( nii l

}i va h11

l

h utd iL ;i(i'sll ) 'ili,

''

ws tiln', (1' !ultF, lhiciulfilip, aitd aftili:mlo i il' ']ii l I
to i('tlu il;.', ( c1ttli t th.t c,d ,

l uponili tlt he '

o IV''

I''1 tL[l; t til(' t(he (1II(C I 's Il;ij'f(l\' I;lis ((1 lll:l i lC'I l i11('

i :

*;1il' tilln s to( dcti.'l.ili lc l,'tldd .tc'tc: t In lll'', A:
''J .:1i 1ci, Jidl lu put Culc iit pu-C.t.tIl t
1lclill 1'lO '

1'.hi lli''

r'.,lme, and when f required of her majcfly, in my m:lif-
tlfcs n1ame, that licr highness would either do for her, (as
her lpecial trust was lie wold) according to her former
pronliles, or otherwise give her counfll, wold not conflnt,
(.l I fliow her LIrace I sand diverlb rcpugnlant) theni that
lie would permit her to pass in France, or to iorc otlher
prince to feck fuipporr, or failing hereof, ((lhilk was
a:;liIs all reaGonl) that fli would permiit her to return in
L;cr awin countric, in sic frc il manlner as fle came out
of it, and said to her majctfy ane of thir, for her ihonour,
Wiuld not be refufit, feeand th.it flic was corned in her
r:lim upon her writings and promiles of fricildhip. Aind
lick ike, I f.id to her highnlfs, gif my mainfrcl had tihe
like promire of her nobility ;nd eflates, a; file had of
iltrlcli, I should hive reprovit them highly, gif they liila
,r!t condefccndit to one of thir three, and lo 1 fiy, and
t, 1 write, that in the warld it flall be maift reprehcnd-
able, gif this promise taketh not other good cflect, nor
!'r it does. Notwithfltanding, I get gud answer of tliir
l'roinilcs of friendlhip made to my fovcreign, and to put
li.r grace in this her awin countrie pe.iccably, we have
filnd the contrary working by Mr. IMiddlemore diirciit
firin her higlhnefs to flay the army that cuift tdown our
houses. And alfu;i, in the proceeding of this late preten-
dit parliailment, promiled twent) dar!s before the time to
mvflclf to have caulcd it been difchnlrg it. And yet con-
tr;!rvto this promi c, have they mIn.d t.eir pretcellit m.in-

i tl orlaiulture of 31 men cot guid rlputatiuia, hifnops,

;'Il Uns, and barronis, obedient iu.i)jcts to our sovcrcign,
',!i. 1l hcr caule .

'iHEY liave dllV difponit, fen our fovcreign's caiife was

T ;.en uilillo hand be the queen's majcety of that re.lin, an
IJnlL d thloufand pound Scots worth of her awiin true
li;"'eJs geir, under the color of the law, groundit upon
tli(:i I.ille, treafbnable, flow in, authority.

ll ilu: murders, the opprelions, the burnings, the ra-

villi ol ut women, the deltruction of policy, both eccle-
fi..ll..il and temporal, in this mean time, as in my for-
m1er wiitungs I haid it was lamentable to ony christian
nit.IJ o hear of, except God gif grace, the profellion of
tlil evaiiglc of Jesus Chrill profefit be your prince, coul -

a1ll aiii rcalmc, be malir myndit, nor the aulJ inamnity
that has stand betwixt the realms, many of my countrymen

11 h2 will

vill (:ilt in this article, and their prcccedings puttis r,-i
ft - in S:'iat Thomas belief.

'. .)W,, Imv lI,:'d, ii' the queen's majeRly of that reailmn

.iii n 'i uhai.i promile and honour my mai f rcrs cname thcu.,
is I have laid, will leave all the FI'rench writilng, all
French pihralfs of writiNgn, qu'hilks a;monrgis them i ov\-e
210'i;i(; i o baith the fides Infit, and p]lainl1], accordo ii 1
!', auld true cufslm of Ing'land and .Scotland, qin};'..,
be a word pronmilt triuth ws obfcrv'd, pr'omii, ill tt
iiame of t!he ct.rnal C;od, and upon the high I(oIICou (:
that nobill aIInd rincely blude of the kings ol I: ..,iu
quhereof fhie is dcticcdit, ani prelcitly wears tI}c t,:-
dicm, thilt flic will put nmy maiitrcfs in her awin counll',
11nd ca.iUs lier as qlu2ei thereof in her authority .;;
,t.i;'ath to be obevit, and to do the fame will appoint ::.
scert ,in;i v v ithin t'vo months at the farthcit, a, v.
utidLcrfta:.n; thi io 1'e o:.:r wle'Ci], ftai will we, or the n;ii;
part of us ;.!, tfolc.v iupon it, ]leain, the Frcnlch!i.ci .
:1.nd their evil irn':ch phrases t,)gidder. And thcrcf.l; ',
..nd ftr the true lPcrpct!al friendship of that realm, v,',
condlition, n!nd so; our ;,:ilt, with the grace of Almnl :

;(]od, keep sc heads and conditions of :reement, as ui!::

nilt wii' men can condicflcend upon, for the wveill ,t I'
haill il;aind. Ax I have been partiiings declaring toi .

iquerl your fo'.crcign, quhilk I flIew to your lo:dii;

lelfis both iln cliiojn, il thellolilhminit of the ciarl (t}h-
wile, for thle (ici'n's ".:!t hufland's fl.uaghtcr, :ndl I: .1

ilutlual band o amit perlpetually to rellain anirlgis !-.
IDOL'U ::TI'. ,

, )my lord-, without that, we nl;ay l ind lc

tillme :11 fricl(dll orkin;, as may ,\if us occliolnl l.it!
to lorp'cttc \lidd(lciloic and Ihis late priclc dit .iilil.'.!,.
we will turni the lIe:af, l;aving olir lovcrcigin aaii.l

.

will to rcft wilere flie is, indl.r the pomlli!c of IilIli;1';.
As 1 'have baiil li id, and w'ill ever alirmn, madie be y.-'
fxc'c:re;: n, q hil k was onlly ca:isie of lchr graces o11L:'
il t1i.il rea;inlle. ad i;e.k the help land nimyen of' 1IF'i,
o: SJ.<lifll, till t.ptlfi: this tre:l sobible arid fallc prItcri t
a; illoritlv, (1q hilk c:;i :is to 'i, ri ai )\ ,vc ui;.

1M y i.)rd., I dcfirc ,'o;i ' ordfllip:, confider, tll [il

1

l:e, thlat:millil .!ircs th 1 ':]:zit, llwi::, In ,la di :1ml .t
iand to (:cotinuil ', d rl s1a poor 1i.111 be'! catle lih., tl
writ tlIis.

1MY brother, tIl.' l:irdl of ,SLilin',, f iahvs rme, fli.i i'
'veOnt !t llfii ' l. coullliii;1" with lioin, it ap;'iCt.t'i LtJ sI1l1,

' ' \;! '.'.

':

A P P E N D ¥ i(~ 4s9

,nur mind was we shold ftiffcr the enii of M 'irrav to
,l.or k, altio' it were againi rcafun to us, and compl!:;
.ricof to the (IICCII'S ,i;t',cty, and her higlinlef wald (cc
,: ;cformit. M'v lords, lher majclt will be over nieikle
r',ullit to reform the Vwranlr es w have I'ultainit alreadi l

' (i I vnt

f(lire, gif reafonl :l irticc may have pl:aci, oil

:ii it't (s, al!nd we her ili'ic.: <, iivc receivd ed cprc\ (
;.ir;nlll', f;ir above twCo hiunil;c( tli).,ii:it;d pouinl s icili i,/,
:r tli tinie of thiis iuliappy y go\ cr:ncit it) fci;l ti: e j-
if-orn:; ion of l': !"rea.t caulcs, coir(e, .I( .v a da\Ls, to flow\liz
:i.d i he moi; l\vw of ,lii io; i lie n(tler'is lo mc ikic

;. ii'(i, 1 t i ', ,'tilC:' t:.': tlhe- ('Ie'2:IIS li()oin'r, noi

,ii'i v.ci1l, l Iri h!rithilps w iild (11 a inic.i:: , :-I t!i,:t it i.

.() t, to i to fiL ' it. A nil tii,:t vc 1x~ll1 ive

, ' youtr lo-

\'.:!'';i: sic a:iv .'rIilc!tcilt tlhelrcot, as voiti' good \'itilolns
!',I..1 h1; ill tlis cauls mIrct. It vill lie true anli frind-
i:l; vozI :ing for t is ,

ine, andl nowtlier l:'cincl phrafcrs.

!:.ir bo:;lli ig, and Im'lllrlg little other es'it, tlat t:II caul
'iS tO hlold away the l'rccnchicn. 'lis is .:iily w. ittel,
.i; I jt lilrc your l'laiiIi)',lls )]iiii. an!swer, for in truth a1l!'!
;i,,iielCI lang1ct contitucs ,uld friendfltip, cqihilk il this
:n.!!ttr I pray d

ay

( ;od lay Iln' contiIne, and h:ive our oild-

/hips in his keeping. (iF)n)umifrcis, thc 3( day of Scp-
.!nilber 156g.

Your lordships at my powcr

to comnmalidl lifully

I 1E R R I S.

Q.ieen MIary to Qo Elizabeth.

A I) A DA E ma bol:l focur. J'ay rcefcu tiic vos I;,E.
lc!tres, d'itmc Incfinc det ; l'iiu c, oil vouS ;ties
i .cs (i lb.

Cal.i. An

i'el.lltioll tid I'cxcult de i oni ' . de lclurric poiur t'cii r ltc-ii (u;inal.
irctclditi parlcmen't, qui mIc fienble ticn fro(id,, Itimr obtc-
li11 IpLs de tolle-rance (Icl jc in'cflois pcrltlfu c i'.iv oir

i .r

'',,I c prolmllef., <(ItIant a l'onfler doniicr com( niflion (l1 \vL'-
i1.r .iiis uii p)rlclnict i pour lcur pen de nombre dlic lilile
:h",>, jc \ous rci)ons, qi'ils n1'out qu( trois o11 qil.tlre
d' tv.alnitge, qni cilolnt aufli bien (iht h't1L opinlionl lhiiir
tic' .irl.iicnit, (tlini n1'a;1 tclnu taut pour cettecLit'cc, mai; s
i;'uir f.iire c (c l q'cxllrenfllmncint lnous avions rc qulis cli rit c1-
I:'!l:hs, u(li cit la forialtre dic ines fril)ji'ts pour ni'.'voir
clts lid clles, ce ] jc

i je ';fl irlois, jtiif(ltj's a heir, avoir e
C11 p1i1Oclli: de vous, par l. Icttrc ccritc a mi lrid Sicrtu

11 h 3 c ,Mail.

'ill '!:l!t in tiis article, and thcei proceedings puttis r,-
f F in S an:t 'IThomas belief.

" '.>w, lmy ];,:ds, 'i_ tile qucenl's majcfy of that realn,

uii;i !':ii .ai promifie and honour my I!aiftrcfs came thel.
as I h:Ive said, will clave all the French writini, alm
French I)lralcs of' writin:,g quililkils gis them is (:eOc
znE''i'ic on baith the fides rnefit, and plainly, accordin: t,,
'!ec :aitid true cultoml of Ingland and Scotland, quh(ri ,
be a word promnift truth was o(lbfeCr'd, promIile, in tl
iam:le of the cternal God, and t,)pon the hih Ihoinour (:
that nobill and princely blude of the kings of 'Ii,1;dJ,
qilhcreof fne is ldfccndit, and prelfbtly .wears tlhe di:-
eirin, that fihe will put my maiftrefs in her awin couil;',

inll c.itlic her as qr!'i-l thereof in her authority .:ii
lnr, gth to he obevit, and to do the fime will appoint m:.
c'crt,.in da;'v wvithin tw'o mont!s at the farthei, a, vc,
unidcr.ta:':;t hi:; t) 1's o(.:r -wil fina will we, or the mnii;
part of us :,l!, ftll.v por it, leavinlr tihe rcncln.,
a( trnd evi i hra todd. A

their

vl ch haes toidr. An trcc,

and lt r the true i'rpCtual friendlihip of that realmn, ,;'
conuditioll, a.( so or ,r ,:urt, with the race of A :

:

(ieud, keep iec ihe;:ds and conditions of .grcement, as n i
and vl'i ie men can cond;iefiend upon, for the w.eill ot ri
haill illandi. A I have been partlings declaring to t'.
euccnl . yo)iu fo:'Crcign, quhilk' I flew to your lo:Ji;i"
lelfis bnth in Iciigion., in thellpunifirment of the carl Bcth-
'wilc, for the (quIn'a O;.; h ufband's fi.l,ghtcr, :ald t(; .1
miutual lband ot amiLty ,il)petually to reil:ain alnigls !i'.

I)OU :TLF.. ;-, my lord-, without that, we may lindlli
imne andl friendly v orkinl, as may

I it tsI occnlloll I'.l!it

to for 'ctte MAid!dlcinolc and his late prettlldit ,.lrli.i.'ll.'
we will turn th!e a:tf, lcavilg our ftvereigtn a,:lil, ' 1.
will to reft whorCe (he is, u1nder the l)oanifi of iricldi!l;'.
As 1 have lbilh liid, and wv ll ever affirm, made 1h )y '
fovcrein, qiclliilk was only c:lail of her Lraces Colli:'
in t riit r-c e, and 1'(ek; the he11) nd nl )ell of Ir:i. I
o): S1iIifh, till c:.pollfi this trc;llo()ible and falle pritclsit
auitlhorit\, qiiliik nitanxs to ,citni :l l've us.

AM\l lords, I de(frc ;'our lordflips confider, th. il

he, that m.lit ,',!ir' s lthi':lexily beltJ:. Ilnglid adl

.)'"t

land to contitue., 'lit adl a 1p joian bll( cawlas

h .e', Ih
w rit tlIis.

Il Y brother, the l:ir (of Skirl']i'', I; lii s me, tIllt lIn
'youl 1.1 lllilli coini nii it; wi th liii) , itl a ;t'.it. t l ,,ltl

':?

.-,ur mind was we scold fii/cr tie c.rlI of Mlnrra, t o
.,ink, altho' it were agains reason to us, anid i.oli!:i
.'i,(cot to the (lticiit's ni;,cfty, and her hiighlinc wamld fce
.; icformit. MI lords, licr majet)ly will be over ncikle
!',ubl it to reform the wvran rcs we have fuftainit alreadcv,
? or I 1111 lure, gil rea:ol :nl !ice l)ay ha:ve place, o'u
min l'ots , alnd vc her fid'1c.: l, ll:ivc received expreCl
. r.aiL, far above two hundred irho lilid potlil(s litlii'l.,
11 tile tiime of tilis hlilappl; y ' rnm) nt) f ,:iii tihe 1-
f(n ii i;ion of F1 !. lreit caults, conlc, inc ' a d.'i\, (o

1luwli'

!;I] t. Ugidly) il; a;e' of oildiv io;i inl liie :itte ri [3i mcliklc
; ;-..;ii'd, 1 t!.i, :, uos,,the: t.:.- the il'iicn's ho:o'Cnr, not
,tr ,till, <v( ;r Ilrdfhips woild fia nli .i: n1(): tli,:t it is.

,· . to, , ts to f'', 2

L w it. \A nd til.:t ,-c l ill !:ive )'our I)o-

;':Irc'i,:l sic ad\rtilb.,nenit thlereot, is v';1r good Jiilom'.
!'...lI 1udl in this cause meet. It will 1e true and friid-
i ,!J \l-oiking tfr us, indaed, :andrl nowthlie l i'-;ch )Ihrlfs.,,
': r bho:llinii, and illing little other cfiLett, that wil c;aufl
:iq t hold away t he irnchiilmin. This is plainly . ittCrl,
.:id I &!d-ire yourt loriprii)'s l)iain anafwer, for ii' trutlh ;:.i,!
i Liniels langetl, conti:lucs grud -ficndflip, cquhilk ii t!,is
:n,.iter 1 pray G(od lmayl Ilan contilue,l and have your ioid-
'hipls in his keping,. i)F DI)umfrcis, the 3(! dav otf Sep
.cnblcr 1 56S.

Your lordflinps at my powcr

to commanliud IciLiilly

TI 7 R R IS.

Qjeen MIary to Q. Elizabeth.

M A A) A
D AME ma honn re focur. J'ay rc-tci (dte Vos i;

lc'tres, d'unc imefllne dcte ; ]'iilc, ol vous f;Aites (,tt. lb.

CM. I. An

rlicletion dc 1'cxctlli die Jonfll. de Al urrl pouir tCir )1l (,),l;inal.
Prtcldiu Iparilemicnt, cqui ne cirnble bicn froid, pour obtc-
nriln pls de tolliranlce (clui jc In'cf'ois pcrfuiladee I'avuoir p;ir
'',ile pI)romicll., <luant a ii' 'ncr dlonlcr cominifllon de vc-
I:r' (.lis unl parlemicnt pour lcur pen de ilollmbre dIe ioli!cfl:
:j"l,., jc vous reCl)ons, qu'ils 1n'uut que trois <il qii.ltltL
<l .iv.itagc, qui cilli'nt aulli bicn dit Ictut oliioln liors
de ri).rlncnit, qcili ln'a eft( tclnu talt pour cctle n:llctl, nials
]pu1r faire Ce (II'c)xpIrcnflmcllt lnous avi(ons rccinis elire CIT1-
p!'lLcs, qliii cti l( a IorIaltturc dic iljc s

fij s potur ln'avlir

leis fidclh, sC, CC (i jc m';flriirois, juti('s a heir, avoir c'1,
c1 plollcJic dec vous, par ]iL lttrc ccritc a mi lord Scrtll)

I-J h 3 c i ll s -

e Maifrec Knoleis vous induire a ire contre culx, voi;.
a les cnfayre rercntir ; toutefois jc vois quc je l'an Ia,,,
pris, j'en luis plus niarrie, pour cc quc fur votre letti:
qul'il lm montrercnt, et leur parole, je l'ay si divulguenieint
:tlilrav q'ce pour vengeance q(ue j'cn dcfirafi, si non mcet-
tre dilitel-cece enitre lcur faux deplrtemens, et Ics mien,
finccics. );Dans vo!I.e lttie amuli dt

tc du lol"''Ao' i,
vous metties ces mots. ' I think your adverse party, up-

on iT my fuiidiy formler advices, \.ill hold no parli.ment

"at all ; and if they do, it fiall be only in formn of ,i
"' a!fiilhly, to accrrd whomi to lidnc into this realm, anli

in what fort; for otherwive, if they shall proceed ill ni;i-

'L Iter of a Ipali;.ainiCt, with any at of ji(ldgnilt :oiil!
' anly perlfn, I fl-nall Iot, inl any Iwife, allow ihcrelf; ;i.,1
" i they filhl be fib o'.erfeen, then you may think thi
'' tiame :o Le ol no ot',tr nmoment, than the former p!(-
<' cedures ; and by such their lrati maniner of proccedii',,
' they fnlial moll prejjudice themllblves ; and he alnired ;t,
' find me ready to condclmn them, in their (lings." Sir
qilov, j'ay co;iti crnii ane ries lerviteurs, Ics lailiilt rctiir,
louffran;t fIloi vofh'e cm minl;ideiment d'etre fauflcntcite
normics traitres; par cculx, qui le font dj vray ; et (1-
core d'etre prs;vJq!Jcs par elcarmons dies, et par prilil< ie
mes geis et lettre , ct aLi contraire vous etes inlforn ;
quc nics fl!'jtCi; oiu e'ahis les vofitres, Madane, qli ;i f.it
ce r;alppoi t i'et pals h dlnii;ie dc licn, car lairi- de Scsrlrd ct
foil fils loot et ort e!le lic tU rbehlles depuis Ic teorimenclc'-
linent; enquiti::, v.ou, s'l'.s n'el.oienlt a Donfris avIqteti
cn]X, j'alvoiS ult'i rc idt icdre fd si 'rontlecre, cc qoui ilCe fii
relil-c, ce (iii ii''en devronit afc:; duifch: il't,'., nIlc.loillir

( oil t tiLre plr )rclliv (!e n,; ilelite, et d(e lcur 1.diI!n , S'ii

V(oIs me lyte ayc donner le 1noilt des oulpables, et nie lfrti-
lier, jc coinmIandletry mcies IuiljIdls s pour fuivre, OL fil
v'(ius voules que cc foit les 'C vltcs, 1Cs Iiiirs Iclurii ac-
.ront; je voIIsIt ic iIl'cn 1n inder volire volotilt, ;1n reiel
nic liiluijeds lidtlles Ieloilt rciponil;abls a tout cc qui Jclei
fir;a niis si les colltle votis, nii ]s v\,ofrjes ni Ies rcl llcs,
ill'I)iiS (Iltn' ie conleil ,ltei l es flirc retirel. (>;etitt Ii.1
I'r'.l]tos, j'elerivis (jile l'oui m'('n fit iutille po(tiu t'l, (.!i
j'ef ieroi' t:init ent vois, quie jc lieC anrois lleloigl.,-je 1tC
s(,-i.' i Ic di t aura en 'es lettics, Imais je vous jitrC dc.li
])ieu (iute je lie k:ay chlofe ctl ioll; tie

( C leur velile, i i,'

. (ittle M'eCl aives i;idi(la), lli In'cn t i l de 1' raiCt' iii"
du iniio(le ct nl Ic p),is Lruilr pIour ccif occalion, et li -

li ti.,,

' ~i 'onc tc!:;r t fans rn ,ciii on'CO n c;
[It Pan L;? Iov

wjs I (2l

l l) c Me MC mcljlcl Ilrt IIc OU'( VV, Car :11, I'C 1

IIrl~le t~'n i* aut :ci (111 y

ccit \.11ix I·wlc,~, et

c, J f2',rc qiuic anleli, qu'Il v pus iA:

l( it lia poulr 1prtliLr letr retour a Ci--fie G: ii ('li
JYIIcurs ~ :niircs e mnin, e1 er, t 11,

111n(2na Fralice (It en] VOnS Iras :W, Ime 1.'), U m

lie J V01' tn p'u p L olnt( otr( f:.lu', II
1( . ne'I prlVvIit).i\'(lir1)i-t u)1rll(2 bluntid mcu~ luKI( I (.5!;~

d

o rr~i'aliar ci U( voul, pan It n

' IL tl· CCI) a

k aill ' L i
tt, pour J iih: vonil e Ii \ Ii II a u 1 IV

Cue eIj

.II111 (2 (211C m a tarte lit 1Il d(2C IC. lIa

1. Al u, I) WL. mcl v ;
(2:lVO' VS llo\' (ijtL r1, ; C 11tC I ,-ll

hI~IC ouruni rr 'nr c cljeclle (p1(2 112 J ue(kI (

l)m12lc jc 111(2 j-mieL(ttla cy ilh r A iciter kindcisa qu,
IilS

si bV hI v rcnlcntcitluvls cc iit ipits Yolus iur

bitSinlh lil~er lpricral JA CUOVIS, donol i (21 IdiV, 1o11''

4l
cit h1 rell htie Vie. DB I rotoa, OU jC Vil S JC C

pv re bonne Ljce, ( Yuakc
11ul(ltcur~S nleoltCi~t. C2c 26 d'Aoust.

No. XXVIII. (Vol. I. pl. 1

0 ueen Elizabeth to the Earl of i\ I urn ay.

RI G IT[' ttinily, and rgtwell beloved, couIin, kwc Pi, cl
R rtyoui well. Whlere wc hear sily, tli.i t (2(rt:1 s 'n

;I11It. at IllilUC 'I lUoln~,y parts of thaI~, :! w~-I

III u rT Ilid

o i II

si Outt 11111(2 upon ti hC em,1 ilj ot' tlil qjueei'1 CcJ.
(I Colts (2:111k, ill anly pruot to co~livi'tice to ljltEI

qu2e1 CcolCerIiing tile horrible nIiller at Ps Cr late 111

11211 ,

ca c eoi~iii, we 11:11(c dcuterineild to re~ltnre hCr to ai

kill, Ind 11 goverlnmCent, we do sii niticl miii ikc hI (iiic

:1 Wen: Calliiol ililtl~rle thle iitime to rec(eiv(2 lly crillit ar:
thclulml W(:VV bav'e thought guiod to atili meC youhate
ta11n1 1IS ijimt- uly dvt by thle authors to our d hmaiI

V(ras we have heen always celtified fsr0111 (Itil s'1k1 PI

liuth by her let ters and mtigsthat (il PV iS I)' mll 12.1
~'lItv or participant of' that murder, which wve Wil' I to lie

H hi~ rm

fruc, so flirclv if ile' fn ultl bc foumnl jiilll to bc ,,I,;;
theIcot ', s

e hitli h(

,': i 3portt'd of heir, dhseito ,'e ;,', ' '

be very (brry, the;: iidc:,, it flioill ibhc'.' uS ti 0 ,,-
fidcr otilcr\i ic (t- lher C:!lfi thani to fittisfy hilr d( lireC i' 1.-
i.itutinl of her c it the govclinwilt ons tli;t [Ki1,: li,;1;
A ndl o vc

w \e w i,, l lh.,s- e v'), 1 a:ill ;ill (,1l('. )

tllil]:, .:,

fhoilIl bc tdil'olceii tkJ cincei'.e iloltrJ)iltly u , ...
:.Ctl,,Is.

Ii:dorfcld : e Scp't. 1565 .

No. XXIX. (Vol. I. p, 49-.)
Sir I'alncis Knuollys to Cccii, the 9tli of O'li,';:

563, from York.

ni-:o ;";:'. --- , lir';i s .rancc of Noifolk fe;l' illdn f,- Ir..

rJP:,C ;cco i l :,

i' t

,,l, te
t ttelt d ulp)ni him in crc 1 hli:'t..

Jafi, I eitdeJ m iLp.i'iL lihthlir aiccoridiigl, in 'i;lliii.
fl;i' hric uiitil ?oiL.;. ' nic:.\t; tns touciin thlie mattc:'-',
the co tinnif7ic tlat his gr

an, th!. rcte ii.t e !'oln i.:

liihncfs, Ils i- i.ce lihtli iinmp:ntcd untllo mle (i' ;ll t!,i
thercunto ap'ticrt.'illinl: , ;rId what lhith hitliciho pi:.'1.!,
nnd alih' tlhc Inattcrs be too weighty for mny weak c:I-
city, to prcel'ill to litter any opillionl of mine own tih a:-
(if, yet I l(ce that my lord 1-Terris, for his partc l.lbotirthl ;..
rcclncil; .tion, to be h:il without the extremity of oWic.:,
accutfations; my lord of Ledington allob f.lith to mnc, th,i.
ihe could wi fn the Ic mntters to be ended il (dulce m;i i'r,
that it mighit be done witli silc:tv ; ol' the cllt yo l .::;
coInecive, by the adulvrilicnl'ilts ai.d writi:ios, lln t upl I'
our coinmilioiclrs.
A lettcr fromn the lhifhop of Ross to tllhe qucn o;

Scots, from York, Ohtober I 568.

"..1. J 'L ETS your majicfly 1 confcerrcd at lettlh witil A.
''';"... C. . j_ ane grC';i part o'i ;l tinilt, who aflniiit lme tint ie c

li'had t rleafo'n, with B. thlis Saturday C. on tlie field(, 'l)
dc'trminllel/ to him tllat it was tle 1). dItc, rmiiit itl-
po[le o

11 to Ciil 'yol:r C'iifc at lthli tielt, but to }loh l tilt

I.lnc i fnti'('illc' ;Ill1 did thatt was il hc' power, lto 11.ikl
tlie E. p;irfue ext clnitl, to the Fli'HlL 1'. a;mi hi li:]l'r-.
relts mlli: ,ht lIt CI ill thil y co( li to y''ir' d(ili ii,()llol r
tihe ftcc.t to caulc yonu c lme c in ildlldn' with tile 1.111l

j'

,', of tihis iT.-lm, that ve may be tihe mrair ulnale to
*.i npt ;any thiin. to lher d(liidlvanta.e. An11 to this cf-ecll

. .! ,her intlentior', a:ii wvhen they h:ve prouilced( nll they

.'1:! .;inil \oi, I). will !is)t rapp)i't

the inatti r iililvtly ,

,, . il.l;(lrt yoi up ill th,' coun:try, niil rctain v ,)i thllrr
:' 1i think time to l.ew VOu fvloiir,> which is lo, likly-

:;e ; h,:il, !cclaufl oft our isunclc; in FIrlncc, ;;nd the
.! .iih. . ha.. rs ;',}uliilf tO bi her iilasric;xl. Aiin! [htic~

r.I., r c(ii;l: Sl is, thl t vc wr;te :'i wliti[n to, tic I).

,; ,,;.: .
: t .t tyc .re infermil th.'t ';uilr flillie O . hi has

.'i

';'. (LI. -This in cli'ut th!.;r y our ml.iji.ty l:'.

:rin,
:,: ..t of yo'ur afiS' irs ;- thecy piroceced i;i n'i:, \.s

t; "',!i- t'i it lcr na1;icfl,' \wIs iillillc oft

C 'Oii, tii, t \( il

,i ll i Il . i(ci' !\el y reinit your /'tlejcls in lul tll ; i .i, ti: v

ii '; ccl;t yo hlriaii.cr, whitll

wyo a .rc "r.i t oIi';.llt tlhe
i;. \ th is *;) it!-Ovc, Iv to be cndied. AiiL til 'l' ic) ]'. r-

1i ''i ). c'i.- i,:tlliv . it to) tric'll aill \ h,' !i;:; 11n.ni1

: ;1 i .:r tatini. But like as vc li:id rendcre( d
.' un l1 t lic

:.,, ;.5s nol tCide(!tr to vyoii o, "iy livillZ, (o) lp.,it lici

. .' n.l o[pinion of you, bu it

tIt that t i

'il her co; -

! i :il your as}tirs, a.il waldl prefer her i'iclidillip ;(!
.. ):'ii', as wn ll itmocics as otnllo c :, i i tic

l l i 'b lI' to c 'lkee

t..t li, yc

. wall prollibc to you: ' fiibje-L s by her advice.

A: iFi 1). dlilferodit yo;, ye wall be gl.d to ( i.istfy hct'
1;: t!:.t puJpint be removi;ng within lihr reailm in lec;-t and
( it .iiler, where heir

lc . p!caf., tnltil the timie h11

(; .

\Lir fdI\v ltistilcd, an adll occ.fioui of dilCeridit re-
;iv\ i.l Fiom l Ier. So that in the mean tine your realnl

i'.'it hi(lcn il (liutictiis, and your trui lhllj cts rle.loli

: '.i 1::;'it::ild in their own tiffate, and lie other tlhinl_,
' i.l, t ho tis etsclt. Adi ai.liriis thalit they helie'xo
*..4t tl.is i;''yi 1) OCClOfOii to Ciile her C Ire.it yoI that ey
.'' i) |:IFr ; alld it maIly come th.it wilthin two or thll-te.
hii.thl; (hlie mal y bLCntcie bettel'-liiiileil to Iou r(ll ace
:: )ow fni is ni.i t w\e i tmlit ld, ;ii1l ill inot Illiew )y)t

iny pJc;ilure t or t1le oaitles foiefi ,id.
A. >'. 'T'le title of this Ip.i l ,r i ii, Cecil's hanild thli

')11u0 in!': kev i.. ;addedl i ili .11i,)tIo ,
ll!,

A. 'l' laiiil (if l1.(',li

. lo i,

1,. 'l1e )uke of Noilolk.

'. \ as tlie iday he rode to C.to ood.
I). 'Ilie (iu'en t of l ' i,1.,.l.

r -
. I l 1eli of Slots, coi,'iiill :ujl(-.S,

No. XXX. (Vol. I. p. 510.)
Deliberation of Secretary Cecil's concernir,

Scotland, Dec. 21i i56S.
I'::,erO;T.c,. TFH'. beftr way for EIillalnd, but nor the neflct-, l!::t

A. the queen of Scots might remaiin ecprivc-d ot Ihci
Ci'owni, and the ftatc continue as it is.

TIH ';: ecoid way for lEngrl.lld prcfl table, antl not si i :(l

--That the queen of Scotts might he in duc e!l, 1.y I;nc
pcrfwafions, to agree that lie' fton mirght cuo;tiiiuc kini::
tbcaufe he is crowned, and hcrfllf to r'llmatin ;!so( (jilc(ll;
iind that the govcrnim:nt of t: e realin mi h t I.c conm;litted
to such perfonrs ;s the queen of Engla od luld iini,
so as for the nomination of them it mighi be otrdaleJ,
that a convenient number of perfliis of Scotland lli)uild hc
firr named to the queen of England, indifFerently for tilc
queen of Scots, and for her fnl, that is to fay the cr1c
half by the queen of Scots, and the other by the c;:lec
of Lennox and lady Lennox, parents to the chiltl ;-li;!
out of those, the queen's majefly of Engl:nd to n::iLc
choice for all the officers of the realm, that are, bY t;:c
laws of Scotland, difiofibile by the king or queen ol

c !:I,
land.

J-HA r until this may be done by the (qiccIn's mIljcly,

the government remain in the hands of the carle ot Alur-
ray as it is, providingll lie h;all not difiool f

e n

of a ficc;c or

perpetuals to continue any longer but to thdeb osiercd U;
the pre ili s.

'I 'lA' la parlilamenlt he fiummoned in Scotland by fc-

vcra.l eonimanldmcets, both of tlie queen of Scots a;dl ol
the youtng king.

-'l'IrAT hoilflages be delivered unto England on the

young king's behall, to the nunlber of twelve )prlniii
of tlie earle of lMurl'ray's part as the queenl of Scots fih.il
,:;ime; and likewile on the queen's behalf to the like niiin-
lcr as thic eacrle of Murray fl'all nam ; tlhe ;inme not to lb'
:lny thalt have by inhlcierice or oflice cauf to he in thi,
p:irliamient, to remain froti the beginning of the flillinl(ll
of that parliamcnlt, , ntil thlree months after th;it parlia-
mncnt; whlich lholtacs shall be pledges, that the Iricill.

,'

tr either part flall keep the pnace in all cafes, till bl tiih-
p:iiil,.Ii1ent t ih conCludIed, lthat the o.rdin;ance which the
.licel of 1 En gland l(halll d(evie flo the iovcrlillncnt of tihe
rc'!in (beiig not to the hurt tof the crown of Scotlalnd
o)r contr:lry to the laws of Scotland for any man's inhe-
rit::l!cc, a;, the fime wvis bcfore the parliamenlt at Ld!inl . the
7' .'ccr. i 567) H !]l be c fl.:blifhd to be kept andtl ber)cdl
.I;il ;Ji):;ill oit hlilh trielbil for hic brcakers thereof'.

--- THA'T bv thie fime >,.rli;iimlet llfo be ctl:ab!ificid

.il execuitions anl j udgmcnts giveil ;ai nil a1ny perlbn fur
tlc death of the late ing.

--'[r!.x'r by the limc |larli:nilent, a rcniflion be

ma:lc t;:ii 'ci lally fromi the queen of Scots to an her con-
til.r, ., an!;l aIt fro( ev\ery (,ne lubjcdt to another, faviiin
h!l.it I(.littltion he mndic of l; ins :tand honfes, and all other
itulis le ritable, that have been

h lvi, either fide taken trom

th ,'m whilch were tihe ov.ncrs tlilreeoftt the comlmiitinll- of
:h (1i!-1cn Ot' scolts to Lochle'tii.

'I I;A T by the anil parli.mllent it be declared who shall

be flrcell-Irs to the c:-',.ln iext aiter the Qt of Scots and
!r ri 'ic ; o e!c, that fuclii 1 ' t of the 1). of Chatelihe-
;.i!it had., at t!he marri; e of thle Qt of Scots with the
'l d

i )arnley, tre.iv be confel'ved rid(l not prej licd Ced.

'1I iHAT' le Q Oi Scots ion'y ihave leave of the queen's

11jc.]efy of I'nglani, , t, le nilolitlhs after t!he i.i1 parliat-
;ient, a3,d rhl:t file flial not dlepart outt of Ldl and, with-
,,it Ie)Ci;]: licence of the qlueen's In:je v\'.

'I'nAT ilec youIn king shall le inourilhcd and brought
:1 in legl:tand, till he be yeCal .ft :t1 c.

'r is to be contliderctd, that in th i ',.: ( tlhe compofi-

t;)iii hltt\'tc' the quccin and ier fuilijccts . ) bi, nmale with
c:il.,;l; a.lt lc., oll twardIl)y to be ectll to the v ,.d for hler
oIlh iut , ;is thoell h ill the parts ilhtlld collce t' hier, and
y)t 1;1o tle surety of contrarys, that certain L -LIWixt her
*'.1il tle queen's nijetlly a.re to be concluded.

No. XXXI. (Vol.. I. 513.)
'I li queen to Sir Francis Knolleys, 22 Jan.

1568-9.
W E grcet you well, we mcean not, at this point, PapeOtffica.

Iby any writing, to renew tihat which it hatli
plcafed God to make grievous to us and3 forryfull to yow;

but

but forbcariln the f.nic as unmcet t at tis lpoin!, h;'. :r
occasion to colmmalnd you ill our frivice, and yo: ;;,
whil:eft Vout are to serve us. We re(qilie vow to co(-
ildecr of this th;it foiiowcth with like confir'r;tioln

,;

(ili Cllnce, as hithertn yow have accuflomnate ill our f:-
vite; :it the tiniC of our :llt lettcrs written to 'c;,' ti,
tourteenth of this month for removing of the (jc:cn ,(
,cc;ts, we had ullderflllading out of Scotlland of cc:!'al
writtiings. tent b) her from thence into Scotland, amonl!'
the wai}chl o I:u is fbuId to contain great and maniaif-ct uni-
trutllhs touilchinrg us anid others a allb n

s llall and ma

plainly appcear uinto yow by the copy of the fimei whliL!
ikewife e

.'cic y(l o\w, andl bccaCtif at tie fiane time we wrc"

aJxertiJbd, that it ihoiild be florly proclaimej in Scut.,,::

,i

ti(,uglh! t!'nt it was llot, we tl;oiulht good firil to renior'.
tie (iucin, becr we would difclole tile fnie, ani11 t!,:
expcct t!uc il'i' thircof; anid Iw, this diay, by lctters IOui.n
our couli;i of H-unfdon we are ascertainc(d, that since th;::
time the faime matters contained int the writing, arc 1;ub-
lifllcd in divcrfe parts of Scotland, whereupon we ih.!
thought it very meet, for the dif'harge of our honor, ;:Ail
to confound tile falsehood contained in thlit writilT', ri,
onily to liave the fame reproved by open proclali;l.';
upton our fiontiers, tile copy whereof we do IheriL:!,
fend y)ow, but also in convenient fort to charge th;t q1a ,
thlrewith, tb as file many be novcd to declare the ;!tiitIr.
tlic;cof, aI:d pcrluaders of 1her to write in fuich flandcr:;;i
fort lilI untruths of us ; and ill tile mean cnltafion, we l.'.c
atc:.e laityed )it cointiit ioers, knowing no other wimr:
we may: mior- piobably Ircfliiiic to be partics hrciet!ilo,
tlian thelc' until tiic queen ihall Inillae I(nline other, ;n:(!
acquit tliem ; who being generally clarged, witlhot.t x-
preffiig to themn anly )lparticul,n-itty, do ule all rnlrincr (ii
peceches to diilclarge theinfelves; wherefore ollr Iplc.rl:i;
is, that )'c lliall, after )yc have well perused the (,i;y
of tilis writing icllt to 'ow, f)pccdily decl;are ulto It' ,
thiat we have good u(l rllailiding given us of divei l' c' -
ecrs :and writtiniigs, lint bIy h1cr inito Seotliiu], fig.ed 1')
her owIn haind, amnollgn wliich, onle fitcli writillg is I::
with her colnmalndmrl nt cxprcflv as liow it is ali'c..l'
publiflled, a;s we ;aie m 1ch troIubled ill mind that l t in-
ccfs as file is liavill! a cattle inl our uhands oi iniplic;lt:l
witil diflicluhys a;dl (;lanitys, Jhould cither concc;:s' ';:
hte 0Wil lmind, or illuw of th'll thIat hould dcvilc f(in i

Iitll's

l..:if, untrue, and improlable matters aainfl us, and our
hlinor, and iiecially to have the avlnture to have the fain;
it'I , kllnowni so untrue to be publlifhcd ; and you fh:il
:.1ob la , bccauife we will not think to ill of her, as that it
ihoulld proceed of her I;lf, but rather the ,lath been coun-
i.llc therciinto, or by abuse made to think finic part
i Tcrcof to be true, we rcquire her, Ceven a fhc nav loo!.
ir oiny favour at (our hands, that lhe will difll rIe CIl her-
r.i' as mluch as truly file may hlc:cin, and nluame then
wnhich have been the authiors an( pcrfwiadcrs thcreofl
;.id ;.i) hle flall make as great aielnds to us as the cafe
n.v require; after you have thitus lfa rprIccd(l:d, andl had
!,nic anfwser of her, whether sic llail deity the writ-
:na aldol'!tcel-, or ianic any that have becci tlle advifi'..
t'hreof, vou fliall ify unto her th: t wvc have it-acyd lelt
comiiiiiionlers here, untill we may have (fnic alnf'wer here-
(i;;, hicaiufc we cannot but impute to themin itl part ,(I
h1vs evil deilinig, Itill by her anlfvr t"K autio:s ma;.
'e known ; and as boon as you cat have direct andiier-

r.,in her, wec pray you to return ui tlhe faime; tor as th,'
lc.: fiandceth, we cannot but be much difiluieted with i.

h.cving our honour lo deeply touched contrary, to :'ny ;::-
tintion in us, and for any thing we kaow in our Jud -
ment the earl of M\lurray :and others na imd in the `slmc
wli ilg void of thouht for the matters, to them thercii
inli'tc ; you rmay impart to the queen us Scots cither
:l}e contents of the Ildlticrl'Ols letter, or fhciv her tli-
c)l)y to re.d it, and you m i l) .lll; impart tlii. miaticr t..
ii; lord Scroop, to oiii with you there as vou nll.,l :'i '
Sir Fr;nncis Knolleys to quccn 1Elizalbeth, fiomr

VWctlicrby, tlic 28 h J ia:ltary i56 '.

IT \I.L suppress my ov-n

' riefrs, a;d p, ifs h"m /.,, .;,.:

over withl lilc ncc, fir tlirc pi)reftl t learlint11 , i '(ul .

' . .i''i

m mi icsny andi lor this (j.,,e 's .liwer t t,) e Colpi 1

c ;( *'1;i',:hce.

i:ap);l, d le tter ('n( t llunr Scotl(, I; d, I llldil :1ad( tlis ' at
11iv liotliers lettlcr, i(t.t unto M r\l. Secrct,.ll' ) lci i;'}ltt
,c;, in lproceIs ot timnc si'c (id I ot deny blit that tlhc
hli]ll ll's coltlitllt ilt thle fii1c (t co ic, was .irV';dlle to>
,' l.ttcr tht (liIe i.;d fi1Ut uuto c.uotl."td, \,':,.)h t'.tnch'd

I ''i

my lord of Mlurrav's promif/ to deliver her son into go:,'
niaielltv's ha;lids, anid to avoid thait the filinc should not be
done withotut i;tr conif.itr, m.de hict, the fiaith, to write
inl that hehail ; ithe l.itli ;tilo tl;tt I(he wrctec thatt they
flhould c.itlc a pr(clamalti)on to b1e mad to ttir her prop1.
to dle'.id mny lord of Mlurraiy's intent .,il piurpollo ,

0t

dlelivei ingt. of iher liid son, and inipungc his rebellious ,o-
Crtlerlcnt, as flic tcrnlcti it, luit flie utterly dcvetn h io
have v. rititr any of the other slanderous part of tie si;!;
etiecr touchiln' your lajelyj ; flie laid also, that file iut(
pc'cd(l tli.t a t'rrenchminll, now in Scotland, niil 'ht te tir
iujthor of loimc Scotch letters deviled in her niime, but liie
would inot allow me to write this for aiy part of her a.,
Asern

No. XXXII. (Vol. I. p. 512.)
Sir Nicholas Throkmorton to the right honour-

able the Lord of Lidclington.

2,-1 .,r Jl:y '% OUR letter of the 3d! of July, I have rccc.ivcd the
*: *s.- .i xsth of the faime. l For aiiver whercunto you fia:ll

u'." ' itnderftlad, that frieids here to my lord regcnt andl )ou

do wvith fuich a coGiicirrence in ;ll doings, as in maiti-r aind
cireuin flaiccs iiere a;: , no d( tfltnioni, or at the Ic.il',
no more nor other t:i,:li the dilc];rence oi" counlilcs ditill
jiccclfl-ily requilp'. \'v hicre do thilik c()vt niit that as
few delays

; ltie d as Ial:y )heC, so the colifunlniatioill tile

matter il hlad, which principilly to advaine, ).m'; .1-
loW;alle, prolecutioln, at1 I'eed]' l)l. l

pird 'o,

n ,aied!,

is molt rclJuilitc, for you ar'e lto ilC, ;1iiJ , vtil ;icl'l. iitid
with the llatc of the worldl, a;d ,. itlh all ouir lliihumour, as
you know thlat oni;c d(o allow a;d dils(illow lor lre'!i, lrti.C
Iblr rciic'l of (Iitltituild, fonm for reIil.(ct

()f pIcrl i1, .iid

f o

t:, ;cs

inis i

to

o for s I ) e to t It-

ward. ' (it ar:e tnot to lei c thiat o \\'will life: , a.!.itnS,
some netln..lity, nme delays,., and Iboi will pliainly in-
pu>llc it. And\ et ll ;iild every of thefl tolt will lic
their doings, whlcn they fill11 i((e the rcegni anld hli; I.-
vourers accord will Ih. lbi and 'I;catel pat ';tt thle':, ,Ja
agree with the v.'is: ..l : (ftl I{ :,lt i|tarty ihere. rlT ' ilre
nmatter has tiakel it., l(';i.iti' iit" l, luil de(' i;id it jt'

5 f l.a' -

co:fiderations, for the well of both the princes and their
rc!ins, as well presently, as in time to come, yet it is
thouirht molt expedient, that the regent and realm of
;cotland, by you, flould propose the matter to the queen
our lovereign, if you like to ulti convenience, good order,
or be difpoifed to leave but a fear, and no wound of the
!nhrts past. I would be glad that thi,; my letter £noul
come to your hands before the convention, whereat it
fccms your queen's restoration and marriage tothei duke
of Norfolk should be propounded, either to w,'nne in them
both allowance or rejection. To which proceedings, be-
c.ufe you pray me to write frankly, I fay and reason thus,
me thinketh you use a prcpofterous order, to deimand ithe
coniliit of such pcrfons, in such matters, as their nii.ll
to a good end hath rather been felt or prepared, and
therefore there must needs follow either a univerfll re--
iiffl, or fatious division amiongft you, whereby a bloufter-
in intelligence mu(t needs come to queen Elizabeth of
tli intended marriage from thence, which ought to have
been secretly and advisedly propounded unto her high-
ness; hereby you fee then the meaning is, by this dealing,
her majefly fliall be made inexorable and io bring the
matter to luch pafic, as this which should have wroug!ht
liirety, quietness, and a flay to both queens and their
realms, /hall augment your calamity, and throw us your
belt friends into divorfe with you, and into unhappy (iyvi-
llon ainongit ourfelvcs; for you may riot conjettl re that
the matter is now in deliberation, but cxpecteth "oodl
occalion for executing ; sure I am you do not judge f(
lenclerly of the managing this matter, as to think we
h;ivc not cafl tlie worit, or to enter therein lb far with-
out the ;aflitance of tlie nobility, the ablelt', the wiletl,
ndl thle miighlieft of this realml excet qucc'n l iza/bctil:
fiiln wliom it hatli been conc.aled unltill )you, as thIe ittelt
niliiller, night propound it to her, onl tie behalf of the
regent, and tlhe nobility of Scotland. [low far mafier
V(oddels defaimations dlo carry theni of queenl Ilizabctl 's
aftaitions, ;and mIirfler secretary's, to aflill the regent and
to firpprcfs the queen of Scots, I know not, nor is it not
allaierial ; but I do afllurdly think, that her majelty will
prefer her surety, the tranqulillity of lcr reign, and tile
cour.lrvation of eicr people, before any (levice, which mray
p1'ocecd from vain difcourfc, or imperfcttions of pallions,
anid inconfidcratc aftiriioiis. And as tor Mr. Sccretary,

4 you

you arc not to learn, that as he likcth not to go tno s.,i
afore, so he coveteth not to tarry too far behind, and fpC-
cially when the rcliqucs be of no great value or power.
If I could as well afilre you of his magnaniniitv, -iW
confhincy, as of his pref'nt conformity, I would favy con-
fidently, you may rcpofe as well of him in this nuti!i,
as (if the duke of Norf;lk, the e:arls of Arundel, l',n-
hroke, Leiccftcr, Bedford, Shrewsbury, andt the rdft (c il
nohility; all which do embrace and protcfte the acc ,n-
plifiihment of this cafe. I have, according to your advit,.
written prclcntly to my lord Regent, with the ftinme/ .,
and care of his well doing that I owe to him, whom I[ l,
atnd honour. I\r. Secretary hath aftured unto himi t'
tqueen of Scotland's favour and good opinion, wherC.,::.
he fccnith to be well fatisfy'd. If your credit be, ;, i
trust-, haften your coming hither, for it is very nccli'i!.
that you were here prefcntly. (O Elizabeth both dcl
write to 0m\ lord Reent in i(ch lort, as he may perc...
\Ir. \WVood's discourses of her majcity's aflcilion tl,!
va;n, and LMr. Secretary otherwilt bent than he coii].c-
turcth of him, the effeit of which her majesty's letter \uit
iliall undcrltind, by my lord leicciler' letter unto vu .,'
this dilipatch. At the court, 2.oth July I569.

No. XXXIII. (Vol. 1. p. 524.)
Pa.rt of a letter from the earl of Murray to L, LU

pprobabl) Lord lc'i/J,

1,rE. .-- ' ECATISE, T i e that ryrc.t advant:ice is t;aik:'

.Vtr.. Ilb. B on linill orccilons, alnd thail the mennion Iof ilL.

o' 1. '. marriage mbetwixt
the qiccen my foverCi'.ln's mother, ;a11

the 1). of Nortolk hatl tlhis hile paif ',.e c very fI'(rii'lt
ill both the re.lmsi, al nd1( I mlf to be fiPok)c ot ,!
a molioncr, which I i;cl(ive is at tihe Ilaf comle ti

:

maljeily's c;r. ; I wxill, for

i ftirtisf.ion of her !irlt

n i

and tlie d(lit( hi';ic of' n)' (ity ty owirs her m;ijclly, nin'li-
eftt unto you my interell, ;1and medling in thai it,:ii,
from the very I,'giininl: , liiuwsinl;, xvi.ttbfo:vxr i> pi,'
(iciai to her hliin':lIs, c.iltn t b ht I) itnili to to i

t Ie: .i

my sovereign, li s his rea;l , ;nla n, . \Viat coni'i -'1'
wa;s betwixt tlli diilkc of No ulkl , ;,1n any of thenll I'.t

v,.:'

,cr!e with me within the realm of England, I am not able
i (tciclarlc hit I Imn no wife forgetful of any thiniig that
:,tiled betwixt him and me, either at that time, or since.
Andi to the cnd her i\ajefly may underfland how I have
bcen dealt with, in this matter, I am compe]led to touch
i; m circunfaiicc, before there was any mention of her
nl-!r'i: l'e. In York, at the meetingr of all the cormmilfion-
c:s, I loundl vrv-and neutral dealing with the duke, and
oti>i.r her hir'iiiCef's conimlifioners in the beginning of

c'; cltif, a1 in the making of the others to proceed

]:.ccLr'y, and fl furth. During which time, I entered
]::to) cl era!l fpctch, flicking at our just defence in the
;;,..tcrs that were objclcd against us, by the said queen's
cnmniiffioecrs, looking certainly for no other thing, but
!:m I:ry co' C lition in the cause of controversy, with a
linil declaration to have followed. Upon a certain clay
m::, lord Lithington secretary rode with the duke to
!o;ward, what purpose they had I cannot fay, but that
:iaht Lithington returning, and entering in conferrence
with me upon the frate of our action, I was advised by
i:im to pass to the duke, and require familiar conferrence,
', the which I might have some feeling to what ifilue our
rnitttcrs would tend. According to which advice, having
_'),teni time and place convenient in the gallery of the house
heirce the duke was lodged, after renewing of our first
::. i(aiiitance made at Berwick, the time before the as-
;.i/ (of Leith, and tbme fpeecches pafled betwixt us; he
:.l'n to fay to me, how he in England had favour and
(cdit, ;ind I in Scotland had will and fricndfhip of many,
it wv; to be thought there could be none more fit infiru-

e:icits, to travel for the continuance of the amity betwixt
ii; reAlms, th;ii we two. And so that discourse upon the
!liC(enit tl.te of both, and how I was entered in that action
t.illdlig Lo far to the queen's dishonour, I was willed by
hiii tu confider how matters flood in this, what honour
I i:ad received of the queen, and what inconveniences her
'('.lniltijill in the matters laid to her charge mihllt breed
t1 licr poficrity. Her rcfpedt was not little to the crown
ul l'.glind, teire was but one heir. ''he Hamiltons my
"li iciids, had the next refpc&l, and that I fliould cflecm
t'Ie illic of her body would be the more affectionate to
mic and ininc, than any other that could attain to that
ci(win. And to it should be meeteft, that slim affirmed her
d:mifiun made in Lochlevin, and We to abflrad the let-

V .L, 1I, i i tcrs

tcrs of her hand write, that fice fliould not be defamed ;;i
lng-1land. Mly reply to that was, how the matter ha;!d p[;ilcii
inl parlanment, and the letters seen of many, so that tie
abtlravLtin of the fame could not then secure her to a;:v
purLpo!l, andi yet fhoulld \c, in that doing, bring the i-
nominy upon us. Affirming it would not be fair fOr i:b
that way to proceed, feciing the queen's mlajicjly of E:;r-
lan,11 was not made privy to the matter as l!th (,:i ':
to be; in ri'pccC't we wereC puirpofcly coi in .!i.'l.:m! Ii.,:
that end, and for the - of the grants of our c;!:ic. I',
iukec'= anfwcer waLs, he would take ill ha:ld o ih i.iC i.i :t-
tcrs well enou.h at the court. After ti, 0; c!, '

ct,.

lion of certain articles, that were re'quirdi to hb r.cfi'.i
o;, before we entered on the dccinh.i!',1 cos thle ,v:
:i'oul. d of our a Wiioll, we came up) t) the co:lri; u,!cril
lo:ne new comniiionlers were adoinldt to dilc forli.r, ;:.:
the hea ii;n of te mnattier oi2rdaiid to li in t!he it:-.,.:
nri"1it liOL12C at .

Ve!iim liT-cr: 1 :lit t kee of w ,ii_3h c02:;-

, ,iioncrs of the l i(J ntccill, aind ---- tlirou't h the --
* -bl;r.iinr oi the queenl oi !nr '.;ia l'ds

,',.i) coiisiiilii 'i-,

..-t uttered the clole ;o the i)';o : d prI' dti'd !l. c:
,* *itiice-,> letter, , :i

prod (i)atioC >, :1. \,'e hlad, wlhlich !i :I:

.,Jvet toe tICil n it t. thik well of Our c.i;;:,
\V:.* nrecpo) x;pe!. ip;l; her lii inc.> .dleclaration, :'ml

a lnd il:

..o :'ca;ti lik i litiou of the f:;me to, ',e fuilddeiilv /iVli, bit.
.;, ii' etieO,> io .'CII ;ll.:;dt,')e i ' ,:iCe t() .til acctit! ,wit.,h ;li :'...:

(i. ,!, olr ll)attt is i ll l l l Cot'i: ld, ill the in ,il 'c::-
i.t,, , lt.id.;i"', inl 1.;,,jid .,i,.l daiiger, we \\'cic put to ti; lit-
:'-:hiloli p,)ini t oil U j'r wit, to ilim aglin wlierclUl to thle i t1111.
'.r.-; tw'.i fend, i hi/ a i' ' e 'Iil

lt

\e th

:ad

left o)l nd..:

: :, :.ii);Cit . .:i ot; l;i e.lii'., yet apI)p)e;11'td L]l >' ld, bi t.
* ,1.1 ;.;.'.1 hlti,.'l;: ni t,. o Co

to s'oume

to aoccC ;ICCd wthl ti..

<, (ijl, .,*;d ! t:(: :: hei to lhole ()l half re ii. 1 hli nu
* i.tM r ;I:i;.;e t I,) lS''iC thlle)l , but ll at I fhotildI ncithc' (l i

;>'.ijlt COIi'(i11e ( 1O lliioi)l ill that matter. Notwillt
fl.:i'iitlg IL'u I:, ttis my plaiin anilwer wrought no end, m11r
> llp.it 1, I,, '-, ::;,,l |Ih It I W.s iit.,ormcd tlh.t thl e ,!iuk bt-

!il to iili]ke of e, ail h to() li lk of i1(, als tha,.t li.

I"' "'!y n1Jported of [lie laid queen irreverently, calling her -
d'j'i ;c.d:l lii:urlercr', 1 W.yis adx ili.l to pals to him, aid 'iv

ln1) g.ood words and to 1p11ge y1)'lll o thilin i -
ji<'led to rnl, tlih.l 1 floild not open the Ibdden i

Cll tl) I' l'

(ill 'rae

i c l'c, o li.e 1hi lt to (ollr Ceiemllly- - Cliiit-r-
il}, his greatitlk. it bciig therewithal wlhililsell, *""

Ilicewed

;cowed to me, that if I Icdparted, he fandiing difcontcntrd
aud not satisficd, I might peradventure find such trouble
in my wav, as my throat iigiht be cut before I came to
.crrick. Ald therelore since it might well enough ap-
pear to her ma rriage, I ihould not put him in utter dc/jpa:r,
that my good( will couild not be had therein. -So few days
!hctfore im departing I ciam to the park in Hampton court,
where the duke and I met together, and there I declared
uJ!)to him that it was colme to inm ears, how some ni;i
,{port fhoi-ld be made of me to him, as that I flould
i -c::k irievercntly anid ra.ly of the ahid queen mly fove-
L .':",s I;othr, such words as bctfre cxpreflUd, tiint hl
,'li 't -- thereby myn afncalion to be lo alienate from Pr,.ba',-
:. :, as that I could not love her, nor be content of her .'/.;
,Iriclrmerit, howbeit he mi(ht pcrfwade himfell'of the con-
tr.lr', for as ihe once was the perbon it the world that I
!'.ced bcfl, ihaviniig that honour to be lb near unto her, and
1l, inlY received fich advanceament and honour by her, I
.'. .- not so tinrrate or To on:natural ever to wilh her body

i..nri, or to licak of her as was untruly! reported us
i;r,, (ioxioevr ithe t truih was in the lelf) and as to the
i: e! r; artion of her flbn now m1Y f1vereigi, had moved
i':'. tro elcir into this cauile, and that her own prefling was
i:.. o':cla;ion of that was uttered to her - whenlver Prohabil
W;ul fiolld lnio her heart to repent of her bypast bcha- dai .n..
'.uur a;Iii lile, a.nd( after her known repentance, that lhe
i,,:!d Lbe flpararte from that ut!godlyv and unlawful mptr-
r...'c th:.t }le vis entered in, ;ind then after were joiled

.'.'it! l';.cl ;i1

a rliv and lionourable a pl rlbagc, as were

!;i ioioned to rhe trle relipion,: arin whom we might trufi,
I co.lid iind ii myn lhe:!rt to love her, anid to fhcw her a;

cit l).:e:filr', s1i our, adl ;good will,, as ever 1 did in my
'i ; ;lnd i af;.l hie fliu;i.l, be that pe)rl na;i!,c there Vwa
:.iic whom 1 c(uld better l:ke of, the queen -- in -
'.. I:'ii lanl lbeill n at(i li

| iv) to the matter, and fhu allow-

' tlircerf, wlhiich beilrnr dlone, I fliould labour in ;!l thinlgs
hiit I could, to her hionoiir and pleasure, that were not
!'raljidl j;.I to the king my Ibvcrcign's estate, and prayed
hiim no: to think otierwitc of me, for my afFc1dion was
,'rlifr buried and d hidduli wvithin me, awaiting until God
l., ;1'd dilre her to know hc l:lfl, than utterly alienated

A"'I .dbliactedt friom her; which he ccemed to accept in
*' rv l;ood part, Ilfyiilg, Earl o1' Mlurray thou thinks of ms

I i ? tliat

that thing,, whereunto I will make none in England or Scct..
land privy, and thou hall Nolflolk's lilc il thy h;ini,
So depart ng, 1 came to my lod..eiiijl and ul y the w. \
1and11 all ight, I was in c lontiiual thought ;radl ;lit;tili)
ol nain,, how to behlave mycflf in tlllt wcill'hty Illltter
ir-ll, iil.l'ininl whcreunto this Illohld telnd, it iwrlt ;iat-
tmiptedl \vitlhmt tile (quceln's majcli of 'I 1il:id'(.s kniw-
ledge and good( will, tilis realm and I m1ylf it p :Irt

ul .

lar haviiig icciivcld (ici faivour andl condlit , it her lii;, .
lnef's handl, and this whole infc filcl peace a;id (iuiietiln i
lincc (iod pinflld her mlajcfly with her clown. And ,111
the other pailt, (ccilng the duke had dlilclofcdl him to mr,
protceliiini, none other were or filiild bc privy to 111
p1)ccch, I tho't I could not find in mlly );ear t to uttlrl ai:i
tililn tla;t Ini llt c (l.mgl r

l cl lin ; moved to tile ulttelr olll

with thfc C-ogitati)onR, and all defico ol' fnccp tihen ll(v-
cd, 1 p'!.;}.d God to lbnd me fline j;o rellicf and c(lt-
gatc, 1. my discharge, and fatisfatt ion of my tr(oull'cd
?lintl, which I found indeed ; for upon the morn, or wilh-
in a day or two thereafter, I entered ill convcrlation willi
my lord of Licciler, in his chamber at the court, where
he began to find flr;nge with me, that in the mattcl I
madec lb difficult to him, ilanding lb precilcly on contcr-
rence, and how when

l had in my communication willt

P'.bhbly the duke, come 1o far - and there le made some dii-
'.') of.
Y courfc with me, about that which was talkc betwixt us,

perceiving that tlhe duke had - the matter to my lui l
of l cicltcr, aind thinking nme therchy dial:harcd at ithl
duke's hands, therelore [ repe)ated the Iame comllliiii-
cation in cv(e.y point to my lord of lciccflcr, who dcliicil
me to nhew thel file to the queen's majclly, which 1 I'c
filltd to tlo, willing himn if he tho't it might impoir hcr
highuicl an;Ily thing, that he as one - by her lma1jclly,
ail tfr tainly bentllts received at her highnles's ha iidl r1
obligcd to wifi l hcr well, lhloulil make declaration ol tl:t
latle' to her n l;U jty, as 1 iunderlaild by firlic licclh ol
her hilghincs to me, lie did. IThis my declaration to tlH
tluke was tle only c:ail'c, that flaid the violence and truiulilc
pr)clarcd for me unlcxccutitd,i as I have divers ways 1n-
dilrllod. 'I'he faimi declaration I was obli.cl ti 1c-
new fintce ill writinigs of f- cnt to my lt;rv:lit 1(!':

'V ood. 'I'he fiul whereof, I truf, he fliewcd tlit dullkl,
Iand lomcthilng allo 1 wrote to hinilcll, lor it wab tlho' t!''

I

!hiolid redclc fInrl time, that tilc luke Tflould not fuid-
(! nl, dCcl.e' lim rmr co'i ,hcv, furl his !'Ic;tiicfs was oft
'.1,d before illm, and wh.it rii tl(ii e

l } had of the chiIf of

I;C!rh i ilit'y 1n Li'lnl: d11, i' tha: it Ill! ht appea:l to thi
(ctctln's inla jsy of Englh d -s I cold in

O ards -ls, ;snd do inug

I.hll. nl; pt;licklv that mi: t ficm i'avoncira:lc 'foi we
Il.,l ( ill cIi ft o iuli

iiC)
! ('tl t t 'l i ir ll('f 1Iicto l nI o)sr ti:'

ot,::i:.trion s to t!he' i: ;:,: \V.'!;',1 it f11oit l ied pri-o flcd t,

ri . 'I'lic i r|) m cl.t1. ' l't

ili \' lu;

i' .j(ft'

l i'.' ;l i

:},c ]

, l' l

1l o l, 11, i h;iit.l till lik( ( ,, mi i;i; llI n t ! ! t.'l

.'ii¥;i

f, lJr

f (l to e .lid ([ui ( (c s

rii 1 c i il i t,

i as it wc) I) * '',i

v f;

wl' n;i)iii'r ( ('',

o f diti cs)- ,m hothl, ,t.i: i !IS t1) thlilk :;h ;t

i'l'r lihi.:l :ni's li:Id l)ccn fb;'lf(i:(l 11i ltl du:ke', d('i ,11, a;id
thit fie' llili, t 1b ilndl ccd to allou tlcr( s)l. luit liowlivit
it \ws il vl i.'fd in J.n alnd, !ithat tihe I l (;1' LI 'liof t i i';ll
I{})li! (il (o c( ts f'roil inic, ;:11 l i'i r k t! l: iln;tti r t') I ll
11ii hilts, :is her ni.ijlly inl a l:'tier i'rcl.irl' tlhat lil
i.ik(d ft;r his comilng, yet tli.t Idvil:: IrIcclld ;icv r o,I
mlrl, [li)l tJi: ll()I ij llncll ;at tlie ('il l

ciiit ( c('i1 wl

l I 'it( :;'-

(<)]'(i t) lis ui(di:ii l,, 11no l llIwv i) tile iltter mnotioncl, hut
.lluI'ctlcr Iifliiikcdi it, as II inbiit' withl thie .limi

_ r
ilt c in-

cuiv'iciuciKces to tlie f'let; ;amli [ictiletlcl of this whol illc;
for oiur i)rccctlill s have (dcclircd o r

L iill kiiki' and dif l-

I'lw.icc of tlhc tjiurlofc frloinl tile I)bcgiiill!', 1antl if we i1:a

'leafe(l lie was ready for the jolrney. And in likewise 'riit.illt

it w.,s devif'ld to (ivc confi(il, tlhat tilhe - between , .
the 'llid queen ; nld ,otlnwell, t(bonild Inc fIifut'red to pro-
teed in tsi's rcalin, as it was dIlircd by tih fLi l lhird ljoyd,
by rc.iloi we could not umderflaiidl whvit was tihe (qiiccSll
nijscliv's jlae;fllrc, ald allow.icc in that bchalf'
Aiil wtlirt.ls ye Illell, tlat iher lihlncl ; was not liadlc
pliv) of anmy fuieh ilsht'ti()li, h li' ult W.s 1 ) ill 111si . ' hll(e
thll Iiitmii( ) ein <lt

d clard, ;Is 1 I. vc writtell, to my

i lid

(,1 leicefler, and by hlitm iiipart.d'.l to i T' il .iljclfty, o l.tl
., I could pciccivc lby i)mce IpcccIl of fi:r liii!lii'ls' to L 'e,

,.'hlre n)y del'arting. 'I'llus I lhave plainly d( (I li, d how 1
iA.vc 1hec. dealt withall (or tlis ma11 1,111L, a;ld how jull 1ti:-
(c.qilt illlvrct Ille not to require (llt' l , tilit wlait i tIn:

iAlke m.li))c ait'l Io - uito. Aniil I (, y iin i.,uiiim,:,
t)i ;l to tohlu ame, 1 lh.t' (x'ilufiultil it' Il.iliCi.; ili('
P)('llilis tlihat laid the matter )before nit, were o1 lily owiI
""iituli.y. JiBut the duke since hith fjiokc)i, tli. ilt i as
h' writing which flivcd my life at that tinlle. Ill (,i-

I i 3 hliui,,

clIufoin I pray you perfiundc her maiefl-, that (he let no
fpeeclt s nor nny other thirng palsel and objefed to

- y

prejudice, move her maiefly to alter her falour-towards
me, or any wiys to doubt of riv afflured conflancy to-
wards her higlncs ; for in any thing which may tend
to her hnnouir .ind furcv. , I \i'l, while I live, befRon,
nvfeilf, *and ;ill tliat will do for me, nntvirhfl;jnili)r nlv
1 izard ri d.n gcr, as prooo ihlouid declar-e when chr r. .-
;!,ty findls tiiie to c'ipl'o,' r.:.

# APPENDIX TO THE SECOND VOLUME.

/\ P P E N D I X

TO THE
. E C O N D V 0 1 IT M F.

,i Ii

No. I. (Vol. II. p. 2.)

'\Villiamn Maitland of LIedington, to my lord of
.,cicefler, March 20th, 1570, fiom Lcdcington.
TI-TH great desolation t'ircatinedJ t hiis whuie realm, An Or: .

be the divisions thereof ill dangcrous fat:ions, doth i;hia1,

'rdcs me to frame nmy letters to your lordjhil, in otier
lort, then were bchovefull for me, if I h ad no rther
r-ipe'l, but only to maintain my private credit; tihrelore
1 am (Iriven to furnliflh them with matter, which I know
not to be plausible, whereupon by mifconflruing my mean-
ing, ofme there may take occasion of oftence, thinking
tha.t I rather utter tny own paflions, than go about to in-
form your lordihip truly of the /ate; but I trust my plain
'ca;iling hall bear rccr)rd to the sincerity of my meanirng;
to imake the fame sensible, I will lay before your lordlfh p's
ircs, the plat of this country; which first i divided into
iwof ftionL1s, the one prctcndilln t 1he llaintenance of the
king's reign, the other alledging the queen to have been
ruclly dealt withall, and unjiutly deprived of her slate;
iic former is conpofedd of a good nuo i her of uobility, gen-
1t'lnii'n, and principal burroughs of tlie realice, who (hall
h.ivc, as Mr. Randolph beareth us in hand, the qucen's
n;ijllfly your fovercign's allowance andl protcftion ; the
rthlr hatl in it flome molf prinicipall of thce nobility, and
lierewithall, good ntimbers of the inferior Itr't, through-
out the whole realin, wlich allb look alluredly that all
k;iii do allow their quarrel and will aid them according-
'. Wlhat conlfqucnlce this divifioll will draw after it, [
cA.Ve it to your lordfllip's coifiddcratirn ; there is l',Icltn oit
aiiutlicr divilion, accidentally, hy my lord regent's dtc.th,
which is like to change the taite of the other two fiacjions,
ta elcrcalc the one, and dininifll the other, whicu is

I i . gruund;:J

grounded upon the regiment of thic relm. ;onv u::.
ber of noblemen aspire to the governml nt, prc clhii;;
right thereto by rcalon of the quecin's dciiiiioil of t:o
croun, and her commiflion granted at that time frr tih
regiment during the king's minority ; another factin dlir
altogether repine against that divilion, thinking it ncit'in
fit nor tolerable, that three or four of the meallrf. foil
amongfl the earls, shall prclume to chailknge to th!iii';l'.';¢
a rule over the whole realme, the next of the bloo!, ti:,
sirs in rank, the grcatelt alway both for the antic;:rv f:
their houses, degree, and forces, being ncgieccktcd ; tih:
order they think prcpoflerous, that the meaner fort flh;:.i
be placed in public function to comlmand, and the grecatr
fliall continue as private men to obey ; besides that, they
think if the commiflion had in the beginning been vale','-
able, (which the mofl part will not grant) yet can it IIv.
be extended to the present, for that the conditions thei'-
unto annexed are ceased, and so the effect of the vwhio!
void; the latter part of this division hath many preten..
ces, for besides the queen's fiction, which is wholly 0o;
that fide, a great number of there that have heretofore pr:;-
sessed the king's obedience, do favour the lame, and wil
not yield to the government of the other, whole prefermenii
for respects they mislike, when the queen's fiction fhial
be increared, with a part of the king's, and theflt not of
least fubltance, and yow may judge what is like to ensue;
an other incident is like to move men to enter in further
discourses, it is given out here in Scotland that tlie Iniiccl'
majefly is setting forth some forces towards the border,
which Ihall enter this realm, to countenance there, that as-
pire to the regiment, and suppress the contrar' f.iL tiorn,
and bruits are spread, that the fame fliall be here out (f
hand ; there that think themselves of equal force with :hi;r
contrary faction at home, are rather an overmatch to tihei;,
yet not able to encounter with the forces of another prili',
rather than yield to their ilnelriois, will, I ftCar, take ;ad-
vice of neceflity, and evil councillors, and feck ;:l (i til:
maintenance of some foreign prince, whereby her m:ljcfl)'
(;ltho no further inconvenient were to be tearel) nmlll I1
riven to excefive charges, and it would apil)C;ir tlinc.'
were a conspiracy of all the elements at one time to i(t
us together by the cars, for now when the ruimotilr o
your forces coming towards the border is liread abro.l,
even at the fame time is arrived at Dumbarton, a gailt, ilI

wi'{)

v,' l a nicfeenger sent cxprefy from the kilng of Francc,
tu that part of the nobility that favours the (jlicien, to
lc.!rn the fltte of the country, and what support they ladc
or desire, either for furtcherance of her nffairs, or t-r their
o.:n falety ; aflurcdly this mef!lgc will be well recci.c d,
.iil fuflFcied accorcdil iy, this is the prfclnt slate of Scot-
l.:in1. Now, if your lordllhip would ::lio knovv n:;,' ,;i:ion,
h:oJ to choice the best, as the cafe fiLaidcthl; I will ill
that allbo fatisfie your lordflip, I am requiredl frtom them to
dcal plainly, and your lord(lilp fhail jije C vw.ht;i.r I do si)
or not; for I think it plain dealing, when I timply utter
i,,. judgment, and go not about to dif,<uifc myl intents.
I iruft the queen's majesty hath a deli-rc t, rct.::i at her
'.:;otion the realnm of Scotl;!nd, which flh h.ath gone
.:bout to purchase, witl beftowiini gr.eat charges, and
:ih loss of fume of her people; this defiCr is lionloulable
for her highness, profitable for both the coOnltryv, and
:f none to be dilallowcd ; fpccially if it be (as I take it) to
h:ave the amity of the whole realm, for it is not ,a portion
ot Scotland can serve her turn, nor will it prove commo-
dious for her to suit the fricndfhip of a faCiion of Scotland,
for in To doing, in gaining the bell, {he may lose the
more, and the inme would bring all her allioiis with us
in suspicion, if he filould go about to nouii, li factions
amongst us, which meaning I am lure never coeItced into
her majest)y's heart; then if it be tle friendlfli:l of tile
whole (ihe doth demand, let her not, for pleasure of one
part, go about to overthrow the remnanit, which will uot
be so salable, as tnile may give her to undcrt.ind; but
:.t!'cr, by way of treaty, let her go about to pacify the
whole slate, bring the pai ties to an accord, reduce us all
bl) good means to ani ulliliormity, so (1all lhe give us all
occfllion to think well of her doings, tihat lie teiideth our
u.ilthl, ;and provokes us llivicrfU.lly to wifll unto her m1.1-
jclt)y a mioft prosperous contilnuance; by the contrary, if,
flr the plcaflure of a flew, flhe will fend forccs to fIipprefa
tllCC: whom they niflike, and lb conflqueItly (,oli'jid m11a-
vr; mc'i be not ol faint hearted, but they have couira;ie
t" pro'vide for their owI faifety, and not only will eciibl ace
tllie mIICs partly oflered, but will allo procure iurithcr, at
t''e lhad of other princes. Thl'is for Iine ownv part,

I d'I abhor, and prot'l I1 dcfire never to fee f(orce of
lir.: .ers to let foot within this land, yet I know not what
p'iiit licccllity may drive lmenl into, as if ' nll in the Illiddle

of

.', til i'i \vcc iC ;: sJJi ',

w!;i( l' ;idd.lcily should be :l

U

.

'ir', tivh' ! o.sbr of iu;'t oilil .in,;k.] ti, c el( Ip leaip iiIto ,t
c,:, ni fooinii aIftr't tihc si..; of tlc wr.tci w\ould div. ti,c!i
:t e<;:,c !Li in to the 1i';-d (hip, li fut avoidi'n picr, .
<'vi!, n1:cn will mall.i tinics be iilifo'lrc to )lve recuotll e to
in.otthcr, no icfk (,aigCi o'l,. 'I'r fl nic forces will Jri'
hrin' r fortl ;iay 1gn(d ;' tit to her lnnjcely's behove, it
muil be ionie w;!y rif ti-:'.it flll f'r; e tie turn, wherein
h ni mv forimer i yor

ltt or lordflip d.oth know .ilc;idy

*.' !it is m', itoL'1enll t; you fice how plaintly I do writr,
.:ithout c(ii;ci:i il;in Isit part miy letters ina' be lk-
'!, et my h-ope is tl; t such as will f.vourablv ilIrclpr'.
;:cni, fl;.fll tliilnk tl;it I mcan as well to her nmijcltv, aii!

ait ralshiie, ai- the.fi thll:t will utt'er other languagc. 1
vw ih the cor!ltiln'lnlcc of the amity betwi.xt the two corur-
;rv., witiiout other rfjictl, andl will not conccal rrolll I;:
mnIljellf a;l thin', to my kinowledge, tending to the prc-
iudice tlhcrof ; ii i fliial pTcrccave her niajcRy taking fri'::k
'c;llils ii evil :i jrt, I fh;lil from tihncccforth forlbc;r,
in the iln c;! ;ean I wilol l not ceale tor trowlile your ]c.i-
I'hip, as I shall have occalionl to write, and so i take i!i'
lcavc of your lordlitp.

No. II. (Vol. II. p. 9.)
Letter of queen Flifabeth to the earle of Sullfck,,

July 2dC, 157c.
r wit'i,,. -I ( I -I T trufly a:l wc1 belovcd coulfin we 'reret ,o:;

MS. ir- well, this day we have received your lettcis otf 2
T"i', i. til .l.tif month, with all otiher letters, lent froim Scot-

l;nd, and mentioned in your letters, whercunto aifwcr i>
dclired to be given before the tentli of thiis monthl ; whicli
is a very liort time, the weightincls of the maitters, ;and
the (lilaluce of the places conlidered ; neverthclcl we.
hive, ;as thle Ihortef's could fuftlcr it, relolvcd to give is
;nlvwer following, which we will that yow, by W;'l;lnii
I:r( o( t ih.ill ca ile to be given in our- n;nim to the call ols
s.('nno" .ld the reftl of the lnobleniel convecIed with li i
\\X hCie tit s sy them, ili their letters, and writiligs ;il-
ldI.ci, ithtl for laick o>1 (ir ref olute ;ililwer, colncertCiilll te
* lI.tillhiiuig ol tl reg (inIit of thc eC;lu, under theil y)ot)il!
k1, rCi ilcoii\eniICI'iCs hlV Iha'iCjcd, and tllu'i ul

! -'

!iiv have deferred now at their lafi conventinn to deter-
milc of the famine, who shall have the place of gnvern.
,lr, iuntil the 2Ift this month, before which time they
icl;iire to have our advilf, in whit p'-rfc n or persons the
,ao;-rnmcnt of that realm ifall be cftabliflhcd, we accept

y:.i thankfully the goodwill and reputation they have of
in, i) yielding so fiankly to require and follow our advil '
a: m;atter, that toucheth the slate of their king, their

icires, and realm fb near, wherein as we perceive, that by
olr formcr forbearirng to intermeddle therein, they have
takecn fonce discomfort, as though that we wntl not have
:canrd to their state and surety, so on the other part, they
f thicir wildoms ought to think, that it might be by the
xl;hrlc world evil interpreted in us to alppoinlt them a form
rs 'overnmcnt, or a governour by name, for that liowfo-
:.'er we should mean well if we should do so, yet it could
;ilt Itc without forne jealousy in the heads of the estate, no-
ii;!!!, and community of that realm, that the government
t.icufl fliould be by me specially named, and ordained;
sI, afilndig difficulty on both parts, and yetiniflikilgi molt
Iat they fiould take any discomfort by our forbearing to
!ow.v our mind therein, we have thought in this fort for to
proccd, confidering with ourselves how now that realm
!,.:d hccii a good fpac of time ruled in the name of their
kiin, and by reason of his base age, governed heretofore
!, .! very careful and honourable person, the earle of Mur-
Iv, untiill that by a mischievous person, (an evil cxam-
p1) lie was murdered, whereby great dilorder and con-
I lii) of ncccflity had, and will more follow, if detcrminl-
Aioll be not made of some other ficcial perlon, or per-
1.,'i, to take the charge of governor, or filpcrior ruler,
l,,, lc.l1 for alminiiiftration of law and jufticc, we cannot
Lit vcry well allow the dcfire of these lords to have otme
I', ,.l govcrnor to be chosen ; and therefore being well
*:liilI, tlat their own underflanding of all others is

l ! t( conlider the slate of that realm, and to difccrn
':: abilities and qualities of every perfbn meet and ca-
:lle l(or such a charge, we flnall better fatisfie oiirllves,
v.,iili they by their common content shall firfl chooRc,
,iel ;I'ipuolit to that pur.pof', then of any to be by Ius afore-
Iii,,1l uncertainly named, and that becaule they fliall pcr-
',tvc that we have care of the person of their king, who
,Y IlcariIefs of blood, and in rcfipcet of his so young yea;rs,
L:'1hlt to bp very tender and deii to us, we hflall not hide

o)ir

o':r opinion fiom them, but if they cv all all accord to ri:',!:c
his grandfather, olr con)lin, the ca:r] of ,ennox to tr.
govern)or alone, or jointlv with others, (whomn wc hlicr:,,
be in the nlm;xl time by their common confient iappa'):, i
}ieulen:ni -i'ncr:tl) riealtiii moveth us to think tllt rirr,
can hc ch li'n inll tli. wh)olC reil; i, that shall malo (,:l.w
rbt t;rcCIer .tioi tf h.' king', .ind be mlre meet to() ,:;
rie govc,' r I i.nt so:' l' :

f. l(lty, I)C; i r ' t to hin in lh!(.,

of anlv nubleill i of tlhat rcalmn, or {i!c\vrl'vi-; ; .nl \t;
herb)y, we lo no lt mnealln to prefcrive to thlicn thls Cloit,
except they h:all of tllcmlelvcs full) and freldl .allyv
thercof; filrthermnore we would have them well iflic,l,
that whatioever reports of devises, are, or fliall be fplr.:
or invented, tihat we have already yielded our nin n ! ,
ailtcr the itate o tihe kinm or government of that relihll,
the fame arc without p!it cause or ground by us :,ciU ,
for as we have al(lcndt- advertizcd them, that aitholill w:
have vielded to he;ar, which in honour we could nut rg.
tufc, what the queen of Scots on her part flllil l;y .li,
oiTer, not only for her own afl'ranlce, but for tle wvc':lr
of that rcalhn, yet not knowing what the fame wxll i.'
that ihall be otfllcdl, we mean not to break the onlcr 1,r
law and julfice, by advancing her cause, or prejudgii:
cr contrary, before we fliall deliberatelv and atllurelly
Cee, upon the hearing of the whole, tofme place ncccl-
thr?, and iiifl caiulc to do ; and therefore findinii til'
'calmn ruLled by a king, and ilhc laic affirmed by l.vs (!
tilat realm, and thereof inv'eted by coronation and otirr
,olemnitics ulcd and rcquiflite and generally so received hc
the whole eltstcs, we niean not by yielding to hcar tll
icomplaints or iniornmations of the queen agaiufl heir feil,
to do any ait whereby to make conclution of governmctlt,
buit as we have found it, so to fufitr the famn to continll',
\.a not to susser it to be altered by any means tliat wv
nii.; imlncflic, as to our lonour it doth belong, :as 1y )'o0!
!.te actions hath inanileftlly appeared, untill by lbme jitlIt',
i;;tl (lcar caulfC, we fliall be directly induced othcrwlif- 1I
(!'claic(t our OlpilJon; and this we would have thcil t1
know to bel o ilt (i:crinitatsion and coUlfe thaot wc m:11 '
to holl, whreron we truit they for their king, mnl;l I1
liow jdlaiily al()d l'olhollIly we mean to pioccd, ;lid
low little c;uite tll(.\' hive to doubt of us, whilllevl :"
Ilic contrary thle'.y i or niall iear ; and on the oithc
pirt, tw plaiy thliel tilh iltei wiifioms to think how 1ti",-

ItiOUt'.L'' '

arable, and contrary to all human order it were for uc,

;ic.hi the queen of Scotland doth 1b many way* require
:o hear her cause, and duth ofcr to be ordered be us in
t!'i fame, as well for malttcrs betwixt ourellvcs and lher,

.- twvixt herfielf and iler 1l; 1 a1td his party of that rc:el:m,
:ins; whiichl offirs no re:ialni cAldl Ilrive u's to rCefut to

've earCl, that we tfouli .Tijrchbad opeCily :inJ directbly, be-
r rtle ctieca s be hteaid anud clt findred, ns it v.'er, iive a

;i(l,:meiit or fentcince Ceitell ser ourTfeIves or for tlicn
;l:..m file makcth to bc her contraries. Finally yefiall
aJminrlilf them, that they do niot, by mif'couccivilin our
,2ood rieanring towards theinm, or by i ndi ret alliertions of
;,i'ir adverlry grounded on unitruths, hinder or weaken
li. itow n caut, in fuich (irt, that our good meaning to-
;ards them fllall not take flch cilcct towards them, as
,;!'' I(lall dllire, or thcnliclv'cs have need of. All this
nr:r nllwvcr ye fliall cauf be given them, and let them
kliiw, lhat for the fhortnIes of time, this being the end
', tlic se'cond of this month, we neither could make any
I,.nlcr declaration of our mind, nor yet write any several
.'iters, a if time might have si vced we would have done.
2.1 uly, 1570.

No. III. (Vol. II. p. 9.)
The biflop of RoTs to fc-cretary Lidington from

Chiattilwortli.

HAVE received your letters dated the 26th of May, i5th Jlnr
here at Chattifworth, the to of' anu:ltry, butt on -'

Ihe receipt thereof I hadi written to ylo a;t leii th, like as
tie (quecr did with my lord Levingflon, by tile which you
will be resolved of maniy points contailled il your litid
letter. I writ to you that I received your letter anld crc-
llt from Thomas Cowy at ,Iolldoin, and fIiet to leiccftcr
to know the queen (of Enlialnd's mind wlihetir y)Ott
lliuuld come here or not. lie tent me word, that fli will
1no Ways have you come as one of the c(iiliiilionci s
h'cacuule he is yet offended with you ; anil thci(loIe It
;1'pcairs good tlhat ye comie not hitlcr, lulI rImlilill where
!uut are, to ulf your willoin aindil dili'I.ece, ,.1, Ir.iV 1)(f'
;llvaitiCe the lqueen's affalirs, forl Il icre'iv' your wc(il .ill1
ltilty depends thereon, ill icic Lp tI' r.lL great Icitd arid

'aria-

eriiimity born againfc you by your Scots people, andi t;'

reait heirship taken of your father's landis; both werefi rs
demonffrations of their malice. Yet I am encouraged l1;:
vour (tout and deliberate mind. Assure yourself no di!in
gcncC flhall be omitted to procure supports forth ofit';,!
parts where it may he had. WVe will not refuse the ;a:
neither of Papilt, Jew, nor (Gentil, after my advice; ;::,
to this end, during this treaty, let all things be well prc.
pared. And secing my lord Seaton is desirous to go il:tn
tFlanders, the queen thinks it very ncceflhry that he id,,
for the duke I)'Alva has gotten express command of thi
kiiin of Spain to give support, and I am sure that thiic
he fliall have aid both of Slanders and the pope, fur i:
abides only on the coming of some men of countcnauce.
to procure and receive the fanme. He must needs t.r:;
there, on the preparations thereof, during the tre;t:.
which will be a great furtherance to the fame here. 'T'tU
queen has already written to the duke D'Alva for t-
effcCt, advcitizing of his coming; there is cert::in I::
of money coming tor fLpport of the Englishmen, as I w:,:
to you before trom the pope. WVhereupon I would ' i.
had a general commiifion to deal for them, and recci;'
such fums as ihall be given. The means shall be fou'l..
to cause you be anfuerit of the fiims you writ for, to i'.
dipoilit upon the f'rnifhing of the cafile of Edeiibirui:
to beini, lonmc honcet and true nlin were flent to F!aumc:,
to receive it, as said is, which I would you prcpalcd :i:J
sent. (rders shall be taken for the metals aR you writ 4,
WVe have proponit your avyce in entering to treat witii tI:
queen of England, tor Irtiriig of her forces puntyo;ihl
for lack oflaid. Your ancvrs to the Englifliine'i are thil':
very good, but above all keep you weil out of their hland<
in that catfi, clote prudentes licut serpentes. You in.!)
take experience with the hard dealing with me, how '
would be usld if ye were here, and yet I am not lurtl ('
danger, beiig in micdlio lnationis p)ra;:; ; always nol 1;!:
with God's grace, shall make me shrink fr-om her tncrji'y '
fervicc. Since the queen of England has refulced th;lt y(,
comre lerc, it lappears to me quod niolnduni elt Ictlat; in.'-
litia amorrecor-uni, &tc. a.nd thlerforce if A: tlul or CiathcImu
ngiht by any meians be procu Ired to colnm, thlly wc reI' l
molt lit for the purpose, Rolies were allo IueICt, ifl le ai
I were not both ol one firname ; so the treaty wouldl ',c
the lcfs credit cither in Scotland ur licc. 'I'licrclorcL' ')

.':',.1

i:.! fend the bcfl may fcrvc the turn, and fail not Robert
\M Ilvil come with thtem, whoever conies, Ior oS is the
t ticcin plc:fure; ill )my lait pac..ct, with .animes Fogo,
*:, yo01, in the begilning of May, 1 fenit a letter of the
,::.!cn's own h.ind.-w;ritilg to him, which I trull yc re-
civc.c!. I aml furry vc coine not for the great rclicf I hoped

ii.:\ve hlad y your prcfencc, for you could wcll i.nce
.:;:!,' tihe q:ic'i of Ji i.:.md, after her ihumour, as voi
.-.;c won0t to (i(d. The rclt 1 rclcr to vour goo(l wiIimton,
:..linil (}G(i to 1c l; you lihalth. From Clt.ltifvwortl
lC i 5th of i aniuary.

No. IV. (Vol. II. p. 3 x)

li'e declaration of Jolin Cais to the lor ls oi

Grangie and Lethi:ngton zoung are upon the Sthi
day ofOcr. 1i571.

1 7?Icrecas you tc:'lce to know the qOu!Ce"' s Inljc.t:v'-

y ' paifurc, wvh,: the.. will do for a;Feali;rn ofl th'sl:

:ontrovcliics, anj tlhrecwith has oifr'rcdl ioii: l;c to he
:t her coin maldin:cnt, touching the Coriln un tranq!uii ty
,;, thel whvole Lfic, aid the a:nity of botli realmls ; her plea-
i.iclsil tiis

I l !i. ii, that ye hould cleave off tlle Iaiil-

tc;!.lilCe o' this cili dliiori!, ald :'^ive ntiv r otleliCIIce to
!:1i kij, w m Ihe

hoi he vll Inaitil.ii to tile uLiImu! of hi'!

!ov'evcr,

A\'n in thiis doinr", ffh evill deal wit!h the rcent anid

k'i; kii;'s party, to ,iccive you into favour, upon rea.

i :n.ii conditions f;r tecilritv of life and livings.

Al.so ilhe fla's tl.it tlic queen of Scotts, lor that sic

:;': It'l.ilici'd with the pope aid other princes, anld allf
'';[tli her ovn fllhjcts iln lInI1IILi, 'Iealt ;and d:ingcruu'
:!i'i '.iis agiinfl tle diltC of r own:( collltr, and albl to
l': ,1i llr I'tioun of licr owni peri)i, tha.t file shall never bear
th"I .ui t),, r1(11 hi,,vc lilberty while flie I :v(s.

lr yc r'c us thclfe enlic o S o,

nw red un0to yolu,

fC wvill prcfently aid thle king's party, witlh mn, aiunil-
i:"n,, anid all rierclsly things, to lie had :irauin!l \'nl.

F ; 'il" Krl' u t nU'

O); 111 i ,ajufly »e'.;'ilC' votItr aiilv',:r vitli
i.,'r. i, VlthOlit 'iiy j'Il.y.

x .\

No. V. (Vol. II. p. 40.)
Articles sent by Knox to tle general Aifembi.i,

At, ll: t 5$th, I572.

sd. Ii;f- TI R S T, d'eftrin :I r i

w :It to le" mnladc rati)il-'i :,i

,orn", v ,,r. I things concCrn i iig t!c king and his oii,-dieinc (i.
. 356. were e(nacted of before without anyv c h; l;i, aiIl thl. t:

ministers who have contravccllcn tic I folli alts be Cur-
rclecd as accordeth.

'T'Trr fute be made to the Regent's grace anld ! ili:;

mainit.ing the kin 's cail(rc, tha;t whatfocvcr pro'.i;c,:!
in this treaty of peace thely he nindful the kirk lec li;:
prej(ild'd thereby, in aunv fort, and they cficci.lly f !h.
m inifiers, th:t lhave lccn robbed of their pollclfions m i::.:;:
the kirk during the tin e ol the troubles, or otherwise duii:
and injured, lny) be icltored.

T''o fitc at the rc nllt, that no gi ft of any bifhpsl k

or other benefice be . ivecl to any lpcrion, cntrary to t;'
tenor of the ai s imane ill the time of the firfl rc:cnt (;t
pood memory, and th v that are given contrar the .!!i
adts, or to any unqualified pcrfon, may he revokel ;:lil
made null be an act of fecrct council, and that all hifhli -
ricks, lb vacand may be prcfelited, and qualiiced pI' 1c:.,
nominat thereunto, within a ye.r after the vaking the'r t,
according to the order taken in Leith ble the corn nini!':l-
'rs of the nobility and of the kirk in the maonth of J.iiu..lil
I.lt-, and in ipecial to C(mplain upon the giving of bilhlq'i
rick of Rotl to the lord Met liven.

'I1T AT no pientions of beiieficc, great or fnm:ial, l;
ivtn l ie finipel donation of aniy lord regent, witi;.,
co:'!.cnt of the pofcll br of the fai i encfices haviig tillic
thereto, and the admnillion of the fuiperintCeldeiCt or ct iii-
rililioners of the province whilre this benefice lythl, (r ('
thl bIllifops lawfully elccctcd according to tlhe said order
taien at Leith ; and dtlire an adt of council to be mn;i:~
thereupon, until the next parliament, wherein thle (.li:i'
may be Ipccially inadlcld, witih ihlibition to the lords u"
cieioll to give aily letters or decrects, upon filch liill',c
pifts ot benlfices ur );:'ntions lnot being given iln rna11il'
alove rchicarr(d, and that the kirk presently afl nmblc
dzclairc all such gifts niull io tar as lyclh in their power.

' T AIT

Si- xT the first form of presentation to beneficcs, wh ch

v.re in the first and fccond regent's time, bc not chanucd
:,iovI, it is commonly; but that this claulei be conrt;ined

the prfcClit;tior), that if the persons presentcd make

,,t r citdllice, or be flaindcrous or found lunworthy either
il ]ilc or doctrimne be the judgment of the kirk (to which
.,,Ilec he lihall be fClA jcdt) or meet to be tranfpiorted to
,! ithelr loom at the light of the kii k, tihe slid preL;; a-
[ n:,, aid all that flhall fall thereupon flall be null and of
i!i lorce nor cfF;ct ; and this to have place alfb in the nu-

:iiiit;lit of the bifhlops.
'iTAT all a.'t lbc nm:ade in this afnimbly that all tili;rs

(If'. u prcjidlicC of the kirk's aflunmlption of the tlili,
ti1l'r by p:ipilis or otheis, by giving of fcws, lilcilllis,
orr t:;.:, or :'ny othicrwilfe difponini the laid anliitfld
tliiM-, bIe Icl:icLd ilill with ai fColeInI IrotCeliton the
\,'i;,lc kilk cliihfi'iitrtl thereto.

1'HAr

; a-11 ;.t be nmade dlecerninr and orl.dnin all li-

:!l:', ;aimhittei to the ordler of the kirk niow reccived, to

. ..ccounit of their whole rents, and intromniliions tli.:rc-

,'tn1 uInce i11 the yeiiar, as the kirk hlall appoint, for fileh
c:ii; s as the kirk may callilv, contider the itmine to be nioit
ex)! , icl lt ndIl neceflill.

,\.l NT tlIe jurilflidlioll of the kirk, that tlhe famie be

(t. tiincied in this aflimbly, bcalufe this article hath been
1l'i loltponed to minke trlte t, the rrcent ;and( council ror
1 i:; liy a;,.i. ift meilengers and exlcommuliciclte perions.

I .\sr that orders le taken anent the lirocurcis of the

i.:., uwh procure again(i nlinifiers alid nmlillilry, aud for
tlillg of jullice of the kirk's actions in the IcFlon.

No. VI. ,Vol. II. p. 46.)
Declaration of -lenry Killigrcw, EFq; upon tle

peace concluded the 23d Feb. 1572.

L it known to all men, by theef prreents, that I
Henry Killcgrewc, Ef.l; ambafl'ador tor the queen's

rm.ki fly Y l']nglandI. Itorafmuch as, at the c;rncefl motion,
;iiio tllicitatiol being made to me, on her hirlinc(:'s he-

Oill, there is accord and pacification ofthe public troiiules

;mI ( ivil war witliin this realm of Scotland agreed and con-
c'lleJ, and the fame favourahly extended towards the right

V oL. 1I. K k hol our-

honlorable George earl of Huntly, lord Gordon and l'.,i.
z.eluch, :and the lord John Hamilton, son to tih d(uki,<
(;ra.' of (Chaftellarault, and coimmniail;tooir of tile ;Iabv ,I
Abii I ,thl ock, for the furcty of their lives, livings, IIo)o;,i i
aind :,omls of them, their kinsfolks, si ends, fervaiits, ;i;,i
par1t. kers, now properly dependingl on them ; in tcratilr,
of the which Cliid p)acificatioln, tile Inurders of the late t(:i1
of Mui lrriay uncle, and the carl of levcnax grandfathir,
Liate .Ocrt to the kiin's nmajefry of Scotland his realm a;il
lie, 's, as :aifo an article tci chin the d(ifchiargc for ilhi
filliis or inovcal)le g)oods, which the said persons hanv
ta'.kcn fit perfionis prolefiing the king's obedience, bclbra
tile di::i:.c (s lcnc or committed by them, since tle 15t1!
d.i o1, J:nij}, 1567, and before the penult day of J!'.'
lalt by pa;tlil, by rcafon of the conlmon caufb or any thlill
depncdinli thercctilponl being thought by the king's conmni-
alrics ni;ltctris of fich wecht and importance, as the kinl,''.
prlefcnt reC. 'nt could not conveniently, of himfcif, rICI!:
or dilcis;::rc the i; ine. Yet in rcfpCct: of tce ncccllity f
tlie pirelcnt pacification, and for the weil of the kinlg, a!li
common quictnels of this realm and lieges, it is accordcJ,
that the matters of reiniflion of the said murderers, ;i:i
of the dlifcharge of the (bid fruclis, moveable goods, niid
othclr damages, be moved by the persons dcfiring tile s;lid rc-
niflions and disC:harge to the queen's m;ajcefi m' lie\r-
'i'iJ, as to the princes necarefl- both in blood and halit-
.ttionl to tile kiln,- of Scots. And whatfoevcr her majil
1ll1ll ati ific and counfil touching the ftid relmiflion ;1i;
(lifclharpc, the ilid lord regent, for the wveil of tiec kl..
:inl iiniverfall qilictecfs of the realln of Scotland, fli:li
pcrfioli m, obfbrvc, and fuilfil thel fame. And in liikev.',,
tie i;ld cCirl HIuntly, and commcndatour of Alilb;u-
lihock, being urgted to ha:ve tdliverled Ipldges and liofi;l'"'
1t, oletrv;ation of (ihe conditions of the laid accord .il
I.c if i c;tionl, h:iith rc(qiire(l me in place thercof, in ij::

.i I:elv's nalme, ly virtue of my commifflon, to proil"

so llllem thlalt tl y fli.iall truly and faithfully obl.frvc ,1'
kcc)p thli' .,i.l ipacilication, anld all articles and comliliii::
till iof, for thelir parts, and that it would ple;i lier i.i-1
jelly lo iiilc'rltjl)f hlicrff, s firety and cautioncr lon thl'1
to tliat cl,,., to the king's ni:jefy of Scotlandl thelirl I-

c'I'eign and his, I.id rceCllt, whicl I have dtnic and I,'-
nli(f to do, liy vilC te of her ll1ajcfy's colniflinion, ;as Iy
tile hb'uoulrablc ;idc plail deIaling of the i;lidl carl alnd I(,!,

tilC I

I'ii intention to peace well :lpenrs, the faile beil n most
1 iic:elL to the mind of the tiqeen's n:1jcfly mny f;)ve-
rcin, which l1 long hy hC lt Iiniflers ha.tlh travelled for
t!l' t'.d pa:cification, and ill til end, at her m1')tioi and
(f)ilitltnlii, thc fame is accorded, knownvil, her im;j effy's
i'fite, tllhat the fiatme my conlinuie intviolate, andl thatl
thiL noblenmen and othiilrs nowri rcturlilg to the kiln 's obe-
d!;lice 1hall have filiicieit furlety for their lives, livings,
1illoiurs and goods. 'I hcrefore in her majcfly's name,
nill by virtue of my corminiiii o, I p 'onmii to tihe aforc-
fiidi c:itrl HtI tly and coilllic(tendator' of Abirbruthock, that
I' lier majcfty's good means, the fliil remillion and dif-
chi.lr r shall be 1purchalcd and obtained to them, their kin-
silks, iilendis, ferx'ants, and partalkers, now properiv de-
i'ciliing uponl them (the perso/ns frecified in the firlIt ab-
tiliniicc always excepted), as also that the Ilid pacification
fiai! be truly obllcived to them, ;and that her m:ljcfty fhlall
::lterpofe hcrlelf as confervatrix thereof, and endeavour
hrrlflf to caduft the fame to be truly and lincerely kept in
a;ll points and articles theeof accordingly. In witness
,uhereof, I have to this prefient fibfcribcdl with my hand,
anil feialed the fame with iinei own feal the r th day of
:,1. Anino Dornini 1572. And this to be perforined by
rnie, betwixt the date hereof, and the parlianment which
i'! ibe blappointed for tleir refftittion, or at the filrthcft
hciuir the end of the faiil parliament. Sic lublc;iibitur.
TI'c bilhop of Glasgow's note concerning the

queen of Scotlandl's dowry.
T -I ; (lueen of Scotland, downger of }ranlce, lad for ,,.

hrir duwry, bcfid.sl( otlher polifflionls, the Cdukdon - cit. l,.

'1 l'urc'le, which was felemnly cnnoitr;bt .d ad ivcn to . 11 L'. 4.
! 'r lh Iel king amd es ;ltcs of par1liaeiit ; whlich dukedom
i1,,: (l.llellbd Ieaceifully till 1567, and then, iupon tlie pa-
ilic.li~l lhctwixt tilhe kingi and Mons. sis brother, to aluj-
'lint \hlne apenageI tilis tdiltchly was givenl, to whiih tlhe

'iri ,l 1 Scotland yielded uipon account of princes, who
'"'t' 1Cr near relations, provided the etquivailenit which

p'" l'lonioild lher hlould be faithfully performed. So

al-i: )y',ir, after a great many (olicit.tions, in lieu of that
t1iit ly, (he had gianted her the ccutly of Vermaniiililf
witll tile lands and bailiwicks of Sclley ;and Vctry; tho'

K k 2 'tis

'tis known that county, and the other lands were not ot
equal value with Turene, but was promiled to have an
addition of lands in the neighbourhood to an equal value.
iUpon this letters patent were granted, which were con-
firmed in the courts of parliament, chamber of accounts,
court of aids, chamber of the trea(ury, and others necel-
fary; upon which file entered into poflcfion of that coun-
tv, &c. A fterwards, by a valuation of the commillioncrsq of
the chamber of accounts, it was found that the revenue
of that county, &c. did not amount to those of Turcne,
by 3000 livres. But inftcad of making up this deficielnc;
according tojuftice, some of the privy council, viz. M.. de
Cheverney, the presidents of Bellievre, Nicocholay and
St. Bonet, in the name of the king, notwithstanding of
her aforesaid lofles, did fell and alienate the lands of Sen-
lis, and the dutchy of Eftaimpes, to Madam de Montpcn-
sier, from whom the king received money; of which lflc
the counsellors aforesaid obliged themselves to be guaran-
tees, which hath hindered the aforesaid queen to have
juitice done her. So that Madam de Monpenfier hat!h
been put in poleflion of these Linds of Senlis, contrary to
all the declaration, protestation, and aflilrances of the
king of France to queen MIary's ambaflhdors. So that ithi
queen of Scotland is dilfofl.Ultlid of her dowry, colitrar)
to all equity, without any regard to her quality.

No. VII. (Vol. II. p. 51.)
A letter from the Lord of Lochlevin to the Reget::

Mortomin.

3d1 March l 'T will please your grace, I received your grace's let.
'i 77. F " 0 tcr, and has confidcred the fame. Tlhe pairlon (!
Archit'c,. Ctamlfey was here at me before the reccit thereof, direitJ!
nuiid. I. fra miy lord of Mar, and the mailer anent my lift winttii.
N0)' £9. which was the anlwer of the writing that the niallc!

sent to me, which I fend to your grace, defiling im tl'
conle to Sterlinlg to conflcr withi themi. I lad given 1l
anl\wer before tlie receit of your grace's lett'er, tli;t I be'
ilulifit to be beLy, S;amdt Amidrois, at ane friltns tnl!,
\.hlecl I might not oinit: I umderftand by my filid coulil:.
i!,tl tli kiu;',s in.lcilty is to write to divers of tilenolillr
:' c:oi0n thllre, aium t your lordflhip's trial, auid tlihat i'

had

had written before his departure to my lord Monthrois.
I underRfand, likewise, he will write to your grace to
comic there for the filune effect, which I tho't good to
niimke your grace foreseen of the falre, praying your
:race, for the love of God Almighty, to look upon the
hdct, and not to flecp in fccurity, but to turn you with
tizlcirined heart to (God, and to conitder with yo;rfelf, that
when thI king's majesty was very young, God made him
the iinfrument to divest his mother from her authority,
wlio was natural princess, for offlldilng of his I)ivine Ma-
jc!i), and that there ran no vice in lher, but that the fame
1 ,:s largely in you, except to that your grace condescend-
cd not to the dcfriiu'tion of your wile. For as to har-
lutry and ambition, I think your grace ihas as far offinded
(odl, and far more in avaritioufnefls, which vycis God
never left unplagued, except fieedy repentance, which I
pray God grant to your grace, for otherwile your grace
can never have the love of God nor man. 1 pray your
grace flatter not yourself; for if your grace believes that
ye have the good will of them that are the king's good
willcrs ye deceive yourlelf; for surely I fee perfeidly that
your own particulars are not contented, lat be the reft,
iiul that moit principally for your hard dealing. I pray
)ulr grace, beir with me that I am thus :ainlie, for cer-
t.til;:y it proceeds from no grudge, but from the very as-
fclion of my heart towards your grace, which has con-
tilued since we were acquainted. And now I fee, because
thec matter itands in your grace's hadlilng with the king's
nl;ljcll, fuor certainly, if your gIace fall forth with him
Iiw, I fee not how ye ihall meet hereafter; pray I your
:Ir.lce to call to God, and look on the best, and catl from
yuur grace hoth your vices, to wit, ambition and avari-
tiloilncfs. I an rl(ling this day to S;iand Androis, and
I11ll to returnl onl \vC(lleflldlly at tile tfarhell . If your
i. ''e will comnlliand me in aly offices that are honefi,
tlhl I may do yout grace plellure in at Sterling, adver-
tile ol youur grace's mind, :ind liall do to my power aud
llut\ ledic, alld this witli my hcartlic, &c. &c,

X s3 kT'

To our tiuflv cousin the lord L.ochlcvce.
Frremthel T RT'S'I'Y cousin, after our mnofi hearty commenidl!-

E.' r- 1 tiolls, we receivced your letter of the 3d1 of '.I!.i:,

n',, '.r- and as we take vour pl.iniiic's therein ill good part, as; pr.-
untr, B cec(diig from ;a friend and kilfiim, ln, in whose onoi ;i-
huni'. B. - 1 c o m
I\o. ; f'rlion to(wlars us xve never doubted, so )e may lot thi,:

it firange that we purge oul'iClf so far of )our accufiiiu,;,
as in confcic:ce we find not ourself to have oft'cidcd
in. As touching our oflencc to God, we intend not to
cxcuifc it, but to fubilit us to his mercy; for anibiticnl
surely we think nonle can jufily accuse us; for in outr
privat late eflate c(ouldJ, and can live as well cont cilJ, .:
any of our degree in Scotland, without farther ic'.ri;:'ii
'The )earing too thecharge of the mgo\-riineinnt ut the ;.,.Iil
indeed, mon lead us, or any o!hic that ihall occupy t!..t
place, not finimply to rcf'ecet ci f; .!, but his n ajcfiV's i .);:,
·whiicli we filply, and thccill liot trail fccihdin; the IT.!.;
of measure, as, we truit, it fliall not be fouiid v,' c liiie
done, it ought not to be attributed to any amlbii(oil ill 1
F'4or as soon as ever his majcfly fliil think hirmfeln f :c;,ly
and able for his own (gvernlent, none shall nore \:'ii
lingly agree andl advance the famne nor I, linc 1 ti;:.k
nlc'ver to liet nli, !tic a:rrinfril hin, whose honour, fiic',
anid Il rclrvationl I!.' iicln [o (dear unto mr, inor [ r:i!
i l',cr l e-lieve to f[lmd rtiicrvil ,

at his ihand than si\,,
;il thoulgh all th,' unfriciids i have in the earth wire i;liit

slil:, to I'rl-fiittIc lil to t;c coitira:l'. As Vc \vrite iLii)

you, our friendly dealing atld (co!: ielncc i tlh teiisl, i.f
I\ ar is inot t!;ii:kli llv ;Iau it; ; ' we tjitll yo'ull;ki cii-
jlil ':;; liot I't .!i'f thie taiii doi.;; us l.jnglai nd, ll v

1 tl

of't ,\o': , tle cli:;lccllor, treilferr, anlld linc m i('!(ii1
riil.s \'tli tills (d, i t f( lic th ilie ;, we praly v n ili .ll
adlilr 's ),lii ellt to ) lie thelrc as fb,,in :,s ) Cal, ;11d

, !. ''

lli:ill find l(ie likelilhood of' all thin , let us hl :, '. cil I,'o
thilcr<ot, willi t cr; ohiwn advice, li)' Alex'. Il1, 1v.l,,'i
we' h,:\c' tiloilglt go)od to fend w'

(,/ ceii;' n loh 'l
h tf ,\;:-

,;s 1' luni Ste' lizu:, rides ,1 I)o,t g l:.~. Anlld (t w,. :':,, .111,

)oil i tilt' [ oitcliiiioll of (Jodl. At\ llo)'o( d lI u,,'li', il
;i t]l of lsar' h, 1 S77.

1 or tile :val it, "i.l f !( . l.rid to our (l.urgc:, hi I ld it

d ,;

i.' i rK

l s t 11 1) .!y lo d l li ki:,,'.,s

.,1'1L', as lk' .II

; v'.

'. i. e'CISs, iesir uI.'nc fhli.il Ill tJ.V i'1 u,1iia d
d .ii'l

I'u,..

aor:n prince, let be any officcr, cfchcw the ditlailos of
l(!h,ias thinks themn judges to their own reward; in many
eaiuli' I doubt not to lind the afliftanlce of my friends,
buti where my actions shall appear unlholeft, 1 will not
crave their aflitance, but let me b;ar my own burtihcn.

No. VIII. (Vol. II. p. 79.)
,eitcr of Walsingham's to Randolph, Feb. 3,

158-0-1.

S I R,
l AVE received fiom my lord lieutenant the copy of ;'tt. .i!,

5your letter of the 25th of the L.t tldiricted Into ]ls C.A1ig. c, 6.
l rdlfhip, containing a rciptrt of your negotiation with tihe
king and his council, in your flcond allience, where-
with having made her imajefly acquainted, fine (Lclined
f(oniwhat to mu//7/ik, that you fiould Ib long (dfr to ,lu!

-', t.h elon'iiz't cf E ipedocles. But I made answer in
.(lur bchalf, that I thought you were dire'led b)y the ad-
..cc of the said Empedocles /icntils, in the soliciting of
th!t cause, who knew what time was fittcft for yen to
t.kc to deal therein, with mol eftcCt, and belt success,
wvith which answer, her majelty did in the end rcft very
vcll litisfied, touching that point.

YouR pultting of us in hope that d'Aubigny might ca-

liy le won at her majclty's devotion, was at first intcr-

ct.'ld to have been ironic sipoke by you. But since it
I iicth you illfili upon it, I could wifli you were othcr-
\\Wilct pcrflade of the man, or at Icaft kept that opinion
t,) \v1tre1 , for confideringl the end and purpose of his
,1111i:!; into Scotland, as may he many ways fuiEciently
|;ilpvc, was only to advance the queen's liberty, and re-

pI iln into that government, to overthrow religion, and
! ,pricurc a forerign match withl Villenarius, wherein the
I:1 lllcil copy), which you may uif to goodt purpose there,
ll 1ill partly give you some light; there is no 1mlan here c.ta
I1. I:lliiadedc that he will change his lprpofe, for lb finall

1\ ngt;lcge as he is likely to find by it, and therefore you
ll.,ll do well to forbear to harl any more upon that llring,

I', 1have already written to you. T'he prince of Or.ange
l.li,, I fear will not be in time that it may do any
' ::Il; lur bcides that tlelic people arc in thlcielvcs

K k 4 flow

flow in their rerFoltions, their own aftRairs are, at p:'er::t,
;i ,ie;itr, thli tr f(ate 1f confuied, and the pri :ri 'sC .,Iii;
rilY so finall, that he cannot tfi oonl take orderl i1 it; ,!:.I
yet for mine own part, 1 have not ceen neliient o;r c(.1!
le_'s in the matter, havinZ, more than tlhree W.eeks '..,
f':lt one about it, froI1 whom neverthclcI I (do yet I',;er
nothing. ' ihe letters, you del; e fliould be v.':'itltc.n tli;
ther by the lFrench miiiiners, I have given order to Mr,
Killingrew to procure, who, I doubt not, will carlef-il!y
perform it, so that, I hope, I 1fall have them to rcndl yo(,'
by the next. And so I commit you to God. At \Vhiti-
hal!, the 3d o0 IFcbruary 1580.

Your very loving couifin and fecrvant,

FRA. WALSINC,II.A:. .

7/':'s I'!tr, is an ;ri7'i/,a l71 in finie
,arts cf it wnr't,' :' :

i\p/.icrs an.d explained ly l sthcer ha.nd. B3y EL;fp'nr'..* :
iendlcrJlood Mriton. By fillenza7rius the' kinrg ,f S ..
D'A rb;'gn:' is ;Iarlcd thus o i 0

3 Feb. 158o.
Sundry notes gathered upon good dliligence given,

and in time to be better iianlifcllt.cd, bceiiLr 1:. ,'
thou!hlit mee t to be in convenient fort u l

t'

u Wl

laid againl: D'Aubitlny, to pr)ov lit au'1. i;
the kingl, the l(noLill,:, anid tl.iat lLate.

"',,' i. Il>. -. 'i' ' , it hlath. bl inLforied, l v credible mll'i,

C.I;a. c. 6;. F that l)'Auhi,,im u was prliv :)(l :redil i.tiitl wilti!
An 1o,1i- ; ivl tv th k inr's iLmoth r's c recti. , (('c ;Ii le, l c (iII Sc l 1,

andl of his crr.i n thtere, tedlil )g 'eli 'fly to prit .i11.''': '
ki)n, to think and elleeen it an evl pIeiidcnt for pI'll':
that lub.jet:s ilt lihave power to deprive their lawfil l
verci:;.,l, as they did his mother, who w.,[ nlot ni.' l,
by ally mCe.nII, to defceat him, either of t[le prefiit Iu\ ciII-
mentl of tlihat ire.tll, or yet of the polleflion of the cr'11
ilnd inheritancc thereof, but rather to aflurc tin' ailltc

i 1

him: and that for the accomplifhnlict of that a;nfl .altl
the king Ihould have been advised alnd d(Irawin to have i

VC1w

ernicd, for some fliort ti me, as prince, cal!in D':h

n I g-

,,y to rule as governor of the prince, by conin iflion fromi
lij (jIicen his mln ther, until the king's enemices wcre furp-
*,.-lld l; after which time, (I'Aiubigny (hould have power
.i.cn to ct;lhlifll and rcti.gn that kindoin to the king,
i;' lis mother's voluntary consent, whereby all fiiuh, as
i,:'l blCre been inil ;clioll ;againfl the (!i'el or her au-
!'alritv, mihlit be brought to tlandl in the kiing's mercy.

I.;il lfur tihat the king might live in more fiurcty, D'Aubig-
:., iloilld be declared hotli second person in ficceflion of
:;iit cro:xvn, andl all) liceutnant general of Scotlinid, and
t'it dl'rx\biiinvy, beifoe liis (lclp:irtuec out of France, re-
, C(.Cl r1 cniililon from the kiino'. mother to the cfle'cts
it,:' ,nil'ied, or near the slime. That in this behalf he
I], ' ( ,f';.'rcrnce \ilth the bif11opIs of (;lafow, antl Rof,

;.: vith sr si .amcs l:iafnor', v itl which perlins, all(i with
t h. iike ors (;uiiti he haJl and hath frequent intclligence,
and i)' :.ir James l';aforl1 he was acivilbd to confer with
the lird I Juhn lni;ilIton bctore his repair into Scotland,
whereiiito he agreed, andl vet aftcrwards he sent one
Jolhn I.initilton to the f.id lord John to excure him in
thi' part, a!lcdgiirl, that he did forbear to conme to him,
lit thereby he fihould marr or hinder greater efftcts to be
extcuted by him in Scotland.

'I'-IAI' blfore Ills coiniin inrto that r:eihn, the nobility

and conintry were well quiected andl , .iiit.l in good con-
cord, vith great love betwixt the king a;(ndl nobiility, ;nd
a;moinul the noblellc, but lie hath both d(Irawn the king
:!;ainlli fillrly of the chietefl of Ihis nollblity, that h.ive
it.n niofi ready, and have exlpended their lblo! and1 of-
IsolicIns to pIell'rvc religion, and declend th1( 1;li 's per-
I' , Ii;s government and estate, ald ;.lo I1lfli given occa-
liRis of gre'at htfjiicions arnd oftLncec to be c igeniidered be-
It.il.t tilte king and his nobility, and cfpecia;ily with Ich

r;a hIve been ;nudin n

ati aiif tl(e ki ng's nitliher, and her
;' lhoilty, who bIy fi;rcc an;d e.i:s of t t te Aliid commiflion

ri.dl plI'.ticc, fl)oull( have bcai brouciht into mnclft dall-

i'! 'ls colinditionl; and who allo llmay sild thclieflvs ill no
s:;i1lIl Irill while he polletlis tihe king's car, al)ufeth
{ii lirel(e.nc, Iand iol(dell'i ch of the p)rilcipal keys anid
P'rlst' l'ii ,s realm, as lie prcefei lly i.njoyeth.

I 'lA'! lie hath drawn tile king not only to forget thl

gr"it lheclfits ldone to hilli andll Ins cialme, by tihe qIueen's
itjIjcny of Enl'and, but altb to rcquite the fmne with

sundry

f.:nidr! ' i;t';ns c;f great u!tl;anktit : ilc',f, ;.1( woulitn,:
thercvi ith the honour of her majli)y, and thereby ;!:ti
advcntulred to ifiake the hrippy amity long time contilnucl
betwixt those princes.

A N : wh-re;;s ihrJle g riefs were to be repaired ly gcintlc

letter; ati;d good ofters, to have pasTid, and been done he-
tVwi:;xt' iC, : inl which repect, the king and council liiV-
i!,, resolved to write to her lmaijci ty, for her high:r;'
bettcr iititfi;Stion in the late negotiation of MAr. Alcx.ai.c.
lTuine of Nortl'bcrwick, had g'iven order to the kin.'s
fecrctary to frame that letter: He minding to brcaik t;ie
bond of amiit in fundcr, willed the fecrctr'y to be sure
that nothing {hould be inserted in that letter, whereby tlhe
king fthoid crave any thing at her hands, ifeking thcribyl
to cut ofF all loving courtesies betwixt them, as by the
declaration of the laid secretary may be better learc;!J,
and thereupon further approved.

THlAT under the hope and encouragement of DI)'u-

bi'n. 's protecion, Alexander King presumed with that
bolhi:.,; to make his lewd harangue, and by his meC;ns
hath hitherto ef'apcd chaftifcmc;ut and correction, due for
his oftlnlcc.

TlInAT fir James Baford, cotlnlclrd of the sauiig!':

cf the kinii's father, hath Iben cCailld'l Ito the rca'lni
Lennox, without the privity of the kill . Anidv,'i:,
the (lid fir Jamnis found iln :a grcn xc'l\ l d'fTi, i.'L Ih -
earl of l'3othwcll's, and f.w a;idl hl( in I:s h1:ai:, ll!K
principal band (c. the corIfpiri:torS inl t .t nti lrder, ;aii (...
best decclare and wlliifc- ' who were aIntllor aind cxe.u:ra
of tile fane ; lie is dralxn by lI.C e:lIn to (uIpprel l thi trtn,
and to accutc fUiil ;ei, lie hliilt'hi knov,'ethli b'- nnu

I .:',

and <is by order ot law, will be so found, it ;ili. :1,..'
have due trial, wlhich, coltlr:l y to all jultiCe, is b: I. .;-
nox mcans denicd.

7his ;is th/i char.,,, :(i ;' ]) .'/ 1t,;/' ),, 7); s/:"'./ .: .

fore-:'e'W,' i ltt'r 1 l 11',/'l ,l."''L. w i

but 1' /

B, 1ts ,/i 'j' ."!!. '/"
"jain.s Jb'Jo, l bl

'.. IX

No. IX. (Vol. II. p. 97.)

lhe copy of the kinr of France his dirciions sent
to Sctland with Seineur de la Motte Fenclon.
Tranllated out of the French.

IRST, on their mos chrif-ian majcfy's part, lle shall Cal.crw.
nake the most honourable f-llutation and visiting to MS.- h(

F ry, VOl.

tic imof ferenc king of Scotland, their good brother and 31.p 2o0.
iiltle son, that in him is poflible.

''o give him their letters that are closed, fich and stich

like as they have wr itten to him with their hands, and to
f!low exprefly the perfec frielldfhip and singular afIec-
tdno1, that their majestys bear to him, and to bring lack

t'!:' ;intwer.
'['o take heed to the thin2s which touch near the molt

I; 'ineC king, to the efl'et that his perlbn may be in no dan-
cr, but that it may he most flrely preserved.
AnD that he be riot hindered in the honest liberty that

he otliht to have, and that no greater, or straiter guards
be abhont him than he had before.

An,, frIch like, that he be not impeached in the au-

th(ority, that God hath given to him of king and prince
fIv.'rci-ii above his fIhjeLs, to the efleSt he may as
frle ordl;aiil and command in his affalirs, and in the as.

Ir' of his country, with his ordinary council, as he was
ilcl to ldo of before.

''lIAT' his noIilit', barons, and commonality of his

or!triy minay have tie ir '-ree liberty to retirt to his fercne
il.itllty witlhoit fiifj)icion of g-re.:tcr guards or more armed
1[n.i about his lpcrfoll tlan the uife was, that they be not
;i'iiitdl and hindered to rclort ; and further that the seg-
ii:II (lr de la. M\tte I'encloin 1ll liberally and freely speak
t1" TnI' Idid U'rcTIn king and council, requiring the re-eC[a-
l'fllil!ug of that that may or hath been chained or al-
I rctl.

A\' 1 that he may know if the principalls of the nobi-

''., :111d other men of good behaviour of' the towns a;1nd
('iii'mnoniality of the contry convecns, 1and are content with
1itcII' of government prcliently with tlie sild fCrelle
k l1', lo lie end that if there be any miicontenl he may
'': .,ilc to agree tlicm together, and that he return not
wi!hellilt ile tcrt;linty of the amlille.

(J tAND

A ' in

if he m:nv iitlcrflilnd ih;it theri be any who liar

not tlf d them io rcvcrcntly towt rr', the filil fIn lir ki;,:
their fivcr(ign jlord, as thile (1v i ,1i their o!hctle-ir ic-
t(pirn l, tli.It he rm.n.' praly n

;L ll lii ht(li(t f iis nl.l "

1 ly

nrm il chrifti.il thle 1.i.d eri(I'l(t' k in' il', h t. 'ood hr tiit 1, !

i1 ,

hlin c, um'ill wholly to f(,", t tl,' (.1in(, ;mld , ':1I,,,:,.
thlir t( (. thei r du(Ity tlOi.l'.: 'd '('. i':,i,,t v, i liilnc '.(l iii. ll
i, a31 l r(';(ci l s v'ith t obc d ient.c trll fhIIL (i l .ll

velid ii
oc ll' liil l.

'\rn it the idc fcitcrllcur (tc i ait rtct prcev' :

I'I I i:1

fcii;e' kil', to ibc iin aniilv nlal.ti r ctiill ilillte ol ins ;':i 1,
;.i t!i(, it, lihci ty, andl ifofitionl ol f his alilailrs, tl.all h
IIkil to lie, a1 (im i;t lonv nient i or his I oyal (liiy ' ily ,

ci .1

the h(:,lvil'' ly of it lir'iitc tlus require, that lie ult' ,1
1l'o('Ce l.l tl1 anld 11tiIllI to rplacc hinl in thlie k11i', .,il
tla,:il I' inlilosv as lnmuch ai tlie crldit of his Illol tl 'it1,l
n :lij'lv i.iiV ido tow ard the nobility, .ind fiijcdtll s I l th..l
Ctllitrl\, 111 .l as mlluchl s Ialmy his ;lilem, with thl lli.11.'
of his crown towa;lus the S(.ottifih nation, thle whlcl !ic
loves and confides in as much as they were proper Ill ItI-II
111 1en.

AND that he wittiness to thel flil fcrcne kini, ami l li,

cftatel, of his conlfent, ;1ilt to ;ill the nobility a;nl I( )linl-
pall perfolages of the coot ry, lthat his nionf Ch'iii i; n i-
jeflie will colitilioc oln his part ill tile mull' i.llicint .i '-
ance and confcdcracy, lwich lie hath had with the Ii(, l!e-
rent kin ll lis . )oo(d rlother, praiyilg hlis nobility ;ii,:.l (1I-
try, with his princip.all ftiljcels, to pellievcrc in tle 111,
in all good tiidecrtatidling and fricndfllip with lhi; tile
wlhicl, on hlis part, lie 1ha1l t1d, oblcivit llthe f.Aliil'
iloft inviolable.

]tiRTtIR -l.t his tmodf clriflian majefly uidi fniHll';l

that the fl.'rci king his good brother was contentiil Wii'
the dklie of Lcnox, and Ilis fervifi, the (hlid fiigictl I)e
l. Motte hail cliarge to ipray his f(rcnc in;ljeflv ill 11 lit
mnioht remani iie lsidle himi to his c(iitcntnlcilit, ilcliloilg
that lie liouild nlu.re willing inltcrtain tile oints ol Ic1
and confcdc liCic, betwixt their inljcflys and tlheir ciooltl i'
bccauifi he was a good fibjcj to them both ; .nu it1 tlc
might not reniin, without some alteration of il( ti;ll' i;ll'
jity of Ilis efiite, thatl e imight retire him to Ills o'wn
lihife in tle alid contry, in lfirenes, or if lie plcit.lti
rctilrn to Fr.inL that lie might fiirely- and if it i'l'
\1\s Icrcrin majcfly, to catllf ccalf and fliy the inll)cacl-

lllclll'i

'tsits, that are made of new upon the Fronticer, to tlie

.*ti':t that the Inatiiural F'reinchmciin may lv e r as ficJy, into
tlti: c.)lty, as they were wont to d(, of hel)rT.

A. 1) that there mayl e

ln piipcfii e of' difli : iin, nor

ii) Ilccch l t lhoi)tr,ille of the inoft Clfhn ll n ki:, , in
iit rniitrv, bht fuil li ke asis is poken molt honliioniilly
ut tlhern1e kiiir of Scotland in I'r:.i'.

l. lihil tnuother lhel1 tio )ropone, vwhich hIi (.ii'e;iled

t:l .1 little befole is d parti r', to

t it, thit llt.i q(IiC( ,

(ti kiun's lmonther, was contcit ti.rti'ci t 1i)in in ailo-
L, ttioi of the kingdom.

No. X. (Vol. II. p. 115.)
'I.'iJl I uItinltlon to Sit I'.rIncis ¥Vlorinftlihai, the

i. l.r of'AugrI i5 i , (ruin Btlcrwl ik.

S I R,
/\ CCO()RDING( to imv former letters, toiichliln my Caldcrw.

i ,iccClii)' withl the c(-;l] (

I Ani 1illll VC(lWei.'lday MS. ui1-

theri cae

th er lith to me fromi t:.e c:arlc, the julticc t ,rvol. 3.

irl:, ;a i Sir WVilli .i Stu:Tltt, c.ptain 0of Dumba.rto Pn, 374
t'tii0 of the king's privic councili, to treat with me about

le,. '

o frder of our ineetinr, rclert i ug wholly to me to aip-
li 11it the hlour, ain the nimtllrr we should meet with al;
{i, ,, we concluded the plc to be Flo lhlen, the liour to

,i tI' o,'clock, and the iiimtll-r with ourf'lves to be '13 of
I,1 I;L; ;in(l the refIt of oCur troops to (tfLnd each of them a,
eItlc Iro n the town; the olei oin the ofe lide, the other
w'1 tlic otiher lide, lo as our troops were two miiles ;rifiuler;
I VS Inot mIany horlenmen, but 1 supplied it with footmen,

1'. , I ha.d ioo fIlot on horse, but they were very near

5'", lioric well appointed: According to which appoinlt-
lo-nt, we met ycfterday, and after some congr;ittul;itioni,
thi, (cic fell in the like protcftations of his good will and
ir'i(liiicfs to firve the (LueeCC'S majefry, before any prinlce
111 tilt world, next his fovcrcign, as lie had (lone hereto.
t1b :ly his letters, and ra;ther more ; with such carneft
'v'w, .as unlcis he be worle th.in a devil, her m;ijclly rmay
'i",ilc) of hlim at her plelafrc; this being cndlcd, 1 en-
te'1 'I with him touching the caufc I had to 1c.l with i1M11,
""ll si nea.r as I could, left nothing unrlchc.ir.il, thalit I h.ld
!. hli.rge the king or him with any unkind dcalin;; toward

hct

her ma;efrt!y, accord ing to mv infilrucnions, which with,,ii
anv delay he anl\fwcld prefentivy, as yc shall perceive hi,1
the Iaid anfwcrs, tnct herewith ; but I replyinll unto hiil,
he ainplied t'hem wivh many nmo circumrnitnces, but to
thiis cfiect. 'l hcn I dealt with him touchil n the p(,ii;
of her niaj F']s (l;iU-S . ion, for the utteI ing such praclio
;il ha1 been late lv (t onr sout f-or the dilif. luiting of I,
n-:'.jeit and her - '4itte, who thereof nla.le I fily dli cotrfi..
xewhat bn.lrri.iecs have been ofrerll to his n.ijll' )by s1l;l,
princes, and by wha!t means the carle has oughlit to dliv,.t
ti.em, and for ':loat caulies; the one, for that ie m.rri:!;
with Sp:.in or I ranle, he mnln' al;lo .lter his reih;,,.,
which as he is sure the king will never dio, so w ill ii
never fuffr m

him to hcarken uiito it, so long as In h,,!,

anv crecdi' \'.ith him

1, I deniys not but tlhe kin:i 11is i,..!)

dealt with:,:l be practices to dl:e a:;ainlt h:r m:ijl t'1jiy, i;:
he h1;s ;o !,ir dcliced and reruf(el to enter intn, al [..I'\
have left (lde:ii;, tlierlin, hut Xha;tfocver tile kiiln r oli
knoweth tlhereii thirt ii:;.!l li: nothingl hiddlen froiml 1,.l
majefly, as her neicluy ih:dl ho!i'..' very shortly; i, nr('l it
seems by hi Ilpeecl, ', t! ht ii th king would h. ve )ih!,iii
thereuinlo there il.:, icn nl o l.l! cson1mcpany of FIrenchl i
Scotlandil ere rnov t'o di,; iuiet 1er m:;ljety.--- 'lis b-
ii:e ended, I[ dic.: ith hiniii c..,ni'lily for the fray ol tii;
parii:umenl, which nw ;.pi,,roacleit; or at the eafl til..
ti,.rc i;may be nothing: donii,: therein, to the prejudlice L
thcIli noblemen :;:i.i others i:,nv in ]inilalnd, for tlie lci-
f.tliltili . of their liv ;i:'. l

: ! 'ood ; hereupon lie n111.t .1

long di.fcour!c to mi',: lhir t ol the earl of Angus edilii
about the (ear. of .\ i.lt()rt, then U f lhis g(ingl outl, lnotwitil-
li:diiiv- lf'uiindri,: . ,rocioiu'.. ofie:'s the kilng had allde hlin,
tlien ot the road of R tiil thve, lhow that l fIIr'intly alite thlit
had the kin,'s In:ljCly in their hands, they implrifiicd
limfelfh, dealt with the ki i:; for putting of the duke oii:
of the re:llm'., the killng recliltfld io to do, they told Iii
p!ainly that ilf hi would not lie Illotild have tlhe earl ,1
Ar ln's lhead il ai difli ; thle king Asked what ote'ncic tin'
'.ll hliad made ? .ind hlicy' iifcre l it iulift bhe :J),
ihould lie lo ; ieieCtip)ll, sIor thle f 'lcnard of \ Arrill'i's 1 '1 '
the kingi was conltent to lend aw;.iv ythe duke, andl yet Ai-
I;ii ;afterwards luiI iei li

t les in dt II eitl' of Is life; I ll'l-

cd unito him the king's ctt to t ie (Iqucen's Anijefl)', in(d
his a1ts in council, that they had dolie nothing hut lor
his IclrviliC, and1 wit llis good liking anil CO'll ltlltlclt1

v.A1

v'whlo anfwvered me he durfl do no otherwile, nor cOt',ii not
io any thing but that which plclcaf tihem, \i;! ihli a
iinnibel of other thelir ldcalins with the king w\hilcll iLhe was
il their hands as arc too long to be written, ;ilnd too bad;
' lhcy were true; I Ilid the ki:o nli.lit :Iet let the uICIeens
ni::iciI'i\''s Iambarl'ld.r ol have kno\wn llis m ld i'r'l't i', )i),l
her i-Ijcfi vw)[ l t',l L ti relivel Iliin ; ie ;i(il vc :r'.(, thatll
the king was not i:iuirant that the ;I p ['i {I l:I,:,ns inl that
n ;ill.ir, pro ceded I'rolil .I r. I ),v'. s

jrv .:icc, a;1nl ti4'rc1bv

itll not1 inipart lo inlliil to him, ;1an )Lt tl;; kinl, was
content, and did cive rcnl ifioni to as iii::ny i; s wo()ii ac-
kI,,m'lcdge tlheir ta'lilts, and ;tI( remif i j Ianclo as
v.'oiidl ollt, lhe th o lht i it to bl.lifil, to liy thu'i- f'i'lthe.r

V.iah'ty, ill which timel they con-llilr theki lil ,l I'Lcoil

.;,. cheilrio)n, and. the k ii illng of tile catl.' ;iirl othL'ers,
.;i:.l fcld ce the llii,;ilcrs to tilh ir ';iL l, ;ull l \I';I t nll(

,i-.ied with thl.'l c iniojracics and tralf;,l .ll (. ' lin.s

,',q he terms tlhem), nrc entered into a thilrd, blen,, in Il,-l
Il]d uindcr her nlljiclly's proteci ioll, to (lifiloI:onrl lh'lr nla-

i sily as far as in tlhcni lyeth, or at lcaft to c.auili tlhe king

:cca.ivc some ililkijliiils in her niajc'fy)', tfor har)ourint

( Fthem.in; I wrote to vow what the conlfir')icv ;\cwa, the
t.iki;g of the kill(n , the killing of thie :erlc or .' Air,n, and
isine others, the taking of tile callic of E!i:n' . ar.d brilg-
,; lonie tie carles, to take th cluhar._ oi the

i kin; all

v'hich (lhvs lie) is by 1)rummti on con!'d;:.l, ainI i,. tlhe
!o~,vonf of GlencuddJel not grc.tl]\'i.d, ;;! !h1. ",-
!abi, ofl tile calfllc thereupon ll el; tihe o: *i! ': , :,

, , .,!.i-

mioiid Wi tilhi n as far ai s Ia'ogt. v.::;'::

h' (', :" !,.!..

Iinicd tli theconlisirac\y i bTorc ;','1; ,: . ;1
' .t'.., h .

l",l i 'iivcd( a l )o',v oil hislc. x.', t !, I:, , ;),: !;

I.::!, !
'.ii!': i.l,; m, suri Lr,- )r!,s , i ; |l. I ,, i ),- *':. ;i ',i '; , t',!] ,,

iv' ld liot work aiN lly ti? |)i 'l cit.

i: 1 I i1 . 'l I. i(

- ix (neS 24liest ji siera 'jtli lL'.'s ,r k" i ! \'ill (' i) ;) :I 1 i :1,

' :

* 'I t.,, hot

I( lii , iV il: ) hl .

' , : aIln t!'.lt l;

:, : ;!i.t, a :)-

I;'.':!v jl'ox,,.l :::biii:il th! in, thlatl it v.\'.i !.c i'.. . I.t 1o

i I,;inm ],ractic; t) :1:. . .kiv t'!c t I' tl,!t, :;ld " ;, .;t. '10.:i

" iiip ly. di, s to

ti lt' kinc ; ,. li tI{i'.'.l l;]., Illit it

I, ' ;ii!l :t ith1 tl l I dl iy it, ,lir tli :; o.'v;i .11d: ,
: i, 1l i

i "'} ! to .):iit ul nA , an1 .I tlicii.i,)! * ( .) :

i 1:''. ! l.'l t il

1 I t , l) Iiould tso pi 1 tl, : Li:

I

, tlr l) !: ..1i t it i; tille(,

ti;, ssuh l r.ltlh, l':

m!;, t h:

!i

1t:. i .tt' uvl ;I;L .:I: 'Ltv,
: 1or

i ul tl)or

further it, and that since they seek chiefly his life, lie counl
not, in any realon, f elc to ldo them any g-ood ; andil licrI.,
he affiurcd mc, that if he wotll, !Ie dalre no!, th!s, Liit
matter being fallen out as it is and filrily it this n.atl, i
had not fallen out, I would nlot Iive (lounbt;tc tie

d Icli,,r

ilg of ti;e carl- ofi Marl v:rv fihortl), if her nm, j. \y v.", ili
have employed me therein, but bi tile c;ail o .\nl'u,,
perceive the king is perlfuaded that hloth hle, and heic l ,'
of the Dol i ulafrls, have conceived fl mortall ail lhatlcr
againlf himi and the carl of Arrani, about thc death of ill;:
earl of M\oritun, as if they were at home, to-morrow next,
they would not leave to pradtice andl conspire thc dl.:i I ,
them both, and therefore a hard naitter to do an v thi a
for him: finally, he concluded and required mnc to ali::
her majetfy from the king, that there flall nothinlg 1e hi'
from her, nor any thing left undone that many fatis!i( lie
majesty with realbn, and that the king shall never do an,
thing, nor conlecnt to have any thinl done ill her prejudic,
fu lung as he had any credit with him, or aitorlity 1111-
der him. Having this far proceeded, he dellred to ih\e
me his conmillion, which is under the _rreat feal, to himi-
telf only, which is as large as may b.', and yet fundrllc us
the privic counicil there with him, lbut not one in conm-
niilioni, nor prefentt, nor near us all this time havin'l
fpcnt almoltf five hours in there matteis ; he prl-feCltedl ti
mnte the lmalter of Gray, who deliverci to me a letter fIroml
thel king in his commendation, wh'uom I perceive tihe
king means to fend to her najeltly, an:i therefore re(litircw
a faie-condilitt for his pailfgc, whiclh pl.ty yow piocure,
1nd to fedII it as foonI as you may. 1 let hiin under[tallnd
the lord Seaton's negociation with the IFrench kilng. l e
swore to me, tha;t Seaton was but a knave, and that it
w.is pa;rtly agaitlf his will, thait he iould be lent thitlhr.
But his coninillion and iiilruction being of no great im-
]ortalice, he yielded the foolnr ; and if Seaton has !?olc
be)yorld his iliidruiitiols, which Arran drew hi{niell, 1h
will niake Seatull lilart for it. Tociching VVilliai New-
gil ten,aid Mi;irk (olglli, he protelled lie never hlear s
;1ny fiiCli ; lie fays there was a little poor foul, with ;i 1l.1ck
bc.rd, come tliitll r a bcg!"iinl, who said lie vlis ;111 c1C-
mny to I)efmllon, to whoml lie gave a croun, bhut ine\cr
lic;rdl of him filce, and for any Scots man goiti, i"':
Ireland, he (fiys there is no fiic I matter; if ilici l'h,
theic maly be Ibmc few rafkals that hc knuows Iot of; ,ll

tu l'll-

l ichling the coming of any Jcfuits into Scotland, he f.lys
i; ib hut the flanderonls dlvilf- of the kiig's encilnyc, and
icll: as would have the world believe the kilng rwere rcady

: cvolt in icligion, who the world shall well sec will
(cotinlne as cofitant therein, as whant prinoc f(bver pro-
1r!'i;l it most ; and the carl himfiif (los protelt to me,
tintt to his knowledge, he neve-r law a jesuit in his life,
.il did afli;rc me if there was any in Scotland, thei
l'>',il,'l rnot do bO much harm ini Scotland, as their miniflTcr;
wvo(:,'d do, if they preach fiich doctrrine as they) did in
,totillad ; and to(icliinr one Ballenden, of whoni I wrte

o \w, 1 hearld from liMr. Colvill, the carlc avvows coil-

i'.:'t!! that he knows nol, nor hath not heard ofl any flicl
aiiii, but he would inquire at the jufiicc clerk, an(d wouold
:fl il me what ire could learn of that ; thus 1 have made
' I,.'s thort a di lcourtL as I can of so manyv matters, lo
,I! dilcourfecd upon, hut tlleif are the priiiici)pal pioints
*! all oilr talk, so near as I can remember it, and soir thi3
:* I commit vow to the Alnmilghty. At iBerwick tile
ith of A\ugiuft, r584.

'['he king is very desirous to lhve

*.v ion Rolbcrt C;ry to come to hi in.
p'tay vow know her majefiy's 1plcafiirc?

\:';ran!'s A nfvwrs to the ' ricfnsor articles proponed
io tlic lordl lunl-lon, Ict down in another form.
A S to the fijailt anld fve('r perfilctioii of ;ll] flclh, a.;

liave h(ee1 noted to have 'been well a 1c.lt'd to tlhe

I ((it11 I, mIlt'llv, it cannot 11appar they weCr either tor
'it c.iil l |iiiiillti d, or h;irdlv (dc lt v ith, since his 111.1.
* ii' ,I ltle lias been (t c1.rct'11l 1ii 1] diliigent to clhoicc n it

"'*I, inlitrliimcllets to dlcil betwvixt hlr m:ij(cfl' :11 lhilm,
, iiniije)ll hais done iln eleIinlg of Vour lo'dlhip :and
'II.; IMllidis that in all their acculations, their tood will

l :ll'c*tll lborn to ]ier majelly was, at no unie, laul

t" I!ltirc (hlrre. , u t capital aclions of tre';aon nimiiy way
nid w e tlhe whole three eflates, anld Iure thln n.t-
iilscl to1 the worlh1.

'\ f;rhis majllty inliibiltiy, hy puiilick proclamatio.,
'ii('li .,t were h.i ifthed, nut to lp):l in ]:it ghland ; thl

lt :1iii(l whulifr.ings that caril to his m;jefiv's ears, of
1hl ' "tdipi.a;.: : d,, tri;)to,: whvhich llince lyn thes ac-
t UL- .. 1 I f:utmpl ifl'hid,

compliflctl , ,o far as in them lay, moved his majeflry
iihibit tli:rn to repair to alily place, so near his majrfv'
rcalrn, lell tlhey should have attcmptiecl thefc things, whici
Illrtlv they di(d atten pt, being fai ther ofl, and inure di(
talut hoth iy ea a idll la;d.

A for icc[s)tion of jelilits, and others, her mnjcfiv'

flutitivcs, ald not dt (ivtei ll them accordling to his piu-
Inil('., as \vuir lordfl1i prl'oponcs, his inajefly would be ml)r,
1,.L!1 l ihit f( it might t.ill )iiit bv' your lo rdfltip's tr.ilgt...
t.I.ct nio ftiiitive of ither icajml . t. ( ld hbe recccived oclt -
thcr, d we

f,

n when so l

bh , it (hall not fail on his m;:ljcl. '

'.irt, allbeit in very d,('l this tinie bygone his ima jellv l
been colftliailuced to receipt her nmajclly's mncan rcbells .i!.
fiiuitivxs, contrar lhis good natural], lince ler in.ilril.
hath receipt, il elftect, the whole and greatest rcbeL.,
aiid trnitols liis naijely il his own blood ever lhal; ;
ior the agrccment with hiis mlijefl)'s mother al.ncIt :lc
aflbciation, his majfcly has commanded me, in prcellc(: I
voul-r lord(lil|'s firvant, to afilre her ninjelly and yoli loi,-
ihip, in hiis majesty's name, that it is altogethcr fallc, ;a,'
;ni untruth, nor a:ny fuclh like matter lone vet.

I-lis majicty has also commanded me to aflure V\i.:

lordlhip, that it is also fallc and untrue, that his nmiljeli
hls, by any means dircei or indirc, sent any mcliL&e tr
the pope, or received any from him ; or th;t his mlijcji'
lias dealt with Spain or any forcigners, to harm her i.:-
jefly or her realmi, which his majefly could have no 1h-.
nollur to do, (tlis good intelligence taking place, as I

11(,l
in (od it mhall.

As; collccrnling, the contemptuous uifage of her maicfll'.

nniltHers, sent unto his majcfly, his majclty uf(d 111,1:
of thcni fio; and if his majclty had, fuflicicnt caule W.
given liy them, as foinc of their own writs do yet tcllil:
;as I nmore particularly showed your lordfhlip at .l'oulidcji.
our late nLeeting.

No. XI. (Vol. II.p. 1 9.)
ih'lc Scottiflh qlueen's offers upon the effiel of le:

liberty prolcnotlled by her ficrctary Naw, NT.
vctI!)ir 1 584.

-' . .
r 1-11' ue' n m mifircs lIeing once well afiired of "':

'. Willi

I. V'~l .i. decLirc: opli;l'l that flhe will (as it is finccrcie

,.! imt':mintL ) fItitll) to jo;; i nIt) o you;' nIajc.fty, .1d to the
i c to yield and: bear thi; chief hlonour a;td teljfc:t, be-
; :iit!l other kings_ and princcs '!n Chi ift'Lndom.

?. Sl:- will swear, anld. Protclit f)lcrmnly, a sincere for-

,*ctlildiicl of .ll wro(lngs which if]li r may prctenl to 1hac'
!. dii ltill unito hl r il this rc(:lint, !1Jd .v'ili IIcver, illn ny
!oi t joi r
.il;ir whietfb; vcr, llc':v Ut':!C(C' Ibr the in'1t.

S. 1Sil will i\u;w lll acklliwl(C!.: , Ias well in lIr own

;. :cu ir name, 1is allo for her hcir'-: ::,l others diC(icnli -
:;.g of her f(r eVter, your lnajcflty, {or jLift, true', and law-
ttl quecn of Enland.

4. A )

NI colni(lc!cntlt', will renounce, as well for herfcif,

.: tor her eit(l heirs, all rights and pretences which ihe
i, . c;lasin to the crown o(f 1';lglind, during your mljn;cit j .'
il-,; :uld oither )rejitlice.

5. .iSH will revle all
l acts ald s'hews, by' hcr hcrctO-

n(c Ind:idt, of pletentCl tO to this li! crownl to the p)rejudicc

(of ytiir rnljef , :lIs ,ii;!y bc the t;;kini (o the arnms and
!hl (,fl' f(e n (,'f .n;.l:ltl d, Iby the colei;lancdncilit of kinll
1- r;tis iher l.te lo d an l I liiflh:a nd.

ó. S'il will rinotince te liope's bInll for rs, ml'ch as

in:i\ be expoundled to turne in Iler f;tavoir, or for her be-
S!,,s)', t(oitl iji.ir the dc)ri.,';ttion of helr ni;:cftly, an i(l xv.'
'l':eliee t}l;l t jhe will lierer h:clp ;cd fiLrvc licrfI'lF v;l!t

1r.

Iv\' oll('n foice or ottl ('w;t:y'l ;.it]' ' ])il), l :k d'i t l':rt lion

,.l

: i: .le. li t fill c i'e(C !il)c : (tI i!;:- r1',.l , lo as fecClt .sJliir-
. !I lt' iVc ii llut her, or :;t the le:,lft prtbiick pronlilse,
1i.i,t 1') dccidinela thereof ftl ,,l eie a
n;;ld ill the preiIldlice o,

1h1, , o,1f ili kit!, Ihe r lin, dulitn i, your majciefy's life,

1,t .ille lirl r d(Cc;L'; ,

c ntil 1fcl, i tille as the ' hl.vc be:ce
!et'!rtl 1)1iert.u)ot, ill pub[ilick, fice, ;an1d (.lIcr,.; aflClllbly

ite )). Iri;tali cit ,t thle fee(.l realm .
:. ,S1lt: will ,not prtaclisP, dirceily or iidir(citl} , with

! ' (I o) l i;iJje ) 's,5 filj i

s, n ither wit hie nor out ot

''"'' It'.li , ;I n y tllil tcn.itlin to wa;r, civil or foreign,

'liiilt \'viur lln.ijclft' atd y).lur Cil;te, be it unider plreCtxt

' hli, ito , (i, lot r vil anl politick ev() Urnlmcent.

'J ) ll: will ,not ilint .iiti'i or fi)ipoit ty of your lib-

, ilcl.ci.I i .c bc
I a d oIiic i\'ited ul tre.ifuil Agi'llit

I. ' 2: 9,. SHE

o1. S IE will enter into the association, which wjl,

ihewed her at \Vinfticld for the fllurty of your majeItlv'
life, io as there be mended or riarht explicatcd Ionic
cl.lues, which I will shew to your Majelty, when I thall
have the copy thereof, as 1 have before time required.

I . SIE will not treat with foreign kings and princes,

for alvy war or trouble ;against this slate, and will renounce,
froln tis time, all enllrprites made or to be made in he;
fAvour for that clic ict.

12.. I" UR 'IHER MOI E, this realm beingr anliled by n', ,

civil or loreign war, flie will take part with y5our majctl,
anid v ill aflilt YoU il n yotlr defence with all her forces and
mteans, depending of herlelf and with all her friends of

13. ANI) to that efl'ec, for the mutual defence and

mnainteillance of your miajefly, and the two realms of tlii;
illc, f1le will enter with your niajefy in a league dcfcn-
1i;V, as shall be more particularly advified, and will p)(r-
fwadleas much as in her, the king her son to do the likU.

1'I-I : !cagues with al: parts abroad remaining firim, alid

eflpcic:ll v the antilent cleatgue between France and Scotland,
in tha t which h1all not be againit this present.

14. S;li will eniter into a league offiefivc, having ,ooJ

:;il;luraicc, or lecrct declaration and acknowledgement (
her right in tlie filcccflion of this crown, and proiil,
tlhit ha;ppenliing alny breach betwixt France and this rcilm,
(which the prayeth God never to happen) the jufti ;al1
of her dowry fh.ll be placed l r her in lands of the ieveliuic
of the crown.

5. FoR alluLrancc of her promises and covenants, h1lr

doth ofltr to abide herlelf in this realmn tor a certaini tinl,
(better hotage can fl e not give tlian her own perl.i
whichl, To ;s she be kept in the liberty here bcllre pre-
Ipoundetd, is Iot il cafel to eflape fecrctly out of this c(oin-
ti ', in tile lickly fate flie is in, and with the good o"it:
whiich youlr illajlly can take therein.

1if. ANI)D i ca;ie your majesty (0o agrlee to her full a1,

whole (IdivCrance, to retire herfiltf at her will out ft [!h'
realll, tlie si(id queenl of Scots she will give lufficicnt hll-
t:1ip fo'r Ifch timle as will be advised.

1 . Ii- I.lh abide in this realm], tlle will promise lot to

tll]part (out of it, witholt your licenc-e, i0 as it be 1l"
lrilecd ullto hie that lier Ilate, ill filch liberty as lii!l Ic
accorded Illtu hlcr, Ilsixll not be ill nlly lirt altere)d, i:le

;11tCI

aiftr tryall to have attempted agaiflt your life, or other
trouble of your efl:tc.

S1. I'l file go into Scotland, she will promise to altcr

nothinig ilere ill the religion o which is now t'll.d there-, ilh
tlilln liuffercd to h;ave frel- ccicif of hers, for hIr- a1nd
hI-r houfhold, as it was at her returln (ut oif 'lraIcc; and
ltulthr, to pull out every root of new division betweer the
inli)icts, that none of tilhe fhlljcs of Scotl.iad fhalll Ie
Iitted for his; confciencc, nor conitrained to go to the IcIrVice
o tile contrary religion.

i9. SHEi will granlt a;l ceral bolition of all ofl-nllccs

,!,ijc agnaiinf her in Scoil.ind, and thiiigs fl:!ll remaini tlhelre
.is they are at this p)lC'cnt, for the refpcCi, Liaviilg that
whliich li thl been (!olc aigin(th her honour, wliicl ilhe
iteanieth to h:ive revcked and annulled.

20. S!.E iViIl travel to fietlc a lilre and general recon-

cii.itimtt bitween the nobilitv of the country, and to caulfe
to i .. j;p')ited about the king her fol, and in his coun-
(ci, t,'!i as Ihall be fit for the eritertainment of the peace
a;t ; :t of the country, and the amity of the realm.

.' . SHE will do he r best to content your nimiajtty, in

fitit,.i ci the Scots lords banihcdl and refuged hither,
iiip': their due fubliltion to their priinces, and )your ma-
Itt'y's promise to aflift the said (iqueen and king of Scotland
;: iiilft them, if they happen to fall into their former
f iilts.

22. SH-. will procced to the marriage of the king her
son, with the -idvice alri ,ood council of your majelt'.

23. As Ihe will pats nothing without the king her lin),

fil doth ile dclilr tlhat he intervene conijointly with iher in
tiss tie;ity, for the greater and perlfeltr lllhiIrai there-
of'; j'r othirwilf any thirig can hardly be cftabliihcd to
')C funlid and continue.

'.4. 'I'1-l faidl Scotch lqueen truiletl), that the French

kiiil, her good brother, according to the good atfIcl ion
wlIich I.e hlath always hICewed hr, ad hOd ath been arlfrl

R,(tilied unto mce by Mons'. die Manifllieicre flr this tlid

t(It, ll r

will vey willingly intervene, and will aftllt her for

I't' Iill lIt of her- promilfs.

*'.5. AND ( will the princes of the honfe of ,orr;iln,

[hlh"witI,, thle will of the siid king, will bind thicmflUlves
III ll't rllit(o,

z6. I' OR other kings and princes of CliriClendon( , (eIC
will ailliy to obtain the like of tlicm, if lor geiclt(r ii-

L 1 3 lclunnity

Icmnity and approbation of tlh treaty it be found ta !t
1e'O I..11,i.

7' bS: doth desire a fpetedv anf:wcr, a: d fin.l eontrli
flon if the Itpreili's, to the cldl to lilect ill time with :t!i

A-N,. NID ill tile i'tl. tini, thle Ilmo to I!(liillicil t!],

slid treaty, :as mnclde v ler o(f ;11 pur ll. ;Il lran;k will, flre
drfircth thalt clemonhit liol be imade uoft lo rl'cl.aslenii;
(f her ciaptivity.

Oh'jertions againfl the Scotti lit queen, under Ic-
c;-ctary Wal';(inhan c's halnd, Novemllber 158 .
rT' 11 t1 queccn of Scnt s is ambiti;ous, and l fl.adcltl I,:

atit.c td to helr .:.jlc, and tierefore it calinot li
but th.!t her libcrtyfiiould bung peril unto her nm licily.

T'Frt.\ her Cel;arlremcent \wil aive coimfurt to p.lpilt. ;tio

other ill a;iFeted uhj!Ieis, and reat.lly advancel thle '';-
nion had of her title as ficcclibr.

THr-lT as long as flc fliall be cointinucl in hcr mii.-

icfl.'s spoi'e(lion, Ihe may aixe ;is it were a gae of t r.
'majcrly's (lircty, for that her friends, for fear of the d.iii-

eli flhc may be thrown into, in c( 1a, alny thilng flioilil 1,:
clone in her favour, dare not attemplt any thing ill tle u!-
'en:ce of hCIr imljcfly.

N W ha1t cotulrr were fit to be taken
November wilh the (Itucen of Scots, citlier

X 4' ( to be enlarged or not.

C, .. li b. -'EI'E course to be taken with the lid quecn nlla I'k
CJt. S. J confidered of il three dce vcs ; cither,

J. To continue lier under cullody in that (1;iat flic
now is.

2. To restrain her (of the priefcT)t liblrty lice now Ilo1.

). ( 1r to set lher at liberty upoCl caution.

I. T'OUCIIIN(; the fihfl, to contilinie her uinlltr

c 11(ls

ilb that Ilite t1ci now ls; it is to be confidered, tl.il tl:
pi nics that favLiour that queen, upol tile complaint I1}
inakt tli of h.lad ti, f c', lre gT rc.atly moved with coniiilll'i'
tlio( tlIIvl s lher, atld1 prol)lilec to do thei-r etidc.itvtiu 1'
her liberty, lor which purpoiet hIlr mijiillcitt fulicit t1t1:

.l
, 1i t'\

ANU'

A\N to move them the more to pity hler cafe, flc nc-

,l:]ji!:;eth them with her oflers maide to her majecfty,, which
.ni',lec,'ed to bc no slet profitable than r'lonlable ior her
'llijef y, i-) as tlh refusal and rcjctingl givtllh her friends
.ild '\vourres cause t think her hardly dealt withal, and
itcrelf ire may, with the better 'roiund and realoll, attemipt
[umoilewha!t fr the lettilrg of her it liberty.

1'r is ;l(o likely that the laid( queen, upon this rcfufil,

f;I]di:lg hler C:'! delperate, v'ill contille her lpr:lctice 11l-
d(i! h;nl, !;(.(t It holme and abroad, not onily io hr Lr di-
licrry, lbut to ntWIii t.) the pl t 'ict ipollcfili of this crown
;ipoi her pretended rtile, as tlil had hitherto done, as
.il) A:ir(.th, and is mnlt maniuti-f bIh letters and plots inter-
tcluied, and chicfl by that late alteration ot Scotland,
\hlichl hath proceeded altogether by her directinl, whcre-
!;x )

. Lri is ilid open for the malice of all her m::jcfty's

'ene'mies, to as it appc;lreth tha. this ianner ({; kccpiing
Ihr, with such mnimber of pcr(o;ns a1 sI c now liathl, and
with liberty to write and receive letters ( heinm dul v confli
Icred ), is oflcnfivc to the princes, the lalid queen's iriends;
r.ith er chargeable, than prolitable to hier mi-jclty ; anud l )b-
jcdt toall such praftices s nmay peril hier mjctl'y's pcrlon
(,r Itate, without any priovilion tir her nimjcliy' s itIcty,
:ind tihrefore no way to be liked of,

.. I OUCHIN( the second, to refrain hir in a more

lraihirter deL ree of the liberty ihe hath hitherto enjoyed.

Ir may at firlt fight, be thought a remedy very apt to

flop the courfc of the d.agerous )i-)ratiics lollered hereto-
lore by her: For, true it is, that this remiledy might prove
very profitable, if the realm ol Scotland ftootl in tli at fort
dv\otled to her iiajcfty, as few years pall it didt ; ;Ild if the
kiii , of that realmii were not likely, as well fOr tli e relc;le
's hiis notiier, as lor the advancement of both their Prn -
itld(led titles, to aittempt lomrewliat againll this realin and

ihTr n;ije(f, wherein he Iliould neither lick foreign as.-
lilt.llic, nor a; pI.ty here within this realm: 1But the
Lnll, anil that realm lHitanding ati(led as they do, this re-
I nr.llnt, initead of remedying, is likely to breed tlicle in-
(or1'.ntucncics 'ollowing:

'i 1ts'r, it will increale the oflernce bothi il himn, ai11d in

11wI c.ll ol the princes her fricnds that nlilliked lo hcr re-
1 lil lt,

L 1 4 SECONDLY,

SECONDLY, It will give them just cause to take lu!Ib
way of redress.

LASTLY, It is to be doubted, that it may provoke

sonic desperate ill-difpofedl pcrfon, all hope of her liberty
removed, to attempt loinewhat againlt her majelly's own
person (a matter above all others to be wtighed), which
inconveniency being duly confidered, it will appear mani-
ffitly, that the restraint, in a Itraighter degrece is likcly
to prove a remedy subjea to very hard events.

'I'HE latter degree, whether it were fit to set the said

tueen at liberty., minifireth Oime cause of doubt, touchiing
the manner ot the liberty, in what foit the fanme is to I(e
performed, whether to be continued here within the rcaeni,
'or to be restored into her own country.

BUT first, this prolxfition, bef:ore the particularities br
wveighed, Js to be conlidered in generality.

FOR it is very hard for a well-atc 'led fubjcc, that tcn-

dereth het majesty's furcty, and weigheth either the in;tue;
'f the Scottish queen, being incliened to ambition aiii
revenge, or her former acTions, what practices flie hai
.set onl foot most dangerous for her majesty and this reail,
to allow of her liberty, being not made acquainted with
fuchl causes, as time hath wrought, to make it iets pcni-
ous than it hath been, nor withi such cautions as may, in
fobnc fort, be deviscd to prevent both her ambition anid
plalice; and therefore, to imake this apparent,

I'r is to be confidered, that the danger that was in tih

mother, is now grown to be in the ion. He prctciidtil
the faime title the doth: Such as do a.er't her, both at
*homne and abroad, do affi:c6 himn (and he is the nmol
*dangerous for that he is unmarried, which may greatly
advance his fortune; and that he is a man, wlihecby Ihe
may enter into aifion iln his own perfrul) ; where fie is rc-
{Itrained, he is at liberty; his own realm is now allto,-
ther at his devotion, and the party afl'ccled to tlis clnwiI
ab;ased; fb as the matter duly confidered, neither her II-
berty nor rcftraint doth greatly alter the c;fc lfr p1cri'
towards her inajcfiy, uiilefs by fich promiles s rn; m1; [1,
nmade by way; of treaty with her, the (danger likely ( !, t'1
floin the king her tioM to lT i provided for.

HBur in this behalf it nmay be objtLcted, that so *Ioc11 :.

the mother remains in ler it:ijely's h;unds, tle kin^ \w'I
, ttlclmt nlothing for fear of hi.is nmuthcr's peril.

1r,

To this objection it may be answered, sirss, That they

ill)) that her majesty, being a prince of juflice, and in-
!iiced to mercy, will not punish the mother for the son's
ofiincc, unleEs fle (hall be found, by good proof, culpable.
Secondarily, That men will not be ovcr-hafty, confider-
ijlg in what predicament the king standeth touching his
,ce). cctatio.. of this crown, to advile any thing that in
::;e future may be dangerous to the giver of fucl council
.s nmayv iach to his mother's peril.

AND laftlV, the takingl away of his mother, he being

illong in the field through both foreign aliftanice, and a
pairty here within the realm, will appear so weak a remedy
(which may rather eXafpcratc both him, and her party, to
proceed with more courage and heat to revenge, if any
Ilch hard meaflre should be offered unto her), as thcy
will lfuppofc for the rcalbn above fpccificd, that no such
extremity will be uscd.

IJ' may allb be objecced, that the settin.g of her at li-

berty will greatly encourage the papilts both at home and
abroad ; but herein, if the provision be duly confidered,
liat may be made by parliament both here and there, they
Jh!:ll rather find cause of dilcomifort than otherrwic.

T' !I:-SE two doubts being resolvcd, and the perils that

was in the mother appearinlg mout manifestly to be seen
ml the flon accompanied with more danger, with due con-
lidcration had alof of fich remedies as may be provided for
the preventing of the dangers, that her liberty may ni -
nilicr jiif caule to douht of; there will be good cause of
holpe lound, that the fame will rather breed benefit than
pcrils.

Now it refleth, in what fort the said liberty filall be

I(lt'lilred ; it it flhll be thought meet she hlall be con-
tilnled within the realm with tome limitation, cfpecially

that lc plce where lihe now refidlth, the country round

;Ihr)it beiCi i so inftcied il religion as it is, it is greatly to
bI' doubted that will very much incrcafl the corruptiol,
; .ll l .ili, ;Iway in that behalf. lBelidesc, she should have
t(i)Imnodity, with much more calt, and speed, to entertain
I'rl.idtic-s within thlis 'ralim, than by being il her own
( Ollltl y.

lI abl)ro:t freely without limitation either in Scotland

'r l"rance, then shall her mIljelty lose the gages of her
l'.i't'!, then niall lce bc at hand to give advice in further-

anico

a ncc of fiich pral ices, as have been l;!idl for to flir troui;.
il this realm, wherein fle hath been ; prilncipal part'.

FtOR the lir,ir it is antlwtered )etore, that the ret;):

any per'ils that malv befal unto her, wii! il ii, I;)rt rclr!,,:i
her ofn. For the other, if it ie coilidcred] \\,h:lt h..rn
her advice will work unto herk!:!, ill refiect: of the ',,.
l.tiol of tihe treaty, ;iid the p'o iiitn th:t m;y b m,'.
in parliamentci hei, it i, to he thotulihr, that hle vwill t':.;,
lbe well advilfid, bi-ore Ilit attlmpt .lnvy

s Il1I tsllttte, whi :l

now ite inlay (io witholut perill. flihdces flcl prrilncC, ,
have interpofel tihcir faithi a1!dl romil' for hler, ct.!:i: !
with honour afliil iler, whel:'in the French kin 'i

V ,

he ftild v'erv forw.rd, who, inii iol frienil' ebrr,

m.or

lately rejecled all ielch reqiuelis, prolpo(ndied eit'ier

c .

her, or her ion's miniiters, thiat mi iht any way ouit',
lher m. ljcfl . An1l to conclludct, ftcin' i tlie catule iof i.;
,ric f f(alll be takeni away ; the Fieiich kiing 'r.itii'
who is a meclintor for her, and will mislike, that, 1 ;.
Spani h pratlicc, he Iliould he (ldawn to violate hcr L:': ,
that the rcil of the prin;ces flill lhave no ju il ca;l ' ii:
fetinc, hut lather to think hIonIurdahly of her injl; y c, -
lctirring the Scottifi (lqueen's carriai;re to:w rds her, v',i;
hath defeived nso way anly I'(l flhtvoir; thle noblenici '
Scotl;ind llill! be rcirored, vwho will le a cootl i.:' ,
lilch countlellc as nm;i\ tel:(t to the troluh lil:il of thi,- r.:
rfpcciall!y having so good :; grouind of warraiit as t'e j'.. -
lim.:lict to il;ad 1unto; tihe chareCS ;llnd peiills wi a 1:.
pr:dI!tices milit halve bred to tls- realmli fni:-l be av;\iild;
and la;ly, tlhe hope of the papilts fliall be takeln awa, I'v
itc:ll good provif(ios, as in both the l-;allis 1m;\; 1h' 11.
whlre hby the perills tihat Illilht fall into her m:t1; f1\" ,'r':,
perlon,' (a matter of' all others to lie weighed) flh.il !'
avoidcdi, when l he thle chnliie that n1i.!\ !'r(o\v I ;:1!' I;.':
wicked id

a luntoVdl)' pradlic, thely llall fee the:ir cit. :'

way relieved ill pint of religion.
leanfons to induce her ,alaiely to Il-occcd itl t,

treaty under Secretary \\'a;lillgiiial's; Illani.
Cri. L:. ' -A'I' FA ich plots ;as have' of l.t'e 'vears blielt t!i;;

CmI '. , J[ (telmilit te
t riloubl e wliithin this lii'ti,,h

have grown Ii oni tile Scots (qttetll's iinlifleis, atillt uli :-
cis, not withuut lier allowaince antl feck.i; VOr,

' '
I !

I' IIA the means used by the said ministers, to itnduc

! ilccs to give car to the said plots, is principally ground-
J up11on some commiseration had of their rcftraint.
'TlflvA the flay, why the said plots have not been put
ii c::rcutiion, hath proceeded, ; or that the laid pnrilces
:,:,, tor the moit part, been cntcrltaincd with home and
n,iuii{ick troubles.
'i'Fl:x' it is gicatly to be doubted, that now their

:',.lli' i

bCjin to be quiet, that fonil:what will be attempted
,l helr favours by the said prilices.

'TI A T it is alio to be doubted, that foirc.lhat ni.av be
:.i.m ptcd by some of her filtors ill an; c-t;; .rdiiar lort,
', lhr pe.rill of her majefly.

'IIIAT for the I rcicri'vatiop I t!:crcof, it fliall I cin'.'c-

i,.iii tior her majelty to prOtil *, lc {i::.! lii:

i ot the

l';,i:t, not long fithlcnce begull betcween her and the slid
; ii.'Cl,

No. XII. (Vol. II. p. 129.)

Letter of Q< Mary to Q. Elizabeth.

\tadaime ma bonne Scur,
/ '"'Afllurant que vous avc'z ei ccrTimunicit .,n l(iiii c,,,t.T r,.

1M 't Ilettre de Gray ue '(ic)re hommie Senr s il 'c livr l. .
hlit r fuhz, Ic nom tie mon filz y recongnoil:int quali de v 1 I'''
nilt a; la mot Icls meflins raifolbs lque c(l it G(ray m'efclivit ,I,, r
cn chiltie cfl'ant dernicrcment prs vos

d dclmonltrliant la n.i!.

Illiillice L& bonic intention dcu personage je vous pricray
ituiileiict fl ivait cc qu e li dcvant je vous ay tant inftan-
liiitcit iiiporturnl l ue vous inc petrmetticz dlfcilaircir li-
t lcmcnt & onvertemcnt cc point de 1'aflbciation d'cntre
nm moi n (filz. & me dcfier Is nimains pour proccder avc
lUi ii' cIlmle jC jinccay ClrC rCqLuis l)our son bien & le
icli. It j 'eltrclprelidz (niqoi que 1l'o vous die &c uific
:11 r ulli rter dt firc Inlctir cc petit bruillon qui persuade
I'r.' liiS n c

s de vo s

micifires a crterpris cctte fpclaration

te 'iic ilo, n 1on enlfant, 9& Iour y commencer jc vous
il'lii'e I'ot'troyer (lui je puiile parler a cc jultice clerk
'iil \'iiis a cfic llouivllcllicm t cnvoyc p iur rmander par luy

o
10 lilz 11n11 intention slur cela, cc qui je me promis qul
i: 1.1 rcfuicrcz, quant cc ne fcroit que pour demontrer
':11 cllucl la bonuic intllntion quc vous nm'avcz alleurce

;uvoir

avoir a l'accord & cntretien de naturel devoir entre la mc'r:
& l'enfant qui dit en bonnes ternes eftre cmpelche pot:
vous me tenant captive en un desert ce que vous nie pourrc/.
mieux defmcntir & faire paroitre voftre bon defir a lintli
union que me dormant les moyens d'y proceder, & nri,
m'en retenir & empefcher comme aucune de vos nii!:l
tres pretcndcnt a fin de laifor toujours lieu a Icur mnau;vati
& finifires praEliques entre nous. La lettre porte que l'a(
fociation n'est pas paflce, auffi ne luy ai je jamais dit, bicn:-
quc mon filz avoit acceptd ; & que nous en avions comne-
nu entcmble, conmme l'acle figndc de a main, & ces lcttrri
tant a mnoy, que en France cn font soy, ayant donnec ,
,neme temoignage de fa bouche propre a plufieurs ambafin;
.dcurs & perfonnes de credit, s'excufant de ne l'oser faii:
publier par craint de vous feulement, demandant forcec
pour vous resister d'avant de ce declarer si ouvertement
cftant journellement persuade au contraire par vos minlii
tres qui luy prometoyent avecqu uline entreire a Yorck
le faire declarer votre hereticr. Au surplus Madame quaind
rnon enfant feroit si malheureux que de s'opiniaftrr c!n
cctte extreme impietc & ingratitude vers moy, jc ne pii:
penser que vous non plus qu'aucuni aultre prince dec Li
Chrctientd le vouliffiez eu cela applaudir ou mcilnitiil
pour luy fayre acqucrir ma maledidlion ains que pluton
:,Itriviacndrcz pour luy faire recongnoitre la raifn'1 trp1
julle & evidant devant Dieu & los hommes. Helas & cii-
cores ne luy vouloicr j'cn ofter, mays donner avcc droit
ce qu'il tient par usurpation. Je me fuis du tout commiilc.
vous, & fidelement faites si il vous pleft que jc ne en I!vc
pis qu'aupravant, & que I faullite des uns lie prevaile dll-
vant la verite vcrs vous, pour bien rcccvant nial, & li
plus grandc affliction que me fcaurroit arrivcr a fcavoil 1i
perte de mon fils. Je vous fi)pplie dte nc manldcr ci c.
qu'il perfillc en cette m'clconnoi c

llailnct de ;) evoir, (IIC

dc luy ou de moy il vous plainl advoucr our o Icittimrc It
ou royne d*' Icolic, & Ii vous aves agrc dc 1o IIIurhailclE
avc( mov a I1part la traitt; commi ncc entre lnus de (]iql)' jC
vous requicrs fa;ls plus attendre de( relpoinlf de cc i(1d
gouvcriln eCnfl;,t v!(is cn reqllcrralnt avcc autlantit ('.,iflc-
tion (qluc je fCiens mlon ccmnII opicll d'enlu.y. I'our I)icu
LbluvlciicI vnus do la prolmncell (lIC Int'av'z fiilc,, d(Ie 11
prelnlre cn votre protchtion mnic rIlportillt de tout a voi",
it fur cc prianl. I)ie(iqu'il vous vicille prelercle tout
';o06 nncIICInys &. dillimulci. anlys, commnije jc I lire (d CII'

collJL~:

cnfoler & de me venger de cculz qui pourchailcilt un tel
mnalhcur entre la mere & I'cnfant. ,c celtcray de vous
troubler, mais non a m'ennuier que je lie recoive quclique
conliolation de vnus & de l)ieu encore tin coup je ]e leult
r,ic de vous garder de tout peril. Futhbery Xli Mlar-.

Votre fdclelmcnt volec lfuiir

& obcifillt coufinc,

A R I J

1 -

A la rev'ne d'AL\nlttcrre
iad;;imc ma bonne lIe;u
.' otdiiCe.

No. XII1. (Vol. II. p. 13o )

A Tefiamtent by Qt Mary.
N. B. Thle following paper was tranifcribed by tile revd. (ot;, 1...

Mr. Crawford late rcgius profcflbr of church hiltory vtet,.,
in the university of Edinburgh. Part of this paper, p.,,^
according to him, is written by Nauc, Mary's ficrc-
tary, the reft with the queen's own hand. What is
marked " i.z in the qluccn's hand.

COnfiderant par ma condition prefente l'cflat de vic

\, lhimalie, ti incertain, qcl perfolllle lnc s'ci pcult,

,iu doibt afleurcr, flinon I;IlI s la grande et infinic ini-
'i.corde dc c Iieu. K It me votiant prevaloir d'icclle contlc
tuliis cs idangers ct ac cideiis, clui nic lourroilnt iinlopiiie-
mcint liirvcnir ci cette captivite, Incinms a cauile des grandcs
et IloIItrs mnal adies, ou j;'a cttd t ctclluc julfqucs a prcrcnt;
I iy ,ldvilc tanidis (Iic j;t'y la comnimoditc, on raifoin en ju-
;''iclelnt, de piorvoir apres in:i mort a1;1 ilt dt mon anim,
c'ilt'rreilticiit de noun corp's ct dilipol;ti(n ll c

i 11n l bicn,

'l{L, t, & :H'aircpar cc lprI'lt 11011 tclla:mcnt ct ordon-
ii:ce dio muon dernier volo)in', (tuii s'enliyt.

Au lnom dlu l'cc, d(u l'ilz, ct du benoitc S'. I'lirit.

I iclnieTrcIlcnt, IIle rcconllloiflaitt indigle pecherecli avCC
I'll' d'oltillccs 'lcnvcs 1oii )1 icu, (quc d (IC tistildion pai
{"tle s Ios ]t IVe lLtcs qilc j'ay fouiflcrt; dont je la loutc si
nuntc. J ntiii'app)tivit luir la croix dte won Saivetur ct Re-
'ItltcuIr Jcfus C'li il. Jc l'cconiOiid 1e111LL ami a lt he-

nloi lt

! :-!t'e ct iniividue Triite, et aux prieres de la glorie,,'.
Vic;', ic iiaric, et de tonis s Ics angcs fainlts & f.inittes (:
pi;,r;.ii, sclperalnt par lcur meites et tintcrccflion, eltre avdci
a neb'ziiir de cicre fai;ec participante avee culx de felici't
t.-ri)' ,. I'.t pour m')y acheminer dc cueur plus inet t
<ti ;.ir delpouil l.nt de es; ;rlcicnt tout reficntinleint Jcs ii:-
ul!, ealon nies, rcb( !ioils, et aultres ofFlcnfes, qui rle
p: l'roiic!t .'voir cer Iac.ts dLuranlt ma vie, par nies t'lu;!
r.lcll,:- ct aul.;rcs ciicnuemis; J'cn retriet la veu c'u'c.
)iu :, '& Ie ic )i,lie Icur pIarilonnlerl de mcrme atef c' :it ,

1[,!Cj hC)'rlus

r pcii ars

p a mcs faultes, et a tons ca::;.

.tcilIs utiue jc puis avoir uflciife de fai(ts ou de paro' !-.

I vr'.'ux (t oi-lonne, &c. [T7,e twa fo/slluig pr'iari-. ,
. .:',dii

. 5','s.'i ,.'.:s csil;/' i:c,: ; -.'. place ail d circunlat cus ,'I
,r/,:/!. .
I'(i:' rce contrc'Vcnir a 1:1 gloirc, honneur, et con f?.:..

iinl tic i'L',"lilit catholiqlue, apolilolique ct Ron; linl-, c:!
t.liclc 'i vc'i:: v ivrc et inourir, file prince d'Efctoili m :
i:7. y uei'tf ctic reduiet contre la miauvaifc nourriteu!:,
(ju'il a prifl a mon tres grand regret en 'rnerefie de Ci.,:i
Celtre nir's rebelles, jc Ie laifie feul et unique hcritier .
nmn ruyaun e d'ELfcoilc, de droict que je pjretenec j:li.-
neiit cin a la couroiiie d'Angleterre et pays (lu i ei dt;-,:l-
dceit, ct cencrallcmenit ie toes ct chacun mcs meubli, t
i iiic ullcs iqui ret'tronit apres ma mort, ct executio;l c.
cc iprIicilt tcilament.

Si nl!u, et (ile mon dit fil. continue a vivrc en la liiY

hecicli', ct cede, traiifportc, et faicce don ' lde ttouiS t
"' C!hiacuIs l1euS droilis, qtle j'c pretende & puis prtcniC!:L
" a li couronine d'Aniilcelrre, ct aultres droicts, Ic-.

,iitriei('s, ou r(yailtiics en d(tpc)ndallint, an to) catholli:;,
i' ntl alltrc ti liens qu(I il lu)' pla:ira, avCefues advis, cil!-

*' ciitttin't de (l si l intet ; t:it pour IC voyr atjouitl '.
,i; .. ll'ul Icurs iapipuli de la rejliion catlioliqlue, iutc l1':
*' rccoliiliiiillnl)cc de gratuitcs laveurs quc moy, ct Icts Ii:l.
" rcLolllniallildcz par iloy, ont avons reccu dec !ily el 1-

I ilus wi:ndc nccefllitd ; ut rctliiard aulli au oict ii ':,t
i' lt! n(:l'inc pent prlCetc(drle a c s di.z loyau;litls ct I1

t jc ll i, i>liillc (Itl'Cll recollnll)lct il prcign alliaince, i' 'U
t" l i
ti o dc I. m raiiie, ct (i il cc ileut dc cclle dc (;ii:,1

poiii r inctnioire de la race de laquellc jc luis lirtlc
'" ' ,1lc di MIel, nl'a ay)'at dc celuy dc 111011 p'r, '

mni'i e stiil cinfillt, lqucl Il.alllt Catholiquc j.)' ti.t''

'1

" vou: pour une de fcs fil'cs, si 11 iln), plaiftit de Il'.,tocp-
( tcr, ou faillant unc de fcs iiclpccs mairice cc mmie li t illc.

' !jc layfli non

t filz a la:1 ,rotcctioin (d rouy, cd prinlce,

e"t duCes de ,Irravne ct dC (;Gui(, et d(

ilayne, mxt

ciuoz, je rcco(rltllcllde ct fun eflat Ce l' iCcoll', ct miol!
(dr:'oi eCn AiryllctcrrIc, 1 il el :

ct.lKhi';(,l:lC, ct quclle )i:

; .iilie ilc ccfft ro','rc."

Jc ti.lit, don an "' comptL doe L'.nix' dl comte de Lc-

:,>x tCilii pi.t i1'c li)n pcti', ct Coililll.tii' 1)on liitz, COluilnle
:(-;:,I hli ctict r cIt iccci. lciiI d('o cy: - ii cclt cnl droit a inoiI

('l))III C .

L Ii 1

t k

J: vcul;X Ct ordo!:nC toutCss lcs om:llS ct dceiiers, qui Ic

','vcOrsllt [):'par moI s d!CUes, IiCn inii, cCiic dc droict cftre
:.:its :a Loi)liic!-" etrc pronipte'niciit pa yec Ct acquittes,
t tout tort et -rl;' rcpaI us 1)'r Icldits cxccuteurs dclqutl,.

ci o chlarg la confcicCice. ()Ultre, &C. [F]c/w7 tz'O Gi

r,,'c /.,: : ,;'./ ' '.

, v:.; ,iot'',: p/;)'tioltul' /,ys^ cs, 7an theu is
,";." ;' 1ait ilau ila; ir i bhlctk'ld en Anlgieterre 1c jou-

-:,: ·i il cuinq s foixant & dix l'pt.

4'ft'r a .larg Il/an.i pr? fhi' w'ns in tl' q;ucn's hand:

" Si mon filz mcurt, au comte tde Lenox, an Claude
' a;lnilton lIquel e montrcra Ic plus fid ltllu vers Inoy, ct
:' l'lls ronlt:lilt Cen rcliion, u1i j uclmllt ic - -- )tcs ti
' ;.li ,. .inc et tic (Gui cIl, ouI j Ic ;l apl urt liur cede cculx a
til: j 'a(ra;y dlonnav Ic ch;are dc traytcr :i'eftluie eux d(t
p' !.II Ino\V ct cculx, ;i coii(iiton idc cc i. liriicl on allior Cn
.'.1 ilte iaylbn l iU parurcur adlvis."

]'"//:l :,'car t7ear ptnj s r(.s'

, ;:'/."'.,,/,1) /erac .

"' lt Ic IremIlC; mla (:ate di(l .IcnI a, dr.l',it quelle pICu,

' irctcn(lre a la contc d'A/\n rou ava;:llt l'.Ici't ;l ait par 11I111
t" t'1Ill llidnl licilt Clltrc I11.1 ditc tiullu (.: I.Cell X ct It

(olitc dc 1M0lItoll, VCu (i 1il a ( it I lit c': p.|ti ICc fu roy
't 11i Mlary ('t mo, lur l I: p1)ro1inc1 d it( fidolle affilf -

alice, Ii luy ct ll)oy CilcoiiL il)liS d(tll'ilrl C: bcfogi d(';iydct,
'c' (Ii'il rollpit, s'clntclacii iJt crctcnliiut iln Ics (is rI-
i' litis rChCllCs, iU' attelrntpricnl Co:intrlc .i \ i', ct p,)iit
' IL ( clf-l' ilis Ics a 1rm cs, (t (lit p)(rl t' Ic¢s t;lli crc

I lt r-

|' [))ieCt;s, C Itc 1c 's,

jc : mV'0ic :lli

t)t ih l a; trc dl)ol

't'11 jc luy ay fait de COltUI d( .\Mloitn (fur promn'lles
",', l's bons liVi' ice, '.t'i;r,
r .t cii(ieid: '1"' la ditc

*, ({.'()ui

" Cont( foit rcunie a la couronne, si ell fe trouve y ,l--
" tnir, comme fes trahifons tant en la mort de mon ~;,
" Mary, que en mon baniltement, ct pourfuit de !a niH.
' ne 1'ont merite. Et defends a mon filz de cc jai-a t' c11-
6 vire de luy pour de luy pour la hnyne qu'il aye ;a Irs p:I-
"' rents, la quelle je crains lie s'cfteende jufqucs a luv, i.
'' connoillant du tout afl'cctioinni aullx cnnemis de iloin
" droite en ce royaume, du quel il eft pcnconnairc.

" Je recomnende mon nepveu Francois Stuart a Io!,

" filz, ct luy commandc dcctenir prcs de luy ct s' cncr:'.
" ct jc luy laiiTe le bien du conte dc Boduel Ion oncli,

o4 en rcfpia qu'il eft de mon fang, mon hllieul, ct 11,..
'- celt laifie en lutelle par son pere.

" Je declare que mon frere baflard Robert Abbc de St
Croix !n'a en que par circonvcntion Orkcnay, et q'"j k
4 noe fut jamays mon intention, comme il aptfr p;:r l;i lc-
c' vocation que j'ay fayi' depuys, et etc anuli

1 :itc l':iv.ii;;

'' la alde de xxv. ans, ce que j'aimois dcilibc-rr i iil :,
C" m'eulelint prenncr par prison de fe dc defayre aulx t .! .t
"je vculx done que Orkenay foit rcunc a la cooilroll;'
" commc une de plus neceflaircs pour mon filz, ' i:!ar
( mayfon ne pourra etre bien tcnue.

-" Lc filles de Morra ne parvicnt accefii heriter, :cl- '

.' revient la conte a la Couronne, ti il luy pleft lu v ,l,
' ner fa ou fille en marriafge, ct il Ionic l'cl eni. 1!

No. XIV. (Vol... II. . 4.)
A etter from Mr. Archibald Douglas to rlh (iticc

of Scots.

Air;:-- D ,LKA.SE your majefly, I received yoni letter (l
H.,I. 1 .:'!. (lite the 12xth of Nov. and in like millncrr ha: 1li:
o,',. t0' fomce part of the contents of one other of the si( 1nc (1.!''.

dirc(tedc to Mons. de Movifir, anmlaflaldor for his lict!'.
the moll Chrifian king, both which :are ;irc(.llc to v('o
Iirincely diglnity, as by the one your highlllins dcfirtn 11
know tie true caufl of my hanifllmnit, alind oftcrr, tril,, "'
:all f.ivour if I niould ie innocent of the hcinlno t.1 ts l::'
Inltted in the person of your hufb;ind of goodi nu[llicr,' '
ly the other the fliid almbaf(ldor is willed to dccl:lire :.
raw, it your hulband's murder couldl be ,aid jutifv :'v;'

., that you could not follicit in my cause, neither yet for
:,iy person that was participant of that execrable tadt,
Ibit would icck tile revenge thereof, when you should
have any meanl to do it; your lmajcfty's oficr, if I be iln-
niccut of that crime, is most favourable, and your de-
liic to k:now the truth of the fame is mofl equitable; and
therefire that I should with all my simplicity, finccrity and
iruth ;anfl;r tliereunto is most reasonable, to the end that
,our princcly dignity may be my help, if my innocence

.lill f'uflciently appear, and procure my condemnation,
.i I be culpable in any matter, except in the knowledge of

e!; cvil difpiofed minds of the most part of your nobility
. :iit vour said husband, and not revealing of it; which I
111 lihured was ilifficiently known to himself, and to all that
i;. d jtudgment never so little in that realm ; which also I
iv.! coi)flr.!in':d to undcrfland, as lie, that was specially
irl,),iocd betwixt the earl Morton, and a good number
1l, !your nobility, that they might with all humility inter-
'ilec ;:t your ni.jCefly's hand for his rclief, in such matters
.,i l!e more pccially contained in the declaration follow-
iiir, which I am conlfirained for my own fjltification, by
thi' letter to call to your majesty's remembrance. Not-
ivitlifl:itditin that 1 am afiilrcd, to my grief, the reading
thereof will not finally ofliend your princely mind. It
ii;l e I;cafc your majesty to remember, that in tile year of
(o;! I 566, the iaid earl of Morton, with divers other
;,'.i!tv atd g(ent. were declared rebels to your mnajefty,
:l Iliinifhed your realm for insolent murder committed
;! your mnije(ly's own chamber, which they alledclcd was
lilnc by commland of your huffland, who inotwitllaniidiii
'iirnlcdl thait he was compelled bh)! thle to fibfcribhe tli

1

-.: r:!'nt ix c fur that c flcrt, hoxvloever the truth of that
,..t; r remailis an on^ln them ; it al)pertaiuls not to me
1t i;is timel to lbe clrious; true it is that 1 was one of that
;llllr,:er, that hleavily of.ll'ec(ld again;t y'r oi;majft, and
1il 1t ilnto l'r;nce the tinme of our baniilinlent, at the de-
'i' ,I tlic lcit, t() hmiollly pray your brother the Molt
t 'ir ,lin t1-:; ins to intercede th;lt our oust 'nccc mighlt be p;;r-
'! '"'I, aniid lour inajelt's remency extended toward us,

d''it divers of no finall reputation, in that realm, was

'"l'. li oil,)n, tliat the flaidl fa} mcitcd neither to be re-
"''te for, nor yet pardoned. Alwavs li'clh was the care-
'1 iiimld of his majcfty towards the q(l;ictincls of that realm,
':t tilt: Icalinl In that calfe was committed t. Mo. s'.

k i. I I. .lM m, de

de lMovifr, who was (lirected at that time to go into Scn,
land, to congratulate the happy birth of you- ion, v\:.
Almnig :vt G( d of his goacdncf s may long prcetrve in h:lia,,
eliate anid perpctual felicity; the caretil travail of thr. lai l
de Mlovinii w:i fb effiCtuial, and your majeiy's mind in,
inlclind to mercy, that within fl]ort space thcrcafte,
wvas Fl:rmiitted to repair in Scotland, to decal with e;,l>
Murray, Athol, Bodvil, Arguilc, and fccretary Lcdliii.
ton, in the name and behalf of the said earl Mnorton, Iori,
Revcn, Lindsay, and rcmanent complelis, that they nmiiht
make offer in the names of the said carl, of any matter tha.
might satisfy your majcfty's wrath, and procure your cle-
mency to be extended in their favours; at my comlin tu
them, after 1 had opened the cfiect of my mefl'ahe, iin(
declared that the marriage betwixt you and your hull;aiil
had been the occasion already of great evil in that realm,
and if your hrnan fould

h be fc ffer-ed to follow the ap-

petite and mind of such as .was about him, that kind of
dealing might produce with time worfk effcts; for help-
ing of fucl inconvenience that might fall out by that kiid
of dealing, they had thought it convenient to join thcm-
selves in league and band with some other noblemen, rc-
solved to obey your majefly as their natural foverci il, aiil
have nothing to do with your husband's command whatlb-
ever, if the said earl would for himself entcr into that band
and confederacy with them, they could be content to
humbly requelt and travel by all means with your m;ijcfi
for his pardon, but before they could any farther proceed,
they desircd to know the fiail carl's mind herein; when 1
had answercd, that he nor his friends, at my departuic,
could not know that any such like matter would be pro-
ponit, and therefore was not iniitruited what to anifwIr
thercin, they desircd that 1 should return iuflicientlv in-
ftrudited in this matter to Sterling, before the baptif llt :
your ton, whom (God niglit prefrvc; this nicfl;ae wi.
taithfully delivered to me ;it Ncwcafile in ':nlantd, I\llitc
the said carl then remailned, iln presence of his Iricmlls lil
co(,mpl;ll, wilere they all condfc(clnded to have no (.11
thlr ideal;i)g with y)our )illb;ind, and to enter into i(l'
liald band. With this deli berationl I returned to Ster-
lint , where at tile jqcue(t of the moss Chriifl ian Kiin ail'd
the i(lecen's nmajefly of' :ngland by their anlb;lliidols I)|'-
fcnt, )our majesty's gracious p)ardtin was granted unito tlli'1
all, inlder condition always thilt they fioulld jcil;lail tanfl

t cJ

:,i forth of the realm, the Cpace of two years, and f;irther
,!!,ri] your niajcfty's pleasure, which limitation was after
mitigated at the humble rcquiiefl of your own nobility, fb
t:it iniediately after the said earl of M'lorton repaireil in-
ie Scotland to Quhittingaiie, where the earl of Bodvell
,:;p! ficrctary Ledington come to him ; Vwhat i)'ech paflcd
'! ;i-c ;ulonitgf them-, as God fial ihe my judge, I knew
,;thiniig at that tire, but at their departure I was request-

hj 1ir the slid earl Ml'orton to accompany the earl B1od-
'J .i d fecretart to l.(derburgh, and to return with fucl
.:!:'cr as they huould obtain of your majesty, which be-
.!;r given to me by the said persons, as God fliall be my
:iidjc, was no other than thcfe words, " Schaw to the

(carl Morton that the queen will hear no fpcch of that
matter appointed uito him ;" when I crafit that the

.ll.L'or Illig.lit be made more fcnfible, fccretary Ledington
l.il, that the earl would fuficiently understand it, albeit
ewM or noneI at that time underfrand what paflcd amongst
them. It is known to all men, als veill be railliing let-
ti>:: paflcd betwixt the said earl and Ledington when they
i'ecoime in divers factions, as also ane buck set furtht by
the miniifters wherein they affirm that the earl of 1\or-
tnni has confeflid to them, before his death, that the earl
}ledvcll come to Qilhittingainme to prepon the calliln
.t.v';, off the kingc your hufland, to the which propofi-
ti'ii the Laid earl of MIorton affirms that he could give no
*mltivcr unto such time lie niight know your iajeflty's
nimtl therein, which he never received. As to the abo-
,iiil;lu)l murder, it is known too by the dcepofitions of
1! i.\' p1ers.)is that were executed to the death for the coin-
1tlillii ,; thereof, that the 1ime was executed by then, and
;1t the comallllnd of fucb1 of the nolility, as hiad fubfcrivit

1.,1r lo, that Cfl'ect; by this unpleafallt declaha-;tion, the

'1l't par.lt t}hcrtof knlvow to yourlftt, alnd the rci;aiinldcl
":!' le underllood by the Ivalrefaid witneflts tlhat was cx-
lltiitil ill torture, and that are extant in tlie cifloCdy
itl lc Olrdini:ly judges in bScotland, iimy innoceCicy ) star as
'!1n.ly ( olcLrn ;anly t'i't does a:l'pear lflinciently to your ia-
Il,. A mii as fl' mly dealing aforelfid, I can be no other-
\'iic c'l.lired ilterein, but as what would accule tlie vcflcl
':.l prefI'cTlvc tlhe vine fronm harm, for thei iliemnperanccy

iln. :as inimoderately liIe thle famne. As for the L)e'-

i.lI c;ulc olf my balllifllllent, I thillil the ilfme has pro-
'"'lc l upoii ;lic olpilion conceived, that 1 was able to ac-

1M in 2 cuTe

cufe the carl of MIorton of so much matter as they a'ici:,
himifel to have con!:l-fiiCd before h dlied, anid would 1,
he induced, tor lo:s (t rclit.;ti l, to pelformll :nv p,:;
thireof. It thi hib the occ,.:i )i of my tr;n bly , ais I l;is
po; t i, wh.t

i punifimcllt 1 liouIld dcllef\' I remit il

to 'nur majelily's bet'cr jud!z(ilc it, wlo well klows ii:
c:;ri(l e'.cr ilk enteknilli ihould he of his slime, r CI'.l.
tion11 honour, iiarid how far ever' ilk manlh ihould .hih.:
the n.ime of a pultroun, and how indecent it wIult
ihave blcln to nme to ;i'clli' the carl of MIrton, beinl l,
nclir of hi., kin, notwitihf;iidinlil all the inljuries I w.="
Coliilrainell to receive .l ihis h1.in all the time of his :o
vcliment, iand for no other c.lnlc, htil for ihewinig of p).-
ticular fricil(ldfip to I.:ilticil.lr fricilds in the time of t..
illt cruel troules ill Scotl.nd. Sorry I he now to :;ccu'l;
him in l any matter bcilng dead, and more lorry that bci:'i;
on l yft; be fiuch kiid of dcaliig obtnincl thait 1ia;11 i
Ingrate. Always for my own part 1 have lbeen hnlihllit
nmy native country those three years and four montlis, in-
ing in anxiety of mindi, my holl guds in Scotland, whilc:
were not finall, intermittit and difprofit upon, and hi:
continually fincc the time I was relieved outt of niv l .ii
troubles at the dcfire of lonsr. dc I\'ovisir, att(ciidi to
know your m;ijcfly's npl

caire, alnd to wait upIon \it'

service it should plcafi your majcfly for to cormanidi. Up-
on the 8lh of April init. your good friend ccrctarv \\;il-
fingliamc has declared unto me, that her higlincfs tho:
it expedient that I should retire myCfelf where I piea;fid, I
declaredl untlo hiii 1 hIha no nicans wher by I might p)rliltn:
tliat desire, till fucli timie as I should receive it from vlur
ma;jcfy Neither knew I where it would ple as youir Ii;!
nefls to direct me, unitil fulch time as I should have r'cclk(r
further inflormiation froni )you. Upon this occafiol, ilr:
partly by p'remilion, I have taken tlhe hardrcls to \w:i'
this present letter, whereby your Ill;ijCy Il.iV\ undIrl!lIJr
.1ll, part of miv tlouhliles p.ill, and li.:lt })IcI('t. A\ li
il]\ inll te l tio siit'lL, I will lieveLr d ll)' that 1 :nil lull)' r'
i(.',el to ' tilt' irctt of mliy dayi's in your iitl.1sc'l l'
vie, .nld the ki i?-, 'our soln's, whieiefocver 1 ll:,:ll

(I" t-

r(ct ed 1by yolr lilaj'lly, ;lnd for the lbettr 'l' 1)21t::' !'
lI-crent, if sIo thall he her l;njeflv's ulc.luic, te, I .' :
llmli the tly.l of' lily illiloconie)', and c\.iiiil;tl'ull i ,
r (ly), ol tihe prectding narration, to tile kiw y;1, I
with rCeiueil that 1 may be Ip.uidoiId fOr uucli (ftlici

.'.'1 C '.' "

-c:iiccrnle your majeny's sIrvice, and var common to a!l
;n,:n th time of hi:; k]s aisc and perdonit to all, except to
o 1, I hould he the hearer thereof mlyfell, and be directed
in w\-llttfhever fiervice it fllould plea;l your majefly for to
cuiman::d. Molt 1humllce I hefic-ech your mlajleit to con-
iL'; hereof, and to Ic to I racious as to rive order, that
i In1! imavCe nIealln to IIrve your nm:jecff accord(linl to the
i;]L'erity )of m mmeaniiny, and io expectini your Ilmaje!y 's
;lu\ncr, after the kI;lin-, yiour hand with all huniilit)y [
:Ac Ilavce from lolun.

No. XV. (Vol. II. p. 15 .)

A Ictrer from Sir Arnias Pawlet.

,r R,
i)Ji forbear, :acolrdirg to lour dirc;ionl finifiud iln Ori;;n Cat.

!our letters or t;iC tooi th oi this 'reli1 t, to p)!occed to c, 9.

the execution of the contents us N1r. \\'a.:Je's lctt':!s nll-
to you, for the difperling of this lady's uitnecellar\ tbr-
rn.ts, atd fur the ie;aing of her money, wherlin i was
0old to write unto you my fiTple opinion (;iltlhouil il
v.1in as it now fllletlh out), by mv letters of the -ith of
tnis inflant, which 1 douht not are with vou hbefre this
tune; but upon the receipt of your letters of the 5r!i
Whlt'h Camlle lot tillto mv hands untill the Slh in the eve:t-
i:1, b, re.otll, as did appear by indortbmllt. tha!:!t they
hi.il becr l ififtaken, and were flent hack to \Xindllo, :lrter
lhyv were entered in to the way toward, ile, 1i c'onfidel r-
r,, that being :wccolmnied onily by 1' own fIrvllts, it

tlhIt be tlou llit ti at they would he ilntrated to fit)' as 1
W'(,1I co malllll:iil tliin, ;llid therefore I tlhotl:llt good,

ti'r 11nY bettelr dlii ar e ill tliefit: oi')' mattCr, t l' to cr.'

I11h .li 1(nce of' Mr. RIichard :laggo, who relmairlIg tIi-
it r'L the ni \t mlolriillg, we ,1hadl acces to to li s ili<.nll,
v.'tl ll we f IoiI

I il. llher l d, totiruled tiler the old 11m.,il-

:, llh .a d'il'ixiol, whl iclI was !allctn dinw into thle ,lde

,I ite k, and lits lbeu t 1

hh er ol the itle { ol' ,Ie (t i..' r

llIl'ds, Itito wloiti 1 declared, tlat t I] tI octCalioil 1' h}e:

1It 1I'

t qr, til;:s, tdo il iti, lell

r he w V(ild p) rtil ttle( lill

}' ci'ripltntg iiI(ICle.i'hd I.lu l..l inmc'lce:> of thll, isai%

*'(s e'xrtle (t1\lcom1itanded to tik- her -Iul-v

l l ti l' ly

l',lid, .il tu 1I!l ;If l
. lwera le for it, he ll it Iha!! he te-

.il 111n 3 tititc'.

qiiired: advising her to deliver the fnaid monet tito i,:-
with qqiieticfs. After nr:'ni deniei, :rmany cxcla i,,,.
and many bitter yuorls

;Igaitii youl a n thiii, ti

[-,:

r!illing againl: riyf'fll), with fla;t afiirmatio.i that h-' '::.
jefli nii rht have her bod(!yl, b' t her lheairt {fie fhoul 'ic ,:
have, rc;in.;in? to deliver the :,i y of the cabincr, I c..1,:,!
my l-rvants, and felt fur barrs to break open the tloo,',
wl', enpo llhe )yieldedl, andl c.iiifin; the loor to Ie o;,cili!
1 ti..iitd there in the coHf rs i, i iend iln Alr. .',,lad;'s ,
merhrbanee, five rolls of ccan;vas, containinill five ti!,l;:;l.
French crowns, a;nd t\o le ;thcr ba.ts, \\ icreof tlhe u;,
had, in gold, one hundred and ol r poul ndl ito filiii; .,
.!!:d the other had three pounds in silver, which bag ot i:-
ver was left with her, affirming that she had ino more tn,-
ney in this houre, and that fle was indebted to her ;ir-

C'rle cin vants for their wages. Mr. XVaadc's note maketh mci-
t.-l :;>i the tion of 3 rolls left in Curie's chamber, wherein, no doult,
tr Ah .i this he was mifireckoned, which is evident as well by the tefli-

monies and oaths of diverse pcrfons, as also by probabl!
conjectures; so as in truth we found only two rolls, ever,:
of which containeth one thousand crowns, which was thil
queen's guifte to Curie's wife at her marriage. Thecre i
found in Naw's chamber, in a cabinet, a chain worth by
elimation one hundred pounds, and in money, in onei
bag nine hundred pounds, in a second ba.; two hu!idrei
fourscore and fix pounds eighteen fliiiings. All the tore-
laid parcels of money are bestowcd i,; b,.s, :, ed In:li1
by AMr. Richard l3agot, saving live hi;:;'irc pounds Oi
Naw's imoile, which I lelferve i mniv i:. ids, I:r the tiie
of this hoiiflold, and may be repayed at London, wuherr
her mi ijecty iliall appoint, out ol tile iol ney, ircCci.i
lately by olne of my firvants, out of the Exchecqucl.
lean dl Ie(t tile people inigiht h\ave dlifcrftl'd this moiie)' li
all this time, or have hidden the fame iln It;nie fecrct c(i-
lctis; for doubt whereof, I 11d cailced all this qtlccll' '
f.'n-i!ly, froln tile highest to the lowvel!, to be !ir;ld(!J 1
'l lvclal Ipl;aces where I founld thenm, so ;s yl 1 h;i
ioiiid t;:e inolley with (tuiet el-,i I hal d

cl 'il l(r'l t

have lilaich flirt all their lodgini s, and t tn their \w::
perfilns. I tliank God with all my heart, as lor a inlg1-
lar blenfing, that that falleth out 1;, well, lCealing Ic!l '
contrarv (liccefs niight hIive ,n\lo)d lumile lha;id coi('
jPI he1 I ,.j:llty.

T i[',xrilllN

TOUCHING the difpcrfing of this queen's servants, I

trufl I have done t; much, as m;ay suffice to latisfy lier
manjcfy for the time, wherein I could not take any absolute
courl', until I heard again from you, partly bccauit her
majesty, by Mr. Waade's letter, doth refer to your confi-
dleration to return such as h,;all be dliclh;lrged to their leve-
ral dwellinigs and coulitrie, wherciin, as it fecill(th , vou
hli.e torgotteni to deliver your oplinion ; Iartly, for tihat as
vet, I h:lve receivcdl no lanli'ecr iroml 'ou, of )yOur resolution,
ijpon the view of the Scottillh fainil lnt unto you, whlat
*.urlsonr you will appoint to be dlilunit ; onl0 , this I lave
t(liie, I have befiowtvcd all flIch as are mentioned ill this
I):l iniclolcd in three or four fcveral rooms, a, the limic
m ii Itfice to contain them, and that their meat lan1d drink
1h.iil be brought unto them by my servants. It may plelfc
v:;i, to advertifc me byv vour next Ictters, in what fort,
.;ndJ lor what courle, I Ihall make their paliforts, as als),
' tile\' fliall fay that tl)ey' are ilupaid of their w;ales, wilat
I shall do therein. Yt is s.lid that they have been ac- Th;s l.ad
ciltinmcd to be p:aid of their w;ages at (Christmas, for the ,3ath 1"'",

ft ,rc ( liu -

iwhlole xear. Her majeitly's charge will be fomcwhat di- ,,, at pr,-
Iu:iiii{hed by the departu're of this people, and my charge -f'. i, the
b',' this occasion, will be the more easy. But the pcrfons, l''t'l:.
all iive Baltian, are such lilly and limple fouls, as there dor, :,l;.
was nio great cau-if to fear their practices, and upon this
ground, I was of opinion, in my former letters, that all
this dilinifl'cd train should have followed thecir n-liit-rcfl,
until tile next remove, and there to have heen discharged
upll the luddicn, for doubt tllat the faiii remove Iiight be
<lt;ive(:d, yf fie dill fear, or expct anly hard meafI:u .

()O''HIEi fliall cxeuib their fuollfh pity as they n;may; hut

lfr my prrt, t renCrince Iy part of the jovs of hea;vCle, yf
anI ..,y tiini!i thit I have siid, written or done, I have
1i.,1l aiy) otlher refli)et than the furtheranlce of ler nia-
i;llvy' Iclvice; and tol I flill nioft earnelily pray you to ;if-
limn tor me, :Is likewilL for tie not fbafilng of thle mric(lve
t' ,1 M1r. Ianl,,,,,r;, tile otlier comllillionlers and llylCell. i
l !'! l r. \;Vaa;lc l;atl ;Ifwered, in ll h1lum11 lle (I(utIes, lotr
il, wrlhlt crll m anv, that nlo olle of us di 1 1( Ill.:tll .as
tl'Iik thil:t :mir coninmillill reaching only to the papers1, we
ii,,lht bc bold to toutlic tile money, so as there Wv.is no
s'chele th liat all| to mny, knowledge, a;ld ils y)'u know L
w.ds no coum illionler in this fIbarch, hut hiad mny hi.1d lull

M ni 4 it

(¾) t il v

ll .

li ..i I si VS I.ii iC, II

p II. X\ ilh r le (1 1 10

Of iil~ )1 .1h til wn .

( l c.1 1 1 ct 11
hap 1 il

.11S o l o11 1 1s(

1('e1. w 111 1 1i(` l\ 11;( 1~

ilIle j )1 C .11111 l(dliv

( liti 111k1 ull 1
ii I ennlltit y eu

No. XVI. (Vol. II. p. i0S.)
I ,ettcr from thc iin2, of Scots to Mr. Ar-clitiilJl

as his aiiin bislaor in En ndl (YC) tober.

Ca3lg. C. 10

to Ily sillother, Iot C c ive.( dolW' I1to lon)1(11

An 0( g i- t11liik Illot Tsi't .1l\ ou, 1
OU ' tiaveli)s can1 do :'o(leI it )m hi1L

in Inibe

oc- i's b tkenl, tot thell adeu mith mydaigXuIlli thaimleslth~
aind IC thC sPCci ii i nil runientliS tjlli irt ; a rd thej rtire, 1iis 'C
looke let the contincunlcCe of my t.ix.oiir towa ;1intls von. p11.
jia pains nor plainnes ill this cace, hutt redde L1.) hIt'lle.
we\vttiln to W\11 I 1.im Keith, and colit- (i11rii'on ri'ch ki quhel'\
to the Collteiitti ihairl..0s, .ind in this ljleict ince rc.Icl
te truiel is of youIr I (;It cicdit tIhlc, Ithei 111w o:

-,cxtter tO sr

to iIri.'.iv

fir i
-W, -,
Ibll ( or1 1

Lind, probably (roin Macrti litland. Net.
27, ;ó

B

Y.i 7 l~ einIter-- ti~tit by thits eic,(.ii'ien i

'~~'* jj) ill phea~~lilt sub1)eJ ) Ill, Cnuihly (-ielk VI

Oic.1 fly prih'and recommndnei. vi i Vislithe flu li] co;
s-wild hi gIlts diopcea 111101 wine. 3s ia11,1 ik

t~iS ti~t~ircia4. JiiUC~ilh~iit' aai ll hi muulic deepbv

!,:c Irt, ;;is a mnatter greatly crnccrnil', hihn hoth in hionour
.Ini oihtrwic'. I lis hli, htlttcsls at' lions ;tnd1 behavloulr itter
pl.IIIlv nit onlly low far n;itntie ptcvils, bltit alto how he
.isijtlel (n(ls qof the( cqti'l of that proccis, atd of wili~t ino-
i11 ill e

li ( cl i s il. ']'hclc is al11 ainbt l il;,h fih rtly to lec

,dlck'lhd, w}icblin l il bc )l\'l ;i, : ;ta l ; anlld two couil -
(cll,,s, o )n ll/ .iilwtcrt will (lhl 1s 1 (' Cd(,u)1im l ,icc O(r
dlii,)l l)1 ()l's ti' 1

;i illy an (i oodI i:it( llit c 1i'cc (lbtweeCll

; 1i( li)r ii ( ,s () lthlliN' Il. Ill tlhC Ilc;cIi f(afrll , 11 If lrtith r cx-
il, ilr IIit b( 'iu lr, lli1 his m1 I jc I tv's t

ItL :nIl rC'qiCi d ilfin-

(1, 1Ins hitlhfMs will tlinl.i f

iib i (ti]io'c anl Con-

'rti,,,til .r hl' Ilil(s his c*xpCl.itil t andl !celrts. \' nma1'
1 ('clvc his l,;ijcl)y's ilil(p)uitiOn blv 1'hs letter to yont,
xhIlii(li , ii .hall iil);>irt 1to lM . A \reli.ltl, a;iil biotli (1dc.
A.1 ct,,ilitL there(to. I l Ced l(t to r-cotlnill tllil to yollr eic'O,

iHiIrlutii , your mil;flt'c s i'rivicc lboth it, w'eill aml illn lo-

i,)ur. Ay's >'l a1(l your coll()[caic fliall lbeih.e )'ourfcif
,it hillis lhial, i) for in' v own piint, \vill [ intcrplet your
i.loiit\itn to vo(tr illtc. I ;am glad of th-it I hlear of
ot tItItf, an]il 1 ,io fully credit tlhat you wriite of Mr. Archi-
1b.il, whoflc t'iculds ihere make girc;lt account of his pro-
t. llf(d tvotioni to the lticien, belides the duty he owc;
to the kingi's aicijlly her fun. Farther I am conitrainced
t, rlemiit to next. occalion, havilln Icarce tine to icribbl)l
thelc lcw lincs (which of themielves mav heir withiels of
mny tliafc). \XViViflhm yvo a proft)erois iflile t \(Lo, ne,,o-
ch.itio, 1 coniniit you, &c. Halyrudhlouik, Nov'. 27th.
158(.

I'It pIcoPc, and all eflatcs here are f ar moved by

the litgrots iiocccliins atlainft the (ciiein, that hts mia-
|.ci' , .iand all that hl.ve credit arc ilinpo rtuitt l, a1dtl inay
tot i] .ibroad tfor xcla;mations againtil theiil, a:d( iliprc-
tiltions .t i.i tilt ti citcl uof I'1En-,land.

No. XVII. (Vul. 1I. p. 17t.)
1o the king's maijflly, from Mr. Archibl),d

l)ougl as.

I, 1. A S E your niajcly, I reccivecl yntlr lrtecr of the r6 n'.
Il.tie tile 28th of Septemlber, tlCe (t! of ().-otii, o'* ,.

''licli wa.s the 1.lmc day that I dirct ctl \V"'. .\ i irr'l
.- or,1

w.,i, t
,,ur higlbht fs; cby ftucl lettrs as he c.lrriutl, .!i'ld i, bl :t t.

r

t 1r .! -.

Ctlzrs u; sixcr; ] datcs, your n:tj cli'y may perc':ict ti.,t I
. ,.

had omitted nothing so far as my travel might reach un.
tn, anent the performing of the two chief points conta;irl d
the said letter befor the receit thereof, which by thecl
presents 1 mutl repeat for answering of the faidis. Ac t:
the first, so far ;s may concern the interceding for ti:e
queen your majesty's mother her life, I have !;vers t'm:.;
and in every audience travelled with this qcuetn in ti.i:
matter, fpeciallv t,

; kiow what her fJull de:erlnilnatil

must be in that point, and couid never bri n;l her to::,
further an \ver, but that this proceeding againt her bv or--
der of justice was no lets against her mind, than ngainfl
their will that loved her cft : as towards her life fhc coi.d(
give no anfwcr thereunto, untill such time as the law h.Ith
declared whether she was innocent or guilty. HIerewith;:
it was her pleallure thus far to inform rme, that it wlvs ;
number of the afltciants that earnefly preflcd her that the
law might proceed agaiinf her, giving rcaolns thlit lo olnr,
as she was urfFered to deal in matters, so long wou', l
never this realm be in quiet, neither her life, neither this
Itate in aflurance, and in the end they uted this protcll.i-
tion that if flhe would not in this matter follow their ;il-
vice, that they should remain without all blame wha;lio-
ever flould fall out; whereupon she had granted thtin
liberty to proceed, left such as had made the rcqucir,
might hereafter have charged herself with inconvenience
if ally should happen.

AND by mlyflf I know this her speech to be true, b.:-

caule both papist and proteflant has behaved them, :;s .t
hath been her pleasure to declare, but upon divers ic-
ipec1s, the one to avoid filpicion that otherwili' was con-
ceived againllt them, the other upon ;eal, anrd caei that they
will be known to have for preservation of their fovereiin's
l f and state in this perilous time, upon confider.iiiii
whlercof, I have been conltrainitl to cnter into tome ic.il-
rng with hotl:,wl h.crwith I made her m;ajefly acqluallitild
ihe protec;lats, and such ;s in other matters will be kvn;i
to bear no fm.ill favour unto vour majefly's fervicc, hIlh
prayed that thev may he excufid( from any dealing ill thi
contr;)ry of th::u, which by their oath they have avoucl,
and by thcir fp:rech to their sovereign requeftced for, ;lail
that before nly corning in this country; if they flhould
nJow otherwile do, it would producc no better cffect bur tr
make them ljlibjet: to the accusation of their fovercigil,
when it flould pleal her to do it, of their inconflrlc'.

: r,

;. giving councell whereby they might incur the dtarrer
f ill coilncellors and be confcq ent worthy of punilih mcnt.
.itiic ofi the papiit, as I did deal with, went imnmediate-
I', and told her maje fly what I had spoken to them, who
.illht she untlerftood the matter of before, fcnt (,ir me
;:nd declared to me nmy own speech that I had uttered to
them, willing me f;r Iel weil of my maifscr's fcr-\ice to
aifl;lin fromi dealim:- with flch, as were iot t vet uFi-
cicntly moved to think of nmv matier as lice (id. I craved

ieave of her majc!'v, th:it I might intorni thein of your

riijcily's late beliaviour towards her, and the t'ate of this
ic:iilm, whercunto Vwith t ml : ifilculty fle gave her con-
t(:iit. At min' ;c dcrl.i-tlre f-'t r n court, whlich was upoll
tlie 5'h of this iiifant, and ti.; d;:y alter that thi lordls of
thii gr;mnd jury h. ,d takcn their Ile.ves of her nmjelty to go
nortilward to Fothringham, it was her pleaiure to pro-
mile to have i 'urth'cr i(ecch in ihis ;'attcr at the returnin r
of the (aidl lords, and to i ive ful! anliwer according to your
nmajefty's contentment to the renl-.i der matters, that I
had proponit in name of your maje(ry. As to the 2d
par: concerling the a! ::liation, and delire that the pro-
mi il made to the manler (f Cray conccrning ' our imajefty's
title may be fulfilled; it appears by the (itd letter, that
the very point, whereupon the queflion that may bring
)our majclty's title in doubt hath not heen rightly at the
writing of the {aid letter confidered, which I take to have
proceeded for lack of reading of the act of parliaa n int,
wherein is fulfilled all the promise made by tle queen to
the laid mailer, and nothing may now cause ;iiy doubt to
ariie against your said title, except that anl opinion lhould
be conceived by these lords of this parliament that are so
vehement at this time against the queen yoiur nijcly's
mother, that your m.jefty is, or may be proved hereafter
Adfenting to her proceedill ngs, andl IOlm that love )'our 1lla-
jfity's service were of th;t opiinion that too earneil req lurl:
might move a groundl, lcwhereupon fuli)iols in iliht :;row
"i men io ill affecled in that matter, which I tho'i might
!' h'lped by obtaining of a declaration in p).rlialnct of
outr majefly's innocence at this time, and by) I.;alio that
good nature and public honefly would cofitrtaini you to il-
tercedc for the queen your mother, which woold ( e.tlry with
Itliell, without any further, lome fLlipicion th.t niglit ii move
'li .:dcCted men to dowbt. In tiy lornier letter, I humblly
*'. avd of )your ma;jety that luiic learlned 11en1 ill the laws,

niioi ll;

n1?1-ht he mvced to a\l, i:' w ith tlic wo-'c of :he aioc..-
tio;: t:nd t}'c niir;',:.o; c :; t:.:icd ill t e .'ct ors pi :;

e t. ;'.P.U \. i :l'. .; .-i\ ,1L. \':-h..t ltpl;, 'ci0'.:,; ii' :.ts \,.:!

Ilicyt, ii'UOe r'' . \\ t 1t

c i'r;i, :

n l ' ' .'

tit

l c ; l' W:' ta

tine.', .:r-:. i:,\ ;* . i.r i; 'i-

c i i: t 1. tb.' m1lv. d tro I

Cti\ r'.';;.;!' ; ::.; pLiMO ;l t. (c'l, co -!

t er.tio:s tcv r':s :

}:.:', :' :': ,! :E .' \':'>. c('r :: d;ccl.!.r;::or ct vo' : n:..i. ~!x\'i

therco; , : . :' .:s ; oo: : .,iii, W: to - e

f :e . c c -

sc.c the t :.; . . :'. tr \. i il..'l '. i !\' ,

' v ,

or mlx b clttr iio: ,I ,.t :i n.

. \ '.i : ; his \:. < m i in.1:7.

o',ll ln, 1 i,! '.!-e ic ti : t.t to t ',>\v :iv teircct o:: i :t
tih.: ;. :'. \ ,ur m;citv to .i \t'c; I i n'.:\ c .,I'el'.i 1u::..
the l tl 'otl . ;'. l er' t to tIo t c , :t.-; l C this rc2i' ,

\l i

seems not to o- ;'.dcl herewrth, .!;i hti; _r;:,d '-
1betvt to teCl. t iherei \ it' lIch or tthi pri..ltinit

, .. .:i

reallini iln :ma' doubt ;: n;i:d. 'lhii be;!tl, the

s1:;i :'

1my proccei dirls i this bes

i th t e

btdes the ralrmii

ccit.li ;l ed in o i ter

lett ers of i'c erl dates, I am cor .l Il:

to L..' the whole open before your manci it , a:i' to
humbiv pr.i that fuli information may be ilint uintor i-
-what further to do heren ; in this middle time, \r 1I
h.'.ll receive more ample direction I shall proceed ;:J ':'
doing according to such direain as I haxe alrea.v r.
ccived. And lo, molt gracious lbvereign, wilhing u:o
5 our majeltlv a,:1 hlippy fuccelt' in your affairs, I humi'l,
take mv le.i\e from London, i6th of ()ct' ti hs 15
Your niajelvy's nioll humble iubjecl and obed: ier'lilt.
A memorial for hlis majfiy by thle master c;'

G rav.

fin. T T 'vl! ', y'our m.jefIv, I have tho't meeter to

i;< -. :Ar, c[ oi, 1 .ll il .,

ti . hey occur, ;and al ndvertililn.::: -

''" --' ' ;IS tl .ev c.' ' ers, t then ji'intlv in a lettre.
.. .' [ ,.

i : F to \'V.t: the 24th of t )ec', ,id lent to '.

"' ' KKe;tlh, .!'1d Mir. .:chitb,ld D)owgt las to ad\ertie'c the tt:c.':

'

, " of it, lik a, thet \v id at their audience, She proiil> It t'
..: -:. q xiitn x>our ne'.ijcl's miother's life should be Lp.1Jd t:l.

X c Xvt'e l.' h . Ia 1' 27th they cameni to \are toI n',
the which c..!'' :tr Rob. came to \' are, where thev IbcV "'
u9 lhow ;.. th'e\ had l alreaJv ^one in theil t leqoct,iil,',
but t; .;t the diic(curiel ot it I' t di't dOW1 in] our ,'e;'.rl1
vtc , I r .mit lme to it, n'ly this far I wi!1 telitr t.;: )

v i'ur mnajeiy that \V. Keith hath used hlimnfeit rilht ho-
neillv land \wilel till our conling, rclipei-tinll all circllm-
ian.cc, ',id chlirflv his coiliea.uc his dc.dli,, which in-
,iced is rnot better than ,'our n.uiedv knov.'- , ;!ic.tlr .

'I'H ?.2Qthl da otf l)ee. wc c.M;r e I; L.olon, where

X\ n rc

\ I)) Ir \\t'. r'S i:. !. 'c Cil x'\ , !nlr attcr the hoiltlii

l:rIt it his lp1.lclJ v ;:' miT ;i x tu;!.' hl . t'l.iio i '.lu s;

s neve'

Irn..11 ; to \..X !coilc l. tl ' COi ', v Is I

i lh Iinllc (.!.iv \we
t'!.:t it cullum pc'mit iii,:t \\w i, t o'iur c.,c'!ces b' M\r.

T l l i.: e t' [.r ;

. K\X . I.ii th a:Jl ilis col!c.icr

.: i, rdl,!:' ) 'ii;c c2 iHt,.' ltilt to cr. .c o'Ir

' tlriLiinCC. \\'C
: ., '.i::ls;; " i;Ix\ r en;l nineid l ti:L' c Icrrl letter, and

. 1 1 jl..', c .::'.I'err till t;. c ;h ,i ji.\., wh l.lt ws i d ncOll

t'...t 3., v

\ x' )r..;. lvi' .;:s it rl the r ncrIal, ' Vet we waC

I..' ::'ic tit :.L't

i,'c': .:lbeit we rtc ix\ ed hard

!;:' \:W
' r ,

I' ' S:;. d'.yv ..' h

:; .. with the e.arl tf IVcicc{s r, wvlhcre

': ti}';,:c:. ::, *'...'.,.-1, .: , .' i ,1t ,'.nl 1il tile cg neral. I rc-

l'i. Cl'. t . .t i. c :,:t

, '.; . '.: :i\', the detaininl,

ct the t lute i ort;lt bcot',.l(i 1

r ':,,z't \'.' -

;,ir ' t '.:t ilic prc-

t'i!' i i t; o I Ct)','.;.

:;

li i ;. thl'i b, tilis,

x\,:..t ibr tlro t ( it r

O iI .,i -'.

S' ;! i' i l ic'.!i ,1 ltilI

Li",lvt 71;

ow h u.

I. i .

TIiiF th dyi 'evc fp-..k wih\ t!:: l ! t:cr':; i ;rnipirid,

wtinri we

t olund Very til. i i . ' . .

v \'o : 1' ;ito rlre

t't .ll Iris proctc1 ii2,, : aiu .Mr. :O i'i, : 'rc we tiriir L.
e.l ni;Ill i! yotur nliljciltys ii:lil al d Col r.l cl d ilt i tllil;lr ' :,n o
\x lad teo tr.eat with this it ccn, i'.:\c l tc i.:i: polit, a, 1n:lt 't
i.!rel v liet down bv our nc .:l.r

IT is tho't here ; 1and1 i e

Jr il'lll rs of Nonir 1iiji l{\i"< C ti-

'.ileda mei, tirh t Bcllilc. his

r r; 'tti tic was

r i l t

tic ti, t.nil,

alrd that the rctidenit was nt plri y toD it, :as rinreel I
think is true, tor lince lecl!ic ic li;s |'r;tirn , there s: ., tli
o' this Chaltcruniciut Ihis icrvants t.rici wi th hIs iwhonl-
l'apces aini pacqtucts, wlicil he wa;.s lcntliin, iln FrI:lilce tt
til.t they charge lirn with a ctuil pir.cr of late agairllt the
uec'r hlrL e her Ilie. It is allcdgired Ilis Icrvant lha. con-
lolisi the mattcl, but lwhom I Ih.ll trnlt I knuw rno.,
Ihnt till 1 Ife prot 1 flIl accounit hlimi :arr hriclt man.,
lr rrIced lo Ie ail)pcpears, and 0ne (witli)out doubt) wvho
snlrh been very istlart ill this imatter. I thellw hm

ti hat tir-
qtIcele anid cail of Leie:ftc lihad delited to, Is';i k witl Icme

. 1

ill private, and craved his opinion; he gave it freely thiat
he tho't it meetefl, I Ihew himr the reason why i commu-
nicate that to hini, for that I had icen suspected by some
of her majefly's fricnds in France to have done cvil offices
in her service, that he nfould be my witness that my earnelt
tlcaling in this fl'ould be a futEciclnt tcltimonv that all was
lyes, and that this knave hTNc who now had betrayed he;-,
had in that done evil offces; he deoired me, feeing ihe saw
only with other Itlks eyes, that I lhould no ways impute
it to her, for the like fne h;ld done to himself by Naud hi.
perfuailon. I answered hcfhould be my witness in that.

THF oth day we ient to court to crave audience, which

we got th:e Ioth day; at the first, she said a thing longi
looked for should be welcome when it comes, I would
now fee your maffer's offers. I answerld, no man makes
offers but for Iomle caule; we would, and like your nla-
jcefy, f.rft know the cault to be extant for which we oftRr,
and likewile that it be extant till your majelty has heard
us. I think it be extant yet, but I will not promise for an
hour, but you think to shift in that fort. I answered vwc
mind not to shift, but to offer from our fovereig n all thing
that with reason may he; and in special, we offered as is
set dlown in our general, all was refused and tho't nothini.
She called on the three that were in the house, the ear!
of Leiceller, my lord admiral, and chamberlain, and very

fcrpitefully repc.ited all our offers in presence of them all.

I opened the last part and litid, Madam, for what rlipcjal is
it tliat men deal againil your person oreftate for her cause ?
She. :tfwercd, because they think fhec hall succecd to mc,
alnd tor that ihe is a papist; appearingly lsid I both the
caulncs may be removed, fie said the would be glad to un-
derfland it. If Madam, said I, all that she has of riglht
of lucceflion were in the king our lovercign's pcrlln, were
not all hope of papists removed ? She answered, 1 hopc
lo. Then Madam I think the queen his mother f111;11
willingly demit all her rights in his person. She anlwclc(l
Ihe iathl no right, for she is declared unhabil. T'hen
(aid, if fle have no right, alpearingly the hope cea.es ;l-
ready, tl that it is not to be leared that any man attempt
for her. ''he queen anfwcrcd, but the papilis allow no!
our declaration; then let it fall, lays I, in the king's per-
son by her atlignation. The earl of Lcicefter alilwcrcl,
she is a priloncr, how can lfhe demit ? I answercd the dc-
nillion is to her Ion, by the advice of all the fricnd(s fe

lA ,

has in Europe, and in cafe, as God forbid, that any at-
tempt cuttis the queen here away, who flall party with
her to prove the demiflion or assignation to be inefteEtual
her son being opposite party and having all the princes her
frielnd for him, haivinii bonded for the efficacy of it with
his miajeiy of before. The queen made as fl:e could not
comprehend my ITne:nillu, and fir Rob'. opened the matter
again, file vet mlade s tho' flc iuideritood not. So the
carl of I.eictefer anlfwered tlht our meaninlg \nvas, that
the king should be put in hi s mother's place. Is it so, the
(l'een an'fwred, thon I put mIyfelf in a worfi cafi than of
bef-re ; by God's palTion1, tlhat were to cut il m own throat,
and for a dutch\', or ,11 earldom to yourlelf, you or flclh
as you would cautln roiiie of your d(eflerate kn.ves kill mc.
No, hv ((od, lie shall never he in that place. I iiifwcrcd
he craves Intililng of \our malelity but only of his mother.
'I ie narl of l,ciccfi-c r anfwvred that were to make hin
party to the lqueell mv nilirc;ls. I said, hI- will be far
more arty, if he be in her place thri' her death. She
would lray no lon:er, but laid the flhould rnt have a worse
in his mother's place. And fitid, tell your king what
coo(l I have dlone for him in holding the crown on his
head since lie was born, and that I mind to keep the leacue
ti:at now stands between us, and if he break it shall be
a double fault, and with this minded to have bidden us
a farewell ; but we achcvit [i. e. finiilled arguilng upon
tlis point]. And I 1pa kc cravilng of her that her life may
lie 1ipred for 15 days ; flle rcftfed. Sir Rob'. craved for
only eight da\s, the !aidi not for an lhour; and (1o :cid h-i
;t.v!y. Your mili;lc.y l es we1 have delivered all we hal
lr offers, but all is for notlingii, for flie and her counitcI
has laid a determinationl that they mind to follow forth, ;ad i
Ice it comes r;ather of h1ir couiicel thlan lierfcel, which I like
the worfb; for without doubt, fir, it shall cut ofliall friclnd.-
Ihip yc hlad lhere. Altho' it were that onc0t they had mean-
d well to your majclty, yet ICmlIembering Illhmfellvs, that
they have inedled withl your mnotlier' lilood, oo(ld faithl
(ily calirtot hope great good ol yourilll, at thimng ii truth
I ll follry for ; further youtr tiii.jcfty' inay e'rc ive by
tiis lilt discourse of tIhat 1 proipoi lit, it tlhe ll i d I ne;.'.;l
w'Cll to your m;lajCfty, they had ulfid it otlerwile; ti.hni tli
hI ien done, for reafoi lias bound tihem. lBut [I di.te niio
'ttue all. 1 mind something to fieak in this imltt(i, be-
illc we look fiurly our letters iha1ll bi: ti ulit by the way.

Fol0

FOR that I fee private credit nor no means can alter

their determination, altho' the queen again and the car) of
Ieicefter has desired to speak with me in particular; I
mind not to speak, nor fhiall not; but assuredly shall leh
all men fee that I in particular was no ways tycd to Eng
land, hut lor the refped of your majesty's service. So al-
beit, at this time, I could not effc.cuate that I desired,
vet my upright dealing in it flall be manifefred to tln:
world. We are, God willing, then to crave audience,
where we mind to use finarpl \ our inflructions, which ii-
therto we have used very calmily, for we can, for your ho-
nour's catui, fay no less for vonr majeflty, than the French
?imbift;l or has said for his mailer

So I pray your majefly conlider my upright dealing in

vour service, and not the ef-cdt, for had it been doAble
Ii. e. poflible to be done] by any [ might have here had
credit, but being I came only for that cause I will not nmy
credit fliall serve here to any further purpose. I pray
(od( prcfirve your iajefly and fend you a true and fincecr-
friendfiip. From London this 12th of Jan. I58

I UNDERSTAND the queen is to fend one of her owv

to your imajefly.

To the right hon. my lord vice-chancellor and si-
crctary to his maijcldy, from the malter of Gray.

' 'l '

J rd

a Y lord, I fetid you these lines with this inclosed ti

O;'n;X'i;,,, |g this nmjefty,whereby your lordship shall underil;iul
th Co,:lc . l' ,w nmtters goes here. And before all things I pray yo:!
o, frt A. lordihip move his majefny to refpecc my diligence, .nld

. tl1. 1'7 not the ctfl'ei il this negociation, for I swear if it h;t
. '1.i. 179.

been for the crown of niigland to myself I coull d)l I!l
more, and let not unfriends have advantage of nic, It,
tihe wot(l flmall fee that 1 loved England for his majs',!'
tervice only. 1 look shortly to find your lordflii) friicd. ;
ye Inade prolifie, an d by God I shall be to you if I c.ii
\V" . Keith andl 1 tevylfct, if matters had gone well, to h.':
ruii a comufl thiat your lordlhipl) miigt have here been il
credit aidl others diippointed, but now I will (1o for xv'i
as for inylflft; which is to care for nl, credit here, ;l t :
coIllfiCilCe thlleyV llell 1not ihoeltily to the king our lo)''
reiii, and if they maiy, lie will go the get his Inothllif
t iic( or lhortly to go, tlierelone my lord withiout all ki'
of fc ruplc I pray you to advifc l hin the belt is not thils w.'

1i. '

Thry fay here, that it his, becen f;'id i,. n!, '.; I

h r.l

it ifroml you, thiit ve dellred lut the I; [:i ;i! i:i '1 ';i t
a2rce, bec2aulf it \;vo, r-;ick lte Illiiecilc,;, I;: .i . :::.

: ;:l

examplle of it by kinim j.mes the fourt. I a ,itv

V, :!tii

vourii name that I was ;,lhIol oU ni v('r il.li1 i1kc1 it. .ir.
\rchibald( is the fpei;kcr of i', who 1 ;lir-' r.UII ;..;liii)
has been a ploifln in this matter, ; r thec Ic.len i\i r n;l kic
to Ilis opinion. I-e c; es not, i.e ti'l , toil .t 1 ':.t the
kinlL will lie fain to deal t):is v, .', either i['' f.;ir n '.;. ; r
ieceflity, so that vwhe he ticl '

t chi,. C(i i1r ' is 'ii.zd t,

be welcome; to fit dowi nl! tht is 1 .. i

(,i' thl liiie 'l!r-

Jiofes, it would conlfuilc 1lc!(,1e p ::r

1h1ii i h;cvc I

.-'t, lo)

1 ideer it to meetin i . 'Ihee a Cnew ';'li';'cv a;.,,,j d
a·ailinft the queen to have leen iintede !l, ti, thi I ci:nc i

tiiLbafln'ldor rcfident thre (,o hli: s nei: t:;:Ku, but L l'i,,'k
in the end it flhal prove nt!hiii!. r. <t.'titii '.vlo is
anibaflador for this queen in France. is toiichcil w\ith it, his
brother is taken here, ;lwa)s it h::.; d(oni this honil in our
licociatioln, that all this council c ,iv(li , n(.t mloxv thii,
(ilecil to meddle with the tiiteenl o0 cotl.ii l'. hilo,', till
tilis invention was 1IInd forth. 1 rtnit a: othtr tli;:,
to the inclolcid. \Ve nlinlld to have leIt to i,;s n:!icliv
a; difiourfc, whlichl wc Ilave fct down of ; , oil r Iprocuedl-
iigs ,lnce our hlither coniilln, blit we are lorli'. :tid'ertiz.(.l
t..i.t the bearer is to be truili; by time wa: ftor oU1r l);c-

ejilets, so tliat we defer it till our owil cominii; li', Ji I ii.;
I.t in a privy part belide the pI equet. '. e il.:, 1 til :I'
tl.e ieave otl li'ryd:;y tile i ;11i d.v', witc'r- \v: I:,ii (! .\-
aiAl) to follow tlie (1rio r ol of r in1i lc i'i , 1 r il * .!-
tiot 1land with thle kint,'s lhoniiou tli.it w' 1.v' I . (i' . :t

tlie Irenlch aei blllltdl lior wa, twiil

w.is, Ie o Iot ::.li;: li'

eIult nloills flilre (1uCe I rei(lttir. So tsillt .i'.'' tie .t!
I 11tinlk we fh11:1l1, (od villin', be It 1ho1w, I.\i.;lt t' tl'iu':
li.y colmie wlich xv look not fir. T'1hli i(uieln aIll tlh,
cirl o(f Ieiccfcter has delired to lpeak wiihiti t'. I iclitd

,ive ill piref.ice oIf lly c llc;iiic, 1\!' r(.;.ill1o I i,;.n .1 'i el-

Ilin,:ti(,ll w hich l)ari C-iil.ir cr ditt C.llill o JI Clil,, .;] I ( i.ivc
II- crdi( t but for tlhat c.i(le. It wil plca ce otil l)lillli)
itlile tile inclof(d Irom Ilis iii;ajelly aiind kce 1;. ' li.r
Inly Ilvice comiiineldcd to youullclal :1d1 I 'llli ! 'v, I t,'1l-
Iilt yot to God. 1' roin Lodoi the l 'ti ol Ja.l. 15C;.
VOL. 1I. N n T'

To te king's mnaefly, from fir Robert Melvil.
.t hn. ,1 T nmln plea I )your maiefiv, since thie dciretionf olf

. i, An ! formelr letters, we had Idlience, and h(er majellv ap-

*,-'. i ,'th' . aving t.iki'n kc(lition to proceed with extrlemitv, inot the
V,,. .

\ h 1't it I',. cd licr nj(:icl to desire us to (lay flor two dv.

iI. , on t .kinll, our leave, untill she he ad pvil
il uon on r pro

)politionll; fiice \\which tinme, lher majcl}y is hecoime more
h.ail b1\ oc Icc leters (i;s \e a;re infornmedtl) ihas coie fronm
Scntl irl, l;klkiln;' InlCol hopei to believe that youn r ilmajcfft
<;ke's no(lt (lis n.matter to lielrt, as we know the contr.niv
in cliW',l, ;inadl ha.l of before removed the like opinioln oi:
olf heir Ii ,'

; "I's Iind, whiclh by finilier inlformltion w\.->

<crii ,!, thlil Irpolts has lind(cetil our cominiflion, :an,i
.:bli;i i ii;i :jl'ccil, icaring in like manner we shall be t;i\v-
cdk ulnil anli\vcr come from Scotland by 1ilch perfoii .'

h'-:\ h \x c i :cllierie of'. And albeit that it will he wl\'r

;,iio,'l 1 I nowril to all Imene how heavily youir najefy t.aic
:i |ilccilin;1. to h'art, the truth is, tlihat they hlave l?

tin,, oc, iillono ti perliaded the queen, that it is like to hiil-
hl rouir icigotiatioi. As also Alchinder ( i. . Alexanldci
',c\tv:ill is to (le diirlc ed in their party, bv our know
L-,i c, \\v',, hi.s al\..int'It more of his credit, than 1 lcicle

lc' Ilavp 1 il iI , aill, n

\v r w r telat itde fro

t tils de.l-

tg Ii it does harm, and

l it oe s inot meet for that pur.

l',', (elmiill iW t ,

yoil- ill:llcvNy's good diferction to t.tik

,ti dci hIlrein as (,'w ihlll he alfwerable to your majefiy il
to( (illr ;ny potit \n e wchave ill chlar , as the trrutl is, ll',
uilticr , (irilavt -i.hs lehavcd himfiflf very uprightly a1'd
!ifrt-rcItlv ill thi, chlilarIec, nlnd evil tayne with he divers i;:
tlri pit ,vl who welc of' before his friends. \Ve ha've c br
I'h;'.lhilr, to tilh mIcnrlilsl who has born iusbeil coinpl).iil,
;'itt hl.s ilot hen'l troulbled with others. \\', lzeme K(elR
Ii.:tl ]l(r it othiie, undone that he hath in charge. As Iu:;
:iif'r '\ ;-cil;iald li hais promnifced at all times to do his dIc
\\n'\r, wh\licrilnhe shall find true report made to your iri-
|ily'!, rvir'lng par11,11don of your m;ljt'liy that I lhiIve heen il
ftedio'lo, ait t( I ave kiflid your m:ljcilty's hland I hnltiill
lake my leave. [ravinll, G(od to gran, t your lmajeiv an'a
o(d tilV dvs and h:lpp)', ill whose prote(d1liiit I colllnlit Vyii
;;:.,bc ;' .it 1,oniul>, thle Ioth o0 Janl. 1 586.

S I R,

S1 R,

A LI. I l 1' M;lcr (,L- i 'c .i .l; t)(t lre: in '

c m i(jTii;i

i C

is (not ilIt 11)1 ii hls (irl i'\ to tIv l oft Ii, ; cs xviel I. l his

{j' ni advice ald dllid;II t ti e
irl l .l.:kc's l{r til.' ; uiv.l'il -

and I'll- ill -

I L

t li i

i'rc

l.

t'ol'ol c ii ll

l i'

m 'nli vi , sI Icll ti ni .Illcr Ofi r (;r
,r

lid li r andi lir ll w

ie Icrltt

li,'1. vilv '. ll

P 1i'; AS1' it mli r riljflt in le lif;l ll li c vr Ih- ;,1 ,

7n 1 1

ic, {faidnc n- t ll: l. l' dI ltYlmcl t lly \,,,. Mj r':;\,

o\\.c ''

,,l

e

{liel hl' ni]rcl. ;i t

i ll'' i'l l'llillr (111' tiol1i 1"(2i)ll. hllil ; 1111- |,',

.l . ..

Joi'l' \ 'VC ,>(t (),1 1

]CI' t lJ. ()!11' 1 {.{ {1:,1!, 1

!, cc .1111 n( ll 1(h 1 '
U , } "' '

lli' lc il, l.'.tIn le , mii ll 'l( .l h 'i l tcll.tl iir, t'l: !lll t:, li -

iic l 1y ()

or ied1 tiiil[Jon, ; I i 111i t, l d !I \,I' i',.. i )'iill' i (r ( .';iit

ill Ihc Chliim b r, .

e \ littl. l i!,,w v (ol a r' at l i.' n;i llitnli

to lli .lic l1te tJrol l i lcl ilu e'li' r oi tidoi, nllo c.li ill I '
i)l(,\itice Vwhat ilc tI tllul idt, il\\ ;In\. wie )lt he inl ti.ha
ll.te, .1 l t since l1 :t e ds ilyv pr(l!itil C' alllcicllcc wtill h ilhe
i'llol c ouncil, wh ich to thi l

o nlr le: ii haiv l

x t b rt. in-

'.1. i hlis la' \v e i.i

,v l .'nl itl cll to clr.ivi h ( I o

l :.r

I lie iC. itceft liimilcr which

i ir iiC!'tl3 tiO iii tls rlmi]n In-
tlicl to is la |i cr'ilit i thil licy l ive i ie ti ll.t .i hll r v, i n;;i-

(lt ' t l'als fupclliici:illy iln ilis I ;liter, I r lla \\'.,t tiliC
c niity bc moved to (li[c) t it, wi h

wl,,'s v., t nli 'r,:lt d:i t-

ltiilty we lhad w'x[u;nit, we'find ai new l th.ii C:Ici.ii ICtIC!';
wlittenll t t lCo theIll o i ]a it roi Scoiti;o ll li.,s [h,(Ii (oilc
plaIc of credCit with them in our cuntrl.ir. So tli.at icfJlv-
il'r, now to clear tlilill ot thlat t iildubt by :1

t )u:i.l nlc{ tc ,

lity tl.t' c iei:tlic chloice ofl Siir Atc xaidr Sit.Wv iiL to tly
your hiigilincfi's i eaninil ill it, :;il(l to pLrluadC yvoli ii r .(i:lley
to likir o their i1rocceilit s,

\ha i r l in llln nc 1cllot l wsc C.11

L\. tint Unto 11h1n is ;aiblc to divert 1 1'n, i,r: !o;u

jix, '

~mt

,'I.lt rCe gli s u(r c reit

witil your iijcl

, Id l tit s

do !)ts

I 1t to lhelp this ma.ltter at youlr

ig ncllc s l.' l. If lic

(')lnc thllc tlha.t errand, we thilnk your in.ij'lltv will nut
°()tl'ic.c ilie grcat dilgriacc th.lt hlis ;lttillgl)t .

(li.ll givc IS

Ihlc, i1 lie be not tanc order witllh bcfre tlhat lie be furtlt:r
(."d(, ;ind il' I(o) be tha;t any otilther lie dil td (.is our
ltclligncc giveb ui thlerc il.ill) our hlunibic lUlt is to

N 1 2: v'ur

vnl! I 11 1\ I I a t I 111,1 v )!]11 ]lo, v

i; l ],,111 1

I w to I I C:1 r31 1 I~

nliitti' 1

v. 1 11, 1

h ll1 1(2 i', I:

l ct t t C;CI I

thc

thel j.n11 I .tl Illlllittill. Ii to o 111,1 1\ a I
( ( ) M 1 1 A 1 1 1 11 1 1 .1 1 1
11 or 1 lie pi (I c II I l (1 (; I)'1 Il l lv] nal I

No. X 111.(Vol. ii 1. , ·

oil\ C . s~

c romtt tile earls t( SI\\htl

(.~~~·11111\ 1~ [111, hc . r ll
&'2~tlito the dathItlt oii tile Ico ll (locct ij , Ik

l 1t1

I uliilV nod to
lieI

kl(lo 11i s 1 uim i ilt, I R'

1,s it ~11(;il( ( ci I1I( lo ilic o\l s m c
t l.S I1\ cm1 I of K ent.~)~~ i c

1\\. 11,1l 1 ,1 - t

l i il
(.l. o r si ip l tt l lll li h'

'1dlrc.iie(, n~,ild li cl sliewill

.lt(; AwleC(1111~111.1

Iuipll I thle len ilrt 111i 1

\\i iten l et pII pts 10 irihth fla w-

slich fox"" and's I

e ci wt li i troublled the Cl ttltr,' , r(Ii Ii

til'( ()il s( iiiillulkeI y oisll' i flich actui, is flIohlllI

Kc l mi
t .111,1 Clll1CCI 'tItli l t o samc 1; wh 11ich fits lolihl.

t l tp Jt Alc

r.ilollhsd. A/\ 1 r

i, 1 , 1' 1i ctwl ,

(t l ll' ti t1l

ll ' t11 (l , !

tIhr i.ll c':lli * li l I' ill I t ut i

M IC
. t, l . 'I I '

"ic' (i' . ct hl ,ci i Shi .' .

11 i t IT' t ;I

i . ill

', ,1

; ill li,

].il1 ll IlI i i, ' l I.llll('l'l ir , ,ll rllli,

i . til, 1 l.lr 'I 1 l, I i !,

:I 1 I| ,1't( ' ('i'

' o l ,'llt

I ' i s)llll ,' 'i 'l t i[' s. ) l 11ilt ' ( l ' Iwll'l' J s

,.l pA ,llcic e l l{ l l 'd ll. ilh , a ll.t t, l

c l( 'o th, ril l ll t

tlliii: '~)t c,i It ]c

t \\ U"1 it *.X Iiv m ii niln!, i hit the htI !

dI ur1.',

i lrllF . l i :i l ti.ik i

m\ 1 1 i tt- 1)' ,111 ,' \

l. t'. Intl' t '1'..

li il tl iir pl. tcst ,itito, fin et, tI s su 1. 1 t11 ,t' 'l t s, t

l c lIt'

rl il \\ 1 i. t 1il l ti tl 1 (llll' t.) ll tll il l1l1i' IC Ci 11 i l fV' t

l ,'i] itl i)'s tc tlt carl t) hi ,. llf h'l , ic l Itx t < it'; \tri ' i i t
1,i m h ('; Il. it .tl l cltltt (tcc slc.il} 1(s iol , il li , \o',"s l i-
Il,,1i )iu II.d:c t .le iltl il]l' 1s iT 'i,11 11t tit it, l i sti il,'

if wli t

t1e, otiutjessy tll ticl1ceul t) cx.uttit, sr

Il tcr ls w1re tll. { ult with t ili l}, lic j,. ;l'],;lt l > lir
l',I\. u'dl ; lo itil.; , (ie l1,iti.l II(l K1i :'l. Irt ', ? ~l r. I1', I. Dii-
ilT' Il, s i vc. t ) 1' f here ui \\

1111l1.1 y11 tlCl 1", (. oft til

t loctk in titC sior'UilU ' at \'ill]e t imeC it \;ii t tl rili'!it If c

Ct

lblit t11 he execution thollhl I

c. io pton 1i' u lly,

: we1 l;c tl

\'.1lHs c:11 t e lit l l, lici rc Iild tudil' 1( t

e 1 u1 -;

, li Il ()iiii

imiivreCnIc bctwcen us it

e.rls el(bl\el ,th.lt 1 IiC

t11 i lor

l'. li lala tin', ;sr t Le l I.';Cl ll' ;il( l otthl' l ll(' lill''

p.ll\'i- Jl;

.e ll ,lie 1c c lm

i lto I ullcl l hli;ll: .iltfi IteC tilT(-

. \m{l \vc

tlllhvi e|l I'i{it ll'e IO lIllU I h(l, ;I,(, I ilt ill (Ill' |u(illnlee {1t

lo; hll ani ler f olks

toi tl: ienat that

tl i ti \ iii;,,ht I,(e.

.il ti'l'e t exl(cu(Ti;R t 0r
l. i t (lt' was not 0ollh rwil 1|,rocee tilel

il)1l1 (llll; i a etowl nI to l.lw, ;u11{ 1 1te dt lolm th1e 1.lltsule

m.lM In (he 27tl, yc.u' os'h er

,sije'tv's ,, 'nsl, it \w ' p thv,,li,.l

11'iiln el t t1c llt

1 er

\I n;lj() ll'" ,

1c onI.li il li) tlnIm i .lA a

l we

*Ilit) l', :lutll l Wl it' ' il

ls (ili W illis by (I . lill tl c.)

p c ll
~x^llcdl lo ptllre c lirlll t :o.iT, il tlit next nl.)i;li )[y . Sh ieit

A'. lli(o puti in t .ciltllrllcc ol her t.mill, the ho o.rlild:c

111t.iiln t Ill I| ot'tetili, \vito l i er, ax aln (lie neccllity thl.lt w ts.
:''|lcl upl n her l I;jell)y to |)iocecJ l to cxccutlu i, l,,r
!h.t ,:tlhcrwil' it was louilld th;lt tlle) cou lld litIt luthl {.lult
'l.'nllel ,; ;1mil lhowvcc{', titlihceo tlec lindl l3, cklul lIl'.s hIs
1)t'll't HCF ,

IT ew onlil I.I:cys . vICol atteill|tcld, :Iil b woull
\ a inink.,, b) 1{ilc l; lord .illtl RolClert 1B 'lc, to think u p-l

N 11 3 ta

on and prepare lierfelf to die, we doubted not but that
ihe was, before this, Ifttled, and therefore would accept
thii rnillaige in good part. And to the effed that no chri-
flian duty might be laid to be omitted, that might be for
her coilfort, and tend to the salvation both of her body
and foul in the world to come, we offered unto her that
if it wVc:id ple:le her to confer with the bishop and dean
cf I'eterborough, fle might; w.hich dean, we had, for that
purpose, appointed to be lodged within one mile of that
rlace. Hf-ereto ihe replied, croiffng herfielf in the name of
the Father, the Son, and the Holy Gholt, si(ing that the
was readv to die i;i the catholic Roman faith, which her
ancellors had prof-iediJ, from which file would not be re-
moved. And albeit we ufied many pcrfuafions to the con-
trary, yet we prevailed nothing; and therefore, when
the demanded the admittance of her priet, we utterly de-
i!Led that unto her. Hereupon, flhe demanded to under-
tiand what aniwcr we had touching her former petition to
her majeft', concerning her papers of accounts, and tho
beflowing of her body. To the first we had none other
answer to make, but that we thoulght if they were not
Ient before, the fame might be in Mr. Waade's cuflody,
who was now in France, and feeing her papers could not
any vwile pleasure her majefly, we doubted not but that the
aime would be delivered unto such as The should appoint.
Flor, for our own parts, we undoubtedly thought that her
inaijefty would not make any profit of her things, and
theres

: re (in our opinions) ihe might set down what (he

wriuld have done, and thle fame flould be imparted unto
her nlijely, of whom both ihe and others might expect
ill courtel, 'T'ouching her body, we knew not her ma-
!ifly's pleafire, and therefore could neither fay that her
Ietition mhould be dcnyeld, or granted. For the praatice of
Ba;bingllo, (lie utterly denied it, and would have inferred it,
i h.it her death was for her religion ; whereunto it was eft-
oins by us replied, that lor nlmany years Ihe was not
iot;clled for religion, nor should have been now, but

i.ht thlis proceeding ;againlfl her was for trealon, in that
lie was culpalble ol tht horrible coulnirlacy for defircyin
h'r majetly's person ; which file again denied, adding fur-
iher, tilt albeit (he lor herself forlave them that were the
Wproc,(urs (f her de(ath, yet (he doitlhted not but that (God
'woold t; ke vengtantce theleof'. And being charged with
Ie lep 'litiloIs (o N.lut :Ind l'uile to lpro\' it.,iaill her,

, nl

fhle replied, that fie accused none, but that hereafter when
f(hc hall be dead, and they remain alive, it flhall be seen
how indifferentlyv ie had been dealt with, and what mca-
fire had been u(ed unto her; and askcd whether it had
been heard before this, that fcrvants hlid been praatifcd
to accute thair mistress, and hereupon also required what
was become of them, and where they remailed.

UPON our departure from her, for that it seemed by the

comimiflion, that the charge of her was in the dilijofition
of us the earls, we required S. Amias Paulet and S. Drue
J)rurie, to receive, for that night, the charge, which they
had before, and to cause the whole number of soldiers to
watch that night, and that her folks should be put up, and
take order that only four of them fiould be at the execu-
lion, remaining aloof of and guarded with certain perflons
1o as they should not come near unto her, whicih \wcre
Mclvil her steward, the physician,, furgcon, and apothe
car y.

WEDNESDAY mornling, after that we the earls were re-

paired unto the callle, and the sheriss had prepared all
things in the hall for the execution, he was coilimmanded
to go into her chamber, and to bring her down to the place
where were prefcnt, we which have signed this letter, Mlr.
Henry Talbot, efq; fir Edward Montague, knt. his son
and heir apparent, and William Monitague his b:other,
fir Richard Knichtly, knt. Mr. Thomas Brudenel, Mr.
Bcuill, Mr. Robert and John Wingeficld, M\r. Forreft,
a.nd Rayner, Benjami n Piggot, Mr. Dean of 'cterbo-
rough, and others.

A'r the ftairfold, the paused to speak to Mclvil in our

hearing, which was to this cffett, " Mclvil, as thou haft
been an honell:t rvant to me, so I pray thee contillue to
nly fln, and commend me unto hili. I have not irmpugn' d
his religion, nor the religion of others, but wilh him well.
And as I forgive all that have offended me in Scotland, lo
I would that he flhuldl alif; and beseech God, that he
would lend him his Holy Spirit, and illuminate him."
Melvill's antfwrr was, that lie would lo do, and at that in-
t;ant he would belbech God to affifl him with his Spirit.
'i'hen fle demanded to speak with her priefr, which was
dtenlid unto her, the rather for that she came with a lu-
perllitious pair of beads and a crucifix. She then desired
to have her women to help her, and upon her ;earnelf re-
q'tcil, and faying that when other gentlewomen were cx-

N n 4 ecuted,

on and prepare herself to die, we doubted not but that
the was, before this, iettled, and therefore would accept
this rnitefge in good part. And to the eFeEt that no chri-
flian duty might be laid to be omitted, that might be for
her conil ort, and tend to the salvation both of her body
and fiul ;n the world to come, we offercd unto her that
if it \vc ld piclIe her to confer with the bishop and dean
of l'terborougr, she rImight; which dean, we had, for that
purrpofe, appopinted to he lodged wiithill one mile of that
rlace. I'cercto ihe replied, croffin herself in the name of
the Father, the Son,i and the Holy Gholt, faying that ihe
was ready to die in tle catholic Roman faith, which her
ancelors had profeiled, from which ile would not be re-
moved. And albeit we used many pcrfuafions to the con-
trary, yet we prevailed nothing; and therefore, when
lhe demanded the admittance of her priefc, we utterly de-
i hcd that unto her. Hereupon, she demanded to under-
itand what anwvcr we had touching her former petition to
her majesty, concerning her papers of accounts, and tha
bcfhowing of her body. To the first we had none other
answer to make, but that we thought if they were not
lent before, the fame might be in Mr. Waade's cuflody,
who was now in France, and feeing her papers could not
any wife pleasure her majesty, we doubted not but that the
larne would be delivered unto such as she should appoint.
For, for our own parts, we undoubtedly thought that her
n:majcfty would not make any profit of her things, and
thlref:re (in our opinions) ihe might set down what (he
w(uld hae dlone, and the famne flould be imparted unto
her niajetly, of whom both ihe and others niight expct
ill courtesly. ITouching her body, we knew not her ma-
rfly's pleaf'irc, al; d therefore could neither fay that her
t ,itition should be dcii)cd, or granted. For the practice of
iahingltiin, lhe utterly) denied it, and would have inferred it,
I liat ier death was for her religion; whereunto it was eit-
!nolns by us replied, that lor many years ihe was not
;oiucled for religion, nor thould have been now, but
h!iit this proceeding aigainfr her was for trealon, in that
flui was culpable ol that horrible conlf)iracy for deftroving
hvr niajetly's person ; which flbe again denied, adding tur-
ther, tin alt aleit (he l'or herfilf lor'gave them that wcre th'
ipr.i rrorst ifher death, yet fie doubted not but that (Goi
'vtlhl tla ke veng(r nce theicof. And beingl charged with
·*cx' lcplifliiions .lt l iu.' 1 tnd Curle to prove\ it .,nila li her,

j ~hc

hec replied, that fhc accused none, but that hereafter when
hie Ihall be dead, anrd they remain alive, it fihal be fenc
how inidifferently fihe had been dealt with, and what inca-
ilre had been ufied unto her; and askcd whether it had
been heard before this, that fcrvants had been pra(itifed
to acculf thair mifltrcfs, and hereiuponl also required what
was become of them, and where they remained.

UPON our departure from her, for that it feecmed by the

con miflion, that the charge of her was in the dilpofition
of us the earls, we required S. Amias Paulet and S. Druc
J)rurie, to receive, for that night, the charge, which they
had before, and to cause the whole number of soldiers to
watch that night, and that her folks thould be put up, and
take order that only four of them fliould be at the execu-
lion, remaining aloof of and guarded with certain pcrlfols1
so as they fiould not come near unto her, which were
Mclvil her steward, the physician, surgeon, and apothc-
carv.

WVEDNESDAY morning, after that we the earls were re-

paired unto the catile, and the sheriss had preparced all
things in the hall for the execution, he was comlnandedc
to go into her chamber, and to bring her down to the place
where were pre'cnt, we which have signed this letter, Mr.
Henry Talbot, efq; fir Edward Montague, knt. his son
and heir apparent, and William M\ontague his b:other,
fir Richard Knichtly, knt. Mr. Thomas Brui'niicl, Mr.
Bcuill, Mr. Robert and John Wingefield, Mr. Forreft,
and R.ayner, Benjamin Piggot, Mr. Dean of Peterbo-
rough, and others.

A'T the flailfold, she paused to speak to Mclvil in our

hearing, which was to this effiet, " Mclvil, as thou haft
been an honlCI fcrvallt to me, so I pray thee continue to
my ), to, and commend me unto h nil. I have not implugnl'd
his religion, nor the religion of others, but wilh him well.
And as I forgive all that have offended me in Scotland, lo
I would that he should :also ; and bcfeech God, that he
wo(uld fend hinm his Holy Spirit, and illuminate him."
Melvill's answer was, that lie would lo do, and at that in-
tiant he would belfcch (God to afnii him with his Spirit.
lheln file demanded to sp)eak with her pries, which was
d(lied unto her, the rather for that she came with a lu-
I'rltitious pair of beads and a crucifix. She then dftiled
to have her womci to help her, and upon her carncft rc-
ul"cfi alld laying that when other gentlewoinci were cx-

N 1 4 ccutedl,

ecutel, ile had1 rena il chronicles that they had women
3al]ow lnto ttltheim, it was permiitted that tfle fliould haxe
tw.vo named bi hcrflc!f, wnhich werse rs. Cure and Ken-
ncd. f'!r tnlhe ca:lm to the fc:affol, r , in pretfnce of
thim ail, her mn.j.eiHcs coinmiflon was openly read; and
asirei vards Mr. Dean. of I'etcrroro<!oih, according to adi-
rc, lic:; which he had received, the niiht before, frIlom l1
the eirl, wou 'd h:ve made a goi dv adlmonitionl to 1her, to
repent arin dye wvill in the iar of (God and chi i.itv to the
world. B'!lt :t thie filli elttry, fie utterly refil bd it, f. v-
inIZ that she was catholique, and that it wArC a folly to
move her, biilr so refolutcly minded, andt thalt our pray-
ers vould little avail her. Whereupon, to the intent it
nii:ht a;p,:.!ir thli c, alnd the whole hlflinclly, had a clhi-
Jti.eli dclile to have !hc: die well, a godly' prayer, conceiv'd
bv ,'ir. ;Dan, lwas read and pronounced by) us all. " lhat
it wvuld pleafl Allmi\ilhts (God to fend her his H-oly Spirit
ai i .'g;:ce, and a1f'i, i' it were his will, to pardon all her
o:;ieC's, :nd oi his m-ercy to rcceive her into his heavelll
:!:ad evcrl.iiig k inlgdoin, and finll:ily to blels her majicl',
and confound ,ll her e rneies ;" swhelcoi Mr. Dean, mind-
i:l, to lcp.iir up hortly, can ihew your lordfhit)s a copy.

TI -is d(Oln c, i}e pronll ouncedl a prayer upon her kinccs

to Ihis c;tic, " to beclech God to fcndl her his HJoly
.2S!i;Ii;, a d

' it ' lit hle trillcd to receive her xlvaation in lis

b) c;'!, ::! I ') lIii grace ro lie received ilto his kilndoml,
b,'lo;i',h (i;.Gd to forgive her cenemies, as she for;l.':le
:cr!;e :,; ti to il;ln lis wrath f this lailn , to bl)les hthI

;|!;;i's I!i ;h'j!i, , thiat fhi e nI'lilt er'e himi. Liew x ife

l t

1b li, i rc iJl )

i heir ion, tto hl\ c(lnlilJli oil of lis (1hur-ch,

,i:;l .'Ilo,' flc

/ \t 1 lLOt w\(ortlh' to be hieiid, vet flle h.id1

. (, !i.i(il ' il hi;: 1 mllerev, ilil I)r.\ l all tile f ints, to pr15.
'::t,) he el .vii, 'r

, l l

,i ii\' hler." /\Cl t r

th I is (tillrn li, lt -

\'..i l!l i:,' ; i ;c,'\.. tL:- (ll (ie .

d ir ed tl11 m1 lo prly for her, tli .I

h! i .S.! v;,l il

1 r,' (.li l '1

r Il c' l . 'I

' l ien, ti)I()1 i )c iti' on 1 .!

)1' (

I,\ the e:.ecu :i,;, i l,, f'.l pa'dolted1c tll cnm; a 1d a1 d, /'lt11i

'. id ; 1:,;t (.: . . 11d

l h

r,

,I.: lher lrrows as oi near. 'l' 11

hce :!:ikc d th*' vdhll' niln[, arid u'ceping of' hler wo enc , . ir-
:I.', lii!lll, G od

ll'hl It hll<( or- herl lclJ.]l-

l:.,) , xn, l 1.;:iin;', themll, x; 1 lt tlein to (depJ ait i-rot)l 1.1:
/c.}'hol1d, .a d 1AI. wl',' l. Aid 11( ;,

I 'ielolly kl ncrw d d1.,1 wl,

.,,,d l.i ii. ; 1a l.cr', ' } bl d d

;.ld, le e\,,11(

h r 1'A, 1.,1 d xI\'n

h1,r lu1 ,X, .\\xlhci(l l') ] t. '

,. cuAi,.:liill' ]l

c ,, 'cIe. I ,'l

!h ;'~ ill s \i,.'.' :'1. t:lti::' iillly It .
il e. . dll 01 e!cl t(.k t n lli;lt

ll')1 '

none floulld approach unto her corps, but that it flhould
bie embalmed by the furgcon appoiltrd And fourther her
crofie, ;pparel; , ald other thing are retained here, .te
not yiclded unto the executioner for inlcolnvenieliccs that
might f1llow, biit he is remitted to be rewarded b)y flich
,is cnt him hitlher.

T':is hath bccn the manner of our dealings in this

service, whereof we hiaxe i ti)ouibt ,uod to aldvcltif your
!onrJdfi:ip, as palrlicul;rly as we could, for the time, and
further have thouglit tucd to fi.nisS' unto your lordfhills
besides, that tor the Iav;idigi of all lniierl and flnderoLus
reports tlat may be raileCd to the contr:;rrv, we have canucd
;i note thereof to he con(ceiv'd to the fimi efec't in writ-
i:lr, which we the said lords have uiflc ribedl, with tlic
:inds of such other tiere the nights and gentlemen above
I.iined that were present at the a;tion. And Cb hefl cch-
inlL Almighty God long to Iblefs her mrnjelly with a niollt
prosperous reign, and to confound all his, and her ene-
mies, we take our leaves. From lFothcrilngavCafltl, the
:lth of February 1586, in half.

Your lordships at commandmcnt.
N, B. This, as well as several other papers in this Ap-

pe ndix, is taken from a collectioln imade by Mir.
Cr.iwflhrd of Drumfoy, hiltoriogr:lpher to Q(1cni
A lie, now in the library of the tacillty of Advo-
c;tes. Mr. Crawfurd's tranilcribcr has omitted to
Incition the book ill the Coit. Lib. ,where it is to be
foun Id.

No. XIX. (Vol. II . . 184.)

i hel oljdciois ag.iinIl Mr. I) .vilbn, in the caiufe

of tle lare Sc'ottilh (Iticcn, mnull Concern' things
done eitcher, i. 'cfore Icler trial at l'othcril;gay.
2. During that fcflion. 3. Aftcr the lane.
;. "p'l F 0) R I'; her trial, he neither is, nor can 1he Cn.,. .il,.

·' charged to have had a;ny hald at all in thle C;III C (':lI.

c. I

.

Il trhe (id 1qeen, or (lone in;)v thiiln whatlf l ver concerniln
:'i" lnle, d(]lrctly or i lliredly.

.. )I')RIN(; lthat I(elion, lie remainiied at court, where
';: o:ly), intteelf lie had thelcin, was as her nuajefly's (e-

cretatI )',

crctary, to receive the letters from the commiflioncrs, im.
parthem to her highness, and return them
her answers.

3. AFT'ER the return thence, of the said commillion-
ers, it is well known to all her council,

1. T'IIA.' he never was at any decihcration or meeting

vwliatfnevcr, in parliament, or council, concerning the
cause of the said queen, tiil the fending down of her ma-
lls warrant nto the ccmmlilione s, by the lords and
ot!;c!s of her council.

2. 7 HAT he was no party in signing the fentenee, pafi-
ed anginft her.

. THAT he never penned either the procl-;r,-:;ion

puililifhing the fame, the warrant after her death, :, r
anv other letter, or thing whatsoever concrning llh
fame. And,

TI' AT the only thing which can be specially and trliv

imputed to him, is the carrying up the fai( w:ii-rant unto
her inajefty to be signed. She fending a great couiiflllor
unto himn, with her pleafire to that end, and carrying it
to the great feal of England, by her own special diretioei
and commandment.

FOR the better clearing of which truth, it is evident,
1. THAT the letter, being penned by the lord trea-

furcr, was delivered by him unto Mr. Davison, with l1i
manjefy's own privity, to be ready for to sign, when isle.
/hould be pleased to call for it.

2. THAT being in his hands, he retained it at the claft

five or fix weeks unprefcnted, nor once oflcring to carry
it up, till she sent a great counfbllor unto him lor tlh
fame, and was sharply reproved tlcrcfor by a great pccr,
in her majefly's own prelence.

3. THAT havinlg iigled it, she gave him an CxprlI.f

commandment to carry it to the eIal, and being fealed to
fend it immediately away unto the conmiiflioncrs, ac-
cording to the direcQion. Herielf appoi ntiing the hall ct
lothcringay for the place of cxecution, nilikinlil, lic
court-yard, in divers reliccIs, and in conclltiroul ;Iiio-
Jutely sorbad him to trouble her any further, or let lih'
icar any more hereof, till it was done. Slhe, for Ihc
part, having (as fle si id) performed all tlih.t, in lawl
rcafon, could be required of her.

4. \ ilt

4. XWHICH directions rntwithfanding, he kept the

vwarrant fl;led all that niht, and the greatcft part cf th-
i:cxt day in his handll' brought it back with him to the
,ouirt, acquainted her m;iieltv withal, alli finiii llhe
rinjaicv refo lved to proceed therein, according to her for-
li_'r (dire tions, a td vyet deCiroui, to carrv the matter so, a-
ft(i mighit throw ti:e burthen firom lici f'l, lie ibibloutcl
,('sol\ed to (1uit his hands tereof'.

5. AND hereupon went over unto the lord trneafurcr's

chamber, totLet;l \rwith Mlr. vicc-chamberlain lattoi,
andl in his pre- ;llc rellored the fame into the hands <s'
the f aid lord treal';rer, of whom he had before recelved
it, who froml hlnclclorth kept it, till hilnlclf and the reft
of tlhe coinicil (liit it av;ay.

'rrIctn, in Iibt;anlc( alnd truth, is all tlhe part and in-

terest the aIid Davilon had in this caule, whiatobevcr is, or
n:ay be pretended to the contrary.

'IoucIIl,'c; the fbnding down thereof unto the com-

mnili';oiers, that it was the general adt of her majesty's
coaucil (as is before mentioned) and not any private act
ot his, may appear by,

I. 'I'lIlR own conliefion. 2. Their own letters sent

dwn therewith to the commiflioners. 3. The teflimo-
riic' of the lords and others to whom they were direCted.
As also, -4. f M\r. Beale, by whom they were sent. 5. 'The
tenor of her majeft,'s first comniflion for their calling to
the liar- chamber for the fame, and private appearance and
fublmiflion afterward inftcad thereof, before the lord chan-
cellor lromley. . . The confcflioln of Mr. Attornev-
general in open court cofiiermed. . 13y the Ifntencc it-
(clf upon record. 8. 'clides a common adt of council,
c(ot:ainiing an lfwe to be verbally delivered to the Scot-
tifli alnballador then remaining here, avowing and jufti-
fying the I;mle.

Now where lfme fuiippofe him to have given some ex-

traordinary furtherance thereuiito, the contrary Ilmay Cvi-
dently appear by,

I. His former ablflute refufill to sign the band of as-

fociatiun, being carneilly prellced thereunto by her ma-
jelly's self.

2. Ills excising of himself from being ifed as a conlm-
tmillioner, in the examiinationl olf Babilngtonl ;d his corn-
1'lites, andi avuiding the fame by a journery to the Bath.

3. tII.

3. His being a mean to flay the commiflionrrs from pr-

nouncii: of the fentcnce at I'othcrinfav, anid deferring it
till they thould return to her mnjefy's preltnce.

J4 IJJs keeping the warrant ill his hands fix weeksun-

pretn!ted, without once ofFering to carry it up, till her
milnTiy sent exprefly for the fame to I'n.

5. His deferring to fe.'ll it ;away alter it was Icalcd un-

to the commitioners, ais he was fjecia!ly com:l:andlcl,i
fLt:iinlt it all that Ilight, and the grea.tcl plCIt of the ni.xt
d(ay ill his hl.ind;.

6. A\':n finally, his reiorling thereof into the hands o(

the lord treafurcr, of wlon lie had befcie received the
smI c.

\VH-Icii are clear and evident proof', that the f:i.l

I)a.'i!!; d(lid nothingt in this c;anfe wlhatf.)vcr, cun:!.ir
to the duty of the place he then held in her Ir,,lijcy'
f.rv ic e.

C'l. C. 9.
THIS freems tobe nn orihlinl. On the back is this title,
ITHE innocency of Mr. I)avifun in the cause of the l.i;
Scottish queen.

No. XX. (Vol .

I . . 27, line 3.)

Letter frorm , to his majef-y King J;amcs'

,n thr iE M 0 S T worthy prince, the depending dlangers ip-
)rigina. l. on yotur affictionates have bcen s'uch, as hathl in-

' C. forced filcice in him, wh!l is faithfuilly devoted to yo!lr

. I. Edin.

A».T . 1.' perlbon, and in due time of trial, will undergo all hazl: rd
No. 4. of fortune, for the maintenance of til jutregal rights,

that, by the laws divine, of nature, and of nations, is in-
vested in y our royal perf;in. F'all not then, mon nonbl!
and renowlmd prince, from him, whole providence ai:ith
in many dangers preflirved you, no doubt to be an inllru-
I)ent of his glory, and the good of his )people. Somie
fe rets, 1 si nd, have been revealed to your prejiiilicC,
which mnlut proceed flromn f;nllle almbitioiis violent (,iriiJed
perion near your majell 5 ii council and favour; nto 1n11,
in particular will I accuIh', but I am sure it Ilath no sounil-

hi In the flrmer eliio s, I , inll' this .) ah lci'r irimI Sir

S .,bcrt (,.'A , ,

hiL am in w f.riw ii,'l th.t I w is m slil.k!,'i in sorning tins pinni. S.' '(I
1). I).]lrymillt' ItRen .

n n he

l il| . l Scot. p. '11 . AI thin In'tl i'cuiliill"

I r1l)11 ilnli it, thoi)ii I ini to prltltill to IyI) in hIcll ot lle .I I(iTC'9 1111n1iC'
iou S rnclIplOidnls in EIin;,ili it fhouldt I)C fclilcd.

atiutI

ation firm any, with whom, for your service, I have hel
correfiondelce; otherwise, I had, long finice, been dif..
tblcd from perf,,rmance of those duties, that the thoue!t:,,
ofmy heart cndtlc;vourcth; being only known to this wor-
thy noblemani be .rcr hereof, one nlotd in all parts o:
Chrillendom for his fidelity to your pcrlon and it;lte, ani
to M\r. David Fowlis your moltl loyal fervanli, mly lir-l. 11an
faithful cotrelondecit; and unto James Hudlonc, \wlhom
I have found in all things that concerln you, molt Ibcrct
and aflured. It may, therefore, please your mnajerv, ;'t
the uilmble motion of 0, which jargon I desire to b tilhe
indorfmenlnt of your commands unto me, that, hv fi(nII
tukcn of your favour, he may underl-cand in wvhat terni'-
you regard his fidelity, Iecrecy and service. My plfiio -.
ate ;afl'cioIl to your pcl on (not as you: are a kinr, but
as ).ou re a good kingr, and Ihave just title, after nly Iu-
icrciign, to be a great :kilug) doth tranflporl t me to prefumnl-
tion. Condemln not, mollt nble( prilnce, the motives ot
c.re and love, altho' nixed with dclecs inl judgimnt.

I. I, thcrctoie, firit bfecch c your nljcltv, that s',i

the good of tliofe Iwhom 1God, byI divine i 'rovidcilc,
bath destined to your charge, tllt youl will be plelted to
hI,.ve an extraordinary care of all pra~licers or practiccs,
,tgiiiilt y'our pcrion ; for it is lot to be doubted, but that1
in both kingdoms, either out of ambition, I.ltion, or fear,
tlhi e are many that defile to have Illei r foC reiin in niniO-
rit\, whereby the ;o('rcignty and llate miglt le fwavueld
by par;tiality of fubalt' r 'tn:te perlins, rather than by true
rule of poweVr aild juflice. l'lrtcrve )your ['"rl;n, a;11
f-ar not the iraclsicc of man uipoi the point of your riglt,
'whiicli will be preserved ;and nmaitaintled against all :;1nult
ol compettiion whatever. 'Ius I leave thle )protetion ot
3ouLr pcIr;It, and royal iofterity, to the Almighlty (God ol
l leaven, muho bless anld prefeilvc you and all yours, ill a!
rcgal hailrlincfs to Ilis glory.

2. NEi'XT to tle pr)cl'rvation of your perilo, is tihl

c(iivcrf.atioin and l:crct keepilng oft' yu' cnllcell-, w'iclh,
as I have slid, are o{tcin hctra;)ed alilt dilcovered, either
olit of pretended zeal in rCli ioni, tin hle'lt l;tio()n, or
b;alI concep tion , the whlichl youlr iliajclt! is to r-g.1,d witL
.al cilrcunmlpscdlion, as ;a matter mitolt dangerous to ,your
I'll)un and slate, a;d tile only tmeiis to Ilill ad de;ltoy

Il tholet that f{la d faitillully devotedl to youIr mi ljctl 's
lerv ice. Some particulars, 1and lprfolis of till, nature, I
ina.l kc1o doubt have beccn diflcuvcrcd by the ciiLcavoLurs of.

Uli's

this nobleman, the bearer hereof, of whom your majcfti
may be further informed.

3. THE third point considerable is that ) our man jcfty, b1

all means poflible, secure yourielf of the good affdction
of the French King and States, by the negociation of fomc
faithful secret confident; the French naturally dillafinal;
the union of the British islands under one nlonarch. In
Germany, I doubt not, hut you have many allies and
friends, but by reason of their remote slate, they do n .t
bo much importe this afl-air, which mull be guidcci by a
quick and sudden motion.

4. WXVEN God, by whose Providence, the period of

11 persons and times is deternmilcd, 'hall call to his kin -
dloin of glory her majefly (altho'iih I don aliiredly hopc
that there wviil not be any q(ueiiionil in competition, yet
for that 1 hold it not fittingr to riv,'e any inute entrance
into a caule of lo high a nature), I do htinbl bcfecch your
mafrjtiy to dcign a secret, faithlll, ::' d experienced con-
sident le'rvant of yours, bcing of an approved fidelity and
juldgmlent, continually to be here reflidct, whose ncrocia-
tion, it were conlvelient your majelty llhlnid lortiic, with
iuch fecrct trufl and powers, as the re may not need 4.
clays relpite, to post for auth)rity, in a caule, that cannot
endure 1o hours relpite, without varieties of danger. In
thi which it is to be confidered, tihat ;ll such as pritc!(
lcall nood to your establishment, will not in public op-
plugn your title, but out of their C cillini( almbition will
'eek to gain time, by allcdgin.; their pretence of coniiiioi
gtood to tile ftitc, in propounding of good conditions to:'
olfburthening the comnmon wcalc, of divers hard laws,

cavy impltions corrtions, crrt , ol)piellionls, &c. which iq

a inailn point to lead the popsilar, wilo are nmuch dilguf!tc(
with many particulars of this nattire. It were therCfoCr
conlvenient, that thelte motivcs, out ol your nmajclty's pio-
vidence, fliould be prceventec, b) )your free uotir in thecl
poilnts following, viz.

1. 'iTHATr your majctly 1would be plc:li:cd to abolifll

purveyors and( purl'vyancc, belCnl ;l nl;tter ilninitely of-
fenflive to tle comnimon pc:pei, inld tile whole kiugduoii,
and not prolitable to the princc.

2. TH'lATr your mnajelty would be plea ed to diflolve lth

court of wards, being the ruin of ill Lthe noble and an1-
cicnt families of tllis rCelA, by ;bal( ml;tches, andl evil
education of their children, by which no revenue of the
cxown will be dfraycdl.

3. It'

,. THEF abrogating the multiplicity of penal lawv, cr-

i.;;ally repincd againll by the subject, ill regard of their
.:iccrt:lintv, being many time; altrcrd from their tr':c
nic:Lmin i , by variety of interpretations.

4. 'I'sATr your majesty will De pleaced to admit free

outport of the native commodities of this kingdom, nov.
oftenl relrained by subalternate pcrfons for private profit,
being most prejudicial to the commerce of all merchants,
and a plain deftrudtion to the true industry and manufac-
ture of all kingdoms, and againift the profit of the crown.

THESE, being by your majelly's confidents in the point

as time propounded, will aflurcdly confirm unto your Ima-
icftic the hearts and arfedions of the whole kingdom, and
bibolutely prevent all insinuations and deviccs of dcfigned
patriots, that, out of pretext of commron good, would
feck to patronize themselves in popular opinion and power,
aid thereby to derogate from your Imajllty's bounty and
free favour, by princely merit of your moderation, judg-
ment and justice.

YOUR majesty's favour, thus granted to the fubjcte,

will no way impeach the profits of the crown but advance
theli. The difproportionable gain of some chequer offi-
ters, with the base and mercenary profits of the idle utn-
aecellary clerks and attendants, will only futecr sone detri -
nlcnt; but infinite will be the good unto the kingdonl,
;vwhich will confirm uito your majesty the univerlal love
:uld afl ietion of the people, and citablifih your renown in
the highest eftcem to all poflerity.

T'IE Iord preserve )youlr i:ljeltie, and make you tri-
:ii)lhant over all your enemies.

A lcare over his person, whose letters pass in this pac-

tiict, and will die before he leave to be yours, fliall he no
IclI than of mine own lile, and in like ecreer I will hold
.11 your faithful confidents, notwithflanding I will hold
ilyfilf reflr-ved from being known unto any of theim, ii
il y p' i:ticular devoted aflcctiions unto your majcty, only
dlUs extraordinary worthy nian, whose albciate I am ii
Ins misfortune, doth know my heart, and we both will
pray lor you, andc if we live you Ihall find us together.

I I. s.EC-IH your m;ijefty burn this letter, and the

others; for altho' it be in an ululilnal hand, yet it may be
thlcovcred.

Your majefly's lmofl (devoted,

.nld hullnble fCrvalnt,

0.h

# The following Note having been omitted, page 44. line 19. is inserted here.

k
Tke followiirg Note having been omilted,

page 44. line 19. is infer/ed here.

to rcurf and i flar.J] A llrikinl dcfcripti;,n rof that jfcc!,-

of eloquence for which Knox was diilinguiiled, is given I,.
one of' hlis contemporaries, Mr. James I\elviilc, lMiniicr (.
A\nitl rther. '" But of all the benelites 1 had l t )ha
[15 1], was the coming of tlint nmol notible prolphet ;:I[.
!,,illc (of our nation, IMr. John Knox, to St. Andrem\~,
wiho , lb the fa;tcion of the Quccn occupyin:; the c;llle a;!'.i
t:.,wxi (i l'ldinlirgh, was compelled to rerTlove tilcrcls.' \wi!'
:it uli)11)r l-t tlie lbe R, anld chiltld1 to comeIc to St. AndrevI..
I leard 1hi tealch t here the proplicics ofi D:anicl tlhat 2im-
iriel andl tlhe winter fl llov;in. I h;d my

l pen land littl

hliiik, andil took iv.k:v lie tlings as I could comi)rehend. hiD
hellic op'ioi of' his tc\t, lie was mlioderat the lif acc of li.i!
:m ii liou; LUtL wihen lie entered to applicaltionl, le iald 1!!.
i;) to, gr ue [thrill] and tele tili hat I could not h1adi th!
pein to writL.- - c was very wcak. 1 li,,i lii every dt
i'i his doCtrine g /.ou/ie [slowly] and fair,

l with a t slir i.:

It;arlicks ahI) t ilis neck, a Itall' in the (tne J;lll, a 'nd .
godlie Rictli:irL Ballriideln holding liitiii ) by' llve'x [llun-
dler tlie arill] l;rcni tlie abl)y to tile p;rii kirk; : m1 l 1i
tle l aid Ri liart ;iild anllot er felv:tal lilfed Ilimi up t ill.'
pulpit, wher e lic beoved to lca:1 at hliiis l ii t cltlic; Iei! lt C!
ie \w.is doi e witl i his Ic1'nll ill, lie \s;l, lo alliveb nd it ' n'r::.,
that lie w\\as like to ding thr pu/lyi in blads [be:it the pltpilt t
Pieces], and fly olut of it." MS. L.ife of Mr. J:amies 1M1-
x'ill, Ibelonllgillg to Mr. Paton of' the Ctilluil-lioult, l'1 '
burgh, 1" i. , 21.

# INDEX.

I N D E X.
iA. B. The Numeral Letters refer to the Volume,

and the Figures to the Pages.

A
.JD/ilMOiN, Archbifiop of St. Andrews, is excommunir.

c.,ted by the fynoc of Fife, ii. 143. lie e;commtuni-

catei his opponents, ib. is reflored by the general :illm!Jiv
upoli conditions, 144. his mean fubmiGfion to the gencral a1-
fce;nb!y - 2 0)
/t;an'y, A'exander Duke of, cabals with his nobles againfl his

brother K. James IIt. . 58. is made prisoner, hut cicapes to
France, ibid. concludes a treaty with Ed. IV. of IEnigl:nd, 9.
plocures aflidance to invade Scotland on mean conditions, it,.
retur s to Scotland, and is rellored to favour, 60. cabals
again, but is foiccd to fy to France - 61
--- 1) uke of, made Regent during the minoi ity of K, Jame,

V. i. 37. 6.1. after Ifevral unfuccef,ful frugglcs with the no-
bili;y, he is Ifrc d to ictire to Fr.nce - 6;
AI',nfont, luke of, Q_ Elizabeth longamufis the court of France

by cair ingi on a treaty of manriae with him ii. 7
Al,'/t, cardinal, publifiied a book proving the lawfulness of ki!

ing excomnmuliicated Princes - ii. i

,'.va, Duke of, his intrigues in favour of Q. Mary, ii. 28. 32.

4('. i recalii d fron I'is government of the Netherlands 5 I
Anb/oaJ)Jzrs, their oflice - - i. q

.:';,h/eSu, S:. the Arclibiflop of, iemarkably cured of a dang(rrous
dillcriper, i. 130. the motives (f his opp,,fition to the Q(
Reenrir, 1( . iiis great influence on the bench of Bilhnp anJd

eigfiht in Parliament, 169. glveinc d the church witli gratc
mr dcration, 17o. perLeeiutes the Reformers, 171. is inlpri-
loned for celebrating Mals, 310o. ruins Q. Mary's aIfrlirs by
iis irlrilo'lit condud, .7'7. is taken priloner in Dunib.lroil
C.allc1, and h:ingcd -l - ii. 18

he--- callle of, dcmolilied by the French i. 11)

--- the piioi of, poniotes a treaty between the Qc Regent

ard lthe Reformers, i. 183. is piovoked to leave he court,
j16. is one of thle chief promoters of the refrmnnation, 201.
lfme ar(ounl, and a character of himt, ibid. 202. artful en-

\VUL. 1, 0 o dcavours

deavours ustd to unldermnne him, ibid. prefumptinn of his ir..
nrocence of the designs charged on him, ibid. is Icnt by the
convention to invite the Queen to Scotland, 28S. is received
by her with colfi.ecnce and ;,feclAion, 260. reltrans the turbulent
spirit of thl people againlll popery, 27z. is Icnt to rcllrain the
I:cCitious p'a.dicei of the borderers, z z . excutts his coni
nitliton with vig:tur and p'udincc, ibid. a conlfiracy ar;ainit
hinm (i!fcoCrer'!, 2il. is created Earl of' Mar, 293. becomes
obnrxioeu tol thle 1.iil of Huntlcy, ib. Sec Mar and M'urr-y.
A''ur, Gilbcrt de Uiiifraville, Earl of, was the only man who

afitrttd t!c inie'lee:idcncy of his country, i. 1
---- DI):uga, Eirl of, afi'urnes the Regency during the mi-
nority of K. Janmes \. i. 38. 65. is unable to gain his afl'dions,
ibid. is attainted and (lies into Eingland, 66. obtains leave to
return into Scotland, ii. 97. lurrenders himself to K. James
VI. 1r7. he with fcveral others feizc the ca'fle of Stirling to
oppose Arrla, i t . they are forced to fly into England at tlec
approach of the Klinig witli an armly, I i . he is attainted and
his cliatc forfeitcd, 119. is concerned in a p!ot in favoor of
Spnin, z14. is seizcd and committed prifoncr to the cailec of
Edinburrgh, 1_ 5. efcap s and liles to the mountains, 2z6.
ofieis to lub!nit to a tiial, z2o. sentence is pronounced
against him, zzi. he rcfufes to submit - 2:z

j4l.'u, Duke of, a marliage propored between him and Q. Eli-

zhbe h - - ii. 2.
Ann, , a l'rincefs of Denmark, mnarried to K. James V[. ii. :o).

her arrival in Scotland and coronation, z28. heads a partv
th. t olpo'es tlhe chancellor 21
Arclhbj/hps, B.J'2/ps, Deans and Chapters revi\ e I in Scotland dur-

ing the King'l n inority, ii. 42, 43. this gives great oflence to
many of the clergy, ibid. an act of assembly againll thelc
ofliccs, 1o, 91. Billops made fullj:ct to prelbyteries and ahiem
blies, 14;. a great flr ke given to their authority, 189, o9o
NwIe ot t';cin p;cf,:nt at the (Queen's coronation 2;8
.lr'., l,'.irl of, is appointed to carry the crown matrimonial to

ile l):tuplhin iof L'r.ia e, i. 1(9. uscs his intcrcll with the
lRefonimcr to nmalke treaty wilth tlle Qucn Regent, 183. leaves
her (co( t in refentlinnnt of her treachlry, i8(). refulcs to ac-
:edc to a treaty wvth lMurray tlhe Regent, 515. is roon alter
:;rc(:d to l;Ub it, 516. acs ia lieutenant to the Qjccn after
tlc Reg nt's miider, ii. 6. is prevailed on to join tle King's
.iity, z2.. uturrils with Athole, 9. confederates with him
;againll lMrton, the Regent, for their mutual defence, ibid,
th y temonio lr[tc againll hirn to the King, z2. they raise forces
;gainllu hilm, (8. ncgociate a treaty with him by the niediation
ol (Q. .li/,:;bctlh, (I). is promoted to the oilice of chancellor,
71. ''he liing'h autlority delegated to hinm and Iord Forbl)
a;iainft the popifn Lords, 22z5. his foices are defeated in an
cniilgemclnt wih them - ibid. 22(
(/iliocracy, l.rcdmitiant in Scotland - i. 27.'

Arnrail,,

.'rmnain, Spanish, preparations for it, ii. 193, 194. it is de-

feated - - 1;9
Aran, Earl, is appointed Regert during the minority of Q M: -

ry, i. 99. his character, icc. consents to tle fchlcmes of 'I(ng-
lind, which di(guIls the publ c, 102. bccoC es suspicious of thi:
Far los Lcnnon<, 1si6. is forced to renounce the friendlhip with
Elngland and declare for France, Ic7. and to persecute the Rc-
formeris, l9, publicly abjures the doctrines of the Reformer',
ibid. is contemned by one hlIf anrd little tru!led by the other
part of the na:ion, i o. heads the partisans of France aid dc-
fcndirs of pnpev, 1 l. attenip's in vain to seize tle nth irdcrer;
o)f cardinal B1.;itotn, 1 7. is 'orced to make a truce with the
conf;pirato.%, l 18. his c1idel son i, conditionally excluded ali
ri!hlt of (ucceilion, 20. hi mean cone flion to the court of
i' a!ice, 128, 1 9.. gl th le title of Chatelherau!t, i -?. is un-
dcrnil:;ed hy the (J. Dowager, 136, 13-. proPrlfals and( ar. u-
mc-nts for lii religna!ion, 1i 8. he conrfets to ir t 91. r,::ra,':
by the inilucince of the Arclibilhop of St. Andrer, l.;o, is
-t lalt prevailed on anid gets advantageous teiirs, 141. S.'
C/;atcrrlhrault.
--- eldest foil of the Duke of Chateiherault, jrinls in an al'.

ciarion with the R fonrm eri, i . o. narrowly clcapes in :red:;
ruin at the court of I'rnncc, 201. is full of rcfenteincnt a;:;in.:l
rlie French on lhat account, ibid. the Congregation lbolcit l
l',izibeth to marry lin, '50. his great imprudence with re-

:nirid to (, Mary, -,S . discovers a conspiracy againil t!;c
()'icn'si fa;\ouiite, 2c. loses his rcafon, i1. 71, 7z. i. im-
I.r:i.ind by Mvorton - - ibid.

lt--- e Capt. Stewart, gets that title and ellate, ii. Sg. i,

;ippoilnted to conduct Morton from )Dumbarton to ldinl)L;i',
ihid. Ir , intimo,)Os niarl iagl willi the Counte:-f of M irch, .
Inis v:,iance ith L',nlox, ibid. is frullrated in an attri.ipt I,
rcfiie the King at Riithvcn, 96. is confined plilbntcr t) ti.e
c;:isle (l Stillirfg, ibidl. rcains hiis liberty and ihc lKin:' rtc-

aiid, 10o. rcijmlis hii, poxker and arrogancc, ibij. ipcts ili.
Rluiliven confiirator:; dec ared guilty ol high treason, i.S.
i. letcrctd ;as author ,f ;i pi rslcncioni againll the clergy, 1 I t
is g.icd over to (t. llizalbcli's interefl, I 18. grti lIi ci:,l
nlrefited ellates, 120. his corruption and inlolrnce, '. i.
rnaide chancelkor ;nd ihas t nlinited posv-cr, iliiJ. 1 z. l.
vent;lhiy is exceeded by Iliat of his silCt, ibid. lhi niobillrcili
tyr;lrny and opprllcliIon, 128. his power undernmired by 'Wt-
tli (lie ltnrglilh envoy, i ;9. is confined in tlle caille of St.
Anldrews, but lhon recovers favour, 1.1. his intirelt liinl.
IilchI, i1.2. is flripped of his lionours and lirils, anti rc-
uirced to Iis original flition - ib '.

,.i lit ir, Lords of, their origin nnd bluftncf, i. 8. . hy u. Iho chr,.

(in, 85, 86. the Iublcqiicnt variations iand l.,olitical uic' nirde

of thiis inllitution - 6- 87
Artindel, Earl of, is appointed a commiflioncr to the conference

at Wefinninlter - S*

0 o 2 ,i!',

.jil,'y, anibalhldor from (Q Elizabeth to Scotland, ii. It,6. hi-;

rca; promises to LinS |ainc, ibid. his promises are soon for.
got, zoo. he is afla;med and withdraws privately from Scot.

and -i - - ibi,',

/&,'.ajbnation, the 'rcquercy of itn Scotland, how accounted for,

jt. 3-(. fever.l inilaniccs of it in France, 37r, 377. a l0op
put to it there and in Scotlandl, 377. several grtat men an.
prove cf it, 377, 378. p!evailed gicatly afterwards ii. :0)
,JjLr'hl/y of the c'iur.h of bot:land, the silt but feeble and irri.

gular, i. 5:7. another alii;nlbly, tleir demands from the com.
Pcintion, 2: 3, 28-1. two other aiilemblies in vain olcit an lap-
nmentr;!ion of their reeinucs, 302, they address Q. Mary ii
hl!.h iljiins of compliints, 3 3. an afTein-lly piocteds ;.e
(.;!agow notwithltanding the King's interdilion, ii. 9l, 9:.
lwo ilfemblics yield manv of the privileges of the church tj
the I-iing, 245, 2z6. declare it lawful for mnitillers to fit i.i
P.illi.iinelnt, 24(). See Clergy.
Aii iltion, fitlnuc. in difciicc of Q. E'izebeth againl 2 Q M

11ii. z2

1:/.', E

. ilf.'
, :. e c ccn.ion of his quarrel with the Earl of Asr-

\l. ii. .

5 . juu ;\\iih him in opposing Mioton the Regcint,

i ic, ito;! ..i.cr all cntcrtaininelat at lMoton':, 70. luf,;-
i ;);s t ,'s I'eis g pimoed - 71
.,'.:.;'o, L.ord di, Itzond son of the Lord Lennox, arrives in

'. ,'li.'i 'Oilom Franie, ii. 7 becomes soon a gicat favouri:e
<rt k. lanmes, ibid. I igih titles and polls bellowed on him, ib.
7. :r':cs aaintll iirn, Appendix, o54. See Lennox.

..;',5,.:,;.,; ;..in !, tiici o;igin and power i. 9, 91
Al/i,.gtr,, A.thlio: v, Tonme account of him, ii. 143. tlhe ric

of li1 t l,: i .it cy i.:.aiilt Q , i''lizibcth, 147, 14I . tlhe nlame
:ind lhleie ut (1i lc:itiiil.s of his allbciatcs, ibid. 1.9. thr
:.( \,li.y. l. r cl /.ti, ;;,d executed i 19, 15'

bU.iio, Si r kili. 1, . ppointcd one of the coommifioncis to tih;

i. i.t.d:'l,nes .t \\'il'iniiilhr - i. 5'!

B,,hol ,
| 'ln, .i i.lim Ito the crown of Scotland, i. to. is pre-

ti ed by 1.:. 1. t 1. bon of)rcecd by him to resign ibli
'.; /;,/, a traili!Lm ii ',

p it'!, Ililcits an ilivionl of ,lngln.il fioo

"'paidi, ii. i in. i' a Ico)1pii;acy to murder Q l.hlal)tlli, I'"
i: dilc' lctcil ;,id t1. ici into ciltidy, 1I 0. and executedl ili.'.
Is,one, tlei iii.,l;l(,i vexrs xenlivc, i, 22. ihc dlflcrercc bc-

t...,(c tldhe ..i(.r .1n1,l Ici'tr, wlhenctec, Si. thelc hundred o(
tl.eit It iiiilll'l,'i :l; tlli,!l t!e cliul ,l of thlle (Q l)ow ge.
1 7. ile Icl:i :.ilLiI.d , , sliher rcileCfntativcs in p.l'li;mnti,
it. i '";'. p) rttl)o ol thU lIliir L arons to Parlianlenl, Ap|'tdc!.
1,i7. Se'c' \ !'le's.
.~a/t'icol Dlro., a bo '; puld'l eid by King Jamcs VI. flreilllii-

ens his intteiell in l','gladid - i*. z:t

JLLtllUII1

'eaioun, Catdin;l, made Life of by K. James V. to mortify the no-

hli, i. 70, 7 1. his pretensions to the Regency on thc death of
that l'incc, 98. forges a tellarncnt of the late King, ib. his
tiews how difappoiited, ib. his character, rg. opponcs the
Earl of Arran, Regent, 102, 103. exiites m It of the nation
againit the Englinf, Ic5. lc:zcs the young Q.ueen and her mo-
ther, ib. cajols the arl of Lenniiox, ib. obl:Qge the Regent to
renounce England and declare for France, o17. and to perle-
cute the Reformers, g09. engrofihs the cliltt direction of as-
fairs, I o1. his double dealing wsith the Earl of Lennox refern
cd, ib. 1 1 i. is murdered, I 6. his death fatal to the Cath, lic',
117. a van attempt to cvenge it, ibid. scandalous reports
concerning him - 151
.Bdc.fra, ELrl of, comes as amba fidor from Q. Elizabeth to wit-

ncfb the baprilim of James VI. i. 398. his inltrudfions, 400.
his letters to Sir W. Cecil, Appendix 423. 428 . 44

/ellendon, Sir Lewis, jullice clerk, K. lames's resident at Lon-

don, il. 137. joins in Fromoting Q. Elizabeth's interell in
Scotllnd, ibid. is rent with iher envoy into that country ibid.

Black, Mr. David, minriiler at St. Andrews, his ridiculous and

teditious (xprellions in the pulpit, ii. 2 5. being supported
by the clergy, he declines the civil jurlldicion, 236. is con-
demned by the privy council, 237. is sentenced by the King
to lelidc beyond Srey - 23S
'lackadder, captain, and three others, executed for the murder
of 1)arnly 1. 449
,oct/,ius, -Heanor, his hifory of Scotland, some account of i.
oiton Cajlle, Q( M ry conlined a pr!foter there i. 488
Rcnct, a so eigincr, made governor of Orkney i. 15
Bordererj, ail attempt to rellrain their licentious practices. i. 281.

(Q. Marv viits them, 388. a fcufle there, in which the Eng-
lih warden, &c. were madle ptilitnrIs ii. 57
];orihlzvick, Lord, aflift, the (Q Regent in defending Leith, i.

219

3'othw/ll, Jame1s I-Irpburn, Earl of, intercepts a fum of money

from England to tile Congitcaiion, i. 218. favours the Queen
Regent, but rclid.s at his own houle, 219. is by the Earl of
l1' lrray limmoned to a public till, 336. prevents it by
leaving the kingdom, ibid. a fentcnce of outlawry against
him prevented by the Quten, ibid. is ptrmittcd to return,
3. 6. f:ape( wvillh her aflcl lte ntilder of R 3r7o, 371. some
.ccouUint (o his lormier bLchavilrur, 3'r0, 381. commences a
litvonrite o1 the (Queen, 3:½-. (1ie Ieconciles him to fevernl
Loids, with whomn he was at variance, 382, 383. heincreales
in favour with her, 38 ,. ticumilallnces concurring in this,
ibid. he is wounded in attenipting to lcize one ot the bor-
dleters, 389. ilie Queen's extiaoidinary re' aid lor hinm on
ihis occasion, ibid. to lfe ure adlhleeits he obtains a pardon for
Mlorton and his aflhlciates, 402. propoles the rleoration of
te popish ccclciallical jurifditliot, 40.t. his viwvs in this,

u 3 ibiJ,

ibid. 401. is rtIfpsced the au.hor of Dlrnly's murlie%, . I-
is char`eed w.h it by Le:nlox, 413. bt 1 ll favoured by ti;
Queen, li ,. :appointtJ Lovern-o,- of i'dinburol' Calile, 41'
ll, tti::l is lill ricd on, ibid. re;nl;'i :. h panrtiait, in hi', tav,. .
4iS. Lninox ar:cuTcs 1'iin openl;, ibid. COni::s tO lis tiil
v. ii a gr'at retinue, 419, 42c. i; acqliu td by a jury, 4"
ile trial universally cunrurcd, ibid. 421. challen-cs any thit
wold accuse him, ibid. sEveral ;..is of Pa;rlian:e:t paz-fd .l
his favour, ibid. 422. he procures an a t in favour (f ti;
cforrnation, i'id. I42. T: cVils u' f.:cral of the noi.!ts t
recomnmend llim as a hu!n:lnd to the (.lu c., L.z7. fciz7.; '.;
Queen on a journey from Stirli: ,, and c.lrries her to l)ul:i'',
431, 432. his view in thi., 43-. ctains a partlon under tIec
great sea', ibi. procures a divorce Irom his \iie, 433. can( ,
the (ctun to the cailec of Ediurgih, 43.1. is created Duk'.
of Orkney, .13;. an i mar:ied to the cQueen, ibid. is ,
allowed the title of Kin', 136. lie w;tclcs teQ!; lc,'n vi i)
clolely, ibid. endeavours to get the P:ince iito Ils cu!ld',
437, 438. is aiarmed with an aflociation t f isle rnuies ai';n:li
the Qu, en and him, 439, 440. carnics tie Q;Ien to thc
calile ot Borthwick, 441. railcs force= againlt the confcder;,t:
Lords, ibir. he marchlcs ag;iinil tlhm, 442. propotcs a finlei
combat, 443. this hoNv preventcl, 444. takes his latl far wll
of the Queen, and is forced to fly, ibid. fends for a clfkct of
letters from Q. Mary to him, 4.49. they are intercepted hy
the Earl of Mdrton. ibid. his nmilerable fate, 4 6z, 46. . ic-
fieaions on his conduCt, 464. copy of his divorce from L.diy
Jean Gordon, Appendix - 431;
EBcith.ul, lrancis S;ewart, created Earl of Bothwell, ii. 2z:.

is imnplilnced for consulting witches, 210, 211. clcapes :nrd
attempts to break into the King's pretence, 211. retires to ilhe
north, ibid. He and his adlhl rents arc attainted, 2 1. . .i il i
an attempt to seize the Kintr, ibid. is taken under plotcilion io
Q. Elizabeth, who Colicils for him, 216). leizcs the Klin;'> p:''-
Jbon, z 8. forces him to difiniil the chan ellor, anl hit, r;li r
favourites, ibid. and to granit iiin a remiflin, ilid. hii:, l.l
and insolent behavioir altervard·, 219. is encouraged by 1lI'
lEnplifl anmbaflhdor, 222. nlalk s antother attenmlpt t . colle it
the King, 223. is repullild ndl oblilge;l to Rly tote n(il (1

nglaindi, 224. i aba1ndoned by (Q. I.lizab.th, alld ir'd i'

fly Into Sp:ain annl Italy, 228. remains in indigent ol)fceuliti,
and is never after recomilc d to tlh, K'ing i
-- - Ad iam, liflio of ()l kney, 1lcrfo ins the ceremony ofni,-

riage '2 Q. Mary to tle ],.:lrl of Bolhwevll i..1

7othlbu/llbhaih. Sc' II/amlihon.
l;ou/logac, wrelled by the lcim li out ns the liands of t) lir 'pll',

i. 28. they conlillt o relfore It and its depeiidcncits t( ilh '
1'rciien i- - I 01(

Inr,,j, Envoy from Q(. I'i/:lcelth, acclfirs Iciinox of dillshl;:
the peaC e, ii. 78. is Ictuli.d al) ,tiit iciitcc, ibid, is Iclt to c10 l-

t~~c

,age the conspirators at Ruthxcn, 97. to inquire about Kin,
Jimes's correspondence with the Pope 25
Boyd, Lord, his anibitious views in tihe time of K. James 111.

frufi:ated - - i. 37
-- is prevai!ed on to join the King's party againfl Q Miarv,

ii. 22. joins the Ruthyven conspirators - 94
Brieine, Count ic, comncs an ambaifldor from France to svit!:r f

the blptirn ol K. Jamcs V . - i
Bruc', Robett, his claimi to the crown of Scotland, i. io. lis

grandlon alihrts his right, and vindicates the honour of his
country, 12. he attempts to reduce the power of the nobles

-1 7 4'S
-- a riefl, employed by the Ki;ig of Spain to seduce the

Scotch nobles - - 11. .ot
-- Mr. Robert, a prefbytcrian miniflcr, performs tice cc:e-

monv of the coroiation of K. .Jimes' Qs : cen ii. 2 S.
-- Edward, abbot of Kinlof., acquits himiicf with ;adtrcfs
and reputation as ambaflador at the court of Engl:ind ii. 25 )
-- .Mr. Robert, a minifler, his ref)luti mn in rcpufCing to pulbnil

the King's accouit of Gowiie's coP;lpiracy, ii. 275. i1 dc-
prived and baniflsed on th.t account - ibid.
Luchanan, Gcorge, hi, hillory of Scotland, f,)ile accnunt of, i.

;. reniarl:s on his dialogue De Jure R:'gis, S8. alone accufcs
Q. Mary of a criminal coriefpond'nc \ with Rizio, 3'(. ap-
proved of afallination, 377. atten's the Rengent ilto Englai d
when called on to accuse (Q. ilarv, 492. was one of the pre-
ceptors of K. James VI. ii. 6o. cnnmmenuded for his great
genius - - 39

Turleigh. Sc' Crcil.
cProlghs, wshen firit represented in Pai liament ii. 1z

C
CAIS, John, a declaration of hi. in name of Q. Elizabcl.i to

the Lrds of (,range at ,cthington, Appendix 1(;5
Caitlhnej, Si rl of, his protclt at the trial of Bothwell for the

murder of Dirnly - i. 42 i
Calvin, the patron and rel.orer of prcfl)teliian clihrch govcrn-

ment - - - . 2

Camlbn, f me millakes of his i. ';9 0. .2i'.
(anongate, near Edinburgh, a lPHliament held there ii. 1i
Cardtan, foic account of him, i. 139, 140. his rcmarkable curt

of the lillhop of St. Andrews - ibid.
Canry, Sit Gror,,c, sent aimbafl;lor from Q2, Illizabcth to cn-

courage the conspirators at Ruthlven "i. )7
-- - Kobclt, sint by Q. Eliz/ablth to sooth K. James altcr

the death of his mother, ii. IS5. i, not permitted to entcr
Scotlanld, ibid. was the firll that btought K. Janics intelli-
gence of the death of Q. Elizai;beth 297
C,/jet ot letters tfom Qt Mary to Bothlvcll, fcijcd by the E arl if

O o 4 Morton.,

AM.rton, i. 4 1. her enemies avail thcmfclvcs r.nt.ch of 1,em

ibid.

r~,ilss, Earl of, joins the King's party - ii. z
Cyielnaru, lth I'rtnch ambaflador, is employed to procure the

conlent of his court to Queen Mary'b marriage with Daniy,
i. 3zg8. he endeavours to make up the differences between the
tQjen and him, 384. his intercession in behalf of Q Mary

ii. 13
Calerrine of Medlicis, alTinics the government after the dralit ( f

;Fan;is I. Iher lo,, i. 25z. her haifh trcatmen of (). Miary,
ib-:J. ht r views in behaving more friei d!y to her, 313, 314.
hendls her whole cndeavouis to delIroy the I'lotcllaiis, ii. 26.
her .i til! condutt k ith th;at view il- ci.
C,.il, his gicat C.,pacity as a miniltlr, i. 27. .62, is crployi l

to negnti:a:e a peace with Franc9, ib d. over-rcachcs lihe
Frrncl aribaffrilor in the treaty of Edi burgh, ibid!. a letter c;f
his cited tn fir'.v th.t Q. Ehizabeth had no intention to incr.
cert Q. I;.ry, in her return to Scotl;tnd, 271. Is anloilni d
s c iniilTionerto the conference at \'c!l liiilr, ;c c. is f t
by Q Ehlzabeih Eih I'oFol;!ls to Q( M.ry) ii. li . h.is :i]
inttrviewv v iili !hcr, xhilh extites (Q. 1liz bhetli's jc.,!(-il',
5-.. is treat.d h:aril y by Qt E.zLibcth for concntiig tit (1.
Mary's (death; -

' -

- Sir !Rcblrt, fi.n to !lie so mer, hneads the pait a;i. I1t
'.cx, ii. 279. his char:,acr, ibii . hi,. ,gret ifi hiiT,
iiri. c(rtIr, into a pri\ate correcpron:cnce w:.th I. Jan.e, 2-.
(Cehi'.xy of the po!ilfh clcrg), a cliicf engine of then p ),iCy, i.

yI8. ! i
Cbl;rl.s \V. m rpcror, his :,reat povcr, i. 9-. and unlii, itcd ;,;;-

bition, i, 9z;, is chlieC.:cl by lilr.iis I. c(,
-- i. of Fidncc nm.lcs a li;ge vlith (Q. liz.bcth, ii. 33 3 ;
C'.te.t i,,trault I,) l(e of, Ilhat title : n'crlecl on ithe Il;ar i ol \ ,iI,

Rcgeint of Scuttai d, i. -.' hi, riit ( flucceiiona to tl.c
<town of Scoil.nd ii, inniainn ed, 1'3. ertcs a )r('ti !;ial)Iii t
si,. hins rih l S, :1'), i' 7. j(,ii s tlic IRc'oimcrs, ill ciC!;t i. 11-
in; ( to e pLu l ti.c , ' iiey, 196. ji ins

: ;nfr,ci; ioi v.i

tilc;l, zc,' is ,;ok<d it1 uis the il.cid ol' the tonuuiCe:;ti( 1,

o. ir pli, ilini ty, 21i(. becoincts obi;o;,ious to Q( Mrv,
2.82. dclitti cd of his [crtinch pcnlioll, 313. i, li,tl icd at itc
farl of Le n ox's return Ito Sicoinl d, 32. an ac.oiin Mici: ion
brougl;t albiut by thl Quecn's ii (l:icice, ibid. a!dhicu
IMilray in oppofrin, the (..,cii's. ilriaw', 3,1$. is pra' dii 1l
v!n his liunil.'c ;alip!ic:i'ioi, Ib t forccd it) rclidc in Ii;iicc, :; 1.
his parl.iils ; tillu le at Murlai's ebinlg advan'cc to t;i
Ri}'L:ccv ', , 4(7) 4(8. rtturns frri n l'rinie and eicadls Ilic
(iicen'. adhcrcnlts, i 1 3. is mande her licutcianli-cncr1i, 1 4.
Hlis rtfoliitiin \avcill,, the Retcnt co(n.mits himi prif('nr it
the cillle of l.id l nrjh, q i 5, is let ;It iiht i tly by Kir all l , d
joiins th ( Qi eii' 1. p lty, ii. 4. is plioclii tlii tlaitor b)' ].cllitrx
the nVew C(eg nt, ). i. reconciled tro Morton ihec legciii, I(;.
lrticlcs of a treaty between thei, ibid. Ilis death t7

Ci:r"'

Churcr of Scotl'nd, revolutions in it after the union of lic

crown;, ii. 3-6, o7. See A..imbly, Clergy.

Church Lands annexed to the cruwn by Parliament ii. 193
CLansr, Lthe inilitution and nature of - i. :8. 2(1
Clergy, popirn, their t:rcet riclhcs and power, ir 68. 145. vwer m.'.!e

ulc of by K. J ines V. to luppreis the noblcs, 7c. nimde a
con filer:ible 1hod) i PIa;! ianment, 146. their grcat inllu nce over
ti.l laity. i 17, they ingr ot ed le.rniti:g, ib. and hil-. m;;iny of
the tliiLfemployn'cn;F, itil!. 1.;. th-ir power incr;!cbd by
c!ilib cv. ibi,!. th ' Fcz/r d ie

it' it: s nof i.'. t incilat, 149. a:id

ried all niitiinnni al ani tc

i l;ti:n:l r.' caucs, t .o.

tbe;oRll.

chloxiciiois to tile laity, wiiOd.

tiLir ,re:!t couruptio!c, whenrce,

1 . tlioel of Scotlantd pa ticnialy ctiii:lutc, ibid. tlrcir weal
defrence of tli: ir Ic:ets, 12. try itn vain to inlo ol fali Inira-
cics, 153. tl- :r i!prditi: t:.,i.Utii to tile IReformers 172

._ . r,'lm i'cl, ti) :n v.iin to icot( r he

l; rcvrcnes cftlicchurclh,

i. z.;8 29, z; :). p';cu, a (1,d'.: iitiot of all rciics of popery,
2' . a lcw regulation conccrninig thir rcvc iotcs, 283-z:8.
tily are no gainers by it, 2.9. their 11ipcnds, wha. in those
C.is , ib i. are oftclided at the moderation ofilcir lead'ts, 3 o.
occasion a titmult anlon the people, ibid. 311. niore com-
pl lintb of thlir )povcitv, 323. 4o2.arc jealous ot Qk Mary.
j,3. tile l;al all!!ow.ices app imticd tofupport them all, ibid.
their ;;plitca:ion fbr pasvment of ticeir tfipends of little eflcCt,
I;. fictil complaints of the deficiency of the funds for their
in:intenrican c( 2. are put ofF wi:h fair ivild, and pronmife,
ilidS. 5jo . iacltlousc

c. .tioued among them by Mor-

ton, ii. 42. their tlicxa..ces under Ilis adtiminiltxation, 56.
tlcy approve of thel Rtlt!ven co;ifpirators, )'S. by favouring
tlihei they p!ov, ke tl : Kiing, log. frvcre laws made again)lt
them, 1 3, tl.t. tlhey of El'lttburgh fly iitolF.igliand, 114. as
(o! fecviltal others I!tit wveCe tioflt elinlen, ibid. more vlgorous
nic;iafuts a;inall !tli,, Izo. tlhey obtain norccl:cf, on the tl,
illr.rtii)n ot tl- c.' iled Lords, 1 4z. reprc-il t thecir gricvaiices
to Parliament, 8 i'. a niainttenl.ance provided for theim ity Par-
liaillnert, 1 o), 1)!. they 1prevail to get I'elbyteiiln government
c.i.iliilt Id Iy liw, 212. theit z.:al aainlt the Popihi l ordis,
2 1 , -2z 0. o. tie;r i:ifli pI occrldililyg ,

231 232. they rct a

ll.,nii: 4 C ioinitil (f flic tl'i.lth , 233. v.tdicate (t, c of tlicir
nluimbrr kblo (dcchinic the civil juttlltdiliIon, Z, Zj,3. their
fl.,itlirg Ctiintil orilccdd to Ic ive EL iinbur;!, 237. this (eca,
lhoIll a rioleCt ttmiiulIt tbice, 237, 238, 239. they us. tIh e:I t-
It1 *!! ll'iits t to spirit tile Iecoplc, 2.11. anrc dlcitt d a l il! to
I':i t;oindl, ibid. 2,.'. tlhtir 1)(0cr grealtly riduced, l ,iJi. ;lia
1),cv.ii i!el oti to ('xn tup manly oti tilir p,1 iril sgc 1, . *1 . ;ar. ic-
l'to-ed t, ;a feat i p

,, p ilitllent, e.' ' thtis vitu n'ly op|loci ly

i,-;:nv of ti.-ni, z;S. but calicd in their )( i(ril A Iletibly,
I j';. cih.l' C titled to this privilcgearc laiil .id: 1i.11n)' Ic,'iu
1 tio0.s' ;nd rcfiriflionts, 25(6. thcy are br;'(: !it: ul. It ', rit: iiil-

Iit)ot,,

-ci':o;. .j. the rcv',;u tir:) amlicng thl:m fi:zce

: e Union i-

the Cr!wr.s - _ -- 6, 3c7
i'i;;dta, I or.;, appcittcd a cotnnm.iiiorer at the con;c:ence at

Welmrnir.,ie - - ol
Ccrk/.rir n. of Ormiflor, rcc is cs a fiupl' of i;oncv ', cm thc E :g:li

to t!e congregati, ., i. 21I . is intcrc-}ti.c and ril;l.c'i cf it, ib,

(Cr;; inl '-.c'ti nd, fonre ac:; u.it of - i.. 2 i. iS
Coi,:2//'arics appO'!;tc.id to try ciuIC,5 il p,! ace of tile a ,:ttali

C'out , i. z46. thy arc deprihcdof ; j: nothoiiy 1 4
Cc'efr7icn ot faith by the Refornier, co:if.n;cd to by Palli:incnt

i. z,fi
Ccngregation, the Pioteitants dift ngu:flcjd by that nanme, i 179.

their leaders enter into an arlciation, i ;so. are involvcd in dif-
ficultles, 21 . apply to Q. Elizabeth fcr aliltancc, 2 i(. mc-
nev sent them by nor, intcrcep:ed, z 1S. make a rash ain: dcrpc-
rateattempt on Lci:h, and are rcpulfed, ib. 1 9. are no lss :1n-
fortunate in a fecord fkirniilh, 219. arc (uite dlliliited and re-
treat to Stirling, ibid. ale joined by the body of the nobles,
22o. their army d\ indles away, zz2. are animitcd by KIrc:,
ibid. they apply again t,) Q( Elizabeth, 222. tl;Lir parties ha-
rafs the Fiench, 227. are afiifled by a fleet fromn in'gl;linl, 22 ).
concludea treaty at Berwick, with the D. of Norlo!k, ilid.
230. the design and fubllance of thi? tieay, ibi'. negociate a
peace with France, 2 8. article of the treaty, 240. they reap
advantages from it, z4:. See Riformation.
Ccvenant, national, framed in defence of the K ing and Go.'crn-

Iieiit. ii. 197. the nature and eafonablenefs of it, ibid. lyS,
the progiefs of it since - - i

Courtey of Scotland, what -i. 1i
Craig, a minillcr, boldly teltifies againfl QEMary's marria(e w\iti

Bothwell - i. 4,
Crafubrd, Capt. of lordnn Hi!l, furpriics Dumbarton CalilU,

ii. i , 16. the difliculriesof th:t enlcrprifr - 16
- Earl of, oneof the heads f th Spanill failion, ii. 1i(.

201. offers his service to the K. of s.pain, 201. joins in re-
bellion againfi the King, 204. is forced to fubinit to him, i,.
and imprisoned a flort tine - ibil,
Crichlon, Regent during the minority of K. Jamcs 11. his barb -

rous policy -i. i4
-- .a JLfuit, a plot agai:ll Q. Elizabeth discovered by hIs
means - - - ii. .1'
Crim.;,nuls, a reman kablc inllance of the difficulty of bringing theml

to jiillice - - - . 20, 21
(rrC, du the l rtenh anilhafflldJr, rcfuted to countenance Q: Mil-

ry's 11nu1;itrrie with Botl[Ilcll, i. 435. aittenipts in vain ;a rccol-
ciliation bri 'ecnii tihe Quen anrd the confederate I.oids, ,it',
4'13. medi:ltes a truce betweci the King and Qecn's party
in Scotlanl - - ii. 34
Cqti '.i matrim)onialof Scotland, iights conveyed by the grallt

of,

of, i. i5 . is grant:.l ty Parlian!enlt to the Dauphin of France,
166. deputies app!iritcd to car!n it, but are prevenmcd, 169.
is detmanlded by l)rniy - - 35t3
Cuniughajm, Rlic: t, appears at t' c tli l of Botlwlcli in name ot

the iarl ol L:nno.\, i. 4 2o. deniaind: a del.y, which is refuted

inid.
Curie, one of Q). Marly's fecrctaries, is fe:zed and carried piiloner

to L,.ndon, ii. I5 . is produced an evi.lcnce againll her 163

D
D. ,-, ly nr, l Tenr , o, proposed as a huniland to C. pIIary, i.

318. his right of fucccflioln confidercd, ili.i. 31.). is pcr-

mitted to visit the court of Scotland, 37 . airives thrd', and
qInickly gains the hQCEti's heait, 32 6. his charaaer, 3 S. di(-
gulls f.cveal of the n.blies par:icu!irly lMurrayv, ilb. ;z. cul-
tivates a familiarity with David liizio, ibid. is dcliifed on tliat
account, 33. trowss intolerably infollnt and haughty, 3;S.
ichermes to ailTfflnate Murray, 340. a plot to Icizc and lend
him to England prevented by the Qcen, ibid. evidences of
th:s, 341, 34,. hIis nia riage with the Queen celebrited, 344.
is honoured with the title of King of iScJtl:nd, 345. is iim-
pli.cable vith rcflect to the exiled nobles, 3 5(. lores the Queen's
Jleition by his untoward behaviour, 3z2. demands the Lrown
matii:no iial, 3'3. becomes suspicious of Rizio's ill offices witli
the () een, ib. hs reiolution to be avengel of.'im encouraged
by the nobles, 3(15. an'iclei agreed oil between them for that
pU: poli, 367. hc.,ds the conf.,irators who perpetrate tIlc nur-
dier, 3; "9. ccnCfiii's thc Qeecc aftcrit is comniiit. d, 370. pro-
hibits the meeting of the l'aliamcnt, ib. makes his efcpe
with the (Qt.cn, 31 . her h:itcd to him increases, 37'). is
nuglecled by her anid trcat(d s\ii:h little refpecDt by the noblec,
384. refilves to leave Scotlan,i 386. his wayward and can '-
priciouis bclievionr, 3' -. lie wriicl the rcaIfols ofhlis condu.t
to the ()uecn, 383. li.s hllraige bechaviour at the bapttrlf of the
I'rince, 399. a fill rc.ifon alleged for this onlittcd, ibi I.
Ico. retires to lis f.thlCr at (:l.i;osv, .0oz. f.ills lick there,
. co. cnjclui i s concernint; hii dillinetlr, ib. is Ine'!leClcd by
tile (1ec. n, .1o6. Ihe aftersc arrd vilhts and cxprclcs iil;'ltioii for
hint, ,.nS. he is prevailed nll by hlrt) comne to l'linl)uiglt, I. .
i:s lo.dged ill a leparate hinlf., iblid. lie is mlnrdcitd it.'rre,
l 1t I. li'. ch;ar.ilaet , iblid. a prrcl;lmation ill'ei(ld lin dillovcrintl
the murderers, 413. a re,i.l:s en'iiry ni::di into ir, .113. 4 1.
Capt. Lil.ckladldr and three o:lhers eCecCted on that account,
4p9. tile conscfli mn of MlJrion ti Re ilent t ht is dc;atli con-
cc ning the marder, ii. R'. a diinirtation c.incorri;n his nilir-
der, 1 ! . paper of obijcldions o tlhe Court ol l.:;l ind a ,null
liIs m11: riagr with Qi. Ivt .y, App. .11 2.

D1)vid I. Ki. of Scotlilnid, 11 proufiLo( to th e cli rch i. 14 ,
- - 11. troubles during liiq minoiity --- i. 5
Davwjon, lInt inlto SGotlinJ l y ( I E1zabetlih, a, a lI)y on tllie Si ; lrli

a 11b.il -

arrtlasd~'r, {i. Iol. is sent to gnin Arran's intcrcl. to Q. E!,
:.:,bclh, ] 1i'. thli he soon acconi li;fhs, ibid. blings the wvi-
.;ant for Q. Mil.rv's death at Q,. L:;i.z bcih's dcire, 173, i.

hA'r.i.d by her x ifi difobeyin.; l,:r o!ders, 1l3. is imnprilincei,
nrrwd, and si ned, ail lofcs a!l savoir, 1 84.. (oijct ons a;ai ll.
hitn in the ca.uII of the late Scottllt (Qli'cl - PP. 55 3

Di,'Lt, Mn.iificor, i; fcr,it with a fuipply of i'r. 'sto ifl;lt th( 'lFno n

a aiinl. he £Enli/h in Scotland, i. i2;, tzS. his I;cce.!i tici:

i'o::l.'ie ir thr Church, the firfl book of, comporfel, i. 2z ,
wvhI oijctc.:i againit in a coirven:ion of t e Stiate, ib;,..:i!.-
othier aitcnllpt in favour cf Church ',ilcirline frullrated li. -
);1,:l., the p oer .n t prop'rty o; thait fimily, i. ':, tl y

ta;picr t. i-d.( pi:r)tcn,'cy, :.t \ ;11. F.al of, miirdcrc ln ib 1.
Ln m.s il, . 5. hi foa; Lndicl\o u to rfilrnit it, 5;. is forced to
iiy ;io L.nii.ntl - - - ibid.

--
- Wii:tan;, Q: Mary commiitte. a prisoner to his c.it'e of
Loc!ch!;vn - - i. .48

G..-- G rge, brothcr to the above, afElls the Qiieen iln inmk-
ing her c'cape i- . 468, 4(9

Ah Acitibal, one of Darnly's murderers, ii. 14''. undei-

.qocs a mnack triail fr that ;r me and is acquitted, ibid. is Tent
aibaibialor to F.nt.lnd, it:d. letter fromn him to the Q. of
Scot. Appendix, 45z. to the King - 528
Dr:,', ,ir \i';iiaml, c:;tcrs Seotland with an aimv to support the

King's party, ii. 6. thev join him and drive off the Qucn's,
ibid. he procures a truce bc:wexen the King and QJ.ccn's
partie, 34. conmc, with forces to aftit Morton in beli. gir g
the'caftle ot LJiiburlh, 50. which is forced to furrendcr li

-- Sir Drue, is :ppoitced one ot Q. MiJary': keepers ii. , ).
Pufd!y, Lord RP ,bcrt, rccon:iicdcl d by (.) I'!i;'bcth as a huIf

h.iid to Q. Ml;lry, i. 314 . '*xhy a f.vourirt of Q. Illiz.bctlt's,
i'iii. is hlihly promotecd by her, ibid. 31; . his fi:uation t \.
trcnle'v dtlicitc, 3.) . becomn: : f.ificio.s of Cecl 5i7

r':nfia;,'r Caile, (iUlpi;fed antd taken in the 1Kii,'s narm me

thic lec'cnt - - ii. I -l'
r>'ry, a ruin iler of diinburgli, btlifi'ed fiom Iii- ch:r'.:e by !..

.,iiiic for his siee invcaives again:l the courtiers, ii. z2. a::{
tcr beinil reilorcd, he is driven frum it a Iccond time lor ;i1)-
proving the Rl.id of Ruthven -- I,)
.jlD)ii:.Slrgh, is tinkn nn' burnt by the Enilifln, i. 11:. i

grcat thay thelc bctwvccn the li'cnth and Scots, 13,, 13'.

is Icir/te by ithe Rclorincr , i,o. its inhabitants are ttel ljtV
nalarmnd hv tile l'rcnch, 2 i . a trtaty there with the l'ictli
;ned lo'',1i)li, 238, 219. n loan deimannded of it by (.01. Maie,
3i2,. which is gia;nted for the iuicrtority of Leithi, ibid. t1c
ti'.lii of, ilfilrtcd on tly ( I'li/iiabcth, i, 40 o, o. is I'oilltI'l
by tnle (ii.L'bc's prly, ii . . a:d fCrtilied by thril, 1o. lhe
City and C;afl ' hlold out againl! the Kling's force:, 3z, z ;re ,-

1 tdtI ttr.

duced to great liraits by famine, 33- ate relieved by a truce,

4. the citizens take up arms to promote the KIing's inmairia;gc,
?.o-. they rife again and iniult the King and li mi nitilies, on
ihe murder of the Earl of Mlurray, 211, 212. aluill the King
a"ainlt HHntley, 223. a violent tumult there on account of
the C!crgy, 237. 240. they are severely puniflicd for it by the
King, 2;l. 244. their miniflers return to their charges, 245,
2. (. divided into parinles, and number of minillers increaled.,
246. they decline publilhing the account of G,:wriv' co.ti'..
racy, 274. all except one, xho is baniflicd, arc tcru:eided by
the King to do it - - - ii. 2-
Ed-card 1. of England, dlilroyed the public archives es So;-..

land, i. 4. is made umpire between Bruce and Baliol, i . h;i
art to acqu:re the fupciiority of Scotland, ibid. his wars wivi
the Scots u!,der Robert Biuce 12?, t . 47
gr/linton, Eirl of, is prevailed on to join the Kiin,'s p irty, i;.
l:/I zam:h, her peaceable acccrflin to the Crown of [n n-lndii, i.

1 '9. ) lppoits the congregat:on in Scotland,, 21, 2 1. Ispd iS:
in ner supplies, 17. rdfulves to support thc! o!n la coc:d aI-
plication, 222. her goad conlui't in miatites of i:l-..cIt.:':c',,
223. motives that determined her to aitill t' c'r, i. ,, ;zo.
her deliberate nnd re!olute contit1, 2zS, z:. le lo a ii:on-
fleet to their fliftiance, 229. couclujes a treat'.' \i1l ithc;, i).
.230. her right to the Crown of lingland aP.fr!ed bLy Franci,
and Mary, in France, 23:). obtains advantagciil tcrin; lur
the Scots, ibid. is solicited by tlhe Farliame;ict a Scol;,:nld (
marly the Earl of Arran, 250. this Ille de:lineS, 251. the
feeds of her discontent wih Qt .Mary , z62, z3. Icr jcaloniy
of the fucceflion, 264. 266. her vc:live vanity a;ilt jealouiy
of MIarny' beauty, 267, 268. lher dinif uln:io' to her, z(.9.
refuses her a safe conducq, ibid. evidences tht t hie haJ no in-
t( nttion to irolell Mary in her il aitce to S:oiland, 271 . Icnds
to conlstatulate her arnival in Sco;land, 277. tefltes a con-
cetlioui made by Qt Mary, 278. hcrjc.:loUl y

v f her right be-

trayed her it:to mean acions, z79. Ic.r rlebnlbltiiice to
llni. VII. ibid. a pcifunal intcrview with Q). Mary propolfed

0ol. flieartfully ecclinel it, 3oz. h11( vie\vw in regard to Q,
Mary's Imarriage, 30!, 3c7. ill'uincs a dl'.eigsccable authority,
ibid. names one fbo a hIliulliild to Q l Mary, 3 1 4. the dillcrcnr
qualifications of her riniileis ,ind tavuulite:., ili. 3 tr dlflilsblc;
vith Q. M.niy about her n)arli;lac, i .

; 317 and likcil':

vwth regard to L. Darnly, 320. ;illb 'i s( Q Mary by hlir ilfii,: -
ation concerning Lcnnox, ib. is perpllcd aholut tle ill r :it:
of the Scottillh Oticn, 32 ., 3z . ptL;1'n l).irnly to vilit Il,(
couilt if Scotland, 325. allczts uO dc(clae .i'diilll Q.. M;ary s
mrini ie to hmn 332, 3 33. ici icA.;us n this conidu.l, 333,
334. her great dilliiiuainiiil in ithai i iir, '39. Icr lhha1Pl1 aid
dcceitful bchlia iour to Ml urra.y and his al;)cralcs hio lih1d lc.d
to lher, 350 is llruck at hearing of tin: bnth of J.,tmei VI.
383. conlcnts to Itlnd godmoutlicr to hiini, ibid. tlic I',rlia-

IncI,;

ment asiLrefs her to fettle the fucceflion, 391. this oreatly em-
bar afles e:', ib. 392, 3()3. fie fiooths and g:,iis. her 'arli:-
nic.it, 3'.4. etdeave'urs to accomnmodate her dilierences with
1Ml. y. 4 o. wiites to her to dl;av the tlial of l)arnly's nmur-
dcr. r,, 419. inttl poses in her bcliaf when a prisoner, 4t;. her
ambalL;dor i, cefuicd access to Q. Mary, 45, . she offers alliit-
ance to the other nobles, 454. her deliberations conceCnintg the
diifpolal of Q( Mary on her arriv.ll in England, 4-7, 4 8. rc-
solves to detdin her there, lb. 4-9. her motives to this con-
duO, ib. 4o0. fends her letter, of condolence, and gives or-
ders to wJtch her condct, :h. 4 1, 4''2. il: gladly accepts
the office of umpire between h('r and her fulbj ts, 4'2, 48.
ieceiv\s a very prcfling letter si om Q Mairy, 8 . her : cc.iu-
l i rln;gain!l her, 4F6. ap[oin t comni iflioncrs lo l ea.r ) M Iry
antd her accusers, 4_2. her imnpr tnt tit' to!:in r tlliat cs-
ii:n, ib. ier views in this atljir, 404, 4, 5 Icc.ive. Ihe Re.

(. It':, demands, 499. lenovcs the ccnfe ence to \\ 'eitllinctr,

Sci. her mc:n artiiecs to get the evidence of C(. MIiry's . uit
t.o.;, the Reginr, ;':S, tr'ats Iher with ilcatcr ritout, 5c9.
wri tes ; lairlli !cttcr to Q M.r, 51 o fn litflti s the Reg'n;
without irpprovi'g (cr condemmiling hi;n, 51 I. but secretly iJp-
ports his party, 5 1 z makes priopo.ils to the RP gent in her f.-
*our, 51 :. Noi!uik's project concealed from her, 20o. dnl-
covers and dle'.is n rebellho in i' Mary's favour, 525, 526.
resolves to delnscr :cr up to ilt: k cent, 53^. her great con-
ctrn at his death, ii. i. ccitinucs to encourage factions in
Scotland. 2, 3. licr political conduc with rcgird to Lcnnox,
7-*9. is c.\comtnn nicated, and dieri\ ed of he le kingdiom, &c.
by tlle Poic, 8. fltppoit the King's patty in Scotilind, and
n;iincs Lennox to be iKc;ent, ). propoles a treaty ofacco:limo-
dtltinn l)ctwcen (. Marv and her f;hj;tfls, o, procures a c'e-
lI'tion of l;ol';iitl,. ib. lenis proto;:als to I) ;Mdrv\, Il . l:er
artifices in tih con;ldut. of this aflir, ib. l

z. ;ippints coIniil'-

fitners to fritl, a tre1atv, 3. finds a pretcnce to lender their
meeting firuitlcF, I;. a marriage proposed lietwcen her :ian
the D. of Anj ;u, 2. declarc.', openly againill tl:e ( )(cin's prt.v,
3j. concludes a ti. ity with }'rince, 33. her miil(eits for nlc-
goritting a pt'e Lre\wen thel twvo p;rties in Scotl.nd, 4'.
i. jealous o0 Cecil's interview withli Q Mary, 54 i.ng tialts ,i
treaty between Morton and his adveifiricF, 6). her anl;er to
K. James's dimantl of a pt)ll'.'ion of an cftalc iln Inglild, l'.
;o. a mialri:;l e between lier ;Itl thle I). of Alenon prl,.ol;il,
73. incerpofes in behalf of Molton, 7S. lier nmcaluite, in or-
der to save Iinm, S8, 82. countenances the c 'nlpiialotsi at
luthven, 97. is alarin(l at a conspiracy alainll ie'1, 1 1, l (, .
the dcfigns of Q. Ma)i 's adh)cr ents at'aiinll her, it . enc.;-
vours to recon ei hcr tnterell in Scolland, an(d saiils Arian to hler
intcerl, 11 t8. aimutfcs ( \Mary with n Iruiitl( negotiation, z 1.
a nev conlpiracy a;iaiitt her, ilbid. aln nflci;ltion tforced for
her derfencc, 1z, 123. licr fufpicionis of Q. Mary, ibid. Ihr

~~~~4-~~~~~~~~~~~~il
4

liie endangered yv a clnfpir:iy, lzo. tlis how difcovcred
and prevented, 130. occlions a, cx.r:oi'inary ft;!tutc for her
prefervaion, ib. ib in a ddan erou, lit. ation fron thie p!'ro!rc
of the holy leat :e, 1 ;. cind;evours tol ibrn a co:ifcJcr cy
c'f tle Praoteflit I'incec, ibid. 136. nid to proc.cj with li-
gour againtl tQ_ Mlr;, i 37. advar.ces lher i!'.crci in Scotland,
nnd propoics a league witl it, ibid. 138. Ilitlcs a penlion uoi'!
K.. J .mes, ibid. concludes a trc.ity wire Sco;allid, 144 account
of B bington's con')ir.;cy aaiiill her, .!i--15o. her iii-
mulation after (2. Mart '. collvit;on, 1(5, 1(6,. ler anllf.ver to
K. James's intetccefi.'n for lier, 16). licr taithr di:lilnu!airon
and anxicty, 171. liins the. warrant fcr her execution. 1- .
her fnecch to Davilbin on iliat occalion, iib. aitfcts to :,nlelt
(Q. Mary's death, iSz. ;vcral in:irks of her .irtificc in til.it :i-
fair, 183, 184. lie eideaviurs to fuoth K. Jaines, 184. pro-
vocitioins given by her to Spain, 113, 194. prepares to meet
its rifentment, r9o, 19'. endeavouns to tecure Scutland, ibid.
tiesto prevent K. Jamtne'b marriage, 2z0.. (Ilcit' hliin l ttreat
cncfpiritors againlt hin with rigour, 216. cva. ls the dcc:!in
of K. J mil e's right of lfuccftlion to the Crown of i' ig land, z c,
251. is ditgulied ;t several of his p.occdinc;s, 2;2, 253.
discovers his correfpondeTi e viith the P 'p, i!.! . frc li rounds
of her furpicion, 279. ler conie u

e witi r re :rd :lte 'rl of

Efiex, ibid. 28;. her irrifohlution c.),-'.'cll ll li ii ath, zi.
and great concern after it, i'oid. recci. cs ibat: l !.i rs from I.
James with regard, and incrcales hi. .1 -'i v, 2:' . tler last ili-
ness, 290. conjeturcs concerning the c \ifes cf her iclonrchol?,
29c-293. her death, 293. and ci!nrait'e, ibid. 2 , declared
tile K. of Scots her fucco.lbr, 2z:6. fimn of hir leCtt;s, Appen-
li, 401. ..,:. 436. 437. 4' 45 · |5 . 47 I;'
rhiphln,'on, eicrctary to 1k. J.iine' \ I. !:l'ccics hliln 11:o a c;rre-

ipondencc with the Pope, ii. 2 ;3. is tlied :;dii f)oinnd guilty of
hiph trcafon, ib. an I pardoned oin rl.e ()trrc.' initrcriliol. ib.
,.gIl;d, thi lEnglilli Icize anil ndciai ii; a in; ie 1. of Stn;land
long a plifonr, i. . tie nio, ls tllice Ihl!nled, ;'). hlad
caily two houlf, ofPl'.ili.·IliltI , *'. itiCv inv.' c

ic' . ;:lC d,

n li ..

tlheir depredations tiierc, 11; , I p a .'e lc cn !'.iiglatid
l'rance, and Scotlaiid, i i'.. in''..d S ^t)tiid ;ic, ;io , i.!. 1 ai;
*al great \viltory, I 'z, 123. i; inkt)'cs i(' littli: al]vaht.tle t1
them, ,

2z . they force itle Scots intl,) closer 1

iii) ll i vi li l'I anc; ,

126. conclidec ai peac,', 13 . an l'.tglils! ct ar: i. cs in Sit:.
land to allifl the congregatio n, 2:';. a peace corn(li'ct bi(.
twcctn them, 2:9, 230. they enter Scotlaind aln(! bcliciec Iet
Flrellncl in Lti.h, 230. are fleveial times rcl)illcfi, z7. CiIautef
(i their bad futcccf, ib. 233. artic:les of a trcty of p eact,
2- 4. they quit Scotland, z.12. rcllellions on tli;c rijiht of ll(-.
crllion to their Crown, :26 .-2')7. the l'alliaincit a1\ ,irs (Q.
Mary's right of fucccflion, 391. a lc;lgue bctween lnglaitd
a1nd l:rance, ii. 33. belwcen I'.igland and Scotland, i4+ tlhe
ntiionnl covenant adopted in Enylanid I9.

i',~tia ,

Ent'aih/, 'ith what view introduced - i. 23, ?
t./cpo/,al government in the Church, some account f it, i. ;4.

..i ,,ttiemn t to revive it, ii. 42. it is abolrflcd by the Ai.ctbyI). ,
r'-, jjuiil'dion abolished, 21 2. See Archbi/'ops.
Eirol, }'arl of, one of the headth e the Spanish lacticn, ii. I,.

h s oiffrs of fervire to the K. of Spain, 20C. appears in rebel-
ion, 203. is forced to submit to the King, 20... imTri!ioc: l
for a fh(urt time, ibid. joins in ai other corfpir.icy, 214. is
summon'ed by the King to surrender, z:6. otfers to fubrlit to
a trial, 220. lentcnce pronounced againil him - 2zi
rlkinie or Dun, is employed by the Qieen Regent to deceive the
Protestants, i. 18o. his refentmerit of this ufae ibid.
·-- .- Lord, governor of Edinburgh Calile, acts a neuiral pa:t
between the Queen Regent and the congregation, i. -o20. ie-
ceives the Queen Regent into the Caiile, z32. is ctea;cJ lI.a'
of Mar, 297. See Mar.
-.-- ,Alexander has the chiefdirecions of the education of I.
James VI. ii. 6o. admits some of the nc.bles to make con;-
plaints to him against Morton the Regent, (2. is tuintd oi:t
of Stirling Caflie by his nephew the Earl of Mir t6ó
Fj.hewal, the French Envoy, endeavours to oblhuc'it a tre:ty be.

twtcn England and Scotland - - . l.!-
Efx, Earl of, set up by the Englifl Papifis ns a candidate f(ir

tie Crown, ii. 227. heads a party in Er.gland, 279. his cb:'-
racter, ibid. is greatly diltinguifhed by the Qjecn, ibid. 2'0.
favours the K. of Scots, ibid. obtains the offices of Loid Lieu-
tenant and Commander in Chief in Ireland, ibid. is milfuctcefl
:fui in that expedition, ibid. receives a harfl letter fromn the
(Qten, 2S 1. returns to England and is confined, it d. is tried
ai.d cenfuicd, ibid. endeavours to spirit up Kinig James, :8'.
his rash and frantic conduct, 283. Is again taken iitto cullod,1
284. his death, 285. his ion and afbiciates are rcllored to
their honours alter the accelion of K. James - ii!i
Europe, the ilate or, at the beginning of the fixtcenth centt, ry

j. .

Excomnmunicaticin, a terrible engine of the Popifl Clergy, i. 1 1
FEtcn, an Fnglif!nimn, fixes the Pope's excommunicntion ('

0t. Illizabeth oll tlhe gales of the Biliop of l.ondon's t,:-
lace
'endeon, M. de ila Al till, sent by lte l'litch King to iilt('ip'l-

for K. Janic; when confined by tlic Rutliven cillpiiia'ol., i.
101. is foiced to return wvthout ifcccls - i11l.
Ieudal (;oviernrenit, its origin. and arillocratical genius, i. i 5, li
A-/, I. caulfes vliich linlted the povwer of feudal Monl;lcliS, :,.
feudal vaflls liable to few taxes, 18. a remaikkable irtlitinc(e
the fccblcncfs of feudal govcrnnient, 21, zz. thle moll per-

jisA

ife' idea of the feudal fv!!em, how attained, 4. !;te of it in
England, So-S2. and in .-cno:land -S, 7,. so
Fife, a populous and ,pwertul country, much de' o:edl t(: c - c. I;-

gregation, i. 227. is dellroecd and plundereil Iv tlin Siei. :,
ib. the fynod of, excommullicates the Arclibilln, ) o S;. i.[-
drew: for contumacy, ii. 1+3. they cxco,rillnincate ti:e hi.,ilh
Lords 220

Floqvien, the battle of, i. 6i.
Sorbel, Lord, with the Earl of Arylec, is f'nt niain/t the Popifit

I-ords, ii. 22;. aie defeated t v [hm ib;d.

Fordun, John de, hi.s hiilorry of Sicotiand lhit n wrrcte i.
Forfier, Sir John, t:iidcli of tie En liilt ihoicr, a tilil; jie-

tween himn and the scots --. 1
Fotheringay Callle, Q. IMlay's imprifoli mcn , t:i:,l, a.l dt.at

there *i, 15 t I~ 9
France, the confcquences of the fu!hx(rtion of ih,, f .' . .(:n-

ment there, i. 8.. a body of lFrerch ;I:riv in <c;'I t !up-
port the Catholics, I 19. they reduce tihe c:!l' AC' ; .

; 't, !I.'',1 s

ibid. another party of thcen arrive th(e. :-, .. ;!i.;r tr.!:i(-
Clions there, ibid. 3 I. coniclude a 3

;:c- \. ith 'i. !.d(!, 13o.

their politic cond tit, 1-1, 1;2. they li:! e 1.:ntId. 131.
their artifices in a treatv cf inl;r',iaL' 'be!\ t

c ihe i !l'iil: i' d

theQ. of Scots, i:z, 16Gi. the Pr.te:.n:s e ie;

, :. '

t, ... l

the French army out of Scotland, i ;. a:Ttlbher p. t;:
arrive there and fortify Lcith, 204. tnl(y ".,:!1i:e::tu ;ic p:ple
by their insolence, ibid. they are f!rn a .!nil t11 cn,'r i ton,
226. they destroy and plunder life, and arc inuci hira'i.I' by
parties of the congregation, z27, 22". arc g'el ..arr.d by
the arrival of the En2lifll l. et, 28. ith y rct:iiin Iu I .i h eaitlv
harafTed and e:.llltled, 2z(;. 1rc lir-fi gged tlic:e bv tiit I 1 itli
annd the congregation, 232. thv g'ain Ice:ral ;.dvanl: ;e< Ib d.
234. their motives for conicluiding a pcac, 230. r;.:oi .itiors
for that purpose, 237, 2.'3. articles of the trcarv ;., z4o.
they leave SCIetl.ind, 2.2. the lrench advifc (2. MNny to miio-
der;ate iealiurcs, 2()0. their propofl;i )\a' an lbihflldo)r re-
ji.tcd, ibid. they agice to Q( MR.1\ 3': in;rl.: e v.'lW Lord
l)arnly, 32S. thel I C, ltiou Onlc s of ti'ir i !ras )
-, King of, a co)p ol his diictio i. ,, to Sc itani, A".

'

07.

i'rait r. gives a click toIn the ;alnibitioun l
p tO.icq (.I C:.iilc \.

i. 92. hi li.fiL lt ti the S io s, I 11. his '' .i i )
--- 11. CO eIL" to t[le crolnv Of l'r..!:C.', i . h

,) .

i' :, -

ter, ibid. .; I. is tii d I'1 y the' I]!.: ' olt

li,i o .o: .l U ;n.iii.d

of l.o ,iin, ibid. lie treats tl: l'ro ll .

c a t w it ' ict 'c. ; *i" ,
:6. hlii death 1;

C;
(/l;,i/ih, D,',9'ir and G(iibert, tl.cir iroi;on conce, r-i ' t!;e t;vw-

tlul( s of killing lih relictil ex mni uiiiiatd I'lj1i '5, . I. 7.

thlty jin in ;a tis: ii acy to liill t. l'i 1 ;i: t. ii, it, i . G( ib. t
btrIt lill.' by \\ illiin ian ) lia)b lis5 Mli i.l:Cltes, lt.), I .

1-. .
II. p ,s

is en'ploycd to carry on a foreign correspondence wlit
Q, M\:ry - - - 151, i;

G/amis, L :dv, is condemned to be burnt for witchcraft i. ;o
----. Lord, chancellor, intimaites the King's order to Morton

to firreinder the Regency, ii. 63. is killed in a rencounter at
Stirling - - - 6;

the turor of, joins the conipirators of Ruthven, ii. 04.

his bold fpccch to K. James, 95. he, with the other cons i-
Jraors, size the Calile es Stiriing and erct their llandard,
i1 l. hi is attainted, and his cllase forfeited 119
GlI./:s, Bi'iop of, a no:c of his concerning the Queeu of

Scotland's dowry, Appt nlix - - 49

Gienrairn, lall of, joins the Ruthven conspirators ii. 9 p
(Gieii.vatt, the battle of - - ii. 22
;,ordon, Si: lihn, a fcu.ffie in the fl eets of Edinburgh between

hilin and Lord Ogilvy, i. 294. being confined for it, he males
his eica;).', z9;. when oldered by the Queen to surrender
limcrclr, he takes up arm an against hcr, ib. 296. is defeated,
nr.it, t'!c-ther with his brother, made p;iibner, 299. he is
bcl. hei:d and his brother pardoned - ibid.
- ILord, set at liberty - - . 34

__-- Sir Adam, exerts himrelf for the Queen's interelt in the
no: t, ii. 31. his charaaer and good conduOt as a soldier

34, 3;
Gowrie, Earl of, joins in aconfpiracyto seize the King at Ruth-

ven, ii. 94. is visited and pardoned by the King after his es-
cape, o10. becomes fufpeted, and is ordered for France, iii.
delays his voyage, and is taken into cultody, ibid. he is tried
and executed - - l
- - John and Alexander, sons of the above, their charafter

and conspiracy, ii. 257. the surprising circumtflances of that
remarkable tranfaafion, 258-263. several different coniec-
tures concerning it, 263-275. their dead bodies brought into
Parliament and condemned, 275. their efates and honours
forfeited, and name abolifled for ever, ib. different accounts
of this aflfair publifled, but not fatisfaaory, 276-278. See
Ruthvyen.
Graham, Sir David, ofFintry, accused ofa conspiracy with the

popifl Lords in fai-our of Spain, ii. 215. is convicted and be-
headed - 216
Gray, mafler of, some account of him, II. 12;. he becomes

a favourite of K. James VI. ib. is gained to Q: Eliz.ibeth's
intcrefl, ibid. betrays Q. Mary, s 6. perftades K. James to
write a hnrfi and undutiful letter to her, 1 3. joins with othl-r
in promoting Q. Elizabeth's intcrefl in Scotland, 137. h';i
treachery when sent to inetccde for Q Mary, 171. his bale-
ness discovercd, he is disgraced, 187. his vain attempt aganill
fecictarv Maitland, i88. acsb in Italy as a spy from the court
of England, z22. a memotial of his for his Majefly, Ap-
pendix, 540-547. to the secretary of atate 4,-

(3td.,, .

Gujie, Duke of, his violent counels with regard to the Scots, i.

198, 199. is murdered at the siege of Orleans 3o'5
---- his intrigues against Q. Elizabeth, ii. 116, 117. Is a

princ:pal promoter of the holy league, 135. 194. drives the
French King out of his capital - ibid.

II
jf.ddingtoun, fcized and fortified by the E.nglish, i. 126. is

relieved by the French --1 I
Hamilton, the rife of that family, i. 3-. arbitrary Droceedings of

Mlorton the Rectent againti it, ii. 71, 7:. See Chatel/erault.

- of Bothwi:lhaugh, taken prloner at the battle of Lang-

fide, i. .A87. is tried and condemned for rebellion, ibid. ob-
tains a pardon from Murray the Regent, hv the interceflion of
Knox, ibid. an ac'oI nt of his muidering Murray, { <o-53:.
I,,akes iis efrcpe, 532. is received in triumph at Hamilton, ii. i
---- Mr. Patrick, the firli who fufltered in Scotland for the

Prorellant religion - - i. I 70
Hartford, Eail of, inrades Scotland with an English army, i.

I z. burns Edinburgh and Leith, ibid. is made Duke of
Somerlrt, and proteAor of England, 21. See Somerfit.
Hatton, vice-chamberlain of England, the argument by *hich

he prevaiied on Q.Mtry to plead at her trial ii. 158
HenrylI. of France, lends fo.ces to aflill the Scots, i. 119. a mar-

riaec proposed between his son the l)auphin and the young Q,
of Scots, Iz7, 12 z. excites the Scots to invade .ngland, 57.
his infamous impolition on Q. Mary in the treaty of marriage,
162. 163. persuades his (nn and Q Mary to afflume the titles
of ICing and Queen of England, 175. his death t97
- I1. degenerates greatly on his accefflon to the crown of
France, ii. 134. enters into a private negotiation with Q. Eli-
zabeth, 137. interposes feebly in belialf f Q [^dMaly 166, 167
-- VIII. of England, by his fyflem of reformation be-
comes formidable bo:h to Papills and Proteliants, i. 7 1. pro-
poles an interview with K'ng James V. ib. is disappointed
by him and declares war againll Scotland, 72, 73. invaces
it, but is forced to retreat, 74. his importance as to the ba-
lance of power in. Europe, 93. his influence in Scotland how
obtained, 95. his schemes with regard to it on the death of
J imes V. too. were i!l.conduaed by himself, and odious to
ilie Sots, o10. [His treacherous cfizure of Scots Ihips that
toolk lhelter in his port,, o10. attempts to gain the Regency
by great promises, 0o6. invades Scotland, ixz. this being
ill-condutled turns to no accountt, ibid. reccives and rewards
the Earl of Lennox, 113. encourages the niurderers of Car-
dinal Beatoln,, 11 8. his death and characLer, ibid. his incon-
fillent conduct, 1,7. excluded the Scotch line by his tella-
mcnt ibid.
Htrries, Lord, joins Chate'lherault in opposing the Regent, i.

5 14l. come. to a treaty with him, ibid. he and the Duke are

p p comn

omm itte, 1,lifoners to the caflle of Ed inburgh, l 5. in tinate3
the King' s rder to Morton to iefig n the Regency, ii. 63. ac-
coun t of his behaviour in Parliament, Appencix, 385. a letter
from him to Lord Scroop and Sil F. Klnollis 465
y.icfo-ra', feiretary to the Duke of Noifolk, betrays him bL dif-
coverilng hli intrigCue \\ith Ql. Maly ii. 28, 29
i l.'aonqJ nnrt. ]if' .'i a attempt to civilize themi by King j;.ies
\ I. i'. zSS. rc.'el.ticns for that p irpofe, ibid. three tonns
endred vitih the privileges of royal boroughs ordered to be
hillt t(, le - 289
hrig/bfn, a piicel of RhCrins, maintained the lawfulncfs of kill-

Ing lhelcrical rxce'mmunicated P'inces - ii. 147
Hvr. A\li'\ani;rier Lord, tilwarts the nmeafures of the Duke of

Aliranv, Re ent -- i. 3'
---- I ol.', f;nt by 1K. James \V. \ ith a fecrct embafly to the

P>i'pc - - ii. 255

.ict'nar,-. Scl, A://fiS.
urn/eoan, I,(ord, govellor of Berwick, his interview with Arran

li. 1 I8, I 19

Hnt/rfl. Farl, tl(rltoh a catl'olie, joinl the refor mrers in opporfing

the i lcnch atinr, i. 1c6. th llils them only with fair pronlmifs,
21 Q. hls Iuf irrhl( cincrier ce \with thezil, 23 . iobloe accountr
cf tlhat f-mlv, : 2, 29

, . hi, enmity againl. the young Qnecn's

mniiiilcls, ibid. h s rct(ltn'ient inflarl.cd bv all aicidcrt,
294. apncarts in an open rebellion aiainfl the Queen, 297. his
plot againr her miniles disappointed, ibid. breaks out in:o
open rebl iion, 29,. is tiodden to death il a battle, 299. Ilis
family proficueed xith the utniofl rigour, 3co. fevccal ancc-
dotes and rcnj,-clures corlccrning his pbtr ibid. 301. is at-
tainted by I'ail:anmcnt, 3e9. tie attainder repealed, and tile
family icllored to ellate and honious - 422
--- Ilis attaclimcnt to Boihwlell, 41 . 4 2,. reflifes to fubnllit

to the IcRi-gc! , i 5. is forced to dj it, q t 6. adss as lieutenant
to tie QC eecn after the Regent's murder, ii. 6. is prt cl.inrecd a
tra :cr by Lent ox ihe nesw Rtgecrt, q. receives ;fime imo :ey
and pironif s of afltianre fioml Spain, ibid. to. agrees to a
tieaiv with lMortn the Regen', 49. is cne of te eicads of the
Spanifl fnflion, I(96. errnages to the l'rince of Pdrina to fierre
tile hine of' S,; in, 2C(1. is illiiloine fr for a lt time, 203.
CreCls a ll1nd .rd of rebcl!ion, ibid. but forced to fubmiiic to l:e
Kiin., 204. is again in prifbned, ibid. is toon set at liberty,
ibid. receives a c,,mn iiionu froul the King, al . his harbaious
niuidcr of the I;sr1l of Mllrrav, ibid. is fumlnonled to fitrrender
to jufiee, 212. flies to the mountains, 216, ofl'cs to luhinit
to a tialn, 2,:, f(tenre pronounlced altanll iln, 221. re-
surf's to uil niir,t 222. .makes another deiicratc arttmpr, but
it foicd to fly - 22,, 225

I

.IM ES I. wsna detnired Iong a prioncer in England, i. 3;
tlouelcs in S.otlnnd during that time, ibid. 36. was nIltch

iinptouiii !,

imnproved b' a.n inglifh education. 49. . g9. Is lolicv 1n !iis re-
turn to Scotland, ro. his charaiRer, ilid. 1,. ippi tiLes til
power of the nobles, ibid. they being c\alpteiied, coiilpire
apainfl, and nlmudcr hiil - R2, ;q
:James II. toubles in Scotl.nd during his linolritv, i. 3(, 3-.

his at(elmpts againl tile nol)lcs, 5 ',, Illul dels (lie l'.rl of
Douglas, 54. piocuires fev\e:al good laws to he palledl, 55 5(,
reduces thie i Ow\Ve of tiue lolcs, ,). his de.itl)

1l,. the larc of SC.'tland dui'll Ins minority, i.

1. hlis

impoltic coiidu1A 97, ;, . kills one 'l hiis Iroilhels, and is
invaded by another, Sq. is grcativ inllultid by his nolles,
60o. his despicable miimon%, ib!d. w.is thc lill that appointed
a (anding guard 0o his 'lfiion, 6 . ihe nolels ate ptosoked 1t
take arms againil ltin, 62. is kislcd in a banle againiil them,
ibid. his charater - - ibid. (i^
~--- \'. his clh;lraicr, i. 63. is killed in a battle againll tlie

Engli at Flowden - -
.--- V. his ninority long and ttiurbulent, i. ;-. tranfai'ioins

during tllat time, 64, (';. aftunits( tile (overlrinillt \lile. very
young, 66. his claraitir, iliid. nd (, lIi. Ilchiiue for hIimbliing
the nobles, 67--71. is ldivetted from it ib the cle gy, 7 ,, 74.
takes arms for the defence of his killrg.on, -4. Ils iobles ic-
fusing to follow him, throws hlim into a deep encIlan holy, 75-
77. which is increafid by a sI rprilng dct'al t of li. fiori, 76,
his death, 77. refletois on bIibscotduil, ibid. 78, he refuted
an alliance with Clhailcs V. IEmperor - 94
.--=- V,. his birth, i. 383. his baptism, 398. the care of lim

committed to tile Earl of Mar, 41. . is by him prcleirvc, from
falling into the liands of Bolt cS ell, 437. is crowned, 1 S7. the
nobles opprcilRd by Morion the Regent, turn theif eCves to hi lt
for redrcfs, ii. 60. his education ani ditfiofiions, iblid. 1. lie
becomes ihfpicious of tile Regent's power, 61. difovcrs
early a gceat attaclihment to fi;vourites, 7 . adopts tnwo of dif-
ferent dispositions, ibid. cnters lEdinburgh w\uil great folciiinntt,,
76. is by his favourteis engaged in unpopular mcliircs, 93,
9+. is seized by a party of nobles at Klu: livcn, 95. ann forced
to receive coniplainls againit his fivoureics, ib. dilinmliles
with them, and baniiles Lennox, 97, is brought to Stirlbn: and
Ilolyroodhoufie, 99, his concetn for l.cniox's Uleait, ;aii' igrd
tor his memory, i o-. receives thle Fretnch ;Ilabllldor wivthi gl at
refipc, ilo. makis l)is clfcape from the cconipiratos, io2z.
rcfolvcs to treat themi witn mnodiratioll. c,4. 'viis Gowi ic uld
grants him a paidon, ibid. reews 1is ltndue f lo Arra:o,
tos. is by hini pcrliladed to viohl ni inlalures aglillfl the coIl-
fpirators, ibid. his an wecr to a halughty lettcr rom Q . I',za, 'etl
on their behalf, o16. is by her intt rploflrioln tcnl'crd nm11 \vio-
lent againlt them, 107. is provokeci by lth. cii y, o.,. iis
fleps to humble lthem, I 12. his prolfuino to Airan, i o. frn.is
a new favourne to England againilt tih boinilicd tlrd J, 124.
devolves the whole regal authority on Arian, i 6, i 27. writes
an uaidutiful lcttcr to his iiotlier, 133. is tlhrca3tcLd Z o ob iiiie-

: p 3 lhcitcj

heritel by her, ibid. receives a pen ion from Q. Elizateth, 1 39.
is reconciled to the exiled lords, 14 I. becomes popular bycon-
cluding a treaty with England, 144, 45. hi' fcalndalousbeha-
viour lith regard to Archd Douglas, i16. his endeavours
to save his mother's life after her condemnation, 167. 16S.
is grcatly incensed at her death, 184. argunmer. t ui'd by the
E;igliflh miniliers to pacify him, ibid. 18S. is forced to I;fie
his resentment, 86j. attempts to unite the nohbes, 188, 189.
is courted both by bpain and lngland, 195, 19q'. resolves vi-
,.orouflv to adheic to the latter, 196. t.akcs ifveral Itcps with
that view, ibid. his fikll in the popilh cntiioverfy, 202. wrote
a commentary on tie Revelations, ibid. his max.ms with re-
g;ird to popeiv, ibid. 203. his exccflive lenity to clnfpiratots
againit him, ibid. refblves to ma ry the Princess of Denml ik,
204. arts ul'cd to prevent it, ibid. the marriage is confunimmt-
ed in Norway, zc6. palles fiveral months in Denmark, ibid.
reflecions on his conduCn there, ibid. 207. his arrival in Scot-
land iwith his Queen, 208. indulges the Pref)ytcrians,ibid. 209.
the ill conkiqucnces of his lenity, ibid. 2 It. hiis zeal againlt
wiu.hc;-aft, ibid. is folici:ed by Q: Elizabeth to treat the con-
fpiratots againil hini with rigour, 2 16, 217. is fufpecaed of con-
niving with them, 217. is fu piied and teizcd by Botlhwll,
ibid. 218. ard forced to com p'y with his term%, ioid. iislenity
to Bothwell abused, 221. is futtpered of favouirig the
popilh Lords, 222. is in nev danger from thenl, 22'. dele-
gates his authority to Arcyle aid l:oibes iaain it them, 22;.
goes in person against them, 22z'. watles their lands and gar-
ifonns their callles, ibid. his right of the fucc (lion to the crown
of Elnland opi-ofid by the papifls, 227. his leniiy to them in-
cenlis the clergy al d people, 23 1, 232. is much provoked by
the obllinacyofthe cle gy, 235. give\ o ders :aain !t them, 23,.
is much insulted, and ii great danier at l:.iinburgh. 238-240.
leaves Edinburgh and proceeds with feveirty aiaini the cili-
zcns, 241-. 44. acquires :,biblute doniin;oii in eccclfia!tical
alfairs, 245, 246. ifrenlthens his intcrell in paIli ment, by ie-
floring the I.ats of the ecclcfi:llics, 247-249. endravours \vnih
fuccels to gain a party in England, z2o. incrcafe: his reputation
by publiflhing his Bafillcon Doron, 25 . is accused by Q: Eli-
zabeth of corresponding with lthe Pole, 253. this he dtnits,
and how accounted for, ibid. 254. other reports coii(erning
this, ibid. is at e;cit pains to gain the Romllni catlho'ic,
25g. his regulations with regard to the church, 2 6, 2 7. tle
itnylleriots aifiair of Gowrie's cotifpiracy, 2 7-278. his cau-
tious behaviour in regard to the Eail of Ertex, 2z 3 frends ain-
i]aftldors to l;v''e him, 284. tl Cy arrive too laIe, ibid. he rellores
his fun and fibciates to their honours after Ins icccflion, ibid.
continues his intrii ues in England, ilid. 28 , 2 7. his intercll
greatly llrengtlered there, tbid. endeavours to(lvilize thle iglh-
lands and iles, 288, 289. is prorlnimed King in tEnllard, afirr
the death of Q E.lizabeth, 295. i1 ptoclaiiiItcd likewil' in Scolt
land, 297. p.rpares fuir l;i Jourit'y to England, 298. eniers

London

London, and takes poflTflinn of the throne, (9)). hii cliar.-rfer
how diflerent from that of (0 I.liz;iheth, il. a Il'tir fr.in iin
to Mr. Archihald Douglas, Apprendix, 56. curicus letter t,
him from ari unknown Englifl correlpondcnr 55-
Invzeu;sm/ callle, resiles to fuirender to t.2 Mary, i. 297. it is

torced, andl the governor punilied - ibi.

l/n/y, the liberty of, how prcletcd - i.
e,

K

I'E'T' I, Sir William, font to intecede for Q. Mirv when

under fen:encc, ii. 108. letter fromn himn to Iecrct.rry M.ait-

land, Appendix - - 5 6
Kent, Earl of, appointed to fee the fentcnce ng::inil Q. Mary

executed - - ii. 174
Ker of Fernihellt, ravages England on the murder of Murray the

Regent, ii. 2. his dleign, 5. has a icuflle with the English 139
- Geo. brother to I,. Newbottle, is discovered when ready to

fail to pomote a plot inl Spain, ii. 214. his fclieme opened,
ibid, cfcapes out of prison - 217

Kildigrecw, Henrv, his declaration on the pcn e, Appcndix 497
Kings, feindal, the m(l. I linited of all Princce, i. 1 . gencral

caules on this, 17. their revenues were but finall, ib. iS. had
no !tanding armies, 19. and jurifdidfion limited, zo. means
used to extend the roval authority, 40. their jurifdit5ion c:-
larned, 42. the extraordinary influence of the Scottifl Kings
in Parliament, 78. the reason of this - ibid. 84
Kirka/dy of Grange, o e of the murderers of Beatoun, is recalled

by the Q( Dowager, i. t6o. his attainder revelsed in 'arlia-
ment, 3c9. oliers to lighlt Botl vell in tingle conbat, 443. his
interview with Q. Mary, in name of the confederate Lords,
44 4. rescues Maitland fiom confinement, s 5. labours to sup-
p,,rt the King's authority, and rellore harmony after the mur-
der of the Regent, ii. 3, 4. accedes to tie (Qeen's party, 4.
provides for a siege by incrcafing his garrison an'd fortlfyi:ll;
Edinburlh, 18. proclaims Lcnnox's autliority unli\vful andi
ufvu pLd, 19. attemi.ts in vain to prevent a meeting of the
Pailiiament, 2o. forms a scheme bor furpriilng the liing's
party, 23. is at firl} fucceliful, but afterwards ideflated, 24.
comes near to an agreement with Mar the Regent, 39. a tre;\:v
with Morton breaks it ofl, 47-19. files upon Edinburgh lorii
the caflle, 4:. is besieged by the Regent, afilted by the Eng-
lifl forces, 5o. is forced by mutiny of the gairiloni to capitu-
late, 51. surrenders to Druiy tlle Englilh cencral, ibid. is hv
order of Q. Elizabeth delivered up to the Rligeit, 53. he anJ
his brother are executed - ibid.
Knol/.r, Sir Francis, sent by Q. Elizabeth with letters of condo-

lence to Q. Mary on her arrival in England, i. 430. fume of
his letter, Appendix - ();--472-477
]Knox, John, a famous reformer, his clharancr, i. 1 34. after bring

lome time abroad, he is recalled by the perfucuted Pi otellians,

1) p + 181.

tsi. inflames the multitude at Perth with rage againfl the Pa-
piets, ibli. his notion conceining the goveminent of womnen
whenlce it. his. residence si.ed in Edinbuigh, 193. con-
plains of t'h lulkewarmnlnefs of the refolbmeiE, 2c8. his opinion
to t; e c'' e,.ton of reloI me s illat it is lawful to refifl and de-
prive it'ramnical Princes, 210. animates and revives the de-
fpnn, 'n C in e2regati on. 2 1, 222. complains of the neglect of
the ,c!inmer s in pioviding mainienance for their preachers,
24 S. i'-ccinnieds the Geneva model of Church Goverlnment,
2 q6. prioplols fluperinCtenants in thle church, 2 57. comnpofe; the
rfil hrok of dicpiiline, 2q8. renounces friendfllip with the Earl
of Murray for hi' mrn'deraion, 310. is tried for encouraging a
mnitin an-lng the leeople, and acquitted, 312. popish judges
concur in this decision, ihid. is publicly accused hy Maitland
of preaihing ftdi iouis diit .ine coccerning Iefillance, 324.
charactels ol the two difjutanis, ib. alpoved of several in.
flances of aflafinaiun, -77. agrees to tome regulations con-
cerning the election of Bllhops, ii. 43. his death and charader,
44, 45 his eulogiuml by Mor.on the Regent, 4;. aiticles
feni by him to the general aflembly, Appendix, 496. fpeci.
mtn ot his eloquence - 560

L
7 Angfide, the batt!e of i. 4-3

Laureai, caidinal, is sent as a nuncio from the Pope with
a prefcnt to Q. Mary of Scotland, i. 395. is itopped at Paris

396
Lcaguer holy, a confederacy of Roman catholic' so called, ii. 13

\Xa univeriilly agreed to Iv thrli all over Europe ibid.

Lcarrig. the revival of, promotes the reformlation i. 1 4
Lejcfler, Rail of, appoiirtcd a comilliioner to the conference at

Vel'iminrfr - - - i. 50o.
tliti. I urnt by the Englifli. i. 112. fortified by the French, 204.

bI li.gie by the lnglll, 23-

. Q I. ay lands there fionm

]ra nce, 271. the ftpcru -itr of it glanted by lici to Edinbu glh,
3 2. is sz.cd and fortiiced by Moi ton the Regent ii. 19
Lenox, .arl of, nrrives in Scotland from Fiance, i. loi is much

coneicd bv caldin al lleatonon, ibid. his i'rctenfions to the fuc-
cclioll. how found(d, 09g. rclfnts Beatoun's dc(eitfulncfs to
him, o. hcads Ithe refoi InCr alrd the advocates obr the Eng-
liflil rllance, I I. ibu:prifes ihe Regent and cardinal, ibid. is
outwitted h% the cardinal, ilhd. continues alone in the in-
tet( 1 of Eligland, 113. is farcd to fly to that court, where
he is rewarded, ibid. is married to a niece of K. Henry's, Iy
which he lecrame father to a i ce of Kings, ibid. his clai n
to the (uccefiion, 3 S. is inmtlpi orid lor a cfcrct coriefpoid(len(c
with Q Mary, 3 . is invited fccitly by her to Ieturl to Scot-
land ibi . arl\ es in Scotland, and i. received with gicat si-
miliarity by he', 321, 322. his forfeititc is rcpea!cd, and I:e is
rellorcd to his cllaic and honours by the Par'lialcnt, 3 22. hio

lady

lady sent prisoner to the Tower of London, 34. and treated
with rigour, 339. he infilts on the prosecution of his ion Dlarn-
ly's murderers, 414 charges lBothwell witi it, ibid. the prose-
cution is litlied, 416. he caves a delay, wxhich i. reflted,
418, he is left alone in it, ibid. lolicits (. Elizabeth's interell
to obtan a dtla\, 419. infills on ir ly proxy ai the trial, but is
over-ruled, 420. being applhenllfive of d incr he files to-
wards l.Enland, 4. z Iis soiiteli accules (. Mary of the mulr-
der to Q. E zabetn, 4. . he appea s at t1i ctfereince at Wefl-
minfl-er, and aittife (. M Mary of the murder upon oatli, sob.
return: to Scotland proltcted lx an Engilh ar v, 11. 6. is cle-
ed Rec:ent, (. his pic grels againil the Que,.n's partv, ibid. ap-
poitls -oinflllliouners t.) fianc a ireatv vith thofc of the Qnicen,
1 3 fIlrprie' )Duinhaton caltle, I --17 join, tie Earl , t Mor-
ton ,t Lehil, i.) holds a Parliament in the Catnoiiatc, ibid.
another at sterliog, 22. he is (Iluprlfed and killed tllee 2e
Lenox, Loid Ahigny., liis chata'ter, )!. - . joins with tle lKing's

other new taav sr lte ti underi ine' Moito,, '6. renolloll-' Plo-
pery, 77. Q_ Ez i.beth deileandhL li i to he rcmoved t onl the
privy council, 78. is acculctfd 1 her in lhatlli ,:, 8z. Artran
tries in vain to fipplant hili, S . is comnimandc d by K James
at tie requelt of the n, bles to leave tile kingdom, 97. pits off
his departure on variu,mu preiences, 097 98 returns unitlilli.ioly
to i'rancc, whlrc he loon die,, 9i, his meincry vmldkate(l and
much regaided by tile King, i )o. died a Pr',tcllant ibid.
---.- Earl of, left as the King's licitenant in the nordi after

dispersing the popiil Lords - - ii. 226
LeJlie, Normian, niurlders Cardinal Bea'oun, i. i I). le and ins

afllciates keep polflilion of lih caltle of 't. Anilrewv, i 1 7.
makes a truce with the R'sgent, 1 . are encou agi'd by
1Hen. \II1. ~ - ihd.
- Bifliop of RoCs, is f nt by ilic Catnhlits il Scotland to

engage Q. Mary in their intercll, i. 25q. hil plpoflls to her
rejeted, ibid . 26.is ine<tiaiiis in Lntiland in favour of
(Q Mary, ii. 27. is conlined long i11 thl'I ower, aid altcr-
wards is baniflied Enigland - 30
Lina/ay', Lord, carries tlie propofCl froin the confederates to t)

Alary, that ihe Illould relignl the govelllment, i. 457. jomns
the Ruihven confpiilators - - ii. 9
Lich/evin catfle, Q. Maiy committed a prisoner there, i. 448.

her cfcapce from thence - -4(8

Lord, letters to and from him, Appendix 500
LoEgan (f cRllalrig, an alleged accomplice in (JGorie's coolpi-

ray, ii. 264, 2();. is tried, and his ellate bfrfeited long after
his death - - - ilid. 2()6
Lords confederate, aflrociatc againll Bothwell and Q_ M.iry, i.

4;9. saife forces against tliem, 475. piiblifl the nintiv.s:s of
their condu&, 440. prevail on tile Quieen to I(urender to thenm,
444. aflume tie titlc of I.oids of tile fdcret counlcil, and the
royal authority - 448

Lord,,

Lords, popifl, conipire againlt K. Times, ii. 2r . are t:eated by

hiin ,with grea.t lmtv, 203. form a new conlpiracy, 21.4. lh
King pro..ted( aglinit themn, 1 5. more o hitb nlitiy to thi'il,
7. fill Jid;i'g trs from theny, 22'. thet receive mor,ev fronm
S,..i;;, 2., /'..il of the clergy againlt thenm, ibid. are declared
guhl:v of trejion and their ll.i;es forfieited. 2;. . iele.it the
Kintg's army, 2 2'. arC dli)prlCd on the Kin:,'s approach,
2-7. go abro ad give ficuri'y to keep the c;:ce, ibid. re-
turn to Scotland, and petition for leave to rcliJc iul their- o\ n
hcuies, 23z. tlins granted by a convention of (1ibs, ihil.
;e2:lnt the:r ero;rs and are ablohled fionI e.x'coiniillnuicliolI
2f(,. rel.apr:, a.d are again reconciled ta the church of Ronoe,
ibid. ale rctoield to thenr cet.ltc.s and honours 247
Lorrtin carlin,.l, gets (on'e of the bIlt benetices in Scotland, i.

16S
---. Princes of, their ambitious views, i. ,. in!.iglnte th':

D;tuphlin andl . Ml irv to take the tit'es of King anJ Qtlein
of i'.ngIlin, 17. roloive to invade Lnglnind, 171.. ;',J :o
clieck the Reformation in Scotli.nd, ibid. the Caririt;i's *;reat
ininuence over the young KJIng, 1t,9, (!rice thlie Queen
RKeient o! Scot'and to violent ni;:ejutcs, 2;.. their violcicrs
occ.ilon ia volilp1r.icy a9ni; it t;e;il, 23-. are tfrced t vIilt-

la\w iher- troops tiom Sc ; tul,;id, ibid. t!lft ifnilut the S 'ottilI
amb.ifilidor, z5o. liave great power ov!r the young Kin g ard
Quecn, 2;i, 252. are forced to con:ract tteir v:e.vs on the
detail ofthe Kig - - 253
Lut!er, a bold and principal promoter of the Refarrmatior, I.

11.3. the rapid progtel; ot his doatril:e - 144
A1-,7lOR John, his illory of Scotl n.', fimrc accountof, i. .

1llriliri of Lcthihin toln, f:CIei;ir to MI.y Queen Regeii;,

leaves her lilvice andl Joins lthl Ctulglc ;tion, i. 2 -. lIi: chi.:-
raise'r, ihid. 22;. is Itilt by tltli'n :t;i :i llid r 1o Q. E lial'tr',
'2:; . t1 . hn ,I1. ,,' ;ll b t;i rCt,; :'. I .' lh:e ;o elt i' ll, 220(. i lent by
Q. MaV lo tilhe Court of l').gl. t(:, 2. niike'.. a el rcllioi t1
(0 l.'!' ;ibetl, ibid. -" .

S :c it. ptiltI. () . \.'i t :1 prll ro;ref; t

thle nloth, l)2. he ie tlpl, *d i'v t My tov t dir.i a pn'rtlol;.l

iilto;vlie ~il') (& I',h.'.dlie:hl, 01. Filulilh .cculi's Ino., of
p)inac lii,L' le'iiliiotj d*,ttrille t( eiil.'er 'in , Hhlillt' , 3?.Jr. lIni-
inaltcs to Q) I ,': ahci te intttt lin t ot iM,i| y t.) t.r; l).;r-
]\, 33 1. pr iticnls ctncti;als biet r Ie 'titenlt liit) (.

] Iiz' il'v li,

;. 'i. nl'1O .'' i. I::tC lltv l

n 1ie 1' Wii

V ill t

l;., l tot ). M ar:ly tIlin'

i i ril, rcl .l, 1q

n; . atlt il.!s tille I: , ( lt x !ii, c 1, c , l t(i .(

t ll :

I.t, ill I "i.'l.l;t{, ,1':z. the a it,iD|'1 3.it ( iof 1ll1 Iti/ ; lsin', ili]d. l,,s
jiIi'.!lUC t" 'll l t11 ' I)e h.C ( f i\,,n[ iolk, .|A) , . ; I , i 1 q. 1i ,pl- 1
/<reed 1) ihe ReC c ,

e 2

I, i 1 ic iln vcd lby lK il;aldl, .Ii n l'etin l

'li ilte .t:ili'r, 2z . I, p[),.Its a cosl;titin of tIle tto |:ltlil's afit,

lii' I;uildt r of 3thte
f'ieit' ii. 3, icc tics to tti Q, ieet'u p 1 ltt', 1

dp'tlivecd ol hii, 0lic ol ln:;ii, nry, utJ l 'tucl itl .'d tlit.al, :.

i, att'an'cd inl a Pailiamcnt of the Kiing's party, 'o. arec,
x\,tn , ivar, 3'l, 4'I. his \viCo s in retulihi} a rec(ncil:.;ti'., .:itli
!Mortoni tle it' . ent, -17, .18. rtcjc't overtures ot a trcltv sjr!i
him, ilid. Is bh liued by hini in the c.,li[c of Edinb.,r:h. : h . is
foirced t.) c;ii:ulate and luirender to the i.itpillil 4c;rcr:l>, libi.
to avoid the Kegent's rcll-'iitniitlt lie diipatIci hl;iielf, 3.
f;\era.l of lii Ietters, Appendix - ii. , ;. , :l
.lI:llana', Sir li'hn, is made fecrrctly for Sco:l.InJ, ii. I ; . cL,;-
curbs wvi) iht.:ern I: [pioiotin: ( 2. .l', iz',.rh's inmter.t ti'ir.',
il;.!a. attempts ag;iiil' hini by U.ipt. J.itna S;'iali, late .\r-
r:.l, I S-'. thev prove aliortivc, aild lie is :Jlvailccl] to bec cl:lin-
ce i:i, i'id. tin atrtemlpt to rcnil.vc lim ifioim i1ilt ofiice, ft;i-
tr,.tc!, ...-. his de:lih, 229. a ol')v o' vc.rcx in hlonour (
lim \ it(o:i l the ;iing - - iiJ.
al/ar, I'.-,: of, th.it title conferred oin the Prior of St. -Anlrciv,

i. 2z) ;. accornpa;nics tihe ()ucen in a progircs tl) il e inr;h, :.'.r
he :.,.i l is ;:li' ci;ltt: n.J r,,vIly efcapc iafillina;tioi, z.,J, -'7.
is tr;iteLl 'lirl of Muir;ly, 298. See Au,,ra'.

t- h title is c(tofcricd on L. ELikine, 2)7. tie iripcol of

the xouiig PrI'Ince put into his handi!s, .. )l;. I :h
r: :in:o ii

t'

l iel mi_.g lhiit fi.m Bothwvell, .37-. i:; cli ,] i<.,- l., ij. 2.I.

l.:l)Iur. to hr ntg ;tliut a gereral p:eace, 8 . iJ w.(

;i. d l,,,

IMIrton land hI!s aIcijidt , .:o. dies of ini'.,l ,ii y, i bld. !is
ch:ir.:l.cr, iild. hlib Itici; a;iid i.tciii:y isas acknliv.e igJe by
buthl partics - - bi.
_--- the yotin Ea.rl, heini, inmoofl nn by lMoiton, turns out

his uncle froml the calile oi Stlliniii<, ii. (,. joi.s tile RuKlthtv
crn;i:.i;a:iis, 9t. lie ksitli tihe otil is fi/e Stilli(ng catllli',
antd :'t d ti ir llanJartd, il . is ;tainted an;lt ,it eltItc t si-
feitdj I i 9. is ardoned, aild zclTlor'li to cllite and l(inotlri 141
:Lar h, countCels of, her i,fitlnioiu niari;iale with lie 1 i, rl oi
Air n - - ii. 8S
lMar) o (i,

; (i_' Dow)vager oi Scotlatnl, take:i a colnifilcI.,ib

ll.r n

; le

l r,\il nIIult, 1. 1 :*). is Ilich ,ddlilcd d to the l'niichl

i,,,Irtl, , lhiJd. pli L . ; ni llt.il. II.a t hcr diul; h r to tiie i l) u-
plii t l'r;ince, i -7. becoinec s in:!,iilllenlli in plii)liii,(I'I i.
iifior( l.ttOli , | ;i.

. *!ipi lc5 to toh cilli.c i .f 1 , it l, 1' ,. I1;-

p oIl') c,, iIfl, l''tti nt o t1 ,i'

t 1iUel .', I '.', ai il i .v s 'vlis i'-

i t sr.i ti;, II , l 3'. \ it', th c

I, if

h .lle, t ;. 1t.'t:1 :

.'.'11. i.., I I t. L j, .

i . ili ol

h lic i,(.rl, y,

! i()

. i

n'. i il Ii ' 1 .

p 1., l l II I],C t I ,ll[,11 u It, I |1I . c 1 '

, '

I t'l. il ti I "i 1 ii

I 1,,'

I ii cd .oi diop it, 1.". tries il v:in 1t i tm' a a:. li v. 'i Il.,i

iiir',,. tI li tii er. ,'itl ';*.it ci' 'l' , l"i . o t

,,i, a t1'.

* ll.)iii, II i)ll ie

t}* i';a l.t t it .,:',,, r I t lle !),.hii lii, 1 it

· .

1 h i

,1, 11t 1 ] ., 11I .12,' ill lit ( l c I-'; ,II

l: I: , I '"

, I ( . * ' ( '

;.. * v ' -

¢.' , ln.'11c.. ",' o(Il ~~l,~ lt'1 / l .n-, I(ei. il .ili('r. i,', c:.m t.ci t,'L.'.

>,l,' r:nl c.i, l/ - ,. r'llio)lil[ .at.cc s .j.a' i l ilc

t e vil, tlt i]

c ..!l .. * ol

l.i, 'l .li:s sts L'. risiii, 177. i. l'.t'lL.icd t
b) tic,ii io 1)'ii

. l;t.

cute the reformers, 178. her rash answer to their remonlfrance,
ibid. 179. summons their preachers to appear before her, ibid.
breaks a promise she had made them, 18o. marches with an
armv against them, 182. concludes a treaty with them, 183.
this fle again breaks, 184. her severity at Perth, ibid. her
scheme dilcovered, ibid. 186. the goes to attack them, ibid.
has again recourse to negotiation, 1iS. she is Itartlcd at their
demands and gets time to answer them, I89. violates another
treaty, ibid. lufes Perth and forced to abandon Stirling and
Edinburgh, The retires wi(h precipitation to Dunbar, ibid. 190.
marches to attack the reformers at Edinburgh, 194. gains time
by her artifice, ibid. makes another treaty with them, ibid. ic5.
her artifices to undermine ihe Prior of St. Andrews, 202. the
absurdity of her scheme, ibid. 203. gets a reinforcement of
French troops, who fortify Lcith, 20.l. she difiegards a remon-
firance of the leformers, 2o5. is influenced by French coun-
kellors, and persuaded to violent measures, ibid. retires to Leith
on the approach of the retormeis army, 207. her prudent and
artful conduct theie, ib. her haughty and impeiious answer to
a fresh remonfirance from them, 208. is, by a convention of
them, deprived of her oflice of Regcnt, z1 . the foundation of
this Icntence, ibid. foments difleiences among them, 215. is
deserted by her principal lecrctary Maitland of Lethington,
220. fends French troops againll tie rcf.riners, 226. retires
into the calile of l'dinl-ur!:h on the approach of the English,
231. her death and cha.iurcr, z24. repented of her violent
meafurcs, 235.if hened to the iilli udtions of a reformed preacher

236
Mary Queen of England, her persecuting reign, i. 142. hcr

death - - - 1i9
- Qieen of Scot,, born, i. 97. a proposal to marry her to Ed.

VI. 1co. fle is demanded by Henry V111. 1ol. her marriage
to the Dauplhin of Fiance proposed, 127. a treaty for tlat
purpose concluded, izS, 1 9. she is sent to be educated in
France, I 29. the fatal conii(quence of this, ibid. is imporlcd
on by the atificesof the French in the treaty ofmarri.ige, 16z.
her marriage celebrated with great poi p, 163. they t.iec the
title of King :ind Queen of England, 17 . (lie m.ikes conccf-
sions ti the Congrcgation, 23Y, 23q. declaresbQ E!liabehi's
right to the crown of Ingliand, 2.-9. Ihe ac(iiliic an entire
afeen..int over her buflsand, 51I. llic is rovt'r\l hli'd wilti
great .,fiiicliii on his death, and ic.'iits to1 Rliinls. 2:i3. lheC is
invittd 1)v the cn ivenltin to retuinll to Sillalnld, 2 H. an ell if-
fary tionl tlhe catlilics in Scotlan rd vpro d iolci iiicl.,ifes to
her, ?gi). flic is ditciiineil to nmdeiatlioin liv the lin:i.h antd
tl I l'lol of bt. A\ndrews, ib. 2(o. is pirev;,ilcdl on io pre;arc
lor her iletui ti bcotl ini, 261. the origin of tile difeord be-
tween hlr and ) (. I.lizbcrll, ibid. 262. her i)rcte.iioiis to tile
cromn of l'niil. siil, 2(. is envltd onn nccouint ol her crautiy,
21)7. d cmaliiird a faf r ciiitlul fin Q2. Eli; l'

, beh, whiich 1s lc-

lulcd, 2,9. If " 'l ;iltc
w;tl' , i't' i: uCtlll. t',, i. 2 ]0,.isn,

i at

at Leith, 27 I. is much affcct'ed by the change of her situation,
ib. several diladvantages attending her .cc.ilion, 272, 273.
some circunm ltancs to her ailvait:;l, , , 274. her accom-
plilh:ients of body and mind, ilb. ithe ;": vUit, of her chapel in-
fulted, 27 . procures the free c.\cl lit of itr religion, Ibid.
iflues a proclamation in favour ,'t 'he lProtciLntj, 276. em-
ploys tnem folcly in tile ;7l inrillr.iltitn, 2-. attempts to gain
Q. LElizabeth's fiv)u',, ilrl. eini; s a coril:clion to her, 278.
which is reJ ire , 279 ' it ln.i her puiic t ',rv intolEdinl-
bu ih, 20o. a i inli.t oikl red io her r, :gion in lih-t occa.ion,
ih. itfcoura2 c the ;t:et;cit, (.f thi p i.' U,) nin hrr favour,
282. her ;avclfion to tile fa1111!y' tf 1 ll;i.tn, Ibid. makes a
prorcr. into the north, 2(; , z91. her miiliers narrowly es-
cape ;fl;l!llC i('i. 2 ), 297. is rc'iifCLC ;i(cetl to the calllc ofln-
vernels, 2z)7. i\ n in tiie utiti 11 coti. criation is reiieved by
the Monros and otlher :ciins, hibi. her forces defeat Hant-
ley's rbe::lioii, 299. the Ju:lilts an inier;ve\w with Q. I]za.iceth,
301. ne!oitini ;)rs (once,' ig le r nmarri;ig, 30;. is iblici' e by
d:fl: int Princes, 33 3-3, 3 h.r dcll) ratioon concerni .g it,
30c. i foeced to bear the ;iel rit :r;ve behaviour of Q. iliza-
beh, 307, 3 8. t) p-!e's h::r !ubjlct-, deterniines aga;lnitl a o-
rei;n .hiliancc, \o. dc';r:ninie I not 'tO ratify the trea.ty of Edin-
burgh, c09. farthcr n.'t'tai'.lns fir her marriiage, 313. dif-
covers the view\s of C. ti,, mine of Medicis,, iid. 31 i. Lord Ro-
bert lDudJlv rt iomincr

i,: c to her as a hul!;'liid by Q. J.l!iza-

beth, 314. fle is lh:; hil ] fi'ttdcd at this, 315. diffemblcs with
Q Eii'.:;l h, 3x;-. enleraii;s thoughts ot inarrying Lord
Daril,l, 318. ll' recalc Lentx, 3 ; i. is afrontcd at a letter of
Qt I'zl.lhtl'. 320. hec iprcj '. ic ' .ini1fl[ the reformed, and
zeal for the c:atlh,,lic rlhgi(il, 32, is t:ii('n ith Darnly atfirlt
fight, 326. is gr.etly !oocd it

:i I ;ii.:ilb tli's infultiing crafti-

ntefs, ib . 2. e;tte csv ':ii l th crt of R r)me for ; dirfpcnE;)-
tion to marirv luirr'', ilidl. :nd t;e con:lint of the court of
Fr;lnce, 3-'. imllol.O on ii;:ltdolph, buir pplies to Q. Eliza-
beth foi coni;et' to her ina ri .;c', 3, . wlvhi file afiftets to re-
stile, .3 2. il rell ltiieit Ih!'- pr() ol ', to i'.nd :in aingry niefit ge
to 11i., hbeth, w\hi(li nn l.itul prceents, 334 jullilf i her con-
duct to ichie l''i1l 1t1 ee.lhfd,'r, 335,. en!;tui\ s to get M/lur-
rayi's coluient, 3'. C('.it' tlie o)0pe'> rictciol)i, and receives a
si ,li tirn I Icnin , i; . lici iheCg t ;tldi:rl- i.! j.p eiic , the consent
es he r il[Ij',' 1, ),. ', |0. piLvents ;i i ', t a1.iiiell 1 ),i nly, ibid.

fun inonls iir vaeili'ls to t 1.1k ;rnis h;p

ineil M turat y, ',4. . ied h1 illi

Itc e ()| ' h l ', 'e'

set,('r

t. s, )

, ni

lrg's

, v1 li ),l)t i) y Ce '-c1ilttiel.d,

jid. tl 'icicI, s tllc ti' I l' l Ki!', o i fit

[C ij ) i

h li , , .'j.

i ills

flie ilI Ie.

l l's ;t' cils themi, 17. Ic.lt i' tcle tn i 'rrc lli i ot f Qc

l'.li-va c.i. i ii the lu i 11If, . 18. coli11l ,(, h cr in irch ;cg;iiliel tihe

r;l c::,, . ii . lii c e l 'tl 'i Ol,'d .oii ,' o i ll

i i( i(.c.ii ole , Il I. .
d(ltI:I, mhem out "f Scotl;andi, ilind. h.''r itlrlrT'r rln.tn lnt

i)t II. \',

m,,ny', 3;,. h'lr prorfpcri' promotcs ier rc¢i2.l", 3;^ . Ier
:clbilerat:itn concerning tie exiled L'nd,, 3;5. dclterinilln
to tie:it them with lenity, 3;7- is divverejt frm tis hv
her religion and French influcnce, 3; ,, 3 ). thii ihe fo)lce
of her afi'r-miisfbrtunes, 3(o. her :nt n.tiio to r.llole p 'pcrv,

i

'1. is dilgulcd ivith Darnl''s infl;leilt hc.aviour, ,;.:. her

f.l:niliari:\' \ i:h RIizio ofiends the 1'.ig, 356,. vindicated
from ann crinil:ni! corre(fondence w\;ih RI..,, 3(', ;67. ufi. s
I- r ;l:no'li cnec neaours to pievent his niiurder, 36). fle is cor-
find hy t!i conrfir::ors, 3-o. fle gains the Kn'!, an1d c1'
c.;ics 0

to1 tli;e', 371. ii rcciL:ciled to the c\i ed nohlet, ;- .
her h itrcd tO D.irnlv increCfies, ;7'). S:. and fai.vtir for Bioh-.

o

! cl r'llnenlc s, ;,S. cxtlituil, (i);: loe dmnclitc fii' !s on!no n

thfin' n! ]. .

:.S 's Jd]ivcred of her sI1 lIimcs VI. ili tl;e Catlle

O(r 'ii ,ir'.gl., 38 ;. invilcs fcverail so (tign priic' s t) hi iii-
iil'.l, S',. continiues to treat i)D.nly Snith rcleg,c, ibid. icr

t. ii. n^::'r tLo othwell\ icrealsce, 3"j . pr\e lnts I)'-'tilv's in-

tendc i I 'i',

; i"7, 3S '*itSis the I'o!dr'T. P.:! inll tiicc (o1

her i-rciirii for Bohwvecl on that occ:filln, ibid. lhow\ ill rlr al'ed
(.. !.'','nil'eth, 3o. her rii ht of :i.cciiinn fal Iit:> .

by tieh

Inr l.flt pr!iailent(d,39i. fli endcavxou's to avail o!til lfol t.h,t
o- .'.rtin:ty t, 393, 3Q4. flne tnlces an cetraiordinll;ry I'p in si-
v..u oi rp}(c;\, 39'i rreeives a picielnt ironi tihe pope, bit
sicps his nuncio it Paris, 396. endeavouis to procint a bet er
Iuibfiilcnce f;,r the rformned clergy, 3 7. Iher a\ci ion to the
Kino' e\ccievce, beconmes mclancholv, ibid. goes to Stitlii.g
tc celecra:e hIr son's Ihaptili, 398. is greatly oilendced at
the King's behaviour on that occasion, 399. rell:'rcs tih
pnpillh ecclcfiallical juiilt.i'lion, 4C0. her ne le;t of tih:
lKing dinUing his fickne4;, 406. the breach between th!cm
becomcs irrcparable, ibid .ic7. . Lic visits l.im at (,l.i o.'',
ibid. the motives of her diii:nillation orn that occalio',
'c'8, 409. prevails on him to coim to ]'.Jili)urlli, .i41:.
her fulpicious behaviour to lhini there, 411. i.ljcs a pio
clnmaiion for difceovering his mu.rderers, 41 . is fuppi l(cd Ii
ihavc been acccnary to it, ibid. 41 4 is char.rld with it a',rea,',
an well as at home, ibid. goes to xvifit her (io nt ntiliiiing , l t.
:s met on her return by Bothwell, who (cizc.s ;anl (arrle s l.'r
to Du)nbar, ibid. 432. this fiippolird \\ilit cr con(L'nt, il d. is
coniduicd to Ediinburgh, 43.1. ar: t niarricd to Bothwcil, 43 .
lends an anology to the courts of Irance and Inpgland, . 3(t.
her conJdu! caifCes a igenerl inll ;;laion ai;:il;l Inr ;,brl.,.l,
43;'. is alarmeJ at a coi.l)intl:tio t

o f tili no[lle ag:i.ill licr,

,t .

(lie piblllifc' a il.nnifclln to i lvilic' e lcr cllId.kd, 440. is , o.-
(lul'd to the cafile of B'3riliwikl, i11. nm:.re!is vilh lotil-
ivcll's forces agarinfl the conicdcilte Iit 1.ol d, 41.. . :an attenIpt i'
an acconmmodation proves iain, ihid. 413 is lforced to li -
render to thc confcder;atc, 414. is inlflted Iv the hnl.lie:s atil
nimobl, I.1I;. is carried to Edinbul hl , lwhere m:!ny abuls :'ri
utr t.cd her, ib. is sent a plifoncr to Lohlilvin Cahile, 4+q
. K.

li,,,.ltb't

L:i hcll]t interrorfc in her b chalf, 45 l . tie l.rcli:h anbafi.,
di:r ir r( s.ised ;:cc Il to iier, 4, ;. varitous prop lils amongif the
c.i.tdicr..ics (cr c'rnneii iher, 454, .;5. tlhey obl;ie licr t'.
lefit'n t l ?"ovkr, metl:, 4 ;. ridfierenlt rcafonin' s on tilis
rne:sili r. 45,--.i' I. 1, much motcd with the tiecr'om of
he l';air r)l . Mll-r:my, .16z. he:r prty anin" the n;obles hb-
(on:0 c liperil:1, 4. t'. Ier r'li.iniitiii off the Crown ;ncccpted
1i, til p:ir;tiit; 'ii , :i t < her inliif om nt Iclared I]aw till 4 (i.
)er litrc.io o, iB thvcl t;i ad, al'd (lie dccltccd accelllart to the
I'.iii's n tnrcer, ibl. cfc..Ce l fim In .oclilcvin, .1'S - r9. .4r(
l;v' ;at Hinmlit:oin, 16). is atenilied by iav iia .oi .ia;l, at 1:.
t11i lc is nril'l , .1' ) 470. n .!l: lI(i in si ilc'c l 11) 71

I 'l ic'lt.nl'c.

il.id. her il ,',.:.(c if, h.ai: 'oi' ,

n I ;tr:. ,I-3. li.r ;arm;i

*'(: l ;irld lv t!ic cl l i'; 'r. 'ics. i:l.

} I' r i

prric tar: lili'ht inrt

( I.llno'a'., ,171. r;ll'i!y dic;tr.;rii(i s tornire t.

i '

I i. l:ii1,

' -;,

.Oi, thihier q.t.inol the atid ice of belr aitrcnlnt, ti 7. 1-6.

ii\cs at C irllil<, ,77. w\Vitts to (. il .z:ii;cih, i::; 'lirii: h' r
poodl rfiiccs, il)it. Ic(.c ves I. t;(i ;o ( if

c ito'clt c fio in h. r, nn,l

(cm:;nids adilrnitt.illc i to Iicr ircfltncc, 'c, .1 tI lis r.''!l!,'
aidi why . i 1. il'r, to fiilmit he r c'm(e to () } litih, ihi .
is iit;il (eceived in her c\pc;atioa n frmn (ii,. 4.(. ;innd lr1;nlt-
ct oin dilcnovcring thle alt li.cs of (I EFliz.ilbcih, .1. c.t ncillv
iolicits to tc adimitjed int:.) lcr prclencc, ibid. fice i. c:irrid 1t
Bolton Cilic, 488. ch:ih eiicd ;it i.iliir, lhcrIlf a pi, ilfncr,
4 8. aglces to an inquiry into heir coindlu, i;ii. her diilimni-
lation with rgairJ to reliPion, 4'9. roniiiinlincrs napoin ri
toappear in her nanie, .4') . Ier clh:c vi"i' in tins ailir,
41'),. confonts to moving thc conference to \Vcriinller, ;,1o-
ihe is carlicd to 'iulthlurv in S:aflilrdliire, qo::. is ni;clh
offcencdd atthe regnrd flaewn the Regent, - i.d rccal hicr conlfcet
to he confe rence, 5`3. tile icculitilions ni.aiill her produced by
the Regent, o04. is acculocd likewise by the Eanl of Leno\,
co6. bcr cnnmmiflioners reluc to aiifwcr, and demand a pci
ional interview, ibid. 5o,. ti'ev piotelt :atainlt future p:occeif
ings, 5n7. a lufpici lus c;rcumii!ilnce I unit her, i). Sr S. hcr
colmmiffniners witlilr;.w from lie rnmetinp, ibid. her reoluitc
:.-nwcr to a harfi proposal of Q iEizlictlh, 5ic. avoids anv
filrthr prcrrcls in tl.e inquiry, 51 i. is ienrlicd at the procccd-
i'.gs, aimd tpro(ifcs dcfperate mcafurcs, 12s,513. f)rcads clii-
imicrical cnjctluIrcs with tihat view, ; 13. propolesa divorcc Iton
Bothvwell, 5 16. is influnccld hy ilt I1). (If Norfolk's fil.errc.,
q 17. c\clilnatgs mn:y Ict:crs and Ilrve--tlktins wiiti hirm, ;qiS.
conlctns to propol.ls Irom the Engith nil.i:c, 520. their viewV,
in th's trinfildion, 5 9--zl2 . ;a Irelillio bly hlr adl:erlriis
:15rlinl (). l'liz.:ibctl, i; z . is remoi \t' to Ctv ill), 527. (.
'.li,.iiz)ctII tilt k' of dcl(I\eitg I'b r t[u to IlC ltcgiie t, 2(;. t11is
prtoij.ci lIomv dilippoinici, 3n. :icccllin of fevcral to licr
paity aftcrthe murder of t(Ie Rege(nt, ii. 5, (). they endcnavour

nio ibrti :; war jith l'iiglan . il. her iutihority proclaimed
at Liililhlow, (r, her p;irti s dcfca;td by tilc new RCegelt, I;

l) j 10.

10. the anIvwers propofils by Q Elizabeth, 1 1. atttnpts in
vain to get foreign aflilance, ihid'. 1 2. appoints coinnli onllera
to frame a treaty (or hei libcratioi,, 13. this pr.,ving friitlcs,
she is more firidl'y confined, I.;. the invaidlitv of her religna-
tion declared in n pariiament icld by her ad ercnts, zo. ad of
parliament in England to curb her and her party, ?5(, (he
lookl for pro:ection from the Klii g of Spiin, :6. i demled ihe
privilece ot an mbaflador at the Cou:t ot EIgl.nd, 30. is
nmore close confined and watched, ib. priiecleinigs againit her
irn En.tland: ;s. her ini:crell negietcid biv the lIrcnch, ilid. is
hurt l' ('ne l.%filcre .t Paris., , ;S. hr r adherents divided
in:o twvo f;lionis, 46. one of thcle jo;ns with l ortor the Rc-
oent, r1. review of thic char:i,';ci of her andilcrnts and oppo-
m nts, 52, 53. her loilorn lituation, g3. is c,:ri cd to iBuxton
Wcll, 54. lofis (fccral o! her fricnds by de 'at, 5( . fends a
letter nnld presents to her son, 7,. her medicngt r. \l hy dliiifined

irhout ft iing hrim, ibid. her uniicafinels at hi- cnflinnemcnt by

the Ruthven confpirdtors, loo. complains to (Q Eliyaheth of
her hard u{la e, il. 1ol. and begs her interrcfiin for11 the Kin
her ion, ibid. 'ITro morton's couiif)iracv in her favour, i 1 i-
I -. a fruitiefs negotiation \i ill Q I Elizabeth, 121. is ;il:irmcd
at an afinciltion in defenccot Q. I'lizabetli, 1 23. is committed
to more feveie keepers, I 24. betiayed by Lord t;rav the Scotch
ambafliaor, 12, 126. a la.tutc for the plefervation o Q. Eli-
zabeth, pioves fatal to hcr, 130. is mnnie in;,oulfly treaited,
13 . her complainis to QC I.lz:abeth difregarjed, 132. Is, by
the French namaflador's iitcrelt, removed to 'ITuthbury, ibid.
is undutilullv treated bv lthc King her ton, ibid. I 33. her pafl
fionate complaint to the French ambailador on that occasion,
ibid. threatens to dilinherit him, ibid. fcveral dilcoveries a!-
leged againlf her, 151, 1 2. fle is guarded with unuifual vi-
gilance, 1; 3. her domiellics, paper:, &c. are seized, ibid. flhe
is conveyed to lotlicrinp.iy Ca;lle, I . dcliberati )n concern-
ing the method of proceed ing aatnlil her, 1;, 6. is Lufpi-
cious of poibon or private inmulide, 15i (. vndlicate herfell to
the 1). of (.niic, ibid. the commillio:ners for trving her anric
at lothlelinnay Callle, I17. Iher fpiiteid fpecch when efl:l-
ing to plead, ib;d. is at Icnth pevailced on, I f. lic pii-
tells againll the authority of the court, ihid. the cacul.,ti'n
anilllt her, I;9. her defence, 159--1i2. her sentence, 1 2.
iiicularities in her trial, l63. her sentence is conlmiiinied Iv
p;lianient, l6 . who demand the cecution of it, ibid. SI a.ce
interpolcs feebly in her behill, It6O. the fintlele niag;minl lier
publifled, (i). file is treated \ithil he ttinolot rigour, ibd(!.
her lalt renrt(ll to Q .lizal'cth, 17I. resiles the allillance of
a P'rotcflant Biflliop or Dean, ibid. atliiies uf'd to inllanie
the people ngainll icr, 172. Ier hehiliour at her e:i:h,
175-170. fenilnents of hiilorians conterining her, 171,
her char.iCler, i S, i . lier prrfoin def.ril e, 8. i h bn wd
fiill at l'cterborouglh, and altcrwarJs in Wcliuilltcr-Albr,

I5 .

IS. le!ters from her, Append. 46:. ' (9.

( 3. 3 her wis,

A pS. 429. objet'dions aniinit hl:r by \Vail/ir!sh.', App.
A467. what ceurlc to be taken w itrh her, ibid. D; /it I:io:l onu
the !cinuiiiencfs of her lrttter to linch\xcll. ntd of \'ol. ii.

lfbaxcul rd, ord, arrivcs lhomn l S.iin and prepares forccs to join

the Slpaniards, ii. I96. hib di;l,\io cliiperlfci, IIh is talcsn
prisoner - - -jbij'.
Ael/vil is sent by the French Kin-. to obrfclc the motions of til

(,lQ<en Regent and her ad11ie ic. i.

ri. Icl ft to nr ilic up a

diflcrenlcec etveen Eliz:bhcth Iand M.ni v, 3; . bri '!:s .lout an
ilpprarancc offricndihipj tectw n lithem, ih. is lert to inforn

. Elizabeth ofthe birth of 1K. l nics \ I. 383. put, a letter in-

to the Qecn's hand againll hcr isiirrias e with lBotiliil II, . o0.
is lorced to fly from court, ib. advises K. J.11m t( Is m:detc
neie.,furs upon his cfcae3 fromn the RuthveC con!ilji. br-, ii.

--.- - .Mr. Andrew, a cler.yman, his chnr.' r, i:. ;S. zcal-

otifly opposes episcopacy, ib. dcclincs the civil juriltiiltl.n ill
ccclefiaftical matters, C9g. is forced to fly into Ilng lb:d tI
avoid perfecuuion - i ,1
,Mctvi//e, Mr. Janes, miiii!icr r f Anlrutlicr, his, encomium onI
the eloquence of Knex the ic',ricr, ii. 6(
--- Sir Robert, lent hb 1K. )amcs to inte:cecde with ( I'1liza-
heth for Q. Mary while under lecntencc, ii. i-i. cxecutcs his
comnmilfi'n with fidelitv and :e:i!, ib;d. a mri(.nlia. of his to
the Kin', Appendix - 4 5

-- Mailer of the houfchlo'd to Q MAary, takcs his lfil fare-
wselofher, ii. 177. 7 ler parting slpccch t; hiii ibid.
il'inamay, Sir Walter, sent by (Q. Elizabeth with propofil to
Q. lMary i. I

lIonlicr, Bishop of Va'.lnce, emp!i\ d by the 1 icunch to Cocl:cill;

;1 peace with Elnglanld and S cotl nd, i. 2 t. tcrni, ;;rticd to
by him - - i23-2|1

"'lonttcmery appointed Archbifliop nfr(!;aiow, ii. )i. i- rctt ifd

;n1ti c\xcomilutliicateil by the (.G:;cial ,A"ficLsrbly )or hlis imn;l il
life - - -. ibidL.
.icnf,'rcrcnyQ, Conftib!e of' Irai cc, retlcn:avours to prcvent ilie

]);aptlilii's nriari;agc with Q_ M.:ry, i. 16o. Its )pr i.e'nt ;ads ice
to Henry I. 161. m:L cs a llcnder :llp['cirarcc iln 1;:l'ul of
Q( MaI y -

,i. 3;
Alorton, I'.arl of, his irrefoliil ci:dtl, 1 is to tc ic Refi(rmnlinio, i.

220. ;accomlpanies Q. l:Uv inl a1tr ? p,:Icls to t'c North, :9.
inlligates Darnly to lc as\cnscdl ol Rs.i), 3 t(' takes the
direction of tlnat cnlteprif', 3t8:. is ;ldilltttrd iUito [le tlrcen's
prclence, wlho pliomifcs shintl ; pa d,,, 371. is forced I fly isito
liilg~nnid, 37 . obtalins lis i);,rd,)in 1i 1 swli.ll in srcliotn,
402. fci'zes a c:ikct with lertcr, frons S. M.iry tro Iolnvcll .

l 4.4).

le is, by 0. EIliz.ibeth's ilnterl)fitiioii, in tia\'o with ie lKin }L's
party, ;isa(r the imuldcr of lth l4.t'i( nit, ii. 4. ;ilpri'inteld oneic
tlih cornnifioners to treat wvlh tile (.uCeen's p.tiy, i 3. Irs de-

VOL. II. (tQ q ,iiids

demands frutrate the meeting, ibid. 14. is entirely influenced
by the Court of England, z . commands the King's forces at
Leith, 3z. has several skirmilhes with the Queen's forces, ib.
closely bcfieges Edinburgh, and commits great cruelties, ib. a
suspension procured by the Englinh and French ambafladors, 34.
a coalition of parties prevented by him, 40. he is cholen
Regent, 41. his mercenary ingratitude to the Earl of Nor-
thumberland, ibid. obtains the temporalities of the Archbishop-
ric of St. Andieivs, 42. labours to procure a peace between
the two parties, 45. attempts in vain to gain Maitland and
Kirkaldy, 47. makes a treaty with Cliatellierault and Hunt-
ly, 48. gets pofliefion of the Catlle of Edinburgh, 5 i. his
severity to Iirkaldy and his brother, 53. his adminillratioi!
becomes odious, 55. his various methods of gratifying his
avarice, ibid. 56. connives at the dispute of the clergy, 57.
he irritates the nobles, 58. Argyll and Athol refuse to an-
fwer his summons, ibid. makes a vain attempt against Lord
Claud Hamilton, 59. discovers the designs of the nobles against
him, and propo(es to resign his office, 6z, 63. his resignation
accepted by the King gives universal joy, 63, 64. obtains an
approbation of his conduct, and a pardon in ample form, 64,
continues to watch the motions of his adversarics, 65. is forced
to surrender the Caltle of Edinburgh, ib. resumes his autho-
rity, 68. gains the Caitle of Stirling, and a feat in the Priv'
Council, ibid. procures a meeting of the parliament at Stirling,
ibid. his security ratified in it, ibid. forces are raised for and
against him, 69. he is reconciled to his adversaries by the in-
terceffion of Q. Elizabeth, ibid. is fufpeced of foul pl:hy at
an entertainment at his own houlc, 71. his illegal proceedings
against the family of Hamilton, ibid. the King's new favouiites
undermine him, 7, 76. he endeavours to prevent them, 77.
Q.Elizabeth interposes in his favour, 78. is charged with being
accellary to the late King's death, 79. he is confined in differ-
ent pribfns, 80. discourages an attempt to rescue him, 81.
all his friends are turned out of office, 84. he is tried and
condemned, 85. his rcfolute calm behaviour and confeflion
before and at his death, 86, 87. his body is treated with
ignominy - - - ibid.
lMurray, Earl of, late Prior of St. Andrews, goes with a handful

of men againit lTunily, i. 298. by his great skill and courage
he gains a complete vitory, ibid. his grant is confirmed by
parliaincit, 3o9. cab:ils againfl him by Lennox aid Dar)ly',
3z9). hi:; aversion to l)arnly and olher Court favourites, 335.
call, lIothwiell to Iland a trli., 336. his reasons for opp-.ling
l)atnly's ii;iriage with the Qtien, ibid. he and his all:,ciat:s
ale miade the dupes of (Q Eliz. betills policy, 339. conc(r' to
seize D)arnly and carry him to I'.,gl]id, 340. this prevented by
the ,Ceen, 34 . avids afli(liniiioi intended him by Dl)..lly,
342, 34'3. evidences of thcfc plots, ibid. the Q (en's v;il.ils
.c ca!lcld to arlms agaill hilm, 3+2, lih is fummllollcd to applear

A~~~~~~~~~~~I ~~bcfu ic

heFore her, 344. is again summoned and outlawed on his nol-
appearance, 34t. is forced to fly with his aflociatcs into Argylc-
Shire, 347. they are interceded for by Q. hlizabeth, ibid. ale
pursued by the Queen, and obliged to fly into England, 341,,
they meet with unexpe&ed ill-treatment Irom QI Elizabeth, ib.
350. courts Rizio to intercede with the Queen for him, 356.
many of his old friends solicit for him, ib. 3,7. the Queen's
favour how intercepted, 358, 359. a parliament is called to
attaint thetn, 36 r, 362. this how prevented, 362, he and his
aiTociates arrive at Edinburgh, 370. are graciously received by
the King and Queen, ib. are alarmed at the Queen's escape,
but loon reconciled to her, 372. he is appointed Regent du-
ring the minority cf K. James VI. 461. his h.rlh behaviour in
a vilit to the Queen, 462. the success of his wifeadminlilration,
41)4. procures many of the Queen's party to join him, ibid,
46;. gets the places of Itrength into his hands, ibid. Ris ollice
of egeintconfirnied by parliament, 466. his severe and haughty
behaviour difgulls several, 467. his adherents in great con-
llfrnation at the Queen's escape from Lochlevin, 470. his pru-
dent conduct on that occasion, 471. defeats the Queen's army
at ln''gfide, 473. he improves this victory, 486. his lenity
to the prisoners, ibid. he calls a parliament, 487. is called
upon by Q_ Elizabeth to vindicate his conduft, 491. he arrives
at York, 493, his views in this affair, 494. complaints of the
Queen's commissioners against him, 495. he behaves with
great reserve on this occasion, 496. this part of his conduct
accounted for, ibid. 497. intrigues with the ])uke of Norft!k,
ibid. his demands from the English commifioners, 498, 499.
answers to the complaints of the (Queen'b commilioncrs without
touching on tle murder, 500, ;oi. agrees to have the confer-
ence moved to Welfminfler, ;ol. is affeftionately rccciied by
Q. Elizabeth, which offends (Q Mary, 503. is pievailcd on by
Elizabeth to accuse Mary (if the murder, 50 . pro.luccs his cvi-
dences, co8. is difmilfed by Q. El)izabcth withoutt approvingl
or condemning his conduct, 5 i1, 5 z. his party i, frciftly ful-
ported by her, 51 z. returns to Scotland, a rnd hy his vigorous
conduct breaks the Queen's party, 514. he receives propof;aa
both from Q. Elizabethl and Q. Mary, .i 6. he dilapppoiits Nor-
folk, 52z, 523. an account of his murder, 5 tc-;3 . his chi-
ratler. 532. his death much lanmntcd Iby Q. lili.;l)cth and
the King's party, ii. i. much anarchy ilte ctil(rlucntce (f it,
2. part of a letter of his, App. 480o. his heir inttIde(rcd )by
tlie E.,.rl of Huntly - - ii.

N

.AT1'.U Secretary to QTl Mary, is fcnt by her wilh a letter and

lrcicilts to hier fol. Ii. 73. why tlillil \vi;lh t lt ciig

him, Ibid. is (f'lt with ottiers ol itlnlble clt)) lli.ltin to Q. Eli-
/.It)ctIl, 12 . 1s I i:'cd alld itent prilUler to I undlon, 15,4 is
produced ,m cvit!C'_ ;iganllt her - - i(3

Q.q z Nrv2l

!\, v;! 'ifcovers and prevents l'.arr's defi gn to mu der Q. Eiiz;-

b; ih- - . - ii. ito
A.i 's, tlcir extensive po.wer, i. 22, 23. be)L'cf - turbulent and

kiimidable, 2.. their po\crr gle.iter in Scotland than in any
other kmnldons, 25. ithe c:llia c f this, 25--z . their power (cf
Joig duration, 39, 40. it becomnie inoleraulc to the Princes,
ibid. they are humibled in Flr;nce and England, ibid. but conti-
nue vigorous in scoitl.ind, 40. i Icord( among them encouraged,
ib;d. their jurif.ei, i

n ciircum. ri:eJd, 4A. are greatly mortified

by K; ii. Jaiiie, V. 67-71. are di lappointed in a scheme to shew
their reientnientl, 73. rftJie to atteiid the King into England,
74, thty seize the ievinues of the church, 247. refuse to par,
\ii:h t11, to the icloilCed clergy, 24+. 258. difenfions
among then', 289, 290. a consention of them approve the
Q(een's marriage to D.irily, 33-. Ieveral of them recommend
Bothvcell as a hulband to her, 426, 427. a llrange combination
of thcm on this occasion, 428, 429. a body of them afibciate
againil her and Bothwell, 439. their different views in this,
ibid. : party ol tlhenm faouis the QQueen, 450. they are much
difpiritedl by the gocd condlud of Murray, 464, 465. they aic
much provokedc by Morton the Regent, ii. 58. thiik of re-
dress from the King, 60. infuse suspicion of the Regent's
power into him, 61. a meeting of them by him, 62. a party
of them conspire againlt the King's favourites, 94. they seize
his perlon and drive them oft; 95, 96. their neglect of, and
ingratitude to the clergy, 142. the King attempts to reconcile
their feuds and unite them, 188. See Lords.
NorJolk, Duke of, appointed a commiflioner to hear the cause be-

Lveen Queen Mary and her accusers, i. 492. forms a scheme
cf tliounting the throne of Scotland, 496, 497. intrigues with
the Regent and Maitland wvith that view, ibid. 498. he repre-
ferns the demands of the Scots to Q. Elizabeth, 499, 5co. his
farther negotiations uithl relpe& to Q. Mary, 517, 1 8. en-
de:vouis to conceal his design fiom ( Q Elizabeth, 518. is im-
posed on hy the artifice of the Regent, ibid. 519. gets the
cuiinit of many of the 'nel:fllh nobles, 52o. his project ap-
proved at foreign courts, 521. is discovered and defeated by

Q( `liZbl,

be 2, 3, 524. flies to Nlrfolk, 524. he surrenders

r;i a itconnd tuniiiioii, andi is ent prisoner to the Tower, ibid.
is lit t ,I belty, and ciiitinues his intrigues with Q. Mary, ii.
'7. is betrayed by his secretary, ibid. is seized with his de-
pcindlits, and accused by them, z9. is executed ibid.

i\'oibratii'/tr/ nd, Earl of; .attenipts a rebellion in favour of Q(

Marv, i. ;2 5. h's fcheiie d fe. td, ,26, 527. he is seized by
thie Keg;r, s28. is delivered up to the governor of Berwick,
:uld l put to ideath at Yok - - ii. 41

.\/it/Inbt'oN , Countc's of, fonme account of the tranfadion con-
tcriiing ilh l,;Itl of Eliex's ring ii. 291

0
OC'alaviarns, thriir iinflit.!inln anli cxtncnic powv^rs, 2 0.

they u:2;3di"r: ,c he]~.'., c:;::i.c

e, 230. I cc.i,. o i

2.:s,

at'd a CO;::i l. ,.i i. f):m '.l

0: .i. ll [ !,i, i'' 1, ,' i,.. i.!it

into f', - "-ns, a J Cll',cid b)'th.I oult c., they ;icigu thir
C'lln]i1iP. 'n - _ - 2.1-
Osi-/vie, ior.l, liha a Ici'! wi:ih Si , i: . .iir in tle fircits

of Eiir;bn'h- -- - i

--

Olipbann, M .:llscr of, ji the '. Il.' ,

n c.,nrpirtors i . t. 4
Oran;ge, Princc of, icc'i. an ;'gcIn iniu S( t!.i-J, ii . n m-

liuciiions, ibid. is afl.inted - - 6
p'0i/t, commnandcrof tlic l'rcnc h troops in S :l::r!i , n !c:);i cls

to pioninte Sa Oar wxitli ]'. !'';1,.l i. I-8. 1ir , :

' . '

! , i:itt !,

ilidi. thel nunbrof tr(,o(p ;tlr,( r i- c 1)iii '.;i , I ; ' :.a
the Qicen }regent to violent :;,Cru'.s :;.2 ,iu.i ::' ::'.. ,:, ,
1.86. is li.nt b)' Q. M :,r,' to d.'n .:. ! .. !..!. uiJ : ' t'.,. .
Llizabeth, during her -oy'gc to 'co::ail - ,i'y

P
pAi /ey, Abbot of, arrives in Sro:Inl:t , i. 6. cre:.tts a tiif

picion of the Earl ns L ;I'I;x in tihe !:arl ot Ar:a;i, IKcicnt,

ib:d. is made Aiclfimh op of St. Ald cn(s - 12o
Paris, the mafn'crc or, ii 36, 37. rejoicings of tlie Popillh fai y

on account of it, 37. tlic collic! n.dti.)n aiid hornor or t:e I'rro.
tcflants - - -
Par,'itiomt, tlie nature of their origin il conllituti ,n, i. 79--,z.

particularly that of Scotland, 8z-g'. 2 z. a a, lil.cnt lItld
oni an extraordinaly (Ct.alion, 242. a dillicults l.i ted ;nld ;ii-
fc red, 243. their procteidings with l Ice.Idl rcli;,ion, 2,.q,
2 5. conldemn the Popill nand app'ovclhe rt, rO micd doutli .,
24:'. fcvcral other ,cgti!ations of the f.iin t i;dtll'y, il,:!.
247. thcir validity c.il(td in qie.limn, :.!28. cxcced their pnocirr
24.0. their p; occcdings laid h('Icore ilhe Kii, ai ( cc;,

" (id,

250. a parlhament in favour of Iotilrvcil, ,l22 ip; li ai i; .1
favour of tlie Reformation, i!idi.2 . c.2

. nrfitrr ti proct c.-

ings of tlhe coii)lfdcratcs, 4' 6. p;rll. .1nib (1e1d Ibotl by tl.e
King's aiId Qu.ecn's par.ics, ii. z2. anllthc'r of the (.icc n's al.
hlerents, i) (d. altaint upwaids (i' o il ilheir opcoiicnrr,, 2 '.
a pa.li;ament ati S irli[p, by thl' K'ns,', p , rt, ili.. fiipilfcd Iby
thel Qucrn1's a.lhircnlte , 2.3. ;11antllc ;I Stirlinri, ('-, o8. one
at iEdillburghi, 7',. antl on tli Kin"'s I{ilih :! ;i .. |IS, I .Wi.
ftvcral new laws mlade tlhere, i So- 192. tile l.'i, BarLiri.ns adJ-
niitted into parli;laient -- I- 19
Parpy, I)olor, indcrt.'l.c.tn munrdlr ( Il iallic;Ii, ii. ?1) i.

encouraced Iby ;i(d gets : iholnrin I l [iLC Ij 1'Jpc, t Io. )li,
dcfign how\ plrcvcnc,l, ib;td is '-ccutled -

Q. q 3 ijaiowi,

Persons, a Jesuit, publishes a book in favour of the Infanta of

Spain's right of fuccellion to the Crown of England ii. 22'
Pa/quiniades and Pictures, accusing Bothwell of Darnly'b murder,

i. 413, 414.' 422. a law made againf them - 423
Patten, William, his account of the Scottifl ancient military

discipline - - - i. 124, 12;
Paulet, Sir Amias, is appointed one of Q. Mary's keepers, ii.

124. his rigid severity to her, 13 1, 132. discovers her foreign
correlpondence, i 5 i. his rude treatment of her, 169. refules
to be concerned in privately afliTfinating her, ibid. a letter
from him, Appendix - - 533
PeI/evi, Bishop of Amiens, is appointed to fizpport the popish in-

terefi in Scotland, i. zo6. drives the Queen Regent to violent
meraures againll the Protellants - ibid. 207
Perth, an insurrection of the Reformers there against the Papifls,

i. i8 , 1z2. its inhabitants are severely treated by the Queen
Regent, 184. a French garrilbn placed there, ibid. i, besieged
and taken by the Proteltants, 1;o. a great tumult there on ac-
count of Gow.ie's conspiracy - - ii. 262
Philip II. of Spain, married to Mary Queen of England, i. 14.

rcirifocrs his army with her troors, 157. his great power, ii.
13;. joins in the holy league, ibid. refo!ves to invade and
conquer England, 195. his preparatiens for it dilatory, o19.
his design fruitrated, ibid. meditates an invasion of England
through Scotland, 2zo. intrigues with rome Scottish Lords
with that view, zo2. remits money to them - 224

Pinkcy, the battle of - - i. 122
Pius V. Pope, excommunicates Q Elizabeth, deprives her of

her kingdom, and absolves her lutbjets - ii. 8
Poiy, one of Babington's conrpiratnrs against Q Elizabeth, ii.

148. dircovers the plot - 149
Po/trot, a frantic zcalot, afaflinates the Duke of Guise at the

siege of Orleans - - i. 30;
Pont, Mr. Robert, a minilier, and one of the Lords of Seflion,

p'otells ai:ainit laws opprefii\e to he Church ii. 1 13
Popery. whete moll nourifling, i. 1.14. wha't kind prevailed in

Scotland, 145. was partly grafted on 1-lcathenilin, 1il. is
mlch hurt by the congregation. 24 . tileirdcct ines condctniied
by l'.rliament, :46. the jurisdiction of their courts abolilhcd,
ibid. their wo flllp prohibited, ilid. attempt in vain to gain
(Qteen M:;ry's f.avour, 282. the great influence of Popery, 350
]'ouwer, tie balance of, the great coinlfquence of piefliving it,

i. S, 90o
Prcrfljterinn chuIch government cflabliflied in Scotland, i. 2.1.

is confiincd hy King James VI. - ii. 2 2
Prctrjfants, in France, violently ptrfincuiel, i. zoo, 2zo. are mn-

dclateo on (. Mary's airival from l'rance, 275. are cnil l,\'ed
Lby her in tile admiilillration, 277. a f henie for fuppreflii
themn all over "uinol(, 38g. a l.gue soLncd for Lhat l'urj k,

i. t j;. Scc R/borrmiaion.

R
R,,:n¥S1y, a favourite of K. James III. narrowly escape Ibein?

hanged with his aflociates, i. 60. is appointed Capta.in of t il
King'sguard, and created Earl of Bothwell, ti. Sec Bru/c//l.
Randan, Sieur de, employed by the lFrench to negotiate ;i peace

with England and Scotland, i. 23 . terms agreed on) I! hliir,

2 ;%', .9
Randolph, sent to encourage the Coneregation, i. - i. con-

gratulates Q.Mary's arrival in Scotland, 277. urgs.q (le r..t:-
fcatinn of tne treaty of Edinburgh, 278. \1 inCpo";i c; ;)v
Q< Mary in the affair of her marri ige with D iriJlv', 3, . f;'ir
into Scotland on the murder of Murray, .. z, 3. 1 tcir'li.
for Morton, 81, 82. flies from Scotland in !!.' ni,;: S4. i~
sent again there, and concludes a treaty wvi: lI nl.Id, 1 1 .
several ofhis letters, App. 319. 403. 405. 41. 4t27, 42'.

433

Ratcli:f See Sufx. 4
Reformation, its progress in Scotland, i. 133. account oF it si It

preachers, ibid. is much influenced by l3ng'an, 134, 1..
two remarkable instruments of promoting it, ibid. it m:akes
great progress, 141. cauleb contributing to prornoe it. 139.
its advantages over popery, 143. is fhvourcd by the Q(. )e-
gent, 15,. an inflance of regard for it in Sco/lard, (i , 16z.
the vhule party not chargeable with C.irdinal Be:itoun's n:ur-
der, 170. a prielt burnt for embracing it, i :. the re-
formers violently perfecuied by the ArchbilhopofSt. -\Anr.lrv,
ibid. arc protcted by the Q. RIegent, ibid. apply in vail tC
the Popili clergy, 17z. a pcrfecution a.':iiilt thilcin iufll.'i (nI
by the French interelf, 177, 171'. the prcaelirls Iuniij'nc(l i)c-
forc the Regent, 1-9. tLhy are deceived ad Cand dcI red out.) I\s
by her, l :,o. a riot:nus ill'ur:coi)ilh otr thlli at l'eri[i ;'ig:lll iit I:
Plapitfs, 18l. p'c.ire to defLtil ithlinI'Tcves a:galiill the cQeC':;,
I8z, 1.3j conclude a tieaty with herwilc ch lir prt ,ktly lIre;k',
I83, 1l.I. tlcy tial e armls aiginlt the (Q.'cn, i.':, ; . il-
fill on redrrfling civil .is well ;s I lgioiu. i riiccv.lnc , 1 7. liie
intlucnce of the Rfcihna,;tioln ilIcriy, l)l d ilcy helc.'d ad
t.ke Perlh, 190. !they I, izc Slilig ,n:il l'.lihlurtli, ilid.
co mmit ireat violenc.'s *(n chlii cie ;iI ino IIlllicl, ie. i i I. their
c:,ndlcL hiowv accoiiti.d fi)r, |1il. an inll.anc of li,' cin ,sde-
ration, 192. fix thcir tclidrncc a; t I.dilllllrl'lh, 1r; I il ()'nc'il
picpa;ires to attack thicin, i).. ii);ike, ;iioilier tll.y ilth lier,
ilbid. :ire forced ti ;ibiidI .l diiul riisrli, '.c. 1u1 :;,lli\ c.l 1 Il
c xercile of tiheir rcli.,ioll, li5. d, 'i i. n, the

Il i , lli n

I f 'the

French ;iaryiv, ilidl ;irc. ,'ire o(f rli' !i,crcr l oinl 1F" ri e,
199. their party ll:c gtli ncl, il, ill. Le:iilfill Ia :;1, 1t tIhe
Feielih fi)rhil )'il)l; .I ill, .'r , l:t' ;illns il tlheir oii' (;, .!,..',i
207. reii)(li(lr;ite a,. :ii t) i li tl R 'iCiit, ; i. i; c 1 l,,.ily i, -
ceilsel at sher iinpci 1ics ;ailt',cr, ibml * ' . I), ;IIi<c f .1 c,,-
veutioll deprive the ()uciit Dowager of ltie ul'l.c of lU'cg, lt,

gII .

21 . the frunditinns of this conduct, ibid. 212. examination
of the dilercnt principles on which it was conducled in dif-
fLrcnt countries, 254.. the growth of it encouraged by par-
ilament, 466, 467. See Congregation.

Re;alities, the ample jurifdiaion of - i. 22
RO pledgi:g, the privilege of. to whom belonging i. 22
Rc'vtngr, encouraged both by custom and law - i. 4 1
Revenues of the church, proceedings of Parliament concerning

them -- i. 247
Ridolpbi, an agent for the Pope at London, negotiates for Q. Ma-

ry, ii. 26. h s arguments with the 1). of Norfolk 27, 28
Rizio, David, fomne account of him and his rife, i. 329, 330,

Darnly's connexion w'th him, 331. his good offices courted
by Murr'y, 3,6. his great interest and familiarity with the
(ueen, 3; 3. incurs the hatred of Darnly, ibid. and of the
fiends o! the exii;ed Iords, 364. several concurring causes of
this, ibid. 365. a combination formed to m rder him, ibid.
ihe is muiredieed in the Queen's palace - 368, 369
Rvm;ans invade Britain, i. 2. give the earliest accounts of the

o~ts ~- - - ibid.
Ro/s. Biffnop of, zcalouflv promotes Qeecn \1a:v's interest at

London, ii. .8, :9. ib confined to the Tower, and threatened
with capital punifhmcnt, 30, 31. is let at liberty and banished
the kingdon , ibid. fieme letters of his, Appendix 472. 493
Rulbaj,, a foicigner, made keeper of the great ecal of Scotland,

i. 155
Ru;')ven, Lord, the murder of Rizio proposed to him by Darnly,

i. 365. heads the conspirators againfl him, 3,'38. his part in
that tranfadion, ibid. 369. is admitted into the Queen's pre-
fence, who promifies himn a pardon, 371. did not repent of it
at his death - - 378
--- cieated R. ofGowrie, he and his afociates seize the King,

and remonfitrate anainfl his favourites, ii. 94, 95. drive them
from him, 95. their conduet approved in an allembly of the
llnies, 98. the King cfcapes from tl'em, Icz. by Arran's in-
iLeunce violent nicafures ate determined against them, 1o5. Q.
Elizabeth intercedes in their helhilf, 0o6. are declared guilty
of high treason, Ic3. tal e refuge in foreign countries, ibid.
:re harlhly treated b\ (Q. l.l;ilbeth, 126. a recunciliaiion with
her brought ai)out, I !9, 0o. return to Scotland, and are re-
conciled to the King, 41. their moderation on being restored
to their ellates and honouis, 142. their neglet of their friends
ie Clergy v -- - ibid.

---- il,;,t nnme abo'ilicdl by P.rliament, ii. 27,. See Go'wrie.
Ria/Lven raid., wshat -- ii. 96

S
$.~S rdr, Sir Ralph. his reprefretatinns of the rerentment of the

Scot:, for the icizure ol their Ihips by Henry VIII. i. 1c4,
I1 5. alppinlted a coIniiflioner to hear the cause between Q.

MIV Iry and her 4ccul;i
- 492

'zndizan.irs of Cader, Lord St. John, sent to l:a the pr'ocrcdinns

oi the coni clgaion pi:iamenrt before t Kig an Q
in Pr:ince, . . is c.l ly received and di lniised wiVthout a
ratification by then - - .o
Savage, a Spanifl officer, his desperate resolution to kill Ql Eli-

zabeth - ii. 147, 148
Scotland, its ancient hiltory filbulont, 5. I. the orij'ii of the Scots,

2. their hiltory why relna'ktily o;nt)ure, 4. ioile account of
the writers of it, 4. 5. is divided into four periods, 5, o. a re-
view of the third ;cra, 7. lome account of the controverlf cuon-
cerning its independency, 7-i z. this the cause of grca anli-
mofities and much bloodlhed, 13. the Ihate of Scotland when
Bruce began his reign, 14. it begins to have an influence on
the fate of diltant nations, 93, 94. influence as to the balance
of power, 93. fiate of Scotland at the brth of Q(. M:iry, 9S.
is iivaded by the Englill, and Icveril places bu!nr a;.d .lun-
dered, ir , It 2. much alienated from the En hliih, 13, 14.
a peace concluded between England, France, and Sco:land, I 14.
computation of damages done by the English in Scotland, ibid.
1 . a new breach with England, 120. is invadel by a rctac
English army, 121. the Scots are defeated with great flagih-
ter, 122, 23. their manner offilhtint, at that tim.', I 24, 12z.
a marriage agreed of their young Qucen anJ the D.)t.,hin of
France, z28, 129. they soon repenit this lep, 1 1. a fray at
Edinburgh occasions their utter avcrlio'i to the French, 132,
133. this inflamed by another incident, 55, I ;6. they decline
a war with England. i 7. fend reprefetiatives to wvitnefs Q:
Mary's marriage, 16i. their ca'e as to the m:!:riale article,,
ibid. they refute consent to the demands of the French, 165.
four of their deputies fuicpeted to be poibined, ibid. \hlhich
much increales the aversion, 16',. grant the cruvi m.itrlimo-
nial to the Dauphin, ibid. hley apply to the Englilh for afsill-
ance againll the French, 216. 222. an l'gli li et arrlcs
for that purpofc, 228. conclude a peace w:iih il !;ldad aLd re-
ceive an English army, 2 9, 230. all parties a;rc:e inJ ettril!ing
the French, 234. a treaty between England, Fr.ance, and S.'u.-
land, 236, 237. both Englifi and French anm:es levtc ,ect-
land, 242. they rejoice much at the death of the youuit, i lng
of France, 2;3. fend to invite the Queen to Scotland, 2;S.
rejec.propofals of an ambaflidor from Flrance, 2'o. llatc of
Scotland on (. Mary's return fromi France, 272. great zeal
of the nation againit the Popery, 27;. the Scot' broul ht into
contempt by Q. Mary's condua. 438. in a iiiifr.ijlle condition
after the murder of Murray the Regent. ii. zo. Itate of sati i)s
at that time in it, ib. zi. a league concluded i,etween Scotland
and England, 144.. a view ot the revoluiions of :collnil since
the acceilion ofJ ames VI. 300-3 14. of tle policy of the ltate,
.300-3o6.-anduf the church, 306, 307. of the genius ind
taste as to learning -- 3 8'-3 14
Srott of Buccleugh enters and ravages England after tion murder

of Murray the Regent, ii. 2, the delign of this

5 Scroop,

Scroop, Lord, sent to condole with, and watch Q Mary on her

arrival in England, i. 4So. she is committed to his cuflody at
Bolhon caltle, 488. Why his fidelity is dillrufed, and the
Qucen removed -- 50oz
Sefion, Lords and court of, by whom first appointed, i. 44. the

Prelident and one halfof their number of tile Clergy 148

Seton, Lord, aflifts the Queen Regent in defending Leith i. 219
ShrtujLtury, Earl of, the charge of QI Mary's person committed

to him, i. 502. why removed from that office, ii. 124. is
appointed to fee the feitence againll her executed, 174. letter
from him and the Earl of Kent concerning her death, Ap-
pendix - - 548
Sintlair, Bishop of Rof-, a zealous Papist, concurs, as President

of the Session, in acquitting Knox of a charge of treason, i.

312
Sonerfit. Duke of, enters Scotland with a powerful army, i. 21.

is reduced to a verycritical situation, 122. defeats the Scots
with great slaughter, 123. this viflory why of little advantage,
125. cabals againll him at the court of England, force him to
retun, 126. is ruined hy his enemies - 13o
Spain, great warlike preparations there, ii. 194, 195. See Ar-

mado. The Infanta of, set up as candidate for the crown of
England - - - 228
Spanijh ambassadors ordered to leave England, for intriguing in

favour of Q. Mary - ii. 30. "18
Sprot, his dilcoveries concerning Gowrie's conspiracy, ii. 265-

267. is executed - - 267
Stewart, James, Prior of St. Andrews, is aopointed to carry the

crown matrimonial to the Dauphin of France, i. 169. See
St. /ndrfeqr.
--- ;fme, Lord Aubigne, his arrival in Scotland, ii. 74.
See Aubigny.
-- Cpt. James, his characOer, ii. 75. becomes a favourite

of King James, ibid. accuses Morton of the muder of the
late King, 79 is created Earl of Atran. See Arran.
-- Col. William, commander of the King's guard, contri-

butes to his escape from the Ruthven conspirators, ii. 103.
ecizes the Earl of Gowrie - - ill
- - Francis, created Earl of Bothwell, ii. 2ol. joins in a

tieafonable correspondence with the l'olfli Lord , Ibid. Sce
Bothl u,I.
-- all of that name combine in oppofing'the Chancellor,

ii. 218
Stirling feizcl by the Reformers, i. Ir)t. a parliament there by

the liiig's party, ii. 22. is furpri(cd by tIe (Q.ecn's adlln--
rents, aidI agieait fiaiy Ciles - - ilbid. 23
Stro:-zi, le.m, cornnilinnds a Lonly of lcenchl Cent into Scotlanid,

1. 119. rcllc'9 and deminlilies the callle ol St. Andrew.,
ibid. See France.
Succrt.oin, a rcslirkablr flatute concec ning ir - i. 12n

...er7/1

:i, evintngtiFents propored in the Church of Scotland, i. z.57 theic

business - - ibid
Svuex, Earl of, one of the commiflioncrs to hear the cause b;t.\'een

Q. Mary and her accusers, i. 492. assembles i powverful army
on the borders, ii. 4. lie and Scroop enter, and ralvage Scot-
land -

T

C. \I4X
L upon :and firil proposCd in Scotland i. z56

';'roskmorto. Sir Nicholas, lent ainbaffador extraorein;.ry
fiom Q.li.zabeti, to oppoi (. Maty's iimarriat! W l:hi D.arn-
iy, i. 334, 33,. his intcrcelin for the exi!ed loi tds i much
regarded, 356, 357. his enmity to Cecil, 36 is tlert o nc-
gociatc Q. l ary'. liberation, 4, 1. is refuul-d accels to h-r by
the confelerates, 453. some letters of his, Appendix, 441,
442. 450. 4j. 457. - , 4L0.
-- Franci-, is charged with a conspiracy againfl ( Eiiza-

beth, ii. 1 5. at fir t he deiie:, but afterwards corifefles it, ib.
1 6. refechtons on his confefli n, I '., I 17. :s c executed 11l

7icrhbourne deligns to aflaflinate t Elizahetl ii. 148
'reason, persons guilty of it, tried after their death by the law of
Scotland - - - ii. z6, 266

U
/ILMORT7; a foreigner, made comptroller of Scc:land,

i. I ,
Union of Scotland and England, the advantages of ii. 30

W
JrT ALL CE, Sir William, bravely asserted the liberty of

his country i. 1

llb'a/ngham, fccretary to (Q Elizabeth, fcnt ambafniiaor to Kin?;

Jamei VI. ii. cG6. returns without lu tefs, ibid. inakc:i a
favourable report to htr concerning ianles, 107. inlerplols il
favour of Q( Mariy. 123. dilcovcrs Babiingtoni's conlpiiracy,
149. why a determined d

n inveterate eneiny to ( Q Mary,

153. a letter fioi l him, Append. - 5;
J'arwirk, Earl of, succeeds Somerset in the govcrnment not

Englaiid - - - i. 3

W/Fimnitser, the conferences concerning (Q MI.y tihre i. 50o
'/tjmlnirl/and, LEarl of, ;at:tempts rebelll on i f;ivour of Q< Mrlr ,

i. 525. his Ichemcs dilcovcred and delcated, 527, 528. lie
el.lipe to the Netherlands - ibid.

I'ihithorn, the P'iiur of, imprifoied for ccclebrati:g inA i. 1 o
ki//lox, a minilltr, declares f1r lelillanicc and dclpriv;ntio(l of ly-

railnical rules, i. to, is called to attenid the Q1. l)o age ol
her deilt bed --- 2 ;6

' ',//.i/-t,

# ERRATA.

Wi/'1ar!, Gcorge, hi; illegal execuoiii revenged i. i
1Fitchcraf/ , vigroufly prolecurec by K. Jame, VI. in Scotland

ii. 21o
WI/b on, dean of Canerbury, employed to negociate a peace

withl FIrancc - - -i. 2,8
-- -- Sir l'dwa :d, fin t lv Q. Eliza7bth into Scotland, ii. 137.

hiL ch!;r.it-tcr, ibi.'. loon gets into lii.,h si -our with K. Ja mLr,
ibid. procures a le;"ue between tne two kindoms, ib. 133.
underminiles Arran's power, 13 . .14. forms a plot on Kirng
Jamn:., antd fo;ced to withdraw without taking leave, 140, 1t..o

Y
'O R K, the conferences there concerl)ing, Q Mary i. 493

z
'0OUCHE, Lo-d, fcnt annibhfador by Q:Elizabeth, to re-

inlonilr:t.c 3ag,;,t i K. James's lenity to the Popilh lords, ii.
zzz. his treich .y on that occasion - ibid,

TI-IE END.

ERRATA.

I'.sge 12. line uilt. fr awakened, early one morning, read awakened, early

on tie mnoriit.g of Seltrember thlird.--'. 21. /. I.for of, real in.-1'. 49. 1. 4
fron] bolt for a.id the lands restored, rrad and Ithe eflates which had been
tork'ited flinoul be cfliored.-;'. 50. 1. 7. J//le \nd.-1'. 67. 1. lo from bait.,
l,r acquiredi lie f.ame .fccndait, read acquired as complete an ascendant ill
r.-i'. 12.l. 1. 9.for his, .rad Arrn's.-i'. 225. /. J2. Jfr niight extitle
lIim, ,taJi .ighIl have cxll)lcd Ja;nes.-P. 217. 1. sO. , r the Council, read
the nienb lrs of the 'oulnril.-l'. 25f. /. 16. /br vdt, rad great.-1'. 260.
1. 7 f1' m bintt. fr aicendanits, read dodirue flis-. 284 l. c. for marched
under, iaud rma cund .painll him under.-I'. .

ig . Idee lc t.--:b. 1.

14. for inhali i. l:., rea,l natives.-I'. 299. /. 19. for sundillinguiflicd, ,'id
unilili i r i flin?.-1'. 3o7 1. 6. fr ec( 1, fi.lical, ts,/th e ccicliallic.il -H .
/. 7. a/irr governmrent, ad, al of 'i two klin:dorrs.-P. 316. /. Si. Irom bitt.
f aii.inllalitiol rc.adi i:iip)aihy.- l'. 317. 1. (. uJ; p|ll ofiall mad. , read Ira-
Iolail wviicli. i is I iil, hi.,! been tiade.-- I'. 320 . /. 7. Jar pu-liflcd(, ,ea./
shich I l.tve puililfleal.-1'. 323,/. ii. 1 1(1n lhiot. far copy is pailrd,
scad copy, llicre is i.lld,', inl ,cd,.-l '. 3 1z . . t il. Jfr irticul.ir. rca,d
.arliculair.-'" . '35z. 1, iz. eal, in his letter fronm Edi uiilrgh, dCiedl Jaly
i h ih, h'olif'rvs hlli.t ' they, c.--hl 1. 2o. fr hlin), erad her.-I'. 360.
,'. 3. /,l./:ately.-l' 41). /. z/.be 3o.ead .ij . -

. 496. /1. .for 440. t'Jad

41 --'. 49)7 / 1'

. 1.r 46. tradl 49.-1'. 50o. 1. 6. /or 51. read 55.1-P.

q 6; .

/ 6i /i 79. ' e./ 14.-I'. 5107. 1, i. fJt 97. read 1to.-I'. 509. 1. 12.

r ;.

J rai ,r lI -

1 1.

0 ,14. 4. . p f>r 1J9. r.i 1z3.-1'. 52'3. . i, /or /

12r. 1r,, 1 3, 1.-1'. 525,1. j. ,r j , rcad 1 34 y. 528. /, 17. fvl 142.
..ad 140,
