THE
HISTORY

OF THE
R E I G N

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES V.

V O L. II.

N

7->~ ~ ~ __

~~-;=~~.~~P I~~$~IM~~~\"\"\' ~~~~ ~-~~--~~7///~~'/////////////////' B~~1 II

THE
HIS TO R Y

OF THE
R E I G N

OF THE

EMPEROR CHARLES V.

By W I L L I A M ROBER T S ON, D.D.

PRINCIPAL OF THE UNIVERSITY'OF EDINBURGH, AND
HISTORIOGRAPHER TO HIS MAJESTY FOIK SCOTLAND.

VOLUME II.
The SEVENTH EDITION, Correted.

LONDON:
Printed for A. STRAHAN ; T. CADELL, in the Strand;

and J. BlAI.ouR, at Edinburgh.

M DCC XCII.

# THE HISTORY OF THE REIGN OF THE EMPEROR CHARLES V. BOOK I.

THE
H I STO R Y

OF THE
R E I GN

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES V.

BOOK I.

HARLES V. was born at Ghent on the B 0 O K
twenty-fourth day of February, in the _.
year one thousand five hundred. His fa- ,iorthF
,* THE

Charier V#

ther, Philip the Handsome, archduke of Austria,
was the son of the emperor Maximilian, and of
Mary, the only child of Charles the Bold, the last
princeof the houre of Burgundy. His mother,
Joanna, was the second daughter of Ferdinand
king of Aragon, and of Isabella queen of Caf-
tile.

A LONG train of fortunate events had opened m;g, om,
the way for this young prince to the inheritance "n"e';,nd
of more extensive dominions, than any European y whih,
monarch, since Charlemagne, had possesrd., Each thbm.
VOL. II. B of

# THE HISTORY OF THE REIGN OF THE EMPEROR CHARLES V. BOOK I.

THE
H I S T O R Y

OF THE
R E I G N

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES V.

BOOK I.
C HARLES V. was born at Ghent on the B oO K'

twenty-fourth day of February, in the -
year one thousand five hundred. His fa- r'tholf

ther, Philip the Handsome, archduke of Austria,
was the son of the emperor Maximilian, and of
Mary, the only child of Charles the Bold, the last
prince of the house of Burgundy. His mother,
Joanna, was the second daughter of Ferdinand
king of Aragon, and of Isabella queen of Caf-
tile.

A LONG train of fortunate events had opened Hi domi-
the way for this young prince to the inheritance th.event
of more extensive dominions, than any European by hichi
monarch, since Charlemagne, had possessed.. Each ,hem.

VOL. II. B of

B 1° K of his ancestors had acquired kingdoms or pro-

-_"~ vinces, towards which their profpea of succession

was extremely remote. The rich possessions of
Mary of Burgundy had been destined for another
family, she having been contra&ed by her father
to the only son of Louis XI. of France; but that
capricious monarch, indulging his hatred to her
family, chore rather to strip her of part of her ter-
ritories by force, than to secure the whole by mar-
riage; and by this nlifconduft, fatal to his pofte-
rity, he threw all the Netherlands and Franche
Comte into the hands of a rival. Isabella, the
daughter of John II. of Castile, far from having
any profpeEt of that noble inheritance which she
tranfinitted to her grandson, passed the early part
of her life in obfcority and indigence. But the Caf-
tilians, exasperated against her brother Henry 1V.
an ill-advifed and vicious prince, publicly charged
him with impotence, and his queen with adultery.
Upon his demile, rejecting Joanna, whom Hen-
ry had uniformly, and even on his death-bed,
owned to be his lawful daughter, and whom an
assembly of the states had acknowledged to be the
heir of his kingdom, they obliged her to retire
into Portugal, and placed Isabella on the throne
of Castile. Ferdinand owed the crown of Aragon
to the unexpeted death of his elder brother, and
acquired the kingdoms of Naples and Sicily by
violating the faith of treaties, and disregarding the
ties of blood. To all there kingdoms, Chrifto-
pher Columbus, by an effort of genius and of in-
trepidity, the boldest and most successful that is

recorded
I

recorded in the annals of mankind, added a new B Oo K
world, the wealth of which became one confider- _
able source of the power and grandeur of the
Spanish monarchs.

DON JOHN, the only son of Ferdinand and Ifa- Philip and

bella, and their eldest daughter, the queen of Por- "ather and
tuga], being cut off, without issue, in the flower of mprvifit
youth, all their hopes centered in Joanna and her
posterity. But as her husband, the archduke, was
a stranger to the Spaniards, it was thought expe-
dient to invite him into Spain, that by residing
among them, he might accustom himself to their
laws and manners; and it was expe&ed that the
Cortes, or assembly of fates, whose authority was
then so great in Spain, that no title to the crown
was reckoned valid unless it received their fanc-
tion, would acknowledge his right of succession,
together with that of the infanta, his wife. Philip
and Joanna, pafring through France in'their way
to Spain, were entertained in that kingdom with ,soi
the utmost magnificence. The archduke did ho-
mage to Louis XII. for the earldom of Slanders,
and took his feat as a peer of the realm in the par-
liament of Paris. They were received in Spain
with every mark of honour that the parental as-
fetion of Ferdinand and Isabella, or the refpec
of their fubjecs, could devise; and their title to
the crown was soon after acknowledged by the
Cortes of both kingdoms.

B a BUT

B 0 0 K. BUT amidfs there outward appearances of satis-

A__ faction and joy, some secret uneafnefs preyedupon

Fe'dunsof the mind of each of there princes. The itately and
ihilip's reserved ceremonial of the Spanish court was so
power.

burdensome to Philip, a prince, young, gay, as.
fable, fond of-fociety and of pleasure, that he soon
began to express a desire of returning to his native
country, the manners of which were more suited
to his temper. Ferdinand, observing the declining
health of his queen, with whose life he knew that
his right to the government of Castile muff cease,
easily foresaw, that a prince of Philip's disposition,
and who already discovered an extreme impatience
to reign, would never content to his retaining any
degree of authority in that kingdom; and the
profpea of this diminution of: his power awaken-
ed the jealousy of that ambitious monarch.

Irahella's ISABELLA beheld, with the sentiments natural
solicitude
with retpe to a mother, the indifference and neglest with
e, hdaughd which the archduke treated her daughter, who was
ttr. destitute of those beauties of person, as well as

those accomplifhiments of mind, which fix the
affecions of an husband. Her understanding,
always weak, was often disordered. She doated
on Philip with such an excess of childish and in-
discreet fondnels, as excited disgust rather than
affection. IHer jealousy, for which her husband's
behaviour gave her too much cause, was propor-
tioned to her love, and often broke out in the
molt extravagant actions. Isabella, though len-
fiblc of her defcrs, could not help pitying her

condition,

conditioni which was soon rendered altogether B 0 0 K
deplorable,- by the archduke's abrupt resolution of _- _
setting out in the middle of winter for Slanders,
and of leaving her in Spain. Isabella intreated
him not to abandon his wife to grief and melan-
choly, which might prove fatal to her, as the was
near the time of her delivery. Joanna conjured
him to put off his journey for three days only,
that she might have the pleasure of celebrating
the festival of Christmas in his company. Ferdi-
nand, after representing the imprudence of his
leaving Spain, before he had time to become ac-
quainted with the genius, or to gain the affections
of the people, who were one day to be his sub-
jests, besought him, at least, not to pass through
France, with which kingdom he was then at open
war. Philip, without'regarding either the ditates
of humanity, or the maxims of prudence, persist-
edin his purpose; and on the twenty-fecond of
December set out for the Low Countries, by the
way of France '

FROM the moment of his departure, Joanna DiCorderof
funk into a deep and fullen melancholy b, and ,"ind.

Birth of

while ihe was in that situation bore Ferdinand her Ferdinand,
second son, for whom the power of his brother afterwards

emperor.

Charles afterwards procured the kingdoms of
Hungary and Bohemia, and to whom he at last
tranfinitced the imperial sceptre. Joanna was the

a Petri Martyris Anglerii Epiftola, 250. 253.
b Id. Epif. 255.

B 3 only

B o0 K only person in Spain who discovered no joy at the

m..m . birth of this prince. Insensible to that, as well as

to every other pleasure, lTe was wholly occupied
with the thoughts of returning to her husband;
nor did- he, in any degree, recover tranquillity of
1504. mind, until flie arrived at Brussels next year'.

PHILIP, in passing through France, had an in-

terview with Louis XII. and signed a treaty with
him, by which he hoped that all the differences
between France and Spain would have been finally
terminated. But Ferdinand, whose affairs, at
that time, were extremely prosperous in Italy,
where the superior genius of Gqnfalvo de Cordova,
the great captain, triumphed on every 9ccafion
over the arms of France, did not pay the least re-
gard to what his fon-in-law had concluded, and
carried on hostilities with greater ardour than ever.

Death of FROM this time Philip seems not to have taken
fbella... .. .

any part in the affairs of Spain, waiting in quiet
till the death either of Ferdinand or of Isabella
should open the way to one of their thrones. The
latter of these events was not far distant. The un-
timely death of her son and eldest daughter had
made a deep impreflion on the mind of Isabella,
and as the could derive but little consolation for
the losses which she had sustained either from her
daughter Joanna, whose infirmities daily increased,
or from her fon-in-law, who no longer preserved

< Mariana, lib. 27. c. i. 14.. Flechicr Vie de Ximen. I.
191. even

2

even the appearance of a decent refpeEt towards B O O K-
that unhappy princess, her spirits and health be- -- -.
gan gradually to decline, and after languishing
some months, she died at Medina del.Campo on
the twenty-fixth of November, one thousand five
hundred and four. She was no less eminent for
virtue, than for wisdom; and whether we confider
her behaviour as a queen, as a wife, or as a mo-
ther, she is justly entitled to the high encomiums
beflowed upon her by the Spanish historians d.

A FEW weeks before her death, she made her Her will
last will, and being convinced of Joanna's incapa- Fpiedina
city to assume the reins of government into her ,egeotnif
own hands, and having no inclination to commit
them to Philip, with whose condu&t he was ex-
tremely dissatisfied, she appointed Ferdinand re-
gent or administrator of the affairs of Castile un-
til her grandson Charles should attain the age of
twenty. She bequeathed to Ferdinand likewise
one half of the revenues which should arise from
the Indies, together with the grand masterships of
the three military orders; dignities, which ren-
dered the person who possessed them almost inde-
pendent, and which Isabella had, for that reason,
annexed to the crown c. But before she signed a
deed so favourable to Ferdinand, she obliged him
to swear that he would not, by a lecond marriage,
or by any other means, endeavour to deprive

I'. Mart. Ep. 279.
' P. Martyr. Ep. 277. Mar. Hill. lib. 28. c. i. Ferre-
ras Iill. Gener. d'Erpagne, tom. viii. 263.'

B 4 Joanna

B o° K Joanna or her posterity of their right of fucceflion
* , _ to any of his kingdoms .

IMMEDIATELY upon the queen's death, Ferdi-

nand retigned the title of king of Castile, and
issued orders to proclaim Joanna and Philip the
sovereigns of that kingdom. But, at the fame
time, he assumed the chara&er of regent, in
consequence of Isabella's testament; and not

Ferdinand long after he prevailed on the Cortes of Cafftile
acknow-
ledged asre- tO acknowledge his right to that office. This,
gent by the
Conles however, he did not procure without difficulty,
The5coS. nor without discovering such symptoms of alien-
ians dif- ation and disgust among the Castilians as filled

him with great uneasiness. The union of Caffile
and Aragon, for almost thirty years, had not so
entirely extirpated the ancient and hereditary en-
mity which subsisted between the natives of there
kingdroms, that the Castilian pride could sub-
mit, without murmuring, -to -the government of
a king of Aragon. Ferdinand's own 'charaaer,
with. which the Castilians were well acquainted,
was far from rendering his authority desirable.
Suspicious, discerning, revere, and parsimOnious,
he was accustomed to observe the most minute
ations of his subjects with a jealous attention,
and to reward their highest services with little
liberality; and they were now deprived of Ifa-
bella, whose gentle qualities, and partiality to her
Castilian fubjecs, often tempered his austerity, or

s Mar. Hill. lib. 28.. 14.

rendered

rendered it tolerable. The maxims of his go- B o K
vernment were especially odious to the grandees;, 1 .
for that artful prince, sensible of the dangerous
privileges conferred upon them by the feudal in-
litutions, had endeavoured to curb their exorbi-
tant powerg, by extending the royal jurifdition,
by protecting their injured vassals, by increasing
the immunities of cities, and by other measures
equally prudent. From all these causes, a formi-
dable party among the Castilians united against
Ferdinand, and though the persons who composed
ir, had not hitherto taken any public ftep in oppo-
firion to him, he plainly saw, that upon the least
encouragement from their new king, they would
proceed to the most violent extremities.
THERE was no less agitation in the Netherlands Philipn-

deavours to

upon receiving the accounts of Isabella's death, obtain the
and of Ferdinand's having assumed the govern- of Cafi^l"
ment of Castile. Philip was not of a temper
tamely to susser himself to be supplanted by the
ambition of his father-in-law. If Joanna's in-
firmities, and the non-age of Charles, rendered
them incapable of government, he, as a husband,
was the proper guardian of his wife, and, as a fa-
ther, the natural tutor of his son. Nor was it sus-
ficient to oppose to there just rights, and to the
inclination of the people of Caflile, the autho-
rity of a testament, the genuineness of which
was perhaps doubtful, and its contents to him
appeared certainly to be iniquitous. A keener

£ Marian. lib, 28. c. 12z.

edge
/Mg

B 0 0 K efdge was ,dded to Philip's resentment, and new

s ^- svigour infuf¢d into his councils by the arrival of

Don John Manuel. He was Ferdinand's am.
baflador at the imperial court, but upon the sirs
notice of Isabella's death repaired to Brussels,
flattering himself, that under a young and liberal
prince, he might attain to power and honours,
which he could never have expected in the ser-
vice of an old and frugal master. He had early
paid court to Philip during his residence in Spain,
with such assiduity as entirely gained his confi-
dence; and having been trained to business under
Ferdinand, could oppose his schemes with equal
abilities, and with arts not inferior to those for
which that monarch was distinguished h

He requires BY the advice of Manuel, ambafladors were dif-
torefingnh patched to require Ferdinand to retire intoAra-
5egency. gon, and to resign the government of Castile to

those persons whom Philip should entrust with ir,
until his own arrival in that kingdom. Such of
the Castilian nobles as had discovered any diffa-
tisfacion with Ferdinand's administration, were
encouraged by every method to oppose it. At
thle fame time a treaty was concluded with
Louis XII. by which Philip flattered himself, that
he had secured the friendship and assistance of that
monarch.

MEANWHILE, Ferdinand employed all the arts
of address and policy, in order to retain the power

1 Zurita Annales de Aragon, tom..vi.. iP- IZ

of which he had got possession. By means of B o ? K
Conchillos, an Aragonian gentleman, he entered _
into a private negociation with Joanna, and pre-
vailed on that weak princess to confirm, by her
authority, his right to the regency. But this in-
trigue did not escape the penetrating eye of Don
John Manuel; Joanna's letter of content was in-
tercepted; Conchillos was thrown into a dungeon;
ihe herself confined to an apartment in the palace,
and all her Spanish domestics secluded from her
presence'.

THE mortification which the discovery of this Ferdinand
intrigue occasioned to Ferdinand, was much in- bytheCafti-
creased by his observing the progress which Philip's lia Dole'.
emissaries made in Castile. Some of the nobles re-
tired to their castles; others to the towns in which
they had influence: they formed themselves int9
confederacies, and began to assemble their vassals.
Ferdinand's court was almost totally deserted;
not a person of diftinstion but Ximenes, arch-
bilhop of Toledo, the duke of Alva, and the mar-
quis of Denia, remaining there; while the houses
of Philip's ambassadors were daily crowded with
noblemen of the highest rank.

EXASPERATED at this universal defection, and Ferdinand
mortified perhaps with feeing all his schemes de- marry, in
feated by a younger politician, Ferdinand resolved, dcludehis.
in defiance of the law of nature, and of decency, sdaght"r

throne.
X P. Mart. Ep. 287. Zurita Annales, vi. p. 14.

to

B O O K to deprive his daughter and her posterity of the

crown of Castile, rather than renounce the re-
gency of that kingdom. His plan for accom.
plifhing this was no less bold, than the intention
itself was wicked. He demanded in marriage
Joanna, the supposed daughter of Henry IV. on
the belief of whose illegitimacy. Isabella's right
to the crown of Castile was founded: and by re.
viving the claim of this princess, in opposition to
which he himself had formerly:led armies and
fought battles, he hoped once more to -get pof.
feflion of the throne of that kingdom. But Ema-
nuel, king of Portugal, in whose dominions Joanna
resided, at that time having married one ofFerdi-
nandcs daughters by Isabella, refused his content to
that unnatural match; and the unhappy princess
herself, having loft all relish for the obje&s of am-
bition, by being long immured in a convent, disco-
vered no less aversion to itk.

Marries a ITHE resources, however, of Ferdinand's am-
niece of the
FrencbC bition were not exhausted. Upon meeting with
king" a repulse in Portugal, he turned towards France,

and fought in marriage Germain de Foix, a
daughter of the viscount of Narbonne, and of
Mary, the sifter of Louis XII. The war which
that monarch had carried on against Ferdinand in
Naples, had been so unfortunate, that he listened
with joy to a proposal, which furnished him with
an honourable pretence for concluding peace;

k Sandov. Hilt. of Civil Wars in Calile. Lon. 1655. P' 5
Zurita Annales de Aragon, tom. vi. p. 213.

: And

And though no prince was ever more remarkable B 0o0 K
than Ferdinand for making all his passions bend to I
the maxims of interest, or become subservient to
the purposes of ambition, yet so vehement was his
resentment against his fon-in-law, that the desire
of gratifying it rendered him regardless of every
other consideration. In order to be revenged of
Philip, by detaching Louis from his interest, and.
in order to gain a chance of excluding him from
his hereditary throne ofAragon, and the dominions
annexed to it, he was ready once more to divide
Spain into separate kingdoms, though the union of
there was the great glory of his reign, and had
been the chief object of his ambition; he consented
to restore the Neapolitan nobles of the French sac-
tion to their possessions and honours; and submitted
to the ridicule of marrying, in an advanced age, a
princess of eighteen'.

THE conclusion of this match, which deprived
Philip of his only ally, and threatened him with
the loss of so many kingdoms, gave him a dread-
fil alarm, and convinced Don John Manuel that
there was now a necessity of taking other mea-
fures with regard to the affairs of SpainT. He
accordingly instructed the Flemish ambassadors,
in the court of Spain, to testify the strong de-
lire which their master had of terminating all
lifferences between him and Ferdinand in an
amicable manner, and his willingness to content

P. Mart. Ep. 290. 29z. Mariana. lib. 28. c. 16, 17.
P. Mart. Ep. 293.

to

'.,

B o o K to any conditions that would re-establish the
a- _ friendlhip which ought to subsist between a father
A treatybe- and a fon-in-law. Ferdinand, though he had
dinand and made and broken more treaties than any prince

of any age, was apt to confide so far in the since-
rity of other men, or to depend so much upon his
own address and their weakness, as to be always
extremely fond of a negociation. He listened
with eagerness to these declarations, and soon con-
Nov.. 4 cluded a treaty at Salamanca; in which it was

stipulated, that the government of Castile Ihould
be carried on in the joint names of Joanna, of
Ferdinand, and of Philip; and that the revenues of
the crown, as well as the right of conferring offices,
should be shared between Ferdinand and Philip,
by an equal division".

Ph50. NOTHING, however, was farther from Philip's

Philip and
Joanna fct thoughts than to observe this treaty. His sole in-
fail for
Spain. tention in proposing it was to amuse Ferdinand,

and to prevent him from taking any measures for
obfftruting his voyage into Spain. It had that
effe&. Ferdinand, sagacious as he was, did not
for some time fufpe&t his design; and though when
he perceived it, he prevailed on the king of France
riot only to remonfirate against the archduke's
journey, but to threaten hostilities if he should
undertake it; though he solicited the duke of
Gueldres to attack his fon-in-law's dominions in
the Low-Countries, Philip and his consort never-

Zurita Annales de Aragon, vi. 19. P. Mart. Ep. 293, 294.

thelefs

thelefs set fail with a numerous fleet and a good B o o K
body of land forces. They were obliged by a vio- .
lent tempest to take shelter in England, where
Henry VII. in compliance with Ferdinand's solicit-
ations, detained them upwards of three months ;
at lass they were permitted to depart, and after a
more prosperous voyage, they arrived in safety at April a.
Corunna in Galicia, nor durst Ferdinand attempt,
as he had once intended, to oppose their landing by
force of arms.

THE Castilian nobles, who had been obliged Thenotb-
hitherto to conceal or to dissemble their senti- ijty of CaCr
ments, now declared openly in favour of Philip. for Phili.
From every corner of the kingdom, persons of the
highest rank, with numerous retinues of their vas-
fals, repaired to their new Sovereign. The treaty
of Salamanca was universally condemned, and all
agreed to exclude from the government of Castile
a prince, who, by consenting to disjoin Aragon
and Naples from that crown, discovered so little
concern for its true interests. Ferdinand, mean-
while, abandoned by almost all the Castilians,
dilconcerted by their revolt, and uncertain whe-
ther he should peaceably relinquish his power, or
take arms in order to maintain it, earnestly soli-
cited an interview with his fon-in-law, who, by the
advice of Manuel, Itudioufly avoided it. Con-
vinced at last, by feeing the number and zeal of
Philip's adherents daily increase, that it was vain
to think of relifting such a torrent, Ferdinand

Ferrcr. I-lift. viii. 285.

consented,

B 010o consented, by treaty, to resign the regency of
.- CaRile into the hands of Philip, toretire into his
uSe i27. hereditary dominions of Aragon, and to reft fa-

,efigns the tisfied with the masterships of the military orders,
Cafile, and and that lhare of the revenue of the Indies, which
retires to
Ara^on. Isabella had bequeathed to him. Though an in-

terview between the princes was no longer necef-
fary, it was agreed to on both fides from motives
of decency. Philip repaired to the place appointed,
with a splendid retinue of Castilian nobles, and a
considerable body of armed men. Ferdinand ap-
peared without any pomp, attended by a few fol-
lowers mounted on mules, and unarmed. On
that occasion Don John Manuel had the pleasure
of displaying before the monarch, whom he had
deserted, the extensive influence which he had
acquired over his new master: While Ferdinand
suffered, in pretence of his former subje&s, the two
most cruel mortifications which an artful and. am-
bitious prince can feel; being at once over-
reached in conduct, and stripped of power P.
July. NOT long after, he retired into Aragon; and

hoping that some favourable accident would soon
open the way for his return into Castile, he took
care to protest, though with great secrecy, that
the treaty concluded with his fon-in-law, being
extorted by force, ought to be deemed void of all
obligation q.

P Zurita Annales de Arag. vi. 64. Mar. lib. 28. c. 19, a20

P. Mart. Ep. 304, 305, &c. q Zurita Annals
de Arag. vi. p. 68. Ferrer. Hill. viii. 290. P

riLIV

PHILIP took poffeflion of his new authority o o t
with a youthful joy. The unhappy Joanna, from r --
whom he derived it, remained, during all these oaa ac
contests, under the dominion of a deep melan- knowiedged
choly; she was seldom allowed to appear in pub- queen by
lic; her father, though he had often desired it,he
was refused access to her; and Philip's chief ob-
jest was to prevail on the Cortes to declare her
incapable of government, that an undivided power
might be lodged in his hands, until his son Ihould
attain to full age. But such was the partial at-
tachment of the Castilians to their native princess,
that though Manuel had the address to gain some
members of the Cortes assembled at Valladolid,
and others were willing to gratify their new so-
vereign in his first requefi, the great body of the
representatives refused their content to a declara-
tion which they thought so injurious to the blood
of their monarchsr. They were unanimous, how-
ever, in acknowledging Joanna and Philip, queen
and king of Castile, and their son Charles prince
of Asturias.

THIS was almost the only memorable event Death of
during Philip's administration. A fever put an Phl"ip.
end to his life in the twenty-eighth year of his Sep. i,
age, when he had not enjoyed the regal dignity, 506
which he had been so eager to obtain, full three
months '.

r Zurita Annales de Arag. v;. p. 7,.
' Marian. lib. 28 . c. 23.
VOL. II. C THE

B 0 0 K THE whole royal authority in Castile ought of

--_-j course to have devolved upon Joanna. But the
T''Jedifondr ihock occasioned by a disaster so unexpected as
of Joanna's
mind in- the death of her husband, completed the disorder

crea. of her understanding, and her incapacity for

government. During all the time of Philip's
sickness, no intreaty could prevail on her, though
in the sixth month of her pregnancy, to leave
him for a moment. When he expired, however,
lhe did not shed one tear, or utter a single groan.
Her grief was silent and fettled. She continued
to watch the dead body with the fame tenderness
arid attention as if it had been alive ', and though
at last she permitted it to be buried, she soon
removed it from the tomb to her own apartment.
There it was laid upon a bed of state, in a fplen-
did dress: and having heard from some monk a
legendary tale of a king who revived after he had
been dead fourteen years, she kept her eyes almost
constantly fixed on the body, waiting for the
happy moment of its return to life. Nor was this
capricious affection for her dead husband less tinc-
tured with jealousy, than that which she had born
to him while alive. She did not permit any of
her female attendants to approach the bed on
which his corpse was laid; fihe would not susser
any woman who did not belong to her family to
enter the apartment; and rather than grant that
privilege to a midwife, though a very aged one
had been chosen on purpose, she bore the

t . Mart. Ep. 316.

princci

princess Catharine without any other assistance B O O K
than that of her own domestics. u-

A WOMAN in such a state of mind was little Sheisof gca
capable of governing a great kingdom; and vernment.
Joanna, who made it her sole employment to be-
wail the loss, and to pray for the foul of her
husband, would have thought her attention to
public affairs an impious negle&t of those duties
which she owed to him. But though Ihe declined
assuming the adminifiration herself, yet, by a
itrange caprice of jealousy, she refused to commit
it to any other person; and no intreaty of her sub-
jets could persuade her to name a regent, or even
to sign such papers as were necessary for the ex-
ecution of justice, and the security of the kingdom.
THE death of Philip threw the Caflilians into Maximilian

*Ee emperor

the greatest perplexity. It was necessary to ap- and Ferdi-
point a regent, both on account of Joanna's fren- etntom-or
zy, and the infancy of her son; and as there was the regency.
not among the nobles, any person so eminently
distinguished either by superiority in rank or abili-
ties as to be called by the public voice to that
high office, all naturally turned their eyes either
towards Ferdinand, or towards the emperor
Maximilian. The former claimed that dignity
as adminiflrator for his daughter, and by virtue
of the testament of Isabella; the latter thought
himelff the legal guardian of his grandson, whom,
on account of his mother's infirmity, he already
"Mar. IIilt.lib. 29. c. 3 & 5. P. Mart. Ep. 318. 3 2.. 32:.

3C condcrd

C 2 confidered

B 0°1 K confidered as king of Caffile. Such of the nobility
A,_. - as had lately been most a&tive in compelling Ser.

dinand to resign the government of the kingdom
trembled at the thoughts of his being restored f0
soon to his former dignity. They dreaded the
return of a monarch, not apt to forgive, and who
to those defects with which they were already
acquainted, added that resentment which the re-
membrance of their behaviour, and refleftion
'upon his own disgrace, must naturally have ex.
cited. Though none of these obje&ions lay
againif Maximilan, he was a stranger to the laws
and manners of Castile; he had not either troops
or money to support his pretensions; nor could
his claim be admitted without a public declara-
tion of Joanna's incapacity for government, an
indignity to which, notwithstanding the notoriety
of her distemper, the delicacy of the Castilians
could not bear the thoughts of fubjeEting her.

DON JOHN MANUEL, however, and a few of

the nobles, who confidered themselves as mofi
obnoxious to Ferdinand's displeasure, declared
for Maximilian, and offered to support his claim
with all their interest. Maximilian, always enter-
prizing and decisive in council, though feeble and
dilatory in execution, eagerly embraced the offer.
But a series of ineffetual negociations was the
only consequence of this tranifation. The em-
peror, as ulual, afTerted his rights in a high strain,
iomiiled a great deal, and performed nothing'.
x Mariana, lib. 29. c. 7. Zurita Annales de Arag. vi. 93'

5 A FEW

A FEW days before the death of Philip, Ferdi- B 0 0 K
nand had set out for Naples, that, by his own v-_
presence, he might put an end, with greater abfnt ona
decency, to the viceroyalty of the great captain, kit, oto hi
whose important services, and cautious conduct, Nayper.
did not screen him from the suspicions of his jea-
lous master. Though an account of his fon-in-
law's death reached him at Porto-fino, in the ter-
ritories of Genoa, he was so solicitous to discover
the secret intrigues which he supposed the great
captain to have been carrying on, and to effablifh
his own authority on a firm foundation in the
Neapolitan dominions, by removing him from
the supreme command there, that rather than
discontinue his voyage, he chose to leave Caffile
in a state of anarchy, and even to rifque, by this
delay, his obtaining poffeflion of the government
of that kingdom Y.

NOTHING but the great abilities and prudent Acquires

conduct of his adherents, could have prevented of Crlle,
the bad effiets of this absence. At the head of chifrly
these was Ximenes, archbishop of Toledo, who, inflnnice of
though he had been raised to that dignity by Ifa- Ximnenc3.
bella, contrary to the inclination of Ferdinand,
and though he could have no expectation of en-
joying much power under the administration of a
master little dirpofcd to diflinguifli him by extra-
ordinary marks of attention, was nevertheless so
difintelrcfe, as to prefer the welfare of his country
before his own grandeur, and to declare, that

Y Zurita Annales de Arag. vi. p. 85.

C 3 Caflile

B oo K Caffile could never be so happily governed asby

_-_ - a prince, whom long experience had rendered

thoroughly acquainted with its true interest. The
zeal of Ximenes to bring over his countrymen to
this opinion, induced him to lay aside somewhat
1507. of his usual austerity and haughtiness. He con-

descended, on this occasion, to court the dif-
affeAed nobles, and employed address, as well
as arguments, to persuade them. Ferdinand
seconded his endeavours with great art; and by
concessions to some of the grandees, by promises
to others, and by letters full of complaisance
to all, he gained many of his most violent op.

Aug. r. ponents . Though many cabals were formed,
Ferdinand
returns to and some commotions were excited, yet when
Spain. Ferdinand, after having fettled the affairs of

Naples, arrived in Castile, he entered upon the
administration without opposition. The prudence
with which he exercised his authority in that
kingdom, equalled the good fortune by which he

His pnrudent had recovered it. By a moderate, but Ready
tio,. adminiifration, free from partiality and from re-

fentment, he entirely reconciled the Castilians to
his person, and secured to them, during the re-
mainder of his life, as much domestic tranquil-
lity, as was confifent with the genius of the
feudal government, which still subsisted among
them in full vigour ".

NoR was the preservation of tranquillity in his
hereditary kingdoms, the only obligation which

z Zurita Annnles de Arag. vi. p. 87. 9+. 109.
a Mariana, lib. 29. c. o.

the

the archduke Charles owed to the wife regency of B o0 K
his grandfather; it was his good fortune, during -- --
that period, to have very important additions
made to the dominions over which he was to
reign. On the coast of Barbary, Oran, and other Conquest
conquests of no small value, were annexed to the
crown of Castile by cardinal Ximenes, who, with
a spirit very uncommon in a monk, led in person 1509.
a numerous army against the Moors of that coun-
try; and, with a generosity and magnificence still
more singular, defrayed the whole expence of the
expedition out of his own revenues b. In Europe,
Ferdinand, under pretences no less frivolous than
unjust, as well as by artifices the most Ihameful
and treacherous, expelled John d'Albret, the Acqufition
lawful Sovereign, from the throne of Navarre;
and, seizing on that kingdom, extended the
limits of the Spanilh monarchy from the Pyrenees
on the one hand, to the frontiers of Portugal on
the other c.

IT was not, however, the desire of aggrandiz- Ferdinand
ing the archduke, which influenced Ferdinand jhl guds o
in this, or in any other of his actions. He was Charles.
more apt to confider that young prince as a rival,
who might one day wrest out of his hands the
government of Castile, than as a grandfbn, for
whole interest he was entrusted with the admini-
flration. This jealousy soon begot aversion, and
even hatred, the symptoms of which he was at

'' Mariana, lib. 29. c. 18.
c Mar. lib. 30. c. 11, 12. 19. 24.

C 4 no

B 0 0 K no pains to conceal. Hence proceeded his im-

1.

A,--_--' moderate joy when his young queen was delivered
3509. of a son, whose life would have deprived Charles

of the crowns of Aragon, Naples, Sicily, and
Sardinia; and upon the untimely death of that
prince, he discovered, for the fame reason, an
excessive solicitude to have other children. This
impatience hastened, in all probability, the ac-
cession of Charles to the crown of Spain. Ferdi-
nand, in order to procure a blessing, of which,
from his advanced age, and the intemperance of
his youth, he could have little profpe&E, had re-
3513. course to his physicians, and by their prescription

took one of those potions, which are supposed to
add vigour to the constitution, though they more
frequently prove fatal to it. This was its effeót
on a frame so feeble and exhausted as that of Ser-
dinand; for though he survived a violent disorder
which it at firif occasioned, it brought on such
an habitual languor and dejetion of mind, as
rendered him. averse from any serious attention to
public affairs, and fond of frivolous amusements,
on which he had not hitherto bestowed much
timed. Though he now despaired of having any
son of his own, his jealousy of the archduke did
not abate, nor could he help viewing him with
that aversion which princes often bear to their

Endeaours successors. In order to gratify this unnatural
to Iiminifih paflion, he made a will, appointing prince Ser-
by P will dinand, who having been born and educated in
favour of
'erdin.ad. d Zurita Annalcs de Arag. vi. p. 347. P. Mart. Ep. 531'

Argenfola Annales de Aragon, lib. i. p. 4. Spain

Spain, was much beloved by the Spaniards, to B 0 0 K
be regent of all his kingdoms, until the arrival __
of the archduke his brother, and by the fame s5'5
deed he fettled upon him the grand-mafterfhip of
the three military orders. The former of there
grants might have put it in the power of the
young prince to have disputed the throne with his
brother; the latter would, in any event, have
rendered him almost independent of him.

FERDINAND retained to the last that jealous
love of power, which was so remarkable through
his whole life. Unwilling even at the approach
of death to admit a thought of relinquilhing any
portion of his authority, he removed continually
from place to place, in order to fly from his dif-
temper, or to forget it. Though his strength
declined every day, none of his attendants durfl
mention his condition; nor would he admit his
father confessor, who thought such silence crimi-
nal and unchristian, into his presence. At last
the danger became so imminent, that it could be
no longer concealed. Ferdinand received the
intimation with a decent fortitude; and touched,
perhaps, with compunction at the injutfice which
hehad done his grandson, or influenced by the
honest remonstrances of Carvajal, Zapata, and
Vargas, his most ancient and faithful coun-
fellors, who represented to him, that by invest-
ing prince Ferdinand with the regency, he would
ililllibly entail a civil war on the two brothers,
aid by betowing on him the grand-mafterflip

of

B 0 o K of the military orders, would strip the crown of
a-_---» its noblest ornament and chief strength, he con-
Is pe5r,6ded rented to.alter his will with refpe& to both these
to alter that particulars. By a new deed he left Charles the

sole heir of all his dominions, and allotted to
prince Ferdinand, infiead of that throne of which
he thought himself almost secure, an inconfider.
able establishment of fifty thousand ducats a
nd dier. year e. He died a few hours after signing this

will, on the twenty-third day of January, one
thousand five hundred and sixteen.

Educationof CHARLES, to whom such a noble inheritance
Charles V. descended by his death, was near the full age of

sixteen. He had hitherto resided in the Low-
Countries, his paternal dominions. Margaret of
Austria, his aunt, and Margaret of York, the
siser of Edward IV. of England, and widow of
Charles the Bold, two princesses of great virtue
and abilities, had the care of forming his early
youth. Upon the death of his father, the Fle-
mings committed the government of the Low-
Countries to his grand-father, the emperor Maxi-
milian, with the name rather than the authority
of regent . Maximilian made choice of William
de Croy lord of Chievres to superintend the edu-

Mar. Hist. lib. 30. c. ult. Zurita Annales de Arag. vi.

401. P. Mart. Ep. 565, 566. Argenfola Annales de Arag.
lib. i. p. i .

f Pontius Ieuterus Rerum Auftriacarum, lib. xv. Lov.
1649. lib. vii. c. 2. p. 155.

cation

cation of the young prince his grandson g. That B 0 O K
nobleman possessed, in an eminent degree, the -
talents which fitted him for such an important IS6.
office, and discharged the duties of it with great
fidelity. Under Chievres, Adrian of Utrecht
acted as preceptor. This preferment, which
opened his way to the highest dignities an eccle-
fiaftic can attain, he owed not to his birth, for
that was extremely mean; nor to his interest, for
he was a stranger to the arts of a court; but to
the opinion which his countrymen entertained of
his learning. He was indeed no inconsiderable
proficient in those frivolous sciences, which, dur-

ing

g The French historians, upon the authority of M. de Bel-
lay, Mem. p. ii. have unanimously asserted, that Philip, by
his lad will, having appointed the king of France to have the
direCtion of his son's education, Louis XII. with a disinterest-
ednefs suitable to the confidence reposed in him, named
Chievres for that office. Even the president Henaut has
adopted this opinion. Abrege Chron. A. D. 1507. Va-
rillas, in his usual manner, pretends to have seen Philip's
telament. Praat. de 'Education des Princes, p. 16. But the
Spanilh, German, and Flemish historians concur in contra-
diding this assertion of the French authors. It appears from
Heuterus, a cotemporary Flemilh historian of great authority,
that Louis XII. by consenting to the marriage of Germaine
de Foix with Ferdinand, had loft much of that confidence
which Philip once placed in him; that this difguR was in-
creased by the French king's giving in marriage to the count
of Angoulcme his cldcft daughter, whom he had formerly
betrothed to Charles ; I-euter. Rer. Aufr. lib. v. X : That
the French, a fiort time before Philip's death, had violated
the pace which fubfitlcd between them and the Flemings,
n"d P'hilip had complaincd of this injury, and was ready to
recnt it. lleutcr. ibid. All these circumstances render it.

impro-

B O o K ing several centuries, aflumed the name of phi.

v - i lofophy, and had published a commentary,
j51. which was highly esteemed, upon The Book of

Sentences, a famous treatise of Petrus Lombardus,
confidered at that time as the standard fyflenm of
metaphysical theology. But whatever admiration
these procured him in an illiterate age, it was
soon found that a man accustomed to the retire-
ment of a college, unacquainted with the world,
and without any tincture of taste or elegance,
was by no means qualified for rendering science
agreeable to a young prince. Charles, accordingly,

improbable that Philip, who made his will a few days before he
died, Heuter. p. z52, should commit the education of his son
to Louis XII. In confirmation of these plausible conjedures,
positive testimony can be produced. It appears from Heu-
terus, that Philip, when he set out for Spain, had entrufled
Chievres both with the care of his son's education, and with
the government of his dominions in the Low-Countries.
Heuter. lib. vii. p. 153. That an attempt was made, soon
after Philip's death, to have the emperor Maximilian ap-
pointed regent, during the minority of his grandson; but
this being opposed, Chievres seems to have continued to dif-
charge both the offices which Philip had committed to him.
Heut. ibid. 153. 155. That in the beginning of the year
1508, the Flemings invited Maximilian to accept of the
regency; to which he consented, and appointed his daughter
Margaret, together with a council of Flemings, to exercif'
the supreme authority, when he himself mlould, at any time,
be absent. He likewise named Chievres as governor, and
Adrian of Utrecht as preceptor to his son. I-Icut. ibid. '155
157. What Heuterus relates with refpe& to this matter is
confirmed by Moringus in Vita Adriani apud Analeca Cafp.
Burmanni de Adriano, cap. so; by Barlandus Chronic.
Brabant. ibid. p. 5 ; and by Harcus Annal. Brab. vol. i.
520, &c.

discovered

discovered an early aversion to learning, and an B 0 0 K
excessive fondness for those violent and martial '.-
exercises, to excel in which was the chief pride, ,s6'
and almost the only fludy of persons of rank in
that age. Chievres encouraged this taste, either
from a desire of gaining his pupil by indulgence,
or from too flight an opinion of the advantages of
literary accomplishments h. He inftru&ed him,
however, with great care in the arts of govern-
ment; he made him study the history not only of
his own kingdoms, but of those with which they
were conneEted; he accustomed him, from the
time of his assuming the government of Slanders The sirs

openings of

in the year one thousand five hundred and fifteen, hts charac.
to attend to busines's; he persuaded him to peruse ''
all papers relating to public affairs; to be present
at the deliberations of his privy-counfellors, and
to propose to them himself those matters, con-
cerning which he required their opinion '. From
such an education, Charles contracted habits of
gravity and recollection which scarcely suited his
time of life, The first openings of his genius did
not indicate that superiority which its maturer
age displayed k. He did not discover in his youth
the impetuosity of spirit which commonly ushers
in an active and enterprizing manhood. Nor did
his early obsequiousness to Chievres, and his

h Jovii Vita Adriani, p. 91. Struvii Corpus Hill. Germ.
ii.967. P. Heuter. Rer. AufRr. lib. vii. c. 3. p. 157.

Memoires de Bellay, 8vo. Par. 1573. p. I. . Heuter.

ib. Viii. . i. p. 184.
k 1 Martyr, Ep. 569. 655.

other

B 0 0 K other favourites, promise that capacious and de-

_--. i cifive judgment, which afterwards direced the
I516. affairs of one half of Europe. But his fubjeas,

dazzled with the external accomplishments of a
graceful figure and manly address, and viewing
his character with that partiality which is always
shown to princes during their youth, entertained
sanguine hopes of his adding lustre to those crowns
which descended to him by the death of Ferdi-
nand.

State of THE kingdoms of Spain, as is evident from
qSires avi- the view which I have given of their political
gorous ad- constitution, were at that time in a situation
tion. which required an administration no less vigorous

than prudent. The feudal inffitutions, which
had been introduced into all its different pro-
vinces by the Goths, the Suevi, and the Vandals,
subsisted in great force. The nobles, who were
powerful and warlike, had long possessed all the
exorbitant privileges which there inffitutions
veited in their order. The cities in Spain were
more numerous and more considerable, than the
genius of feudal government, naturally unfavour-
able to commerce and to regular police, seemed
to admit. The personal rights, and political in-
fluence, which the inhabitants of there cities had
acquired, were extensive. The royal prerogative,
circumscribed by the privileges of the nobility,
and by the pretensions of the people, was confined
within very narrrow limits. Under such a form
of government, the principles of discord were

many;

many; the bond of union was extremely feeble; B °0 K
and Spain felt not only all the inconveniencies -
occasioned by the defects in the feudal system, s5'6.
but was exposed to disorders arising from the
peculiarities in its own constitution.

DURING the long administration of Ferdinand,
no internal commotion, it is true, had arisen in
Spain. His superior abilities had enabled him to
restrain the turbulence of the nobles, and to mo-
derate the jealousy of the commons. By the wis-
dom of his domestic government, by the sagacity
with which he conducted his foreign operations, and
by the high opinion that his subjects entertained
of both, he had preserved among them a degree
of tranquillity, greater than was natural to a con-
ftitution, in which the feeds of discord and dif-
order were so copiously mingled. But, by the
death of Ferdinand, these restraints were at once
withdrawn; and faction and discontent, fiom
being long repressed, were ready to break out
with fiercer animosity.

IN order to prevent there evils, Ferdinand had Ferdinand
in his last will taken a most prudent precaution, cd cardinal
by appointing cardinal Ximenes, archbishop of r"et.
Toledo, to be sole regent of CafRile, until the
arrival of his grandson in Spain. The singular
charadcr of this man, and the extraordinary qua-
lities which marked him out for that office at
lhl a jun&ture, merit a particular description.
tle was defecnded of an honourable, not of a nlisrife an

wealthy aratter

B 0 0 K wealthy family; and the circumstances of hi!

- -- parents, as well as his own inclinations, havint
zSI6. determined him to enter into the church, he earll

obtained benefices of great value, and whicl
placed him in the way of the highest preferment
All these, however, he renounced at once; anc
after undergoing a very revere noviciate, assumed
the habit of St. Francis in a monastery of Obfer.
vantine friars, one of the most rigid orders in the
Romish church. There he soon became eminent
for his uncommon austerity of manners, and for
those excesses of superstitious devotion, which are
the proper chara&teriftics of the monastic life.
But notwithstanding there extravagances, to which
weak and enthusiastic minds alone are usually
prone, his understanding, naturally penetrating
and decisive, retained its full vigour, and ac-
quired him fich great authority in his own order,
as raised him to be their provincial. His repu-
tation for fantity soon procured him the office
of father-confeflor to queen Isabella, which he
accepted with the utmost relu&ance. He pre-
served in a court the fame austerity of manners
which had distinguished him in the cloister, He
continued to make all his journies on foot; he
subsisted only upon alms; his ads of mortifica-
tion were as revere as ever, and his penances as
rigorous. Isabella, pleated with her choice, con-
ferred on him, not long after, the archbishopric
of Toledo, which, next to the papacy, is the
richefl dignity in the church of Rome. This
honour le declined with a firmness, which no-

thing

thing but the authoritative injunction of the pope B o o K
was able to overcome. Nor did this height of ,
promotion change his manners. Though obliged isx6.
to display in public that magnificence which be-
calne his flation, he himself retained his monastic
severity. Under his pontifical robes he con-
flantly wore the coarse frock of St. Francis, the
rents in which he used to patch with his own
hands. He at no time used linen; but was com-
monly clad in hair-cloth. He slept always in his
habit, most frequently on the ground, or on
boards, rarely in a bed. He did not taste any of
the delicacies which appeared at his table, but
satisfied himself with that simple diet which the
rule of his order prescribed'. Notwithstanding
these peculiarities, so opposite to the manners of
the world, he possessed a thorough knowledge of
its affairs; and no sooner was he called by his fta-
tion, and by the high opinion which Ferdinand
and Isabella entertained of him, to take a princi-
pal share in the adminifiration, than he displayed
talents for business, which rendered the fame of
his wisdom equal to that of his fanctitv. 'His poli-
tical condut, remarkable for the boldness and
originality of all his plans, flowed from his real
charaCter, and partook both of its virtues and its
defecEs. His extensive genius suggested to him
Ichemes vast and magnificent. Conscious of the
integrity of his intentions, he pursued these with

liftoire de I'adminiltration du Card. Ximen. par Mich.
laudier, 4to. :63 5. p. 3.

VOL. II. D unremitting

B o K unremitting ard undaunted firmness. Accustomed
. _. from his early youth to mortify his own pafflons,

sL6- he shewed little indulgence towards those of other

men. Taught by his system of religion to check
even his most innocent desires, he was the enemy
of every thing to which he could affix the name of
elegance or pleasure. Though free from any sus-
picion of cruelty, he discovered in all his commerce
with the world a revere inflexibility of mind, and
austerity of character, peculiar to the monastic pro-
session, and which can hardly be conceived in a
country where that is unknown.

Cardinal SUCH was the man to whom Ferdinand corn
Adrian ap-
ponted re- mitted the regency of Castile; and though Xi-
gent by
Charles. menes was then near fourscore, and perfedly ac-

quainted with the labour and difficulty of the
office, his natural intrepidity of mind, and zeal
for the public good, prompted him to accept of
it without hesitation. Adrian of Utrecht, who
had been sent into Spain a few months before
the death of Ferdinand, produced- full powers
from the archduke to assume the name and au-
thority of regent, upon the demise of his grand:
father; but such was the aversion of the Spaniards
to the government of a stranger, and so un-
equal the abilities of the two competitors, that
Adrian's claim would at once have been re-
jected, if Ximenes himself, from complaisance to
his new master, had not consented to acknow-
ledge him as regent, and to carry on the govern-
ment in conjunction with him. By this, how-

l,~~~~~~ ¢¥¢f~ever,

ever, Adrian acquired a dignity merely nominal. B o Io
Ximenes, though he treated him with great de-
cency, and even refpe&, retained the whole power xsi6.
in his own hands'. obtains the

sole direc-
tion of as-
THE cardinal's first care was to observe the mo- fairs.

Fils precau-
tions of the infant Don Ferdinand, who, having tionsleaginft

the infant

been flattered with so near a profpe6t of supreme Don Ser-
power, bore the disappointment of his hopes with dinand.
greater impatience than a prince at a period of life
so early could have been supposed to feel. Xi-
menes, under pretence of providing more effec-
tually for his safety, removed him from Gaudalupe,
the place in which he had been educated, to Ma-
drid, where he fixed the residence of the court.
There he was under the cardinal's own eye, and his
condut, with that of his domestics, was watched
with the utmost attention ".

THE first intelligence he received from the
Low-Countries, gave greater disquiet to the car-
dinal, and convinced him how difficult a talk it
would be to condut the affairs of an unexperi-
enced prince, under the influence of counsellors
unacquainted with the laws and manners of Spain.
No sooner did the account of Ferdinand's death Charles as-
reach Brussels, than Charles, by the advice of his titleofc
Flemilh ministers, resolved to aflume the title of kin".

' Gometius de reb. gest. Ximenii, p. 15o. fol. Compl.
1569.

Miniana Contin. Mariana, lib. i. c. z. Baudier, Iill. de
.^imene, p. 1 8.

D 2 king.

S

A 0 K king. By the laws of Spain, the sole right to the

A-_- crowns, both of Castile and of Aragon, belonged
15'6. to Joanna; and though her infirmities .difquali.

sied her from governing, this incapacity had not
been declared by any public at of the Cortes
in either kingdom; so that the Spaniards con-
fidered this resolution, not only as a direst
violation of their privileges, but as an unnatural
usurpation in a son on the prerogatives of a mo-
ther, towards whom, in her present unhappy situ.
ation, he manifested a less delicate regard than
her fubjeds had always expressed °. The Flemilh
court, however, having prevailed both on the pope
and on the emperor to address letters to Charles
as king of Castile; the former of whom, it was
pretended, had a right as head of the church, and
the latter, as head of the empire, to confer this
title; inftrutions were sent to Ximenes, to prevail
on the Spaniards to acknowledge it. Ximenes,
though he had earnestly remonstrated against the
measure, as no less unpopular than unnecessary,
resolved to exert all his authority and credit in
carrying it into execution, and immediately as-
fembled such of the nobles as were then at court.
What Charles required was laid before them; and
when, instead of complying with his demands,
they began to murmur against such an unpre-
cedented encroachment on their privileges, and
to talk high of the rights of Joanna, and their
oath of allegiance to her, Ximenes hastily inter-

P. Mart. Ep. 568.

posed,

posed, and, with that firm and decisive tone which B o o K
was natural to him, told them that they were _
not called now to deliberate, but to obey; that 1,16.

Recognized

their sovereign did not apply to them for advice, through the
but expeEted submission; and " this day," added Ximenes.
he, "Charles shall be proclaimed king of Castile April 13.
in Madrid; and the reft of the cities, I doubt not,
will follow its example." On the spot he gave
orders for that purpose P; and notwithstanding the
novelty of the praftice, and the secret discontents
of many persons of diftin&ion, Charles's title was
universally recognized. In Aragon, where the
privileges of the subje&t were more extensive, and
the abilities as well as authority of the archbishop
of Saragossa, whom Ferdinand had appointed re-
gent, were far inferior to those of Ximenes, the
fame obsequiousness to the will of Charles did not
appear, nor was he acknowledged there under any
other character but that of prince, until his arrival
in Spain .
XIMENES, though possessed only of delegated Hiss hemes

r i /- i i i1 for extend-

power, which, from his advanced age, he could ing the pre.
not expect to enjoy long, assumed, together with r"og"'ti
the characer of regent, all the ideas natural to a
monarch, and adopted schemes for extending the
regal authority, which he pursued with as much
intrepidity and ardour, as if he himself had been

P Gnmetius, p. 152, &c. Baudier, His. de Ximen.p. 2li.
P. Mart. Ep. 572.

D 3 to

B O o0 to reap the advantages resulting from their success.

---' The exorbitant privileges of the Castilian nobles
zS'6. circumscribed the prerogative of the prince within

very narrow limits. These privileges the cardinal
confidered as so many unjust extortions from the
crown, and determined to abridge them. Dan.
gerous as the attempt was, there were circum-
fiances in his situation, which promised him greater
success than any king of Castile could have, ex.
peeed. His ftri& and prudent ceconomy of his
archiepiscopal revenues, furniihed him with more
ready money than the crown could at any time
command; the san&ity of his manners, his charity
and munificence rendered him the idol of the peo-
ple; and the nobles themselves, not fufpeaing any
danger from him, did not observe his motions with
the fame jealous attention, as they would have
watched those of one of their monarchs.

By depref- IMMEDIATELY upon his accession to the re-
ing the no-
bility. gency, several of the nobles, fancying that the

reins of government would of consequence be
somewhat relaxed, began to assemble their vassals,
and to. prosecute, by force of arms, private quar-
rels and pretensions, which the authority of Ser-
dinand had obliged them to dissemble, or to re-
linquifh. b.ut Ximenes, who, had taken into pay
a good body of troops, oppofi d

an defated all

their designs with unexpected vigour and facility;
and though he did not treat the authors of these
disorders with any cruelty, he. forced them to

acts

a&s of submission, extremely mortifying to the B o1 K
haughty spirit of Castilian grandees. 1-a

Z156.

BUT while the cardinal's attacks were confined By forming
to individuals, and every a& of rigour was jufti- tropd oe-
sied by the appearance of necessity, founded on pending on
the forms of justice, and tempered with a mix-
ture of lenity, there was scarcely room for jea-
lousy or complaint. It was not so with his next
measure, which, by striking at a privilege eflen-
tial to the nobility, gave a general alarm to the
whole order. By the feudal conflitution, the
military power was lodged in the hands of the
nobles, and men of an inferior condition were
called into the field only as their vassals, and to
follow their banners. A king, with scanty re-
venues, and a limited prerogative, depended on
these potent barons in all his operations. It was
with their forces he attacked his enemies, and
with them he defended his kingdom. While at
the head of troops attached warmly to their own
immediate lords, and accustomed to obey no other
commands, his authority was precarious, and
his efforts feeble. From this state Ximenes re-
solved to deliver the crown; and as mercenary
standing armies were unknown under the feudal
government, and. would have been odious to a
martial and generous people, he issued a pro-
clamation, commanding every city in Castile to
enroll a certain number of its burgesses, in order
that they might be trained -to the use of arms on
Sundays and holidays; he engaged to provide of-

D 4 ficers

B 0 0 K ficers to command them at the public expence;

.--- and as an encouragement to the private men,

6 promised them an exemption from all taxes and

impositions. The frequent incursions of the
Moors from Africa, and the necessity of having
some force always ready to oppose them, furnished
a plausible pretence for this innovation. The ob-
ject really in view was to secure the king a body
of troops independent of his barons, and which
might serve to counterbalance their power'. The
nobles were not flow in perceiving what was his
intention, and saw how effe&ually the scheme
which he had adopted would accomplish his end;
but as a measure which had the pious appearance
of resisting the progress of the infidels was ex-
tremely popular, and as any opposition to it, arising
from their order alone, would have been imputed
wholly to interested motives, they endeavoured to
excite the cities themselves to refute obedience,
and to inveigh against the proclamation as in-
confjifent with their charters and privileges. In
consequence of their instigations, Burgos, Valla-
dolid, and several other cities, rose in open mu-
tiny. Some of the grandees declared themselves
their protectors. Violent remonstrances were
presented to the king. His Flemish counsellors
were alarmed. Ximenes alone continued firm
and undaunted; and partly by terror, partly by
intreaty; by force in some instances, and by for-
bearance in others; he prevailed on all the re-

'Minianx Continuatio Marianx, fol. Hag. 1733. P' 3'

fraPiory

fratory cities to comply. During his admini- B 0O K
ftration, he continued to execute his plan with -
vigour; but soon after his death it was entirely Is16'
dropped.

His success in this scheme for reducing the Byrecalling

the grants

exorbitant power of the nobility, encouraged him of former
to attempt a diminution of their poffefrions, which the"obiicty.
were no less exorbitant. During the contests and
disorders inseparable from the feudal government,
the nobles, ever attentive to their own interest,
and taking advantage of the weakness or distress
of their monarchs, had seized some parts of the
royal demesnes, obtained grants of others, and
having gradually wrested almost the whole out
of the hands of the prince, had annexed them to
their own estates. The titles, by which most of
the grandees held these lands, were extremely
defective; it was from tome successful usurpation,
which the crown had been too feeble to dispute,
that many derived their only claim to poffefslon.
An enquiry carried back to the origin of there
encroachments, which were almost coeval with
the feudal fyfl-em, was impracticable; and as it
would have stripped every nobleman in Spain of
great part of his lands, it must have excited a
general revolt. Such a ftep was too bold, even
for the enterprising genius of Ximenes. He
confined himself to the reign of Ferdinand; and
beginning with the pensions granted during that

. P. Mart. Ep. 556, &c. Gometius, p. 160, &c.

time,

B O 0 K time, refused to make any farther payrient, be.

J.
a --- cause all right to them expired with his life. He

516' then called to account such as had acquired

crown lands under the administration of that
monarch, and at once refuned whatever.he had
alienated. The effects of these revocations ex.
tended to many persons of high rank; for though
Ferdinand was a prince of little generosity, yet
he and Isabella having been raised to the throne
of Castile by a powerful faction of the nobles,
they were obliged to reward the zeal of their
adherents with great liberality, and the royal
demesnes were their only fund for that purpose.
The addition made to the revenue of the crown
by these revocations, together with his own frugal
ceconomy, enabled Ximenes not only to discharge
all the debts which Ferdinand had left, and to
remit considerable fums to Slanders, but to pay
the officers of his new militia, and to establish ma-
gazines not only more numerous, but better fur-
nilhed with artillery, arms, and warlike stores,
than Spain had ever possessed in any former age'.
The prudent and disinterested application of these
fums, was a full apology to the people for the
rigour with which they were exacted.

The nohles THE nobles, alarmed at there repeated attacks,
oppose his
meafurcsi began to think of precautions for the safety of

their order. Many cabals were formed, loud
complaints were uttered, and desperate refolu-

t Fieelier Vic de Ximen. ii. 600.

tions

tions taken; but before they proceeded to extre- B 0 K.
mities, they appointed some of their number to _
examine the powers in consequence of which the I5S6.
cardinal exercised ads of such high authority.
The admiral of Castile, the duke de Infantado,
and the Conde de Benevento, grandees of the
firit rank, were entrusted with this commission.
Ximenes received them with cold civility, and in
answer to their demand, produced the teflament
of Ferdinand by which he was appointed regent,
together with the ratification of that deed by
Charles. To both there they obje&ed; and he
endeavoured to establish their validity. As the
conversation grew warm, he led them insensibly:
towards a balcony, from which they had a view of but wthout
a large body of troops under arms, and of a for-
midable train of artillery. " Behold," fays he,
pointing to these and rairing his voice, "' the
powers which 1 have received from his Catholic
majesty. With there I govern Castile; and with
these I will govern it, until the king your mater
and mine takes poffeflion of his kingdom u." A
declaration so bold and haughty silenced them, and
afronifhed their associates. To take arms against
a man aware of his danger, and prepared for his
defence, was what despair alone would dictate.
All thoughts of a general confederacy against the
cardinal's administration were laid aside; and.
except from some flight commotions, excited by
the private resentment of particular noblemen,

' lech. ii. 551. Ferreras, Hilt. vili. 433.

the

B O OK the tranquillity of Caflile suffered no interrup-

I i,>z tion.

r516.

Thwarted IT was not only from the opposition of the
byCharles's
Flemflh Spanish nobility that obstacles arose to the exe-
ministers.

cution of the cardinal's schemes; he had a con-
ftant firuggle to maintain with the Flemish mini-
ifers, who, presuming upon their favour with
the young king, aimed at dire6ting the affairs of
Spain, as well as those of their own country.
Jealous of the great abilities and independent fpi-
rit of Ximenes, they confidered him rather as a
rival who might circumscribe their-power, than
as a minister, who by his prudence and vigour was
adding to the grandeur and authority of their
master. Every complaint against his adminiftra-
tion was listened to with pleasure by the courtiers
in the Low-Countries. Unnecessary obftruc-
rions were thrown by their means in the way of
all his measures; and though they could not,
either with decency or safety, deprive him of the
office of regent, they endeavoured to lessen his
authority by dividing it. They soon discovered
that Adrian of Utrecht, already joined with him
in office, had neither genius nor spirit sufficient
to give the leafr check to his proceedings; and

An ad;- therefore Charles, by their advice, added to the
tional num- commission of regency La Chau, a Flemish gen-,
ber of re-
geni ap- tleman, and afterwards Amerftorf, a nobleman
pointed. of Holland; the former distinguished for his

addrcfs, the latter for his firmness. Ximenes,
though no stranger to the malevolent intention

of

of the Flemish courtiers, received there new sB 0 K
al(ociates with all the external marks of diftinc- _
tion due to the office with which they were in- I516'
velfed; but when they came to enter upon bufi-
ness, he abated nothing of that air of superiority
with which he had treated Adrian, and frill re-
tained the sole direction of affairs. The Spaniards, Ximen r:
more averse, perhaps, than any other people, to retion of
the government of strangers, approved of all his affair,.
efforts to preserve his own authority. Even the
nobles, influenced by this national paflion, and
forgetting their jealousies and discontents, chore
rather to fee the supreme power in the hands of
one of their countrymen, whom they feared, than
in those of foreigners, whom they hated.

XIMENES, though engaged in such great ul;s fuccer.(
schemes of domestic policy, and embarrassed by Navarre.
the artifices and intrigues of the Flemish ministers,
had the burden of two foreign wars to support.
The one was in Navarre, which was invaded by
its unfortunate monarch, John d'Albret. The
death of Ferdinand, the absence of Charles, the
discord and difaffeation which reigned among the
Spanish nobles, seemed to present him with a
favourable opportunity of recovering his domi-
nions. Ihe cardinal's vigilance, however, le-
feated a measure so well concerted. As he fore-
saw the danger to which that kingdom might be
exloifcld, one of his first aEts of adminittration
was to order thither a confiderablc body of troops.
yWhile the king was employed with one part of

his

B oo0 K his army in the siege of St. Jean Pied en Port,

v - - Villalva, an officer of great experience and courage,
zi56r attacked the other by furprize, and cut it to pieces.

The king instantly retreated with precipitation,
and an end was put to the war ". But as Navarre
was filled at that time with towns and castes
slightly fortified, and weakly garrisoned, which
being unable to resist an enemy, served only to
furnish him with places of retreat; Ximenes, al-
ways bold and decisive in his measures, ordered
every one of there to be dismantled, except Pam-
peluna, the fortifications of which he proposed to
render very strong. To this uncommon precau-
tion Spain owes the poffelfion of Navarre. The
French, since that period, have often entered, and
have as often over-run the open country; while
they were exposed to all the inconveniencies at-
tending an invading army, the Spaniards have
easily drawn troops from the neighbouring pro-
vinces to oppose them; and the French having no
place of any strength to which they could retire,
have been obliged repeatedly to abandon their
conquest with as much rapidity as they gained it.

His opera- THE other war which he carried on in Africa,
Africas against the famous adventurer Horuc Barbarossa,
forcunatc. who, from a private corrair, raised himself by his

singular valour and address, to be king of Algiers
and Tunis, was far from being equally successful.
The ill conduct of the Spanish general, and the

x P. Mat. . 570. ra

rafl valour of his troops, presented Barbarossa B 0 0 K
with an easy viEtory. 1VMany perished in the '--
battle, more in the retreat, and-the remainder L516.
returned into Spain covered with infamy. The
magnanimity, however, with which the cardinal
bore this disgrace, the only one he experienced
during his administration, added new lufti-e to
his character Y. Great composure of temper un-
der a disappointment, was not expected from a
man so remarkable for the eagerntEs and impa-
tience with which he urged on the execution of
all his schemes.

THIS disaster was soon forgotten ; while the Corruptcn
conducf of the Flemish court proved the cause of ot;fhe-
constant uneasiness, not only to the cardinal, but ftlrs, par-

', , , '.~~~~~~~ ticularly of

to the whole Spanish nation. Alll the great chievres.
qualities of Chievres, the prime n ninifter and
favourite of the young king, were sullied with an
ignoble and fordid avarice. The ac cession of his
master to the crown of Spain, opened a new and
copious source for the gratification of this passion.
During the time of Charles's r efidence in
Slanders, the whole tribe of pretend ers to offices
or to favour resorted thither. They soon dif-
covered that, without the patronage D f Chievres,
it was vain to hope for preferment; nor did they
want sagacity to find out the proper method of
Kcuring his protection. Great fums; of money
were drawn out of Spain. Every thin: g was venal,

Y Gometius, lib. vi. p. 179.

and

B o< K his army in the siege of St. Jean Pied en Port,
;I_ ,- Villalva, an officer of great experience and courage,

z5i6. attacked the other by furprize, and cut it to pieces.

The king instantly retreated with precipitation,
and an end was put to the war ". But as Navarre
was filled at that time with towns and cafties
lightly fortified, and weakly garrisoned, which
being unable to resist an enemy, served only to
furnish him with places of retreat; Ximenes, al-
ways bold and decisive in his measures, ordered
every one of these to be dismantled, except Pam-
peluna, the fortifications of which he proposed to
render very strong. To this uncommon precau-
tion Spain owes the possession of Navarre. The
French, since that period, have often entered, and
have as often over-run the open country; while
they were exposed to all the inconveniencies at-
tending an invading army, the Spaniards have
easily drawn troops from the neighbouring pro-
vinces to oppose them; and the French having no
place of any strength to which they could retire,
have been obliged repeatedly to abandon their
conquest with as much rapidity as they gained it.

is opera- THE other war which he carried on in Africa,
Africa les against the famous adventurer Horuc Barbaroffi,
fortunate, who, from a private corlair, raised himself by his

singular valour and address, to be king of Algiers
and Tunis, was far from being equally successful.
The ill conduct of the Spanilh general, and the

x P. Mart. Ep. 570. ral

rash valour of his troops, presented Barbarossa B °0 K
with an easy vi6tory. lMany perified in the '--
battle, more in the retreatt, and-the remainder L516.
returned into Spain covered with infamy. The
magnanimity, however, with which the cardinal
bore this disgrace, the only one he experienced
during his administration, added new lufRre to
his characer Y. Great composure of temper un-
der a disappointment, was not expected from a
man so remarkable for the eagerness and impa-
tience with which he urged on the execution of
all his schemes.

THIS disaster was soon forgotten ; while the Corruption
conduct of the Flemish court proved the cause of ofthemFlV-
constant uneasiness, not only to the cardinal, but itrs, -ar
to the whole Spanish nation. Al!l the great Chievres.
qualities of Chievres, the prime nninifter and
favourite of the young king, were sullied with an
ignoble and fordid avarice. The ac cession of his
master to the crown of Spain, opened a new and
copious source for the gratification of this pafion.
During the time of Charles's r efidence in
Slanders, the whole tribe of pretend crs to offices
or to favour retorted thither. Tht y soon dif-
Covered that, without the patronage iof Chievres,
it was vain to hope for preferment; nor did they
want sagacity to find out the proper method of
securing his protection. Great fiumns of money
were drawn out of Spain. Every tliin: was venal,

Y Gomerius, lib. vi. p. 179.

and

B OO0 K and disposed of to the highest bidder. After the

Y- _ example of Chievres, the inferior Flemish mini-
x516. fters engaged in this traffic, which became as

general and avowed, as it was infamousZ. The
Spaniards were filled with rage when they beheld
offices of great importance to the welfare of their
country, set to sale by strangers, unconcerned for
its honour or its happiness. Ximenes, disinterested
in his whole administration, and a firanger, from
his native grandeur of mind, to the passion of
avarice, inveighed with the utmost boldness
against the venality of the Flemings. He repre-
sented to the cking, in strong terms, the murmurs
and indignation which their behaviour excited
among a free and high-fpirited people, and be-
fought him to set out without loss of time for
Spain, that, by his presence, he might diflipate
the clouds which were gathering all over the
kingdom

Charle.per- CHARLES was fully sensible that he had de-
fuaded by

menes, ro layed too loi3g to take pofTeffion of his dominions
vis Spain. in Spain. Powerful obstacles, however, flood

in his way, and detained him in the Low-Coun-
tries. The war which the league of Cambray
had kindekS in Italy, frill fubrifted; though
during its c:ourse, the armies of all the parties
engaged in it had changed their deffination and
their objedri. France was now in alliance with
Venice, which it had at first combined to destroy.
: Miniana, Contin. . i. c. z. a p. Mart. Ep. 576.

Maximilian

Maximilian and Ferdinand had for some years B 00 K
carried on hostilities against France, their ori- I.
ginal ally, to the valour of whose troops the confede- x5s6.
racy had been indebted in a great measure for - its
ficcefs. Together with his kingdoms, Ferdinand
transmitted this war to his grandson; and there was
reason to expect that Maximilian, always fond of
new enterprizes, would persuade the young mo-
narch to enter into it with ardour. But the Fle-
mings, who had long possessed an extensive com-
merce, which, during the league of Cambray,
had grown to a great height upon the ruins of
the Venetian trade, dreaded a rupture with
France; and Chievres, sagacious to discern the
true interest of his country, and not warped on
this occasion by his love of wealth, warmly de-
clared for maintaining peace with the French
nation. Francis I. destitute of allies, and soli-
citous to secure his late conquests in Italy by a
treaty, listened with joy to the first overtures of
accommodation. Chievres himself conducted the
negociation in the name of Charles, Gouffier ap-
peared as plenipotentiary for Francis. Each of
them had presided over the education of the prince
whom he represented. They had both adopted
the fame pacific system; and were equally per-
fuaded that the union of the two monarchs was
the happiest event for themselves, as well as for
their kingdoms. In such hands the negoci.ition
did not languifl. A few days after opening their Apeacecon-
conferences at Noyon, they concluded a treaty of c"'`'illl
confederacy and mutual defence between the two Aug.- 3,

VOL. 11. E monarchs; 1

B oo K monarchs; the chief articles in which were, that

J- Francis Ihould give in marriage to Charles his
5'6- eldest daughter, the princess Louise, an infant of

a year old, and as her dowry, should make over
to him all his claims and pretensions upon the
kingdom of Naples; that, in consideration of
Charles's being already in poffeffioh of Naples, he
should, until the accomplishment of the marriage,
pay an hundred thousand crowns a year to the
French king; and the half of that fum annually,
as long as the princess had no childreni that
when Charles shall arrive in Spain, the heirs of
the king of Navarre may represent to himtheir
right to that kingdom; and if, after examining
their claim, he does not give them fatisfastion,
Francis shall be at liberty to assist them with all
his forces b This alliance not only united Charles
and Francis, but obliged Maximilian, whq was
unable alone to cope with the French and Vene-
tians, to enter into a treaty with those pqwers,
which put a final period to the bloody and tedious
war that the league of Cambray had occasioned.
Europe enjoyed a few years of universal tranquil-
lity, and was indebted for that blessing to two
princes, whore rivalfhip and ambition kept itin
perpetual discord and agitation during the re-
mainder of their reigns.

The Fle- BY the treaty of Noyon, Charles secured a fae
to Ch^,",rc passage into Spain. It was not, however, the
visit to
Spai . .

Leonard Rcueil dcs Traitez, tom. ii. 69,

isitercit

interest of his Flemish ministers, that he should B o0 o K
visit that kingdom soon. While he resided in A--
Slanders, the revenues of the Spanilh crown were ''56'
spent there, and they engrossed, without any
competitors, all the effees of their monarch's
generosity; their country became the feat of
government, and all favours were dispensed by
them. Of all these advantages they run the
rifque of feeing themselves deprived, from the
moment that their sovereign entered Spain. The
Spaniards would naturally assume the dire&tion
of their own affairs; the Low-Countries would
be confidered only as a province of that mighty
monarchy; and they who now distributed the
favours of the prince to others, muif then be
content to receive them from the hands of
itrangers. But what Chievres chiefly wished to Afrad of
avoid was, an interview between the king and men
Ximenes. On the one hand, the wisdom, the
integrity, and the magnanimity of that prelate,
gave him a wonderful ascendant over the minds
of men; and it was extremely probable, that
these great qualities, added to the reverence due
to his age and office, would command the refpet
of a young prince, who, capable of noble and
generous sentiments himself, would, in propor-
tion to his admiration of the cardinal's virtues,
lessen his deference towards persons of another
character. Or, on the other hand, if Charles
flould allow his Flemilih favourites to retain all
the influence over his councils which they at

E a prcfent

B O0O K present poffeied, it was easy to foresee that the
s.- -j cardinal would remonstrate loudly against fuchan
x516. indignity to the Spanish nation, and vindicate the

rights of his country with the fame intrepidity
and Iuccefs, with which he had asserted the prero-
gatives of the crown. For these reasons, all his
Flemish counsellors combined to retard his de-
parture; and Charles, unfufpicious, from want
of experience, and fond of his native country,
suffered himself to be unnecessarily detained in
the Netherlands a whole year after signing the
treaty of Noyon.

Chlel7:en. THE repeated entreaties of Ximenes, the ad-
Charles ,oc
barks lor vice of his grandfather Maximilian, and the im-
Spain. patient murmurs of his Spanilh fubjets, prevail-

ed on him at last to embark. He was attended
not only by Chievres, his prime minister, but by
a numerous and splendid train of the Flemilh
nobles, fond of beholding the grandeur, or of
Sept. 13. sharing in the bounty of their prince. After a

dangerous voyage, he landed at Villa Viciofa, in
the province of Asturias, and was received with
such loud acclamations of joy, as a new monarch,
whose arrival was so ardently desired, had reason
to expet. The Spanlih nobility resorted to their
sovereign from all parts of the kingdom, and dif-
played a magnificence which the Flemings were
unable to emulate'.

' P. Mart. Ep. 599. 6oz.

XIMENES,

XIMENES, who confidered the pretence of the B O o K
king as the greatest blessing to his dominions, -
was advancing towards the coast, as fast as the Hii7.mi
infirm state of his health would permic, in order mirfleri,

cende, yvour

to receive him. During his regency, and not- toprevent
withstanding his extreme old age, he had abated, aifecw th
in no degree, the rigour or frequency of his Ximene'.
mortifications; and to these he added such labo-
rious assiduity in business, as would have worn
out the most youthful and vigorous constitution.
Every day he employed several hours in devo-
tion; he celebrated mars in person ; he even
allotted some space for study. Notwithstanding
these occupations, he regularly attended the coun-
cil; he received and read all papers presented to
him; he ditated letters and inftruAions; and
took under his inspection all business, civil, ec-
clefiaftical, or military. Every moment of his
time was filled up with some serious employment.
The only amusement in which he indulged him-
self, by way of relaxation after business, was to
canvass, with a few friars and other divines, some
intricate article in scholastic theology. Wafted
by such a course of life, the infirmities of age
daily grew upon him. On his journey, a violent
disorder seized him at Bos Equillos, attended
with uncommon symptoms; which his followers
confidered as the effect of poison d, but could not
agree whether the crime ought to be imputed to
the hatred of the Spanilh nobles, or to the malice

d Miniana, Contin. lib. i. c. 3.

E 3 of

B o 0OK of the Flemish courtiers. This accident obliging

--- _j him to tfop ihort, he wrote to Charles, and with

Charls7. his usual boldness advised him to dismiss all the
ingratitude itrangers in his train, whose numbers and credit

gave offence already to the Spaniards, and would
ere long alienate the affections of the whole
people. At the fame time he earnestly desired to
have an interview with the king, that he might
inform him of the Rfate of the nation, and the
temper of his subjeCts. To prevent this, not
only the Flemings, but the Spanish grandees,
employed all their address, and industriously kept
Charles at a distance from Aranda, the place to
which the cardinal had removed. Through their
suggestions, every measure that he recommended
was rejected; the utmost care was taken to make
him feel, and to point out to the whole nation,
that his power was on the decline; even in things
purely trivial, such a choice was always made, as
was deemed most disagreeable to him. Ximenes
did not bear this treatment with his usual forti-
tude of spirit. Conscious of his own integrity
and merit, he expe&ed a more grateful return
from a prince to whom he delivered a kingdom
more flourishing than it had been in any former
age, together with authority more extenrive and
better established, than the most illustrious of his
ancestors had ever possessed. He could not,
therefore, on many occasions, refrain from giving
vent to his indignation and complaints. W la-
mented the fate of his country, and foretold the
calamities which it would susser from the in

folence,

folence, the rapaciousness, and ignorance of B 0 0 K
strangers. While his mind was agitated by these
parions, he received a letter from the king, in ,5s7'
which, after a few cold and formal expressions of
regard, he was allowed to retire to his diocese;
that after a life of such continued labour, he
might end his days in tranquillity. This message His death.
proved fatal to Ximenes. His haughty mind, it
is probable, could not survive disgrace; perhaps
his generous heart could not bear the profpet
of the misfortunes ready to fall on his country.
Whichsoever of these opinions we embrace, cer-
tain it is that he expired a few hours after read- Nov. g.
ing the lettere. The variety, the grandeur, and
the success of his schemes, during a regency of
only twenty months, leave it- doubtful, whether
his sagacity in council, his prudence in condu&t,
or his boldness in execution, deserve the greatest
praise. His reputation is fill high in Spain,
not only for wisdom, but for fanaity; and he is
the only prime minister mentioned in history,
whom his contemporaries reverenced as a faints,
and to whom the people under his government
ascribed the power of working miracles.

SOON after the death of Ximenes, Charles made ,S,1.

his public entry, with great pomp, into Valla. c.vtllhdo.d
dolid, whither he had summoned the Cortes of lid.
Castile. Though he assumed on all occasions

' Marfollier, Vie de Ximenes, p. 447. Gomerius, lib. vii.
p. 2C6, &c. Baudicr, Ilift. de Ximen. p. 208.

Flechier, Vie de Ximen. ii. p. 746.

E 4 the

B °o0 the name of king, that title had never been
I--__- acknowledged in the Cortes. The Spaniards

Z51S' confidering Joanna as possessed of the sole right

to the crown, and no example of a son's having
enjoyed the title of king during the life of his
parents occurring in their history, the Cortes
discovered all that scrupulous refpe& for ancient
forms, and that aversion to innovation, which
are conspicuous in popular assemblies. The pre-
fence, however, of their prince, the address, the
artifices, and the threats of his miniflers, pre-

Dclate vailed on them at last to proclaim him king, in
king. conjunftion with his mother, whose name they

appointed to be placed before that of her son in
all public aads But, when they made this con-
cession, they declared, that if, at any future
period, Joanna ihould recover the exercise of rea-
son, the whole royal authority should return into
her hands. At the fame time, they voted a free
gift of fix hundred thousand ducats to be paid in
three years, a fum more considerable than had
ever been granted to any former monarch g.

Discontent NOTWITHSTANDING this obsequiousness of the
of I he Cafli-
ian,, and Cortes to the will of the king, the most violent
trea""" symptoms of diffatisfation with his government

began to break out in the kingdom. Chievres
had acquired over the mind of the young mo-
narch the ascendant not only of a tutor, but of a

g Miniana, Contin, lib. i. c. 3. P. Mart. Ep. 608.
Sandov. p. Iz,

parent.

parent. Charles seemed to have no sentiments B O o K
but those which his minister inspired, and scarcely -
uttered a word but what he put into his mouth. *'8'
He was conflantly surrounded by Flemings; no
person got access to him without their permission;
nor was any admitted to audience but in their
presence. As he spoke the Spanish language
very imperfe&Ely, his answers were always ex-
tremely fhorr, and often delivered with hefita-
tion. From all these circumstances, many of the
Spaniards were lead to believe that he was a prince
of a flow and narrow genius. Some pretended to
discover a firong resemblance between him and
his mother, and began to whisper that his capa-
city for government would. never be far superior
to hers; and though they who had the bet oppor-
tunity of judging concerning his character, main-
tained, that notwithstanding such unpromising
appearances, he possessed a large fund of know-
ledge, as well as of sagacity h yet all agreed
in condemning his partiality towards the Fle-
mings, and his attachment to his favourites, as
unreasonable and immoderate. Unfortunately for
Charles, there favourites were unworthy of his
confidence. To amass wealth seems to have been
their only aim; and as they had reason to fear,
that either their makler's good sense, or the in-
dignation of the Spaniards, might soon abridge
their power, they hastened to improve the present
O°portunity, and their avarice was the more ra-

h Sandoval, p. . P. Mart. Ep. 655.

pacious,

B o o K pacious, because they expected their authority to

I_ be of no long duration. All honours, offices,
1518. and benefices, were either engrossed by the Fle.

mings, or publicly fold by them. Chievres, his
wife, and Sauvage, whom Charles, on the death of
Ximenes, had imprudently raised to be chan-
cellor of Castile, vied with each other in all
the refinements of extortion and venality. Not
only the Spanibh 'historians, who, from resent.
ment, may be fufpe&ed of exaggeration, but
Peter Martyr Angleria, an Italian, who relided
at that time in the court of Spain, and who was
under no temptation to deceive the persons to
whom his letters are addressed, give a description
which is almost incredible, of the insatiable and
lhamelefs covetousness of the Flemings. Ac-
cording to Angleria's calculation, which he asserts
to be extremely moderate, they remitted into the
Low-Countries, in the space of ten months, no
less a fum than a million and one hundred thou-
sand ducats. The nomination of William de
Croy, Chievres' nephew, a young man not of
canonical age, to the archbishopric of Toledo,
exasperated the Spaniards more than all there
exa6tions. They confidered the elevation of a
.tranger to the head of their church, and to the
richest benefice in the kingdom, not only as an in-
jury, but as an insult to the whole nation; both
clergy and laity, the former from interest, the latter
from indignation, joined in exclaiming againfR it'.

Sandoval, 28-31. P. Mart. Ep. 608. 611. 613, 614.
622, 623. 639. Miniana, Contin. lib. i. c. 3. p. 8

CHARLES

CHARLES leaving Castile thus disgusted with his B 0O0 K
administration, set out for Saragossa, the capital --
of Aragon, that he might be present in the Cortes Chbries
of that kingdom. On his way thither, he took Cod'b,,t,
leave of his brother Ferdinand, whom he lent Aragon.
into Germany on the pretence of visiting their
grandfather, Maximilian, in his old age. To this
prudent precaution, Charles owed the preferv-
ation of his Spanish dominions. During the vio-
lent commotions which arose there soon after this
period, the Spaniards would infallibly have offered
the crown to a prince, who was the darling of the
whole nation; nor did Ferdinand want. ambition,
or counsellors, that might have prompted him to
accept of the offer k.
THE Aragonefe had not hitherto acknowledged Thfe Arag.

· nefe more
Charles as king, nor would they allow the Cortes untratable

than the,

to be assembled in his name, but in that of the Castilians.
Juftiza, to whom, during an inter-regnum, this
privilege belonged'. The opposition Charles
had to struggle with in the Cortes of Aragon,
was more violent and obitinate than that which
he had overcome in Catile; after long delays,
however, and with much difficulty, he persuaded
the members to confer on him the title of king,
in conjunction with his mother. At the fame
time he bound himself by that solemn oath, which
the Aragonefe exacted of their kings; never

t P. Martyr, Ep. 619. Ferreras, viii. 460.
P. Martyr, Ep. 605.

7 to

B O00 K to violate any of their rights or liberties. When

a donative was demanded, the members were still
1518. more intractable; many months elapsed before

they would agree to grant Charles two hundred
thousand ducats, and that furn they appropriated
so ftriftly for paying debts of the crown, which
had long been forgotten, that a very small part
of it came into the king's hands. What had hap.
pened in Caftiie taught them caution, and deter-
mined them rather to satisfy the claims of their
fellow-citizens, how obsolete soever, than to fur.
nifh firangers the means of enriching themselves
with the spoils of their country m

DURING there proceedings ,of the Cortes, am-

baffadors arrived at Saragossa from Francis I.
and the young king of Navarre, demanding the
restitution of that kingdom in terms of the treaty
of Noyon. But neither Charles, nor the Cafti-
lian nobles whom he consulted on this occasion,
discovered any inclination to part with this acqui-
fition. A conference held soon after at Montpe-
lier, in order to bring this matter to an amicable
issue, was altogether fruitless; while the French
urged the injustice of the usurpation, the Spaniards
were attentive only to its importance ".
»s59. FROM Aragon Charles proceeded to Catalonia,

where he waited as much time, encountered more

P. Martyr, Ep. 615 -634.
P. Martyr, Ep. 605. 633. 640.

difficulties,

difficulties, and gained less money. The Fle- B--OJ K
mings were now become so odious in every pro- I--
vince of Spain by their exactions, that the desire 's59'
of mortifying them, and of disappointing their
avarice, augmented the jealousy with which a free
people usually conduct their deliberations.

THE Castilians, who had felt most sensibly the Cobina-
weight and rigour of the oppressive schemes caftiliana

against the

carried on by the Flemings, resolved no longer Flemnifmin
to submit with a tameness fatal to themselves, ni"'as.
and which rendered them the objects of scorn
to their fellow-fubjeEts in the other kingdoms, of
which the Spaniff monarchy was composed. Sego-
via, Toledo, Seville, and several other cities of the
first rank, entered into a confederacy- for the defence
of their rights and privileges; and notwithftand-
ing the silence of the nobility, who, on this
occasion, discovered neither the public spirit,
nor the resolution, which became their order, the
confederates laid before the king a full view of
the state of the kingdom, and of the mal-admi-
niftration of his favourites. The preferment of
strangers, the exportation of the current coin,
the increase of taxes, were the grievances of
which they chiefly complained; and of these
they demanded redress with that boldness which
is natural to a free people. There rcmonftrances,
presented at first at Saragoifa, and renewed after-
wards at Barcelona, Charles treated with great
"eglect. The confederacy, however, of these
cities, at this junture, was the beginning of that

I famous

Boo o d famous union among the commons of Callile
L.--- which not long after threw the kingdom into

5''9- such violent convulsions as shook the throne, and

atmoft overturned the constitution .

Deathofthe SOON after Charles's arrival at Barcelona, he
emperor
Mapxmir received the account of an event which interested
Jia.ry him rmuch more than the murmurs of the Cafti.

lians, or the scruples of the Cortes of Catalonia;
This was the death of the emperor Maximilian;
an occurrence of small importance in itself, for
he was a prince conspicuous neither for his vir.
tues, nor his power, nor his abilities; but ren-
dered by its consequences more memorable than
any that had happened during several ages. It
broke that profound and universal peace which
then reigned in the Christian world; it excited
a rivalftip between two princes, which threw all
Europe into agitation, and kindled wars more
general, and of longer duration, than had hitherto
been known in modern times.

T:EE revolutions occasioned by the expedition

of the French king, Charles VIII. into Italy, had
inspired the European princes with new ideas
concerning the importance of the Imperial dig-
nity. The claims of the empire upon some of
the Italian itates were numerous; its jurifdidion
over others was extensive; and though the for-
mer had been almost abandoned, and the latter
seldom exercised, under princes of slender abi-

° P. Martyr, Ep. 630. Ferreras, viii. 464.

Jities

ties and of little influence, it was obvious, that Bo 0O K
in the hands of an emperor possessed of power or -
of genius, they might be employed as engines for X519'
retching his dominion over the greater part
of that country. Even Maximilian, feeble and
unfeady as his conduct always was, had availed
imfelf of the infinite pretensions of the empire,
and had reaped advantage from every War and
every negociation in Italy during his reign. These
considerations, added to the dignity of the station,
confessedly the first among Christian princes, and.
to the rights inherent in the office, which, if ex-
erted with vigour, were far from being inconfi-
derable, rendered the Imperial crown more than
ever an obje& of ambition.

NOT long before his death, Maximilian had Maximilian
discovered great solicitude to preserve this dig- voured to

secure the

nity in the Austrian family, and to procure the I^mperita
king of Spain to be chosen his successor. But crwn"to hi

grandfor,

lie himself having never been crowned by the
pope, a ceremony deemed essential in that age,
was confidered only as emperor eleft. Though
hitorians have not attended to that diftinaion,
neither the Italian nor German chancery bestowed
any other title upon him than that of king of
the Romans; and no example occurring in his-
tory of any person's being chosen a successor to
a king of the Romans, the Germans, always
tenacious of their forms, and unwilling to confer
upon Charles an office for which their conftitu-

tion

B oI oK tion knew no name, obstinately refused to gratis
vh-e- Maximilian in that point P.

I519.

Charles and BY his death, this difficulty was at once re.
Francis h.
competitors moved, and Charles openly aspired to that dig.
forethe m- nity which his grandfather had attempted, with.

out success, to secure for him. At the fame
time, Francis I. a powerful rival, entered the
lifts against him; and the attention of all Europe
was fixed upon this competition, no less illuftri.
ous from the high rank of the candidates, than
from the importance of the prize for which they
contended. Each of them urged his pretensions
with sanguine expectations, and with no unpro-

ndt'fops mifing prospect of success. Charles confidered
of Charls,. the Imperial crown as belonging to him of right,

from its long continuance in the Austrian line;
he knew that none of the German princes pof-
fefled power or influence enough to appear as his
antagonist; he flattered himself, that no confi-
deration would induce the natives of Germany
to exalt any foreign prince to a dignity, which
during so many ages had been deemed peculiar
to their own nation ; and least of all, that they
would confer this honour upon Francis I. the
sovereign of a people whole genius, and laws,
and manners, differed so widely from those of

P Guicciardini, lib. xiii. p. 15. L-if. Gencr. d'Allemagne,

par P. Barre, tom. viii. part i. p. o087. P. Ieuter. Rler
Auftr. lib. vii. c. 17. 179. lib. viii. c. 2. p. 183.

the

the Germans, that it was hardly possible to efta- B 0C 0 K
blifh any cordial union between them; he trusted -_
not a little to the effect of Maximilian's negocia- 15'9'
*.ons, which, though they did not attain their
end, had prepared the minds of the Germans for
his elevation to the Imperial .throne ; but what
he relied on as a chief recommendation, was the
fortunate situation of his hereditary dominions in
Germany, which served as a natural barrier
tothe empire against the encroachments of the
Turkish power. The conquests, the abilities,
and the ambition of Sultan Selim II. had spread
over Europe, at that time, a general and well-
founded alarm. By his victories over the Ma-
malukes, and the extirpation of that gallant body
of men, he had not only added Egypt and Syria
to his empire, but had secured to it such a degree
of internal tranquillity, that he was ready to turn
against Christendom the whole force of his arms,
which nothing hitherto had been able to refill.
The most effectual expedient for stopping the
progress of this torrent, seemed to be the election
of an emperor, poITeffed of extensive territories
in that country, where its firlft impreflion would
be felt, and who, betides, could combat this
formidable enemy with all the forces of a power-
ful monarchy, and with all the wealth furnished
by the mines of the new world, or the commerce
of the Low-Countries. These were the argu-
ments by which Charles publicly supported his
claim; and to men of integrity and reflection,
they appeared to be not only plausible but con-

VOL. II. ;1 vincing.

B o1o K tion knew no name, obflinately refused to gratify

_-- --' Maximilian in that point P.

1519.

Charles and BY his death, this difficulty was at once re.
Francis 1.
competitors moved, and Charles openly aspired to that dig.
pirtem- nity which his grandfather had attempted, with.

out success, to secure for him. At the fame
time, Francis I. a powerful rival, entered the
lifts against him; and the attention of all Europe
was fixed upon this competition, no less illuftri.
ous from the high rank of the candidates, than
from the importance of the prize for which they
contended. Each of them urged his pretensions
with sanguine expectations, and with no unpro-

Pretensions
and hopes mifing profpe6t of success. Charles confidered
of Charles. the Imperial crown as belonging to him of right,

from its long continuance in the Austrian line;
he knew that none of the German princes pof-
sessed power or influence enough to appear as his
antagonist; he flattered himself, that no confi-
deration would induce the natives of Germany
to exalt any foreign prince to a dignity, which
during so many ages had been deemed peculiar
to their own nation; and least of all, that they
would confer this honour upon Francis I. the
sovereign of a people whose genius, and laws,
and manners, differed so widely from those of

P Guicciardini, lib. xiii. p. 15. FHil. Gencr. d'Allenagne,

par P. Barre, tom. viii. part i. p. 1087. P. Hcutcr. Ker.
AuRr. lib. vii. c. 17. 179. lib. viii. c. z. p. 183.

the

the Germans, that it was hardly possible to efta- B 0 0 K
blifh any cordial union between them; he trusted
not a little to the effec of Maximilian's negocia- 5 '9'
tions, which, though they did not attain their
end, had prepared the minds of the Germans for
his elevation to the Imperial.throne; but what
he relied on as a chief recommendation, was the
fortunate Situation of his hereditary dominions in
Germany, which served as a natural barrier
tothe empire against the encroachments of the
Turkish power. The conquests, the abilities,
and the ambition of Sultan Selim II. had spread
over Europe, at that time, a general and well-
founded alarm. By his victories over the Ma-
malukes, and the extirpation of that gallant body
of men, he had not only added Egypt and Syria
to his empire, but had secured to it such a degree
of internal tranquillity, that he was ready to turn
against Chriflendom the whole force of his arms,
which nothing hitherto had been able to resist.
The most effectual expedient for flopping the
progress of this torrent, seemed to be the elecion
of an emperor, poeTffed of extensive territories
in that country, where its first impression would
be felt, and who, besides, could combat this
formidable enemy with all the forces of a power-
fll monarchy, and with all the wealth furnished
by the mines of the new world, or the commerce
of the Low-Countries. These were the argu-
ments by which Charles publicly supported his
claim; and to men of integrity and reflection,
they appeared to be not only plausible but con-

VOL. II. vincing.

B 0 0 K vincing. He did not, however, trust the fuc-
._ v- cess of his cause to these alone. Great fums of
1519. money were remitted from Spain; all the refine-

ments and artifice of negociation were employed;
and a considerable body of troops, kept on foot,
at that time, by the itates of the Circle of Suabia,
was secretly taken into his pay. The venal were
gained by presents; the objetions of the more
'crupulous were answered or eluded; some feeble
princes were threatened and over-awed q.
Of France. ON the other hand, Francis supported his

claim with equal eagerness, and no less confidence
of its being well founded. His emissaries con-
tended that it was now high time to convince the
princes of the house of Austria that the Imperial
crown was elective, and not hereditary; that other
persons might aspire to an honour which their ar-
rogance had accustomed them to regard as the
property of their family; that it required a fove-
reign of mature judgment, and of approved abili-
ties, to hold the reins of government in a country
where such unknown opinions concerning reli-
gion had been published, as had thrown the minds
of men into an uncommon agitation, which
threatened the most violent effects; that a young
prince, without experience, and who had hither-
to given no specimens of his genius for command,
was no fit match for Selim, a monarch grown

i Guicc. lib. 13. 159. Sleidan, Hid. of the Reformat. 4.
Struvii Corp. Hill. German. ii. 971. Not. 20.

old

old in the art of war, and in the course of vietory; B 00 K
whereas a king, who in his early youth had A.
triumphed over the valour and discipline of the 1'59'
Swiss, till then reckoned invincible, would be an
antagonist not unworthy the Conqueror of the
Eafi; that the fire and impetuosity of the French
cavalry, added to the discipline and liability of
the German infantry, would form an army so
irrefiflible, that, instead of waiting the approach
of the Ottoman forces, it might carry hostilities
into the heart of their dominions; that the elec-
tion of Charles would be inconffifent with a fun-
damental conflitution, by which the person who
holds the crown of Naples, is excluded from
aspiring to the Imperial dignity; that his eleva-
tion to that honour would soon kindle a war in
Italy, on account of his pretensions to the dutchy
of Milan, the effecs of which could not fail of
reaching the empire, and might prove fatal to itr.
But while the French ambassadors enlarged upon
these and other topics of the fame kind, in all
the courts of Germany, Francis, sensible of the
prejudices entertained against him as a foreigner,
unacquainted with the German language or man-
ners, endeavoured to overcome there, and to
gain the favour of the princes by immense gifts,
and by infinite promises. As the expeditious
method of transmitting money, and the decent
mode of conveying a bribe, by bills of exchange,

r Guicc. lib. r3. 16o. Sleid. p. 16. Geor. Sbbini de Elet.
Car.V. I-lilloria apud Scardii Script. Rer. German. vol. ii. p. 4.

F 2 were

B 0 o K were then little known, the French ambassadors

..% - travelled with a train of horses loaded with trea-
'519. sure, an equipage not very honourable for that

prince by whom they were employed, and in.
famous for those to whom they were sent'.

Views and THE other European princes could not remain
interest of
otheri ates. indifferent fpeatators of a contest, the decifionof

which so nearly affe&ed every one of them. Their
common interest ought naturally to have formed a
general combination, in order to disappoint both
competitors, and to prevent either of them from
obtaining such a pre-eminence in power and
dignity, as might prove dangerous to the'liberties
of Europe. But the ideas with respect to a proper
distribution and balance of power were so lately
introduced into the system of European policy,
that they were not hitherto obje&s of sufficient
attention. The passions of some princes, the
want of foresight in others, and the fear of giving
offence to the candidates, hindered such a falu-
tary union of the powers of Europe, and ren-
dered them either totally negligent of the public
safety, or kept them from exerting themselves
with vigour in its behalf.

Of the THE Swiss Cantons, though they dreaded the
Swjii. elevation of either of the contending monarchs,

and though they wifled to have seen tome prince
whose dominions were less extensive, and whose

' Mcmoires de Marcch. de Fleuranges, p. z96.

power

power was more moderate, feated on the Im- B O 0 K
perial throne, were prompted, however, by their A _
hatred of the French nation, to give an open i5'9.
preference to the pretensions of Charles, while
they used their utmost influence to frustrate those
of Francis'.

THE Venetians easily discerned, that it was the of the Ve-

interest of their republic to have both the rivals neins
set aside; but their jealousy of the house of Au-
itria, whose ambition and neighbourhood had
been fatal to their grandeur, would not permit
them to at up to their own ideas, and led them
hastily to give the sanCtion of their approbation
to the claim of the French king.
IT was equally the interest, and more in the of Henry

VIII.

power of Henry VIII. of England, to prevent
either Francis or Charles from acquiring a dig-
nity which would raise them so far above other
monarchs. But though Henry often boasted,
that he held the balance of Europe in his hand,
he had neither the steady attention, the accurate
discernment, nor the dispassionate temper which
that delicate function required. On this occasion
it mortified his vanity so much, to think that he
had not entered early into that noble competition
which reflected such honour upon the two anta-
gonifts, that he took a resolution of fending an am-
baflador into Germany, and of declaring himself a

Sabinus, p. 6.

F 3 candidate

B O o K candidate for the Imperial throne. The am.

I. ,---' baffador, though loaded with caresses by the Ger-
5s'9. man princes and the pope's nuncio, informed his

master, that he could hope for no success in
a claim which he had been so late in preferring.
Henry, imputing his disappointment to that cir-
cumftance alone, and soothed with this oftenta-
tious display of his own importance, seems to have
taken no farther part in the matter, either by
contributing to thwart both his rivals, or to pro-
mote one of them u.
Of Leo X. LEO X. a pontiff no less renowned for his po-

litical abilities, than for his love of the arts, was
the only prince of the age who observed the mo-
tions of the two contending monarchs with a
prudent attention, or who discovered a proper
solicitude for the public fafery. The Imperial
and papal jurisdiction interfered in so many in-
fiances, the complaints of usurpation were so
numerous on both fides, and the territories of the
church owed their security so little to their own
force, and so much to the weakness of thepowers
around them, that nothing was so formidable to
the court of Rome as an emperor with exten-
five dominions, or of enterprizing genius. Leo
trembled at the profpec of beholding the Im-
perial crown placed on the head of the king of
Spain and of Naples, and the master of the new

Memoires de Fleuranges, 314. Herbert, Hi-i., of
Henry V111.

world ,

world; nor was he less afraid of feeing a king of B o o K
France, who was duke of Milan and lord of _
Genoa, exalted to that dignity. He foretold '5'9.
that the eleaion of either of them would be fatal
to the independence of the holy fee, to the peace
of Italy, and perhaps to the liberties of Europe.
But to oppose them with any profpet of success,
required address and caution in proportion to the
greatness of their power, and their opportunities
of taking revenge. Leo was defective in neither.
He secretly exhorted the German princes to place
one of their own number on the Imperial throne,
which many of them were capable of filling with
honour. He put them in mind of the conftitu-
tion by which the kings of Naples were for ever
excluded from that dignity a. He warmly ex-
horted the French king to persist in his claim,
not from any desire that he ihould gain his end,
but as he foresaw that the Germans would be
more disposed to favour the king of Spain, he
hoped that Francis himself, when he discovered
his own chance of success to be desperate, would
be stimulated by resentment and the spirit of
rivalfhip, to concur with all his interest in raising
some third person to the head of the empire; or,
on the other hand, if Francis fllould make an
unexpected progress, he did not doubt but that
Charles would be induced by similar motives to
at the fame part; and thus, by a prudent atten-

Goldalti Confitutioncs Imperiales. Francof. 1673.
v01, i, 439.

F 4 tion,

B- 0 K tion, the mutual jealousy of the two rivals might

I.
L-_ - ' be so dexreroufly managed, as to disappoint both.

35l9' But this scheme, the only one which a prince

in Leo's situation could adopt, though con.
certed with great wisdom, was executed with
little discretion. The French ambassadors in
Germany fed their master with vain hopes; the
pope's nuncio, being gained by them, altogether
forgot the inftruEtions which he had received;
and Francis persevered so long and with such
obstinacy in urging his own pretensions, as ren-
dered all Leo's measures abortive x.

The diet SUCH were the hopes of the candidates, and
assembles,
Jalen th. the views of the different princes, when the diet

was opened according to form at Frankfort. The
right of chufing an emperor had long been vested
in seven great princes, distinguished by the name
of Electors, the origin of whose office, as well.as
the nature and extent of their powers, have al-
ready been explained. These were, at that time,
Albert of Brandenburgh, archbishop of Mentz;
Herman count de Wied, archbishop of Cologne;
Richard de Greiffenklau, archbishop of Triers;
Lewis, king of Bohemia; Lewis, count palatine
of the Rhine; Frederic, duke of Saxony; and

Vi;ewofthe Joachim I. marquis of Brandenburgh. Not.
Eicor*. withstanding the artful arguments produced by

the ambassadors of the two kings in favour of their
refpeeive matters, and in spite of all their soli-
citations, intrigues, and presents, the eledorsdid

y Guicciar. lib. 13. 161. not

not forget that maxim on which the liberty of u oo K
the German constitution was thought to be founded.
Among the members of the Germanic body, which is519
is a great republic composed of states almost in-
dependent, the first principle of patriotism is to
depress and limit the power of the Emperor; and
of this idea, so natural under such a form of go-
vernment, a German politician seldom loses fight.
No prince of considerable power, or extensive
dominions, had for some ages been raised to the
Imperial throne. To this prudent precaution
many of the great families in Germany owed
the splendour and independence which they had
acquired during that period. To eleat either
of the contending monarchs, would have been
a gross violation of that salutary maxim, would
have given to the empire a master, inftead--of
an head; and would have reduced themselves
from the rank of being almost his equals, to the
condition of his fubjeas.

FULL of these ideas, all the elec-ors turned their offer the
eyes towards Frederic, duke of Saxony, a prince ,oPeniat
of such eminent virtue and abilities, as to be Fredericof
distinguished by the name of the Sage, and with Saxony,
one voice they offered him the Imperial crown.
He was not dazzled with that object, which
monarchs, to far superior to him in power, courted
with such eagerness; and after deliberating upon
the matter a ihort time, he rejected it with a whorejcal
magnanimity and disinterestedness no less singular it'
than admirable. , Nothing," he observed, " could

2 be

B o O K be more impolitic, than an obstinate adherence

to a maxim which, though found and just in many
'5:9. cafes, was not applicable to all. In times of tran.

quillity, said he, we wish for an emperor who has
not power to invade our liberties; times of danger
demand one who is able to secure our safety.
The Turkish armies, led by a gallant and vic-
torious monarch, are now affernbling. They are
ready to pour in upon Germany with a violence
unknown in former ages. New conjunctures call
for new expedients. The Imperial sceptre muds
be committed to some hand more powerful
than mine, or that of any other German prince.
We possess neither dominions, nor revenues, nor
authority, which enable us to encounter such
a formidable enemy. Recourse muff be had in
this exigency to one of the rival monarchs. Each
of them can bring into the field forces sufficient
for our defence. But as the king of Spain is
of German extraction; as he is a member and
prince of the empire by the territories which
descend to him from his grandfather; as his
dominions firetch along that frontier which lies
moist exposed to the enemy; his claim is pre-
ferable, in my opinion, to that of a firanger to
our language, to our blood, and to ourI country;
and therefore I give my vote to confer on him
the Imperial crown."

THis opinion, dicated by ilch uncommon

generosity, and iipported by arguments so plai-
fible, made a deep impreflion on the elec0rs.

leJ.
!

The king of Spain's ambassadors, sensible of the B o O K
important service which Frederic had done their,
master, sent him a considerable fum of money, 1t5'9

and refuses

as the first token of that prince's gratitude. But any present
he who had greatness of mind to refute a crown, Chale,',
ditllained to receive a bribe; and, upon their ambassadors.
entreating that at least he would permit them to
diltribute part of that fum among his attendants,
he replied, That he could not prevent them from
accepting what flould be offered, but whoever
took a finale florin should be dismissed next
morning from his service z.

No prince in Germany could now aspire to a Furtherde-
dignity, which Frederic had declined, for rea- of thetiec-
sons applicable to them all. It remained to tor8.

z P. Daniel, an historian of considerable name, seems to
call in queflion the truth of this account of Frcderic's be-
haviour in refusing the Imperial crown, because it is not
mentioned by Georgius Sabinus in his History of the Elec-
tion and Coronation of Charles V. tom. iii. p. 63. But no
great stress ought to be laid on an omiflion in a superficial
author, whose treatise, though dignified with the name of
History, contains only such an account of the ceremonial of
Charles's election, as is usually publiflied in Germany on like
occasions. Scard. Rer. Germ. Script. v. 2. p. i. The teflti
mony of Erasmus, lib. 13. epift. 4. and that of Sleidan, p. 18.
are cxprefs. Seckendorf, in his Commentarius Hiltoricus &
Apologeticus de Lutheranifmo, p. 121. has examined this
fat with his usual industry, and has eftablilhed its truth by
the most undoubted evidence. To these teRtimonies which he
has collefed, 1 may add the decisive one of cardinal Caje-
tan, the pope's legate at Frankfort, in his letter, July 5th,
1519. Epiflres au Princes, &c. recueilles par Rufcclli, traduidts
par Belforell. Par. 1572. p. 6o.

make

O o r make a choice between the two great compe

_,, ttitors. But besides the prejudice in Charles'
35s9. favour arising from his birth, as well as the

situation of his German dominions, he owed no
a little to the abilities of the cardinal de Gurk
and the zeal of Erard de la Mark, bishop of Liege
two ofhis ambassadors, who had conduEted their
negociations with more prudence and address
than those entruRted by the French king. The
forrnei, who had long been the minister 'and fa.
vourite of Maximilian, was well acquainted with
the art of managing the Germans; and the latter,
having been disappointed of a cardinal's hat by
Francis, employed all the malicious ingenuity
with which the desire of revenge inspires an
ambitious mind, in thwarting the measures of
that monarch. The Spanish party among the
eletors daily gained ground; and even the Pope's
nuncio, being convinced that it was vain to
make any farther opposition, endeavoured to ac.
quire some merit with the future emperor, by
offering voluntarily, in the name of his master, a
dispensation to hold the Imperial crown in con-
junction with that of Naples a.

ON the twenty-eighth of June, five months

and ten days after the death of Maximilian, this
important contest, which had held all Europe
1 ~ in fufpence, was decided. Six of the elecors

a FreheriRer. German. Scriptores, vol. iii. 172. cur. Struvii
Argent. 1717. Gianone Elilt. of Naples, z. 498. l

had already declared for the king of Spain; arid B o K
the archbilhop of Triers, the only firm adherent .-y-
to the French interest, having at laftjoined his Th,,5c9b
brethren, Charles was, by the unanimous voice Charles cn-
of the electoral college, raised to the Imperial po
throne b.

BUT though the electors consented, from va-
rious motives, to promote Charles to that high
itation, they discovered at the fame time great
jealousy of his extraordinary power, and endea- They are
voured, with the utmost Solicitude, to provide aPeoebh,
againit his encroaching on the privileges of the power, and
Germanic body. It had long been the custom cautions

against it

to demand of every new emperor a confirma-
tion of there privileges, and to require a promise
that he would never violate them in any instance.
While princes, who were formidable neither from
extent of territory, nor of genius, possessed the
Imperial throne, a general and verbal engage-
ment to this purpose was deemed sufficient fe-
curity. But under an emperor so powerful as
Charles, other precautions seemed necessary. A
Capitulation or claim of right was formed, in
which the privileges and immunities of the elecors,
of the princes of the empire, of the cities, and of
every other member of the Germanic body, are
enumerated. This capitulation was immediately
fgned by Charles's ambassadors in the name of
b Jac. Aug. Thuan. Hist. fui Temporis, edit. Bulkley,

lib. 1. ~C~. 9.their

their

B O O K their matter, and he himself, at his coronation, con.

firmed it in the most solemn manner. Since that
s519. period, the eletors have continued to prescribe the

fame conditions to all his successors; and the capi.
tulation, or mutual contract between the emperor
and his fubjecs, is confidered in Germany as a
firong barrier against the progress of the Imperial
power, and as the great charter of their liberties,
to which they often appealc.

The elec- THE important intelligence of his ele&ion was
tion noti-
fid to conveyed in nine days from Frankfort to Bar.
Charles. celona, where Charles was still detained by the

obstinacy of the Catalonian Cortes, which had
not hitherto brought to an issue any of the affairs
which came before it. He received the account
with the joy natural to a young and aspiring mind,
on an acceflon of power and dignity which raised
him so far above the other princes of Europe.
Then it was that those vast profpets, which
allured him during his whole administration, be.
gan to open, and from this ara we may date the
formation, and are able to trace the gradual pro-
grefs, of a grand system of enterprizing ambition,
which renders the history of his reign so worthy
of attention.

Its effc A TRIVIAL circumstance first discovered the
Vpon him. cffets of this great elevation upon the mind of

c Pfeffcl Abregó de 1'Iill. de, Droit Publique d'Allemag",

590. Limnei Capitulat. Imper. Epiflrei des Princes parluf'
cclli, p. 60. hrle

r Cnarler

Charles. In all the public writs which he now B o O K
issued as king of Spain, he assumed the title of _
Majefly, and required it from his fubjeds as a 15s9
mark of their refpet. Before that time, all the
monarchs of Europe were satisfied with the ap-
pellation of Highness or Grace; but the vanity of
other courts soon led them to imitate the example
of the Spanish. The epithet of Majesty is no
longer a mark of pre-eminence. The most incon-
fiderable monarchs in Europe enjoy it, and the ar-
rogance of the greater potentates has invented no
higher denomination d.
THE Spaniards were far from viewing the The Spa-

niards dif-

promotion of their king to the Imperial throne fntirfied
with the fame fatisfaation which he himself felt. with his
To be deprived of the pretence of their fove-
reign, and to be subjected to the government
of a viceroy and his council, a species of admi-
niftration often opprefiive, and always disagree-
able, were the immediate and necessary confe-
quences of this new dignity. To fee the blood
of their countrymen shed in quarrels wherein the
nation had no concern; to behold its treasures
wafted in supporting the splendour of a foreign
title; to be plunged in the chaos of Italian and
German politics, were effets of this event almost
as unavoidable. From all there considerations,
they concluded, that nothing could have hap-

Miniana: Contin. Mar. p, 13. Ferreras, viii. 475.
Mcmoires Hifi. de la Houffaie, tom. i. p. 53, &c.

pened

B oo K pened more pernicious to the Spanish nation

-_--i and the fortitude and public spirit of their an.
z519. ceftors, who, in the Cortes of Catile, prohibited

Alphonfo the Wife from leaving the kingdom,
in order to receive the Imperial crown, were of.
ten mentioned with the highest praise, and pro-
nounced to be extremely worthy of imitation at
this junEture e.

.BUT Charles, without regarding the sentiments

or murmurs of his Spanish fubjets, acceptedof
the Imperial dignity which the count palatine,
at the head of a solemn embalfy, offered him in
November. the name of the electors; and declared his inten-

tion of setting out soon for Germany, in order to
take possession of it. This was the more necessary,
because, according to the forms of the German
constitution, he could not, before the ceremony
of a public coronation, exercise any ad6 of jurif.
diEtion or authority f.

The;nd ir THEIR certain knowledge of this resolution
ctrafes. augmented so much the disgust of.the Spaniards,

that a fullen and refra6tory spirit prevailed among
persons of all ranks. The Pope having granted
the king the tenths of all ecclesiastical benefices
in Castile, to assist him in carrying on war with
greater vigour against the Turks, a convocation
of the clergy unanimously refused to levy that

c Sandoval, i. p. 32. Miniana, Contin, p. 14.
f Sabinus, P. Barrc, viii. 1085.

l'um,

fum, upon preterice' that it ought never to be B o' K
exaEed but at those' times When Christe'ndom _-j
was adtually invaded' by the Infidels; and though 's'9
Leo, in order to support his authority, laid the
kingdom under an interdict, so little regarid was
paid to a censure which Was universally deemed'
unjust, that Charles himself applied to- have it
taken off. Thus the Spanish clergy, befides-their'
merit in opposing the' usurpations of the Pope,
and disregarding the infibeneii of the' crown,
gained the'exemption' which they had claimed'g.

THE commotions which atoPe' in the kingdoin' Aninr-Ur-

of Valencia, annexed to the crown of Aragon, Valencia.
were more formidable, anid prodiuced more dan-
gerous and lasting effects. A seditious monk
having by his fermoins excited the citizens of
Valencia, the capital' city, to take arms, and: to
punish certain criminals in a tunnultuary manner,
the people, pleased' with this exercise of power,
and with such a discovery of their own im-
portance, not only refused to lay down their
arms, but formed theinfelves into troops and
Companies, that they might be reigularly trained'
to martial exercises. To obtain some security
against the oppression of the grandees was the
motive of this afrociation, and' proved a power-
ful bond of union; for as the ariftocratical privi-
leges and independence were more complete in
Valencia than in any other of the Spanifli king-

g P. Martyr. IEp. 46z. Ferreras, viii 4.73.
VOL. II. ( doms,

B o.o K doms, the nobles, being scarcely accountable for

<-1 their conduEt to any superior, treated the people
.'59. not only as vassals but as slaves. . They were

alarmed, however, at the progress of this unex-
pected infurreaion, as it might encourage the
people - to attempt shaking off the yoke alto.
gether;, but as they could not repress them with-
out taking arms, it became necessary to have
recourse to the Emperor, and to desire his per.
,'r5. miifion tp attack them. At the fame time the

people made choice of deputies to represent their
grievances, and to implore the protection of their
sovereign. Happily for the latter, they arrived at
court when Charles was exasperated to an high
degree against the nobility. As he was eager to
visit Germany, where his presence became every
day more necessary, and as his Fiemifh courtiers
were still more impatient to return into their
native country, that they might carry thither the
spoils which they had amafled in Castile, it was
impossible for him to hold the Cortes of Valencia
in person. He had for that reason empowered the
cardinal Adrian to represent him in that assem-
bly, and in his name to receive their oath of al-
legiance, to confirm their privileges with the ufial
folemnities, and to demand of them a free gift.
But the Valencian nobles, who confidered this
measure as an indignity to their country, which
was no less entitled, than his other kingdoms,
to the honour of their fovereigoi's presence, de-
clared that by the fundalmental laws of the con-
flitution they could neither acknowledge as king

a perl0n

aperfon who' was absent, nor grant him any sub- B 0 0 K
fidy; and to this declaration they adhered with -.,-..-
an haughty and inflexible obstinacy. Charles, I520o
piqued by their behaviour, decided in favour of
the people, and rashly authorized them to continue
in arms. Their deputies returned in triumph,
and were received by their fellow-citizens as the
deliverers of their country. The insolence of the
multitude increasing with their success, they ex-
pelled all the nobles out of the city, committed
the government to magistrates of their own elec-
tion, and entered into an association distinguished
by the name of Germanada or Brotherhood, which
proved the source not only of the wildest difor-
ders, but of the most fatal calamities in that king-
dom h

MEANWHILE, the kingdom of Caflile was The Corte

agitated with no less violence. No sooner was of Caflule
the Emperor's intention to leave Spain made to meet in
known, than several cities of the first rank re-
solved to remonstrate against it, and to crave
redress once more of those grievances which they
had formerly laid before him. Charles artfully
avoided admitting their deputies to audience;
and as he saw from this circumstance how diffi-
cult it would be, at this jdin6ure, to restrain the
mutinous spirit of the greater cities, he fum-
moned the Cortes of Castile to meet at Com-

'' P. Martyr. Ep. 65 . Ferrcras, viii. 476. 485.

G 2 poflelJa,

B o° K poftella, a town in Galicia. His. only reason for
-.--- calling that assembly, was the. hope of obtaining

-s0 another donative; for as his treasury had been

exhausted in the fame proportion that the riches
of his ministers increased, he could not, without
some additional aid, appear in Germany with
splendour suited to the Imperial dignity. To
appoint a meeting of the Cortes in so remote a
province, and to demand a new subsidy before
the time for paying the former was expired,
were innovations of a. most dangerous tendency;
and among a people not only jealous of their
liberties, but accuflomed to supply the wants. of
their sovereigns with a very frugal hand, excited
an universal alarm. The. magistrates of Toledo
remonstrated against both these measures in a
very high tone; the inhabitants of Valladolid,
who. expected that the Cortes ihould have been
held in that city, were so enraged, that they took
arms in a tumultuary manner; and if Charles,
with his foreign counsellors, had not fortunately
made their escape during a violent tempef, they
would have nmaffacred all the Flemings, and
have prevented him from continuing his journey
towards Compoftella.

The pro- EVERY city through which he passed, peti
thatffm- tioned against holding a Cortes in Gajia,n a

by. point with regard to which Charles was inflex

ible. But though the utmost influence had been
exerted by the ministers, in order to procure a

choice

choice of representatives favourable to their de- B o1 oK
signs, such was the temper of the nation, that, '--rJ
at the opening of the affiebly, there appeared Apsi1.
among many of the members unusual symptoms
of ill-humour, which threatened a fierce oppo-
fition to all the measures of the court. No re-
presentatives were sent by Toledo; for the lot,
according to which, by ancient custom, the
elecion was determined in that city, having
fallen upon two persons devoted to the Flemish
ministers, their fellow-citizens refused to grant
them a commission in the usual form, and in
their stead made choice of two deputies, whom
they empowered to repair to Compoftella, and
to protest against the lawfulness of the Cortes
assembled there. The representatives of Sala- The difaf-
manca refused to take the usual oath of fidelity, the Caanl
unless Charles consented to change the place of 'crafrc.
meeting. Those of Toro, Madrid, Cordova,
and several other places, declared the demand of
another donative to be unprecedented, unconfli-
tutional, and unnecessary. All the arts, however,
which influence popular assemblies, bribes, pro-
mises, threats, and even force, were employed
in order to gain members. The nobles, soothed
by the refpetful assiduity with which Chievres
and the other Flemings paid court to them,
or inffigated by a mean jealousy of that spirit of
independence which they saw rising among the
commons, openly favoured the pretensions of
the court, or at the utmost did not oppose them;

G 3 and

B 0 0 K and at last, in contempt not only of the senti.
L __-j merits of the nation, but of the ancient forms of

520. the constitution, a majority voted to grant the

donative for which the Emperor had appliedi
Together with this grant, the Cortes laid before
Charles a representation of those grievances where.
of his people complained, and in their name
craved redress; but he, having obtained from
them all that he could expe&, paid no attention
to this ill-timed petition, which it was no longer
dangerous to disregard k.

Charles ap- As nothing now retarded his embarkation, he
ents during disclosed his intention with regard to the regency
bis absence, of Castile during his absence, which he had

hitherto kept secret, and nominated cardinal
Adrian to that office. The viceroyalty of Ara-
gon he conferred on Don John de L.anuza;
that of Valencia on Don Diego de Mendoza
Conde de Melito. The choice of the two latter
was universally acceptable; but the advance-
Inent of Adrian, though the only Fleming who
had preserved any reputation among the Spa-
niards, animated the Castilians with new hatred
againf foreigners; and even the nobles, who
had so tamely suffered other inroads upon the
constitution, felt the indignity offered to their
own order by his promotion, and remonstrate(
against it as illegal. But Charles's desire of
visiting Germany, as well as the impatience of

i P. Martyr. Ep. 663. Sandoval, p. 32, &c.
k Sandoval, 84. hi

his ministers to leave Spain, were now so much B 0 0 K
increased, that without attending to the murmurs -
of the Castilians, or even taking time to provide 'SZO
any remedy against an infurreAion in Toledo,
which at that time threatened, and afterwards
produced most formidable effects, he failed from andembarks

for the Low

Corunna on the twenty-fecond of May; and by Countries.
setting out so abruptly in quest of a new crown,
he endangered a more important one of which he
was already in poffefion '.

i P. Martyr. Ep. 670. Sandov. 86.

G 4

# THE HISTORY OF THE REIGN OF THE EMPEROR CHARLES V. BOOK II.

T H E

H ! S T O R Y
HISTORY

OF THE
R E I G N

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES V.

B O K II.
M ANANY concurring circumifances not only B o o K

called Charles's thoughts Towards the as-
fairs of Germany, but rendered his presence in 'sio.

...rv~. ',-,-,

i i n * Charles's

that country necessary. The electors grew im- pretencein
patient of so long an interregnum; his heredi- 'eceary
tary dominions were disturbed by intestine com-
motions; and the new opinions concerning rel,'
gion made such rapid progress as required the
most serious consideration. But above all, the
motions of the French king drew his attention,
and convinced him, that it w4s necessary to take
measures for his own defence with no less speed
than vigour.

WHEN Charles and Francis entered the lifts as Rieand

progress of
candidates for the Imperial dignity, they con- therival(hip

between
duced Cha ileFsand

Francis I.

B O 0 K du&ed their rivallhip with many professions of
L-, regard for each other, and with repeated declara.

35z0. tions that they would not susser any tinture of

enmity to mingle itself with this honourable emu-
lation. " We both court the fame mistress,"
said Francis, with his usual vivacity; " each
ought to urge his suit with all the address of
which he is master; the most fortunate will pre.
vail, and the other must reft contented 2." But
though two young and high-fpirited princes, and
each of them animated with the hope of success,
might be capable of forming such a generous
resolution, it was soon found that they promised
upon a moderation too refined alid disinterested
for human nature. The preference given to
Charles in the fight of all Europe mortified
Francis extremely, and inspired him with all the
paflions natural to disappointed ambition. To
this was owing the personal jealousy and rivallhip
which subsisted between the two monarchs during
their whole reign; and the rancour of these, aug-
mented by a real opposition of interest, which
gave rife to many unavoidable causes of discord,
involved them in alioft perpetual hostilities.
Charles had paid no regard to the principal ar-
tice in the treaty of Noyon, by refuting oftener
than once to do juffice to John d'Albret, the ex-
cluded monarch of Navarre, whom Francis was
bound in honour, and prompted by interefl, to
restore to his throne. The French king had pre-

a Guic. lib. 13, p. 159.

tensions

tenions to the crown of Naples, of which Ferdi- B 0 0 K
nand had deprived his predecessor by a most un-. -
justifiable breach of faith. The emperor might 's5B
reclaim the dutchy of Milan as a fief of the em-
pire, which Francis had seized, and still kept in
poffeflion, without having received investiture of
it from the Emperor. Charles confidered the
dutchy of Burgundy as the patrimonial domain
of his ancestors, wrested from them by the unjust
policy of Louis XI. and observed with the greatest
jealousy the ftrift connetions which Francis had
formed with the duke of Gueldres, the hereditary
enemy of his family.

WHEN the sources of discord were to many and Their den

berations
various, peace could be of no long continuance, previous to

the corn-
even between princes the most exempt from am- mencement

of hoftili-

bition or emulation. But as the shock between tieshl
two such mighty antagonists could not fail of
being extremely violent, they both discovered
no small solicitude about its consequences, and
took time not only to collec and to ponder their
own strength, and to compare it with that of their
adverlfry, but to secure the friendship or assist-
ance of the other European powers.

THE pope had equal reason to dread the two They nego.

rivals, and saw that he who prevailed, would be- etatepwitp
come absolute master in Italy. If it had been in
his power to engage them in hostilities, without
rendering Lombardy the theatre of war, nothing
would have been more agreeable to him than to

2 fee

o °0° 0 fee them waste each other's strength in endless
_-,,.^ quarrels. But this was impossible. Leo fore.

L52o- saw, that, on the first rupture between the two

monarchs, the armies of France and Spain would
take the field in the Milanese; and while the
scene of their operations was so near, and the
subject for which they contended so interesting to
him, he could not long remain neuter. He was
obliged, therefore, to adapt his plan of conduit
to his political situation. He courted and tooth.
ed the emperor and king of France with equal
industry and address. Though warmly solicited
by each of them to espouse his cause, he affumned
all the appearances of entire impartiality, and
attempted to conceal his real sentiments under
that profound dissimulation which seems to have
been affeced by most of the Italian politicians in
that age.

With the THE views and interest of the Venetians were
Venetians.

not different from those of the pope; nor were
they less solicitous to prevent Italy from becom.
ing the feat of war, and their own republic from
being involved in the quarrel. But through all
Leo's artifices, and notwithstanding his high pre
tensions to a perfect neutrality, it was visible that
he leaned towards the emperor, from whom he
had both more to fear and m-ore to hope than
fiom Francis; and it was equally manifest, that
if it became neceffiry to take a fide, the Vene-
tians would, from motives of the fame nature)
declare for the king of France. No considerable

afliftance

afiifRance, howeverg was to, be expected from. the B 00 K
Italian states, who were jealous to an extreme. t -.
degree of the Transalpine powers, and careful to, I5sO'
preserve the balance even between them, unless
when they were reduced to violate this favourite-
maxim of their policy, by the certain profpea of
some great advantage to themselves.

BUT the chief attention both of Charles and of With Hen-
Francis, was employed in, order to gain the king 'y vm'
of England, from whom each. of them expected
afiftance more effe&ual, and afforded with, less
political caution, Henry VIII. had ascended the
hrone of that kingdom in the year one thousand
ve hundred and nine, with such circumstances
f advantage as promised a reign of distinguished
elicity and splendour. The union in his person Thegreat
f the two contending, titles of York and Lan- wer f
aser; the alacrity and emulation with which both nachb
alions obeyed his commands, not only enabled
im to exert a degree of vigour and authority in.
is domestic government which none of his pre-
ecefors could have safely assumed; but permit-
ed him to take a share in the affairs of the con-
ent, from which the attention of the. English.
ad long been diverted by their unhappy intestine
ivifions. The great fums of money which his fa-
her had amassed, rendered him the most wealthy
rince in Europe. The. peace which had sub.-
ied under the, cautious administration of that
onarch, had, been of sufficient length to recruit
le population of the kingdom after the defola-

tion

B °0 1 K tion of the civil wars, but not so long as to ener-
v_-1-. vate its spirit; and the English, ashamed of hav-

3sZO ing rendered their own country so long a scene

of discord and bloodshed, were eager to display
their valour in some foreign war, and to revive
the memory of the victories gained on the conti.
Hischarac- nent by their ancestors. Henry's own temper

perfectly suited the slate of his kingdom, and the
disposition. of his fubjets. Ambitious, active,
enterprising, and accomplished in all the martial
exercises which in that age formed a chief part in
the education of persons of noble birth, and in-
spired them with an early love of war, he longed
to engage in action, and to signalize the beginning
of his reign by some remarkable exploit. An
5sT3. opportunity soon presented itself; and the viftory

at Guinegate, together with the successful sieges of
Teroiienne and Tournay, though of little utility
to England, reflecEed great lustre on its monarch,
and confirmed the idea which foreign princes
entertained of his power and consequence. So
many concurring causes, added, to the happy
situation of his own dominions, which secured
them from foreign invasion; and to the fortunate
circumstance of his being in possession of Calais,
which served not only as a key to France, hut
opened an easy passage into the Netherlands, ren-
dered the king of England the natural guardian
of the liberties of Europe, and the arbiter between
the emperor and French monarch. Henry him-
self was sensible of this singular advantage, and
convinced, that, in order to preserve the balance

even,

even, it was his office to prevent either of the B ° ° K
rivals from acquiring such superiority of power a_
as might be fatal to the other, or formidable to pa0'
the reft of Christendom. But he was destitute of
the penetration, and still more of the temper,
which such a delicate function required. In-
fluenced by caprice, by vanity, by resentment,
by affetion, he was incapable of forming any
regular and extensive system of policy, or of ad-
hering to it with steadiness. His measures seldom
resulted from attention to the general welfare, or
from a deliberate regard to his own interest, but
were dictated by passions which rendered him
blind to both, and prevented his gaining that
ascendant in the affairs of Europe, or from reap-
ing such advantages to himself, as a prince of
greater art, though with inferior' talents, might
have easily secured.
ALL the impolitic steps in Henry's admini- Andnofhi

n tim er

ftration must not, however, be imputed to de- cardinal
sets in his own charater; many of them were WoJ'cy.
owing to the violent pafions and insatiable ambi-
tion of his prime minister and favourite cardinal
XVolley. This man, from one of the lowest
ranks in life, had rilfn to an height of power and
dignity, to which no English fubjcEL ever arrived;
and governed the haughty, presumptuous, and
1ntraftable spirit of Henry with absolute autho-
'ity. Great talents, and of very different kinds,
fitted him for the two opposite stations of mini-
ser, and of favourite. His profound judgment,

Iis

o° o / K his unwearied in'dustry, his thorough acquaintance
<>.v-s with the state of the kingdorm, his extensive

t520' knowledge of the views and interests of foreign

courts, qualified him for that uncontrolled di.
rection of affairs with which hie -was intrusted.
The elegance- of his manners, the gaiety of his
conversation, his insinuating address, his love of
magnificence, and his proficiency in those parts
of literature' of which Henry was- fond, gained
him the affection and confidence of the young
monarch. Wolfey was far froi employing this
vast and almost royal power, to; promote either the
true intereftof the nation; or the real grandeur of
his masser. Rapacious at the fame time, and pro.
fuse, he was insatiable ini desiring wealth. Of
boundless ambition, he aspired after new honours
with an eagerness' unabated by his' former success;
and being rendered presumptuous by his uncom:
mon elevation, as well as by the ascendant which
he had gained over a prince, who scarcely brooked
advice from any other person, he discovered
in his whole demeanour the most' overbearing
haughtiness and pride. To these passions he him-
self sacrificed every consideration; and whoever
endeavoured to obtain his favour, or that of his'
master, found it necessary to sooth and to gratify
them.

The court As all the flates of Europe fought Henry's
Wolfey by friendflip at that time, all courted his minister,
rtancil. with incredible attention and obsequiousness, and

strove by presents, by promises, or by flattery, to

work

work upon his avarice, his ambition, or his pride '. B ° K
Francis had, in the year one thousand five hun- .-..
dred and eighteen, employed Bonnivet, admiral 1520'
of France, one of his most accomplished and
artful courtiers, to gain this haughty prelate. He
himself beitowed on him every mark of refpe&
and confidence. He consulted him with regard
to his most important affairs, and received his
responses with implicit deference. By these arts,
together with the grant of a large pension, Francis
attached the cardinal to his interest, who per-
fuaded his matter to surrender Tournay to France,
to conclude a treaty of marriage between his
daughter the princess Mary and the dauphin, and
to content to a personal interview with the French
kingc. From that time, the moit familiar inter-
course subsisted between the two courts; Francis,
sensible of the great value of Wolsey's friendlhip,
laboured to secure the continuance of it by every
possible expression of regard, bestowing on him, in
all his letters, the honourable appellations of Fa-
ther, Tutor, and Governor.

CHARLES observed the progress of this union And by
with the utmost jealousy and concern. His near
affinity to the king of England gave him ibme
title to his friendship; and soon after his accef-
sion to the throne of Castile, he had attempted to

b Fiddcs's Life of Wolfey, 166. Rymer's Fccdera, xiii.
718.

lerbert's HIit. of Henry VIII. 30. Rymer, xiii. 624.
VOL. II. 1-1 ingratiate

B o° o ingratiate himself with Wolfey, by fettling on

»'.- him a pension of three thousand livres. His chief
350o. solicitude at present was to prevent the intended

interview with Francis, the effeEs of which upon
two young princes, whose hearts were no less
susceptible of friendship, than their manners were
capable of inspiring it, he extremely dreaded.
But after many delays, occasioned by difficulties
with refped to the ceremonial, and by the anxious
precautions of both courts for the safety of their
refpetive sovereigns, the time and place of
meeting were at last fixed. Messengers had been
sent to different coutts, inviting all comers, who
were gentlemen, to enter the lifts at tilt and
tournament, against the two monarchs and their
knights. Both Francis, and Henry loved the
splendour of there fpeaacles too well, and were
too much delighted with the graceful figure
which they made on such occasions, to forego
the pleasure or glory which they expeced from
such a singular and brilliant assembly. Nor was
the cardinal less fond of displaying his own mag-
nificence in the pretence of two courts, and of
discovering to the two nations the extent of his
influence over both their monarchs. Charles,
finding it impossible to prevent the interview,
endeavoured to disappoint its effects, and to pre-
occupy the favour of the English monarch and
his minister by an aft of complaisance fill more

clh,,reg flattering and more uncommon. Having failed
lnd. from Corunna, as has already been related, he
May 6h. steered his courts directly towards England, and

relying

relying wholly on Henry's generosity for his own B 0° K
safety, landed at Dover. This unexpected visit i---
furprized the nation. Wolfey, however, was 1510*
well acquainted with the emperor's intention. A
negociation, unknown to the historians of that
age, had been carried on between him and the
court of Spain; this visit had been concerted;
and Charles granted the cardinal, whom he calls
his most dearfriend, an additional pension of seven
thousand ducats d. Henry, who was then at Can-
terbury, in his way to France, immediately dif-
patched Wolfey to Dover, in order to welcome
the emperor; and being highly pleased with an
event so soothing to his vanity, hastened to re-
ceive, with suitable refpet, a guest who had
placed in him such unbounded confidence.
Charles, to whom time was precious, Itaid only infinatet
four days in England; but during that ihort favor both
space, he had the address not only to give Henry kwithte
favourable impressions of his character and inten- Wolfey.
tions, but to detach Wolfey entirely from the in-
terest of the French king. All the grandeur, the
wealth, and the power, which the cardinal pof-
sessed, did not satisfy his ambitious mind, while
there was one ftep higher to which an ecclesiastic
could ascend. The papal dignity had for some
time been the object of his wishes, and Francis,
as the most effectual method of securing his
friendflip, had promised to favour his prcten-
ions, on the first vacancy, with all his interest.

a Rymcr, xiii. 714.

-1 2 1 But

B o0 K But as the emperor's influence in the college of

_I· - cardinals was greatly superior to that of the French
5Js*° king, Wolfey grasped eagerly at the offer which

that artful prince had made him, of exerting it
vigorously in his behalf; and allured by this pro.
spect, which, under the pontificate of Leo, still
in the prime of his life, was a very distant one,
he entered with warmth into all the emperor's
schemes. No treaty, however, was concluded at
that time between the two monarchs; but Henry,
in return for the honour which Charles had done
him, promised to visit him in some place of the
Low Countries, immediately after taking leave of
the French king.

June7th. His interview with that prince was in an open
Interview
between plain between Guifnes and Ardres, where the two
Francis. kings and their attendants displayed their mag-

nificence with such emulation, and profuse ex-
pence, as procured it the name of the Field of the
Cloth of Gold. Feats of chivalry, parties of gal-
lantry, together with such exercises and pastimes
as were in that age reckoned manly or elegant,
rather than serious business, occupied both courts
during eighteen days that they continued toge-
ther'. Whatever impression the engaging man-

ners

e The French and Englifli hiflorians describe the pomp of

this interview, and the various fpecacles, with great minute-
ness. One circumliance mentioned by the marechal de Fleu-
ranges, who was present, and which mull appear singular il
the present age, is commonly omitted. " After the tour

nament,"

ners of Francis, or the liberal and unfufpicious B o o K
confidence with which he treated Henry, made -
on the mind of that monarch, was soon effaced 1520
by Wolsey's artifices, or by an interview he had
with the emperor at Gravelines; which was con- July o,.
dusted with less pomp than that near Guifnes, but
with greater attention to what might be of political
utility.

THIS assiduity, with which the two greatest Henry's
monarchs in Europe paid court to Henry, ap- ideaof his
peared to him a plain acknowledgment that he potrance.
held the balance in his hands, and convinced him
of the justness of the motto which he had chosen,
"That whoever he favoured would prevail."
In this opinion he was confirmed by an offer
which Charles made, of submitting any difference
that might arise between him and Francis to his
sole arbitration. Nothing could have the ap-

nament," fays he, " the French and English wrestlers made
their appearance, and wrestled in presence of the kings, and
the ladies; and as there were many stout wrestlers there, it
afforded excellent pastime; but as the king of France had
negleced to bring any wrestlers out of Bretagne, the Englihf
gained the prize.- After this, the kings of France and
England retired to a tent, where they drank together, and
the king of England, seizing the king of France by the col-
lar, said, " My brother, I 7murf/ rejile 'withyou, and endea-
voured once or twice to trip up his heels ; but the king of
France, who is a dextrous wrestler, twilted him round, and
threw him on the earth with prodigious violence. The king
of England wanted to renew the combat, but was prevented."
Memoircs de Fleuranges, 12°. Paris, 1753. p. 329.

I- 3 pearance

B OOK But as the emperor's influence in the college of

-,- _. cardinals was greatly superior to that of the French
5sz0. king, Wolfey grasped eagerly at the offer which

that artful prince had made him, of exerting it
vigorously in his behalf; and allured by this pro.
fpe&6, which, under the pontificate of Leo, frill
in the prime of his life, was a very distant one,
he entered with warmth into all the emperor's
schemes. No treaty, however, was concluded at
that time between the two monarchs; but Henry,
in return for the honour which Charles had done
him, promised to visit him in some place of the
Low Countries, immediately after taking leave of
the French king.

June7th. His interview with that prince was in an open
between plain between Guifnes and Ardres, where the two
-enry and
Francis. kings and their attendants displayed their mag-

nificence with such emulation, and profuse ex-
pence, as procured it the name of the Field of the
Cloth of Gold. Feats of chivalry, parties of gal-
lantry, together with such exercises and pastimes
as were in that age reckoned manly or elegant,
rather than serious business, occupied both courts
during eighteen days that they continued toge-
ther'. Whatever impression the engaging man-

ners

e The French and English hilorians describe the pomp of

this interview, and the various fpe&acles, with great minute-
ness. One circumltancc mentioned by the marechal de Fleu-
ranges, who was present, and which must appear singular ill
the prefcnt age, is commonly omitted. " After the tour-

nament,"

ners of Francis, or the liberal and unfufpicious B o o K
confidence with which he treated Henry, made -'
on the mind of that monarch, was soon effaced 1520.
by Wolsey's artifices, or by an interview he had
with the emperor at Gravelines; which was con- July 1.o
dusted with less pomp than that near Guifnes, but
with greater attention to what might be of political
utility.

THIS assiduity, with which the two greatest enry's
monarchs in Europe paid court to Henry, ap- ide3siofhis
peared to him a plain acknowledgment that he portance.
held the balance in his hands, and convinced him
of the juffnefs of the motto which he had chosen,
"That whoever he favoured would prevail."
In this opinion he was confirmed by an offer
which Charles made, of submitting any difference
that might arise between him and Francis to his
sole arbitration. Nothing could have the ap-

nament," fays he, " the French and English wrestlers made
their appearance, and wrestled in presence of the kings, and
the ladies; and as there were many flout wrestlers there, it
afforded excellent pastime; but as the king of France had
neglected to bring any wrestlers out of Bretagne, the English
gained the prize.- After this, the kings of France and
England retired to a tent, where they drank together, and
the king of England, seizing the king of France by the col-
lar, said, '" My brother, I zmritt wreaile with you, and endea-
roured once or twice to trip up his heels ; but the king of
France, who is a dextrous wrestler, twilted him round, and
threw him on the earth with prodigious violence. The king
f England wanted to renew the combat, but was prevented."
Memoircs de Fleuranges, z2°. Paris, 1753. p. 329.

H 3 pearance

B 0 K pearance of greater candour and moderation, than
,_-_ the choice of a judge who was reckoned the com-
510-. mon friend of both. But as the emperor had now

attached Wolfey entirely to his interest, no proposal
could be more insidious, nor, as appeared by the
sequel, more fatal to the French king'.

Coronatinn CHARLES, notwithstanding his partial fondness
Pro.E- for the Netherlands, the place of his nativity,

made no long flay there; and after receiving the
homage and congratulations of his countrymen,
hastened to Aix-la-Chapelle, the place appointed
Dober 23. by the golden bull for the coronation of the em.

peror. There, in presence of an assembly more
numerous and splendid than had appeared qn any
former occasion, the crown of Charlemagne was
placed on his head, with all the pompous folem-
nity which the Germans asse&t in their public ce-
remonies, and which they deem ¢efential to the
dignity of their empires.

Solymnnthe ALMOST at the fame time Solyman the Mag-
Magnificent
acends Ihe nificent, one of the most accomplished, enter-
Otrom n
throne. pricing, and victorious of the Turkish sultans,

a constant and formidable rival to the emperor,
ascended the Ottoman throne. It was the pecu-
liar glory of that'period to produce the mofl
illustrious monarchs, who have at any one time

f Herbert, 37.
g Hartman. Mauri Relatio Coronat. Car. V. ap. Goldaf.
Folit. Imperial, Franc, 16X4. fol. p. 264.

appeared

appeared in Europe. Leo, Charles, Francis, B o10 K
Henry, and Solyman, were each of them poiffefed --
of talents which might have rendered any age, 's50
wherein they happened to flourish, conspicuous.
But such a constellation of great princes ihed un-
common lustre on the sixteenth century. In every
contest, great power as well as great abilities were
set in opposition; the efforts of valour and con-
duc on one fide, counterbalanced by an equal
exertion of the fame qualities on the other, not
only occasioned such a variety of events as renders
the history of that period interesting, but served
to check the exorbitant progress of any of those
princes, and to prevent their attaining such pre-
eminence in power as would have been fatal to the
liberty and happiness of mankind.

THE first a&t of the emperor's administration Dietcalled

to mee tat

was to appoint a diet of the empire to be held at Worms.
Worms on the sixth of January, one thousand
five hundred and twenty-one. In his circular
letters to the different princes, he informed threm,
that he had called this assembly in order to con-
cert with them the most proper meafiures for
checking the progress of those new and dangerous
opinions, which threatened to disturb the peace
of Germany, and to overturn the religion of their
ancestors.

CHARLES had in view the opinions which had Rif; orth

been propagated by Luther and his disciples since tunr
lie year one thousand five hundred and fevenceen.

H-4 As

B °°o K As these led to that happy reformation in religion
«--^~- which rescued one part of Europe from the papal

I510. yoke, mitigated its rigour in the other, and pro.

duced a revolution in the sentiments of mankind,
the greatest, as well as the most beneficial, that
has happened since the publication of Christianity,
not only the events which at first gave birth to
such opinions, but the causes which rendered their
progress so rapid and successful, deserve to be con-
fidered with minute attention.

To overturn a system of religious belief, founded

on ancient and deep-rooted prejudices, supported
by power, and defended with no less art than
industry; to establish in its room doctrines of
the moit contrary genius and tendency.; and to
accomplish all this, not by external violence or
the force of arms; are operations which hifto-
rians, the leafl prone to credulity and fuperfli-
tion, ascribe to that Divine Providence which,
with infinite cafe, can bring about events which
to human sagacity appear impossible. The in-
terpofition of Heaven, in favour of the Christian
religion at its firfl publication, was manifested
by miracles and prophecies wrought and uttered
in contirmation of it. Though none of the re-
formers pofleffed, or pretended to posess, there
supernatural gifts, yet that wonderful preparation
of circumflances which disposed the minds of
men for receiving their doctrines, that fingulal
combination of causes which secured their fuc-
cess, and canbled men, destitute of power and

... a.

of policy to triumph over those who employed B O O K
againf them extraordinary efforts of both, may -_
be confidered as.no flight proof, that the fame 15s0
hand which planted the Christian religion, pro-
teted the reformed faith, and reared it, from
beginnings extremely feeble, to an amazing de-
gree of vigour and maturity.
IT was from causes, seemingly fortuitous, and Fromin-

considerable

from a source very inconsiderable, that all the beg innnns.
mighty effeEts of the Reformation flowed. Leo X.
when raised to the papal throne, found the re-
venues of the church exhausted by the vast pro-
jeces of his two ambitious predeceiTors, Alex-
ander VI. and Julius II. His own temper, na-
turally liberal and enterprising, rendered him
incapable of that severe and patient ceconomy
which the Situation of his finances required. On
the contrary, his fichemes for aggrandizing the
family of Medici, his love of splendour, his taste
for pleasure, and his magnificence in rewarding
men of genius, involved him daily in new ex-
pences; in order to provide a fund for which, he
tried every device, that the fertile invention of
priests had fallen upon, to drain the credulous
multitude of their wealth. Among others, he
,had recourse to a sale of Indulgences. According A Cale of
to the doctrine of the Romish church, all the pubtlihed by
good works of the Saints, over and above those Lco X.
which were necessary towards their own juffifi-
cation, are deposited, together with the infinite
merits of Jesus Christ, in one inexhaustible trea-
fur'y The keys of this were committed to St.

Peter,

B o0 K Peter, and to his successors the popes, who
Ar--J-. may open it at pleasure, and by transferring

'0o.' a portion of this superabundant merit to any

particular person, for a fum of money, may
convey to him either the pardon of his own fins,
or a release for any one in whose happiness he
is interefled, from the pains of purgatory. Such
indulgences were firfi invented in the eleventh
century by Urban II. as a recompence for those
who went in person upon the meritorious enter.
prise of conquering the Holy Land. They were
afterwards granted to those who hired a f6ldier for
that purpose; and in process of time were be.
tlowed on such as gave money for accomplilhing
any pious work enjoined by the pope h. Julius II.
had beflowed indulgences on all who contributed
towards building the church of St. Peter at Rone;
and as Leo was carrying on that magnificent and
expensive fabric, his grant was founded on the
fame pretence i.

Soconda. TIHE right of promulgating there Indulgences
gd as to give in Germany, together with a share in the profits
general of-
kne. arising from the sale of them, was granted to

Albert, elector of Metz and archbilhop of Mag-
deburg, who, as his chief agent for retailing
them in Saxony, employed Tetzel, a Dominican
friar, of licentious morals, but of an active spirit,
and remarkable for his noisy and popular elo-
quence. He, afifted by the monks of his order,

h Hiflory of the Council of Trent, by F. Paul, p. 4'
A Palavic. lift. Cone. Trident. p. 4.

executed

executed the commiffon with great zeal and fuc- B 01 K
cess, but with little discretion or decency; and z -
though by' magnifying exceflively the benefit of ,s50'
their Indulgencesk, and by dilpofing of them at
avery low price, they carried on for some time
an extensive and lucrative traffick among the
credulous and the ignorant; the extravagance
of their afTertions, as well as the irregularities
in their conduct, came at last to give general
ofence. The princes and nobles were irritated at

feeing

k As the form of these Indulgences, and the benefits which
they were foppofed to convey, are unknown in proteltant
countries, and little understood, at present, in several places
where the Roman catholic religion is established, I have,
for the information of my readers, translated the form of
absolution used by Teczel: " May our Lord Jesus Christ
have mercy upon thee, and absolve thee by the merits of his
most holy passion. And I by his authority, that of his blessed
apoflles Peter and Paul, and of the molt holy Pope, granted
and committed to me in these parts, do absolve thee, first
from all ecclefiaflical censures in whatever manner they have
been incurred, and then from all thy fins, tranfgreflions, and
Ixcefl:s, how enormous soever they may be, even fiom such
as are reserved for the cognizance of the holy fee, and as fir
as the keys of the holy church extend, I remit to you all
punilhment which you deserve in purgatory on their account,
and I restore you to the holy sacraments of the church, to the
Unity of the faithful, and to that innocence and purity which
you pofliegd at baptism, so that when you die, the gates of
Punishment shall be Ihut, and the gates of the paradise of
delight fiall be opened, and if you flall not die at piefent,
this grace shall remain in full force when you are at the point
0fdeath. In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of
the Ioly GhoL." Seckend. Comment. lib. i. p. 14.
The terms in which Tetzel and his aflbciates dcfcribed the
bcnefts of Indulgences, and the neceflity of purchasing thenm.

arc

B o 0 K feeing their vaifals drained of so much wealth, in

_.-.--J order to replenith the treasury of a profuse pontiff.
35±0. Men of piety regretted the delusion of the people,

who being taught to rely for the pardon of their
fins on the Indulgences which they purchased,
did not think it incumbent on them either to
study the doEtrines taught by genuine Christianity,
or to praatie the duties which it enjoins. Even
the most unthinking were shocked at the scan-
dalous behaviour of Tetzel and his afrociates,
who often squandered in drunkenness, gaming,

are so extravagant, that they appear to be almolt incredible.
If any man (said they) purchase letters of Indulgence, his
foul may reft secure with refpea to its salvation. The fouls
confined in purgatory, for whose redemption Indulgences
are purchased, as soon as the money tinkles in the chefl, in.
flantly escape from that place of torment, and ascend into
heaven. That the efficacy of Indulgences was so great, that
the most heinous fins, even if one should violate (which was
impofible) the Mother of God, would be remitted and ex-
piated by them, and the person he freed both from punilhment
and guilt. That this was the unspeakable gift of God, in
order to reconcile men to himself. That the cross ereded by
the preachers of Indulgences, was as efficacious as the cross of
Chrill itself. Lo! the heavens are open; if you enter not
now, when will you enter ? For twelve pence you may re-
deem the feul of your father out of purgatory; and are you
so ungrateful, that you will not rescue your parent from tor-
ment P If you had but one coat, you ought to firip yourself
instantly, and fell it, in order to purchase such benefits, &c.
These, and many such extravagant expreflions, arc felecfed
out of Luther's works by Chemnirius in his Examen Concilii
Tridentini, apud Herm. Vonder Hardt. Hi-s. Liter. Reform.
pars iv. p. 6. The fame author has published fevera) of
Tetzcl's discourses, which prove that there expreflions were
neither lingular nor exaggerated. Ibid. p. 14.

anti

and low debauchery, those fums which were B o I K
pioufy bestowed in hopes of obtaining eternal
happiness; and all began to wish that some check '510'
weregivento this commerce, no less detrimental
to society than deftruEtive to religion.
SUCH was the favourable juncture, and so dif- Firrf ppear-

ance of Lu-

posed were the minds of his countrymen to liften ther, and
to his discourses, when Martin Luther first began his chaac-
to call in question the efficacy of Indulgences,
and to declaim against the vicious lives and false
doEtrines of the persons employed in promulgating
them. Luther was a native of Eifleben in Saxony,
and though born of poor parents, had received a
learned education, during the progress of which he
gave many indications of uncommon vigour and
acuteness of genius. His mind was naturally sus-
ceptible of serious sentiments, and tinctured with
somewhat of that religious melancholy which de-
lights in the solitude and devotion of a monastic
life. The death of a companion killed by lightning
at his fide in a violent thunder-storm, made such an
impreflipn on his mind, as co-operated with his
natural temper, in inducing him to retire into a
convent of Augustinian friars, where, without sus-
fering the intreaties of his parents to divert him
from what he thought his duty to God, he assumed
the habit of that order. He soon acquired great
reputation, not only for piety, but for his love of
knowledge, and his unwearied application to fludy.
lie had been taught the scholastic philosophy and
theology which were then in vogue by very able
"aifters, and wanted not penetration to compre-

hend

B o [ K hend all the niceties and diftinftions with which they
, c^- abound; but his underifanding, naturallyfound,and

s'"°- superior to every thing frivolous, soon became dif-

gusted witth those subtile and uninflrudive sciences,
and fought for some more solid foundation of know.
ledge and of piety in the holy scriptures. Having
found a copy of the Bible, which lay negleted in
the library of his monastery, he abandoned all
other pursuits, and devoted himself to the study of
ir, with ruch eagerness and assiduity, as'aftonilhed
the monks, who were little accustomed to derive
their theological notions from that source. The
great progress which he made in this uncommon
course of study, augmented so much the fame both
of his sanctity and of his learning, that Frederick,
ele&or of Saxony, having founded an university
at Wittemberg on the Elbe, the place of his refi-
dence, Luther was chosen first to teach philofo-
phy, and afterwards theology there; and difcharg-
ed both offices in such a manner, that he was
deemed the chief ornament of that society.

IWe ppofrs WHILE Lpther was at the height of his repu-
ndt'- tration and authority, Tetzel began to publilh
hence". Indulgences in the neighbourhood of Wittem-

berg, and to ascribe to them the fame imaginary
virtues, which had, in other places, imposed on the
credulity of the people. As Saxony was not
more enlightened than the other provinces of
Germany, Tetzel met with prodigious success
there. It was with the utmno{f concern, that
Luther beheld the artifices of those who fold,
and the simplicity of those who bought In-

7 dulgcnces.

dtllgences. The opinions of Thomas Aquinas B °0 K

11.

and the other fchoolmen, on which the doctrine -v--
of Indulgences was founded, had already loft 15s0Q
much of their authority with him; and the Scrip-
tures, which he began to confider as the great
flandard of theological truth, afforded no coun-
tenance to a practice, equally subversive of faith
and of morals. His warm and impetuous temper
did not susser him long to conceal such import-
ant discoveries, or to continue a silent fpeaator
of the delusion of his countrymen. From the
pulpit, in the great church at Wittemberg, he
inveighed bitterly against the irregularities and
vices of the monks who published Indulgences j
he ventured to examine the doctrines which they
taught, and pointed out to the people the danger
of relying for salvation upon any other means
than those appointed by God in his word. The,
boldness and novelty of these opinions drew great
attention, and being recommended by the autho-
rity of Luther's personal character, and delivered
with a popular and persuasive eloquence, they
made a deep impression on his hearers. Encou-
raged by the favourable reception of his doc-
trines among the people, he wrote to Albert,
eletor of Mentz and archbishop of Magdeburg,
to whose jurifdition that part of Saxony was sub-
Je&, and remonstrated warmly against the false
opinions, as well as wicked lives, of the preachers
of Indulgences; but he found that prelate too
deeply interested in their success to corrert their
abuses. Ilis next attempt was to gain the fiif-

firage

B OO K frage of men of learning. For this purpose he

- -*I published ninety-five theses, containing his senti.

Hlpbl52es ments with regard to Indulgences. These he
his these proposed, not as points fully established, or of
against
them. undoubted certainty, but as filbjects of inquir)

and disputation; he appointed a day, on which
the learned were invited to impugn them, either
in person or by writing; to the whole he sub.
joined solemn protestations of his high refpet for
the apostolic fee, and of his implicit submission
to its authority. No opponent appeared at the
time prefixed; the theses spread over Germany
with aflonilhing rapidity; they were read with
the greatest eagerness; and all admired the bold-
ness of the man, who had ventured not only to
call in question the plenitude of papal power, but
to attack the Dominicans, armed with all the
terrors of inquisitorial authority .

Supported THE friars of St. Augustine, Luther's own
order. order, though addicted with no less obsequious-

ness than the other monastic fraternities to the
papal fee, gave no check to the publication of
there uncommon opinions. Luther had, by his
piety and learning, acquired extraordinary autho-
rity among his brethren ; he profeifed the highest
regard for the authority of the pope; his pro-
sessions were at that time sincere; and as afecret

' Lutheri Opera, Jenax, 1612, vol. i. prefat. 3. P 2. 66.

Hilt. of Counc. of Trent by F. Paul. p. 4. Scckend. Coin.
Apol. p. 16.

2. enmity,

enmity, excited by interest or emulation, .fubfits B 0 l K
among all the monastic orders in the Romish .---..
church, the Augufftinians were highly pleated with -',5.
his invectives againIt the Dominicans, and hoped
to fee them exposed to the hatred and scorn of
the people. Nor was his sovereign, the elecor
ofSaxony, the wisest prince at that time in Ger-
many, dissatisfied with this obstruction which
Luther threw in t}le way of the publication of In-
dulgences. He secretly encouraged the attempt,
and flattered himself that this dispute among the
Ecclesiastics themselves, might give some check
to the exactions of the court of Rome, which the
secular princes had long, though without success,
been endeavouring to oppose.
MANY zealous champions immediately arose to Many .-

ps , . . i *

i i ii , deavour to

defend opinions on which the wealth and power confutehim.
of the church were founded, against Luther's at-
tacks. In opposition to his theses, Tetzel pub-
lifiled counter-thefes at Francfort on the Oder;
Eccius, a celebrated divine of Augsburg, endea-
voured to refute Luther's notions; and Prierias,
a Dominican friar, master of the sacred palace
and Inquifitor-general, wrote againlt him with
all the virulence of a scholastic disputant. But
the manner in which they conducted the contro-
verfy, did little service to their cause. Luther
attempted to combat Indulgences by arguments
founded in reason, or derived fiorn scripture;
they produced nothing in support of them but
the sentiments of fchoolmen, the conclusions of
Vol. II. I the

B o o K the canon law, and the decrees of popes m. The
a-,-' decision of judges so partial and interested, did not
t5z0. satisfy the people, who began to call in question

the authority even of these venerable guides, when
they found them tanding in dire& opposition to
the dictates of reason, and the determinations of
the divine laws".*
The court MEANWHILE, these novelties in Luther's doc-

me trines which interested all Germany, excited little

atten.
*m F. Paul, p. 6. Seckend. p. 40. Palavic. p. 8.

Seckend. p. 30.

* Guicciardini has asserted two things with regard to the

firt promulgation of Indulgences; i. That Leo bellowed a
gift of the profits arising from the sale of Indulgences in Sax-
ony, and the adjacent provinces of Germany, upon his fifler
Magdalen, the wife of Francefcetto Cibo, Guic. lib. 13. 168.
2. That Arcemboldo, a Genoese ecclesiastic, who had been
bred a merchant, and still retained all the acivity and address
of that profession, was appointed by her to collet the money
which should be raised. F. Paul has followed him in both
these particulars, and adds, that the AuguRinians in Saxony
had been immemorially employed in preaching Indulgences;
but that Arcemboldo and his deputies, hoping to gain more
by committing this truR to the Dominicans, had made their
bargain with Tetzel, and that Luther was prompted at firfto
oppose Tetzel and his afrociates, by a dcfire of taking revenge
for this injury offered to his order. F. Paul, p. 5. Almo(
all hillorians since their time, popish as well as proteltant,
have, without examination, admitted these aflirtions to be
true upon their authority. But notwithflanding the concui-
ring tesimony of two authors, so eminent both for exaafel
and veracity, we may observe,

i. That Felix Contolori, who searched the pontifical archives

of purpose, could not find this pretended grant to Leo's filler
in any of those registers where it mull neceflarily have been
recorded. Palav. p. s.-z. That the profits arising from In-
dulgences in Saxony and the adjacent countries, had been
granted not to Magdalen, but to Albert archbiflop of Meot"

whe

attentron and no alarm in the court of Rome. B OOK
Leo, fond of elegant and refined pleasures, intent i-_
upon great schemes of policy, a itranger to theo- firt5d ,.-
logical controversies, and apt to despise them, garded Lui
regarded with the utmost indifference the opera-
tions of an obscure friar, who, in the heart of
Germany, carried on a scholastic disputation in

who had the right of nominating those who publified theni,
Seek. p. Iz. Luth. Oper. i. praef. p. i. Palav. p. 6.-3. That
Arcemboldo never had concern in the publication of Indul-
gences in Saxony; his diltric was Slanders and the Upper
and Lower Rhine. Seek. p. 14. Palav; p. 6.-4. That Lu-
ther and his adherents never mention this grant of Leo's to his
filler, though a circumstance of which they could hardly have
been ignorant, and which they would have been careful not
to suppress.-5. The publication of Indulgences in Germany
was not usually committed to the Augustinians. The pro-
mulgation of them, at three different periods under Julius II.
was granted to the Franciscans the Dominicans had been
employed in the fame office a short time before the prefenc
period. Palar. p. 46.-6. The pronlulgatioh of those Irdul-
gences, which first excited Luther's indignation, was entrusted
to the archbishop of Mentz, in conjuntion with the guardian
of the Franciscans ; but the latter having declined accepting
of that trust, the sole right became veiled in the archbiflop.
Palav. 6. Seck. 16, Ij.-7. Luther was not instigated by his
superiors among the Augultinians to attack the Dominicans
their rivals, or to depreciate Indulgences because they were
promulgated by them; his opposition to their opinions and
vices proceeded from more laudable motives. Seck. p. 15. 3z.
Lutheri Opera, I. p. 64. 6. 8. A diploma of Indulgences is
published by Herm. Vonder Hatdt, from which it appears,
that the name of the guardian of the Franciscans is retained,
together with that of the archbilsop, although the former did
not aft. The limits of the country to which their commiflions
extended, viz. the diocese of Mentz, Magdeburg, Halberftadr,
and the territories of the marquis of Brandenburg, are men-
tioned in that diploma. Hil. Literaria Reformat. pars iv. p. 14.

I 2 a br-

B o o K a barbarous style. Ittle did he apprehend, or

II.
A-h _ s Luther himself dream, that the effe&s of this

5s20' quarrel would be so fatal to the papal fee. Leo

imputed the whole to monastic enmity and emula-
tion, and seemed inclined not to interpose in the
contest, but to allow the Augustinians and Domi-
nicans to wrangle about the matter with their usual
animosity.

The pro- THE solicitations, however, of Luther's adver-
grefs of Lu-
ther's opi- saries, who were exasperated to an high degree by
"""'n. the boldness and severity with which he animad-

verted on their writings, together with the furpri-
sing progress which his opinions made in different
parts of Germany, routed at last the attention of
the court of Rome, and obliged Leo to take
measures for the security of the church against an
attack that now appeared too serious to be de-

He is um spifed. For this end, he summoned Luther to
appear at appear at Rome, within sixty days, before the au-
July r51s. ditor of the chamber, and the Inquifitor-general

Prierias, who had written against him, whom he
empowered jointly to examine his dotrines, and
to decide concerning them. He wrote, at the fame
time, to the elector of Saxony, beseeching him not
to protect a man whose heretical and prophane
tenets were so flocking to pious ears; and en-
joined the provincial of the Augustinians to check,
by his authority, the rafhlnefs of an arrogant monk,
which brought disgrace upon the order of St.
Augustine, and gave offence and dilturbance to
the whole church.

FROM

/

FROM the strain of these letters, as well as from B o0 K
the nomination of a judge so prejudiced and par- I
tial as Prieriass Luther easily saw what sentence TheSpope
he might expe&t at Rome. He discovered, for ernPower
that reason, the utmost solicitude to have his to tryhim
cause tried in Germany, and before a less fufpet- i
ed tribunal. The professors in the university of
Witternberg, anxious for the safety of a man
who did so much honour to their society, wrote
to the pope, and after employing several pretexts
to excuse Luther from appearing at Rome, in-
treated Leo to commit the examination of his
doctrines to some persons of learning and autho-
rity in Germany. The elector requested the
fame thing of the pope's legate at the diet of
Augsburg; and as Luther himself, who, at that
time, was so far from having any intention to
disclaim the papal authority, that he did not
even entertain the smallest suspicion concerning
its divine original, had written to Leo a mos
submissive letter, promising an unreserved com-
pliance with his will, the pope gratified them so
far as to empower his legate in Germany, cardi-
nal Cajetan, a Dominican, eminent for scholastic
learning, and passionately devoted to the Roman
fee, to hear and determine the cause.

LUTHER, though he had good reason to decline Lutre'ep,
a judge chosen among his avowed adversaries, Ihclegate.
dil not hesitate about appearing before Cajetan;
and having obtained the emperor's fafe-concluc-,
immeldiately repaired to Augsburg. The cardinal
received him with decent refpec, and endeavour-

I 3 cd

B o0 K ed at first to gain upon him by gentle treatment,

II.
-,-_--> The cardinal, relying on the superiority of his own

I5Z0' talents as a theologian, entered into a formal dif-

pute with Luther concerning the doctrines con-
rained in his theses -. -But the weapons which
they employed were so different, Cajetan appealing
to papal decrees, and the opinions offchoolmen,
and Luther refting entirely on the authority of
scripture, that the contest was altogether fruitless.
The cardinal relinquished the charadter of a dif-
putant, and assuming that of judge, enjoined Lu-
ther, by virtue of the apostolic powers with which
lie was clothed, to retraft the errors which he had
uttered with regard to Indulgences, and the nature
of faith; and to abstain, for the future, from the
publication of new and dangerous opinions. Lu-
ther, fully persuaded of the truth of his own tenets,
and confirmed in the belief of them by the appro-
bation which they had met with among persons
conspicuous both for learning and piety, was fur-
prifed at this abrupt mention of a recantation, be-
fore any endeavours were used to convince him that
he was mistaken. He had flattered himself, that in
a conference concerning the points in dispute with
a prelate of such distinguished abilities, he should
be able to remove many of those imputations with
which the ignorance or malice of his antagonists
had loaded him; but the high tone of authority

* In the former editions I alferted, upon the authority of

Father Paul, that Cajetan thought it beneath his dignity to
enter into any dispute with Luther; but M. Beaufobre, in his
IIifloire de la Reformation, vol. i. p. 121, &c. has satisfied ms
that I was niilakcn. Sec also Scckend. lib. i. . 46, &c.

that

that the cardinal assumed, extinguished at once all B 0o K
hopes of this kind, and cut off every prospect of -.
advantage from the interview. His native intrepi- His'Ip.a
dity of mind, however, did not desert him. He behaviour.
declared, with the utmost firmness, that he could
not, with a safe conscience, renounce opinions
which he believed to be true; nor flould any con-
fideration ever induce him to do what would be
so base in itfqf, and so offensive to God. At
the fame time, he continued to express no less re-
verence than formerly for the authority of the
apostolic fee°; he signified his willingness to sub-
mit the whole controversy to certain universities
which he named, and promised neither to write
nor to preach concerning Indulgences for the fu-
ture, provided his adversaries were likewise en-
joined to be silent with respect to them P. All
there offers Cajetan disregarded or rejeced, and
still insisted peremptorily on a simple recantation,
threatening him with ecclesiastical censures, and
forbidding him to appear again in his presence,
unless he resolved instantly to comply with what
he had required. This haughty and violent
manner of proceeding, as well as other circum-
stances, gave Luther's friends such strong reasons
to fufpe&, that even the Imperial fafe-conduct
would not be able to protect him from the
legate's power and resentment, that they pre-
vailed on him to withdraw secretly from Augf-
burg, and to return to his own country. But be-
fore his departure, according to a form of which

e Luth. Oper. vol. i. p. 164. P Ibid. p. 169.

I 4 there

B °0 K there had been omre examples, he prepared a

A_,- solemn appeal from the pope, ill-informed at that
1520. time concerning his cause, to the pope, when he

Hh1s appeal,
oaober s. ihould receive more full information with refpet

to it .

Heisf up. CAJETAN, enraged at Luther's abrupt retreat,
theeleor and at the publication of his appeal, wrote to the
of Saxony. eleEtor of Saxony, complaining of both; and

requiring him, as he regarded the peace of the
church, or the authority of its head, either to
fend that seditious monk a prisoner to Rome, or
to banish him out of his territories. It was not
from theological considerations that Frederic had
hitherto countenanced Luther; he seems to have
been much a stranger to controversies of that
kind, and to have been little interested in them.
His protection flowed almost entirely, as hath
been already observed, from political motives,
and was afforded with great secrecy and caution.
He had neither heard any of Luther's discourses,
nor read any of his books; and though all Ger-
many resounded with his fame, he had never
once admitted him into his presence'. But upon
this demand which the cardinal made, it became
necessary to throw off somewhat of his former
reserve. SHe had been a: great expence, and had
beltowed much attention on founding a new uni-
verfity, an object of considerable importance to
every German prince; and foreseeing how fatal a

q Sleid. HIilt. of Reform. p. 7. Seckend. p. 45. Luth.
Oper. i. 163.

rSeckend. p. 27. Sleid. Hill p. p. blo

, l...

blow the removal of Luther would be to its re- B 0 0 K
putation5, he, under various pretexts, and with
many professions of esteem for the cardinal, as J5
well as of reverence for the pope, not only declined
complying with either of his requests, but openly
dilcovered great concern for. Luther's fafetyt.

THE inflexible rigour with which Cajetan in- Motivesof
filsed on a simple recantation, gave great offence ,condu'.t
to Luther's followers in that age, and hath since
been censured as imprudent, by several Popish
writers. But it was impossible, for the legate to
act another part. The judges before whom Lu-
ther had been required to appear at Rome, were
so eager to display their zeal against his errors,
that, without waiting for the expiration of the
sixty days allowed him in the citation, they had
already condemned him as an heretic ". Leo
had, in several of his briefs and letters, stigma-
tized him as a child of iniquity, and a man given
up to a reprobate sense. Nothing less, therefore,
than a recantation could save the honour of the
church, whose maxim it is, never to abandon the
smallest point that it has established, and which
is even precluded, by its pretensions to infallibi-
lity, from having it in its power to do so.
LUTHER'S situation at this time, was such as Luther'c

perilous

would have filled any other person with the molt situation.

'Seckend. p. 59. t Sleid. Hlit. p. to. Luth. Oper. i. 17i.
Luth. Ope:. i. 161.

disquieting

B 0 0 K disquieting apprehensions. He could not expel

Do_- that a prince so prudent and cautious as Frederic,
'20'. would, on his account, set at defiance the thunders

of the church, and brave the papal power, which
had crushed some :of the most powerful of the
German emperors. He knew what veneration
was paid, in that age, to ecclesiastical decisions;
what terrors ecclefiaitical censures carried along
with them, and how easily these might intimidate
and shake a prince, who was rather his protector
from policy, than his disciple from convi&ion. If
he should be obliged to quit Saxony, he had no
profpea of any other asylum, and must Itand ex.
posed to whatever punishment the rage or bigotry
of his enemies could infli&t. Though sensible of
his danger, he discovered no symptoms of timidity
or remissness, but continued to vindicate his own
conduct and opinions, and to inveigh against
those of his adversaries with more vehemence
than ever".

We appeals RUT as every ftep taken by the court of Rome,
,oaunil, particularly the irregular sentence by which he

had been so precipitately declared a heretic, con-
vinced Luther that Leo would soon proceed to the
most violent measures against him, he had recourse
to the only expedient in his power, in order to
Frevent the effet of the papal censures. He
appealed to a general council, which he affirmed
to be the representative of the catholic church,

x Scclcend. p. 59. an

and superior in power to the pope, who being a B o°1° o
fallible man, might err, as St. Peter, the most .--,--
perfet of his predecessors, had erred '. s.lo
IT soon appeared, that Luther had not formed A newbun

in favour of

ralfhconjectures concerning the intentions of the Indul-
Romish church. A bull, of a date prior to his g
appeal, was issued by the pope, in which he mag-
nifies the virtue and efficacy of Indulgences, in
terms as extravagant as any of his predecessors
had ventured to use in the darkest ages; and
without applying such palliatives, or mentioning
such concessions, as a more enlightened period,
and the disposition in the minds of many men at
that junEture, feerned to call.for, he required all
Christians to assent to what he delivered as the
doflrine of the Catholic church, and fubjeced
those who should hold or teach any contrary opi-
iion, to the heaviest ecclesiastical censures.

AMONG Luther's followers, this bull, which Maximill,
they confidered as an unjustifiable effort of the ofadvaltag,
pope, in order to preserve that rich branch of his o Luthcr-
revenue which arose from Indulgences, produced
little efect. But, among the reft of his country-
men, such a clear decision of the sovereign pon-
tlft against him, and enforced by such dreadful
penalties, muff have been attended with confe-
quences very fatal to his cause; if these had not
been prevented in a great meafire by the death
f the emperor Maximilian, whom both his prin- T.n. 17.

r Slcid. Hill. z. Luth. Opcr.i. 179.

per. i.
iplcs

ciple~s

B o0 K ciples and his interest prompted to support the

_ authority of the holy fee. In consequence ol
1520- this event, the vicariat of that part of Germany

which is governed by the Saxon laws, devolved to
the elector of Saxony; and under the Ihelter of
his friendly administration, Luther not only en.
joyed tranquillity, but his opinions were suffered,
during the inter-regnum which preceded Charles's
eleetion, to take root in different places, andto
grow up to some degree of strength and firmness,
At the fame time, as the elet-ion of an emperor
was a point more interesting to Leo than a theo.
logical controversy, which he did not understand,
and of which he could not foresee the confe.
quences, he was so extremely solicitous not to
irritate a prince of such considerable influence in
the elecoral college as Frederic, that he dif.
covered a great unwillingness to pronounce the
sentence of excommunication against Luther,
which his adversaries continually demanded with
the most clamorous importunity.

Sufpenrion To there political views of the pope, as well
of proceed. h
ings againt as to his natural aversion from severe measures,
Luther. was owing the suspension of any further proceed-

ings against Luther for eighteen months. Per.
petual negociations, however, in order to bring
the matter to some amicable issue, were carried
on during that space. The manner in which thele
were conducted having given Luther mriny op-
portunities of observing the corruption of the
court of Rome; its obflinacy in adhering to csa-

blilled

lifhed errors; and its indifference about truth, B 0°o K
owever clearly proposed, or strongly proved, he '---
egan to utter some doubts with regard to the 1520'
ivine original of the papal authority. A public He bleins
ifputation was held upon this important question question the
tLeipfic, between Luther and Eccius, one of horiP.
is mnbt learned and formidable antagonists; but
t was as fruitless and indecisive as such scholastic
combats usually prove. Both parties boasted of
having obtained the viEtory; both were con-
firmed in their own opinions; and no progress
was made towards deciding the point in contro-
verfy z.

NOR did this spirit of opposition to the doc- Reforma.
trines and usurpations of the Romish church switzer.
break out in Saxony alone; an attack no less vio- land.
lent, and occasioned by the fame causes, was
made upon them about this time in Switzerland.
The Franciscans being entrusted with the pro-
mulgation of Indulgences in that country, exe-
cuted their commiflion with the fame indiscretion
and rapaciousness, which had rendered the Domi-
nicans so odious in Germany. They proceeded,
nevertheless, with uninterrupted success till they
arrived at Zurich. There Zuinglius, a man not
inferior to Luther himself in zeal and intrepidity,
ventured to oppose them; and being animated
with a republican boldness, and free from those
rearaints which fubjedion to the will of a prince

Luth. Oper. i. 199.

x imposed

B 0 0 K imposed on the German reformer, he advanced

. - with more daring and rapid steps to overturr
z°.0* the whole fabric of the established religion.,

The appearance of such a vigorous auxiliary, and
the progress which he made, was, at firsts matter
of great joy to Luther. On the other hand, the
decrees of the universities of Cologne and Lou.
vain, which pronounced his opinions to be erro.
neous, afforded great cause of triumph to his
adversaries.

lutdbers 1BUT the undaunted spirit of Luther acquired
boldness
and pro- additional fortitude from every instance of oppo.
grcfs. fition; and pushing on his inquiries and attacks

from one docrine to another, he began to shake
the firmest foundations on which the wealth or
power of the church were established. Leo came
at last to be convinced, that all hopes of reclaim-
ing him by forbearance were vain; several prelates
of great wisdom exclaimed no less than Luther's
personal adversaries, against the pope's unprece-
dented lenity in permitting an incorrigible he-
retic, who during three years had been endea.
vouring to subvert every thing sacred and vene-
rable, flill to remain within the bosom of the
church ; the dignity of the papal fee rendered
the moif vigorous proceedings necessary; the
new emperor, it was hoped, would support its
authority; nor did it seem probable that the
elector of Saxony would so far forget his usual
caution, as to set himself in opposition to their

* Sleid. Hlif. z. Seckcnd. 59. nite

««u

united power. The college of cardinals was B °0 K
often assembled, in order to prepare the fen- .
tence with due deliberation, and the ablest ca- 15o'
nonifts were consulted how it might be expressed
with unexceptionable formality. At last, on the Bull ofer
fifteenth of June, one thousand five hundred and cationpub-
twenty, the bull, so fatal to the church of Rome, iguahin.
was issued. Forty-one propositions, extraEced
out of Lather's works, are therein condemned
as heretical, scandalous, and offensive to pious
ears; all persons are forbidden to read his writ-
ings, upon pain of excommunication; such as
had any of them in their custody are commanded
to commit them to the flames; he himself, if
he did not, within sixty days, publicly recant
his errors, and burn his books, is pronounced
an obstinate heretic; is excommunicated, and
delivered unto Satan for the deftruEtion of his
flesh; and all secular princes are required, under
pain of incurring the fame censure, to seize his
person, that he might be punished as his crimes
deserved .
THE publication of this bull in Germany ex- TheeRfle

* J rr-'1 T off Illis in

cited various passions in different places. ,u- Ccrm.nr,
ther's adversaries exulted, as if his party and
opinions had been crushed at once by such a de-
cifive blow. His followers, whose reverence for
the papal authority daily diminished, read Leo's
anathemas with more indignation than terror.

b Palavic. 27. Luth. Oper. i. 423.
7 In

B o o K In some cities, the people violently obftrueed the

,_ -_promulgation of the bull; in others, the persons
'5"2. who attempted to publish it were insulted, and

the bull itself was torn in pieces, and trodden un.
der foote.

and upon THIS sentence, which he had for some time
Luh';. expeEted, did not disconcert or intimidate Luther.

After renewing his appeal to the general coun-
cil, he published remarks upon the bull of ex-
communication; and being now persuaded that
Leo had been guilty both of impiety and injuf.
tice in his proceedings against him, he boldly
declared the pope to be that man of fin, or Anti.
christ, whose appearance is foretold in the New
Testament; he declaimed against his tyranny and
usurpations with greater violence than ever; he
exhorted all Christian princes to ihake off such
an ignominious yoke; and boasted of his own
happiness in being marked out as the obje&t of
ecclesiastical indignation, because he had ventured
to assert the liberty of mankind. Nor did he
confine his expressions of contempt for the papal
power to words alone; Leo having, in execution
of the bull, appointed Luther's books to be
burnt at Rome, he, by way of retaliation, as-
fembled all the professors and students in the uni-
verfity of Wittemberg, and with great pomp, in
presence of a vast multitude of fpedators, cast the
volumes of the canon law, together with the

c Seckend. p. z 1 6. b

bull

bull of excommunication, into the flames; and B 0 0 K
his example was imitated in several cities of Ger- -v
many. The manner in which he justified this '5so.
aftion was still more offensive than the action it-
self. Having colleEted from the canon law
some of the most extravagant propositions with
regard to the plenitude and omnipotence of the
papal power, as well as the subordination of all
secular jurifdition to the authority of the holy
fee, he published there with a commentary; point-
ing out the impiety of such tenets, and their evi-
dent tendency to subvert all civil government d

SUCH was the progress which Luther had made, State of the

and such the state of his party, when Charles tionwhen
arrived in Germany. No secular prince had rvediS
hitherto embraced Luther's opinions; no change Germanyc
in the eflablifhed forms of worship had been in-
troduced; and no encroachments had been made
upon the poffieitons or jurifdi&ion of the clergy;
neither party had yet proceeded to action; and
the controversy, though conducted with great
heat and passion on both fides, was still carried on
with its proper weapons, with theses, disputations,
and replies. A deep impreflion, however, was
made upon the minds of the people; their reve-
rence for ancient inflitutions and doctrines was
flaken; and the materials were already scattered,
which kindled into the combustion that loon
fpreac over all Germany. Students crowded from

d Luth. Oper. ii. 315.
VOL. II. K evcry

B 0 0 K every province of the empire to Wittemberg;

_ --' and under Luther himself, Melancthon, Car-
3520. loftadius, and other masters then reckoned emi.

nent, imbibed opinions, which, on their return,
they propagated among their countrymen, who
listened to them with that fond attention, which
truth, when accompanied with novelty, naturally
commands e.

Refleions DURING the course of these tranfaEtions, the
upon the
,condti of court of Rome, though under the direction of one
the curt of of its ablest pontiffs, neither formed its schemes

with that profound sagacity, nor executed them
with that steady perseverance, which had long
rendered it the most perfec model of political
wifdorn to the reft of Europe. When Luther
began to declaim against Indulgences, two dif-
ferent methods of treating him lay before the
pope; by adopting one of which, the attempt,
it is probable, might have been crushed, and by
the other it might have been rendered innocent.
If Luther's first departure from the docrines of
the church had instantly drawn upon him the
weight of its censures, the dread of there might
have restrained the elector of Saxony from pro-
tecting him, might have deterred the people from
listening to his discourses, or even might have
overawed Luther himself; and his name, like
that of many good men before his time, would
now have been known to the world only for his

Seckend. 59. hnnef

honest but ill-timed effort to corre& the corrup- B ° ° K
tions of the Romiih church. On the other hand, a- _
if the pope had early testified some displeasure 15o"'
with the vices and excesses of the friars who had
been employed in publishing Indulgences; if he
had forbidden the mentioning of controverted
points in discourses addressed to the people; if
he had enjoined the disputants on both fides to
be silent; if he had been careful not to rifque the
credit of the church by defining articles which
had hitherto been left undetermined; Luther
would, probably, have ftopt short at his first
discoveries: he would not have been forced, in
felf-defence, to venture upon new ground, and
the whole controversy might possibly have died
away insensibly; or being confined entirely to the
schools, might have been carried on with as little
detriment to the peace and unity of the Romish
church, as that which the Franciscans maintain
with the Dominicans, concerning the immacu-
late conception, or that between the Jansenists
and Jesuits concerning the operations of grace.
But Leo, by fluctuating between these opposite
fyRems, and by embracing them alternately, de-
feated the effets of both. By an improper exer-
tion of authority, Luther was exasperated, but
not reltrained. By a mistaken exercise of lenity,
time was given for his opinions to spread, but no
progress was made towards reconciling him to the
church; and even the sentence of excommunica-
ton, which at another junature might have been

K 2 decisive,

B o0 o decisive, was delayed so long, that it becameat

-vc-J lass scarcely an objeEt of terror.
iao.

and opnu SUCH a series of errors in the rneifures of
the conduct
of Luther. court seldom chargeable with mistaking its own

true interest, is not more astonishing than the
wisdom which appeared in Luther's condul,
Though a perfe&t stranger to the maxims of
worldly wifdorn, and incapable, from the impe-
tuofity of his temper, of observing them, he was
led naturally by the method in which he made
his discoveries, to carry on his operations in a
manner which contributed more to their success,
than if every ftep he took had been prescribed by
the most artful policy. At the time when he set
himself to oppose Tetzel, he was far fron intend.
ing that reformation which he afterwards effet&.
ed; and would have trembled with horror at the
thoughts of what at last he gloried in accomplish
ing. The knowledge of truth was not poured
into his mind all at once, by any special reve.
lation; he acquired it by industry and meditation,
and his progrers, of consequence, was gradual.
The dotrines of popery are so closely conne&ed,
that the exposing of one error condut&ed hi
naturally to the detection of others; and all the
parts of that artificial fabric were so united to
gether, that the pulling down of one loosened the
foundation of the reft, and rendered it more easy
to overturn them. In confuting the extravagant
tenets concerning Indulgences, he was obliged to

inquirG

inquire into the true cause of our justification and B O 0 K
acceptance with God. The knowledge of that -
discovered to him by degrees the inutility of pil- 1og
grimages and penances; the vanity of relying on
the intercession of faints; the impiety of wor(hip-
ping them; the abuses of auricular confefiion;
and the imaginary existence of purgatory. The
detetion of so many errors, led him of course to
confider the character of the clergy who taught
them; and their exorbitant wealth, the revere in-
junaion of celibacy, together with the intolerable
rigour of monastic vows, appeared to him the
great sources of their corruption. From thence,
i was but one ftep to call in question the divine
original of the papal power, which authorised
and supported such a system of errors. As the
unavoidable result of the whole, he disclaimed
the infallibility of the pope, the decisions of school-
men, or any other human authority, and ap-
pealed to the word of God as the only standard of
theological truth. To this gradual progress Lu-
ther owed his success. :-His hearers were not
ihocked at sift by any proposition too repugnant
to their ancient prejudices, or too remote from
established opinions. They were conducted in-
sensibly firom one doctrine to another, Their
faith and conviction were able to keep pace with
his discoveries. To the fame cause was owing
the inattention, and even indifference with whiclh
Leo viewed Luther's first proceedings. A dire&l
pr violent attack upon the authority of the churcl
w!old at once have drawn upon Luther the wholQ

K3 uwvi;ght

B °0 KC weight of its vengeance; but as this was far from

II.

V--- his thoughts, as he continued long to profefa
i20.- great refpec for the pope, and made repeated

offers of fubmiflion to his decisions, there seemed
to be no reason for apprehending that he would
prove the author of any desperate revolt; and he
was suffered to proceed ftep by flep, in under.
mining the constitution of the church, until the
remedy applied at last came too late to produce
any effect.

Aninquiry BUT whatever advantages Luther's cause de-
into the
causes rived either from the miflakes of his adversaries,
which con-
tributedto or from his own good conduc, the sudden pro-
the progress grefs and firm establishment of his doctrines,
of the Re-
formation. must not be ascribed to these alone. The fame

corruptions in the church of Rome which he
condemned, had been attacked long before his
time. The fame opinions which he now
propagated, had been published in different
places, and were supported by the fame argu-
ments. Waldus in the twelfth century, Wick-
liss in the fourteenth, and Huss in the fifteenth,
had inveighed against the errors of popery with
great boldness, and confuted them with more in-
genuity and learning than could have been ex-
pected in those illiterate ages in which they flou-
rifhed. But all these premature attempts towards
a reformation proved abortive. Such feeble
lights, incapable of dispelling the darkness which
then covered the church, were 'oon extinguished;
and though the doctrines of these pious men pro-

duced

duced some effets, and left some traces in the B 0o0 K
countries where they taught, they were neither '_---
extensive nor considerable. Many powerful causes '5so
contributed to facilitate Luther's progress, which
either did not exist, or did not operate with full
force in their days; and at that critical and ma-
ture juncture when he appeared, circumflances
of every kind concurred in rendering each ftep
that he took successful.

THE long and scandalous fcbifLn which divided The long

schism in
the church during the latter part of the four- the fur-

Ci i i i

< * /- i r- r iteenth cen-

teenth, and the beginning of the fifteenth cen- tury.
turies, had a great effe& in diminishing the vene-
ration with which the world had been accustomed
to view the papal dignity. Two or three con-
tending pontiffs roaming about Europe at a time;
fawning on the princes whom they wanted to
gain; extorting large fums of money from the
countries which acknowledged their authority;
excommunicating their rivals, and cursing those
who adhered to them, discredited their preten-
lions to infallibility, and exposed both their per-
sons and their office to contempt. The laity, to
whom all parties appealed, came to learn that
Tome right of private judgment belonged to
them, and acquired the exercise of it so far as
to chufe, among there infallible guides, whom
they would please to follow. The proceedings of
the councils of Constance and Basil spread this
difrefpet for the Romifl fee frill wider, and by
their bold exertion of authority in deposing and

K 4 eledting

B 0 0 K eleting popes, taught men that there was in the

V,---- church a jurifdi&ion superior even to the. papal
35·o. power, which they had long believed to be supreme.

fThe pon;- THE wound given on that occasion to the papal
ficates of
Alexander authority was scarcely healed up, when the pon-
VI. and cf
ulis u. tificates of Alexander VI. and Julius II. both able

princes, but detestable ecclesiastics, raised new
scandal in Christendom. The profligate morals
of the former in private life; the fraud, the in-
justice, and cruelty of his public adminiflration,
place him on a level with those tyrants, whose deeds
are the greatest reproach to human nature. The
latter, though a stranger to the odious paflions
which prompted his predeceflor to commit so
many unnatural crimes, was under the dominion
of a restless and ungovernable ambition, that
scorned all considerations of gratitude, of decen-
cy, or of justice, when they obftruted the exe-
cution of his schemes. It was hardly possible to
be firmly persuaded that the infallible knowledge
of a religion, whose chief precepts are purity and
humility, was deposited in the breasts of the
profligate Alexander or the overbearing Julius.
The opinion of those who exalted the authority
of a council above that of the pope, spread won-
derfully under their pontificates: and as the
emperor and French kings, who were alternately
engaged in hostilities with those active pontiffs,
permitted and even encouraged their fubjeds to
expose their vices with all the violence of invec-
five and all the petulance of ridicule, men's ears

being

being accustomed to these, were not shocked with B 0 0 K
the bold or ludicrous discourses of Luther and m
his followers concerning the papal dignity. 15Z9.

NOR were such excefles confined to the head of The ifnmo-

the church alone. Many of the dignified clergy, th clergy.
secular as well as regular, being the younger sons
of noble families, who had assumed the eccle-
fiaftical character for no other reason but that
they found in the church stations of great dignity
and affluence, were accustomed totally to neglect
the duties of their office, and indulged them-
selves without reserve in all the vices to which
great wealth and idleness naturally give birth.
Though the inferior clergy were prevented by
their poverty from imitating the expensive luxury
of their superiors, yet grois ignorance and low
debauchery rendered them as contemptible as the
other were odious f. The severe and unnatural
law of celibacy, to which both were equally sub-
jec, occasioned such irregularities, that in feve-

The corrupt Rlate of the church prior to the Reformation,

is acknowledged by an author, who was both abundantly
able to judge concerning this matter, and who was not over-
forward to confess it. " For some years (fays Bellarmine)
before the Lutheran and Calvinific herefies were published,
there was not (as contemporary authors teflify) any severity
in ecclesiastical judicatories, any dircipline with regard to mo-
rals, any knowledge of sacred literature, any reverence for
divine things ; there was not almoRf any religion remaining."
Bellarminus Concio xxviii. Oper. tom. vi. col. 296. edit.
Colon. 1617. apud Gerdefii Jlil. Evan. Renovati, vol. i,
. 2j.

7 *rl

B o o K ral parts of Europe the concubinage of prielb
a__-j was not only permitted, but enjoined. The em.
useo. ploying of a remedy so contrary to the precepts

of the Christian religion, is the strongest proof
that the crimes it was intended to prevent were
both numerous and flagrant. Long before the
sixteenth century, many authors of great name and
authority give such descriptions of the dissolute
morals of the clergy, as seem almost incredible
in the present age . The voluptuous lives of
ecclesiastics occasioned great scandal, not only
because their manners were inconsistent with their
sacred charaAer; but the laity being accustomed
to fee several of them raised from the lowes
ifations to the greatest affluence, did not shew
the fame indulgence to their excesses, as to those
of persons possessed of hereditary wealth or gran.
deur; and viewing their condition with more
envy, they censured their crimes with greater

severity.

g Centum Gravamina Nation. German. in Fafciculo Rer,

expetend. & fugiendarum, per Ortuinum Gratium, vol. i
361. See innumerable palages to the fam" purpose in the
appendix, or second volume, published by ldw. Brown. Set
also Ilerm. vonder Iardt, Hilt. Lit. Reform, pars iii. and the
vail colleaions of Walchius in his four volumes ofMonumenta
Medii .Evi. Gotting. 1757.

The authors I have quoted enumerate the vices of the

clergy. When they ventured upon alions manifestly criminal,
we may conclude that they would be less scrupulous with
refpea to the decorum of behaviour. Accordingly their
neglec of the decent condu& suitable to their profelfion,
feemn to have given great offence. In order to illusfrate this,

1 Ihall

severity. Nothing, therefore, could be more B °0 K
acceptable to Luther's hearers, than the violence _
with which he exclaimed against the immoralities J5'0.
of churchmen, and every person in his audience
could, from his own observation, confirm the
truth of his invectives.
THE scandal of there crimes was greatly in- Thefacili-

ty with

creased by the facility with which such as commit- which these
ted them obtained pardon. In all the European ieswerea
kinigdoms, the impotence of the civil magistrate, pardone"
urnder forms of government extremely irregular
and turbulznt, made it necessary to relax the
rigour of justice, and upon payment of a certain
fine or composition prescribed by law, judges
were accustomed to remit farther punishment,
even of the most atrocious crimes. The court of
Rome, always attentive to the means of aug-
menting its revenues, imitated this practice, and,

I hall transcribe one passage, becauCe it is taken not from
any author whose profefled purpose it was to describe the im-
proper conduc of the clergy; and who, from prejudice or ar-
tifice, may be supposed to aggravate the charge against them.
The emperor Charles IV. in a letter to the archbishop of
Mentz, A. D. 1359, exhorting him to reform the disorders of
the clergy, thus exprcfles himself: " De Chrifli patrimonio,
ludos, haftiludia & torneamenta exercent; habitum militarem
cum platextis aureis et argenteis geltant, et calceos militares;
comain & barbam nutriunt, & nihil quod ad vitam & ordinem
eclefialticum fpectat, oflendunt. Militaribus fe duntaxat &
fecularibus aftibus, vita & moribus, in fuae falutis difpendium,
&generale populi fcandalum, immifcent." Codex Diploma-
licus Anecdotorum, per Val. Ferd. Gudenum, 4to. vol. iii.
P. 438.

by

a °o. K' by a preposterous accommodation of it to reli,
i-v-'.. gious concerns, granted its pardons to such tranf.

4°0' greflbrs as gave a fum of money in order to pur.

chafe them. As the idea of a composition foi
crimes was then familiar, this strange traffic was
so far from (hocking mankind, that it soon
became general; and in order to prevent any
imposition in carrying it on, the officers of the
Roman chancery published a book, containing
the precise fum to be exacted for the pardon of
every particular fin. A deacon guilty of mur.
der was absolved for twenty crowns. A bishop
or abbot might assassinate for three hundred
livres. Any ecclesiastic might violate his vows
of chastity, even with the most aggravating cir-
cumftances, for the third part of that fum. Even
such ihocking crimes, as occur seldom in human
life, and perhaps exist only in the impure imagina-
tion of a casuist, were taxed at a very moderate
rate. When a more regular and perfect mode of
dispensing justice came to be introduced into
civil courts, the practice of paying a composition
for crimes went gradually into disuse; and man-
kind having acquired more accurate notions con-
cerning religion and morality, the conditions on
which the court of Rome bestowed its pardons
appeared impious, and were confidered as one
great source of ecclesiastical corruption \

h Fafcicul. Rer. expet. & fug. i. 355. J .

G. Schellornii

Am:unit. Literar. Francof. 1725. vol. ii. 369. Diction. d
Baylc, Artic. Banck & Tuppius. Taxa Canccllar. Ro.oman:C,
pdit. Francof. 1 z51. palliim.

Tilrs

THrs degeneracy of manners among the clergy B ° ° .
might have been tolerated, perhaps, with greater --
indulgence, if their exorbitant riches and power Th5 xorbi-
had not enabled them, at the faime time, to encroach nta nteallt
on the rights of every other order of men. It is church
the genius of superstition, fond of whatever is pom-
pous or grand, to set no bounds to its liberality
towards persons whom it esteems sacred, and to
think its expreflions of regard defective, unless it
hath raised them to the height of wealth and autho-,
rity. Hence flowed the extensive revenues and
jurifdiftion poTieffed by the church in every
country of Europe, and which were become in-
tolerable to the laity, from whose undifcerning
bounty they were at first derived.

THE burden, however, of ecclefiaRical oppref- finu lr

sion had fallen with such peculiar weight on the mny i
Germans, as rendered them, though naturally
exempt from levity, and tenacious of their an-
cient customs, more inclinable than any people
in Europe to liften to those who called on them
to assert their liberty. During the long contcfls
between the popes and emperors concerning the
right of investiture, and the wars which there oc-
cafioned, most of the considerable German ecclefi-
aftics joined the papal faction ; and while engaged
in rebellion against the head of the empire, they
seized the Imperial dorrains and revenues, and
usurped the Imperial jurisdiction within their own
dio(ceses. Upon the re-eflablilimcnt of tranquil-
lity, they Rill retained these ulurpations, as if by

&lth

B °0 K the length of an unjust pofleflion they had ac-

L -; quired a legal right to them. The emperors, too
15s0. feeble to wrest them out of their hands, were ob.

liged to grant the clergy fiefs of those ample ter-
ritories, and they enjoyed all the immunities as
well as honours which belonged to feudal barons.
By means of these, many bishops and abbots in
Germany were not only ecclesiastics, but princes,
and their character and manners partook more of
the licence too frequent among the latter, than of
the sanctity which became the former .

where the THE unsettled slate of government in Ger-
'.furp a many, and the frequent wars to which that coun-
great part of
the ,proer. try was exposed, contributed in another manner
ty. towards aggrandizing ecclesiastics. The only

property, during those times of anarchy, which
enjoyed security from the oppression of the great,
or the ravages of war, was that which belonged
to the church. This was owing, not only to the
great reverence for the sacred character prevalent
in those ages, but to a fuperftiious dread of the
sentence of excommunication, which the clergy
were ready to denounce against all who invaded.
their poffefions. Many observing this, made a
surrender of their lands to ecclesiastics, and con-
senting to hold them in fee of the church, ob-
tained as its vassals a degree of safety, which
without this device they were unable to procure.
By such an increase of the number of their vas.

J F. Paul, Hiflory of Ecclefiaft. Benefices, p. 107.

fills,

f3ls, the power of ecclesiastics received a real and B O 0 K
permanent augmentation; and as lands, held in
fee by the limited tenures common in those ages, '520
often returned to the persons on whom the fief
depended, considerable additions were made in
this way to the property of the clergy k.
THE solicitude of the clergy in providing for The great

personal im-

the safety of their own persons, was fill greater munitiesof
than that which they displayed in securing their .ecclefiaaic,
possessions; and their efforts to attain it were
still more successful. As they were consecrated
to the priestly office with much outward folem-
nity; were diflinguifhed from the reft of man-
kind by a peculiar garb and manner of life;
and arrogated to their order many privileges
which do not belong to other Christians, they
naturally became the objecs of excessive vene-
ration. As a superstitious spirit spread, they
were regarded as beings of a superior species to
the profane laity, whom it would be impious to
try by the fame laws, or to fubjeet to the fame
punilhments. This exemption from civil jurif-
diftion, granted at first to ecclesiastics as a
mark of refpe&, they soon claimed as a point of
right. This valuable immunity of the priest-
hood is afierted, not only in the decrees of popes
and councils, but was confirmed in the most

F. Paul, Hit. of Eccles. Benef. p. 66. Boulainvillcrs,
,tat de France, tom. i. 169. Lond. 1737.

a ample

a %o o ample form by many of the greatest emperoris;

-,-- As long as the clerical chara&er remained, the
1520. person of an eccleiaftic was in some degree sacred;

and unless he were degraded from his office, the

nhallowed hand of the civil judge durst not touch
him. But as the power of degradation was lodged
in the spiritual courts, the difficulty and expence
of obtaining such a sentence, too often secured ab-
solute impunity to offenders. Many assumed the
clerical character for no other reason, than that
it might screen them from the punishment which
their actions deserved'". The German nobles
complained loudly, that these anointed malefac-
tors, as they called them , seldom suffered capi-
tally, even for the most atrocious crimes; and
their independence on the civil magistrate is
often mentioned in the remonstrances of the
diets, as a privilege equally pernicious to society,
and to the morals of the clergy.

Their en- WHILE the clergy aflerted the privileges of
crouchments
onthejurif their own order with so much zeal, they made
-ialon of
th laity, continual encroachments upon those of the laity.

All causes relative to matrimony, to testaments,
to usury, to legitimacy of birth, as well as those
which concerned ecclesiastical revenues, were
thought to be so connected with religion, that

t Goldafli Conflitut. Imperial. Francof. 1673. vol. ii 9z
107.

" Rymer's Fwedera, vol. xiii. 532.

Centumn Giavam. § 31.

they

they could be tried only in the spiritual courts. B 0 0 K
Not satisfied with this ample jurifdieion, which I
extended to one half of the fubje&ts that give '5o '
rife to litigation among men, the clergy, with
wonderful industry, and by a thousand inventions,
endeavoured to draw all other causes into their
own courts °. As they had engrossed almost the
whole learning known in the dark ages, the fpi-
ritual judges were commonly so far superior in
knowledge and abilities to those, employed in the
secular courts, that the people at first favoured any
firetch that was made to bring their affairs under
the cognizance of a judicature, on the decisions
of which they could rely with more perfect confi-
dence than on those of the civil courts. Thus the
interest of the church, and the inclination of the
people, concurring to elude the jurifdiaion of the.
lay-magiftrate, soon reduced it almost to nothing P.
By means of this, vast power accrued to ecclesias-
tics, and no inconsiderable addition was made to
their revenue by the fums paid in those ages to
the persons who administered justice.
THE penalty by which the spiritual courts The dred.

f Il es' cas

enforced their sentences, added great weight and f fpiriial
terror to their jurifdition. The censure of ex- cenfuros.
communication was inflituted originally for pre-
serving the purity of the church; that obstinate
ofnenders, whose impious tenets or profane lives

(° iannonc Ililt. of Naples, book xix. § 3.
' Centum Gravan. § 9. 56. 64.

or.. II. 1_ were

B °10 K were a reproach to Christianity, might be cut off
-_ -- from the society of the faithful: this ecclesias.

520.' tics did not scruple to convert into an engine for

promoting their own power, and they inflited it
on the most frivolous occasions. Whoever de-
spifed any of their decisions, even concerning
civil matters, immediately incurred this dreadful
censure, which not only excluded them from all
the privileges of a Christian, but deprived them
of their rights -as men and citizensq; and the
dread of this rendered even the most fierce and
turbulent spirits obsequious to the authority of
the church.

The devices NOR did the clergy neglec the proper methods
of ecclesias-
tics to f- of preserving the wealth and power which they
cure their
ulurpations. had acquired with such industry and address.

The possessions of the church, being consecrated
to God, were declared to be unalienable; so that
the funds of a society which was daily gaining,
and could never lose, grew to be immense. In
Germany, it was computed that the ecclesiastics
had got into their hands more than one half of
the national property r In other countries, the
proportion varied; but the Ihare belonging to
the church was every where prodigious. These
vast possessions were not subjea to the burdens
imposed on the lands of the laity. The Ger-
man clergy were exempted by law from all

q Centum Gravam. § 34.

Centum Gravam. § 28.

taxes;

taxes'; and if, on any extraordinary emergence, 1B O I
ecclesiastics were pleased to grant some aid to- ---
wards supplying the public exigencies, this was 1520o
confidered as a free gift flowing from their own
generosity, which the civil magistrate had no title
todemand, far less to exact. In consequence of
this strange solecism in government, the laity in
Germany had the mortification to find themselves
loaded with excessive impositions, because such
as possessed the greatest property were freed from
any obligation to support or to defend the state.

GRIEVOUS, however, as the exorbitant wealth The Cer-

man eccle-

and numerous privileges of the clerical order iafiMot-.
were to the other members of the Germanic body, 'y so,"'ei
they would have reckoned it some mitiga-
tion of the evil, if there had been possessed only
by ecclesiastics residing among themselves, who
would have been less apt to make an improper
use of their riches, or to exercise their rights
with unbecoming rigour. But the bishops of
Rome having early put in a claim, the boldest
that ever human ambition suggested, of being
supreme and infallible heads of the Christian
church; they, by their profound policy and un-
wearied perseverance, by their address in avail-
ing themselves of every circumstance which oc-
curred, by taking advantage of the fuperfition
of some princes, of the necessities of others,
and of the credulity of the people, at length efta-

' Centum Gravam. § z8. Goldafli Conft. Imper. ii. 79.
108. Pfcffel Hiit. du Droit Publ. 350. 374.

L 2 blified

B 0°1 K blified their pretensions, in opposition both to

P the interest and common sense of mankind. Ger.
'5°.* many was. the country which these .ecclefiatical

sovereigns governed with most absolute autho.
rity. They excommunicated and deposed some
of its most illustrious emperors, and excited their
fubjefts, their ministers, and even' their children,
to take arms against them. Amidit these con-
tests, the popes continually extended their own
immunities, spoiling the secular princes gradually
of their most valuable prerogatives, and the Ger-
man church felt all the rigour of that oppression
which flows from fubjecion to foreign dominion,
and foreign exations.

Nominated THE right of conferring benefices, which the
by the pope.

popes usurped during that period of confusion;
was an acquisition of great importance, and
exalted the ecclesiastical power upon the ruins
of the temporal. The emperors and other
princes of Germany had long been in possession
of this right, which served to increase both their
authority and their revenue. But by wresting
it out of their hands, the popes were enabled
to fill the empire with their own creatwres; they
accustomed a great body of every prince's sub-
jects to depend, not upon him but upon the Ro-
man fee; they bestowed upon Ifrangers the richest
benefices in every country, and drained their
wealth to supply the luxury of a foreign court.
Even the patience of the most fuperflitious ages
could no longer bear fiich oppression; and so loud

and

and frequent were the complaints and murmurs of B I0o K..
the Germans, that the popes, afraid of irritating - _
them too far, consented, contrary to their usual I520.
practice, to abate fbomewhat of their pretensions,
and to ress satisfied with the right of nomina-
tion to such benefices as happened to fall vacant
during fix months in the year, leaving the dif-
pofal of the remainder to the princes and other
legal patrons '

BUT the court of Rome easily found expedients The expe-

"dients for

for eluding an agreement which put such re-,erainifng
firaints on its power. The praEtice of reserving "thiP poper
certain benefices in every country to the pope's ineff'teual.o
immediate nomination, which had been long -
known, and often complained of, was extended
far beyond its ancient bounds. All the benefices
possessed by cardinals, or any of the numerous
officers in the Roman court; those held by per-
bons who happened to die at Rome, or within
forty miles of that city on their journey to or fi-om
it; such as became vacant by translation, with
many others, were included in the number of re-
served benefices; Julius II. and Leo X. firetch-
ing the matter to the utmost, often collated to
benefices where the right of reservation had not
been declared, on pretence of having mentally
reserved this privilege to theifelves. The right
of reservation however, even with this extension,
had certain limits, as it could be exercise*d only

F . Paul, Hilt. of Ecclcf. Benef. 20o4. Gold. Con.fit.
Imper. i. 408.

L, 3 where

B °0 K where the benefice was actually vacant; and there.

II.
Luv-r @ fore, in order to render the exertion of papa]
520ce power unbounded, expeetative graces, or mandates

nominating a person to succeed to a benefice upon
the first vacancy that ihould happen, were brought
into use. By means of there, Germany was filled
with persons who were servilely dependant on the
court of Rome, from which they had received
such reversionary grants; princes were defrauded,
in a great degree, of their prerogatives; the
rights of lay-patrons were preoccupied, and ren-
dered almost entirely vain .

Venality of THE manner in which these extraordinary
thecourtof powers were exercised, rendered them flill more

odious and intolerable. The avarice and extor-
tion of the court of Rome, were become excelfive
almost to a proverb. The practice of felling be-
nefices was so notorious, that no pains were taken
to conceal or to disguise it. Companies of mer-
chants openly purchased the benefices of different
diftrits in Germany from the pope's ministers,
and retailed them at an advanced price . Pious
men beheld with deep regret these fimoniacal
tranfaaions, so unworthy the ministers of a chris-
tian church; while politicians complained of the
loss sustained by the exportation of so much wealth
in that irreligious traffic.

u Centum Gravam. § 21. Fafcic. Rer. expet. &c. 334'

Gold. Conft. Imper. i. 391. 404, 405. F. Paul, Hilt. of
Eccl. Benef. 167. 199.

x Fafcic. Rer. expet. i. 359.

THE

THE fums, indeed, which the court of Rome B o 0 K

drew by its stated and legal impositions from all
the countries acknowledging its authority, were itdrained
so considerable, that it is not strange that princes, other con-
as well as their fubjets, murmured at the smallest wealtb.
addition made to them by unnecessary or illicit
means. Every ecclesiastical person, upon his ad-
miflion to his benefice, paid annats, or one year's
produce of his living, to the pope; and as that
tax was exaaed with great rigour, its amount was
very great. To this must be added, the frequent
demands made by the popes of free gifts from
the clergy, together with the extraordinary levies
of tenths upon ecclesiastical benefices, on pre-
tence of expeditions againit the Turks, seldom
intended, or carried into execution; and from the
whole, the vast proportion of the revenues of the
church, which flowed continually to Rome, may
be estimated.

SUCH were the dissolute manners, the exorbi- The ""nitr,

effet of all

tant wealth, the enormous power and privileges therecaufe.
of the clergy before the Reformation; such the
oppressive rigour of that dominion which the
popes had eftablifled over the christian world;
and such the sentiments concerning them that
prevailed in Germany at the beginning of the fix-
teenth century. Nor has this sketch been copied
from the controversial writers of that age, who,
in the heat of disputation, may be fufpeaed of
having exaggerated the errors, or of having mil-
represented the conduct of that church which they

L 4 laboured

B i0 K laboured to overturn; it is formed upon more
-v -> authentic evidence, upon the memorials and re-
510o. monstrances of the Imperial diets, enumerating

the grievances under which the empire groaned,
in order to obtain the redress of them. Diffatif-
faction must have risen to a great height among the
people, when these grave assemblies expressed
themselves with that degree of acrimony which
abounds in their remonitrances; and if they de-
manded the abolition of these enormities with so
much vehemence, the people, we may be assured,
uttered their sentiments and desires in bolder and
more virulent language.

Men pre- To men thus prepared for shaking off the
pared to
embrace Lu- yoke, Luther addressed himself with certainty of
tnh's opi- success. As they had long felt its weight, and
nions,

had borne it with impatience, they listened with
joy to the firnf offer of procuring them deliver-
ance. Hence proceeded the fond and eager
reception that his docrines met with, and the

- rapidity with which they spread over all the pro-

and to tole- .
rate his de- vinces of Germany. Even the impetuosity and
seas. fierceness of Luther's fpirir, his confidence in

asserting his own opinions, and the arrogance as
well as contempt wherewith he treated all who
differed from him, which, in ages of greater
moderation and refinement, have been reckoned
defeats in the character of that reformer, did hot
appear excessive to his contemporaries, whldli
minds were firongly agitated by those interefirng
controversies vwhich he carriced on, and who lha;

themlelvcs

hemfelves endured the rigour of papal tyranny, iB 6'o'I
and leen the corruptions in the church against - _--
which he exclaimed. : s2

NOR were they offended at that;grofs scurrility
with which his polemical writings.;are filled, or
at the low buffoonery which he sometimes in-
troduces into his gravest 'discourses. .No'difpute .
was managed in thole rude times without a large
portion of the former; and the latter was .cornm
mon, even on the most solemn occasions,: and..in
treating the most sacred. fubjeds. So .fad were
either of there from doing hurt to his cause, :that
inveEtive and ridicule had some effe&, as -well
as more laudable arguments, in exposing the
errors of popery, and in determining mankind to
abandon them.
BESIDES all these causes of Luther's rapid pro- The eft't

of the in-

grels, arising from the nature of his enterprise, ventin of
and the juncture at which he undertook it, he Pt; progocs
reaped advantage fiom some foreign and acven- t hrTRei-

'

t.

. ° to l~ormnatin.

titious circumstances, the beneficial influence of
which none of his forerunners in the fame course
had enjoyed. Among these may be reckoned the
invention of the art of printing, about half a
Century before his time. By this fortunate .dif-
Covery, the facility of acquiring and of propar
gating knowledge was wonderfully incrcarfcd, apn
Luther's books, which must otherwise have made
their way slowly and with uncertainty into diflant
countries, spread at once all over Europe. Nor
yere they read only by the rich and the learned,

who.

B °10 K who alone had access to books before that inven.

A _. tion; they got into the hands of the people, who,
£520. upon this appeal to them as judges, ventured to

examine and to reject many doctrines which they
had formerly been required to believe, without
being taught to underifand them.

And of the THE revival of learning at the fame period was
revival of
earnig. a circumstance extremely friendly to the Reform.

ation. The study of the ancient Greek and Ro-
man authors, by enlightening the human mind
with liberal and found knowledge, routed it
from that profound lethargy in which it had been
funk during several centuries. Mankind seem,
at that period, to have recovered the powers of
enquiring and of thinking for themselves, facul-
ties of which they had long loft the use; and
fond of the acquisition, they exercised them with
great boldness upon all fubjets. They were not
now afraid of entering an uncommon path, or o
embracing a new opinion. Novelty appears ra-
ther to have been a recommendation of a dotrine;
and instead of being startled when the daring
hand of Luther drew aside, or tore the veil
which covered established errors, the genius
of the age applauded and aided the attempt.
Luther, though a stranger to elegance in taft or
composition, zealously promoted the cultivation
of ancient literature; and sensible of its being
necessary to the right underflanding of the fcrp-
tures, he himself had acquired considerable
knowledge both in the Hebrew and Greek

tongues,

tongues. Melanahon, and some other of his B ° 0 K
disciples, were eminent proficients in the polite *
arts; and as the fame ignorant monks who op- 's0'
posed the introduction of learning into Germany,
set themselves with equal fierceness against Lu-
ther's opinions, and declared the good reception
of the latter to be the effect of the progress which
the former had made, the cause of learning and
of the Reformation came to be confidered as
closely conneced with each other, and, in every
country, had the fame friends and the fame ene-
mies. This enabled the reformers to carry on
the contest at first with great superiority. Eru-
dition, industry, accuracy of sentiment, purity of
composition, even wit and raillery, were almost
wholly on their fide, and triumphed with ease
over illiterate monks, whose rude arguments,
expressed in a perplexed and barbarous style, were
found insufficient for the defence of a system, the
errors of which, all the art and ingenuity of its
later and more learned advocates have not been
able to palliate.
THAT bold spirit of inquiry, which the revival Luther ad-

ed by per-

of learning excited in Europe, was so favourable ;onsY ho
to the Reformation, that Luther was aided in his did ot i&h
progress, and mankind were prepared to embrace
his doctrines, by persons who did not wish fuc-
cess to his undertaking. The greater part of
the ingenious men who applied to the study of an-
cient literature towards the close of the fifteenth

century,

B. 0 0 K century, and the beginning of the sixteenth,

A _^- though they had no intention, and perhaps no
I530. wish, to overturn the eftablilhed system of reli.

gion, had discovered the absurdity of many tenets
and praAices authorised by the church, and per.
ceived the futility of those arguments, by which
illiterate monks endeavoured to defend them,
Their contempt of these advocates for the re-
ceived errors, led them frequently to expose the
opinions which they supported, and to ridicule
their ignorance with great freedom and severity.
By this, men were prepared for the more serious
attacks made upon them by Luther, and their
reverence both for the doctrines and :persons
against whom he inveighed, was coifiderably,
abated. This was particularly the case:;in Ger;
many. When the first attempts were made/to
revive a taste for ancient !learning, in ,that coun-
try, the ecclesiastics There, who ·were frill more
ignorant than their .bretlren on the other fide of
the Alps, set ;themfe]ves to oppose its progress
with more active zeal; and the patrons of the
new fludies, in return, attacked them with greater
violence. 'In the writings of 1Reuchlin; Hutten,
and the other revivers of learning in Germany, the
corruptions of the church of Rome are censured
with an acrimony of flyle, little inferior to that of
Luther himself Y.

Y Gerdefius HiR. F.vang. Renov. vol. i. p. 14.:l 57

Seckend. lib. i. p. Io3. Vonder Hardl H-ist, Literar. Re-
form. pars ii.

.. ~,: ...~~. 7IFROM

FROM thle fame cause proceeded the frequent B ° ° K
ftriures of Erafinus upon' th'e :ertrors of the A
church, as well as upon the ignorance and vices Particularly
of the clergy. His: reputation and authority Erasmus-
were so high in Europe at the beginning of the
sixteenth century, and his works were read with
such universal admiration, that the effect of there
deserves to be mentioned as one of the circum-
fances which contributed considerably towards
Luther's success. Erasmus, having been deftfied
for the church, and trained up in the know-
ledge of ecclesiastical literature, applied himself
more to theological inquiries than any of the
revivers of learning in that age.; His acute
judgment and extensive erudition enabled him
to discover many errors, both in the doctrine and
worship of the Romish church. Some of there he
confuted with great solidity of reasoning -and
force of eloquence. Others he treated as bjet&s
of ridicule, and turned againft-them that' irre-
fifible torrent of popular and satirical wit, of
which he had the command. There was hardly
any opinion or practice of the Romilh church
which Luther endeavoured to reform, but what
had been previously animadverted upon by Eras-
1mus, and had afforded him subjea either of cen-
lure or of raillery. Accordingly, when Luther
firftbegan his attack upon the church, Erasmus
femcd to applaud his condua; he courted the
friendship of fIveral of his disciples and patrons,
and condeimned the behaviour and spirit of his

adver-

B 0 0 K adversaries ". He concurred openly with him ir
L.->.. inveighing against the school divines, as tht

50to' teachers of a system equally unedifying and ob.

fcure. He joined him in endeavouring to turn the
attention of men to the tfudy of the holy scrip.
tures, as the only standard of religious truth'.

VARIOUS Circumstances, however, prevented

Erasmus from holding the fame course with
Luther. The natural timidity of his temper; his
want of that firength of mind which alone can
prompt a man to assume the character of a re.
formerb; his excessive deference for persons in
high station; his dread of losing the pensions
and other emoluments, which their liberality had
conferred upon him; his extreme love of peace,
and hopes of reforming abuses gradually, and byl
gentle methods, all concurred in determining
him not only to repress and to moderate the
zeal with which he had once been animated

- Seckend. lib. i. p. 40. 96.
a Vonder Hardt Hiftor. Literar. Reform. pars i. Gerde.
Hifl. Evang. Renov. i. 147.

b Erafnus himself is candid enough to acknowledge this:

" Luther," fays he, " has given us many a wholerome doc
trine, and many a good counsel. I with he had not defcated
the effedt of them by intolerable faults. But if he had written
every thing in the molf unexceptionable manner, I had to
inclination to die for the fake of truth. Every man hath not
the courage requisite to make a martyr; and I am afraid, that
if I were put to the trial. I should imitate St. Peter." Epid.
Erafmi in Jortin's Life of Erafi. vol. i.p. 273,

~~~~~~~2 ~against

ainft the errors of the church , but to assume B o°° K
e character of a mediator between Luther and - ,
isopponents. But though Erasmus soon began Ls5o
o censure Luther as too daring and impetuous,
nd was at last prevailed upon to write against
iim, he mufl, nevertheless, be confidered as his
orerunner and auxiliary in this war upon the
hurch. He first scattered the feeds, which Lu-
ter cherished and brought to maturity. His
raillery and oblique censures prepared the way
for Luther's inve&ives and more direct attacks,
In this light Erasmus appeared to the zealous de-
fenders of the Romish church in his own times d.
n this light he mufft be confidered by every per-
son conversant in the history of that period.

IN this long enumeration of the circumfsances
which combined in favouring the progress of
Luther's opinions, or in weakening the resistance
of his adversaries, I have avoided entering into
any difcufiion of the theological doctrines of
popery, and have not attempted to shew how
repugnant they are to the spirit of Christianity,
and how destitute of any foundation in reason,
in the word of God, or in the practice of the
primitive church, leaving those topics entirely
to ecclesiastical historians, to whose province
they peculiarly belong. But when we add the
Cffel of there religious considerations to the in-

'Jortin's Life of Erasmus, vol. i. p. 258.
Vonder IIardt Iilt. Literar. Reform. par: i. p. 2.

fluence

B o o K 'fluence of political causes;, it is obvious that th
,-~-._ united operation of both on the human rin
'520. must have been sudden and' irresistible. Though

to Luther's: contemporaries, who were too nea
perhaps' to 'th'e scene,' or too deeply interested ii
it; f6 trace causes with accuracy, or to examin
'thlm 'nwith '"cdolnefs, the rapidity with which hi!
6pini'ons fpreadi appeared to be so uhaccountable,
tthat some of thehi imputed it to a certain un'
''comfion and .malignant position of the stars,
which scattered the spirit of giddiness and inno-
vation over the world'; it is evident, that the
success of the Reformation was the natural effet
of many powerful causes prepared by peculia
Providence,- and -happily corifpiring to that end
This attempt to investigate these causes, and t
throw- lighit on 'an event so fingular;'iand im
portant, will'not, perhaps, be- deemed an unne
ceffary digreffon.-I return from it to.the course
of the history. .

Proceei;nps THE Diet'at Worms conlduaed its delibera-
at Worm. tions 'with 'that flow fdomrnlity peculrar' to such

'5"' assemblies. 'Much time 'was fpel t:in e.ffablifhing

some regulations' with' regard to the internal po
lice of-'tlhe empire. The juri'idiction of the Im-
perial chariber wis'confirmed, and the forms of
its proceeding rendered more fixed and regular.
A council of regency was appointed to alfift Ser-
dinand in the government of the empire during

e Jovii itioria, Lut. 1553. fol. p. 34.

any

any occasional absence of the emperor; which B O0 K
from the extent of the emperor's dominions, as -,
well as the multiplicity of his affairs, was an 'szx'
event that might be frequently -expected f. The
Bate of religion was then taken into confider-
ation. There were not wanting some plau- The empe-

ro views

fible reaSons which might have induced Charles with regard
to have declared himself the prote&or of Lu- toLuther.
ther's cause, or at least to have connived at its
progress. If he had pofeffed no other dominions
but those which belonged to him in Germany, and
no other crown besides the Imperial, he might
have been disposed, perhaps, to favour a man,
whoafferted so boldly the privileges and immu-
nities for which the empire had struggled so
long with the popes. But the vast and dan-
gerous schemes which Francis I. was forming
against Charles, made it necessary for him to
regulate his conduct by views more extenive
than those which would have suited a German
prince; and it being of the utmost importance
tofecure the pope's friendflip, this determined
him to treat Luther with great severity, as the
mol effecual method of toothing Leo into a
concurrence with his meafires. His eagerness
to accomplifli this, rendered him not unwilling
to gratify the papal legates in Germany, who
infiled that, without any delay or formal deli-
beration, the diet ought to condemn a man

Pont. Hcutcr. Rer. Aufir. lib. viii. c. I . p. 195. Pfeffel

Abrreg Chronol. p. 598.
VoL. II. M whom

B 0oo K whom the pope had already excommunicated

I!.
----' as an incorrigible heretic. - Such an abrupt
5"'1- manner of proceeding, however, being deemed

unprecedented and unjust by the members of the

He is du. diet, they made a point of Luther's appearing in
moned to
appear. person, and declaring whether he adhered or not

to those opinions which had drawn upon him
the censures of the church . Not only the em.
peror, but all the princes through whose terri.
tories he had to pass, granted him a fafe-con.
March 6. duEt; and Charles wrote to him at the fame time,

requiring his immediate attendance on the diet,
and renewing his promises of protection from
any injury or violence h. Luther did not hesitate
one moment about yielding obedience, and set
out for Worms, attended by the herald who had
brought the emperor's letter and fafe.condut&.
While on his journey, many of his friends, whom
the fate of Huss under similar circumstances,
and notwithstanding the fame security of an Im-
perial fafe-condcEt, filled with folicicude, ad.
vised and intreated him not to rush wantonly

Hisun. into the midst of danger. But Luther, superior
spirit. to such terrors, silenced them with this reply,

" I am lawfully called," said he, " to appear
in that city, and thither will I go in the name
of the Lord, though as many devils, as there
are tiles on the houses, were there combined
againfl me'."

c P. Mart. Ep. 7zz. b Luth. Oper. ii. 4"'
! Luth. Oper. ii. 412.

*T,,

THE reception which he met with at Worms, B o0 K
was such as he might have reckoned a full re..
ward of all his labours, if vanity and the love of His5rc'p
applause had been the principles by which he was tion at
influenced. Greater crowds afembled to behold
him, than had appeared at the emperor's public
entry; his apartments were daily filled with
princes and personages of the highest rank k, and
he was treated with all the refpet paid to those who
possess the power of directing the understanding
and sentiments of other men; an homage, more
sincere, as well as more flattering, than any
which pre-eminence in birth or condition can
command. At his appearance before the diet, The man-

p nerof his

he behaved with great decency, and with equal appearance.
firmness. He readily acknowledged an excess
of vehemence and acrimony in his controversial
writings, but refused to retract his opinions, un-
less he were convinced of their falsehood; or to
consent to their being tried by any other rule than
the word of God. When neither threats nor
entreaties could prevail on him to depart from
this resolution, tome of the ecclesiastics pro-
posed to imitate the example of the council of
Constance, and by punishing the author of this
pestilent heresy, who was now in their power, to
deliver the church at once from such an evil.
But the members of the diet refuting to expose
the German integrity to fi-efl reproach by a fccond
violation of public faith; and Charles being no

k Seckend. 156. Luth. Opcr. ii. 414.

M 2 leTs

B 0 0 K less unwilling to bring a stain upon the begin.
L---,,J ning of his administration by such an ignomini.

35Z1- Ous action, Luther was permitted to depart in

April 26. safety '. A few days after he left the city, a
Edia revere edit was published in the emperor's name,
sainfihim. and by authority of the diet, depriving him, as

an obstinate and excommunicated criminal, of
all the privileges which he enjoyed as a fubje&
of the empire, forbidding any prince to harbour
or protect him, and requiring all to concur in
seizing his person as soon as the term specified in
his fafe-conduct was expired m.

Heis fezed BUT this rigorous decree had no considerable
and coneal- effet, the execution of it being prevented, partly
vd at Wart-
lurg. by the multiplicity of occupations, which the

commotions in Spain, together with the wars in
Italy and the Low Countries, created to the
emperor; and partly by a prudent precaution
employed by the eletor of Saxony, Luther's
faithful and discerning patron. As Luther, on
his return from Worms, was passing near Alten-
stein in Thuringia, a number of horsemen in
masks rushed suddenly out of a wood, where the
elector had appointed them to lie in wait for him,
and surrounding his company, carried him, after
dismissing all his attendants, to Wartburg, a
strong castle not far distant. There the elecor
ordered him to be supplied with every thing nc-

F. Paul, Hifl. ofCcunc. p. 13. Seckend. 160.
u" Gold. Conft. Imperial. ii. 4cS.

ceffary

ceffary or agreeable, but the place of his retreat B 0 0 K
was carefully concealed, until the fury of the
present storm againit him began to abate, upon I52''
a change in the political situation of Europe.
In this solitude, where he remained nine months,
and which he frequently called his Patmos, after
the name of that island to which the apostle John
was banished, he exerted his usual vigour and
industry in defence of his doctrines, or in con-
futation of his adversaries, publishing several
treatises, which revived the spirit of his followers,
astonished to a great degree, and disheartened at
the sudden disappearance of their leader.

DURING his confinement, his opinions con- Progress of
tinued to gain ground, acquiring the ascendant nions.
in almost every city in Saxony. At this time,
the Auguflinians of Wittemberg, with the ap-
probation of the university, and the connivance
of the eleEtor, ventured upon the firif ftep to-
wards an alteration in the established forms of
public worf-lip, by abolilhing the celebration of
private males, and by giving the cup as well as
the bread to the laity in administering the sacra-
ment of the Lord's supper.

WHATEVER consolation the courage and fuc- Decree.of
cess of his disciples, or the progress of his doc- fity ofPari
trines in his own country, afforded Luther in his ithcm.
retreat, he there received information of two
events which considerably damped his joy, as
they feemeed to lay insuperable obstacles in the

M 3 way

B oO K way of propagating his principles, in the two

_V^- . modt powerful kingdoms of Europe. One was,
3521- a solemn decree, condemning his opinions, pub-

lifhed by the university of Paris, the most
ancient, and, at that time, the most respectable

4enryVIII. of the learned societies in Europe. The other
gainst was the answer written to his book concerning
them. the Babylonifl captivity by Henry VIII. of Eng.

land. That monarch, having been educated un-
der the eye of a suspicious father, who, in order
to prevent his attending to business, kept him
occupied in the study of literature, fill retained
a greater love of learning, and stronger habits of
application to it, than are common among princes
of so active a disposition and such violent pas-
sions. Being ambitious of acquiring glory of
every 'ind, as well as zealously attached to the
Romifi church, and highly exasperated against
Luther, who had treated Thomas Aquinas, his
favourite author, with great contempt, Henry
did not think it enough to exert his royal autho-
rity in opposing the opinions of the reformer,
but resolved likewise to combat them with fcho-
laftic weapons. With this view he published
his treatise on the Seven Sacraments, which,
though forgotten at present, as books of con-
troverfy always are, when the occasion that pro-
duced them is past, is not destitute of polemical
ingenuity and acuteness, and was represented by
the flattery of his courtiers to be a work of such
wonderful science and learning, as exalted him
no leCs above other authors in merit, than he

was

was diflinguifhed among them by his rank. The B O, I K
pope, to whom it was presented with the greatest :
formality in full consistory, spoke of it in such o"'
terms, as if it had been dictated by immediate
inspiration; and as a testimony of the gratitude of
the church for his extraordinary zeal, conferred on
him the title of Defender of the Faith, an appella-
tion which Henry soon forfeited in the opinion
ofthofe from whom he derived it, and which is
still retained by his fuccefors, though the avowed
enemies of those opinions, by contending for
which he merited that honourable diftintion.
Luther, who was not overawed, either by the Lulther'
authority of the University, or the dignity of boph.
the Monarch, soon published his animadversions
on both, in a style no less vehement and revere,
than he would have used in confuting his meanest
antagonist. This indecent boldness, instead of
shocking his contemporaries, was confidered by
them as a new proof of his undaunted spirit. A
controversy managed by disputants so illuftri-
ous, drew universal attention; and such was the
contagion of the spirit of innovation, diffused
through Europe in that age, and so powerful the
evidence which accompanied the do&trines of the
reformers on their first publication, that, in spite
both of the civil and ecclesiastical powers com-
bined against them, they daily gained converts
both in France and in England.

How desirous soever the emperor might be Stateofaf.
tO put a flop to Luther's progress, he was often twetn

M 4 obliged, FranChales on,
M 4 obliged, Frnci,,.

B o K way of propagating his principles, in the two

- r most powerful kingdoms of Europe. One was,
1511. a solemn decree, condemning his opinions, pub-

lifhed by the university of Paris, the moss
ancient, and, at that time, the most respectable

RenryVJ1I. of the learned Societies in Europe. The other
agatint was the answer written to his book concerning
them. the Babyloniil captivity by Henry VIII. of Eng-

land. That monarch, having been educated un-
der the eye of a suspicious father, who, in order
to prevent his attending to business, kept him
occupied in the study of literature, still retained
a greater love of learning, and stronger habits of
application to it, than are common among princes
of so active a disposition and such violent pas-
sions. Being ambitious of acquiring glory of
every .nd, as well as zealously attached to the
Romish church, and highly exasperated against
Luther, who had treated Thomas Aquinas, his
favourite author, with great contempt, Henry
did not think it enough to exert his royal autho-
rity in opposing the opinions of the reformer,
but resolved likewise to combat them with fcho-
laftic weapons. With this view he published
his treatise on the Seven Sacraments, which,
though forgotten at present, as books of con-
troverfy always are, when the occasion that pro-
duced them is past, is not defRitute of polemical
ingenuity and acuteness, and was represented by
the flattery of his courtiers to be a work of such
wonderful science and learning, as exalted him
no less above other authors in merit, than he b

was e

W;S !

i

was distinguished among them by his rank. The B 00oo K
pope, to whom it was presented with the greatest
formality in full consistory, spoke of it in such '
terms, as if it had been dictated by immediate
inspiration; and as a testimony of the gratitude of
the church for his extraordinary zeal, conferred on
him the title of Defender of the Faith, an appella-
tion which Henry soon forfeited in the opinion
ofthofe from whom he derived it, and which is
aill retained by his successors, though the avowed
enemies of those opinions, by contending for
which he merited that honourable diftinaion.
Luther, who was not overawed, either by the Luther's

o reply to

authority of the University, or the dignity of both.
the Monarch, soon published his animadversions
on both, in a style no less vehement and revere,
than he would have used in confuting his meanest
antagonist. This indecent boldness, instead of
ihocking his contemporaries, was confidered by
them as a new proof of his undaunted spirit. A
controversy managed by disputants so illuftri-
ous, drew universal attention; and such was the
contagion of the spirit of innovation, diffused
through Europe in that age, and so powerful the
evidence which accompanied the doatrines of the
reformers on their first publication, that, in spite
both of the civil and ecclesiastical powers com-
bined against them, they daily gained converts
both in France and in England.

How desirous soever the emperor might be stateof f.
to put a flop to Luther's progress, he was often twen

M 4 obliged, Franles
M 4 obliged, Fr.nci,.

B OO K obliged, during the diet at Worms, to turn his
c_- thoughts to matters still more interesting, and

5Z1'' which demanded more immediate attention. A

war was ready to break out between him and the
French king in Navarre, in the Low Countries,
and in Italy; and it required either great address
to avert the danger, ot timely and wife precautions
to resist it. Every circumstance, at that junc-
ture, inclined Charles to prefer the former mea-
sure. Spain was torn with intestine commotions.
In Italy, he had not hitherto secured the assist-
ance of any one ally. In the Low Countries,
his fubjecs trembled at the thoughts of a rupture
with France, the fatal effeats of which on their
commerce they had often experienced. From
these considerations, as well as from the folici-
tude of Chievres, during his whole adminiftra-
tion, to maintain peace between the two mo-
narchs, proceeded the emperor's backwardness
to commence hostilities. But Francis and his
mninifters,did not breathe the fame pacific spirit.
He easily foresaw that concord could not long
fubfiRf, where interest, emulation, and ambition
conspired to dissolve it; and he possessed several
advantages which flattered him with the hopes
of surprising his rival, and of overpowering him
before he could put himself in a poflure of de-
fence. The French king's dominions, fiom
their compact situation, from their fubje6tion to
the royal authority, from the genius of the people,
fond of war, and attached to their sovereign by
every tie of duty and affct6ion, were more ca-

pable

pable of a great or sudden effort, than the larger B 0o K
but disunited territories of the emperor, in one -
part of which the people were in arms against his ,5s'L
ministers, and in all his prerogative was more
limited than that of his rival.
THE only princes, in whose power it was to Henryvm.

fivours the

have kept down, or to have extinguished this emperor.
fame on its first appearance, either negleced to
exert themselves, or were active in kindling and
spreading it. Henry VIII. though he affected to
alfume the name of mediator, and both parties
made frequent appeals to him, had laid aside the
impartiality which suited that characer. Wolfey,
by his artifices, had. estranged him so entirely
from the French king, that he secretly fomented
the discord which he ought to have composed,
and waited only for some decent pretext to join
his arms to those of the emperor ".
LEo's endeavours to excite discord between Len hefi-

rates be-

the emperor and Francis were more avowed, tweenthe
and had greater influence. Not only his duty, tivals.
as the common father of Christendom, but. his
interefl: as an Italian potentate, called upon the
pope to at as the guardian of the public tran-
quillity, and to avoid any mealure that might
overturn the system, which after much blood-
flied, and many negociations, was now eflablifh-
cd in Italy. Accordingly Leo, who instantly

" Herbert. Fiddls's Life of Wol'cy, 258-

dtliccrncd

B °oo K discerned the propriety of this conduc, had
A__3 fformed a scheme, upon Charles's promotion to

511.' the Imperial dignity, of rendering himself the

umpire between the rivals, by soothing them al.
ternately, while he entered into no close con-
federacy with either; and a pontiff less ambi.
tious and enterprizing, might have saved Eu.
rope from many calamities by adhering to this
plan. But this high-fpirited prelate, who was
still in the prime of life, longed passionately to
distinguish his pontificate by some splendid aftion.
He was impatient to walh away the infamy of
having loft Parma and Placentia, the acquiR-
tion of which reflected so much lustre on the
administration of his predecessor Julius. He
beheld, with the indignation natural to Italians
in that age, the dominion which the Tranfal-
pine, or as they, in imitation of the Roman arro-.
gance, denominated them, the barbarous nations,
had attained in Italy. He flattered himself, that
after assisting the one monarch to strip the other
of his possessions in that country, he might find
means of driving out the victor in his turn, and
acquire the glory of refloring Italy to the liberty
and happiness which it had enjoyed before the
invasion of Charles VIII. when every state was
governed by its native princes, or its own laws,
and unacquainted with a foreign joke. Extra-
vagant and chimerical as this proje&t may seem,
it was the favourite obje& of almost every Italian
eminent for genius or enterprize during great
part of the sixteenth century. They vainly hoped,

that

that by superior ikill in the artifices and refine- B O .1
ments of negociation, they should be able to i_
baffle the efforts of nations, less polished indeed 15s1.
than themselves, but much more powerful and
warlike. So alluring was the profpea of this to
Leo, that notwithitanding the gentleness of his
disposition, and his fondness for the pleasures of
a refined and luxurious ease, he hastened to dif-
turb the peace of Europe, and to plunge himself
into a dangerous war, with an impetuosity scarcely
inferior to that of the turbulent and martial Ju-
lius".

IT was in Leo's power, however, to chufe
which of the monarchs he would take for his
confederate against the other. Both of them
courted his friendship; he wavered for some time
between them, and at first concluded an alliance
with Francis. The object of this treaty was the
conquest of Naples, which the confederates agreed
to divide between them. The pope, it is pro-
bable, flattered himself, that the brisk and active
spirit of Francis, seconded by the fame qualities
in his fubjefts, would get the itart of the flow
and wary councils of the emperor, and that they
might over-run with ease this detached portion
of his dominions, ill provided for defence, and
always the prey of every invader. But whether
the French king, by discovering too openly his
suspicion of Leo's sincerity, disappointed there

Guic, lib. xiv. p. 173.

hopes;

B oJo K hopes; whether the treaty was only an artifice

CL-,'-_ of the pope's to cover the more serious negocia-
152ZI tions which he was carrying on with Charles;

whether he was enticed by the profpea of reap.
ing greater advantages from an union with that
prince; or whether he was toothed by the zeal
which Charles had manifested for the honour of

Cncludes a the church in condemning Luther; certain it is,
treaty with
cailes. that he soon deserted his new ally, and made

overtures of frienndfhip, though with great fecre-
cy, to the emperor P. Don John Manuel, the
fame man who had been the favourite of Philip,
and whose address had disconcerted all Ferdi-
nand's schemes, having been delivered, upon the
death of that monarch, from the prison to which
he had been confined, was now the Imperial am-
baffador at Rome, and fully capable of improv-
ing this favourable disposition in the pope to his
master's advantage q. To him the conduct of this
negociation was entirely committed; and being
carefully concealed from Chievres, whose aver-
sion from a war with France would have prompt-
ed him to retard or to defeat it, an alliance be-
tween the pope and emperor was quickly con-
May s. eluded . The chief articles in this treaty, which

proved the foundation of Charles's grandeur in
Italy, were, that the pope and emperor ihouldjoin

P Guic. lib. xiv. p. 175. Mem. de Bellay, Par. 1573. P. 24'
' Jovii Vita Lconis, lib. iv. p. 89.
r Guic. 1. xiv. 181. Mem. de Bellay, p. 24. Du Mont
Corps Diplom. tom. iv. suppl. p. 96. t

their

their forces to expel the French out of the Mi- B °o° K
lnefe, the pofeffion of which should be granted --
toFra'ncis Sforza, a son of Ludovico the Moor,
who had resided at Trent since the tin-e that his
brother Maximilian had been difpoffeffed of his
dominions by the French king; that Parma and
Placentia should be restored to the church; that
theemperor should assist the pope in conquering
Ferrara; that the annual tribute paid by the king-
dom of Naples to the Holy See should be in-
creased; that the emperor should take the family
of Medici under his protetion ; that he should
grant to the cardinal of that name a pension of
ten thousand ducats upon the archbishopric of
Toledo; and should fettle lands in the kingdom
ofNaples to the fame- value upon Alexander the
natural son of Lorenzo de Medici.
THE tranfadiing an affair of such moment with- Death of

Chievre¢,

out his participation, appeared to Chievres so the empe
decisive a proof of.his having loft the ascendant at and.
which he had hitherto maintained over the mind mini"ser
of his pupil, that his chagrin on this account,
added to the melancholy with which he was
overwhelmed on taking a view of the many and
unavoidable calamities attending a war against
Irance, is said to have shortened his days'. But
though this, perhaps, may be only the conjec-
tlreofhiftorians, fond of attributing every thing
that befalls illustrious personages to extraordinary

' Bclcarii Comment. de Rcb. Gallic. 483.

causes,

B 0 0 K causes, and of ascribing even their diseases an

!i.
Do_ . death to the effeet of political passions, whic

a51C· are more 'apt to disturb the enjoyment than t

abridge the period of life, it is certain that hi
,death, at this critical juncture, extinguished al
hopes of avoiding a rupture with France'. Thi
event, too, delivered Charles from a minister, t(
whose authority he had been accustomed fron
his infancy to submit with such implicit deference
as checked and depressed his genius, and retainei
him in a state of pupillage, unbecoming hi
years as well as his rank. But this restrain
being removed, the native powers of his min
were permitted to unfold themselves, and he be
gan to display such great talents, both in counci
and in a&ion, as exceeded the hopes of his con
temporaries", and command the admiration o
posterity.

Commence. WHILE the pope and emperor were preparing
ment of
omilitiesin in consequence of their secret alliance, to attac
Navarre. Milan, hostilities commenced in another quarter

The children of John d'Albret, king of Navarre
having often demanded the restitution of thei
hereditary dominions, in terms of the treaty 0
Noyon, and Charles having as often eluded thei
requests upon very frivolous pretexts, Franci
thought himfelfauthorized by that treaty to affi
the exiled family. The juncture appeared ex

' P. Heuter. Rer. AuRriac. lib. viii. c. xI. p. '97-
·P. Mart. Ep. 735.

2 tremely

tremely favourable for such an enterprize. Charles B o 0 K
was at a distance from that part of his dominions; Lmj
the troops usually stationed there, had been called '5'*
away to quell the commotions in Spain; the
Spanilh malecontents warmly solicited him to
invade Navarre', in which a considerable faction
was ready to declare for the descendants of their
ancient monarchs. But in order to avoid, as
much as possible, giving offence to the emperor,
or king of England, Francis directed forces to be
levied, and the war to be carried on, not in his
own name, but in that of Henry d'Albret. The
conduEt of these troops was committed to An-
drew de Foix, de l'Efparre, a young nobleman,
whom his near alliance to the unfortunate king
whose battles he was to fight, and what was still
more powerful, the interest of his sifter, madame
de Chateaubriand, Francis's favourite mistress,
recommended to that important trust, for which
he had neither talents nor experience. But as ProBger8 of
there was no army in the field to oppose him,
he became mafier, in a few days, of the whole
kingdom of Navarre, without- meeting with any
obftrution but from the citadel of Pampeluna.
The additional works to this fortress, begun by
Ximenes, were still unfinished; nor would its
flight resistance have deserved notice, if Ignatio
Loyola, a Bifcayan gentleman, had not been
dangerously wounded in its defence. During the
progress of a lingering cure, Loyola happened
to have no other amusement than what he found

c P. Mart. Ep, 721.

in

B °0 0 in reading the lives of the faints: the effe& of
i _----* this on his mind, naturally enthusiastic but am.

'5Z'1 bitious and daring, was to inspire him with such

a desire of emulating the glory of there fabulous
worthies of the Romish church, as led him into
the wildest and most extravagant adventures,
which terminated at last in, instituting the society
of Jesuits, the molt political and best regulated of
all the monastic orders, and from which man.
kind have derived more advantages, and received
greater injury, than from any other of those reli
gious fraternities.

'The enter IF, upon the reduction of Pampeluna, L'Es-
Castile. parre had been satisfied with taking proper pre-

cautions for securing his conquest, the kingdom
of Navarre might till have remained annexed to
the crown of France, in reality, as well as in title.
But, pushed on by youthful ardour, and encou-
raged by Francis, who was too apt to be dazzed
with success, he ventured to pass the confines of
Navarre, and to lay siege to Logrogno, a small
town in Castile. This routed the Castilians, who
had hitherto beheld the rapid progress of his arms
with great unconcern, and the dissensions in that
kingdom (of which a full account shall be given)
being almost composed, both parties exerted
themselves with emulation in defence of their
country; the one, that it might efface the memory
of pas misconduct by its present zeal; the other,
that it might add to the merit of having subdued
the emperor's rebellious fubjees, that of repulsing

his

his foreign enemies. The sudden advance of B 0O K
their troops, together with the gallant defence <
made by the inhabitants of Logrogno, obliged the ,5".
French general to abandon his rash enterprize.
The Spanish army, which increased every day, They are

defeated,

harassing him during his retreat, he, instead of and driven
taking flelter under the cannon of Pampeluna, rreN
or waiting the arrival of some troops which were
marching to join him, attacked the Spaniards,
though far superior to him in number, with great
impetuosity, but with so little condu&, that his
forces were totally routed, he himself, together
with his principal officers, was taken. prisoner,
and Spain recovered poffefiion of Navarre in still
florter time than the French had spent in the
conquest of it Y.
WHILE Francis endeavoured to justify his in- Hofili;t;e

begun in

vafion of Navarre, by carrying it on in the name the Low
ofHenry D'Albret, he had recourse to an artifice countriCs
much of the fame kind, in attacking another
part of the emperor's territories. Robert de la
Mark, lord of the finall but independent territory
of Bouillon, situated on the fiontiers of Lux-
embourg and Champagne, having abandoned
Charles's service on account of an encroachment
which the Aulic council had made on his jurif-
diftion, and having thrown himself upon France
for protection, was easily persuaded, in the heat
of his refentnent, to fend a herald to WoVrms,

Y Mcm. de Bcllay, p. 21. P. Mart. Ep. 726.
VOL. II. N and

B 010 K and to declare war against the emperor in form.

11.
<s-Jt Such extravagant insolence in a petty prince fur-

I5a1. prized Charles, and appeared to him a certain

proof of his having received promises of powerful
support from the French king. The justness of
this conclusion soon became evident. Robert
entered the dutchy of Luxembourg with troops
levied in France, by the king's connivance, though
seemingly in contradiction to his orders, and after
ravaging the open country, laid siege to Vireton.
Of this Charles complained loudly, as a dired
violation of the peace subsisting between the two
crowns, .and summoned Henry VIII. in terms of
the treaty concluded at London in the year one
thousand five hundred and eighteen, to turn his
arms against Francis as the firfl aggressor. Francis
pretended that he was not answerable for Robert's
conduct, whose army fought under his own
standards and in his own quarrel; and affirmed,
that, contrary to an express prohibition, he had
seduced some fubjecs of France into his service;
but Henry paid so little regard to this evasion,
that the French king, rather than irritate a prince
whom he frill hoped to gain, commanded De la
Mark to disband his troops .

THE emperor, mean while, was afembling an

army to chattife Robert's insolence. 'Iwenty
thousand men, under the count of Nafau, in-

Merm. de Bellay, p. 22, &c. Mem. de Flcuranges, p.
335, &dc.

vadcd

vaded his little territories, and in a few days be- B o ° K
came masters of every place in them but Sedan. ---
After making him feel so sensibly the weight of I's.
his mafler's indignation, Nassau advanced towards
the frontiers of France; and Charles knowing
that he might presume so far on Henry's partia-
lity in his favour, as not to be overawed by the
fame fears which had restrained Francis, ordered
his general to besiege Moufon. The cowardice
of the garrison having obliged the governor to
surrender almost without resistance, Nassau in- Slege by

Mezieresby

veiled Mezieres, a place at that time of no con- the Impe-
fiderable strength, but so advantageously situated, ialifis;
that by getting possession of it, the Imperial army
might have penetrated into the heart of Cham-
pagne, in which there was hardly any other, town
capable of obftru&ing its progress. Happily for
France, its monarch, sensible of the importance
of this fortress, and of the danger to which it was
exposed, committed the defence of it to the che-
valier Bayard, distinguished among his contem-
poraries by the appellation of The Knight without
fear, and without reproach . This man, whole
prowess in combat, whose punctilious honour and
formal gallantry, bear a nearer resemblance, than
any thing recorded in history, to the character
ascribed to the heroes of chivalry, possessed all
the talents which form a great general. These
he had many occasions of exerting in the defence
of Mezieres; partly by his valour, partly by his

a Ocuvrcs de Brantome, tom. vi. 114.

N 2 condut,

B 0 0 K condut, he protraaed the siege to a great length,

I'.

i--v-- and in the end obliged the Imperialists to raise
rai'fd. it, with disgrace and loss b. Francis, at the head

of a numerous army, soon retook Moufon, and
entering the Low Countries, made several con-
quests of small importance. In the neighbour-
hood of Valenciennes, through an excess of cau-
tion, an error with which he cannot be often
charged, he loft an opportunity of cutting off the
whole Imperial army ; and what was still more
unfortunate, he disgusted Charles duke of Bour-
bon, high constable of France, by giving the com-
mand of the van to the duke D'Alencon, though
this po0t of honour belonged to Bourbon, as a pre-
rogative of his office.

Auguar. DURING these operations in the field, a con-

Congress at
Calais,un- grefs was held at Calais under the mediation of
der the me-
dlation of Henry VIII. in order to bring all differences to
England, an amicable issue; and if the intentions of the

mediator had corresponded in any degree to his
professions, it could hardly have failed of produ-
cing some good effe&. But Henry committed the
sole management of the negociation, with unli-
mited powers, to Wolfey; and this choice alone
was sufficient to have rendered it abortive. Tha:
prelate, bent on attaining the papal crown, the
great object of his ambition, and ready to facri-
fice every thing in order to gain the emperor's

b Mem. de Bellay, p. 25, &c.
c P. Mart. Ep. 747. Mem. de lellay, 35. itere

interest, was so little able to conceal his partia- B °11o K
lity, that, if Francis had not been well acquaint- _
ed with his haughty and vindictive temper, he 52".
would have declined his mediation. Much time
was spent in inquiring who had begun hostilities,
which Wolfey affected to represent as the princi-
pal point; and by throwing the blame of that on
Francis, he hoped to justify, by the treaty of
London, any alliance into which his malter should
enter with Charles. The conditions on which ,wihout any

effeO:.

hostilities might be terminated, came next to be
confidered; but with regard to these, the empe-
ror's proposals were such, as discovered either
that he was utterly averse to peace, or that he
knew Wolfey would approve of whatever terms
should be offered in his name. He demanded
the restitution of the dutchy of Burgundy, a pro-
vince, the poffefion of which would have given
him access into the heart of France; and re-
quired to be released from the homage due to
the crown of France for the counties of Slanders
and Artois, which none of his ancestors had ever
refused, and which he had bound himself by the
treaty of Noyon to renew. These terms, to
which an high-fpirited prince would scarcely
have listened, after the disasters of an unfortu-
nate war, Francis rejected with great disdain;
and Charles fiewing no inclination to comply
with the more equal and moderate propositions
of the French monarch, that he should restore
Navarre to its lawful prince, and withdraw his
troops fiom the siege of Tournay, the congirefs

N 3 broke

B o 0 K broke up without any other effect than that which
i--,- 1attends unsuccessful negociations, the exasperating
15?.. of the parties whom it was intended to recon.

cile d.

League DURING the continuance of the congress, Wol.
trance be. fey, on pretence that the emperor himself would
,perr nd be more willing to make reasonable concessions
HcnryVIl. than his ministers, made an excursion to Bruges,

to meet that monarch. He was received by
Charles, who knew his vanity, with as much
refpe& and magnificence as if he had been king
of England. But instead of advancing the
treaty of peace by this interview, Wolfey, in his
master's name, concluded a league with the em-
peror against Francis; in which it was stipulated,
that Charles should invade France on the fide of
Spain, and Henry in Picardy, each with an army
of forty thousand men; and that, in order to
strengthen their union, Charles should espouse
the princess Mary, Henry's only child, and the
apparent heir of his dominionse. Henry produced
no better reasons for this measure, equally unjust
and impolitic, than the article in the treaty of
London, by which he pretended that he was
bound to take arms against the French king as the
firfl aggressor; and the injury which he alleged
Francis had done him, in permitting the duke of
Albany, the head of a faEtion in Scotland, which

'A P. Mart. Ep. 739. Herbert.
c Rynmr, Fa.'der. xiii. Herbert.

opposed

opposed the interest of England, to return into B 0O K
that kingdom. He was influenced, however, by I
other considerations. The advantages which ac- '5s
crued to his subjects from maintaining an exac:
neutrality, or the honour that resulted to hinmfelf
from acting as the arbiter between the contending
princes, appeared to his youthful imagination to
inconsiderable, when compared with the glory
which might be reaped from leading armies or
conquering provinces, that he determined to re-
main no longer in a state of inactivity. Having
once taken this resolution, his inducements to
prefer an alliance with Charles were obvious. He
had no claim upon any part of that prince's
dominions, most of which were so situated, that
he could not atack them without great difficulty
and disadvantage; whereas several maritime pro-
vinces of France had been long in the hands of
the English monarchs, whose pretensions, even
to the crown of that kingdom, were not as yet
altogether forgotten; and the possession of Ca-
lais not only gave him easy access into tome of
those provinces, but in cafe of any disaster, as-
forded hirl a secure retreat. While Charles at-
tacked France on one frontier, Henry flattered
himself that hebI--ould find little refiflance on the
other, and that the glory of re-annexing to the
crown of England the ancient inheritance of its
monarchs on the continent, was reserved for his
reign. Wolfey artfully encouraged thefl vain
hopes, which lcd his master into such meafurcs as

N 4 were

B o0 K were most subservient to his own secret schemes;

1I.
i _r and the English, whose hereditary animosity againlt

152'. the French was apt to rekindle on every occasion,

did not disapprove of the martial spirit of their
sovereign.
Moflilities MEANWHILE the league between the pope and

the emperor produced great effeds in Italy, and
rendered Lombardy the chief theatre of war. There
was, at that time, such contrariety between the
charanter of the French and the Italians, that the
latter submitted to the government of the former
with greater impatience than they expressed un-
der the dominion of other foreigners. The
phlegm of the Germans and gravity of the Spa-
niards, suited their jealous temper and ceremo-
nious manners better than the French gaiety, too
prone to gallantry, and too little attentive to
decorum. Lewis XII. however, by the equity
and gentleness of his administration, and by grant-
ing the Milanese more extensive privileges than
those they had enjoyed under their native princes,
had overcome, in a great measure, their preju-
dices, and reconciled them to the French govern-
ment. Francis, on recovering that dutchy, did not
imitate the example of his predecessor. Though
too generous himself to oppress his people, his
boundless confidence in his favourites, and his ne-
gligence in examining into the conduac of those
whom he entrusted with power, emboldened
them to venture upon many aas of oppreflion.

2 The

The government of Milan was committed by him B o 0 K
to Odet de Foix, Marechal de Lautrec, another _
brother of Madame de Chateau-Briand, an officer The5Mii..
ofgreat experience and reputation, but haughty, nee dif-

gusted with

imperious, rapacious, and incapable either of liten- the French
ingto advice or of bearing contradicion. His St."
inlblence and exations totally alienated the assec-
tions of the Milanese from France, drove many
of the considerable citizens into banishment,
and forced others to retire for their own safety.
Among the last was Jerome Morone, vice-chan-
cellor of Milan, a man whose genius for intrigue
and enterprize diftinguilhed him in an age and
country, where violent facions, as well as fre-
quent revolutions, affording great scope for such
talents, produced or called them forth in great
abundance. He repaired to Francis Sforza,
whose brother Maximilian he had betrayed; and
fufpecing the pope's intention of attacking the
Milanese, although his treaty'with the emperor
was not yet made public, he proposed to Leo,
in name of Sforza, a scheme for furprizing
several places in that dutchy by means of the
exiles, who, from hatred to the French, and from
attachment to their former maflers, were ready for
any desperate enterprize. Leo not only encou-
raged the attempt, but advanced a considerable
uml towards the execution of it; and when,
through unforeseen accidents, it failed of success
in every part, he allowed the exiles, who had
almrbled in a body, to retire to Reggio, which
belonged at that time to the church. The Mare-

chal

B 0 0 K chal de Foix, who commanded at Milan in ab.

-v_.* fence of his brother Lautrec, who was then in
june^4' France, tempted with the hopes of catching ai

once, as in a snare, all the avowed enemies of his
master's government in that country, ventured
to march into the ecclesiastical territories, and to
invest Reggio. But the vigilance and good con
dua of Guicciardini the historian, governor o
that place, obliged the French general to aban

'Teh pope don the enterprize with disgrace'. Leo, on re
declares
againhs ceiving this intelligence, with which he wa

highly pleased,. as it furnished him a decent pre
tence for a rupture with France, immediately a
fembled the consistory of cardinals. After .co.
plaining bitterly of the hostile intentions of th
French king, and magnifying the emperor's ze
for the church, of which he had given a recen
proof by his proceedings against Luther, hede
dared that he was constrained in felf-defence, an
as the only expedient for the security of the eccl.
fiaftical tate, to join his arms to those of tha
prince. For this purpose, he now pretended t
conclude a treaty with Don Johr Manuel, al
though it had really been signed some month
before this time; and he publicly excommunl
cated De Foix, as an impious invader of Sk
Peter's patrimony.

War in the LEo had already begun preparations for war b
Milancfe.

taking into pay a considerable body of Swiis; bu

f Guic. lib. xiv. 183. Men.,de Bellay, p. 38, &c.

th(

the Imperial troops advanced so slowly from B O° K
Naples and Germany, that it was the middle of ---
autumn before the army took the field under the I"'
command of Prosper Colonna, the most eminent
of the Italian generals, whole extreme caution, the
effeCt of long experience in the art of war, was
opposed with great propriety to the impetuosity
of the French. In the mean time, De Foix dif-
patched courier after courier to inform the king
of the danger which was approaching. Francis,
whose forces were either employed in the Low
Countries, or assembling on the frontiers of
Spain, and who did not expect so sudden an at-
tack in that quarter, sent ambafiadors to his allies
the Swiss, to procure from them the immediate
levy of an additional body of troops; and com-
manded Lautrec to repair forthwith to his govern-
ment. That general, who was well acquainted
with the great neglect of ceconomy in the admi-
niltration of the king's finances, and who knew
how much the troops in the Milanese had already
suffered from the want of their pay, refuted to
setout, unless the fum of three hundred thousand
crowns was immediately put into his hands. But
the king, Louise of Savoy, his mother, and
Semblancy, the superintendent of finances, hav-
ing promised, even with an oath, that on his
arrival at Milan, he should find remittances for
the frum which he demanded; upon the faith of
this, he departed. Unhappily for France, Louise,
a woman deceitful, vindictive, rapacious, and
capable of sacrificing any thing to the gratifica-

I tion

B O i K tion of her pafions, but who had acquiredan

-. --.i absolute ascendant over her son by her maternal

r511. tenderness, her care of his education, and her

great abilities, was resolved not to perform this
promise. Lautrec having incurred her difplea.
sure by his haughtiness in neglecting to pay court
to her, and by the freedom with which he had
talked concerning some of her adventures in gal.
lantry, she, in order to deprive him of the ho.
nour which he might have gained by a fuccefsfuli
defence of the Milanese, seized the three hundred
thousand crowns deflined for that service, and
detained them for her own use.

progrefsof LAUTREC, notwithstanding this cruel difap.
t^ha e
I pointment, found means to assemble a confl-

derable army, though far inferior in number to
that of the confederates. He adopted the plan of
defence most suitable to his situation, avoiding
a pitched battle with the greatest care, while he
harassed the enemy continually with his light
troops, beat up their quarters, intercepted their
convoys, and covered or relieved every place
which they attempted to attack. By this pru-
dent conduEt, he not only retarded their progress,
but would have soon wearied out the pope, who
had hitherto defrayed almost the whole expence
of the war, as the emperor, whose revenues in
Spain were diflipated during the commotions in
that country, and who was obliged to support a
numerous army in the Netherlands, could not
make any considerable remittances into Italy.

But

ut an unforeseen accident disconcerted all his B 0 0 K
easures, and occasioned a fatal reverse in the -_
rench affairs. A body of twelve thousand Swiss '5s'Z
red in Lautrec's army under the banners of
republic, with which France was in alliance.
nconfequence of a law, no less political than
mane, established among the cantons, their
oops were never hired out by public authority
both the contending parties in any war. This
aw, however, the love of gain had sometimes
uded, and private persons had been allowed to
nlift in what service they pleated, though not
nder the public banners, but under those of
heir particular officers. The cardinal of Siow,
ho fill preserved his interest amrong his coun-
rymen, and his enmity to France, having pre-
vailed on them to connive at a levy of this kind,
twelve thousand Swiss, instigated by him, joined
he army of the confederates. But the leaders
inthe cantons, when they saw so many of their
countrymen marching under hostile standards,
and ready to turn their arms against each other,
became so sensible of the infamy to which they
would be exposed, by permitting this, as well as
the loss they might susser, that they dispatched
couriers, commanding their people to leave both
armies, and to return forthwith into their own
country. The cardinal of Sion, however, had
tle address, by corrupting the messengers ap-
pointed to carry this order, to prevent it from
being delivered to the Swiss in the service of the
confederates; but being intimated in due form to
'tofe in the French army, they, fatigued with the

length

B o O K length of the campaign, and murmuring for war

o_, _
. of pay, instantly yielded obedience, in spite
15:' Lautrec's remonstrances and intreaties.

AFTER the desertion of a body which forme

the strength of his army, Lautrec durst no longe
face the confederates. He retired towards Milan
encamped on the banks of the Adda, and place
his chief hopes of safety in preventing the enemn
from passing that river; an expedient for defend
ing a country so precarious, that there are fee
instances of its being employed with fuccefi
against any general of experience or abilities,

Bencme Accordingly Colonna, notwithstanding Lautrec'i
Masters of
Milan. f vigilance and a&civity, passed the Adda with littlh

loss, and obliged him to ihut himself up- withi
the walls of Milan, which the confederates wer
preparing to besiege, when an unknown person
who never afterwards appeared either to boast
this service, or to claim a reward for it, cam
from the city, and acquainted Morone, that
the army would advance that night, the Ghibel
line or Imperial faction would put them in pof
feflion of one of the gates. Colonna, though n
fiiend to rash enterprizes, allowed the marqui
de Pescara to advance with the Spanish infantr
and he himself followed with the reft of hi
troops. About the beginning of night, Pefcar
arriving at the Roman gate in the suburbs, fur
prized the soldiers whom le found there; tho
poflcd in the fortifications adjoining to it, iirme
diately fled; the marquis seizing the works whic
·they abandoned, and puffing forward. incessant

though

though with no less caution than vigour, became B o0 K
master of the city with little bloodshed, and
almost without resistance; the vicors being as J521s
much astonished as the vanquished at the facility
and success of the attempt. Lautrec retired pre-
cipitately towards the Venetian territories with
the remains of his shattered army; the cities of
the Milanese, following the fate of the capital,
surrendered to the confederates; Parma and Pla-
centia were united to the ecclesiastical state, and
of all their conquests in Lombardy, only the town
of Cremona, the castle of Milan, and a few in-
considerable forts, remained in the hands of the
French g.

LEO received the accounts of this rapid fuc- Dea'hof
cession of prosperous events with such transports Leo X.
of joy, as brought on (if we may believe the
French historians) a flight fever, which being ne-
gle&ed, occasioned his death on the second of
December, while he was still of a vigorous age and
at the height of his glory. By this unexpected
accident, the spirit of the confederacy was
broken, and its operations suspended. The car-
dinals of Sion and Medici left the army that they
might be present in the conclave; the Swiss were
recalled by their superiors; some other merce-
naries disbanded for want of pay; and only the
Spaniards, and a few Germans in the Emperor's

t Guic. 1. xiv. 190, &c. Mem. de Bellay, 42, &c. Ga-
leacii Capella de reb. gest. pro reltitut. Fran. Sfortia: Com-
ment, ap. Scardium, vol. ii. 8o, &c.

service,

B °0 K service, remained to defend the Milanese. But
a_.- Lautrec, destitute both of men and of money,

5 was unable to improve this favourable opportu.

nity in the manner which he would have wilhed,
1522. The vigilance of Morone, and the good condut

of Colonna, disappointed his feeble attempts on the
Milanese. Guicciardini, by his address and valour,
repulsed a bolder and more dangerous attack which
he made on Parma h

Adrian GREAT discord prevailed in the conclave,
ecIed which followed upon Leo's death, and all the

arts natural to men grown old in intrigue, when
contending for the highest prize an ecclefiafic
can obtain, were praEtifed. Wolsey's name, not.
withstanding all the emperor's magnificent pro.
mises to favour his prerenfions, of which that
prelate did not fail to remind him, was' hardly
mentioned in the conclave. Julio cardinal de
Medici, Leo's nephew, who was more eminent
than any other member of the sacred college for his
abilities, his wealth, and his experience in tranf-
acting great affairs, had already secured fifteen
voices, a number sufficient, according to the forms
of the conclave, to exclude any other candidate,
though not to carry his own election: As he was
still in the prime of life, all the aged cardinals com-
bined against him, without being united in favour
of any other person. While these factions were
endeavouring to gain, to corrupt, or to weary
out each other, Medici and his adherents voted

'' Guic. 1. xiv. 214. on

' ~~~one

one morning at the scrutiny, which according to B 0 0 K
form was made every day, for cardinal Adrian of
Utrecht, who at that time governed Spain in the 15"'
emperor's name. This they did merely to pro-
trat time. But the adverse party instantly
closing with them, to their own amazement and
that of all Europe, a stranger to Italy, unknown
to the perfbns who gave their suffrages in his
favour, and unacquainted with the manners of
the people, or the interest of the Rate, the go-
verninent of which they conferred upon him, was
unanimously railed to the papal throne, at ajunc- January9.
ture so delicate and critical, as would have de-
manded all the sagacity and experience of one of
the most able prelates in the sacred college.
The cardinals themselves, unable to give a reason
for this strange choice, on account of which, as
they marched in procession from the conclave,
they were loaded with insults and curses by the
Roman people, ascribed it to an immediate im-
pulse of the Holy Ghost. It may be imputed with
greater certainty to the influence of Don John
Manuel, the Imperial ambaflEdor, who by his
addrels and intrigues facilitated the election of a
person devoted to his mailer's service, from gra-
titude, from interest, and from inclination '.

BESIDE the influence which Charles acquired W.arrenw.
by Adrian's promotion, it threw great lustre on `vi'ln,.,-,.

i lerm. Moringi Vita H-adriani, ap. Cafp. Birman. in

Alnalcd. de Hadr. p. 52. Conclave Hadr. Ibid. p. 1.1+, &c.

VOL. I
. 0 his

B 0 K his administration. To bestow on his preceptor

IT.

..-,--- such a noble recompence, and to place on the
1522- papal throne one whom he had raised from obfcu-

rity, were acts of uncommon magnificence and
power. Francis observed, with the sensibility of a
rival, the pre-eminence which the emperor was
gaining, and resolved to exert himself with freih
vigour, in order to wrest from him his late con-
quests in Italy. The Swiss, that they might make
some reparation to the French king, for having
withdrawn their troops from his army so unfeafon-
ably, as to occasion the loss of the Milanese, per-
mitted him to levy ten thousand men in the re-
public. Together with this reinforcement, Lau-
trec received from the king a small fum of money,
which enabled him once more to take the field;
and after seizing by surprise, or force, several
places in the Milanese, to advance within a few
miles of the capital. The confederate army was
in no condition to obflrud his progress; for
though the inhabitants of Milan, by the artifices
of Morone, and by the popular declamations of
a monk whom he employed, were inflamed with
such enthusiastic zeal against the French govern-
ment, that they consented to raise extraordinary
contributions, Colonna mult soon have abandoned
the advantageous camp which he had chosen
at Bicocca, and have difmifed his troops for
want of pay, if the Swiss in the French service
had not once more extricated him out of his dif-
ficulties.

THlE

THE insolence or caprice of those mercenaries B 0 0 K

were often no less fatal to their friends, than their
valour and discipline were formidable to their The' Frnch
enemies. Having now served some months with- defeatedaif

the battle of

out pay, of which they complained loudly, a Bicocca.
fum destined for their use was sent from France
under a convoy of horse; but Morone, whose
vigilant eye nothing escaped, poited a body of
troops in their way, so that the party which
escorted the money durst not advance. On re-
ceiving intelligence of this, the Swiss loft all pa-
tience, and officers as well as soldiers crowding
around Lautrec, threatened with one voice in-
tantly to retire, if he did not either advance
the pay which was due, or promise to lead them
next morning to battle. In vain did Lautrec
remonstrate against these demands, representing
to them the impossibility of the former, and the
rashness of the latter, which must be attended
with certain deftruation, as the enemy occupied
acamp naturally of great strength, and which by
art they had rendered almost inaccessible. The
Swiss, deaf to reason, and persuaded that their
valour was capable of surmounting every ob-
Racle, renewed their demand with greater fierce-
ness, offering themselves to form the vanguard,
and to begin the attack. Lautrec, unable to
overcome their obstinacy, complied with their
request, hoping, perhaps, that some of those un-
foreseen accidents which so often determine the
fate of battles, might crown this rash enterprize
with undeserved success; and convinced that the

0 efl-cas

B °0 K ef3fets of a defeat could not be more fatal than

I'.
, rhofthofe which would certainly follow upon the re-
May.'' treat of a body which composed one half of his

army. Next morning the Swiss were early in the
field, and marched with the greatest intrepidity
against an enemy deeply intrenched on every
fide, surrounded with artillery, and prepared to
receive them. As they advanced, they sustained a
furious cannonade with great firmness, and with-
out waiting for their own artillery, rushed impe-
tuoufly upon the intrenchments. But after in-
credible efforts of valour, which were seconded
with great spirit by the French, having loft their
braveit officers and best soldiers, and finding that
they could make no impression on the enemy's
works, they founded a retreat; leaving the field
of battle, however, like men repulsed, but not
vanquished, in close array, and without receiving
any molestation from the enemy.

Driven n.t NEXT day, such as survived set out for their
thnef , ' own country; and Lautrec, despairing of being

able to make any farther resistance, retired into
France, after throwing garrilbns into Cremona
and a few other places; all which, except the
citadel of Cremnona, Colonna soon obliged to
furrcncler.
LofcCcnoo. G iNOx, however, and its territories, remain-

ing fubtject to France, still 'gave Francis colln-
dci able footing in Italy, and made it easy

C fr
him to execute any fcheime for the recovery ofthe

Milanmlie.

Milanese. But Colonna, rendered enterprizing B ° 0 K
by continual success, and excited by the folicita- x
tions of the faction of the Adorni, the hereditary I5'
enemies of the Fregofi, who under the protec-
tion of France possessed the chief authority in
Genoa, determined to attempt the redution of
that state; and accomplished it with amazing fa-
cility. He became master of Genoa by an acci-
dent as unexpeced as that which had given him
poneffion of Milan; and almolt without oppofi-
tion or bloodshed, the power of the Adorni, and
the authority of the emperor, were established in
Genoa k

SucHr a cruel iucceffion of misfortunes affee&ed HenryVIIT.
Francis with deep concern, which was not a little againf
augmented by the unexpe&ed arrival of an Eng- FrM"'.9
lilh herald, who, in the name of his sovereign,
declared war in form against France. This ftep
was taken in consequence of the treaty which
Wolfey had concluded with the emperor at
Bruges, and which had hitherto been kept secret.
Francis, though he had reason to be furprized
with this denunciation, after having been at such
pains to sooth Henry and to gain his minister,
received the herald with great composure and
dignity'; and without abandoning any of the
Ichemecs which he was forming against the empe-
ror, began vigorous preparations for refifling this

k JoviiVita Ferdin. Davali, p. 344. Guic. 1. xiv. 233.
Journal de Louise de Savoie, p. 199.

0 3 new

B o0 K new enemy. His treasury, however, being ex.

1I.
L-----> haufted by the efforts which he had already made,

as well as by the fums he expended on his plea-
fures, he had recourse to extraordinary expe-
dients for fupply;ng it. Several new offices were
created, and exposed to sale; the royal demesnes
were alienated; unusual taxes were imposed; and
the tomb of St. Martin was stripped of a rail of
massive silver, with which Louis XI. in one of
his fits of devotion, had encircled it. By means
of there expedients he was enabled to levy a con-
fiderable army, and to put the frontier towns in
a good posture of defence.

isits Eng- THE emperor, meanwhile, was no less soli-
land. citous to draw as much advantage as possible

from the accession of such a powerful ally; and
the prosperous situation of his affairs, at this
time, permitting him to set out for Spain, where
his presence was extremely necessary, he visited
the court of England in his way to that coun-
try. He proposed by this interview not only to
strengthen the bonds of friendship which united
him with Henry, and to excite him to push the
war against France with vigour, but hoped to
remove any disgust or resentment that Wolfey
might have conceived on account of the mortifying
disappointment which he had met with in the
late conclave. His success exceeded his most
sanguine expectations; and by his artful address,
during a residence of fix weeks in England, he
gained not only the king and the minifler, but

the

the nation itself. Henry, whose vanity was fen- B O 0 K
sibly flattered by such a visit, as well as by the --J
studicd refpet with which the emperor treated '52'2
him on every occasion, entered warmly into all
his schemes. The cardinal foreseeing, from
Adrian's age and infirmities, a hudden vacancy in
the papal fee, dissembled or foi'got his resent-
ment; and as Charles, betides augmenting the
pensions which he had already featled on him, re-
newed his promise of favouring his pretensions
to the papacy, with all his interest, he endea-
voured to merit the former, and to secure the
accomplilhment of the latter by fresh services.
The nation, sharing in the glory of its monarch,
and pleased with the confidence which the empe-
ror placed in the English, by creating the earl of
Surrey his high-admiral, discovered no less in-
clination to commence hostilities than Henry
hinfelf.

IN order to give Charles, before he left Eng- TheEnglih

land, a proof of this general ardour, Surrey failed Fra.ce,
with such forces as were ready, and ravaged the
coalts of Normandy. He then made a descent
on Bretagne, where he plundered and burnt
Morlaix, and some other places of less confe-
quence. After there flight excursions, attended
with greater dishonour than damage to France,
he repaired to Calais, and took the command of
the principal army, consisting of sixteen thou-
sand men; with which, having joined the Flernifll
troops under the count de Buren, he advanced

0 4 into

B 0 0 K into Picardy. The army which Francis had as-

Ii. _v.-_-. fembled, was far inferior in number to these
Tsai' united bodies. But during the long wars be-
with little tween the two nations, the French had discovered

fucce the proper method of deftending their counrry

against the English. They had been taught by
their misfortunes to avoid a pitched battle with
the utmost care, and to endeavour, by throwing
garrisons into every place capable of resistance,
by watching all the enemy's motions, by inter-
cepting their convoys, attacking their advanced
polls, and harassing them continually with their
numerous cavalry, to ruin them with the length
of the war, or to beat them by piece-meal. This
plan the duke of Vendome, the French general
in Picardy, pursued with no less prudence than
success; and not only prevented Surrey from
taking any town of irmportance, but obliged him
to retire with his army greatly reduced by fa-
tigue, by want of provisions, and by the lots
which it had sustained in several unsuccessful fkir-
mifhes.

THUS ended the second campaign, in a war the

noft general that had hitherto been kindled in
Europe; and though Francis, by his mother's
ill-timed refentmennr, by the diflgufing insolence
of his general, and the caprice of the mercenary
troops which he employed, had loft his conquelts
in Italy, yet all the powers combined against him
had not been able to make any impreflion on his
ahcTcditary dominions ; and wherever they cithl'r

'intenldedl

intended or attempted an attack, he was well pre- B 0 0 K
pared to receive them.

1522.

WHIIE the Christian princes were thus waft- Solymans
ing each other's ffrength, Solyman the Magni- Rhodes.
ficent entered Hungary with a numerous army,
and inveffing Belgrade, which was deemed the
chief barrier of that kingdom against the Turkish
arms, soon forced it to surrender. Encouraged by
this success, he turned his victorious arms against
the island of Rhodes, the feat, at that time,
of the knights of St. John of Jerusalem. Thi~
finall state he attacked with such a numerous army
as the lords of Asia have been accustomed
in every age to bring into the field. Two hun-
dred thousand men, and a fleet of four hundred
fail, appeared against a town defended by a garri-
son consisting of five thousand soldiers, and fix
hundred knights, under-the command of Villiers
de L'lfle Adam, the grand mafler, whose wisdom
and valour rendered him worthy of that station
at such a dangerous junEture. No sooner did
he begin to fufpl.c the destination of Solyman's
vast armaments, than he dispatched Inefengers
to all the Christian courts, imploring their aid
against the common enemy. But though every
prince in that age acknowledged' Rhodes to be
the great bulwark of Chriflenldom in the ealt,
ani trustcd to the gallantry of its knights as the
belt security againfl the progress of the Ottoman
armns; though Adrian, with a zeal which became
tee head and father of the church, exhorted the

contending

B ooI K contending powers to forget their private quarrels,
_-- --- and, by uniting their arms, to prevent the Infidels

512.- from destroying a society which did honour to

the Christian name; yet so violent and im.
placable was the animosity of both parties, that,
regardless of the danger to which they exposed all
Europe, and unmoved by the intreaties of the
grand master, or the admonitions of the pope,
they suffered Solyman to carry on his operations
against Rhodes without disturbance. The grand
master, after incredible efforts of courage, of
.patience, and of military conduEt during a siege
of fix months ; after sustaining many assaults,
and disputing every post with amazing obstinacy,
was obliged at last to yield to numbers; and hav.
ing obtained an honourable capitulation from the
sultan, who admired and refpeaed his virtue, he
surrendered the town, which was reduced to a
heap of rubbish, and destitute of every resource".
Charles and Francis, aihamed of having occa.
sioned such a loss to Christendom by their ambi-
tious contests, endeavoured to throw the blame
of it on each other, while all Europe, with greater
juflice, imputed it equally to both. The empe-
ror, by way of reparation, granted the knights of
St. John the small island of Malta, in which they
fixed their residence, retaining, though with less
power and fplcndour, their ancient spirit and
implacable enmity to the Infidels.

m Fontanus de Bcllo Rhodio, ap. Scard. Script. Rer. Ger-
man. Vol. ii. p. 88. P. Barre. I!ia. d'AllIm. ton. viii. 57'

# THE HISTORY OF THE REIGN OF THE EMPEROR CHARLES V. BOOK III.

THE
HISTO R Y

OF THE
R E IG N

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES V.

BOOK III.

HARLES, having had the fatisfaf-ion of BOO K.
C III.

feeing hostilities begun between France and
England, took leave of Henry, and arrived in 5's.

Civil war in

Spain on the seventeenth of June. He found that Cafile.
country just beginning to recover order and
irength after the miseries of a civil war, to which
it had been exposed during his absence; an ac-
count of the rife and progress of which, as it was
but little conneaed with the other events which
happened in Europe, hath been reserved to this
place.

No sooner was it known that the Cortes assem- Inrtlrreaion
bled in Galicia had voted the emperor a free gift, of Toledo
without obtaining the redress of any one grievance,

than

B 0 0 K than it excited universal indignation. The citi.

III.

v__---- zens of Toledo, who confidered themrfdves, on
May 52;, o account of the great privileges which they en.

joyed, as guardians of the liberties of the Calti.
lian commons, finding that no regard was paid
to the remonstrances of their deputies againl
that unconfLicutional grant, took arms with tu-
multuary violence, and seizing the gates of the
city which were fortified, attacked the al-cazar,
or castle, which they soon obliged the governor
to surrender. Emboldened by this success, they
deprived of all authority every person whom the
fufpeaed of any attachment to the court, ella
blifhed a popular form of government, compolfe
of deputies from the several parishes in the city,
and levied troops in their own defence. The
chief leader of the people in these infurreftion
was Don John de Padilla, the eldest son of th
commendator of Castile, a young nobleman of
generous temper, of undaunted courage, an
possessed of the talents as well as of the ambitio
which,/ in times of civil discord, raise men t
power and eminence a.
Of Scgovia. THE resentment of the citizens of Segovia pro

duced effects still more fatal. Tordefillas, on
of their representatives in the late Cortes, ha
voted for the Donative, and being a bold an
haughty man, ventured, upon his return, to cal

a Sandov. p. 77.

togethe

rogether his fellow-citizens in the great church, B 0,o K
that he might give them, according to custom, '-
al account of his condua in that assembly. But I''
the multitude, unable to bear his insolence, in
attempting to jufftify what they thought in-
excusable, burst open the gates of the church
,ith the utmost fury, and seizing the unhappy
Tordefillas, dragged him through the streers,
with a thousand curses and insults, towards
the place of public execution. In vain did the
dean and canons come forth in procession with
the holy sacrament, in order to appease their
rage. In vain did the monks of those monasteries
by which they passed, conjure them on their
knees to spare his life, or at least to allow hiln
time to confess, and to receive absolution of his
fins. Without listening to the di&ates either of
humanity or religion, they cried out, " That
the hangman alone could absolve such a traitor to
his country ;" they then hurried him along with
greater violence; and perceiving that he had ex-
piced under their hands, they hung him up with
hih head downwards on the common gibbet .
The fame spirit seized the inhabitants of Burgos,
Zamnora, and several other cities; and though
their representatives, talcing warning fi-om the
site of Tordefillas, had been so wife as to save
themlelves by a timely flight, they were burnt in
e tigy, their houses rafed to the ground, and
thcil efslels consumed with fire; and such was

b P. Martyr. Ep. 671.

the

B O O K the horror, which the people had conceived againf

AL - them, as betrayers of the public liberty, that noi
J52^. one in those licentious multitudes would touch

any thing, however valuable, which had belonged
to them c.

Mearures of ADRIAN, at that time regent of Spain, had
order to- scarcely fixed the feat of his government atVal.
n'ifthm. ladolid, when he was alarmed with an account of
June 5,

1520. these inluiretions. He immediately assembled

the privy council to deliberate concerning the
proper method of fupprefling them. The coun.
fellors differed in opinion; some insisting that it
was necessary to check this audacious spirit in its
infancy by a severe execution of juffice; others
advising to treat with lenity a people who had
iome reason to be incensed, and not to drive
them beyond all the bounds of duty by an ill-
timed rigour. The sentiments of the former
being warmly supported by the archbishop of
Granada, president of the council, a person of
great authority, but choleric and impetuous,
were approved by Adrian, whose zeal to support
his master's authority, hurried him into a measure,
to which, from his natural caution and timidity,
he would otherwise have been averse. He com-
manded Ronquillo, one of the king's judges, to
repair instantly to Segovia, which had set the sirs
example of mutiny, and to proceed against the
delinquents according to law; and left the people

c Sandov. 103. P. Mart. Ep. 674.
I should

lould be To outrageous as to resist his authority, B 0 0 K
a considerable body of troops was appointed to ---
attend him. The Segovians, foreseeing what Hisroos
they might expea from a judge so well known epugftd at
or his auffere and unforgiving temper, took
arms with one content, and having mustered
twelve thousand men, shut their gates against
him. Ronquillo, enraged at this insult, de-
nounced them rebels and outlaws, and his troops
eizing all the avenues to the town, hoped that it
would soon be obliged to surrender for want of
provisions. The inhabitants, however, defended
themselves with vigour, and having received a
considerable reinforcement from Toledo, under
the command of Padilla, attacked Ronquillo,
and forced him to retire with the loss of his
baggage and military chest d.
UPON this, Adrian ordered Antonio de Fonseca, and at Me.

dina del

whom the emperor had appointed comnma-nder in campo.
chief of the forces in Castile, to aflemnble an
army, and to besiege Segovia in form. But the.
inhabitants of Medina del Campo, where cardi-
nal Ximenes had established a vast magazine of
military flores, would not susser him to draw
from it a train of battering cannon, or to destroy
their countrymen with thole arms which had
been prepared againfit the enemies of the king-
dem. Fonseca, who could not execute his orders
without artillery, determined to seize the maga-
'Sandov. lz. P. Mart. Ep. 679. Miniana, Contin. p. 15.

zine

B o o K zine by force; and the citizens standing on their
A ----' defence, he assaulted the town with great brilk.
5""'. nes : But his troops were so warmly received,
Aug. al. that despairing of carrying the place, he set fire

to some of the houses, in hopes that the citizens
would abandon the walls in order to save their
families and effects. Instead of that, the expe-
dient to which he had recourse served only to in-
crease their fury, and he was repulsed with great
difrace, while the flames spreading from ftreetto
street, reduced to ashes almost the whole town,
one of the most considerable at that time in Spain,
and the great mart for the manufaEtures of Sego-1
via and several other cities. As the warehouses
were then filled with goods for the approaching
fair, the lots was imrenfe, and was felt universally.
This, added to the impression which such a cruel
action made on a people long unaccuflomed to the
horrors of civil war, enraged the Castilians almost
to madness. Fonseca became the object of ge.
neral hatred, and was branded with the name
of incendiary, and enemy to his country. Even
the citizens of Valladolid, whom the presence o
the cardinal had hitherto restrained, declared that
they could no longer remain inactive fpecators
of the fu fflrings of their countrymen. Takin
arms with no les fury than the other cities, they
burnt Folfcca's house to the ground, eleted new
magistrates, railed soldiers, appointed officers to
command them, and guarded their walls with as
lmuch diligence as if an enemy had been ready to
attack them.

TrIE

TIE cardinal, though virtuous and difinte- B c)0 i
refted, and capable of governing the kingdom a
with honour in times of tranquillity, possessed Adriandif
neither the courage nor the sagacity necessary at bIadshis
such a dangerous juncture. Finding himself un-
able to check these outrages committed under his
own eye, he attempted to appease the people, by
protesting that Fonseca had exceeded his orders,
and had by his rash conduct offended him, as
much as he had injured them. This condefcen-
sion, the effe&t of irresolution and timidity, ren-
dered the malecontents bolder and more insolent;
and the cardinal having soon after recalled Son-
feca, and dismissed his troops, which he could no
longer afford to pay, as the treasury, drained by
the rapaciousness of the Flemish ministers, had
received no supply from the great cities, which
were all in arms, the people were left at full
liberty to a& without controul, and scarcely any
fladow of power remained in his hands.
NOR were the proceedings of the commons the The views

and preten-

effecs merely of popular and tumultuary rage; ,dns oftthne
they aimed at obtaining redress of their political common, of
grievances, and an establishment of public li-
berty on a secure bais, objects worthy of all the
zeal which they discovered in contending for
them. The feudal government in Spain was at
that time in a slate more favourabl2 to liberty
than in any other of the great European king-
doms. This was owing chiefly to the number
of great cities in that country, a circumstance I
have already taken notice of, and which contri-

VOL. II. P butes

B 0l K butes more than any other to mitigate the rigour

v- _ of the feudal institutions, and to introduce a
15"'. more liberal and equal form of government.

The inhabitants of every city formed a great cor.
poration, with valuable immunities and privi.
leges; they were delivered from a slate of sub-
jeition and vassalage; they were admitted to a
considerable share in the legislature; they had
acquired the arts of industry, without which cities
cannot fubfif:; they had accumulated wealth, by
engaging in commerce ; and being free and in-
dependent themselves, were ever ready to aft as
the guardians of.the public freedom and inde-
pendence. The genius of the internal govern-
ment established among the inhabitants of cities,
which, even in countries where despotic power
prevails most, is democratical and republican,
rendered the idea of liberty familiar and dear to
them. Their representatives in the Cortes were
accuftonred, with equal spirit, to check the en-
croachments of the king and the oppression of
the nobles. They endeavoured to extend the
privileges of their own order; they laboured to
flake off the remaining incumbrances with which
the spirit of feudal policy, favourable only to
the nobles, had burdened them; and, conscious
of being one of the most considerable orders in
the itate, were ambitious of becoming the mos
powerful.

'Irhr cnl. I'HE present juncaure eippeared favourable for
tnlrna,.1' f pufhling any new claim. ''heir sovereign was
t'`"^I y aLbfClt fiom his dominions; by the ill-condutl of

" ' Jus~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~)

liis ministers he had loft the esteem ahd afferion B °0 K
of his fubjeds; the people, exasperated by many i-
injuries, had taken arms, though without concert, 5s"'
almost by general consent; they were animated
with rage capable of carrying them to the most
violent extremes; the royal treasury was ex-
haufted; the kingdom destitute of troops; and
the government committed to a stranger, of
great virtue indeed, but of abilities unequal to
such a trust. The first care of Padilla, and the
other popular leaders who observed and deter-
mined to improve there circumstances, was to
establish rome form of union or association among
the malecontents, that they might ac with greater
regularity, and pursue one common end; and as
the different cities had been prompted to take
arms by the fame motives, and were accuftored
to confider themselves as a difiinit body from the
reft of the fubjeds, they did not find this diffi-
cult. A general convention was appointed to be
held at Avila. Deputies appeared there in name
of almost all the cities entitled to have represent-
atives in the Cortes. They all bound them-
selves, by solemn oath, to live and die in the ser-
vice of the king, and in defence of the privileges
of their order; and assuming the name of the
holy 7yunta, or afrociation, proceeded to deliberate
colcelrning the state of the nation, and the proper
inetliud of redrefling its grievances. The first Theydif-

claim A-

that naturally presented itself, was the normina- drian'su-
tion of a foreigner to be regent; this they de- th"ricy
dared with one voice to be a violation of the

P 2 funda-

B 0 K fundamental laws of the kingdom, and resolved

111. L._,,--' to fend a deputation of their members to Adrian,

1512- requiring him in their name to lay aside all the

ensigns of his office, and to abfRain for the future
from the exercise of a jurisdiction which they had
pronounced illegal .

Get pof WHILE they were preparing to execute this
fefion of bold resolution, Padilla accomplished an enter-
queen joanna. prize of the greatest advantage to the cause.
Aug. 29. After relieving Segovia, he marched suddenly to

Tordefillas, the place where the unhappy queen
Joanna had resided since the death of her hus-
band, and being favoured by the inhabitants, was
admitted into the town, and became master of
her person, for the security of which Adrian had
negle&ed to take proper precautions . Padilla
waited immediately upon the queen, and accost-
ing her with that profound refpet, which she
exacted from the few persons whom The deigned
to admit into her presence, acquainted her at
large with the miserable condition of her Callilian
subjects under the government of her son, who
being destitute of experience himself, permitted
his foreign ministers to treat them with such
rigour as had obliged them to take arms in de.
fence of the liberties of their country. The
cqueen, as if she had been awakened out of a
lethargy, exprefied great aftonifiment at what

* P. Mart. Ep. 691. f Vitadell' Imper. Carl. V.
dell' Als. Ulloa. Ven. 15og. p. 67. Miniana, Contin. p. 17,

he

he said, and told him, that as she had never B o o

Ill.

heard, until that moment, of the death of her -_-
father, or known the sufferings of her people, no z52.
blame could be imputed to her, but that now she
would take care to provide a sufficient remedy;
and in the mean time, added she, let it be your
concern to do what is neceflary for the public
welfare. Padilla, too eager in forming a con-
clufion agreeable to his withes, mistook this lucid
interval of reason for a perfect return of that
faculty; and acquainting the Junta with what
had happened, advised them to remove to Tor-
delillas, and to hold their meetings in that place.
This was instantly done; but though Joanna re-
ceived very graciously an address of the Junta,
beseeching her to take upon herself the government
of the kingdom, and in token of her compliance,
admitted all the deputies to kifs her hand;
though she was present at a tournament held on
that occasion, and seemed highly satisfied with
both these ceremonies, which were conducted
with great magnificence in order to please her,
she soon relapsed into her former melancholy and
sullenness, and could never be brought, by any
arguments or intreaties, to sign any one paper
necessary for the dispatch of business .

THE Junta, concealing as much as possible this Carryongo-

lift circumstance, carried on all their delibera- Vhernnment,
tions in the name of Joanna; and as the Cafli-

6 Sandov. 164. P. Mart. Ep. 68S, 686.

P 3 lians,

B 0 01 K lians, who idolized the memory of Isabella, re.

Ill.
L-A--._ tained a wonderful attachment to her daughter,

' no sooner was it known that she had consented to

assume the reins of government, than the people
expressed the most universal and immoderate joy;
and believing her recovery to be complete,
ascribed it to a miraculous interposition of Hea-
ven, in order to rescue their country from the

andideprve opprefflon of foreigners. The Junta, conscious
Adrian of
all power. of the reputation and power which they had ac-

quired by seeming to adt under the royal autho-
rity, were no longer satisfied with requiring
Adrian to resign the office of regent; they de-
tached Padilla to Valladolid with a considerable
body of troops, ordering him to seize such mem-
bers of the council as were still in that city, to
condu&t them to Tordefillas, and to bring away
the feals of the kingdom, the public archives,
and treasury books. "Padilla, who was received
by the citizens as the deliverer of his country,
executed his commission 'with great exaftnefs;
permitting Adrian, however, fill to reside in Val-
iadolid, though only as a private person, and
without any shadow of power h.

Iheempe- THE emperor, to whom fiequent accounts of
ioralarmed. there tranfa'tions were tranfinitted while he was

still in Slanders, was sensible of his own impru-
dence and that of his minilters, in having despised
too long the murmurs and remonstrances of the

" Sandov. 17,1. P. Mart. Ep. 791.

Castilians.

Castilians. He beheld, with deep concern, a B 0i0 K
kingdom, the most valuable of any he possessed, -_--
and in which lay the strength and sinews of his ,52.
power, just ready to disown his authority, and on
the point of being plunged in all the miseries of
civil war. But though his presence might have
averted this calamity, he could not, at that
time, visit Spain without endangering the Impe-
rial crown, and allowing the French king full
leilure to execute his ambitious schemes. The His mea-

fures with
only point now to be deliberated upon, was, refpea to

the male.

whether he should attempt to gain the malecon- contents.
tents by indulgence and concessions, or prepare
diretly to suppress them by force; and he re-
solved to make trial of the former, while, at the
fame time, if that should fail of success, he pre-
pared for the latter. For this purpose, he issued
circular letters to all the cities of Castile, exhort-
ing them in most gentle terms, and with affur-
ances of full pardon, to lay down their arms;
he promised such cities as had continued faithful,
not to exact from them the subsidy granted in the
late Cortes, and offered the fame favour to such
as returned to their dutyi he engaged that no
office should be conferred for the future upon
any but native Castilians. On the other hand,
lie wrote to the nobles, exciting them to appear
with vigour in defence of their own rights, and
t!lolc of the crown, against the exorbitant claims
of the commons ; he appointed the high admiral
Don Fadrique Enriquez, and the high constable
JfCaftile, Don Inigo de Velafco, two noblemen

P 4 of

oB 0 K of great abilities as well as influence, regents of
c J the kingdom in conjunction with Adrian; and

5'2' he gave them full power and inftruEtions, if the

obitinacy of the malecontents should render it
necefary, to vindicate the royal authority by
force of arms .

The large THESE conceflions, which, at the time of his
trance of leaving Spain, would have fully satisfied the
:theJun people, came now too late to produce any effiet.
theirgriev- The Junta, relying on the unanimity with which

nce. the nation submitted to their authority, elated

with the success which hitherto had accompanied
all their undertakings, and feeing no military
force colleEted to defeat or obftrua their designs,
aimed at a more thorough reformation of political
abuses. They had been employed for some time
in preparing a remonstrance, containing a large
enumeration, not only of the grievances of which
they craved redress, but of such new regulations
as they thought necessary for the security of their
liberties. This remoniErance, which is divided
into many articles relating to all the different
members of which the constitution was com-
posed, as well as the various departments in the
administration of government, furnishes us with
more authentic evidence concerning the inten-
tions of the Junta, than can be drawn from the
testimony of the later Spanifli hiflorians, who lived
in times when it became faifhionable and even

J P. -Ieuter. Rer. AuRr. lib. viii. c. 6. p. 8f?.

neceflary

eceffary to represent the conduc of the male- B o 0 K
contents in the worst light, and as flowing from v_
the worst motives. After a long preamble con- $".
cerning the various calamities under which the
nation groaned, and the errors and corruption in
government to which these were to be imputed,
they take notice of the exemplary patience where-
with the people had endured them, until self-
preservation, and the duty which they owed to
their country, had obliged them to assemble, in
order to provide in a legal manner for their own
safety, and that of the constitution: For this
purpose, they demanded that the king would be
pleased to return to his Spanish dominions and
reside there, as all their former monarchs had
done; that he would not marry but with content
of the Cortes; that if he should be obliged at
any time to leave the kingdom, it Ihall not be
lawful to appoint any foreigner to be regent;
thatthe present nomination of cardinal Adrian to
that office shall instantly be declared void; that
he would not, at his return, bring along with
him any Flemings or other firangers; that no
foreign troops shall, on any pretence whatever,
be introduced into the kingdom; that none but
natives ihall be capable of holding any office or
benefice either in church or itate; that no so-
reigner shall be naturalized; that firee quarters
Ifall not be granted to soldiers, nor to the mem-
bers of the king's household, for any longer time
than fix days, and that only when the court is in
a progress; that all the taxes shall be reduced

~~~~I ~to

B 1° 0 to the fame slate they were in at the death o

MI.

queen Isabella; that all alienations of the royal
I5Z2- demesnes or revenues since that queen's death

shall be resumed; that all new offices created
since that period ihall be abolished; that the sub
fidy granted by the late Cortes in Galicia {ha
not be exacted; that in all future Cortes each cit
lhall fend one representative of the clergy, one o
the gentry, and one of the commons, each to
elected by his own order; that the crown fnia
not influence or direc any city with regard
the choice of its representatives; that no membe
of the Cortes shall receive an office or penfio
from the king, either for himself or for any o
his family, under pain of death, and confiscation
of his goods; that each city or community fhal
pay a competent salary to its representatives for hi
maintenance during his attendance on the Cortes
that the Cortes shall assemble once in three year
at least, whether summoned by the king or not
and shall then enquire into the observation of th
articles now agreed upon, and deliberate con-
cerning public affairs; that the rewards which
have been given or promised to any of the mem-
bers of the Cortes held in Galicia, shall be re-
voked; that it fllall be declared a capital crime to
fend gold, silver, or jewels out of the kingdom;
that judges shall have fixed lillaries assigned them,
and shall not receive any flare of the fines and
forfcitures of persons condemned by them; that
no grant of the goods of persons accused shall be
valid, if given before fcmtencc was pronounced

: againll

gainft them; that all privileges which the nobles B o o K

,ave at any time obtained, to the prejudice of I----

he commons, Ihall be revoked ; that the govern. I52.
ent of cities or towns shall not be put into the
ands of noblemen , that the pofleffions of the
obility shall be subject to all public taxes in the
fame manner as those of the commons; that an
nquiry be made into the conduc of such as have
een entrufled with the management of the royal
patrimony since the accession of Ferdinand; and
f the king do not within thirty days appoint
persons properly qualified for that service, it flall
be lawful for the Cortes to nominate them; that
Indulgences shall not be preached or dispersed
inthe kingdom until the cause of publishing them
be examined and approved of by the Cortes;
that all the money arising from the sale of Indul-
gences shall be faithfully employed in carrying
onwaragainft the Infidels; that such prelates as
do not reside in their dioceses fix months in the
'ear, shall forfeit their revenues during the time
they are absent; that the ecclesiastical judges
and their officers shall not exact greater fees than
those which are paid in the secular courts; that
the present archbishop of Toledo, being a so-
reigner, be compelled to resign that dignity,
which shall be conferred upon a Castilian; that
the king shall ratify and hold, as good service
done to him and to the kingdom, all the pro-
ceedings of the Junta, and pardon any irregula-
rities which the cities may have committed f-om
an excess of zeal in a good cause: That he shall

promise

B o K promise and swear in the most solemn manner t(

..- .. observe all these articles, and on no occasion at.
'521. tempt either to elude, or to repeal them; and that

he shall never solicit the pope or any other prelate
to grant him a difpeniation or abtblution from
this oath and promise .

The spirit SUCH were the chief articles presented by the
of liberty
which it Junta to their sovereign. As the feudal inftitu.
rathed. tions in the several kingdoms of Europe were

originally the fame, the genius of those govern-
ments which arose from them bore a firong re-
semblance to each other, and the regulations
which the Castilians attempted to establish on this
occasion, differ little from those which other na.
tions have laboured to procure in their tfruggles
with their monarchs for liberty. The grievances
complained of, and the remedies propofed-by the
English commons in their contests with the
princes of the house of Stuart, particularly re-
femble those upon which the Junta now insisted.
But the principles of liberty seem to have been
better understood, at this period, by the Castilians,
than by any other people in Europe; they had
acquired more liberal ideas with refpe& to their
own rights and privileges; they had formed more
bold and generous sentiments concerning go-
vernment; and discovered an extent of politi-
cal knowledge to which the Englifli themselves

k Sandov. zo6. P. Mart. Ep. 686. did

id not attain until more than a century after- B O o K
ards.

152Z,

IT is not improbable, however, that the spirit
reformation among the Castilians, hitherto
nreftrained by authority, and emboldened by
ccefs, became too impetuous, and prompted the
unta to propose innovations which, by alarming
the other members of the confeitution, proved
atal to their cause. The nobles, who, instead
ofobftruaing, had favoured or connived at their
proceedings, while they confined their demands
of redress to such grievances as had been occa-
ioned by the king's want of experience, and by
the imprudence and rapaciousness of his foreign
ministers, were filled with indignation when the Irritates the
Junta began to touch the privileges of their "nbl,.
order, and plainly saw that the measures of the
commons tended no less to break the power of
the aristocracy, than to limit the prerogatives of
the crown. The resentment which they had con-
ceived on account of Adrian's promotion to the
regency, abated considerably upon the emperor's
raising the constable and admiral to joint power
with him in that office; and as their pride and
dignity were less hurt by suffering the prince to
polllls an extensive prerogative, than by ad-
mitting the high pretensions of the people, they
determined to give their sovereign the assistance
which he had demanded of them, and began to
alleinble their vassals for that purpose.

THI

B O 0 K THE Junta, meanwhile, expected with impa

-- - tience the emperor's answer to their remon

The Sep.- france, which they had appointed some of thei
ties of the number to present. The members entrufle(
Junta dare
not present with this commission set out immediately foi
theirrcmon-
flrances. Germany, but having received at different place,
oober o. ce tain intelligence from court, that they could

not venture to appear there without endangering
their lives, they ftopt short in their journey, and
acquainted the Junta of the information which
had been given them'. This excited such vio.
lent passions as transported the whole party be-
yond all bounds of prudence or of moderation,
That a king of Castile should deny his Iubje&s
access into his presence, or refute to liften
their humble petitions, was represented as an a
of tyranny so unprecedented and intolerable
that nothing now remained but with arms in
their hands to drive away that ravenous band o
foreigners which encompassed the throne, who,
after having devoured the wealth of the kingdom,
found it necessary to prevent the cries of anin-
jured people from reaching the ears of their

Violentpro- sovereign. Many insisted warmly on approving a
Phie'jna of motion which had formerly been made, for de-

priving Charles, during the life of his mother,
of the regal titles and authority which had been
too rashly conferred upon him, from a faide fop-
position of her total inability for government.

' Sandov. 143.

Some

iie proposed to provide a proper person to afflf BO O KC
er in the administration of public affairs, by a-
arrying the queen to the prince of Calabria, '5sZ
he heir of the Argonefe kings of Naples, who
ad been detained in prison since the time that
erdinand had difpoffeffed his ancestors of their
rown. All agreed that, as the hopes of obtain-
ng redress and security merely by presenting
teir requests to their sovereign, had kept them
too long in a state of inaction, and prevented
them from taking advantage of the unanimity
ith which the nation declared in their favour,
itwas now necessary to colleEt their whole force,
and to exert themselves with vigour, in opposing
this fatal combination of the king and the nobi-
lity against their liberties m.

THEY soon took the field with twenty thou- Take the
and men. Violent disputes arose concerning the feld
command of this army. Padilla, the darling of
the people and soldiers, was the only person
whom they thought worthy of this honour. But
Don Pedro de Giron, the eldest son of the Conde
e Uruena, a young nobleman of the first order,
having lately joined the commons out of private
tCeltment against the emperor, the refpe&t due
tohisbirth, together with a secret desire of dif-
appointing Padilla, of whose popularity many
members of the Junta had become jealous, pro- November
ctledl him the office of general; though lie soon 23'

"' P. Mart. Ep. 688.

gave

B o O K gave them a fatal proof that he possessed neither

-- - the experience, the abilities, nor the fceadinefs
I'j2. which that importaut flation required.

The regents THE regents, meanwhile, appointed Riofeco as
and nobles

,arm." the place of rendezvous for their troops, which,

though far inferior to those of the commons in
number, excelled them greatly in discipline and
in valour. They had drawn a considerable body
of regular and veteran infantry out of Navarre,
Their cavalry, which formed the chief strength
of their army, consisted mostly of gentlemen ac.
customed to the military life, and animated with
the martial spirit peculiar to their order in that
age. The infantry of the Junta was formed en.
tirely of citizens and mechanics, little acquainted
with the use of arms. The fmrall body of ca-
valry which they had been able to raise, was
composed of persons of ignoble birth, and perseS
strangers to the service into which they entered.
The charater of the generals differed no less
than that of their troops. The royalists were
commanded by the Conde de Haro, the conitable's
eldest son, an officer of great experience and of
diflinguifhed abilities.

Imprudence GIRON marched with his army directly to Rio-
d il' fu- feco, and seizing the villages and pasTes around
general of it, hoped that the royalists would be obliged

either to surrender for want of provisions, or to
fight with disadvantage before all their troops
were afembled. But he had not the abilities,

nor

nor his troops the patience and discipline necef- B 0°, K
fary for the execution of such a scheme. The --.--,
Conde de Haro found little difficulty in condu&t- . 5"'
ing a considerable reinforcement through all his
polls into the town; and Giron, despairing of
being able to reduce it, advanced suddenly to
Villa-panda, a place belonging to the constable,
in which the enemy had their chief magazine of
provisions. By this ill-judged motion, he left
Tordefillas open to the royalists, whom the
Conde de Haro led thither in the night, with the DecemberSi
utmost secrecy and dispatch; and attacking the
town, in which Giron had left no other garrison
than a regiment of priests raised by the bishop of
Zamora, he, by break of day, forced his way
into it after a desperate resistance, became master
of the queen's person, took prisoners many mem-
bers of the Junta, and recovered the great feal,
with the other ensigns of government.

BY this fatal blow, the Junta loft all the repu-
tation and authority which they had derived from
seeming to ad by the queen's commands; such
of the nobles as had hitherto been wavering or
undetermined in their choice, now joined the
regents with all their forces; and an universal
conifernation seized the partizans of the commons.
This was much increased -by the suspicions they
began to entertain of Giron, whom they loudly
accused of having betrayed Tordefillas to the
enemy; and though that charge seems to have
been destitute of foundation, the success of the

VOL. 1I. Q royalists

B o o K royalists being owing to Giron's ill-conduc ra.
v__- /-, ther than to his treachery, he so entirely loft credit

152Z. with his party, that he resigned his commission,

and retired to one of his castles ".

The J,.nta SUCH r members of the Junta as had efeaped the
adhere to
theirfyrem. enemy's hands at Tordefillas, fled to Valladolid;

and as it would have required long time to supply
the places of those who were prisoners by a new
elecion, they made choice among themselves of
a small number of persons, to whom they com.
mitted the supreme direEtion of affairs. Their
army, -which grew fironger every day by the
arrival of troops from different parts of the king-
dom, marched likewise to Valladolid i and Padilla
being appointed commander in chief, the spirits of
the soldiery revived, and the whole party, forget-
ting the late misfortune, continued to express the
fame ardent zeal for the liberties of their country,
and the fame implacable animosity against their
oppreffars.

'Their ex. WHAT they flood moss in'need of, was money
pedients tor
raising to pay their troops. A great part of the current
n'""nc. coin had been carried out of the kingdom by

the Flemings ; the tfated taxes levied in times of
peace were inconsiderable; commerce of every
kind being interrupted by the war, the fum which
it yielded decreased daily; and the Junta were
afraid of difgufling the people by burdening them

Mifccllancous 'rads by Dr. Mich. Gcddes, vol. i. z78.

with

with new impositions, to which, in that age, they B o o K
were little accustomed. But from this difficulty A
they were extricated by Donna Maria Pacheco, ,S"'
Padilla's wife, a woman of noble birth, of great
abilities, of boundless ambition, and animated
with the most ardent zeal in support of the cause
of the Junta. She, with a boldness superior to
those fuperfitious fears which often influence her
sex, proposed to seize all the rich and magnifi-
cent ornaments in the cathedral of Toledo; but
left that action, by its appearance of impiety,
might offend the people, she and her retinue
marched to the church in solemn procession, in
mourning habits, with tears in their eyes, beat-
ing their breasts, and falling on their knees, im-
plored the pardon of the faints whose shrines Ihie
was about to violate. By this artifice, which
screened her from the imputation of sacrilege,
and persuaded the people that necessity and zeal
for a good caule had constrained her, though
with reluctance, to venture upon this action, she
firipped the cathedral of whatever was valuable,
and procured a considerable supply of money for
the Junta°. The regents, no less at a loss how
to maintain their troops, the revenues of the
crown having either been diflipated by the Fle-
mings or seized by the commons, were obliged
to take the queen's jewels, together with the
plate belonging to the nobility, and apply them
to that purpose; and when those failed, they

o Sandov. 3o8. Di&t. de Bayle, ait. Padilla.

0Q2 obtained

oB 0O K obtained a small fum by way of loan .from the
'----' kiing of Portugal P.

LofSetimen THE nobility discovered great unwillingness to
with the proceed to extremities with the Junta. They

*obiiy. were animated with no less hatred than the corn.

mons against the Flemings; they approved much
of several articles in the remonstrance; they
thought the jun&ture favourable, not only for
redressing past grievances, but for rendering the
.constitution more perfect and secure by new re-
gulations; they were afraid, that while the two
orders, of which the legislature was composed,
wafted each other's strength by mutual hostilities,
the crown would rife to power on the ruin or
weakness of both, and encroach no less on the
independence of the nobles, than on the privi-
leges of the commons. To this disposition were
owing the frequent overtures of peace which the
regents made to the Junta, and the continual
negociations they carried on during the progress
of their military operations. Nor were the terms
which they offered unreasonable; for on condi-
tion that the Junta would pass from a few articles
most subversive of the royal authority, or.incon-
fiftent with the rights of the nobility, they en-
gaged to procure the emperor's content to their
other demands, which if he, through the in-
fluence of evil counsellors, flould refute, several
of the nobles promised tojoin with the commons

P. Mart. Ep. 71 8.

in their endeavours to extort itq. Such divisions, B O o K
however, prevailed among the members of the a
Junta, as prevented their deliberating calmly, or '5'.
judging with prudence. Some of the cities which
had entered into the confederacy, were filled with
that mean jealousy and diftrufi of each other,
which rivallhip in commerce or in grandeur is
apt to inspire; the constable, by his influence and
promises, had prevailed on the inhabitants of
Burgos to abandon the Junta, and other noble-
men had shaken the fidelity of some of the lesser
cities; no person had arisen among the commons
offuch superior abilities or elevation of mind as
to acquire the direction of their affairs; Padilla,
their general, was a man of popular qualities,
but diftrutled for that reason by those of highest
rank who adhered to the Junta; the conduct
ofGiron led the people to view, with suspicion,
every person of noble birth who joined their
party; so that the strongest marks of irrefo-
lution, mutual distrust, and mediocrity of genius,
appeared in all their proceedings at this time.
After many consultations held concerning the
terms proposed by the regents, they suffered
themSelves to be 1o carried away by resentment
against the nobility, that, rejecting all thoughts
of accommodation, they threatened to ft-ip them
of the crown lands, which they or their ancestors
had ulurped, and to re-annex these to the royal
domain. Upon this preposterous scheme, which

1 P. Mart. Ep. 695. 713. Geddes's Trafcs, i. 261.

Qu3 would

B 0°i° K would at once have annihilated all the liberties

Ii.

- _---' for which they had been firuggling, by rendering
J5j"' the kings of Castile absolute and independent on

their iubjeEts, they were so intent, that they now
exclaimed with less vehemence against the ex-
aftions of the foreign ministers, than against the
exorbitant power and wealth of the nobles, and
seemed to hope that they might make peace with
Charles, by offering to enrich him with their spoils.

Si.ted with THE success which Padilla had met with in
their fucctfs
;in fnme several finall encounters, and in reducing some
small ren-
counterr. inconsiderable towns, helped to precipitate the

members of the Junta into this measure, filling
them with such confidence in the valour of
their troops, that they hoped for an easy victory
over the royalists. Padilla, that his army might
not remain inactive while flushed with good
fortune, laid siege to Torrelobaton, a place of
greater strength and importance than any that
he had hitherto ventured to attack, and which was
defended by a sufficient garrison; and though
the besieged made a deflperate reiftlance, and

Varch I, the admiral attempted to relieve them, he took
1531. the town by storm, and gave it up to be plun-

dered by his soldiers. If he had marched instantly
wiih his viLtorious army to Tordefillas, the head-
quarters of the royalists, he could hardly have
failed of making an effitual imprefion on their
troops, whonvm he would have found in allo-
niflimcnt at the biifknefs of his operations, and
filr firom being of fuiliiccnt fircngth to give himl

battle.

battle. But the fickleness and imprudence of B 0 0 K
the Junta prevented his taking this ftep. In- - -
capable, like all popular associations, either of i,,5ece
carrying on war or of making peace, they liften- ofhcir con-
ed again to overtures of accommodation, and
even agreed to a short suspension of arms. This
negociation terminated in nothing; but while it
was carrying on, many of Padilla's soldiers, un-
acquainted with the restraints of discipline, went
offwith the booty which they had got at Torre-
lobaton; and others, wearied out by the unusual
length of the campaign, deserted . The constable
too had leisure to assemble his forces at Burgos,
and to prepare every thing for taking the field;
and as soon as the truce expired, he effe&ted a
junEtion with the CondO de Haro, in spire of all
Padilla's efforts to prevent it. They advanced
immediately towards Torrelobaton; and Padilla,
finding the number of his troops so diminished
that he durst not rifle a battle, attempted to re-
treat to Toro, which if he could have accom-
plifhed, the invasion of Navarre at that juncture
by the French, and the necessity which the re-
gents must have been under of detaching men to
tlatkingdom, might have saved him from dan-
ger. But Haro, sensible how fatal the confe- Tkn1th'leS
quences would be of suffering him to escape, mv o orthe
marched with such rapidity at the head of his A1ll 23.
cavalry, that he came up with himl near Villalar,
and, without waiting for his infantry, advanced to

r Sandcv. 336.

Q4 ,lthe

B °0 K the attack. Padilla's army, fatigued and dif-
ti--_ heartened by their precipitant retreat, which they

5z22. could not distinguish from a flight, happened at

that time to be passing over a ploughed field,
on which such a violent rain had fallen, that
the soldiers funk almost to the knees at every
ftep, and remained exposed to the fire of some
field-pieces which the royalists had brought along
with them. All there circumstances so difcon-
certed and intimidated raw soldiers, that without
and defeat facing the enemy, or making any resistance, they

i'. fled in the utmost confusion. Padilla exerted

himfelfwith extraordinary courage and activity in
order to rally them, though in vain; fear render-
ing them deaf both to his threats and intreaties:
Upon which, finding matters irretrievable, and
resolving not to survive the disgrace of that day,
and the ruin of his party, he rushed into the
thickest of the enemy; but being wounded and
dismounted, he was taken prisoner. His princi-
pal officers ihared the fame fate; the common
soldiers were allowed to depart unhurt, the nobles
being too generous to kill men who threw down
their arms S.

THE resentment of his enemies did not susser
Padilla to linger long in expecation of what

* Sandov. 345, &c. P. Mart. Ep. 720. Miniana, Contin.

p. g6. Epitome de la Vide y Hechos del Emper. Carlos V.
por D. Juan Anton. de Vera y Zuniga. 4to. Madr. 1627.
p. 19. lhould

should befal him. Next day he was condemned B O K:
to lose his head, though without any regular trial, -.-
the notoriety of the crime being supposed fuffi- '5s-
cient to supersede the formality of a legal pro-
cess. He was led inflantly to execution, toge- Pad;lla,
ther with Don John Bravo, and Don Francis thei, gene-

>' 1 ral, put to

Maldonada, the former commander of the Sego- death.
vians, and the latter of the troops of Salamanca.
Padilla viewed the approach of death with calm
but undaunted fortitude; and when Bravo, his
fellow-fuifferer, expressed some indignation at
hearing himself proclaimed a traitor, he checked
him, by observing, " That yesterday was the
time to have displayed the spirit of gentlemen,
this day to die with the meekness of Christians."
Being permitted to write to his wife and to the
community of Toledo, the place of his nativity,
he addressed the former with a manly and vir-
tuous tenderness, and the latter with the exulta-
tion natural to one who confidered himself as a
martyr for the liberties of his country'. After

this,

'The firain of there letters is so eloquent and high-fpirit-
ed, that 1 have translated them for the entertainment of my
:eaders.

The Letter of Don John Padilla to his ff'ife.

c S E N 0 R A,

"IF your grief did not afflit me more than my own
death, I should deem myfclf perfecaly happy. For the end
of life being certain to all men, the Almighty confers a mark
ofdiRinguiflhing favour upon that person, for whom he ap-
Pints a death such as mine, which, though lamented by

many,

B o o K this, he fubmiited quietly to his fate. Most of

A-_---3 the Spanish historians, accustomed to ideas of
I5j2. government and of regal power, very different

from those upon which he aEted, have been so
t- eager to teilify their disapprobation of the cause

in which he was engaged, that they have ne-
gleted, or have been asiaid to dojuftice to his
virtues; and by blackening his memory, have
endeavoured to deprive him of that pity, which
is seldom denied to illustrious sufferers.

'PDin oftte THE victory at Villalar proved as decisive as it
party,

was complete. Valladolid, the most zealous of

all

many, is nevertheless acceptable unto him. It would require
more time than 1 now have, to write any thing that could afford
you consolation. That my enemies will not grant me, nor
do I wish to delay the reception of that crown which I hope
to enjoy. You may bewail your own loss, but not my death,
which, being so honourable, ought not to be lamented by
any. My foul, for nothing else is left to me, I bequeath to
you. You will receive it, as the thing in this world which
you valued molt. I do not write to my father Pero Lopez,
because I dare not ; for though I have fiewn myself to be his
son in daring to lose my life, I have not been the heir of his
good fortune. I will not attempt to fay any thing more, that
I may not tire the executioner, who waits for me, and that I
may not excite afufpicion, that, in order to prolong my lif',
1 lengthen out my letter. My servant Sofia, an eye-witnels,
and to whom I have communicated my most fecrct thoughts,
will inform you of what I cannot now write; and thus I re,,
expedting the infirument of your grief, and of my deliver-
ancc."

His Letter to the City of Toledo.

"To thee, the crown of Spain, and the light of the
whole world, free from the time of the mighty GuotOh:. to

thee,

al the associated cities, opened its gates inmme- B 0o a
diacely to the conquerors, and being treated with
great clemency by the regents, Medina del Carn- s52
po, Segovia, and many other towns, followed its
example. This sudden dissolution of a confede-
racy, formed not upon flight disgusts, or upon
trifling motives, into which the whole body of the
people had entered, and which had been allowed
time to acquire a considerable degree of order and
conrfience by establishing a regular plan of go-
vernment, is the strongest proof either of the in-
ability of its leaders, or of some secret discord
reigning among its members. Though part of

thee, who, by shedding the blood of frangers, as well as thy
ownblood, haft recovered liberty for thyfelfand thy neigh-
bouring cities, thy legitimate son, Juan de Padilla, gives
information, how by the blood of his body, thy ancient vic-
tories are to be refreshed. If fate hath not permitted my
aclions to be placed among your successful and celebrated ex-
ploits, the fault hath been in my ill fortune, not in my good
wil. This I request of thee as of a mother, to accept, since
God hath given me nothing more to lose for thy fake, than
that which i am now to relinquilh. 1 am more solicitous
about thy good opinion than about my own life. The lhift-
ings of fortune, which never stands frill, are many. But
this 1 fee with infinite consolation, that I, the leall of thy
children, susser death for thee; and that thou halt nursed at
thy brealts such as may take vengeance for my wrongs.
MJny tongues will relate the manner of my death, of which
lam Hill ignorant, though I know it to be near. My end
'illtcltify what was my desire. My foul I recommend to thee
10 tohe patroness ofChrifltianity. Of my body I fay nothing,
orit is not mine. I can write nothing more, for at this very
moment I feel the knife at my throat, with greater dread of
thydifpleafure, than apprchenfion of my own pain." San-
dv, llilt. vol. i .
p 478.

that

B 0 0 K that army, by which they had been subdued was

--- obliged, a few days after the battle, to march
15Z" towards Navarre, in order to check the pro-

grefs of the French in that kingdom, nothing
could prevail on the dejeaed commons of Castile
to take arms again, and to embrace such a fa-
vourable opportunity of acquiring those rights
and privileges for which they had appeared so

PAdilia's zealous. The city of Toledo alone, animated
T,,td,,,idh by Donna Maria Pacheco, Padilla's widow, who,
great lpri. instead of bewailing her husband with a womanilh

sorrow, prepared to revenge his death, and to
prosecute that cause in defence of which he had
fuffel-ed, muff be excepted. Respect for her sex,
or admiration for her courage and abilities, as
well as sympathy with her misfortunes, and ve-
neration for the memory of her husband, secured
her the fame ascendant over the people which lie
had poffefled. The prudence and vigour with
which The aAed, jufified that confidence they
placed in her. She wrote to the French general
in Navarre, encouraging him to invade Castile by
the offer of powerful assistance. She endeavoured
by her letters and emifaries to revive the spirit
and hopes of the other cities. She raised soldiers,
and exacted a great fum from the clergy belonging
to the cathedral, in order to defray the expence
of keeping them on foot ". She employed every
artifice that could incereft or inflame the popu-
lace. For this purpose fle ordered crucifixes to

U p. Mart. Ep. 727. . ,

be

be used by her troops instead of colours, as if a o o K
they had been at war with the infidels and enemies
ofreligion; she marched through the streets of x'",
Toledo with her son, ayoung child, clad in deep
mourning feated on a mule, having a standard
carried before him, representing the manner of
his father's execution ". By all these means file
kept the minds of the people in such perpetual
agitation as prevented their passions firom fob-
fiding, and rendered them insensible of the dan-
gers to which they were exposed, by flanding
alone in opposition to the royal authority. While
the army was employed in Navarre, the regents
were unable to attempt the reduction of Toledo
by force; and all their endeavours, either to di-
minifh Donna Maria's credit with the people, or
to gain her by large promises and the folicita-
tions of her brother the marquis de Mondeiar,
proved ineffecual. Upon the expulsion of the
French out of Navarre, part of the army return-
edinto Castile, and invested Toledo. Even this
made no impression on the intrepid and obstinate
courage' of Donna Maria. She defended the
town with vigour, her troops in several sallies
beatthe royaliffts, and no progress was made to-
wards reducing the place, until the clergy, whom
Ihe had highly offended by invading their pro-
perty, ceased to support her. As soon as they
received information of the death of William le
Croy, archbiflop of Toledo, whose possession of

x Sandov. 375.

tha at

B o0 K that fee was their chief grievance, and that the
v_-_--' emperor had named a Castilian to succeed him,

1s22. they openly turned against her, and persuaded

the people that she had acquired such influence
over them, by the force of enchantments, that
she was aliifted by a familiar d-emon which at-
tended her in the form of a Negro-maid, and
that by its suggestions she regulated every part of
her conduct y. The credulous multitude, whom
their impatience of a long blockade, and despair
of obtaining succours either from the cities for-
merly in confederacy with them, or from the
French, rendered desirous of peace, took arms
against her, and driving her out of the city, fur-
oaober26. rendered it to the royalists. She retired to the

citadel, which she defended with amazing forti-
tude four months longer; and when reduced to
the last extremities, she made her escape in dif-
Feb. 1o, guise, and fled to Portugal, where she had many

relations z.

of thisil UPON her flight, the citadel surrendered. Tran-
v/ar quillity was re-established in Caflile; and this

bold attempt of the commons, like all unsuccess-
ful infurreftions, contributed to confirm and ex-
tend the power of the crown, which it was in-
tended to moderate and abridge. The Cortes
still continued to make a part of the Castilian
conflitution, and was summoned to meet when.

r P. Mart. Ep. 727.
* Sandov. 375. P'. Mart. Ep. 754. Ferrer. viii. 563.

y~~7~~~~~~~ cver
7

ever the king stood in need of money; but in- nB 0 K
Read of adhering to their ancient and cautious --
form of examining and redreling public griev- 15s"2
ances, before they proceeded to grant any fupp]y,
the more courtly cuflom of voting a donative in
the firfl- place was introduced, and the sovereign
having obtained all that he wanted, never al-
lowed them to enter into any inquiry, or to
attempt any reformation injurious to his autho-
rity. The privileges which the cities had en-
joyed were gradually circumscribed or aboliflled;
their commerce began from this period to de-
cline; and becoming less wealthy and less po-
pulous, they loft that power and influence which
they had acquired in the Cortes.

WHrLE Castile was exposed to the calamities The pro-
of civil war, the kingdom of Valencia was torn iSnfurre,
byinteftine commotions itill more violent. The lin'"a-
alrfciation which had been formed in the city of
Valencia in the year one thousand five hundred
and twenty, and which was distinguished by the
name of the Germanada, continued to filbfifl
after the emperor's departure fiom Spain. The
members of it, upon pretext of defcncling the
coasts against the descents of the Corsairs of Bar-
bary, and under fancLion of that permiflion,
vwhich Charles had rafily granted them, refused
to lay down their arms. But as the grievances,
whichl the Valencians aimed at redrerfing, pro-
ct(ledl from the arrogance and exations of the

nobility,

B 0 10 C nobility, rather than from any unwarrantable ex.
v__I-- ercife of the royal prerogative, their resentment
1512. turned chiefly against the former. As soon as

they were allowed the use of arms, and became
conscious of their own flrength, they grew impa-
tient to take vengeance of their oppressors. They
drove the nobles out of most of the cities, plun-
dered their houses, wafted their lands, and assault-
ed their castles. They then proceeded to eleEc
thirteen persons, one from each company of
tradesmen established in Valencia, and committed
the administration of government to them, under
pretext that they would reform the laws, establish
one uniform mode of dispensing jultice without
partiality or regard to the diftinAion of ranks,
and thus restore men to some degree of their ori-
ginal equality.

THE nobles were obliged to take arms in self-

defence. Hoffilities began, and were carried on
with all the rancour with which resentment at
oppression inspired the one party, and the idea of
insulted dignity animated the other. As no per-
son of honourable birth, or of liberal education,
joined the Germanada, the councils as well as
troops of the confederacy were conducted by low
mechanics, who acquired the confidence of an
enraged multitude chiefly by the fircenefs of
their zeal and the extravagance of their pro-
ceedings. Among fuich men, the laws intro-
duced in civilized nations, in order to restrain or

moderate

moderate the violence of war, were unknown or B O O K

III.

despised; and they run into the wildest excelres -.
ofcruelty and outrage. J512.

THE emperor, occupied with suppressing the
infurretion in Castile, which more immediately
threatened the subversion of his power and pre-
rogative, was unable to give much attention to
the tumults in Valencia, and left the..nobility of
that kingdom to fight their own battles. His
viceroy, the Conde de Melito, had the supreme
command of the forces which the nobles raised
among the vassals. The Germanada carried on
the war during the years one thousand five hun-
dred and twenty and twenty-one, with a more
persevering courage, than could have been ex-
peced from a body so tumultuary, under the
conduct of such leaders. They defeated the no-
bility in several a&tions, which, though not con-
liderable, were extremely sharp. They repulsed
them in their attempts to reduce different towns.
But the nobles, by their superior flill in war, and
at the head of troops more accustomed to service,
gained the advantage in most of the rencounters.
Atlength they were joined by a body of Castilian
cavalry, which the regents dispatched towards
Valencia, soon after their vi&cory over Padilla at
Villalar, and by their affif.a ce the Valencian nobles
acquired fuich superiority ,.iat they entirely broke
and ruined the Germanada. The leaders of the
party were put to death, alimoft without any for-

VoL. 11. R mality

r'

B 0 O K mality of legal trial, and suffered such cruel pu-

ll. Ce-_- nifhments, as the sense of recent injuries prompted
Z512, their adversaries to inflic. The government of

Valencia was re-eftablilhed in its ancient form .

Appear- IN Aragon, violent symptoms of the fame
antes of di -
affetion in spirit of disaffection and sedition, which reigned
Aragon. in the other kingdoms of Spain, began to appear,

but by the prudent conduct of the viceroy, Don
John de Lanufa, they were so far composed, as
to prevent their breaking out into any open in-

nTrmedabl'e furrection. But in the ifand of Majorca, an-
infurression
in Majorca. nexed to the crown of Aragon, the fame causes

which had excited the commotions in Valencia,
produced effets no less violent. The people, im-
patient of the hardships which they had endured
March 19, under the rigid jurisdiction of the nobility, took

a '1- arms in a tunultuary manner; deposed their

viceroy; drove him out of the island; and maf-
sacred every gentleman who was so unfortunate
as to fall into their hands. The obstinacy with
which the people of Majorca persisted in their
rebellion, was equal to the rage with which they
began it. Many and vigorous efforts were re-
quifite in order to reduce them to obedience; and
tranquillity was re-established in every part of

a Argenfola Annales de Aragon, cap. 75. 90. 99. 118.

Sayas Annalesde Aragon, cap. 5. 1z, &c. P. Mart. Ep. lib.
xxxiii. & xxxiv. paflim. Ferrer. His. d'Efpagne, viii. 54z.
564, &c.

Spain,

Spain, before the Majorcans could be brought to B 0 0 I
submit to their fovereigl b.

152z.
WHILE the spirit of difaffestion was so general causes

',~~~~~~

- . . . which pre.

among the Spaniards, and so many causes con- vented the
curred in precipitating them into such violent the nale-
measures, in order to obtain the redress of their CODntetS.
grievances, it may appear strange, that the male-
contents in the different kingdoms Ihould have
carried on their operations without any mutual
concert, or even any intercourse with each other.
By uniting their councils and arms, they might
have aaed both with greater force and with
more effect. The appearance of a national confe-
deracy would have rendered it no less refpedtable
among the people than formidable to the crown;
and the emperor, -unable to resist such a combina-
tion, must have complied with any terms which
the members of it should have thought fit to pre-
scribe. Many things, however, prevented the
Spaniards from forming themselves into one body,
and pursuing common measures. The people of
the different kingdoms in Spain, though they were
become the subjeCts of the fame sovereign, re-
tained, in full force, their national antipathy to
each other. The remembrance of their ancient
rivalfhip and hostilities was frill lively, and the
sense of reciprocal injuries so strong, as to pre-

b Argenfola Annales de Aragon, c. 113. Ferrer. Hill. viii.
54z. Sayas Annalesde Aragon, cap. 7. 11. 14. 76. 81. Ser-
eras Hill. d'Epagne, viii. 579, &c. 609.

R 2 vent

B 011 K vent them from aaing with confidence and con-

_-- cert. Each nation chose rather to depend on its

5 own efforts, and to maintain the struggle alone,

than to implore the aid of neighbours, whom
they distrusted and hated. At the fame time, the
forms of government in the several kingdoms of
Spain were so different, and the grievances of
which they complained, as well as the alterations
and amendments in policy which they attempted
to introduce, so various, that it was not easy to
bring them to unite in any common plan. To
this disunion Charles was indebted for the prefer-
vation of his Spanish crowns; and while each of
the kingdoms followed separate measures, they
were all obliged at last to conform to the will of
their sovereign.

Them rpc- THE arrival of the emperor in Spain filled his
ror's pru-
dentand u -g fubjeas who had been in arms- against him with
1^vi(,trt deep apprehensions, from which he soon deliver-
naisdconh ed them by an aat of clemency, no less prudent
tenrs. than generous. After a rebellion so general,

scarcely. twenty persons, among so many crimi-
nals obnoxious to the law, had been punithed
capitally in Castile. Though ft-ongly solicited
by his council, Charles refused to shed any more
blood by the hands of the executioner; and pub-
0oa. s. lifhed a general pardon, extending to all crimes

committed since the commencement of the iniir-
reaions, from which only fourscore persons were
exceptcd. Even these he seems to have named,
rather with an intention to intimidate others,

,41~^~~~~~~~~~
* than

than from any inclination to seize them; for B o o K

II-.

when an officious courtier offered to inform him.
where one of the most considerable among them S."'
was concealed, he avoided it by a good-natured
pleasantry; " Go," fays he, " I have now no
reason to be afraid of that man, but he has some
caulf to keep at a distance from me, and you
would be better employed in telling him that I
am here, than in acquainting me with the place
of his retreat '." By this appearance of magna-
nimity, as well as by his care to avoid every
thing which had disgusted the Castilians during
his former residence among them; by his address
in assuming their manners, in speaking their
language, and in complying with all their hu-
mours and customs, he acquired an ascendant
over them which hardly any of their native mo-
narchs had ever attained, and brought them to
support him in all his enterprizes with a zeal and
valour to which he owed much of his success and
grandeur d.

ABOUT the time that Charles landed in Spain, Adri;n set
Adrian set out for Italy to take possession of his Rom f, nd
new dignity. But though the Roman people his'"""
longed extremely for his arrival, they could not, there-
on his firfi appearance, conceal their furprize and
disappointment. After being accustomec to the

" Sandov. 377, &c. Vida del Emper. Carlos, por Don
Juan Anton. de Vcra y Zuniga, p. 3Q.
't Ulloa Vita de Carlo V. p. 85.

R 3 princely

B ° 0 K princely magnificence of Julius, and the elegant

III.
a- -I splendour of Leo, they beheld with contempt an
r5"2t old man of an bumble deportment, of auflere

manners, an enemy to pomp, destitute of taste in
the arts, and unadorned with any of the external
accomplishments which the vulgar expet in those
raised to eminent itations e. Nor did his poli.
tical views and maxims seem less strange and
astonishing to the pontifical ministers. He ac-
knowledged and bewailed the corruptions which
abounded in the church, as well as in the court
of Rorme, and prepared to reform both; he dif-
covered no intention of aggrandizing his family;
he even scrupled at retaining such territories as
some of his predecessors had acquired by violence
or fraud, rather than by any legal title, and for
that reason he invested Francesco Maria de Ro-
vere anew in the dutchy of Urbino, of which
Leo had firipped him, and surrendered to the
dukeof Ferrara several places wrested from him
by the church f. To men little habituated to fee
princes regulate their conduct by the maxims
of morality and the principles ofjuftice, there
actions of the new pope appeared inconteftible
proofs of his weakness or inexperience. Adrian,
who was a perfe&t stranger to the complex and
intricate system of Italian politics, and who could
place no confidence in persons whose subtle re-
finements in business suited so ill with the natural

e Giic. 1. xv. 238. Jovii Vita Adriani, 117. Bellefor,
Epitr. des Princ, 84.. ' Geic. lib. xv. 240.

fimpliciry

simplicity and candour of his own character, be- B 0O K
ing often embarrassed and irresolute in his deli- _
berations, the opinion of his incapacity daily in- 15s2.
creased, until both his person and government
became objects of ridicule among his fubjeds g.

ADRIAN, though, devoted to the emperor, en- ,-He ena-
deavoured to assume the impartiality which be- for peace
came the common father of Christendom, and la-
boured to reconcile the contending princes, in
order that they might unite in a league against,
Solyman, whose conquest of Rhodes rendered
him more formidable than ever to Europe h. But
this was an undertaking far beyond his abilities.
To examine such a variety of pretensions, to ad-
just such a number of interfering interefis, to ex-
tinguifh the pafiions which ambition, emulation,
and mutual injuries had kindled, to bring so many
hostile powers to pursue the fame scheme with
unanimity and vigour, required not only upright-
ness of intention, but great superiority both of
understanding and address.

THE Italian states were no less desirous of peace
than the pope. The Imperial army under Co-
lonna was still kept on foot, but as the emperor's
revenues in Spain, in Naples, and in the Low
Countries, were either exhausted or applied to

z Joy. Vita Adr. 1 8. P. Mart. Ep. 774. Rufcelli Let-
tres de Princ. vol. i. 87 96. 9o.
h Bellefor. Epitr. p. 86.

R + some

B ° K f rome other purpose, it depended entirely for pay
. - j and subsistence on the Italians. A great part of

J5l2. it was quartered in the ecclefiaflical state, and

monthly contributions were levied upon the Flo-
rentines, the Milanese, the Genoese, and Luc-
chefe, by the viceroy of Naples; and though all
exclaimed against such oppression, and were im-
patient to be delivered from it, the dread, of
worse consequences from the rage of the army, or
the resentment of the emperor, obliged them to
submit .

'new3 So much regard, however, was paid to the pope's

league exhortations, and to a bull which he issued, re-
against the
French quiring all Christian princes to consent to a truce
king. for three years, that the Imperial, the French, and

English ambassadors at Rome were empowered by
their refpeaive courts to treat of that matter; but
while they wafted their time in fruitless negocia-
tions, their masters continued their preparations
for war. The Venetians, who had hitherto adhered
with great firmness to their alliance with Francis,
being now convinced that his affairs in Italy were
in a desperate situation, entered into a league
June 28. against- him with the emperor; to which Adrian,

at the instigation of his countryman and friend
Charles de Lannoy, viceroy of Naples, who per-
fuaded him that the only obstacles to peace arose
fiom the ambition of the French king, soon after
acceded. The other Italian states followed their
example; and Francis was left without a tingle

Guic. 1. xv. 238.

ally

ally to resist the efforts of so many enemies, whose n o o K
armies threatened, and whotf territories encomr-
passed, his dominions on every fide . {1523.

THE dread of this powerful confederacy, it Francis's
was thought, would have obliged Francis to keep me'arr in
wholly on the defensive, or at least have prevent- plto it.do
ed his entertaining any thoughts of marching
into Italy. But it was the character of that
prince, too apt to become remits, and even ne-
gligent on ordinary occasions, to route at the ap-
proach of danger, and not only to encounter it
with spirit and intrepidity, qualities which never
forsook him, but to provide against it with dili-
gence and industry. Before his enemies were
ready to execute any of their schemes, Francis
had assembled a numerous army. His authority
over his own fubjets was far greater than that
which Charles or Henry pofferfed over theirs.
They depended on their diets, their Cortes, and
their parliaments for money, which was usually
granted them in small fums, very slowly, and
with much reluctance. The taxes he could im-
pose were more considerable, and levied with
greater dispatch; so that on this, as well as on
other occasions, he brought his armies into the
field while they were only devising ways and
means for railing theirs. Sensible of this advan-
tage, Francis hoped to disconcert all the emperor's
schemes by marching in person into the Milanese;
and this bold measure, the more formidable be-

k Guic. 1. xv. 24I. 248.

cause

B 0 0 K cause unexpe&ed, could scarcely have failed of

III.

:- -, producing that effet. But when the vanguard of
sur23.d his army had already reached Lyons, and he him-
upon the f elf was hastening after it with a second division
discover' of
theconfta. of his troops, the discovery of a domestic con.
bn'S con- fpiracy, which threatened the ruin of the king.
fpiracy. dom, obliged him to flop short, and to alter his

measures.

Js charac. THE author of this dangerous plot was Charles
t'a. duke of Bourbon, lord high constable, whose noble

birth, vast fortune, and high office, raised him to
be the most powerful fubjedt in France, as his great
talents, equally fujted to the field or the council,
and his signal services to the crown, rendered
him the most illufirious and deserving. The
near resemblance between the king and him in
many of their qualities, both being fond of war,
and amiitious to excel in manly exercises, as well
as their equality in age, and their proximity of
blood, ought naturally to have secured to him a

Thecaures considerable share in that monarch's favour. But
aff^ion. unhappily Louise, the king's mother, had con-

tracted a violent aversion to the house of Bour-
bon, for no better reaoln than because Anne of
Bretagne, the queen of Louis the Twelfth, with
whom she lived in perpetual enmity, had disco-
vered a peculiar attachment to that branch of the
royal family; and had taught her son, who was
too ilufceprible of any impreflion which his mo-
ther gave him, to view all the conflable's afions
with a mean and unbecoming jealousy. His dil-

tinlguslcnd

tinguilhed merit at the battle of Marignano had B °o° K
not been sufficiently rewarded; he had been re- -- -
called from the government of Milan upon very 15'3.
frivolous pretences, and had met with a cold
reception, which his prudent condu& in that
difficult flation did not deserve; the payment of
his pensions had been suspended without any good
cause; and, during the campaign of one thou-
sand five hundred and twenty-one, the king, as
has already been related, had affronted him in
presence of the whole army, by giving the com-
mand of the van to the duke of AlenSon. The
constable, at first, bore these indignities with,
greater moderation than could have been expected
from an high-fpirited prince, conscious of what
was due to his rank and to his services. Such
a multiplicity of injuries, however, exhausted his
patience; and inspiring him 'with thoughts of
revenge, he retired from court, and began to hold
afecret correspondence with some of the empe-
ror's ministers.

ABOUT that time the duchess of Bourbon
happened to die without leaving any children.
Louise, of a disposition no less amorous than
vindiacive, and still susceptible of the tender
pallions at the age of forty-fix, began to view
the constable, a prince as amiable as he was
accompliflhed, with other eyes; and nocwith-
Randing the great disparity of their years, fhie
formed the scheme of marrying him. Bourbon,
who might have expeted every thing to which

2 an

3B o K an ambitious mind can aspire, frornmthe doating

Ill.

_-, fondness of a woman who governed her son and
1523. the kingdom, being incapable either of imitating

the queen in her sudden transition from hatred
to love, or of dissembling so meanly as to pre-
tend affction for one who had persecuted him so
long with unprovoked malice, not only rejected
the match, but embittered his refusal by forne
severe raillery on Louise's person and character.
She finding herself not only contemned, but in-
fulted, her disappointed love turned into hatred,
and since Ihe could not marry, she resolved to
ruin Bourbon.

FOR this purpose she consulted with the chan-

cellor Du Prat, a man, who, by a bate proftitu-
tion of great talents and of superior skill in his.
profession, had risen to that high office. By his
advice a law-suit was commenced against the
constable, for the whole estate belonging to the
house of Bourbon. Part of it was claimed in the
king's name, as having fallen to the crown; part
in that of Louise, as the nearest heir in blood of
the deceased duchess. Both there claims were
equally deltitute of any foundation in justice;
but Louise, by her solicitations and authority,
and Du Prat, by employing all the artifices and
chicanery of law, prevailed on the judges to
order the estate to be sequestered. This unjust
decision drove the constable to despair, and to

S1is rrerct measures which despair alone could have dictated.
~'.ls, tho Ile renewed his intrigues in the Imperial court,
cml'eror and

and flattering himself that the injuries which he B o o K
had suffered would justify his having recourse to -.-
any means in order to obtain revenge, he offered '523.
to transfer his allegiance from his natural so-
vereign to the emperor, and to assist him in the
conquest of France. Charles, as well as the king
of England, to whom the secret was communi-
cated', expecting prodigious advantages from
his revolt, were ready to receive him with
open arms, and spared neither promises nor al-
lurements which might help to confirm him in his
resolution. The emperor offered him in mar-
riage his sifter Eleanor, the widow of the king of
Portugal, with an ample portion. He was in-
cluded as a principal in the treaty between Charles
and Henry. The counties of Provence and Dau-
phine were to be fettled on him, with the title
of king. .The emperor engaged to enter France
by the Pyrenees, and Henry, supported by the
Flemings, to invade Picardy; while twelve thou-
sand Germans, levied at their common charge,
were to penetrate into Burgundy, and to as in
concert with Bourbon, who undertook to raise
fix thousand men among his friends and vassals
in the heart of the kingdom. The execution of
this deep-laid and dangerous plot was fifpend-
ed, until the king should cross the Alps with the
only army capable of defending his dominions;
and as he was far advanced in his march for that

Rymer's Foeder. xiii. 794.

pur pose,

B °n1° K purpose France was on the brink of detruc.
a-_v.- tion m.

1513.
discovered. HAPPILY for that kingdom, a negociation

which had now been carrying on for several
months, though conducted with the mos pro-
found secrecy, and communicated only to a few
chosen confidents, could not altogether escape
the observation of the reft of the constable's nu-
merous retainers, rendered more inquisitive by
finding that they were distrusted. Two of these
gave the king some intimation of a mysterious
correspondence between their master and the
count de Roeux, a Flemish nobleman of great
confidence with the emperor. Francis, who could
not bring himself to fufped that the first prince
of the blood would be so base as to betray the
kingdom to its enemies, immediately repaired to
Moulins, where the constable was in bed, feign-
ing indisposition, that he might not be obliged
to accompany the king into Italy, and acquainted
him of the intelligence which he had received.
Bourbon with great solemnity, and the most
imposing affeitation of ingenuity and candour,
afrerted his own innocence; and as his health, he
*said, was now more confirmed, he promised to join
the army within a few days. Francis, open and
candid himself, and too apt to be deceived by

"m Thuani Hilt. lib. i. c. To. IIeuter. Rcr. Aultr. lib. viii.
c. 18. p. 207.

.l.e

the appearance of those virtues in others, gave B 0 K
such credit to what he said, that he refused to -
arrest him, although advised to take that pre- 1s53'
caution by his wisest counsellors, and, as if the
danger had been over, he continued his march
towards Lyons. The constable set out soon after, September.
seemingly with an intention to follow him; but
turning suddenly to the left he crossed the Rhone, Fles to
and after infinite fatigue and peril, escaped all the Itall
parties which the king, who became sensible too
late of his own credulity, sent out to intercept
him, and reached Italy in safety ".

FRANCIS took every possible precaution to pre-
vent the bad effects of the irreparable error which
he had committed. He put garrisons in all the
places of strength in the constable's territories.
He seized all the gentlemen whom he could
fufpef of being his afrociates; and as he had not
hitherto discovered the whole extent of the con-
fpirator's schemes, nor knew how far the insec-
tion had spread among his fubjelts, he was afraid
that his absence might encourage them to make
some desperate attempt, and for that reason re-
linquilhed his intention of leading his army in
person into Italy.

HE did not, however, abandon his design on French in-
the Milanese; but appointed admiral Bonnivet Milanee.

"Mem. de Bellay, p. 64, &c. Pafquier Recherches de la
"rancc,p. 481

to

B 0 0 K to take the supreme command in his stead, and

11l.

v 1 to march into that country with an army thirty
t5^3* thousand strong. Bonnivet did not owe this pre-

ferment to his abilities as a general; for of all the
talents requisite to form a great commander, he
poleffed only personal courage, the lowest and
the most common. But he was the mors accom-
plilhed gentleman in the French court, of agree-
able manners, and insinuating address, and a
sprightly conversation; and Francis, who lived
in great familiarity with his courtiers, was so;
charmed with there qualities, that he honoured
him, on all occasions, with the most partial and
distinguishing marks of his favour. He was, be-
fides, the implacable enemy of Bourbon; and as
the king hardly knew whom to trust at that junc-
ture, he thought the chief command could be
lodged no where so safely as in 'his hands.
Theirill COLONNA, who was entrusted with the defence

of the Milaneie, his own conquest, was in no
condition to rcfit such a formidable army. He
was deftitutc of money sufficient to pay his troops,
which were reduced to a finall number by sick-
ness or desertion, and had, for that reason, been
obliged to neglect every precaution necessary for
the security of the country. ' he only plan which
he formed was to defend the passage of the river
Teftino against the French ; and as if he had for-
gorten how easily he hilmelf had disconcerted a
similar scheme formed by Lautrec, he promirted
with great confidence on its being eflecual. But

i ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~in~

in spite of all his caution, it succeeded no better B °° K
with him than with Lautrec. Bonnivet passed --
the river without loss, at a ford which had been Sz3'
negleaed, and the Imperialists retired to Milan,
preparing to abandon the town as soon as the
French should appear before it. By an unac-
countable negligence, which Guicciardini im-
putes to infatuationo, Bonnivet did not advance
for three or four days, and loft the opportunity
with which his good fortune presented him. The
citizens recovered from their consternation; Co-
lonna, still active at the age of fourscore, and
Morone, whose enmity to France rendered him
indefatigable, were employed night and day in
repairing the fortifications, in amafling provi-
sions, in collecting troops from every quarter;
and by the time the French approached, had put
the city in a condition to itand a liege. Bon-
nivet, after some fruitless attempts on the town,
which harassed his own troops more than the
enemy, was obliged, by the inclemency of the
season, to retire into winter-quarters.

DURING these tranfadtions, pope Adrian died; Ddath ofl
an event so much to the fatisfation of the Ro-
man people, whose hatred or contempt of him
augmented every day, that the night after his
decease, they adorned the door of his chief phy-
fician's house with garlands, adding this infcrip-

o Guic. lib. xv. z54.
VOL. II. S tion,

'B o K tion, TO THE DELIVERER OF HIS

_
4--~ COUNTRY . The cardinal de Medici in.
'jZ3' flantly renewed his pretensions to the papal dig-

nity, and entered the conclave with high expeta-
tions on his own part, and a general opinion of
the people that they would be successful. But
though supported by the Imperial faction, pof-
sessed of great personal interest, and capable of
all the artifices, refinements, and corruption,
which reign in those affernblies, the obstinacy and
intrigues of his rivals protraced the conclave to

EleAionof the unusual kngth of -fifty days. The address
viI. and perseverance of the cardinal at last fur-
Nov. 2. mounted every obstacle. He was raised to the

head of the church, and assumed the government
of it by the name of Clement VII. The choice
was universally approved of. High expectations
were conceived of a pope, whose great talents,
and long experience in business, seemed to qua-
lify him no less for defending the spiritual in-
rerefts of the church, exposed to imminent dan-
ger by the progress of Luther's opinions, than
for conducting its political operations with the
prudence nequifite at fiuch a difficult junEture;
and who, besides there advantages, rendered
the ecclesiastical fiate more rcfpeEable, by hav-
ing in his hands the government of Florence,
together with the wealth of the family of Me-
lici '.

Jovii Vit. Adr. iaz;. ,1 Guic. 1. av. z63.

4 R RD'TN" 1.

CARPINAL WOLSEY, not disheartened by the B oI0 K

disappointment of his ambitious views at the '-
former eleEtion, had entertained more sanguine Wolfy dif-
hopes of success on this occasion. Henry wrote appointed
to the emperor, reminding him of his engage- withrefent.
ments to second the pretensions of his minister.
Wolfey beftirred himself with activity suitable to
the importance of the prize for which he con-
tended, and inftruced his agents at Rome to
spare neither promises nor bribes in order to gain
his end. But Charles had either ainufed him
with vain hopes which he never intended to
gratify, or he judged it impolitic to oppose a
candidate who had such a prospect of succeeding
as Medici; or perhaps the cardinals durst not
venture to provoke the people of Rome, while
their indignation against Adrian's memory was
still fresh, by placing another Ultra-montane on
the papal throne. Wolfey, after all his expeta-
tions and endeavours, had the mortification to
fee a pope elected, of such an age, and of so
vigorous a constitution, that he could not derive
much comfort to himself from the chance of fur-
viving him. This second proof fully convinced
Wolfey of the emperor's insincerity, and it ex-
cited in him all the resentment which an haughty
mind feels on being at once disappointed and
deceived; and though Clement endeavoured to
soothe his vindictive nature by granting him a
commifnion to be legate in England during life,
with such ample powers as velted in him almost
the whole papal jurifilition in that kingdom, the

S 2 injury

B O o K injury he had now received made such an impression

_- -- as entirely dissolved the tie which had united him
52*3- to Charles, and from that moment he meditated

revenge. It was neceflary, however, to conceal
his intention from his maiter, and to suspend the
execution of it, until, by a dextrous improvement
of the incidents which might occur, he Ihould be
able gradually to alienate the king's affections
from the emperor. For this reason, he was so
far from expressing any uneasiness on account of
the repulle which he had rset with, that he
abounded on every occasion, private as well as
public, in declarations of his high fatisfa6ion with
Clement's promotion .

Henry's HENRY had, during the campaign, fulfilled,
Foeratincl with great sincerity, whatever he was bound to

perform by the league against France, though
more slowly than he could have wiihed. His
thoughtless profusion, and total negle& of ceco-
nomy, reduced him often to great straits for
money. The operations of war were now car-
ried on in Europe in a manner very different from
that which had long prevailed. Instead of armies
suddenly assembled, which under diftin& chief-
tains followed their prince into the field for a
short space, and served at their own coil, troops
were now levied at great charge, and received
regularly considerable pay. Instead of impa-
tience on both iides to bring every quarrel to the

r Fiddes'a Life of Wolfey,, z94, &c. HIerbert.

aBs~~~~~~~ ~~~ifue

issue of a battle, which commonly decided the 1B o0 K
fate of open countries, and allowed the barons, '-v-
together with their vassals, to return to their 5123.
ordinary occupations; towns were fortified with
great art, and defended with much obstinacy;
war, from a very simple, became a very in-
tricate science; and campaigns grew of course
to be more tedious and less decisive. The
expence which these alterations in the military
system neceflarily created, appeared intolerable
to nations hitherto unaccustomed to the burden
of heavy taxes. Hence proceeded the frugal,
and even parsimonious spirit of the English par-
liaments in that age, which Henry, with all his
authority, was seldom able to overcome. The
commons, having refused at this time to grant
him the supplies which he demanded, he had
recourse to the ample and almost unlimited pre-
rogative which the kings of England then pof-
sessed, and by a violent and unulual exertion of
it, raised the money he wanted. This, however, Sept. 20.
wafted so much time, that it was late in the sea-
son before his army, under the duke of Suffolk,
could take the field. Being joined by a confi-
derable body of Flemings, Suffolk marched into
Picardy, and Francis, from his extravagant eager-
ness to recover the Milanese, having left that
fiontier almost unguarded, he penetrated as far
as the banks of the river Oyfe, within eleven
leagues of Paris, filling that capital with confter-
nation. But the arrival of tome troops detached
by the king, who was still at Lyons; the active

S 3 gallantry

B 0 0 K gallantry of the French officers, who allowed the

*- -a allies no respite night or day; the rigour of a
'5'3' most unnatural season, together with scarcity of

provisions, compelled Suffolk to retire; and La
November. Tremouille, who commanded in those parts, had

the glory not only of having checked the pro-
grefs of a formidable army with an handful of
men, but of driving them with ignominy out of
the French territories .

And those THE emperor's attempts upon Burgundy and
of the Ger-
mansand Guienne were not more fortunate, though in
Spaniards both these provinces Francis was equally ill pre-

pared to resist them. The conduc and valour of
his generals supplied his want of foresight; the
Germans, who made an irruption iito one of these
provinces, and the Spaniards, who attacked the
other, were repulsed with great disgrace.

End of the THUS ended the year I523, during which
camPaign. Francis's good fortune and success had been such

as gave all Europe an high idea of his power and
resources. He had discovered and disconcerted
a dangerous conspiracy, the author of which he
had driven into exile, almost without an at-
tendant; he had rendered abortive all the schemes
of the powerful confederacy formed against him;
he had protected his dominions when attacked
on three different fides; and though his army in
the Milanele had not made such progress as might

Herbert. Mem. de Bellay, 73, &c.

hlive

have been expe&ed from its superiority to the B o o
enemy in number, he had recovered, and still ---
kept poffefion, of one half of that dutchy. s153.

THE ensuing year opened with events more , s24'

disastrous to France. Fontarabia was loft by the ofhe new
cowardice or treachery of its governor. In Italy, Feb. 17.
the allies resolved on an early and vigorous effort
in order to dispossess Bonnivet of that part of the
Milanele which lies beyond the Tefino. Cle-
ment, who, under the pontificates of Leo and
Adrian, had discovered an implacable enmity to
France, began now to view the power which the
emperor was daily acquiring in Italy, with so
much jealousy, that he refuscd to accede, as his
predecessors had done, to the league againfl
Francis, and forgetting private passions and ani-
mofities, laboured with the zeal which became
his character, to bring about a reconciliation
among the contending parties. But all his en-
deavours were ineffectual; a numerous army, to
which each of the allies furnished their contin-'
gent of troops, was assembled at Milan by the be-
ginning of March. Lannoy, viceroy of Naples, Imperi..i

army ready

took the command of it upon Colonna's death, to tYke the
though the chief direction of military operations 'eld early.
was committed to Bourbon and the marquis de
Pescara; the latter the ablest and most enter-
prifng of the Imperial generals; the former in-
ipired by his resentment with new activity and
invention, and acquainted so thoroughly with
the characters of the French commanders, the

S 4 genius

B 0 o K genius of their troops, and the strength as well as

v----' weakness of their armies, as to be of infinite
15,4. service to the party which he had joined. But

all these advantages were nearly loft through the
emperor's inability to raise money sufficient for
executing the various and extensive plans which

Retarded by he had formed. When his troops were corn-
a mutiny of
the troops. manded to march, they mutinied against their

leaders, demanding the pay which was due to
them for some months; and disregarding both
the menaces and intreaties of their officers,
threatened to pillage the city of Milan, if they
did not inflantly receive fatisfadion. Out of this
difficulty the generals of the allies were extri-
cated by MoronS, who prevailing on his country-
men, over whom his influence was prodigious,
to advance the fum that was requisite, the army
took the field

oThe Frnh BONNIVET was destitute of troops to op-
obliged to
ab.ndor the pole this army, and still more of the talents
Milanlco

which could render him an equal match for
its leaders. After various movements and en-
counters, described with great accuracy by
the contemporary historians, a detail of which
would now be equally uninterebing and un-
instructive, he was forced to abandon the strong
camp in which he had entrenched himself at
Biagrafla. Soon after, partly by his own mif-
conduct, partly by the ativity of the enemy,

Guic. I. xv. 267. Capella, 190.

who

who harassed and ruined his army by continual B °0 K
Ikirmi(hes, while they carefully declined a battle
which he often offered them; and partly by the I524'
caprice of 6000 Swiss, who refused to join his
army, though within a day's march of it; he was
reduced to the necessity of attempting a retreat
into France, through the valley of Aoft. Just as
he arrived on the banks of the Seffia, and began
to pass that river, Bourbon and Pescara appeared
with the vanguard of the allies, and attacked his
rear with great fury. At the beginning of the
charge, Bonnivet, while exerting himself with
much valour, was wounded so dangerously, that
he was obliged to quit the field; and the conduct
of the rear was committed to the chevalier Bay-
ard, who, though so much a itranger to the arts
of a court that he never rose to the chief com-
mand, was always called, in times of real dan-
ger, to the post of greatest difficulty and import-
ance. He put himself at the head of the men
at arms, and animating them by his presence
and example to sustain the whole Ihock of the
enemy's troops, he gained time for the reft
of his countrymen to make good their retreat.
But in this service he received a wound which he Deathofthe
immediately perceived to be mortal, and being Bayard,and
unable to continue any longer on horseback, he in of the

Frenck

ordered one of his attendants to place him under army.
a tree, with his face towards the enemy; then
fixing his eyes on the guard of his sword, which
he held up instead of a cross, he addrfired his
prayers to God, and in this posture, which be-

came

B 0 0 K came his character both as a soldier and as a
Em -. Christian, he calmly waited the approach of

';4- death. Bourbon, who led the foremost of the

enemy's troops, found him in this situation, and
expressed regret and pity at the fight. " pity
,c not me," cried the high-fpiirited chevalier
" I die as a man of honour ought, in the dif-
" charge of my duty: They indeed are objets
" of pity, who fight against their king, their
" country, and their oath." The marquis de
Pescara, passing soon after, manifested his admi-
ration of Bayard's virtues, as well as his sorrow
for his fate, with the. generosity of a gallant ene-
my; and finding that he could not be removed
with safety from that spot, ordered a tent to be
pitched there, and appointed proper persons to
attend him. He died, notwithstanding their
care, as his ancestors for several generations had
done, in the field of battle. Pescara ordered his
body to be embalmed, and sent to his relations;
and such was the respect paid to military merit in
that age, that the duke of Savoy commanded it
to be received with royal honours in all the cities
of his dominions; in Dauphine, Bayard's native
country, the people of all ranks came out in a
solemn procession to meet it".

BONNIVET led back the flattered remains o

his army into France; and in one flort cam-

u Bellifor. Epitr. p. 73. Mem. de Bellay, 7'. Oeuv-
de Brant. tom. vi. xo8, &c. Paftluier Rechcrches, p. 526.

paign,

paign, Francis was stripped of all he had pof- B 1 K
fdfed in Italy, and left without one ally in that I-
country. 1524-
WHILE the war, kindled by the emulation of t"'rogerof

the ref,,rm~

Charles and Francis, spread over so many coun- a-ion in
tries of Europe, Germany enjoyed a profound
tranquillity, extremely favourable to the reform-
ation, which continued to make progress daily.
During Luther's confinement in his retreat at
Wartburg, Carloftadius, one of his disciples,
animated with the fame zeal, but possessed of less
prudence and moderation than his master, began
to propagate wild and dangerous opinions, chiefly
among the lower people. Encouraged by his ex-
hortations, they rose in several villages of Saxony,
broke into the churches with tumultuary vio-
lence, and threw down and destroyed the images
with which they were adorned. Those irregular
and outrageous proceedings were to repugnant
to all the eleEtor's cautious maxims, that, if
they had not received a timely check, they could
hardly have failed of alienating from thie re-
formers a prince, no less jealous of his own au-
thority, than afraid of giving offence to the
emperor, and other patrons of the ancient opi-
nions. Luther, sensible of the danger, imine-
diately quitted his retreat, without waiting for
Frederic's permission, and returned to Wittem- Mrch 6,
berg. Happily for the reformation, the venera- 152'
tion for his person and authority was still so
great, that his appearance alone lupprefled that

spirit

B 0o K fpiric of extravagance which began to seize his
i-_-. party. Carloftadius and his fanatical followers,

'24' struck dumb by his rebukes, submitted at once,

and delared that they heard the voice of an angel,
not of a man .

Luther BEFORE Luther left his retreat, he had begun
trangites
she bibc. to translate the Bible into the German tongue,

an undertaking of no less difficulty than im-
portance, of which he was extremely fond, and
for which he was well qualified: He had a com-
petent knowledge of the original languages; a
thorough acquaintance with the style and senti-
ments of the inspired writers; and though his
compositions in Latiif were rude and barbarous,
he was reckoned a great matter of the purity of
his mother tongue, and could express himself
with all the elegance of which it is capable. By
his own assiduous application, together with the
afliftance of Melanfthon and several other of his
disciples, he finished part of the New Testament
in the year 1522 ; and the publication of it proved
more fatal to the church of Rome, than that of
all his own works. It was read with wonderful
avidity and attention by persons of every rank.
They were astonished at discovering how con-
trary the precepts of the Author of our religion
are, to the inventions of those priests who pre-
tended to be his vicegerents; and having now
in their hand the rule of faith, they thought
thcmfclves qualified, by applying it, to judge of

1 Sleid. Hill. 51. Scckcnid. 195. th

the eftablilfed opinions, and to pronounce when B o

o0

they were conformable to the standard, or when
they departed from it. The great advantages 155.
arising from Luther's translation of the Bible,
encouraged the advocates for reformation, in the
other countries of Europe, to imitate his example,
and to publish versions of the Scriptures in their
refpe&ive languages.
ABOUT this time, Nuremberg, Francfort, Ham- Peoetal c-

tics abolilh

burgh, and several other free cities in Germany, the rites ol
of the first rank, openly embraced the reformed thpeUreh
religion, and by the authority of their magistrates
abolished the mars, and the other superstitious rites
of popery y. The elector of Brandenburgh, the
dukes of Brunswick and Lunenburgh, and prince
of Anhalt, became avowed patrons of Luther's
opinions, and countenanced the preaching of
them among their fubjeats.

THE court of Rome beheld this growing de- Mearures
feftion with great concern; and Adrian's first care by PAdria
after his arrival in Italy, had been to deliberate iorhe 't
with the cardinals, concerning the proper means prOgefs of
ofputting a stop to it. He was profoundly Skilled ation.
in fcholaltic theology, and having been early cele-
brated on that account, he fill retained such
an excessive admiration of the science to which he
was first indebted for his reputation and success in
life, that he confidered Luther's inveRives against

Y Seckend. z24. Chytrai Contin. Krantzii, 203.

the

B i0 K the fchoolmen, particularly Thomas Aquinas, as
L-_ .-.3 little less than blasphemy. All the tenets of that

1J24- doctor appeared to him so clear and irrefragable,

that he supposed every person who called in quef.
tion or contradicted them, to be either blinded
by ignorance, or to be ascing in opposition to
the conviction of his own mind: Of course, no
pope was ever more bigoted or inflexible with
regard to points of docrine than Adrian; he not
only maintained them as Leo had done, because
they were ancient, or because it was dangerous
for the church to allow of innovations, but he
adhered to them with the zeal of a theologian,
and with the tenaciousness of a disputant. At
the fame time his own manners being extremely
simple, and uninfected with any of the vices
which reigned in -the court of Rome, he was as
sensible of its corruptions as the reformers them-
selves, and viewed them with no less indignation.
The brief which he addressed to the diet of the
November, empire assembled at Nuremberg, and the in-

I51' ftrudtions which he gave Cheregato, the nuncio

whom he sent thither, were framed agreeably to
these views. On the one hand, he condemned
Luther's opinions with more asperity and rancour
of exprefion than Leo had ever used; he severely
censured the princes of Germany for suffering
him to spread his pernicious tenets, by their
neglecting to execute the edict of the diet at
Worms, and required them, if Luther did not
inflantly retract his errors, to destroy him with
site as a gangrened and incurable member, in

like

like manner as' Dathan and Abiram had been cut B o0 K
off by Moses, Ananias and Sapphira by the
apoRles, and John Huss and Jerome of Prague 1s24
by their anceflors . On the other hand, he,
with great candour, and in the most explicit
terms, acknowledged the corruptions of the Ro-
man court to be the source from which had flowed
most of the evils that the church now felt or
dreaded; he promised to exert all his authority
towards reforming these abuses, with as much dif-
patch as the nature and inveteracy of the disorders
would admit; and he requested of them to give
him their advice with regard to the most effectual
means of fupprefling that new heresy which had
sprung up among them a.

THE members of the diet, after praising the Diet of Nu-
pope's pious and laudable intentions, excused propos a
themselves for not executing the ediat of Worms, eecarl
by alleging that the prodigious increase of Lu- the proper
rher's followers, as well as the aversion to the
court of Rome among their other fubje6ts on
account of its innumerable exactions, rendered
such an attempt not only dangerous, but im-
possible. They affirmed that the grievances of
Germany, which did not arise from imaginary
injuries, but from impositions no less real than
intolerable, as his Holiness would learn from a
catalogue of them which they intended to lay

Fafcic. Rcr. expet. & fugiend. 342.
a Ibid. p. 345

before

B 0 K before him, called now for forne new and effica-
-i.-' cious remedy; and, in their opinion, the only

3524. remedy adequate to the disease, or which afford-

ed them any hopes of feeing.the church restored
to soundness and vigour, was a General Council
Such a council, therefore, they advised him,
after obtaining the emperor's consent, to assemble
without delay, in one of the great cities of Ger-
many, that all who had right to be present might
deliberate with freedom, and propose their opi-.
nions with such boldness, as the dangerous fitua-
tion of religion at this juncture requiredb.
Artifices of THE nuncio, more artful than his mafler, and

elude t. better acquainted with the political views and

intereRts of the Roman court, was startled at
the proposition of a council; and easily foresaw
how dangerous such an assembly might prove, at
a time when many .openly denied the papal au-
thority, and the reverence and fubmifiion yielded
to it visibly declined among all. For that reason
he employed his utmost address in order to
prevail on the members of the diet to proceed
themselves with greater severity against the Lu-
theran heresy, and to relinquish their proposal
concerning a general council to be held in Ger-
many. They, perceiving the nuncio to be more
Solicitous about the interests of the Roman court,
than the tranquillity of the empire, or purity of
the church, remained inflexible, and continued

b Fafcic. Rcr. expet. & fugiend. p. 346.

to

to prepare the catalogue of their grievances to B 0O0 K
be presented to the pope c. The nuncio, that he ,---
might not be the bearer ofa remonstrance so dif- 5sa4
agreeable to his court, left Nuremberg abruptly,
without taking leave of the diet d.

THE secular princes accordingly, for the eccle- The det

fiaftics, although they gave no opposition, did Pefe" a lih
not think it decent to join with them, drew up dred griev-

ances to tho

the lift (so famous in the German annals) of an pope.
hundred grievances, which the empire imputed to
the iniquitous dominion of the papal fee. This
lift contained grievances mucl of the fame nature
with that prepared under the reign of Maximi-
lian. It would be tedious to enumerate each of
them; they complained of the fums exacted for
dispensations, absolutions, and indulgences; of
the expence arising from the law-suits carried by
appeal to Rome; of the innumerable abuses
occasioned by reservations, commendams, and
annates; of the exemption from civil jurifdic-
tion which the clergy had obtained; of the arts
by which they brought all secular causes under
the cognizance of the ecclesiastical judges; of the
indecent and profligate lives which not a few of
the clergy led; and of various other particulars,
many of which have already been mentioned
among the circumstances that contributed to
the favourable reception, or to the quick pro-
grefs of Luther's doctrines. In the end they con-

c afcic. Rer. cxpct. & fugiend. 349. Ibid. 376.
VOL. II.T eluded,

0 0oi K before him, called now for some new and effca.
Il. c-v- cious remedy; and, in their opinion, the only
'54"* remedy adequate to the disease, or which afford.

ed them any hopes of feeing the church restored
to soundness and vigour, was a General Council
Such a council, therefore, they advised him,
after obtaining the emperor's content, to assemble
without delay, in one of the great cities of Ger-
many, that all who had right to be present might
deliberate with freedom, and propose their opi.
nions with such boldness, as the dangerous fitua-
tion of religion at this juncture required b.

Art;fice of THE nuncio, more artful than his mafler, and
the nuncio
o elude t. better acquainted with the political views and

interelts of the Roman court, was startled at
the proposition of a council; and easily foresaw
how dangerous such an assembly might prove, at
a time when many openly denied the papal au-
thority, and the reverence and fubmiflion yielded
to it visibly declined among all. For that reason
he employed his utmost address in order to
prevail on the members of the diet to proceed
themselves with greater severity against the Lu-
theran heresy, and to relinquish their proposal
concerning a general council to be held in Ger-
many. They, perceiving the nuncio to be more
solicitous about the interests of the Roman court,
than the tranquillity of the empire, or purity of
the church, remained inflexible, and continued

b Fafcic. Rcr. cxpet. & fugiend. p. 346.

to

to prepare the catalogue of their grievances to B 0 ° K
be presented to the pope c. The nuncio, that he -
might not be the bearer ofa remonstrance so dif- 154.
agreeable to his court, left Nuremberg abruptly,
without taking leave of the diet d'

THE secular princes accordingly, for the eccle- The diet

present a li

fiaftics, although they gave no opposition, did ot an hun-
not think it decent to join with them, drew up dred griev
the lift [(so famous in the German annals) of an pope.
hundred grievances, which the empire imputed to
the iniquitous dominion of the papal fee. This
lift contained grievances mucl of the fame nature
with that prepared under the reign of Maximi-
lian. It would be tedious to enumerate each of
them; they complained of the fums exacted for
dispensations, absolutions, and indulgences; of
the expence arising from the law-suits carried by
appeal to Rome; of the innumerable abuses
occasioned by reservations, commendams, and
annates; of the exemption from civil jurifdic-
tion which the clergy had obtained; of the arts
by which they brought all secular causes under
the cognizance of the ecclesiastical judges; of the
indecent and profligate lives which not a few of
the clergy led; and of various other particulars,
many of which have already been mentioned
among the circumstances that contributed to
the favourable reception, or to the quick pro-
grefs of Luther's doctrines. In the end they con-

C Fafcic. Rcr. cxpct. & fugiend. 349. i ibid. 376.
VOL. II. T cluded,

B 0 0 K cluded, that if the holy fee did not speedily de-
* - 1 liver them from those intolerable burdens, they
J524. had determined to endure them no longer, and

would employ the power and authority with
which God had entrusted them, in order to pro-
cure reliefc.

the recess INSTEAD of such severities against Luther and
of the diet, .
March 6, his followers as the nuncio had recommended,

'523' the recess or edi&c of the diet contained only a

general injunction to all ranks of men to wait
with patience for the determinations of the coun-
cil which was to be assembled, and in the mean
time not to publish any new opinions contrary to
the established doctrines of the church; together
with an admonition to all preachers to abstain
from matters of controversy in their discourses to
the people, and to confine themselves to the plain
and inftrutive truths of religion f.

This diet of THE reformers derived great advantage from
greathenefit the tranfastions of this diet, as they afforded
tothe Re-
formation. them the fullest and most authentic evidence

that gross corruptions prevailed in the court of
Rome, and that the empire was loaded by the
clergy with insupportable burdens. With regard
to the former, they had now the testimony of
the pope himself, that their invectives and accu-
fations were not malicious or ill-founded. As
to the latter, the representatives of the Ger-
e Fafcic. Rcr. expet. & fugiend. 354. f Ibid. 348.

manic

manic body, in an assembly where the patrons B o o K
of the new opinions were far from being the most
numerous or powerful, had pointed out as the 1524.
chief grievances of the empire, those very prac-
tices of the Romish church against which Luther
and his disciples were accustomed to declaim.
Accordingly, in all their controversial writings
after this period, they often appealed to Adrian's
declaration, and to the hundred grievances, in
confirmation of whatever they advanced concern-
ing the dissolute manners, or insatiable ambition
and rapaciousness, of the papal court.

AT Rome, Adrian's conduc was confidered as Adrian's

a proof of the mos: childish simplicity and im- cenfureda;
prudence. Men trained up amidst the artifices Rome.
and corruptions of the papal court, and ac-
customed to judge of aEtions not by what was
just, but by what was useful, were astonished at
a pontiff, who, departing from the wife maxims
of his predecessors, acknowledged disorders which
he ought to have concealed; and forgetting his
own dignity, asked advice of those, to whom he
was entitled to prescribe. By such an excess of
impolitic sincerity, they were afraid that, instead
of reclaiming the enemies of the church, he would
render them more presumptuous, and inflead of
extinguishing heresy, would weaken the founda-
tions of the papal power, or flop the chief sources
from which wealth flowed into the churchg. For

'I . Paul, Hilt. ofCounc. p. 28. Pallavic. IIift. 5S.

T this

B o0 K this reason the cardinals and other ecclesiastics o0

Ill. vL-,, greatest eminence in the papal court industriously
1524. opposed all his schemes of reformation, and by

throwing objeEtions and difficulties in his way,
endeavoured to retard or to defeat the execution
of them. Adrian, amazed, on the one hand, at the
obstinacy of the Lutherans, disgusted, on the other,
with the manners and maxims of the Italians, and
finding himself unable to corre& either the one or
the other, often lamented his own situation, and
often looked back with pleasure on that period
of his life when he was only dean of Louvain, a
more humble but happier station, in which little
was expe&ed from him, and there was nothing to
frustrate his good intentions h

Clement' CLEMENT VII. his successor, excelled Adrian
eainft Lu- as much in the arts of government, as he was
ther, and inferior to him in purity of life, or uprightness
his dread of
a general of intention. He was animated not only with
council. the aversion which all popes naturally bear to a

council, but having gained his own election by
means very uncanonical, he was afraid of an
assembly that might subjet it to a scrutiny which
it could not fland. He determined, therefore,
by every possible means to elude the demands of
the Germans, both with refpe6c to the calling of
a council, and reforming abuses in the papal
court, which the rafnlnefs and incapacity of his
predecessor had brought upon him.. For this
purpose, he made choice of cardinal Campeggio,

h Jovii Vit. Adr. p. 118.

7 Jan

an artful man, often entrusted by his predecefrors B °o Kr
with negociations of importance, as his nuncio to
the diet of the empire assembled again at Nurem- '54'
berg.

CAMPEGGIO, without taking any notice of February.

Tne negoci-

what had passed in the last meeting, exhorted the aions of hi
diet, in a long discourse, to execute the edi& of fecondd i
Worms with vigour, as the only effectual means at Nulcm-
of suppressing Luther's doctrines. The diet, in
return, desired to know the pope's intentions
concerning the council, and the redress of the
hundred grievances. The former, the nuncio
endeavoured to elude by general and unmeaning
declarations of the pope's resolution to pursue
such measures as would be for the greatest good
of the church. With regard to the latter, as A-.
drian was dead before the catalogue of griev-
ances reached Rome, and of consequence it had
not been regularly laid before the present pope,
Campeggio took advantage of this circumstance
to decline making any definitive answer to them
in Clement's name; though, at the fame time,
he observed that their catalogue of grievances
contained many particulars extremely indecent
and undutiful, and that the publishing it by their
own authority was highly difrefpe&ful to the
Roman fee. In the end, he renewed his demand
of their proceeding with vigour against Luther
and his adherents. But though an ambassador
from the emperor, who was at that time very attended

with little
felicitous to gain the pope, warmly seconded the efca.

T 3 nuncio,

B 0 ° K nuncio, with many professions of his master's zeal

-u-' for the honour and dignity of the papal fee, the
A154; . recess of the diet was conceived in terms of almost

the fame import with the former, without enjoin-
ing any additional severity against Luther and his
party '.

BEFORE he left Germany, Campeggio, in order

to amuse and soothe the people, publilhed cer-
tain articles for the amendment of some disorders
and abuses which prevailed among the inferior
clergy; but this partial reformation, which fell
so far short of the expe&tations of the Lutherans,
and of the demands of the diet, gave no fatisfac-
tion, and produced little effect. The nuncio,
with a cautious hand, tenderly lopped a few
branches; the Germans aimed a deeper blow,
and by striking at the root wished to exterminate
the evil k.

Seckend. 286. Sleid. Hill. 66. k Seckend. 292.

# THE HISTORY OF THE REIGN OF THE EMPEROR CHARLES V. BOOK IV.

THE
H I S T 0 R Y

OF THE
R E I GN

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES V.

B00 K IV.
HE expulsion of the French, both out of o o K

UT~~~~~ l~~~Iv.

T the Milanese and the republic of Genoa,
was confidered by the Italians as the termination sI524.

views of

of the war between Charles and Francis; and as the Italian
they began immediately to be apprehensive of the refpa to
emperor, when they saw no power remaining in F"har and
Italy capable either to controul or oppose him,
they longed ardently for the re-effablifhment of
peace. Having procured the restoration of Sforza
to his paternal dominions, which had been their
chief motive for entering into confederacy with
Charles, they plainly discovered their intention
to contribute no longer towards increasing the
emperor's superiority over his rival, which was
already become the object of their jealousy. The
pope especially, whose natural timidity incrcaled

T 4 his

B o0 K his suspicions of Charles's designs, endeavoured

Iv.

t -

. by his remonstrances to inspire him with mode.

3524. ration, and incline him to peace.

Charle re- BUT the emperor, intoxicated with success,
£olves to in-
adcFrance. and urged on by his own ambition, no less than

by Bourbon's desire of revenge, contemned Cle-
ment's admonitions, and declared his resolution
of ordering his army to pass the Alps, and to
invade Provence, a part of his rival's dominions,
where, as he least dreaded an attack, he was leaf
prepared to resist it. His most experienced mi-
nifters dissuaded him from undertaking such an
enterprize with a feeble army, and an exhausted
treasury: but he relied so much on having ob-
tained the concurrence of the king of England,
and on the hopes which Bourbon, with the con-
fidence and credulity natural to exiles, enter-
tained of being joined by a numerous body of
his partizans as soon as the Imperial troops
should enter France, that he persisted obstinately
in the measure. Henry undertook to furnish an
hundred thousand ducats towards defraying the
expence of the expedition during the first month,
and had it in his choice either to continue the
payment of that umr monthly, or to invade Pi-
cardy before the end of July with an army ca-
pable of acing with vigour. The emperor
engaged to attack Guienne at the fame time with
a considerable body of men; and if these enter-
prizes proved successful, they agreed, that Bour-
bon, betides the territories which he had loft,

should

lhould be put in poffeflion of Provence, with the B O O K
tide of king, and should do homage to Henry I
as the lawful king of France, for his new domi- '5X4'
nions. Of all the parts of this extensive but
extravagant project, the invasion of Provence was
the only one which was executed. For although
Bourbon, with a scrupulous delicacy, altogether
unexpe&ed after the part which he had acted,
positively refused to acknowledge Henry's title
to the crown of France, and thereby absolved
him from any obligation to promote the enter-
prize, Charles's eagerness to carry his own plan
into execution did not in any degree abate.
The army which he employed for that pur-
pose amounted only to eighteen thousand men;
the command of which was given to the mar-
quis de Pescara, with inftrutions to pay the
greatest deference to Bourbon's advice in all his
operations. Pescara passed the Alps without The impe.
opposition, and entering Provence, laid siege to aP're'ovnCee
Marseilles. Bourbon had advised him rather to Auu"t 19.
march towards Lyons, in the neighbourhood of
which city his territories were situated, and where
of course his influence was most extensive; but
the emperor was so desirous to get poffefion of a
port, which would, at all times, secure him ar
easy entrance into France, that by his authority
he overruled the ConRtable's opinion, and di-
reEted Pescara to make the reduction of Mar-
feilles his chief object .

a Guic, 1. xv. 273, &c. Mem. de Bcllay, p. 80.

FR ANCIS,

B 0 K FRANCIS, who foresaw, but was unable to pre.
, -<- vent this attempt, took the most proper precau.
PrueZ4t tions to defeat it. He laid waste the adjacent

,rnearces of country, in order to render it more difficult for

the enemy to subsist their army; he rated the
suburbs of the city, strengthened its fortifications,
and threw into it a numerous garrison under the
command of brave and experienced officers.
To there, nine thousand of the citizens, whom
their dread of the Spanish yoke inspired with
contempt of danger, joined themselves; by their
united courage and industry, all the efforts of Pes-
cara's military skill, and of Bourbon's ativity and
revenge, were rendered abortive. Francis, mean-
while, had leisure to assemble a powerful army
under the walls of Avignon, and no sooner be-
gan to advance towards Marseilles, than the Im-
perial troops, exhausted by the fatigues of a siege
which had lasted forty days, weakened by dif-

Imperialist eases, and almost destitute of provisions, retired
forced to . .
retreat. with precipitation towards Italy b.
Sept. 19.

IF, during these operations of the army in Pro-

vence, either Charles or Henry had attacked
France in the manner which they had projeted,
that kingdom must have been exposed to the
most imminent danger. But on this, as well as
on many other occasions, the emperor found that
the extent of his revenues was not adequate to

b QGuI. 1. XV. 277. Ulloa Vita dell Carlo V. p. 93'

the

the greatness of his schemes, or the ardour of his B 0 o lo

IV.

ambition, and the want of money obliged him, --
though with much reluctance, to circumscribe I54.
his plan, and to leave part of it unexecuted.
Henry, disgusted at Bourbon's refuting to recog-
nize his right to the crown of France; alarmed
at the motions of the Scots, whom the folicita-
tions of the French king had persuaded to march
towards the borders of England; and no longer
incited by his minister, who was become ex-
tremely cool with regard to all the emperor's
interests, took no measures to support an enter-
prize, of which, as of all new undertakings, he
had been at first exceflively fondc.

IF the king of France had been satisfied with Francis -
having delivered his fubjets from this formidable his fucc'i.
invasion, if he had thought it enough to shew
all Europe the facility with which the internal
Rrength of his dominions enabled him to refit:
the invasion of a foreign enemy, even when
seconded by the abilities and powerful efforts of
arebellious fubje&, the campaign, notwithfland-
ing the loss of the Milanese, would have been far
from ending ingloriously. But Francis, animated
with courage more becoming a soldier than a
general; pushed on by ambition, enterprizing
rather than considerate; and too apt to be elated
with success ; was fond of every undertaking that
seemed bold and adventurous. Such an under-

cFiddes'3 Life of Wolfey, Append. N° 70, 7 1, 72.

taking,

B 0 0 K taking, the situation of his affairs, at that june.

A_ / _ ture, naturally presented to his view. He had
;e5e2.'to under his command one of the most powerful and
ivade the best appointed armies France had ever brought

into the field, which he could not think of dif.
banding without having employed it in any ative
service. The Imperial troops had been obliged t
retire almost ruined by hard duty, and dishearten
ed with ill success; the Milanese had been les
altogether without defence; it was not impoffbli
to reach that country before Pescara, with hi
Shattered forces, could arrive there; or if sea
Ihould add speed to their retreat, they were in n
condition to make head againrf his fresh and nu
merous troops; and Milan would now, as i
former instances, submit without refiltance to
bold invader. These considerations, which wer
not destitute of plausibility, appeared to his fan
guine temper to be of the utroft weight. I
vain did his wifefl ministers and generals reprefen
to him the danger of taking the field at a feafo
so far advanced, with an army composed chief
of Swiss and Germans, to whose caprices
would be subjet in all his operations, and
whose fidelity his safety muff absolutely depend
In vain did Louise of Savoy advance by halt
journies towards Provence, that ihe might exer
all her authority in dissuading her son from fuc
a ralh enterprize. Francis disregarded the renon
ftrances of his fubjeas; and that he might sav
himfelfthe pain of an interview with his mothe
whose counsels he had determined to reje& h

be~i

began his march before her arrival; appointing B 0 0 K
her, however, by way of atonement for that ne- a-_
glet, to be regent of the kingdom during his Ap1pi2n4

Appoints

absence. Bonnivet, by his persuasions, contri- his mother
buted not a little to confirm Francis in this refo- ing hisab-
lution. That favourite, who strongly resembled fence
his master in all the defective parts of his charac-
ter, was led, by his natural impetuosity, warmly
to approve of such an enterprize; and being
prompted besides by his impatience to revisit a
Milanese lady, of whom he had been deeply ena-
mouredduring his late expedition, he is said, by
his flattering descriptions of her beauty and ac-
complifhments, to have inspired Francis, who
was extremely susceptible of such passions, with
an equal desire of feeing her d.

THE French passed the Alps at Mount Cenis; Operat;oi,

in the MI.

and as their success depended on dispatch, they ad- Ianecr.
vanced with the greatest diligence. Pescara, who
had been obliged to take a longer and more diffi-
cult route by Monaco and Final, was soon in-
formed of their intention; and being sensible that
nothing but the pretence of his troops could
save the Milanese, marched with such rapidity,
that he reached Alva on the fame day that the
French army arrived at Vercelli. Francis, in-
ftruaed by Bonnivet's error in the former cam-
paign, advanced directly towards Milan, where
the unexpected approach of an enemy so power-

d Ocuv. de Brant. tom. vi. 253.

ful,

B o o K fU] occasioned fiuch consternation and difordeer
* -- that although Pescara entered the city with some

1524. of his best troops, he found that the defence of

it could not be undertaken with any probability
of success; and having thrown a garrison into
the citadel, retired through one gate, while the
French were admitted at anothere.

EmbarafT - THESE brisk motions of the French monarch
ig late of
th Impe- disconcerted all the schemes of defence which

the Imperialists had formed. Never, indeed, did
generals attempt to oppose a formidable inva.
sion under such circumstances of disadvantage.
Though Charles possessed dominions more exten-
five than any other prince in Europe, and had,
at this time, no other army but that which was
employed in Lombardy, which did not amount
to sixteen thousand men, his prerogative in all
his different states was so limited, and his sub-
jeas, without whose consent he could raise no
taxes, discovered such unwillingness to burden
themlelves with new or extraordinary impositions,
that even this small body of troops was in want
of pay, of ammunition, of provisions, and of
clothing. In such a situation, it required all the
wisdom of Lannoy, the intrepidity of Pescara,
and the implacable resentment of Bourbon, to
preserve them from finking under despair, and
to inspire them with resolution to attempt, or
sagacity to difcovcr, what was essential to their

Mcm. de Bllay, p. 81. Guic. 1. xv. 278.

safety.

safety. To the efforts of their genius, and the B 0o0 t
activity of their zeal, the emperor was more in-
debted for the preservation of his Italian domi- 4
nions than to his own power. Lannoy, by mort-
gaging the revenues of Naples, procured bfme
money, which was immediately applied towards
providing the army with whatever was most ne-
ceffary '. Pescara, who was beloved and almost
adored by the Spanish troops, exhorted them to
flew the world, by their engaging to serve the
emperor, in that dangerous exigency, without
making any immediate demand of pay, that they
were animated with sentiments of honour very dif-
ferent from those of mercenary soldiers; to which
proposition, that gallant body of men, with an un-
exampled generosity, gave their confentg. Bour-
bon having raised a considerable fum, by pawn-
ing his jewels, set out for Germany, where his in-
fluence was great, that by his pretence he might
haften the levying of troops for the Imperial
service h

FRANCIs, by a fatal error, allowed the empe- FrJn'cs e-
ror's generals time to derive advantage fiom all gspa
there operations. Instead of purruing the enemy,
who retired to Lodi on the Adda, an untenable
pcft, which Pescara had resolved to abandon on

fGuic. 1. xv. 280.
,Jovii Vit. Davali, lib. xv. p. 386. Sandov. vol. i. 621
Ulloa Vita dell Carlo V. p. 94, &c. Vita deli Emper,
Carlos V. per Vera y Zuniga, p. 36.
I' AMe. de Bcllay, p. 83.

the

B V° K the approach of the French, he, in compliance

,_. with the opinion of Bonnivet, though contrary to
zOs 42g. that of his other generals, laid siege to Pavia on

the Tefino; a town, indeed, of great importance,
the possession of which would have opened to him
all the fertile country lying on the banks of that
river. But the fortifications of the place were
strong; it was dangerous to undertake a difficult
siege at so late a season; and the Imperial gene.
rais, sensible of its consequence, had thrown into
the town a garrison composed of fix thousand ve-
terans, under the command of Antonio de Leyva,
an officer of high rank; of great experience; of
a patient, but enterprising courage; fertile in
resources; ambitious of distinguishing himfelfi
and capable, for that reason, as well as from his
having been long accustomed both to obey and
to command, of suffering or performing any thing
in order to procure success.

;s vigor- FRANCIS prosecuted the siege with obstinacy
ou fforts. equal to the rashness with which he had under.

taken it. During three months, every thing
known to the engineers of that age, or that could
be effeted by the valour of his troops, was at-
tempted, in order to reduce the place; while
Lannoy and Pescara, unable to obftru&t his ope-
rations, were obliged to remain in such an igno-
minious state of ination, that a Pasquinade was
publifled at Rome, offering a reward to any per-
son who could find the Imperial army, loft in the
month of Otober ini the mountains between

France

France and Lombardy, and which had not been B 0O K
heard of since that time. -.

1524.

LEYVA, well acquainted with the difficulties The town
under which his countrymen laboured, and the efendd.
impofribility of their facing, in the field, such
a powerful army as formed the liege of Pavia,
placed his only hopes of safety in his own vigi-
lance and valour. The efforts of both were ex-
traordinary, and in proportion to the importance
of the place, with the defence of which he was
entrufied. He interrupted the approaches of the
French by frequent and furious rallies. Behind
the breaches made by their artillery, he ereEted
new works, which appeared to be scarcely inferior
in strength to the original fortifications. He
repulsed the besiegers in all their assaults; and
by his own example, brought not only the garri-
son, but the inhabitants, to bear the most severe
fatigues, and to encounter the greateit dangers
without murmuring. The rigour of the season
conspired with his endeavours in retarding the
progress of the French. Francis attempting to
become master of the town, by diverting the
course of the Tefino, which is its chief defence
on one fide, a sudden inundation of the river de-
troyed, in one day, the labour of many weeks,
and swept away all the mounds which his army
had railed with infinite toil, as well as at great
expence k.

I Sandov. i. 6o8.
k Guic. 1. xv. 280. Ulloa Vita di Carlo V. p. 95.
VOL. II. U NOT-

6 0 K '--NoTWITHssTANTTN.e the flow progress of the

t .- j besiegers, and. the glory which Leyva acquired
Tbh'poc by .his. gallant defence, it was not doubted but
o^tud, a that the town' would at last be obliged to fur-
neu:rlIi;; render. The pope, who already confidered the

-French arms as superior in Italy, became impa.
tient to' disengage himself from his connections
with the. emperor, of whose designs he was ex-
tremely jealous, and to enter into terms of friend-
lhip with Francis. As Clement's timid and cau-
tious temper rendered him incapable of following
the bold plan which Leo had formed, of deliver-
ing Italy from the yoke of both the rivals, he
returned to the more obvious and practicable
scheme of employing the power of the one to
balance and to restrain that of the other. For
this reason, he did not dissemble his fatisfaftion
at feeing the French king recover Milan, as he
hoped that the dread of such a neighbour would
be some check upon the emperor's ambition,
which no power in Italy was now able to con-
troul. He laboured hard to bring about a peace
that would secure Francis in the possession of his
new conquests; and as Charles, who was always
inflexible in the prosecution of his schemes, re-
jecEed the proposition with disdain, and with
bitter exclamations againrt the pope, by whore
persuasions, while cardinal de Medici, he had
been induced to invade the Milanese, Clement
immediately concluded a treaty of neutrality with

the

the king of France, in which the .republic of B 'O0 K
Florence was included'.

1524,

FRANCIS having, by this tranfarion, deprived iracd
the emperor of his two most powerful allies, and Naples.
at the fame time having secured a pafage for his
own troops through their territories, formed a
scheme of attacking the kingdom of Naples,
hoping either to over-run that country, which
was left altogether without defence, or that at
least such an unexpected invasion would oblige
the viceroy to recal part of the Imperial army
out of the Milanese. For this purpose he
ordered fix thousand men to march under the
command of John Stuart duke of Albany. But
Pescara foreseeing that the effect of this diversion
would depend entirely upon the operations of the
armies in the Milanese, persuaded Lannpy to
disregard Albany's motions m, and to bend his
whole force against the king himself; so that
Francis not only weakened his army very unfea-
fonably by this great detachment, but incurred
the reproach of engaging too rashly in chimerical
and extravagant projects.

BY this time the garrison of Pavia was reduced Eforts of
to extremity; their ammunition and provisions o;:bon.
began to fail; the Germans, of whom it was
chiefly composed, having received no pay for

G Guic .
xv. 28. 285. m Guic. 1. xv. 285.

U 2 seven

B 0 0 K seven months ", threatened to deliver the town

1V. .., ,.- into the enemy's hands, and could hardly be re-

3515' strained from mutiny by all Leyva's address and

authority. The Imperial generals, who were no
strangers to his situation, saw the necessity of
marching without loss of time to his relief. This
they had now in their power: Twelve thou-
sand Germans, whom the zeal and activity of
Bourbon taught to move with unusual rapidity,
had entered Lombardy under his command, and
rendered the Imperial army nearly equal to that
of the French, greatly diminished by the ab-
fence of the body under Albany, as well as by
the fatigues of the siege, and the rigour of the
season. But the more their troops increared in
number, the more sensibly did the Imperialists
feel the distress arising from want of money. Far
from having funds for paying a powerful army,
they had scarcely what was sufficient for defraying
the charges of conduting their artillery, and of
carrying their ammunition and provisions. The
abilities of the generals, however, supplied every
defect. By their own example, as well as by
magnificent promises in name of the emperor,
they prevailed on the troops of all the different
nations which composed their army, to take the
field without pay; they engaged to lead them
direcly towards the enemy; and flattered them
with the certain profpeat of vicory, which would

Gold. Polit. Imperial. 875.

at

at once enrich them with such royal spoils as B o° K
would be an ample reward for all their ser- -
vices. The soldiers, sensible that, by quitting 152s5
the army, they would forfeit the great arrears
due to them, and eager to get possession of the
promiied treasures, demanded a battle with all
the impatience of adventurers who fight only for
plunder o.

THE Imperial generals, without suffering the Theymarch
ardour of their troops to cool, advanced imme- French.
diately towards the French camp. On the first February 3.
intelligence of their approach, Francis called a
council of war, to deliberate what course he
ought to take. All his officers of greatest expe-
rience were unanimous in advising him to retire,
and to decline a battle with an enemy who courted
it from despair. The Imperialists, they observed,
would either be obliged in a few weeks to dif-
band an army, which they were unable to pay,
and which they kept together only by the hope of
plunder, or the soldiers, enraged at the non-per-
formance of the promises to which they had
trusted, would rife in some furious mutiny, which
would allow their generals to think of nothing
but their own safety: That, meanwhile, he
might encamp in some strong polf, and wait-
ing in safety the arrival of frelh troops from
France and Switzerland, might, before the end
of spring, take possession of all the Milanese,
without danger or bloodshed. But in oppofi-

o Eryci Peuteani Hist. Cifalpina, ap Gr,.vii Thef. Antiquit.
Ital. iii. . 1170. 1179.

U 3 tion

B 0 0 K tion to them, Bonnivet, whose destiny it was to
_ ., · give counsels fatal to France during the whole
*515' campaign, represented the ignominy that it would

reflect on their sovereign, if he should abandon
a siege which he had prosecuted so long, or turn
his back before an enemy to whom he was flill
superior in number; and insisted on the necef-
fity of fighting the Imperialists rather than re.
linquifh an undertaking, on the success of which
the king's future fame depended. Unfortunately,
Prancis's notions of honour were delicate to an
excess that bordered on what was romantic.
Having often said that he would take Pavia, or
perish in the attempt, he thought himself bound
not to depart from that resolution; and rather
than expose hinfelf to the slightest imputation,
he chore to forego all the advantages which were
the certain consequences of a retreat, and deter-
mined to wait for the Imperialists before the walls
of Pavia P.

stItle of THE Imperial generals found the French so
Pavia. firongly entrenched, that notwithstanding the

powerful motives which urged them on, they
hesitated long before they ventured to attack
them; but at last the neceflities of the besieged,
and the murmurs of their own soldiers, obliged
Feb. 24, them to put every thing to hazard. Never did

armies engage with greater ardour, or with an
higher opinion of the importance of the battle

P Guic. 1. xv. 291.

which

which they were going to fight; never were troops ' o, o

0

more strongly animated with emulation, national i ,--
antipathy, mutual resentment, and all the passions S',
which inspire obstinate bravery. On the onec
hand, a gallant young monarch, seconded by at
generous nobility, and followed by fubjeas -to
whose natural impetuosity, indignation at the op-
position which they had encountered, added new-
force, contended for viEory and honour. Ore
the other fide, troops more completely disciplined,
and conducted by generals of greater abilities,
fought from necessity, with courage heighteped
by despair. The Imperialists, however, were
unable to resist the first efforts of the French va-
lour, and their firmest battalions began to give
way. But the fortune of the day was quickly
changed. The Swiss in the service of France,
unmindful of the reputation of their country for
fidelity and martial glory, abandoned their post
in a cowardly manner. Leyva, with his garri-
fln, rallied out and attacked the rear of the
French, during the heat of the ation, with such
fury as threw it into confusion; and Pescara fall-
ing on their cavalry with the Imperial horse,
among whom he had prudently intermingled a
considerable number of Spanish foot, armed with
the heavy muflcets then in use, broke this for-
midable body by an unusual method of attack,
againPt which they were wholly unprovided. The The Frenh
rout became universal; and resistance ceased in armyrtsd.
alioft every part, but where the king was in

U 4 person,

B oV K person, who fought now, not for fame or viaory,

v-.- but for afety. Though wounded in several
'55. places, and thrown from his horse, which was

killed under him, Francis defended himself on
foot with an heroic courage. Many of his bravest
officers gathering round him, and endeavouring
to save his life at the expence of their own, fell
at his feet. Among these was Bonnivet, the
author of this great calamity, who alone died
unlamented. The king, exhausted with fatigue,
and scarcely capable of farther resistance, was left
almost alone, exposed to the fury of some Spanish
soldiers, strangers to his rank, and enraged at
his obstinacy. At that moment came up Pom-
perant, a French gentleman, who had entered to-
gether with Bourbon into the emperor's service,
and placing himself by the fide of the monarch
against whom he had rebelled, assisted in pro-
teEting him from the violence of the soldiers; at
the fame time beseeching him to surrender to
Bourbon, who was not far distant. Imminent as
the danger was which now surrounded Francis,
he rejeted with indignation the thoughts of an
action which would have afforded such matter
of triumph to his traiterous subjet; and calling
for Lannoy, who happened likewise to be near
at hand, gave up his sword to him; which he,

Francia kneeling to kifs the king's hand, received with
takien pri-
oncrr. profound refpeEt; and taking his own sword

from his fide, presented it to him, faying, That
it did not become so great a monarch to remain

difarimed

disarmed in the presence of one of the emperor's B o 0 K
subje&s q.

155zS.

TEN thousand men fell on this day, one of
the molt fatal France had ever seen. Among
these were many noblemen of the highest diftinc-
tion, who chore rather to perish than to turn their
backs with dishonour. Not a few were taken
prisoners, of whom the most illustrious was Henry
D'Albret, the unfortunate king of Navarre. A
small body of the rear-guard made its escape, un-
der the command of the duke of Alencon; the
feeble garrison of Milan, on the first news of the
defeat, retired without being pursued, by another
road; and in two weeks after the battle, not a
Frenchman remained in Italy.

LANNOY, though he treated Francis with all
the outward marks of honour due to his rank and
character, guarded him with the utmost atten-
tion. He was solicitous, not only to prevent
any poflibility of his escaping, but afraid that his
own troops might seize his person, and detain it
as the best security for the payment of their ar-
rears. In order to provide against both there
dangers, he conducted Francis, the day after the
battle, to the strong castle of Pizzichitone near

q Guic. 1. 15. 292. Oeuv. de Brant. vi. 355. Mem. de
Bellay, p. 90. Sandov. Hilt. i. 638, &c. P. Mart. Ep. 80o.
81o. Rufcelli Lettere de Principi, ii. p. 70. Ulloa Vita dell
Carlo V. p. 98.

Cremona,

B 0v K Cremona, committing him to the cuflody of
La ,ip Don Ferdinand Alarcon, general of the Spanish

"5'5'> infantry, an officer of great bravery and of ftrif

honour, but remarkable'for that severe and fcru-
pulous vigilance which.fuch a trust required.

FRANCIS, who formed a judgment of the em-

peror's dispositions by his own, was extremely
desirous that Charles Ihould be informed of his
situation, fondly hoping that, from his generosity
or sympathy, he should obtain speedy relief. The
Imperial generals were no less impatient to give
their sovereign an. early account of the decisive
vietory which they had gained, and to receive
his instructions with regard to their future con-
dud. As the most certain and expeditious me-
thod of conveying intelligence to Spain, at that
season of the year, was by land, Francis gave the
commendador Pennalofa, who was charged with
Lannoy's dispatches, a passport to travel through
France.

Effeea of CHARLES received the account of this signal
uipory and unexpected success that had crowned his arms,
Charles.
March o. with a moderation, which, if it had been real,

would have done him more honour than the
greatest vicory. Without uttering one word ex-
preffive of exultation, or of intemperate joy, he
retired immediately into his chapel, and having
spent an hour in offering up his thanklgivings to
heaven, returned to the prefence-chamber, which
by that time was filled with grandees' and foreign

anibaf-

ambassadors, assembled in order to congratulate B °O K
him. He accepted of their compliments with a _-
modest deportment; he lamented the misfortune 5ss
of the captive king, as a striking example of the
fad reverse of fortune, to which the most power-
ful monarchs are subject; he sorbad any public
rejoicings, as indecent in a war carried on among
Christians, reserving them until he should obtain
a vi&ory equally illustrious over the Infidels; and
seemed to take pleasure in the advantage which
he had gained, only as it would prove the. occasion
of retloring peace to Christendom r.

CHARLES, however, had already begun to form The

shemes he

schemes in his own mind, which little suited such beganto
external appearances. Ambition, not generosity, form
was the ruling passion in his mind; and the
vi'ory at Pavia opened such new and unbounded
profpeSs of gratifying it, as allured him with
irresistible force: But it being no easy matter to
execute the vast designs which he meditated, he
thought it necessary, while proper measures were
taking for that purpose, to asset the greatest
moderation, hoping under that veil to conceal his
real intentions from the other princes of Europe.

MEANWHILr, France was filled with confterna- The general

tion. The king himself had early tranfinitted io in
an account of the rout of Pavia, in a letter to his France.
mother, delivered by Pennalofa, which contained

Sandov. Hilt. i. 641. Ulloa Vita dell Carlo V. p. x 10.

2 only

BOO K only these words, 'C Madam, all is loft, ex.

a_ . cept our honour." The officers who made their
Is5t5 escape, when they arrived from Italy% brought

such a melancholy detail of particulars as made
all ranks of men £enfibly feel the greatness and
extent of the calamity. France, without its so-
vereign, without'money in her treasury, without
an army, without generals to command it, and
encompassed on all fides by a victorious and aEtive
enemy, seemed to be on the very brink of de.

The Pru- ftruEtion. But on that occasion the great abilities
du. of the of Louile the regent saved the kingdom, which
Regent. the violence of her paflions had more than once

exposed to the greatest danger. Instead of giving
herself up to such lamentations as were natural to
a woman so remarkable for her maternal tender-
ness, ihe discovered all the foresight, and exerted
all the aEtivity of a conrummate politician. She
assembled the nobles at Lyons, and animated them
by her example no less than by her words, with
such zeal in defence of their country, as its pre-
sent situation required. She colleEted the remains
of the army which had served in Italy, ransomed
the prisoners, paid the arrears, and put them in a
condition to take the field. She levied new troops,
provided for the security of the frontiers, and
raised fums sufficient for defraying there extra-
ordinary expences. Her chief care, however, was
to appease the resentment, or to gain the friend-
ship of the king of England; and from that quar-
ter, the first ray of comfort broke in upon the
French,

THIOUC01

THOUGH Henry, in entering into alliances with B O o K
Charles or Francis, seldom followed any regular A--v
or concerted plan of policy, but was influenced ,.ffS2of
chiefly by the caprice of temporary passions, such the vi&aor
occurrences often happened as recalled his atten- HenryVIIl.
tion towards that equal balance of power which
it was necessary to keep between the two con-
tending potentates, the preservation of which he
always boasted to be his peculiar office. He had
expected that his union with the emperor might
afford him an opportunity of recovering some
part of those territories in France which had
belonged to his ancestors, and for the fake of
such an acquisition he did not scruple to give
his assistance towards raising Charles to a con-
fiderable pre-eminence above Francis. He had
never dreamt, however, of any event so decisive
and so fatal as the vitory at Pavia, which seem-
ed not only to have broken, but to have anni-
hilated the power of one of the rivals; so that
the prospect of the sudden and entire revolution
which this would occasion in the political system,
filled him with the most disquieting apprehen-
sions. He saw all Europe in danger of being
over-run by an ambitious prince, to whose power
there now remained no counterpoise; and though
he himself might at first be admitted, in quality
of an ally, to some fiare in the spoils of the
captive monarch, it was easy to discern, that with
regard to the manner of making the partition,
as well as his security for keeping poffelfion of

what

B 0 0t what should be allotted him, he mulf absolutely

IV.
* --. depend upon the will of a confederate, to whose

s525- forces his own bore no proportion. He was fen-

fible, that if Charles were permitted to add any
considerable part of France to the vast dominions
of which he was already master, his neighbour-
hood would be much more formidable to Eng-
land than that of the ancient French kings;
while, at the fame time, the proper balance on
the continent, to which England owed both its
safety and importance, would be entirely loft.
Concern for the situation of the unhappy mo-
narch co-operated with there political confidera-
tions; his gallant behaviour in the battle of Pavia
had excited an high degree of admiration, which
never fails of augmenting sympathy; and Henry,
naturally susceptible of generous sentiments, was
fond of appearing as the deliverer of a van-
quilhed enemy from a state of captivity. The
pafrions of the English minister seconded the in-
clinations of the monarch. Wolfey, who had not
forgotten the disappointment of his hopes in
two successive conclaves, which he imputed chiefly
to the emperor, thought this a proper opportu-
nity of taking revenge; and Louise, courting
the friendship of England with such flattering
submissions as were no less agreeable to the king
than to the cardinal, IHenry gave her secret
assurances that he would not lend his aid towards
oppressing France, in its present helpless state,
and obliged her to promise that (he would not

consent

consent to dismember the kingdom even in order B °o K
to procure her son's liberty ".

11sS.

BUT as Henry's connections with the emperor
made it necessary to a&t in such a manner as to
save appearances, he ordered public rejoicings
to be made in his dominions for the success of
the Imperial arms; and as if he had been eager
to seize the present opportunity of ruining the
French monarchy, he sent ambassadors to Madrid,
to congratulate with Charles upon his victory; to
put him in mind, that he, as his ally, engaged
in one common cause, was entitled to partake in
the fruits of it; and to require that, in com-
pliance with the terms of their confederacy, he
would invade Guienne with a powerful army, in
order to give him possession of that province.
At the fame time, he offered to fend the princess
Mary into Spain or the Low Countries, that ihe
might be educated under the emperor's direction,
until the conclusion of the marriage agreed on
between them; and in return for that mark of
his confidence, he insisted that Francis should be
delivered to him, in consequence of that article
in the treaty of Bruges, whereby each of the
contracting parties was bound to surrender all
usurpers to him whose rights they had invaded.
It was impossible that Henry could expect that
the emperor would liften to these extravagant de-
mands, which it was neither his interest, nor in

Mem. de Bcllay. 94. Guic. I. xvi. 318. Herbert.

his

B °0 K his power to grant. They appear evidently to

V'.
'-,-- .have been made with no other intention than to
1525, furnish him with a decent pretext for entering

into such engagements with France as the junc.
ture required'.

On the Ita- IT was among the Italian fiates, however, that
ian powers. the vidory at Pavia occasioned the greatest alarm

and terror. That balance of power on which
they relied for their security, and which it had
been the constant. obje& of all their negociations
and refinements to maintain, was destroyed in a
moment. They were exposed by their situation
to feel the first effects of the uncontrouled autho-
rity which Charles had acquired. They observed
many symptoms of a boundless ambition in that
young prince, and were sensible that, as emperor,
or king of Naples, he might not only form dan-
gerous pretensions upon each of their territories,
but might invade them with great advantage.
They deliberated, therefore, with much solicitude
concerning the means of railing such a force as
might obftrua his progress u. But their con-
fultations, conduaed with little union, and exe-
cuted with less vigour, had no effea. Clement,
instead of pursuing the measures which he had
concerted with the Venetians for securing the
liberty of Italy, was so intimidated by Lannoy's

t Herbert, p. 64.

Guic. I. xvi. 300. Rufcelli Lettere de Princ. ii. 74. 76
&c. Thuani Hilt. lib. i. c. 1i.

threats,

i

threats, or overcome by his promises, that he B °o K
entered into a separate treaty, binding himself to .-
advance a considerable fum to the Emperor, in Apli25
return for certain emoluments which he was to
receive from him. The money was instantly paid;
but Charles afterwards refused to ratify the treaty;
and the pope remained exposed at once to infamy
and to ridicule: to the former, because he had
deserted the public cause for his private interest;
to the latter, because he had been a loser by that
unworthy action x.

How dishonourable soever the artifice might Mutiny u
be which was employed in order to defi-aud the armyeria
pope of this rum, it came very seasonably into
the viceroy's hands, and put it in his power to ex-
tricate himself out of an imminent danger. Soon
after the defeat of the French army, the Ger-
man troops, which had defended Pavia with such
meritorious courage and perseverance, growing
insolent upon the fame that they had acquired,
and impatient of relying any longer on fruitless
promises with which they had been so often
amused, rendered themselves masters of the town,
with a resolution to keep poffeflion of it as a fe-
curity for the payment of their arrears; and the
reft of the army discovered a much ifronger in-
clination to affif, than to punish the mutineers.
By dividing among them the money exaded from

x Guic. lib. xvi. 3OS. Mauroceni Hiftor. Venet. ap. Il-o-
richi dell core Venez. V. 131. 136.

VoL. II. X the

B o0 K the pope, Lannoy quieted the tumultuous Ger-
»_--- mans; but though this satisfied their present

525-' demands, he had so little profpec of being able

to pay them or his other forces regularly for the
future, and was under such continual apprehen-
sions of their seizing the person of the captive
king, that, not long after, he was obliged to
difinifs all the Germans and Italians in the Impe-
rial service Y. Thus, from a circumstance that
now appears very singular, but arising naturally
from the constitution of most European govern-
ments in the sixteenth century, while Charles was
fufpeted by all his neighbours of aiming at uni.
versal monarchy, and while he was really form-
ing vast projeEts of this kind, his revenues were
so limited, that he could not keep on foot his
victorious army, though it did not exceed twenty-
four thousand men.

The Empe- DURING there tranfations, Charles, whose
rors delibe- pretensions to moderation and disinterestedness
ratlons co rt-
cerning tie were soon forgotten, deliberated, with the utmost
mprovying folicitude,.how he might derive the greatest ad-

viry. vantages from the misfortune of his adversary.

Some of his counsellors advised him to treat
Francis with the magnanimity that became a
vicorious prince, and, inflead of taking advan-
tage of his situation to impose rigorous condi-
tions, to difnifs him on fiich equal terms, as
would bind him for ever to his interest by the
ties of gratitude and affection, more forcible as

Y Guic. I. xvi. p. 0oz.

<clH

well as more permanent than any which could BO O K

IV.

be formed by extorted oaths and involuntary fti- ----
pulations. Such an exertion of generosity is not, 15s5s
perhaps, to be expe&ed in the conduct of political
affairs, and it was far too refined for that prince to
whom it was proposed. The more obvious, but
less splendid scheme, of endeavouring to make
the utmost of Francis's calamity, had a greater
number in the council to recommend it, and suit-
ed better with the emperor's genius. But though
Charles adopted this plan, he seems not to have
executed it in the most proper manner. Instead of
making one great effort to penetrate into France
with all the forces of Spain and the Low Coun-
tries; instead of crushing the Italian states before
they recovered from the consternation which the
success of his arms had occasioned, he had recourse
to the artifices of intrigue and negociation. This
proceeded partly from necessity, partly from the
natural disposition of his mind. The situation of
his finances at that time, rendered it extremely
difficult to carry on any extraordinary armament;
and he himself having never appeared at the
head of his armies, the command of which he
had hitherto committed to his generals, was averse
to bold and martial counsels, and trufled more
to the arts with which he was acquainted. He
laid, besides, too much fl-refs upon the viAory of
Pavia, as if by that event the fRrength of France
had been annihilated, its resources exhaufl-ed, and
the kingdom itself, no lels than the person of its
monarch, had been fubjeted to his power.

·X 2 FULL

B 0 0 K FULL of this opinion, he determined to set the

IV.

A,-^- highest price upon Francis's freedom, and having
The rior- ordered the count de Roeux to visit the captive
ous terms king in his name, he inftru&ed him to propose
hle proposes
to rancis. the following articles as the conditions on which

he would grant him his liberty: That he should
restore Burgundy to the emperor, from whose
ancestors it had been unjuffly wrested; that he
Thould surrender Provence and Dauphine, that
they might be ere&ed into an independent king-
dom for the constable Bourbon; that he should
make full fatisfation to the king of England for
all his claims, and finally renounce the preten.
sions of France to Naples, Milan, or any other
territory in Italy. When Francis, who had hi-
therto flattered himself that he lhould be treated
by the emperor with the generosity becoming one
great prince towards another, heard these rigorous
conditions, he was so transported with indigna-
tion, that, drawing his dagger hastily, he cried
out, "'Twere better that a king should die thus."
Alarcon, alarmed at his vehemence, laid hold on
his hand; but though he soon recovered greater
composure, he still declared, in the most solemn
manner, that he would rather remain a prisoner
during life, than purchafc liberty by such igno-
minious concefions .

Frantrscar- 'I'-IS mortifying discovery of the emperors
nied pdoer . o

th e
to Spain. intentions, greatly augmented Ftrancis's chagrin

1Memn. de Bellay, 9.1-. Ferrcras IIilt, ix. 4.3' ..

and impatience under his confinement, and must B o0 K
have driven him to absolute despair, if he had - .
not laid hold of the only thing which could frill JS'5'
adminifRer any comfort to him. He persuaded
himself, that the conditions which Roeux had pro-
posed, did not flow originally from Charles him-
self, but were diftated by the rigorous policy of
his Spanish council; and that therefore he might
hope, in one personal interview with him, to do
more towards hastening his own deliverance, than
could be effected by long negociations passing
through the subordinate hands of his ministers.
Relying on this supposition, which proceeded
from too favourable an opinion of the emperor's
chara&cer, he offered to visit him in Spain, and
was willing to be carried thither as a fpeaacle to
that haughty nation. Lannoy employed all his
address to confirm him in these sentiments; and
concerted with him in secret the manner of exe-
cuting this resolution. Francis was so eager on
a fiheme which seemed to open some profpecc of
liberty, that he furnished the galleys necessary for
conveying him to Spain, Charles being 'at this time
unable to fit out a squadron for that purpose. The
viceroy, without communicating his intentions either
to Bourbon or Pescara, conducted his prisoner
towards Genoa, under pretence of transporting hiln
by lea to Naples; though soon after they let fail,
he ordered the pilots to steer directly for Spain ; but
the wind happening to carry them near the French
coall, the unfortunate monarch had a full pro-
IpeEt of his own dominions, towards which he

X 3 cast

B 0 0 K cait many a sorrowful and desiring look. They

_ * landed, however, in a few days at Barcelona, and
'5s5- soon after Francis was lodged, by the emperor's
AuguRft4. command, in the Alcazar of Madrid, under the

care of the vigilant Alarcon, who guarded him
with as much circumfpeation as ever a.

HenryVIII. A FEW days after Francis's arrival at Madrid,
trctludwlth and when he began to be sensible of his having
F.rance,on relied without foundation on the emperor's gene-
order to pro-
cure his re- rofity, Henry VIII. concluded a treaty with the
lease.

regent of France, which afforded him some hope
of liberty from another quarter. Henry's extra-
vagant demands had been received at Madrid
with that neglect which they deserved, and which
he probably expected. Charles, intoxicated with
prosperity, no longer courted him in that re-
fpec'tful and submissive manner which pleased his
haughty temper. Wolfey, no less haughty than
his master, was highly irritated at the emperor's
discontinuing his wonted caresses and profeflions
of friendlhip to himself. These flight offences,
added to the weighty considerations formerly men-
tioned, induced Henry to enter into a defensive
alliance with Louise, in which all the differences
between him and her son were adjusted; at the
fame time he engaged that he would employ his
belt offices in order to procure the deliverance of
his new ally from a state of captivity b.

a Mcm. de Bellay, 95. 1'. Mart. Ep. ult. Guic, . b. xvi.
323. " lierbert. Fiddcs's Life of \Volfey, 337.

NVWItlLE

WHILE the open defe&ion of such a powerful B ° V K

confederate affected Charles with deep concern, a v.
secret conspiracy was carrying on in Italy, which Mo,:rn's
threatened him with consequences still more fatal. intrigues

in order to
The reftlers and intriguing genius of Morone, overturn

the empe-

chancellor of Milan, gave rife to this. His revenge ror's power
had been amply gratified by the expulsion of the i Italy.
French out of Italy, and his vanity no less soothed
by the re-establishment of Sforza, to whose inte-
reft he had attached himself in the dutchy of Mi-
lan. The delays, however, and evasions of the
Imperial court, in granting Sforza the investiture
of his new acquired territories, had long alarmed
Moron:; these were repeated so often, and with
such apparent artifice, as became a full proof to
his suspicious mind, that the emperor intended to
strip his master of that rich country which he had
conquered in his name. Though Charles, in or-
der to quiet the pope and Venetians, no lets jea-
lous of his designs than Morone, gave Sforza, at
last, the investiture which had been so long de-
fired; the charter was clogged with so many re-
servations, and fubje&ted him to such grievous
burdens, as rendered the duke of Milan a depend-
ent on the emperor, rather than a vassal of the
empire, and afforded him hardly any other fecu-
rity for his poffeflions than the good pleasure of
an ambitious superior. Such an accession of
power as would have accrued fi-om the addition
of the Milanese to the kingdom of Naples, was
confidered by Morone as fatal to the liberties of

X + Italy,

B ov K. Italy, no lels than to his-own importance. Full
i-_-^-~ of this idea, he began to revolve in his mind the

5ZS' possibility of rescuing Italy from the yoke of so-

reigners; the darling scheme, as has been already
observed, of the Italian politicians in that age, and
which it was the great object of their ambition to
accomplish. If to the glory of having been the
chief instrument of driving the French out of
Milan, he could add that of delivering Naples
from the dominion of the Spaniards, he thought
that nothing would be wanting to complete his
fame. His fertile genius soon suggested to him a
project for that purpose; a difficult, indeed, and
daring one, but for that very reason more agree-
able to his bold and enterprising temper.

tons goit BOURBON and Pescara were equally enraged at
Pcfcara. Lannoy's carrying the French king into Spain

without their knowledge. The former, being
afraid that the two monarchs might, in his ab-
fence, conclude some treaty in which his interefis
would be entirely sacrificed, hastened to Madrid,
in order to guard against that danger. The
latter, on whom the command of the army now
devolved, was obliged to remain in Italy; but,
in every company, he gave vent to his indigna-
tion against the viceroy, in expressions fill of
rancour and contempt; he accused him in a let-
ter to the emperor, of cowardice in the time of
danger, and of insolence after a vicory, towards
the obtaining of which he had contributed no-

thing

thing either by his valour or his conduct; nor B 0° K
did he abstain from bitter complaints against the -v--
emperor himself, who had not discovered, as he 352s'
imagined, a sufficient sense of his merit, nor be-
flowed any adequate reward on his services. It
was on this disgust of Pescara, that Morons found-
ed his whole fyflem. He knew the boundless
ambition of his nature, the great extent of his
abilities in peace as well as war, and the intrepi-
dity of his mind, capable alike of undertaking and
of executing the most desperate designs. The
cantonment of the Spanish troops on the frontier
of the Milanese, gave--ccafion to many inter-
views between him and Morone, in which the
latter took care frequently to turn the converfa-
tion to the tranfations subsequent to the battle
of Pavia, a subjet upon which the marquis
always entered willingly and with passion; and
Morone observing his resentment to be uniformly
violent, artfully pointed out and aggravated
every circumstance that could increase its fury.
He painted, in the strongest colours, the emperor's
want of discernment, as well as of gratitude,
in preferring Lannoy to him, and in allowing
that presumptuous Fleming to dispose of the
captive king, without consulting the man to
whose bravery and wifdiom Charles was indebted
for the glory of having a formidable rival in his
power. I-Iaving warmed him by such discourses,
le then began to insinuate, that now was the time
to be avenged for there insults, and to acquire

immortal

B o
0 K immortal renown as the deliverer of his country

-V. from the opprefflon of strangers; that the ftaes
1525. of Italy, weary of the ignominious and intolerable

dominion of barbarians, were at last ready to
combine in order to vindicate their own inde-
pendence; that their eyes were fixed on him as
the only leader whose genius and good fortune
could ensure the happy success of that noble en-
terprize; that the attempt was no less practicable
than glorious, it being in his power so to disperse
the Spanish infantry, the only body of the empe-
ror's troops that remained in Italy, through the
villages of the Milanese, that, in one night, they
might be destroyed by the people, who, having
suffered much from their exaCtions and insolence,
would gladly undertake this service; that he
might then, without opposition, take possession
of the throne of Naples, the station destined for
him, and a reward not unworthy the restorer of
liberty to Italy; that the pope, of whom that
kingdom held, and whose predecessors had dif-
posed of it on many former occasions, would
willingly grant him the right of investiture; that
the Venetians, the Florentines, the duke of Milan,
to whom he had communicated the scheme, to-
gether with the French, would be the guarantees
of his right; that the Neapolitans would natu-
rally prefer the government of one of their coun-
trymen, whom they loved and admired, to that
odious dominion of ftrangcrs, to which they had
been so long fubjeEtcd; and that the emperor,

astonished

astonished at a blow so unexpected, would find B: 0 K
that he had neither troops nor money to resist such -
a powerful confederacy '. '5s15

PESCARA, amazed at the boldness and extent Betrayed

and taken

of the scheme, listened attentively to Moronc, prioncr by
but with the countenance of a man loft in pro-
found and anxious thought. On the one hand,
the infamy of betraying his sovereign under whom
he bore such high command, deterred him from
the attempt ; on the other, the profpe& of ob-
taining a crown allured him to venture upon it.
After continuing a short space in suspense, the
least commendable motives, as is usual after such
deliberations, prevailed, and ambition triumphed
over honour. In order, however, to throw a
colour of decency on his condu&t, he insisted
that some learned casuists should give their opi-
nion, " Whether it was lawful for a fubje6 to
take arms against his immediate sovereign, in
obedience to the lord paramount of whom the
kingdom itself was held ?" Such a resolution of
the cafe as he expected was soon obtained from
the divines and civilians both of Rome and Milan
the negociation went forward; and measures
seemed to be taking with great spirit for the speedy
execution of the design.

c Guic. 1. xvi. 325. Jovii Vita Davali, p. 417. Oeuv.

de Brantome, iv. 171. Rufcelli Lettre de Princ. ii. 9I.
Thuani Hilt. lib. i. c. Il. P. Heutcr. Rpr. Aufir. lib. ixt
c. 3. . 207.

DURINqo

B 0 0 K DURING this interval, Pescara, either ihocked

1I,_ at the treachery of the aftion that he was going
s525. to commit, or despairing of its success, began to

entertain thoughts of abandoning the engage-
ments which he had come under. The indifpo-
fition of Sforza, who happened at that time to
be taken ill of a distemper which was thought
mortal, confirmed his resolution, and determined
him to make known the whole conspiracy to the
emperor, deeming it more prudent to expet the
dutchy of Milan from him as the reward of this
discovery, than to aim at a kingdom to be pur-
chased by a series of crimes. This resolution,
however, proved the source of actions hardly less
criminal and ignominious. The emperor, who
had already received full information concerning
the conspiracy from other hands, seemed to be
highly pleated with Pescara's fidelity, and com-
manded him to continue his intrigues for some
time with the pope and Sforza, both that he might
discover their intentions more fully, and that he
might be able to convict them of the crime with
greater certainty. Pescara, conscious of guilt,
as well as sensible how suspicious his long silence
muff have appeared at Madrid, durfl not decline
that dishonourable office; and was obliged to aa
the meanest and most disgraceful of all parts, that
of seducing with a purpose to betray. Confider-
ing the abilities of the persons with whom he had
to deal, the part was scarcely less difficult than
bale; but he acted it with such address, as to de-
ceive even the penetrating eye of Morone, who

relying

relying with full confidence on his sincerity, o °0 K
visited him at Novara, in order to put the last .
hand to their machinations. Pescara received '55s
him-in an apartment where Antonio de Leyva was
placed behind the tapeitry, that he might over-
hear and bear witness to their conversation; as
Morone was about to take leave, that officer fud-
denly appeared, and to his astonishment arrested
him prisoner in the emperor's name. He was
conducted to the castle of Pavia; and Pescara,
who had so lately been his accomplice, had now
the assurance to interrogate him as his judge.
At the fame time, the emperor declared Sforza
to have forfeited all right to the dutchy of Milan,
by his engaging in a conspiracy against the so-
vereign of whom he held; Pescara, by his com-
mand, seized on every place in the Milanese,
except the castles of Cremona and Milan, which
the unfortunate duke attempting to defend, were
closely blockaded by the Imperial troops d.

BUT though this unsuccessful conspiracy, in- The r:3'r-

stead of firipping the emperor of what he already °yr~t-
pofleffed in Italy, contributed to extend his domi- Ftrncis in
nions in that country, it flewed him the necelSity
of coming to some agreement with the French
king, unless he chose to draw on himself a confe-
deracy of all Europe, which the progress of his
arms and his ambition, now as undifguilcd as it was
boundless, filled with general alarm. l-e had not

d Guic. 1. xvi. 329. Jovii IIll. 319. Cnaplla, lib. v.
p. 200.

7 hitllcrto

B o0 K hitherto treated Francis with the generosity which

'V. -,-.j that monarch expected, and hardly with the de-
315Z. cency dtie to his station. Instead of displaying

the sentiments becoming a great prince, Charles,
by his mode of treating Francis, seems to have
acted with the mercenary art of a corsair, who,
by the rigorous usage of his prisoners, endea-
vours to dr'aw from them an higher price for
their ransom. The captive king was confined in
an old castle, under a keeper whose formal aufte-
rity of manners, rendered his vigilance fill more
disgusting. He was allowed no exercise but that
of riding on a mule, surrounded with armed
guards on horseback. Charles, on pretence of
its being necessary to attend the Cortes assembled
in Toledo, had gone to reside in that city, and
suffered several weeks to elapse without visiting
Francis, though he solicited an interview with

Endangers the moQf pressing and submissive importunity. So
bislite. many indignities made a deep impreflion on an

high-fpirired prince; he began to lose all relilh
for his usual amusements; his natural gaiety of
temper forsook him; and after languishing for
some time, he was seized with a dangerous fever,
during the violence of which he complained con-
flantly of the unexpected and unprincely rigour
with which he had been treated, often exclaim-
ing, that now the emperor would have the satis-
fation of his dying a prisoner in his hands,
without having once deigned to fee his face. The
physicians, at last, delpaired of his life, and
informed the emperor that they tfw no hope of

I his

his recovery, unless he were gratified with' regard B o° K
to that point on which he seemed to be so strongly ----
bent. Charles, solicitous to preserve a life with 15s5.
which all his profpeats of farther advantage from
the victory of Pavia muff have terminated, im-
mediately consulted his ministers concerning the
course to be taken. In vain did the chancellor
Gattinara, the most able among them, represent
to him the indecency of his visiting Francis, if
he did not intend to set him at liberty imme-
diately upon equal terms; in vain did he point
out the infamy to which he would be exposed,
if avarice or ambition should prevail on him to
give the captive monarch this mark of attention
and sympathy, for which humanity and generosity
had pleaded so long without effet. The empe-
ror, less delicate, or less solicitous about reputa- pt.
tion than his minister, set out for Madrid to visit Theemrpe-
his prisoner. The interview was ihort; Francis hbirm'.,it
being too weak to bear a long conversation,
Charles accofred him in terms full of affection
and refpedt, and gave him such promises of speedy
deliverance and princely treatment, as would
have reflected the greatest honour upon him if
they had flowed from another source. Francis
grasped at them with the eagerness natural in his
situation; and cheered with this gleam of hope,
began to revive from that moment, recovering
rapidly his wonted health o,

Guic. 1. xvi. 339. Sandov. Hi. i. 66s.

HE

B 0 0 K HE had soon the mortification to find, that his

IV. _.-y. confidence in the emperor was not better founded
sTh5^5nfla- than formerly. Charles returned instantly to To.
bie Bourbon ledo; all negociations were carried on by his
arrives at
Madrid. ministers; and Francis was kept in as strict cuf.

tody as ever. A new indignity, and that very gall.
ing, was added to all those he had already suffered.
Bourbon arriving in Spain about this time,
Charles, who had so long refused to visit the king
of France, received his rebellious subjet with
Nov. I. the mpft studied respect. He met him without

the gates of Toledo, embraced him with the
greatest affection, and placing him on his left
hand, conducted him to his apartment. These
marks of honour to him, were so many insults to
the unfortunate monarch; which he felt in a very
sensible manner. It afforded him some confo-
lation, however, to observe, that the sentiments
of the Spaniards differed widely from those of
their sovereign. That generous people detested
Bourbon's crime. Notwithstanding his great
talents and important services, they ihunned all
intercourse with him, to such a degree, that
Charles having desired the marquis de Villena to
permit Bourbon to reside in his palace while the
court remained in Toledo, he politely replied,
"( That he could not refuse gratifying his fove-
reign in that request;" but added, with a CaRfi-
lian dignity of mind, that the emperor rnuft not
be surprised if, the mnoment the constable de-
parted, he should burn to the ground a house
which, having been polluted by the presence of

a traitor,

a traitor, became an unfit habitation for a man B °o° K
of honour f. '

1525.

CHARLES himself, nevertheless, seemed to have Appointed

it much at heart to reward Bourbon's services in geeltspof
a signal manner. But as he insisted, in the first ,ial arrn
place, on the accompliihment of the emperor's
promire of giving him in marriage his filter
Eleanora, queen dowager of Portugal, the ho-
nour of which alliance had been one of his chief
inducements to rebel against his lawful sovereign;
as Francis, in order to prevent such a dangerous
union, had offered, before he left Italy, to marry
that princess; and as Eleanora herself discovered
an inclination rather to match with a powerful
monarch, than with his exiled fubje&ft all there
interfering circumstances created great embar-
raflment to Charles, and left him hardly any
hope of extricating himself with decency. But Decembere
the death of Pescara, who, at the age of thirty-
fix, left behind him the reputation of being one
of the greatest generals and ablest politicians of
that century, happened opportunely at this junc-
ture for his relief. By that event, the command
of the army in Italy became vacant, and Charles,
always fertile in resources, persuaded Bourbon,
who was in no condition to dispute his will, to
accept the office of general in chief there, to-
gether with a grant of the dutchy of Milan
forfeited by Sforza; and in return for there to

f Guic. 1. xvi. 335.
VOL. II. Y rclinquifl

B o00 K relinquish all hopes of marrying the queen of
L-__ Portugal g.

1525.

Negocia- TIHIE chief obstacle that flood in the way of
procuring Francis's liberty was the emperor's continuing
Frncis's to insist so peremptorily on the restitution of Bur-

gundy, as a preliminary to that event. Francis
often declared, that he would never content to
dismember his kingdom; and that, even if he
lhould so far forget the duties of a monarch, as
to come to such a resolution, the fundamental
laws of the nation would preven't its taking effet.
On his part, he was willing to make an abfolure
cession to the emperor of all his pretensions in
Italy and the Low Countries; he pvomifed to
restore to Bourbon all his lands which had been
confiscated; he renewed his proposal of mar-
rying the emperor's sifter, the queen dowager
of Portugal; and engaged to pay a great fum
by way of ransom for his own person. But all
mutual esteem and confidence between the two
rionarchs were now entirely loft; there appeared,
on the one hand, a rapacious ambition, labour-
ing to avail itself of every favourable circum-
stance; on the other, suspicion and resentment,
standing perpetually on their guard; so that the
profped of bringing their negotiations to an iflue
seemed to be far distant. The duchess of Alen-
Son, the French king's siser, whom Charles
permitted to visit her brother, in his confinement,

: Sandov. Iiilt. i. 676. Oeuv. de Brnnt. iv. 249.

employed

employed all her address, in order to procure B 0 0 K
his liberty on more reasonable terms. Henry of .--
England interposed his good offices to the fame s525.
purpose; but both with fb little success, that
Francis in despair took suddenly the resolution Francis i,
of resigning his crown, with all its rights and folvPeto
prerogatives, to his son the dauphin,. determin- regn his
ing rather to end his days in prison, than to
purchase his freedom by concessions unworthy of
a king. The deed -for this purpose he signed
with legal formality in Madrid, empowering his
filler to carry it into France, that it might be
registered in all the parliaments of the king-
dom; and at the fame time intimating his in-
tention to the emperor, he desired him to name
the place of his confinement, and to assign him
a proper number of attendants during the re-
mainder of his days h.

THIS resolution of the French king had great Charles

effect; Charles began to be sensible, that by
pushing rigour to excess he might defeat his
own measures; and inttead of the vast advantages
which he hoped to draw from ransoming a
powerful monarch, he might at last find in his
hands a prince without dominions or revenues.
About the fame time, one of the king of Na-
vare's domestics happened, by an extraordinary
exertion of fidelity, courage, and address, to

h This paper is publiflied in Memoircs Hiftoriqucs, &c.
par M. 1'Abbe Raynal, tom. ii. p. 151.

Y 2 procure

B °sV°K procure his master an opportunity of escaping

--1-' from the prison in which he had been confined

5 ever since the battle of Pavia. This convinced

the emperor, that the most vigilant attention
of his officers might be eluded by the ingenuity
or boldness of Francis or his attendants, and
one unlucky hour might deprive him of all the
advantages which he had been so solicitous to
obtain. By these considerations, he was induced
to abate somewhat of his former demands. On
the other hand, Francis's impatience under con-
finement daily increased; and having received
certain intelligence of a powerful league forming
against his rival in Italy, he grew more com-
pliant with regard to concessions, trusting that,
if he could once obtain his liberty, he would
soon be in a condition to resume whatever he had
yielded.

1516. SUCH being the views and sentiments of the

Trteay of
Madrid. two monarchs, the treaty which procured Francis

his liberty was signed at Madrid, on the four-
teenth of January one thousand five hundred
and twenty-fix. The article with regard to
Burgundy, which had hitherto created the greatest
difficulty, was compromised; Francis engaging
to restore that dutchy with all its dependencies in
full sovereignty to the emperor; and Charles
consenting, that this restitution Ihould not be
made until the king was set at liberty: in order
to secure the performance of this, as well as the
other conditions in the treaty, Francis agreed

that

that at the fame initant when he himself Ihould B 0 0 K

IV.

be released, he would deliver as hostages to the ---
emperor, his eldest son the dauphim, his second I5e
son the duke of Orleans, or in lieu of the latter,
twelve of his principal nobility, to be named by
Charles. The other articles swelled to a great
number, and, though not of such importance,
were extremely rigorous. Among these the most
remarkable were, that Francis should renounce
all his pretensions in Italy; that he should dif-
claim any title which he had to the sovereignty of
Slanders and Artois; that, within fix weeks after
his release, he ihould restore to Bourbon, and his
adherents, all their goods, moveable and im-
moveable, and make them full reparation for
the damages which they had sustained by the con-
fifcation of them; that he should use his interest
with Henry D'Albret to relinquish his preten-
sions to the crown of Navarre, and should not
for the future assist him in any attempt to re-
cover it; that there should be established be-
tween the emperor and Francis a league of per-
petual friendship and confederacy, with a pro-
mise of mutual assistance in every cafe of necef-
fity; that, in corroboration of this union, Francis
Ihould marry the emperor's sifter, the queen
dowager of Portugal; that Francis flould cause
all the articles of this treaty to be ratified by the
flates, and registered in the parliaments of his
kingdom; that, upon the emperor's receiving
this ratification, the hostages flhould be set at

Y 3 liberty;

B 0 0 K liberty; but in their. place, the duke of Angou.

----i leme, the king's third son, should be delivered
156'. to Charles, that in order to manifest, as well as

to strengthen the amity between the two mo-
narchs, he might be educated at the Imperial
court; and that if Francis did nor, within the
time limited, fulfil the stipulations in the treaty,
he should prornife, upon his honour and oath,
to return into Spain, and to surrender himself
again a prisoner to the emperor'.

Sentiments BY this treaty, Charles flattered himself that
withrerpge he had not only effe&ually humbled his rival,
toit. but that he had taken such precautions as would

for ever prevent his re-attaining any formidable
degree of power. The opinion, which the wisest
politicians formed concerning it, was very dif-
ferent; they could not persuade themselves that
Francis, after obtaining his liberty, would execute
articles against which he had fruggledl so long,
and to which, notwithstanding all that he felt
during a long and rigorous confinement, he
had conrented with the utmost reluctance. Am-
birion and resentment, they knew, would con-
spire in prompting him to violate the hard con-
ditions to which he had been constraincd to
submit; nor would arguments and cafuifry be
wanting to rcprefent that which was so manifeltly
advantageous, to be necefTlary and just. If one
part of Francis's conduct had been known at

J Rccucil dcs Trait. tom. ii,. i I. Ulloa Vita del Carlo V.
p. 1o2, &c.

tha:

that time, this opinion might have been founded, B 0 0 K
not in conjecture, but in certainty. A few v.--
hours before he signed the treaty, he assembled Fran,6.
such of his counsellors as were then at Madrid, secretly pro-

teRs against

and having exa&ed from them a solemn oath of the validity
secrecy, he made a long enumeration in their °fit.
presence of the dishonourable arts, as well as
unprincely rigour, which the emperor had em-
ployed in order to enfinare or intimidate him.
For that reason, he took a formal protest in the
hands of notaries, that his content to the treaty
should be confidered as an involuntary deed, and
be deemed null and void". By this disingenuous
artifice, for which even the treatment that he had
met with was no apology, Francis endeavoured to
satisfy his honour and conscience in signing the
treaty, and to provide at the fame time a pre-
text on which to break it,

GREAT, meanwhile, were the outward demon-

firations of love and confidence between the two
monarchs; they appeared often together in pub-
lic; they frequently had long conferences in
private; they travelled in the fame litter, and
joined in the fame amusements. But, amidst these
signs of peace and friendship, the emperor flill
harboured suspicion in his mind. Though the
ceremonies of the marriage between Francis and
the queen of Portugal were performed soon after
the conclusion of the treaty, Charles would not

k Recueil de Trait. tom. ii, p. 107.

Y 4 pl.er iAi

B 0O K permit him to consummate it until the return of
X - -_, the ratification from France. Even then Francis

l326. was not allowed to be at full liberty; his guards

were still continued; though carefled as a bro-
ther-in-law, he was fill watched like a prisoner;
and it was obvious to attentive observers, that
an union, in the very beginning of which there
might be discerned such symptoms of jealousy and
diftruff, could not be cordial, or of long conti-
nuance'.
Ra:fied in ABOUT a month after the signing of the treaty,

France. the regent's ratification of it was brought from

France; and that wife princess, preferring, on
this occasion, the public good to domestic as-
section, informed her son, that, instead of the
twelve noblemen named in the treaty, ihe had
sent the duke of Orleans along with his brother
the dauphin to the frontier, as the kingdom
could susser nothing by the absence of a child,
but mufft be left almost incapable of defence, if
deprived of its ablest Ratefmen, and most expe-
rienced generals, whom Charles had artfully in-

Francis set eluded in his nomination. At lafft Francis took
at liberty leave of -the emperor, whose suspicion of the

king's sincerity increasing, as the time of putting
it to the proof approached, he endeavoured to
bind him frill fafler by exaaing new promises,
which, after those he had already made, the
French monarch was not flow to grant. He set

Guic . . xvi. 353

out

out from Madrid, a place which the remem- °00 K
brance of many afflicting circumstances rendered a_-i
peculiarly odious to him, with the joy natural 3526.
on such an occasion, and began the long-wifhed-
for journey towards his own dominions. He was
escorted by a body of horse under the command
of Alarcon, who, as the king drew near the fron-
tiers of France, guarded him with more fcrupu-
lous exatnefs than ever. When he arrived at
the river Andaye, which separates the two king-
doms, Lautrec appeared on the opposite bank
with a guard of horse equal in number to Alar-
con's. An empty bark was moored in the mid-
dle of the stream; the attendants drew up in
order on the oppolite banks; at the fame in-
itant, Lannoy with eight gentlemen put off from
the Spanish, and Lautrec with the fame number
from the French fide of the river; the former
had the king in his boat; the latter, the dauphin
and duke of Orleans; they met in the empty
veffi ; the exchange was made in a moment:
Francis, after a short embrace of his children,
leaped into Lautrec's boat, and reached the
French fllore. He mounted at that instant a Turkish
horse, waved his hand over his head, and with a
joyful voice crying aloud several times, " I am
yet a king," galloped full speed to St. John de
Luz, and from thence to Bayonne. This event,
no less impatiently desired by the French nation
than by their monarch, happened on the eighteenth

7 of

B °0 K of March, a year and twenty-two days after the

-j fatal battle of Pavia '.

15;6.

The empe- SOON after the emperor had taken leave of
ror hs marI

,- *

,iie with Francis, and permitted him to begin his journey
ibreula olf towards his own dominions, he set out for Se-

ville, in order to solemnize his marriage with
Isabella, the daughter of Emanuel, the late king
of Portugal, and the sifter of John III. who had
succeeded him in the throne of that kingdom.
Isabella was a princess of uncommon beauty and
accomplihmnents; and as the Cortes, both in
Castile and Aragon, had warmly solicited their
sovereign to marry, the choice of a wife, so nearly
allied to the royal blood of both kingdoms, was
extremely acceptable to his subjects. The Portu-
guefe, fond of this new connedtion with the first
monarch in Christendom, granted him an extra-
ordinary dowry with Isabella, amounting to nine
hundred thousand crowns, a fum which, from
the situation of his affairs at that junEture, was
of no finall consequence to the emperor. The
March 12. marriage was celebrated with that splendour and

gaiety, which became a great and youthful prince.
Charles lived with Isabella in perfe&t harmony,
and treated her on all occasions with much dif-
tinc ion and regard "

m Sandov. Hi-i. i. 735. Guic. I. xvi. 35.
" Ulloa Vita di Carlo V. p. o16. Belcarius Com. Rer.
Gallic. p. 565. Spalatinus np. Struv. Corp. Hilt. Germ. ii.

D)URING

DURING these tranfaftions, Charles could hard- B o o K

IV.

ly give any attention to the affairs of Germany, .
though it was torn in pieces by commotions, which Affa,5
threatened the most dangerous consequences. By Gcrmany.
the feudal institutions, which still subsisted almost
unimpaired in the Empire, the property of lands
was vested in the princes and free-barons. Their
vassals held of them by the ftriEteft and most li- Grievance-

of the pea-

mited tenures; while the great body of the people ofans.
was kept in a state but little removed from abfo-
lute servitude. In some places of Germany,
people of the lowest class were so entirely in the
power of their masters, as to be subjea to per-
lonal and domestic slavery, the most rigorous
form of that wretched state. In other provinces,
particularly in Bohemia and Lusatia, the peasants
were bound to remain on the lands to which they
belonged, and making part of the estate, were
transferred like any other property from one hand
to another. Even in Suabia, and the countries
on the banks of the Rhine, where. their condition
was molt tolerable, the peasants not only paid the
full rent of their farms to the landlord; but if
they chose either to change the place of their
abode, or to follow a new profeflion, before they
could accomplifl what they desired, they were
obliged to purchase this privilege at a certain
price. Betides this, all grants of lands to peasants
expired at their death, without descending to their
poltterity.- Upon that event, the landlord had A
right to the best of their cattle, as well as of their
furniture i and their heirs, in order to obtain a

renewal

B o o K renewal of the grant, were obliged to pay large
*-- fums by way of fine. These exactions, thougt

"516 grievous, were borne with patience, because the)

were customary and ancient: but when the pro.
grefs of elegance and luxury, as well as the changes
introduced into the art of war, came to increase
the expence of government, and made it necessary
for princes to levy occasional or stated taxes on
their subje&s, such impositions being new, ap-
peared intolerable; and in Germany, these du-
ties being laid chiefly upon beer, wine, and other
necessaries of life, affected the common people in
the most sensible manner. The addition of such
a load to their former burdens, drove them to
despair. It was to the valour inspired by resent-
ment againit impositions of this kind, that the
Swiss owed the acquisition of their liberty in the
fourteenth century. The fame cause had excited
the peasants in several other provinces of Ger-
many to rebel against their superiors towards the
end of the fifteenth and beginning of the sixteenth
centuries; and though there infurredions were
not attended with like success, they could not,
however, be quelled without much difficulty and
bloodshed .

'rherincr- BY there checks, the spirit of the peasants was
Subia." overawed rather than subdued; and their griev-

ances multiplying continually, they ran to arms,
in the year one thousand five hundred and
twenty-fix, with the most frantic rage. Their

S* $ckcnd. lib. ii. p. z. 6.

,fi.t(

firfr appearance was near Ulm in Suabia. The B °0° K
peasants in the adjacent country flocked to their --
standard with the ardour and impatience natural ';6.
to men, who having groaned long under oppref-
sion, beheld at last some profped of deliverance s
and the contagion spreading from province to
province, reached almost every part-of Germany.
Wherever they came, they plundered the mo-
nafteries; wafted the lands of their superiors;
rated their castles, and massacred without mercy
all persons of noble birth, who were so unhappy
as to fall into their hands P. Having intimidated
their oppressors, as they imagined, by the vio-
lence of these proceedings, they began to confi-
der what would be the most proper and effe&ual
method of securing themselves for the future
from their tyrannical exactions. With this view,
they drew up and published a memorial, contain-
ing all their demands, and declared, that while
arms were in their hands, they would either per-
fuade or oblige the nobles to give them fill satis-
faEtion with regard to these. The chief articles
were, that they might have liberty to chufe their
own pastors; that they might be freed from the
payment of all tythes except those of corn; that
they might no longer be confidered as the slaves or
bondmen of their superiors; that the liberty of
hunting and fishing might be common; that the
great forests might not be regarded as private pro-

P Petr. Crinitus de Bcllo Ruflicano, ap. Frcher. Script.
Rer. Germ. Argent. 1717, vol. iii. p. 243.

perty,

B O pK perty, but be open for the use of all; that they
_--z--/ might be delivered from the unusual burden of

ja56. taxes under which they laboured; that the ad-

miniflration of justice might be rendered less ri-
gorous and more impartial; that the encroach.
ments of the nobles upon meadows and commons
might be restrained q.
Qoelicd. MANY of these demands were extremely reason.

able; and being urged by such formidable num-
bers, should have met with fbme redress. But
those unwieldy bodies, afiernbled in different
places, had neither union, nor condu&t, nor vi-
gour. Being led by persons of the lowest rank,
without skill in war, or knowledge of what was
neceltary for accomplifling their .defgns; all
their exploits were distinguished only by a brutal
and unmeaning fury. To oppose this, the princes
and nobles of Suabia and the Lower Rhine raised
such of their valTals as still continued faithful, and
attacking some of the mutineers with open force,
and others by furprize, cut to pieces or dispersed
all who infested those provinces; i o that the pea-
sants, after ruining the open country, and losing
upwards of twenty thousand of their associates in
the field, were obliged to return to their habita-
tions with less hope than ever of relief from their
grievances r.

' Sleid. Hilt. p. 90.
r Scckend. lib. ii. p. io. Petr. Gnodalius de Ruticano-

rum Tumultu in Germania, ap. Scard. Script. vol. ii. p. 131,
&c.

THIESE

THESE commotions happened at first in pro- B o o K
vinces of Germany where Luther's opinions had v--.
made little progress; and being excited wholly The5;ur.
by political causes, had no connection with the resaionsin
disputed points in religion. But the frenzy reach-
ing at last those countries in which the Reforma-
tion was established, derived new strength from
circumfiances peculiar to them, and rose to a
still greater pitch of extravagance. The Reform-
ation, wherever it was received, increased that
bold and innovating spirit to which it owed its
birth. Men who had the courage to overturn a
system supported by every thing which can com-
mand refpea or reverence, were not to be over-
awed by any authority, how great or venerable
soever. After having been accustomed to con-
fiderthemfelves as judges of the most important
docrines in religion, to examine these freely, and
to reje&t, without scruple, what appeared to them
erroneous, it was natural for them to turn the
fame daring and inquisitive eye towards govern-
ment, and to think of reEtifying whatever difor-
ders or imperfections were discovered there. As
religious abuses had been reformed in several
places without the permiflion of the magifirate,
it was an easy transition to attempt the redress of
political grievances in the fame manner.

No sooner, then, did the spirit of revolt break Morc rr-
out in Thuringia, a province subje&t to the
eletor of Saxony, the inhabitants of which were

inonly

BI 0 K mostly converts to Lutheranifn, than it aflumec

- 1a new and more dangerous form. Thomas Mun.
15z6. cer, one of Luther's disciples, having eftablilhed

himfelfin that country, had acquired a wonder.
ful afcendart over the minds of the people. He
propagated among them the wildest and mos
enthusiastic notions, but such as tended mani.
feftly to inspire them with boldness, and lead

Ther fana- them to sedition. " Luther, he told them, had
cal spirt. done more hurt than service to religion. He had,

indeed, rescued the church from the yoke of
popery, but his doctrines encouraged, and his
life set an example of, the utmoff licentiousness
of manners. In order to avoid vice (fays he),
men muff pradife perpetual mortification. They
must put on a grave countenance, speak little,
'wear a plain garb, and be serious in their whole
deportment. Such as prepare their hearts in
this manner, may expe&t that the Supreme Be-
ing will direc all their steps, and by some visible
Iign discover his will to them; if that illumina-
tion be at any time withheld, we may expoftu-
late with the Almighty, who deals with us so
harshly, and remind him of his promises. This
expostulation and anger will be highly acceptable
to God, and will at last prevail on him to guide
us with the fame, unerring hand which condu&ed
the patriarchs of old. Let us beware, however,
of offending him by our arrogance; but as all
men are equal in his eye, let them return to
that condition of equality in which he formed

them,

them, and having all things in common, let them B ° 0 K
live together like brethren, without any marks of
subordination or pre-eminence ." I5Z6.

EXTRAVAGANT as these tenets were, they flat-

tered so many passions in the human heart, as to
make a deep imprefflon. To aim at nothing
more than abridging the power of the nobility,
was now considered as a trifling and partial re-
formation, not worth the contending for; it was
proposed to level every distinction among man-
kind, and by abolishing property, to reduce them
to their natural state of equality, in which all
lhould receive their fubfiflence from one com-
mon flock. Iuncer aflured them, that the de-
sign was approved of by Heaven, and that the
Almighty had in a dream ascertained him of its
success. The peasants set about the execution
of it, not only with the rage which animated
those of their order in other parts of Germany,
but with the ardour which enthusiasm inspires.
They deposed the magistrates in all the cities of
which they were masters; seized the lands of the
nobles, and obliged such of them as they got
into their hands, to put on the dress commonly
worn by peasants, and instead of their former
titles, to be satisfied with the appellation given
to people in the lowest class of life. Great num-
bers engaged in this wild undertaking; but

Seckend. lib. ii. p. 13. Slcid. Hilt. p. 83.
VOL. II. Z Muncer,

B 0o K Muncer, their leader and their prophet, wa9
<-v-.-* destitute of the abilities necessary for conducting

1526' it. He had all the extravagance, but not the

courage, which enthusiasts usually possess. It
was with difficulty he could be persuaded to take
the field; and though he soon drew together
eight thousand men, he suffered himself to be
surrounded by a body of cavalry under the com-
mand of the elector of Saxony, the landgrave of
Hesse, and duke of Brunswick. These princes,
unwilling to shed the blood of their deluded sub-
jets, sent a young nobleman to their camp, with
the offer of a general pardon, if they would im-
mediately lay down their arms, and deliver up
the authors of the sedition. Muncer, alarmed at
this, began to harangue his followers with his
usual vehemence, exhorting them not to trust
there deceitful promises of their oppressors, nor
to desert the cause of God, and of Christian
liberty.

Pe'fnt BUT the sense of present danger making a
dficeaed. deeper impreilon on the peasants than his elo-

quence, confusion and terror were visible in every
face, when a rainbow, which was the emblem
that the mutineers had painted on their colours,
happening to appear in the clouds, Muncer, with
admirable pretence of mind, laid hold of that
incident, and suddenly raising his eyes and hands
towards heaven, " Behold," cries he, with an
elevated voice, "' the sign which God has given.

"( There

" There is the pledge of your safety, and a token B o

° K

It that the wicked shall be destroyed." The fa-
natical multitude set up instantly a great shout, 5s6.
as if victory had been certain; and passing in a
moment from one extreme to another, mafia-
cred the unfortunate- nobleman who had come
with the offer of pardon, and demanded to be
led towards the enemy. The Princes, enraged at
this shocking violation of the laws of war, ad-
vanced with no less impetuosity, and began the
attack; but the behaviour of the peasants in the May r,
combat was not such as might have been ex-
peced either from their ferocity or confidence of
success; an undisciplined rabble was no equal
match for well-trained troops; above five thou-
sand were slain in the field, almost without mak-
ing resistance; the reft fled, and among the fore-
inoft Muncer their general. He was taken next
day, and being condemned to such punishments
as his crimes had deserved, he suffered them with
a poor and dastardly spirit. His death put an
end to the infurredions of the peasants, which
had filled Germany with such terror'; but the
enthusiastic notions which he had scattered were
not extirpated, and produced, not long after,
effeCts more memorable, as well as more ex-
travagant.

' Sleid. Hilt. p. 84. Seckend. lib. ii. p. 12. Gnodalius
Tumult. Ruflican. 155.

Z 2 Du li rIN

B V0 K DURING these commotions, Luther acted with

IV.
-v-- exemplary prudence and moderation; like a
1526.

Luther's common parent, solicitous About the welfare of
mroderate both parties, without sparing the faults or errors
and prudent
condut. of either. On the one hand, he addressed a mo-

nitory discourse to the nobles, exhorting them to
treat their dependents with greater humanity and
indulgence. On the other, he severely censured
the seditious spirit of the peasants, advising them
not to murmur at hardships inseparable from their
condition, nor to seek for redress by any but legal
means u.

H;smar- LUTHER'S famous marriage with Catharine a
"iage. Boria, a nun of a noble family, who, having

thrown off the veil, had fled from the cloister,
happened this year, and was far from meeting
with the fame approbation. Even his most de-
voted followers thought this flep indecent, at a
time when his country was involved in so many
calamities; while his enemies never mentioned
it with any softer appellation than that of in-
ceftious or profane. Luther himself was fen-
fible of the imprefflon which it had made to his
disadvantage; but being satisfied with his own
conduct, he bore the censure of his friends, and
the reproaches of his adversaries, with his usual
fortitude ".

u Slid. Hist. p. 87. x Scckend. lib. ii. p. 15.

T1 S

THIS year the Reformation loft its first pro- B o00 K

te&or, Frederic, elector of Saxony; but the blow v_
was the less sensibly felt, as he was succeeded by 1526.
his brother John, a more avowed and zealous, May 5.
though less able patron of Luther and his doc-
trines.

ANOTHER event happened about the fame time, Pruflia

which, as it occasioned a considerable change in whreaedfro
the state of Germany, must be traced back to order.
its source. While the frenzy of the Crusades
possessed all Europe during the twelfth and thir-
teenth centuries, several orders of religious knight-
hood were founded in defence of the Christian
faith against Heathens and Infidels. Among
these, the Teutonic order in Germany was one of
the most illustrious, the knights of which diftin-
guifhed themselves greatly in all the enterprizes
carried on in the Holy Land. Being driven at
last from their settlements in the east, they were
obliged to return to their native country. Their
zeal and valour were too impetuous to remain
long inative. They invaded, on very flight pre-
tences, the province of Prufia, the inhabitants of
which were still idolaters; and having completed
the conquest of it about the middle of the thir-
teenth century, held it many years as a fief de-
pending on the crown of Poland. Fierce con-
tests arose during this period, between the grand
masters of the order, and the kings of Poland;
the former firuggling for independence, while

Z 3 the

B I K the latter afterted their right of sovereignty with

,__ great firmness. Albert, a prince of the house of
ZJ26. Brandenburgh, who was eleced grand master in

the year one thousand five hundred and eleven,
engaging keenly in this quarrel, maintained a
long war with Sigismund, king of Poland; but
having become an early convert to Luther's
doctrines, this gradually lessened his zeal for the
interests of his fraternity, so that he took the
opportunity of the confusions in the Empire,
and the absence of the emperor, to conclude
a treaty with Sigismund, greatly to his own pri-
vate emolument. By it, that part of Prussia,
which belonged to the Teutonic order, was
ereEted into a secular and hereditary dutchy, and
the investiture of it granted to Albert, who, in
return, bound himself to do homage for it to the
kings of Poland as their vassal. Immediately
after this, he made public profession of the re-
formed religion, and married a princess of Den-
mark. The Teutonic knights exclaimed so
loudly against the treachery of their grand malter,
that he was put under the ban of the Empire;
but he frill kept possession of the province which
he had usurped, and transmitted it to his pofte-
rity. In process of time, this rich inheritance
fell to the ele6toral branch of the family, all de-
pendence on the crown of Poland was shaken off,
and the margraves of Brandenburgh, having as-
furned the title of kings of Prussia, have not
only rifcn to an equality with the firn- princes in

Germany,

Germany, but take their rank among the great B o, K
monarchs of Europe Y. _

15Z6.
UPoN the return of the French king to his Fir fmea-

fures of the

dominions, the eyes of all the powers in Europe French
were fixed upon him, that, by observing his first kigeturn
motions, they might form a judgment concern- to France.
ing his subsequent conduEt. They were not held
long in suspense. Francis, as soon as he arrived at
Bayonne, wrote to the king of England, thanking
him for the zeal and affetion wherewith he had
interposed in his favour, to which he acknow-
ledged that he owed the recovery of his liberty.
Next day, the emperor's ambassadors demanded
audience, and, in their master's name, required
him to issue such orders as were necessary for
carrying the treaty of Madrid into immediate
and full execution; he coldly answered, that
though, for his own part, he determined religi-
oufly to perform all that he had promised, the
treaty contained so many articles relative not to
himself alone, but afficcing the interests of the
French monarchy, that he could not take any
farther flep without consulting the States of his
kingdom, and that some time would be necesSary,
in order to reconcile their minds to the hard con-
ditions which he had consented to ratify Z. This
reply was confidered as no obscure discovery of
his being resolved to elude the treaty; and the

Y Sleid. Hilt. p. 98. rfeiel Abrcg6 de 1'HIilt. de Droit
Publ. p. 605, &c. 2 Mem. de Bcllay, p. 97.

Z 4 corn-

B 0 0 K compliment paid to Henry, appeared a very pro-

IV.
i_- _) per ftep towards securing the assistance of that

J516. monarch in the war with the emperor, to which

such a resolution would certainly give rife. These
circumflances, added to the explicit declarations
which Francis made in secret to the ambassadors
from several of the Italian powers, fully satisfied
them that their conjectures with regard to his
conduc had been just, and that, instead of in-
tending to execute an unreasonable treaty, he
was eager to seize the first opportunity of re-
venging those injuries which had compelled him
to feign an approbation of it. Even the doubts,
and fears, and scruples, which used, on other
occasions, to hold Clement in a state of uncer-
tainty, were difipated by Francis's seeming im-
patience to break through all his engagements
with the emperor. The situation, indeed, of
affairs in Italy at that time, did not allow the
Pope to hesitate long. Sforza was tfill besieged
by the Imperialifrs in the castle of Milan. That
feeble prince, deprived now of Morone's advice,
and unprovided with every thing necessary for
defence, found means to inform Clement and
the Venetians, that he must soon surrender, if
they did not come to his relief. The Imperial
troops, as they had received no pay since the
battle of Pavia, lived at discretion in the Mi-
lanefe, levying such exorbitant contributions in
that dutchy, as amounted, if we may rely on
Guicciardini's calculation, to no less a rum than

five

five thousand ducats a day'; nor was it to be B o o K
doubted, but that the soldiers, as soon as the -
castle should submit, would chufe to leave a 1526-
ruined country which hardly afforded them sub-
fiftence, that they might take poffelffon of more
comfortable quarters in the fertile and untouched
territories of the Pope and Venetians. The as-
fiftance of the French king was the only thing
which could either save Sforza, or enable them to
protect their own dominions from the insults of
the Imperial troops.

FoR there reasons, the Pope, the Venetians, A leaue

and duke of Milan, were equally impatient to againl the
come to an agreement with Francis, who, on his cmperor'
part, was no less desirous of acquiring such a
considerable accession both of strength and repu-
tation as such a confederacy would bring along
with it. The chief objects of this alliance, which
was concluded at Cognac on the twenty-fecond
of May, though kept secret for some time, were
to oblige the emperor to set at liberty the French
king's sons, upon payment of a reasonable ran-
fom; and to re-establish Sforza in the quiet
possession of the Milanese. If Charles flould re-
fuse either of these, the contra&ing parties bound
themselves to bring into the field an army of
thirty-five thousand men, with which, after driv-
ing the Spaniards out of the Milanese, they
would attack the kingdom of Naples. The king

a Guic. 1. xvii. 360.

Of

B ov K of England was declared protector of this league,

IV.

_ .which they dignified with the name of Holy, be-
5. cause the Pope was at the head of it; and in or-

der to allure Henry more effectually, a principa-
lity in the kingdom of Naples, of thirty thousand
ducats yearly revenue, was to be fettled on him;
and lands to the value of ten thousand ducats on
Wolfey his favourite b.

The Pope No sooner was this league concluded, than
abfoives
Francis Clement, by the plenitude of his papal power,
from his
ath to ob- absolved Francis from the oath which he had
tfeaty of taken to observe the treaty of Madridc. This
J¥ladrid. right, how pernicious soever in its effects, and

deflructive of that integrity which is the bais of
all tranfadtions among men, was the natural con-
sequence of the powers which the popes arro-
gated as the infallible vicegerents of Christ upon
earth. But as, in virtue of this pretended pre-
rogative, they had often dispensed with obliga-
tions which were held sacred, the interest of rome
men, and the credulity of others, led them to
imagine, that the decisions of a Sovereign pontiff
authorized orjultified aEtions which would, other-
wife, have been criminal and impious.
rThel'empe. TIE discovery of Francis's intention to elude

the treaty of Madrid, filled the emperor with
a variety of disquieting thoughts. He had treat-

, P. I-Icuter. Rer. Auflr. lib. ix. c. 3. p. 217. Recucil
des Trait. ii. 2,4..

Goldall. Polit. Imperial. p. 1ooz. Pallav. IIilt. p. 70.

cd

ed an unfortunate prince in the most ungene-B o0, K
rous manner; he had displayed an insatiable -.---.
ambition in all his negociations with his pri- '5
Ibner; he knew what censures the former had
drawn upon him, and what apprehensions the lat-
ter had excited in every court of Europe; nor
had he reaped from the measures which he
pursued, any of those advantages which poli-
ticians are apt to confider as an excuse for the
most criminal condu&, and a compensation for the
severest reproaches. Francis was now out of his
hands, and not one of all the mighty confe-
quences, which he had expected from the treaty
that set him at liberty, was likely to take place.
His rafinefs in relying so far on his own judg-
ment as to trust to the sincerity of the French king,
in opposition to the sentiments of his wisest rri-
nifters, was now apparent; and he easily con-
jeftured, that the fame confederacy, the dread of
which had induced him to set Francis at liberty,
would now be formed against him with that gal-
lant and incensed monarch at its head. Self-
condemnation and shame, on account of what
was pait, with anxious apprehensions concerning
what might happen, were the necessary result of
these refletions on his own conduEt and situ-
ation. Charles, however, was naturally firm and
inflexible in all his measures. To have receded
luddenly from any article in the treaty of Madrid,
would have been a plain confeflion of imprudence,
and a palpable symptom of fear; he determined,

therefore,

B o°O K therefore, that it was most suitable to his dignity,
L-_--. to insist, whatever might be the consequences,

52z6. on the ftri& execution of the treaty, and parti-

cularly not to accept of any thing which might
be offered as an equivalent for the restitution of
Burgundy d.

Rsequires IN consequence of this resolution, he appointed
Francis to
perform Lannoy and Alarcon to repair, as his ambaffa-
what he had
liipulated. dors, to the court of France, and formally to

summon the king, either to execute the treaty
with the sincerity that became him, or to return,
according to his oath, a prisoner to Madrid.
Instead of giving them an immediate answer,
Francis admitted the deputies of the states
of Burgundy to an audience in their pretence.
They humbly represented to him, that he had
exceeded the powers vested in a king of France,
when he consented to alienate their country
from the crown, the domains of which he was
bound by his coronation oath to preserve entire
and unimpaired. Francis, in return, thanked
them for their attachment to his crown, and in-
treated them, though very faintly, to remember
the obligations which he lay under to fulfil his
engagements with the emperor. The deputies,
assuming an higher tone, declared, that they
would not obey commands which they confidered
as illegal; and, if he should abandom them to
the enemies of France, they had resolved to de-

I Guic. 1. xvii. 366.

fend

fend themselves to the best of their power, with B o°, K
a firm purpose rather to perilh than submit to a '--
foreign dominion. Upon which Francis, turning Hisnwer
towards the Imperial ambassadors, represented
to them the impossibility of performing what he
had undertaken, and offered, in lieu of Bur-
gundy, to pay the emperor two millions of
crowns. The viceroy and Alarcon, who easily
perceived, that the scene to which they had been
witnefies, was concerted between the king and
his subje&s in order to impose upon them, fig-
nified to him their master's fixed resolution not
to depart in the smallest point from the terms of
the treaty, and withdrew e. Before they left the
kingdom, they had the mortification to hear the
holy league against the emperor published with June xl
great solemnity.

CHARLES no sooner received an account of this Theempc-

confederacy than he exclaimed, in the most pub- pratoiPs
lic manner, and in the harshest terms, against for war.
Francis, as a prince void of faith and of honour.
He complained no less of Clement, whom he
solicited in vain to abandon his new allies; he
accused him of ingratitude; he taxed him with
an ambition unbecoming his character; he
threatened him not only with all the vengeance
which the power of an emperor can inflict, but,
by appealing to a general council, called up be-

e Bclcar. Comment. de Rcb. Gal. 573. Mem. de Bel-
lay, 97.

fore

B 1v0 K fore his eyes all the terrors arising from the autho.
#--.- rity of those assemblies so formidable to the papal

x5z6. fee. It was necessary, however, to oppose some.

thing else than reproaches and threats to the pow-
erful combination formed against him; and the
emperor, prompted by so many passions, did not
fail to exert himself with unusual vigour, in order
'to fend supplies, not only of men, but of money,
which was still more needed, into Italy.

Feetleope- OrN the other hand, the efforts of the confede-
he cons"- rates bore no proportion to that animosity against

the emperor, with which they seemed to enter
into the holy league. Francis, it was thought,
would have infused spirit and vigour into the
whole body. He had his loft honour to repairs
many injuries to revenge, and the fiation among
the princes of Europe, from which he had fallen,
to recover. From all these powerful incitements,
added to the natural impetuosity of his temper, a
war more fierce and loody than any that he had
hitherto made upon his rival, was expeEted. But
Francis had gone through such a scene of difirefs,
and the impression it had made was frill so frefl
in his memory, that he was become diffident
himself, distrustful of fortune, and desirous of
tranquillity. To procure the release of his sons,
and to avoid the restitution of Burgundy by pay-
ing some reasonable equivalent, were his chief
objecs; and for the fake of thele, he would wil-
lingly have sacrificed Sforza, and the liberties
of Italy, to the emperor. Ile flattered him-

self,

self, that the dread of the confederacy which he B ° ° K
had formed would of itself induce Charles to ---
liften to what was equitable; and was afraid of Is26.
employing any considerable force for the re-
lief of the Milanese, left his allies, whom he
had often found to be more attentive to their
own interest, than punEual in fulfilling their en-
gagements, should abandon him as soon as the
Imperialists were driven out of that country, and
deprive his negotiations with the emperor of
that weight which they derived from his being
at the head of a powerful league. In the mean
time the castle of Milan was pressed more closely
than ever, and Sforza was now reduced to the
last extremity. The Pope and Venetians, trufl-
ing to Francis's concurrence, commanded their
troops to take the field, in order to relieve him;
and an army more than sufficient for that ser-
vice was soon formed. The Milanese, passion-
ately attached .to their unfortunate duke, and no
less exasperated against the Imperialists, who had
oppressed them so cruelly, were ready to aid the
confederates in all their enterprizes. But the
duke d'Urbino, their general, naturally flow and
indecisive, and reftraihed, betides, by his an-
cient en mity to the family of Medici, from tak-
ing any flep that might aggrandize or add repu-
tation to the Pope , loft rome opportunities of
attacking the Imperialifis, and raising the liege,
and refused to improve others. These delays gave

f Guic. 1. xvii. 32z.

Bourbon

B o 0 K Bourbon time to bring up a reinforcement of

1V.
(__ frelh troops, and a supply of money. He im-
J1y5^2. mediately took the command of the army, and

pushed on the siege with such vigour, as quickly
obliged Sforza to surrender, who retiring to Lodi,
which the confederates had furprized, left Bour-
bon in full poffeflion of the reft- of the dutchy,
the investiture of which the emperor had pro-
mifed to grant him g.

irfqu;etude THE Italians began now to perceive the game
of the Ita-
ian powrs. which Francis had played, and to be sensible

that, notwithstanding all their address, and re-
finements in negociation, which they boasted
of as talents peculiarly their own, they had for
once been over-reached in those very arts by a
tramontane prince. He had hitherto thrown
almost the whole burden of the war upon them,
taking advantage of their efforts, in order to en-
force the proposals which he often renewed at the
court of Madrid for obtaining the liberty of his
sons. The Pope and Venetians expoftulated and
complained h; but as they were not able to rouse
Francis from his inactivity, their own zeal and
vigour gradually abated, and Clement, having
already gone farther than his timidity usually per-
mitted him, began to accuse himself of raflinefs,
and to relapse into his natural slate of doubt and
uncertainty.

g Guic. 1. xvii. 376, &c. h Rufcclli Lettere do
Principi, ii. 157, &c. 159g,i6o-GG6.

7 ALL

ALL the emperor's motions depending on B VOO K

himself alone, were more brisk and better con- -_
certed. The narrowness of his revenues, in- Me5f6es o
deed, did not allow him to make any sudden or the impc-
great effort in the field, but he abundantly sup-
plied that defect by his intrigues and negocia-
tions. The family of Colonna, the most power-
ful of all the Rornan barons, had adhered uni-
formly to the Ghibeline or Imperial faction, dur-
ing those fierce contentions between the popes
and emperors, which, for several ages, filled
Italy and Germany with discord and bloodshed.
Though the causes which at first gave birth to
these deftrutive factions existed no longer, and
the rage with which they had been animated was
in a great measure spent, the Colonnas frill re-
tained their attachment to the Imperial interest,
and by placing themselves under the protection
of the emperors, secured the quiet possession of
their own territories and privileges. The car-
dinal Pompeo Colonna, a man of a turbulent
and ambitious temper, at that time the head of
the family, had long been Clement's rival, to
whose influence in the last conclave he imputed
the disappointment of all his fchenes for attain-
ing the papal dignity, of which, from his known
connection with the emperor, he thought him-
self secure. To an aspiring mind, this was an
injury too great to be forgiven; and though he
had dissembled his resentment so far as to vote
for Clement at his elecEion, and to accept of

VOL. II. A a great

B Ov K great offices in his court, he waited with the

- ,- ' utmost impatience for an opportunity of being
1526. revenged., Don Hugo de Moncada, the Impe-

rial ambassador at Rome, who was no firanger
to these sentiments, easily persuaded him, that
now was the time, while all the papal troops
were employed in Lombardy, to attempt some-
thing, which would at once avenge his own
wrongs, and be of essential service to the em-
peror his patron. The pope however, whose
timidity rendered him quick-fighted, was so
attentive to their operations, and began to be
alarmed so early, that he might have drawn to-
gether troops sufficient to have disconcerted all
Colonna's measures. But Moncada amused him
so artfully with negociations, promises, and faife
intelligence, that he lulled asleep all his fufpi-
cions, and prevented his taking any of the
precautions necessary for his safety; and to the
disgrace of a prince possessed of great power,
as well as renowned for political wisdom, Co-
lonna, at the head of three thousand men,

sept. C9. seized one of the gates of his capital, while he,
The Colon-
nas hc..me imagining himself to be in perseet security, was
1omsof altogether unprepared for resisting such a feeble

enemy. The inhabitants of Rome permitted
Colonna's troops, from whom they apprehended
no injury, to advance without opposition; the
pope's guards were dispersed in a moment; and
Clement himself, terrified at the danger, ashamed
of his own credulity, and deserted by almost

every

every person, fled with precipitation into the B °0 K
caftleof St. Angelo, which was immediately in- -
vested. The palace of the Vatican, the church 5'6.
of St. Peter, and the houses of the pope's mini-
flers and servants, were plundered in the most
licentious manner; the reft of the city was left
unmolested. Clement, destitute of every thing
necessary either for subsistence or defence, was
soon obliged to demand a capitulation; and
Moncada, being admitted into the castle, pre- Accommo-
fcribed to him, with all the haughtiness of a dati the
conqueror, conditions which it was not in his pope and
power to rejec. The chief of there was, That emo
Clement should not only grant a full pardon to the
Colonnas, but receive them into favour, and im-
mediately withdraw all the troops in his pay from
the army of the confederates in Lombardy i

/

THE Colonnas, who talked of nothing less
than of deposing Clement, and of placing Pom-
peo, their kinsman, in the vacant chair of St.
Peter, exclaimed loudly against a treaty which
left them at the mercy of a pontiffjuftly incensed
against them. But Moncada, attentive only to
his master's interest, paid little regard to their
complaints, and, by this fortunate measure, broke
entirely the power of the confederates.

WHILE the army of the confederates suffered The mpe-

such a considerable diminution, the Imperialists rcinficcd.

i Jovii Vita Pomp. Colon. Guic. 1. xvii. 407. Rufcelli
Lettere de Principi, i. p. o14.

A a 2 received

B 0 0 K received two great reinforcements; one from

. !Spain, under the command of Lannoy and Alar-
i5i6. con, which amounted to fix thousand men; the

other was raised in the empire by George
Fronfperg, a German nobleman, who having
served in Italy with great reputation, had ac-
quired such influence and popularity, that mul-
titudes of his countrymen, fond on every occa-
sion of engaging in military enterprizes, and im-
patient at that jun&ure to escape from the op-
prefflon which they felt in religious as well as
civil matters, crowded to his standard'; so that,
without any other gratuity than the payment
of a crown to each man, fourteen thousand en-
lifted in his service. To these the archduke
Ferdinand added two thousand horse, levied in
the Austrian dominions. But although the em-
peror had raised troops, he could not remit
the fums necessary for their support. His or-
dinary revenues were exhausted; the credit of
princes, during the infancy of commerce, was
not extensive; and the Cortes of Castile, though
every art had been tried to gain them, and some
innovations had been made in the constitution,
in order to secure their concurrence, peremp-
torily refused to grant Charles any extraordi-
nary fipply k; so that the more his army in-
creased in number, the more were his generals
embarrassed and distressed. Bourbon, in par-
ticular, was involved in such difficulties, that

Sandov. i. 81.
5 h<i

he flood in need of all his address and courage B o00 K
in order to extricate himself. Large fums were ---.
due to the Spanish troops already in the Milan- X5Z6.
efe, when Fronfperg arrived with sixteen thou-
sand hungry Ge-mans, deffitute of every thing.
Both made their demands with equal fierceness; The empe-
the former claiming their arrears, and the lat- ceedefici-
ter, the pay which had been promised them on eC."
their entering Lombardy. Bourbon was alto-
gether incapable of giving fatisfation to either.
In this situation, he was constrained to commit
a6ts of violence extremely shocking to his own
nature, which was generous' and humane. He
seized the principal citizens of Milan, and by
threats, and even by torture, forced from them
a considerable fum; he . rifled the churches of
all their plate and ornaments; the inadequate
supply which there afforded, he distributed among
the soldiers, with so many soothing expressions
of his sympathy and affetion, that, though it
fell far short of the fums due to them, it ap-
peased their present murmurs '

AMONG other expedients for raising money, fius rloron,

Bourbon granted his life and liberty to Morone, at librty.
who having been kept in prison since his in-
trigue with Pescara, had been condemned to die
by the Spanish judges empowered to try him.
For this remission he paid twenty thousand du-
cats and such were his singular talents, and the

J Ripamond. Hist. Mediol. lib. ix. p. 717.

A a 3 wonderful

B 0 OK wonderful ascendant which he always acquired

IV.

_- - over the minds of those to whom he had access,
1526. that in a few days, from being Bourbon's pri-

soner, he became his prime confident, with whom
he consulted in all affairs of impdrtance. To his
insinuations must be imputed the suspicions which
Bourbon began to entertain, that the emperor
had never intended to grant him the investiture
of Milan, but had appointed Leyva, and the
other Spaniih generals, rather to be spies on his
conduct, than to co-operate heartily towards the
execution of his schemes. To him likewise, as
he frill retained, at the age of fourscore, all the
enterprising spirit of youth, may be attributed
the bold and unexpected measure on which Bour-
bon soon after ventured m.

His delibe- SUCH, indeed, were the exigencies of the Im-
rations with
,erDoa to perial troops in the Milanese, that it became in-
hismotions. difpenfably necessary to take tome immediate

ftep for their relief. The arrears of the soldiers
increased daily; the emperor made no remit-
tances to his generals; and the utmost rigour
of military extortion could draw nothing more
from a country entirely drained and ruined. In
this situation there was no choice left, but either
to disband the army, or to march for fubfiitence
into the enemy's country. The territories of the
Venetians lay nearest at hand; but they, with
their usual foresight and prudence, had taken

"' Guic. 1. xvii. 419.

inch

such precautions as secured them from any in- B o K
fult. Nothing, therefore, remained but to in- -v--,_
vade the dominions of the church, or of the '5X6'
Florentines; and Clement had of late acted such
a part, as merited the severest vengeance from the
emperor. No sooner did the papal troops return
to Rome after the insurrection of the Colonnes,
than, without paying any regard to the treaty
with Moncada, he degraded the cardinal Co-
lonna, excommunicated the reft of the family,
seized their places of strength, and wafted their
lands with all the cruelty which the smart of a
recent injury naturally excites. After this, he
turned his arms against Naples, and as his ope-
rations were seconded by the French fleet, he
made some progress towards the conquest of
that kingdom; the viceroy being no less defti-
tute than the other Imperial generals of the money
requisite for a vigorous defence n.

THESE proceedings of the pope justified, in 1517.

appearance, the measures which Bourbon's situ- invade the
ation rendered necessary; and he set about exe- Pio' ttois'
cuting them under such disadvantages, as furnilh
the strongest proof both of the despair to which
he was reduced, and of the greatness of his abi-
lities which were able to surmount so many ob-
flacles. Having committed the government of
Milan to Leyva, whom he was not unwilling
to leave behind, he began his march in the depth January 30.

Jovii Vita Pomp. Colon. Guic. 1. xviii. 424.

A a 4 of

B 0 0 K of winter, at the head of twenty-five thousand

IV.
V---j men, composed of nations differing from each
J5t7' other in language and manners; without money,

without magazines, without artillery, without
carriages; in short, without any of those things
which are necessary to the finalleft party, and
which reem essential to the existence and mo-
tions of a great army. His route lay through
a country cut by rivers and mountains, in which
the roads were almost impracicable; as an ad-
dition to his difficulties, the enemy's army, fu-
perior to his own in number, was at hand to
watch all his motions, and to improve every
advantage. But his troops, impatient of their
present hardships, and allured by the hopes of
immense booty, without confidering how ill
provided they were for a march, followed him
with great cheerfulness. His first scheme was to
have made himself master of Placentia, and to
have gratified his soldiers with the plunder of
that city; but the vigilance of the confederate
generals rendered the design abortive; nor had
he better success in his proje& for the reduction
of Bologna, which was seasonably supplied with
as many troops as secured it from the insults of
an army which had neither artillery nor ammu-
nition. Having failed in both there attempts to
become master of some great city, he was under
a necelcity of advancing. But he had now been
two months in the field i his troops had suffered
every calamity that a long march, together with
the uncommon rigour of the season, could bring

upon

upon men destitute of all necessary accommo- B o o K
dations in an enemy's country; the magnificent _-
promises to which they trusted, had hitherto proved 3517.
altogether vain; they saw no profpec of relief; their
patience, tried to the utmost, failed at last, and
they broke out into open mutiny. Some officers, Mutinyof

his troopta

who rashly attempted to restrain them, fell vic-
tims to their fury; Bourbon himself, not daring
to appear during the first transports of their rage,
was obliged to fly secretly from his quarters°.
But this sudden ebullition of wrath began at last
to subside; when Bourbon, who possessed in a
wonderful degree the art of governing the minds
of soldiers, renewed his promises with more con-
fidence than formerly, and assured them that they
would be soon accomplished. He endeavoured
to render their hardships more tolerable, by par-
taking of them himself; he fared no better than
the meanest centinel; he marched along with
them on foot; he joined them in singing their
camp ballads, in which, with high praises of his
valour, they mingled many strokes of military
raillery on his poverty; and wherever they came,
he allowed them, as a foretaste of what he had
promised, to plunder the adjacent villages at dif-
cretion. Encouraged by all these soothing arts,
they entirely forgot their sufferings and com-
plaints, and followed him with the fame implicit
confidence as formerly P.

° Guic. I. xviii. 434. Jovii Vit. Colon. 163.
P Oeuvres de Brant. vol. iv. p. 246, &c.

BOURBON,

B 0 0 K BOURBON, meanwhile, carefully concealed his

IV.
--- intentions. Rome and Florence,' not knowing
Th5p7. on which the blow would fall, were held in the
rrcrfoution most disquieting state of suspense. Clement,
and impru-
dencc. equally solicitous for the safety of both, flutuated

in more than his usual uncertainty; and while
the rapid approach of danger called for prompt
and decisive measures, he spent the time in de-
liberations which came to no issue, or in taking
resolutions, which, next day, his restless mind,
more sagacious in discerning than in obviating
difficulties, overturned, without being able to
fix on what should be substituted in their place.
At one time he determined to unite himself
more closely than ever with his allies, and to
push on the war with vigour; at another, he
inclined to bring all differences to a final accom-
modation by a treaty with Lannoy, who know-
ing his paflion for negociation, solicited him in-

March 15. ceffantly with proposals for that purpose. His
Ceoncydsh timidity at length prevailed, and led him to con-
the viceroy lude an agreement with Lannoy, of which the

following were the chief articles: That a sus-
pension of arms should take place between the
Pontifical and Imperial troops for eight months;
That Clement Thould advance sixty thousand
crowns towards satisfying the demands of the Im-
perial army; That the Colonnas should be ab-
solved from censure, and their former dignities
and poffefions be restored to them; That the
viceroy should come to Rome, and prevent Bour-

2 bon

bon from approaching nearer to that city, or to B o o K
Florence . On this hasty treaty, which depriv- ,
ed him of all hopes of assistance from his allies, 1s^7-
without affording him any solid foundation of
security, Clement relied so firmly, that, like a
man extricated at once out of all difficulties, he
was at perfec ease, and in the fulness of his con-
fidence disbanded all his troops, except as many
as were sufficient to guard his own person. This
amazing confidence of Clement's, who on every
other occasion was fearful and suspicious to ex-
cess, appeared so unaccountable to Guicciardini,
who, being at that time the pontifical commissary-
general and resident in the confederate army, had
great opportunities, as well as great abilities, for
observing how chimerical all his hopes were, that
he imputes the pope's conduc, at this juncture,
wholly to infatuation, which those who are
doomed to ruin cannot avoidr.

LANNOY, it would seem, intended to have ex- which

Bourbon

ecuted the treaty with great sincerity; and hav- difed.
ing detached Clement from the confederacy,
wished to turn Bourbon's arms against the Vene-
tians, who, of all the powers at war with the
emperor, had exerted the greatest vigour. With
this view he dispatched a courier to Bourbon,
informing him of the suspension of arms, which,
in the name of their common master, he had
concluded with the pope. Bourbon had other

s Guic. 1. xviii. 436. · Guic. 1. xviii. 446.

schemes,

B 0 0 K fchemres, and he had prosecuted them now too

AV.
,-,-. far to think of retreating. To have mentioned

7 a retreat to his soldiers, would have been dan-

gerous; his command was independent on Lan-
noy; he was fond of mortifying a man whom he
had many reasons to hate: for there reasons,
without paying the leafl regard to the message,
he continued to ravage the ecclesiastical territo-
ries, and to advance towards Florence. Upon
this, all Clement's terror and anxiety returning
with new force, he had recourse to Lannoy, and
intreated and conjured him to put a flop to
Bourbon's progress. Lannoy accordingly set out
for his camp, but durst not approach it; Bour-
bon's soldiers having got notice of the truce,
raged and threatened, demanding the accom-
plifhment of the promiies to which they had
tufted; their general himself could hardly re-
firain them; every person in Rome perceived
that nothing remained but to prepare for resisting
a storm which it was now impossible to dispel.
Clement alone, relying on some ambiguous and
deceitful professions which Bourbon made of his
inclination towards peace, funk back into his for-
mer security .
Advancec BOURBON, on his part, was far from being free

mtOWrdS fiom solicitude. All his attempts on any place

of importance had hitherto miicarrield; and Flo-
rence, towards which he had been approaching

'Guic. 1. xviii. 437, &c. Mcm. de Bellay, p. ioo.

for

for some time, was, by the arrival of the duke B o0 o
d'Urbino's army, put in a condition to set his * ,
power at defiance. As it now became necessary s27-
to change his route, and to take instantly some
new resolution, he fixed without hesitation on
one which was no less daring in itself, than it was
impious, according to the opinion of that age. This
was to assault and plunder Rome. Many reasons,
however, prompted him to it. He was fond of
thwarting Lannoy, who had undertaken for the
safety of that city; he imagined that the em-
peror would be highly pleated to fee Clement,
the chief author of the league against him,
humbled; he flattered himself, that by gratify-
ing the rapacity of his soldiers with such im-
mense booty, he would attach them for ever to
his interest; or (which is fill more probable
than any of tlefe) he hoped that by means of the
power and fame, which he would acquire from
the conquest of the first city in Christendom, that
he might lay the foundation of an independent
power; and that, after shaking off all connec-
tion with the emperor, he might take pofiefflon
of Naples, or of some of the Italian states, in his
own name .

WHATEVER his motives were, he executed his The pope'

preparations

resolution with a rapidity equal to the boldness for dfcene
with which he had formed it. His soldiers, now

Brant. iv. 271. vi. 189. Belcarii Comment. 594.

that

B 0 0 K that they had their prey full in view, complained

iv.
A_ .- neither of fatigue, nor famine, nor want of pay,
Zja7. No sooner did they begin to move from Tuscany

towards Rome, than the pope, sensible at last
how fallacious the hopes had been on which
he reposed, flarted from his security. But no
time now remained, even for a bold and decisive
pontiff, to have taken proper measures, or to
have formed any effeatual plan of defence. Un-
der Clement's feeble conduct, all was confterna-
tion, disorder, and irresolution. He colle&ed,
however, such of his disbanded soldiers as till re-
mained in the city; he armed the artificers of
Rome, and the footmen and train-bearers of the
cardinals'; he repaired the breaches in the walls;
he began to ere& new works; he excommuni-
cated Bourbon and all his troops, branding the
Germans with the name of Lutherans,- and the
Spaniards with that of Moors . Truiting to
these ineffectual military preparations, or to his
spiritual arms, which were still more despised by
rapacious soldiers, he seems to have laid aside
his natural timidity, and, contrary to the advice
of all his counsellors, determined to wait the
approach of an enemy whom he might easily have
avoided by a timely retreat.

Asault of BOURBON, who saw the neceflity of dispatch,
Ro"e. now that his intentions were known, advanced

with such speed, that he gained several marches

" Seckend. lib. ii. 68.

on

on the duke d'Urbino's army, and encamped in B O o K
the plains of Rome on the evening of the fifth --I-
of May. From thence he shewed his soldiers the '57-
palaces and churches of that city, into which, as
the capital of the Chrifian commonwealth, the
riches of all Europe had flowed during many
centuries, without having been once violated by *
any hostile hand; and commanding them to re-
frelh themselves that night, as a preparation for
the assault next day, promised them, in reward of
their toils and valour, the possession of all the
treasures accumulated there.

EARLY in the morning, Bourbon, who had
determined to diftinguiih that day either by his
death or the success of his enterprize, appeared
at the head of his troops, clad in complete
armour, above which he wore a vest of white
tiile, that he might be more conspicuous both
to his friends and to his enemies; and as all de-
pended on one bold impreflion, he led them in-
ifantly to scale the walls. Three difint bo-
dies, one of Germans, another of Spaniards,
and the last of Italians, the three different na-
tions of whom the army was compored, were ap-
pointed to this service; a separate attack was as-
signed to each; and the whole army advanced to
support them as occasion should require. A
thick mist concealed their approach until they
reached almost the brink of the ditch which
surrounded the suburbs: having planted their

ladders

B 0 0 K ladders in a moment, each brigade rushed on

_.- to the assault with an impetuosity heightened by
5s7. national emulation. They were received at first

with fortitude equal to their own; the Swiss in
the pope's guards, and the veteran soldiers who
had been assembled, fought with a courage be-
... coming men to whom the defence of the noblest

city in the world was entruited. Bourbon's
troops, notwithstanding all their valour, gained
no ground, and even began to give way; when
their leader, perceiving that on this critical mo-
ment the fate of the day depended, leaped from
his horse, prelfed to the front, snatched a scaling
ladder from a soldier, planted it againit the wall,
and began to mount it, encouraging his men

Bourbon with his voice and hand to follow him. But at
I"'a that very instant, a musket bullet from the ram-

parts pierced his groin with a wound, which he
immediately felt to be mortal; but he retained
so much presence of mind as to desire those who
were near him to cover his body with a cloak,
that his death might not dishearten his troops;
and soon after he expired with a courage worthy
of a better cause, and which would have entitled
him to the highest praise, if he had thus fallen
in defence of his country, not at the head of its
enemies x.

x Mem. de Bellay, lo0. Guic. 1. xviii. p. 44S, &c. Oeur.
deBrant. iv. 357, &c.

Tls

THIS fatal event could not be concealed from B o o K

Iv.

the army; the soldiers soon miffed their general, I ,
whom they were accustomed to fee in every time ITht7
of danger; but, instead of being disheartened by taken.
their loss, it animated them with new valour;
the name of Bourbon resounded along the line,
accompanied with the cry of blood and revenge.
The veterans who defended the walls were soon
overpowered by numbers i the untrained body of
city recruits fled at the fight of danger, and the
enemy, with irresistible violence, rulhed into the
town.

DURING the combat, Clement was employed

at the high altar of St. Peter's church in offering
up to Heaven unavailing prayers for vitory. No
sooner was he informed that his troops began to
give way, than he fled with precipitation; and
with an infatuation still more amazing than any
thing already mentioned, instead of making his
escape by the opposite gate, where there was no
enemy to oppose it, he shut himself up, together
with thirteen cardinals, the foreign ambassadors,
and many persons of diftin&ion, in the castle of
St. Angelo, which, from his late misfortune, he
might have known to be an insecure retreat.
In his way from the Vatican to that fortress, he
saw his troops flying before an enemy, who pur-
sued without giving quarter; he heard the cries
and lamentations of the Roman citizens, and be-
held the beginning of those calamities which his

VOL. II. B b own

B:ovo'K own credulity 4nd ill-conduEt had brbught upon
i-~-- - his fubjet&sY.

1527.
Plundered. IT is impoflible to describe, or even to imagine

the misery and horror of that scene' which fol-
lowed.: Whatever a city taken by storm can
dread from military rage,- unreitrained by difci-
pline; whatever excefres the- ferocity of' the Ger-
mans, the avarice of the Spaniards, or the licen-
tioufneSs of the Italians could commit, these
the wretched inhabitants were obliged to susser.
Churches, palaces, and the houses of private.per-
sons, were plundered without diftintion. No age,
or c-hara&er·, .or sex, was' exempt' from injury.
Cardina;ls' nobles, priests, matrons, virgins, were
all the-prey of -soldiers, and at the mercy of men
deaf to- the voice of humanity. Nor did these
Outrages- cease, as is usual in towns which are car-
ried by assault, when the firfi fury of the storm was
over; the Imperialists kept poifeflion of Rome fe-
veral months;; and, during all that time, the in-
folence and! brutality of the soldiers hardly abated.
Their booty in ready money alone amounted to
a ' million of' dcats ; what they raised, by ransoms
and exaifions far exceeded that fun. Rome,
though; taken several different times by the north-
ern nations, who over-ran the Empire in the fifth
andt sixth centuries, was never treated with To
much cruelty by the- barbarous and heathen Hiunsl

j Jov. Vit. Colon. z65.

Vandals,

Vandals, or Goths, as how by-the-bigoted fubjets B 0 0 K
of a Catholic Monarch.

3527.

AFTER Bourbon's deaths. *the Ctommiand 'of the The Pope

Imperial army devolved obn Philibert de Chalons the cgfaeof
prince of Orange, who with diffictilty prevailed st. Ange,.
on as many of his soldiers to desist from the pil-
lage as were necessary to :inveift the ecaftle of St.
Angelo. Clement Was immediately sensible of his
error in having retired into 'that itl-provided and
untenable fort. But as the Impeiiaifts, Tcorning
discipline, and intent only on plunder, pushed the
siege with little vigour, he did nrot despair of
holding out until the duke d'Urbino co'uld come
to his relief. That general -advanced at the head
of an army composed of .Venetianss Florentines,
and Swiss, in the pay of France, of sufficient
strength to have delivered Clement from the pre-
sent danger. But d'Urbino, preferring the indul-
gence of his hatred against the family of Medici
to the glory of delivering the capital of Christen-
dom, and the head of the church, pronounced
the enterprize to be too hazardous; and, from an
exquisite refinement in revenge, having marched
forward so far, that his army being seen from the
ramparts of St. Angelo, flattered the Pope with
the profpea of certain relief, he immediately
wheeled about, and retired . Clement deprived

Z Jov. Vit. Colon. 166. Guic. 1. xviii. 440, &c. Com-

ment. de Capta Urbe Ronia, ap. Scardium, ii. 230. Ulloa
Vita dell Carlo V. p. lo, &c. Giannone Hilt. of Nap. B.
xxxi. c. 3. p. 507. " Guic. 1. xviii. 450.

Bb b of

B °o K of every resource, and reduced to such extremity

cz
- of famine as to feed on asses flesh b, was obliged
Ju527. to capitulate on such conditions as the conquerors
Shmendfers were pleased to prescribe. He agreed to pay four
prisoner. hundred thousand ducats to the army; to surrender

to the Emperor all the places of strength belong-
ing to the church; and, besides giving hostages,
to remain a prisoner himself until the chief ar-
ticles were performed. He was committed to the
care of Alarcon, who, by his revere vigilance in
guarding Francis, had given full proof of his be-
ing qualified for that office; and thus, by a fin-
gular accident, the fame man had the custody of
the two most illustrious personages who had been
made prisoners in Europe during several ages.

The Empe- THE account of this extraordinary and unex-
ror's bcha-
siouratthis peaed event was no less surprising than agreeable

jnurc to the Emperor. But in order to conceal his joy

from his fubjets, who were filled with horror at
the success and crimes of their countrymen, and
to lessen the indignation of the reft of Europe, he
declared that Rome had been assaulted without
any order from him. He wrote to all the princes
with whom he was in alliance, disclaiming his
having had any knowledge of Bourbon's inten-
tion'. He put himself and court into mourning;
commanded the rejoicings which had been ordered
for the birth of his son Philip to be flopped; and
employing an artifice no less hypocritical than

b Jov. Vit. Colon. 167.
c Rufcelli Lettere di Principi, ii. 234.

gross,

gross, he appointed prayers and procefflons B o°o K
throughout all Spain for the recovery of the
Pope's liberty, which, by an order to his gene- ,s7-
rals, he could have immediately granted him d.

THE good fortune of the house of Austria was SolyTmaan-

` ades$ an-

no less conspicuous in another part of Europe. gary.
Solyman having invaded Hungary with an army
of three hundred thousand men, Lewis II. King
of that country, and of Bohemia, a weak and un-
experienced prince, advanced rashly to meet him
with a body of men which did not amount to
thirty thousand. With an imprudence fill more
unpardonable, he gave the command of these
troops to Paul Tomorri, a Franciscan monk, arch-
bishop of Golocza. This awkward general, in the
dress of his order, girt with its cord, marched at
the head of the tropps; and, hurried on by his
own presumption, as well as by the impetuosity
of nobles whq despised danger, but were impa-
tient of long service, he fought the fatal battle of Aug. 29.
Mohacz, in which the King, the flower of the
Hungarian nobility, and upwards of twenty thou-
sand men, fell the victims of his folly and ill-
condut. Solyman, after his victory, seized and Defeat of
kept possession of several towns of the greatest in a..g.
strength in the southern provinces of Hungary, d'ah .o
and, over-running the reft of the country, carried
near two hundred thousand persons into captivity.
As Lewis was the last male of the royal family of

' Sleid. Io9. Sandov. i. 8zz. Maurac. Hill. Vcncta, litb.
iii. 220.

7 Jagellon,

B c o K Jagellon, the Archduke Ferdinand claimed botss
_- _. his crowns. This claim was founded on a double

s.57. title; the one derived from the ancient pperenfions

of the house of Austria to 'both kingddms; the
other from the right of his wife, the only siser of
the deceased monarch. The feudal institutions,
however, sublisted both in Hungary and Bohemia
in such vigour, and the .nobles possessed such ex-
tensive power, that the crowns were frill elecive,
and Ferdinand's rights, if they had not been
powerfully supported, would have met with little
regard. But his own personal merit; the refped
due to the brother of the greatest Monarch in

Ferdinand Christendom; the necessity of chufing a prince
King. able to afford his fubjeats some additional protec-

tion against the Turkish arms, which, as they had
jrecently felt their power, they greatly dreaded;
together with the intrigues of his fitter, who had
been married to 'the late King, overc'ame the pre-
judices which the :Hungarians had conceived
against the Archduke as a foreigner; fnd though
a considerable party voted for the Vaywode of
Tranfilvania, at length secured FEitdinand the
throne of that kingdom. The states of Bohemia
imitated the example of their neighbour kingdom;
but in order to ascertain and secure their own pri-
vileges, they obliged Ferdinand, before his coro-
nation, to fub'cribe a deed which they term a Re-
verse, declaring that he held that crown not by
any previous right, but by their gratuitous and
voluntary ele&ion. By such a vast accession of
territories, the horeditary pofeffion of which they

secured.

secured in process of time to their family, the B 0 K
princes of the house of Austria attained that pre- _.
eminence in power which hath' rendered them so 157.-
formidable, to the reft of Germanyc.

THE dissensions between the Pope and Empe- Pr,,grefsof

tile Reform-

ror proved. extremely favourable to the progress ation.
of Lutheranifin. Charles, exasperated by Cle-
ment's conduct, and fully employed in opposing
the league which he had formed against him, had:
little inclination, and less leisure, to take any mea-
fures for suppressing the new opinions in Germany.
In a diet of the Empire held at Spires, the ifate of June 25s
religion came to be confidered, and all that the ,526
Emperor required of the princes was, that they
would wait patiently, and without encouraging
innovations, for the meeting of a general council
which he had demanded of the Pope. They, in re-
turn, acknowledged the convocation of a councilt
to be the proper and regular ftep towards reform-
ing abuses in the church , but contended, that a
national council held in Germany would be more,
effecual for that purpose than what he had pro-
posed. To his advice, concerning the difcou-
ragement of innovations, they: paid so little re-
gard, that even during the meeting of the diet at
Spires, the divines who attended the Eleftor of
Saxony and Landgrave of Heffe-Caffel thither,

c Steph. Btoderick Procancelarii Hungar. Clades in Campo

Mohacz, ap. Scardium, ii. z18. i. Barre Hift.d'Allemagne,
tom. viii. part i. p. 198.

5 preached

B O oK preached publicly, and administered the Sacraments

v--1 according to the rites of the Reformed Churchf.
3527. The Emperor's own example emboldened the

Germans to treat the Papal authority with little
reverence. During the heat of his resentment
against Clement, he had published a long reply
to an angry brief, which the Pope had intended as
an apology for his own condut. In this mani-
fefto, the Emperor, after having enumerated
many inflances of that Pontiff's ingratitude, de-
ceir, and ambition, all which he painted in the
itrongeft and most aggravated colqurs, appealed
from him to a general council. At the fame time
he wrote to the college of Cardinals, complaining
of Clement's partiality and injustice; and requir-
ing them, if he refused or delayed to call a coun-
cil, to ihew their concern for the peace of the
Christian Church, so shamefully negleced by its
chief pastor, by summoning that assembly in their
own name g. This manifesto, little inferior in
virulence to the invetives of Luther himself, was
dispersed over Germany with great industry, and
being eagerly read by persons of every rank, did
much more than counterbalance the effe& of all
Charles's declarations against the new opinions.

f Sleid. o03. s Goldall. Polit. Imper. p. 984.

END OF THE SECOND VOLUME.

N;7So T. Or.

jicyA~
