/

THE
HISTORY

OP THE
RE I G .N

: OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES V.

VOL. I.

'1~~~~~~~~~L

- 7, ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ICC~-ij

I~~~~~~~~~~~~~~l-~ 4~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~·c;
Ž1*..yIy:,.../,.

THE
HISTO R Y

OF THE
R E IG N

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES V.

WITH
AVIEWof the PROGRESS of SOCIETY in

EUROPE, from the Subverfo.n of the ROMAN EM PIRE,

to the Beginning of the SIXTEENTH CENTURY.

IN FOUR VOLUMES.

By WILLIAM ROBERTSON, D.D.
PRII;CIPAL of the University of EDINBURcGH, and HIsTo-

RIOGRAPHER to his MAJESTY for SCO'),AND.

A NEW EDITION.

VOL. I.

LONDON:
Printed fo'r W. STRAHAN; T. CADELL, in the

Strand; and J. B A L F U R, at Edinburgh.

MDCCLXXXII.

# TO THE KING.

TO THE

K I N G.

S I R,
I PRESUME to lay before Your

Majesty the Hiflory of a Period,

which, if the abilities of the Writer
were equal to the dignity of the Sub-
jed, would not be unworthy the at-
tention of a Monarch, who is no less
a Judge than a Patron of Literary
Merit.

HISTORY claims it as her preroga-

tive to offer initru&tion to KINGS, as
well as to their people. What re-
flieions the Reign of the Emperor

A 3 CHARLES

CHARLES V. may suggest to Your Ma.
jelly, it becomes not me to conjecture.
But your Subjets cannot observe the
various calamities, which that Mo-
narch's ambition to' be diftinguilhed
as a Conqueror, brought upon his
dominions, without recollecting the
felicity of their own times, and look-
ing up with gratitude to their Sove-
reign, who, during the fervour of
youth, and amidst the career of vic-
tory, pofflefed such felf-command,
and maturity of judgment, as to set
bounds to his own- triumphs, and pre-
ser the blessings of peace to the'fplen-
dour of military glory.

POSTERITY will not only celebrate

the Wisdom of Your Majesty's choice,
bur will enumerate the many Virtues,
which render Your Reign confpituous
for a sacred regard to all the duties

incumbent

incumbent on the Sovereign of a Free
People.

IT is our happiness to feel the in-

fluence of these Virtues; and to live
under the dominion of a Prince, who
delights more in promoting the Pubs
lick Welfare, than in receiving the
just Praise of his Royal Beneficence.
I am,

SIR,
YOUR MAJESTY's

Most faithful Subje&,

And most dutiful Servants
WILLIAM ROBERTSON.

A4

# THE PREFACE.

THE

P R E F A C E.
N O period in the history of one's own

country can be confidered as alto-

gether unintereffing. Such tranfaftions as
tend to illustrate the progress of its confti-
tution, laws, or manners, merit the utmost
attention. Even remote and minute events
are objects of a curiosity, which, being na-
tural to the human mind, the gratification of
it is attended with pleasure.

BUT, with refpea to the history of foreign

States, we must set other bounds to our
desire of information. The univeril pro-
grefs of science, during the two last centuries,
the art of printing, and other obvious causes,
have filled Europe with such a multiplicity
of histories, and with such vast colletions
of historical materials, that the term of hu-
man life is too short for the study or even
the perusal of them. It is necessary, then,
not only for those who are called to condud

the

the affairs of nations, but for such as inquire
and reason concerning them, to remain satis-
fled with a general knowledge of distant
events, and to confine their fludy of history
in detail chiefly to that period, in which the
fieveral States of Europe having become inti-
mately connecledi the operations of one
power are so felt by all, as to influence their
councils, and to regulate their measures.

SOME boundary, then, ought to be fixed

in order to separate these periods. An azra
mhould be pointed out, prior to which, each
country, little conneted with those around
it; may trace its own history apart; after
which, the tranfadions of every considerable
nation in Europe become interefRing and
inflruaive to all. With this intention I
undeftook to write the history of the Em-
peror CHARLES V. It was during his ad-
ministration that the powers of Europe were
formed into one great political system, in
which each took a fRation, wherein it has
since remained with less variation, than eould
have been expeced after the shocks occa-
sioned by so many internal revolutions, and

so

so many foreign wars. The great events
which happened then have not hitherto spent
their force. The political principles and
maxims, then established, fill continue to
operate. The ideas concerning the balance of
power, then introduced or rendered general,
fill influence the councils of nations.

TaE age of CHARLES V. may therefore

be confidered as the period it *hich the
political state of Europe began to aflume a
new form. I have endeavoured to render
my account of it, an introdution to the
history of Europe subsequent to his reign;
While his numerous Biographers describe his
personal qualities and acions; while the
historians of different countries relate occur-
rences the consequences of which were local
or transient, it hath been my purpose to
record only those great tranfations in his
reign, the' effets of which were universal, or
continue to be permanent.

As my readers could derive little infiruc-

tlon from such a history of the reign of
CHARLES V. without some information con-

cerning

cerning the slate of Europe previous to the
sixteenth century, my desire of supplying
this has produced a preliminary volume, in
which I have attempted to point out and
explain the great causes and events, to whose
operation all the improvements in the poli-
tical fiate of Europe, from the subversion of
the Roman Empire to the beginning of the
sixteenth century, muff be ascribed. I have
exhibited a view of the progress of society
in Europe, not only with refpea to interior
governments, laws, and manners, but with re-
fpea to the command of the national force
requisite in foreign operations; and I have
described the political constitution of the prin-
cipal flates in Europe at the time when
Charles V. began his reign.

IN this part of my work I have been led

into several critical disquisitions, which be-
long more properly to the province of the
lawyer or antiquary, than to that of the
hifiorian. These I have placed at the end of
the first volume, under the title of Proofs
and Illuitrations. Many of my readers will,
probably, give little attention to such re-

searches.

searches. To some they may, perhaps, ap-
pear the most curious and interesting part of
the work. I have carefully pointed out the
sources from which I have derived informa-
tion, and have cited the writers on whose
authority I rely with a minute exacnefs,
which might appear to border upon oftenta-
tion, if it were possible to be vain of having
read books, many of which nothing but the
duty of examining with accuracy whatever
I laid before the Publick, would have induced
me to open. As my inquiries conduded me
often into paths which were obscure or little
frequented, such constant recourse to the
authors who have been my guides, was not
only necessary for authenticating the fads
which are the foundations of my reasonings,
but may be useful in pointing out the way
to such as shall hereafter hold the fame
eourfe, and in enabling them to carry on
their researches with greater facility and
success.

EVERY intelligent reader will observe one

omiflion in my work, the reason of which
it is necessary to explain. I have given no
account of the conquests of Mexico and

3 Peru,

Peru, or of the establishment of the Spaniih
colonies in the continent and islands of
America. The history of these events I ori-
ginally intended to have related at confider-
able length. But upon a nearer and more
attentive consideration of this part of my
plan, I found that the discovery of the new
world; the Itate of society among its ancient
inhabitants; their character, manners, and
arts; the genius of the European settlements
in its various provinces, together with the
influence of there upon the fyflems of policy
or commerce in Europe, were subje&s so
splendid and important, that a superficial
view of them could afford lttle fitsfation;
to treat of them as extensively as they me-
rited, must produce an episode, difpropor-
tionate to the principal work. I have there-
fore reserved there for a separate history;
which, if the performance now offered to the
Publick hall receive its approbation, I propose
to undertake.

THOUGH, by omitting such considerable

but detached articles in the reign of Charles V.
I have circumscribed my narration within
more narrow limits, I am yet persuaded,

7 from

from this view of the intention and nature
of the work which I thought it necessary to
lay. before my readers, that the plan must
still appear to them too extensive, and the
undertaking too arduous.. I have often felt
them to be so. But my convition of the
utility of such a history prompted me to
persevere. With what success I have exe-
cuted it, the Publick must now judge. I wait,
in solicitude, for its- decision; to which I
,hall submit with a refpeatful silence.

# DIRECTIONS to the BINDER.

DIRECTIONS to the BINDER,
Place the Head of the Author before the Title

Vol. I.

The Head of Charles V. before the Title Vol. II,
- ---- Francis before the Title Vol. III.
Charles V. expiring, before the Title Vol. IV.

A VI E'W

# A VIEW OF THE PROGRESS OF SOCIETY IN EUROPE, FROM THE SUBVERSION OF THE  ROMAN EMPIRE, TO THE BEGINNING OF THE SIXTEENTH CENTURY.

## SECTION I. View of the Progress of Society in Europe, with respect to interior Government, Laws, and Manners.

A
V I E W

OF THE
PROGRESS OF SOCIETY

.I N
EURO P E,

PROM THE
SUBVERSION OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE,

T-O THE
BEGINNING OF THE SIXTEENTH CENTURY.

SECTION I.

View of the Progress of Society in Europe, with re-
fpeS to interior Government, Laws, and Mlanners.

WO great revolutions have happened in SECT. I,
the political state, and in the manners of Theeffe
the European nations. The first was oc- of the Ro.

man power

carloned by the progress of the Roman power; onthrtate
the second by the subversion of the Roman Em- of E.fote
pire. When the spirit of conquest led the armies
of Rome beyond the Alps, they found all the
countries, which they invaded, inhabited by people
whom they denominated barbarians, but who were

Vob. I. B never-

SECT. I. nevertheless brave and independent. These de.

' - fended their ancient polfelfions with obstinate va-

lour. It was by the superiority of their discipline,
rather than of their courage, that the Romans
gained any advantage over them. A single battle
did not, as among the effeminate inhabitants of
Asia, decide the fate of a ifate. The vanquished
people refuumed their arms with fresh spirit, and
their undisciplined valour, animated by the love
of liberty, supplied the want of condut as well

The Jenla. as of union. During those long and fierce ftrug-
tion which
it occa.on- gles for dominion or independence, the countries

of Europe were successively laid wafe, a great part
of their inhabitants perilhed in the field, many
were carried into slavery, and a feeble remnant,
incapable of further refitance, Submitted to the
Roman power.

the im. THE Romans having thus desolated Europe, set
provemerits
which itin- themselves to civilize it. The form of govern-

tued ment which they eftablifled in the conquered pro-

vinces, though revere, was regular, and preserved
publick tranquillity. As a consolation for the loss
of liberty, they communicated their arts, sciences,
languagc, and manners, to their new subje&s.
Europe began to breathe, and to recover ftrengtl.
after the calamities which it had undergone; agri-
culture was encouraged; population increased; the
ruined cities were rebuilt; new towns were found-
ed; an appearance of prorperity succeeded, and
repaired, in tome degree, the havock of war.

THIS

THIS state, however, was far from being happy, SECT. I.

or favourable to the improvement of the human The bad
mind. The vanquished nations were disarmed by ors it
their conquerors, and overawed by soldiers kept in dontiio*
pay to restrain them. They were given up as a
prey to rapacious governors, who plundered them
with impunity; and were drained of their wealth
by exorbitant taxes, imposed with so little atten-
tion to the situation of the provinces, that the
impositions were often increased in proportion to
their inability to support them. They were de-
prived of their most enterprizing citizens, who re-
forted to a distant capital in quell of preferment,
or of riches; and were accustomed in all their
aaions to look up to a superior, and tamely to
receive his commands. Under so many depref-
sing circumstances, it was impossible that they
could retain vigour or generosity of mind. The
martial and independent spirit, which had diftin-
guifhed their ancestors, became extinct among all
the people fubje&ed to the Roman yoke; they loft
not only the habit but even the capacity of deci-
ding for themselves, or of aaing from the impulse
of their own minds; and the dominion of the
Romans, like that of all great Empires, degraded
and debased the human species [A].

A SOCIETY in this fate could not fubfit long. The ;rirm

There were defects in the Roman government, bb.roe
even in its most perfect form, which threatened its ""0°"'"
diFlolution. Time ripened thete original feeds of

[A] NOTE i.

B 2 corruption,

SICT. I. corruption, and gave birth to many new disorders.

A constitution, unsound, and worn out, must have
fallen in pieces of itself without any external shock.
The violent irruption of the Goths, Vandals, Huns,
and other barbarians hastened this event, and pre-
cipitated the downfal of the Empire. New nations
seemed to arise, and to ruhl from unknown regions,
in order to take vengeance on the Romans for the
calamities which they had inflicted on mankind.
These fierce tribes either inhabitedthe variouspro-
vinces in Germany which had never been subdued
by the Romans, or were scattered over the vast
countries in the north of Europe, and north-west
of Asia, which are now occupied by the Danes,
the Swedes, the Poles, the fubjets of the Ruffian
Empire, and the Tartars.. Their condition, and
transactions, previous to their invasion of the Em-
pire, are but little known. All our information
with refpeat to these is derived from the Romans;
and as they did not penetrate far into countries
which were at that time uncultivated and unin-
viting, the accounts of their original slate given
by them are extremely imperfect. The rude inha-
bitants thenfelves, destitute of science,. and of re-
cords, without leisure, or curiosity to inquire into
remote events, retained, perhaps, some indiftind:
memory of recent occurrences, but beyond these,
all was buried in oblivion, or involved in dark-
ness, and in fable [B].

'ae ns the THE. prodigious fwarnls which poured in upon
councicre
fron which the Empire from the beginning of the fourth cen.
thry ilaucrll.

[13) NOTE IT.

tury

tury to the final extinction of the Roman power, SECT. I.
have given rife to an opinion that the countries
whence they issued were crowded with inhabitants;
and various theories have been formed to account
for such an extraordinary degree of population as
hath procured these countries the appellation of
The Storehouse of Nations. But if we confider,
that the countries possessed by the people who in-
vaded the Empire were of vast extent; that a great
part of there was covered with woods and marfles;
that some of the molf considerable of the barba-
rous nations subsisted entirely by hunting or pas-
turage, in both which ifates of society large traEts
of land are required for maintaining a few inha-
bitants; and that all of them were firangers to the
arts and industry, without which population can-
not increase to any great degree, it is evident, that
these countries could not be so populous in ancient
times as they are at present, when they itill con-
tinue to be less peopled than any other part of
Europe or of Asia,

BUT if there circurntances prevented the bar- The people

fit for dar-

barous nations from becoming populous, they con- ilg entcr.
tributed to inspire, or to strengthen, the martial PN'"'
fpiric by which they were diltinguifhed. Inured
by the rigour of their climate, or the poverty of
their foil, to hardihips which rendered their bodies
firm, and their minds vigorous; accustomed to a
course of life which was a continual preparation
for action; and disdaining every occupation but
that of war; they undertook, and prosecuted their

B 3 military

SECT. I. military enterprizes with an ardour and impetuo-

fity, of which men softened by the refinements
of more polilhed times can scarcely form any
idea [C].

The mo- TaiEiR first inroads into the Empire proceeded
tire' -ftheir
fir+ icutr- rather from the love of plunder, than from the

diffire of new fetclements. Roused to arms by
rome enterprizing or popular leader, they sallied
out of their forests, broke in upon the frontier
provinces with irreliftible violence; put all who
opposed them to the sword; carried off the mont
valuable effe&s of the inhabitants; dragged along
multitudes of captives in chains; wafted all before
them with fire or sword; and returned in triumph
to their wilds and faitneires. Their success, toge-
ther with the accounts which they gave of the un-
known conveniencies and luxuries that abounded
in countries better cultivated, or blessed with a
milder climate than their own, excited new adven-
turers, and exposcd the fi'ontirr to new devatlations.

Their r*. W HEN nothing was left to plunder in the adja-
Ains for set-
ingfin 'the cent provinces, ravaged by freq'lentexcurfions, they
'"'"tIey marched farther from home, and finding it diffi-
CuLuctred. cult, or dangerous to return, they began to fettle

in the countries which they had subdued. The
sudden and Ihort excursions in que(t of booty,
which had alarmed and disquieted the Empire,
ceal'ed; a more dreadful calamity impended.
Great bodies of armed men, with their wives and

[C] NOTE III.

childreno

children, and slaves and flocks, iflued forth, like SECT. I.
regular colonies, in quest of new settlements. Peo- ,¢-'
pie who had no cities, and seldom any fixed habi-
tation, were bo little attached to their native foil,
that they migrated without reluctance from one
place to another. New adventurers followed
them. The lands which they deferred were oc-
cupied by more remote tribes of barbarians.
These, in their turn, pufled forward into more The e.ent
fertile countries, and, like a torrent continually fthet.
increasing, rolled on, and swept every thing be-
fore them. In less than two centuries from their
first irruption, barbarians of various names and
lineage, plundered and took poffeflion of Thrace,
Pannonia, Gaul, Spain, Africa, and at last of Italy,
and Rome itself. The vast fabrick of the Roman
power, which it had been the work of ages to per-
sect, was in that (hort period overturned from the
foundation.

MANY concurring causes prepared the way for Tle cir.

this great revolution, and ensured success to the Cm'lfnel'!
nations which invaded the Empire. The Roman Calonedi th

downfall of

commonwealth had conquered the world by the the Roma'q
wisdom of its civil maxims, and the rigour of its
military discipline. But, under the Emperors, the
former were forgotten or cerpifed, and the latter
was gradually relaxed. The armies of the Empire
in the fourth and fifth centuries bore scarcely any
resemblance to thole invincible legions which had
been victorious wherever they marched. Instead
ps freemen, who voluntarily took arms from the

B4 loYv

SECT. I. love of glory, or of their country, provincials and

barbarianswere bribed or forcedinto service. They
were too feeble, or too proud to submit to the fa-
tigue of military duty. They even complained of
the weight of their defensive armour as intole-
rable, and laid it aside. Infantry, from which the
armies of ancient Rome derived their vigour and
stability, fell into contempt; the effeminate and
undisciplined soldiers of later times could hardly
be brought to venture into the field but on horse-
back. These wretched troops, however, were the
only guardians of the Empire. The jealousy of
despotism had deprived the people of the use of
arms; and ftibjeas, oppressed and rendered inca-
pable of defending themselves, had neither spirit
nor inclination to resist their invaders, from whom
they had little to fear, because their condition could
hardly be rendered more unhappy. As the mar-
tial spirit became extin&t, the revenues of the Em-
pire gradually diminished. The taste for the lux-
uries of the East increased to such a pitch in the
Imperial court, that great fums were carried into
India, from which money never returns. By the
vast subsidies paid to the barbarous nations, a
still greater quantity of species was withdrawn
from circulation. The frontier provinces, wafted
by frequent incursions, became unable to pay the
customary tribute; and the wealth of the world,
which had long centered in the capital of the Em-
pire, ceased to flow thither in the fame abundance,
or was diverted into other channels. The limits
of the empire continued to be as extensive as ever,

while

while the spirit requisite for its defence declined, SECT. r,
and its resources were exhausted. A vail body, --
languid, and almost unanimated, became incapa-
ble of any effort to save itself, and was easily over-
powered. The Emperors, who had the absolute
direction of this disordered system, funk in the soft-
ness of eastern luxury, shut up within the walls of
a palace, ignorant of war, unacquainted with as-
fairs, and governed entirely by women and eu-
nuchs, or by ministers equally effeminate, trem-
bled at the approach of danger, and, under cir-
cumftances which called for the utmotr vigour in
counsel as well as in ation, discovered all the im-
potent irresolution of fear, and of folly.

IN every refpet, the condition of the barbarous The ce,.

nations was the reverse of that of the Romans. chhRan¢o'
Among them, the martial spirit was in full vigour; ribu"cd to

tie fucteef

their leaders were hardy and enterprizing; the arts f thc b'r.
which had enervated the Romans were unknown tios,.
among them; and such was the nature of their mi-
litary institutions, that they brought forces into the
field without any trouble, and supported them at
little expence. The mercenary and effeminate
troops itationed on the frontier, aftonilhed at their
fierceness, either fled at their approach, or were
routed in the first onset. The feeble expedient
to which the Emperors had recourse, of taking
large bodies of the barbarians into pay, and of
employing them to repel new invaders, instead of
retarding, hastened the deftrucion of the Empire.
They soon turned their arms against their masters,

and

SECT. I. and with greater advantage than ever; for, by ferv-
-J' ing in the Roman armies, they had acquired all the

discipline, or skill in war, which the Romans till
retained; and, upon adding there to their native
ferocity, they became altogether irresistible.

Thefrpirt BUT though from these, and many other causes,
ith cri'd the progress and conquests of the nations which
on "vr over-ran the Empire became so extremely rapid,

they were accompanied with horrible devastations,
and an incredible deltrution of the human ipecies.
Civilized nations which take arms upon cool re-
fletion, from motives of policy or prudence, with
a view to guard against some distant danger, or to
prevent some remote contingency, carry on their
hostilities with so little rancour or animosity, that
war among them is disarmed of half its terrors.
Barbarians are firangers tofuch refinements. They
rush into war with impetuosity, and prosecute it
with violence. Their sole obje& is to make their
enemies feel the weight of their vengeance; nor
does their rage subside until it be fatiared with
infliting on them every polible calamity. It is
with such a spirit that the ravage tribes in America
carry on their petty wars. It was with the fame
spirit that the more powerful and no leis fierce
barbarians in the north of Europe, and of Asia,
fell upon the Roman Empire.

'irle dcta. WWHEREVER they marched, their route was
ti,.II Which
,tlryb.lshit marked with blood. They ravaged or destroyed
.rp£ EU. all around them. They made no diltintion be.

9 ~~~twvee

tween what was sacred and what was profane. S#CT.I.
They respected no age, or sex, or rank. What
escaped the fury of the first inundation, perilhed
in those which followed it. The most fertile and
populous provinces were converted into deserts,
in which were scattered the ruins of villages and
cities, that afforded shelter to a few miserable in-
habitants whom chance had preserved, or the
sword of the enemy, wearied with destroying, had
spared. The conquerors who first fettled in the
countries which they had wafted, were expelled or
exterminated by new invaders, who, coming from
regions farther removed from the civilized parts
of the world, were (till more fierce and rapa-
cious. This bropght new calamities upon man-
kind, which did not cease until the north, by
pouring forth fuccefive swarms, was drained of
people, and could no longer furnish inltruments
of deftruL'ion. Famine and pestilence, which al-
ways march in the train of war, when it ravages
with such inconsiderate cruelty, raged in every
part of Europe, and completed its sufferings. If
a man were called to fix upon the period in the
history of the world, during which the condition
of the human race was moit calamitous and as-
flited, he would, without hesitation, name that
which elapsed from the death of Theodoflus the
Great, to the eftablifllment of the Lombards in
Italy . The contemporary authors, who beheld

a Theodoflus died A. D. 395, the reign of Alboinus in
,ombardy began A. D. 57 1; so that this period was 176 years.

that

SECT. I. that scene of desolation, labour and are at a loss

J

for expreflions to describe the horror of it. The
fcoarge of God, Ihe dcJfroyer of nations, are the
dreadful epithets by which they dilfinguifh the
most noted of the barbarous leaders; and they
compare the ruin which they had brought on the
world, to the havock occasioned by earthquakes,
conflagrations, or deluges, the melt formidable
and fatal calamities which the imagination of
man can conceive.

The Mier. BUT no exprefflons can convey so perse& an idea
' hih they of the defrrusive progrefsofthe barbarians, as that
Iccarnoned which mull firike an attentive observer, when he
in the Rfate
f Europ. contemplates the total change which he will dif-

cover in the state of Europe, after it began to re-
coverformedegree of tranquillity, towards the close
of the sixth century. The Saxons were by that
time masters of the southern and more fertile pro-
vinces of Britain; the Franks of Gaul; the Huns
of Pannonia; the Goths of Spain; the Goths and
Lombards of Italy and the adjacent provinces.
Scarce any vestige of the Roman policy, jurifpru-
dence, arts, or literature, remained. New forms
of government, new laws, new manners, new dref-
fes, new languages, and new names of men and
countries, were every where introduced. To make
a great or sudden alteration with refpea to any of
there, unless where the ancient inhabitants of a
country have been almolf totally exterminated, has
proved an undertaking beyond the power of the

7 greatelt

greatest conquerors [D]. The total change which SECT. I.
the settlement of the barbarous nations occasioned
in the Rfate of Europe, may, therefore, be con-
fidered as a more decilive proof, than even the
testimony of contemporary hiltorians, of the de-
ftrudive violence with which there invaders car-
ried on their conquests, and of the havock which
they had made from one extremity of this quarter
of the globe to the other [E].

IN the obscurity of the chaos occasioned by this Frmm hi:

slae of diii-

general wreck of nations, we must search for the otrer the
feeds of order, and endeavour to discover the first t °n°'
rudiments of the policy and laws now eitabliihed b` "d
in Europe. To this source, the historians of its be traced,
different kingdoms have attempted, though with
less attention and industry than the importance of
the enquiry merits, to trace back the inffitutions
and customs peculiar to their countrymen. It is
not my province to give a minute detail of the pro-
grefs of government and manners in each particu-
lar nation, whose tranfadtions are the object of the
following history. But, in order to exhibit a just
view of the state of Europe at the opening of the
sixteenth century, it is necessary to look back, and
to contemplate the condition of the northern na-
tions upon their first settlement in those countries
which they occupied. It is necessary to mark the
great steps by which they advanced from barba-
rifm to refinement, and to point out those general
principles and events which, by their uniform as

(DI NOTL IV. [E] NOTE y.

well

SecT. I. well as extensive operation, conduEted all of thern

to that degree of imnprovement in poiicy and in
manners which they had attained at the period
when Charles V. began his reign.

Theprin- WHEN nations subjea to despotic government
cin Oil o*
lrichthe rmake conquests, these serve only to extend the
Yoithernna.

'on nmade dominion and the power of their matter. But ar-

their fettle-
,nents m mies composcd of freemen conquer for themselves,

r" vp' not for their leaders. The people who overturned.

the Roman Empire, and fettled in its various pro-
vinces, were of the latter class. Not only the dif-
ferent nations that issued from the north of Europe,
which has always been confidered as the feat of
liberty, but the Huns and Alans who inhabited
part of those countries, which have been marked
out as the peculiar region of fervitudeb, enjoyed
freedom and independence in such a high degree as
seems to be scarcely compatible with a state of so-
cial union, or with the subordination necessary to
maintain it. They followed the chieftain who led
them forth in quest of new settlements, not by con-
ftraint, but from choice; not as soldiers whom he
could order to march, but as volunteers who offered
to accompany him [F]. They confidered their
conquets as a common property, in which all had
a title to fliare, as all had contributed to acquire
them [G]. In what manner, or by what prin-
ciples, they divided among thent the lands which
they seized, we cannot now determine with any

b De l'efprit des lox, liv. 17. ch. 3.
[F] NOTE Vl. [GJ NOTE VI.

certainty,

certainty. There is no nation in Europe whose SECT. L
records reach back to this remote period; and
there is little information to be got from the un-
inftruative and meagre chronicles, compiled by
writers ignorant of the true end, and unacquaint-
ed with the proper objets, of history.

THIS new division of property, however, toge- The reuda:

ther with the maxims and manners to which it gave ITad'all
rife, gradually introduced a species of government Rbiaid'
formerly unknown. This singular institution is theo.
now diftinguilhed by the name of the Feudalfyfietn:
and though the barbarous nations which framed it,
fettled in their new territories at different times,
came from different countries, spoke various lan-
guages, and were under the command of separate
leaders, the Feudal policy and laws were eftablilh-
ed,with little variation, in every kingdom ofEurope.
This amazing uniformity hath induced tome au-
thors' to believe that all there nations, notwith-
fianding so many apparent circumstances of dif-
tintion, were originally the fame people. But it
may be ascribed, with greater probability, to the
similar fate of society and of manners to which they
were accustomed in their native countries, and to
the similar situation in which they found then-
selves on taking poireflion of their new domains.

As the conquerors of Europe had their acqui-
fitions to maintain, not only against such of the

c Procop. de bello Vandal. ap. Script. Byz. cdit.lVn. vcl, i.
P. 345.

ancient

SECT. I. ancient inhabitants as they had spared, but againf
ationa the more formidable inroads of new invaders, sids
f-an. ojhe defence was their chief care, and seems to have
of feudal been the sole obje& of their first institutions and

policy. Instead of those loose associations, which,
though they scarcely diminished their personal in-
dependence, had been sufficient for their security
while they remained in their original countries,
they saw the necessity of confederating more closely
together, and of relinquilhing some of their private
rights in order to attain public safety. Every
freeman, upon receiving a portion of the lands
which were divided, bound himself to appear in
arms against the enemies of the community. This
military service was the condition upon which he
received and held his lands; and as they were ex-
empted from every other burden, that tenure,
among a warlike people, was deemed both easy
'and honourable. The King or general, who led
them to conquest, continuing still to be the head
of the colony, had, of course, the largest portion
allotted to him. Having thus acquired the means
of rewarding past services, as well as of gaining
new adherents, he parcelled out his lands with this
view, binding those on whom they were bestowed,
to follow his- standard with a number of men in
proportion to the extent of the territory which
they received, and to bear arms in his defence.
Iis chief officers imitated the example of the so-
vereign, and, in distributing portions of their lands
among their dependents, annexed the fame condi-

tion

tion to the grant. Thus a feudal kingdom re- SECT. L
fembled a military eitablilhment, rather than a
civil institution. The vitorious army, cantoned
out in the country which it had seized, continued
ranged under its proper officers, and subordinate
to military command. The names of a soldier
and of a freeman were synonymous d. Every pro-
prietor of land, girt with a sword, was ready to
march at the summons of his superior, and to
take the field against the common enemy.

BUT though the Feudal policy seems to be so The feudal

admirablycalculated for defence againi the afaults ff'te ia
of any foreign power, its provisions for the interior ,s to, in-
order and tranquillity of society were extremely t^"ri"°er
defecive. The principles of disorder and corrup-
tion are discernible in that constitution under its
best and most perse& form. They soon unfolded
themselves, and spreading with rapidity through
every part of the system, produced the mofl fatal
effecs. The bond of political union was ex-
tremely feeble; the sources of anarchy were innu-
merable. The monarchical and ariftocratical parts
of the constitution, having no intermediate power
to balance them, were perpetually at variance, and
juftling with each other. The powerful vassals of
the crown soon extorted a confirmation for life of
those grants of land, which being at firi purely
gratuitous, had been bestowed only during plea-

d Du Cange Gloflar. voc. Miles.
VOL. I. C fire.

SECT. I. sure.. Not satisfied with this, they prevailed to

have them converted into hereditary pofcffions.
One tRep more completed their usurpations, and
rendered them unalienable [H]. With an ambi-
tion no less erterprizing, and more preposterous,
they appropriated to themselves titles of honour,
as well as offices of power or trust. These per-
fonal marks of diftinaion, which the public ad-
miration beitows on illustrious merit ior:which the
public confidence confers on extraordinary abi-
lities, were annexed to certain families, and tranf-
mitted like fiefs, from father to son, by hereditary
right. The crown vaflals having thus secured the
poffelion of their lands and dignities, the nature
of the feudal institutions, which though founded
on fubordinationverged to independence, led them
to new, and still more dangerous encroachments
on the prerogatives of the sovereign. They ob-
tained the power of fupremejurifdiation, both civil
and criminal, within their own territories the right
of coining money; together with the privilege of
carrying on war against their private enemies, in
their own name, and by their own authority. The
ideas of political fubje&tion were almost entirely
loft, and frequently scarce any appearance of feu-
dal subordination remained. Nobles, who had ac-
quired such enormous power, scorned to confider
themselves as fubje&ts. They aspired openly at
being independent: the bonds which conneted the
principal members of the constitution with the
crown, were dissolved. A kingdom, considerable

[H] NOTE VIII.

in

:n name and in extent, was broken into as' many SeCT. I.
separate principalities as it contained powerful ba-
rons. A thousand causes of jealousy and discord
fubfifed among them, and gave rife to as many
wars. Every country in Europe, wafted or kept
in continual alarm during these endless contests,
was filled with castles and places of strength, ere.t-
ed for the security of the inhabitantsj not against
foreign force, but against internal hostilities. An
universal anarchy, detruAive, in a great measure,
of all the advantages which men expet to derive
from society, prevailed. The people, the most
numerous as well as the most useful part of the
community, were either reduced to a Rate of
oa&tual servitude, or treated with the fame insolence
and rigour as if they had been degraded into that
wretched condition [I]. The king, fripped ofal-
most every prerogative, and without authority to
enaEt or to execute salutary laws, could neitherpro-
te&c the innocent, nor punish the guilty. The no-
bles, superior to all restraint, harassed each other
with perpetual wars, opproffed their fellow-fub-
jets, and humbled or insulted their sovereign.
To crown all, time gradually fixed, and rendered
venerable this pernicious system, which violence
had etablilhed.

SucH was the fate of Europe with rerpe& to Jt pecnted

the interior administration of government from thie ai'ik.
Seventh to the eleventh century. All the external aetinu i'th

. Vigour in
operations of its various states, during this period, thir, , e.

[I] NOTE I X. ratiun.

C a were,

SZCT.L were, of course, extremely feeble. A kingdom

*
'' dismembered, and torn with dissension, without

any common interest to rouze, or any common
head to conduc its force, was incapable of acting
with vigour. Almost all the wars in Europe, dur-
ing the ages which I have mentioned, were trifling,
indecisive, and produCtive of no considerable event.
They resembled the Ihort incursions of pirates or
banditti, rather than the steady operations of a
regular army. Every baron, at the head of his
vassals, carried on some petty enterprize, to which
he was prompted by his own ambition, or revenge.
The state itself, destitute of union, either remained
altogether inactive, or if it attempted to make any
effort, that served only to discover its impotence.
The superior genius of Charlemagne, it is true,
united all these disjointed and discordant members,
and forming them again into one body, restored to
government that degree of activity which diftin-
guifhes his reign, and renders the transactions of
it, objects not only of attention but of admiration
to more enlightened times. But this fate of union
and vigour, not being natural to the feudal govern-
ment, was of short duration. Immediately upon
his death, the spirit which animated and sustained
the vast system which he had established, being
withdrawn, it broke into pieces. All the calamities
which flow from anarchy and discord, returning
with additional force, afflited the different
kingdoms into which his empire was split.
From that time to the eleventh century, a fuccef-
sion of uninteresting events i a series of wars, the

motives

motives as well as the consequences of which were SECT. I.
equally unimportant, fill and deform the annals
of all the nations in Europe.

To there pernicious effeCs of the feudal anarchy The fatal

may be added its fatal influence on the character this ftte of
and improvement of the human mind. If men fientesan
do not enjoy the prote&tion of regular government, "'i
together with the certainty of personal security,
which naturally flows from it, they never attempt
to make progrels in science, nor aim at attaining
refinement in taste, or in manners. That period
of turbulence, opprefion, and rapine, which I have
described, was ill suited to favour improvement in
any of these. In less than a century after the bar-
barous nations fettled in their new conquests, al-
most all the effe&s of the knowledge and civility,
which the Romans had spread through Europe,
disappeared, Not only the arts of elegance, which
minister to luxury, and are supported by it, but
many of the useful arts, without which life can
scarcely be confidered as comfortable, were ne-
gle&ed or loft, Literature, science, taste, were
words hardly in use during the ages we are con-
templating; or, if they occur at any time, emi-
nence in them is ascribed to persons and produc-
tions so contemptible, that it appears their true im-
port was little understood. Persons of the highest
rank, and in the most eminent stations, could not
read or write. Many of the clergy did not under-
&tand the breviary which they were obliged daily

C 3 to

SECT. I. to recite; some of them could scarcely read it [K].
'' - All memory of past tranfadions was loft, or pre-

served in annals filled with trifling events, or le-
gendary tales. Even the codes of laws, publilhed
by the several nations which etablilhed themselves
in the different countries of Europe, fell into dif-
use, while, in their place, customs, vague and ca-
pricious, were substituted. The human mind, ne-
gleted, uncultivated, and depressed, funk into the
most profound ignorance. Europe did not pro-
duce, during four centuries, one author who merits
to be read, either on account of the elegance of
his composition, or the justness and novelty of his
sentiments. There is hardly one invention useful
or ornamental to society, of which that long pe-
riod can boat.
pon re. EVEN the Christian religion, though its precepts

are delivered, and its institutions are fixed in scrip-
ture, with a precision which ihould have exempted
them from being misinterpreted or corrupted, de-
generated, during those ages of darkness, into an
illiberal superstition. The barbarous nations, when
converted to Christianity, changed the object, not
the spirit, of their religious worship. They endea-
voured to conciliate the favour of the true God by
means not unlike to those which they had em-
ployed in order to appease their false deities. In-
stead of apiring to fandity and virtue, which alone
can render men acceptable to the great Author of

[g] NOTE X.

order

order and of excellence, they imagined that they SECT. I.
satisfied every obligation of duty by a scrupulous
observance of external ceremonies [L]. Religion,
according to their conception of it, comprehended
nothing else; and the rites, by which they per-
fuaded themselves that they should gain the favour
of heaven, were of such a nature as might have
been expe&ted from the rude ideas of -the ages
which devised and introduced them. They were
either so unmeaning as to be altogether unworthy
of the Being to whose honour they were confe-
crated; or so abfiurd as to be a disgrace to reason
and humanity[M]. Charlemagne in France, and
Alfred the Great in England, endeavoured to dif-
pel this darknels, and gave their fubjeEs a (hort
glimpse of light and knowledge. But the igno-
rance of the age was too powerful for their efforts
and inititutions. The darkness returned, and
fettled over Europe more thick and heavy than
formerly.

As the inhabitants of Europe, during these cen- upon the

turies, were Ifrangers to the arts which embellish Z'd ",t
a polised age, they were destitute of the virtues of i'Ch`.

mann mind.

which abound among people who continue in a
simple lfate. Force of mind, a sense ofperfonal
dignity, gallantry in enterprize, invincible peric-
verance in execution, contempt of danger and of
death, are the chara'&eriftic virtues of uncivilized
nations. But theft are all the offspring of equa-

[L] NOTE XI. [M] NOTE XnI.

C 4 lity

SECT. I. lity and independence, both which the feudal in.

R fitutions had destroyed. The spirit of domination
corrupted the nobles; the yoke offervitude depref-
fed the people; the generous sentiments inspired
by a sense of equality were extinguiihed, and no.
thing remained to be a check on ferocity and vio-
lence. Human society is in its most corrupted
state at that period, when men have lott their ori-
ginal independence and simplicity of manners,
but have not attained that degree of refinement
which introduces a sense of decorum and of pro-
priety in condut, as a restraint on those passions
which lead to heinous crimes. Accordingly, a
greater number of thqfe atrocious actions, which
fill the mind of man with atonifhment and horror,
occur in the history of the centuries under review,
than in that of any, period of the fame extent in the
annals of Europe. If we open the history of Gre-
gory of Tours, or of any contemporary author, we
meet with a Ieries of deeds of cruelty, perfidy, and
revenge, so wild and enormous as almost to exceed
belief.

Frvn the BUT, according to the observation of an ele?
begiinivbg tl
teSicvi,,th gant and profound historian , there is an ultimate
sentur"y no point of depression, as well as of exaltation,
^an i"anne from which human affairs naturally return in a
gKiove. contrary progress, and beyond which they never

pass either in their advancement or decline. When
dcfects, either in the form or in the administration

P Humc's HiRfory of England, vol. i. p. 441.

of

of government, occaifon such disorders in society as SECT. I.
are excessive and intolerable, it becomes the com-
mon inteaeft to discover and to apply such remedies
as will most effectually remove them. Slight incon-
veniencies may be long overlooked orendured; but
when abuses grow to a certain pitch, the society
must go to ruin, or must attempt to reform them.
The disorders in the feudal system, together with
the corruption of taste and manners consequent
upon there, which had gone on increasing during
a long course of years, seemed to have attained their
utmost point of excess towards the close of the
eleventh century. From that era, we may date
the return of government and manners in a con-
trary direcion, and can trace a fucceflion of causes
and events which contributed, some with a nearer
and more powerful, others with a more remote and
less perceptible influence, to abolilh confusion and
barbarifin, and to introduce order, regularity, and
refinement.

IN pointing out and explaining there causes aid Necetrry to

events, it is not necessary to observe the order of point
time with a chronological accuracy; it is of more a.d evcnts

which con.
importance to keep in view their mutual connec- toibute -

wards this

tion and dependance, and to ihow how the opera- improve.
tion of one event, or one cause, prepared the way et
for another, and augmented its influence. We
have hitherto been contemplating the progress of
that darkness, which spread over Europe, from its
first approach, to the period of greatef obfcura-
tion i a more pleasant exercise begins here, to ob-

serve

SeCT. I. erve the sirs dawnings of returning light, to mark

'" ' the various accefllons by which it gradually in-

creased and advanced towards the full fpiendor of
day.

Th ten. I. THE Crusades, or expeditions in order to
Cde.of toe rescue the Holy Land out of the hands of Infi-
tdu'c, dels, seem to be the first event that roused Eu-

,o1nm."t rope from the lethargy in which it had been long

woo. funk, and that tended to introduce any change in
,he mm government or in manners. It is natural to the
~tef human mind to view those places which have been
caues of
the, pe. diftinguilhed by being the residence of any illuftri-

ous personage, or the scene of any great tranfac-
tion, with some degree of delight and veneration.
From this principle flowed the superstitious devo-
tion with which Christians, from the earliest ages
of the church, were accustomed to visit that coun-
try which the Almighty had fele&ed as the inhe-
ritance of his favourite people, and in which the
Son of God had accomplished the redemption of
mankind. As this distant pilgrimage could not be
performed without considerable expence, fatigue,
and danger, it appeared the more meritorious, and
came to be confidered as an expiation for almost'
every crime. An opinion which spread with ra-
pidity over Europe about the close of the tenth,
and beginning of the eleventh century, and which
gained universal credit, wonderfully augmented
the number of credulous pilgrims, and increased
the ardour with which they undertook this use-
lecf voyage. The thousand years, mentioned by

St.

St. John , were supposed to be accomplilhed, and SzCT. I.
the end of the world to be at hand. A general '
consternation seized mankind; many relinquilhed
their polfeflions; and abandoning their friends and
families, hurried with precipitation to the Holy
Land, where they imagined that Christ would
quickly appear to judge the world . While Pa-
leftine continued subjeA to the Caliphs, they had
encouraged the resort of pilgrims to Jerufalenr;
and confidered this as a beneficial species of com-
merce, which brought into their dominions gold
and flver, and carried nothing out of them but
relicks and consecrated trinkets. But the Turks
having conquered Syria about the middle of the
eleventh century, pilgrims were exposed to out-
rages of every kind from these fierce barbarians b.
This change happening precisely at the jun&ture
when the panic terror, which I have mentioned,
rendered pilgrimages mroft frequent, filled Europe
with alarm and indignation. Every person who
returned from Palestine related die dangers which
he had encountered, in visiting the holy city, and
described with exaggeration the cruelty and vexa-
tions of the Turks.

f Revel. xx. 2, 3, 4.
c Chronic. Will. Godelli ap. Bouquet Recueil des Hifto-

riens de France, tom. x. p. 262. Vita Abbenis, ibid. p, 332.
Chronic. S. Pantaleonis ap. Eccard. Co,'p. Scrip. medii avi,
vol. i. p. 909. Annalifta Saxo, ibid. 576.

1 Jb. Dan. Schoepflini de.facris Ga!torum in orientem cx.
peditionibus, p. 4. Argent. 17z6. 4to.

VV~H.IW

SECT. I WHEN the minds of men were thus prepared, the
The immc. zeal of a fanatical monk, who conceived the idea of
diate occao

afit.'i. leading all the forces of Christendom against the

infidels, and of driving them out of the Holy Land
by violence, was sufficient to give a beginning to
that wild enterprize. Peter the hermit, for that
was the name of this martial apostle, run from
province to province with a crucifix in his hand,
exciting princes and people to this Holy War, and
wherever he came kindled the fame enthusiastic
ardour for it with which he himself was animated.
The council of Placentia, where upwards of thirty
thousand persons were assembled, pronounced the
scheme to have been fuggeRed by the immediate
inspiration of heaven. In the council of Clermont,
still more numerous, as soon as the measure was
proposed, all cried out with one voice, " It is the
,' will of God." Persons of all ranks were finit-
ten with the contagion; not only the gallant nobles
of that age, with their martial followers, whom
the boldness of a romantic enterprize might have
been apt to allure, but men in the more humble
and pacific stations of life; ecclesiastics of every
order, and even women and children, engaged with
emulation in an undertaking, which was deemed
sacred and meritorious. If we may believe the
concurring testimony of contemporary authors, fix
millions of persons assumed the cross', which was
the badge that diftinguified such as devoted them-
selves to this holy warfare. All Europe, fays the

i Fulcherius Carnotenfis ap. Bongarfii Gella Dei per Fran-
Cos, vol. i. 387. edit. Han. t611.

6 Prince¢s

Printefs Anna Comnena,.torn up. from.the soón-: SECT. L
dactin, feemed.ready. to precipitate: itself in one -
united body upon Asia . Nor did the fumes of
this enthusiastic zeal evaporate at once: the frenzy
was as lasting as it was extravaganrt,, During, two
centuries, Europe seems to have had no object but
to recover, or keep pofellion of, the Holy Land;
and through that period vast armies continued to
march thither [N].

THE first efforts of valour, animated by enthufi- The furer

of the Cto.

afm, were irresistible; partofthelefferAfia, allSyria fhdCs.
and. Ealeftine, were wre(ted from the infidels . the
banner ps the cross was difplayed.on Mount.Sion;
Conftantinople,:the capital of the Christian empire
in the East, was seized by a body of those adven-
turers,. who hid taken arms against the Mahome-
tans, and an Earl of Slanders, and his descendants,
kept poffefion of the Imperial throne during half
a century. But though the first impression of the
Crusaders was so unexpected that they made their
conqueits with great ease, they found infinite diffi-
culty in preserving them. Ettablifliments so dif-
tant from Europe, surrounded by warlike nations,
animated with fanatical zeal scarcely inferior to
that of the Crusaders themselves, were perpetually
in danger of being overturned. Before the expi- A.,D.191.
ration of the thirteenth century, the Christians were
driven out of all their Asiatic poffdlions, in ac-
quiring of which incredible numbers of men had

k Alexias, lib. x. ap. Byz. script. vol. Pi. p. 224.
[N] NOTE X1II.

perinled,

S CT. . perifled, and immense fums of money had been
' - wafted. The only common enterprize in which

the European nations ever engaged, and which
all undertook with equal ardour, remains a fingu-
lar monument of human folly.

The ben- . BuT from these expeditions, extravagant as they
f te cru. were, beneficial conequences followed, which had
adeu on
Sanens neither been foreseen nor expected. In their pro-

grefs towards the Holy Land, the followers of the
cross marched through countries better cultivated,
and more civilized than their own. Their firt ren-
dezvous was commonly in Italy, in which Venice,
Genoa, Pila, and other cities, had begun to apply
themselves to commerce, and had made some ad-
vances towards wealth as well as refinement. They
embarked there, and landingin Dalmatia, pursued
their route by land to Conftrtinople. Though the
military spirit had been long extinc in the eaRern
Empire, and a despotism of the worf species had
annihilated almost every public virtue, yet Con-
ftantinople, having never felt the deftru&ive rage
of the barbarous nations, was the greatest, as well
as the mos beautiful city in Europe, and the only
one in which there remained any image of the an-
cient elegance in manners and arts. The naval
power of the eastern empire was considerable.
Manufatures of the most curious fabrick were
carried on in its dominions. ConRantinople was
the only mart in Europe for the commodities of
the East Indies. Although the Saracens and Turks
had torn from the Empire many of its richest pro-

vinces.

vinces, and had reduced it within very narrow SICT. L
bounds, yet great wealth flowed into the capital
from there various sources, which not only che-
rilhed such a taste for magnificence, but kept alive
such a relish for the sciences, as appears confider-
able, when compared with what was known in
other parts of Europe. Even in Asia, the Euro-
peans, who had assumed the cross, found the re-
mains of the knowledge and arts which the exam-
pie and encouragement of the Caliphs had diffused
through their Empire. Although the attention of
the historians of the Crusades was fixed on other
obje&s than the fate offociety and manners among
the nations which they invaded, although most of
them had neither taste nor discernment enough to
describe there, they relate, however, such signal
aes of humanity and generosity in the condut of
Saladin, as well as some other leaders of the Ma.
hometans, as give us a very high idea of their
manners. It was not possible for the Crusaders to
travel through so many countries, and to behold
their various customs and infitutioni, without
acquiring information and improvement. Their
views enlarged; their prejudices wore off; new
ideas crowded into their minds; and they mutl have
been sensible, on many occasions, of the ruficity of
their own manners, when compared with those of a
more polished people. These impreflions were
not so flight as to be effaced upon their return to
their native countries. A close intercourse subsisted
between the East and Weft during two centuries;
new armies were continually marching from Eu-

3 rope

SECT. I. rope to Asia, while former adventurers returned
i-r ' home and imported many of the customs to which

they had been familiarized by a long residence
abroad. Accordingly, we discover, soon after the
commencement of the Crusades, greater splendour
in the courts of princes, greater pomp in public
ceremonies, a more refined taste in pleasure and
amusements, together with a more romantic spirit
of enterprize spreading gradually over Europe;
and to there wild expeditions, the effect of super-
flition or folly, we owe the first gleams of light
which tended to dispel barbarity and ignorance.

.beir inu- . BUT these beneficial confequencesofthe Crusades
#ateopro took place slowly; their influence upon the state
Y"ty. of property, and consequently of power, in the dif-

ferent kingdoms of Europe, was more immediate
as well as discernible. The nobles who aflumed
the cross, and bound themselves to march to the
Holy Land, soon perceived that great fums were
necessary towards defraying the expence of such a
distant expedition, and enabling them to appear
with suitable dignity at the head of their vassals.
But the genius of the feudal system was averse to
the imposition of extraordinary taxes; and sub-
jecs in that age were unaccustomed to pay them.
No expedient remained for levying the fums re-
quifitc, but the sale of their poffeflions. As men
were inflamed with romantic expectations of the
splendid conquests which they hoped to make in
Asia, and possessed with such zeal for recovering the

Holy

Huly Land as swallowed up every other patflon, SECT. I.
they rclinquifhed tieirancient inheritances without
any reluctance, and for prices far below their value,
that they might lally forth as adventurers in quest
of new fcttlernents in unknown countries. The
monarchs of the great kingdoms in the weft, none
of whom had engaged in the first Crusade, eagerly
seized this opportunity of annexing considerable
territories to their crowns at finall expcnce'. Be-
fides this, several great barons, who perilhed in the
Holy War, having left no heirs, their fiefs reverted
of course to their respective lbvercigns; and by
there accefflons of property, as well as power taken
from the one scale and thrown into the other, the
regal authority increased in proportion as thatofthe
Aristocracy declined. The absence, too, of many
potent vassals, accuffomed to controu! and give law
to their sovereigns, afforded them an opportunity
of extending their prerogative, and. of acquiring a
degree of weight in the constitution which they
did not formerly possess. To these circu.imfances,
we may add, that as all who affuined the cross
were taken under the immediate proteCt.ion of the
church, and its heaviefl anathemas were denounced
againit luhch as should disquiet or annoy those who
had devoted tliemfelves to this service; the private
quarrels and hoflilities which banifled tranquillity
from a feudal kingdom, were suspended or extin-
guifhed; a more general and fieady adminifsration

Willclm. ah!mlnbur. Guibcrt. Abbas np. Bongarf. vol. i.
481.

VoL. I. D of

SCT.. 1. of jullice began to be introduced, and some ad-

vances were made towards the eRtablifhment of
regular government in the several kingdoms of
Europe m [O].

Teir . THE commercial effe&s of the Crusades were
coulmmercial
*cffa. not less considerable than those which I have al-

ready mentioned. The first armies under the Rand-
ard of the cross, which Peter the hermit and God-
frey of Bouillon led through Germany and Hun-
gary to Constantinople, suffered so much by the
length .of the march, as well as by the fierceness
of the barbarous people who inhabited those coun-
tries, that it deterred others from taking the fame
route; so that rather than encounter so many dan-
gers, they chose to go by sea. Venice, Genoa, and
Pisa furniihed the transports on which they em-
barked. The fum which there cities received merely
for freight from such numerous armies was im-
mense . This, however, was but a small part
of what they gained by the expeditions to the
Holy Land; the Crusaders contracted with them
for military flores and provisions; their fleets
kept on the coast as the armies advanced by land;
and, supplying them with whatever was wanting,
engrossed all the profits of that lucrative branch
of commerce. The success which attended the
arms of the Crusaders was producive of advantages

I Du Cange Glofiar. voc. CruceJignatuf. Guil. Abbas ap.
Bongarf. vol. i. 480. 482.

[01 NOTE XIV.
" Muratori Antiquit, Italic. mcdii avi', vol. ii. 90o,

still

fill more permanent. There are charters yet ex- SECT. I.
tant, containing grants to the Venetians, Pifans, ---~
and Genoese of the most extensive immunities in
the several settlements which the Christians made
in Asia. All the commodities which they im-
ported or exported are thereby exempted from
every imposition; the property of entire suburbs
in tome of the maritime towns, and of large streets
in others, is vested in them and all questions,
arising among persons fettled within their pre-
cinas, or who traded under their protection, are
appointed to be tried by their own laws, and by
judges of their own appointment0. When the
Crusaders seized Constantinople, and placed one
of their own leaders on the Imperial throne, the
Italian States were likewise gainers by that event.
The Venetians, who had planned the enterprize,
and took a considerable part in carrying it into
execution, did not neglec to secure to themselves
the chief advantages redounding from its success.
They made themselves matters of part of the an-
cient Peloponnefus in Greece, together with rome
of the most fertile islands in the Archipelago.
Many valuable branches of the commerce, which
formerly centered in Constantinople, were tranf-
ferred to Venice, Genoa, or Pisa. Thus a fuccef-
sion of events, occasioned by the Holy War, opened
various sources, from which wealth flowed in such

° Muratori Antiquit. Italic. medii s.vi, vol. ii. 906, &c.

D 2 abundance

SECT. I. abundance in these citiesP, as enabled them, in

concurrence with another institution which shall
be immediately mentioned, to secure their own
liberty and independence.

The fla. II. THE infitution to which I alluded was the
liflim-nt
or comm. forming of cities into communities, corporations,

l.ail to or bodies politic, and granting them the privilege
^ovdnrncnt of municipal jurifdition, which contributed more,
and order.

perhaps, than any other cause, to introduce regular
government, police, and arts, and to diffuse them
over Europe. The feudal government had dege-
nerated into a system of opprefflon. The ufurpa-
tions of the nobles were become unbounded and
intolerable: they had reduced the great body of
the people into a slate of actual servitude: the
condition of those dignified with the name of free-
men, was often little preferable to that of the other.
Nor was such oppression the portion of those alone
who dwelt in the country, and were employed in

The ncient cultivating the estate of their matter. Cities and
,,tsf villages held of some great lord, on whom they

depended for protection, and were no less subject
to his arbitrary jurifdidtion. The inhabitants were
deprived of the natural and mo(c unalienable rights
of humanity. They could not dispose of the es-
sects which their own industry had acquired, either
by a latter will, or by any deed executed during

P Villehardouin Hill. de Constant. fous 'Enmpereurs Fran-
Vois, 105, &c.

their

their life 1. They had no right to appoint guar- SECT. I.
dians for their children during their minority.
They were not permitted to marry without pur-
chafing the content of the lord on whom they de-
pended '. If once they had cormmenced a law-suit,
they durst not terminate it by an accommodation,
because that would have deprived the lord, in
whose court they pleaded, of the perquiites due
to him on passing sentence'. Services of various
kinds, no less disgraceful than opprefflve, were
exafted from them without mercy or moderation.
The spirit of induifry was checked in some cities
by absurd regulations, and in others by unrea-
fonable exactions; nor would the narrow and op-
prcffive maxims of a military aristocracy have
permitted it ever to rife to any degree of height
or vigour'.

BUT as soon as the cities of Italy began to turn The free-

thcir attention towards commerce, and to conceive ,°n".f'citi
fume idea of the advantages which they might de- bfl., i"
rive from it, they became impatient to shake off
the yoke of their insolent lords, and to establish
among themselves such a free and equal govern-

1 Dacherii Spicclcg. tom. i. 374, 375. edit. in 4to. Or-
donances des Rois de France, tom. iii. zo4. No. z. 6.

r Ordonanccs des Rois de Francc, tom. i. p. 22. tom. iii.

203. No. I. Murat. Antiq. Ital. vol. iv. p. 20. Dacher. Spicel,
vol. xi. 325. 341.

Dacher. Spicel. vol. ix. 18z.
M. 1'AbbL Mably obfervat. fur 'l'ifl. de France, tom. ii.
p. 2. 96.

D 3 menr,

SECT. I. ment, as would render property secure, and indus-

try flourilhing. The German emperors, especially
those of the Franconian and Suabian lines, as the
feat of their government was far ditlant from
Italy, possessed a feeble and imperfect jurifdition
in that country. Their perpetual quarrels, either
with the popes or with their own turbulent vaslals,
diverted their attention from the interior police of
Ita!y, and gave conflant employment to their arms.
These circumstances encouraged the inhabitants of
Ibrne of the Italian cities, towards the beginning
of the eleventh century, to assume new privileges,
to unite together more closely, and to form them-
selves into bodies politic under the government of
laws established by common content ". The rights,
which many cities acquired by bold or fortunate
usurpations, others purchased from the emperors,
who deemed themselves gainers when they received
large fums for immunities which they were no
longer able to withhold; and Ibme cities obtained
them gratuitously, from the generosity or facility of
the princes on whom they depended. The great
increase of wealth which the Crusades brought into
Italy, occasioned a new kind of fermentation and
activity in the minds of the people, and excited
such a general pafllon for liberty and independence,
that, before the conclusion of the last Crusade, all
the considerable cities in that country had either
purchaled or had extorted large immunities from
!ile emperors [P].

" Murat. Antiquit. Ital. vol. iv, p. 5.
[I'] NOTE XV,

THIS

THIS innovation was not long known in Italy SECT. 1.

before it made its way into France. Louis the Is nrt-
Gross, in order to create some power that might F.,en1c nd
counterbalance those potent vassals who controuled, ",t',,;hef
or gave law to the crown, first adopted the plan of Europ;.
conferring new privileges on the towns situated -,"37
within his own domaine. These privileges were
called charters of community, by which he en-
franchised the inhabitants, abolished all marks of
servitude, and formed them into corporations or
bodies politic, to be governed by a council and
magiitrates of their own nomination. Thcfc ma-
gitlrates had the rightofadminifteringj uftice within
their own precincs, of levying taxes, of embody-
ing and training to arms the militia of the town,
which took the field when required by the fove-
reign, under the command of officers appointed by
the community. The great barons imitated the
example of their monarch, and granted like im-
munities to the towns within their territories. They
had wafted such great fums in their expeditions to
the Holy Land, that they were eager to lay hold
on this new expedient for railing money, by the
sale of those charters of liberty. Though the in-
ftitution of communities was as repugnant to their
maxims of policy, as it was adverse to their power,
they disregarded remote consequences, in order to
obtain present relief. In less than two centuries,
Servitude was abolifled in most of the towns in
France, and they became free corporations, instead
of dependant villages, without jurifdi&ion or pri-

D 4 vileges.

SECT. I. vileges [ QJ. Much about the fame period, the

great cities in Germany began to acquire like im-
munities, and laid the foundation of their present
liberty and independence [R]. The practice spread
quickly over Europe, and was adopted in Spain,
England, Scotland, and all the other feudal king-
doms IS].

_Its ppy THE good eftceis of this new institution were
effec*s upon
thecondi- immediately fclt, and its influence on government
tion of the
inhabitants; as well as manners was no less extenfivc than fa-

lutary. A great body of the people was released
from fervituile, and from all the arbitrary and grie-
vous impositions to which that wretched condition
had fubjeaed them. Towns, upon acquiring the
right of community, became so many little re-
publics, governed by known and equal laws.
Liberty was deemed such an efential and charac-
teriftic part in their conlitution, that if any slave
took refuge in one of them, and resided there du-
ring a year without being claimed, he was inrfant-
ly declared a freeman, and admitted as a member
of the communityw.

upon tihe As one part of the people owed their liberty to
p',wer ofthe
lobiiitys the erection of communities, another was indebted

to them for their (;Ccurity. Such had been the
fate of Europe during several centuries, that self-

[Q] NOTE XVI. [R] NOTE XVII.
[S] NOTE XVIil,
w Statut. Humberti Bellojoci Dacher. Spicel. vol. ix. 18.
185. Charta Comit. Forenl: ibid 193.

prcfervation

preservation obliged every man to court the patron- SECT. I,
age of some powerful baron, and in times of danger
his catle was the place to which all resorted for
safety. But towns surrounded with walls, whose
inhabitants were regularly trained to arms, and
bound by interetl, as well as by the most solemn
engagements, reciprocally to defend each other,
afforded a more commodious and secure retreat.
The nobles began to be confidered as of less im-
portance, when they ceased to be the sole guardi-
ans to whom the people could look up for protec-
tion againit violence.

IF the nobility suffered rome diminution of their upen the

credit and power by the privileges granted to the thcrow;
cities, the crown acquired an increase of both. As
there were no regular troops kept on foot in any
of the feudal kingdoms, the monarch could bring
no army into the field, but what was compored of
soldiers furniffed by the crown vassals, alwaysjea-
lous of the regal authority; nor had he any funds
for carrying on the public service, but such as they
granted him with a very sparing hand. But when
the members of communities were permitted to
bear arms, and were trained to the use of there,
this in some degree supplied the first defect, and
gave the crown the command of a body of men,
independent of its great vailals. The attachment
of the cities to their sovereigns, whom they re-
iItpeed as the firit authors of their liberties, and
whom they were obliged to court as the protectors

of

SLcT. I. of their immunities against the domineering spirit

of the nobles, contributed somewhat towards re-
moving the second evil, as, on many occasions, it
procured the crown supplies of money, which add-
ed new force to government".

Uron the THE acquisition of liberty made such a happy
:mereale of
=dudiy. change in the condition of all the members of

communities, as roused them from that inaction
into which they had been funk by the wretch-
ednefs of their former state. The spirit 'of in-
duftry revived. Commerce became an object of
attention, and began to flourish. Population in-
creased. Independence was established; and wealth
flowed into cities which had long been the feat of
poverty and oppreflion. Wealth was accompanied
by its usual attendants, ostentation and luxury;
and though the former was inelegant and cumber-
some, and the latter indelicate, they led gradually
to greater refinement in manners, and in the habits
of life. Together with this improvement in man-
ners, a more regular species of government and
police was introduced. As cities grew to be more
populous, and the occasions of intercourse among
men increased, flatures and regulations multiplied
of course, and all became sensible that their com-
mon safety depended on observing them with ex-
a:Xnefs, and on punishing such as violated them,
with promptitude and rigour. Laws and fubordi-

x Ordon, des Rois de France, tom. i. 6oz. 785.; tom. ii.
318. 42..

nations

nation, as well as polished manners, taking their SECT. I.
rife in cities, disused themselves insensibly through
the reft of the society.

III. THE inhabitants of cities, having obtained The nha.

personal freedom and municipal jurifdi&ion, loon cities g.
acquired civil liberty and political power. It was qic epowr
a fundamental principle in the feudal fyvtem of as member

~~~~~- -*~~~~ "of the con.

policy, that no freeman could be governed or taxed Ritutiont
unless by his own content. In consequence of this,
the vassals of every baron were called to his court,
in which they eftablilhed, by mutual content, such
regulations as they deemed most beneficial to
their fimall society, and granted their superior such
supplies of money, as were proportional to their
abilities, or to his wants. The barons themselves,
conformably to the fame maxim, were admitted
into the supreme assembly of the nation, and con-
curred with the Sovereign in ena&ing laws, or in
impoting taxes. As the superior lord, according
to the original plan of feudal policy, retained the
dire& property of those lands which he granted,
in temporary poffefiion, to his vaflals; the law,
even after fiefs became hereditary, itill ftppofed
this original practice to fubfit, and a baron con-
tinued to be confidered as the guardian of all who
resided within his territories. The great council
of each nation, whether diftinguilled by the name
of a parliament, a diet, the Cortes, or the states-
general, was composed entirely of such barons,
and dignified ecclesiastics, as held immediately of

5 the

».

SECT. I. the crown. Towns, whether situated within the
^"J royal domaine or on the lands of a subjeCt, de-

pended for protection on the lord of whom they
held. They had no legal name, no political ex-
iftence, which could entitle them to be admitted
into the legiilative assembly, or could give them any
authority there. But as ibon as they were cnfran-
chiicd, and formed into bodies corporate, they
became legal and independent members of the
confitution, and acquired all the rights efential
to freemen. Amongf these, the most valuable
was, the privilege of a decisive voice in enacting
public laws, and granting national llbfidies. It
was natural for cities, accutlomed to a form of
municipal government, according to which no
regulation could be eLtablifhed within the com-
munity, and no money could be raised but by
their own content, to claim this privilege. The
viealth, the power, and consideration, which they
acquired on recovering their liberty, added weight
to their claim ; and favourable events happened,
or fortunate conjuncttu:es occurred, in the difflerent
kingdoms of Europe, which facilitated or for-
warded their obtaining po'cffron of this important
right. In England, one of the sift countries in
which the representatives of boroughs were ad-
mitted into the great council of the nation, the
A,D. 165. barons who took arms against Henry III. fum-

moned them to attend parliament, in order to add
greater popularity to their party, and to ftrengthcn
the barrier against thecncroachmnentof regal power.
In Francc, Philip the Fair, a monarch no lets faria-

7 ti.us

cious than enterprizing, confidered them as inftru- SECT. I.
ments which might be employed with equal ad- *
vantage to extend the royal prerogative, to coun-
terbalance the exorbitant power of the nobles, and
to facilitate the imposition of new taxes. With
there views, he introduced the deputies of such
towns as were formed into communities into the
itates-general of the nation Y. In the empire, the
wealth and immunities of the imperial cities
placed them on a level with the most considerable
members of the Germanic body. Conscious of
their own power and dignity, they pretended to
the privilege of forming a leparate bench in the A.). .:93.
diet; and made good their prctenfion .

BUT in what way soever the repre'entatives of The happy

eft.. s ofT

cities first gained a place in the legisature, that t:,;,,,,,,
event had great influence on the obrmn and genius of 5UV"""t ":.
government. It tempered the rigour of ariftocra-
tical opprelfion with a proper ini:ture of popular
liberty: It secured to the great body of the peo-
ple, who had formerly no representatives, active
and powerful guardians of their rights and privi-
leges: It e'fablifhed an intermediate power between
the king and nobles, to which each had recourft
alternately, and which at fine times opposed the
usurpations of the formler, on other occasions
checked the encroachments of the latter. As loon

Y Papiuicr Rcchcrches de la France, p. 8 1. edit. P;r. 1633.

I' Pfecl Abregc dc I'hiftoire & droit d'A.!nm:;nc, p. 40..

as

SECT. I. as the representatives of communities gained any
'""'Lv degree of credit and influence in the legiflaturey

the spirit of laws became different from what it
had formerly been; it flowed from new princi-
ples; it was direAed towards new objecs; equa-
lity, order, the public good, and the redress of
grievances, were phrases and ideas brought into
ule, and which grew to be familiar in the itatutes
andjurifprudence of the European nations. Al-
most all the efforts in favour of liberty in every
country of Europe, have been made by this new
power in the legislature. In proportion as it rose
to consideration and influence, the severity of the
ariftocratical spirit decreased; and the privileges
of the people became gradually more extensive,
as the ancient and exorbitant jurifdicEion of the
nobles was abridged IT].

The people IV. THE inhabitants of towns having been de-
acquire li-
berty by en. dared free by the charters of communities, that
franehif¢-
e.cn. part of the people which resided in the country,

and was employed in agriculture, began to recover
liberty by enfranchisement. During the rigour of
feudal government, as hath been already observed,
the great body of the lower people was reduced
to servitude. They were slaves fixed to the foil
which they cultivated, and together with it were
transferred from one proprietor to another, by sale,
or by conveyance. The spirit of feudal policy did
not favour the enfranchisement of that order of
men. It was an eftablilhed maxim, that no vassal

[T] NOTE XIX.

could

could legally diminish the value of a fief, to the SECT. I.
detriment of the lord from whom he had received
it. In consequence of this, manumifflon by the
authority of the immediate mailer was not valid:
and unless it was confirmed by the superior lord of
whom he held, slaves belonging to the fief did not
acquire a complete right to their liberty. Thus ic
became necessary to ascend through all the grada-
tions of feudal holding to the King, the lord Para-
mount'. A form of procedure lb tedious and
troublesome, discouraged the practice of manu-
million. Domestic or personal slaves often ob-
tained liberty from the humanity or beneficence of
their mailers, to whom they belonged in absolute
property. The condition of slaves fixed to the
foil, was much more unalterable.

BUT the freedom and independence which one Theo-

part of the people had obtained by the inflitution VS.;:,,:
of communities, inspired the other with the moll thl'.
ardent desire of acquiring the fame privileges; and
their superiors, sensible of the benefits which they
themselves had derived from former concefions,
were less unwilling to gratify them by the grant
of new immunities. The enfranchisement of slaves
became more frequent; and the Monarchs of
France, prompted by necessity no less than by
their inclination to reduce the power of the nobles, A D. ,,;,
cndeavoured to render it general. Louis X. and il"d '31
his brother Philip, issued ordinances, declaring,

' Etablilemens de St. Louis, liv. ii. ch. 34. Ordon. torn. i.
2S3, not. (a).

.c That

SECT. I. " That as all men were by nature free-born, and

as their kingdom was called the kingdom of
Franks, they determined that it should be so in
reality as well as in name; therefore they ap-
pointed that enfranchisements Ihould be granted
throughout the whole kingdom, upon just and
reasonable conditions b." These edias were car-
ried into immediate execution within the royal
domaine. The example of their sovereigns, to-
gether with the expectation of considerable fums
which they might raise by this expedient, led many
of the nobles to set their dependants at liberty
and servitude was gradually abolished in almost
every province of the kingdom [U]. In Italy,
the establishment of republican government in
their great cities, the genius and maxims of which
were extremely different from those of the feudal
policy, together with the ideas of equality, which
the progress of commerce had rendered familiar,
gradually introduced the pracice of enfranchi-
sing the ancientpredia! slaves. In rome provinces
of Germany, the persons who had been subject
to this species of bondage, were released; in
others, the rigour of their ltate was mitigated.
In England, as the spirit of liberty gained
ground, the very name and idea of personal
servitude, without any formal interposition of
the legislature to prohibit it, was totally ba-
nifhed.

b Ordon. tom. i. p. 583, 653.
[U] NOTE XX.

T1-ia

THE effects of luch a remarkable change in the SECT. I.

condition of so great a part of the people, could The eff.ct
not fail of being considerable and extensive. The t'theim-"
husbandman, mailer of his own industry, and fe- P;",'e.t:
cure of reaping for himself the fruits of his labour,
became the farmer of the fame fields where he had
formerly been compelled to toil for the benefit of
another. The odious names of maser and of slave
the most mortifying and deprefling of all diftinc-
tions to human nature, were abolished. New pro-
fpe5ls opened, and new incitements to ingenuity
and enterprize presented themselves to those who
were emancipated. The expe&ation of bettering
their fortune, as well as that of railing themselves
to a more honourable condition, concurred in call-
irg forth their activity and genius; and a nume-
rous class of men, who formerly had no political
existence, and were employed merely as instruments
of labour, became useful citizens, and contributed
towards augmenting the force or riches of the so-
ciety, which adopted them as members.

V. THE various expedients which were enlployed The nro.

. g rt:on of

in order to introduce a more regular, equal, and a 'nrer.
vigorous adminillration of justice, contributed $u,,i dmi-
greatly towards the improvement of focicty. What J'i'utes',°
was the particular mode of difpeniing julice in thl iml-

* jQprvt'emen t

the several barbarous nations which over-ran the of ociety.
Roman Empire, and took pofeflion of its differ-
ent provinces, cannot now be determined with cer-
tainty. We may conclude, from the form of go-
vernment eftablilhed among them, as well as from

VOL. I. E their

SECT. I. their ideas concerning the nature of soc:iety, that

the authority of the magistrate was extremely li-
mited, and the independence of individuals pro-
portionally great. History and records, as far as
these reach back, jultify this conclusion, and re-
present the ideas and exercise of justice in all the
countries of Europe, as little different from those
which mutl take place in a fiate of nature. To
maintain the order and tranquillity of society by
tile regular execution of known laws; to inflict
vengeance on crimes deftrufive of the peace and
safety of individuals, by a prosecution carried on
in the name, and by the authority of the commu-
nity; to confidcr the punishment of criminals as a
public example to deter others from violating the
laws; were objects of government little understood
in theory, and less regarded in pracice. The ma-
giftrate could hardly be said to hold the sword of
justice; it was left in the hands of private per-
tbns. Resentment was almost the tble motive for
profccuting crimes; and to gratify that passion,
was the end and rule in punilhing them. He who
fuffired the wrong, was the only person who had a
right to pursue the aggreflor, and to exac or to
remit the puniflhment. From a system of judicial
procedure, so crude and defective as seems to be
scarcely compatible with the subsistence of civil so-
cie:y, disorder and anarchy flowed. Superstition
concurred with this ignorance concerning the na-
ture of government, in obflruacing the adminiftra-
tion of juflicc, or in rendering it capricious and
unequal. To provide remedies for there evils, so

as

as to give a more regular course to juflice, was, SECT. L
during several centuries, one great objeA of poli- "
tical widorm. The regulations for this purpose
may be reduced to three general heads: To ex-
plain there, and to point out the manner in which
they operated, is an important article in the history
of society among the nations of Europe.

I. THE firfi considerable ftep towards establish- This, sea-

ed by abo-

ing an equal administration ofjuftice, was the abo- lifling he
lilhment of the right which individuals claimed of vitew.
waging war with each other, in their own name,
and by their own authority. To repel injuries,
and to revenge wrongs, is no less natural to man,
than to cultivate friendlhip: and while society re- Original

ideas of mea

mains in its moir timple slate, the former is con- concrning
fidered as a personal right no lets unalienable than l'"i'ce
the latter. Nor do men in this situation deem that
they have a title to redress their own wrongs alone;
they are touched with the injuries of those with
whom they are conne&ed, or in whose honour they
are interested, and are no less prompt to avenge
them. The savage, how imperfeEdly soever he
may comprehend the principles of political union,
feels warmly the sentiments of social affection, and
the obligations arising from the ties of blood. On
the appearance of an injury or affront offered to
his family or tribe, he kindles into rage, and pur-
sues the authors of it with the keeneit resentment.
He confiders it as cowardly to expe& redress from
any arm but his own, and as infamous to give up
to another the right of determining what repara-

E t.ion

SECT. I. tion he should accept, or with what vengeance he

*- ' I lhould reft satisfied.

ThE.t lead THE maxims and practice of all uncivilized sa-
to the pr-c-
tice of pci. tions, with refpet to the prosecution and punish-

te ment of offenders, particularly those of the ancient

Germans, and other Barbarians who invaded the
Roman Empire, are perfectly conformable to these
ideas'. While they retained their native fimpli-
city of manners, and continued to be divided into
finall tribes or societies, the defects in this imper-
set system of criminal jurisprudence (if it merits
that name) were less lfnfibly felt. When they
came to fettle in the extensive provinces which
they had conquered, and to form themselves into
great monarchies; when new objects of ambition
presenting themselves, incrtafed both the number
and the violence of their dissensions, they ought to
have adopted new maxims concerning the redress
of injuries, and to have regulated, by general and
equal laws, that which they formerly left to be di-
reted by the caprice of private paflion. But
fierce and haughty chieftains, accustomed to avenge
themselves on such as had injured them, did not
think of relinquishing a right which they con-
fidered as a privilege of their order, and a mark
of their independence. Laws enforced by the au-
thority of princes and magiflrates, who polleffled
little power, commanded no great degree of reve-
rence. The adminifiration ofjuftice among rude

Tacit. de Mor. German. cap. zi. Vell. Paterc. lib. ii.
C. i18.

illiterate

illiterate people, was not To accurate, or decisive, SECT. I.
oruniform, as to inducemen to 1fubnit implicitlyto
its determinations. Every offended baron buckled
on his armour, and fought redress at the head of
his vaflals. His adversary met him in like hostile
array. Neither of them appealed to impotent
laws, which could afford them no protection. Nei-
ther of them would submit points, in which their
paflions were warmly interested, to the flow deter-
mination of a judicial enquiry. Both truft;l to
their swords for the decision of the contell. The
kindred and dependants of the aggrelfor, as well
as of the defender, were involved in the quarrel.
They had not even the liberty of remaining neu-
tral. Such as refused to act in concert with the
party to which they belonged, were not only ex-
poted to infamy, but fubjeted to legal penalties.

THE different kingdoms of Europe were torn The pern.

C t'ius Ll' cl

and affliaed, during several centuries, by inteRine ot it.
wars, excited by private animoficies, and carried
on with all the rage natural to men of fi.rce man-
ners, and of violent paflions. The efl-ate of every
baron was a kind of independent territory, dif-
joined from those around it, and the hofcilities be-
tween them were perpetual. The evil became fb
inveterate and deep-rooted, that the form and laws
of private war were aicertained, and regulations
concerning it made a part in the fyflemn of jurif.
prudence d in the fame manner as if this practice

,I Beaumanoir Couflumes de Beauvoilis, ch. 59, et les notes
le' Thaumaflicre, p. 447.

E 3 had

SECT. I. had been founded in some natural right of huma-

nity, o: in the original conRitution of civil society.

Various SO great was the disorder, and such the calami-
methods employed ties, which there perpetual hoffilities occasioned,
in order to
aboliab it. that various efforts were made to wrest from the

nobles this pernicious privilege which they claimed.
It was the interest of every sovereign to abolish a
practice which almost annihilated his authority.
Charlemagne prohibited it by an express law, as
an invention of the devil to deitroy the order and
happiness of society '; but the reign of one mo-
narch, however vigorous and acive, was too Ihort
to extirpate a custom so firmly efiablifhed. In-
fiead of enforcing this prohibition, his feeble fuc-
ceffors durRf venture on nothing more than to ap-
ply palliatives. They declared it unlawful for any
person to commence war, until he had sent a for-
inal defiance to the kindred and dependants of his
adversary; they ordained that, after the commis-
sion of the trespass or crime which gave rife to ;
private war, forty days must elapse before the per-
son injured should attack the vassals of his adver-
fary they enjoined all persons to suspend their
private animosities, and to cease from hoffilities,
when the king was engaged in any war against the
enemies of the nation. The church co-operated
with the civil magiatrate, and interposed its autho-
rity in order to extirpate a pra&ice so repugnant
to the spirit of Christianity. Various councils if-
sued decrees, prohibiting all private wars; and

: Capitul, A. D. 80ot. Edi. Baluz. vol. i. p. 371.

d3cnouncedl

denounced the heaviest anathemas against such as SECT. .
should disturb the tranquillity of society, by claim- L
ing or exercising that barbarous right. The aid
of religion was called in to combat and subdue the
ferocity of the times. The Almighty was said to
have manifested, by visions and revelations to dif-
ferent persons, his disapprobation of that spirit of
revenge, which armed one part of his creatures
against the other. Men were required, in the name
of God, to sheath their swords, and to remember
the sacred ties which united them as Christians, and
as members of the fame society. But this jun&ion
of civil and ecclesiastic authority, though itrength-
ened by every thing molt apt to alarm and to over-
awe the credulous spirit of those ages, produced
no other effet than some temporary suspensions of
hostilities, and a cessation from war on certain days
and seasons consecrated to the more solemn ats of
devotion. The nobles continued to assert this dan-
gerous privilege; they refused to obey some of the
laws calculated to annul or circumscribe it; they
eluded others; they petitioned; they remonstrated;
they ltruggled for the right of private war, as the
highelt and most honourable diftintion of their
order. Even so late as the fourteenth century, we
find the nobles, in several provinces of France, con-
tending for their ancient method of terminating
their differences by the sword, in preference to that
of fubmiitting them to the decision of any judge.
The final abolition of this pradice in that king-
dom, and the other countries in which it prevailed,
is not to be ascribed so much to the force of fta-

F. 4 tutes

SECT. I. rutes and decrees, as to the gradual increase of the

royal authority, and to the imperceptible progrels
of jufler fcnriments concerning government, order,
and public ficurity [X].

rie pri;,. -. THE. prohibition of the form of trial byju-
r,.i iy.-. dicial combat, was another considerable ftep to-
'bar, a!., her wards the introdu&ion of luch regular government
nen: in the as secured public order and private tranquillity.
ti,'n .i' j'.; As the right of private war left many of the quar-
tice. rels among individuals to be decided, like those

between nations, by arms; the form of trial by
judicial combat, which was established in every
country of Europe, b:anilhed equity from courts of
jultice, and rendered chance or force the arbiter of
their determinations. In civilized nations, all tranf-
adtionsof any inportance arc concluded in writing.

De*,s, in The exhibition of the deed or inflrunent is full
tne ;t i idl

lS evidencc of the fact, and ascertains with precision
,.i ,"1 what each party has flipulated to perform. But

amlong a rude people, when the arts of reading and
writing were such uncommon attainments, that to
bc mallcr of either, intitled a person to the appel-
lation of a clerk or learned man, scarcely any thing
wvas committed to writing but treaties between
princes, their grants and charters to their fubjets,
or fiuch tranltations between private parties as were
of extra!ortlinary confcquence, or had an extensive
.effci. The greater part of affairs in common
life and bufinels, were carried on by verbal con-

[X] NOTE ..XX.

tracts

trass or promises. This, in many civil questions, SECT. I.
not only made it difficult to bring prooffufficient to
establish any claim, but encouraged falsehood and
fraud, by rendering them extremely easy. Even in
criminal cafes, where a particular sac must be as-
certained, or an accusation be disproved, the nature
and effec: of legal evidence was little underfRood
by barbarous nations. To define with accuracy
that species of evidence which a court had reason
t.( expect; to determine when it ought to infilt on
positive proof, and when it should be satisfied with
a proof from circumstances; to compare the tefti-
monv of discordant witnesses; and to fix the de-
gree of credit due to each; were discussions too
intricate and subtile for the jurisprudence of igno-
rant ages. In order to avoid encumbering them-
selves with these, a more simple form of procedure
was introduced into courts as well civil as criminal.
In all cafes, where the notoriety of the facd did
not furnilh the cleared and most direEt evidence,
the person accused, or he against whom an aftion
was brought, was called legally, or offered volun-
tarily to purge himself by oath; and upon his de-
claring his innocence, he was instantly acquitted'.
This absurd practice effetually screened guilt and
fiaud from detection and punifhr.ent, by render-
ing the temptation to perjury to powerful, that it
was not easy to refilt it. The pernicious effects
of it were sensibly felt and in order to guard

f Leg. Burgund. Tit. 8, &45. Leg. Aleman. Tit. 89.
Leg. Baiwar. Tit. 8. § 5. :. &c.

against

SECT. I. against them, the laws ordained, that oaths should

be administered with great solemnity, and accom-
panied with every circumstance which could in-
spire religious reverence, or superstitious terror g.
This, however, proved a feeble remedy: these
ceremonious rites became familiar, and their im-
prefflon on the imagination gradually diminished;
men who could venture to disregard truth, were
not apt to startle at the folemnities of an oath.
Their observation of this, put legislators upon de-
vising a new expedient for rendering the purgation
by oath more certain and fatisfadory. They re-
quired the person accused to appear with a certain
number of freemen, his neighbours or relations,
w ho corroborated the oath which he took, by swear-
ing that they believed all that he had uttered to be
true. Thele were called Compurgators, and their
number varied according to the importance of the
fubljet in dispute, or the nature of the crime with
which a person was charged h. In loine cafes, the
concurrence of no less than three hundred of there
auxiliary witnesses was requiite to acquit the per-
ibn accutled'. But even this device was found to
be ineffestual. It was a point of honour with
every man in Europe, during several ages, not to
diefertthe ciiif on whom he depended, and to stand
by those with whom the ties of blood connected
him. Whoever then was bold enough to violate

c Du C:anec GlolTar. voc. 7uamentrnrn, vol. iii. p. 1607.
E.tli;. fenedic. ' Du Cange, ibid. vol. iii. p. 1 g99.

* Spchl:la G:olaar. voc. Aa;thb Gregor. Turon. Hill. lib.
v:.;. c. .

the

the laws, was sure of devoted adherents, willing to SECT. L
abet, and eager to serve him in whatever manner
he required. The formality of calling compur-
gators, proved an apparent, not a real security,
against falsehood and pejury; and the sentences
of courts, while they continued to refer every
point in question to the oath of the defendant, be-
came so flagrantly iniquitous, as excited universal
indignation against this method of procedure k.

SENSIBLE of these defeats, but strangers to the Thae in-

manner of correcing them, or of introducing a prdce of
more proper form, our ancestors, as an infallible appealig
method of discovering truth, and of guarding
against deception, appealed to Heaven, and re-
ferred every point in dispute to be determined, as
they imagined, by the decisions of unerring wis-
dom and impartial jullice. The person accused,
in order to prove his innocence, submitted, in
some cafes, to trial, by plunging his arm in boil-
ing water; by lifting a red-hot iron with his na-
ked hand; by walking bare-foot over burning
plough-lhares; or by other experiments equally
perilous and formidable. On other occasions, he p.rtKcttiarym
challenged his accuser to fight him in single com- c,.b'Lt
bat. All there various forms of trial were con-
ducted with many devout ceremonies; the mini-
fters of religion were employed, the Almighty was
called upon to interpose for the manifestation of
guilt, and for the protection of innocence and
whoever escaped unhurt, or came off victorious,

k Leg. Langobard, lib. ii. tit. 55. 34.

was

SECT. I. was pronounced to be acquitted by the 7Judgment

of God'.

' ;i~t°O- AMONG all the whimsical and absurd institutions

ducion of
is:.praic which owe their existence to the weakness of hu-
fhroumI1 by
tcfi:uxz,- man reason, this, which submitted queltions that
tion of the
miCU: agei asseted the property, the reputation, and the lives

of men, to the determination of chance, or of
bodily firength and addrels, appears to be the most
extravagant and preposterous. There were cir-
cumftances, however, which led the nations of Eu-
rope to confider this equivocal mode of deciding
any point in contest, as a dire& appeal to Heaven,
and a certain method of discovering its will. As
men are unable tocomprehend the manner in which
the Almighty carries on the government of the uni-
verse, by equal, fixed, and general laws, they are
apt to imagine, that in every cafe which their pas-
sions or interest render important in their own eyes,
the Supreme Ruler of all ought visibly to display
his power, in vindicating innocence and punishing
vice. It requires no inconsiderable degree of fci-
ence and philosophy to corredt this popular error.
But the sentiments prevalent in Europe during the
dark ages, instead of correcting, strengthened it.
Religion, for several centuries, confifed chiefly in
believingthe legendary hifory of those faints whose
names crowd and disgrace the Romish calendar.
The fabulous tales concerning their miracles, had
been declared authentic by the bulls of popes, and

3 Murat, Difiertatio de judiciis Del. Antiquit. Ital. vol. iii.
p. 612.

the

the decrees of councils; they made the great sub- SCT.'I.
jc& of the inflrutions which the clergy offered to
the people, and were received by them with im-
plicit credulity and admiration. By attending to
there, men were accuffomed to believe that the
established laws of nature might be violated on the
most frivolous occasions, and were taught to look
rather for particular and extraordinary ats of
power under the divine administration, than to
contemplate the regular progress and execution of
a general plan. One fuperltition prepared the way
for another; and whoever believed that the Su-
preme Being had interposed miraculously on those
trivial occasions mentioned in legends, could not
but expect his intervention in matters of greater
importance, when folemnlyreferred to his decision.

WITH this fuperfititous opinion, the martial and ike-

spirit of Europe, during the middle ages, concurred l,.r ir.
in establishing the mode of trial by judicial corn- t'l (pit
bat. To be ready to maintain with his Itord
whatever his lips had uttered, was the firfl maxim
of honour with every gentleman. To aflert their
own rights by force of arms, to inflit vengeance
on those who had injured or affronted them, were
the diftinaion and pride of high-fpirited nobles.
The form of trial by combat coinciding with this
maxim, flattered and gratified there paflions. Every
man was the guardian of his own honour, and of
his own life; the justice of his cause, as well as his
future reputation, depended on his own courage
and prowess. This mode of decision was con-

3 fidered,

SICT. 1. fidered, accordingly, as one of the happiest efforts

"
' of wife policy: and as soon as it was introduced,

all the forms of trial by fire or water, and other
superstitious experiments, fell into disuse, or were
employed only in controversies between persons of
inferior rank. The trial by combat was autho-
rized over all Europe, and received in every coun-
try with equal fatisfa&ion. Not only questions
concerning uncertain or contested sacs, but general
and abftraa points in law, were determined by the
issue of a combat; and the latter was deemed a
method of discovering truth more liberal as well
as more fatisfa&ory, than that by examination and
argument. Not only might parties, whose minds
were exasperated by the eagerness and the hostility
of opposition, defy their antagonist, and require
him to make good his charge, or to prove his in-
nocence, with his sword; but witnesses, who had
no interest in the issue of the question, though
called to declare the truth by laws which ought
to have afforded them protection, were equally
exposed to the danger of a challenge, and equally
bound to assert the veracity of their evidence
by dint of arms. To complete the absurdities
of this military jurisprudence, even the charaLter
of a judge was not sacred from its violence.
Any one of the parties might interrupt a judge
when about to deliver his opinion; might accuse
him of iniquity and corruption in the most re-
proachful terms, and throwing down his gauntlet,
might challenge him to defend his integrity in
the field; nor could he, without infamy, refute

to

to accept the defiance, or decline to enter the SECT. I.
lifts against such an adversary.

THUS the form of trial by combat, like other It becomes

abuses, spread gradually, and extended to all per- U'e
sons, and almost to all cafes. Ecclefialtics, women,
minors,fuperannuated and infirm perfons,whocould
not with decency or justice be compelled to take
arms, or to maintain their own cause, were obliged
to produce champions, whom they engaged, by
affetion or rewards, to fight their battles. The
folemnities of a judicial combat were such as were
natural in an action, which was confidered both as
a formal appeal to God, and as the final decision
of quellions of the highest moment. Every cir-
cumftance relating to them was regulated by the
edics of princes, and explained in the comments
of lawyers, with a minute and even fuperfitious
accuracy. Skill in these laws and rights was the
only science of which warlike nobles boasted, or
which they were ambitious to attain m.

BY this barbarous custom, the natural course T,,, ,,-

ofproceeding, both in civil and criminal questions, "',f",' o,
was entirely perverted. Force usurped the place of
equity in courts of judicature, and jultice was ba-
nihced from her proper mansion. Discernment,
learning, integrity, were qualities less necelary to
a judge, than bodily strength and dexterity in the

m See a curious discourse concerning the laws of judicial

combat, by Thomas of Woodfock, duke of G!ouc:cicr, un-
cle to Richard II. in Spclman's Gloffar. voc. Campui.

use

SECT. I. use of arms. Daring courage, and superior vigour

or address, were of more moment towards securing
the favourable ilrue of a suit, than the equity of
a caule, or the clearness of the evidence. Men,
of courfc, applied themtielves to cultivate the ta-
lents which they found to be of greatest utility.
As tren;gth of body and address in arms were no
less rcquifite in those lifts which they were obliged
to enter in defence of their private rights, than in
the field of battle, where they met the enemies of
their country, it became the great obje& of edu-
cation, as well as the chief employment of life, to
acquire these martial accompliflments. The ad-
ministration ofjultice, instead ofaccuftoming men
to liflen to the voice of equity, or to reverence
the decisions of law, added to the ferocity of
their manners, and taught them to confider force
as the great arbiter of right and wrong.

Various ex. THESE pernicious effects of the trial by combat
poedlef'f were so obvious, that they did not altogetherefcape
tp"cc- the view of the unobferving age in which it was

introduced. The clergy, from the beginning, re-
monftrated againt it as repugnant to the spirit of
Christianity, and subversive ofjuftice and order".
But the maxims and pailons which favoured it, had
taken such hold of the minds of men, that they
disregarded admonitions and cenfires, which, on
other occasions, would have struck them with
terror. The evil was too great and inveterate to
yield to that remedy, and continuing to increase,

" Du Cange Gloffar. voc. Duellurm, vol. ii. p. 1675.

the

the civil power at length found it necessary to in- SECT. I.
terpofe. Conscious, however, of their own limited
authority, monarchs proceeded with caution, and
their first attempts to restrain, or to set any bounds
to this practice, were extremely feeble. One of the
earliest restrictions of this practice which occurs in
the history of Europe, is that of Henry I. of Eng-
land. It extended no farther than to prohibit
the trial by combat in questions concerning pro-
perty of small value o. Louis VII. of France imi-
tated his example, and iflued an edi& to the fame
effet P. St. Louis, whose ideas as a legislator were
far superior to those of his age, endeavoured to in-
troduce a more perfect jurisprudence, and to sub-
ltitute the trial by evidence, in place of that by
combat. But his regulations, with refpec to this,
were confined to his own domains; for the great
vassals of the crown pofleffed such independent
authority, and were so fondly attached to the an-
cient pratice, that he durfi not venture to extend
it to the whole kingdom. Some barons volunta-
rily adopted his regulations. The spirit of courts
of justice became averse to the mode of decision
by combat, and discouraged it on every occasion.
The nobles, nevertheless, thought it so honourable
to depend for the security of their lives and for.
tunes on their own courage alone, and contended
with so much vehemence for the preservation of
this favourite privilege of their order, that the fuc-

* Bruffel Urage des Fiefs, vol. ii. p. 96.
P Ordon. tom. i. p. 16.
VOL. I. F cellors

SECT. I. cefitrs of St. Louis, unable to oppose, and afraid

of offending such powerful fubjets, were obliged
not only to tolerate, but to authorize the pratice
which he had attempted to abolish . In other
countries of Europe, efforts equally zealous were
employed to maintain the efablifhed custom; and
limilar conce-flions were extorted from their refpec-
tive lbvereigns. It continued, however, to be an
obje& of policy with every monarch of abilities or
vigour, to explode the trial by combat; and vari-
ous edi&s were iffied for this purpose. But the
oblervation which was made concerning the right
of private war, is equally applicable to the mode
us trial under review. No custom, how absurd
fiever it may be, if it has subsisted long, or de-
rives its force from the manners and prejudices of
the age in which it prevails, was ever aboliihed
by the bare promulgation of laws and statutes.
The sentiments of the people must change, or rome
new power sufficient to counterac it must be in-
troduced. Such a change accordingly took place
in Europe, as science gradually increased, and so-
ciety advanced towards more perfect order. In
proportion as the prerogative of princes extended,
and came to acquire new force, a power, interested
in lipprerning every pra&cice favourable to the in-
dependence of the nobles, was introduced. The
struggle, nevertheless, subsisted for several centu-
ries; Sometimes the new regulations and ideas
seemed to gain ground; sometimes ancient habits
recurred; and though, upon the whole, the trial

' Ordon. tom. i, p. 38. 390. 435.

by

by combat went more and more into disuse, yet SECT. L
instances of it occur, as late as the sixteenth cen-
tury, in the history both of France and of Eng-
land. In proportion as it declined, the regular
administration ofjuftice was restored, the proceed-
ings of courts were directed by known laws, the
study of there became an object of attention to
judges, and the people of Europe advanced fat
towards civility, when this great cause of the fero.
city of their manners was removed [Y].

3. By authorizing the right of appeal from the The priv;

courts of the barons to those of the king, and peglingo
subjecting the decisions of the former to the review f thce a
of the latter, a new ftep, not less considerable the,' ats
than those which I have already mentioned, was imnP"ri,,
taken towards establishing the regular, confidfent, tininftru

tion of jul-

and vigorous administration of julice. Among tice.
all the encroachments of the feudal nobles on
the prerogative of their monarchs, their usurping
the administration ofjufiice with supreme autho-
rity, both in civil and criminal causes, within the
precincts of their own estates, was the molt fin-
gular. In other nations, subjects have contended
with their princes, and have endeavoured to ex-
tend their own power and privileges; but in the
history of their itruggles and pretensions, we dif-
cover nothing similar to this right which the
feudal barons claimed, and acquired. It muf Origin of
have been something peculiar in their genius and hndi.-m'
manners that suggested this idea, and prompted rrfidoj

the nobility,.
[Y] NOTE XXII.

F 2 them

SECT. I. them to insist on such a claim. Among the rude

people who conquered the various provinces of
the Roman Empire, and established new king-
doms there, the palfion of resentment, too impe-
tuous to bear controul, was permitted to remain
almost unreitrained by the authority of laws.
The person offended, as has been observed, re-
tained not only the right of prosecuting, but of
punishing his adversary. To him it belonged to
inflit such vengeance as satiated his rage, or to
accept of such satisfaCtion as appeased it. But
while fierce barbarians continued to be the sole
judges in their own cause, their enmities were im-
placable and immortal; they set no bounds either
to the degree of their vengeance, or to the dura-
tion of their resentment. The excefles which this
occasioned, proved so destructive of peace and
order in society, as forced them to think of some
remedy. At first, arbiters interposed, and by per-
suasion or intreaty prevailed on the party offended
to accept of a fine or composition from the ag-
greffor, and to drop all farther prosecution. But
as fubmifflon to persons who had no legal or magi.
fterial authority was altogether voluntary, it be-
came necessary to establish judges, with power
sufficient to enforce their own decisions. The
leader whom they were accustomed to follow and
to obey, whose courage they relpeaed, and in
whose integrity they placed confidence, was the
person to whom a martial people naturally com-
mitted this important prerogative. Every chieftain
was the commander of his tribe in war, and their

judge

judge in peace. Every baron led his vassals to SECT. I.
the field, and administered jutfice to them in his '
hall. Their high-fpirited dependants would not
have recognized any other authority, or have sub-
mitted to any other jurifdition. But in times of
turbulence and violence, the exercise of this new
funtion was attended not only with trouble, but
with danger. No person could assume the cha-
rafer of a judge, if he did not posiess power sus-
ficient to protet the one party from the violence
of private revenge, and to compel the other to
accept of such reparation as he enjoined. In con-
fideration of the extraordinary efforts which this
office required, judges, besides the fine which they
appointed to be paid as a compensation to the
person or family who had been injured, levied an
additional fum as a recompence for their own
labour; and in all the feudal kingdoms the latter
was not only as precisely ascertained, but as regu-
larly exacted, as the former.

THNs, by the natural operation of circumRfances The etent
peculiar to the manners or political state of the ,fnd^n b 6

tot fe of this

feudal nations, separate and territorial jurisdictions privilege.
came not only to be eltablifhed in every kingdom,
but were eftablifled in such a way, that the in-
terest of the barons concurred with their ambition
in maintaining and extending them. It was not
merely a point of honour with the feudal nobles
to dispense justice to their vasals; but from the
exercise of that power arose one capital branch of
their revenue i and the emoluments of their courts

- F 3 were

SECT. I. were frequently the main support of their dignity.

It was with infinite zeal that they avferted and
defended this high privilege of their order. By
this institution, however, every kingdom in Eu-
rope was split into as many separate principalities
as it contained powerful barons. Their vassals,
whether in peace or in war, were hardly sensible
of any authority, but that of their superior lord.
They felt themselves fubje& to no other com-
mand. They were amenable to no other jurif-
diaion. The ties which linked together these
smaller confederacies became close and firm; the
bonds of public union relaxed, or were dissolved.
The nobles strained their invention in devising re-
gulations which tended to ascertain and perpetuate
this diftinssion. In order to guard againit any
appearance of subordination in their courts to
those of the crown, they constrained their mo-
narchs to prohibit the royal judges from enter-
ing their territories, or from claiming anyjurif-
dition there; and if, either through miflake, or
from the spirit of encroachment, any royal judge
ventured to extend his authority to the vasals of
a baron, they might plead their right of exemp-
tion, and the lord of whom they held could not
only rescue them out of his hands, but was inti-
tied to legal reparation for the injury and affront
offered to him. The jurifdietion of the royal
judges scarcely reached beyond the narrow limits
of the king's demernes. Intfead of a regular gra-
dation of courts, all acknowledging the authority
of the fame general laws, and looking up to these

6 as

as the guides of their decisions, there were in SECT. I.
every feudal kingdom a thousand independent tri- '-
bunals, the proceedings of which were directed by
local cuftors and contradictory forms. The col-
lifion ofjurifdi&ion among these numerous courts
often retarded the execution of justice: The
variety and caprice of their modes of procedure
mull have for ever kept the adminifiration of it
from attaining any degree of uniformity or per-
feEtion.

ALL the monarchs of Europe perceived these Expedenat

encroachments on their jurisdiction, and bore them crnpo li
with impatience. But the usurpations of the nobles ,it or abo.
were so firmly eflablifhed, and the danger of en-
deavouring to overturn them by open force was
so manifcfr, that they were obliged to rem-.in
satisfied with attempts to undermine them. Vari-
ous expedients were employed for this purpose;
each of which merit attention, as they mark the
progress of law and equity in the several kingdoms
of Europe. At first, princes endeavoured to cir-
cumfcribe the jurifdidion of the barons, by per-
mitting them to take cognizance only of finaller
offences, reserving those of greater moment, under
the appellation of Pleas of the Crown, and Royal
aufes., to be tried in the king's courts. This
affectd only the barons of inferior note; the more
powerful nobles scorned such a diftindion, and
notonlyclaimed unlimitedjurifdi&ion, butobliged
their sovereigns to grant them charters, con-
veying or recognizing this privilege in the most

F 4 ample

SecrT I. ample form. The attempt, nevertheless, was pro.

du&ive of some good consequences, and paved
the way for more. It turned the attention of men
towards a jurifdiEtion diftin& from that of the
baron whose vassals they were; it accustomed them
to the pretensions of superiority which the crown
claimed over territorial judges; and taught them,
when oppressed by their own superior lord, to look
up to their sovereign as their protecor. This
facilitated the introducion of appeals, by which
princes brought the decisions of the barons' courts
under the review of the royal judges. While trial
by combat subsisted in full vigour, no point de-
cided according to that mode, could be brought
under the review of another court. It had been
referred to the judgment of God; the issue of
battle had declared his will; and it would have
been impious to have called in question the equity
of the divine decision. But as soon as that bar-
barous custom began to fall into disuse, princes
encouraged 1 the vassals of the barons to sue for
redress, by appealing to the royal courts. The
progress of this pra&ice, however, was sow and
gradual. The first instances of appeals were on
account of the delay or the reffal of jutlice in the
barons' court; and cs these were countenanced
by the ideas of subordination in the feudal con-
fitution, the nobles allowed them to be intro-
duced without much opposition. But when these
were followed by appeals on account of the in.
juflice or iniquity of the fentenee, the nobles then
began to be sensible, that if this innovation became

general,

general, the Ihadow of power alone would remain SecT. I.
in their hands, and all real authority and jurif--
diction would centre in those courts which pof-
fefled the right of review. They instantly took
the alarm, remonstrated against the encroachment,
and contended boldly for their ancient privileges.
But the monarchs in the different kingdoms of
Europe pursued their plan with steadiness and pru-
dence. Though forced to suspend their opera-
tions on some occasions, and seemingly to yield
when any formidable confederacy of their vassals
united against them, they resumed their measures
as soon as they observed the nobles to be remiss
or feeble, and pushed them with vigour. They
appointed the royal courts, which originally were
ambulatory, and irregular with relpect to their
times of meeting, to be held in a fixed place, and
at stated fearons. They were solicitous to name
judges of more distinguished abilities than such as
presided in the courts of the barons. They added
dignity to their character, and splendour to their
assemblies. They laboured to render their forms
regular, and their decrees confitent. Such judi-
catories became, of course, the obje&s of public
confidence as well as veneration. The people,
relinquilhing the partial tribunals of their 1;crJ;s,
were eager to bring every subjet of contest under
the more equal and discerning eye of thore whom
their sovereign had chosen to give judgment in
his name. Thus kings became once more the
heads of the community, and the difpenlcrs of

justice
9

SECT. I. justice to their fubjets. The barons, in fume

kingdoms, ceased to exercise their right of jurif-
di&ion, because it funk into contempt; in others,
it was circumscribed by such regulations as ren-
dered it innocent, or it was entirely abolifled by
express statutes. Thus the adminiltration ofjuf-
tice taking its rife from one source, and following
one diretion, held its course in every slate with
more uniformity, and with greater force [Z].

The regula- VI. THE forms and maxims of the canon law,
tions of the

Jnmn lawv which were become universally refpetable from

proimnle a
moreperfea their authority in the spiritual courts, contributed
adminiftra-
tion. not a little towards these improvements in jurif-

-- prudence which I have enumerated. If we confider

· the canon law politically, and view it either as a
^3) vyftem framed on purpose to aflift the clergy in

u furping powers and jurifdi&ion no less repugnant
to the nature of their funaion, than inconfiftentwith
the order of government; or as the chief inftru.
ment in eltablifling the dominion of the popes,
which shook the throne, and endangered the liber-
ties of every kingdom in Europe, we muf pro-
nounce it one of the most formideble engines ever
formed against the happiness of civil society. But
if we contemplate it merely as a code of laws
refpesting the rights and property of individuals,
:;nal attend only to the civil effeas of its decisions

,. concerning there, it will appear in a different,
,,1,2,,: .- and a much more favourable light. In ages of

[1 NOTE XXIII.

ignorance
l*

ignorance and credulity, the ministers of religion SECT. I.
are the objects of superstitious veneration. When
the barbarians who over-ran the empire first em-
braced the ChriRlian faith, they found the clergy
in poleffilon of considerable power; and they
naturally transferred to those new guides the pro-
found ftlbmiffion and reverence which they were
accustomed to yield to the priests of that religion
which they had forsaken. They deemed their
persons to be as sacred as their funcion; and
would have confidered it as impious to fubje&
them to the profanejurifdiction of the laity. The
clergy were not blind to the advantages which the
weakness of mankind afforded them. They efta-
blilhed courts, in which every question relating to
their own chara6ter, their function, or their pro-
perty was tried. They pleaded, and obtained an
almost total exemption from the authority of civil
judges. Upon different pretexts, and by a mul-
tiplicity of artifices, they communicated this pri-
vilege to so many persons, and extended their ju-
rifhiicion to such a variety of cafes, that the
greater part of those affairs which gave rife to
contest and litigation, was drawn under the cog-
nizance of the spiritual courts.

BuT in order to dispose the laity to susser these The plan of

ifurpations without murmuring or opposition, it 'l,'nl
was neceflary to convince them, that the admi- dancemore
niftration of jultice would be rendered more per- thatin the

civil coult*
fct by the eftabliniment of this newjurifdi&ion.

This

SECT. I. This was not a difficult undertaking, at the period

C"- when ecclefialtics carried on their encroachments

with the greatest success. That scanty portion
of science which served to guide men in the ages
of darkness, was wholly engrofled by the clergy.
They alone were accustomed to read, to enquire,
and to reason. Whatever knowledge of ancient
jurisprudence had been preserved, either by tradi-
tion, or in such books as had escaped the deftruc-
tive rage of barbarians, was possessed only by
them. Upon the maxims of that excellent system,
they founded a code of laws consonant to the
great principles of equity. Being direced by fixed
and known rules, the forms of their courts were
ascertained, and their decisions became uniform
and consistent. Nor did they want authority sus-
ficient to enforce their sentences. Excommuni-
cation and other ecclesiastical censures, were pu-
nilhments more formidable than any that civil
judges could inflit in support of their decrees.

The ged IT is not surprising, then, that ecclefiatical
efscbs of
imitirfs jurisprudence ihould become such an obijec of
id i.opt admiration and refpe&t that exemption from civil

jurifdi'tion was courted as a privilege, and con-
ferred as a reward. It is not surprising, that even
to rude people, the maxims of the canon law
ihould appear more equal and just than that ill.
digested jurisprudence which direced all proceed.
ings in the civil courts. According to the latter,
the differences between contending barons were

terminated,

terminated, as in a state of nature, by the sword; SECT. .
according to the former, every matter was sub- *-r
jeted to the decision of laws. The one, by per-
mitting judicial combats, left chance and force to
be arbiters of right or wrong, of truth or false-
hood; the other, passed judgment with refpet to
there by the maxims of equity, and the testimony
of witnesses. Any error or iniquity in a sentence
pronounced by a baron to whom feudal jurifdiclion
belonged, was irremediable, because originally it
was fubje& to the review of no superior tribunal;
the ecclesiastical law established a regular grada-
tion of courts, through all which a cause might be
carried by appeal, until it was determined by that
authority which was held to be supreme in the
church. Thus the genius and principles of the
canon law prepared men for approving those three
great alterations in the feudal jurisprudence which
I have mentioned. But it was not with refpe& to
these points alone that the canon law suggested
improvements beneficial to society. Many of the
regulations, now deemed the barriers of personal
security, or the safeguards of private property,
are contrary to the spirit, and repugnant to the
maxims of the civil jurisprudence, known in Eu-
rope during several centuries, and were borrowed
from the rules and pra&ice of the ecclesiastical
courts. By observing the wisdom and equity of
the decisions in these courts, men began to per-
ceive the necellity either of deserting the martial

tribunals

SECT. I. tribunals of the barons, or of attempting to re-

^

- form them [AA].

The rival VII. THE revival of the knowledge and fludy of
of the Ro-

ai lawR the Roman law co-operated with the causes which

contributes
,or' liberal I have mentioned, in introducing more just and
ideU cnJ, liberal ideas concerning the nature of government,
eeningju£-
ice and or- and the administration ofjuftice. Among the ca-

d. lamities which the devastations of the barbarians

who broke in upon the empire brought upon
mankind, one of the greatest was their overturn-
ing thefyftem of Roman jurisprudence, the noblest
monument of the wifdori of that great people,

The ir- formed to subdue and to govern tre world. The
fir^m hic, laws and regulations of a civilized community,
hiRfelln- were altogether repugnant to the manners and
eoblijion. ideas of there fierce invaders. They had refpec'

to objecs of which a rude people had no con-
ception and were adapted to a state of society
with which they were entirely unacquainted. For
this reason, wherever they fettled, the Roman
jurisprudence soon funk into oblivion, and lay
buried for some centuries under the load of those
institutions which the inhabitants of Europe dig-
nified with the name of laws. But towards the
middle of the twelfth century, a copy of Jufti-
nian's PandeAs was accidentally discovered in
Italy. By that time, the slate of society was so
far advanced, and the ideas of men so much en-

[AA] NOTE XXIV.

larged

larged and improved by the occurrences of several SECT. L
centuries, during which they had continued in circ-
political union, that they were struck with admi- "it's,
ration of a system which their ancestors could not vr"v'vc he

revival of it.

comprehend. Though they had not hitherto at-
tained such a degree of refinement, as to catch
from the ancients a relish for true philosophy, or
speculative science; though they were Rill insen-
fible to the beauty and elegance of claflical com-
position; they were sufficiently qualified to judge
with refpe&t to the merit of their system of laws,
in which all the points mos interefing to man-
kind, and the chief obje&s of their attention in
every age, were fettled with discernment, precision
and equity. All men of letters studied this new
science with eagerness and within a few years
after the discovery of the Pandets, professors of
civil law were appointed, who taught it publicly
in nmot countries of Europe.

THE effects of having such a perfelt model to The effcis

study and to imitate were soon manifest. Men, as f tisup:
soon as they were acquainted with fixed and ge- ,etn, i.d
neral laws, perceived the advantage of them, and f.tio, of
became impatient to ascertain the principles and
forms by which judges Ihould regulate their deci-
sions. Such was the ardour with which they car-
ried on an undertaking of so great importance to
society, that, before the close of the twelfth cen-
tury, the feudal law was reduced into a regular
system; the code of canon law was enlarged and

methodized;

SECT. I. methodized; and the loose uncertain customs of
' *- different provinces or kingdoms were colleced

and arranged with an order and accuracy acquired
from the knowledge of Roman jurisprudence. In
some countries of Europe the Roman law was
adopted as subsidiary to their own municipal law;
and all cafes to which the latter did not extend,
were decided according to the principles of the
former. In others, the maxims as well as forms
of Roman jurisprudence, mingled imperceptibly
with the laws of the country, and had a powerful,
though less sensible, influence, in improving and
perfecing them [BB].

From al, THESE various improvements in the fyfsem of
thi aro jurisprudence, and adminifiration ofjuftice, occa-
in pross. ioned a change in manners, of great importance,

and of extensive effect. They gave rife to a dif-
tinclion of profefilons; they obliged men to cul.
tivate different talents, and to aim at different
accomplilhments, in order to qualify themselves
for the various departments and funtions which
became necefiary in society'. Among uncivilized
nations, there is but one profeflion honourable,
that of arms. All the ingenuity and vigour of
the human mind are exerted in acquiring military
Ikill, or address. The functions of peace are few
and simple; and require no particular course of

[BB] NOTE XXV.
, Dr. Ferguron's E.ahy on the Hifory of Civil Society, part
iv. leht. i.

education

education or of Rudy, as a preparation for dif- SECT. I.
charging them. This was the state of Europe
during several centuries. Every gentleman, born
a soldier, scorned any other occupation; he was
taught no science but that of war; even his exer-
cifes and pastimes were feats of martial prowess.
Nor did the judicial character, which persons of
noble birth were alone entitled to assume, demand
any degree of knowledge beyond that which such
untutored soldiers possessed. To recollea a few
traditionary customs which time had confirmed.
and rendered refpeftable; to mark out the lifts of
battle with due formality; to observe the iffuc of
the combat; and to pronounce whether it had
been conduced according to the laws of arms;
included every thing that a baron, who ated as a
judge, found it necessary to underfand.

BUT when the forms of legal proceedings were Thel: fre

fixed, when the rules of decision were committed 'c tcitty'0o
to writing, and collected into a body, law became
a science, the knowledge of which required a
regular course of study, together with long atten-
tion to the practice of courts. Martial and illi-
terate nobles, had neither leisure nor inclination to
undertake a talk so laborious, as well as so foreign
from all the occupations which they deemed enter-
taining, or suitable to their rank. They gradu-
ally relinquilhed their places in courts ofjuRfice,
where their ignorance exposed them to contempt.
They became weary of attenling to the difcIuiion

VOL. I. G u

SECT. I. of cafer, which grew too intricate for them to

comprehend. Not only the judicial determination
of points which were the fubjecit of controversy,
but the conduct of all legal business and tranfac-
tions was committed to perfuns trained by previous
fludy and application to the knowledge of law.
An order of men, to whom their fellow-citizens
had daily recourse for advice, and to whom they
looked up for decifon in their most important
concerns, naturally acquired conlideration and in-
fluence in society. They were advanced to ho-
nours which had been confidered as the peculiar
rewards of military virtue. They were entrusted
with offices of the hilghef dignity, and molt exten-
five power. Thus, another profeflion than that
of arms, came to be introduced among the laity,
and was reputed honourable. The fun&tions of ci-
vil life were attended to. The talents requisite for
discharging them were cultivated. A new road
was opened to wealth and eminence. The arts
and virtues of peace were placed in their proper
rank, and received their due recompence [CC].

Tle rp,, VIII. WHILE improvements, so important with
of chiv.ary
introduce, refpeE to the state of society and the adminif'tra"

nore liberal
f.ntinients. tion ofjultice, gradually made progress in Europe,
generou, sentiments more liberal and generous had begun
anner. to animate the nobles. Thele were inspired by

the spirit of Chivalry, which, though confidered,
commonly, as a wild inltitution, the effeet of

[CC] NOTE XXVI.

caprice,

caprice, and the source of extravagance, arose SECT. I.
naturally from the state of fbciety at that period, --
and had a very serious influence in refining the
manners of the European nations. The feudal O.in of
state was a stare of perpetual war, rapine, and
anarchy; during which the weak and unarmed
were exposed every moment to insults or injuries.
The power of the sovereign was too limited to
prevent these wrongs; and the administration of
justice too feeble to redress them. There was
scarcely any protecion against violence and op-
preflion, but what the valour and generosity of
private persons afforded. The fame spirit ofenter-
prise which had prompted so many gentlemen to
take arms in defence of the oppressed pilgrims in
Palestine, incited others to declare themselves the
patrons and avengers of injured innocence at
home. When the final redution of the Holy
Land under the dominion of infidels put an end
to these foreign expeditions, the latter was the
only employment left for the aAivity and courage
of adventurers. To check the infqlence of over-
grown oppreflors; to succour the diftrcffed; to
rescue the helples from captivity; to proteCt, or
to avenge women, orphans, and ecclesiastics, who.
could not bear arms in their own defence to
redress wrongs, and to remove grievances; were
tleemed a&s of the highelt prowess and merit.
Valour, humanity, courrefy, justice, honour, were
the charateriflic qualities of chivalry. To these
were added religion, which mingled irfelf with
every pafflon and institution during the nmiddls

l, a ages,

SECT. r. ages, and by infusing a large proportion of enthu.'

' - fiaftic zeal, gave them such force, as carried them

to romantic excess. Men were trained to knight-
hood by a long previous discipline; they were
admitted into the order by folemnities no less de-
vout than pompous; every person of noble birth
courted that honour; it was deemed a diftin&ion
superior to royalty, and monarchs were proud to
receive it from the hands of private gentlemen.

, ten",- THIS singular institution, in which valour, gal-
cial cfiti:.

lantry, and religion, were so firangely blended,
was wonderfully adapted to the taste and genius
of martial nobles; and its effets were soon visible
in their manners. War was carried on with less
ferocity, when humanity came to be deemed the
ornament of knighthood no less than courage.
More gentle and polished manners were intro-
duced; when courtesy was recommended as the
most amiable of knightly virtues. Violence and
oppression decreased, when it was reckoned meri-
torious to check and to puniflh them. A fcrupu-
lous adherence to truth, with the modt religious
attention to fulfil every engagement, became the
ditinguifhing charaaeriftic of a gentlt:man, be-
cause chivalry was regarded as the school of
honour, and inculcated the most delicate sensibility
with refpe& to that point. The admiration of
these qualities, together with the high distinctions
and prerogatives conferred on knighthood in every
part of Europe, inlpirct persons of noble birth on

folne

some occasions with a species of military fana- S ecT..
ticism, and led them to extravagant enterprises.
But they deeply imprinted on their minds the
principles of generosity and honour. These were
strengthened by every thing that can assea the
senses, or touch the heart. The wild exploits of
those romantic knights who sallied forth in quest
of adventures, are well known, and have been
treated with proper ridicule. The political and
permanent effets of the spirit of chivalry have
been less observed. Perhaps, the humanity which
accompanies all the operations of war, the refine-
ments of gallantry, and the point of honour, the
three chief circumstances which diftingui(h modern
from ancient manners, may be ascribed in a great
measure to this whimsical inititution, femingly of
little benefit to mankind. The sentiments which
chivalry inspired, had a wonderful influence on
manners and conduCt during the twelfth, thir-
teenth, fourteenth, and fifteenth centuries. They
were so deeply rooted, that they continued to
operate after the vigour and reputation of the
institution itself began to decline. Some confi-
derable tranfaEtions, recorded in the following
hi.fory, resemble the, adventurous exploits of chi-
valry, rather than the well-regulated operations
of found policy. Some of the rmofi eminent per-
fonages, whofre chara,~ers will be delineated, were
[trongly tinctured with this romantic spirit. Fran-
cis I. was ambitious to diltinguilh himnfel by all
the qoalitics of an accomplished knighr, and en-

G 3 tn.ivourcd

SECT.I. deavoured to imitate the enterprising genius of

chivalry in war, as well as its pomp and courtesy
during peace. The fame which he acquired by
there splendid actions, to far dazzled his more
temperate rival, that he departed on tome occa-
sions from his usual prudence and moderation, and
emulated Francis in deeds of prowess, or of gal-
lantry [DD].

The pfCi IX. THE progress of science, and the cultiva-
ence his tion of literature, had considerable effeet in chang-
g' .et T nl.U-
Ence on die ing the manners of the European nations, and
"1 linets
and ethrac- introducing that civility and refinement by which
trr.en. they are now diftinguilhed. At the time when

their Empire was overturned, the Romans, though
they had loft that correct taste which has rendered
the productions of their ancestors the standards of
excellence, and models of imitation for succeed-
ing ages, fill preserved their love of letters, and

Ignoran'e cultivated the arts with great ardour. But rude
of the nid.
dle.d? barbarians were so far from being fIruck with any

admiration of these unknown accompliflhments,
that they despised them. They were not arrived
at that state of society, when those faculties of the
human mind, which have beauty and elegance
for their objects, begin to unfold themrelves.
They were strangers to all those wants and defies
which are the parents of ingenious invention; and
as they did not comprehend either the merit or
utility of the Roman arts, they destroyed the mo-

[DD] NOTE XXVIr.

nuinicnts

numents of them, with industry not inferior to that SzcT. I.
with which their posterity have since studied to
preserve, or to recover them. The ;onvulfions
occasioned by their settlement in the Empire; the
frequent as well as violent revolutions in every
kingdom which they eftablifled; together with
tie interior defecs in the form of government
which they introduced, banilted security and lei-
sure; prevented the growth of tafl, or the culture
of science; and kept Europe, during several cen-
turies, in that state of ignorance which has been
already described. But the events and inflitutions
which I have enumerated, produced great altera-
tions in society. As soon as their operation, in re-
toring liberty and independence to one part of the
community, began to be felt; as soon as they be-
gan to communicate to all the members of society
some taste of the advantages arising from colm-
merce, from public order, and firom personal icu-
rity, the human mind became conlcious of powers
which it did not formerly perceive, and fond of
occupations or pursuits of which it was formerly
incapable. Towards the beginning of the twelfth
century, we discern the sirs sy.mptoms of its
awakening fiom that lethargy in which it had been
long funk, and oblsrve it turning with curiosity
and attention towards new o'!jecs.

THE fir-lc literary efforts, however, of the Euro- Tr. fr i ;-

pean nations in the middle ages, were extremely tri-;.,I.
ill.directed. Among nations, as well as individu- '",''1'
als, the powers of inmagination a:tain Ibme degree '

G4 of

Szc,. I. of vigour before the intellectai faculties are much

L*^' exercised in speculative or abftrat disquisition.

Men are poets before they are philosophers. They
feel with sensibility, and describe with force, when
they have made but little progress in inveafigation
or reasoning. The age of Homer and of Hesiod
long preceded that of Thales, or of Socrates. But,
unhappily for literature, our ancestors, deviating
from this course which nature points out, plunged
at once into the depths of abstruse and metaphy-
lical inquiry. They had been converted to the
Christian faith, soon after they fettled in their new
conquelts. But they did not receive it pure. The
presumption of men had added to the simple and
inftruaive docrines of Chrillianity the theories of
a vain philosophy, that attempted to penetrate into
mysteries, and to decide queltions which the li-
mited faculties of the human mind are unable to
comprehend, or to resolve. These over-curious
speculations were incorporated with the system of
religion, and came to be confidered as the molt
essential part of it. As soon, then, as curiosity
prompted men to inquire and to reason, these were
the fubjets which first presented themselves, and
en3igaged their attention. The fcholaflic theology,
with its infinite train of bold difquilitions, and sub-
tile difliintions concerning points which are not
the object of human reason, was the first produc-
tion of the spirit of inquiry after it began to re-
ibme rome degree of acivity and vigour in Eu-
rope. It was not this circum.tance alone that gave

such

fuch.a wrong turn to the minds of men, when they SECTI.
began again to exercise talents which they had so
long negleted. Most of the persons who attempted
to revive literature in the twelfth and thirteenth
centuries, had received inftrutionA or derived their
principles of science from the Greeks in the eastern
Empire, or from the Arabians in Spain and Africa.
Both these people, acute and inquisitive to excess,
corrupted those sciences which they cultivated.
The former rendered theology a fyltem of fpecu-
lative refinement, or of endless controversy. The
latter communicated to philosophy a spirit of me-
taphyfical and frivolous subtlety. Misled by these
guides, the persons who first applied to science were
involved in a maze of intricate inquiries. Instead
of allowing their fancy to take its natural range,
and to produce such works of invention as might
have improved their taste, and refined their senti-
ments; instead of cultivating those arts which em-
bellilh human life, and render it comfortable; they
were fettered by authority, they were led astray
by example, and wafted the whole force of their
genius in speculations as unavailing as they were
difficult.

BUT fruitless and ill-dire&ed as these fpecula- Tirv hba,

tions were, their novelty rouzed, and their boldness i,:,fl;abie
interelted the human mind. The ardour with which C'-'.'
men pursued those uninviting studies, was aflonifh-
ing. Genuine philoolphy was never cultivated, in
any enlightened age, with more zeal. Schools, upon
the model of those inlfitutel by Charlemagne,

SW tCr

SET. I. were opened in every cathedral, and almofl in

every monastery of note. Colleges and univerri-
ties were ereeted, and formed into communities
or corporations, governed by their own laws, and
invelted with separate and extensive jurifdi&icn
over their own members. A regular course of
ltudies was planned. Privileges of great value
were conferred on masters and scholars. Acade-
mical titles and honours of various kinds were in-
vented as a recompence for both. Nor was it in
the schools alone that superiority in science led to
reputation and authority; it became an obje& of
refpec' in life, and advanced such as acquired it
to a rank of no inconsiderable eminence. Allured
by all these advantages, an incredible number of
v students resorted to those new feats of learning,

and crowded with eagerness into that new path
which was opened to fame and diftintion.

A circumn. BUT how considerable soever these firR efforts
tlancewhich
prevented may appear, there was one circumflance which pre-

,re aite., vented the effets of them from being as extensive
five' as they ought to have been. All the languages in

Europe, during the period under review, were bar-
barous. They were destitute of elegance, offorce,
and even of perspicuity. No attempt had been
hitherto made to improve or to polish them. The
Latin tongue was consecrated by the church to re-
ligion. C;ltom, with authority scarcely less fa-
cred, had appropri:ited it to literature. All the
1cienccs cultivated in the twelfth and thirteenth
centuries, were taught in L:tin. All books with

refpet

refpec to them were written in that language. To SECT. I.
have treated of any important subjet in a modern
language, would have been deemed a degradation
of it. This confined science within a very narrow
circle. The learned alone were admitted into the
temple of knowledge; the gate was ihut againLt
all others, who were allowed to remain involved in
their former darkness and ignorance.

BUT though science was thus prevented, during i;tinflucne

several ages, from diffusing itself through society, o, .T,.'
and its influence much circumlcribedl the pro- tntiu"*
grefs which it made may be mentioned, neverthe-
less, among the great causes which contributed to
introduce a change of manners into Europe. The
ardent, though ill-judged spirit of inquiry which I
have described, occasioned a fermentation of mind
that put ingenuity and invention in motion, and
gave them vigour. It led men to a new employment
of their faculties, which they found to be agreeable
as well as interesting. It accustomed them to ex-
ercires and occupations which tended to soften
their manners, and to give them some relish for
the gentle virtues, peculiar to nations among
which science had been cultivated with ifcccfs
LEE].

X. THE progress of commerce had considerable The pro.

influence in polilling the manners of the European mnrce ha
na.tions. and in leading them to order, equal laws, nt nlo"'

EL] N O'r E XXVIL govrrment.

and

SECT. . Iand humanity. The wants of men, in the original
^' ~" and mos simple itate of society, are so few, and

their desires so limited, that they reft contented
with the natural producions of their climate and
foil, or with what they can add to these by their
own rude intuftry. They have no superfluities to
dispose of, and few neceflities that demand a sup-
ply. Every little community fubfifling on its own
domeflick flock, and satisfied with it, is either un-
acquainted with the states around it, or at variance

ta:cfleof with them. Society and manners mull be con-
commerce
inthe m;d. fiderably improved, and many provisions mutt be
die ages.

made for public order and personal security, before
a liberal intercourse can take place between differ-
ent nations. We find, accordingly, that the first
effect of the settlement of the barbarians in the
Empire, was to divide those nations which the
Roman power had united. Europe was broken
into many separate communities. The intercourse
between there divided states, ceased almost totally
during several centuries. Navigation was dange-
rous in teas infefred by pirates; nor could firan-
gers trust to a friendly reception in the ports of
uncivilized nations. Even between distant parts
of the fmrne kingdom, the communication was rare
and dilicuTt. The lawlels rapine of banditti, to-
gether with the avowed exactions of the nobles,
iicarcely lets formidable and oppreflive, rendered
ajourney of any length a perilous enterprise. Fixed
to the spot in which they resided, the greater part
es the inhabi;anrs of Europe loft, in a great mca-
fi'rc, the ?:now.!.e d e cf remote regions, and were

un acquaiin ted

unacquainted with their names, their situations, SECT.I.
their climates, and their commodities [FS].

VARIOUS caures, however, contributed to revive caifes of

the spirit of commerce, and to renew, in some de- it'"s c*:.
gree, the intercourse between different nations.
The Italians, by their conneEtion with Conflanti-
nople, and other cities of the Greek empire, had
preserved in their own country some relish for the
precious commodities and curious manufacures
of the East. They communicated some know-
ledge of these to the countries contiguous to Italy.
But this commerce was extremely limited, nor was
the intercourse which it occasioned between differ-
ent nations considerable. The Crusades, by lead-
ing multitudes from every corner of Europe into
Asia, opened a more extensive communication be-
tween the EaR and Weft, which subsisted for two
centuries; and though the obje& of there expe-
ditions was conquest and not commerce; though
the issue of them proved as unfortunate, as the
motives for undertaking them were wild and en-
thufiaftic, their commercial effects, as hath been
shewn, were both beneficial and permanent. Dur-
ing the continuance of the Crusades, the great cities
in Italy, and in other countries of Europe, acquired
liberty, and together with it such privileges as ren-
dered them refpe&able and independent commu-
nities. Thus, in every state, there was formed a
new order of citizens, to whom commerce pre-
sented itself as their proper objec, and opened to

[FS] NOTE XXIX.

tlihe

SECT.rI. them a certain path to wealth and dignity. Soon
1- '- after the clofi of the Holy War, the mariner's conm

pass was invented, which. by rendering navigation
more secure as well as more adventrous, facilitated
the communication between remote nations, and
brought them nearer to each other.
Fitll amcng THE Italian States, during the fame period, efta-

, bliihed a regular commerce with the East in the

ports of Egypt, and drew from thence all the rich
produts of the Indies. They introduced into
their own territories manufactures of various kinds,
and carried them on with great ingenuity and vi-
gour. They attempted new arts; and rranfplanted
from warmer climates, to which they had been
hitherto deemed peculiar, several natural produc-
tions which now furnish the materials of a lucra-
tive and extended commerce. All there commo-
dities, whether imported from Aia, or produced
by their own skill, they disposed of to great ad-
vantage among the other people of Europe, who
began to acquire some taste of elegance unknown
to their ancestors, or despised by them. During
the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, the commerce
of Europe was almost entirely in the hands of the
Italians, more commonly known in those ages
by the name of Lombards. Companies or focie-
ties of Lombard merchants fettled in every differ-
ent kingdom. They were taken under the imme-
diate protecion of the several governments. They
enjoyed extensive privileges and immunities. The
operation of the ancient barbarous laws concerning

Itrangers,

strangers, was suspended with refpe&t to them. SECT. .
They became the carriers, the manufaturers, and
the bankers of all Europe.

WHILE the Italians, in the south of Europej Thlcbyrte

mean~of the

cultivated trade with such indultry and success, mIIAJletik.
the commercial spirit awakened in the North to-
wards the middle of the thirteenth century. As the
nations around the Baltick were, at that time, ex-
tremely barbarous, and infested that sea with their
piracies, the cities of Lubeck and Haamburgh,
soon after they began to open some trade with there
people, found it neceflary to enter into a league of
mutual defence. They derived such advantages
from this union, that other towns acceded to their
confederacy, and, in a short time, eighty of the
molt considerable cities scattered through those vail
countries which stretch from the bottom of the
Baltick to Cologne on the Rhine, joined in the
famous Hanfeatick league, which became so for-
midable, that its alliance was courted, and its en-
mity was dreaded by the grcateft monarchs. The
members of this powerful association formed the
first fyftematick plan of commerce known in the
middle ages, and condu&ed it by common laws
enated in their general assemblies. They i upplied
the ret of Europe with naval Itores, and pitched
on different towns, the molt eminent of which was
Bruges in Slanders, where they leablifhcd staples
in which their commerce was regularly carried on.
Thither the Lombards bro:ught the p!od utions of

India,

SACT. I. India, together with the manufatures of Italy, and

o~-. exchanged them for the more bulky, but not less

useful commodities of the North. The Hansea-
tick merchants disposed of the cargoes which they
received from the Lombards, in the ports of the
Baltick, or carried them up the great rivers into
the interior parts of Germany.

Comme"c THIS regular intercourse opened between the
makes pror
grefs in the nations in the North and South of Europe, made
Nethero
Iands them sensible of their mutual wants, and created

such new and vast demands for commodities of
every kind, that it excited among the inhabitants
of the Netherlands a more vigorous spirit in car-
rying on the two great manufactures of wool and
flax, which teem to have been considerable in that
country as far back as the age of Charlemagne.
As Bruges became the centre of communication
between the Lombard and Hanfeatick merchants,
the Flemings traded with both in that city to such
extent as well as advantage, as spread among them
a general habit of industry, which long rendered
Slanders and the adjacent provinces the most opu-
lent, the most populous, and best cultivated coun-
tries in Europe.
and in STRUCK with the flouriihnng state of there pro-

vinces, of which he discerned the'true cause, Ed-
ward III. of England endeavoured to excite a fpi-
rit of industry among his own subje&s, who, blind
to the advantages of their situation, and ignorant

8 of

of the source from which opulence was deslined SECT. I.
to flow into their country, were so little attentive to
their commercial interefs, as hardly to attempt
thoie manufaCtureS, the materials of which they
furnished to foreigners. By alluring Flemi!h arti-
fans to fcttle in his dominions, as well as by llany
wife laws for the encouragement and regulation of
trade, Edward gave a beginning to the woollen
manufactures of England, and first turned the ac-
tive and enterprizing genius of his people towards
thol arts which have raited the Englifl to the
hiilghcif: rank among conmmercial nations.

Tnis increase of commerce, and of intercourse Thr inrz-;

ciai cfef. t

between nations, how inconGiderable soever it may of tiis.
appear in relpe&t of their rapid and extensive pro-
grels during the lalf and present age, seems vast,
when we compare it with the ifate of both in Eu-
rope previous to the twelfth century. It did not
fail of producing great eiTets. Commerce tends
to wear ofl those prejudices which maintain diftinc-
tion and animosity between nations. It softens and
polishes the manners of men. It unites them by
one of the strongest of all ties, the dceire of sup-
plying their mutual wan:s. It dilpols them to
peace, by eflablinfing in every flare an order of
citizens bound by their intcrefl to be the guardians
of public tranquiliity. As soon as the commercial
ftirit begins to acquire vigour, and to gain an as-
cendant in any lfciety, we lif:over a new genius in
its pl'licy, its alliances, its wars, and its negociations.

VOL. I. ti Ccnfpicuous

SECT. I Conspicuous proofs of this occur in the history of

the Italian States, of the Hanleatic league, and
the cities of the Netherlands during the period
under review. In proportion as commerce made
its way into the different countries of Europe, they
fucceffivcly turned their attention to thofi objects,
and adopted those manners, which occupy ar.t
distinguish polilhed nations [GG].

[GG] NOTE XXX.

# A VIEW OF THE PROGRESS OF SOCIETY IN EUROPE, FROM THE SUBVERSION OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE, TO THE BEGINNING OF THE SIXTEENTH CENTURY.

## SECTION II. View of the Progress of Society in Europe, with respect to the command of the national force requisite in foreign operations.

A
V I E W

OF THE
PROGRESS OF SOCIETY

IN
E U R P E,

FROM THE
SUBVERSION OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE,

TO THE
BEGINNING OF THE SIXTEENTH CENTURY.

SECTION II.
View of the Progress of Society in Europe, 'witb

refpetl to the command of the nationalforce requi-
Jit in foreign operations.
SU C H are the events and institutions, which, SE. If.

by their powerful operation, contributed gra- -

dually to introduce more regular government and ci'ey retly
more polilhed manners into the various nations of iPboe14 c
Europe. When we furvev the fate of society, or fii," ohe
the charater of individuals, at the opening ot the .cnt,.y.

I-I fifteenth

SECT. IL. fifteenth century, and then turn back to view the

* condition of both at the time when the barbarous

tribes, which overturned the Roman power, com-
pleted their fettlcmnent in their new conquests, the
progress which mankind had made towards order
and refinement will appear immense.

S.iil ,e- GOVERNMENT, however, was fiill far from ha-
ti:tc ::t rec .
ip.Cto tic ving attained that lrate, in which extensive mo-
comman.l ( ,f
the n.tioinl narcllies as with united vigour, or carry on great

"' undertakings with perfcverance and success. Small

tribes or communitics, even in rheir rudest Pate,
may operate 'n conce:t, and exert their utinofl
force. They are excited to act not by the distant
objecs or the refined fIeculations, which interest
or aiTc& men in poliflhcd Ibcieties, but by their
prelfnt feelings. The insults of an enemy kindle
relentmcnt; the success of a rival tribe awakens
emulation: thele paflions communicate from breast
to breast, and all the members of the community,
with united ardour, rush into the field in order to
gratify their revenge, or to acquire diftiniion.
But in widely extended ltates, such as the great
kingdoms of Europe at the beginning of the sis-
teenth century, where there is little intercourse
between the dillant members of the community,
and where every great enterprize requires previous
concert and long preparation, nothing can rouse
and call forth their united flrength, but the ablb-
lute command of a despot, or the powerful in-
fluence of regular policy. Of the former, the valt

empires

empires in the E.;.fq are an examplle; the irrefS1F- SECT. II.
ible tn:' ...t: of t'ie lt'vcrei l r,.cii s tihe muit
remote p-rvinces of !is dominio:is, anu c(,ii-.ls
whatever nuibcr of his fubjccis he is pleasld to
summon, to follo;v his i'.tndard. The kin(dlco;;s
of Europe, in the prd'cfint a., .:re an inflince of
the latter the prin ec, ty the ir'; vioi'enr, Ib.t no
lets effectual operation ors ia.s and a ve!!-r gu-
lated governmlnt, is enabiL! ro) :vail !;inm'.lf of
the whole force of i'is .., . to ir in
cnterprizes which lcqu;irc ]lii'coLU and pcrfivce-
ring eiorts.

BuT, at the opening of the firteenth century, Tr.er. .r

the political conittiutlon in all lie ingdomns of vrrylmit.
Europc; was very Jiler cnt from either of tllcl't fates cd
of government. The livcrai monarchs, tliough
they had fomrewhat cnlargrd the boundaries of pre-
rogative by fuccetfiLil encroaciiments on the im-
munities and privileges of the nobility, were pof-
I-ni.d of an authority extremely limited. The laws
and interior police of kiin dom s, thoighi much im-
proved by the various event:s and regulations which
I have enumrrated, were f;ill IfC.ble and iniper-
sect. In every country, a numerous body of no-
bles, who continued to be formidable notwithlland-
ing the various expediencs rnmployed to deprels
thl:m, watched all the rlntions of their foivereign
with a jealous aitcn tion, which fetbound(s to iis ain-
bition, and cither prevented his forming fcheinc, of

H 3 cxtcnfive

SECT. Ir. extensive enterprize, or thwarted the execution

of them.
Their ,r,- THE ordinary revenues of every prince were so

extremely finall as to be inadequate to any great
undertaking. He depended for extraordinary lup-
plies on the good-will of his subje&s, who granted
them often with a reluctant, and always with a
sparing hand.

Their ar- As the revenues of princes were inconfidcrable,
mies unfit
futconquclt. the armies which they could bring into the field

were unfit for long and effectual service. Inltcad
of being able to employ troops trained to ikill in
arms, and to military Subordination, by regular
discipline, monarchs were obliged to depend on
such forces as their vassals conduced to their
itandard in consequence of their military tenures.
These, as they were bound to remain under arms
only for a short time, could not march far from
their usual place of residence, and being more
attached to the lord of whom they held, than to
the sovereign whom they served, were often as
much disposed to countera& as to forward his
£chemes. Nor were they, even if they had been
more subject to the command of the monarch,
proper instruments to carry into execution any
great and arduous enterprize. The strength of
an army, formed either for conquest or defence,
lies in infantry. To the liability and discipline
of their legions, confifing chiefly of infantry, the

Romans,

Romans, during the times of the republic, were SECT. II.
indebted for all their viAories; and when their
descendants, forgetting the institutions which had
led them to universal dominion, so far altered their
military fyllem as to place their principal confi-
dence in a numerous cavalry, the undisciplined
impetuosity of-the barbarous nations who fought
moltly on foot, was sufficient, as I have already
observcd, to overcome then. These nations, soon
after they fettled in their new conquests, unin-
ltruted by the fatal error of the Romans, relin-
quifhed the customs of their ancestors, and con-
verted the chief force of their armies into cavalry.
Among the Romans this change was occasioned
by the effeminacy of their troops, who could not
endure the fatigues of service, which their more
virtuous and hardy ancestors sustained with ease.
Among the people who eftabliflied the new mo-
narchies into which Europe was divided, this
innovation in military discipline seems to have
flowed from the pride of the nobles, who scorning
to mingle with persons of inferior rank, aimed at
being distinguished from them in the field, as well
as during peace. The institution of chivalry, and
the frequency of tournaments, in which knights,
in complete armour, entered the lifts on horseback
with extraordinary splendour, displaying amazing
address, and force, and valour, brought cavalry
into still greater esteem. The fondness for that
service increased to such a degree, that, during
the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries, the armies

H 4 of

Sc.r. II. of Europe were composRd almnoft entirely of ca-

valry. No gentleman would appear in the field
but on horfcback. To i rve in any other manner,
he would have deemed derogatory to his rank.
The cavalry, by way of dcliitincion, was called
1he b,:!:e, and on it alone depended the fate of
every action. The infnirry, collcded fiomi the
dregs and refute of the people, ill armed and
worfc dii'cplined, was of no account.

Trr.ryr in- As thcfc circulnflances rendered the operations
Crap le ei

,,: .ng.any of particular kingdoms lets considerable and lels
e^ r.s r vigorous, so they long kept the princes of Europe
pIli, . .p"e. from giving fich attention to the fchemnes and

tran,'acions of their neighbours, as led them to
form any regular system of public security. They
prevented them from uniting in confederacy, or
from acting with concert, in order to eftabliih such
a distribution and balance of power, as fliould
hinder any slate from riling to a superiority, which
might endanger the general liberty and independ-
ence. During several centuries, the nations of
Europe appear to have confidered themselves as
separate societies, scarcely connected together by
any common interest, and little contcerned in each
others' affairs or operations. An extensive com-
merce did not aflord them an opportunity of ob-
frrving and penetrating into the schemes of every
different state. They had not ambassadors residing
conffantly in every court to watch and give early
intelligence of all its motions. The expecation

of
3

of remote advantages, or the pro!pe& of diflant SECT. II.
and contingent evils, were not fu.lcient to excite
nations to take arms. They only, who were
within the fr:here of immediate dan;er, and un-
avoidably ea:polcd to inj!;'ry or ;il!llir, thought
thernliclves interested in any contelt, or bound to
take precautions for their own safety.

WHOEVER records the tranfaltions of any of They were

lit'e crn-

the more considerable European fra;es during the netell , ith
two lafl centuries, mufl write the hi'ior, of Eu- each hh"r.
rope. Its various kingdoms, throughout that
period, have been formed into one great fyflcIm,
so clol;:ly united, that each holding a determinate
station, the operations of one are so felt by all,
as to influence their counsels and regulate their
mealures. But previous to the fifteenth century,
unless when vicinity of territory rendered the occa-
sions of discord frequent and unavoidable, or
when national emulation fomented or embittered
the spirit of hoflility, the af'airs of diiterent coun-
fries are feidom interwoven. In each king;!om of
Europe great events and revolutions happened,
which the other powers beheld with alinoei the
fame indiflirence as if tlhey uadl been unintereted
fpedators, to whom the elic-l of thefc tranfadcions
could never extend.

During the violent firuggles between France Aconfirm, .

and England, and notwithllanding the alarming i,'f 'hi
prosrefs which was made towards rendering one 'F",,iof

prince

SECT. II. prince the master of both these kingdoms, hardly

one measure, which can be confidered as the result
of a sagacious and prudent policy, was formed in
order to guard against an event lo fatal to Europe.
The dukes of Burgundy and Brctagne, whom
their situation would not permit to remain neutral,
engaged, it is true, in the conteit; but in taking
their part, they lecml rather to have followed the
impulse of thicir paflions, than to have been
guided by any jult discernment of the danger
which threatened thcinfelves and the tranquillity
of Europe. The other princes, seemingly unaf-
feeted by the alternate ItlccdTes of the contending
partics, left them to decide the quarrel, or inter-
posed only by feeble and ineffectual negociations.

Frnm those NOTWITHSTANDING the perpetual hostilities in
of Sp.in. which the various kingdoms of Spain were engaged

during several centuries, and the fucceflive occur-
rences which visibly tended to unite that part of
the continent into one great monarchy, the princes
of Europe scarcely took a tingle ftep, which dif-
covers that they gave any attention to that impor-
tant event. They permitted a power to arise im-
perceptibly, and to acquire strength there, which
soon became formidable to all its neighbours.

Fr"m thore AMIDST the violent convulsions with which the
m' 'r- spirit of domination in the See of Rome, and the

turbulent ambition of the German nobles, agitated
the empire, neither the authority of the popes,
seconded by all their artifices and intrigues, nor

the

the solicitations of the emperors, could induce SECT. II.
any of the powerful monarchs in Europe to engage
in their quarrel, or to avail themselves of many
favourable opportunities of interposing with efetr
and advantage.

THIS amazing inaaivity, during tranfaitions so Th: i,..r

iilterefting, is not to be imputed to any incapacity c...^:j' l.-
of discerning their political consequences. The IJr,;',r .th
power of judging with sagacity, and ofactingr with '":l"""'l
vigour, is the portion of men in every age. The
monarchs who reigned in the different kingdoms
of Europe, during several centuries, were not blind
to their particular interest, negligent of the pub-
lic safety, or firangers to the method of fccuring
both. If they did not adopt that salutary system,
which tcaches modern politicians to take the alarm
at the profpct of distant dangers, which prompts
them to check the first encroachments of any
formidable power, and which renders each slate
the guardian, in some degree, of the rights and
independence of all its neighbours, this was owing
entirely to such imperfcctions and disorders in the
civil government of each country, as made it im-
possible for sovereigns to ae suitably to those ideas,
which the posture of affairs, and their own obfer-
vation, must have suggested.

BUT during the course of the fifteenth century, EvnF I,.p.

yarious events happened, which, by giving princes ^,"'d' ,,''
more entire command of the force in their re- c"t"rry,

which ren.
ipeeive dominions, rendered their operations more der the er-

vigoroIus

SECT. II. vigorous and extensive. In consequence of this,

i"r -,, the affairs of different kingdoms becoming more
^sr,,'.' frequently as well as more intimately connectted,

- they were gradually accultomedl to a&t in concert

andi. confederacy, and were ililifnibly prepared fcr
forming a fylicm of i;oc, in orr to cftabli
or to prefcrve fich a 'h.lance of power as was moil
confillent with the ecneral fcurity. It .as dtz-
ring the reign of Charles the Fifth, that the ideas,
on which this fytleln is flundcd, fiill came to be
fully underflood. It was rlen, that the maxims
by which it h.;s been unifcrnmily maintained since
that t;rn, wxcr universally adopted. On this ac-
count, a view of the causes and events which con-
tributed to eflablifh a plan of police, more salutary
and extensive than any that has taken place in the
conduc of human affairs, is not only a necefary
introduction to the following work, but is a ca-
pital objeft in the history of Europe.

The sirs of THE first event, that occasioned any considerable
the dr.v- alteration in the arrangement of affairs in Europe,
I,''',, was the annexation of the extensive territories,
.UTr'nti',' which England possessed on the continent, to the
on the con-
otnclt. crown of France. While the English were mlatcrs

of several of the moa fertile and opulent provinces
in France, and a great part of its moes martial
inhabitants was bound to follow their flandard,
an English monarch confidered himself rather as
the rival, than as the vafiTl of the sovereign of
whom he held. The kings of France, circum-

lbribcd

fcribed ant( thwarted in their lfthemes anti opera- SECT. II.
tions by an adversary no leTs jealous than formi-
dable, durst not venture upon any enterprize of
importance or of difiicult. ThiT. nglillh were
always at hand, rc-ly to oppoIe them. They
disputed even their right to their crown, and being
able to penetrate, with cafea, into the heart of the
kingdom, could arm againtf them those very
hands which ought to have been employed in their
defence. Timid counsels and feeble efforts were
natural to monarchs in filch a filration. France,
dilinembercd and overawed, could not attain its
proper station in the '!vtsem of Europe. But the
death of Henry V. of L'ng! and, happily so; France,
and not unfortunately for his own country, deli-
vered the French from the calamity of having a
foreign master feated on their throne. The weak-
ness of a long minority, the dilTenfions in the
English court, together with the unteady and
languid conduEt which therl occasioned, alfirded
the French a favou:rable opportunity of recovering
the territories which they had lcft. The native
valour of the French nobility, heightened to an
enthusiastic conf'idence, by a fippofed interpo-
fit'on of heaven in their behalf; conduted in the
field by fkilffl ieadcrs; and dircctcd in the cabiner
by a prucdnt mnar-chl; was exerted with such
vigour and ftccels, during, this favourable junc-
ture, as nor cnl- wrelccd fromn the Englifl their
new conqucts, but; ilipt them of their ancient
poffcflions in France, and reduced them within

the

SECT. 1I. the narrow precincts of Calais, and its petty ter-

ritory.

The ff-r As soon as so many confidlcrable prov nces were
ic'.,ng re-united to their dominions, the kings ofFrance,
,l ..T..lr conlclous of this acquisition of strength, began to
... "': form bolder fcheim.es of interior policy, as well as

of foreign operations. They immediately became
formidable to their neighbours, who began to fix
their attention on their measures and motions, the
importance of which they fully perceived. From
this ara, France, possessed of the advantages
which it derives from the situation and contiguity
of its territories, as well as from the number and
valour of its people, roTe to new influence in Eu-
rope, and was the firlf power in a condition to
give alarm to the jealousy or fears of the states
around it.

On the fae NOR was France indebted for this increase of
of the m:li- .
lar turce in importance merely to the re-union of the provinces
he nft.on. which had been torn from it. A circumstance

attended the recovery of these, which, though less
considerable, and less observed, contributed not a
little to give additional vigour and decision to all
the efforts of that monarchy. During the ob-
flinate firuggles between France and England, all
the defects of the military system under the feudal
government were sensibly felt. A war of long
continuance languished, when carried on by troops
bound and accustomed to keep the field only for

7 a few

a few weeks. Armies, compoied chiefly of heavy- SECT. II.
armed cavalry, were unfit either for the attack or
the defence of the many towns and castles, which
it became necefiary to guard or to reduce. In or-
der to obtain such permanent and effective force,
as became requisite during these lengthened con-
tells, the kings of France tooo into their pay con-
liderable bands of mercenary foldicrs, levied Ibme-
times among their own fitbjeds, and sometimes in
foreign countries. But as the feudal policy pro-
vided no sufficient fund for lfch extraordinary ser-
vice, these adventurers were difniffed at the close
of every campaign, or upon any profpe&t of ac-
commodation; and having been little accuflomed
to the restraints of discipline, they frequently
turned their arms against the country which they
had been hired to defend, and desolated it with
no less cruelty than its foreign enemies.

A BODY of troops kept conltantly on foot, and t octcaon,

the intro-

regularly trained to military subordination, would duaionof
have supplied what was wanting in the feudal n.ig ""'
constitution, and have furnished princes with the
means of executing enterprizes, to which they
were then unequal. Such an eltablifliment, how-
ever, was To repugnant to the genius of feudal
policy, and To incompatible with the privileges
and pretensions of the nobility, that during fe-
veral centuries no monarch was either so bold, or
so powerful, as to venture on any fep towards
introducing it. At lat, Charles VII. availing
himself of the reputation which he had acquired

by

SECT. I. by his fuccestes against the Englirn, and taking
..-. advantage of the impreflions of terror which such

a formidable enemy had left upon the minds of
his subje&s, executed that which his predecessors
durst not attempt. Under pretence of keeping
always on foot a force sufficient to defend the
A.D. 144. kingdom againit any silden invasion of the Eng-

lilh, he, at the time when he disbanded his other
troops, retained under arms a body of nine thou-
sand cavalry, and of sixteen thousand infantry.
He appropriated funds for the regular payment
of these; he stationed them in different places of
the kingdom, according to his pleasure; and ap-
pointed the officers who commanded and difci-
plined them. The prime nobility courted his
service, in which they were taught to depend on
their sovereign, to execute his orders, and to look
up to him as the judge and rewarder of their
merit. The feudal militia, composed of the vas-
fals whom the nobles could call out to follow their
standard, as it was in no degree comparable to a
body of soldiers regularly trained to war, funk
gradually in reputation. The strength of armies
came to be eltimated only by the number of dif-
ciplined men which they contained. In less than
a century, the nobles and their military tenants,
though sometimes summoned to the field, ac-
cording to ancient form, were confidered as an
incumbrance upon the troops with which they
aifed i and were viewed with contempt by fol-
diers accultomed to the vigorous and steady ope-
rations of regular service.

THus

THus the regulations of Charles the Seventh, by SECt. If.

efrablifhing the first fslnding army known in Eu- Tie entsa
rope, occasioned an important revolution in its ' ""'i.
affairs and policy. By depriving the nobles of that
direc&ion of the national military force of the tiate,
which had raited them to such high authority and
importance, a deep wound was given to the feudal
ariilocracy, in that part where its power seemed to
be most complete.

FRANCE, by forming this body of regular troopsi
at a time when there was hardly a squadron or
company kept in constant pay in any other part of
Europe, acquired such advantages over its neigh-
bours, either in attack or defence, that feif-pre-
servation made it ncceffary for them to imitate its
example. Mercenary troops were introduced into
all the considerable kingdoms on the continent.
They gradually became the only military force that
was employed or trusted. It has long been the
chief objet of policy to increafei and to fipport
them. It has long been the great aim of princes
and miniflers to discredit and to annihilate all other
means of national activity or defence.

As the Kings of France got the start of other The Mo.

n .rcl ov

powers in establishing a military force in their do- Fr,,,,,h-
minions, which enabled them to carry on foreign ','.l7,d ',i
operations with more vigour, and to greater ex- relrroativeC
tent, so they were the flrft who effectually broke
the feudal aristocracy, and humbled the great vas-

VOL,1. I fals

SECT. II. fals of the crown, who by the r exorbitant power
<> - had long circumscribed the royal prerogative with-

in very narrow limits, and had rendered all the
efforts of the monarchs of Europe inconsiderable.
Many things concurred to undermine, gradually,
the power of the feudal aristocracy in France. The
wealth and property of the nobility were greatly
impaired during the long wars which the kingdom
was obliged to maintain with the English. The
extraordinary zeal with which they exerted them-
selves in defence of their country againfi its an-
cient enemies, exhautfed the f;rtunes of some great
families. As almost every province in the king-
dom was, in its turn, the feat of war, the lands of
others were exposed to the depredations of the
enemy, were ravaged by the mercenary troops
which their sovereigns hired occasionally, but could
not pay, or were desolated with rage'ftill more de-
ftruftive by the peasants, in their different infur-
reEtions. At the fame time, the neceflities of go-
vernment having forced their kings upon the def-
perate expedient of making great and sudden al-
terations in the current coin of the kingdom, the
fines, quit-rents, and other payments fixed by an-
cient custom, funk much in value, and the reve-
nues of a fief were reduced far below the tuln which
it had once yielded. During their concefts with
the Engliil, in which a generous nobility courted
every fiation where danger. appeared, or honour
could be gained, many families of note became
extinct, and their fiefs were reunited to the crown.
Other fiefs, in a long course of years, fell to female

heirs,,

heirs, and were divided among them; wcerc dimi- SECT. I.
nifhed by profife donations to the church, or were
broken and split by the fuccefl.on of rlemote col-
lateral heirs'.

ENCOURAGED by there manif4(t fvmpomns of r'rn,'refi

- · of tne :', I
decline in that body which he withed to d;.n:rcfs, .n.Wr...llr

-!. 1 1cbiarlLsvli.

Charles VII. during the fir!t interval of pea-e withi
England, made several efforts towards eilablisling
the regal prerogative on the ruins of the arillo-
cracy. But his obligatrins to the nobles were so
many, as well as recent, and their fcrvices in re-
covering the kingdom Ib fplendidl, as made it ne-
celffry for him to proceed with moderation and
caution. Such, however, was the authority which
the crown had acquired by the progrels of its arms
against the English, and so much was the power
of the nobility'diminifled, that, without any op-
polition, he fson made innovations of great confe-
quence in the conflitucion. He not only efta-
blifhed that formidable body of regular troops,
which has been mentioned, bur he wa, the firit
monarch of France who, by his roy.l edidl, with-
out the concurrence of the States-gencral of the A.oD.44o.
kingdom, levied an extraordinary fi'bfiu y on his
people. He prevailed likewise with his fubjets,
to render several taxes perpetual, which had for-
merly been imposed occasionally, and exacted du-
ring a lhort time. By means of all tlhei, he ac-
quired such an increalf of power, and extended

t Boulainvillicrs Hifloire de Gouvernement de France, Let-
tre xii.

!I his

SECT.IL his prerogative so far beyond its ancient limit%,

that, from being the mol: dependant prince who
had ever fat upon the throne of France, he came
to possess, during the latter years of his reign, a
degree of authority which none of his predecelfors
had enjoyed for several ages'.
Lo"de X Tr-.AT plan of humbling the nobility which

Charles formed, his son Louis XI. carried on with
a bolder spirit, and with greater success. Louis
was formed by nature to be a tyrant; and at what-
ever period he had been called to aliend the throne,
his reign muff have abounded with schemes to op-
press his people, and to render his own power ab-
solute. Subtle, unfeeling, cruel; a itranger to
every principle of integrity, and regardless of de-
cency, he scorned all the restraints which a sense
of honour, or the desire of fame, impose even upon
ambitious men. Sagacious, at the fame time, to
discern his true interefl, and influenced by that
alone, he was capable of pursuing it with a per-
fevering industry, and of adhering to it with a sys-
tematic spirit, from which no object could divert,
and no danger could deter him.

H, men. THE maxims of his adminietration were as pro.
humbling found as they were fatal to the privileges of the
the nubili. nobility. He filled all the departments of govern-

ment with new men, and often with persons whom

Hiftoire de France par Velly & Villaret, tom. xv. 331,

&c. 389. tom. xvi. 324. Variations de la Monarchie Fran-
Soife, tom. iii. 162.

he

he called from the lowest as well as most despised SECT. IH.
functions in life, and railed at pleasure to stations
of great power or trust. These were his only con-
sidents, whom he consulted in forming his plans,
and to whom he committed the execution of them:
While the nobles, accustomed to be the compa-
nions, the favourites, and the miniflers of their
sovereigns, were treated with such fludied and
mortifying neglect, that if they would not submit
to follow a court in which they appeared without
any shadow of their ancient power, they were
obliged to retire to their castles, where they re-
mained unemployed and forgotten. Not satisfied
with having rendered the nobles of lets confider-
ation, by taking out of their hands the sole di;icc-
tion of affairs, Louis added infullt to neglrt; and
by violating their molt valuable privileges, endea-
voured to degrade the order, and to reduce the
members of it to the fame level with other sub-
jecbs. Persons of the highell rank among them,
if so bold as to oppose his fcheiies, or so unfor-
tunate as to awaken the jealousy of his capricious
temper, were persecuted with rigour, from which
all who belonged to the order of nobility had
hitherto been exempt; they were tried by judges
who had no right to take cognizance of their
ations; and were fubjeted co torture, or con-
demned to an infamous death, without regard to
their birth or condition. The people, accullomecd
to fee the blood of the molt illuftriuois personages
shed by the hands of the common executioner, to
behold them shut up in dungeons, and carried

1 3 about

SEc-T.Tr. about in cages of iron, began to view the nobility
tr'' vwith le's reverence than formerly, and looked up

with terror to the royal authority, which seemed to
have humbled or annihilated every other power in
the kingdom.

and ns di- AT the 1:tme time, Louis, being afraid that op-
^i'nci.'. position might rouze the nobles, whom the rigour

of his government had intimidated, or that lelf-
preservation might at last teach them to unite, dex-
teroufly scattered among them the feeds ofdifcord;
and indtilrioufly fomented those ancient animo-
fities between the great families, which the spirit
of jealousy and emulation, natural to the feudal
government, had originally kindled and still kept
alive. To accomplilh this, all the arts of intrigue,
all the mysteries and refinements of his fraudulent
policy were-employed, and with such success, that
at a juncture which required the molt strenuous
efforts, as well as the most perfect union, the no-
bles never acted, except during one short sally of
resentment at the beginning of his reign, either
with vigour or with concert.

,-i.a.Is to As he stripped the nobility of their privileges,

'l.:'', lig he added to the power and prerogative of the
i'". crown. In order to have at command such a body

of soldiers as might be sufficient to crush any force
that his diliafected fubjets could draw together,
he not only kept on foot the regular troops
which. his father had raised, but took into his pay
.is thousand Swils, at that time the best disciplined

and

and most formidable infantry in Europe". From SECT. I,
the jealousy natural to tyrants, he confided in these
foreign mercenaries, as the moil devoted inffru-
ments of oppreHion, and the mouf faithful guard-
ians of the power which he had acquired. That
they might be ready to act on the ihorteft warning,
he, during the latter years of his reign, kept a con-
fiderable body of them encamped in one place w.

GREAT funds were requisite, not only to defray mHe ag-

1ime s (he

tlhe expence of this additional eftabliftnent, but revenu.leof
to supply the fums employe. in the various en- tnecrown
terprizes which the re!tlefs activity of his ge-
nius prompted him to undertake. But the prero-
gative that his father had assumed of lrvying taxes
without the concurrence of the flates-gencral,
which he was careful not only to retain but to ex-
tend, enabled him to provide in some measure for.
the encreafing charges of government.

WIIAT his prerogative, enlarged as it was, could Hi, adders

not furnish, his address procured. He was the il",,i;mbl
first monarch in Europe who discovered the me- Ot ft''s.
thod of managing those great alTemblics, in which
the feudal policy had veiled the power of granting
subsidies and of imposing taxes. -Ie sir:s taught
other princes the fatal art of beginning their
attack on publick liberty, by corrupting the
iource from which it Ihould flow. By exerting all

u Mem. de Comines, ton. i. 67. Dan. Hi.. de la Milice

Francoise, torn. i. 8,
1 * wMem, de Com. tom. i. 381.

I 4 his

SEcT. IT. his power and address in influencing the eledion

of representatives, by bribing or overawing the
members, and by various changes which he art-
fully made in the form of their deliberations,
Louis acquired Iuch entire direction of these afterm-
blies, that, from being the vigilant guardians of
the privileges and property of the people, he ren-
dered them tamely fubicrvient, in promoting the
molt odious measures of his reign ". As no power
remained to set bounds to his exations, he not
only continued all the taxes imposed by his father,
but made immense additions to them, which
amounted to a fum that appeared aftonilhing to
his contemporariesy.*

We enla.,ri NOR was it the power alone or wealth of the
th: btu;,Is
.,f tlue crown that Louis increased; he extended its terri-

c'fir''h tories by acquisitions of various kinds. .He got

pofIeffon of Roufillon by purchase; Provence
was conveyed to him by the will of Charles de
Anjou; and upon the death of Charles the Bold,
he seized with a strong hand Burgundy and Artois,
which had belonged to that prince. Thus, du-
ring the course of a lingle reign, France was
formed into one compati kingdom, and the fleady
unrelenting policy of Louis XI. not only subdued

Mern. de Comin. tom. i. 136. Chron. Scandal. ibid.
tom. ii. p. 71. y Mvem. de Corn. tom. i. 334.

* Charles VII. levied taxes to the amount of i,8o,oo00

francs; Loui.s XI. railed 4,7cc,coo. The former had in pay
qgoo cavalry and i6,ooo infntry. The latter augmented the
cavalry to 15,ooo, and the infantry to z;,ooo. Mem. d'
Comines; i. 384,

the

the haughty spirit of the feudal nobles, but efta- SECT. fr.
blifled a species of government, scarcely less ab- -y
solute, or less terrible than ealtern dclpotiiin.

BUT fatal as his adminifiration was to the liber- By all there

tic Frenich

tits of his fltbjets, the authority which he ac- gov'rnneat
quired, the resources of which he became matler, ";,'recriv
and his freedom from restraint in concerting his and enltr-

t> prlziz.g.

plans as well as in executing them, rendered his
reign acive and enterprizing. Louis nrgociated
in all the courts of Europe; he observed the
motions of all his neighbours; he engaged, either
as principal, or as an auxiliary, in every great
tranla-tion; his resolutions were prompt; his ope-
rations vigorous; and upon every emergence he
could call forth into action the whole force of his
kingdom. From the era of his reign, the kings
of France, no longer fettered and circumscribed at
home by a jealous nobility, have exerted them-
selves more abroad, have formed more extensive
schemes of foreign conquells, and have carried on
war with a lpirit and vigour long unknown in
Europe.

THE example which Louis fct was too inviting Strpstalre

towarlds es.

not to be imitated by other princes. Henry VII. teuding Ihe
as soon as he was feated on the throne of England, fheron in
formed the plan of enlarging his own prerogative, Ens1'1d;
by breaking the power of the nobility. The cir-
cumftances under which he undertook to execute
it, were lets favourable than those which induced
CharlesVI . ;o make the fame attempt; and

the

SEC. II. the spirit with which he conduted it, was very
-- 'different from that of Louis XI. Charles, by the

success of his arms againit the English, by the
merit of having expelled them out of so many
provinces, had eftablilhed himself tb firmly in the
confidence of his people, as encouraged him to
make bold encroachments on the ancient confti-
tution. The daring genius of Louis broke through
every barrier, and endeavoured to overturn or to
remove every obstacle that flood in his way. But
Henry held the lceptre by a disputed title; a po-
pular faction was ready every moment to take
arms against him; and after long civil wars, du-
ring which the nobility had often displayed their
power in creating and deposing kings, he felt
that the regal authority had been so much relaxed,
and that he entered into pocffflon of a prerogative
so much abridged, as made it necessary to carry
on his measures deliberately, and without any vio-
lent exertion. He endeavoured to undermine that
formidable ftruature, which he durst not attack
with open force. His schemes, though cautious
and flow in their operation, were well concerted,
and produtLive in the end of great effecs. By
his laws, permitting the barons to break the en-
tails of their estates, and to expose them to sale;
by his regulations to prevent the nobility from
keeping in their service those numerous bands of
retainers, which rendered them formidable, and
turbulent; by encouraging population, agricul-
ture, and commerce; by securing to his fubjeEts,
during a long reign, the enjoyment of the bleflings

which

which flow from the arts of peace; by accuf- SeCT. U.
toming them to an acminil'tration of government,
under which the laws were executed witih leali-
ness and vigour; he made imperceptibly fuzc
alterations in the Elaiffh constitution, that he
tranlinitted to his filcccfiJr authority so extcn.five,
as ren-{tred him one of the most abbiutc mlo-
narchs in Europe, and capable of the greatest and
most vigorous efforts.

IN Spain, the union of all its crowns by the .and

marriage of Ferdinand and Isabella; the glory that pSai*.
they acquired by the conquest of Granada, which
brought the odious dominion of tle Moors to a
period; the command of the great armies which
it had been necelTary to keep long on foot, in
order to accomplish this; the wiftlom and fteadi-
ness of their administration; and the address with
which they availed themselves of every incident
to humble the nobility, and to extend their own
prerogative, conifired in raising theft monarchs
to such eminence and authority, as none of their
predecessors had ever enjoyed. Though several
causes, which shall be explained in another place,
prevented their attaining the fame extensive powers
with the kings of France and England, and pre-
served the feudal conltitution in Spain longer
entire, their great abilities supplied the defeRs of
their prerogative, and improved with fich dex-
terity all the advantages which they pofIfeed, that
Ferdinand carried on his foreign operations, which

3 were

Sr.cT.II. were very extensive, with extraordinary vigour

^

" and e:lc:.

E-,.rntsp. WHlLE there princes :-er thus cnlarging the
p:.ncd,
.. hIa!'.ed boundaries of aprru

raive, and taking it;h iteps

nn2rchito towards rendering thclr king, dins capable of aft-
exc:,'he ing with union and wi:h firce, events occurred,
new p0.,, s
,h..,n ,i, which called them fbrrt to exert their ncw powers
1had Jcquir-
td. which they had acquired. There engaged them

in such a lries o nerp:'zcis aind negociatiun',
that the affairs of all the considerable nations in
Europe came to be incnfilly inttrwoven with
each other; and a great political fitl:eim was gra.
dually sorned, which grew to be an object of
universal attention.

Tht sirs of THE firif event which merits notice, on account
the f' rsvcnts
ws the of its influence in producing this change in the
mar, iage of 1
the heire's state of Europe, was the marriage of the daughter
ot RBrL of Charles the Bold, the Ible heirets of the house
'n""d. of Burgundy. For some years before her father's

death, she had been confidered as the apparent
successor to his territories, and Charles had made
propolals of marrying her to several diilerenr
princes, with a view of alluring them, by thac
offer, to favour the fchelnes which his rcfillls am-
bition was continually fo'rming.

Thei;mprt. THIS rendered the alliance with her an objet
anc' ot rh s
* lit L..,re of general attention, and all the advantages of
ofEuope. acquiring pofflefion of her territories, the most

opulent at that time, and bell cultivated of any on

this

this fide of the Alps, were perfcc'ly understood. SECT.It.
As soon, then, as the unrinely death of Charles
opened the fuccefion, the eyes of all the princes
in Europe were turned towards Mary, and they A. . 1477.
felt thelnfelves deeply inierdefcd in the choice li'""rys'
which she was about to make of the perlbn on
whom l(e would below that rich inheritance.

Louis XI. from whore kingdlm several of the v;ew.of

L,,i;s XI.

provinces which lie poflcihcd h:d been difinem- with cipt:
bered, and whole donmnioons fIretched along the to it
frontier of her territrics, had every inducement
to court her alliance. He had, likewifc, a good
title to expec the favourable reception of any rca-
fonabie proposition he should make, with refpeft
to tle dioioal of a princels, who was the vassal
of his crown, and detcended from the royal blood
of France. There were only two propositions,
however, which he could make with propriety.
The one was the marriage of the dauphin, the
other that of the count of Angouleme, a prince
of the blood, with the heiress of Bur-undv. By
the former, he would have annexed ail her terri-
tories to his ciown, and have rendered France at
once the lmol rel)peable monarchy in JEro..e.
But the ,reat dilparity of ags between the t'r.o
parties, Mary being twenty, and the dauphin
only eight years old; the avowed rcl!iution of t!:e
Flemings, not to chutf a master polf.lTcd of flch
power as might enable him to fbrn fc!lhees dan-
gerous to their liberties; togetlier with their dread
of falling under the odious and oppreiTivc ógovern-

n:ent

Szcr. IT. ment of Louis, were obtacles in the way ofexe-

'- - cuting this plan, which it was in vain to think of

surmounting. By the latter, the accomnplilhment
of which might have been attained with ease, Mary
having discovered rome inclination to a match with
the count ofAngouiemeZ, Louis would have pre-
vented the dominions of the house of Burgundy
from being conveyed to a rival power, and in
return for such a splendid eflabliihment for the
count of Angouleme, he mufr have obtained, or
would have extorted from him, concefiions highly
beneficial to the crown of France. But Louis had
been accustomed so long to the intricacies of a
crooked and insidious policy, that he could not be
satisfied with what was obvious and simple; and
was so fond of artifice and refinement, that he
came to confider there as his ultimate object, not
as the means only of condu&ing affairs. From
this principle, no less than from his unwillingneis
to aggrandize any of his own fubieds, or from his
desire of oppressing the house of Burgundy, which
he hated, he neglected the course which a prince
less able and artful would have taken, and fol-
lowed one more suited to his own genius.
The sing- HI-E proposed to render himself, by force of arms,

,°"he matter of those provinces which Mary held of
iuwtd,. the crown of France, and even to pufli his con-

quells into her other territories, while he amused
her with insisting continually on the impraAicable
match with the dauphin. In prosecuting this

' Mcm. de Comincs, i. 3;S.

plan,

plain, he displayed wonderful talents and industry, SECT. IL
and exhibited such scenes of treachery, falsehood
and cruelty, as are amazing even in the hiltory
of Louis XI. Immediately upon the death of
Charles, he put his troops in motion, and ad-
vanced towards the Netherlands. He corrupted
the leading men in the provinces of Burgundy and
Artois, and seduced them to desert their sovereign.
lie got admiflion into some of the frontier towns
by bribing the governors; the gates of others were
opened to him in confcquence of his intrigues
with the inhabitants. He negociated with Mary;
and, in order to render her odious to her fubjets,
he betrayed to them her most important secrets.
He carried on a private correspondence with the
two ministers whom ihe chiefly trusted, and then
communicated the letters which he had received
from them to the states of Slanders, who, enraged
at their perfidy, brought them immediately to
trial, tortured them with extreme cruelty, and,
unmoved by the tears and entreaties of their fove-
reign, who knew and approved of all that the
mniillers had done, they beheaded them in her
pretence a.

WHILE Louis, by this condu&, unworthy of a The effe

great monarch, was lecuring the poffeflion of f ahh, e
Burgundy, Artois, and the. towns on the Somme, Mxmii thea
the hfates of Slanders carried on a negociation heiref of

BDlrgnsLv.

withl the emperor Frederick III. and concluded a A.D. 177.
treaty of marriage between their sovereign and his

Miem. dc Comines, liv. v. chap. zj. p. 309, &c.

for

SECT. IT. son Maximilian, archduke of Auffria. The il-

luftrious birth of that prince, as well as the high
dignity of which he had the profpet, rendered
the alliance honourable for Mary, while, from
the distance of his hereditary territories, and the
scantiness of his revenues, his power was so incon-
fiderable, as did not excite thejealoufy or fear of
the Flemings.

TRhe infi,- THUS Louis, by the caprice of his temper, and
ence of that
enhen3ate the excess of his refinements, put the house of

°iEa"ope. Aultria in pofTeflion of this noble inheritance.

By this acquisition, the foundation of the future
grandeur of Charles V. was laid; and he became
nailer of those territories, which enabled him to
carry on his most formidable and decisive opera-
tions againit France. Thus, too, the fame mo-
narch who firfr united the interior force of France,
and eftabliihed it on such a footing as to render
it formidable to the reft of Europe, contributed,
far contrary to his intention, to raise up a rival
power, which, during two centuries, has thwarted
the measures, opposed the arms, and checked the
progress of his fuccefibrs.

Th enext THE next event of consequence in the fifteenth

onhfiderall

event was century, was the expedition of Charles VIII. into
^f taly by Italy. This occasioned revolutions no less me-
Charles morable; produced alterations, which were more
.0.1494. immediately perceived, both in the military and

political fyflem; rouzed the states of Europe to
bolder efforts; and blended their affairs and

interests

interests more clofcly together. The mild admi- SECT. II.
niftration of Charles, a weak but generous Prince, Themotives
leems to have revived the spirit and genius of of this.
the French nation, which the rigid despotism of
Louis XI. his father, had depressed, and almost
extinguished. The ardour for military service,
natural to the French nobility, returned, and their
young monarch was impatient to diftinguilh his
reign by Tome splendid enterprize. While he was
uncertain towards what quarter he should turn his
arms, the solicitations and intrigues of an Italian
politician, no less infamous on account of his
crimes, than eminent for his abilities, determined
his choice. Ludovico Sforza, having formed the
design of deposing his nephew the duke of Milan,
and of placing himself on the ducal throne, was
so much afraid of a combination of the Italian
powers to thwart this measure, and to support the
injured Prince, with whom moit of them were
conneted by blood or alliance, that he saw the
necessity of securing the aid of rome able pro-
tetor. The King of France was the person to
whom he applied; and without disclosing to him
his own intentions, he laboured to prevail with
him to march into Italy, at the head of a powerful
army, in order to seize the crown of Naples, to
which he had pretensions as heir of the house of
Anjou. The right to that kingdom, claimed by
the Anigevin family, had been conveyed to Louis
XI. by Charles of Anjou, count of Maine and
Provence. But that sagacious monarch, though
he took immediate poeffion of those territories of

VoL. I, K which

SECT. II. which Charles was really mailer, totally disregarded

his ideal title to a kingdom, over which another
prince reigned in tranquillity; and uniformly de-
clined involving himself in the labyrinth of Italian
politicks. His son, more adventurous, or more
inconsiderate, embarked eagerly in this enterprize;
and contemning all the remonstrances of his most
experienced counsellors, prepared to carry it on
with the utmost vigour.
Hisrefour- THE power which Charles poffiefed was so

rnte0i th, great, that he reckoned himfclf equal to this ar-

duous undertaking. His father had transmitted
to him ufch an ample prerogative, as gave him
the entire command of his kingdom. He himself
had added considerably to the extent of his do-
minions, by his prudent marriage with the heiress
of Bretagne, which rendered him matter of that
province, the last of the great fiefs that remained
to be annexed to the crown. He soon assembled
forces which he thought sufficient; and so impa-
tient was lie to enter on his career as a conqueror,
that sacrificing what was real, for what was chime-
rical, he restored Roufillon to Ferdinand, and
gave up part of his father's acquisitions in Artois
to Maximilian, with a view of inducing these
princes not to molest France, while he was carry-
ing on his operations in Italy.

t'i'sep.a., BUT so different were the efforts of the States
t;uns for it.

of Europe in the fifteenth century, from those

3n,~ wwhich

which we shall behold in the course of this hiflory, SECT. II.
that the army with which Charles undertook this '
great enterprize, did not exceed twenty thousand
men. The train of artillery, however, the am-
munition, and warlike Itores of every kind pro-
vided for its use, were To considerable, as to bear
tome resemblance to the immense apparatus of
modern warb.

WHEN the French entered Italy, they met with Its sucre..

nothing able to resist them. The Italian powers
having remained, during a long period, undif-
turbed by the invasion of any foreign enemy, had
formed a system with refpet to their affairs, both
in peace and war, peculiar to themselves. In
order to adjust the interelts, and balance the power
of the different states into which Italy was divided,
they were engaged in perpetual and endless nego-
ciations with each other, which they conduifted
with all the subtlety of a refining and deceitful
policy. Their contests in the field, when they
had recourse to arms, were decided in mock bat-
tles, by innocent and bloodless vi orics. Upon
the firit appearance of the danger which now im-
pended, they had recourse to the arts which they
had tfudied, and employed their utmost: fiill in
intrigue in order to avert it. But this proving
ineffecual, their effeminate mercenaries, the only
military force that remained in the country, being
fit only for the parade of service, were terrified

b Mezeray Hilt. tom. ii. 7;7.

K 2 at

SECT. II. at the afpe& of real war, and shrunk at its ap-

proach. The impetuosity of the French valour
appeared to them irresistible. Florence, 1'ifa, and
Rome opened their gates as the French army
advanced. The profped of this dreadful invasion
struck one King of Naples with such panic terror,
that he died (if we may believe historians) of the
fright. Another abdicated his throne from the
fame pusillanimous spirit. A third fled out of
his dominions, as soon as the enemy appeared on
the Neapolitan frontiers. Charles, after marching
thither from the bottom of the Alps, with as
much rapidity, and almost as little opposition, as
if he had been on a progress through his own
dominions, took quiet poffeflion of the throne of
Naples, and intimidated or gave law to every
power in Italy.

hrtfeft, SUCH was the conclusion of this expedition,
pjrtiutilarly
in giving which must be confidered as the first great exertion
rife to the
fn''m con. of those new powers which the princes of Europe
b.lnc or had acquired, and now began to exercits. Its
poer. effecas were no less considerable, than its fuccefl

had been astonishing. The Italians, unable to
refill the impression of the enemy which broke in
upon them, permitted him to hold on his course
undisturbed. They quickly perceived that no
single power, which they could rouse to action,
was an equal match for a monarch, who ruled
over such extensive territories, and was at the
head of such a martial people; but that a confe-

deracy

deracy might accomplish what the separate mem- SECT. II.
bers of it durR not attempt. To this expedient, ' '
the only one that remained to deliver or to pre-
serve them fiom the yoke, they had recourse.
While Charles inconsiderately wafted his time at
Naples in feltivals and triumphs on account of
his past fuccelres, or was fondly dreaming of fu-
ture conquests in the East, to the empire of which
he now aspired, they formed against him a power-
ful combination of almoif all the Italian states,
supported by the Emperor Maximilian, and Ser-
dinand King of Aragon. The union of to many
powers, who suspended or forgot all their parti-
cular animofities, that they might at with con-
cert against an enemy who had become formidable
to them all, awakened Charles from his thought-
lels security. He saw now no profpe&t of safety
but in returning to France. An army of thirty
thousand men, alfembled by tile allies, was ready
to obftru&t his march; and though the French,
with a daring courage, which more than counter-
balanced their inferiority in number, broke through
that great body, and gained a victory, which
opened to their monarch a safe paflage into his
own territories, he was stripped of all his con.
quests in Italy in as (hort a time as it had taken
to acquire them i and the political system in that
country resumed the fame appearance as before his
invasion.

TIHE sudden and decilive effte& of this confe-
deracy, seems to have inftruted the princes and

K 3 fatefrmen

SECT. I. ftatefincn of Itily as much as the irruption of the
This be- French had dilconcerted and alarmed them. They
Er'!,h=t had extended, on this occasion, to the affairs of
oipn.ii,,y Europe, the maxims of that political science which
rdb phrn in had hitherto been applied onlyto regulate the ope-

rations of the petty flates in their own country.
They had discovered the method of preventing any
monarch from rising to such a degree of power, as
was inconsistent with the general liberty; and had
manifested the importance of attending to that
great secret in modern policy, the preservation of
a proper distribution ofpower among all the mem-
bers of the system into which the fiates of Europe
are formed. During all the wars of which Italy
from that time was the theatre, and amidfE the
hostile operations which the imprudence of
Louis XII. and the ambition of Ferdinand of Ara-
gon, carried on in that country, with little inter-
ruption, from the. close of the fifteenth century,
to that period at which the subsequent hiitory
commences, the maintaining a proper balance of
power between the contending parties, became the
great obje& of attention to the ftatefmien of Italy.
Nor was the idea confined to them. Self-prefer-
vation taught other powers to adopt it. It grew
to be falhionable and universal. From this ara we
can trace the progress of that intercourse between
nations, which had linked the powers of Europe to
closely together; and can discern the operations of
that provident policy, which, during peace, guards
against remote and contingent dangers; which,

in

in war, hath prevented rapid and deftlrutive con- SECT. II.
queffs.

THIS was not the only cffec of the operations Thewas, i

ira v render

which the great powers of Europe carried on in tni ngr-
Italy. They contributed to render general such a rl.
change, as the French had begun to make in the
state of their troops; and obliged all the princes,
who appeared on this new theatre of ation, to
eltablifl the military force of their kingdoms on
the fame footing with that of Frlnce. When the
feat of war came to be remote fiom the countries
which maintained the contest, the service of the
feudal vassals ceased to be of any use; and the ne-
cefity of employing troops regularly trained to
arms, and kept in constant pay, came at once to
be evident. When Charles marched into Italy,
his cavalry was entirely compored of those com-
panies of Gendarmes, embodied by Charles VII.
and continued by Louis XI.; his infantry confided
partly of Swiss, hired of the Cantons, and partly
of Gascons, armed and disciplined after the Swiss
model. To there Louis XII. added a body of
Germans, well known in the wars of Italy by the
name of the Black Bands. But neither of there
monarchs made any account of the feudal militia,
or ever had recourse to that military force which
they might have commanded, in virtue of the an-
cient institutions in their kingdom. Maximilian
and Ferdinand, as loon as they began to act in
Italy, cmployed the fame inftrumcnts, and trust-

K 4 ed

SECT. II. ed the execution of their plans entirely to mer-

cenary troops.

Teach the THIS innovation in the military system was
Turooeans
t fu^erior quickly followed by another, which the custom of
importance
of infaTry employing Swiss in the Italian wars was the occa-
in wa". sion of introducing. The arms and discipline of

the Swiss were different from those of other Euro-
pean nations. During their long and violent ftrug-
gles in defence of their liberties against the house
of Autria, whose armies, like those of other con-
fiderable princes, consisted chiefly of heavy-armed
cavalry, the Swiss found that their poverty, and
the finall number of gentlemen residing in their
country, at that time barren and ill cultivated, put
it out of their power to bring into the field any
body of horse capable of facing the enemy. Ne-
ceffity compelled them to place all their confidence
in infantry; and in order to render it capable of
withstanding the shock of cavalry, they gave the
soldiers brealt-plates and helmets as defensive ar-
mour; together with long spears, halberts, and
heavy swords, as weapons ofoffence. They formed
them into large battalions, ranged in deep and
clof array, so that they could present on every fide
a formidable front to the enemy'. The men at
arms could make noimpreffion on the solid Itrength
of such a body. It repulsed the Aufrians in all
their attempts to conquer Swiferland. It broke
the Burgundian Gendarmerie, which was scarcely
inferior to that of France, either in number or re-

, Machiavel's Art of War, b. ii. chap. ii. p. 45 1.

l putation:

putation: And when first called to as in Italy, it SECT. 11.
bore down, byits irresistible force, every enemy that -'v'
attempted to oppose it. These repeated proofs of
the decisive effect of infantry, exhibited on such
conspicuous occasions, restored that service to re-
putation, and gradually re-established the opinion,
which had been long exploded, of its superior im-
portance in the operations of war. But the glory
which the Swiss had acquired, having inspired them
with such high ideas of their own prowess and.
consequence as frequently rendered them mutinous
and insolent, the princes who employed them be-
came weary of depending on the caprice of foreign
mercenaries, and began to turn their attention to-
wards the improvement of their national infantry.

THE German powers having the command of Nationuin.

men, whom nature has endowed with that steady blied in
courage and persevering strength which forms them c"ary.
to be soldiers, soon modelled their troops in such
a manner, that they vied with the Swiss both in
discipline and valour.

THE French monarchs, though more slowly, and r, Fr,,,e.

with greater difficulty, accustomed the impetuous
spirit of their people to subordination and difci-
pline; and were at such pains to render their na-
tional infantry refpe&able, that as early as the
reign of Louis XII. several gentlemen of high
rank had so far abandoned their ancient ideas, as
to condescend to enter into that service'.

d Brnltome, tom. x. p. iS. Mem. de Fleura,igcs, 143.

THE

SECT. II. THE Spaniards, whose situation made it difficult
; painc ,to employ any other than their national troops in

the southern parts of Italy, which was the chief
scene of their operations in that country, not only
adopted the Swiii discipline, but improved upon it,
by mingling a proper number of soldiers, armed
with heavy mulkets, in their battalions; and thus
formed that famous bodyof infantry, which, during
acentury and a half, was the admiration and ter-
ror of all Europe. The Italian states gradually
diminished the number of their cavalry, and, in
imitation of their more powerful neighbours,
brought the strength of their armies to consist in
foot Ibldiers. From this period the nations of
Europe have carried on war .with forces more
adapted to every species of service, more capable
of a&ting in every country, and better fitted both
for making conquests, and for preserving them.
The Italian As their effortsin Italy led the people ofEurope

twrs ncca. to these improvements in the art of war, they gave

fin an in-
crc_:of ilie them likewise the first idea of the expence which
,nuC in accompanies great and continued operations, and
Europe. accustomed them to the burden of those impofi-

tions which are necessary for supporting them.
While the feudal policy lubfifted in full vigour,
while armies were composed of military vassals
called forth to attack some neighbouring power,
and to perform, in a flort campaign, the services
which they owed to their sovereign, the expence
of war was extremely moderate. A small fubtidv
enabled a prince to begin and to finifl his greatelt

operations.

operations. But when Italy became the theatre on SECT. II.
which the porers of Europe contended for fupe- '*
riority, the preparations requisite for such a dirtant
expedition, the pay of armies kept conltantly on
foot, their fubtfitlence in a foreign country, the
fleges to be undecrtaken, and the towns to be de-
fended, swelled the charges of war immensely, and,
by creating demands unknown in less a&tive times,
multiplied taxes in every kingcdom. The progress
of ambition, however, was fb rapid, and princes
extended their operations so fall', that it was im-
pollible at firfl to eftablilh funds proportional to
the increase of expence which these occasioned.
When CharlesVIII. invaded Naples, the fums re-
quifite for carying on that enterprize so far ex-
ceeded those which'France had been accustomed
to contribute, that before he reached the frontiers
of Italy, his treasury was exhauited, and the do-
meftic resources, of which his extensive preroga-
tive gave him the command, were at an end. As
he durlt not venture to lay any new imposition on
his people, oppressed already with the weight of
unusual burdens; the only expedii:nt that remained
was, to borrow of the Genoese as much money as
might enable himn to continue his march. But he
could not obtain a ffificient fum, without con-
senting to pay annually the exorbitant interclf
of forty-two livres for every hundred that ihe
received. We may observe tlhe fame diirc;oor-
tion between the efflrts and revenues of other

e Mem. de Coin
; nc , lib. vii. c. 5. P 1 I"

p inces,

SECT.II. princes, his contemporaries. From this period,

' taxes went on increasing; and during the reign of

Charles V. such fums were levied in every Rfate,
as would have appeared prodigious at the close of
the fifteenth century, and gradually prepared the
way for the more exorbitant exactions of modern
times.

The league THE last tranfation, previous to the reign of
of Cambry .

V

anuthi im. Charles V. that merits attention on account of its
°",^"' influence upon the state of Europe, is the league

of Cambray. To humble the republick of Venice,
and to divide its territories, was the objet of all
the powers who united in this confederacy. The
civil constitution of Venice, established on a firm
bafls, had suffered no considerable alteration for
several centuries; during which, the senate con-
ducted its affairs by maxims of policy no less pru-
dent than vigorous, and adhered to these with an
uniform confifent spirit, which gave that common-
wealth great advantage over other states, whose
views and measures changed as often as the form
of their government, or the persons who admini-
ftered it. By there unintermitted exertions of wis-
dom and valour, the Venetians enlarged the domi-
nions of their commonwealth, until it became the
most considerable power in Italy. While their ex-
tensive commerce, the useful and curious manufac-
tures which they carried on, together with their
monopoly of the precious commodities of the Eall,
rendered Venice the most opulent Itate in Europe.

THEIR

THEIR power was the objec of terror to their SECT. II.

Italian neighbours. Theirwealth was viewed with Th-c---
envy by the greatest monarchs, who could not vie i'' of it.
with their private citizens in the magnificence of
their buildings, in the richness of their dress and
furniture, or in splendor and elegance of living'.
Julius II. whose ambition was superior, and his
abilities equal, to those of any pontiff who ever fat
on the papal throne, formed the idea of this league
against the Venetians, and endeavoured, by apply-
ing to these palions which I have mentioned, to
persuade other princes to join in it. By working
upon the fears of the Italian powers, and upon the
avarice of the monarchs beyond the Alps, he in-
duced them, in concurrence with other causes,
which it is not my province to explain, to form one
of the most extensive confederacies against those
haughty republicans, that Europe had ever beheld.

TiE emperor, the king of France, the king of The npi4

Aragon, the pope, were principals in the league hIe"of`
of Cambray, to which almost all the princes of d'erate'
Italy acceded, the least considerable of them ho-
ping for some lhare in the spoils of a state, which
they already deemed to be devoted to deftrution.
The Venetians might have diverted this storm, or
have broken its force; but with a presumptuous
ralhnefs, to which there is nothing similar in the
course of their history, they waited its approach.
The impetuous valour of the French rendered
r H-liani oratio apud Goldatlum in polit. Impeial. p. 980.

inefflt.u al

SECT. Il. ineffectual all their precautions for the safety of the
L'" - republick; and the fatal battle of Ghiarradda

entirely ruined the army, on which they relied for
defence. Julius fcized all the towns which they
held in the ecclesiastical territories. Ferdinand re-
annexed the towns of which they had got poffeflion
on the coast of Calabria, to his Neapolitan domi-
nions. Maximilian, at the head of a powerful
army, advanced towards Venice on the one fide.
The French pushed their conquefs on the other.
The Venetians, surrounded by so many enemies,
and left without one ally, funk from the height of
presumption to the depths of despair; abandoned
all their territories on the continent; and shut
themfelvcs up in thi.ir capital as their last refuge,
and the only place which they hoped to preserve.

Diviflon THIS rapid fuccels, however, proved fatal to the
it,,.""g confederacy. The members of it, united while

they were engaged in sizing their prey, began to
feel their ancient jealousy and animofities revive,
as soon is they had a prospect of dividing it. When
the Venetians obfirvcd there symptoms of aliena-
tion and distrust, a ray of hope broke in upon
them; the spirit natural to their councils returned;
they rcfumed such wisdom and firmness, as made
some atonement for their former imprudence and
dejecion; they recovered part of the territory
which they had lofl; they appeared the pope and
Ferdinand by well-timed conceflions in their fa-
vour; and at l;ei:, diflu!ved the confederacy,

which

which had brought their commonwealth to the SECT. r.
brink of ruin. --

JULIUS, elated with beholding the effects of a New abjeis

off their po,-

league which he himlftilf had planned, and ima- iicyalld.n
gining that nothing was too arduous for him to Fatio"'
undertake, conceived the idea of expelling every
foreign power out of Italy, and bent all the force
of his mind towards executing a scheme so well
suited to his va2 and enterprizing genius. He
directed his first attack against the French, who,
on many accounts, were more odious to the Ita-
lians, than any of the foreigners who had acquired
dominion in their country. By his activity and
address, he prevailed on moil of the powers, who
had joined in the league of Cambray, to turn
their arms againit the king of France, their for-
mer ally; and engaged Henry VIII. who had
lately ascended the throne of England, to favour
their operations by invading France. Louis XII.
refilled all the efforts of this formidable and un-
expeted confederacy with undaunted fortitude.
Hostilities were carried on, during several cam-
paigns, in Italy, on the fiontiers of Spain, and in Pi-
cardy, with alternate success. Exhausted, at length,
by the variety as well as extent of his operations;
unable to withstand a confederacy which brought
against him superior force, conducted with wisdom,
and aaing with perseverance; L.,ois found it ne-
celrary to conclude ftparate treaties of pe:ce with

his

SECT. If. his enemies; and the war terminated with the loss
'.- --of every thing which the French had acquired in

Italy, except the castle of Milan, and a few incon-
fiderable towns in that dutchy.

By this the THE various negociations carried on during this
intertourfc
among the busy period, and the different combinations formed
ntions in. among powers hitherto little conneced with each
c"af"e. other, greatly increased that intercourse between

the nations of Europe, which I have mentioned
as one effet of the events in the fifteenth century.
While the greatnels of the objects at which they
aimed, the distant expeditions which they under-
took, as well as the length and obfinacy of the
contests in which they engaged, obliged them to
exert themselves with a vigour and perseverance
unknown in the preceding ages.

They are THOSE arive scenes which the following history
prepared for
the tranr. will exhibit, as well as the variety and importance
Idions of
therateenth of those tranfa&Eions which distinguish the period
century, to which it extends, are not to be ascribed solely

to the ambition, to the abilities, or to the rival-
flip of Charles V. and of Francis I. The king-
doms of Europe had arrived at such a degree of
improvement in the internal administration ofgo-
vernment, and princes had acquired fich com-
mand of the na ional force which was to be ex-
erted in foreign wars, that they were in a condition
to enlarge the !phere of their operations, a,!r to

inlc ;cae

increase the vigour of their efforts. Their con- SECT. II.
tests in Italy, which led them first to try the ex-
tent of the power that they had acquired, gave
rife to so many opposite claims and pretensions,
excited such a spirit of discord and rivallhip be-
tween nations, and laid the foundation of so
many quarrels, as could not fail of producing
extraordinary convulsions in Europe. Accord-
ingly the sixteenth century opened with the cer-
tain profpeft of its abounding in great and inte-
refling events.

VOL. I. L A VIEW

# A VIEW OF THE PROGRESS OF SOCIETY IN EUROPE, FROM THE SUBVERSION OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE, TO THE BEGINNING OF THE SIXTEENTH CENTURY

## SECTION III. View of the political Constitution of the principal States in Europe, at the Commencement of the sixteenth Century.

A
V E W

OF THE
PROGRESS OF SOCIETY

IN
EUROP E,

FROM THE
SUBVERSION OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE,

TO THE
BEGINNING OF THE SIXTEENTH CENTURY.

SECTION III.
View of the political Conflitution of the principal

States in Europe, at the Commencement of the
fixteentb Century.

SECT.III. H AVING thus enumerated the principal
A 'on'der. causes and events, the influence of which
able varient extended to all the states in Europe, and contri-
in the con-
flituion of buted either to improve their internal government
the diftr,.nt
n.ions of and police, or to enlarge the sphere of their aai-
*f "'Pe' vity, and to augment their national force; nothing

remains, in order to prepare my readers for enter-
". t. ;* * $ i.n g

ing with full information upon perusing the His- SCT.III.
tory of the Reign of Charles V. but to give some
view of the particular constitution and form of
civil government, in each of the nations which
a&ed any considerable part during that period.
While the institutions and occurrences, which I have
endeavoured to illuitrate, formed the people of Eu-
rope to resemble each other, and conducted them
from barbarism to refinement; in the fame path, and
with almost equal feps, there were other circum-
ifances which occasioned a difference in their poli-
tical eftablilhments, and gave rife to those peculiar
modes of government, which have produced such
variety in the charater and genius of nations.

IT is no less necessary to become acquainted N,,ccfry ;o
with the latter, than to have contemplated the tPf ,,h

when

former. The view which I have exhibited of the cirIls v.
causes and events, whose influence was universal, b,'.
will enable my readers to account for the furpri-
sing resemblance among the nations of Europe in
their interior police, and foreign operations. But,
without a diftin& knowledge of the peculiar form
and genius of their civil government, a great part
of their tranfations must appear altogether myfte-
rious and inexplicable. The historians of parti-
cular flates, as they seldom extended their views
farther than to the amusement or inftrution of
their fellow-citizens, by whom they might pre-
fume that all domestic customs and inffitutions
were perfetly undcrftood, have often negleced to

.1 2 dercenrd

StcT.III. descend into such details with refpe& to these, as

are sufficient to convey to foreigners full light and
information concerning theoccurrenceswhich they
relate. But a history, which comprehends the
tranfa&ions of so many different countries, would
be extremely imperfet, without a previous survey
of their refpetive conflitutions and political Rfate.
It is from his knowledge of there, that the reader
muf draw those principles, which will enable him
to judge with difcetnment, and to decide with
certainty concerning the condut of nations.

A MINUTE detail, however, of the peculiar

forms and regulations in every country, would
lead to dedu&ions of immeasurable length. To
Iketch out the great lines which difinguifh and
characerife each government, is all that the na-
ture of my present work will admit of, and all
that is necessary to illustrate the events which it
records.
7he Rfate AT the opening of the fixtecnth century, the

o"'y. political face of Italy was extremely different from

that of aniy other part of Europe. Instead of
those extensive monarchies, which occupied the
reft of the continent, that delightful country was
parcelled out among many small states, each of
which pofltTed sovereign and independent jurif-
di&ion. The only monarchy in Italy was that of
Naples. The dominion of the popes was of a
peculiar species, to which there is nothing similar
either in ancient or modern times. In Venice and

Florence,

Florence, a republican form of government was SCTr.III.
eftiblifhed. Milan was fubje& to sovereigns, who
had alrumed no higher title than that of dukes.

THE Pope was the first of there powers in dig- The papal

nity, and not the least considerable by the extent highest in
of his territories. In the primitive church, the Eu"o"e.
jurildidion of bihfops was equal and co-ordinate.
They derived, perhaps, some degree of confider-
ation from the dignity of the fee in which they
presided. They pofeffed, however, no real au-
thority or pre-eminence, but what they acquired
by superior abilities, or superior fandity. As
Rome had so long been the feat of empire, and
capital of the world, its bishops were on that Origin and
account entitled to refpee ; they received it; but t-i;p-"',
during several ages they claimed and received no- Po°"'
thing more. From these humble beginnings, they
advanced with such an adventurous and well-
dire&ed ambition, that they eltablifhed a Spiritual
dominion over the minds and sentiments of men,
to which all Europe submitted with implicit obe-
dience. Their claim of universal jurildilion, as
heads of the church; and their pretensions to in-
fallibility in their decisions, as fuccefirs of St.
Peter, are as chimerical, as they are repugnant to
the genius of the Christian religion. But on these
foundations, the fuperifition and credulity of man-
kind enabled them to erect an amazing super-
fruture. In all ecclefialtical controversies, their
decisions were received as the infallible oracles of
truth. Nor was the plenitude of their power con-

L 3 fined

SEcr.UI. fined to there alone; they dethroned monarchs

' disposed of crowns; absolved fubjeas from the

obedience due to their sovereigns; and laid king-
doms under interdi&s. There was not a state in
Europe which had not been disquieted by their
ambition. There was not a throne which they
had not shaken; nor a prince, who did not trem-
ble at their power.

T, ervitn. NOTHING was wanting to render this empire
rip!* l tile
p,,tes in- absolute, and to eftablilh it on the ruins of all
aidcqu.,tc to
l.upporttheir civil authority, but that the popes should have
spiritual ju-
riiitio,. pollefIed such a degree of temporal power, as

was sufficient to second and enforce their spiritual
decrees. Happily for mankind, while their fpi-
-ritual jurifdition was most extensive, and at its
greatest height, their temporal property was ex-
tremely limited. They were powerful pontiffs,
formidable at a distance; but they were petty
princes, without any considerable domestic force.
They had early endeavoured, indeed, to acquire
territory by arts, similar to those which they had
employed in extending theirjurifdiaion. Under
pretence of a donation from Confantine, and of
another from Charlemagne or his father Pepin,
they attempted to take pooffelion of rome towns
adjacent to Rome. But these donations were fiEti-
tious, and availed them little. The benefations,
for which they were indebted to the credulity of
the Norman adventurers, who conquered Naples,
and to the luperlcition of the counters Matilda,

were

were real, and added ample domains to the Holy SECT.IrI.
See.

BUT the power of the popes did not increase in Their au-

th< rity in
proportion to the extent of territory which they their own

territories

had acquired. In the dominions annexed to the extremly
Holy See, as well as in those fubjedt to other luniLed.
princes in Italy, the sovereign of a state was far
from having the command of the force which it
contained. During the turbulence and confusion
of the middle ages, the powerful nobility, or
leaders of popular facions in Italy, had seized the
government of different towns; and after strength-
ening their fortifications, and taking a body of
mercenaries into pay, they aspired at independ-
ence. The territory which the church had gained
was filled with petty tyrants of this kind, who left
the Pope hardly the Ihadow of dominion.

As these usurpations almolt annihilated the Itwras i-.
papal power in the greater part of the towns sub- by the m-

bitionoftbe

jea to the church, the Roman barons frequently Roman
disputed the authority of the popes, even in Rome bArons,
itself. In the twelfth century, an opinion began
to be propagated, " That as the funtion of eccle-
flaftics was purely spiritual, they ought to poirefs
no property, and to claim no temporaljurifdition;
but, according to the laudable example of their
predecessors in the primitive church, should subsist
wholly upon their tithes, or upon the voluntary
oblations of the people'." This do&rine being

a Otto Frifigenfis de GeRis Frider. Imp. lib. ii. cap. to.

L 4 addressld

SECT.III. addrefled to men, who had beheld the scandalous

manner in which the avarice and ambition of the
clergy had prompted them to contend for wealth,
and to exercise power, they listened to it with fond
attention. The Roman barons, who had felt molt
sensibly the rigour of ecclesiastical oppression,
adopted there sentiments with such ardour, that
they set themselves instantly to lhake off the yoke.
A. D. s43. They endeavoured to restore some image of their

ancient liberty, by reviving the institution of the
Roman senate, in which they velted supreme au-
thority; committing the executive power some-
times to one chief senator, sometimes to two, and
Sometimes to a magistrate dignified with the name
of The Patrician. The popes exerted themselves
with vigour, in order to check this fatal encroach-
ment on their jurifdicion. One of them, finding
all his endeavours ineffe&ual, was To much morti-
sied, that extreme grief cut ihort his days. Ano-
ther, having ventured to attack the senators at the
head of some armed men, was mortally wounded
in the fray b. During a considerable period, the
power of the popes, before which the greatest
monarchs in Europe trembled, was circumscribed
within such narrow limits in their own capital,
that they durst hardly exert any at of authority,
without the permirion and concurrence of the
senate.

b Otto Srising. Chron. lib. vii. cap. 27. 31. Id. de Gell.
Frid. lib. i. c. 27. Muratori Annali d'Italia, vol. ix. 398.

ENCROACH-

ENCROACHMENTS were made upon the papal SscT.III.

authority, not only by the usurpations of the and by the
Roman nobility, but by the mutinous spirit of trblc.ce
the people. During seventy years of the four- "an people,

Irom A. D.
teenth century, the popes fixed their residence in 3<s, to

A. Z277,

Avignon. The inhabitants of Rome, accuf-
tomed to confider themselves as the descendants
of the people who had conquered the world,
and had given laws to it, were too high-fpirited
to fubmir with patience to the delegated autho-
rity of those persons to whom the popes commit-
ted the government of the city. On many oc-
cafions, they opposed the execution of the papal
mandates, and on the slightest appearance of inno-
vation or oppreflon, they were ready to take arms
in defence of their own immunities. Towards
the middle of the fourteenth century, being in-
fligated by Nicolas Rienzo, a man of low birth
and a seditious spirit, but of popular eloquence,
and an enterprising ambition, they drove all the
nobility out of the city, eflablifhed a democrati-
cal form of government, elected Rienzo tribune
of the people, and inveRted him with extensive
authority. But though the fran:i proceedings
of the tribune soon overturned this new fyTtenm;
though the government of Rome was reinflated
in its ancient form; yet every fresh attack con-
tributed to weaken the papal ju:ifdilion: and
the turbulence of the people concurred with the
ipirit of independence among the nobility, to cir-

ciumlllfrihe

SECT..Il. cumfcribe it within very narrow bounds . Gre.

gory VII. and other domineering pontiffs, ac-
complifhed those great things which rendered
them so formidable to the emperors with whom
they contended, not by the force of their arms,
or by the extent of their power, but by the dread
of their spiritual censures, and by the effet of
their intrigues, which excited rivals, and called
forth enemies against every prince whom they
wilhed to depress or to destroy.

Atar,,, MA NY attempts were made by the popes, not
VIl;;ld,! only to humble those usurpers, who lorded it

'er the over the cities in the ecclesiastical state, but to

pnpes con.
fiderabe break the turbulent spirit of the Roman people.

These were long unsuccessful. At last Alexan-
der VI. with a policy no less artful than flagi-
tious, subdued and extirpated most of the great
Roman barons, and rendered the popes masters
of their own dominions. The enterprizing am-
bition of Julius II. added conquests of no incon-
fiderable value to the patrimony of St. Peter.
Thus the popes, by degrees, became powerful
temporal princes. Their territories, in the age
of Charles V. were of greater extent than at pre-
sent; their country seems to have been better
cultivated and more populous; and as they drew
large contributions from every part of Eiurpe,

c HiRoire Fiorentine de Giov. Villani, lib. xii. c. 89. Io.t.

ap. Murat. Script. Rerum Ital. vol. xiii. Vita de Cola li
Kienzo, ap. Murat. Antiq. Ital. vol. iii. p. 399, &c. Hiit.
de Nic. Piecimz, par M. de Boifprcaux, p. 9l, &c.

their

their revenues'far exceeded those of the neigh- SEcT.III.
bouring powers, and rendered them capable of '-
more sudden and vigorous efforts.

THE genius of the papal government, how- Defeasi

ever, was better adapted to the exercise of fpiri- es reclli
tual dominion, than of temporal power. With i.a .10
refpec to the former, all its maxims were fleady
and invariable. Every new pontiff adopted the
plan of his predecessor. By education and habit,
ecclesiastics were so formed, that the chara&ter
of the individual was funk in that of the profef-
sion; and the pafrlons of the man were sacrificed
to the interest and honour of the order. The
hands which held the reins of administration
might change; but the spirit which conduted
them was always the fame. While the measures
of other governments fluctuated, and the objeAs
at which they aimed varied, the church kept one
end in view; and to this unrelaxing constancy of
pursuit, it was indebted for its success in the
boldest attempts ever made by human ambition.

BUT in their civil administration, the popes fol-

lowed no such uniform or conrfient plan. There,
as in other governments, the character, the par-
lions, and the interests of the person who had the
supreme direction of affairs, occasioned a varia-
tion both in objects and measures. As few pre-
lates reached the summit of ecclcfiaflical dignity,
until ;hey were far advanced in lit:, a change of

Imlltiers

SECT.II[. maRers was more frequent in the papal domi-

nions than in other stares, and the political lytlem
was, of course, less stable and permanent. Every
pope was eager to make the most of the short pe-
riod, during which he had the profpet of enjoy-
ing power, in order to aggrandize his own fa-
mily, and to attain his private ends; and it was
often the first business of his fucceflor to undo all
that he had done, and to overturn what he had
eftablilhed.

As ecclesiastics were trained to pacific arts,

and early initiated in the mysteries of that policy,
by which the court of Rome extended or sup-
ported its spiritual dominion, the popes were apt
to conduct their temporal affairs with the fame
spirit; and in all their measures were more ready
to employ the refinements of intrigue, than the
force of arms. It was in the papal court that
address and subtlety in negociation first became a
science; and during the sixteenth century, Rome
was confidered as the school in which it might be
best acquired.

As the decorum of their ecclesiastical charater

prevented the popes from placing theinfelves at
the head of their armies, or taking the command,
in person, of the military force in their dominions,
they were afraid to arm their subje&s; and in all
their operations, whether offensive or defensive,
they trusted entirely to mercenary troops.

As

As their power and dominions could not de- SECT.IIl'

scend to their posterity, the popes were leTs soli- 3
citous than other princes to form or to encou-
rage schemes of public utility and improvement.
Their tenure was only for a Ihort life; present
advantage was what they chiefly Rudied; to
squeeze and to amass, not to meliorate, was their
object. They ere&ed, perhaps, some work of
ostentation, to remain as a monument of their
pontificate; they found it necessary, at some
times, to eftablilh useful institutions, in order to
soothe and silence the turbulent populace of
Rome; but plans of general benefit to their sub-
jects, and framed with a view to futurity, were
rarely objecs of attention in the papal policy.
The patrimony of St. Pcter was worse governed
than any part of Europe; and though a gene-
rous pontiff might suspend for a little, or coun-
tera&t the eflfets of those vices which are pecu-
liar to the adminiRration of ecclefialtics; the
disease not only remained incurable, but has gone
on increasing from age to age; and the decline
of the state has kept pace with its progress.

ONE circumltance, farther, concerning the papal The popes

derive roime

government, is so singular, as to merit attention. ,advantag
As the Spiritual supremacy and temporal power unin oth
wereunited in one person, and uniformlyaided each heianPii-
other in their operations, they became so blended temporal
together, that it was difficult to separate them,
even in imagination. The potentates, who found
it necessary to oppose the mie.ures which the

popes

SCT.III. popes pursued as temporal princes, could not di.

'" vcft themselves of the reverence which they ima-

gined to be due to them as heads of the church,
and vicars of Jesus Christ. It was with reluctance
that they could be brought to a rupture with them;
they were averse to push their operations against
them to extremity; they listened eagerly to the first
overtures of accommodation, and were willing to
procure it almost upon any terms. Their confci-
oufnefs of this encouraged the enterprizing pon-
tiffs, who filled the papal throne about the begin-
ning of the sixteenth century, to engage in schemes
seemingly the molt extravagant. They trusted,
that if their temporal power was not sufficient to
carry them through with success, the refpe& paid
to their spiritual dignity would enable them to ex-
tricate themselves with facility and with honourd.

But

d The manner in which Louis XI. of France undertook

and carried on war against Julius II. remarkably illustrates
this observation. Louis solemnly consulted the clergy of
France, whether it was lawful to take arms against a pope
who had wantonly kindled war in Europe, and whom nei-
ther the faith of treaties, nor gratitude for favours received,
nor the decorum of his characer, could restrain from the
moll violent aaions to which the luRt of power prompts
ambitious princes. Though his clergy authorized the war,
yet Anne of Bretagne, his queen, entertained scruples with
regard to the lawfulness of it. The king himself, from
some fupcrfition of the fame kind, carried it on faintly;
and, upon every fresh advantage, renewed his propositions
of peace. Mezeray, Hill. de France, fol. edit. 1685. tom. i.
852. I hiall produce another proof of this reverence for the
papal character, Rill more Ariking. Guicciardini, the moll
if:gacious, perhaps, of all modern hidorians, and the bolded

in

But when popes came to take part more fre- SECT.Il.
quently in the contests among princes, and to *
engage as principals or auxiliaries in every war
kindled in Europe, this veneration for their fa-
cred eharater began to abate; and striking in-
flances will occur in the following History of its
being almost totally extinct.

OF all the Italian powers, the republic of Ve- Connitution

nice, next to the pope, was most conneted with ublic of
the reft of Europe. The rife of that common- , ,i, i,,re
wealth, during the inroads of the Huns in the andJp't"rcl
fifth century; the singular situation of its capital
in the small isles of the Adriatick gulf; and the
more singular form of its civil constitution, are
generally known. If we view the Venetian go-
vernment as calculated for the order of nobles
alone, its institutions may be pronounced excel-
lent; the deliberative, legislative, and executive
powers, are so admirably distributed and adjuRfed,
that it must be regarded as a perfet model of po-
litical wisdom. But if we confider it as formed
for a numerous body of people subjet to its ju-
rifdi&ion, it will appear a rigid and partial arif-
tocracy, which lodges all power in the hands of
a few members of the community, while it de-
grades and oppresses the reft.

in painting the vices and ambition of the popes, represents
the death of Migliau, a Spanilh officer, who was killed du-
ring the siege of Naples, as a punilhment infliled on him
by Heaven, on account of his having opposed the setting of
Clement VII. at liberty. Guic. HiRoria d'ltilia, Gcner.
164;, vol. ii. lib. s1. p. 467.

THE.

SECr.III. THE spirit of government, in a commonwealth
Defectsin of this Ipecies, was, of course, timid and jea-
its govcn. lous. The Venetian nobles difrufted their own

entr, par-

ticularly fubjets, and were afraid of allowing them the
with refpea t
to its mili- use of arms. They encouraged among them the
try o/cra-
tims. arts of indultry and commerce; they employed

them in manufactures and in navigation; but
never admitted them into the troops which the
state kept in its pay. The military force of the
republic consisted entirely of foreign mercena-
ries. The command of these was never trusted
to noble Venetians, left they Ihould acquire such
influence over the army, as might endanger the
public liberty; or become accustomed to the ex-
ercife of such power, as would make them un-
willing to return to the condition of private ci-
tizens. A soldier of fortune was placed at the
head of the armies of the commonwealth; and
to obtain that honour, was the great objet of the
Italian CG;doii.oriC, or leaders of bands, who, in
the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, made a
trade of war, and raised and hired out soldiers to
different flates. But the fame suspicious policy,
which induced them to employ there adventu-
rers, prevented their placing entire confidence in
them. Two noblemen, appointed by the fe-
nate, accompanied their army when it took the
field, with the appellation of Proveditori, and,
like the field-deputies of the Dutch republic in
latter times, obierved all the motions of the ge-
neral, and checked and controuled him in all his
operations.

2 A COMMON-

A COMMONWEALTH, with such civil and mili- SECT.III.

tary infti/utions, was not formed to make con-
quests. While its subje&s were disarmed, and its
nobles excluded from military command, it car-
ried on its warlike enterprizes with great difad-
vantage. This ought to have taught the Venetians
to make felf-prefervation, and the enjoyment of
domestic security, the objects of their policy. But
republics are apt to be seduced by the spirit of
ambition, as well as princes. When the Venetians
fb far. forgot the interior defe&s in their govern-
ment. as to aim at extenlive conquells, the fatal
blow, which they received in the war excited by
the league of Cambray, convinced them of the
imprudence and danger of making violent efforts,
in opposition to the genius and tendency of their
constitution.

IT is not, however, by its military, but by its Fr:-l:ence

naval and commercial power, that the importance inititutions.
of the Venetian commonwealth must be eflimated.
In the latter, the real force and nerves of the state
confited. The jealousy of government did not
extend to this department. Nothing was appre-
hended from this quarter, that could prove formi-
dable to liberty. The senate encouraged the nobles
to trade, and to serve on board the fleer. They
became merchants and admirals. They increared
the wealth of their country by their induitry.
They added to its dominions, by the valour with
which they conduced its naval armaments.

VOL. I. M THE

SECT.II1. THE.Venetian commerce was. an incxhauftible
The xtent source of opulence.- All the nations in; Etrope de-
of' it co" - pended upon them, not only for the commodities

of the Eafl, but for various: manufafures fabri-
cated by theln,aone, or finished with a dexterity
and elegance unknown in other countries. From
this extensive commerce, the late derived fiichim-
mense supplies, as concealed there vices in its con-
flitution which I have mentioned; and enabled it
to keep on foot such armies, as were not only an
over-match for the: force which any of its neigh-
bours could bring into the field, but were sufficient
to contend, for some time, with the powerful mo-
narchs beyond the Alps. During its. struggles
with the princes united against ic by the league
of Cambray, the republic levied fums which, even
in the present age, would be deemed considerable;
and while the king of France paid the exorbitant
interest which I have mentioned for the moreyrad-
vanced to him, and the emperqr, eager to borrow,
but destitute of credit, was known by tile name of
Maximilian the 1Money-lefr, the Venetians railed
-whatever furs they pleated, at the moderate pre-
nium of five in the hundred'.

The conrai. TE-E conftittion of Florence was perfectly the
lution of ' · ,
I lorence, reverse of the Venetian. It partook as much of

the democratical turbulence and licentioulhefs, as

' Hilt. dc 1a Liguc fait L' Cambray par M. I'Abbe du Do,,

4ib. v. Sandi Storia Civil Vene.iana, lib. viii. c. i6. p. 891.
&c.

S~~~~~-..'',~~~~ .the

the other of ariftocratical rigour. Florence, how- SicT.IIL.
ever, was a commercial, not a military democracy.
The nature of its institutions was favourable'to
commerce, and the genius of the people was turned
towards it. The vast wealth which the family of
Medici had acquired by trade, together with the
magnificence, the generosity, and the virtue of
the first Cosmo, gave him such an ascendant over
the affections as well as the councils of his coun-
trymen, that though the forms of popular govern-
ment were preserved, though the various depart-
ments of administration were filled by magif-
trates distinguished by the ancient names, and
eleted in the usual manner, he was in reality the
head of the commonwealth; and in the flation of
a private citizen, he possessed supreme authority.
Cosmo tranfiitted a considerable degree of this
power to his descendants; and during the greater
part of the fifteenth century, the political ifate of
Florence was extremely singular. The appearance
of republican' government subsisted, the people
were passionately attached to it, and on some oc-
cafions contended warmly for their privileges, and
yet they permitted a tingle family to assume the di-
rection of their affairs, allmof as absolutely as if it
had been formally invested with lbvereign power.
The jealousy of the Medici concurred with the
commercial spirit of the Florentines, in putting
the military force of the republic upon the farce
footing with that of the other Italian fIrats. The
troops, which the Florentines employed ini th'slr

M 2 vwars,

Slter.II. wars, confifed alnmof entirely of mercenary fol-

diers, furnished by the Condottieri, or leaders of
bands, whom they took into their pay.

The Cffe °IN

the kingdom of Naples, to which the fove-

tution es the
kindom of reignty of the ifand of Sicily was annexed, the
Naplc.

feudal government was established in the fame
form, and with the fame defecs, as in the other
nations of Europe. The frequent and violent re-
volutions which happened in that monarchy had
considerably increased there defets, and rendered
them more intolerable. The succession to the
crown of Naples had been so often interrupted or
altered, and To many princes of foreign blood had
taken pofeffion of the throne, that the Neapolitan
nobility had lolf, in a great meafiure, that attach-
ment to the family of their sovereigns, as well as
that reverence for their persons, which, in other
feudal kingdoms, contributed to set some bounds
to the encroachments of the barons upon the royal
prerogative and power. At the fame time, the
different pretenders to the crown, being obliged to
court the barons who adhered to them, and on
whose support they depended for the success of
their claims, they augmented their privileges by
liberal concellions, and connived at their boldest
usurpations. Even when feated on the throne, it
was dangerous for a prince, who held his sceptre
by a disputed title, to venture on any ftep towards
extending his own power, or circumscribing that
of the nobles.

FROM

FROM all there causes, the kingdom of Naples SzCT.IU.

was the most turbulent of any in Europe, and the
authority of its monarchs the least extensive.
Though Ferdinand I., who began his reign in the
year one thousand four hundred and fixty-eight,
attempted to break the power of the ariltocracy;
though his son Alphonfo, that he might crush it at
once by cutting off the leaders of greatelt repu-
tation and influence among the Neapolitan barons,
ventured to commit one of the most perfidious
and cruel ations recorded in hitfory; the order of A. D-. 17.
nobles was nevertheless more exasperated than
humbled by their measures . The resentment
which these outrages excited was To violent, and
the pewer of the malcontent nobles was still so
formidable, that to there may be ascribed, in a
great degree, the ease and rapidity with which
Charles VIII. conquered the kingdom of Naples L.

THE event that gave rife to the violent contelts Stte of the

concerning the fuccelfion to the crown of Naples ceringth
and Sicily, which brought so many calamities ,iefl^o t
upon there kingdoms, happened in the thirteenth the croVn.
century. Upon the death of the emperor Frede-
ric II., Manfred, his natural Ton, aspiring to the
Neapolitan throne, murdered his brother, the em- A. D. 1s4.
peror Conrad (if we may believe contemporary
hiltorians), and by that crime obtained poireflion
of it h The popes, from their implacable enmity

( Giannone, book xxviii. chap. z. vol. ii. p. 410, &c.
v Giannone, ibid. p. 414.
1' Struv. Corp. I-ilt. Germ. i. 489. Giannone, book xviii.
el:. St

M 3 to

S.ECT.II. to the houle of Swabia, not only refused to recog-

nize Manfred's title, but endeavoured to excite
against him some rival capable of wresting the
sceptre out of his hand. Charles, count of Anjou,
the brother of St. Louis king of France, under-
took this; and he received from the popes the
investiture of the kingdom of Naples and Sicily
as a fief held of the Holy See. The count of
Anjou's efforts were crowned with success; Man-
fred fell in battle; and he took poffeflion of the
vacant throne. But soon after, Charles sullied the
glory which he had acquired, by the injuetice and
cruelty with which he put to death, by the hands
of the executioner, Conradin, the last prince of
the house of Swabia, and the rightful heir of the
Neapolitan crown. That gallant young prince
ifferted his title, to the last, with a courage worthy
of a better fate. On the scaffold, he declared
Peter, at that time prince, and soon after kin,
of Aragon, who had married Manfred's only
daughter, his heir; and throwing his glove among
the people, he entreated that it might be carried
raPeter, as the symbol by which he conveyed all
his rights to him'. The desire of avenging the
insult offered to royalty, by the death of Conradin,
concurred with ambition, in prompting Peter to
take arms in support of the title which he had
acquired. From that period, during almost two
centuries, the houses of Aragon and Anjou con-
tended for the crown of Naples. Amidst a fuc-
cciflon of revolutions more rapid, as well as of

Giannonc, book xix. ch. 4. § z.

crimes

crimes more atrocious, than what occur in the SECT.III.
history of almost any other kingdom, monarchs, '
fomnetimes of the Aragonefe line, and sometimes
of the Angevin, were feated on the throne. At
length the princes of the house of Aragon obtained A. D. 1434.
such firm pofleffion of this long-difputed- inherit-
ance, that they transmitted it quietly to a ballard
branch of their family k.

THE race of the Angcvin kings, however, was Pretenoions

of the

not extinct; nor had they relinquished their title French and
to the Neapolitan crown. The count of Maine SPh^is.
and Provence, the heir of this family, conveyed
all his rights and pretensions to Louis XI. and to
his successors. Charles VIII., as I have already A. D. 494.
related, crossed the Alps at the head of a powerful
army, in order to prosecute his claim with a degree
of vigour, far superior to that which the princes
,from whom he derived it had been capable of
exerting. The rapid progress of his arms in Italy,
as well as the short time during which he enjoyed
the fruits of his success, are well known. Frede-
rick, the heir of the illegitimate branch of the
Aragonefe family, soon recovered the throne of
which Charles had difpcffeffed him. Louis XII.
and FerdinandofAragon united against this prince,
whom both, though for different reasons, confi-
dered as an ufurpcr, and agreed to divide his
dominions between them. Frederick, unable to A. D, 11.
refilt the combined monarchs, each of whom was
far his superior in power, resigned his sceptre.

k Giannone, hook xxvi. ch. 2.

M 4 Louis

S.cT.III. Louis and Ferdinand, though they had concurred

in making the conquest, differed about the division
of it; and from allies became enemies. But Gon-
salvo de Cordova, partly by the exertion of such
military talents as gave him ajuf title to the ap-
pellation of the Great Captain, which the Spanifl
historians have beltowed upon him; and partly
by such Ihamelefs and frequent violations of the
most solemn engagements, as leave an indelible
stain on his memory; firipped the French of all
that they possessed in the Neapolitan dominions,
and secured the peaceable polfeflion of them to his
master. These, together with his other kingdoms,
Ferdinand transmitted to his grandobn Charles V.,
whose right to possess them, if not altogether
incontrovertible, seems, at least, to be as well
founded as that which the kings of France set in
opposition to it'.

Stte ofthe THERE is nothing in the political conititution,
Outch! of
Milin, and or interior government of the dutchy of Milan,
Ihe right of
suctelion so remarkable, as to require a particular expla-

nation. But as the right of fucceflion to that
fertile province was the cause or the pretext of
almost all the wars carried on in Italy during the
reign of Charles V., it is necessary to trace these
disputes to their source, and to inquire into the
pretensions of the various competitors.

' Droits des Rois de France au Royaume de Sicile. Merm.
de Comin. Edit. de Frcfnoy, tom. iv. part ii. p. 5.

DURIN'G

- DURING the long and fierce contefis excited in SZCT.III.
Italy by the violence of the GQelf and Ghibelline rerand

rorefs of

faclions, the family of Vi!'contirofe to great emi- the ,iput,
nence among their fellow- itiiens of Milan.. As ~"'s"'.
the Viiconti had adhered uxiformly to the Ghibel-
line or-Imperial'intereft, they, by way of recom-
pence, received, from one emperor, the dignity A.D. 1354.
of perpetual vicars of the enlpire in Italy m": they
were created, by another, dukes of Milan; and, A.D.1395.
together with that title, the poffeflion of the city
and its territories was beltowt d. upon them.as an
hereditary fief". John, king of France, among
other expedients for raising r.noney, which the
calamities of his reign obliged him to employ,
condescended to give one of his daughters in mar-
riage to John Galeazzo Vifconci, the first duke of
Milan, from whom he had receI'ved considerable
fums. Valentine Visconti, one cos the children of
this marriage, married her cousin, Louis, duke of
Orleans, the only brother of Charles VI. In their
marriage contract, which the pope, confirmed, it
was stipulated that, upon failure of heirs male in
the family of Visconti, the dutchy ot'Mil n should
descend to the posterity of Vaen tine and the
duke of Orleans. That event too!i place. In
the year one thousand four hundred and forty-
f.ven, Philip Maria, the lafl prince of the ducal
family of Vifcon:i, died. Various coml )etitors pre-
tended'to the succession. Charles, duke of Ori- ns,

m Petrarch epif. ap. Struv. corp. i. 62;.

Lcibnit. cod. jur. gent. diplorn. vol. i. 2,7.
a pleaded

SE'C;nr.- pleaded his right to it, founded on the marriage-
~i--" contrt of'his mother Valentine Visconti. Alfonso

kiz.g 6f-Naples claimed it in consequence of a
will made by Philip Maria in his:favour. The
ei~peror contended that; upon the extiniio'n of
male issue in the fainilyof Visconti, the fief returned
to the fipericr lord, and ought to be re-annexed
to the empire. The people of Milani, finitten with
that love of liberty which prevailed among the
Italian flates, declared againt -the dominion of
any maiter, and cftablified a republican form of
government.

BUT during the struggle among so many com-

petitors, the prize for which they contended was
seized by one from whom none of them appre.-
hended any danger. Francis Sforza, the natural
son of Jacomuzzo Sforza, whor !lis courage and
abilities had elevated from the rank of a peasant to
be one of the most eminent and powerful of the
Italian Condotticri, having iucceeded his fatcer in
the command of the adventurers who followed
his ilandard, had married a natural daughter of
the last duke of Milan. Upon this fladow of a
title Francis founded his pretensions to the dutchy,
which he supported with such talents and valour,
as placed him at .lafl on the ducal throne. The
virtues, as well as abilities, with which he governed,
inducing his fubjEts to. frget the defects in hi.s
title, he tranfimitted his dominions quietly to hi:
son; from whom they descended to his grandi 'n.
HIe was murdered by his grand-uncle Ludolvico,

7 surnamed

surnamed the Moor, who took poflfflion of the secT.IIi
dutchy; and his right to it was confirmed by the '--
inveffiture of the emperor Maximilian in the year
one thousand four hundred and ninety-fouro.

Louis XI., who took pleasure in depressing the

princes of the blood, and who admired the poli-
tical abilities of Francis Sforza, would not permit
the duke of Orleans to take any ftep in prose-
cution of his right to the dutchy of Milan. Lu-
dovico the Moor kept up such a close connetion
with Charles VIII. that, during the greater part of
his reign, the claim of the family of Orleans con-
tinued to lie dormant. But when the crown of
France devolved on Louis XII., duke of Orleans,
he initantly asserted the rights of his family with
the ardour which it was natural to expect. Lu-
dovico Sforza, incapable of contending with such
a rival, was stripped of all his dominions in the
space of a few days. The king, clad in the ducal
robes, entered Milan in triumph; anti soon after,
Ludovico, having been betrayed by the Swiss in
his pay, was sent a priolner into France, and shut
up in the castle of Loches, where he lay unpitied
during the remainder of his days. In consequence
of one of the singular revolutions which occur so
frequently in the history of the Milanese, his obn
Maximilian Sforza was placed on the ducal throne,
of which he kept possession during the reign of

O Ripalin il o.

Hilt. eio .

Iib .

v i .

65. t.

ap . . corp. i. 93
Du Mont Corps Diplom. torn. iii. p. ii. 333. ibid.

Lo'''is

StCT.II. Louis XII. But his fuccebor Francis I. was too
A.D. .5z. hligh-fpirited and entcrprizing tamely to relinquifl

his title. As fbon as he was ieared upon the
throne, he prepared to invade the MilanefL; and
his right of' lucceiion to it appears, from thi.,
detail, to have been more natural and more juit-
than that of any other competitor.

Ir is unneceflary to enter into any detail with

refpe& to the form of government in Genoa,
Parma, Modena, and. the other inferior Itates of
.Italy. Their names, indeed, will often occur in
the following hiflory. But the power of, these
flates themselves was so inconsiderable, that their
fate depended little upon their own efforts; and
the frequent revolutions which they underwent,
were brought about by the operations of the
princes who attacked ordefended them, ratherthan
by any thing peculiar in their internal conflitu:ion.
The tnnfti- OF the great kingdoms on this fide of the Alps,

n:roA. Spain is one of the most considerable; and as it
't SP"". was the hereditary domain of Charles V., as well

as the chief source of his power and wealth, a
diftina knowledge of its political conffitution is
of capital importance towards under.fanding the
transactions of his reign.

Cn-quered The Vandals and Goths, who overturned the
:,.,,; Roman power in Spain, eltablifhed a form of

government in that coun:ry, and brought in cuf-
toms and laws, perfeIly timilar to those which

were

were introduced into the reft of Europe, by the SECT.II.
other vitorious tribes which acquired fettlcments ~
there. For Ibme time, fociery advanced, among
the new inhabitants of Spain, by the fame fleps,
and seemed to hold the fame course, as in other
European nations. To this progress, a sudden A. .7 2.
flop was put by' the invasion of the Saracens or aid by the
Moors.' The Goths could not withstand the efforts Ioos'
of their enthusiastic valour, which fibdiicd Spain,
with the fame impetuous rapidity that dif-in-
guifhes all the operations of their arms.' The con-
querors introduced into the country in which they
fettled, the Mahometan religion, the Arabic lan-
guage, the manners of the East, together with
that taste for the arts, and that love of elegance
and splendour, which the Caliphs had begun to
cultivate among their fibje'ts.

SUCH Gothic nobles as disdained to filbmn;t to TheChrit.

the Moorilh yoke, fled for refuge to the inac- i',S ,dec,
ceffible mountains of , fturias. There they corn- d"inioa in

'*>ted *em~clves 'ith''' Splan.

forted themselves with' enioying the exercise of
the Christian religion, and with maintaining the
authority of their ancient laws. Being joined by
many of the b:oldest and, most warlike among their
countrymen, they sallied out upon the adjacent
settlements of the Moors in finall parties; but
venturing only upon fliort excursions at first, they
were satisfied with plunder and revenge, without
thinking of conquest. By degrees, their strength
increased, their views enlarged, a regular govern-
ment was cftablifhed among them, and they began

to

$cT.JIU. to.aim at extending their territories. While they

Y, '
" pushed on their attacks with the unremitting

ardo.ur, excited by zeal for religion, .by the defirl
of vengeance, and by the hope of rescuing their
country from opprelfion; while they conducted
their operations with the courage natural to men
who had no other occupation but war, and who
were strangers to all the arts which corrupt or
enfeeble the mind, the Moors gradually loft many
of the advantages to which they had been in-
debted for their first success. They threw off all
dependence on the Caliphs *; they negleced to
preserve a close connecion with their countrymen
in ,frica; their empire in Spain was.fplit into
many finall kingdoms; the arts which they cul-
tivated, together with the luxury to which there
gave rife, relaxed, in some measure, the force of
their military institution, and abated the vigour
of their warlike spirit. The Moors;. however,
continued fill to be a gallant people, and pof.
sessed great resources. According to, the magni-
ficent style of the Spanish historians, eight cen-
turies of almost uninterrupted war elapsed, and
three thousand seven hundred battles were fought,
,49,. before the last of the Moorish kingdolms'in Spain

-submitted to the Christian arms. ..

The union .As the Chriltians made their conquefRs upon
kofiSv.IO"'the. Mahometans at various perincs,j and under

different leaders, each formed the:territory which
he had wrested from.the common enemy, into an
* Jos. Sim. Anemanni HiAior. Ital. Scriptorie, vol iii..p. 13;

independent

ind~pendenst;. (rate.; :iSain: rw~d~i'di t

c)t' a: &~ SB-r.IM;

many separate ki ngd'ois icowntitted

provinces;. .''.

in each: ic:it; nb: ieve a pett. y imonaith eflablihed .
his throi, :and: afliuned, alli theicnfigns of royalty.
In a iEries ofCyearsh howe-er,. by-the. usual events
of incermarriagess· ortegat ficcefion, orconqueft
all the{feinfefgPrietrieca.iitties W're %aiinexcd to the
rtior, powe-rfultkiigdomS of Cftile anld- tf Ara:
'goh- At: length, by.the forfiinate marsiige of
Ferdinahd ahd,1irfabe'lli,c tle foinier 'he hereditary
monarch of Aragn;: and the larter raiied to the
thirone of Ca'file by the 'affe&ti6n of her lubjects
lai'the Spanilh crowns were united, and defceid-

.145I
:d ini-the famte'line.-'l " ' ': -

,VOM this,.peiod, th political constitution of Their n-

Spain began to affumle a regular and uniform ap- cientca.,

j' .*

...., .. . . .. .. . .. .

. toms and
pearance; the genius of government may be de- :laws eser1,.

·- i 1 1 '

r ed arniid'k

lineated,.an4 thel progress of its laws and manners all their re-
.y! be traeed, wjxh certainty. Notwitlhflanding
the fi.tilar ,revolution which the invasion of the
Moprs occasioned in Spain, aiid the peculiarity of
.its fate, in being so lopg fubjeted to She Maho-
..-etan yoke, the cufnomis. introduced by the Van-
das. and Goths had taken such deep root, and
.wer,e so thoroughly incorporated with the frame of
its government, that in every province which the
Chriltians recovered from the Moors, we find the
conditipn' of individuals, as well as the political
conflitutiom, nearly the fame as in other nations
of Eurppe...Lancts were ,;: ld by the fame tenure;
juflice was difpcnled in the fame form; the fame

privileges

SseT.IJ. privtigeS, o$)ereclaiLned byrthe 4obiliky and the
whic;h fr . fewpower rxercifed by the' Cortes, or genral
,,:thire aifob.'ey of ti¢, kingli m. Se.vew'al; circumilances
deg-e fimi coAtributed to fisc.u.c his permanence of the feudal
lar to 1.at
of otlher infitutions in Spaih,, notwithRtanding the conquett
nations of
Ez ope. qf.t.: Morfthitch. seened, to have overturned

th,.; S.ch:o'..Sp*~iar4awgspreferved their
independence, !a9ri tQ: theiri ncient customs,
not only from :attachmett -to the,. but oit of
antipathy to the Moors, to whos' idcas concerning
propierty,..d-'ge.¥er,,nent these cfdooms ivere to-
tally rrpugnant.. L:ye. anong g the Christians, who
fubnmitted to t he.' 'oo.rii. cooquerors, and: cqn-
sented to become their fubjedts,, ancient. customs
were not entirely abolished. They were permitted
'to retiin:rthctr rHit:i , tiir-laws' dorcerning pri-
vate property, rheir ormi:0s ofs adrtriftering jotIffe,
anid their 'miode of 'eviying taxe's. The foliowiers
of Mahornet are the ohly enchufiiats who have
united the spirit of toleration with zeal for maK!{f
proselytes, ard who, at the far'e time that they
took arms to propagate the dotrirne bs thefr Pro-
phet,'permitted such as wbuld not embrace ir, to
'adhere to their own tenets, and to pra&ise their
own rites. To this peculiarity in the genius of
the Mahometan religion, as well as to the desire
which the Moors had of reconciling the' Christians
to their ydke, it was owing that the ancient man-
ners and laws in Spain survived the violent shock
cf a conquest, and were permitted to fubfil, not-
withstanding the introduftion of a new 'religion

.and

,nd a new form of government into that country. SECT.Il.
It is obvious, fiom all these particulars, that the
Christians muRf have found it extremely easy to
re-eftablilh manners and government on their
ancient foundations, in those provinces of Spain
which they wrested fucceitlvely from the Moors.
A considerable part of the people retained such a
fondness for the customs, and such a reverence
for the laws of their ancestors, that, wilhing to fee
them completely reltored, they were not only will-
ing but eager to resume the former, and to re-
cognize the authority of the latter.

BUT though the feudal form of government, certain pe.

2eliarities in
with all the institutions which charaterize it, was their coni.

tation and

thus preserved entire in Castile and Aragon, as law,.
well as in all the kingdoms which depended on
these crowns, there were certain peculiarities in
theirpolitical conifitutions, which distinguish them
from those of any other country in Europe. Tile The p.o~.

gatlye More
royal prerogative, extremely limited in every feudal rimitrd, and

the immu-

kingdom, was circumscribed, in Spain, within niris of the
such narrow bounds, as reduced the power of the Px'to,,"
sovereign almost to nothing. The privileges of
the nobility were vast in proportion, and extended
so far, as to border on abfolure independence.
The immunities of the cities were great, they pof-
fefled considerable influence in the Cortes, and they
aipired at obtaining more. Such a slate of ociety,
in which the political machine was so ill adjusted,
and the several members of the legiflactire so irn-

VOL. 1. N properly

SECT.III. properly balanced, produced interior disorders in

the kingdoms of Spain, which rose beyond the
pitch of turbulence and anarchy usual under the
feudal government. The whole tenor of the Spa-
niSh history confirms the truth of this obServation;
and when the mutinous spirit, to which the genius
of their policy gave birth and vigour, was no
longer restrained and overawed by the immediate
dread of the Moorinl arms, it broke out into
more frequent infurrefions against the govern-
ment of their princes, as well as more outrageous
insults on their dignity, than occur in the annals
of any other country. These were accompanied
at rome times with more liberal sentiments con-
cerning the rights of the people, at other times
with more elevated notions concerning the privi-
leges of the nobles, than were common in other
nations.

tnaftnee IN the principality of Catalonia, which was an-
f this. nexed to the kingdom of Aragon, the impatience

of the people to obtain the redress of their griev-
ances having prompted them to take arms against
A.D, D46s. their sovereign John II.) they, by a solemn deed,

recalled the oath of allegiance which they had
sworn to him, declared him and his posterity to
be unworthy of the throne , and endeavoured to
establish a republican form of government, in
order to secure the perpetual enjoyment of that

P Zurita Annales de Arag. tom. iv. 113. 115, &c.

liberty,

liberty, after which they aspired q. Nearly about SECT.III.
the fame period, the indignation of the Castilian -v
nobility against the weak and flagitious adminiftra-
tion of Henry IV., having led them to combine
against him, they arrogated, as one of the privi-
leges belonging to their orders the right of trying
.and of pafling sentence on their fbvereign. That
the exercise of this power might be as public
and solemn, as the pretension to it was bold, they
summoned all the nobility of their party to meet A. D.a465
at Avila; a spacious theatre was ereted in a plain,
without the walls of the town; an image, repre-
senting the king, was ecated on a throne, clad in
royal robes, with a crown on its head, a sceptre
in its hand, and the sword of justice by its fide.
The accusation against the king was read, and
the sentence ofdepofition was pronounced, in pre-
fence of a numerous assembly. At the close of
the first article of the charge, the archbiflop of
Toledo advanced, and tore the crown from the
head of the image; at the close of the second, the
Conde de Placentia snatched the sword of justice
from its fide; at the close of the third, the Conde
de Benevente wrested the sceptre from its hand; at
the close of the last, Don Diego Lopes de Stuniga
tumbled it headlong from the throne, At the fame
instant, Don Alfonso, Henry's brother, was pro-
claimed king of Castile and Leon in its flead '.

1 Ferreras Hill. d'Efpagne, tom. vii. p. z9. P. Orlcanr

Revol. d'Efpagne, tom. iii. p. is5. L. Marinisus oiculus de
Reb, Hifpan. apud Schotti Script. Hilpan. ful. .+9.

Marian. Hill. lib. xxiii. c. 9.

N. a TiIz.

SECT.III. THE most daring leaders of fation would not

w^"' have ventured on these measures, nor have con-

du&ed them with such public ceremony, if the
sentiments of the people concerning the royal dig-
nity had not been so formed by the laws and
policy, to which they were accuflomed both in
Caltile and Catalonia, as prepared them to ap-
prove of such extraordinary proceedings, or to
acquiesce in them.

the confli. I, Aragon, the form of government was mo-
tution and
oveirMent narchical, but the genius and maxims of it were
ol Alagon.

purely republican. The kings, who were long
elefive, retained only the shadow of power; the
real exercise of it was in the Cortes or parliament
of the kingdom. This supreme aflembly was com-
posed of four different arms or members. The
nobility of the first rank. The equestrian order,
or nobility of the second class. The reprefenta-
tives of the cities and towns, whose right to a place
in the Cortes, if we may give credit to the hifo-
rians of Aragonj-was coeval with the constitution.
The ecclcfiaftical order, composed of the digni-
taries of the church, together with the represent-
atives of the inferior clergy'. No law could pass
in this assembly without the assent of every single
member who had a right to vote'. Without the
permission of the Cortes, no tax could be imposed;
no war could be declared no peace concluded;
no money could be coined nor any alteration be

, Forma de celebrar. Cortes en Aragon. por Geron. Martel.
'Martel. ibid. p. 2.

made

made in the current specie". The power of re- SECT.III.
viewing the proceedings of all inferior courts, the ~'
privilege of infpeaing every department of ad-
ministration, and the right of redressing all griev-
ances, belonged to the Cortes. Nor did those who
conceived themselves to be aggrieved, address the
Cortes in the humble tone of supplicants, and pe-
tition for redress; they demanded it as the birth-
right of freemen, and required the guardians of
their' liberty to decide with refpe& to the points
which they laid before them'. This sovereign
court was held, during several centuries, every
year; but, in consequence of a regulation intro-
duced about the beginning of the fourteenth cen-
tury, it was convoked from that period only once
in two years. After it was aflembled, the king
had no right to prorogue or dissolve it without its
own content; and the fellion continued forty daysr.

NOT satisfied with having ere&ed such formida- officend
ble barriers against the encroachments of the royal jfthin
prerogative, nor willingtocommit the guardianship Jui"za.
of their liberties to the vigilance and authority of
an assembly, timilar to the diets, ftates-general, and
parliaments, in which the other feudal nations
placed so much confidence, the Aragonefe had re-
course to an institution peculiar to themselves, and
eleced a YuAfiza or supreme judge. This magif-

" Hier. Blanca Comment. Rer. Aragon. ap. Schot. Script.

Hifpan. vol. iii. p. 750.

A Martel. Forma de Celebr. p. a.
Y Hier. Bianca comment. 763.

N 3 crate,

Secr.It . trate, whose office bore some resemblance to that

* of the Ephori in ancient Sparta, a&ed as the pro-

testor of the people, and the comptroller of the
prince. The person of the Juftiza was sacred,
his power and jurifditipon almost unbounded.
HIe was the supreme interpreter of the laws. Nor
only inferiorjudges, but the kings themselves were
bound to consult him in every doubtful cafe, and
to receive his refponfcs with implicit deference*.
An appeal lay to him from the royal judges, as
well as from those appointed by the barons within
their refpetive territories. Even when no appeal
was made to him, he could interpose by his own
authority, prohibit the ordinary judge to proceed,
take immediate cognizance of the cause himself,
and remove the parry accused to the Manifestation,
or prison of the state, to which no perfop had ac-
cess but by his permiflion. His power was exerted
with no less vigour and effe& in superintending
the adminiftratiqn of government, than in regulat-
ing the course of juflice. It was the prerogative
of the Juftiza to infpet the conduct of the king.
He had a title to review all' the royal proclama-
tions and patents, and to declare whetheror not
they were agreeable to law, and ought to be car-
ried into execution. He, by his sole authority,
could exclude any of the king's minilters from
the condumt of affairs, and call them to answer for

' Blanca has preservcd two responses of the Julliza to

lamce II. who reigned towards the clofc of the thirteenth
icntury, Blanca 74;.

their

theirmal-adminiftration. He himself was account- SECT.II.
able to the Cortes alone, for the manner in which -
he discharged the duties of this high office; and
performed funcions of the greatest importance that
could be committed to a subjeF [HH] Z.

IT is evident, from a bare enumeration of the The real

privileges of the Aragonefe Cortes, as well as of er cir
the rights belonging to the Juftiza, that a very wthin n, -
finall portion of power remained in the hands of
the king. The Aragonefe seem to have been so-
licitous that their monarchs (hould know and feel
this state of impotence, to which they were re-
duced. Even in swearing allegiance to their fove-
reign, an at which ought naturally to be accom-
panied with profelfions of fubmiflion and refpeet,
they devised an oath. in such a form, as to remind
him of his dependence on his fubjees. Cc We,"
said the Juftiza to the king in name of his high-
spirited barons, " who are each of us as good, and
who are altogether more powerful than you, pro-
mise obedience to your government, if you main-
tain our rights and liberties; but if not, not."
Conformably to this oath, they eftablifled it as a
fundamental article in their constitution, that if
the king lhould violate their rights and privileges,
it was lawful for the people to disclaim him as
their sovereign, and to ele& another, even though
a heathen, in his placea. The attachment of the

[}IH] NOTE XXXI.
' Hicr. BIanca Comment. p. 747-755.
' Hicr. 3Blanca Comment. 72o.

N 4 Aragonele

SECT.III. Aragonefe to this singular conflitution of govern-

ment was extreme, and their refpea for it ap-
proached to superstitious veneration rII]. In the
preamble to one of their laws, they declare, that
such was the barrenness of their country, and the
poverty of the inhabitants, that, if it were not on
account of the liberties by which they were diftin-
guifhcd from other nations, the people would aban-
don it, and go in quest of a lettlement to ornme
more fruitful region b

(onfiit'den Iu Caftilc, there were not such peculiarities in
a, . vel - -
oC,* ol the form of government, as to establish any re-

markable dittinscion between it and that of the
other European nations. The executive part of
government was committed to the king, but with
a prerogative extremely limited. The legislative
authority resided in the Cortes, which was com-
posed of the nobility, the dignified ecclefiaflics,
and the representatives of the cities. The aiTembly
of the Cortce in Castile was very ancient, and
seems to have been coeval with the conflitution,
Themembers of the three different orders, who had
a right of suffrage, met in one place, and delibe-
rated as one collective body ; the decisions of which
were regulated by the sentiments of the majority.
The right of imposing taxes, of enating laws,
and of redrefling grievances, belonged to this as-
fembly; and in order to secure the assent of the
king to ihch statutes and regulations as were deem-

[IIl N4OTE XXXII.
b Hicr. Blanca Coin. p. 751,

ed salutary or beneficial to the kingdom, it was SECT.III.
usual in the Cortes to take no Rsep towards grant-
ing money, until all business relative to the pub-
lic welfare was concluded. The representatives
of cities seem to have obtained a feat very early
in the Cortes of Catile, and soon acquired such
influence and credit, as were very uncommon, at a
period when the splendour and pre-eminence of the
nobility had eclipsed or annihilated all other orders
of men. The number of members from cities
bore such a proportion to that of the whole col-
letive body, as rendered them extremely refpe&-
able in the Cortes [KK]. The degree of confi-
deration, which they possessed in the state, may be
estimated byone event. Upon the death of John I. A. D- 13S,
a council of regency was appointed to govern the
kingdom during the minority of his son. It was
composed of an equal number of noblemen, and
of deputies chosen by the cities; the latter were
admitted to the fame rank, and invested with the
fame powers, as prelates and grandees of the first
order'. But though the members of communi-
ties in Catile were elevated above the condition
wherein they were placed in other kingdoms of
Europe; though they had attained to such politi-
cal importance, that even the proud and jealous
ipirit of the feudal aristocracy could not exclude
them from a considerable share in government; yet
the nobles, notwithstanding there acquisitions of
the commons, continued to assert the privileges of

[KK] NOTE XXXIII.
c Marian. Hil. lib. xviii. c. 1;,

their

SEcr.III. their order, in opposition to the crown, in a tone
*- ' extremely high. There was not any body of nobi-

lityin Europe more diftinguiihed for independence
of spirit, haughtiness of deportment, and bold
pretensions, than that of Castile. The history of
that monarchy affords the mofl striking examples
of the vigilance with which they observed, and of
the vigour with which they opposed, every scheme
of their kings, that tended to encroach on their
jurifdicion, to diminish their dignity, or to abridge
their power. Even in their ordinary intercourse
with their monarchs, they preserved such a con-
'cioufnefs of their rank, that the nobles of the first
order claimed it as a privilege to be covered in the
royal presence, and approached their sovereigns
rather as equals than as fubjeas.

THE constitution of the subordinate monarchies,

which depended on the crowns of Castile and
Aragon, nearly resembled that of the kingdom to
which they were annexed. In all of them, the
dignity and independence of the nobles were
great; the immunities and power of the cities
were considerable.

,-i,» AN attentive observation of the singular fitua-

t'ei'. 'ild tion of Spain, as well as the various events which
'. t'ni:nf occurred there, from the invasion of the Moors
=.l;,h,. to the union of its kingdoms under Ferdinand

and Isabella, will discover the causes to which all
the peculiarities in its political constitution I have
pointed out, ought to be ascribed.

4&~ ~As

As the provinces of Spain were wrested from SECT.IIL

the Mahometans gradually and with difficulty, the i
nobles, who followed the standard of any eminent
leader in these wars, conquered not for him alone,
but for themselves. They claimed a lhare in the
lands which their valour had torn from the enemy,
and their prosperity and power increased, in pro-
portion as the territory of the prince extended.

DURING their perpetual wars with the Moors,

the monarci s of Spain depended so much on their
nobles, that It became necessary to conciliate their
good-will by successive grants of new honours and
privileges. By the time that any prince could
establish his dominion in a conquered province,
the greater part of the property was parcelled out
by him among his barons, with such jurifdiaion
and immunities as raised them almost to sovereign
power.

AT the fame time, the kingdoms ereLted in so

many different corners of Spain, were extremely
inconsiderable. The petty monarch was but lit-
tle elevated above his nobles. They, feeling
themselves to be almost his equals, aied as such.
The kings of such limited domains could neither
command much respect, nor po. eat power.
and noblemen, so nearly on the fame level, could
not look up to them with that reverence, with
which the sovereigns of'the great monarchies in
Europe were viewed by their fubjets [LL].

[LL] NOTE XXXIV.

TriVsr:

5ECT'.II. THESE circumstances concurred in exalting the

nobility, and in depressing the royal authority;
there were other causes which railed the cities in
Spain to consideration and power.

As the open country, during the wars with the

Moors, was perpetually exposed to the excursions
of the enemy, with whom no peace or truce was
so permanent as to prove any lasting security, self-
preservation obliged persons of all ranks to fix
their residence in places of strength. The castles
of the barons, which, in other countries, afforded
a commodious retreat from the depredations of
banditti, or from the transient violence of any in-
terior commotion, were unable to refill an enemy
whose operations were conducted with regular and
persevering vigour. Cities, in which great num-
bers united for their mutual defence, were the
only places in which people could fix their refi-
dence with any prolpeft of safety. To this was
owing the rapid growth of those cities in Spain
of which the Christians recovered poffefTlon. All
who fled from the Moorilh yoke retorted to them,
as to an asylum j and there, the greater part of
those who took the field against the Mahometans,
eRlablifhed their families.

EACH of there cities, during a longer or shorter

course of years, was the capital of a little state,
and enjoyed all the advantages which accelerate
the increase of inhabitants in every place that is
tie feat of government.

THE

THE number of cities in Spain, at the begin- SEcr.IIL

ning of the fifteenth century, was considerable, '
and they were peopled far beyond the proportion
which was common in other parts of Europe, ex-
cept in Italy and the Low-Countries. The Moors
had introduced manufactures into those cities,
while under their dominion. The Christians, who,
by intermixture with them, had learned their arts,
continued to cultivate there. The trade of leveral
of the Spanish towns appears to have been con-
fiderable; and the spirit of commerce continued
to preserve the number of their inhabitants, as
the sense of danger had firfl induced them to
crowd together.

As the Spanish cities were populous, many of

the inhabitants were of a rank superior to those
who resided in towns in other countries of Eu-
rope. That cause, which contributed chiefly to
their population, asseted equally persons of every
condition, who flocked thither promiscuously, in
order to find shelter, or in hopes of making a
sand there against the enemy, with greater ad-
vantage than in any other station. The peribns
eleted as their reprefenrarives in the Cortes by
the cities, or promoted to offices of trult and dig-
nity in the government of the community, were
often, as will appear from tranrlSlions which 1
flhall hereafter relate, of such confidcrable rank in
the kingdom, as reflected lustre on their confti-
tuents, and on the fations wherein they were
placed.

As

SECT.IIL. As it was impoflible to carry on a continual

war against the Moors, without some other mili-
tary force, than that which the barons were obliged
to bring into the field, in consequence of the feudal
tenures, it became neceflary to have rome troops,
particularly a body oflightcavalry, incontant pay.
It was one of the privileges of the nobles, that
their lands were exempt from the burden of taxes.
The charge of supporting the troops requisite for
the public safety, fell wholly upon the cities;
and their kings, being obliged frequently to apply
to them for aid, found it necessary to gain their
favour by conceflions, which not only extended their
immunities, but added to their wealth and power.

WHEN the influence of all these circumstances,

peculiar to Spain, is added to the general and
common causes, which contributed to aggrandize
cities in other countries of Europe, this will fully
account for the extensive privileges which they
acquired, as well as for the extraordinary confi-
deration to which they attained, in all the Spa-
nilh kingdoms [MM].

Metfures of BY these exorbitant privileges of the nobility,
pin'c,,n and this unusual power of the cities in Spain, the

td'heir t i royal prerogative was hemmed in on every fide,
rower . and reduced within very narrow bounds. Sensible

of this, and impatient of such restraint, different
monarchs endeavoured, at various jun&ures, to
enlarge their own jurifdiAion, and to circumscribe

[MM] NOTE XXXV.

that

that of their fubjets. Their power, however, or SECT.II,
their abilities, were so unequal to the undertaking, '-
that their efforts were attended with little success.
But when Ferdinand and Isabella found themselves part;,,,arlla

of Ferdi-

at the head of the united kingdoms of Spain, nandtnd
and delivered from the danger and interruption Ib';il.
of domeRfic wars, they were not only in a con-
dition to resume, but were able to prosecute with
advantage, the schemes of extending the preroga-
tive, which their ancestors had attempted in vain.
Ferdinand's profound sagacity in concerting his
measures, his persevering induitry in conducting
them, and his uncommon address in carrying them
into execution, fitted him admirably for an un-
dertaking which required all these talents.

As the overgrown power, and high pretensions Ferdinan's

of the nobility were what the monarchs of Spain hemes tot
felt mos sensibly, and bore with the greatest im- tahidgi
patience, the great objec of Ferdinand's policy lpeesadh
was to reduce these within more moderate bounds. nobility.
Under various pretexts, sometimes by violence,
more frequently in concequence of decrees ob-
tained in the courts of law, he wrested from the
barons a great part of the lands which had been
granted to them by the inconsiderate bounty of
former monarchs, particularly during the feeble
and profuse reign of his predecessor Henry IV.
He did not give the entire condu& of affairs to
persons of noble birth, who were accustomed to
occupy every department of importance in peace
or in war, as if it had been a privilege peculiar to

their

SECT.TII. their order, to be employed as the sole counsellors

ard minifiers of the crown. He often tranfated
business of great consequence without their inter-
vention, and committed many offices of power
and trust to new men, devoted to his interef d.
He introduced a degree of fiate and dignity into
his court, which being unknown in Spain, while
it remained split into many finall kingdoms, taught
the nobles to approach their sovereign with more
ceremony, and gradually rendered him the objec
of greater deference and refpe&:

Prcticulaily THE annexing the masterships of the three mili-
by annexong
the grand- tary orders of St. Jago, Calatrava, and Alcantara,
'fthethreeh to the crown, was another expedient, by which
,dr, to the Ferdinand greatly augmented the revenue and

power of the kings of Spain. These orders were
instituted in imitation of those of the Knights
Templars and of St. John of Jerusalem, on pur-
pose to wage perpetual wars with the Mahometans,
and to protect the pilgrims who visited Compos-
tella, or other places of eminent fanaity in Spain.
The zeal and superstition of the ages in which
they were founded, prompted persons of every
rank to bellow such liberal donations on those holy
warriors, that, in a short time, they engrossed a
considerable share in the property and wealth of
the kingdom. The masterships of these orders
came to be stations of the greatest power and opu-
lence to which a Spanilh nobleman could be ad-
vanced. These high dignities were in the disposal

Zurita annales de Arag. tom. vi. p. 22.

s5 o

of the knights of the order, and placed the per- SECT.III.
sons on whom they conferred them almost on a
level with their sovereign [NN]. Ferdinand, un-
willing that the nobility, whom he confidered as
already too formidable, should derive such addi-
tional credit and influence from poffefling the
government of these wealthy fraternities, was soli-
citous to wrest it out of their hands, and to vest
it in the crown. His measures for accomplishing A.D. x47S,

nd r*49*3

this, were wifely planned, and executed with vi-
gour'. By address, by promises, and by threats,
he prevailed on the knights of each order to
place Isabella and him at the head of it. Inno-
cent VIII. and Alexander VI. gave this eletion
the sanction of papal authority ' and subsequent
pontiffs rendered the annexation of thele malter-
ships to the crown perpetual.

WHILE Ferdinand, by this measure, diminished And bcy ir

(crmlscibing
the power and influence of the nobility, and added thejurildicc

tion of the

new lustre or authority to the crown, he was nobility
taking other important steps with a view to the
Iaime object. The sovereign jurifdiAion, which the
feudal barons exercised within their own territories,
was the pride and diftintion of their order. To
have invaded openly a privilege which they prized
so highly, and in defence of which they would

[NN] NOTE XXXVI.

Marian. Hill. lib. xxv. c. 5

f Zurita Annales, tom. v. p. 2z. Elii Anton. Ncbriflenfis

rerum a Ferdinand & Elizabe gelarunm decades ii. apud Schot.
script. Hitpan. i. 860.

VOL. I. O have

SET.IIr. have run so eagerly to arms, was a measure too

daring for a prince of Ferdinand's cautious tem-
per. He took advantage, however, of an oppor-
tunity which the slate of his kingdoms and the
spirit of his people presented him, in order to
undermine what he durst not atfault. The incef-
sant depredations of the Moors, the want of dif-
cipline among the troops which were employed to
oppose them, the frequent civil wars between the
crown and the nobility, as well as the undifcerning
rage with which the barons carried on their private
wars with each other, filled all the provinces of
Spain with disorder. Rapine, outrage, and mur-
der became lb common, as not only to interrupt
commerce, but in a great measure to suspend all
intercourse between one place and another. That
security and prote&ion, which men expect from
entering into civil society, ceased almost totally.
Interior order and police, while the feudal inftitu-
tions remained in vigour, were so little objects of
attention, and the adminifiration ofjuftice was so
extremely feeble, that it would have been vain to
have expeted relief from the eftablifled laws of
the ordinary judges. But the evil became so in-
tolerable, and the inhabitants of cities, who were
the chief fufierers, grew so impatient of this
anarchy, that fllf-prefervation forced them to have
o. recourse to an extraordinary remedy. About the

middle of the thirteenth century, the cities in the
kingdom of Aragon, and, after their exanple,
thore in Cafile, formed thenlves into an aflu-

ciation,

eiation, distinguished by the name of the Ioy Secr.IIfI
Brotherhood. They exacted a certain contribution
from each of the associated towns; they levied a
considerable body of troops, in order to prote&
travellers, and to pursue criminals; they appointed
judges, who opened their courts in various parts
of the kingdom. Whoever was guilty of mur:!er,
robbery, or of any at that violated the public
peace, and was fcized by the troops of the Brother.
hood, was carried before judges of their nomination,
who, without paying any regard to the exclusive
and sovereign jurifdiAion, which the lord of the
place might claim, tried and condemned the crimi-
nals. By means of this, the prompt and impartial
administration ofjuRtice was refored; and together
with it, internal tranquillity and order began to
return. The nobles alone murmured at this falu-
tary institution. They complained of it as an
encroachment on one of their most valuable privi-
leges. They remonftiated against it in an high
tone; and, on some occasions, refused to grant
any aid to the crown, unless ic were abolished.
Ferdinand, however, was sensible not only of the
good effets of the Holy Brotherhood with refpeft
to the police of his kingdoms, but perceived itt
tendency to abridge, and at length to annihilate,
the territorial jurildition of the nobility. He
countenanced the institution on every occasion.
He fuppotted it with the whole force of royal au-
thority; and, besides the expedients employed by
him in common with the other monarchs of Eu-

0 a ruoe,

SECT.IIM. rope, he availed himself of this institution, which

was peculiar to his kingdom, in order to limit and
abolifl that independentjuriUifti&ion of the nobility,
which was no less inconfitlent with the authority
of the prince, than with the order offociery [00].

Notwitb- BUT though Ferdinand by there mealures con-
sanding all
these, the fiderably enlarged the boundaries of prerogative,
government
fspain ntil and acquired a degree of influence and power far
rtemey beyond what any of his predecessors had enjoyed,

yet the limitations of the royal authority, as well as
the barriers against its encroachments, continued
to be many and frong. The spirit of liberty was
vigorous among the people of Spain; the spirit
of independence was high among the nobility;
and though the love of glory, peculiar to the Spa-
niards in every period of their history, prompted
them to support Ferdinand with zeal in his foreign
operations, and to afford him such aid as enabled
him not only to undertake but to execute great
enterprizes; he reigned over his subje&s with a
jurifdi&ion less extensive than that of any of the
great monarchs in Europe. It will appear from
many passages in the following history, that, du-
ring a considerable part of the reign of his fuc-
ceffor Charles V., the prerogative of the Spanilh
crown was equally circumscribed.

Conftitutin THE ancient government and laws in France so
'"ent '' nearly resembled those of the other feudal king-
France.

[00] NOTE XXXVII.

doms,

doms, that such a detail with refpe&t to them as SEcT.III.
was necessary, in order to convey some idea of the
nature and effects of the peculiar inititutions which
took place in Spain, would be luperfluous. In
the view which 1 have exhibited of the means by
which the French monarchs acquired such full
command of the national force of their kingdom,
as enabled them to engage in extensive schemes of
foreign operation, I have already pointed out the
great steps by which they advanced towards a
more ample poffefTion of political power, and a
more uncontrouled exerciie of their royal prero-
gative. All that now remains is to take notice of
fucl particulars in the constitution of France, as
serve either to distinguish it from that of other
countries, or tend to throw any light on the tranl-
a.ions of that period, to which the following
history extends.

UNDER the French monarchs of the firIf race, Powerof

the royal prerogative was very inconsiderable. nbs,.'l
The general assemblies of the nation, which met ,ine th,,
annually at stated feafbns, extended their authority k'"o.
to every department of government. The power
of elecing kings, of enacting laws, of redrefling
grievances, of conferring donations on the prince,
of passing judgment in the lalf resort, with respect
to every person and to every cause, resided in
this great convention of the nation. Under the Und.r th
second race of kings, notwithltanding the power con
and splendour which the conquells of Charle-
magne added to the crown, the general alrem-

0 3 blies

SecT.IsI. blies of the nations continued to possess extensive

authority. The right of determining which of the
royal family should be placed on the throne, was
vested in them. The princes, elevated to that dig-
nity by their suffrage, were accustomed regularly to
call and to confule them with refpet to every affair
of importance to the slate, and without their consent
no law was passed, and no new tax was levied.
Vnder the BUT, by the time that Hugh Capet, the father

of the third race of kings, took poffeflion of .he
throne of France, such changes had happened in
the political (late of the kingdoms as considerably
asseted the power and jurifdition of the general
assembly of the nation. The royal authority, in
the hands of the degenerate posterity of Charle-
magne, had dwindled into insignificance and con-
tempt. Every considerable proprietor of land had
formed his territory into a barony, almost inde-
pendent of the sovereign. The dukes or gover-
nors of provinces, the counts or governors of towns
and finall diftrits, and the great officers of the
crown, had rendered these dignities, originally
granted only during pleasure or for life, hereditary
in their families. Each of there had usurped all
the rights which hitherto had been deemed the
diftinaions of royalty, particularly the privileges
of difpenflng justice within their own domains, of
coining money, aned of waging war, Every diftri&
was governed by local customs, acknowledged a
diftinA lord, and pursued a separate interest. The
formality of doing homage to their sovereign, was

almost

almost the only acd of fubjetion which haughty SEcT.I[.
barons would perform, and that bound them no
farther than they were willing so acknowledge its
obligation [PP].

IN a kingdom broken into so many independent The power

,I the r .h... I

baronies, harl:-; any common principle of union ,ri aifmbiy
remained; and the general assembly, in its delibe- rablId ao
rations, could scarcely confider the nation as forming extcnfie.
one body, or efablifh common regulations to be of
equal force in every part. Within the immediate
domains of the crown, the king might publish
laws, and they were obeyed, because there he was
acknowledged as the only lord. But if he had
aimed at rendering these general, that would have
alarmed the barons, as an encroachment upon the
independence of their jurifdi&ion. The barons,
with no less care, avoided the enacing of general
laws, because the execution of them must have
been vested in the king, and would have enlarged
that paramount power, which was the object of
their jealousy. Thus, under the descendants of
Hugh Capet, the States General (for that was the
name by which the supreme assembly of the French
nation came then to be diftinguilhed) loft their
legislative authority, or at least entirely rclin-
quifhed the exercise of it. From that period, the
jurifdiftion of the States General extended no
farther than to the imposition of new taxes, the
determination of questions with refpe& to thy

PP] NO T E XXXVUI.

0 4 right.

ECT.III. right of fucceflion to the crown, the fettling of

the regency when the preceding monarch had not
fixed it by his will, and the presenting remon-
ftrances enumerating the grievances of which the
nation wished to obtain redress.

As, during several centuries, the monarchs of

Europe icldom demanded extraordinary subsidies
of their fubjeds, and the other events, which re-
quired the interposition of the States, rarely oc-
curred, their meetings in France were not fre-
quent. They were summoned occasionally by
their kings, when compelled by their wants or by
their fears to have recourse to their aid; but they
did not, like the Diet in Germany, the Cortes in
Spain, or the parliament in England, form an
eflential member of the constitution, the regular
exertion of whose powers was requisite to give
vigour and order to government.

the crown WHEN the flates of France ceased to exercise
ulegi, ir- legislative authority, the kings began to aftume it.
atioeiy,. They ventured at firtl on ads of legislation with

great reserve, and after taking every precaution
that could prevent their fulbjets from beingalarmed
at the exercise of a new power. They did not at
once iliue their ordinances in a tone of authority
and command. They treated with their fubjedts;
they pointed out what was bell; and allured them
to comply with it. By degrees, however, as the
prerogative of the crown extended, and as the fu-
premc jurifdietion of thle royal courts came to be

eflablifled,

established, the kings of France aflumed more SECT.III
openly the style and authority of law-givers; and,
before the beginning of the fifteenth century,
the complete legislative power was veiled in
them [QQ..Q

HAVING secured this important acquisition, the and the

power of

Rteps which led to the right of imposing taxes were leyin;
rendered few and easy. The people, accuflomed to ta"e
fee their sovereigns, by their sole authority, ifue
ordinances which regulated points of the greatest
consequence with respect to the property of their
fubjets, were not alarmed when they were re-
quired, by the royal edits, to contribute certain
slums towards supplying the exigencies of govern-
ment, and carrying forward the measures of the
nation. When Charles VII. and Louis XI. first
ventured to exercise this new power, in the man-
ner which I have already described, the gradual
increase of the royal authority had so impercepti-
bly prepared the minds of the people of France
for this innovation, that it excited no commotion
in the kingdom, and seems scarcely to have given
rife to any murmur or complaint.

WHEN the kings of France had thus engrossed Covern-

every power which can be exerted in government; F'anc be.
when the right of making laws, of levying money, poul mo,.
of keeping an army of mercenaries in confrant n"achi"caL
pay, of declaring war, and of concluding peace,

[QQJ NOTE XXXIX.

centered

SICT.tII. centered in the crown, the constitution of the king.

dom, which, under the first race of kings, was
nearly democratical; which, under the second
race, became an aristocracy; terminated, under
the third race, in a pure monarchy. Every thing
that tended to preserve the appearance, or revive
the memory, of the ancient mixed government,
seems from that period to have been industriously
avoided. During the long and a&five reign of Fran-
cis I., the variety as well as extent of whose opera-
tions obliged him to lay many heavy impositions on
his fubjefts, the States General of France were not
once assembled, nor were the people once allowed
to exert the power of taxing themselves, which,
according to the original ideas of feudal govern,
ment, was a right essential to every freeman,

The exCe- Two things, however, remained, which mode-
(iJ'e of pr'-
roative re. rated the exercise of the regal prerogative, and re-
fi.lained by
tne privi. strained it within such bounds as preserved the con-

ib;b,'"h ifitution of France from degenerating into mere

despotism. The rights and privileges claimed by
the nobility, must be confidered as one barrier
against the absolute dominion of the crown.
Though the nobles of France had loft that poli-
tical power which was vetted in their order as a
body, they still retained the personal rights and
pre-eminence which they derived from their rank.
They preserved a consciousness of elevation above
other classes of citizens; an exemption from bur-
dens to which they were elubjec't; a contempt of
the occupations in which they were engaged; the

4 privilege

privilege of assuming ensigns that indicated their SECT.IIL.
dignity ; a right to be treated with a certain degree
of deference during peace and a claim to various
diftin&ions when in the field. Many of these pre-
tensions were not founded on the words of fatutcs,
or derived from positive laws; they were defined
and ascertained by the maxims of honour, a title
more delicate, but no less sacred. These rights,
eftablilhcd and protected by a principle equally
vigilant in guarding, and intrepid in defending
them, are to the sovereign himself objects of re-
fpeA and veneration, Wherever they stand in its
way, the royal prerogative is bounded. The vio-
lence of a despot may exterminate such an order
of men; but as long as it subsists, and its ideas
of personal diftintion remain entire, the power of
the prince has limits ,

As in France the body of nobility was very nu-

merous, and the individuals of which it was com-
posed retained an high sense of their own pre-emi-
nence, to this we may ascribe, in a great measure,
the mode of exercising the royal prerogative whi;ch
peculiarly diltinguilhes the government of that
kingdom. An intermediate order was place( bLe-
tween the monarch and his other subjes, ard in
every at of authority it became necessary to arcend
to its privileges, and not only to guard againil ally
real violation of these, but to avoid any liIiicion
of its being possible that they might be virla::d.

g De l'Erprit des Loix, liv. ii. c. 4. Dr. Fcrgufo:.'o , .y
pn the EIilt. of Civil Society, part i. sea. 1o.

. - 6 .81*Ti~

SECT.III. Thus a species of government was established in

' "France, unknown in the ancient world, that of a

monarchy, in which the power of the sovereign,
though unconfined by any legal or constitutional
restraint, has certain bounds set to it by the ideas
which one class of his subje&s entertain concern-
ing their own dignity.

h:. ,.* the THE jurifdition of the parliaments in France,

,e i.'ar- particularly that of Paris, was the other barrier
p....c..i.aly which served to confine the exercise of the royal
:,."' '" prerogative within certain limits. The parliament

of Paris was originally the court of the kings of
France, to which they committed the supreme ad-
ministration of jutlice within their own domains,
as well as the power of deciding with refpet to all
cafes brought before it by appeals from the courts
of the barons. When, in consequence of events
and regulations which have been mentioned for-
merly, the time and place of its meeting were fixed,
when not only the form of its procedure, but the
principles on which it decided, were rendered re-
gular and confifent, when every cause of import-
ance was finally determined there, and when the
people became accustomed to resort thither as to
the supreme temple of justice, the parliament of
Paris rose to high estimation in the kingdom, its
members acquired dignity, and its decrees were
fubinitted to with deference. Nor was this the
only source of the power and influence.which the
parliament obtained. The kings of FFance, when
,rey l'irt began to assume the legislative power, in

7 ord'r

order to reconcile the minds of their people to SECT.III.
this new exertion of prerogative, produced their
edicts and ordinances in the parliament of Paris,
that they might be approved of and registered
there, before they were published and declared to
be of authority in the kingdom. During the in-
tervals between the meetings of the States Gene-
ral of the kingdom, or under those reigns when
the States General were not aflembled, the mo-
narchs of France were accustomed to consult the
parliament of Paris with refpe& to the molt ar-
duous affairs of government, and frequently re-
gulated their conduct by its advice, in declaring
war, in concluding peace, and in other tranfac-
tions of public concern. Thus there was ereced
in the kingdom a tribunal which became the great
depository of the laws, and by the uniform tenour
of its decrees, it established principles of justice
and forms of proceeding which were confidered as
so sacred, that even the sovereign power of the
monarch durit not venture to disregard or to vio-
late them. The members of this illustrious body,
though they neither poflefs legislative authority,
nor can be confidered as the representatives of the
people, have availed themselves of the reputation
and influence which they had acquired among
their countrymen, in order to make a stand, to the
utmost of their ability, against every unprece-
dented and exorbitant exertion of the prerogative.
In every period of the French history, they have
merited the praise of being the virtuous but feeble

guardians

SECT.III. guardians of the rights and privileges of the na-

tion [RR].

ConRtlution THE kingdom of France extends to the confines
and gov-ern
m-nt o the of the German empire, from which Charles V.
c·pit. derived his title of highest dignity. In explaining

the political constitution of this vast and com-
plex body at the beginning of the sixteenth cen-
tury, I shall avoid entering into such a detail as
would involve my readers in that inextricable la-
byrinth, which it formed by the multiplicity of
its tribunals, the number of its members, their
interfering rights, and by the endless discussions
or refinements of the public lawyers of Germany,
with respeCt to all there,

Itsn ate n. THE empire of Charlemagne was a firuature
der Chatrle ereted in so Ihort a time, that it could not be per-
hias dt"nd. manent. Under his immediate fuccefior it began

to totter; and it soon fell to pieces. The crown
of Germany was separated for ever from that of
France, and the descendants of Charlemagne elta-
blilhed two great monarchies so situated as to give
rife to a perpetual rivallhip and enmity between
them. But the princes of the race of Charle-
magne who were placed on the imperial throne,
were not altogether so degenerate, as those of the
fame family who reigned in France. In the hands
of the former the royal authority retained lome
vigour, and the nobles of Germany, though pof-

[RRI NOTE XL.

sessed

fefled of extensive privileges as well as ample ter- SECTr.II.
ritories, did not so early attain independcnce.
The great offices of the crown continued to be at
the disposal of the sovereign, and during a long
period, fiefs remained in their original fhate, with-
out becoming hereditary and perpetual in the fa-
milies to which they had been granted.

AT length the German branch of the family of Other fami.

Charlemagne became extin&, and his feeble de- c' to the
fcendants who reigned in France had funk into ni
such contempt, that the Germans, without looking
towards them, exercised the right inherent in a
free people; and in a general assembly of the na- A. D. 91,
tion ele&ed Conrad count of Franconia emperor.
After him Henry of Saxony, and his descendants
the three Othos, were placed, in fucceflion, on
the Imperial throne, by the suffrages of their
countrymen. The extensive territories of the
Saxon emperors, their eminent abilities and en-
terprizing genius, not only added a new vigour to
the Imperial dignity, but raised it to higher power
and pre-eminence. Otho the Great marched at A D. 92.
the head of a numerous army into Italy, and after
the example of Charlemagne, gave law to that
country. Every power there recognized his au-
thority. He created popes, and depolf:d them by
his sovereign mandate. He annexed the kingdom
of Italy to the German empire. Elated with his
success, he assumed the title of Cafar Augustus b.
A prince, born in the heart of Germany, pretended
* Annalita Saxo, &c. ap. Stuv. Corp. vol. i. p. 246.

to

SET.III. to be the fucceflor of the emperors of ancient

L^3 Rome, and claimed a right to the fame power

and prerogative.

The er- BUT while the emperors, by means of there
man nibi-
ity acquire new titles and new dominions, gradually acquired
nd^fv" additional authority and splendour, the nobility
r^ifltho-y of Germany went on at the fame time extending

their privileges and jurifdi&tion. The situation of
affairs was favourable to their attempts. The
vigour which Charlemagne had given to govern.
ment quickly relaxed. The inability of some of
his successors was such, as would have encouraged
vassals less enterprizing than the nobles of that
age, to have claimed new rights, and to have
assumed new powers. The civil wars in which
other emperors were engaged, obliged them to
pay perpetual court to their subje&s on whose sup-
port they depended, and not only to connive at
their usurpations, but to permit, and even to au-
thorize them. Fiefs gradually became hereditary.
They were transmitted not only in the dire&, but
in the collateral line. The invetiture of them
was demanded not only by male but by female
heirs. Every baron began to exercise sovereign
jur;fdiEtion within his own domains; and the
dukes and counts of Germany took wide steps
towards rendering their territories diftin& and in-

The Gr. dependent flates'. The Saxon emperors ob-
man ecee-
^iaics served their progress, and were aware of its ten-
fed to the
amepowrer# Pfcffel. Abreg, p. 3zo. sSz. Lib. Feudor. tit. i.

dency.

dency. But as they could not hope to humble 9SCT.III
vassals already grown too potent, unless they had
turned their whole force as well as attention to
that enterprize, and as they were extremely intent
on their expeditions into Italy, which they could
not undertake without the concurrence of their
nobles, they were solicitous not to alarm them by
any dire& attack on their privileges and jurif-
ditions. They aimed, however, at undermining
their power. With this view, they inconsiderately
bestowed additional territories, and accumulated
new honours on the clergy, in hopes that this
order might serve as a counterpoise to that of the
nobility in any future struggle k,

THE unhappy effects of this fatal error in policy The fAtal

etyeas of

were quickly felt. Under the emperors of the aggrandiz.
Franconian and Swabian lines, whom the Ger- ighc
mans, by their voluntary election, placed on the A. D. 104
Imperial throne, a new face of things appeared,
and a scene was exhibited in Germany, which
astonished all Christendom at that time, and in
the present age appears almost incredible. The
popes, hitherto dependent on the emperors, and
indebted for power as well as dignity to their be-
neficence and protection, began to claim a fupe-
riorjurifdiition and, in virtue of authority which
they pretended to derive from heaven, tried,
condemned, excommunicated, and deposed their
former masters. Nor is this to be confidered

1 Pfeffcl. Abreg&, p. 54..
VOL. I. P merely

SECT.III. merely as a frantic rally of paflon in a pontiff in-

4 toxicated with high ideas concerning the extent

of priestly domination, and the plenitude of papal
authority. Gregory VII. was able as well as daring.
His prefi.mption and violence were accompanied
with political discernment and sagacity. He had
observed that the princes and nobles of Germany
had acquired such considerable territories and such
extensive jurifdition, as rendered them not only
formidable to the emperors, but disposed them to
favour any attempt to circumlcribe their power.
HIe foresaw that the ecclesiastics of Germany,
railed almost to a level with its princes, were rea-
dy to support any person who would stand forth
as the protecor of their privileges and independ-
ence. With both of these Gregory negociated
and had secured many devoted adherents amorng
them, before he ventured to enter the lilts against
the head of the empire.

The contefR HE began his rupture with Henry IV. upon a
betrwern the
popes and pretext that was popular and plaufsble. He com-

4 the con. plained of the venality and corruption with which
t:.e'fe." the emperor had granted the inveititure of bene-

sices to ecclefiafics. He contended that this
right belonged to him as head of the church; he
required Henry to confine himself within the
bounds of his civil jurifdiaion, and to abltain for
the future from iuch sacrilegious encroachments
on the spiritual dominion. All the censures of the
church were denounced against Henry, because

he

he refused to relinquilh those powers which his SECT.III.
predecessors had uniformly exercised. The most
considerable of the German princes and eccle-
fiaftics were excited to rake arms against him.
His mother, his wife, his sons were wrought upon
to disregard all the ties of blood as well as of
duty, and tojoin the party of his enemies k. Such
were the successful arts with which the court of
Rome inflamed the tiperrfitious zeal, and con-
du&ed the factious spirit of the Germans and Ita-
lians, that an emperor, distinguishcd not only for
many virtues, but polffeled of considerable talents,
was at length obliged to appear as a supplicant at
the gate of the castle in which the pope resided,
and to Rfand there, three days, bare-footed, in the
depth of winter, imploring a pardon, which at A. D. 77.
length he obtained with difficulty [SS].

THIS at of humiliation degraded the Imperial

dignity. Nor was the depreliion only momentary.
The contest between Gregory and Henry gave
rife to the two great factions of the Guelfs and
Ghibellines; the former of which supporting the
pretensions of the popes, and the latter defending
the rights of the emperor, kept Germany and
Italy in perpetual agitation during three centuries.
A regular system for humbling the emperors and The .mpr-
circumscribing their power was formed, and ad- riv rliu-
hered to uniformly throughout that period. The ,ylll.
popes, the free flates in Italy, the nobility, and

k Annal. German. ap. Struv. i, p. 32=.
[SS] NOTE XLI.

P 2 ecclefiafics

StcT.IIM. eccleiaftics of Germany, were all interested in

its ilccefs; and notwithstanding the return of
orne lhort intervals of vigour, under the admi-
niftration of a few able emperors, the Imperial
A.D. j136. authority continued to decline. During the anar-

chy of the long interregnum subsequent to the
death of William of Holland, it dwindled down
A D. t273. to nothing. Rodulph of Hapfburgh, the founder

of the Houte of Auliria, and who first opened the
way to its future grandeur, was at length eleted
emperor, not that he might re-eftablifli and ex-
tend the Imperial authority, but because his terri-
tories and influence were so inconsiderable as to
excite no jealousy in the German princes, who
were willing to preserve the forms of a coniti.
tution, the power and vigour of which they had
destroyed. Several of his successors were placed
on the Imperial throne from the fame motive; and
almost every remaining prerogative was wrested
out of the hands of feeble princes unable to exer-
cist or to defend them.

A total DuntING this period of turbulence and confu-
,. Pl..,tical sion, the conltitution of the Germanic body under-
:,,ni tmn. went a total change. The ancient names of courts
Pi". a:nda magistrates, together with the original forms

and appearance of policy, were preserved; but
such new privileges and jurilcli&ion were assumed,
and so many various rights ettablilhed, that the
fame species of government no longer subsisted.
The princes, the great nobility, the dignified ec-
clefialtics, the free cities had taken advantage of

the

the interregnum, which I have mentioned, to efta- Sc r.lI.
blifh or to extend their usurpations. They claimed '
and exercilhe the right of governing their refpec-
tive territories with full lbvereignty. They ac-
knowledged no superior with refpet to any point,
relative to the interior administration and police
of their domains. They enaced laws, imposcd
taxes, coined money, declared war, concluded
peace, and exerted every prerogative peculiar to
independent itates. The ideas of order and poli-
tical union, which h d sor:ned the various pro-
vinces of Germany into one body, were entirely
loft; and the society must have dissolved, if the
forms of feudal subordination had not preserved
such an appearance of connection or dependence
among the various members of the community,
as preserved it from falling to pieces,

THis bond of union, however, was extremely Exp,.,enrt

feeble; and no principle remained in the German 'an i.d'o
constitution, of sufficient force to maintain public ,i t'b," (
order, and hardly to ascertain perlonal iecurity.
From the acceflon of Rodulph of Hapfburgh, to
the reign of Maximilian, the immediate predecef-
for of Charles V., the empire felt every calamity
which a state mull endure, when the authority of
government is so much relaxed as to have loft all
vigour. The causes of diflenfion among that vas
number of members, which composed the Ger-
manic body, were infinite and unavoidable.
These gave rife to perpetual private wars, carried
Op with all the violence of resentment, when un-

P 3 restrained.

SrcT.[II. restrained by superior authority. Rapine, outrage,

cxactions, became universal. Commerce was in-
terrupted; industry fifpended; and every part of
Germany resembled a country which an enemy
had plundered and laid delolate'. The variety of
expedients employed with a view to restore order
and tranquillity, prove that the grievartces occa-
sioncd by this slate of anarchy had grown into-
kcr-ai!. Arbiters were appointed to terminate the
diffe.'ences among the fevcral Rates. The cities
tinited in a league, the obj iec of which was to
check the rapine and extortions of the nobility.
The nobility form-ed confederacies, on purporf to
maintain tranquillity among their own order.
Germany was divided into several circles, in each
of which a provincial and partial jurisdiction was
eltablifled, to supply the place of a public and
common tribunal .

Pii,,:ichia. Bu-T all these remedies were so fruitless, that
i.y tle ;nli-
luronIhie they served only to demonltrate the violence of
,: ail]br. that anarchy which prevailed, and the inefficacy

of the means employed to corret it. At length
Maximilian re-eftablithed public order in the
empire, by instituting the Imperial Chamber, a
tribunal composed ofjudges named partly by the
A,. 0. ,i;. emperor, partly by the several itates, and vested

with authority to decide finally concerning all dif-
ferences among the members of the Germanic

Se above, pangc 53, and note xxi. Datt. de pace publicn
Imper. p. zS, no. 53. p. 28, no. 26. p. 35, no. 1I.

A DIatt. pailim. Struv. Corp. Hist. i. 51o, &c.

body,

body. A few years after, by giving a new form SECT.IIl.
to the Aulic council, which talkes cognizance of A.D. '5.
all feudal causes, and fich as belong to the em-
peror's immediate jurilicdion, he reflored some
degree of vigour to the Imperial authority.

BE- notwith[landing the salutary efrcs of these ^ h., b..
regulations and improvements, the political con- thefitcent

ntelu:y. th:
ftitution of the German enmpire, at the commence- er.pir. an

a Ciatio n

ment of the period of which I propose to write ofr coetcig
the hiflory, was of a Ipecies bi peculiar, as not to
resemble perfectly any form of government known
either in the ancient or modern world. It was a
complex body, formed by the aflociacion of lfveral
states, each of which pofTired sovereign and in-
dependent jurildiaion within its own territories.
Of all the members which comnpofed this united
body, the t Ti'::! o: was the head. In his name,
all decrees and regulations, with refpet& to points
of common concern, were issued; and to him the
power of carrying them into execution was com-
mitted. But this appearance of monarchical power
in the emperor was more than counterbalanced
by the influence of the princes and frates of the
empire in every ac of adminirLrat'.n. No law
extending to the whole body could pass, no re-
solution that affected the general interefl could be
taken, without the approbation of the diet of the
empire. In this assembly, every sovereign prince
and state of the Germanic body had a right to be
present, to deliberate, and to vote. The decrees

P 4 or

S$CTII. or Recefes of the diet were the laws of the em-

pire, which the emperor was bound to ratify and
enforce.

iu t 'le a- UNDER this afpe&, the constitution of the em-
tueof'this pire appears a regular confederacy, similar to the

Achaan league in ancient Greece, or to that of
the United Provinces and of the Swiss cantons in
modern times. But if viewed in another light,
flriking peculiarities in its political slate present
themfclves. The Germanic body was not formed
by the union of members altogether diftin: and
inldependent. All the princes and fates, joined in
this alrociation, were originally subjec't to the em-
perors, and acknowledged them as sovereigns.
Btfides this, they originally held their lands as
Imperial fiefs, and in consequence of this tenure
owed the emperors all those lervices which feudal
vatfals are bound to perform to their liege lord.
But though this political fubje&ion was entirely
at an end, and the influence of the feudal relation
much diminified, the ancient forms and inftitu-
tions, introduced while the emperors governed
Germany with authority not inferior to that which
the other monarchs of Europe poflfeled, still re-
mained. Thus an opposition was eftablilhed be-
tween the genius of the government, and the
forms of adminittration in the German empire.
The former confidered the emperor only as the
head of a confederacy, the members of which,
by their voluntary choice, have raised him to that
dignity the latter feerped to imply, that he is

+~~~4 ~really

really invested with Sovereign power. By this cir- SEcT.III.
cumfiance, such principles of hostility and discord The deferc
were interwoven in the frame of the Germanic ittuon of
body, as affected each of its members, rendering thc empire.
their interior union incomplete, and their external
efforts feeble and irregular. The effeats of this
vice or disorder inherent in the conititution of the
empire are so considerable, that, without attend-
ing to them, it is impossible to comprehend many
tranfations in the reign of Charles V., or to form
just ideas concerning the genius of the German
government.

THE emperors of Germany, at the beginning Arising

h'orn the rt-
of the sixteenth century) were diftinguilhed by the mied po.r

of the Mc.

most pompous titles, and by such ensigns of dig- p
nity, as intimated their authority to be superior to
that of all other monarchs. The greatest princes
of the empire attended, and served them, on some
occasions, as the officers of their household. They
exercised prerogatives which no other sovereign
ever claimed. They retained pretensions to all
the extensive powers which their predeceflors had
enjoyed in any former age. But, at the fame time,
instead of poffdfling that ample domain which had
belonged to the ancient emperors of Germany,
and which Itretched from Basil to Cologne, along
both banks of the Rhine ", they were stript of all
territorial property, and had not a single city, a
tingle caRle, a tingle foot of land, that pertained
to them, as heads of the empire. As their domain

" Pfcffcl Abrege, &c. p. z.t.

was

SEcT.IIm. was alienated, their flated revenues were reduced

almofi to nothing; and the extraordinary aids,
which on a few occasions they obtained, were
granted sparingly, and paid with reiuctance. The
princes and states of the empire, though they
teemed to recognize the Imperial authority, were
fibjeas only in name, each of them poffcfilg a
complete municipal jurifdidtion within the pre-
cincts of his own territories.

Fmm the FROM this ill-compacted frame of government,
s)ture of
irr titles effects that were unavoidable resulted. The em-
i't1"". perors, dazzled with the splendor of their titles,

and the exterior signs of vast authority, were apt
to imagine themselves to be the real sovereigns of
Germany, and were led to aim continually at re-
covering the exercise of those powers which the
forms of the constitution seemed to vest in them,
and which their predecessors, Charlemagne and
the Othos, had atually enjoyed. The princes
and states, aware of the nature as well as extent
of their pretensions, were perpetually on their
,gurd, in order to watch all the motions of the
Imperial court, and to circumscribe its power
within limits fill more n.:'rrow. The emperors,
in support of their claims, appealed to ancient
forms and institutions, which the itates held to be
obsolete. The states founded their rights on re-
cent pratice and modern privileges, which the
emperors confidercd as uliirpations.

THIS

THI jeaolufy of the imperial authority, toge- SECT.III.

ther with the opposition between it and the rights From the
of the flates, increased considerably from the time hich th
that the emperors were elected, not by the col- ict:ca-
leetive body of German nobles, but by a few
princes of chief dignity. During a long period,
all the members of the Germanic body aflem-
bled, and made choice of the perlon whom they
appointed to be their head. But amidst the vio-
lence and anarchy which prevailed for several
centuries in the empire, seven princes who pof-
sessed the molt extensive territories, and who had
obtained a hereditary title to the great offices of
the state, acquired the exclusive privilege of nomi-
nating the emperor. This right was confirmed
to them by the Golden Bull; the mode of exer-
cifing it was a'scertained, and they were dig-
nified with the appellation of Elegtors. The no-
bility and free cities being thus stripped of a pri-
vilege wlich they had once enjoyed, were less
connected with a prince, towards whose elevation
they had not contributed by their suffrages, and
came to be more apprehenrive of his authority.
The eletors, by their extensive power, and the dif-
tinguilhing privileges which they possessed, be-
came formidable to the emperors, with whom they
were placed almost on a level in several aas of
jurifdiiton. Thus the introdu&ion of the elec-
toral college into the empire, and the authority
which it acquired, instead of diminishing, contri-
bN,, I to strengthen, the principles of hostility and
dificord in the Germanick contitution.

5 TuESE

StcT.III. THESE were further augmented by the various
Frn tlhe and repugnant forms of civil policy in the several

"diffrnt states which composed the Germanick body. It

forms of
gsol"lrnt is no easy matter to render the union of independ-
e iablinhed
in thefates ent fates perse& and entire, even when the genius
which corn-
pofad the and forms of their refpe&ive governments happen
crmaidck
body. to be altogether similar. But in the German em-

pire, which was a confederacy of princes, of ec-
clefiaftics, and of free cities, it was impoflible
that they could incorporate thoroughly. The
free cities were small republics, in which the
maxims and spirit peculiar to that species of go-
vernment prevailed. The princes and nobles, to
whom supreme jurifdiaion belonged, poieffled a
fort of monarchical power within their own terri-
tories, and the forms of their interior adminiftra-
tion nearly resembled those of the great feudal
kingdoms. The interests, the ideas, the obje&s
of states so differently confitiuted, cannot be the
fame. Nor could their common deliberations be
carried on with the fame Ipirit, while the love of
liberty, and attention to commerce, were the reign-
ing principles in the cities; while the desire of
power, and ardour for military glory, were the
governing pafions of the princes and nobility.

from the TzE secular and ecclesiastical members of the
°N°fitih, empire were as little fitted for union as the free
fcular and cities and the nobility. Valf territories had been
ecclefritaicl
ne;.tbls. granted to several of the German bifhopricks and

abbeys, and some of the higheit offices in the em-
pire having been annexed to them inalienably, were

held

held by the ecclesiastics raised to these dignities. SEcr.II.
The younger sons of noblemen of the second or-
der, who had devoted themselves to the church,
were commonly promoted to these stations of
eminence and power; and it was no finall mor-
tification to the princes and great nobility, to fee
persons raised from an inferior rank to the fame
level with themselves, or even exalted to superior
dignity. The education of there churchmen,
the genius of their profeflion, and their connec-
tion with the courtof Rome, rendered their cha-
racter as well as interest different from those of
the other members of the Germanick body, with
whom they were called to aft in concert. Thus
another source ofjealoufy and variance was open-
ed, which ought not to be overlooked when we
are searching into the nature of the German con-
ftitution.

To all there causes of dissension may be added rrom tte

one more, arising from the unequal distribution of tribution f
power and wealth among the states of the empire. weahl
The electors, and other nobles of the highest rank. mogthe
not only possessed sovereign jurifdii-lion, but go-
verned such extensive, populous, and rich coun-
tries, as rendered them great princes. Many of
the other members, though they enjoyed all the
rights of sovereignty, ruled over such petty do-
mains, that their real power bore no proportion to
this high prerogative. A well-compacted and vi-
gorous confederacy could not be formed of such
dissimilar states. The weaker were jealous, timid,

and

SECT.II. and unable either to assert or to defend their just

privileges. The more powerful were apt to as-
fume and to become oppreflive. The electors
and emperors, by turns, endeavoured to extend
their own authority, by encroaching on the rights
of those feeble members of the Germanick body
and they, overawed or corrupted, tamely furren-
dered their privileges, or meanly favoured the
designs formed against them [TT].

All thee AFTER contemplating all there principles of dif-
reader the
Germanick union and oppofirion in the constitution of the Ger-
body inca-
pabeofaa- man empire, it will be easy to account for the
ing with
nion nid want of concord and uniformity, conspicuous in its
vigour. councils and proceedings. That flow, dilatory, dif-

truitful, and irrelilute spirit, which charaterizes
all its deliberations, will appear natural in a body,
the junction of whose members was so incomplete,
the different parts of which were held together by
such feeble ties, and set at variance by such power-
ful motives. But the empire of Germany, never-
thelefs, comprehended countries of such vast ex-
tent, and was inhabited by such a martial and hardy
race of men, that when the abilities of an empe-
ror, or zeal for any common cause could rouze
this unwieldy body to put forth its strength, it
a&ed with irresistible force. In the following his-
tory we ihall find, that as the measures on which
Charles V. was most intent, were often thwarted
or rendered abortive by the spirit of jealousy and
division peculiar to the Germanick confitiu-

[TT] N 0 T E XLII.

tion;

tion; so it was by the influence which he acqui- SECT.11I.
red over the princes of the empire, and by enga-
ging them to co-operate with him, that he was
enabled to make tome of the greateli efforts
which diftinguili his reign.

THE Turkifl hiRory is so blended, during the V:cwofie

Tusk:ili go-

reign of Charles V., with that of the great nations vclii,.t.
in Europe, and the Ottoman Porte interpoflid so
often, and with such decilive influence in the wars
and negociations of the Chriltian princes, that
some previous account of the lhate of government
in that great empire, is no lets necelEarv for the
information of my readers, than there views of
the contiitution of other kingdoms which I have
already exhibited to them.

IT has been the fate of the southern and more It oigin.

fertile parts of Asia, at different periods, to be
conquered by that warlike and hardy race of men,
who inhabit the vast country known to the an-
cients by the name of Scythia, and among the
moderns by that of Tartary. One tribe of these
people, called Turks or Turcomans, cxrended
its conquests, under various leaders, nnd during
several centuries, from the Ihore of the Ca'rpian
to the Straits of, the Dardanelles. Towards the
middle of the fifteenth century, there formidable
conquerors took Conflantinople by storm, and
established the feat of their government in that
imperial city. Greece, Moldavia, Walachia, and
the other provinces of the ancient kingdoms of

'Ihrace

SiCT.IIr. Thrace and Macedonia, together with part of
'-~ t Hungary, were subjected to their power.

It, derpotic BUT though the feat ofthe Turkish government
tents' was fixed in Europe, and the sultans obtained pof.

session of such extensive dominions in that quarter
of the globe, the genius of their policy was purely
Afiatick; and may be properly termed a delpo-
tifin, in contradiftin&ion to those monarchical and
republican forms of government which we have
been hitherto contemplating. The supreme power
was veiled in sultans of the Ottoman race, that
blood being deemed so sacred, that no other was
thought worthy of the throne. From this eleva-
tion, these sovereigns could look down and behold
all their fubje ts reduced to the fame level before
them. The maxims of Turkifn policyadmitnotany
of those inflitutions, which, in other countries, limit
the exercise, or moderate the rigour of monarchical
p:wer: no great court with constitutional and per-
manentjurifdidion to interpose, both in enaaing
laws, and in executing them: no body of hereditary
nobles, whose sense of their own pre-eminence,
whose confciouihefs of what is due to their rank
and chara&er, whose jealousy of their privileges
circumciribe the authority of the prince, and serve
not only as a barrier against the excesses of his ca-
price, but Itand as an intermediate order between
him and the people. Under the Turkish govern-
ment, the political condition of every fubje& is
equal. To be employed in the service of the ful-
tan, is. the only circumstance that confers diftinc-

tiol.

tlon. Even this diftin&ion is annexed so closely SscT.III.
to the stations in which persons serve, that it is
scarcely communicated to thole who are placed in
them. The highest dignity in the empire does
not give any rank or pre-eminence to the family
of him who enjoys it. As every man, before he
is'raifed to any station of authority, mufl go thro'
the preparatory discipline of a long and servile obe-
dience °, the moment he is deprived of power, he
and his pofteriry return to the fame condition with
other subje&s, and fink back into obscurity. It is
the distinguishing and odious chara&eriftick of
Eastern defpotifin, that itannihilates all other ranks
of men, in order to exalt the monarch; that it
leaves nothing to the former, while it gives every
thing to the latter; that it endeavours to fix
in the minds of those who are subjet to it, the
idea of no relation between men, but that of a
mailer and of a save, the former destined to com-
mand and to punish, the latter formed to tremble
and to obey [UU].

BuT as there are circumstances which frequently poer of

obltrua or defeat the salutary effets of the belt- tc eudbR
regulated governments, there areothers which con- rcliiion
tribute to mitigate the evils of the molt vicious
forms of policy. There can, indeed, be no con-
flitutional restraints upon the will of a prince in a
despotic government; but there may be fich as

0 State of the Turkish Empire by Rycaut, p. 25.
[UU] NO T E XL1JI.
VOL. I. are

SECT.III. are accidental. Absolute as the Turkilh Sultans

are, they feel themselves circumscribed both by
religion, the principle on which their authority is
founded P, and by the army, the instrument which
they must employ in order to maintain it. Where.
ever religion interposes, the will of the sovereign
muff submit to its decrees. When the Koran hath
prescribed any religious rite, hath enjoined any
moral duty, or hath confirmed by its fan&ion
any political maxim, the command of the Sultan
cannot overturn that which an higher authority
hath eflabliihed. The chief restriction, however,
on the will of the Sultans, is imposed by the mili-

nditbythe tary power. An armed force mut surround the
_ilitary ,

throne of every despot, to maintain his authority,
and to execute his commands. As the Turks ex-
tended their empire over nations which they did
not exterminate, but reduce to fubjetion, they
folund it necefiary to render their military eftablifl-

Oripin of E,:cnt numerous and formidable. Amurath, their
the Jalli.
·atie. third Sultan, in order to form a body of devoted
A, D. 53 62.

troops, that might serve as the immediate guards
of his person and dignity, appointed his officers to
seize annually, as the Imperial property, the fifth
part of the youth taken in war. These, after be-
ing inftruled in the Mahometan religion, inured
to obedience by severe discipline, and trained to
warlike exerciles, were formed it:o a body diftin-
guifled by the name of Janizarics, or new soldiers.
Every fentimentwliicihenthuliafm can inspir'e, every
mark of difin&ion that the favour of the prince

P Ryceut, p. 3.

could

could confer, were employed in order to animate SECT.II[.
this body with martial ardour, and with a con-
fcioufncfs of its own pre-eminence . The Jani-
zaries soon became the chief ifrength and pride of
the Ottoman armies; and, by their number as well
as reputation, were diftinguilhed above all the
troops, whose duty it was to attend on the perion
of the Sultans [XX].

THUS, as the supreme power in every society is Their va

influence il

poRtefecld by those who have arms in their hands, tlhcTurkil
this formidable body of soldiers, delined to be the govern.
instruments of enlarging the Sultan's authority,
acquired, atthe fame time, the meansofcontrouling
it. The Janizaries in Conflantinople, like the Pr.?-
torian bands in ancient Rome, quickly percecvcd
all the advantages which they derived from being
flationed in the capital; fi-om their union under
one standard; and from being masters of the person
of the prince. The Sultans became no less fen-
fible of their influence and importance. The
Capiculy, or soldiery of the Port, was the only
power in the empire that a Sultan or his vifier
had reason to dread. To preserve the fidelity and
attachment of the Janizarics, was the great art of
government, and the principal object of attention
in the policy of the Ottoman court. Under a mo-
narch, whose abilities and vigour of mind fit him
for command, they are obsequious initruments;
execute whatever he enjoins; and render his power

q Prince Cantemir's Hiltory of the Othman Empire, p. 87.
[XX] NOTE XLIV.

~Q2 ~
~ irrefifible.

SZCT.III. irresistible. Under feeble princes, or such as are

unfortunate, they become turbulent and mutinous;
assume the tone of masters; degrade and exalt
Sultans at pleasure; and teach those to tremble, on
whore nod, at other times, life or death depend.

Pregrets of FROM Mahomet II., who took Confsantinople,
the Turks
toward do. to Solyman, who began his reign a few months
minion.

after Charles V. was placed on the Imperial throne
of Germany, a succession ofillultrious princes ruled
over the Turkilh empire. By their great abili-
ties, they kept their fubjeds of every order, mili-
tary as well as civil, fubmiflive to government;
and had the absolute command of whatever force
their vast empire was able to exert. Solyman, in
particular, who is known to the Christians chiefly
as a conqueror, but is celebrated in the Turkifl
annals, as the great law-giver who eftablilhed or-
der and police in their empire, governed, during
his long reign, with no less authority than wisdom.
He divided his dominions into several districts;
he appointed the number of Ibldiers which each
Ihould furnish; he appropriated a certain propor-
tion of the land, in every province, for their main-
tenance; he regulated, with a minute accuracy,
every thing relative to their discipline, their arms,
and the nature of their service. He put the si-
nances of the empire into an orderly train of ad-
miniltration; and, though the taxes in the Turk-
isl dominions, as well as in the other despotic
monarchies of the east, are far from being confi-
derable, he supplied that defec by an attentive
and levere economy.

NOR

NOR was it only under such Sultans as Solymanr, SECT.II.

whose talents were no less adapted to preserve inteC Adv.itige.
rior order than to condu&t the operations of war, p'i,:rcd1r
that the Turkith empire engaged with advant:,ge c e,,,
in its contests with the Christian fates. The long ao°f'n
uacce!r:on of able princes, which I have mentioned, ',;11' ""n
had given such vigour and firmness to the Otto-
man guvernment, that it seems to have attained,
during the fixteer.th century, the highest degree of
perfccRion of which its conflitution was capable.
Whereas the great monarchies in Chritlcndomn
were tlill far from that slate, which could enable
them to act with a full exertion of their for-ce.
Betldes this, the Turkilh troops in that age po:-
rcifed every advantage which ariles from ltu.trio-
rity in military discipline. At the time when So-
lyman began his reign, the Janizaries had been
embodied near a century and a half; and, during
that long period, the severity of their military dif-
cipline had in no degree relaxed. The soldiers,
drawn from the provinces cf the emrire, had been
kept almost continually under arms, in the vari-
ous wars which the Suitans had carried on, with
hardly any interval of peace. Againfl troops thus
trained and accuftonicd to service, the furces of
the Christian powers took the field wiclh great dif-
advantage. The moR intel!igent as well as im-
partial authors of the sixteenth century acknow-
ledge adcl lament the lI;perior attainments of the
Turks in the military art [YY]. The fuccels
which uniformly attended their arms, in all their

[YY] NOTE XLV.

Q 3 wars,

ScT.IUI. wars, demonstrates the juflnefs of this obferva-
'"" *' tion. The Christian armies did not acquire that

superiority over the Turks, which they now pof-
fess, until the long eftablihmnent of standing
forces had improved military discipline among
the former; and until various causes and events,
which it is not my province to explain, had cor-
rupted or abolilhed their ancient warlike inftitu-
tions among the latter.

P 1t 0 C) 1; S

P R O F S

AND
I L LUSTRATIONS.

Q-4

# PROOFS AND ILLUSTRATIONS.

PR OOF S

AND
ILLUSTRATION S.

NOTE I. SECT. I. p. 3. [A]
T H E consternation of the Bricons, when

invaded by the Pits and Caledonians

after the Roman legions were called out of
the island, may give some idea of the degree of
debasement to which the human mind was re-
duced by long servitude under the Romans. In
their supplicatory letter to Aetius, which they call
the groans of Britain, " We know not (fay they)
which way to turn us. The barbarians drive us
to the sea, and the sea forces us back on the bar-
barians; between which we have only the choice
of two deaths, either to be swallowed up by the
waves, or to be butchered by the sword." Hiftor.
Gilde. ap. Gale. Hilt. Britan. Script. p. 6.
One can hardly believe this dastardly race to be
the descendants of that gallant people, who re-
pulsed Cafar, and defended their liberty so long
against the Roman arms.

NOITE

NOTE II. SECT I. I. 4. [B].

THE barbarous nations were not only illiterate,

but regarded literature with contempt. They
found the inhabitants of all the provinces of the
empire funk in effeminacy, and averse to war.
Such a charat&r was the objec of scorn to an
high-fpirited and gallant race of men. c, When
we would brand an enemy," fays Liutprandus,
cC with the moR disgraceful and contumelious ap-
pellation, we call him a Roman ; hoc solo, id eft
Romani nomine, quicquid ignobilitatis, quicquid
timiditatis, quicquid avaritise, quicquid luxuriax,
quicquid mendacii, immo quicquid vitiorum cf
comprehendentes." Liutprandi Legatio apud Mu-
rat. Scriptor. Italic. vol. ii. pars I. p. 481. This
degeneracy of manners, illiterate barbarians im-
puted to their love of learning. Even after they
fettled in the countries which they had conquered,
they would not permit their children to be in.
stru&ted in any science; " for (said they) intlruc-
tion in the fcicnces tends to corrupt, enervate, and
depress the mind; and he who has been accu-f
tomed to tremble under the rod of a pedagogue,
will never look on a sword or spear with an un-
daunted eye." Procop. de bello Gothor. lib. i.
p. 4. ap. Scrip. Byz. edit. Venet. vol. i. A con-
riderable number of years elapsed, before nations
so rude, and so unwilling to learn, could produce
hiltorians capable of recording their tranfations,
or of describing their manners and institutions.
By that time, all memory of their ancient con-

dition

dition was loft, and no monument remained to
guide their firit writers to any certain knowledge
of it. If one expects to receive any fatisfa&ory
account of the manners and laws of the Goths,
Lombards, or Franks, during their residence in
those countries where they were originally feated,
from Jornandes, Paulus Warnefridus, or Gregory
of Tours, the earlieff and molt authentic hiRlo-
rians of thele people, he will be miserably difap-
pointed. Whatever imperfe& knowledge has been
conveyed to us of their ancient slate, we owe not
to their own writers, but to the Greek and Roman
hiforians.

NOTE III. SECT. I. p. 6. [C].

A CtRCUMSTANCE, related by Prifcus in his his-

tory of the embafly to Attila, king of the Huns,
gives a striking view of the enthufiatic paflion
for war which prevailed among the barbarous
nations. When the entertainment, to which that
fierce conqueror admitted the Roman ambassadors,
was ended, two Scythians advanced towards At-
tila, and recited a poem in which they celebrated
his vicdories and military virtues. All the Huns
fixed their eyes with attention on the bards.
Some seemed to be delighted with the verses;
o' hers, remembering their own battles and exploits,
exulted with joy; while such as were become
feeble through age, burt out into tears, bewail-
ing the decay of their vigour, and the state of
inactivity in which they were now obliged to

rem an,,

remain. Excerpta ex hiftoria Prifci Rhetoris ap.
Byzant. Hiftor. Script. vol. i. p. 45.

NOTE !V. SECT. I. p. ir. [D].

A REM.. RK.A UL confirmationi of both parts of

this reafuning occurs in the history of England.
The Saxons carried on the corquefl; of that country
virh the fame dcferuSive spirit which diftin-
gui.hied the other barLarous nations. The ancient
inhabitants of Britain were either exterminated,
or forced to take shelter among the mountains of
Wales, or reduced into servitude. The Saxon
government, laws, manners, and language were of
consequence introduced into Britain; and were so
perfealy established, that all memory of the in-
ititutions previous to their conquelt was aboliihed.
The very reverse of this happened in a subsequent
revolution. A tingle victory placed William the
Norman on the throne of England. The Saxon
inhabitants, though oppressed, were not exter-
minated. William employed the utnoft efforts
of his power and policy to make his new fubjeEts
confbrm in every thing to the Norman standard;
but without success. The Saxons, though van-
quifhed, were far more numerous than their con-
querors; when the two races began to incorporate,
the Saxon laws and manners gradually gained
ground. The Norman institutions were unpopu-
lar and odious; many of them fell into disuse;
and in the English conltitution and language, at
this day, many eflential parts are manifestly of
Saxon, not of Norman extract.

NOTE

NOTE V. SECT. I. p. 13. [El.

PRocoPIUs, the hiRforian, declines, from a prin-
ciple of benevolence, to give any particular detail
of the cruelties of the Goths: " Left, fays he, I
should tranlnit a monument and example of in-
humanity to iucceeding ages." Proc. dt bello
Goth. lib. iii. cap. io. ap. Byz. Script. vol. i. 126.
But as the change, which I have p(;intdc out as a
consequence of the fcrtlttment of the barbarous
nations in the cour.tries formerly iubjcE to the
Roman empire, could not have taken pl;cc, if
the greater part of the ancient inhabitants had not
been extirpated, an event of such importance and
influence merits a more particular iiluflration.
This will jultify me for exhibiting some part of
that melancholy fpeaacie, over which humanity
prompted Procopius to draw a veil. I (hall not,
however, difguil my readers by a long detail;
but reft satisfied with collegcing sone inlances of
the devaltations maide by two of tle many nations,
wvhich fettled in rhe empire. The Vandals were
the firfi of the Iarbarians who invaded Spain. It
was one of the richeit and moit populous of the
Roman provinces; the inhabitants had been diflin-
guiflied for courage, and hitid defended their liberty
against the arms of Rome, with greater obltinacy,
and during a longer course of years, than any
nation in Europe. But so entirely were they ener-
vated by their subjection to the Romans, that the
Vandals, who entered the kingdom A. D. 409.
completed the conquefl of it with such rapidity,

2 that

that in the year 411, these barbarians divided it
among them by casting lots. The desolation oc-
cafioned by their invasion is thus described by
Idatius an eye-witness. c" The barbarians waRsed
every thing with hostile cruelty. The pestilence
was no less deftrucive. A dreadful famine raged,
to such a degree, that the living were confrained
to feed on the dead bodies of their fellow-citizens;
and all those terrible plagues desolated at once the
unhappy kingdoms." Idatii Chron. ap. Biblioth.
Patrum, vol. vii. p. 1233. edit. Lugd. 1677. The
Goths having attacked the Vandals in their new
settlements, a fierce war ensued; the country was
plundered by both parties; the cities which escaped
at first, were laid in aflles, and the inhabitants ex-
posed to luffer every thing that the wanton cru-
elty of barbarians could infli&. Idatius describes
these, ibid. p. 1235. b. 1236. c. f. A similar
account of their devastations is given by Ifidorus
Hifpalenfis, and the contemporary writers. Ifid.
Chron. ap. Grot. hist. Goth. 732. From Spain
the Vandals passed over into Africa, A. D. 428.
Africa was, next to Egypt, the moR fertile of the
Roman provinces. It was one of the granaries
of the empire, and is called by an ancient writer,
the foul of the commonwealth. Though the army
with which the Vandals invaded it, did not ex-
ceed 3o,ooo fighting men, they became absolute
maiters of the province in less than two years. A
contemporary author gives a dreadful account of
the havoc which they made: " They found a
province well cultivated, and enjoying plenty, the

beauty

beauty of the whole earth. They carried their
deftrutive arms into every corner of it; they dilf
peopled it by their devaluations; exterminating
every thing with fire and sword. They did not
even Ipare the vines and fruit-trees, that those,
to whom caves and inacceflible mountains had
a.fforded a retreat, might find no nourilhment of
any kind. Their hostile rage could not be fa-
tiaced, and there was no place exempted from the
effeas of it. They tortured their prisoners with
the molt exquisite cruelty, that tlhy t1litt force
from them a discovery of their hidden treasures.
The more they discovered, the more they ex-
peced, and the more implacable they became.
Neither the infirmities of age nor of sex; neither
the dignity of nobility, nor the fantity of the
sacerdotal office, could mitigate their fury; but
the more illustrious their prisoners were, the more
barbarously they insulted them. The public
buildings, which refltecl the violence of the flames,
they levelled with the ground. They left many
cities without an iniih.itant. When they ap-
proached any fortified place, which their undif-
ciplined army could not reduce, they gathered
together a multictude of pri Ibn rs, and putting themn
to the sword, left their bodies unburied, that the
stench of the carcalles might oblige the garrilib
to abandon it." Vi&or Virenfis de perlfcurione
Africana ap. Bibl. Patrum, vol. viii. p. 666. Sr.
Auguftin, an African, and a contemporirl r a'ut'r,
gives a limilar description of their cruelties, Opera
vol. x. p. 372. edit. z616.-About an hundred

7 years

years after the settlement of the Vandals in Africa,
Belilarius attacked and dif)offefled them. Pro-
copius, a contemporary historian, describes the
devastation which that war occasioned. "c Africa,
fays he, was so entirely difpeopled, that one
might travel several days in it without meeting
one man; and it is no exaggeration to fay, that
in the couri: of the war five millions of persons
perifled." Proc. hist. Arcana, cap. 18. ap. Byz.
Script. vol. i. 3i5.-- I have dwelt longer upon
the calamities of this province, because they are
described not only by contemporary authors, but
by eye-witncffes. The present fate of Africa con-
firms their testimony. Many of the mot flouri(h-
ing and populous cities with which it was filled,
were so entirely ruined, that no vestiges remain
to point out where they were situated. That ser-
tile territory which sustained the Roman empire,
lies in a great measure uncultivated; and that
province, which Vihor in his barbarous Latin
called Specioitas totius

to erri e flore;tis, is now the re-
treat of pirates and banditti.

WHi.i. the Vanials; laid ware one part of the

empire, the Huns dcfoiated the ret of it. Of all
the barbarous tribes they were the fiercest and
modt formidable. Ammianus Marcellinus, a con-
temporary author, and one of the best of the later
historians, gives an account of their policy and
manners. They nearly resemble those of the Scy-
thians described by the ancients, and of the Tartars

known

known to the moderns. In some parts of their
character, and in several of their customs, they
resemble the savages in North America. Their
passion for war and a&cion was extreme. cc As in
polished societies (fays Ammianus) ease and tran-
quillity are courted, they delight in war and dan-
gers. lie who fills in battle is reckoned happy.
They who die of old age or of disease are deemed
infamous. They boast, with the utmost exulta-
tion, of the number of enemies whom they have
hlain, and, as the mott glorious of all ornaments,
they faftcn the Icalps of tholie who have fallen by
their hand to the trappings of their horks." An-
mian. Marc. lib. xxxi. p. 477. edit. Gronov.
Lugd. 1693.-Their incurfiun: into the elmpire
began in the fourth century , and the Romans,
though no strangers, by that ctime, to the e'flsc:s
of barbarous rage, were aitonifhed a:t the cruelty
of their devaflations. Thrace, Pa:inoii:i, an;d
Illyricum, were the cotun.rirs which rley firll Li'l
desolate. As they had no tho ugots oi lcLling i.i
Europe, their inroads were frequent, and 'Prijco-
pius computes that in each of thcie, at a mclit.lm,
two hundred thoufancd perlons plerillied, or wcre
carried off as slaves. Procop. I-Ti1t. Arc.nl. ap.
Byz. Script. vol. i. 316. Thrace, the bclt cu.lti-
vated province in that quarter of the ea;lpir, was
converted into a desert, and, v'i.htn Priituis accCom-
panied the ambassadors sent to Attila, ticre \'( re
no inhabitants in some of the cities, b)uc a i(..v
miserable people wlo had taken llhehlcer ai;n;:,g the
ruins of the churches; and the fields were co'vc,-cr

VOL . . ;,:

with the bones of those who had fallen by the
sword. Prifcus ap. Byz. Script. vol. i. 34. Attil?.
became king of the Huns, A. D. 434. He is
one of the greatest and most enterprizing con-
querors mentioned in hillory. He extendetl his
empire over all the vast countries comprehended
under the general names of Scythia and Germany
in the ancient division of the world. While he
was carrying on his wars against the barbarous
nations, he kept the Roman empire under per-
petual apprehensions, and extorted vast subsidics
from the timid and effeminate monarchs who go.
verned it. In the year 451, he entered Gaul, at
the head of an army composed of all the various
nations which he had subdued. It was more nu-
merous than any with which the barbarians had
hitherto invaded the empire. The devastations
which he committed were horrible; not only the
open country, but.the most flourishing cities were
desolated. The extent and cruelty of his devafta-
tions are described by Salvianus de Gubernat. Dei,
edit.Baluz. Par. 1669. p. 139, &c. and by Idatius,
ubi supra, p. 1235. Aetius put a flop to his pro-
grefs in that country by the famous battle of
Chalons, in which (if we may believe the hifto-
rians of that age) three hundred thousand pcrl'oi.s
perilhed. Idat. ibid. Jornandes de rebus Getici,
ap. Grot. lIifl. Gothor. p. 671. Amfc. 1665. BuIt
next year he rebflved to ;ttack the centre of the
empire, and, marching inlLo Italy, wafted it witli
rage, inflamed by the fenfc of his late difgracl.
What Italy suffered by the Hunis exceeded all the

cal.i-

calamities which the preceding incursions of the
barbarians had brought upon it. Conringius has
colletccd several passages from the ancient hitori-
ans, which prove that the devastations committed
by the Vandals and Huns in the countries fituat-
ed on the banks of the Rhine, were no less cruel
and fatal to the human race. Exercitatio de ur-
bibus Germani.', Opera, vol. i. 483. But it is
endless, it is Ihocl.ing, to follow these cicilroyers
of mankind through so many scenes of horror.
and to contemplate the havoc whilch they made
of the human Ipecies.

BLT the slate in which Italy appears to have

been, during fcveral ages, after the barbarous
nations fettled in it, is the inofl decisive proof of
the cruelty as weil as extent of their devallations.
Whenever any country is thinly inhabited, trees
and Ihrubs Ipring up in the uncultivated fields,
and, spreading by degrees, form large forests; by
the overflowing of rivers, and the fllagnating of
waters, other parts of it are converted into lakes
and marlhes. Ancient Italy, the feat of the Ro-
man elegance and luxury, was cultivated to the
highest pitch. But so efFeiiually did the devalta-
tions of the barbarians dellroy all the efTets of
their industry and cultivation, that in the eightl
century Italy appears to have been covered with
forests and marfles of vail extent, Muratori
enters into a long detail concerning the fitultioa
and limits of there j and proves, by the mofl au-
thentic evidence, that great trac.s of territory,
in all the diffcrent provinces of Italy, were either

R 2 over-

over-run with wood, or laid under water. No:
did these occupy parts of the country naturally
barren or of little value, but were spread over
diftrits, which ancient writers reprcfint as ex-
tremely fertile, and which at prlfent arc highllv
cultivated. Muratori Antiquitares Itaiicse mctii
a:vi, difiert. xxi. v. ii. p. 149. i53, &c. A strong
proof of this occurs in a description of the city
of Modena, by an author of the tenth century.
Murat. Script. Reruin Italic. vol. ii. pars ii. p 69 1.
The Itate of detlfution in other countries of Eu-
rope teeins to have been the fame. In many of
the moll early charters now extant, the lands
granted to monacr.ies, or to private persons, are
diflinguiflhed into fich as are cultivated or inha-
bited, and Iich as were eremi, desolate. In many
instances, lands are granted to perlbns because they
had taken them from the desert, ab eremzo, and had
cultivated and planted themwith inhabitants. This
appears from a charter of Charlemagne, publifned
by Eckhart de Rebus Francie Orientalis, vol. ii.
p. 864, and from many charters of his successors,
quoted by Du Cange v c. Ercnmus.-Wherever a
right of property in land can be thus acquired, it
is evident that the country mull be extremely
desolate, and thinly peopled. The firll tlttlers in
America obtained poiffefion of land by such a title.
Whoever was able to clear and to cultivate a field,
was recognized as the proprietor. His indutlry
merited ifch a recompence. The grants in the
charters which I have mentioned flow from a ti-
milar principle, and there mult have been fume
ref!llbiance in the state of the countries.

MUR;.

MURATOR I adds, that during the eighth and ninth
centuries, Italy was greatly inseted by wolves and
other wild beaCis; another mark of its being delti-
tute of inhabitants. A'lorat. Antiq. vol. ii. p. I63.
Thus Italy, the pride of the ancient world for its
fertility and cultivation, was reduced to the Rate of
a country newly peopled and rendered habitable.

I AM sensible, not only that flme of there de-

scriptions of the dcvaiiariouls, which I have quoted,
nmay be exaggerated, but that the barbarous tribes,
in making their Icttlcments, did not proceed in-
variably in the f.line l::anclr'. S.'; c ol them leem-
e(i to be bent on cxicri ti;,

. ng the ancient inha-

bitants; others were more (licpo!d to incorporate
with them. It is not my province either to en-
quire into the caules which occasioned this variety
in the conduct of the conqueirors, or to describe
the state of tholf coun:ries where the ancient in-
habitants were treated mnoftl m ldlv. The facts
which I have produced are lfu,!icicnt to prove, that
the deltruction of the human Ipecies, occasioned
by the hostile inVasions of the northern nations,
and their liibfequent fettleiments, was much great-
er than many authors seem to i.n.agine.

NOTE VI. SECT. I. p. 14. [F].

I HAVE observed, Note II., thnt our only certain

information concerning the ancient flrate of the
barbarous nations mull be derived from the Greek
and Roman writers. Happily an account of the
{nlfitutions and customs of one people, to which,

R 3 thole

those of all the reft seem to have been in a great
measure timilar, has been tranfimitted to us by
two authors, the most capableperhaps, that ever
wrote, of observing them with profound dilcern-
ment, and of describing them with propriety and
force. The reader muit perceive that 1 have C efar
and Tacitus in my eye. The former gives a fhorc
account of the ancient Germans in a few chapters
of the sixth book of his Commentaries: The latter
wrote a treatise expressly on that fubjcc'. Thelfe
are the most precious and instructive monuments
of antiquity to the present inhabitants of Europe.
From them we learn,

i. THAT the flare of society among the ancient

Germans was of the rudest and most simple form.
They fubrifted entirely by hunting or by pallu-
rage. Ca:. lib. vi. c. 21. They neglected agri-
culture, and lived chiefly on milk, cheese, an;
flesh. Ibid. c. 22. Tacitus agrees with him in
most of there points; De morib. Germ. c. 14, 15.
23. The Goths were equally negligent of agri-
culture. Priic. Rliet. ap. Byz. Script. v. i. p. 3I.
B. Society was in the lailme state among the -Huns,
who difklained to cultivate the earth, or to touch
a plough. Amini. Marcel, lib. xxxi. p. 475. ThI
lame manners took place among the Alans; ibil.
p. 477. V:'hilic uciety remains in this simple
llate, men by uniting together fcarccly relinqlisni
any portion of their natural independence. Ac-
cordingly we are informed, 2. That the authority
of civil gouvernlentn was extremely limited among

the

the Germans. During times of peace they had
no common or fixed magiflrate, but the chief men
of every district dispensed justice, and accommo-
dated differences. Cxef. ibid. c. 23. Their kings
had not absolute or unbounded power their au-
thority confifded rather in the privilege of advising,
than in the power of commanding. Matters of
finall consequence were determined by the chief
men; affairs of importance by the whole coim-
munity. Tacit. c. 7. Ii. The Huns, in like
manner, deliberated in common concerning every
business of moment to the society; and were not
ilbject to the rigour of regal authority. Amm.
Marcel. lib. xxxi. p. 474. 3. Every individual
among the ancient Germans was left at liberty to
chufe whether he would take part in any military
enterprize which was proposed; there seems to
have been no obligation to engage in it imposed
on him by public authority. " When any of the
chief men proposes any expedition, such as ap-
p;ove of the caulf and of the leader rife up, and
declare their intention of following him; those,
who do not fulfil this engagement, are confidered
as deserters and traitors, and are looked upon as
infamous." CTf. ibid. c. 23. Tacitus plainly
points at the fame cuffoi, though in terms more
obscure. Tacit. c. I. 4. As every individual
was to independent, and maflcr in so great a de-
gree of his own actions, it became, of consequence,
the great object of every peribn among the Ger-
mans, who aimed ar being a leader, to gain adhe-
rents, and attach thlem to his pcrlbn and interefr.

1. 4 rlel,

These adherents Caelar calls Ambasi and Clicites,
i. e. retainers or clients; Tacitus, Coaites, or com-
panions. The chief diftintion and power of the
leaders confiled in being attended by a numerous
band of choftn youth. This was their pride as
well as ornament during peace, and their defence
in war. The leaders gained or preserved the
favour of there retainers by prelents of armour
and of horses; or by the profuse though inelegant
hospitality with which they entertained them.
Tacit. c. 14, 15. 5. Another conflquencc of the
perbonal liber , and independence which the Ger-
mans retainec even after they united in society,
was their circumlcribinu the criminal jurifdiution
of the magistrate within very narrow limits, and
their not only claiming but exercising almost all the
rights of private refcir-nent and revenge. Their
magistrates had not the power either of imprison-
ing, or of infliting any corporal punishment on a
free man. Tacit. c. 7. Every person was obliged
to avenge the wrongs which his parents or friends
had sustained. Their enmities were hereditary,
but not irreconcilable. Even murder was com-
penfated by paying a certain number of cattle.
Tac. c. 21. A part of the fine went to the king,
or i:ace, a part to the person who had been in-
jurel, or to his kindred. Ibid. c. 12.

TiosS. particulars concerning the inflitutions

and manners of the Germans, though well known
to every person conversant in ancient literature, I
have thought proper to arrange in this order, and

to

to lay before such of my readers as may be less
acquainted with these fatcs, both because they con-
firm the account which I have given of the state
of the barbarous nations, and because they tend
to illustrate all the observations I llall have oc-
cafion to make concerning the various changes in
their government and cuilomis. Tile laws and
customs introduced by the barbarous nations into
their new Ifttlements, are thc belt co;mrrentary on
the writings of Cefiar and Tacitus; and their ob-
servations are the belt key to a pIr':i'i knowledge
of these laws and cultoms.

ONE circr:mftance,with refpc't to the tcfiimnonies
of CaEsar and Tacitus concerning the Germans, me-
rits attention. Cefar wrote his brief account of
their manners more than an hundred years before
Tacitus composed his treatise De mor;bus Germa-
norurn. An hundred years make a considerable pe-
riod in the progress of national manners, especially
if, during that time, those people who are rude
and unpolifhed have had much communication
with more civilized states. This was the cafe with
the Germans. Their intercourfc with the Romans
began when Cafar crossed the Rhine, and increased
prodigioufy during the interval between that
event and the time when Tacitus flourished. Be-
fides this, there was a conliderable difference be-
tween the slate of focicty among the different
tribes of Germans. The Suiones were to much
improved, that they began to be corrupted. Tac.
cap. 44. The Ferni were so barbarous, that it is

wonderful

wonderful how they were able to subsist. Ibid. cap.
46. Whoever undertakes to describe the manners
of the Germans, or to found any political theory
upon the state of society among them, ought care-
fully to attend to both these circumstances.

BEFORE I quit this subjet, it may not be im-

proper to observe, that, though fucceflive altera-
tions in their institutions, together with the gra-
dual progress of refinement, have made an entire
change in the manners of the various people who
conquered the Roman empire, there is still one
race of men nearly in the fame political situation
with theirs, when they firfl fettled in their new con-
quests: I mean the various tribes and nations of
Savages in North America. It cannot then be
confidered either as a digression, or as an improper
indulgence of curiosity, to enquire whether this
Ilmilarity in their political fiate has occafione.1
any resemblance between their chara&er and
manners. If the likeness turns out to be trik-
ing, it is a stronger proof that a just account
has been given of the ancient inhabitants of Eu-
rope, than the testimony even of Cafar or of
Tacitus.

i. TuE Americans fubfill chiefly by hunting and

firnine. Some tribes negle& agriculture entirely.
Among those who cultivate some fnall spot near
their huts, that, together with all works of labour,
is performed by the women. P. Charlevoix Jour-
nil Hiioricue d'un Voyage de L'AInerique, 4'.

Par.

Par. 1744. p. 334. In such a state of society, the
common wants of men being few, and their mutual
dependence upon each other fiall, their union is
extremely imperfect and feeble, and they continue
to enjoy their natural liberty almost unimpaired.
It is the fiiit idea of an American, that every man
is born free and independent, and that no power on
earth hath any right to diminish or circumscribe
his natural liberty. There is hardly any appear-
ance offubordination either in civil ordomeflic go-
vernment. Every onedoes what he pleafcs. A father
and mother with their children, live like perlbns
whom chance has brought together, and whom no
common bond unites. Their manner of educat-
ing their children is suitable to this principle. They
never chastise or punifi them, even during their
infancy. As they advance in years, they allow
them to be entirely masters of their own actions,
and responsible to nobody. Id. p. 272, 273._--
2. The power of their civil rnagiflrates is extremely
limited. Among milft of their tribes, the Sachem
or chief is elective. A council of old men is chosen
to affis him, without whose advice he determines
no affair of importance..The Sachems neither pof-
tefs nor claim any great degree of authority. They
propose and intreat, rather than command. The
obedience of their people is altogether v6luntarv.
Id. p. 26. 268.--3. The savages of Amcrica
engg1e in any military enterprize, not from con-
tlraint, but choice. When war is rcfolved, a chief
aril;s, and offers himself to be the leader. Such
a's :r:'T willing (for they compel no person) stand

up

up one after another, and ling their war-fong. Eut
if, after this, any of thele should refuse to folljw
the leader to whom they ha;ve engaged, his life
would be in danger, and he would be confilered
as the most infamous of all men. Id. p. 217, 2,8.
--~4. Such as engage to follow any leader, ex-
pe& to be treated by him with great attention and
refpe&; and he is obliged to make them presents
of considerable value. Id. p. 218.--5. Amor.,
the Americans, the magistrate has scarcely any cri-
minaljurifdi&ion. Id. p. 272. Upon receiving any
injury, the person or family offended, may inflic
what punishment they please on the person who
was the author of it. Id. p. 274. Their resent-
ment and desire of vengeance are exceflive and im-
placable. Time can neither extinguill nor abate it.
It is the chief inheritance parents leave to their
children; it is tranfinitted from generation to ge-
neration, until an occasion be found of fitisfying
it. Id. p. 309. Sometimes, however, the offended
party is appeased. A compensation is paid for a
murder that has been committed. The relations
of the deceased receive it; and it con[ilts molt
commonly of a captive taken in war, who being
substituted in place of the person who was mur-
dered, afumes his name, and is adopted into his
family. Id. p. 274. The resemblance holds in
many other particulars. It is sufficient for my
purpose to have pointed out the similarity of thole
great features which diflinguifl and characterize
both people. Bochart, and other philologists
of the latt century, who, with more erudition

2 than

than science, endeavoured to trace the migrations
of various nations, and who were apt, upon the
slightest appearance of resemblance, to find an affi-
nity between nations far removed from each other,
and to conclude that they were descended from
the fame anceflors, would harllly have failed, on
viewing such an amazing similarity, to pronounce
with confidence, " Th,:t the Germlans and Ame-
ricans mufR be the fame people." But a philo-
fopher will satisfy hitinlcf v.'itl obfcrving, c That
the charaSters of nations depend on the flatc of
fbcicty in which they live, and on the political in-
ftitutions eflablifled among them ; and that the
human mind, whenever it is placed in the fame
situation, will. in ages the mull diltant, and in
countri's the mort remote, afTimne the fame form,
and he diffinguifhed by the fame manners."

I HAVE pufled the comparison between the

Germans and Americans no farther than was ne-
ceffary for the illustration of my subje&t. I do not
pretend that the Itate of society in the two coun-
tries was perfectly similar. Many of the German
tribes were more civilized than the Americans.
Some of them were not unacquainted with agri-
culture; almolt all of them had flocks of tame
cattle, and depended for the chief part of their
fubfillence upon there. Molt of the American
tribes fubfit by hunting, and are in a ruder and
more simple Itate than the ancient Germans. The
reiemblance, however, between their condition, is
greater, perhaps, than any that hiftcry affords an

opportunity

opportunity of observing between two races of
uncivilized nations, and this has produced a fur.
prizing similarity of manners.

NOTE VII. SECT. I. P. 4. [G].

THE booty gained by an army belonged to the

army. The king himself had no part of it but
what he acquired by lot. A remarkable instance
of this occurs in the history of the Franks. The
army of Clovis, the founder of the French mo-
narchy, having plundered a church, carried off;
among other sacred utensils, a vase of extraordinary
size and beauty. The bishop sent deputies to
Clovis, beseeching him to restore the vase, that it
might be again employed in the sacred services to
which it had been consecrated. Clovis desired
the deputies to follow him to Soiflons, as the
booty was to be divided in that place, and pro-
mifed, that if the lot should give him the difpoial
of the vase, he would grant what the bishop de-
fired. When he came to Soiflons, and all the
booty was placed in one great heap in the middle
of the army, Clovis entreated, that before making
the division, they would give him that vase over
and above his {hare. All appeared willing to gra-
tify the king, and to comply with his requelt,
when a fierce and haughty soldier lifted up his
battle-axe, and striking the vase with the utmort
violence, cried out with a loud voice, " You fiall
receive nothing here but that to which the lor
gives you a right." Gregor. Turon. Hifor.
Francorum, lib. ii. c. 27. p. 7Q. par. x16o.

NOTE

NOTE VIII. SECT. I. p. 18. [H].

THE hiflory of the cftablifliment and progress

of the feudal 'ftlem, is an interesting object to all
the nations of Europe. In ftme countries; their
jurisprudence and laws are fill in a great measure
feudal. In others, many forms and practices efta-
blifhed by custom, or founded on flatutes, took
their rife from the feudal law, and cannot be un-
derltood without attending to the ideas peculiar to
it. Several authors of the highest reputation for
genius ant erudition, have endeavoured to illul'-
trate this fubje&, but they have left many parts of
it obscure. I lhall endeavour to trace, with pre-
cifion, the progress and variation of ideas concern-
ing property in land among the barbarous nations;
and shall attempt to point out the causes which
introduced these changes, as well as the effects
which followed upon them. Property in land
seems to have gone through four successive
changes among the people who fettled in the va-
rious provinces of the Roman empire.

I. WHILE the barbarous nations remained in

their original countries, their property in land was
only temporary, and they had no certain limits to
their polfeffions. After feeding their tiocks in one
diltri&, they removed with them, their wives and
families, to another; and abandoned that likewise
in a thort time. They were nor, in conlqlquence of
this imperfec fpecics of property, brouuglt under
any positive or formal obligation to ltirve the com-

. 7 n.lunity;

munity; all their services were purely voluntarv,
Every individual was at liberty to chufe how far
he would contribute towards carrying on any mi-
litary enterprize. If he followed a leader in any
expedition, it was from attachment, not from a
sense of obligation. The clearest proof of this
has been produced in Note VI. While property
continued in this state, we can discover nothing
that bears any resemblance to a feudal tenure, or
to the subordination and military iervice which
the feudal system introduced.

II. UPON fettling in the countries which they

had subdued, the vi&orious troops divided the
conquered lands. Whatever portion of them fell
to a soldier, he seized as the recompence due to
his valour, as a iettlement acquired by his own
sword. He took poffeflion of it as a freeman in
fiull property. He enjoyed it during his own life,
and could dispose of it at pleasure, or transmit it as
an inheritance to his children. Thus property in
land became fixed. It was at the fame time allo-
dial i. e. the pofleffur had the entire right of
property and dominion; he held of no sovereign
or superior lord, to whom he was bound to do
homage, and perform lervice. But as there new
proprietors were in some danger (as has been ob-
served in the text) of being disturbed by the
remainder of the ancient inhabitants, and in still
greater danger of being attacked by fuccelfive
colonies of barbarians as fierce and rapacious as
themselves, they saw the neceflity of coming under

obligations

obligations to defend the community, more ex-
plicit than those to which they had been fubje&
in their original habitations. On this account,
immediately upon their fixing in their new fettle-
ments, every freeman became bound to take arms
in defence of the community, and, if he refused
or negleaed so to do, was liable to a considerable
penalty. I do not mean that any contract of this
kind was formally concluded, or mutually ratified
by any legal solemnity. It was eflablilhed by
tacit consent, like the other compacts which hold
society together. Their mutual security and pre-
servation made it the interest of all to recog-
nize its authority, and to enforce the observation
of it. We can trace back this new obligation on
the proprietors of land to a very early period in
the history of the Franks. Chilperic, who began
his reign A. D. 562, exaced a fine, balnos juiit
exigi, from certain persons who had refused to
accompany him in an expedition. Gregor, Turon.
lib. v. c. 26. p. 21 . Childibert, who began his
reign A. D. 576, proceeded in the fame manner
against others who had been guilty of a like crime.
Id. lib. vii. c. 42. p. 342. Such a fine could not
have been exacted while property continued in its
first state, and military service was entirely volun-
tary. Charlemagne ordained, that every freeman
who possessed five manfi, i. e. sixty acres of land,
in property, should march in peribn againit the
enemy. Capitul. A. D. 807. Louis le Debonnaire,
A. D. 8 5, granted lands to certain Spaniards who
fled from the Saracens, and allowed them to fettle

VOL. I. S in

in his territories, on condition that they should
serve in the army like other free men. Capitul. vol. i.
p. 00o. By land possessed in property, which is
mentioned in the law of Charlemagne, we are to
underhand, according to the Rile of that age, al-
lodial land; alodes and proprietas alodum and pro-
prium being words perfe6tly fynonimous. Du Cange
voce dlodis. The clearest proof of the diftinEtion
between allodial and beneficiary poffelrion, is con-
tained in two charters published by Muratori, by
which it appears, that a person might possess one
part of his estate as allodial, which he could dispose
of at pleasure, the other as a beneficirm, of which
he had only the ufufrut, the property returning
to the superior lord on his demise. Antiq. Ital.
medii avi, vol. i. p. 559. 565. The fame dif-
tineion is pointed out in a Capitulate of Charle-
magne, A. D. 812. edit. Baluz. vol. i. p. 491.
Count Everard, who married a daughter of Louis
de Debonnaire, in the curious testament, by which
he disposes of his vatl estate among his children,
diftinguilhes between what he pofefTed propri-
etatec and what he held beneficio; and it appears
that the greater part was allodial. A. D. 837.
Aub. Mirai Opera Diplomatica, Lovan. 1723.
Vol. p. 1 9.

IN the fame manner Liber hoto is commonly

opposed to VaJlis or Vaallus ; the former denotes
an allodial proprietor, the latter one who held of
a superior. These free men were under an obli-
gation to serve the hate; and this duty was con-

fidered

fidered as so sacred, that free men were prohibited
from entering into holy orders unless they had
obtained the confient of the sovereign. The reason
given for this in the statute is remarkable, " For
we are informed that Come do so, not so much
out of devotion, as in order to avoid that military
service which they are bound to perform. Capitul.
lib. i. § 114. If, upon being summoned into
the field, any free man refused to obey, a full
HIerbannum, i. c. a fine of sixty crowns, was to
be exaced from him according to the law of the
Franks." Capit. Car. Magn. ap. Leg. Longob.
lib. i. tit. 14. § 13. p. 539. This expreflion, ac-
cording to the law of the Franks, seems to im-
ply, that both the obligation to serve, and the
penalty on those who disregarded it, were coeval
with the laws made by the Franks at their first set-
tlement in Gaul. This fine was levied with tuch
rigour, " That if any person convicted of this
crime was insolvent, he was reduced to servitude,
and continued in that state until such time as his
labour should amount to the value of the herebal-
num." Ibid. The emperor Lotharius rendered
the penalty fill more revere; and if any person
pocfefing such an extent of property as made it
incumbent on him to take the field in person, re-
fiufed to obey the summons, all his goods were
declared to be forfeited, and he himself might be
punished with banishment. Murat. Script. Ital.
vol. i. pars ii. p. 153.

S III. Pro-

III. PROPERTY in land having thus become

fixed, and subje&t to military service, another
change was introduced, though slowly, and ftep
by ftep.. We learn from Tacitus, that the chief
men among the Germans endeavoured to attach
to their persons and interests certain adherents
whom he calls Comites. These fought under their
standard, and followed them in all their enter-
prizes. The fame custom continued imong them
in their new settlements, and those attached or
devoted followers were called fideles antruJfiones,
bomines in trufte Dominica, leudes. Tacitus informs
us, that the rank of a Comes was deemed honour-
ablei De morib. Germ. c. 13. The composition,
which is the standard by which we must judge of
the rank and condition of persons in the middle
ages, paid for the murder of one in trufte Domi-
nica, was triple to that paid for the murder of a
freeman. Leg. Salicor. Tit. 44.'§ i. & 2. While
the Germans remained in their own country, they
courted the favour of these Comites by presents of
arms and horses, and by hospitality. See Note VI.
As long as they had no fixed property in land,
chefe were the only gifts that they could belfow,
and the only reward which their iollowers desired.
But upon their fettling in the countries which they
conquered, and when the value of'property came
to be understood among them,. instead of those
fight presents,, the kings and chieftains bellowed
a more substantial recompence in land on their
adherents. There grants were called benejiia, be-

~~~~~~~.. c
~. cauf.

cause they were gratuitous donations; and bonares,
because they were regarded as marks ofdiftinfion.
What were the services originally exa&ed in return
for these beneficia cannot be determined with ab-
solute precision; because there are no records so
ancient. When allodial polIeffions were first ren-
dered feudal, they were not, at once, subjected to
all the feudal services. The transition here, is in
all other changes of importance, was gradual.
As the great object of a feudal vassal was to ob-
tain protection, when allodial proprietors firt con-
sented to become vassals of any powerful leader,
they continued to retain as much of their ancient
independence as was confident with that new rela-
tion. The homage which they did to the superior
of whom they chore to hold, was called bomagium
planun, and bound them to nothing more than
fidelity, but without any obligation either of mili-
tary service, or attendance in the courts of their
superior. Of this homagitum planum rome traces,
though obscure, may Rill be discovered. Bruffel,
tom. i. p. 97. Among the ancient writs published
by D. D. DeVic and Vaifette hist. de Lanqued. are
a great many which they call bomagia. They
seem to be an intermediate ftep between the ho-
magium planran mentioned by Bruffel, and the
engagement to perform complete feudal service.
The one party promires protection, and grants
certain castles or lands; the other engages to defend
the person of the granter, and to aflift him like-
wife in defending his property as often as he flall

S3 be·

be summoned to do to. But these engagements
are accompanied with none of the feudal formali-
ties, and no mention is made of any of the other
feudal services. They appear rather to be a mu-
tual contrac between equals, than the engage-
ment of a vaflal to perform services to a superior
lord. Preuves de 1'hist. de Lang, tom, ii. 173.
8 paflim. As soon as men were accustomed to
there, the other feudal services were gradually in-
troduced. M. de Montesquieu confiders these
beneficia as fiefs, which originally fubjeted those
who held them to military service. L'Efprit des
Loix, 1. xxx. c. 3. & i6. M. L'abbe de Mably
contends that such as held these were at first sub-
jeted to no other service than what was incum-
bent on every free man. Observations fur l'hiftoire
de France, I. 356. But, upon comparing their
proofs and reasonings and conje&ures, it ieems to
be evident, that as every free man, in consequence
of his allodial property, was bound to serve the
community under a severe penalty, no good reason
can be assigned for conferring there beneficia, if
they did not subjet such as received them to
tome new obligation. Why should a king have
stripped himself of his domain, if he had not ex-
peted that, by parcelling it out, he might acquire
a right to services, to which he had formerly no
title ? We'may then warrantably conclude, That
as allodial property fubje&ed those who possesed
it to serve the community, so beneficia fubjeAed
such as held them to personal service and fidelity

to

to him from whom they received there lands.
These benefcia were granted originally only du-
ring pleasure. No circumstance relating to the
customs of the middle ages is better ascertained
than this; and innumerable proofs of it might
be added to those produced in L'Efprit des Loix,
1. xxx. c. x6. and by Du Cange voc. benejicium
& feudum.

IV. BUT the poffeion of benefices did not con-
*inue long in this state. A precarious tenure du-
ring pleasure, was not sufficient to satisfy such as
held it, and by various means they gradually
obtained a confirmation of their benefices du-
ring life. Feudor, lib. tit. i. Du Cange produces
several quotations from ancient charters and chro-
nicles in proof of this; Glof. voc. Beneficium,
After this it was easy to obtain or extort charters
rendering beneficia hereditary, first in the direct
line, then in the collateral, and at las in the fe-
male line. Leg, Longob, lib. iii. tit. 8. Du
Cange, yoc. Bncjicium,

IT is no easy matter to fix the precise time when
each of these changes took place. M, l'Ab. Mably
conjecures with rome probability, that Charles
Martel first introduced the practice of granting be-
ndcia for life: Obfervat, tom. i. p. 103. i60o and
that Louis Ie Debonnaire was among the first who
rendered them hereditary, is evident from the au.
thorities to which he refers; Id. 429. Mabillon
however has publishcd a placitum of Louis le De-

S 4 bonnaire,

bonnaire, A. D. 860, by which it appears, that he
fRill continued to grant some benefcia only during
life. De Re Diplomatica, lib. vi. p. 353. In the
year 889, Odo king of France granted lands to
Ricabodo.fideli suo jure beneficiario & fru&uario
during his own life; and if he should die, and a son
were born to him, that right was to continue du-
ring the life of his son. Mabillon ut supra, p. 556.
Thlis was an intermediate siep between fiefs merely
during life, and fiefs hereditary to perpetuity.
While beneficia continued under their first form,
and were held only during pleasure, hewho granted
them-.not only exercised the Dominium or preroga-
tive of uiperior lord, but he retained the property,
giving his vassal only the ufufruti. But under the
latter form when they became hereditary, although
feudal lawyers continued to define a beneficium
agreeably to its original nature, the property was
in effcit taken out of the hands of the superior
lords, and lodged in those of the vassal. As soon
as the. reciprocal advantages of the feudal mode
of tenure came to be understood by superiors as
well as vassals, that species of holding became so
agreeable to both, that not only lands, but casual
rents, such as the profits of a toll, the fare paid at
ferries, &c. the salaries or perquisites of offices,
and even pensions themselves, were granted and
held as fiefs; and military service was promised
and exacted on account of these. Morice Mem.
pour fervir de.preuves . Phift. de Bretagne, tom. ii.
78. 690.. Bruffel, ton. i. p. 41. Howabfurd o-
ever it may 'fcm to grant or to hold such preca-

6 . ricOs

rious and casual property as a fief, there are in-
stances of feudal tenures till more singular. The
profits arising from the mafles said at an altar,
were properly an ecclesiastical revenue, belong-
ing to the clergy of the church or monaitery
which performed that duty; but these were some-
times seized by the powerful barons. In order to
ascertain their right to them, they held them ai
fiefs of the church, and parcelled them out in the
fame manner as other property to their fub-vaf-
fals. Bouquet. receuil des hist. vol. x. 238. 480.
The fame lpirit of encroachment which rendered
fiefs hereditary, led the nobles to extort from
their foyereigns hereditary grants of offices. Many
of the great offices of the crown became heredi-
tary in most of the kingdoms in Europe; and so
conscious were monarchs of this spirit of usurp-
ation among the nobility, and so solicitous to
guard against it, that, on some occasions, they
obliged the persons whom they promoted to any
office of dignity, to grant an obligation, that nei-
ther they nor their heirs should claim it as belong-
ing to them by hereditary right. A remarkable
inflance of this is produced, Mem. de l'Acad. des
Infcript. tom. xxx. p. 595. Another occurs in
the Thefaur. anecdot. publilhed by Martene &
Durand, vol. i. p. 873.-This revolution in pro-
perty occasioned a change corresponding to it in
political government, the great vaflals of the
crown, as they acquired such extensive posses-
sions, usurped a proportional degree of power,
depressed the iurifdiclion of the crown, and tram-

pled

plCd,qo t privilegsof, the.people. Itis on ac-
count of, thiscontca oion, that it becomes an ob-
jecS of importance in hiftQry to trace the progress
of feudal pererty for, upon discovering in what
ftgc property was at any particular period, we
may determine with precision what was the degree
of power poffeifed by the king or by the nobility
a that juncture.

ONX circumstance more, with refpe& to the

Ghangs which property underwent, deserves atten-
tion. I have shewn, that when the various tribes
of barbarians divided their conquests in the fifth
and sixth centuries, the property which they ac-
quired was allodial; but in several parts of Eu-
sope, property had become almost entirely feudal
by the beginning of the tenth century. The for-
mer species of property seems to be so much bet-
ter. and more desirable than the latter; that such a
change appears surprising, especially when we are
informed that allodial property was frequently
converted into feudal, by a voluntary deed of the
pofelTor. The motives which determined them
to a choice so repugnant to the ideas of modern
times concerning proeprty, have been investigated
and explained by M. de Montesquieu with his usual
discernment and accuracy, lib. xxxi. c. 8. The
noft considerable is that of which we have an hint
in Lambertus Ardenfis, an ancient writer quoted
by Du Cange, voce Alodis. In those times of anar-
chy and disorder which became general in Europe

after

after the death of Charlemagne, when. ther w4,
fcarccly. any union among the different me.mblr,
of the community, .and individuals were; exorfe4
tingle and undefended by. government, to.rapine
and oppreflion, it became nece-fary for. ev~ mn;
to have. a powerful prote&or, under who e bapner
he might range himself, and,obtain fecu.rity:againf
enemies whom he could not singly oppo,0e For.
this reason he relinquilhed his. allodial incepend-
ence, and fubjeced: himself to th.e feudal-fervices,,
that he might find safety under the patronage, of
some refpc&able superior.. In some part! of Eu,
rope, this change from allodial: to feudal property,
became so general, that he who pofefied land had;
no longer any liberty of choice left. He was
obliged to recognize foame liege lord, and to, hold
of him. Thus Beaumanoir informs us, that in
the counties of Clermont and Beauvois, if thel ord,
or count discovered any lands within; hisjurifdic-
tion, for which no service was performed, an4
which paid to.him no taxes or cuRfoms, he might
inftandly seize it as his own; for, fays he, accord-
ing to our custom no man can hold allodial pro-
perty. Couft. ch. 24. p. 123. Upon the fame
principle is founded a maxim, which has at length
become general in the law of- France, Nulle terre
fans S$igneur. In other provinces of France, allo.
dial property seems to have remained. longer una-
lienated, and to have been more highly valued. A
vast numberofcharters, containing grants, or sales,
or exchanges of allodial lands in the province o'
Languedoc, arepublilhed Hist. gener, de Langued.

'ar

par D. D. De Vic & Vaifette, tom. ii. During the
ninth, tenth, and great part of the eleventh cen-
tury, the property in that province seems to have
been entirely allodial; and scarcely any mention of
feudal tenures occurs in the deeds of that country.
The fate of property, during there centuries, seems
to have been perfectly similar in Catalonia and
the country of Roufillon, as appears from the ori-
ginal charters published in the Appendix to Petr.
de la Marca's treatise de Marca five limite Hifpa-
nico. Allodial property seems to have continued
in the Low Countries, to a period still later.
During the eleventh, twelfth, and thirteenth cen-
turies, this species of property appears to have
been ofconfiderable extent. Mirai opera Diplom.
vol. i. 34, 74, 75, 83, 817, 296, 842, 847, 578.
Some veefiges of allodial property appear there as
late as the fourteenth century. Ibid. 218. Several
fa&s which prove that allodial property fubfited
in different parts of Europe long after the intro-
ducioi of feudal tenures, and which tend to illus-
trate the diftin&ion between these two different
fpccies of pofleflion, are produced by M. Houard,
Anciennes Loix des FranSois, conservees dans les
Coutumes Angloifes, vol. i. p. z92, &c. The no.
tions of men with refpea to property, vary accord-
ing to the diversity of their understandings, and
the caprice of their paflions. At the fame time
that some persons were fond of relinquishing allo-
dial property, in order to hold it by feudal tenure,
others seem to have been solicitous to convert their
fiefs into allodial property. An instance of this

occurs

occurs in a charter of Louis le Debonnaire, pub.
lillhed by Eckhard, Commentarii de rebus Franciae
Orientalis, vol. ii. p. 885. Anotheroccurs in the
year 1299. Reliquia: MSS. omnis evi, by Lud-
wig, vol. i. p. 209, and even one as late as the year
I337, ibid. vol. vii. p. 40. The fame thing took
place in the Low Countries. Miraei oper. i. 52.

IN tracing these various revolutions ofproperty,

I have hitherto chiefly confined myself to what
happened in France, because the ancient monu-
ments of that nation have either been more care-
fully preserved, or have been more clearly illus-
trated than those of any people in Europe.

IN Italy, the fame revolutions happened in pro-

perty, and succeeded each other in the fame order.
There is rome ground, however, for conjeturing,
that allodial property continued longer in eftima-
tion among the Italians, than among the French.
It appears, that many of the charters granted by
the emperors in the ninth century, conveyed an
allodial right to land. Murat. Antiq. med. avi,
v. i. p. 575, &c. But in the eleventh century, we
find some examples of persons who resigned their
allodial property, and received it back as a feudal
tenure. Id. p. 6zo, &c. Muratori observes, that
the wordfeudum, which came to be fubfitiuted in
place of benfjicium, does not occur in any authen-
tick charter previous to the eleventh century. Id.
· 594. A charter of king Robert of France, A. D.
,oao8, is the carlicft deed in which 1 have met with

the

the wordfeudum. Bouquet reccuil des hiftoriens
de Gaule & de la France, tom. x. p. 593, b.
This wdrd occurs indeed in an edic, A. D. 790,
published by'Bruffel, vol. i. p. 77. But the au-
thenticity of that deed has been called in question,
and-perhaps the frequent use of the word feudum
in it, is an additional reason for doing so. The
account which I have given of the nature both of
allodial and feudal poffefions receives some con-
firmation from the etymology of the words them-
iclves. Alode or allodium is compounded of the
German particle an and lot, i. e. land obtained by
lot. Wachteri Gloflar. Germanicum, voc. Allo-
diutn, p. 35. It appears firom the authorities pro-
duced by him and by Du Cange, voc. fors, that
the northern nations divided the lands which they
had conquered in this manner. Feodum is com-
pounded of od pofIefrion or estate, and feo wages,
pay; intimating that it was stipendiary, and grant-
ed as a'recoipence for service. Wachterus ibid.
voc. feadtm, p. 441.

THE progress of the feudal system among the

Germans was perfetly similar to that which we
have traced in France. But as the emperors of
Germany, especially after the Imperial crown
passed from the descendants of Charlemagne to
'the house of Saxony were far superior to the
contemporary monarchs of France, in abilities,
*the Imperial vassals did not aspire so early to in-
dependence, nor did they so soon obtain the pri-
'vilCgc 'f posiTsing their benefices by hereditary

right.

right. According to the compilers of the Libri
Feudorum, Conrad II. or the Salic, was the first
emperor who rendered fiefs hereditary. Lib. i.
tit. i. Conrad began his reign A. D. 1024. Lu-
dovicus Pius, under whose reign grants of here-
ditary fiefs were frequent in France, succeeded his
father A. D. 814. Not only was this innovation
tb much later in being introduced among the vas-
fils of the German emperors, but even after
Conrad had eltablifhed it, the law continued fa-
vourable to the ancient practice; and unless the
charter of the vassal bore expressly that the fief
descended to his heirs, it was presumed to be
granted only during life. Lib. feud. ibid. Even
after tie alteration made by Conrad, it was not
uncommon in Germany to grant fiefs only for life;
a charter of this kind occurs as late as the year
1376. Charta ap. Boehmer. Princip. Jur. feud.
p. j6 I. The tranfmiflron of fiefs to collateral and
female heirs, took place very slowly among the
Germans. There is extant a charter, A. D. 1201,
conveying the right of fucceflon to females, but
it is granted as an extraordinary mark of favour,
and in reward of uncommon services. Boehmer.
ibid. p. 365. In Germany, as well as in France
and Italy, a considerable part of the lands con-
tinued to be allodial long after the feudal mode
of tenure was introduced. It appears from the
Codex Diplomaticus MonafRerii Buch, that a great
part of the lands in the marquisate of Mifnia was
still allodial as late as the thirteenth century.
N. 3i, 36, 37a'46, &c. ap. Scriptores hit. Gee-

4 man.

man. cura Schoetgenii & Kreyfigii. Altenb. 1755.
vol. ii. 183, &c. Allodial property seems to have
been common in another diftriE of the fame pro-
vince, during the fame period. Reliquia Diplo.
matica Sancaimonial. Beutiz. N' 17, 36, 58, ibid.
374, &c.

NOTE IX. SECT. I. p. 19. [1].

As I shall have occasion, in another Note, to

represent the condition of that part of the people
who dwelt in cities, I will confine myself in this
to confider the state of the inhabitants of the
country. The persons employed in cultivating
the ground during the ages under review may be
divided into three classes; I. Servi or slaves. This
seems to have been the molt numerous class, and
consisted either of captives taken in war, or of
persons, the property in whom was acquired in
rome one of the various methods enumerated by
Du Cange, voc. fervus, v. 6. p. 447. The
wretched condition of this numerous race of men
will appear from several circumstances. I. Their
maRiers had abiblute dominion over their persons.
They had the power of punilhing their saves ca-
pitally, without the intervention of any judge.
This dangerous right they' possessed not only in
the more early periods, when their manners were
fierce, but it continued as late as the twelfth
century. Joach. Potgiefferus de ftatu fervorum.
Lemgov. 1736. 4to. lib. ii. cap. I. § 4, 10, 13,
24. Even after this jurifdition of masters came
to be restrained, the life of a save was deemed to

be

be of so little Value; that a very flight compen-
fation atoned for taking it away. Idem, lib. iii.
c. 6. If mailers had power over the lives of their
slaves it is evident that almost no bounds would
be set to the rigour of the punithments which they
might infli& upon them. The codes of ancient
laws prescribed punilhments for the crimes of
slaves different from those which were inflicted on
free men. The latter paid only a fine or com-
penfation; the former were fubjeAed to corporal
punifnmenrs. The cruelty of theie was in many
instances excellive. Slaves might be put to the
rack on very flight occasions. The laws with
refpea to these points are to be found in Porgi-
efferus, lib. iii. cap. 7. 2. If the dominion of
matiers over the lives and persons of their slaves
was thus extensive, it was no less so over their
aftions and property. They were not originally
permitted to marry. Male and female saves were
allowed, and even encouraged, to cohabit together.
But this union was not confidered as a marriage,
it was called contuberxiim, not meptia or marin.
mronium. Potgief. lib. ii. c, 2. § z. This notion
was so much lftablilhed, that, during several cen-
turies after the barbarous nations embraced the
Chriltian religion, slaves, who lived as husband and
wife, were not joined together by any religious
ceremony, and did not receive the nuptial beneh
diction from a priest. Ibid. § to, xi. When this
conjuntion between saves came to be confidered
as a lawful marriage, they were not permitted to
marry without the consent of their matqr, and

VOL, . T such

such as ventured to do so, without obtaining that,
were puniibed with great severity, and ofmetimes
were put to death. Potgieff. ibid. § 12, &c.
Gregor. Turon. hist. lib. v. c. 3. When the
manners of the European nations became more
gentle, and their ideas more liberal, naves who
married without their master's consent were sub-
jeeed only to a fine. PotgieTf. ibid. § 20. Du
Cange Gloss. voc. Forifm4ritagiwn. 3. All the
children of saves were in the fame condition with
their parents, and became the property of the
master. Du Cange Gloss. voc.fervw, vol. vi. 450.
Murat. antiq. Ital. vol. i. 766. 4. Slaves were so
entirely the property of their maflers, that they
could fell them at pleasure. While domeflic
slavery continued, property in a slave was fold
in the fame manner with that which a person had
in any other moveable. Afterwards slaves became
adfiripti gleba, and were conveyed by sale, to-
gether with the farm or estate to which they be-
longed. Potgiefferus has collected the laws and
charters which illustrate this well-known circum-
stance in the condition of saves. Lib. ii. c. 4.
5. Slaves had a title to nothing but subsistence
and clothes from their malter; all the profits of
their labour accrued to him. If a matter, from
indulgence, gave his saves any pectlium, or fixed
allowance for their subsistence, they had no right
of property in what they saved out of that. All
that they accumulated belonged to their matier.
gogiefi.lib. ii. c. o1. Murat. antiq. Ital.vol. i.768.
pu Cange, yoc. fJtus, vol. vi. p. 451. Con-

formably

formably to the fame principle, all the effeis of
slaves belonged to their master at their death, and
they could not dispose of them by testament. Pot-
gieff. lib. ii. c. I. 6. Slavea were distinguishcd
from free men by a peculiar dress. Among all
the barbarous nations, long hair was a mark of
dignity and offreedom; slaves were for that reason
obliged to Ihave their heads; and by this diftinc-
tion, how indifferent soever it may be in its own
nature, they were reminded every moment of the
inferiorityoftheir condition. Porgief. lib. iii. c.4.
For the fame reason it was enac&ed in the laws of
almost all the nations of Europe, that no slave
ihould be admitted to give evidence against a free
man in a court ofjutice.' Du Cange, voc. fervu,
vol. vi. p. 451. Potgief. lib. iii. c. 3.

a. Yilkwi. They were likewise dfcripti glebe or

?uiile, from which they derived their name, and
were transferable along with it. Du Cange, voc.
villa/sr. But in this they differed from slaves, that
they paid a fixed rent to their master for the land
which they cultivated, and, after paying that, all
the fruits of their labour and induflry belonged to
themselves in property. This diftintion is mark-
ed by Piere de Fontain's Confeil. Vie de Sr.
Louis par Joinville, p. x19. edit. de Du Cange.
Several cafes decided agreeably to this principle.
are mentioned by Murat. Ibid. p. 773.

3. THu lalf class of persons employed in agri-
culture were free men. Theif ar diftinguilet.

T by

by various names among the writers of the middle
ages, Ari#namni, conditionales, originarii, tributales,
&'c. These seem to have been persons who pof-
fefled some finall allodial property of their own,
and besides that, cultivated some farm belonging
to their more wealthy neighbours, for which they
paid a fixed rent; and bound themselves likewise
to perform several fmnall services in prato vel in
mefe, in aratura vl in vinca, such as ploughing a
certain quantity of their landlord's ground, afift-
ing him in harvest and vintage work, &c. The
clearest proof of this may be found in Muratori,
v. i. p. 712. and in Du Cange under the refpe&-
ive words above mentioned. I have not been able
to discover whether thefeolarimanni, &c. were re-
moveable at pleasure, or held their farms by lease
for a certain number of years. The former, if
we mayjudge from the genius and maxims of the
age, seems to be most probable. These persons,
however, were confidered as free men in the most
honourable sense of the word; they enjoyed all
the privileges of that condition, and were even
called to serve in war; an honour to which no
gave was admitted. Murat. Antiq. vol. i. p. 743.
vol. ii. p. 446. This account of the condition of
these three different claires of persons, will enable
the reader to apprehend the full force of an argu-
inent which I ihall produce in confirmation of
what I have said in the text concerning the wretched
state of the people during the middle ages. Not-
withstanding the immenle difference between the
first of there classes. and the third, such was the

pirit

spirit of tyranny which prevailed among the great
proprietors of lands, and so various their oppor-
tunities of oppressing those who were fettled on
their eRtates, and of rendering their condition into-
lerable, that many free men, in deipair, renounced
their liberty, and voluntarily surrendered them-
selves as slaves to their powerful matters. This
they did, in order that their matters might become
more immediately interested to afford them pro-
tetion, together with the means of subsisting
themselves and their families. The forms of such
a surrender, or obnoxatio, as it was then called,
are preserved by Marculfus, lib. ii. c. 28; and by
the anonymous author publifled by M. Bignon,
together with the collection of formula compiled
by Marculfus, c. 16. In both, the reason given
for the obnoxatio, is the wretched and indigent
condition of the person who gives up his liberty.
It was still more common for free men to surrender
their liberty to bishops or abbots, that they might
partake of the security which the vassals and saves
of churches and monasteries enjoyed, in confe-
quence of the superstitious veneration paid to the
faint under whose immediate protection they were
supposed to be taken. Du Cange, voc. oblatus,
vol. iv. p. 1286. That condition must have been
miserable indeed, which could induce a free man
voluntarily .to renounce his liberty, and to give
up himself as a lave to the disposal of another.
The number of saves in every nation of Europe
was prodigious, The greater part of the inferior

T 3 class

class of people in France were reduced to this state
at the commencement of the third raceof kings.
L'Efpr. des Loix, liv. xxx. c. t . The fame was
the cafe in England. Brady Pref. to Gen. HiR.
Many curious fa&s, with refpe& to the ancient
state of villains, or slaves in England, are publish.
ed in Observations on the Statutes, chiefly the
more ancient, 2d edit. p. 244.

NOTE X. S Icr. . p. 22. [K].

IMUNItERABLE proofs of this might be pro-

duted. Many charters, granted by persons of the
highest rank, are preserved, from which it appears
that they could not fubicribe their name. It was
usual for persons, who could not write, to make
the sign of the cross in confirmatiop of a charter.
Several of these remain, where kings and persons
of great eminence affix fgnm crucis mana proria
pro igmratione literarum. Du Cange, voc. Crux,
vol. iii. p. 1191. From this is derived the phrase
ps signing instead of subscribing a paper. In the
pinch century, Herbaud Comes Palatii, though
supreme judge of the empire by virtue of his
office, could not subscribe his name. Nouveau
Traire de Diplomatique par deux Benediatins,
4to. torn. ii. p. 412. As late as the fourteenth
century, Pu Guefclin, conlfable of France, the
greatelt man in the state, and one of the greatest
sien of his age, could neither read nor write. Sr.
Palaye Memoirrs fur l'ancienne Chevalerie, tit. ii.

p. 82.

p. 82. Nor was this ignorance confined to lay-
men; the greater part of the clergy was not many
degrees superior to them in science. Many dig-
nified ecclcfiaftics could not subscribe the canons
of those councils, in which they fat as members.
Nouv. Traite de Diplom. tom. ii. p. 424. One
of the questions appointed by the canons to be
put to persons who were candidates for orders
was this, c Whether they could read the gospels
and epistles, and explain the sense of them, at
least literally ?' Regino Prumienfis ap. Bruck.
Hist. Philof. v. iii. p. 63i. Alfred the Great com-
plained, that from the Humber to the Thames
there was not a priest who understood the liturgy
in his mother-tongue, or who could tranlate the
easiest piece of Latin and that from the Thames
to the sea, the ecclesiastics were still more igno-
rant. Afferus de rebus geftis Alfredi, ap. Cam-
deni Anglica, &c. p. 25. The ignorance of the
clergy is quaintly described by an author of the
dark ages. "C Potius dedidi gulc: quam Gloffe;
potius colligunt libras quam legunt libros; liben-
tius intuentur Martham quam Marcum; malunt
legere in Salmone quam in Solomone. Alanus de
art. Predicat. ap, Lebeuf. Dissert. tom. ii. p. 21.
To the obvious causes of such universal ignorance.
arising from the state of government and manners,
from the seventh to the eleventh century, we may
add the scarcity of books during that period, and
the difficulcy of rendering them more common.
The Romans wrote their books either on parch-

T 4 ment

ment or on paper made of the Egyptian papyrus.
The latter being the cheapest, was of course the
mofi commonly used. But after the Saracens
conquered Egypt in !the lIventh century, the com-
minnication bcLt.wevn that country and the people
fettrld in Italy or in other parts of Europe, was
almoil entirely broken off, and the papyrus was
no longer in use among them. They were ob-
liged, on that account, to write all their books
uipon parchment, and, as the price of that was high,
baoks became extremely rare and of great value.
We may judge of the scarcity of the materials for
writing them from one circumstance, There still
remain several manuscripts of the eighth, ninth,
and following centuries, wrote on parchment, from
which some former writing had been erased, in
.order to substitute a new composition in its place.
In this manner, it is probable, that several works
of the ancients periflcd. A book of Livy or of
Tacitus might be erared, to make room for the
!tgendary tale of a fainr, or the fuperflRiious
prayers of a miital. Murat. Antiq. Ital, v. iii.
p. 833. P. dc Montfttucqn affirms, that the greater
part of the manulcripts on parchment which he
has secn, thof oan an cicie date excepted, are
written on parchiment from which some former
rreatife had been erased. Meem. de l'Acad. dles
Inlitript. tom:. ix. p. 325. As the want of mate-
si.ls for writing, is one reason why so many of the
works of the ancients have perished, it accounts
}ikewii: for the fmiall number of manuicripts of

anyi

any kind, previous to the eleventh century, when
they began to multiply from a cause which shall be
mentioned. Hist. Liter. de France, tor. vi. p. 6.
Many circumstances prove the scarcity of books
during these ages. Private persons seldom poffelfed
any books whatever. Even monatleries ofconfider-
able note had only one nmiflal. Murat. Antiq.
v. ix. p. 789. Lupus, abbot of Ferrieres, in a
letter to the pope, A. D. 855, beseeches him to
lend him a copy of Cicero de Oratore and Quin-
tilian's Institutions, "' for," fays he, " although
we have parts of those books, there is no complete
copy of them in all France. Murat. Ant. v. iii.
p. 835. The price of books became so high, that
persons of a moderate fortune could not afford to
purchase them. The counters of Anjou paid for
a copy of the Homilies of Haimon, bishop of
Halberfladt, two hundred Iheep, five quarters of
whear, and the fame quantity of rye and millet.
Iiftoire Literaire de France par des Religieux Be-
nedictins, tom. vii. p. 3. Even so late as the year
1471, when Louis XI. borrowed the works of
Ralis, the Arabian physician, from the faculty
of medicine in Paris, he not only deposited in
pledge a considerable quantity of plate, but was
obliged to procure a nobleman to join with him as
flurety in a deed, binding himself under a great
forfeiture to restore it. Gabr. Naude Addit. a l'hif-
toire de Louys XI. par Comines. edit. de Frefnoy,
tom. iv. p. 281. Many curious circumstances,
with respeac to the extravagant price of books in

the

the middle ages, are colleced by that industrious
compiler, to whom I refer such of my readers as
deem this small branch of literary history an obje&
of curiosity. When any person made a present of
a book to a church or a monastery, in which were
the only libraries during there ages, it was deemed
a donative of such value, that he offered it on the
altar pro remedio anima fua, in order to obtain the
forgiveness of his fins. Murat. vol. iii. p. 836.
Hill. Liter. de France, torn. vi. p. 6. Nouv.
Trait. du Diplomat. par deux Benedictins, 4to, tom.
i. p. 481 . In the eleventh century, the art of mak-
ing paper, in the manner now become universal,
was invented; by means of that, not only the num-
ber of manuscripts increased, but the 1fudy of the
sciences was wonderfully facilitated. Murat. ib.
p. 871. The invention of the art of making pa-
per, and the invention of the art of printing, are two
confidertble events in literary hiftcry. It is re-
markable that the former preceded the first dawn-
ing of letters and improvement in knowledge to-
wards the close of the eleventh century 1 the latter
ushered in the light which spread over Europe at
the zra of the Reformation.

NOTE XI. SECT. I . p. 3 [L].

ALL the religious maxims and practices of the

dark ages are a proof of this. I hall produce one
remarkable testimony in confirmation of it, from
an author canonized by the church of Rome, St.
Eloy or Egidius, bishop of Noyon, in the seventh

century.

century. " He is a good Christian who comes
frequently to church; who presents the oblation
which is offered to God upon the altar; who doth
not taste of the fruits of his own industry until he
has consecrated a part of them to God; who, when
the holy festivals approach, lives chastely evenwith
his own wife, during several days, that with-a fate
conscience he may draw near the altar of God;
and who, in the last place, can repeat the Creed
and the Lord's Prayer. Redeem then your fouls
from deftrdtion, while you have the means in
your power; offer presents and tythes to church-
men; ome more frequently to church; humbly
implore the patronage of the faints; for, if you
observe these things, you may come with security
in the day of retribution to the tribunal of the
eternal Judge, and fay, " Give to us, O Lord,
for we have given unto thee." Dacherii Specile-
gium Vet. Script. v. ii. p. 94. The learned and
judicious translator of Dr. Molheim's Ecclefiafti-
cal History, from one of whose additional notes I
have borrowed this pafiage, subjoins a very pro-
per reflection; " We fee here a large and ample
description of a good Christian, in which there is
not the least mention of the love of God, refigna.
tion tp his will, obedience to his laws, or of jus.
tice, beneyolence, and charity towards men."
Mosh. Eccles. Hist. v. i. p. 324.

NOTE XII . ST. p.

I. . [M].

IT is no inconsiderable misfortune to the church
of Rome, whose dotrine of infallibility renders all

4 such

such inititutions and ceremonies as have been
once. universally received, immutable and ever-
lasing, that the must continue to observe, in en-
lightened. times, those rites which were introdu-
ced during the ages of darkness and credulity.
What delighted and edified the latter, must dif-
gust and ihock the former. Many of these rices
appear manifefly to have been introduced by a
fuperflition of the lowest and most illiberal fpe-
cies. Many of them were borrowed, with little
variation, from the religious ceremonies eftablili-
ed among the ancient Heathens. Some were so
ridiculous, that if every age did not furnith in-
stances of the fascinating influence of fuperftiion,
as well as of the whimsical forms which it as-
fumes, it must appear incredible that they should
ever be received or tolerated. In several churches
of France, they celebrated a festival in comme-
moration of the Virgin Mary's flight into Egypt.
It was called the feast of the Ass. A young girl
richly dressed, wi;h a .child in her arms, was let
upon an ass superbly caparisoned. The ass was
led to the alar in solemn proceftion. High mass
was said with great pomp,. The ass was taught
to kneel at proper.places; a hymn no less child-
ifh. than impious was sung in his praise; And
when the ceremony was ended, the priest, infteal
of the usual words with which he dismissed the
people, brayed three times like an ass; and the
people, instead of their usual response, We blel;
the Lord, brayed three times in the fame manner.
Du Cange, voc, Fellum. v. iii. p. 424. This ri-

diculous

dictlous ceremony was not, like the festival of
fools, and Tome other pageants of those ages, a
mere farcical entertainment exhibited in a church,
and mingled, as was then the custom, with an imi-
tation of some religious rites; it was an aEt of de-
votion, performed by the ministers of religion,
and by the authority of the church. However, as
this pracice did not prevail universally in the Ca-
tholick church, its absurdity contributed at last
to abolifl it.

NOTE XIII. SECT. I. p. 29. [N].

As there is no event in the history of mankind
more singular than that of the Crusades, every
circumstance that tends to explain or to give any
rational account of this extraordinary frenzy of the
human mind is interesting. I have asserted in the
text, that the minds of men were prepared gra-
dually for the amazing effort which they made in
consequence of the exhortations of Peter the her-
mit, by several occurrences previous to his time.
A more particular detail of this curious and ob-
cure part of history, may perhaps appear to some
of my readers to be of importance. That the end
of the world was expeted about the close of the
tenth and beginning of the eleventh century; and
that this occasioned a general alarm, is evident
from the authors to whom I refer in the text.
IThis belief was so universal and so itrong, that it
mingled itself with their civil tranfadions. Many
charters, in the latter part of the tenth century,

begin

begin in this manner: " Appropinquante mundi
termino," &c. As the end of the world is now at
hand, and by various calamities and judgments
the signs of its approach are now manifet. Hill.
de Langued. par D. D. de Vic Vaifette, tom. ii.
Preuves, p. 86, 89, 9o, 117, 158, &c. One
efflet of this opinion was, that a great number of
pilgrims resorted to Jerusalem, with a resolution
to die there, or to wait the coming of the Lord;
kings, earls, marquifles, bishops, and even a great
number of women, besides persons of inferior
rank, flocked to the Holy Land. Glaber. Ro-
duiph. Hill. chez Bouquet Reccuil, tom. x. p. 50,
52. Another historian mentions a vast cavalcade
of pilgrims who accompanied the count of An.
gouleme to Jerusalem in the year 1026. Chro-
nic. Ademari, ibid. p. 162. These pilgrims fill-
ed Europe with lamentable accounts of the fate
of ChriRians in the Holy Land. Willerm. Tyr.
Hist. ap. Gef. Dei per Franc. vol. ii. p. 636.
Guibert. Abbat. Hist. ibid. vol. i. p. 476. Besides
this, it was usual for many of the Christian inha-
bitants of Jerusalem, as well as of other cities in the
East, to travel as mendicants through Europe; and
by describing the wretched condition of the pro-
fefors of the Christian faith under the dominion of
Infidels, to extort charity, and to excite zealous
persons to make rome attempt in order to deliver
them from opprellon. Baldrici Archiepifcopi
Hiftor. ap. GeftaDei, &c. vol. i. p. 86. In the
year 986, Gerbert, archbishop of Ravenna, after-
wards Pope Silvefter 11. addrefied a letter to all

Clriflians

Christians in the name of the church of Jerusalem.
It is eloquent and pathetic, and contains a formal
exhortation to take arms against the Pagan oppref-
fors, in order to rescue the holy city from their
yoke. Gerberti Epiftola ap. Bouquet, Receuil,
tom. x. p. 416. In consequence of this spirited
call, fomne fubjeas of the republick of Pisa equip.
ped a fleet, and invaded the territories of the Ma-
hometans in Syria. Murat. Script. Rer. Italic.
vol. iii. p. 400. The alarm was taken in the East,
and an opinion prevailed, A. D. 1olo, that all
the forces of Christendom were to unite, in order
to drive the Mahometans out of Palestine. Chron.
Ademari ap. Bouquet, tom. x. p. 152. It is evi-
dent from all there particulars, that the ideas which
led the Crusaders to undertake their wild enter-
prize were gradually formed; so that the univer-
fal concourse to the standard of the cross, when
erected by Urban II., will appear less surprising.

IF the various circumstances which I have enu-

merated in this note, as well as in the history, are
sufficient to account for the ardour with which
such vati numbers engaged in such a dangerous
undertaking, the extensive privileges and immu-
nities granted to the persons who aflumed the
cross, lcrve to account for the long continuance
of this spirit in Europe. i. They were exempted
from prosecutions on account of debt during the
time of their being engaged in this holy service.
Du Cange, voc. Crucis privilegi#wu v. ii. p. 1194-
-2. They were exempted from paying interest

for

for the money which they had borrowed. Ibid,
-3. They were exempted either entirely, or at
least during a certain time, from the payment of
taxes. Ibid. Ordonances des Rois de France,
tom. i. p. 33.-4. They might alienate their
lands without the conlent of the superior lord of
whom they held. Ib.-5. Their persons and es-
ects were taken under the prote&tion of St. Peter,
and the anathemas of the church were denounced
against all who (hould molest them, or carry on
any quarrel or hostility against them, during their
absence, on account of the holy war. Du Cange,
Ib. Guibertus Abbas ap. Bongarf. i. p. 480,
482.-6. They enjoyed all the privileges of ec-
clefiafticks, and were not bound to plead in any
civil court, but were declared subjet to the fpi-
ritual jurifdic&ion alone. Du Cange, lb. Ordon.
des Rois, tom. i. p. 34. 174.-7. They obtained
a plenary remifilon of all their fins, and the gates
of heaven were set open to them, without requi-
ring any proof of their penitence, but their enga-
ging in this expedition, and thus gratifying their
favourite paTlion, the love of war. Guibert, Ab-
bas, p. 480. When we behold the civil and ecc
clefiattical powers vying with each other, and
!training their invention in order to devise expe-
dients for encouraging and adding strength to the
ipirit of superstition, can we be furprized that it
should become so general as to render it infa-
mous, and a mark of cowardice to decline enga-
ging in the holy war? Willierm Tyrienfis ap.
Bongarf. vol. ii. p. 64r. The histories of the

Crusades,

Crusades, written by modern authors, who are
apt to fubfticute the ideas and maxims of their
own age in the place of those which influenced the
persons whose actions they attempt to relate, con.
vey a very imperfec notion of the spirit at that
time predominant in Europe. The original his-
torians, who were animated themselves with the
famne paflrons which possessed their contempora-
ries, exhibit to us a more striking picture of the
times and manners which they describe. The en-
thufiaftic rapture with which they account for the
effecs of the pope's discourse in the council of
Cle.rmont; the.exultation with which they men-
tion the numbers who devoted themselves to .this
holy warfare} the confidence with which they rely
on the divine protetion; the extacy of joy with
which they describe their taking pofleflion of the
holy city, will enable us to conceive, in some de-
gree, the extravagance of that zeal which agitated
the minds of men with such violence, and will
suggest as many singular relections to a philofo-
pher, as any occurrence in the history of man-
kind. It is tilnecelrary to seleCt the particular
passages in the several historians, which confirm
this observation. But left there authors may be
fufpe&ed of adorning their narrative with any ex-
aggerated description, I Ihall appeal to one of the
leaders who conducted the enterprize. There is
extant a letter from Stephen, the earl of Chartres
and Blois, to Adela his wife, in which he gives
her an account of the progress of the Crusaders.
He describes lhe Crusaders as the chosen army of

VOL. 1, U Chrit,

Christ, as the servants and soldiers of God, as
men who marched under the immediate protec-
tion of the Almighty, being condu&ed by his
hand to vicory and conquest. He speaks of the
Turks as accursed, sacrilegious, and devoted by
Heaven to deftrution; and when he mentions
the soldiers in the Christian army, who had died,
or were killed, he is confident that their fouls
were admitted direcly into the joys of Paradise.
Dacherii Spicelegium, vol. iv. p. 257.

THE expence of condu&ing numerous bodies of
men from Europe to Asia, must have been excef-
five, and the difficulty of raising the necessary
fums muff have been proportionally great, during
ages when the public revenues in every nation of
Europe were extremely small. Some account is
preserved of the expedients employed by Hum-
bert II. Dauphin of Vienne, in order to levy the
money requisite towards equipping him for the
Crusade, A. D. ? 6. Thete I ifhall mention, as
they tend to shew the considerable influence which
the Crusades had, both on the state of property,
and of civil government. i. He exposed to Wale
part of his domains; and as the price was defined
for such a sacred service, he obtained the consent
of the French king, of whom there lands were
held, ratifying the alienation. lill. de Dauphinc,
tom. i. p. 332. 335.-2. He aifued a proclamation,
in which he promised to grant new privileges to
the nobles, as well as new immunities to the cities
and towns, in his territories, in confidcration of

certain

rcrrain fitms which they were instantly to pay on
t!rat account. Ibid. tom. ii. p. 5 1 2. Many of the
charters of community, which I ihall mention in
another Note, were obtained in this manner.-
3. He exaated a contribution towards defraying
ti:e charges of the expedition from all his fubjeds,
v ihether ecclesiastics or laymen, who did not ac-
company him in person to the East. Ibid. tom. i.
p. .35--4. He appropriated a considerable part
of his usual revenues for the support of the troops
to be employed in this service. Ibid. tom. ii. p.
518.-5. He exated considerable fiuns not only
of the Jews fettled in his dominions, but also of
the Lumbards and other bankers who had fixed
their residence there. Ibid. tom. i. p. 338. tom. ii.
528. Notwithstanding the variety of there refour-
ces, the dauphin was involved in such expence by
this expedition, that on his return he was obliged
to make new demands on his tfibjeEts, and to pil-
lage the Jews by frefl cxactions. Ibid. torn. i. p.
344. 347. When the count dc Foix engaged in
the filrf Crusade, he raised the money necelffhry for
defraying the expences of that expedition, by
alienating part of his territories. HIill. de Lan-
gued. par D. D. de Vic & Vaifetce, torn. ii. p.
287. In like manner, Baldwin, count of Hai-
naut, mortgaged or fold part of his dominions to
the biffop of Liege, A. D. 1096. Du Mont
Corps Diplomatiqte, tom. i. p. 59. At a later
period, Baildwin, count of Namur, fold part of
his estate to a monallery, when he intended to as-
fume the cross, A. 1). 1239. Mirei Oper. i. 313.

U % NOTE

NOTE XIV. SECT. I. P. 34. [0.
THE usual method of forming an opinion con-

cerning the comparative itate of manners in two
different nations, is by attending to the factb
which historians relate concerning each of them.
Various paflages might be felcted from the By-
zalntin historians, describing the splendour and
magnificence of the Greek empire. P. de Mont-
faucon has produced from the writings of St.
Chrysostom a very full account of the elegance
and luxury of the Greeks in his age. That father
in his sermons enters into such details concerning
the manners and customs of his contemporaries,
as appear strange in discourses from the pulpit.
P. de Montfaucon has collected there descriptions,
and ranged them under different heads. The
court of the more early Greek emperors seems to
have resembled those of Eastern monarchs, both
in magnificence and in corruption of manners.
The emperors in the eleventh century, though in-
ferior in power, did not yield to them in oftenta-
tion and splendour. Memoires de l'Acad. des In-
script. tom. xx. p. 197.-- But we may decide
concerning the comparative slate of manners in
the Eastern empire, and among the nations in
the weft of Europe, by another method, which, if
not more certain, is at lead more gtriking. As
Constantinople was the place of rendezvous for
all the armies of the Crusaders, this brought to.
gether the people of the east and weft as to one
great interview. There are extant several con.

temporar!

temporary authors both among the Greeks and
Latins, who were witnefes of this singular con-
grefs of people, formerly strangers, in a great
measure, to each other. They describe, with fim-
plicity and candour, the impreflion which that
new fpedacle made upon their own minds. This
may be confidered as the molt lively and julf pic-
ture of the real charater and manners of each
people. When the Greeks fpeal of the Franks,
they describe them as barbarians, fierce, illite-
rate, impetuous, and savage. They afrume a
tone of superiority, as a more polished people,
acquainted with the arts both of government and
of elegance, of which the other was ignorant.
It is thus Anna Comnena describes the manners
of the Latins, Alexias, p. 224. 231. 237. ap.
Byz. Script. vol. xi. She always treats them
with contempt as a rude people, the very men-
tion of whose names was sufficient to contami-
nate the beauty and elegance of history, p. 229.
Nicetas Choniatas inveighs against them with still
more violence, and gives an account of their fe-
rocity and devafiations, in terms not unlike those
which preceding hiltorians had employed in de-
scribing the incursions of the Goths and Vandals.
Nicet. Chon. ap. Byz. Script. vol. iii. p. 3o0,
&c. But, on the other hand, the Latin his-
toriains were struck with aflonifllment at the mag-
nificence, wealth, and elegance which they dif-
covered in the Ealtern empire. " 0 what a vafl
city is Conflantinople (exclaims Fulcherius Car.
notcnfis, when he firlt beheld its, and how beau.

U tifuill

tiful! How many monasteries are there inl it,
and how many palaces built with wonderful art!
How many manufactures are there in the city
amazing to behold! It would be aftonilhing to
relate how it abounds with all good things, Wvit!1
gold, silver, and stuffs of various kinds; fr
every hour ships arrive in its port laden with .il
things necessary for the use of man." Fui.; 'r.
ap. Bongarf. vol. i. p. 386. Willermus arc!ii-
shop of Tyre, the molt intelligent hiiltoria of
the Crusades, takes frequent occasion to dcfcribe
the elegance and fplcndour of the court of Con-
Itantinople, and adds, that what they obl:rvcd
there exceeded any idea which they could lhve
formed of it, noitrarum enim rerurn modu!n &
dignitatem excedunt, Willerm. Tyr. ap. Bong.
vol. ii. p. 657. 664. Benjamin the Jew, of
Tudela in Navarre, who began his travels A. I).
1173, appears to have been equally afloniihlcd
at the magnificence of that city, and gives a cic-
scription of its splendour, in terms of high ad-
miration. Benj. Tudel. chez les Voyages faits
en 12, 13, &c. siecles par Bergeron, p. io, &c.
Guntherus, a French monk, who wrote a hillory
of the conquest of Constantinople by the Cru-
fiaders in the thirteenth century, speak;s of the
magnificence of that city in the iame tone of a.d-
miration, "S Struituran autern eadificiorum in
corpore civitatis, in ccclefiis videlicet, & turri.
bus, & in domibus inagnatorum, vix ullus vcl
defcribere potelt, vel credere del':ribenti, nili qu;
ea oculata tide cognoverit." Hilt. Con(ltlinui'

ap. Canifii Lectiones Antiquas, fol. Antw. 1725.
vol. iv. p. 14. Geoffrey de Villehardouin, a no-
bleman of high rank, and accustomed to all the
magnificence then known in the weft, describes,
in similar terms, the aftonilhment and admiration
of such of his fellow-foldiers who beheld Con-
slantinople for the first time: " They could not
have believed, fays he, that there was a city so
beautiful and rich in the whole world. When
they viewed its high walls, its lofty towers, its
rich palaces, its superb churches, all appeared
so great, that they could have formed no concep-
tion of this sovereign city, unless they had seen it
with their own eyes." Hiftoire de la Conquete
de Constant. p. 49. From these undisguised re-
presentations of their own feelings, it is evident,
that to the Greeks, the Latins appeared to be a
race of rude, unpolifhed barbarians; whereas the
latter, how much soever they might contemn the
unwarlike chara&er of the former, could not
help regarding them as far superior to themselves
in elegance and arts.-That the slate of govern-
ment and manners was much more improved in
Italy than in the other countries of Europe, is
evident not only from the facts recorded in his-
tory, but it appears that the more intelligent
leaders of the Crusaders were firuck with the
difference. Jacobus de Vitriaco, a French his-
torian of the holy war, makes an elaborate pane-
gyric on the character and manners of the Ira-
lians. He views them as a more polifled peo-
ple, and particularly celebrates them for their

U 4 love

love of liberty, and civil wifdor; " in confiliis
circumfpe&i, in re fua publics procuranda di-
ligentes & ftudiorf; fibi in polterum providen-
tes; aliis fubjici renuentes; ante omnia liber-
tatem fibi defendentes; sub uno quem eligunt
capitaneo, communitati fua jura & inftituta
disantes & fimiliter observantes." Hiftor. Hie-
robfl. ap. Gefta Dei per Francos, vol. ii. p.
1085.

N 0 T E XV. SECT. I. p. 38. [P].

THE different steps taken by the cities of Italy

in order to extend their power and dominions are
remarkable. As loon as their liberties were efta-
bliihed, and they began to feel their own im-
portance, they endeavoured to render themselves
maflers of the territory round their walls. Under
the Romans, when cities enjoyed municipal pri-
vileges and jurifdi&ion, the circumjacent lands
belonged to each town, and were the property of
the community. But as it was not the genius of
the feudal policy to encourage cities, or to shew
any regard for their poffelfions and immunities,
thele lands had been seized, and lhared among
the conquerors. The barons to whom they were
granted, ereEted their castles almost at the gates
of the city, ant exercised their jurifdi&ion there.
Under pretence of recovering their ancient pro-
perty, many of the cities in Italy attacked these
troublerome neighbours, and difpoffefling them,
annexed their territories to the communities, and

made

made thereby a considerable addition to their
power. Several instances of this occur in the
eleventh, and beginning of the twelfth centuries.
Murat. antiq. Ital. vol. iv. p. 159, &c. Their
ambition increasing together with their power, the
cities afterwards attacked several barons situated
at a greater diflance from them, and obliged these
to engage that they should become members of
their community; that they should take the oath
of fidelity to their magistrates; that they should
lubje&t their lands to all burdens and taxes im-
posed by common content; that they should de-
fend the community against all its enemies; and
that they ihould reside within the city during a
certain specified time in each year. Murat. ibid.
163. This fubje&tion of the nobility to the muni-
cipal government established in cities, became
almost universal, and was often extremely grievous
to persons accustomed to confider themselves as
independent. Otto Frifingenfis thus describes the
Rate of Italy under Frederick I. " The cities so
much asset liberty, and are so solicitous to avoid
the insolence of power, that almost all of them
have thrown off every other authority, and are
governed by their own magistrates. Insomuch
that all that country is now filled with free cities,
each of which have compelled their bishops to
reside within their walls, and there is scarcely any
nobleman, how great soever his power may be,
who is not fitbje& to the laws and government
of omne city. De Gefris Frider. I. Imp. lib. ii.
c. 13. p. 453. In another place he observes of

6 the

the Marquis of Montf'-rrat, that he was almost
the only Italian baron who had prelerved his in-
dependence, and had not become subject to the
laws of any city. See also Muratori Antichita
ELtenfi, vol. i. p. 411, 412. 'lhat Ltte, into
which some of the nobles were compelled to enter,
others embraced from choice. They observed the
high degree of security, as well as of credit and
c:timation,which the growing wealth and diminion
of the great communities procured to all the
members of them. They were desirous to partake
of there, and to put themfclves under such power-
ful protection. With this view they voluntarily
became citizens of the towns to which their lands
were molt contiguous; and, abandoning their an-
cient castles, took up their residence in the cities
at least during part of the year. Several deeds
are still extant, by which bome of the most illul-
trious families in Italy are associated as citizens of
different cities. Murat. ib. p. i65, &c. A charter,
by which Atto de Macerata is admitted as a
citizen of Ofimo, A. D. 1198, in the Marcha di
Ancona, is still extant. In this he stipulates, that
he will acknowledge hirfelf to be a burgers of
that community; that he will to the utmost of
his power promote its honour and welfare that
he will obey its magistrates; that he will enter
into no league with its enemies; that he will reside
in the town during two months in every year, or
fur a longer time, if required by the magifrates.
The comllmuinit,, on the other hand, take him, his
s;Lily, a:d friends, under theicir protection, and

enlgage

engage to defend him against every enemy. Fr.
Ant. Zacharias Anecdota medii avi. Aug. Taur.
1755. fol. p. 66. 'Ihis privilege was deemed so
important, that not only laymen, but ecclesiastics
of the highcft rank, condescended to be adopted
as members of the great communities, in hopes
of enjoying the safety and dignity which that con-
ferred. Murat. ib. 179. Before the institution
of communities, persons of noble birth had no
other refidcnce but their catles. They kept their
petty courts there; and the cities were delerted,
having hardly any inhabitants but slaves or persons
of low condition. But in consequence of the
practice which I have mentioned, cities not only
became more populous, but were filled with in-
habitants of better rank, and a cuftor which fiill
fubfilts in Italy was then introduced, that all
families of diftin&tion reside more constantly in
the great towns, than is usual in other parts of
Europe. As cities acquired new consideration and
dignity by the accession of such citizens, they
became more Solicitous to preserve their liberty
and independence. The emperors, as sovereigns,
had anciently a palace in almost every great city
of Italv; when they visited that country they
v. ci e acc:uioined to reside in there, and the troops
which accompanied them .were quartered in the
houtes of the citizens. This the citizens deemed
both ignominious and dangerous. They could
not help confidering it as receiving a master and
an enemy within their walls. They laboured there.
fire to get free of this fubjetion. Some cities

prevailed

prevailed on the emperors to engage that they
would never enter their gates, but take up their
residence without the walls: Chart. Hen. IV.
Murat. ib. p. 2 . Others obtained the Imperial
licence to pull down the palace situated within
their liberties, on condition that they built another
in the suburbs for the reception of the emperor.
Chart. Hen. IV. Murat. ib. p. 25. These various
encroachments of the Italian cities alarmed the
emperors, and put them on schemes for re-efta-
blilhing the Imperial jurilidiaion over them on its
ancient footing. Frederick Barbarossa engaged in
this enterprize with great ardour. The free cities
of Italy joined together in a general league, and
flood on their defence; and after a long contest,
carried on with alternate success, a solemn treaty
of peace was concluded at Constance, A. D. I i83,
by which all the privileges and immunities grant-
ed by former emperors to the principal cities in
Italy were confirmed and ratified. Murat. dissert.
XLVI!I. This treaty of Constance was confi-
dered as such an important article in the jurif-
prudence of the middle ages, that it is usually
publilhed together with the Libri Feudorum at
the end of the Corpus Juris Civilis. The treaty
secured privileges of great importance to the con-
federate cities, and though it reserved a confider-
able degree of authority and jurifdition to the
empire, yet the cities persevered with such vigour
in their efforts in order to extend their immunities,
and the conjuntures in which they made them
were so favourable, that, before the conclusion

of

of the thirteenth century, molf of the great cities
in Italy had shaken off all marks of fubjetion to
the empire, and were become independent fore-
reign republics. It is not requisite that I Ihould
trace the various teps by which they advanced to
this high degree of power so fatal to the empire,
and so beneficial to the cause of liberty in Italy.
Muratori, with his usual industry, has collected
many original papers which illustrate this curious
and little known part of history. Murat. Antiq.
Ital. Dissert. L. See also Jo. Bapt. Villanova hist.
Laudis Pompeii five Lodi in Grav. Thef. Anti-
quit. Ital. vol. iii. p. 888.

N O T E XVI. SECT. I. p. 40. [Q].

LONG before the intitution of communities in

France, charters of immunity or franchise were
granted to some towns and villages by the lords
on whom they depended. But there are very dif-
ferent from such as became common in the twelfth
and thirteenth centuries. They did not ere& there
towns into corporations ; they did not ettablifh a
municipal government; they did not grant them
the privilege of bearing arms. They contained
nothing more than a manumission of the inha.
bitants from the yoke of servitude; an exemption
from certain services which were oppressive and
ignominious; and the establishment of a fixed
tax or rent which they were to pay to their lord
in place of impositions which he could formerly
lay upon them at pleasure. Two charters of this

kind

kind to two villages in the county of Roufillon,
one A. D. 974, the other A. D. o125, are still
extant. Petr. de Marca Marca, five limes His-
panicus,App. p. 9go. o138. Such concessions, it
is probable, were not unknown in other parts of
Europe, and may be confidered as a itep towards
the more extensive privileges conferred by Louis
the Gross on the towns within his domains. The
communities in France never aspired to the fame
independence with those in Italy. They acquired
new privileges and immunities, but the right of
sovereignty remained entire to the king or baron
within whose territories the refpeaive cities were
situated, and from whom they receive the charter
of their freedom. A great number of these char-
ters, granted both by the kings of France, and by
their great vairals, are publifsed by M. D'Achery
in his Spicelegium, and many are found in the
colle&tion of the Ordonnances des Rois de France.
These convey a very friking representation of the
wretched condition of cities previous to the infti-
tution of communities, when they were subjeA to
the judges appointed by the superior lords of
whom they held, and had scarcely any other law
but their will. Each concefllon in thele charters
must be confidered as a grant of some new pri-
vilege which the people did not formerly enjoy,
and each regulation as a method of redrefing some
grievance under which they formerly laboured.
The charters of communities contain likewise the
first expedients employed for the introduction of

equal

equal laws, and regular government. On both
these accounts they merit particular attention, and
therefore, instead of referring my readers to the
many bulky volumes in which they are scattered,
I lhall give them a view of rome of the most im-
portant articles in these charters, ranged under two
general heads. I. Such as refpe& personal safety.
II. Such as refpet the security of property.

I. DURING that state of turbulence and difg

order which the corruption of the feudal govern-
ment introduced into Europe, personal safety was
the chief obje&t of every individual; and as the
great military barons alone were able to give
sufficient protetion to their vassals, this was one
great source of their power and authority. But,
by the institution of communities, effelual pro-
vision was made for the safety of individuals, inde-
pendent of the nobles. For, i. the fundamental
article in every charter was, that all the members
of it bound themselves by oath to affif, defend,
and stand by each other against all aggressors, and
that they should not fiffer any perfbn to injure,
diltrefs, or molest, any of their fellow-citizens.
D'Acher. Spicel. x. 642. xi. 341, &c.-2. Who-
ever resided in any town, which was made free,
was obliged, under a revere penalty, to accede to
the community, and to take part in the mutual
defence of its members. D'Acher. Spic. xi. 344.
-3. The communities had the privilege of car-
rying arms; of making war on their private'enc-

7 mies;

nmies; and of executing by military force any
sentence which their magistrates pronounced.
D'Ach. Spicel. x. 643, 644. xi. 343.-4. The
practice of making fatisfa&ion by a pecuniary
compeniation for murders assault, or other a&s of
violence, most inconsistent with the order of fb-
ciety, and the safety of individuals, was abolished;
and such as committed these crimes were punilhed
capitally, or with rigour adequate to their guilt.
D'Ach. xi. 362. Mirai opera Diplomatica, i. 292.
-.S No member of a community was bound to
justiFy or defend himself by battle, or combat;
but, if he was charged with any crime, he could
be convicted only by the evidence of witnefles,
and the regular course of legal proceedings. Mi-
rtus, ibid. D'Ach. xi. 375. 349. Ordon. torn iii.
265.-6. If any man fufpeetd himself to be in
danger from the malice or enmity of another,
upon his making oath to that effee before a ma-
giftrate, the person suspeCted was bound under a
severe penalty to give security for his peaceable
behaviour. D'Ach. xi. 346. This is the fame
species of security which is still known in Scotland
under the name of Lawburrows. In France, it was
first introduced among the inhabitants of commu-
nities, and having been found to contribute con-
fiderably towards personal safety, it was extended
to all the other members of the society. Ela-
bliffemens de St. Louis, liv. i. cap. 28. ap. Du
Cange V ie de St. Louis, p. 5.

II. TIIE

II. The provisions in the charters of commu-

nities concerning the security of property, are not
leis considerable than those refpe&ing personal
lafcry. By the ancient law of France, no person
could be arrested or confined in prison on account
of any private debt. Ordon. des Rois de France,
tom. i. p. 72. 80. If any person was arrelted up-
on any pretext, but his having been guilty of a
capital crime, it was lawful to rescue him out of
the hands of the officers who had seized him.
Ordon. iii. p. 17. Freedom from arrest, on account
of debt, ifems likewise to have been enjoyed in
other countries. Gudenus Sylloge Diplom. 473.
In society, while it remained in its rudest and molt
finple form, debt seems to have been confidered
as an obligation merely personal. Men had made
some progress towards refinement, before creditors
acquired a right of seizing the property of their
debtors in order to recover payment. The expedi-
ents for this purpose were all introduced originally
in communities, and we can trace the gradual pro-
grefs of them. I. The simplest and molt obvious
ipecies of security was, that the person who fold
any commodity Ihould receive a pledge from him
who bought it, which he restored upon receiving
payment. Of this cultom there are vestiges in
several charters of community. D'Ach. ix. 185.
xi. 377.-2. When no pledge was given, and the
debtor became refraEtory or insolvent, the creditor
was allowed to seize his effets with a strong hand,
and by his private authority; the citizens of Paris
are warranted by the royal mandate," ut ubicum-

VOL. I. X que,

que, et quocumque modo poterunt, tantum capi-
ant, unde pecuniam fibi debitam integrc & plenari-
habeant, & inde fibi invicem adjutores exiftant."
Ordon. &c. toni. i. p. 6. This rude practice,
suitable only to the violence of a state of nature,
was tolerated longer than one can conceive to be
possible in any society where laws and order were
at all known. The ordonance authorizing it was
iflued, A. D. 1134 and that which correats the
law, and prohibits creditors from feizingtheefifEts
of their debtors, unless by a warrant from amagif-
trate, and under his infpe&ion, was not publiffied
until the year 1351. Ordon. tom. ii. p. 438. It is
probable, however, that men were taught, by ob-
lerving the disorders which the former mode of
proceeding occasioned, to correc it in pratice long
before a remedy was provided by a law to that
effec. Every discerning reader will apply this ob-
lervation to many other customs and pratices
which I have mentioned. New customs are not
always to be ascribed to the laws which authorize
them. These statutes only give a legal fan&ion to
luch things as the experience of mankind has pre-
vioufy found to be proper and beneficial.-3. As
loon as the interposition of the magistrate became
requisite, regular provision was made for attaching
or distraining the moveable effets of a debtor;
and if his moveables were not fufFcient to discharge
the debt, his immoveable property, or estate in
land, was liable to the fame distress, and was fold
for the benefit of his creditor. D'Ach. ix. p. 1 84

1 .5,

185. xi. p. 348. 380. As this regulation afforded
the molt complete security to the creditor, it was
confidered as so severe, that humanity pointed out
lIveral limitations in the execution of it. Credi-
tors were prohibited from seizing the wearing ap-
parel of their debtors, their beds, the door of their
house, their in (ruments ofhusbandry, &c. D'Ach.
ix. 184. xi. 377. Upon the fame principles, when
the power of distraining effeEts became more gene-
ral, the horse and arms of a gentleman could not
be seized. D'Ach. ix. x85. As huntingwas the
favourite amusement of martial nobles, the Empe-
ror Lodovicus Pius prohibiting the seizing of a
hawk on account of any composition or debt.
Capitul. lib. iv. § 21. But if the debtor had no
other moveables, even these privileged articles
might be seized.- 4. In order to render the security
of property complete within a community, every
person who was admitted a member of it, was
obliged to buy or build a house, or to purchase
lands within its precincts, or at lealf to bring into
the town a considerable portion of his moveables,
per qua jufliciari poSit, ft quid forte in eum qucrela
evenerit. D'Ach. xi. 326. Ordon. i. 367. Liber-
tates S. GeorgiideEfperanchia. Hist. de Dauphine,
tom. i. p. 26.-5. That security might be as per-
feet as poflible, in rome towns, the members of
the community seem to have been bound for each
other. D'Ach. x. 644.-6. All questions with re-
spect to property were tried within the commu-
nity, by magistrates and judges which the citi-
zens elected or appointed. Their decisions were

X 2 more

more equal and fixed than the sentences which de-
pended on the capricious and arbitrary will of a
baron, who thought himself superior to all laws.
D'Ach. x. 644. 646. xi. 344. & paflln. Ordon. iii.
204.-7. No member of a community could be
burdened by any arbitrary tax; for the superior
lord, who granted tie charter of community, ac-
cepted of a fixed census or duty in lieu of all de-
mands. Ordon. t. iii. 204. Libertates de Calma.
Hill. de Dauphine, tom. i. p. 19. Libert. St.
Georgii de Efperanchia, ibid. p. 26. Nor could
the members of a community be distressed by an
unequal imposition of the fur to be levied on the
community. Regulations are inserted in the char-
ters of some communities, concerning the method
of determining the quota of any tax to be levied
on each inhabitant. D'Ach. xi. 350. 365. St.
Louispubliffed an ordonance concerning this mat-
ter which extended to all the communities. Ordon.
t. i. i86. These regulations are extremely favour-
able to liberty, as they veil the power of propor-
tioning the taxes in a certain number of citizens
chosen out of each parish, who were bound by so-
lemn oath to decide according to juftice.-That
the more perfec security of property was one great
object of those who instituted communities, we
learn, not only from the nature of the thing, but
from the exprefswords of several charters, of whiclh
I fhallonly mention that granted by Alienor Queen
of England and Duchess of Guienne, to the com-
munity of Poitiers," ut fua propria melius defe:.-
derepofrintt, &i agis integr; cuftodire." Du Cange

vocO

voc. com'n;nia, v. ii. p. 863.-Such are some of the
capital regulations eftablilhed in communities du-
ring the twelfth and thirteenth centuries.Thefemay
be cnfidered as thefirftrudimnentsof law and order,
and contributed greatly to introduce regular go-
vcrnment among all the members of society. As
lbon as communities were instituted, high senti-
nents of liberty began to appear. When Hurl-
bert, lord of Beaujeu, upon granting a charter of
community to the town of Belleville, exateld of
the inhabitants an oath of fidelity to himfclfand
successors, they stipulated, on their part, that he
should swear to maintain their franchises and liber-
ties; and, for their greater security, they obliged
him to bring twenty gentlemen to take the fame
oath, and to be bound together with him. D'Ach.
ix. 183. In the fame manner the lord of Moriens
in Dauphine produced a certain number ofperfons
as his sureties for the observation of the articles
contained in the charter of community to that
town. These were bound to surrender themselves
prisoners to the inhabitants of Moirens, if their
liege lord flould violate any of their fianchitifs,
and they promiltd to remain in cuflody until he
hiould grant them redress. Hil. de Dauphine,
torn. i. p. 17. If the mayor or chieiimagiflrate of
a town did any injury to a citizen, he was obliged
to give security for his appearance in judgment,
in the fame manner as a private person ; and
if cast, was liable to the fame penalty. D'Ach.
ix. 183. These are ideas of equality uncommon
in the feudal times. Communities were so favour-

X 3 able

able to freedom, that they were diltinguinled by
the name of Libcrtates. Du Cange, v. ii. p. 863.
They were at firif extremely odious to the nobles,
who foresaw what a check they must prove to their
power and domination. Guibert Abbot of Nogcnt
calls them execrable inventions, by which, con-
trary to law and justice, fiaves withdrew them-
selves from thatobedience which they owed to their
nmalers. Du Cange, ib. 862. The zeal with which
Tome of the nobles and powerful ecclefiafticks op-
poled theeftabliflhmentof communities, and endca.
voured to circumscribe their privileges, was extra-
ordinary. A ifriking instance of this occurs in
the contests between the archbishop of Reims and
the inhabitants of that community. It was the
chief bufinels of every archbishop, during a con-
fiderable time, to abridge the rights andjurifdiaion
of the community; and the great object of the ci-
tizens, especially when the fee was vacant, to main-
tain, to recover, and to extend their own jurifdic-
tion. Hiftoire civile & politique de la ville de
Reims, par M. Anquetil, tom. i. p. 287, &c.

THE observations which I have made concern-

ing the state of cities, and the condition of their
inhabitants, are confirmed by innumerable passages
in the hitlorians and laws of the middle ages. It
is not improbable, however, that some cities of the
firll: order were in a better Itate, and enjoyed a fil-
perior degree of liberty. Under the Roman go-
vernment, the municipal government eftabliflieli
in cities was 'xtrecely favourable to liberty. The

jurifdi&ioii

jl;ifitiAion of the senate in each corporation, and
the privileges of the citizens, were both extensive.
There is realon to believe, that some of the greater
cities which eicaped the defcruaive rage of the
barbarous nations, ltill retained their ancient tform
of government, at lealr in a Treat measure. They
were governed by a council of citizens, and by
lnmgiltrates whom they themflves elected. Very
itrcng prelumptions in favour o' this opinion are
produced by M. 1'AbbC De Bos. i !il. Crit. de la
Mon. Franc. tom. i. p. i8, &c. turn. ii. p. 524.
edit. 1742. It appears from ftoni us the charters
of coLmunity to cities, granted in tlhe twlfth and
thirteenth centuries, that thele only conirm the
privileges poffeflid by the inhabitants previous to
the eftablilhment of the community. D'Acher.
Spicileg. vol. xi. p. 345. Other cities claimed
their privileges, as having possesscd them without
interruption from the times of the Romans. I-ilt.
Crit. de la Mon. Franc. tom. ii. p. 333. But the
number of cities which enjoyed fich immunities
was lo fimall, as in no degree to diiniiilh the force
of my conclusions in the text.

NOTE XVII. SECT. I. p. 40. [-1].

HAVING given a full account of the cltabliil-

ment as well as effei.s of communities in Italy and
France, it will be neceliary to inquire with some
attention into the progress of cities and of mnuni-
cipal government in Germany. The ancient Ger-
mans had no cities. Even in their hamlets or vil-

X 4 lagcs

lages they did not build their houses contiguous to
each other. Tac. de Mor. Germ. cap. 16. They
confidered it as a badge of servitude to be obliged
to dwell in a city surrounded with walls. When
one of their tribes had shaken off the Roman
yoke, their countrymen required of them, as an
evidence of their having recovered liberty, to de-
nolilh the walls of a town which the Romans had
built in their country. Even the fiercest animals,
laid they, lose their spirit and courage when they
are confined. Tac. Hiftor. lib. iv. c. 64. The Ro-
mans built several cities of note on the banks of
the Rhine. But in all the vast countries from that
river to the coasts of the Baltick, there was hardly
onecity previous to the ninth century of the Christ-
ian era. Conringius Exercitatio de Urbibus Ger-
mania, Oper. vol. i. § 25,27,31, &c. Heineccius
differs from Conringius with respect to this. But
even, after allowing to his arguments and autho-
rities their utmost force, they prove only, that there
were a few places in those extensive regions on
which some historians have bestowed the name of
towns. Elem. Jur. German. lib. i. § 102. Under
Charlemagne, and the Emperors of his family, as
the political state of Germany began to improve,
several cities were founded, and men became ac-
cuttomed to associate and to live together in one
place. Charlemagne founded two archbifliopricks
and nine bifhopricks in the most considerable
towns of Germany. Aub. Miraei Opera Diploma-
tica, vol. i. p. 16. His successors increased the
number of these; and as biflops fixed their refi-

dence

dence in these cities, and performed religious func-
tions there, that induced many people to fettle in
them. Conring. ibid. § 48. But Henry, firnamed
the Fowler, who began his reign A. D. 920, must
be confidered as the great founder of cities in Ger-
many. The Empire was at that time infested by
the incursions of the Hungarians and other bar-
barous people. In order to oppose them, Henry
encouraged his fubjets to fettle in cities which he
surrounded with walls and towers. He enjoined
or persuaded a certain proportion of the nobility
to fix their residence in the towns, and thus ren-
dered the condition of citizens more honourable
than it had been formerly. Wittikindus Annal.
lib. i. ap. Conring. § 8z. From this period the
number of cities continued to increaie, and they
became more populous and more wealthy. But
cities were still deRlitute of municipal liberty or
jurifdi&ion. Such of them as were situated in the
Imperial demesnes, were fubje& to the Emperors.
Their Comites, MiDi, and other judges presided in
them, and dispensed jullice. Towns lituated on
the estate of a baron, were part of his fief, and he
or his officers exercised a similar jurifdi'tion in
them. Conring. ibid. § 73, 74. Heinec. licm.
Jur. Germ. lib. i. § 104. Tie Germans borrowcd
the inltitution of communities from the Italians.
Knipfchildius Tratatus Politico-Hiftor. Jurid. de
Civitatum Imperialium Juribus, vol. i. lib. i. cap.
5. No. 23. Frederick Barbarola was the firfl
Emperor who, from the fame political confidera-

tion

tion that influenced Lewis the Gross, multiplied
communities in order to abridge the power of the
nobles. Pfeffel Abrege de l'Hiftoire & du Droic
Publique d'Allemagne, 4to. p. 297. From the
reign of Henry the Fowler, to the time when the
German cities acquired full poffeflion of their im-
munities, various circumfrances contributed to
their increase. The etfablifhmenr of biliopricl:s
(already mentioned) and the buildingof cactherali,
naturally induced many people to fettle there. it
became the custom to hold councils and courts ot
iudicature of every kind, ecclcfiaftical as well ;s
civil, in cities. In the eleventh century, many
haves were enfranchised, the greater part of whiei
fettled in cities. Several mines were dilcoverel
and wrought in different provinces, which drew
together such a concourse of people, as gave rife to
several cities. Conring. § 1o5. The cities began
in the thirteenth century to form leagues for their
mutual defence, and for repressing the disorders
occasioned by the private wars among the barons,
as well as by their exa&ions. This rendered the
condition of the inhabitants of cities more secure
than that of any order of men, and allured many
to become members of their communities. Con-
ring. § 94. There were inhabitants of three dif-
ferent ranks in the towns of Germany. The no-
,W bles, or familia: the citizens, or liberi; and the

arrifans, who were slaves, or homines proprii.
Knipiclhild. lib. ii. cap. 29. No. 13. Henry V.
who began his reign A. D. 1o6, enfranchised the
slaves who were artisans or inhabitants in several

6 towlns

towns, and gave them the rank of citizens or li-
beri. Pfeffel, p. 254. Knipfch. lib. ii. c. 29.
No. I I3. 19. Though the cities in Germany did
not acquire liberty so early as those in France,
they extended their privileges much farther. All
the Imperial and free cities, the number of which
is conliderable, acquired the full right of being
immediate; by which term, in the German jurif-
prudence, we are to underltand, that they are
iubjeft to the Empire alone, and poflefs within
their own precincts all the rights of complete and
independent sovereignty. The various privileges
of the Imperial cities, the great guardians of the
Germanic liberties, are enumerated by Knipfchild,
lib. ii. The motl important articles are generally
known, and it would be improper to enter into any
dilquifition concerning minute particulars.

NOTE XVIII. SECT. I. p. 40. [S].
TrH Spanish hiflorians are almost entirely silent

concerning the origin and progress of communities
in that kingdom; lb that I cannot fix, with any
degree of certainty, the time and manner of their
firIt introduction there. It appears, however,
fron Mariana, vol. ii. p. 221. fol. Hag;e, 1736,
that in the year 135o, eighteen cities had obtained
a feat in the Cortes of Caitile. From the account,
which fllall be given of their constitution and
pretensions, Sed. III. of this volume, it is evident
that their privileges and form of government were
the fame with those of the other feudal corpora-
tions; and this, as well as the perfect similarity

of

of political infticutions and tranfacions in all the
feudal kingdoms, may lead us to conclude, that
communities were introduced there in the fame
manner, and probably about the fame time, as
in the other nations of Europe. In Aragon, as I
shall have occasion to observe in a subsequent
gote, cities seem early to have acquired extensive
immunities, together with a share in the legifla-
ture. In the year x11 8, the citizens of Saragossa
had not only attained political liberty, but they
were declared to be of equal rank with the nol!cs
of the second class; and Inany other immuniti:,,
unknown to persons in their rank of life in o-her
parts of Europe, were conferred upon them.
Zurita Annales de Aragon, tom. i. p. 44. In
England, the eftablithment of communities or
corporations was polterior to the Conquest. The
pratice was borrowed from France, and the pri-
vileges granted by the crown were perfectly similar
to those which I have enumerated. But as this
part of history is well known to most of my read-
ers, I fliall, without entering into any critical or
minute discussion, refer them to authors who have
fully illustrated this interesting point in the Eng-
·i(h hiflory. Brady's Treatie of Boroughs. Madox
Firma Burgi, cap. i. set. ix. Hume's History
of England, vol. i. append. i. and ii. It is not
improbable that rome of the towns in England
were formed into corporations under the Saxon
Kings, and that the charters granted by the Kings
of the Norman race were not charters of enfran-
clifement from a state of slavery, but a confirna-

tio 1

tion of privileges which they already enjoyed. See
Lord Lyttelton's History of Henry 1I. vol. ii.
p. 317. The Englith cities, however, were very
inconsiderable in the twelfth century. A clear
proof of this occurs in the history to which I last
referred. Fitzflephen, a contemporary author,
gives a description of the city of London in the
reign of Henry II. and the terms in which he
Ipeaks of its trade, its wealth, and the splendour
of its inhabitants, would suggest no inadequate
idea of its slate at present, when it is the greatest
and most opulent city of Europe. But all ideas
of grandeur and magnificence are merely compa-
rative. It appears from Peter of Blois, archdea-
con of London, who flourished in the fame reign,
and who had good opportunity of being well in-
formed, that this city, of which Fitzftephen gives
such a pompous account, contained no more than
forty thousand inhabitants. Ibid. 3: , 316. The
other cities were finall in proportion, and in no con-
dition to extort any extensive privileges. That the
constitution of the boroughs in Scotland, in many
circumstances, resembled that of the towns in
France and England, is manifest from the Leges
Burgorum, annexed to the Regiam Majeliatem.

NOTE XIX. SECT. I. p. 46. [T].

SOON after the introdution of the third estate

into the national council, the spirit of liberty
which that excited in France began to produce
conspicuous effers. In several provinces of France,

7 the

the nobility and communities formed associations,
whereby they bound themselves to defend their
rights and privileges against the formidable and
arbitrary proceedings of the King. The Cour.t
de Boulainvilliers has preserved a copy of one of
these associations, dated in the year 1314, twelve
years after the admiflion of the deputies from
towns into the States General. Hiftoire de l'ancien
gouvernement de la France, tom. ii. p. 94. The
vigour with which the people aflerted and pre-
pared to maintain their rights, obliged their fove-
reigns to refpest them. Six years after this aflo-
ciation, Philip the Long issued a writ of summons
to the community of Narbonne, in the following
terms: " Philip, by the grace, &c. to our weli-
beloved, &c. As we desire with all our heart, and
above all other things, to govern our kingdom
and people in peace and tranquillity, by the help
of God; and to reform our said kingdom in so
far as it stands in need thereof, for the publick
good, and for the benefit of our fubjeds, who in
times palt have been aggrieved and opprefred in
diverse manners by the malice of sundry perlbns,
as we have learned by common report, as well as
by the information of good men worthy of credit,
and we having determined in our council which
we have called to meet in our good city, &c. to
give redress to the utmost of our power, by all
ways and means possible, according to reason and
jultice, and willing that this should be done with
solemnity and deliberation by the advice of the

prelates,

prelates, barons, and good towns of our realm,
and particularly of you, and that it flould be
tranfadled agreeably to the will of God, and for
the good of our people, therefore we command,"
&c. Mably, Obfcervar. ii. App. p. 386. I shall
allow thele to be only the formal words of a pub-
lic and legal 1tyle; but the ideas are singular,
and much more liberal and enlarged than one
could expec't in tlhat age. A popular monarch of
Great Britain could hardly address himself to par-
liament, in terms more favourable to public
liberty. There occurs in the History of France a
firiking infsance of the progress which the prin-
ciples of liberty had made in that kingdom, and
of the influence which the deputies of towns had
acquired in the States General. During the cala-
mities in which the war with England, and the
captivity of King John, had involved France, the
States General made a bold effort to extend their
own privileges and jurifdiclion. The regulations
eftablilhed by the States, held A. D. i355, con-
cerning the mode of levying taxes, the adminiftra-
tion of which they vetted not in the crown, but
in commiffloners appointed by the States; con-
cerning the coining of money; concerning the
redress ofthe grievance of purveyance; concerning
the regular administration of jultice; are much
more suitable to the genius of a republican go-
vernment than that of a feudal monarchy. This
curious ftacure is publilhed, Ordon. t. iii. p. 19.
Such as have not an opportunity to confulc that

la rge

large collection, will find an abridgment of it in
Hist. de France par Villaret, tom. ix. p. 130, or
in Hiftoire de Boulainv. tom. ii. 213. The French
hiltorians represent the bishop of Laon, and Mar-
cel Provof of the merchants of Paris, who had
the chief direction of this affemblyi as seditious
tribunes, violent, interested, ambitious, and aim-
ing at innovations subversive of the constitution
and government of their country. That may have
been the cafe, but there men possessed the confi-
dence of the people; and the measures which they
proposed as the most popular and acceptable,
plainly prove that the spirit of liberty had spread
wonderfully, and that the ideas which then pre-
vailed in France concerning government were ex-
tremely liberal. The States General held at Paris,
A. D. '355, confifed of about eight hundred
members, and above one half of there were de-
puties from towns. M. Secouffe Pref. a Ordon.
tom. iii. p. 48. It appears that in all the different
afemblies of the States, held during the reign of
John, the representatives of towns had great in-
fluence, and in every refpe& the third State was
confidered as co-ordinate and equal to either of
the other two. Ibid. pafiim. These spirited efforts
were made in France long before the House of
Commons in England acquired any considerable
influence in the legislature. As the feudal system
was carried to its utmost height in France sooner
than in England, so it began to decline sooner in
the former than in the latter kingdom. In Eng-

land,

in;d, almotf all attempts to efrablifh or to extend
the liberty of the people have been successful; in
France they have proved unfortunate. What
were the accidental events, or political cauies,
which occasioned this difference, it is not my
present business to enquire.

NOTE XX. SECT. I. p. 48. [U].

IN a former Note, No. VIII. I have enquired

into the condition of that part of the people which
was employed in agriculture, and have repre-
sented the various hardlhips and calamities of their
situation. When charters of liberty and manu-
miflion were granted to such persons, they con-
tained four concellions corresponding to the four
capital grievances to which men in a itate of ser-
vitude are fubje&. i. The right of disposing of
their persons by sale or grant was relinquilhed.
2. Power was given to them of conveying their
property and effeEs by will or any other legal
deed. Or if they happened to die intestate, it
was provided that their property ihould go to
their lawful heirs in the fame manner as the pro-
perty of other persons. 3. The service. and taxes
which they owed to their superior or liege lord,
which were formerly arbitrary and imposed at
pleasure, are precisely ascertained. 4. They are
allowed the privilege of marrying whatever person
they chore, as formerly they could contlraa no
marriage without their lord's permiflion, and with
no person but one of his [laves. All there par-
ticulars are found unit:ed in the charter granted

VOL. I. Yr Eli-

Habitoribus Montis-Britonis, A.D. 1376. Hifi.
de Dauphine, tom. i. p. 81. Many circumstances
concurred with thufe which I have mentioned in
the text in procuring them deliverance from that
wretched fate. The gentle spirit of the Chriltian
religion ; the do&trines which it teaches, concern-
ing the original equality of mankind; its tenets
concerning the divine government, and the im-
partial eye with which the Almighty regards men
of every condition, and admits them to a partici-
pation of his benefits, arc all inconsistent with ser-
vitude. But in this, as in many other instances,
considerations of interest, and the maxims of false
policy, led men to a conduct inconsistent with their
principkl. They were so sensible, however of
the inconfi:lency, that to set their fellow-chriftians
at liberty from servitude was deemed an at of
piety highly meritorious and acceptable to heaven.
The humane spirit of the Chritlian religion ftrug-
gled with the maxims and manners of the world,
and contributed more than any other circum-
stance to introduce the practice of manumiiffon.
When Pope Gregory the Great, who flourished
toward the end of the sixth century, granted
liberty to Tome of his slaves, he gives this rea-
son for it, " Cumn redemptor nofter, totius
conditor naturae, ad hoc propitiatus humanam
carnem voluerit affumere; ut divinitatis sue gra-
cia, dircmpto (quo tenebamur captivi) vinculo,
pristinae nos refticucret libertati; falubriter agitur,
Ii homines, quos ab initio liberos natura protulit,
& jus gentium jugo fubftituit fervitutis, in eal

qua

qua nati fuerant, manumittentis beneficio libertati
rcddantur." Grcgor. Magn. ap. PotgiTff. lib. iv.
c. i. § 3. Several laws or charters founded on
realons similar to this, arc produced by the fame
author. Accordingly, a great part of the charters
of manumission, previous to the reign of Louis X.
are granted pro amore Dei, pro remedio animae,
& pro mercede aninma. Murat. Antiq. Ital. vol. i.
p. 849, 85o. Du Cange, voc. manwm.iao. The
formality of manumillion was executed in a church,
as a religious solemnity. The person to be set
free was led round the great altar with a torch in
his hand, he took hold of the horns of the altar,
and there the solemn words conferring liberty were
pronounced. Du Cange, ib. vol. iv. p. 467. I
shall transcribe a part of a charter of manumiflion
granted A. D. io56; both as it contains a full
account of the ceremonies used in this form of
manumission, and as a specimen of the imperfect
knowledge of the Latin tongue in that barbarous
age. It is granted by Willa the widow of Hugo
the Duke and Marquis, in favour of Clariza one
of her slaves. " Et ideo nos Domine Wille inclite
comecife-libera et abfolvo te Cleriza filia Uberto
-pro timore omnipotentis Dei, & remedio lumi-
narie anime bone memorie quondam tlopra fcripto
Domini Ugo gloriotiffinmo, ut quando ilium Do-
minus de hac vita migrare, juiferit, pars iniqua
non abeat poteRatem ullam, fed anguelus Domini
noftri jesu Chrifti colocare dignitur illum inter
s'antos dile&os suos; & beatus Petrus princips
apoftolorum, qui habed potetiatem omnium ani-

Y a nmarum

marum ligandi et abfolvendi, ut ipfi abfolvat
anim"ae ejus de peccatis fui, & aperiad ilium janua
paradifi; pro eadem vero rationi, in mano mite te
Benzo prefbiter, ut vadat tecum in ecclesia faini
Bartholoimai apofloli; traad de tribus vicibus circa
altare ipflus ecclefla cum cum reo apprehenfum in
manibus tuis & manibus fuis; deinde exite am-
bulate in via quadrubio, ubi quatuor vie fe devi-
duntur. Statimq; pro remedio luminarie anime
bone memorie quondam supra fcripto Domini Ugo
et ipfi prefbiter Benzo fecit omnia, & dixit, Ecce
quatuor vie, ite et ambulate in quacunq; parter
tibi placuerit, tam sic supra fcripta Cleriza, qua
nofque tui heredes, qui ab ac hora in antea nati,
vel procreari fuerit utriufq; fexus, &c." Murat.
ib. p. 853. Many other charters might have been
felcded, which, in point of grammar or flyle, are
in no wife faperior to this. ManumiTffon was
frequently granted on death-bed or by latter-will.
As the minds of men are at that time awakened
to fcntiments of humanity and piety, these deeds
proceeded from religious motives, and are granted
pro redemnptione animea, in order to obtain accept-
ance with God. Du Cange ubi supra, p. 470.
& voc. fJrvtus, vol. vi. p. 451. Another method
of obtaining liberty was by entering into holy
orders, or taking the vow in a monastery. This
was permitted for some time; but so many slaves
escaped, by this means, out of the hands of their
maifers, that the pratice was afterwards restrained,
and at last prohibited by the laws of almost all
the nations of Europe. Murat. ib. p. 842. Con-

5 formably

formably to the fame principles, Princes, on the
birth of a son, or upon any other agre'cable event,
appointed a certain number of slaves to be en-
franchised, as a teffimony of their gratitude to
God for that benefit. Marculfi. Form. lib. i.
cap. 39. There are fIvcral formns of nlanuiillion
published by Marculfus, and all of tliem are
founded on religious coniderations, in order to
procure the favour of Gad, or to obtain the fur-
giveneis of their iins. Lib. ii. c. 23. 33, 34. edit.
3Bluz. The l'i.nc obrsrv;a:i, holds with refbe&t
to the other toiiccions of urortnul.ai annce'ed to
Marculfus. As Icntiments of religion induced
some to grant liberty to their fillow-chriiitians
who groaned under the yoke of servitude; so
miffaken ideas concerning devotion led others to
relinquish their liberty. When a person conceived
an extraordinary refpe.t for the laint who was
the patron of any church or monafrery in which
he was accustomnd to attend religious worlhip,
it was not unulual among men poffffed with an
excess of fuperflitious reverence, to give up them-
selves and their pofferity to be the tlaves of the
faint. Mabillon de re Diplomat. lib. vi. 632.
The oblati or voluntary slaves of churches or no-
nalteries were very numerous, and may be divided
into three 'different claniies. The firill were such
as put themselves and effects under the proteCtion
of a particular church or monaltery, binding
themselves to defend its privileges and property
against every aggressor. These were prompted to

Y 3 do

do so not merely by devotion, but in order to
obtain that security which arose from the protec-
t;on of the church. They were rather vaflals than
slaves, and sometimes persons of noble birth found
it prudent to secure the protection of the church
in this manner. Persons of the second class bound
themselves to pay an annual tax or quit-rent out
of their estates to a church or monastery. Besides
this, they sometimes engaged to perform certain
services. They were called cenfuales. The last
class consisted of such as actually renounced their
liberty, and became saves in the ftri& and proper
sense cf the word. These were called mini/feriales,
and enslaved their bodies, as some of the charters
bear, that they might procure the liberty of their
fouls. Potgiefferus de ftatu fervorum, lib. i.
cap. i. § 6, 7. How zealous the clergy were to
encourage the opinions which led to this pra&tice,
will appear from a clause in a charter by which
one gives up himself as a slave to a monafter:,
t Cum fit omni carnali ingenuitate generofius
extremum quodcumq; Dei fervitium, scilicet quod
terrena nobilitas multos plerumq; vitiorum servos
facit, icryitus Yero Chrifti nobiles virtutibus red-
dit, nemlo autem iutni ca'pitis virtutibus vitia com-
paraverit, claret pro certo eum eife generofioremn,
qui ie Dei 'ervitio pr:abuerit proniorem. Quod
ego Ragnaldus inteiligt'ns, &c." Another author
fays, ( Eligens magis cfwe fervus Dei quam libertuis
feculi, firniter credens & fciens, quod fervire
Deo, regnare elt, fumimaque ingenuitas fit in qua

!ervitu:i

iervitus comparabatur Chrifti, &c." DuCange,
voc. oblatus, vol. iv. p. 1286, 1287. It does not
appear, that the enfranchiliment of slaves was a
frequent practice while the feudal f.flRem preferred.
its vigour. On the contrary, there were laws
which set bounds to this pradice as detrimental
to society. PotgieiF. lib. iv. c. 2. § 6. The infe-
rior order of men owed the recovery of their
liberty to the decline of that .riftocratical policy,
which lodged the molt extenivc power in the
hands of a few members of t!he fociery, and ce-
pressed all the reft. When Louis X. ifiued his
ordonance, several slaves had been so long accuf-
tomed to servitude, and their minds were lb much
debased by that unhappy situation, that they re-
fused to accept of the liberty which was osiered
them. D'Ach. Spicel. vol. xi. p. 387. Long after
the reign of Louis X. several of the French no-
bility continued to aflert their ancient dominion
over their slaves. It appears from an ordonance
of the famous Bertrand de Guefclin Constable of
France, that the custom ofenfranchifing them was
confidered as a pernicious innovation. Morice
Mem. pour fervir des prcuves a l'hift. de Bret.
corn. ii. p. zoo. In some instances, when the pra-
'Jial saves were declared to be freemen, they were
t'ill bound to perform certain services to their
ancient masters; and were kept in a itate different
t.om other fubjets, being reltricted either from
purchasing land, or becoming members of a com-
.nunity within the precints of the manor to whichl

Y 4 they

they formerly belonged. Martene & Durand.
Thefaur. Anecdot. vol. i. p. 914. This, however
seems not to have been common.-There is no
general law for the manumilnion of slaves in the
Statute-book of England, similar to that which
has been quoted from the Ordonances of the Kines
of France. Though the genius of the EngliOf
conffitution seems early to have favoured perfonnl
liberty, perlonal 1crvitude, nevertheless, continued
long in England in some particular places. In the
year 1514, we find a charter of Henry VIII. en-
franchising two slaves belonging to one of his ma-
nors. Rym. Feeder. vol. xiii. p. 470. As lite
as the year 1 574, there is a comrniffion from Queen
Elizabeth with refpec& to the manumiflion of cer-
tain bondmen belonging to her. Rymer. in Ob-
fervat. on the tactutes, &c. p. 25x.

NO T E XXI. SECT. I. p. 56. [X].

THERE is no custom in the middle ages more

singular than that of private war. It is a right of
so great importance, and prevailed so univerrally,
that the regulations concerning it make a con-
liderable figure in the fyftemn of laws during the
middle ages. M. de Montesquieu, who has un-
ravelled so many intricate points in feudal jurif-
prudence, and thrown light on so many cultorns
formerly oblcure and unintelligible, was not led
by his subjet to confider this. I shall therefore
give a more minute account of the customs and
regulations which dire&rd a praAice so contrary

to

to the present ideas of civilized nations concerning
government and order. I. Among the ancient
Germans, as well as other nations in a imnilar
!l..te of lociety, the riith of avenging injuries was
a private and personal right, exercised by force
or ar.ms, without any reference to an umpire, cr
any appeal to a i1Ag!iicrate for decision. The
clearest proofs of this were produced, Note VI.
2. This praEice fuih.fl-ed airng the barbarous
ni.rions after their settlement in the provinces of
i!e Empire which th'y conquered; and as the
causes of dif i-ntion m.mong thi!n mnultil!ied, their
iamily feuds and pri .'ate wars bec:;.;e more fre-
quent. Proofs of tlis occur in ti;cir car!;' hiifo-
rians. Greg. Turon. liii,. lib. vii. c. 2. lib. viii.
c. iS. lib. x. c. 77. and likewile in the codes of
their laws. It was not only allcwable for the
relations to avenge the injuries of their family,
but it was incumbent on them.. Thus by the law.
of the Angli and Werini, ad qucmcuncr!2 here-
ditas terra pervenerir, ad illum vellis bcliica id efl:
lorica & ultio proximi, & fo!atio leudis, debet
pertinere, tit. vi. § 5. ap. Lindenbr. L.c;. Salic.
tit. 63. Leg. Longob. lib. ii. tit. 14. § 1o.-
3. None but gentlemen, or persons of noble birth,
had the right of private war. All difputcs among
slaves, villani, the inhabitants of towns, and free-
men of inferior condition, were decided in the
courts ofjuftice. All disputes between gentlemen
and perlons of inferior rank were terminated in
the fame manner. The right of private war sup-
oofed nobility of birth, and equality of rank in

the

the contending parties. Beaumanoir Couftumns
de Beauv. ch. lix. p. 3co. Ordon. des Rois cce
France, tom. ii. 395. 5 xVii. 508. xv. &c. The
dignified ecclefiaicicks likewif ciaimed and e:.er-
ciied the right of private war; but as it wvas not
altogether decent for them to proiccute quarrels
in person, advocati or vidae.es were ;hofen by the
several monafreries and biihopricks. Thefc were
commonly men of high rank and reputation, who
became the proteaors of the churches and con-
vents by whom they were elected; espoused their
quarrels, and fought their battles; arnis omni:
qus erant ecclefie viriliter defendebant, et vigi-
lanter protegebant. Bruffel Usage des Fiefs, torn. i.
p . 1.4. Du Cange, voc. advocatts. On many
occasions, the martial ideas to which ecclefiaticks
of noble birth were accustomed, made them forget
the pacifick spirit of their profcfion, and led them
in;o the field in person at the head of their vassals,
.: flamdrma, ferro, cade, possessiones ecclefiarum
p::lati defendebant." Guido Abbas ap. Du
Cange, lb. p. 179.-4. It was not every injury or
trelfp:ls that gave a gentleman a title to make
war upon his adversary. Atrocious ats of vio-
In:-e, insults and affronts publickly committed,
v:ere legal and permitted motives for taking arms
again{t the authors of them. Such crimes as are
now punished capitally in civilized nations, at thar
time jiltiied private hoftiltiies. Beauman. ch. li?:.
D.i Cange Dif':rr. x::. fur Joinville, p. 33!.
B:t though the avenging off injuries was the onl,

I!;O'i "C- *h l '.t:!< lc'-»a'l) 5 ' i;ii'c ;l TrivatC war,

ycet

yet disputes concerning civil property often gave
rife to ho!tilities, and were terminated by the
sword. Du Caage Dilfert. p. 332,-5. All per-
sons present when any quarrel arose, or any aL:
of violence was committed, were included in the
war which it occaf:ined; for it was supposed tQ
be impoflible for any mal in such a iituation to
remain neutral, without taking fide with one or
other of the contending parties, Beauman. p. 3oo.
-6. All the kindred of the two principals in the
war were included in ir, and obliged to espouse
the quarrel of the chieftain with whom they were
conneted, Du Cange, ib. 332. This was founded
on the maxim of the ancient Germans, "( fulCipere
tam inirnicitias feu patris, feu propinqui, quarn
amicitias, neceffe eft ;" a nlaximr natural to all
rude and simple nations, among which the form
of society, and political union, strengthen such a
sentiment. The method of alcertaining the de-
gree of affinity which obliged a person to take
part in the quarrel of a kinfi-nan, was curious.
While the church prohibited the marriage of per-
sons within the seventh degree of affinity, the
vengeance of private war extended as far as this
absurd prohibition, and all who had such a remote
connefOion with any of the principals, were in-
volved in the calamities of war. But when the
church relaxed somewhat of its rigour, and did
not extend its prohibition of marrying beyond the
fourth degree of affinity, the aime reftriaion took
place in the conduct of private war. Beauman.
,30j. Du Cange Diflert. 333.-7. A private war

could

could not be carried on between two full brothers,
because both have the fame common kindred, and
consequently neither had any persons bound to
stand by him againit the other, in the contet;
but two brothers of the half blood might wagpe
war, because each of them has a diftinc kindred.
Beauman. p. 299.-8. The vassals of each prin-
cipal in any private war were involved in the con-
test, because by the feudal maxims they were
bound to take arms in defence of the chieftain
of whom they held, and to assist him in every
quarrel. As soon, therefore, as the feudal tenures
were introduced, and this artificial conne&ion was
established between vaiTals and the baron of whom
they held, vasals came to be confidered as in the
fame state with relations. Beauman. 303.-9. Pri-
vate wars were very frequent for several centuries.
Nothing contributed more to increase those dif-
orders in government, or to encourage such fero-
city of manners as reduced the nations of Europe
to that wretched state which diflinguifhed the pe-
riod of history which I am reviewing. Nothing
was such an obstacle to the introducion of a regu-
lar administration ofjuftice. Nothing could more
effetually discourage industry, or retard the pro-
grefs and cultivation of the arts of peace. Private
wars were carried on with all the delfru&ive rage
which is to be dreaded from violent resentment
when armed with force, and authorised by law. It
appears from the statutes prohibiting or restraining
the exercise of private hoffilities, that the invasion
of the molt barbarous enemy, could not be more

desolating

d!eolating to a country, or more fatal to its inha-
bitants, than those inteltine wars. Ordon.tom. i. p.
7ol. tom. ii. p. 395. 40S. 507, &c. The contem-
porary historians describe the excesses committed in
prosecution of thele quarrels in such terms as ex-
c;te astonishment and horror. I shall mention only
one passage from the hifsory of the Holy War, by
Guibert Abbot of Nogent: " Erat eo tempore
maximis ad invicemn hoftilitatibus, totius Franco-
rum regni faca turbatio; crebra ubiq; latrocinia,
viarum obfefio; audiebanturpaflim, immo fiebant
incendia infinita; nullis prater sola & indomita
cupiditate exiflentibus caufis extruebantur pralia;
& ut brevi totum claudam, quicquid obtutibus
cupidorum fubjacebat, nufquam attendendo cujus
ciTet, praede patebat." Gefta Dei per Francos,
vol. i. p. 482.

HAVING thus colleced the chief regulations
which custom had established concerning the right
and exercise ofprivate war, I shall enumerate, in
chronological order, the various expedients employ-
ed to abolish or restrain this fatal custom. I. The
firfl expedient employed by the civil magistrate, in
order to set some bounds to the violence of private
revenge, was the fixing by law the fine or compo-
fition to be paid for each different crime. The
injured person was originally the sole judge con-
cerning the nature of the wrong which he had sus-
sered, the degree of vengeance which he lhould
exaft, as well as the species of atonement or re-
paration with which he should reft satisfied. Re-

fentment

sentiment became of course as implacable as it was
fierce. It was often a point of honour not to for-
give, nor to be reconciled. This made it necef-
fary to fix those compositions which make so great
a figure in the laws of barbarous nations. The
hature of crimes and offences was estimated by the
magifrate, and the fum due to the person offended
vas ascertained with a minute, and often a whim-
fical accuracy. Rotharis, the legislator of the
Lombards, who reigned about the middle of the
seventh century, discovers his intention both in as-
certaining the compofiron to be paid by the offen-
der, and in increasing its value; it is, fays he, that
the enmity may be extinguified, the prosecution
may cease, and peace may be restored. Leg. Lan-
gob. lib. i. tir. 7. § io.-2. About the beginning
of the ninth century, Charlemagne struck at the
root of the evil, and enaeted, 'C That when any
person had been guilty of a crime, or had comn
mitted an outrage, he should immediately rubmit
to the penance which the church imposed, and
offer to pay the composition which the law pre-
fcribed; and if the injured person or his kindred
Should refuse to accept of this, and presume to
avenge themselves by force of arms, their lands
and properties flould be forfeited." Capitul. A. D.
o02. edit. Baluz. vol. i. 371.-3. But in this, as
well as in other regulations, the genius of Charle-
magne advanced before the spirit of his age. The
ideas of his contemporaries concerning regular
government were too imperfet, and their man-
->~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~lr

ners too fierce to submit to this law. Private wars,
with all the calamities which they occajioned, be-
caine more frequent than ever after the death of
that great monarch. His successors were unable
to restrain them. The church found it necefTary
to interpose. The molt early of these intcrpofi-
tions now extant, is towards the end of t!h tenth
century. In the year 990, fcveral biihops in tile
south of France allcffbled, and publilhed various
regulations, in order to lit iflm bounds to the
violence and frequency of private v.'ars; if any
peroln withintheir dioceses fiho'id vea;i!re to tlranf-
gelss, they ordained trhat hI: 1-. i b!e excludIed
from all C!hrifti:n priviieges during his life, ind be
denied Chrii'ian burial afrtr his death. D)l Mont
Corps Diplornatique, tom. i. p. 41. Thelb, how-
ever, were only partial renedies and thearefre a
council was held at Li:noges, A. D. (,94. The
bodies of the fa'ins, according to the cullto- of
thole ages, were carried thither; and by thcf; fra-
cred relicks men were exhorted to lay do..'n their
arms, to extinguish their aninofiGics, and to swear
that they would not for the future violate the pub-
lick peace by their private hoftiiities. Bouquet
Recueil des Hiftor. vol. x. p. ;!9. 147. Several
other councils issued decrees to the lfane eflfct. Dui
Cange Dissert. 343.-4. But the authorityof coun-
cils, ilow venerable soever in those ages, was not
fufficicnt to aboliGi a cuftorn which flattered the
pride of the nobles, and gratified their favourite
palions, The evil grew so intolerable, that ic be-

4 came

came necefihry to employ supernatural means for
fupprefling it. A bilhop of Aquitaine, A. D.
o032, pretended that an angel had appeared to
him, and brought him a writing from heaven, en-
joining men to cease from their hostilitics, and to;
be reconciled to each other. It was during a sea-
son of public calamity that he publilhed this reve-
lation. The minds of men were disposed to re-
ceive pious imnpreffons; and willing to perform
any thing in order to avert the wrath of heaven.
A general peace and cessation from hofliliries took
place, and continued forfeven years; and a refolu-
tion was formed, that no man (hould in times to
come attack or molest his adversaries during the
seasons set apart for celebrating the great festivals
of the church, or from the evening of Thursday
in each week, to the morning of Monday in the
week ensuing, the intervening days being confider-
ed as particularly holy, our Lord's Paflion having
happened on one of these days, and his Refurrec-
tion on another. A change in the dispositions of
men so sudden, and which produced a resolution
so unexpected, was confidered as miraculous; and
the respite from hostilities which followed upon it,
was called the truce of God. Glaber. Rodulphus
Hitor. lib. v. ap. Bouquet. vol. x. p. 59. This,
from being a regulation or concert in one king-
dom, became a general law in Christendom, anl
was confirmed by the authority of the Pope, and
the violators were fubjeted to the penalty of ex-
communication. Corpus Jur. Canon. Decretal.
lib, i. tit. 34. c. I. Du Cange Gloffar. voc. Treuga.

An

An a't cf the council of Toulujes in Roufmllon,
A.D. 1041, containing all the ftipulztions re-
quired by the truce of God, is publi!hed by Dom
deVic & Dom Vaifette Hilt. de Languedec, tom. ii.
Preuves, p. 206. A cclition from hostilities du-
ring three complete days in every week, allowed
such a conliderable ipace for the patlions of the
antagonists to cool, and for the people to enjoy a
respite from the calamities of war, as well as to
take measures for their own security, that, if this
truce of God had been exactly observed, it mufl
have gone far towards putting an end to private
wars. This, however, seems not to have been the
cafe; the nobles, disregarding the truce, prosecuted
their quarrels without interruption as formerly.
Qua nimirum tempefate, univerfr provincira adeo
devaftationis continuas importunitate inquietantutr
ut ne ipfa pro obfervatione divina pacis, profeffa
facramenta cuftodiantur. Abbas Ufpergenfis apud
Datt de pace imperii publica, p. 13. No. 35. The
violent spirit of the nobility could not be restrained
by any engagements. The complaints of this were
frequent; and bifldps, in order to compel them
to renew their vows and promises of ceafirsg from
their private wars, were obliged to enjoin their
clergy to suspend the performance of divine ser-
vice and the exercise of any religious funsion
within the parishes of such as were refractory and
obstinate. His. de Langued. par D D. de Vic. &
Vaifette, tom. ii. Preuves, p. r i8.--. The peo-
ple, eager to obtain relief from their fuflcrings,
called in a second time a pretended revelation to

VOL. J, Z. their

their aid. Towards the end of the twelfth century,
a carpenter in Guienne gave out, that Jesus Christ,
together with the blefled Virgin, had appeared to
him, and having commanded him to exhort man-
kind to peace, had given him, as a proof of his
,minion, an image of the Virgin holding her son
in her arms, with this inscription, Lamb of God,
who taket away the fins of the world, give us peace.
This low fanatick addressed himself to an ignorant
age, prone to credit what was marvellous. He
was received as an inspired messenger of God.
Many prelates and barons assembled at Puy, and
took an oath, not only to make peace with all
their own enemies, but to attack such as refused
to lay down their arms, and to be reconciled to
their enemies. They formed an association for this
purpose, and assumed the honourable name of the
Brotherhood of God. -Robertus de Monte Michaele
ap. M. de Lauriere Pref. tom. i. Ordon. p. 29.
But the influence of this superstitious terror or de-
votion was not of long continuance.-6. The civil
magistrate was obliged to exert his authority i.
order to check a custom which threatened the dif-
solution of government. Philip Augustus, as some
imagine, or St.Louis, as is more probable, pub-
lifhed an ordonance, A. D. 1245, prohibiting any
person to commence hostilities against the friends,
and vassals of his adverlary, until forty days after
the commimlion of the crime or offence which gave
rife to the quarrel; declaring, that if any man
presumed to transgress this statute, he Ihould be
confidered as guilty of a breach of the publicl

peace,

peace, and be tried and punished by the judge or.
dinary as a traitor. Ordon. tor. i. p 56. This
was called the Royal Truce, and afforded time for
the violence of resentment to subside, as well as
leisure for the good offices of such as were willing
to compose the difference. The happy effects of
this regulation seem to have been conliderable, if
we may judge from the solicitude of succeeding
monarchs to enforce it.-7. In order to restrain
the exercise of private war till farther, Philip the
Fair, towards the close of the fame century, A. D.
1296, published an ordonance commanding all
private hostilities to cease, while he was engaged
in war against the enemies of the state. Ordon.
tom. i. p. 328. 390. This regulation, which feemns
to be almost essential to the existence and prefer-
vation of society, was often renewed by his fuccef.
fors, and being enforced by the regal authority,
proved a considerable check to the deltru&tive con-
tells ofthe nobles. Both these regulations, intro-
duced first in France, were adopted by the other
nations of Europe.-8. The evil, however, was
so inveterate, that it did not yield to all there re-
medies, No sooner was publick peace eftablifled
In any kingdomj than the barons renewed their
private holtilities. They not only struggled to
maintain this pernicious right, but to secure the
exercise of it without any restraint. Upon the
death of Philip the Fair, the nobles of different
provinces in France formed associations, and pre-
sented remonstrances to his successor, demanding
the repealef evcral laws, by which he had abridg-

Za ed

ed the privilges of their order. Among these,
the right of private war is always mentioned as
one of the most valuable; and they claim, that the
restraint imposed by the truce of God, the royal
truce, as well as that arising from the ordonance of
the year 296, ihould be taken off. In some in-
stances, the two sons of Philip, who mounted the
throne fucceflively, eluded their demands; in
others, they were obliged to make conceflions.
Ordon. tom. i. p. 551. 557. 56I. 573. Theordo-
nances to which I here refer, are of such length
that I cannot insert them, but they are extremely
curious, and may be peculiarly inftrutive to an
English reader, as they throw considerable light on
that period of Englilh history, in which the at-
tempts to circumscribe the regal prerogative were
carried on, not by the people struggling for liber-
ty, but by the nobles contending for power. It
is not necessary to produce any evidence of the
continuance and frequency of private wars under
the successors of Philip the Fair.-9. A pra&Eice
somewhat similar to the royal truce was intro-
duced, in order to strengthen and extend it. Bonds
of assurance, or mutual security, were demanded
from the parties at variance, by which they obliged
themselves to abstain from all hostilities, either du-
ring a time mentioned in the bond, or forever; and
became subjea to heavy penalties, if they violated
this obligation. These bonds were sometimes
granted voluntarily, but more frequently exa&ed
by the authority of the civil magitrate. Upon a
petition from the party who felt himself weakcfe,

4 the

the magistrate summoned his adversary to appear
in court, and obliged him to give a bond of affu.
rance. If, after that, he committed any farther
hostilities, he became fubje& to all the penalties of
treason. This restraint on private war was known
in the age of St. Louis. Eftabliffemens, liv. i. c.
^8. It was frequent in Bretagne; and what is
very remarkable, such bonds of aflurance were
given mutually between vassals and the lord of
whom they held. Oliver de Cliffon grants one to
the Duke of Bretagne, his sovereign. Morice Mem.
pour fervir de preuves a l'hilt. de Bret. tom. i.
p. 846. ii. p. 37 1. Many examples of bonds of as-
furance in other provinces of France are colleted
by Bruffel. torn. ii. p. 856. The nobles of Bur-
gundy remonstrated againfl this pra&ice, and ob-
tained exemption from it as an encroachment on
the privileges of their order. Ordon. tom. i. p.
S58. This mode of security was first introduced
in cities, and the good effects of it having been
felt there, was extended to the nobles. See note
XVI.- o. The calamities occasioned by private
wars became at rome times so intolerable, that the
nobles entered into voluntary associations, binding
themselves to refer all matters in dispute, whether
concerning civil property, or points of honour, to
the determination of the majority of the associates.
Morice Mem.pour fervirde preuves al'hift.deBret.
tor. ii. p. 728.-x I. But allthefe expedients prov-
ing ineffetual, Charles VI. A. D. 1413, issued an
ordonance expressly prohibiting private wars on
any pretext whatsoever, with power to the judge

Z 3 ordinary

ordinary to compel all persons to comply with this
injunaion, and to punish such as ihould prove re-
fratory or disobedient, by imprisoning their per-
sons, seizing their goods, and appointing the officers
ofjuRfice, Mengeurs UGajlears, to live at free quar-
ters on their estate. If those who were disobedient
to this edit could not be personally arrested, he
appointed their friends and vassals to be seized,
and detained until they gavefurety for keeping the
peace; and he abolished all laws, customs, or pri.
vileges which might be pleaded in opposition to
this ordonance. Ordon. tom. x. p. 138. How
low is the progress of reason and of civil order!
Regulations which to us appear so equitable, ob-
vious, and simple, required the efforts of civil and
Occlefiaftical authority, during several centuries, to
introduce and eftablilh them. Even posterior to
this period, Louis XI. was obliged to abolish pri-
vate wars in Dauphine, by a particular edict

D. D 4. . Pu Cange dissert. p. 348.

This note would swell to a disproportional bulk,

if I ihould attempt to enquire with the fame mi-
nute attention into the progress of this pernicious
custom in the other countries of Europe, In Eng-
land, the ideas of the Saxons concerning personal
revenge, the right of private wars, and the com-
position due to the party offended, seem to have
been much the fame with those which prevailed
on the Continent. The law ofIna de Yindicantibus,
in the eighth century. Lamb. p. 3. those ofEd.
iund in the tenth century, de bkomieidio. Lamb.

p. 72.

p. 72. & de inimictiiis, p. 76; and those of Edward
the Confessor, in the eleventh century, de tempori-
bivs & diebus pacis, or Treuga Dei, Lamb. p. 126,
are perfectly similar to the ordonances of the French
Kings their contemporaries. The laws of Edward,
de pace regis, are still more explicit than those of
the French Monarchs, and, by several provisions
in them, discover that a more perfect police was
established in England at that period. Lambard.
p. 128. fol. verf. Even after the conquest, private
wars, and the regulations for preventing them,
were not altogether unknown, as appears from
Madox Formulare Anglicanum, N. CXLV. and
from the extracts from Domesday Book, published
by Gale Scriptores hit. Britan. p. 759. 777. The
well-known clause in the form of an English in.
di&ment, which, as an aggravation of the crimi-
nal's guilt, mentions his having aflaulted a person,
who was in the peace of God and of the King,
seems to be borrowed from theTreuga or Pax Dei,
and the Pax Regis, which I have explained. But
after the conquest, the mention of private wars
among the nobility occurs more rarely in' the
Englilh history, than in that of any other Euro-
pean nation, and no laws concerning them are to
be found in the body of their statutes. Such a
change in their own manners, and such a variation
from those of their neighbours, is remarkable. Is
it to be ascribed to the extraordinary power that
William the Norman acquired byrightof conquest,
and tranfiiitted to his fucceflors, which rendered
the execution of justice more vigorous and deci-

Z 4 fives

five, and the jurifdi&ion of the King's court more
extensive than under the Monarchs on the Conti-
nent ? Or, was it owing to the settlement of the
Normans in England, who having never adopted
the pracice of private war in their own country,
abolilhed it in the kingdomwhich they conquered ?
It is asserted in an qrdonance of John King of
France, that in all times pafl, perfonsofeyery rank
in Normandy have been prohibited to wage private
war, and the pratice has been deemed unlawful.
Ordon. tom. ii. p. 407. If this faa were certain,
it would go far towards explaining the peculiarity
which I have mentioned. But as there are rome
Engliih AEts of Parliament, which, according to the
remark of the learned author of the Ofservations on
the Statutes, ckiefly tje more ancient, recite false-
hoods, it may be added, that this is not peculiar to
the laws of that country. Notwithstanding the
positive afferrton contained in this publick law, of
France, there is good reason for confidering it as
a flatate which recites a falsehood. This, how-
ever, is not the place for difcufling that point.
It is an inquiry not unworthy the curiofiry of an
Englinfl antiquary.

Is Caflile, the pernicious pracice of private war

prevailed, and was authorized by the customs and
law of the kingdom. Leges Tauri, tit. 76. cum
cornmnentario Anton. Gomezii, p. 55r. As th~
Castilian nobles were no less turbulent than power-
ful, their quarrels and hostilities involved thei;

countr/

country in many calamities. Innumerable proofs
of this occur in Mariana. In Aragon, the right
of private revenge was likewise authorized by law;
exercised in its full extent, and accompanied with
the fame unhappy con sequences. Hieron. Blanca
Comment. de rebus Arag. ap. Schotti. Hifpan.
illuftrat. vol. iii. p. 7 33. Lex Jacobi I. A. D. 1 47.
Fueros & Obfervancias del Reyno de Aragon, lib.
ix. p. 182. Several confederacies between the
Kings of Aragon and their nobles, for the refto-
ting of peace, founded on the truce of God, are
fill extant. Petr. de Marca. Marca five Limes Hil-
panic. App. 1303, 1388, 1428. As early as the
year x 165, we find a combination of the King and
court of Aragon, in order to abolish the right of
private war, and to punith those who presumed to
claim that privilege. Anales de Aragon por Zu-
rita, vol. i. p. 73. But the evil was so inveterate,
that as late as A. D. 1 5 1 9, Charles V. was obliged
to publish a law enforcing all former regulations
tending to suppress this practice. Fueros & Ob-
fervanc. lib. ix. 183. b.

THE Lombards, and other northern nations

who fettled in Italy, introduced the fame maxims
concerning the right of revenge into that country,
and these were followed by the fame effcts. As
the progress of the evil was perfetly similar to
what happened in France, the expedients employ-
ed to check its career, or to extirpate it finally,
resembled those which I have enumerated. Mu-
:at. Ant. Ital. vol. ii. p. 3o6.

1N Germany, the disorders and calamities occa.

soned by the right of private war were greater
and more intolerable than in any other country of
Eyrope. The Imperial authority was To much
ihaken and enfeebled by the violence of the civil
wars, excited by the contests between the Popes
and the Emperors of the Franconian and Suabian
lines, that not only the nobility but the cities
acquired almost independent power, and scorned
all Subordination and obedience to the laws. The
frequency of thefefaidr, or private wars, are often
mentioned in the German Annals, and the fatal
effets of them are mos pathetically described,
Datt. de pace Imper. pub. lib. i. cap. v. n°. 30.
& passim. The Germans early adopted the Treuga
Dei, which was firit eftablilhed in France. This,
however, proved but a temporary and ineffetual
remedy. The disorders multiplied so faf, and
grew so enormous, that they threatened the diffo.
lution of society, and compelled the Germans to
have recourse to the only remedy of the evil, viz.
an abfolure prohibition of private wars. The
Emperor, William, published his edict to this
purpose, A. D. I2 5, an hundred and sixty years
previous to the ordonance of Charles VI. in
France. Dart, lib. i. cap. 4. n°. 20. But neither
he nor his successors had authority to secure the
observance of it. This gave rife to a practice in
Germany, which conveys to us a striking idea
both of the intolerable calamities occasioned by
private wars, and of the feebleness of government
during the twelfth and thirteenth centuries. The

3 cities

cities and nobles entered into alliances and aflo-
ciations, by which they bound themselves to main-
tain the public peace, and to make war on such
as should violate it. This was the origin of the
league of the Rhine, of Suabia, and of many
smaller confederacies diltinguilhed by various
names. The rife, progress, and beneficial effets
of these afbociations are traced by Dart, with great
accuracy. Whatever degree ofpublick peace, or
of regular administration was preserved in the
Empire from the beginning of the twelfth century
to the close of the fifteenth, Germany owes to
these leagues. During that period, political order,
refpe& for the laws, together with the equal ad-
ministration ofjuftice, made considerable progress
in Germany. But the final and perpetual abo-
lition of the right of private war was not accom-
plilhed until A.D. 1495. The Imperial authority
was by that time more firmly established, the ideas
of men with refpet to government and fubor-
dination were become more just. That barbarous
and pernicious privilege which the nobles had Co
long possessed, was declared to be incompatible
with the happiness and existence of society. In
order to terminate any differences which might
arise among the various membersoftheGermanick
body, the Imperial chamber was instituted with
supreme jurifdiCion, to judge without appeal in
every question brought before it. That court has
subsisted since that period, forming a very refpec-
able tribunal, of efential importance in the Ger-

man

man constitution. Datt, lib. iii, iv, v. ,fesse
Abrege de 1'Hiftoire du Droit, &c. p. 556.

WOTE XXIr. SecT. I. p. 67. [Y].

IT would be tedious and of little use to enu-

merate the various modes of appealing to the
juflice of God, which superstition irtroduced du-
ring the ages of ignorance. I fiall mention only
one, because we have an account of it in a pla-
citum or trial in the pretence of Charlemagne,
from which we may learn the imperfect manner
in which justice was administered even during his
reign. In the year 775, a contest arose between
the bilhop of Paris and the abbot of St. Denys,
concerning the property of a finall abbey. Each
of them exhibited deeds and records, in order to
prove the right to be in them. Inflead of trying
the authenticity, or confidering the import of
these, the point was referred to thejudiciun; crucis.
Each produced a person, who, during the cele-
bration of mars, flood before the cross with his
arms expanded and he, whose representative first
became weary, and altered his posture, loft the
cause. The person employed by the bilhop on
this occasion had lets strength or less spirit than
his adversary, and the question was decided in
favour of the abbot. Mabillon de re Diplomat.
lib. vi. p. 498. If a Prince To enlightened as
Charlemagne countenanced such an absurd mode
of decision, it is no wonder that other monarchs

flou ld

should tolerate it so long. M. de Montesquieu
has treated of the trial by judicial combat at con-
fiderable length. The two talents which diftin-
guifh that illustrious author, industry in tracing
all the circumstances of ancient and obscure intli-
tutions, and sagacity in penetrating into the causes
and principles which contributed to establish them,
are equally conspicuous in his observations on this
fubje&. To there I refer the reader, as they con-
tain most of the principles by which I have endea-
voured to explain this practice. De 'Esprit des
Loix, lib. xxviii. It seems to be probable from
the remarks of M. de Montelquieu, as well as
from the fats produced by Muratori, tom. iii.
Dissert. xxxviii. that the appeals to the justice of
God by the experiments with fire and water, &c.
were pratifed by the people who fettled in the
different provinces of the Roman Empire, before
they had recourse to the judicial combat. The
judicial combat, however, was the moit ancient
mode of terminating any controversy among the
barbarous nations in their original settlements.
This is evident from Velleius Paterculus, lib. ii.
c. i 8. who informs us, that all questions which
were decided among the Romans by legal trial,
were terminated among the Germans by arms.
The fame thing appears in the ancient laws and
customs of the Swedes, quoted by Jo. O. Stiern-
ho6k de jure Sueonum & Gothorum vetufto. 4to.
Holmia: 1682, lib. i. c. 7. It is probable that
when the various tribes which invaded the Em-

pire

pire were converted to Christianity, their ancient
custom of allowing judicial combats appeared so
glaringly repugnant to the precepts of religion,
that, for some time, it was abolished, and by de-
grees, several circumstances which I have mena
tioned, led them to resume it.

IT seems likewise to be probable from a law

quoted by Stiernhiik in the treatise which I have
mentioned, that the judicial combat was originally
permitted, in order to determine points refpe&ing
the personal character, or reputation of individuals,
and was afterwards extended not only to criminal
cafes, but to questions concerning property. The
words of the law are, "c if any man shall fay to
another these reproachful words, " you are not a
" man equal to other men," or, " you have not
" the heart of a man," and the other shall reply,

1 am a man as good as you," let them meet

on the highway. If he who first gave offence ap-
pear, and the person offended absent himself, let
the latter be deemed worse than he was called;
let him not be admitted to give evidence in judg-
ment either for man or woman, and let him not
have the privilege of making a testament. If the
person offended appear, and he who gave the
offence be absent, let him call upon the other
thrice with a loud voice, and make a mark upon
the earth, and then let him who absented himself
be deemed infamous, because he uttered words
which he durst not support, If both ihall appear

properly

properly armed, and the person offended Ihall fall
in the combat, let a half compensation be paid
for his death. Bdt if the person who gave the
offence shall fall, let it be imputed to his own
ralhnefs. The petulance of his tongue hath been
fatal to him. Let him lie in the field without
any compensation being demanded for his death."
Lex Uplandica ap. Stiern. p. 76. Martial people
were extremely delicate with refpe& to every thing
that affeaed their reputation as soldiers. By the
laws of the Salians, if any man called another a
bare, or accused him of having left his Ihield in
the field of battle, he was ordained to pay a large
fine. Leg. Sal. tit. xxxii. § 4. 6. By the law
of the Lombards, if any one called another
arga, i. e. a good for nothing fellow, he might
immediately challenge him to combat. Leg. Lon-
gob. lib. i. tit. v. § i. By the law of the Sa-
lians, if one called another cenitus, a term of
reproach equivalent to arga, he was bound to
pay a very high fine. Tit. xxxii. § i. Paulus
Diaconus relates the violent impreflion which this
reproachful exprefion made upon one of his coun-
trymen, and the fatal effe6ts with which it was
attended. De geftis Longobard. lib. vi. c. 24.
Thus the ideas concerning the point of honour,
which we are apt to confider as a modern refine-
ment, as well as the pratice of duelling, to which
it gave rife, are derived from the notions of our
anceofors, while in a fate of society very little
improved.

As

As M. de Montesquieu's view of this fubje&

did not lead him to confider every circumstance
relative to judicial combats, I lhall mention some
particular fa&s necessary for the illustration of
what I have said with refpe& to them. A remark-
able instance occurs of the deciflon of an abstraCt
point of law by combat. A question arose in the
tenth century concerning the fight of representation,
which was not then fixed, though now universally
established in every part of Europe. " It was a
matter of doubt and dispute (faith the historian),
whether the sons of a son ought. to be reckoned
among the children of the family, and succeed
equally with their uncles, if their father happened
to die w'hile their grandfather was alive. An
afTembly was called to deliberate on this pointi
and it was the general opinion that it ought to be
remitted to the examination and decision ofjudges.
But the Emperor following a better course, and
desirous of dealing honourably with his people
and nobles, appointed the matter to be decided by
battle between two champions. He who appeared
in behalf of the right of children to represent
their deceased father was vicorious; and it was
eftablilhed, by a perpetual decree, that they should
hereafter hlare in the inheritance together with
theiruncles." Wittickindus Corbienfis, lib. Annat.
ap. M. de Lauriere Pref. Ordon. vol. i. p. xxxiii.
If we can suppose the caprice of folly to lead men
to any ation more extravagant than this of set-
ling a point in law by combat, it must be that cf

referring

referring the truth or falfchood of a religious opi-
nion to be decided in the fame manner. To the
tifgrace of human reason, it has been capable even
of this extravagance. A question was agitated in
Spain in the eleventh century, whether the Mu-
farabic Liturgy and ritual which had been used
in the churches of Spain, or that approved of by
the See of Rome, which differed in many parti-
culars from the ether, contained the form of
worship most acceptable to the Deity. The Spa-
niards contended zealously for the ritual of their
ancestors. The Popes urged them to receive that
to which they had given their infallible fanaion.
A violent contest arose. The nobles proposed to
decide the controversy by the (word. The King
approved of this method of decision. Two
knights in complete armour entered the lifts. John
Rlys de Matanca, the champion of the Mufarabic
Liturgy, was victorious. But the Queen and
Archbiff.op of Toledo, who favoured the other
form, infifed on havin: the matter fubiritted to
another trial, and had interefr enough to preva:!
in a request, inconfifent with the laws of combat,
vlhich being confidered as an appeal to God, the
decision ought to have been acquiesced in as final.
. great fire was kindled. A copy ofciach Liturgy
was cats into the flames. It was agreed that the
b'ok which flood this proof, and-remained un-
t.,uchcd, nlould be received in all the churches
of Spain. The Mufarabic Liturgy triumphed
uklewife in this trial, and if we may believe Rode-

VOL, I. A a rigo

rigo de Toledoi remained unhurt by thelire, when
the other was reduced to ahes. The Queen and
Archbiffiop had power or art sufficient to elude
this decision also, and the use of the Mufarabic
1form of devotion was permitted only in certain
churches. ' 'A determination no left extraordinary
- than the whoei tranfation. Roder. de Toledo,

quoted by P. Orleans, Hist. de Revol. d'Efpagne,
tom. i. p. s17. Mariana, lib. i. c. x8. vol. i.
p. 378.-A remarkable proof of the general use
of trial by combit, 'and of the predile&tion for
that mode of decision occurs in the laws of the
Lombards. It was a custom in the middle ages,
that any person might chute the law to which he
would be fubje&ted; and by the prescriptions of
that law he was obliged to regulate his tranf-
actions, without being bound to comply with any
practite aiuthorized by other codes of law. Per-
· fonswhd had-fubjeated themselves to the Roman

law, and adhered to the ancient jurisprudence,
ias far.as any knowledge of it was retained in thole
ages of ignorance, were -exempted from paying
any regard to the forms of proceedings established
by the laws of the Burgundians, Lombards, and
other barbarous people. 'But the EmperorrOtho,
in dire& contradiction to this received maximn
'ordained, " That all persons, under whatever law
' they lived; even although it were the Roman law,

heould be bound to conform to the edias con-
cerning'the. trial by combat. Leg. Longob.
lib.'il. tit.55; § '38. While the judicial combat

* ' . fubfifed,
·": ,\ g .. ..

fubfiktd, proof by charters, contrals, or other
deeds, became ineffe&tual; and even this species
of evidence, calculated to render the proceedings
of courts certain and decisive, was eluded. When
a charter or other instrument was produced by one
of the parties, his opponent might challenge it,
affirm that it was faire and forged, and offer to
prove this by combat. Leg. Longob. ib. § 34.
It is true, that among the reasons enumerated by
Beaumanoir, on account of which judges might
refute to permit a trial by combat, one is, C If the
point in contest can be clearly proved or ascertain-
ed by other evidence." Couft. de Beauv. ch. 63.
p. 323. But that regulation removed the evil on-
ly a tingle fRep. For the party who fufpeded that
a witness was about to depose in a manner un-
favourable to his cause, might accuse him of being
luborned, give him the lie, and challenge him to
combat; if the witness was vanquished in battle,
no other evidence was admitted, and the party
by whom he was summoned to appear loft his
cause. Leg. Baivar. tit. 16. § a. Leg. Burgund.
tit. 45. Beauman. ch. 61. p. 315. The reason
given for obliging a witness to accept of a defi.
ance, and to defend himself by combat, is remark-
able, and contains the fame idea which is Rtill the
foundation of what is called the point of honour i
" for it is just, that if any one affirms that he pere
fecly knows the truth of any thing, and offers to
give oath upon it, that he lhould iot hcfitate to
maintain the veracity of his afirmation in combat."
Leg. Burgund. tit. 45.

A i' THAT

THAT the trial by judicial combat was efta-

blifhed in every country of Europe, is a fad well
known, and requires no proof. That this mode
of"decifion was frequent, appears not only from
the codes of ancient laws which eftabliffied it, but
from the earliest writers concerning the practice of
law in the different nations of Europe. They
treat of this custom at great length; they enu-
merate the regulations concerning it with minute
accuracy;. and explain them with much fblicitude,
It made a capital and extensive article in jurif-
prudence. There is not any one fiubjef in their
y7ftem of law which Beaumanoir, Defontai.es, co
the compilers of the Af.ifes de Jerulalem seem to
have conhdered as of greater importance; and
none on which they have bestowed tb much atreii-
tion. 'The fame observation will hold with refbeai
to the early authors of other nations. It appears
from Mado,' !that-trials of this kind were so fre-
quent in England, that fines, paid on these occ:-
sions, made no inconsiderable brancii of the Kin r':.
revenue. Hilt. of the TEchleq. vol. i . p. 349.'\
very curious account of a judicial combat betwecl;
Mefire lRobert de Beaumanoir, and Melire Pierre
Tournemine, in pretence of the duke of Bretagne,
A. D. 1385, is published by Morice Mem. pour
fervir de preuves a l'hifl. de Bretagne, tom. ii.
p. 498. Ail the formalities observed in such ex-
traordinary proceedings are there dcfcribed more
minutely, than in any ancient monument which I
have had an opportunity of confidering. Tour-
cmrnine was accused by Beaumanoir of having

murderdt.l

murdered his brother. The former was van-
quithed, but was saved from being hanged upon,
the spot, by the generous interceflion of his anta-
gonift. A good account of the origin of the laws
concerning judicial combat, is published in the
history of Pavia, by Bernardo Sacci, lib. ix. c. 8
in Grev. Thef. Antiquit. Ital. vol. iii. 743.

THiIS mode of trial was so acceptable, that ec-

clefiaticks, notwithstanding the prohibitions of the
church, were conflrained not only to connive at
the practice, but to authorize it. A remarkable
inltance of this is produced by Patquier Recher-
ches, lib. iv. ch. i. p. 30o. The abbot Wittikin-
dus, whose words I have produced in this note,
confidered the determination of a point in law by
combat, as the belt and moil honourable mode of
decision. In the year 978, a judicial combat was
fought in the pretence of the Emperor Henry. The
archbishop Aldebert advised him to terminate a
contest which had arisen between two noblemen of
his court, by this mode of decilion. The van-
quifhed combatant, though a person of high rank,
was beheaded on the spot. Chronic. Ditmari Epifc,
Merfb. chez Bouquet Recueil des Hill. tor. x,
p. 121. Questions concerning the property ot
churches and monasteries, were decided by com-
bat. In the year 961, a controverft concernin
the church of St. Medard, whether it belonged ao
the abbey of Beaulieu, was terminated lbyjudicia:
combat.' Bouquet Recueil des IIift. tom. i.
p. 729. Ibil. p. 612, &c. The Emnperor Henry T.

A a dlr.-

declares, that this law authorizing the pracice of
judicial combats, was enaed 'with consent and
applause of many faithful bishops. Ibid. p. 231.
So remarkably did the martial id;eas of those ages
prevail over the genius and maxims of the canon
law, which in other instances had such credit and
authority with ecclefiafticks. A judicial combat
was appointed in Spain, by Charles V. A. D. 522.
The combatants fought in the Emperor's pretence,
and tbe battle was conducted with all the rites
prescribed by the ancient laws of chivalry. The
whole tranfaEion is described at great length by
Pontus Heuterus Rer. Auftriac. lib. viii. c. 17.
p.o05.

THE last inRance which occurs in the history of

France, of a judicial combat authorized by the.
magistrate, was the famous one between M. Jarnac
and M. de la Chaifaignerie, A. D. 547.. A trial.
by combat was appointed in England, A. D. 157 i
under the infpetion of the judges in the court of
Common Pleas; and though it was not carried to
the fame extremity with the former, Queen Eliza-'
beth having interposed her authority, and enjoined.
the parties to compound the matter, yet, in order wt
preserve their honour, the lifts were marked out,
and all the forms previous to the combat were ob-
served With much ceremony. Spelm. Gloir. voc..
Caspw, p 1o03. In the year :63I, ajudicial com-
bat was appointed between Donald Lord Rea, and
pavid Ramsay, Efq; by the authority of the Lord
high Contable, and Earl Marthal of England; but

that

that quarrel likewise terminated without bloodlhed,
being accommodated by. Charles I.. Another in- ..
fiance occurs seven yeas, .ter. . uihworth in
Observations on the Statutes,. &c. p. a66. <

NOTE XXIII. Sict. f.'. 74. [Z].! ;

THE text contains the great outlines which marki

the course of private and publick jurifdiiotin in the-'
several nations of Europe. I ihall here follow
more minutely the various steps of this progress:
as the matter is curious and important enoygh ,ti
merit this attention, The payment of a fine by:
way of fatisfaciol) to the person or family injured,
was the first device of a rude people, in order to
check' the career of private refentmenti aid to ex-
tinguifh those faide, or deadly feuds which were'
ptofecuted among them with the utmot. violence.
This custom may be traced back..tc the ancient
Germans, Tacit. de Morib. Germ, c. 2.1. and pre-.
yailed among other uncivilized nations. Many ex-
amples of this are colleced by the ingenious and
leamned author of Historical Law-Trads,. vol. i.
plX.'. These fines were ascertained and levied.in-:
thPee different manners, At firt they were.fettled

.voluntary agreement between the parties at va..

rianCe;' When their rage begah to subside, and.
they felt the bad effec&s of their continuing in en-"
mity, they came to terms of concord, and the satis-'
fation made was called a compoition, implying tha.t,
it wai fired by mutual confcnt. De l'Efprit d;r

A a q Loix,

Loix, lib. xxx. c. 19. It is apparent frqm some of
the more ancient codes of laws, that when these
were compiled, matters Rill remained in that simple
slate. In certain cafes, the person who had corm-
mitted an offence, was left exposcd to the resent-
ment of thor: whom he had injured, until he should
recover their favour, quoquo modo potuerit. Lex
Frifion. tit. il. § i. The next mode of levying
these fines was by the sentence of arbiters. An
arbiter is called in the Regiam majeftatem amica-
bilis compositor, lib. xi. c. 4. § 10. He could efi-
mate the degree of offence with more impartiality
than the parties interested, and determine with
greater equity what fatisfaftion ought to be de-
manded. It s difficult to bring an authentick proof
of a custom previous to the records preserved in
any nation of Europe. But one of the Formula
Andegavenfes compiled in the sixth century, seems
to allude to a tranfation carried on not by the au-
thority of a judge, but by the mediation of arbi-
ters. Bouquet Recueil des Hiftor. tom. iv. p. 566.
But as an arbiter wanted authority to enforce his
decisions, judges were appointed with compulsive
power to oblige both parties to acquiesce in their
decisions. Previous to this last ftep, the expedient
of paying compositions was an impcrfect remedy
against the pernicious effe&s of private resentment.
As soon as this important change was introduced,
the magistrate, putting himself in place of the per-
son injured, afccrtained the composition with
Which he ought to reft satisfied. Every poslible

injury

injury that could occur in the intercourse of humanr
society, was confidered andeftimated, and the. com-
pufitions due to the person aggrieved were fixed
with such minute attention as dilcovers, in most
cafes, amazing discernment and delicacy, in rome
inflances, unaccountable caprice. Besides the con-
position payable to the private party, a certain tfim
called afredum, was paid to the King or State, as
Tacitus expresses it, or to the fifcus, in the lan-
guage of the barbarous laws. Some authors,
blending the refined ideas of modern policy witli
their reasonings concerning ancient tranfadions,
have imagined that thefredrm was a compensation
due to the community, on account of the violation
of the publick peace. But it is manifestly nothing
more than the price paid to the magiltrate for the
protetion which he afforded against the violence
ofrefentment. The enacting of this was a confider-
able frep towards improvement in criminal jurif-
prudence. In some of the more ancient codes of
laws, the freda are altogether omitted, or so fel-
dom mentioned, that it is evident they were but
little known. In the later codes, thefiredumJ is as
precisely specified as the composition. In common
cafes it was equal to the third part of the compo-
fition. Capitul. vol. i. p. 52. In some extraor-
dinary cafes, where it was more difficult to protee
the person who had committed violence, the fre-
dum was augmented. Capitul. vol. i. p. Sx5.
Thelt;freda made a considerable branch in the re-
venues of the barons; and wherever territorial
jurifdieion was granted, the royal judges were
prohibited from levying any freda. In explaining

the

the.nature: of the freJid, 1 have followed, in a
grereamafure,, the opinion of M. de Montesquieu
though I. know that several learned antiquaries
havetaken the word in a different sense. Dc l'Efprit
deC Loix, liv. xx. c. 20, &c. The great objeet
of judges was to compel the one party to give,
and.the other to accept the fatisfa&ion prescribed.
They-multiplied regulations to this purpose, and
enforced them by grievou, penalties. Leg. Lon-
gob. lib. i. tit. .

9 34. Ib. tit 37. § i, 2. Capi-

tul. vol. i, p. 37 . § 22. The person who received
a composition was obliged to cease from all farther
hostility, and to confirm his reconciliation with the
adverse party by an oath. Leg. Longob. lib. i.
tit. .. § 8. As an additional and more permanent
evidence ofreconciliation, he was required4orgrant
a bond of fec'rity to the perfqp onfromnybom h.
received a composition, abfislvinghim mfrom:, a
farther prosecution. Marculfusj,# .,dLsq, othr.-
coqltcors of ancient writs, have ;pfrveed irS.
different forms of such bonds,. Marc,.b,;,3q^§i.;
Append. § 23. Form. Sirmondicae, ? 9.;:: 'The
Lettersr.of Slanr, known..in. the law of Soqtland,
are perfe&lyfimilar to there boidsQf fcurity. By
th; letters of Slanes, the heirs and relations of a.
person who had been murdered,,:b9und themsElves,.
ir 'consideration of an 4.ytbmmtt or composition-
paid to them,, to forgive," pa.s over, and for ever"
forget, and in oblivion inter, all rancqor, maliSc,
revenge, prejudice,, grudge and refentinent, thai
they have or may conceive against the aggressor or
his pqfterity, for the crime which he had commit-
ted, and discharge him of all ation, civil or cri-

minal,

minal, aginft him or his eftate,'for now and ever,'
Sytem of Stiles by Dallas of St. Martin's, p. 861.
In the ancient form of letters ofSlanes, the private
party not only forgives and forgets, but pardons
and grants remillion of the crime. This practice,
Dallas, reasoning according to the principles of.
his own age, confiders as an encroachment on the
rights offovereignty, asnone, fays he, could pardon
a criminal but the-King. Ibid. But in early and.
rude times, the prosecution, the punilhment, and;
the pardon of criminals, were all deeds of the
private person who was injured. Madox has pub-
lithed two writs, one in the reign of Edward I. the
other in the reign of Edward III. by which private
persons grant a release or pardon of all trefpafles,
felonies, robberies, and murders committed.- For-
nml. Anglican. No. 702. 705. In the lat ofthefe
inltuments, Come regard teems to be paid to the
fights of die imreign, for the pardon is granted
ms guat W m IS eft. Even after the authority
of the magiftte is interposed in punilhing crimes,
the punishment of criminals is long confidered
chiefly as a gratification to the resentment of the
persons who have been injured. In Persia, a mur-
derer is (till delivered to the relations of the person
whom he has (lain, who put him to death with their
own hands. If they refuse to accept of a fum of
money as a compensation, the sovereign, absolute:.
as he is, cannot pardon the murderer. Voyages
deChardin III. p. 417. edit. 1735, 4to. Voyages..
te Tavernier, liv. v. c. 5. lo. Among the Ara-r
hians, though one of the first polished people in -
the East, the fame custom (iill fubfifs. Defcr.ip-

7 tion

tioul de l'Arabie par M. Nieubuhr, p. .8. By a
law in the kingdom of Aragon as.late as the year
1564, the punishment of one condemned to death
cannot be mitigated but by content of the parties
who have been injured. Fueros & Obfervancias
dei Reyno de Aragon, p. o04. 6.

IF, after all the engagements to cease from en-

mity which I have mentioned, any person renewed
hosiilities, and was guilty of any violence, either
towards the person from whom he had received a
composition, or towards his relations and heirs,
thiswasdeemed a most heinous crime, and punished
with extraordinary rigour. It was an at of dire&
rebellion against the authority of the magistrate,
and was repriffed by the interposition of all his
power. Leg. Longob. lib. i. tit. 9. § 8. 34. Capit.
vol. i. p. 371. § 22. Thus the avenging of in-
juries was taken out of private hgnds, a legal con-
position was eftablifed, and peace and amity were
restored under the infpe&ion, and by, the authority
of a judge. It is evident, that at the time when
the barbarians fettled in the provinces of the Ro-
man Empire, they had fixed judges establishcd
among them with compulsive authority, Persons
veiled with this character are mentioned by the
earliest historians. Du Cange, voc. Yudices. The
right of territorial jurifdietion was not altogether
an usurpation of the feudal barons. There i.
good reason to believe, that the powerful leaders,
who seized different diftri&s of the countries whicl;
they conquered, and kept pofrefion of thenm s
allodial property, assumed at elie fame time tlh

rig'

right of jurifdi&ion, antlexercifed it within their
own territories. This jurifdi&ion was supreme,
and extended to all causes: The clearest proofs of
this areproduced by M. Bouquet. Le Droit pub-
lique de France eclairci, &c. tom. i. p. 206, &c.
The privilege of judging his own vassals, appears
to have been originally a right inherent in evenr
baron who held a fief. As far back as the archives
of nations can conduct us with any certainty, we
find the jurifdiaion and fief united. One of the
earliest charters to a layman which I have met with,
is that of Ludovicus Pius, A.D. 814. And it
contains the right of territorial jurifdition, in the
most express and extensive terms. Capitul. vol. ii.
p. 1405. There are many charters to churches
and monasteries of a more early date, containing
grants of fimilarjurifdicion, and prohibiting any
royal judge to enter the territories of those churches
or monasteries, or to perform any at of judicial
authority there. Bouquet. Recueil des Hifit. torn.
iv. p. 628. 63. 633. tom. v. p. 703. 7Io0 752.
762. Muratori has published many very ancient
charters containing the fame immunities. Antiq.
Ital. Differr. lxx. In most of there deeds, the royal
judge is prohibited from exacting the freda due to
the poflfeor of territorial jurifd ition, which flewss
that they constituted a valuable part of the pub-
lick revenue at that jmunure. The expence of
obtaining a sentence in a court ofjuftice during
the middle ages was so considerable, chat this cir-
cumftance alone was sufficient to render men un-
willing to decide any contest in judicial form. It
appears from a charter in the thirteenth centuiy,

a t!;;at

that the baron who had the right of justice, re.
ceived the fifth. part of the value of every sub-
je&f, the property of which was tried and deter-
mined in his court. If, after the commencement
of a law-fuic,. the parties terminated the conteit
in an amicable manner, or by arbitration, they
.were nevertheless bound to pay the fifth part of
the fubjeft contelted, to the court before which
· the suit had been brought. Hist. de Dauphinc,
Geneve, 1722. tom. i. p. 22. Similar to this is
-.a regulation in the charter of liberty granted to
-the town of Friburg, A D. D 120. If two of the
citizens shall quarrel, and if one of them Ihall
complain to the superior Lord or to his judge,
and after commencing the suit, Ihall be privately
reconciled to his adversary, the judge, if he does
not. approve of this reconciliation, may compel
him to inlift in his law-suit; and all who were pre.
lent at the reconciliation Ihall forfeit the favour of
the superior Lord. Hiftoria Zaringo Badenfis.
Au&or. Jo. Dan. Schoepflinus. Carolfr. 1765. 4to.
vol; v. p. $5

WHAT was the extent of that jurifdiaion which

those who held fiefs pofueiTed originally, we can-
not now determine with certainty. It is evident
that, during the disorders which prevailed in every
kingdom of Europe, the great vassals took ad-
vantage of the feebleness of their Monarchs, and
enlarged their jurifdi&ions to the utmost. As
early as the tenth century, the more powerful
barons had usurped the right of deciding all

causes,

causes, whether civil or criminal. They had ac-
quired the High 7Ju/ice as well as the Law.
Eltabl. de St. Louis, lib. i. c. 24, 25. Their
sentences were final, and there lay no appeal from
them to any fopetior court. Several striking in-
stances of this ate colleted by Bruffel. TraitE
des Fiefs, liv. iii. c. it, 12, 13. Not satisfied
with this, the more potent barons got-their terri-
tories ere&ed into Regalitie, with almost every
royal prerogative and jurifdiaion. [nfances of
thele were frequent in France. Bruff. ib. In Scot-
land, where the power of the feudal nobles became
exorbitant, they were very numerous. Historical
Law Trass, vol. i. tra&. vi. Even in England,
though the authority of the Norman kings cir-
cumfcribed the jurifdi&ion of the barons more
than in any feudal kingdom, several counties
palatine were ereced, into which the King'sjudges
could not enter, and no writ.could come in the
King's name, until it received the Teal of the
county palatine. Spelnan.' Glofi. voc. Comites
Palatini; Blackstone's Commentaries on the Laws
of England, vol. iii. p. 78. These lords of rega-
lities had a right to claim or rescue their vaflals
from the King's judges, if they aflumed any jurif-
diction over them. Bruflel, ubi supra. In the
law of Scotland this privilege was termed the
right of repledging; and the frequency of it not
only interrupted the course of justice, but gave
rife to great disorders in the exercise of it. HiR.
Law Tracs, ib. The jurisdiction of the counties

palatine

palatine was productive of like inconveniencies in
England.

THE remedies provided by Princes against the

bad effcc&s of theie usurpations were various, and
gradually applied. Under Charlemagne and his
immediate descendants, the regal prerogative tfili
retained great vigour, and the Duces, Cornites, and
Mifi Doninici, the former of whom were ordinary
and fixed judges, the latter extraordinary and
itinerant judges, in the different provinces of their
extensive dominions, exercised a jurifiiiction co-
ordinate. with the barons in folme cafes, and fu-
perior to them in others. Du Cange, voc. Dux,
Coiiites & Mifi. Murat. Antiq. Dificrt. viii. & ix.
But under the feeble race of monarchs who fuc-
ceeded them, the authority of the royal judges
declined, and the barons usurped that unlimited
jurifdicion which has been described. Louis VI.
of France attempted to revive the function of the
lMi'i Dominici under the title of 3uges des Exempts,
but the barons were become too powerful to bear
such an encroachment on their jurifdi&ion, and
he was obliged to defilt from employing them.
Henaut. Abregc Chron. tom. ii. p. 730. His
fucceflor (as has been observed) had recourse to
expedients less alarming. The appeal de defaote
de Droit, or on account of the refusal of juflicc,
was the firat which was attended with any conli-
derable effctr. According to the maxims of f'luda!
law, if a baron had not as many vassals as enabled

liiii

him to try by their peers, the parties who offered
to plead in his court, or if he delayed or refused
to proceed in the trial, the cause might be carried,
by appeal, to the court of the ftperior lord of
whom the baron held, and tried there, De I'Ef-
prit des Loix, liv. xxviii. c. 28. Du Carge, voc.
defe,7us Juflitiia. The number of Peers or assessors
in the courts of Barons was frequently very con-
fiderable. It appears from a criminal trial in the
court of the viscount de Lautrec, A. D. 1299,
that upwards of two hundred persons were pre-
sent, and affitled in the trial, and voted in palling
iudgment. Hil. de Langued. par D. D. De Vic
& Naifette, torn. iv. Preuves, p. 1 14. But as the
right of jurifdicion had been ulurped by many
inconsiderable barons, they were often unable to
hold courts. This gave frequent ocdafion to such
appeals, and rendered the practice familiar. By
degrees, such appeals bcgan to be taken from
the courts of the more powerful barons, and it
is evident, from a decision recorded by Bruffel,
that the royal judges were willing to give counte-
nance to any pretext for them. Traite dcs Fiefs,
ton. i. p. 235. 61i. This species of appeal had
lets effect in abridging the ju'ri.tiCiocn ot tile no-
bles, than the appeal on account of the i;ijuflice
of the sentence. When the feudal monarchs were
powerful, and their judges possessed extensive au-
thority, such appeals seem to have been frequent.
Capitul. vol. i. p. £75. 180; and they were made
in a manner fuicable to the rudeness of a simple
age. The persons aggrieved resorted to the pala-ce
of their sovereign, and with outcries and loud

VOL. I. B b noise

noise called to him for redress. Capitul. lib. ii.
c. 59. Chronic. Lawterbergienfe ap. Menclken.
Script. German. vol. ii. p. 284. b. In the king-
don of Aragon, the appeals to the 7ujziza or
supreme judge were taken in such a form as sup.
poled the appellant to be in immediate danger of
death, or of some violent outrage ; he rushcd innt
the presence of thejudge, crying with a loud voice,
/A'i, zvi, Ftierza, Fuerza, thus imploring (a:; it
were) the instant interposition of that fipr'tcin
jidge in order to lave him. Hlier. Blanca Corn-
merlt. de rebus Aragon. ap. Script. Hispanic.
Pifforii, vol. iii. p. 753. The abolition of the
trial by combat facilitated the revival of appeals
of this kind. The effets of this subordination
which appeals established, in introducing attention,
equity, and consistency of decision into courts of
judicature, were soon conspicuous; and almost all
causes of importance were carried to be finally
determined in the King's courts. Bruffel, torn. i.
252. Various circumstances which contributed
towards the introduction and frequency of such
appeals are enumerated De l'Elprit de Loix, liv.
xxviii. c. 27. Nothing, however, was of such
effect as the attention which monarchs gave to tle
constitution and dignity of their courts ofjuftice.
'It was the ancient custom for the feudal monarchs
to preside themselves in their courts, and to ad-
mninifterjuftice in person. Marculf. lib. i. § 25.
Murat. Diflert. xxxi. Charlemagne, whilst he was
drefling, used to call parties into his prefencc,
and having heard and confidered the subje&t of
litigation, gave judgment concerning it. Egin-

6 hartus

hartus vita Caroli magni cited by Madox Hist. of
Exchequer, vol. i. p. 9t. This could not fail
of rendering their courts refpelable. St. Louis,
who encouraged to the utmofl the practice of
appeals, revived this ancient cuiloin, and admi-
niftered juflice in p:rfon with all the ancient fim-
plicity. "' I have often seen the faint," fays
Joinville, " fit under tie shade of an oak in the
wood of Vincennes, vwhln all who had any com-
plaint, freely approached him. At other times he
gave orders to spread a carpet in a garden, and
feating himself upon it, heard the causes that
were brought before him." Hist. de St. Louis,
p. 13. edit. 1761. Princes of inferior rank, who
potfeffed the right ofjuftice, sometimes difpenlfd
it in person, and presided in their tribunals. Two
inflances of this occur with relpeft to the Dau-
phines of Vienne. Hill. de Dauphine, tor. i.
p. i8. tom. ii. p. 257. But as Kings and Princes
could not decide every cause in person, nor bring
them all to be determined in the fame court;
they appointed Baillis, with a right ofjurifdiaion,
in different clifrits of their kingdom. These
pofleffed powers somewhat similar to those of the
ancient C(omites. It was towards the end of the
twelfth century, and beginning of the thirteenth,
that this office was firit instituted in France.
Bruflel, liv. ii,, c. 35. When the King had a court
eftablilhed in different quarters of his dominions,
this invited his fubjedts to have recourse to it.
It was the private interest of the Baillis, as well as
an obje& of publick policy, to extend their jurif-
dicion. They took advantage of every defeEt in

B b . the

the rights of the barons, and of every error in
their proceedings, to remove causes out of their
courts, and to bring them under their own cog-
nizance. There was a diftintion in the feudal
law, and an extremely ancient one, between the
high justice and the low. Capitul. 3. A.D. 812.
§ 4. A. D. 815. § 3. Eftabl. de St. Louis, liv. i.
c. 40. Many barons poffefied the latter jurifdic-
tion who had no title to the former. The for-
mer included the right of trying crimes of every
kind, even the highest; the latter was confined to
petty trespasses. This furnished endless pretexts
for obftrucing, restraining, and reviewing the
proceedings in the baron courts. Ordon. ii. 457.
§ 25. 458. § 29.- A regulation of greater im-
portance succeeded the infticution of Baillis. The
King's supreme court or parliament was rendered
fixed as to the place, and constant as to the time
of its meetings. In France, as well as in the other
feudal kingdoms, the King's court of justice was
originally ambulatory, followed the person of the
monarch, and was held only during some of the
great festivals. Philip Augustus, A. D. 1,35,
rendered it sedentary at Paris, and continued its
terms during the greater part of the year. Pas-
quier Recherches, liv. ii. c. 2. & 3, cc. Ordon.
tom. i. p. 366. § 62. He and his fuccefiors veiled
extensive powers in that court; they granted the
members of it several privileges and diitinctions
which it would be tedious to enumerate. Pas-
quier, ib. Velly hist. de France, tom. vii. p. 307.
Persons eminent for integrity and f;ill in law w.ec
appointed judges there. Ib. By degrees the final

I decilion

decision of all causes of importance was brought
into the parliament of Paris, and the other par-
liaments which administered jultice in the King's
name, in different provinces of the kingdom.
This jurif li tion, however, the parliament of Paris
acquired very slowly, and the great vassals of the
crown made violent efforts in order to obftruc:
the attenipts of this parliament to extend its au-
thu ity. Towards the close of the thirteenth cen-
tury, Philip the Fair was obliged to prohibit his
parliament from taking cognizance of certain
appeals brought into it fromn the courts of the
Count of Bretagne, and to recognize his right of
fuprenme and final jurisdiction. Memoires pour
fervir de Preuves a I'Hiltoire de Bretagne par
Morice, torn. i. p. io37. 1074. Charles VI. at
the end of the following century was obliged to
confirm the rights of the Dukes of Bretagne in
more ample form. Ibid. tom. ii. p. 580, 581.
So violent was the oppolition of the barons to this
right of appeal, which they confidered as fatal to
their privileges and power, that the authors of the
Encyclopedic have mentioned fiveral intances in
which barons put to death, or mutilated lich per-
sons as ventured to appeal from the lcntences pro-
nounced in their courts, to the parliament of
Paris, tom. xii. Art. Parlement, p. 25.

THI. progress ofjuri lition in the other feud.l

kingdoms was in a great nal'tilre linilar to that
which we have traced in France. In England,
the territorial jurifdiion of the barons was both
ancient and extensive. Leg. Edw. Cons. No. 5

B b 3 alll

and 9. After the Norman conquest it became
more ftritly feudal; and it is evident from fads re-
corded in the English hillory, as well as from tlh
institution of Counties Palatine, which I have al-
ready mentioned, that the usurpations of the noble
in England were not inferior to those of their coli-
temporaries on the continent. The fame expedLi-
ents were employed to circumscribe or abolifll thofl
dangerous jurifdiaions. William the Conqueror
eftablithed acoinfantcourt in the hall of his palace;
fro-n which the four courts now entrufled with the
adminiilration ofjuttice in England took their rile.
Henry II. divided his kingdom into fix circuits,
and sent itinerant judges to hold their courts ill
them at statcd seasons. Blackstone's Commentaries
on the Laws of England, vol. iii. 57. Justices of
peace were appointed in every county by fubfe-
quent monarchs; to whofejuril'diion the people
gradually had recourse in many civil causes. The
privileges of the Counties Palatine were gradually
limited; with refpec' to some points they were
aboliflied and the administration of jufice was
brought into the King's courts, or before judges
of his appointment. The several steps taken for
this purpole are enumerated in Dalrymple's His-
tory of Feudal Property, chap. vii.

IN Scotland the usurpations of the nobility were

more exorbitant than in any other feudal king-
dom. The progress of their encroachments, andl
the methods taken by the crown to limit or abolilh
their tcrricorial and independent jurifdiaions, both
vhich I had occasion to confider and explain in in

fornlcr

former work, differed very little from those of
which I have now given the detail. Hillory of
Scotland, vol. i. p. 45.

I SHOULD perplex myielf and my readers in the

lab'irinth of German jurili,.1ldcnce, were I to
attempt to delineate the progrels of jurifdiaion in
tie Empire, with a minute accuracy. It is luffi-
cieii to obfcrve, that the authority which the
Aiuli'k council and Imperial chamaber now poffcfs,
took irs rife from the fame abuse of territorial
jurildicion, and was acquired in the fame manner
that the royal courts attained influence in other
countries. All the ilnportan: facts with respeCt
to both thele particulars, may be found in Phil.
Datt, depace publica Imperii, lib. iv. The ca-
pital articles are pointed out in Pfeffel Abrege3
de l'Hiftoire & Droit publique d'Allemagne,
p. 556. 581.; and in Traite du Droit publique
de l'Empire par M. le Coq. de Villeray. The twi
last treaties are of great authority, having becin
compolcd under the eye of M. Schoepflin of
Stralbrirg, one of the ablest publick lawyers in
Gerniany.

NO' E XXIV. SeCT. I. P. 78. [AA].

IT is not easy to fix with precision the period at

which Ecclefiaflicks first began to claim exemp-
tion firom the civil jurificiiion. It is certain, that
during the early and purest ages of the church,
they pretended to no such imnnlunity. Thec au.

B b 4 thority

thority of the civil magifirate extended to all per.
sons, and to all causes. This fad has not only
been clearly eftablilhed by Protestant authors, but
is admitted by many Roman Catholicks of eLimi-
nence, and particularly by the writers in defence
of the liberties of the Gallican church. There
are several original papers publilhed by Muratori,
which thew that, in the ninth and tenth centuries,
causes of the greatest importance relating to eccle-
fiafticks were still determined by civil judges.
Antiq. Ital. vol. v. dissert. Ixx. Proofs of this
are produced likewise by M. Houard, Anciennes
Loix des Francois, &c. vol. i. p o209. Eccle-
fiafticks did not flhake off all at once their itb-.
je&tion to civil courts. This privilege, like their
other usurpations, was gained slowly, and itep by
ftep. This exemption seems at first to have been
merely an at of complaisance, flowing from vene-
ration for their character. Thus from a charter
of Charlemagne in favour of the church of Mans,
A. D. 796, to which M. l'Abb: de Soy refers in
his Notice de Diplomes, tom. i. p. 201, that
monarch directs hisjudges, if any difference should
arise between the ad.iiiniltrators of the revenues
of that church and any person whatevtr, not to
fumnon the adminiatrators to appear in mallo
publico; but first of all to meet with them, and
to endeavour to accommodate the diflerence in an
amicable manner. This indulgence was in pro-
cetl of time improved into a legal exemption;
which was founded on the fame superstitious refped.
of the laity for the clerical characer and function.

'

"

.

.
. .R A r e -

A remarkable inRtance of this occurs in a charter of
Frederick Barbarossa, A. D, 1 172, to the monastery
of Altenburg. He grants them judicium non tan-
turn fanguinolentis plaga, fed vitae & mortis; he
prohibits any of the royal judges from diflurbing
their jurisdiction; and the reason which he gives
for this ample concession is, nam quorum, ex Dei
gratia, ratione divini minifterii onus leve eft, &
jugurn suave; nos penitus nolumus illius oppref-
fionis conturneiia, vel manu Laica fatigari. Menc-
ken. Script. rer. Germ. vol. iii. p. 1067.

IT is not necessary for illutrating what is con-

tained in the text, that I floulddefcribe the manner
in which the code of the canon law was compiled,
and ihew that the dotrines in it most favourable
to the power of the clergy, are founded on igno-
rance, or filpported by fraud and forgery. The
reader will find a full account of there in Gerard.
Van Maltricht. Hiftoria Juris Ecclefiaftici, & in
Science de Government par M. Real, tom. vii.
c. & 3. § ", 3, &c. The history of the pro-
grefs and extent of ecclefiaflical jurisdiction, with
an account of the arts which the clergy employed
in order to draw causes of every kind into the
spiritual courts, is no less curious, and would
throw great light upon many of the customs and
institutions of the dark ages; but it is likewise
foreign from the present subje&t. Du Cange in
his Glossary, voc. Curia Chrifiianitatis, has col-
lected most of the caufis with refpe.t to which
the clergy arrogated an exclufive.jurifdikion, and

refers

refers to the authors, or original papers, wii',
confirm his obfcrvarions. Giannon: in his Civil
History of Naples, lib. xix. § 3. has ranged thclc
under proper heads, and scrutinizes the preten-
sions of the church with his usual boldness and
discernment. M. Fleury obfervts, that the cl!rgy
multiplied the pretex;s fur extending the autlioritv
of the ipiritual courts, at such a rate, that ic v;..,
in their power to withdraw every pcrfon and ever,
caufc from the juriftii'ion of the civil magiiRrte.
HilZ. Eccles. torn. xix. Disc. Prelimi-. 16. B'Ei
how ill-founded soever the jriifcdiion of t,:
clergy may be, or whatever might be the abul's
to which their manner of exerciring it gave rile,
the principles and forms of their juriil)rudence
were far more perfct than that which was known
in the civil courts. It is probable that ecclefi-
afLicks never submitted, during any period in the
middle ages, to the laws contained in the codes
of the barbarous nations, but were governed
entirely by the Roman law. Tley regulated all
ti;ir tranfadtions by such of its maxims as were
prelerved by tradition, or were contained in the
Theodosian code, and other books extant among
them. This we learn from a cuttom which pre-
vailed universally in those ages. Every person was
permitted to chuft among the various codes o'
laws then in 'fo-ce, that to which he was willini,
to conform. In any tranfation of importance, ir
was ul'ual for die persons contracling to mention
the law to which they submitted, that it might be
knoun how any cuntroverfy that lhould arise be-

tween

tween them was to be decided. Innumerable proofs
of this occur in the charters of the middle ages.
But the clergy confidered it as such a valuable pri-
vilege of their order to be governed by the Ro-
man law, tlat when any person entered into holy
orders, it was usual for him to renounce the laws
to which he had been formerly fubjeEt, and to de-
clare that he now submitted to the Roman law.
Conflat me Johannem clericurn, filium quondam
Verandi, qui profeiffis fum, ex natione mea, lege
vivere Langobardorum, fed tanien, pro honore
ecclefialfico, lege nunc videor vivere Romana.
Charta, A. ). 1072. Farulfus presbyterqui pro-
fclfus rum, more facerdotii mei, lege vivere Ro-
mana. Charta, A.D. 1075. Muratori Antichita
Eltenfi. vol. i. p. 78. See likewise Houard An-
ciennes Loix des Francois, &c. vol. i. p. 203.

TriE- code of the canon law began to be com-

piled earl) in the ninth century. Mem. de l'Acad.
des Infcript. tom. xviii. p. 346, &c. It was above
two centuries after that before any collection was
made of those customs, which were the rule of
judgments in the courts of the barons. Spiritual
judges decided, of course, according to written and
known laws; Lay judges, left without any fixed
guide, were tlir-c:kcd by loose traditionary cultoms.
But hides this general advantage of the canon
law, its forms and principles were more consonant
to realon, anti more favourable to the equitable
decision of every point in controversy, than rhofe
which prevailed in liy courts. It appears from Notes

XXI.

XXI. and XXIII. concerning private wars, and the
trial by combat, that the whole spirit of ecclefi-
affical jurisprudence was adverse to there fangui-
nary customs which were deftru&ive of justice;
and the whole force of ecclefiafiecal authority was
exerted to aboliln them, and to substitute trials by
law and evidence in their room. Almost all the
forms in lay courts, which contribute to establish,
and continue to preserve order in judicial proceed-
ings, are borrowed from the canon law. Fleury
Inftit. du droit canon. part iii. c. 6. p. 52. St.
Louis, in his Eftabliffemens, confirms many of his
new regulations concerning property, and the ad-
ministration of justice, by the authority of the
canon law, from which he borrowed them. Thus,
for instance, the first hint of attaching moveables
for the recovery of a debt, was taken from the
canon law. Eftab. liv. ii. c. 21 and 40. And
likewise the ceDio bonorum, by a person who was
insolvent. Ibid. In the fame manner, he efta-
blifhed new regulations with refpet to the effects
of persons dying inteltate, liv. i. c. 89. These
and many other salutary regulations, the Cano-
nifts borrowed from the Roman law. Many other
examples might be produced of more perfect ju-
rifprudence in the canon law than was known in
lay courts. For that reason it was deemed an high
privilege to be fubjeft to ecclesiastical jurifdicion.
Among the many immunities, by which men were
allured to engage in the dangerous expeditions for
the recovery of the Holy Land, one of the modt
considerable was the declaring such as took the

Cross

Cross to be subjet only to the iipirtual courts. See
Note XIII. and Du Cange, voc. crucis privilgia.

NOTE XXV. SECT. I. p. 80. [BB1.
THE rapidity with which the knowledge and

fludy of the Roman law spread over Europe, is
amazing. The copy of the Pandets was found
at Amalphi, A. D. 1 137. Irnerius opened a col-
lege of civil law at Bologna a few years after.
Giann. Hist. book xi. c. 2. It began to be taught
as a part of academical learning in different parts
of France before the middle of the century. Vac-
carius gave lectures on the civil law at Oxford, as
early as the year I 147. A regular system of fel-
dal law, formed plainly in imitation of the Ro-
man code, was composed by two Milanese law-
yers about the year I 50o. Gratian publifled the
code of canon law, with large additions and emen-
dations, about the fame time. The earlieit col-
le&tion of those culomrs, which served as the rules
ofdecifion in the courts ofjuftice, is the /fifes de
7eruJalem. They were compiled, as the preamble
informs us, in the year o199, and are called Jus
Confuecudinarium quo regebatur regn um oriientale.
Willerm. Tyr. lib. xix. c. 2. But peculiar circum-
fRances gave occasion to this early compilation.
The vicorious Crusaders fettled as a colony in a
foreign country, and adventurers from all the dif-
ferent nations of Europe composed this new so-
ciety. It was necessary on that account to afcer-
tain the laws and cufloms which were to regulate
the tranlfasions of business, and the administration
ofjuftice among them. But in no country of Eu-

rope

rope was there, at that time, any collection of
cuttors, nor had any attempt been made to render
law fixed. The first undertaking of that kind was
by Glanville, Lord Chief Justice of England, in
his Tracatus de Legibus & Confuetudinibus Ai-
glie, composed about the year i ix. The R-
giam Majeftatem in Scotland, ascribed to David i.
seems to be an imitation, and a servile one or
Glanville. Several Scottish Antiquaries, under
the influence of that pious credulity, which dil-
poses men to afnent, without hesitation, to what-
ever they deem for the honour of their native
country, contend zealously, that the Regian Maje-
Ratem is a production prior to the treatise of Glan-
ville; and have brought themselves to believe,
that a nation, in a superior state of improvement,
borrowed its laws and institutions from one con-
fiderably.lefs advanced in its political progress.
The internal evidence (were it my province to ex-
amine it) by which this theory might be refuted,
is, in my opinion, decisive. The external circum-
ilances which have seduced Scottish authors into
this miflake, have been explained with so much
precision and candour by Sir David Dalrymple, in
his examination of some of the arguments for the
high antiquity of Regiam Majeftatem,Edin. 1769,
4to, that it is to be hoped the controversy will
not be again revived. Pierre de Fontaines, who
tells us, that he was the sirs who had attempted
such a work in France, composed his Con/eil,
which contains an account of the customs of
the country of Vermandois, in the reign of

Sc.

Sr. Louis, which began A. D. 1226. eanmna-
:ir, tile author of the Couftumes de clmtcoifis,
lived about the fame time. The Eltabliffemens
,f Sr. Louis, containing a large collefion of
the cuflorns which prevailed wichin the royal do-
mains, were publifhlcd by the authority of that
monarch. As soon as men became acquainted
with the advantages of having written culloms and
laws, to which they could iave recouri.' on every
occasion, the method of collceting them became
common. Charles VII. of France, by an ordo-
nance, A. D. i 4:3, appointed the culomiarv laws
in every province of France to be collected and
arranged. Velley and Vill.aret. Hifloire, ton. xvi.
p. 113. His 1fucccfio)r, Louis XI. renewed the
injuntion. But this salutary undertaking hath
never been fully executed, and the French jurif-
prudence remains more obscure and uncertain than
if these prudent regulations of their monarchs had
taken effect. A pratice was eftabliflcd in the
middle ages, which affords the clearest proof that
judges, while they had no other rule to dire&
their decrees but unwritten and traditionary cuf-
toms, were often at a loss how to lind out the fa&s
and principles, according tovwhich theywere bound
to decide. They were obliged, in dubious cafes,
to call a certain number of old men, and to lay
the cafe before them, that they might inform them
what was the pracice or cultomnwith regard to the
point. This was called Enque/fe par turbe. Du
Cange, voc. Trba. The clFe's of the revival of
the Roman jurisprudence have been explained by
M. dc Montclfuieu, liv. xxviii. c. 4., and by Mr.

. lune,

Hume, Hist. of England, vol. ii. p. 441. I have
adopted many of their ideas. Who can pretend to
review any subjet which such writers have confi-
dered, without receiving from them light and in-
formation ? At the fame time I am convinced,
that the knowledge of the Roman law was not so
entirely loft in Europe during the middle ages, as
is commonly believed. My subjec does not re-
quire me to examine this point. Many firiking
facts with regard to it are colleted by Donato
Antonio d'Afti Dall' Ufo e autorita della regione
civile nelle provincie dell' Imperio Occidentale.
Nap. 1751. 2 vol. 8vo.

THAT the civil law is intimately connected with

the municipaljurifprudence in several countries of
Europe, is a fat so well known, that it needs no
illustration. Even in England, where the common
law is supposed to form a system perfecly diftin&
from the Roman code, and although such as ap-
ply in that country to the study of the common law
boaftof this diftinc'ion with fomedegree of affecta-
tion, it is evident that many of the ideas and maxims
of the civil law are incorporated into the Englih j u-
rifprudence. This is well illustrated by the inge-
nious and learned author of Observations on the
Statutes, chiefly the more ancient. 2d edit. p. 66.

NOTE XXVI. SECT. I. p. 82. [CC].

THE whole history of the middle ages makes

it evident, that war was the sole profession of gen-
tleien, and the only objec attended to in their

education.

education. Even after some change in manners
began to take place, and the civil arts of life had
acquired some reputation, the ancient ideas, with
refpe& to the accomplilhments necessary for a per-
son of noble birth, continued long in force. In the
Memoires de Fleuranges, p. 9, &c. we have an ac-
count of the youthful exercises and occupations of
Francis I. and they are altogether martial and athle-
tick. That father of letters owed his relish for
them, not to education, but to his own good sense
and good taste. The manners of the superior or-
der of ecclefiaficks during the middle ages, fur-
nifh the strongest proof that the diftin&ion of pro-
fefions was hardly known in Europe. The func-
tions and character of the clergy are obviously
very different from those of laymen; and among
the inferior orders of churchmen, this constituted
a diftint characer separate from that of other ci-
tizens. But the dignified ecclefiafticks, who were
frequently of noble birth, were above such a dif-
tin&ion; they retained the idea of what belonged
to them as gentlemen, and in spite of the decrees
of Popes, or the canons of councils, they bore
arms, led their vaftals to the field, and fought at
their head in battle. Among them the priesthood
was scarcely a separate profeflion; the military
accompliihments which they thought eTential to
them as gentlemen, were cultivated; the theolo.
gical science, and pacifick virtues suitable to their
spiritual funftion, were negleced and despised.

As Coon as the science of law became a labo-
rious study, and the pra&ice of it a separate pro-

VOL. I. C c feioon,

fellion, such as rose to eminence in it obtained ho-
nours formerly appropriated to soldiers. Knight-
hood was the molt illustrious mark of ditlin&ion
during several ages, and conferred privileges to
which rank or birth alone were not entitled. To
this high dignity persons eminent for their know-
ledge of law were advanced, and by that were
placed on a level with those whom their military
talents had rendered conspicuous. Miles 7ufitiii,
Miles Literalus became common titles. Matthew
Paris mentions such knights as early as A.D.25 1.
If ajudge attained a certain rank in the courts of
justice, that alone gave him a right to the honour
of knighthood. Pafquier Recherches, liv. xi. c.
16. p. 130. Dissertations hiftoriques fur la Cheva-
lerie par Honorc de Sainte Marie, p. 164, &c. A
profeflion that led to offices, which ennobled such
as held them, grew into credit, and the people of
Europe became accustomed to fee men rife to
eminence by civil as well as military talents.

NOTE XXVII. SECT. I. p. 86. [DD].
THE chief intention of there notes, was to bring

at once under the view of my readers, such fats
and circumstances as tend to illustrate or confirm
what is contained in that part of the history to
which they refer. When there lay scattered in
many different authors, and were taken from books
not generally known, or which it would be difa-
greeable to consult, I thought it would be of ad-
vantage to colle& them together. But when every
thing necessary for the proof or illustration of my
narrative or reasoning may be found 'in any one

book

book which is generally known, or deserves to be
Io, I (hall satisfy myself with referring to it. This
is the cafe-with refpet to Chivalry. Almost every
fa& which I have mentioned in the text, together
with many other curious and inftru&ive particulars
concerning this singular institution, may be found
in Metnoires fur l'ancienne Chevalerie confideree
comme une etabliffement politique & militaire,
par M. de la Curne de St. Palaye.

NO T E XXVIII. SECT. I. p. 91. [EE].

The subjeCt of my enquiries does not call me

to write a history of the progress of science. The
fats and observations which I have produced, are
sufficient to illustrate the effects of its progress
upon manners and the state of society. While
science was altogether extint in the weflern parts
of Europe, it was cultivated in Constantinople and
other parts of the Grecian Empire. But the sub-
tile genius of the Greeks turned almost entirely to
theological disputation. The Latins borrowed
that spirit from them, and many of the controver-
fies which still occupy, and divide theologians,
took their rife among the Greeks, from whom the
other Europeans derived a considerable part of
their knowledge. See the testimony of ZEneas
Sylvius ap. Conringium de antiq. academicis,
p. 43. Hiftoire literaire de France, tom. vii. p.
113, &c. tom. ix. p. 151, &c. So3n after the
Empire of the Caliphs was eatablifled in the East,
some illustrious princes arose among them, who
encouraged science. But when the Arabians turned

vt CC c 2 their

their attention to the literature cultivated by the
ancient Greeks and Romans, the chaste and correct
taste of their worksof genius appeared frigid and
unanimated to a people of a more warm imagina-
tion. It was impossible for them to admire the
poets and historians of Athens, or of Rome. But
they were sensible of the merit of their philofo-
phers. The operations of the intelleft are more
fixed and uniform than those of the fancy or taste.
Truth makes an impression nearly the fame in every
place; the ideas of what is beautiful, elegant, or
sublime, vary in different climates. The Arabi-
ans, though they neglected Homer, translated the
most eminent of the Greek philosophers into their
own language; and, guided by their precepts and
discoveries, applied themselves with great ardour
to the fludy of geometry, astronomy, medicine,
dialectics, and metaphysics. In the three former
they made considerable and useful improvements,
which have contributed not a little to advance
those sciences to that high degree of perfection
which they have attained. In the two latter, they
chose Aristotle for their guide, and refining on the
subtle and distinguishing spirit which characterizes
his philosophy, they rendered it altogether frivo-
lous or unintelligible. The schools eftablifled
in the East for teaching and cultivating there fci-
ences, were in high reputation. They commu-
nicated their love of science to their countrymen,
who conquered Asia and Spain; and the schools
instituted there were little inferior in fame to those
in the East. Many of the persons who di0rl-
guilhed themselves by their proficiency in si

7 )

in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, were edu-
cated among the Arabians. Bruckerus collets
many instances of this, Hiftor. Philof. v. iii. p.
68 , &c. Almost all the men eminent for science
during several centuries, were inftru&ed in the
philosophy of the Arabians. The first knowledge
of the Aristotelian philosophy in the middle ages,
was acquired by translations of his works out of
the Arabick. The Arabian commentators were
deemed the most skilful and authentick guides in
the study of his lyftem. Conring. antiq. acad.
Diff. iii. p. 95, &c. Supplem. p. 241, &c. Mu-
rat. antiquit. Ital. vol. iii. p. 932, &c. From
them the Schoolmen derived the genius and prin-
ciples of their philosophy, which contributed so
much to retard the progress of true science,

THE establishment of Colleges or Universities

is a remarkable sera in literary history. The
schools in cathedrals and monasteries confined
themselves chiefly to the teaching of grammar.
There were only one or two maiters employed in
that office. But in colleges, professors were ap-
pointed to teach all the different parts of science.
The course or order of education was fixed. The
time that ought to be allotted to the fludy of each
science was ascertained. A regular form of trying
the proficiency of students was prescribed; and
academical titles and honours were conferred on
such as acquitted themselves with approbation.
A good account of the origin and nature of there
is given by Seb. Bacmeifterus Antiquitates Rofto-
chienfes, five, Hiftoria Urbis & AcademireRofoch.

Cc 3 ap.

ap. Monumenta inedira Rer. Germ. per E. J. de
Weftphalen, vol. iii. p. 781. Lips. 1743. The
first obscure mention of these academical degrees
in the University of Paris (from which the other
universities in Europe have borrowed most of their
customs and institutions) occurs A. D. 1215.
Crevier hist. de l'univ. de Paris, tom. i. p. 296,
&c. They were completely established A. D. a3 1.
Ib. 248. It is unnecessary to enumerate the several
privileges to which bachelors, maflers, and doc-
tors were entitled. One circumstance is fufficienc
to demonstrate the high degree of estimation in
which they were held. Do&ors in the different
faculties contended with knights for precedence,
and the dispute was terminated in many inflances
by advancing the former to the dignity of knight-
hood, the high prerogatives of which I have
mentioned. It was even asserted, that a doctor
had a right to that title without creation. Bar-
tolus taught- doaorem a&ualiter regentem in
jure civili per decennium eftici militem ipso facto.
Honore de St. Marie Dissert. p. 165. This was
called Chevalerie de lectures, and the persons ad-
vanced to that dignity, Milites Clerici. There new
establishments for education, together with the
extraordinary honours conferred on learned men,
greatly increased the number of scholars. In the
year 1262, there were ten thousand students in
the university of Bologna; and it appears firom
the hirfory of that university, that law was tile
only science taught in it at that time. In the year
;340, there were thirty thousand in the university

us

of Oxford. Speed's Chron. ap. Anderson's Chro-
nol. Deduaion of Commerce, vol. i. p. 172. In
the fame century, ten thousand persons voted in a
question agitated in the university of Paris; and
as graduates alone were admitted to that privilege,
the number of students must have been valtiy
great. Velly Hist. de France, tor. xi. p. 147.
There were indeed few universities in Europe at
that time; but such a number of tfudents may
nevertheless be produced as a proof of the extra-
ordinary ardour with which men turned to the
fludy of science in those ages; it shows likewise
that they already began to confider other profef-
sions than that of a soldier as honourable and use-
ful.

NO T E XXIX. SECT. I. p. 93. [FS].
The great variety of fubjeas which I have en-

deavoured to illustrate, and the extent of this upon
which I now enter, will justify my adopting the
words of M. de Montefqiieu, when he begins to
treat of commerce. " The subjet which follows
ic would require to be discussed more at large;
cc but the nature of this Work does not permit it.

1I with to glide on a tranquil /tream; but I am
c hurried along by a torrent."

Many proofs occur in history of the little inter-

course between nations during the middle ages.
Towards the close of the tenth century, Count
Bouchard intending to found a monaltery at St.
Maur des Fosses, near Paris, applied to an abbot

¢c 4 of

of Clugny in Burgundy, famous for his fancity,
intreating him to condu& the monks thither. The
language in which he addreffied that holy man is
singular: he tells him, that he had undertaken
the labour of such a great journey; that he was
fatigued with the length of it, therefore hoped to
obtain his request, and that his journey into such
a distant country Ihould not be in vain. The an-
fwer of the abbot is still more extraordinary: He
refused to comply with his desire, as it would be
extremely fatiguing to go along with him into a
strange and unknown region. Vita Burchardi
venerabilis Comitis ap. Bouquet Rec. des Hist.
vol. x. p. 351. Even so late as the beginning of
the twelfth century, the monks of Ferrieres in the
diocese of Sens did not know that there was such
a city as Tournay in Slanders; and the monks
of St. Martin of Tournay were equally unac-
quainted with the situation of Ferrieres. A tranf-
aftion in which they were both concerned, made
it necessary for them to have some intercourse.
The mutual interest of both monasteries prompted
each to find out the situation of the other. After
a long search, which is particularly described, the
discovery was made by accident. Herimannus
Abbas de Reftauratione St. Martini Tornacenfis
ap. Dacher. Spicel. vol. xii. p. 400. The igno-
rance of the middle ages with refpe& to the fitua-
tion and geography of remote countries was till
more remarkable. The molt ancient geographical
chart which now remains as a monument of the
Rate of that science in Europe during the middle

ages,
*\

ages, is found in a manuscript of the Chronique
de St. Denys. There the three parts of the earth
then known are so represented, that Jerusalem is
placed in the middle of the globe, and Alexandria
appears to be as near to it as Nazareth.' Mem. de
l'Acad. des Belles Lettres, tor. xvi. p. 185.
There seems to have been no inns or houses of
entertainment for the reception of travellers during
the middle ages. Murat. Antiq. Ital. vol. iii.
p. 58 , &c. This is a proof of the little inter-
course which took place between different nations.
Among people whose manners are simple, and
who are seldom visited by strangers, hospitality is
a virtue of the first rank. This duty of hospitality
was so necessary in that state of society which took
place during the middle ages, that it was not
confidered as one of those virtues which men may
praftife or not, according to the temper of their
minds, and the generosity of their hearts. Ho-
fpitality was enforced by statutes, and such as
negleced this duty were liable to punishment.
Quicunque hofpiti venienti leaum, aut focum
negaverit, trium folidorum inlatione mulaetur.
Leg. Burgund. tit. xxxviii. § I. Si quis homini
aliquo pergenti in itinere mansionem vetaverit
fexaginta folidos componat in publico. Capitul.
lib. vi. § 82. This increase of the penalty, at a
period so long after that in which the laws of the
Burgundians were publifled, and when the state
of society was much improved, is very remark-
able. Other laws of the fame purport are col-
leted by Jo. Fred. Polac. Syftema Jurifprud. Ger-

manica,

manice2 Lips. 1733, p. 75. The laws of the
Slavi were more rigorous than any that he men.
tions; they ordained, " that the moveables of an
inhospitable person should be confiscated, and hi,
house burnt. They were even so solicitous for
the entertainment of strangers, that they permitted
the landlord to steal for the support of his guefa."
Quod no&u furatus fueris, cras appone, hofpiti.
bus. Rerum Mecleburgicar. lib. viii. .a Mat. Jo.
Beehr. Lips. 1751, p. 50. In consequence of
there laws, or of that state of society which made
it proper to ena& them, hospitality abounded
while the intercourse among men was inconfider.
able, and secured the stranger a kind reception
under every roof where he chore to take shelter.
This, too, proves clearly, that the intercourse
among men was rare, for as soon as this increased,
what was a pleasure became a burden, and the en-
tertaining of travellers was converted into a branch
of commerce.

BUT the laws of the middle ages afford a proof

fill more convincing of the small intercourse be-
tween different nations. The genius of the Feudal
fyfteln, as well as the spirit of jealousy which
always accompanies ignorance, concurred in dif.
couraging frangers from fettling in any country.
If a person removed from one province in a king-
dom to another, he was bound within a year and
day to acknowledge himself the vassal of the
baron in whose efate he fettled if he negleced

to do so, he became liable to a penalty; and if
at his death he neglected to leave a certain legacy
to the baron within whose territory he rclided, all
his goods were confiscated. The hardflhips inm-
posed on foreigners fettling in a firange country,
were still more intolerable. In more early times,
the superior lord of any territory: in which a so-
reigner fettled, might seize his person, and reduce
him to servitude. Very Ltriking instances of this
occur in the hiftory.of the middle ages. The
cruel depredations of the Normans in the ninth
century, obliged many inhabitants of the maritime
provinces of France to fly into the interior parts
of the kingdom. But instead of being received
with that humanity to which their wretched con-
dition entitled them, they were reduced to a state
of servitude. Both the civil and ecclesiastical
powers found it necessary to interpose, in order to
put a flop to this barbarous practice. Porgieffer.
de Statu Servor. lib. i. c. I. § 16. In other coun-
tries, the laws permitted the inhabitants of the
maritime provinces to reduce such as were ihip-
wrecked on their coast to servitude. Ibid. § 17.
This barbarous custom prevailed in many countries
of Europe. The practice of seizing the goods of
persons who had becn. hipwrecked, and of con-
fifcating them as the property of the lord on whose
manor they were thrown, seems to have been
universal. De Weftphalen Monum. inedita Rer.
Germ. vol. iv. p. 907, &c. et Du Cange, voc.
Laganum, Beehr. Rer. Mecleb. lib. p. 512. Among
the ancient Welfl, three forts of persons, a mad-

man,

man, a stranger, and a leper, might be killed with
impunity. Leges Hoel Dda, quoted in Obfervat.
on the statutes, chiefly the more ancient, p. a2.
M, de Lauriere produces several ancient deeds
which prove, that in different provinces of France,
strangers became the slaves of the lord on whose
lands they fettled. Gloffaire du Droit Francois,
Art. Aubaine, p. 92. Beaumanoir fays, i" that
there are several places in France, in which, if a
franger fixes his residence for a year and day, he
becomes the save of the lord of the manor." Coult.
de Beauv. ch. 45. p. 254. As a pra&ice so con-
trary to humanity could not subsist, the superior
lords found it necessary to reft satisfied with levy-
ing certain annual taxes from aliens, or imposing
upon them some extraordinary duties or services.
But when any stranger died, he could not convey
his effecs by will; and all his real, as well as
personal estate, fell to the King, or to the lord of
the barony, to the exclusion of his natural heirs.
This is termed in France Droit D'Aubaine. Pref.
de Laurier. Ordon. tom. i. p. IS. Bruffel. tom. ii.
p. 944. Du Cange, voc. Albani. Pafquier Recher-
ches, p. 367. This pra&ice of confiscating the
effe&ts of strangers upon their death was very an-
cient. It is mentioned, though very obscurely,
in a law of Charlemagne, A. D. 813. Capitul.
Baluz. p. 507. § 5. Not only persons who were
born in a foreign country were subjeCt to the
Droit D'Aubaine, but in Come countries such as
removed from one diocese to another, or from the
lands of one baron to another. Bruffel. vol. ii

p. 947'

p. 947. 949. It is hardly possible to conceive
any law more unfavourable to the intercourse be-
tween nations. Something similar to it, however,
may be found in the ancient laws of every king-
dom in Europe. With respect to Italy, fee Murat.
Ant. vol. ii. p. 14. It is no finall disgrace to the
French jurisprudence, that this barbarous, inho-
fpitable custom should still remain in a nation so
highly civilized.

THE confusion and outrage which abounded
under a feeble form of government, incapable of
framing or executing salutary laws, rendered the
communication between the different provinces
of the fame kingdom extremely dangerous. It
appears from a letter of Lupus, abbot of Ser-
rieres, in the ninth century, that the highways
were To much infested by banditti, that it was
necessary for travellers to form themselves into
companies or caravans, that they might be safe
from the assaults of robbers. Bouquet Recueil
des Hist. vol. vii. p. 515. The numerous regu-
lations published by Charles the Bald in the fame
century, discover the frequency of there disorders;
and such a&s of violence were become so com-
mon, that by many they were hardly confidered
as criminal. For this reason the inferior judges,
called Centenarii, were required to take an oath,
that they would neither commitany robbery them-
selves, nor protect such as were guilty of that
crime. Capitul. edit. Baluz. vol. ii. p. 63. 68.
The historians of the ninth and tenth centuries

give

give pathetick descriptions of these disorders. Some
remarkable paTfages to this purpose are collected
by Mat. Jo. Beerh. RerMjecleb. lib. viii. p. 603.
They became so frequent and audacious, that the
authority of the civil magiltrate was unable to re-
press them. The ecclesiastical jutrifdicion was
called in to aid it. Councils were held with
great folemnicy, the bodies of the faints we-e
brought thither, and, in presence of their sacred
reliques, anathemas were denounced against rob-
bers, and other violators of the publick peace.
Bouquet Recueil des Hifc. tom. x. p. 360. 431.
536. One of these forms of excommunication,
issued A. D. 988, is still preserved, and is so fin-
gular, and conpofed with eloquence of such a
peculiar kind, that it will not perhaps be deemed
unworthy of a place here. After the usual in-
troduScion, and mentioning the outrage which
gave occasion to the anathema, it runs thus:
" Obtenebrefcant oculi vefiri, qui concupiverunt;
arefcant manus, quae rapuerunt, debilitentur
omnia membra, qua adjuverunt. Semper labo-
retiy, nec requiem inveniatis, fructuque veftri
laboris privemini. Formidetis, & paveatjs, i
facie periequentis, & non perfequentis hoftis, ut
tabefcendo deficiatis. Sit portio veftra cum Ju-
da traditore Domini, in terra mortis et tenebra-
rum; donec corda veftra ad fatisfadtionem ple-
nam convertantur.-Ne ceffant a vobis hae ma-
leditiones, tcelerum veltrorum periicutrices,
quamdiu permanebitis in peccato pervafionis.
Amen,Piat, Fiat." Bouquet. Ib. p. 517.

3 NOTE

NOTE XXX. SECT. I. p. 9. [GG].
WITH respect to the progress of commerce

which I have described, p. 93, &c. it may be ob-
served, that the Italian states carried on some com-
merce with the cities of the Greek empire, as
early as the age of Charlemagne, and imported
into their own country the rich commodities of
the East. Murat. Antiq. Ital. vol. ii. p. 882. In
the tenth century, the Venetians had opened a
trade with Alexandria in Egypr. Ibid. The in-
habitants of Amalphi and Pisa had likewise ex-
tended their trade to the fame ports. Murat. Ib.
p. 884, 885. The effe&s of the Crusades in in-
creasing the wealth and commerce of the Italian
flates, and particularly that which they carried
on with the East, I have explained, page 34th of
this volume. They not only imported the Indian
commodities from the East, but eftablilhed manu-
fa&ures of curious fabrick in their own country.
Several of these are enumerated by Muratori in his
Dissertations concerning the arts and the weaving
of the middle ages. Antiq. Iral. vol. ii. p. 349.
399. They made great progress, particularly in
the manufacture of silk, which had long been
peculiar to the eastern provinces of Asia. Silk
fluffs were of such high price in ancient Rome,
that only a few persons of the first rank were able
to purchase them. Under Aurelian, A. D. 270,
a pound of silk was equal in value to a pound of
gold. Abfit ut auro filia penfentur. Libra enim
auri tune libra ferici suit. Vopifcus in Aureliano.

Jufl:inian,

Justinian, in the sixth century, introduced the art
of rearing silk-worms into Greece, which rendered
the commodity somewhat more plentiful, though
still it was of such great value, as to remain an
article of luxury or magnificence, reserved only
for persons of the first order, or for publick so.
lemnities. Roger I. King of Sicily, about the
year 130, carried off a number of artificers in
the silk trade from Athens, and fettling them in
Palermo, introduced the culture of silk into his
kingdom, from which it was communicated to
other parts of Italy. Gianon. Hist. of Naples,
b. xi. c. 7. This seems to have rendered silk so
common, that, about the middle of the fourteenth
century, a thousand citizens of Genoa appeared in
one procession clad in silk robes. Sugar is like-
wife a production of the East. Some plants of
the sugar-cane were brought from Asia; and the
first attempt to cultivate them in Sicily was made
about the middle of the twelfth century. From
thence they were transplanted into the southern
provinces of Spain. From Spain they were car-
ried to the Canary and Madeira isles, and at
length into the new world. Ludovico Guicciar-
dini, in enumerating the goods imported into
Antwerp, about the year i So, mentions the sugar
T which they received from Spain and Portugal as

a considerable article. He describes that as the
product of the Madeira and Canary ifands. Def-
critt. de Paefi Bafli, p. I8o, 18x. The fu-
' pgar-cane was introduced into the Weft-Indies

before that time, but the cultivation of it was

7 not

not so considerable as to furnith an article in com-
merce. In the middle ages, though sugar was not
railed in such quantities, or employed for so many
purposes, as to become one of the common necef-
iaries of life, it appears to have been a considerable
article in the commerce of the Italian Ilates.

THESE various commodities with which the Ita-

lians furnished the other nations of Europe, pro--
cured them a favourable reception in every king-
dom. They were eRtablifhed in France in the thir-
teenth century with most extensive immunities.
They not only obtained every indulgence favour-
able to their commerce, but personal rights and
privileges were granted to them, which the natives
of the kingdom did not enjoy. Ordon. tom. iv.
p. 668. By a special proviso, they were exempted
from the droit d'aubaine. Ibid. p. 670. As the
Lombards engrossed the trade of every kingdom
in which they fettled, they became masters of its
cash. Money of course was in their hands not
only a sign of the value of their commodities, but
became an objec of commerce itself. They dealt
largely as bankers. In an ordonance, A. D. i295,
we find them tiled mnercatores and carmpfores. They
carried on this as well as other branches of their
commerce with somewhat of that rapacious spirit
which is natural to monopolizers who are not re-
strained by the concurrence of rivals. An absurd
opinion, which prevailed in the middle ages, was,
however, in lbome measure, the cause of their ex-
orbitant demands, and may be pleaded in apology

VOL. I. D d for

for them. Commerce cannot be carried on with
advantage, unless the persons who lend a fumr are
alloweda certain premium for the use of their
money, as a compensation for the rilk which
they run in permitting another to traffick with
their stock. This premium is fixed by law in all
commercial countries, and is called the legal in-
terest of money. But the Fathers of the church
preposterously applied the prohibitions ofufury in
scripture to the payment of legal interest, and con-
demned it as a fin. The fchoolmen, mifed by
Aristotle, whose fcntiments they followed impli-
citly, and without examination, adopted the fame
error, and enforced it; Blackstone's Commenta-
ries on the laws of England, vol. ii. p. 4(5. Thus
the Lombards found themselves engaged in a traf-
sick which was deemed criminal and odious. They
were liable to puniffiment if detected. They were
not satisfied, therefore, with that moderate pre-
mium, which they might have claimed if their
trade had been open and authorized by law.
They exated a fum proportional to the danger
and infamy ofa discovery. Accordingly, we find
that it was usual for them to demand twenty per
cent. for the use of money in the thirteenth cen-
tury. Murat. Antiq. ttal. vol. i. p. 893. About
the beginning of that century, the Countess of
Slanders was obliged to borrow money in order
pay her husband's ransom. She procured the furn
requisite, either from Italian merchants or from
Jews. The lowest interest which the paid to
them was above twenty per cent. and some of

4 there

them exated near thirty. Martene and Durand.
Thefaur. Anecdotorum, vol. i. p. 886. In the
fourteenth century, A. D. 131 , Philip IV. fixed
the interest which might be legally exated in the
fairs of Champagne at twenty per cent. Ordonan.
tom. i. p. 4S4. The interest of money in Aragon
was somewhat lower. James I. A. D. 1242, fixed
it by law at eighteen per cent. Petr. de Marca.
Marca five Limes Hifpan. app. 1433. As late as
the year 14 90, it appears that the interest of money
in Placentia, was at the rate of forty per cent.
This is the more extraordinary, because at that
time the commerce of the Italian States was be-
come considerable. Memorie Storiche de Piacenza,
tom. viii. p. 104. I'iac. 1760. It appears from
Lud. Guicciardini, that Charles V. had fixed the
rate of interest in his dominions in the Low-
Countries at twelve per cent. and at the time when
he wrote, about the year 1560, it was not uncom.
mon to exaEt more than that fum. He complains
of this as exorbitant, and points out its bad effecs
both on agriculture and commerce. Defcritt. di
Paefi Bafi, p. 172. This high interest of money
is alone a proof that the profits on commerce were
exorbitant.-The Lombards were likewise efta-
blifhed in England in the thirteenth century, and
a considerable ftrcet in the city of London still
bears their name. They enjoyed great privileges,
and carried on an extensive commerce, particularly
as bankers. See Anderson's Chronol. Deduction.
vol. i. p. 137 6. 6o0. 4. 231. where the ftatuces
or other authorities which confirm this are quoted,

Dd a But

But the chiefmart for Italian commodities was at
Bruges. Navigation was then so imperfect that a
voyage between the Baltic and Mediterranean
could not be performed in one summer. For that
reason, a magazine or iforehoufe half-way between
the commercial cities in the north, and those in
Italy, became necessary. Bruges was pitched upon
as the most convenient station. That choice in-
troduced vait wealth into the Low-Countries.
Bruges was at once the staple for Englilh wool;
for the woollen and linen manufactures of the Ne-
therlands; for the naval itores, and other bulky
commodities of the North; and for the Indian
commodities, as well as domeftick produ&ions
imported by the Italian States. The extent of its
commerce in Indian goods with Venice alone, ap-
pears from one fa&. In the year 1318, five Ve-
netian galeaffes laden with Indian commodities
arrived at Bruges, in order to dispose of their car-
goes at the fair. These galeaTes were vessels of
very considerable burden. L. Guic. Defcritt. di
Paefi Bassi, p, 174. Bruges was the greatelt em-
porium in all Europe. Many proofs of this oc-
cur in the historians and records of the thirteenth
and fourteenth centuries. But, instead of multi-
plying quotations, I shall refer my readers to An-
derfon, ol. i. p. 12. 137. 213. 246, &c. The
nature of this work prevents me from entering into
any long details, but there are fbme detached fa&s,
which give an high idea of the wealth both of the
Fleminl and Italian commercial fRates. The Duke
of Brabant contraAed his daughter to the Black

Prince,

Prince, ofn of Edward III. of England, A. D. 1339,
and gave her a portion which would amount to
three hundred thousand pounds of our present
money. Rymer's Feedera, vol. v. p. 113. John
Galeazzo Visconti Duke of Milan concluded a
treaty of marriage between his daughter and Lionel
Duke of Clarence, Edward's third Ibn, A. D. 367,
and granted her a portion equal to two hundred
thousand pounds of our present money. Rymer.
Feeder. vol. vi. p. 547. These exorbitant umss
lb far exceeding what was then granted by the molt
powerful monarchs, and which appear extraordi-
rary even in the present age, when the wealth of
Europe is so much increaied, must have arisen from
the riches which flowed into these countries from
their extensive and lucrative commerce. The first
source of wealth to the towns situated on the Bal-
tick tea, seems to have been the herring fishery; the
lhoals ofherringsfrequenting a that time the coasts
of Sweden and Denmark, in the fame manner as
they Row resort to the British coasts. The effe&s
of this fishery are thus described by an author of
the thirteenth century. The Danes, fays he, who
were formerly clad in the poor garb of sailors, are
now clothed in scarlet, purple, and fine linen. For
they abound with wealth flowing fron their an-
nual fishery on the coast of Schonen; so that all
nations retort to them, bringing their gold, silver,
and precious commodities, that they may purchase
herrings, which the divine bounty bestows upon
them. Arnoldus Lubecenfis ap. Conring. de Ur-
bib. German. § 87.

D d 3 Tu

THE Hanfeatick league is the most powerful

commercial confederacy known in history. Its ori-
gin towards the close of the twelfth century, and
the obje&s of its union, are described by Knip-
ichildt Tradatus HiRcorico-Politico Juridicus de
Juribus Civitat. Imper. lib. i. cap. 4. Anderson has
mentioned the chief fa&s with refpec to their com-
mercial progress, the extent of the privileges which
they obtained in different countries, their success-
ful wars with several monarchs, as well as the spirit
and zeal with which they contended for those liber-
ties and rights without which it is impossible to
carry on commerce to advantage. The vigorous
efforts of a society of merchants attentive only to
commercial objets, could not fail of diffusing new
and more liberal ideas concerningjuftice and order
in every country of Europe where they fettled.

IN England, the progress of commerce was ex-

tremeiy sow; and the causes of this are obvious.
During the Saxon heptarchy, England, split into
many petty kingdoms, which were perpetually at
variance with each other, exposed to the fierce in-
curfions of the Danes, and other northern pirates,
and funk in barbarity and ignorance, was in no
condition to cultiva:e commerce, or to pursue any
ylltem of useful and salutary policy. When a
better profpce began to open by the union of the
kingdom underone monarch, the Norman conquest
took place. This occaiioned such a violent shock,
as well as such a sudden and total revolution of
property, that the nation did not recover from it

' , * · '
' ' "' 'during

during fcveral reigns. By the time that the con-
Ititution began to acquire some stability, and the
Englifi had so incorporated with their conquerors
as to become one people, the nation engaged with
no lets ardour than imprudence in iuppert of their
monarch's pretensions to the crown of France, and
long wafted its vigour and genius in its wild es-
forts to conquer that kingdom. When by ill fuc-
cess, and repeated disappointments, a period was
at last put to this fatal frenzy, and the nation be-
ginning to enjoy some repose, had leisure to breathe
and to gather new strength, the deftrutive wars
between the houses of York and Lancaster broke
out, and involved the kingdom in the worf of all
calamities. Thus, betides the common obftruc-
tions of commerce occasioned by the nature of the
feudal government, and the state of manners du-
ring the middle ages, its progress in England was
retarded by peculiar causes. Such a succession of
eventsadverfe to the commercial spirit was sufficient
to have checked its growth, although every other
circumstance had favoured it. The English were
accordingly one of the last nations in Europe who
availed themselves of their natural commercial ad-
vantages. Before the reign of Edward III. all the
wool of England, except a small quantity wrought
into coarse cloths for home consumption, was fold
to the Flemings or Lombards, and manufactured
by them. Though Edward, Ab D. 1326, began
to allure rome of the Flenmih weavers to fettle in
.'ngland, it was long before the Englilh were ca-

D d 4 pable

pable of fabricating cloth for foreign markets, and
the export of unwrought wool till continued to be
the chief article of their commerce. Anderson
paffim-All foreign commodities were brought in-
to England by the Lombard or Hanfeatick mer-
chants. The Englilh ports were frequented by
ships both from the north and south of Europe, and
they tamely allowed foreigners to reap all the pro-
fits arising from the supply of their wants. The first
commercial treaty of England on record, is thatwith
Haquin King of Norway, A. D. 2 x17. Anders.
vol. i. p. Io8. But they did not venture to trade
in their own ships to the Baltick until the beginning
of the fourteenth century. Ib. 15 . It was after the
middle of the fifteenth, before they sent any ship
into the Mediterranean. Ib. p. 177. Nor was it
long before this period that their veflels visited the
ports of Spain or Portugal. But though I have
pointed out the flow progress of the English com-
merce as a fa& little attended to, and yet merit-
ing consideration ; the concourse of foreigners to
the ports of England, together with the commu-
nication among all the different countries in Eu-
rope, which went on increasing from the begin-
ning of the twelfth century, is sufficient to jultify
all the observations and reasonings in the text
concerning the influence of commerce on the state
of manners and of society.

NO T E XXXI. SECT. III. p. 183. [HIH].
I HAVE not been able to discover the precisl
manner in which the Juftiza was appointed. Among

the

the claims of the junta or union formed againt
James I. A. D. 164, this was one that the King
flould not nominate any person to be JuRiza,
without the content or approbation of the ricos-
hombres or nobles. Zurita Anales de Aragon,
vol. i. p. 80o. But the King in his answer to their
remonstrance asserts, " that it was eftablilhed by
immemorial practice, and was conformable to the
laws of the kingdom, that the King, in virtue of
his royal prerogative, Mhould name the Juftiza."
Zurita, Ibid. i81. Blanca, 656. From another
palfage in Zurita, it appears, that while the Ara-
gonefe enjoyed the privilege of the union, i. e. the
power of confederating against their sovereign as
often as they conceived that he had violated any
of their rights and immunities, the Juftiza was not
only nominated by the King, but held his office
during the King's pleasure. Nor was this practice
attended with any bad effecs, as the privilege of
the union was a sufficient and effTeual check to
any abuse of the royal perogative. But when the
privilege of the union was abolished as dangerous
to the order and peace of society, it was agreed
that the Juftiza Lhould continue in office during
life. Several Kings, however, attempted to re-
move the Juftizas who were obnoxious to them,
and they sometimes succeeded in the attempt. In
order to guard against this encroachment, which
would have destroyed the intention of the initi-
tution, and have rendered the JuRiiza the depen-
dant and tool of the crown, instead of the guarr

dian

dian of the people, a law was enated in the Cortc:
A. D. 144., ordaining that the Juftiza ihould con-
tinue in office during life, and should not be re-
moved from it unless by the authority of the Cortes
Fueros & Obfervancias del Reyno de Arag. lib. i.
p. 22. By former laws the person of the Jufliza
had been declared sacred, and he was responsible
only to the Cortes. Ibid. p. S5, b. Zurita and
Blanca, who both published their histories while
the Juftiza of Aragon retained the full exercifc of
his privileges and jurifdi&ion, have neglected to
explain several circumstances with regard to the
office of that refpe&able magistrate, because they
addressed their works to their countrymen, who
were well acquainted with every particular con-
cerning the fun&ions of a judge, to whom they
looked up as to the guardian of their liberties. It
is vain to consult the later historians of Spain,
about any point, with relpet to which the excel-
lent historians whom I have named are silent. The
ancient constitution of theircountry was overturned,
and despotism established on the ruin of its liber-
ties, when the writers of this and the preceding
ceitury composed their histories, and on that ac-
count they had little curiosity to know the nature
of those institutions to which their ancestors owed
the enjoyment of freedom, or they were afraid to
describe them with much accuracy. The spirit wit.
which Mariana, his continuator Miniana, and Ser-
reras, write their histories, is very different from
that of the two hiflorians of Aragon, from whom

J have

I have taken my account of the constitution of
that kingdom.

Two circumrances concerning the Juftiza, be-

fides those which I have mentioned in the text,
are worthy cf observation, I. None of the ricos-
hombres, or noblemen of the first order, could
be appointed Juttiza. He was taken out of the
second class or cavalleros, who answer nearly to
gentlemen or commoners in Great Britain. Fueros
& Obfervanc. del Reyno, &c. lib. i. p. 21, b. The
reason was, By the laws of Aragon, the ricos-
hombres were not fubje& to capital punishment;
but as it was necessary. for the security of liberty,
that the Juftiza should be accountable for the
manner in which he executed the high trust re-
posed in him, it was a powerful restraint upon him
to know that he was liable to be punished with
the utmost rigour. Blanca, p. 657. 756. Zurita,
tom. ii. 229. Fueros & Obfervanc. lib. ix. p.
s82, b. 183. It appears too from many patlages
in Zurita, that the Jutiza was appointed to check
the domineering and oppressive spirit of the no-
bles, as well, as to set bounds to the power of the
monarch, and therefore he was chosen from an
order of citizens equally interested in opposing
both.

c. A MAGISTRATE possessed of uch vast powers

as the Jurtiza, might have exercised them in a
manner pernicious to the (tate, if he himself had
been subjet to no controul, A conflitutional

remedy,

remedy, however, was provided against this dan-
ger. Seventeen persons were cholen by lot in each
meeting of the Cortes. These formed a tribunal
called the court of inquisition into the office of
JuRfiza. This court met at three fated terms in
each year. Every person had liberty of com-
plaining to it of any iniquity or neglect of duty
in the Juftiza, or in the inferior judges, who aEted
in his name. The Juftiza and his deputies were
called to answer for their conduct. The members
of the court passed sentence by ballot. They
might punish by degradation, confiscation of
goods, or even with death, The law which ereEttd
this court, and regulated the form of its proce-
dure, was enacted, A. D. 1461. Zurita Anales,
iv. 102. Blanca Comment, Rer. Aragon. 770.
Previous to this period, inquiry was made into
the conduct of the Juftiza, though not with the
fame formality. He was, from the first institution
of the office, subjet to the review of the Cortes.
The constant dread of fiuch an impartial and
severe inquiry into his behaviour, was a powerful
motive to the vigilant and faithful discharge of
his duty. A remarkable instance of the authority
of the Juftiza when opposed to that of the King,
occurs in the year 13$6. By the cpnftitution of
Aragon, the eldest son or heir apparent of the
crown pofeffed considerable power and jurifdiaion
in the kingdom. Fueros & Obfervan. del Reyno
de Arag. lib. i. p. 16. Peter IV. instigated by a
iecond wife, attempted to deprive his son of this,
i cd enjoined his fubjCta to yield hirn no obe-

dience,

dience. The Prince immediately applied to the
Juftiza; " the safeguard and defence, flvs Zuri-
ta, against all violence and opprefflon." The Jus-
tiza granted him the firmo de dcrecho, the effec of
which was, that upon his giving surety to appear
in judgment, he could not be deprived of any im-
munity or privilege which he pofieffed, but in con-
sequence of a legal trial before the Juftiza, and of
a sentence pronounced by him. This was pub-
lithed throughout the kingdom, and notwithltand-
ing the proclamation in contradiction to this
which had been issued by the King, the Prince
continued in the exercise of all his rights, and his
authority was universally recognized. Zurita
Anales de Aragon, tor. ii. 385.

NOTE XXXII. SECT. III. p. 184. [II].

I HAVE been induced, by the concurring teiti-

mony of many relpeclable authors, to mention
this as the constitutional form of the oath of alle-
giance, which the Aragonefe swore to their Sove-
reigns. I must acknowledge, however, that 1
have not found this singular oath in any Spanish
author whom I have had an opportunity to con-
fult. It is mentioned neither by Zurita, nor
Blanca, nor Argenfola, nor Sayas, who were all
historiographers appointed by the Cortes of Ara-
gon to record the tranfa6tions of the kingdom.
All these writers possess a merit, which is very rare
among historians. They are extremely accurate
in tracing the progress of the laws and conftitu-

7 tion

tion of their country. Their fi!ence with refpecc
to this, creates some suspicion concerning the ge-
nuinenefs of the oath. But as it is mentioned by
so many authors, who produce the ancient Spanifil
words in which it is exprefled, it is probable that
they have taken it from some writer of credit,
whose works have not fallen into my haids. The
spirit of the oath is perfetly agreeable to the geni-
us of the Aragonefe conititution. Since the publi-
cation of the first edition, the learned M. Totze,
Profefror of History at Batzow in the Dutchy of
Mecklenburgh, has been so good as to point out
to me a Spanish author of great authority, who
has publilhed the words of this oath. It is An-
tonio Perez, a native of Aragon, secretary to Phi-
lip II. The words of the oath are, " Nos, que vale-
mos tanto como vos, os hazemos mueftro Rey y
Segnor, con tal que nos guardeys nueftros fueros,
y libertades, y si No, No." Las Obras y Relaciones
de Ant. Perez. 8vo. par Juan de la Planche x631.
p. 143.

THE privilege of Union, Which I have men-

tioned in the preceding note, and alluded to in
the next, is indeed one of the most singular which
could take place in a regular government, and
the oath that I have mentioned expresses nothing
more than this constitutional privilege entitled the
Aragonefe to perform. If the King or his mi-
nifters violated any of the laws or immunities of
the Aragonefe, and did not grant immediate re-
dress in consequence of their representations and

remon-

remonstrances, the nobles of the first rank, or
Ricos-borzbres de natura, & de mefnada, the equef-
trian order, or the nobility of the second class,
called Hidalgos & Infanciones, together with the ma-
giftrates of cities, might, either in the Cortes, or in
a voluntary assembly, join in union, and binding
themselves by mutual oaths and the exchange of
hostages to be faithful to each other, they might
require the King, in the name and by the autho-
rity of his body corporate, to grant them redress.
If the Iing refuCtd to comply with their request,
or took arms in order to oppose them, they might,
in virtue of the privilege of union, instantly with-
draw their allegiance from the King, refuse to
acknowledge him as their Sovereign, and proceed
to elect another monarch; nor did they incur any
guilt, or become liable to any prosecution on that
account. Blanca Corn. Rer. Arag. 66i. 669.
This union did not refernble the confederacies in
other feudl kingdoms. It was a conititutional
alrociation, which pretended to legal privileges,
which issued its mandates under a common Teal,
and proceeded in all its operations by regular and
ascertained forms. This dangerous right was not
only claimed, but exerciscd. In the year I287,
the Aragonefe formed an union in opposition to
Alfonso III. and obliged that King not only tu
comply with their demands, but to ratify a privi,-
lege so fatal to the power of the crown. Zurita
Anales, tom. i. p. 322. In the year 1347, an
union was formed against Peter IV. ,with equal

fu cces,

success, and a new ratification of the privilege
was extorted. Zurita, tom. ii. p. 202. But soon
after, the King having defeated the leaders of the
union in battle, the privilege of union was finally
abrogated in the Cortes, and all the laws or re-
cords which contained any confirmation of it,
were cancelled or destroyed. The King, in pre.
fence of the Cortes, called for the aft whereby he
had ratified the union, and having wounded his
hand with his poniard, he held it above the
record, " that privilege, fays he, which has been
" so fatal to the kingdom, and so injurious to
,c royalty, should be effaced with the blood of a
'i King." Zurita, tom. ii. p. 229. The law abo-
lifhing the union is published. Fueros & Obfer-
vanc. lib. ix. p. I78. From that period the Jufliza
became the conffitutional guardian of publick
liberty, and his power andjurifdi&tion occasioned
none of those violent convulsions which the tu-
multuary privilege of the union was apt to pro-
duce. The conffitution of Aragon, however, fill
remained extremely free. One source of this
liberty was from the early admiflion of the repre-
fentatives of cities into the Cortes. It seems pro-
bable, from Zurita, that burgeftes were constituent
members of the Cortes from its first inffitution.
He mentions a meeting of Cortes, A. D. I 133, in
which the procuradores de las ciudad's y villas were
present. Torn. i. p. 5. This is the confitiu-
;ional language in which their pretence is declared
in the Cortes, after the journals of that court

were

were regularly kept. It is probable, that an his-
torian so accurate as Zurita, would not have used
there words, if he had not taken them from some
authentick record. It was more than a century
after this period before the representatives of cities
formed a constituent part in the supreme afferm-
blies of the other European nations. The free
spirit of the Aragonefe government is conspicuous
in many particulars. The Cortes not only op-
posed the attempts of their Kings to increaic their
revenue, or to extend their prerogative, but they
claimed rights and exercised powers which will
appear extraordinary even in a cou:i rr? accu fomed
to the enjoyment of liberty. In the year i236,
the Cortes claimed the privilege of naming the
members of the King's council and the officers of
his houfhold, and they seem to have obtained it
for rome time. Zurita, torn. i. p. 303. 307. It
was the privilege of the Cortes to name the officers
who commanded the troops raited by their au-
thority. This seems to be evident from a passage
in Zurita. When the Cortes, in the year I503,
railed a body of troops to be employed in Italy,
it passed an at empowering the King to name
the officers who should command them. Zurita,
tom. v. p. 274; which plainly implies that without
this warrant, it did not belong to him in virtue
of his prerogative. In the Fueros & Obfervancias
del Reyno de Aragon, two general declarations of
the rights and privileges of the Aragonefe are
publilhed; the one in the reign of Pedro I. A. D.
283, the other in that of James II. A. D. 1325.
VOL. I. E e They

They are offuch length, that I cannot insert them;
but it is evident from thele, that not only the
privileges of the nobility, but the rights of the
people, personal as well as political, were, at that
period, more extensive, and better underliood than
in any kingdom in Europe. Lib. i. p. 7. 9. The
oath by which the King bound himfelfto observe
those rights and liberties of the people, was very
solemn. Ibid. p. 14, b. & p. 15. The Cortes
of Aragon discovered not only the jealousy and
vigilance, which are peculiar to free Rfates, in
guarding the essential parts of the conflitution,
but they were scrupulously attentive to observe
the mnol minute forms and ceremonies to which
they were accustomed, According to the efta-
blifhed laws and customs of Aragon, no foreigner
had liberty to enter the hall in which the Cortes
assembled. Ferdinand, in the year 1481, ap-
pointed his Queen, Isabella, regent of the king-
dom, while he was absent during the course of the
campaign. The law required that a regent should
take the oath of fidelity in presence of the Cortes;
but as Isabella was a foreigner, before fie could
be admitted, the Cortes thought it necessary to
pass an aCt authorizing the serjeant. porter to open
the door of the hall, and to allow her to enter;
" so attentive were they (fays Zurita) to observe
" their laws and forms, even such as may seem
' moIst minute." Tom. iv. p. 313.

THE Aragonefe were no less solicitous to secure
the personal rights of individuals, than to main-

tain

tain the freedom of the con fitution; and the
spirit of their statutes with relpe to both was
equally liberal. Two fads relative to this matter
merit obfcrvation. By an express statute in the
year 1235, it was declared to be unlawful to put
any native Aragonefe to the torture. If he could
not be convicted by the teltimony ofwitneffes, he
was instantly absolved. Zurita, tom. ii. p. 66.
Zurita records the regulation with the fatisfaaion
natural to an historian, when he contemplates the
humanity of his countrymen. He compares the
laws of Aragon to those of Rome, as both ex-
empted citizens and freemen from iuch igno-
minious and cruel treatment, and had recourse to
it only in the trial of slaves. Zurita had reason
to bestow such an encomium on the laws of his
country. Torture was at that time permitted by
the laws of every other nation in Europe. Even
in England, from which the mild spirit of legis-
lation has long banished it, torture was not, at
that time, unknown. Observations on the Sta-
tutes, chiefly the more ancient, &c. p. 66.

THE other fa s(hows, that the fame spirit which

influenced the legislature prevailed among the
people. In the year 1485, the religious zeal of
Ferdinand and Isabella prompted them to intro-
duce the inquisition into Aragon. Though the
Aragonefe were no les filperilitioufly attached
than the other Spaniards to the Roman Catholick
faith, and no less desirous to root out the feeds

E e 2 of

of error and of heresy which the Jews and Moors
had scattered, yet they took arms against the in-
quifitors, murdered the chief inquisitor, and long
opposed the establishment of that tribunal. The
reason which they gave for their conduct was,
That the mode of trial in the inquisition was in-
confilent with liberty. The criminal was not
confronted with the witnesses, he was not ac-
quainted with what they deposed against him, he
was fubjeted to torture, and the goods ofperfons
condemned were confiscated. Zurita Anales, tom.
iv. p. 341.

THE form of government in the kingdom of

Valencia, and principality of Catalonia, which
were annexed to the crown of Aragon, was like-
wife extremely favourable to liberty. The Valen-
cians enjoyed the privilege of union in the fame
manner with the Aragonefe. But they had no
magiltratc resembling the Jufiza. The Catalo-
nians were no less jealous of their liberties than
the two other nations, and no less bold in alferting
them. But it is not necessary for illustrating the
following history to enter into any farther detail
concerning the peculiarities in the constitution of
these kingdoms.

NOTE XXXIII. SECT. III. p. I;S. [KK].

I HAVE searched i vn vn among the historians

of Castile for such information as might enable
me to trace the progress of laws and government

in

in Castile, or to explain the nature of the confti-
tution with the fame degree of accuracy wherewith
I havedefcribed the political state of Aragon. It
is manifest not only from the hifrorians of Caflile,
but from irs ancient laws, particularly the Fuero
Juzgn, that its mo:iarchs were originally elecive.
Ley 2. 5. 8. They were chosen by the bishops,
the nobility, and the :PeoIle, ibId. It appears
from the .t.ine venerable code of laws, that the
prerogative of the Castilian monarchs was ex-
tremelv limitcd. Villaldiego, in his commentary
on these laws, produces many facts and authorities
in confirmation of both thc.f particulars. Dr.
Geddes, who was well acquainted with Spanifli
literature, complains that he could find no author,
who gave a diftina account of the Cortes or fu-
preme assembly of the nation, or who described
the manner in which it was held, or mentioned
the precise number of members who hld a right
to fit in it. He produces, however, from Gil
Gonzales d'Avila, who publinled a hittory of
Henry II. the writ of summons to the town of
Abula, requiring it to chule reprelentatives to ap-
pear in the Cortes which he called to meet A. D.
1390. From this we learn, that Prelates, Dukes,
Marquifies, the maflers of the three military
orders, Condes and Riccos-hombres were required
to attend. These composed the bodies of eccle-
fiafticks and nobles, which formed two members
of the legislature. The cities which sent members
to that meeting of the Cortes were forty-eight.
The number of representatives (for the cities had

E e 3 right

right to chute more or fewer according to their
respective dignity) amounted to an hundred and
twenty-five. Geddes' Mircellaneous TraCts, vol. i.
331. Zurita having occasion to mention the
Cortes which Ferdinand held at Toro A. D, 1So5,
in order to secure to himfclf the government of
Castile after the death of Isabella, records, with
his usual accuracy, the names of the member.
present, and of the cities'which they represented.
From that lift ic appears, that only eighteen cities
had deputies in this assembly. Anales de Aragon,
tom. vi. p. 3. What was the occasion of this
great difference in the number of cities ieprefented
in there two meetings of the Cortes, I am unable
to explain.

NOTE XXXIV. SECT. III. p. 187. [LL].
A GREAT part of the territory in Spain was

Fngroffed by the nobility. L. Marineus Siculus,
who composed histreatife De Rebus Hifpaniae du-
ring the reign of Charles V. gives a catalogue of
the Spanish nobility, together with the yearly rent
of their estates. According to his account, which
he affirms was as accurate as the nature of the
fubjeet would admit, the fum total of the annual
revenue of their lands amounted to one million
four hundred and eighty-two thousand ducats. If
we make allowance for the vast difference in the
value of money in the fifteenth century from that
which it now bears, and confider that the cata-
logue of Marin;eus includes only the 7itulados, or

nobility

nobility whose families were diltinguiflhed by some
honorary title, their wealth must appear very
great. L. Marinaeusap.Schotti Scriptores Hifpan.
vol. i. p. j2-. The Commons of Caflile, in their
conteits with the crown, which I fiall hereafter
relate, complain of the extensive property of the
nobility as extremely pernicious to the kingdom.
In one of their manifestoes they a.Tert that from
Valladolid to St. Jago in Gilicia, which was an
hundred leagues, the crown did not possess more
than three villages. All the reft belonged to the
nobility, and could be fubjeaed to no publick
burden. Sandov. Vida del Emperor. Carl. V.
vol. i. p. 422. It appears from the testimony of
authors quoted by Bovadilla, that thefc vail pot-
feflions were bestowed upon the Ricos bombres,
hidalgos, and cavalleros by the Kings of Castile,
in reward for the afliftance which they had receiv-
ed from them in expelling the Moors. They like-
wife obtained by the fame means a considerable
influence in the cities, many of which anciently
depended upon the nobility. Politica para Cor-
regidores. Amb. 1750. fol. vol. i. 440. 442.

NOTE XXXV. SECT. III. p. 190. [MM].
I HAVE been able to discover nothing certain,

asI obfervedNote XVIII.with refpet to the origin
of communities or free cities in Spain. It is pro-
bable, that as soon as the considerable towns were
recovered from the Moors, the inhabitants who
fixed their residence in them, being perfins of di-

r e ,i tintion

tin.ion and credit, had all the privileges of muni-
cipal government and jurifdition conferred upon
them. Many firiking proofs occur of the fplen-
dour, wealth, and power of the Spanish cities. Hie-
ronymus Paulus wrote a description of Barcelona in
the year 1491, and compares the dimensions of the
sown to that of Naples, and the elegance of its
buildings, the variety of its manufactures, and the
extent of its commerce, to Florence.Hieron. Paulus
ap. Schottum Script. Hifp. ii. 844. Marinseus de-
lcribes Toledo as a large and populous city. A
great number of its inhabitants were persons of
quality and of illurtrious rank. Its commerce was
great. It applied particularly to the manufaftures of
silk and wool; and the number of inhabitants em-
ployed in theie two branches of trade, amounted
nearly to ten thousand. Marin. ubi supr. p. 308.
I know no city, lays he, that I would prefer to
Valladolid for elegance and splendour. Ibid. p.
312. We may form some estimate of its popu-
loufnefs from the following circumstances. The
citizens having taken arms in the year x516, in
order to oppose a measure concerted by cardinal
Ximenes, they muflered in the city, and in the
territory which belonged to it, thirty thousand
fighting men. Sandov. Vida del Emper. Carl.V.
torn. i. p. 8i. The manufactures carried on in
the towns of Spain were not intended merely for
home consumption, they were exported to foreign
countries, and their commerce was a considerable
source of wealth to the inhabitants. The maritime
tlws of Barcelona are the foundation of mercantile

jurif-

jurisprudence in modern times, as the Leges Rho-
dime were among the ancients. All the commercial
fiates in Italy adopted thele laws, and regulated
their trade according to them. Sandi Storia
Civile Veneziani, vol. ii. 865. It appears from
several ordonances of the Kings of France, that
the merchan ts of Aragon and Ca!tile were received
on the fame footing, and admitted to the fame
privileges with those of Italy. Ordonances des
Roys, &c. tom. ii. p. 135. iii. I66. 504. 635.
Cities in such a flourishing itate became a refpe&t-
able part of the society, and were entitled to a
considerable share in the leginature. The magif-
trates of Barcelona aspired to the highest honour a
Spanish subjet can enjoy, that of being covered
in the pretence of their sovereign, and of being
treated as grandees of the kingdom. Origin de
la dignidad de Grande de Castilla por don Alonfo
Carillo. Madr. I657. p. 18.

NOTE XXXVI. SECT. III. p. 193. [NN].
THE military order of St. Jago, the most ho-

nourable and opulent of the three Spanish orders,
was inffituted about the year 1170. The bull of
confirmation by Alexander III. is dated A. D.
176. At that time a considerable part of Spain
was subject to the Moors, and the whole country
much exposed to the depredations not only of the
enemy, but of banditti. It is no wonder, then,
that an institution, the object of which was to
oppose the enemies of the ChrifLian faith, and to

reftrai n

restrain and punish those who disturbed the pub-
lick peace, should be extremely popular, and meet
with general encouragement. The wealth and
power of the order became so great, that one his-
torian fays, that the Grand Master of St. Jago was
the person in Spain ofgreateft power and rligitv
next to the King. ]El. Anton. Nebriflanil,, ap,
Schort. Scrip. riifp. i. 812. Another observe: ,
that the order possessed every thing in Callile thica
a King would most desire to obtain. Zuri;,,
Anales, v. 22. The knights took the vows of
obedience, of poverty, and of conjugal charicy.
By the former they were bound implicitly to obey
the commands of their grand master. The orde;
could bring into the field a thousand men at arms.
B.E. Ant. Nebref. p. 813. If these men at arlms
were accompanied, as was usual in that age, this
was a formidable body of cavalry. There be-
longed to this order eighty-four commanderics,
and two hundred priories and other benefices.
Dissertations fur la Chevalerie par Hon. de S:.
Marie, p. 262. It is easy to fee how formidable
to his sovereign the command of these troops, the
administration of such revenues, and the disposal
of so many offices, mult have rendered a subjel.
The other two orders, though inferior to that of
St. Jago in power and wealth, were neverthelel:
very considerable. When the conquest of Gra-
nada deprived the knights of St. Jago of thole
enemies against whom their zeal was originally
direted, superstition found out a new obje&t, in

de fclcc

defence of which they engaged to employ their
courage. To their usual oath, they added the
following clause: " We do swear to believe, to
maintain, and to contend in publick and in pri-
vate, that the Virgin Mary, the mother of God,
our Lady, was conceived without the stain of ori-
ginal fn." This singular addition was made
about the middle of the seventeenth century. Ho-
norc de St. Marie Dissertations, &c. p. 263.-This
singular engagement is not peculiar to the order of
St. Jago. The members of the second military
order in Spain, that of Calarrava, equally zeal-
ous to employ their prowess in defence of the ho-
nours of the Blessed Virgin, have likewise pro-
selffd themselves her true knights. Their vow,
conceived in terms more theologically accurate
than that of St. Jago, may afford some amuse-
ment to an English reader. " I vow to God, to
the Grand Master, and to you who here represent
his person, that now, and for ever, I will main-
tain and contend, that the Virgin Mary, Mother of
God, our Lady, was conceived without original
fin, and never incurred the pollution of it; but
that in the moment of her happy conception, and
of the union of her foul with her body, the Di-
vine Grace prevented and preserved her from ori-
ginal guilt, by the merits of the passion and death
of Chril our Reedeemer, her future son, foreseen
in the Divine Council, by which flie was truly
redeemed, and by a more noble kind of redemp-
tion than any of the children of Adam. In the
bclief of this t:uth, and in maintaining the ho-

nour

nour of the most Holy Virgin, through the
itrength of Almighty God, I will live and die."
Definiciones de la Orden de Calatrava, conforrre
al Capitulo General en i652, fol. Madr. 1748.
p. 153. Though the church of Rome hath pru-
dently avoided to give its fancion to the doc-
trine of the immaculate conception, and the t.vo
great monaftick orders of St. Dominick and Sc.
Francis have espoused opposite opinions concc;-n-
ing it, the Spaniards are such ardent champions
for the honour of the Virgin, that when the pre-
ient King of Spain infiitutcd a new military order
in the year 1771, in commemoration of tile hirt!
of his grandlbn, he put it under the immediate
proteetion of the most i-iHuy Mary in the mystery
of her immaculate concci:ion. Conflitutiones de
la Real y dilinguida Ordin. lpanola de Carlos
III. p. 7. As this zeal for the honour of the
Virgin has some refeiblance to that fpccies of re-
fined gallantry, which v;,; tih original obje&t
of chivalry, one ices a rcabfn for its being
adopted by the nlJlitary crlJi;s, while the i ipirit of
chivalry retained some vigour. But in the present
age, it must excite foine furprize to fee the inilitt-
cion of an illufRrious order conne'tecd wirh a I:-c-
trine so extravagant and destitute of foundation.

NOTE XXX.VII. SECT. II. p. I96. [00].

I HAVE frequently had occacon to take notice

of the defets in police during h:c nid.!: ag;s,
occasioned by the fie'blencfs of goverlnment, and

the

the want of proper subordination among the dif-
ferent ranks of men. I have olferved in a former
Note, that this greatly interrupted the intercourse
between nations, and even between different places
in the fame kingdom. T!he deicription which the
Spanifli historians give of the frequency of rapine,
murder, and every at of violence, in all the pro-
vinces of Spain, are amazing, and present to us the
idea of a society but little removed from the dif-
order and turbulence of that iwhiich has been called
a state of nature. Zurita Anales de Arag. i. 175.
!El. Ant. Nebriiienfis rer. a Ferdin. geftar. Hist.
ap. Schottum, II. 849. Though the excels of these
disorders rendered the inflitution of the Santa Hber-
wandad necessary, great care was taken at first to
avoid giving any offence or alarm to the nobility.
The jurifdietion of the judges of the Hermandad
was expressly confined to crimeswhich violated the
publick peace. All other o!'e nces were left to the
cognizance of the ordinary judges. If a person
was guilty of the most notorious perjur!y, in any
trial before a judge of the I-lrmandad, he could
not punish him, but was obli-ed to remit the cafe
to the ordinary judge of the !lace. Ccmmentaria
in RegiasHifpan. Con!iitut. per Alph. deAzevedo,
parsv. p. 220, &c. fol. Duaci, 1612. Notwith-
Itanding there rellri(tionls the barons were fenrible
how much the Hermandad woullJ enc;c:ic h

on their

jurifdiaion. In Caflile, ibme oppolirion was made
to the institution ; but }erdinand had the address
to obtain the con sent of the Conitable to the intro-

ductior

dudion of the Hermandad into that part of the
kingdom where his estate lay; and by that means,
as well as the popularity of the institution, he if;r-
mounted every obstacle that stood in its way. ,'
Ant. Nebriffen. 85 . In Aragon, the nobles co;l;
bined against it with greater spirit; and Ferdinam;l'
though he supported it with vigour, was obli:; i
to make some conceflions in order to reconcil,
them. Zurita Anales de Arag. iv. 356. ThI
power and revenue of the Hermandad in Caflile
seems to have been very great. Ferdinand, whc,i
preparing for the war against the Moors of G(:.t
nada, required of the Hermandad to furnifl hi :i
sixteen thousand beasts of burden, together vw;i
eight thousand men to condut them, and he ob-
tained what he demanded. El. Ant. Nebriff. 83 i
The Hermandad has been found to be of so much
use in preserving peace, and restraining or deteEt-
ing crimes, that it is still continued in Spain; but
as it is no longer necessary either for moderating
the power of the nobility, or extending that of
the crown, the vigour and authority of the infti-
tution diminilhes gradually.

NOTE XXXVIII. SECT. III. p. 199. [PP].

NOTHING is more common among Antiquaries.

and there is not a more copious source of error,
than to decideconcerningthe institutions and man-
ners ofpaft ages, by the fbrms and ideas which
prevail in their own times. The French lawyers
, '1in

in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, having
found their Ibvereigns in pofleflion of absolute
power, seem to think it a duty incumbent on them,
to maintain that such unbounded authority be-
longed to the crown in every period of their mo-
narchy. " The government of France," fays M.
de Real very gravely, " is purely monarchical at
this day, as it was from the beginning. Our Kings
were absolute originally as they are at present."
Science du Governement, tom. ii. p. 31. It is
impossible, however, to conceive two flates of civil
society more unlike to each other, than that of the
French nation under Clovis, and that under Louis
XV. It is evident from the codes of laws of the
various tribes which fettled in Gaul and the coun-
tries adjacent to it, as well as from the history of
Gregory of Tours, and other early annalists, that
among all there people the form of government
was extremely rude and simple, and that they had
scarcely begun to acquire the first rudiments of
that order and police which are necessary in ex-
tensive societies. The King or leader had the com-
mand offoldiers or companions, who followed his
standard from choice, not by constraint. I have
produced the clearest evidence of this, Note VI.
An event related by Gregory bof Tours, lib. iv.
c. 14. affords the most striking proof of the de-
pendance of the early French Kings on the senti-
ments and inclination of their people. Clotaire I.
having marched at the head of his army, in the
year 553, against the Saxons, that people, intimi-

6 dated

dated at his approach, sued for peace, and offered
to pay a large fum to the offended monarch. Clo-
taire was willing to close with what they proposed.
But his army insisted to be led forth to battle. The
King employed all his eloquence to persuade them
to accept of what the Saxons were ready to pay.
The Saxons, in order to sooth them, increased their
original offer. The King renewed his folicita-
tions: But the army enraged, rushed upon the
King, tore his tent in pieces, dragged him out of
it, and would have slain him on the spot, if he
had not consented to lead them instantly against
the enemy.

IF the early monarchs of France polfeTfed such

limited authority, even while at the head of their
army, their prerogative during peace will be found
to be still more confined. They arcended the throne
not by any hereditary right, but in consequence of
the elecion of their fubjeas. In order to avoid
an unnecessary number of quotations, I refer my
readers to Hottomanni Franco-gallia, cap. vi. p. 47.
edit. 1573, where they will find the fullest proof
of this from Gregory of Tours, Amoinus, and the
most authentick historians of the Merovingian
Kings. The effe& of this election was not to in-
vest them with absolute power. Whatever related
to the general welfare of the nation, was submitted
to public deliberation, and determined by the
suffrage of the people, in the annual assemblies
called Les Champs de Mars and Les Champs de

Mai.

Mai. These assemblies were called Champs, be-
cause, according to the custom of all the barbarous
nations, they were held in the open air, in some
plain capable of containing the vast number of
persons who had a right to be present. Jo. Jac.
SorberusdeComitiis veterum Germanorum, vol. i.
§ 19, &c. They were denominated Champs de
Mars and de Mai, from the months in which they
were held. Every freeman seems to have had a
right to be present in there assemblies. Sorberus,
ibid. § i33, &c. The ancient annals of the Franks
describe the persons who were present in the as-
fembly held A. D. 7 88, in these words: In placito
Ingelheimenfi conveniunt pontifices, majores, mi-
nores, facerdotes, reguli, duces, comites, praefecti,
cives, oppidani, Apud Sorber. § 304. There every
thing that concerned the happiness of their coun-
try, fays an ancient hiltorian, every thingthat could
be of benefit to the Franks, was confidered and
enjoined. Fredegarius ap. Du Cange Gloflar. voc.
Campus Martii. Chlotharius II. describes the bufi-
ness, and acknowledges the authority of these as-
femblies. They are called, fays he, that whatever
relates to the common safety may be confidered
and resolved by common deliberation; and what-
ever they determine, to thati will conform. Amoi-
nus de Gest. Franc. lib. iv. c. i. ap. Bouquet Re-
cueil, iii. 116. The statutory clauses, or words of
legislative authority in the decrees issued in there
aflemblies, run not in the name of the King alone.
" We have treated, fays Childebert, in a decree,

VoL. I. F f A.D.

A.D. 532, in the afflmbly of March, together
with our Nobles, concerning fume affairs, and we
now publish the conclusion, that it may come to
the knowledge of all." Childeb. Decret. ap. Bou-
quet Recueil des Hiftor. torn. iv. p. 3. We have
agreed together with our vassals. Ibid. § 2. It
is agreed in the assembly in which we were all
united. Ibid. § 4. The Salic laws, the most ve-
nerable monument of French jurisprudence, were
enaded in the fame manner. Dictavcrunt Salicain
legem proceres ipfius gentis, qui tunc temporis
apud earn erant ReCtores. Sunt auter eleci dc
pluribus viri quatuor-qui per tres Mallos conve-
nientes, omnes cauIarurn origines solicit: difcur-
rendo, tra&antesde fingulisjudicium decreverunE
hoc modo. Pref. Leg. Salic. ap. Bouquet. Ibid.
p. 122. Hoc decretum eft apud regem & prin-
cipes ejus, & apud cunEtum populum chriftianurn,
qui infra regnum Merwingorum confiftunt. Ibid.
p. 124. Nay, even in their charters, the Kings
of the first race are careful to specify that they
were granted with the content of their vassals. Ego
Childebertus Rex una cum confcnfu & voluntate
Francorum, &c. A. D. 558. Bouquet, ibid. 622.
Chlotharius III. una cum patribus noftrisepifcopis,
optimatibus, casterifque palatii ncftri minifiris,
A. D. 664. Ibid. 648. De confenfu fidelium nof-
trorun. Mably Obferv. tom. i. p. 2j9. The his-
torians likewise describe the funcions of the King
in the national assemblies in such terms as imply
that his authority there was extremely finall, and

3 that

that every thing depended on the court itfclf. Ipfe
Rex (fays the author of Annales Francorurn,
speaking of the Field of March) fedebat in fella
regia, circumftante exercitu, pracipiebatque is,
die illo, quicquid a Francis decrerum erat. Bou-
quet Recueil, tom. ii. p. 647.

THAT the general assemblies exercised supreme

jurisdiction over all persons, and with refpeEt to all
causes, is so evident as to itand in need of no proof.
The trial of Brunehaut, A. D. 613, how unjult
soever the sentence against her may be, as related
by Fredegarius, Chron. cap. 42. Bouquet, ibid.
430. is in itself sufficient proof of this. The no-
torious violence and iniquity of the sentence, serve
to demonstrate the extent of jurisdiction which
this assembly poffi'ed, as a Prince so sanguinary
as Clothaire II. thought the fan&ion of its autho-
rity would be sufficient to jualify his rigorous
treatment of the mother and grandmother of so
many Kings.

WITH respect to conferring donatives on the

Prince, we may observe, that among nations whose
manners and political inltitutions are simple, the
publick, as well as individuals, having few wants,
they are unacquainted with taxes, and free un-
civilized tribes disdain to fubmic to any ltated
imposition. This was remarkably the cafe of the
Germans, and of all the various people that iiTued
from that country. Tacitus pronounces two tribes
not to be of German origin, because they submit-

Fs a ted

ted to pay taxes. De Morib. Germ. c. 43. And
speaking of another tribe according to the ideas
prevalent in Germany, he fays, " they were not
degraded by the imposition of taxes." Ibid. c. 29.
Upon their settlement in Gaul, we may conclude,
that while elated with the consciousness of vitory,
they would not renounce the high-fpirited ideas
of their ancestors, or voluntarily submit to a bur-
den which they regarded as a badge of Servitude.
The evidence of the earliest records and historians
justify this conclusion. M. de Montesquieu, in
the twelfth and subsequent chapters of the thir-
teenth book ofl'Efprit des Loix, and M.de Mably
Obfervat. fur 'Hitt. de France, tom. i. p. 247.
have investigated this fa& with great attention,
and have proved clearly, that the property of free-
men among the Franks was not fubje& to any
stated tax. That the state required nothing from
persons of this rank, but military .service at their
own expence, and that they (hould entertain the
King in their houses when he was upon any pro-
grefs through his dominions, or his officers when
lent on any publick employment, furnilhing them
with carriages and horses. Monarchs fublited al-
moif entirely upon the revenues of their own do-
mains, and upon the perquisites arising from the
adminifration ofjuftice, together with a few fnlall
fines and forfeitures exaaed from such as had been
guilty of certain trefpafes. It is foreign from my
subjet to enumerate these. The reader may find
them in Obfervat. de M. de Mablv, vol. i. p. :67.

WH:':

Wa£E, any extraordinary aid was granted by

free-men to their sovereign, it was purely volun-
tary. In the annual assembly of March or May,
it was the custom to ma.ke the King a present of
money, of horses or arms, or of some other thing
of value. This was an ancient custom, and derived
from their ancestors the Germans. Mos eft civi-
tatibus, ultro ac viritim conferri principibus vel
armentorum vel frugnm, quod pro honore accep-
tum, etiam neceflitatibus fubvenit. Tacit de Mor.
Germ. c. I5. These gifts, if we may form a judg-
ment concerning them from the general terms in
which they are mentioned by the ancient hifto-
rians, were considerable, and made no small part
of the royal revenue. Many passages to this pur-
pose are produced by M. du Cange, Dissert. iv. fur
Joinville, 153. Sometimes a conquered people
specified the gift which they bound themselves to
pay annually, and it was exa&ted as a debt if they
failed. Annales Metenfes, ap. Du Cange, ibid.
p. 155. It is probable, that the first ftep towards
taxation was to ascertain the value of these gifts
which were originally gratuitous, and to compel
the people to pay the fum at which they were rated.
Still, however, some memory of their original
was preserved, and the aids granted to monarchs
in all the kingdoms of Europe were termed be-
nevolences or free gifts.

THE Kings of the second race in France were

raised to the throne by the election of the people.
Pcpinus Rex pius, fays an author who wrote a few

F f 3 years

years after the tranfa&ion which he records, per
authoritatem Papa, &unationem fanEti chrifmatis
& elet&ionem omnium Francorum in regni folio
fublimatus eft. Claufula de Pepini confecratione
ap. Bouq. Recueil des Hiftor. tom. v. p. 9. At
the fame time, as the chief men of the nation had
transferred the crown from one family to another,
an oath was exacted of them, that they should
maintain on the throne the family which they had
now promoted; ut nunquam de alterius lumbis
regem in avo prafumant eligere. Ibid. p. io.
This oath the nation faithfully observed during a
considerable space of time. The posterity of Pepin
kept poffefion of the throne; but with refpe& to
the manner of dividing theirdominions among their
children, Princes wereobliged to consult the gene-
ral assembly of the nation. Thus Pepin himself,
A. D. 768, appointed his two sons, Charles and
Carlomannus, to reign as joint sovereigns; but he
did this, una cum confenfu Francorum & proce-
rum fuorum feu & epifcoporum, before whom he
laid the matter in their general allembly. Conven-
tus apud sanctum Dionyfium, Capitular. vol. i.
p. 187. This dellination the French confirmed in
a subsequent aflembly, which was called upon the
death of Pepin; for, as Eginhart relates, they not
only appointed them Kings, but by their authority
they regulated the limits of their refpetive terri-
tories. Vita Car. Magni ap. Bouquet Recueil,
tom. v. p. 90. In the fame manner, it was by
the authority of the supreme assemblies that any
dispute which arose among the descendants of the

royal

royal family was determined. Charlemagne re-
cognizes this important part of their jurifdi&ion,
and confirms it in his charter concerning the par-
tition of his dominions; for he appoints, that, in
cafe of any uncertainty with refpef to the right
of the several competitors, he whom the people
flall chufe, flall succeed to the crown. Capitular.
vol. i. 442.

UNDER the second race of Kings, the aflembly

of the nation, difinguifled by the name of Con-
ventus, Malii, Piacita, were regularly assembled
once a year at least, and frequently twice in the
year. One of the rnof valuable monuments of
the history of France is the treatise of Hincmarus,
archbishop ofRheims, de ordine .Palatii. He died
A. D. 882, only fixty-eight years after Charlc-
magne, and lie relates in that fliort discourse the
fats which were communicated to him by Adal-
hardus, a minister and coniident of Charlemagne.
From him we learn, that this great monarch never
failed to hold the general assembly of his fubjedts
every year. In quo placito generalitas tuiiver-
forum majorum tam clericorum quam laicorum
conveniebat. Hincm. oper. edit. Sirmondi, vol. ii.
c. 29. 2i . In there aflemblies, matters which
r 1ated to the general fifety and IRate of the king-
.!om were always discussed, before they entered
upon any private or lels important bufiners. Ibid.
c. 33. P. 213. His immediatefucceflors imitated
his example, and tranlaited no affair of import-
ance without the advice of their great council.

F f 4 UNDI.

UNDR the second race of 1ings, the genius of

the French government continued to be in a good
measure democratical. The nobles, the dignified
ecclefiafticks, and the great officers of the crown,
were not the only members of the national coun-
cil; the people, or the whole body of free-men,
either in person or by their representatives, had
a right to be present in it. Hincmarus, in de-
scribing the manner of holding the general assem-
blies, fays, ahat, if the weather was favourable,
they met in the open air; but, if otherwise, they
had different apartments allotted to them: so that
the dignified clergy were separated from the laity,
and the comites vcl hujufmodi principes fibimet
honorificabiliter a catera multitudinefegregaren-
tur. Ibid. c. 35. p. I 14. Agobardus, archbishop
of Lyons, thus describes a national council in the
year 8 43, wherein he was present. Qui ubique
conventus extitit ex reverendillimis epifcopis, &
magnificentiflimis viris illuftribus, collegio quoque
abbatum & comitum, promifcuaeque aetaris et
dignitatis populo. The cotera multitudo of Hinc-
marus is the fame with the poulus of Agobardus,
and both describe the inferior order of free-men,
the fame who were afterwards known in France
by the name of the third estate, and in England
by the name of commons. The people, as well
as the members of higher dignity, were admitted
to a share of the legislative power. Thus, by a
law, A. D. 803, it is ordained, " that the queltion
shall be put to the people with relpea to every
new law, and if they shall agree to it, they shall

confirm.

confirm it by their signature." Capit. vol. i. 394.
There are two capitularia which convey to us a
full idea of the part which the-people had in the
administration of government. When they felt
the weight of any grievance, they had a right to
petition the sovereign for redress. One of these
petitions, in which they desire that ecclefiaflicks
might be exempted from bearing arms, and from
serving in person against the enemy, is Rill cxtant.
It is addressed to Charlemagne, A. D. 803o, and
expressed in such terms as could have been used
only by men conscious of liberty, and of the ex-
tensive privileges which they possessed. They con-
clude with requiring him to grant their demand,
if he wilhed that they should any longer continue
faithful fubjeas to him. That great monarch,
instead of being offended or surprised at the bold-
ness of their petition, received it in a most gracious
manner, and signified his willingness to comply
with it. But sensible that he hilnfelf did not
possess legislative authority, hepromifes to lay the
matter before the next general aflembly, that such
things as were of common concern to all might
be there confidered and eftablilhed by common
content. Capitul. tom. i. p. 405-409. As the
people by their petitions brought matters to be
proposed in the general assembly, we learn from
another capitulare the form in which they were
approved there, and ena&ted as laws. The pro-
positions were read aloud, and then the people
were required to declare whether they assented to
them or not. They signified their afent by crying

three

three times, 'c We are satisfied," and then the
capitular: was confirmed by the subscription of
the monarch, the clergy, and the chief men of the
laity. Capitul. tom. i. p. 627. A. D. 822. It
teems probable from a capitulare of Carolus
Calvus, A. D. 851, that the sovereign could not
refute his aftent to what was proposed and efta-
blifhed by his fubjeds in the general assembly.
Tit. ix. § 6. Capitul. vol. ii. p. 47. It is un-
necelfary to multiply quotations concerning the
legislative power of the national assembly of France
under the second race, or concerning its right to
determine with regard to peace and war. The
uniform style of the Capitularia is an abundant
confirmation of the former. The reader who de-
fires any farther information with refpet to the
latter, may consult Les Origines ou l'Ancien Gou-
vernement de la France, &c. torn. iii. p. 87, &c.
What has been said with refpet to the admillion
of the people or their reprefintatives into the fu-
preme affcmbly merits attention, not only in tracing
the progress of the French government, but on
account of the light which it throws upon a firni-
lar qucition agitated in England, concerning the
time when the commons became part of the le-
gillative body in that kingdom.
NOTE XXXIX. SecT. III. p. o20. [QQ].

'ITHAr important change which the con[litution

of France underwent, when the lcgillative power
was transFerrcd from the great council of the

nation

nation to the King, has been explained by the
French antiquaries with less care, than they
betlow in illustrating other events in their hiflory.
For that reason I have endeavoured with greater
attention to trace the steps which led to this me-
morable revolution. I shall here add some par-
ticulars which tend further to illustrate it. The
Leges Salic;, the Leges Burgundionum, and other
codes published by the several tribes which fettled
in Gaul, were general laws extending to every
person, to every province and difltric where their
authority was acknowledged. But they seem to
have become obsolete; and the reason of their
falling into dilule is very obvious. Almost the
whole property of the nation was allodial when
these laws were framed. But when the feudal in-
flitutions became general, and gave rife to an
infinite variety of queflions peculiar to that species
of tenure, the ancient codes were of no use in
deciding with regard to there, because they could
not contain regulations applicable to cafes which
did not exill at the time when they were compiled.
This conliderable change in the nature of property
made it neccffary to publilh the new regulations
contained in the Capitularia. Many of these, as
is evident fiom the perusal of them, were publick
laws extending to the whole French nation, in
the general aflembly of which they were en:,ecd.
The wealncfs of the greater part of the monarchs
of the second race, and the disorder into wlich
the nation was thrown by the depredations of the
Normans, encouraged the barons to usurp an i:-

depenident

dependent power formerly unknown in France,
The nature and extent of that jurifdiaion which
they assumed, I have formerly confidered. The
political union of the kingdom was at an end, its
ancient constitution was dissolved, and only a
feudal relation fubfilted between the King and his
vassals. The regal jurifdi&ion extended no fur-
ther than the domains of the crown. Under the
lait Kings of the 'ecpnd race, these were reduced
almost to nothing. Under the first Kings of the
third race, they comprehended little more than
the patrimonial efate of Hugh Capet, which he
annexed to the crown. Even with this accelion,
they continued to be very narrow. Vellv, Hilt. de
France, tom. iii. p. 32. Many of the moif confi-
derable provinces in France did not at first ac-
knowledge Hugh Capet as a lawful Monarch.
There are till extant several charters, granted
during the first years of his reign, with this re-
markable clause in the form of dating the charter;
$' Deo regnante, rege expeaante," regnante do-
mino noftro Jesu Chrilto, Francis autem contra
jus regnum ui.rpante Ugone rege. Bouquet Re-
cueil, torn. x. p. 544. A Monarch whose title
was thus openly disputed, was not in a condition
to assert the royal jurifdition, or to limit that of
the barons.

ALL these circumitances rendered it easy for

the barons to usurp the rights of royalty within
their own territories. The capitularia became no
!cfs obsolete than the ancient laws ; local customs

were

were every where introduced, and became the sole
rule by which all civil tranfadions were condu&ed,
and all causes were tried. The wonderful igno-
rance, which became general in France during
the ninth and tenth centuries, contributed to the
introdu&ion of customary law. Few persons, ex-
cept ecclefiafticks, could read; and as it was not
in the power offuch illiterate persons to have re-
course to written laws, either as their guide in
business, or their rule in adminifteringjultice, the
customary law universally prevailed.

DURING this period, the general afrembly of

the nation seems not to have been called, nor to
have once exerted its legislative authority. Local
customs regulated and decided every thing. A
striking proof of this occurs in tracing the pro-
grefs of the French jurisprudence. The last of
the Capitularia collected by M. Baluze, was iffied
in the year 921, by Charles the Simple. An
hundred and thirty years elapsed from that period
to the publication of the first ordonance of the
Kings of the third race, contained in the great
collection of M. Lauriere, and the first ordonance
which appears to be an act of legislation extend-
ing to the whole kingdom, is that of Philip Au-
guftus, A. D. 19go. Ordon. tom. i. p. i. i8.
During that long period of one hundred and sixty-
nine years, all tranfa&ions were direted by local
customs, and no addition was made to the ftatu-
tory law of France. The ordinances, previous to
the reign of Philip Augustus, contain regulations,

the

the authority of which did not extend beyond th:
King's domains.

VARIOUS intfances occur of the caution with

which the Kings of France ventured at first to
exercise legislative authority. M. l'Ab. de Mably
produces an ordonance of Philip Augustus, A. D.
1206, concerning the Jews, who, in that age,
were in some measure the property of the lord in
whose territories they resided. But it is not Ib
much an a& of royal power, as a treaty of the
King with the counters of Champagne, and the
comte de Dampierre; and the regulations in it
seem to be eRablifhed not by his authority, but
by their content. Obfervat. fur l'hift. de France,
ii. p. 355. In the fame manner an ordonance of
Louis VIII. concerning the Jews, A. D. 1223,
is a contra&t between the King and his nobles,
with refpe& to their manner of treating that un-
happy race of men. Ordon. tom. i. p. 47. The
Eftabliffemens of St. Louis, though well adapted
to serve as general laws to the whole kingdom,
were not published as such, but only as a complete
code of customary law, to be of authority within
the King's domains. The wisdom, the equity, and
the order conspicuous in that code of St. Louis,
procured it a favourable reception throughout the
kingdom. The veneration due to the virtues and
good intentions of its author, contributed not a
little to reconcile the nation to that legifative
authority, which the King began to aflTumc. Soon
after his time, the idea of the King's poffleiing

supreme

supreme legislative power became common. If,
fays Beaumanoir, the King makes any eftablilh-
ment specially for his own domain, the barons
may nevertheless adhere to their ancient customs;
but if the effablifhment be general, it ihall be
current throughout the whole kingdom, and we
ought to believe that Iuch eftablilhments are made
with mature deliberation, and for the general
good. Cour. de Beauvoifis, c. 48. p. 265.
T'hough the Kings of the third race did not call
the general assembly of the nation, during the
long period from Hugh Capet to Philip the Fair,
yet they leem to have consulted the bishops and
barons vwho happened to be present in their court,
with relpect to any new law which they publithed.
Examples of this occur Or-on. tom. i. p. 3 & 5.
The praetice tiems to have continued as late as
thle reign of St. Louis, when the legiflarive au-
thority of the crown was well establishcd. Ordon.
ton. i. p . 5 . AD. 1246. This attention paid
to the barons facilitated the Kings acquiring such
full poffeflion of the legiflnt:ive power, as en:bled
them afterwards to exc.ci; it without oblerving
that foirnaliyv.

THE alfcmblies diftinguifid by :he na-ie of

the States General, were tfilt called A. D. 1 02,
and were held occasionally fiom that period to
the year 1614, since which ti:e they have noc
been summoned. These were very difiirrent 4'iom
the ancient assemblies of the French nation under
the Kings of the first and sI:c,.:d r .:.' T'!her. i

:.-3

no point with refpet to which the French anti-
quaries are. more generally agreed, than in main-
taining that the States General had no suffrage in
the paring of laws, and possessed no proper legis-
lative jurisditiion. The whole tenor of the French
hiRfory confirms this opinion. The form of pro-
ceeding in the States General was this. SThe King
addressed himself to the whole bodraffembled in
one place, and laid before them the affairs on
account of which he had summoned them. The
deputies ofeach of the three orders, of nobles, of
clergy, and of the third estate, met apart, and
wrepared their caTer or memorial, containing their
answer to the propositions which had been made
to them, togejeir with the representations which
they4hought proper to laybbefore the King. These
Aefwers and reprefentions were confidered by the
King in his council, and generally gave rife to an
ordonancR. These ordonanecs were not tddreffed
to the three estates in common. Somietimes the
I&ing addrefed an ordonance to each of the estates
in particular. SoMetimcs he mentioned the afltem-
bli f the threeiEfates. SometCnes mention is
made only offthe alembly of4]at estate to which
the-ordoace is addreflic. Sometimes no men-
tion at is a' de of the aremtt , ofteftates,
whicbfiuggeisd the propriety o a^ g the law.
Preface au tom. iii. desprdon. zxx. Thus the
States Seneral hada ly the privigof advising
¥ andremonftingicle&ative, tlhority resided

in thcjelonp A,
1 . Y J T

N OTE E XL. SECT. III. p. 205. [RR].

IF the parliament of Paris be confidered only

as the supreme court of juflice, every thing rela-
tive to its origin and jurifdiaion is clear and ob-
vious.. It is the ancient court of the King's palace,
new-modelled, rendered fcdentary, and invested
with an extcnfive and afccrtained jurifdidtion. The
power of this court, while employed in this part
of its functions, is not the object of prelhnt con-
ilderation. The pretensions of the palliament'to
controul the exercise of the legillative authority,
and its claim of a righ. to.-iitcrpofe with refipe
to publick affairs and the political administration
of the kingdom, lead to inquiries attended with
great difficulty. As the officers and members of
the parliament of Paris were anciently nominated
by the King, were paid by him, and on several
occasions were removed by him at pleasure
(Chronic. Scandaleufe de Louis XI. chez les
Mem. de Comines, torn. ii. p. 51. Edit. de M.
Lenglet de Frefnoy), they dinnot be confidered
as reprefentatiies of the people, nor could they
claim any lhare in the legislative' power as acting
i, cteir nrine. We mutt lircrh fdo' some other
fourcc1ohiFigh privilege. Tih parliament was
originally dnmpofed of the most emihent persons
in the kiTltom. The peers of France, eccle-
fiafticks fihe higeflt order, and noblemen of
illustrious irth, were minmberi f it, to whom
were added fqme clerli and counfellts learned in

VOL. I. '
? G g the

the laws. Pafquier Recherches, p. 44, &c. Ency-
clopedic, torn. xii. Art. Parlement. p. 3, 5. A
court thus constituted was properly a committee
of the States General of the kingdom, and was
composed of those barons and fide!es, whom tle
Kings of France were accustomed to consult with
regard to every act of jurifdiaion or legislative
authority. It was natural, therefore, during the
intervals between the meetings of the States Gene-
ral, or during those periods when that assembly
was not called, to contult the parliament, to lay
matters of publick concern before its and to ob-
tain its approbation and concurrence, before any
ordonance was published, to which the people
were required to conform. c. Under the second
race of Kings, every new law was reduced into
proper form by the Chancellor of the kingdom,
was proposed by him to the people, and when
enacted, was committed to him to be kept among
the publick records, that he might give authen-
tick copies of it to all who should demand them.
IIincm. de ord. palat. c. 16. Capitul. Car. Calv.
tit. xiv. § 1 . tit. xxxiii. The chanc.llor presided
in the parliament of Paris at its first institution.
Encyclopedie, tom. iii. art. Chancelier, p. 88. It
was therefore natural for the King to .ontinue to
employ him in, his ancient funcAions of' framing:
taking into his custody, and publilhing the ordo-
nances which were issued. To an ancient copy
of the Capitularia of Charlemagne, the following
wores arc subjoined: Anno tcrtio clementifrinli
domini roftri Caroli Augufti, sub iplo anno, lh'c

1. 1} fla-,

fata Capitula funt, & confignata Stephano comiti,
ut hec manifefta faceret Pariflis mallo publico, &
illa legere faceret corarn Scabineis, quod ita &
fccit, & oxnnes in uno confenferunt, quod ipfi
vo!uitlent obfervare ufque in pofleruin, etiam om-
ncs Scabinci, Epifcopi, Abbates, Comlites, manu
propria fubtcr lignaverunt. Bouquet Recueil,
tom. v. p. 663. Mlallts signifies not only the pub-
lick afftrmbly of the nation, but the court ofjuflice
held by the comes, or missus dominicus. Scabini
wvere the judges, or the afichfors of the judges in
that court. lIere then fee;s to be a very early
instance, not only of laws being published in a
court of justice, but of their being verified or
confirmed by the subscription of the judges, If
this was the common practice, it naturally intro-
duced the verifying of edits in the parliament of
Paris. But this conrje&ure I propose with that
diffidence, which I have fclt in all my reafinings
concerning the laws and intlitutions of foreign
nations. 3. This fiipreme court of juitice in
France was dignified with the appellation of par-
liament, the nanic by wvhich the gencrrl afim-nbly
of the nation was diitinguifhc, towards the close
of the Ifcond race of Kings; andi men, both in
reafoni1n and in condu&, are wonderfully influ-
enced by the imnilaiity of names. The preleirving
the ancient names of the miagilrlntcs ctlablilhed
while republican government Lubliiled in Romle,
enabled Augulltis and his successors to aflinlc ric\v
powers, with lcfs observation, and greater calc.
The bestowing the .lme name in France upon two

G g 2 courts,

courts, which were extremely different, contri-
buted not a little to confound their jurisdiction
and functions.

ALL there circunmfances concurred in leading

the Kings of France to avail themselves of the
parliament of Paris, as the infrrulnent of reconcil-
ing the people to thcitrexercife of legislative autho-
rity. The French, accullomed to fee all new laws
t examined and auchorifed before they were pub-
lifhld, did not fuiciently diftinguifl between the
. .-effe& of perfornmig this in the national assembly,

. rr il a court appointed by the Kifig. But as that
court.as composed of refpeAable members, and
well ikilled;' the laws of their country, when any
riew-di&t received its sanction, that was sufficient
' to(dif.fe the people to implicit fubmiiifion.

WHBEN the pra&ice of verifying and regifiering

the royal edi&s in the parliament of Paris became
common, the parliament contended that this was
necessary in order to give them legal authority. It
wasftablifled as a fundamental maxim in French
jurifaidence, that no law could be pubinfiied in
any other manner; that, Without this formality, no
edi& or ordonance could liave any,,effe; that the
people were not bound to obeyit, and ought not
to confider it as an edi& orQrdonance until it was
verified in the supreme cd rt,,after free delibera-
tion. Roche-fiavin des Parlemens de France, 4to.
Gen. 1621. .

p. 92. The parliament, at different
times, hath with great fortitudKand integrity op-

5 '; -,poscd

posed the will of their sovereigns; and notwith-
standing their repeated and pcremptory requi-
fitions and commands, hath refused to verify and
publish such edits as it conceived to be oppreflive
to the people, or subversive of the conftitutijo of
the kindom. Roche-favin reckons, that between
the yc';r x5ó2, and lheyear j153, the parliament
rcfutkld to verify marc than a hui..;red edicts of
the Kings. Ibid. 92-. Many in'lances of the
spirit and constan.cy vwith icL the 'arli.lmc;ls of
France opposcd pcrnicious laws, a,;d aslitlrted their
own privileges, arc enunmerated by Lmnnxu.s No-
titia Regni Franci;, lib. i. c. 9. p. 224.

BUT the power of the parlianent to maintain

and defend this privilege, bore no proportion to its
importance, or:to the courage with which the mem-
bers asserted it. When any monarch was deter-
mined that an edi& Ihould be carried into execu-
tion, and found the parliament inflexibly resolved
- not to verify or publih it, he could cafily filpply

.is defe by the plenitude of his regai power..

e paireid to the parliament in perfbn, ie took

'poffiion of his feat of justice, and commanded
the ediAc to be ready; verified, rcgiftered, and pub-
lifhed, his presence. WlThen, atcording to ano.
ther maxim of'Frelch law, the king himself beini
preferi neither the parliament, nor any magifrrare
whatever, can exercifoeqny authority, or perforrm
any funetion. Adveniente Principe, 'cert >

magif..

tratus. Roche-flavin, ibid. p.;g98, 929. Ency-
clopedie, tom. ix. Art. Lit. de Yufiicr, p. S11.

g 3 Roclhe

Roche-flavin mentions several inflances of Kings
who acually exerted this prerogative, so fatal to
the residue of the rights and liberties tranfinitte.l
to the French by their ancestors. Palqulicr pro-
duces some instances of the fuine kind. Richi.
p. 6I. Limnat=s enumerates many others, wiiich
t he length to which this note has swelled, prevents
me from inserting at length, though they tend grea;-
ly to illustrate this important article in the Frc' ch
history, p. 245. Thus by an exertion of prero-
gative, which, though violent, seems to be conlli-
tutional,and is juttificd by innumerable prccedei -,
all the efforts of the parliament to limit and con-
troul the King's legislative authority, are rendered
ineffectual.

I HAVE not attempted to explain the conftitu-

tion or jurifdiaion of any parliament in France
but that of Paris. All of them are formed upon
the model of that most ancient and respectable tri-
bunal, and all my observations concerning it will
apply with full force to them.

t

NQT E XLI. SECT. III. p. 211. [SSJ.

THE humiliating posture, in which a great Fin-

peror implored absolution, is an event fT fingul;ir,
that the words in which Gregory himself lcfcrit),
it, merit a place here, and convey a striking li'-
ture of the arrogance of that Pontiff. Per triduuin,
ante portam caftri, depofito omniregio cultu, milI
rabiliter, utpote difcalceatus, & laneis indutts,

perfi'(tcnl,

.perfiftens, non prius cum multo fletu apoftolice
nirCerationis auxilium, & conColationem implorari
dcfitit, quam omnes qui ibi aderant, & ad quos
rumor ille pervenit, ad tantam pietatem, & com-
paffionis mifericordiam movit, ut pro eo multis
precibus & lacrymis intercedentes, omnes quidem
irlblitam noftrs mentis duririern mirarentur; non-
Dulli vcro in nobis non apoftolic:e fcdis gravitatem,
ll.1 (luasr tyrannic:t feritatis crudelitatem efie cla-
na.lrunt. Epilt. Gregor. ap. Mernorie della Con-
:clii Matilda da Fran. Mar. Fiorcntini. Lucca,
-756, vol. i. p. 174.

N O T E XLII. SECT. III. p. :22. [TlT].

As I have endeavoured in the history to trace

;the various. steps in the progrels of the conflitu-
tion of the Empire, and to explain the peculiarities
in its policy very fully, ic is not necesSary to add
mnuch by way of illustration. What appears to
be of ar.y importance, I lhall range under diftin'l
.heads.

1. WITH refit)et to the power, jurifdirlion, and

revenue of the Emperors. A very just idea of
thefc may be formed by attending to the view
which Pfieflel gives of the rights of the Emperors
at two different periods. The first at the dole of
the Saxon race, A. D. 102-.. These, according to
his enumeration, were the right of conferring all
the great ecclesiastical benelices in Germany; of
icceiving the revenues of themn during a vacancy;

; g 4 of

of Mortmain, or of succeeding to the effets of ec-
clefiaRicks who died intestate. The r:-ht of con-
firming or of annulling the elections of the Popes.
The right of aflembling councils, and of appoint-
ing them to decide concerning the affairs of the
church. The right of conferring the title of King
upon their vaflals. The right of granting vacant
fiefs. The right of receiving the revenues of the
Empire, whether arising from the Imperial do-
mains, from impoils and tolls, from gold or silver
mines, from the taxes paid by the Jews, or from
forfeitures. The right of governing Italy as its
. proper sovereigns. The right of erecing free

cities, and of elfablilhing fairs in them. The right
of affembling-the diets of the Empire, and of fix-
ing the time of their duration. The right of coin-
ing money, and of conferring that privilege on the
flates of the Empire. Tile right of adrhiniftering
both high and low justice within the territories of
the diffeirht states. ` Abrege, p. 60. The other
period is at the extiri&ion of the Emperors of the
families of Luxemlbrg and Bavaria, A. ID 1437.
'c According to the fame author, the Imp.ial pre-

gatives at that timewere the right of conferring
ai% di.ities and titles, except 'the privilege-of
being a ate of the Empire.,.. 'he right of Preces
,^ primarie, ,or of apoiwting micedA g their reign

a digrita'y m^ach, chapter oItregious house.
The right t'grantf g ct'Tperfatio nsa, th rCfpe&
to the age of rmajticy. .T rie n of ere&ting
cities, and of coferri the privil ining
money. 'The righpfc alling thi meec ofthe

,, t As ,.

"' ' ,!,.diet,
'*

diet, and ofprefiding in them. Abrege, &c. p.
507. It were easy to show that Mr. Pfeffel is well
foutnded in all these afiTrtions, and to confirm them
by the tefiinony of the moll reliectable authors.
In the one perid, tihe Emperors appear as mighty
tovereigns witIh cxtenfive prerogatives; in the
other, as the h;.ids of a confederacy with very
limited powers.

THE revenues of the Emperors decreased still

more than their authority. The early Emperors,
and particularly thole of the Saxon line, besides:.
their vail. patrimonial or heredirarv territories, pof- -
feTecd an cxtetirivc doinain both in Italy and Ger-"
nmarn, which belo!:ncd co them as i.1mpcrors Italy
bclonged to the Empecrors as their proper kin g-
dom, and the revenues which they drew frdi it
were very considerable. The firi alienitions of .;,
the Imperial revenue were made in this,.count'ry.
The Italian cities having acquired wealthands
aspiring at indepcndence, puchafed their libe'ri
from difflrent Emperors, asI have observcd, Note
i.V. .The fumns whirfr they paid, and the Em-
perors with ,whom they co6luded thele bargazts,
areienentioned by Cafp. Klockius de PiErario No-,
rimb. i67 , p. 85, &c. Charles IV. and his foni" ,'..
Wenceslaus, diflpated al'tntemn of thet I,
,Italian!branch of the domainl,:,he German do-
m4a lay chifly upon the banks of ie Rhine, ahd
was underi!e goyernment of the Counts Palatine. ",'

.. is1 ite i

efy*to mark out the.'boundaries, or to
e\allimtathe viuer.cf this ancient domain, which

*:41

*^ ,' '
has

^~~~~~~~~~~~~~~M

has been so long incorporated with the territories
of different Princes, Some hints with refpe& to
it may be found in the gloflary of Speidelius, which
he has intitled Speculum Juridico-Philologico-
politico Hilloricum Obfervationum, &c. Norimb.
1673, vol. i. 679. 1045. a more full account of it
is given by Klockius de rErario, p. 84. Besides
this, the Emperors poffeIfed considerable diltri&ts
of land lying intermixed with the etlatcs of the
dukes and barons. They were accullomed to vieit
these frequently, and drew from them what was
sufficient to ftrpport their court during the time of
their residence. Annalifta. ap. Struv. tom. i. 6 1 1.
A great part of these were seized by the nobles
during the long interregnum, or during the warn
occasioned by the contests between the Emperors
and the court of Rome. At the fame time that
fich encroachments -were made on the fixed or ter-
ritorial property of the Emperors, they were rob-
bed almost entirely of their casual revenues. Thc
Princes and barons appropriating to themselves
taxes and duties of every kind, which had usually
been paid to them. Pfeffel Abrege, p. 374. The
profuse and inconfiderke ambition ofCharles IV.
Squandered whatever remained of the Imperial re-
venues after so many defalcations. He, in the
y.ear 1376, in order to prevail with the EleEtors to
chufe his son Wencellaus King of the Rorans,
promised each of them a hundred thousand crowns.
But being unable to pay so large a film, and eager
to secure the eleEtion to his ton, he alienated to
dihe three ecclcfiaftical Eleators, and to the.Counc

Palatinc.

Palatine, such countries as still belonged to the
Imperial domain on the banks of the Rhine, and
likewise made over to them all the taxes and tolls
then levied by the Emperors in that diftricl. Tri-
themius, and the author of the Chronicle ofMag-
drburgh, enumera:e the territories and taxes which
were thus alienated, and represent this as the last
and fatal blow to tle Imperial authority. Struv.
Corp. vol. i. p. 437. From that period, the shreds
of the ancient revenues pofflffed by the Emperors
have bec'n lo inconsiderable, that, in the opinion
rof Speidelius, all that they yield would be so far
from defraying the expence of supporting their
hol!feold, that they would not pay the charge of
maintaining the polts ercablifhed in the Empire.
Speidelii Speculum, &c. vol. i. p. 680. These
finds, inconsiderable as they were, continued to
decrea!i. Granvclle, the minifler of Charles V.
ail'crted in the year 1546, in presence of several
of the German princes, that his master drew no
money at all from the Empire. Sleid. I-Iiflory of
the Reformation, Lond. 1680, p. 372. The lame
is the cafe at prelent. Traitc de droite Publique de
P:nEmpire, par M. le Coq. de Villeray, p. 55. From
the r('i r of Charles IV. whom Maximilian called
the pl:i of the Empire, the Emperors have de-
pended entirely on their hereditary dominions, as
the only source of their power, and even of their
subsistence.

2. The ancient mode of eleting the Empe-
rors, and the various changes which it underwent,

require

require some illu;'rlatlon. 'The Imperial crown
was originally attained b, eleEtion, as well as
thofet of most monarchies in Europe. An opinion
long prevailed among the antiquaries and publick
lawyers of Germany, that the right of chufing, the
Emperors was vecIed in the archlbiflops of Mentz,
Cologne, and Treves, the King of Bohemia, the
Duke of Saxony, the Marquis of Brandenbturgh,
and the Count Palatine of the Rhine, by an edict
of Ocho III. confirmed by Gregory V. about th
year 996. But the whole tenor ofiiltory contra-
di2ts this opinion. It appcars, that from the ear-
lief period in the hifIory of Gc-rmaiv, the perlon
who was to reign over all, ;was elecetd by he 'Llf-
frage of all. Thus Conrad I. was e!eCtcL by all
the people of the Franks, fay oime annaliits; by
all the princes and chief men, f.iy olhers; by all
the nation, fay others. See their words, '.ruv.
Corp. :I I. Conringius de German. Imper. Repub.
Acroamata Sex. Ebroduni 165.p. ), . .n the
year io24, pofteriCr to the luppo;dl rcgtil.rions
of OtlioIII. Conrad II. was cle&ted by, .ill the
chief men, and his eleLcion wa-I approved an;l con-
firmed by the people, Srruv. Corp. 284. At the
election of Lotharilus 1i. A. D. 125, lixt t thou-
fiand perlons of all rank;s were present. 1-Ic was
named by the chief men, a;nd their nomination wls
;.ppri)ovd by tlh peop!l. ::;'irl. ibidl. p. 357. The
firlt author who iinril;ns the fivcen Eletors is
Mvartinis Poloin,, wl:h ftlonrifhed in the reign of
l'rederick II. which ended A. D. 1250. We find
that in all t!he ancient elelions to which 1 have

referred,

referred, the Princes of the greatelt power and
authority were allowed by their countrymen to
name the perlon whom they wiihed to appoint
Emperor, and the pcopjle approved or ciifipproved
of their nomination. This privilege of voting first
is called by the Gcrlman lawsyers tle rilht of P;'c-
taxat/cn. PfeiC', Abr c-, p. 315. lTlis was the
first origin of the e:;c!w'.,e ri-i: which the Elec-
tors acquired. The Ele&,5lrs poikcffed the molt
extensive territories of any princs t

in the Enpirc;

all the great offces of the eate wcre in their hands
by hereditary ri. ht; as i>on is th;c obtainell or en-
grosned so much inf;lence in the election as to be
allowed the right of pritax.ation, it became un-
necef(ary for the inferior ecclefialticks and barons
to attend, when they had no other func&ion but
that of confirming the deed of thele more powerful
Princes by their afflent. During times of turbu-
lence, they could not resort to the place of election
without a numerous retinue of armed vaflals, the
expence of which they were obliged to dclfiry out
of their own revenues. The liihts of the ieven
Electors were supported by a.ll the dcfcei'ants and
allies of their powerful fami!ics, who filredin the
iplendor and influence whii l thicy enjioyed by this
diitinuiisilhing privilege. 'ic'ciil Abrc%ó, p. 376.
The fleven Eledlors were conldticred as the rcprc-
Icntatives of all the or which compored the
highest: class of German nobility. There were three
archbishops, chancellors of the three great difirits
into which the Empire v.,as ancic:ltly divided; one
King, one Duke, one Mnrdquis, and one Count.

All

All these circumstances contributed to render the
introduction of this confidcrable innovation into
the conflitution of the Germanick body extremely
easy. Every thing of importance, relating to this
branch of the political ltate of the Empire, is well
illustrated by Onuphrius Panvinius, an Augufti-
nian Monk of Verona, who lived in the reign of
Charles V. His treatise, if we make Ibme allow-
ance for that partiality which he expresses in favour
of the powers which the Popes claimed in the
Empire, has the merit of being one of the sirs
works in which a controverted point in history is
examined with critical precision, and with a pro-
per attention to that evidence which is derived
from records, or the tectimony of contemporary
historians. It is inferred by Goldaflus in his Po-
litica Imperialia, p. a.

As the Elecaors have engrossed the sole right

of chufing the Emperors, they have assumed like-
wife that of deposing them. This high power the
Electors have not only presumed to claim, but
have ventured, in more than one instance, to exer-
cife. In the year I298, a part of the Electors
deposed Adolphus of Nassau, and substituted Albert
of Austria in his place. The reasons on which
they found their sentence, flow that this deed
flowed from factious, not from publick-fpirired
motives. Struv. Corp. vol.i. 540. In the first
year of the fifteenth centlry, the Eleors' deposcd
'Wencefaus, and placed the'mperil1 crown on
the head of Rupert Eltor alratine. The at of

7 d ip~fition

deposition is still extant. Goldafti Conflit. vol. i.
379. It is pronounced in the name and by the
authority of the Elecors, and confirmed by several
prelates and barons of the Empire, who were
present. These exertions of the electoral power
demonstrate that the Imperial authority was funk
very low.

THE other privileges of the Eleetors, and the

rights of the electoral college, are explained by
the writers on the publick law in Germany.

3. rWITH refpeat to the diets or general affern-

blies of the Empire, it would be necessary, if my
object were to write a particular history of Ger-
many, to enter into a minute detail, concerning
the forms of assembling it, the persons who have
right to be present, their division into several Col-
leges or Benches, the obje&s of their deliberation,
the mode in which they carry on their debates or
give their suffrages, and the authority of their
decrees or recesses. But in a general history it is
sufficient to observe, that, originally, the diets of
the Empire were exaaly the fame with the
assemblies of March and of May, held by the
Kings of France. They met, at lealt, once a year.
Every freeman had a right to be present. They
were assemblies, in which a monarch deliberated
with his fubjcts, concerning their common in-
terest. Arumi us de Comitiis Rom. German. Im-
perii, 4to. JcnaS, 166o, cap. 7. N° o2, &c. But
when the Princes, dignified ecclefiafticks, and ba-

rons,

rons, acquired territorial and independent jurilf
dilaion, the diet became an aflembly of the separate
states, which formed the confederacy of which
the Emperor was head. While the constitution
of the Empire remained in its primitive form,
attendance on the diets was a duty, like the other
services due from feudal fubjeas to their fove-
reign, which the members were bound to perform
in person; and if any member who had a right
to be present in the diet negle&ced to attend in
person, he not only loft his vote, but was liable
to an heavy penalty. Arumaeus de Comit. c. 5,
N° 40. Whereas, from the time that the menm-
bers of the diet became independent states, the
right of suffrage was annexed to the territory or
dignity, not to the person. The members, if they
could not, or would not attend in person, might
fend theirFdeputies, as Princes fend ambassadors,
,', and they were entitled to exercise all the rights

. belonging to their conRfituents. Ibid. N° 42. 46.
;' 49. Byrdegrees, and upon the fame principleof

confidering?.thediet as an assembly of independent
flates, in which each confederate had the right of
" H suffrage, if any member possessed more than one

koftlof e itates or characters which entijle to a feat

. in the diete.,was allowed a proportional number
Z ~of suffrages,1 effel Abrege, 6i22. From the

t ifameeaufe tlh Imperial cities, asfoon as they

beca'l fwe andcladcqtired supreme 4nd indepen-
T jitti &icon0~.within tcliii(vrp territories, were

*s , ' r'iBi asmembers of the djejThie powf*s of
.. .~ .tl/'c extend to every thingclativco.the corn-

*^ ^~~~M o,

mon concern of the Germanick body, or that can
interest or affte it as a confederacy. The diet
takes no cognizance of the interior administration
in the different states, unless that happens to
disturb or threaten the general safety.

4. WITR refpe&t to the Imperial chamber, the

jurifdiaion of which has been the great source of
order and tranquillity in Germany, it is necessary
to observe, that this court was instituted in order
to put an end to the calamities occasioned by pri-
vate wars in Germany. I have already traced the
rife and progress of this practice, and pointed out
its pernicious effe&ts as fully as their extensive
influence during the middle ages merited. In
Germany, private wars seem to have been more
frequent and productive of worse consequences
than in the other countries of Europe. There are
obvious reasons for this. The nobility of Ger-
many were extremely numerous, and the causes
of their dissention multiplied in proportion. The
territorial jurifditlion which the German nobles
acquired, was more complete than that poffefied
by their order in other nations. They became, in
reality, independent powers, and they claimed all'
the privileges of that character. The long inter-
regnum from A. D. 1255. to A. D. 1273, accuf-
tomed them to an uncontrouled licence, and led
them to forget that fubi'di'dation whiclis ne-
ceffary in order toiatfhtain publick tranquilUy.
At the time win the other monarchs of Eutpe
.r:VoL. 1. H h 'ibegan

began to acquire such an increase of power and
revenues, as added new force to their government,
the authority aud revenues of the Emperors con-
tinued gradually to decline. The diets of the
Empire, which alone had authority to judge be-
tween such mighty barons, and power to enforce
its decisions, met very seldom. Conring. Acroa.
mata, p. 234. The diets, when they did assemble,
were often composed of several thousand members,
Chronic. Constant. ap. Struv. Corp. i. p. 546,
and were mere tumultuary assemblies, ill qualified
to decide concerning any question of right. The
session of the diets continued only two or three
days; Pfeffel Abrege, p. 244, so that they had
no time to hear or discuss any cause that was in the
smallest degree intricate. Thus Germany was
left, in some measure, without any court ofjudica-
ture, capable of reprefling the evils of private war.

ALL the expedients which were employed in

other countries of Europe in order to restrain this
practice, and which I have described Note XXI.
were tried in Germany with little effe&.. The
confederacies of the nobles and of the cities, and
the division of Germany into various circles, which
I mentioned in that Note, were found likewise
infuficient. As a last remedy, the Germans had
recourse to arbiters whom they called duflrege.
The barons and states in different parts of Ger-
manyjoined in conventions, by which they bound
themselves to refer all controversies, that might

arise

arise between then, to the determination of Au/ji
Tege, and to submit to their tEntences as final.
These arbiters are named sometimes in the treaty
of convention, an instance of which occurs in
Ludewig Reliquia: Manufcr. omnis avi, vol. ii,
212; sometimes they were chosen by mutual con-
sent; sometimes they were appointed by neutral
persons and fumctimes the choice was left to be
decided by lot. Datt. de Pace publica Imperil,
lib. i. cap. 27. No. 60, &c. Speidelius Speculum,
&c. voc. AuJfrag. p. 95. Upon the introdu&ion
of this pra&ice, the publick tribunals of justice
became, in a great measure, useless, and were al-
moLt entirely deserted,

IN order to re-eftablifl the authority of governó

ment, Maximilian instituted the Imperial chamber,
at the period which I have mentioned. This tri-
bunal consisted originally of a prefsdent, who was
always a nobleman of the first order, and of sixteen
judges. The president was appointed by the Em-
peror, and.the judges, partly by him, and partly
by the States, according to forms which it is un-
necessary to describe. A furn was imposed, with
their own content, on the States of the Empire,
for paying the salaries of the judges, and officers
in this court. The Imperial chamber was efta-
blilhed first at Francfort on the Maine. During
the reign of Charles V. it was removed to Spires,
and continued in that city above a century and a
half. It is now fixed at Wctzlar. This court

J.I h 2 takes

takes cognizance of all questions concerning civil
right between the States of the Empire, and passes
judgment in the last resort, and without appeal.
To it belongs, likewise, the privilege ofjudging
in criminal caules, which may be confidered as
conneted with the preservation of the publick
peace. Pfeffel Abrege, 560.

ALL causes relating to points of feudal right or

jurifdiAion, together with such as refpe& the terri-
tories which hold of the Empire in Italy, belong
properly to the jurifdition of the Aulick council.
This tribunal was formed upon the model of the
ancient court of the palace infRicuted by the Em-
perors of Germany. It depended not upon the
States of the Empire, but upon the Emperor; he
having the right of appointing at pleasure all the
judges of whom it is composed. Maximilian, in
order to procure some compensation for the dimi-
nution of his authority, by the powers vested in
the Imperial chamber, prevailed on the diet, A.D.
1512, to give its consent to the establishment of
the Aulick council. Since that time, it has been
a great obje&t of policy in the court of Vienna to
extend the jurifdition, and support the authority
of the Aulick council, and to circumscribe and
weaken those of the Imperial chamber. The
tedious forms and dilatory proceedings of the Im-
perial chamber have furnilhed the Emperors with
pretexts for doing so. Lites Spira, according to
the witticism of a German lawyer, spirant, fed

nunquam

nunquam expirant. Such delays are unavoidable
in a court composed of members named by States,
jealous of each other. Whereas the judges of the
Aulick council, depending on one master, and
being responsible to him alone, are more vigorous
and decisive. Puffendorf. de Statu Imper. Ger-
man. cap. v. § 20. Pfeffcl Abrege, p. 58 .

NOTE XLIII. SECT. III. p. 225. [UU].

THE description which I have given of the

Turkish government is conformable to the ac-
counts of the most intelligent travellers who have
visited that Empire. The count de Marfigli, in
his treatise concerni ig the military state of the
Turkish Empire, ch. vi. and the Author ofObfer-
vations on the religion, laws, government and
manners of the Turks, published at London 1768,
vol. i. p. 81. differ from other writers who have
described the political constitution of that powerful
monarchy. As they had opportunity, during their
long residence in Turkey, to observe the order
and justice conspicuous in fcveral departments of
administration, they seem unwilling to admit that
it should be denominated a defpotifin. But when
the form of government in any country is repre-
fenced to be defpotick, this does not suppose that
the power of the monarch is continually exerted
in ats of violence, injustice, and cruelty. Under
governments of every species, unless when rome
frantick tyrant happens to hold the scepter,. the

H h 3 ordinary

ordinary adminiifration must be conformable to
the principles ofjuftice, and if not active in pro-
moting tie welfare of the people, cannot certainly
have their deftru&ion for its objet. A Rate, in
which the sovereign pofefires the absolute com-
mand of a vast military force, together with the
disposal of an extensive revenue; in which the
people have no privileges, and no part either im-
mediate or remote in legislation; in which there
is no body of hereditary nobility, jealous of their
own rights and diftindions, to fland as an inter-
mediate order between the Prince and the people,
cannot be distinguished by any name but that of
a despotism. The restraints, however, which I
have mentioned, arising from the Capiculy, and
from religion, are powerful. But they are nut
such as change the nature or denomination of the
government. When a defpotick Prince empio,:s
an armed force to support his authority, he conm-
mits the supreme power to their hands. The
Prmtorian bands in Rome dethroned, murdered,
and exalted Princes, in the fame wanton inanne:'
with the soldiery of the Porte at Constantinople.
But notwithalanding this, the Roman Empero:s
have been confidered by all political writers as
pptflfiing defpotick power.

THE Author of Observations on the religion,

law, government, and manners of the Turks, in
a preface to the second edition of his work, hath
made some remarks on what is contained in this

Note,

Note, and that part of the text to which it re-
sers. It is with diffidence I set my opinion in
opposition to that of a person, who has observed
the government of the Turks with attention,
and has described it with abilities. But after a
careful review of the fubje&, to me the Turkilh
government flill appears offilch a species. as can
be ranged in no clais, but that to which political
writers have given the name of defpoifi;. There
is not in Turkey any conffitutional rcetraint upon
the will of the sovereign, or any barrier to cir-
cumfcribe the exercili of his power, but the two
which I have mentioned; one afforded by reli-
gion, the principle upon which the authority of
the Sultan is founded; the othcr by the army,
the instrument which he muff employ to main-
tain his power. The Author represents the
Ulcr;a, or body of the law, as an intermediate
order between the monarch and the people.
Pref. p. 30. But whatever restraint the authority
of the Ulcma may impose upon the lovereign, is
derived from religion. The aolNaMs, out of
whom the Mufti and other chief officers of the
law must be cholln, are ecclefiaficks. It is
as interpreters of the Koran or Divine Will that
they are objecs of veneration. The check,
then, which they give to the exercise of arbitrary
power is not different from one of thore of'\vhici
I took notice. Indeed, this reltraint cannot be
very considerable, The Mufti, who is the head
of the order, as well as every inferior officer of

H h 4 la

law, is named by the Sultan, and removable at
pleasure. The frange means employed by the
ULcma in 1746, to obtain the difmifion of a mi-
nifter whom they hated, is a manifest proof that
they possess but little conRtitutional authority
which can serve as a reltraint upon the will of the
sovereign. Obfervat. p. 92 of ad edit. If the
author's idea be just, it is astonishing that the
body of the law should have no method of remon-
itrating against the errors of administration, but
by letting fire to the capital.

THE Author seems to confider the Capiculy,

or soldiery of the Porte, neither as formidable
instruments of the Sultan'a power, nor as any re-
ftraint upon the exercise of it. His reasons for
this opinion are, that the number of the Capi-
culy is small in proportion to the other troops
which compose the Turkish armies; and that in
time of peace they are undisciplined. Pref. ad
edit. p. 23, &c. But the troops Rationed in a
capital, though their number be not great, are
always maiters of the sovereign's person and
power. The pretorian bands bore no proportion
to the legionary troops in the frontier provinces.
The soldiery of the Porte are more numerous,
and mult possess the fame power, and be equally
formidable, sometimes to the sovereign, and
oftener to the people. However much the difci-
pline of the Janizaries may be neglected at pre-
sent, it certainly was not so, in that age to which

6 alone

alone my description of the Turkish government
applies. The Author observes, Pref. p. 29, that
the Janizaries never deposed any Sultan of them-
selves, but that some form of law, true or false,
has been observed, and that either the Mufti, or
some other minister of religion, has announced to
the unhappy prince the law which renders him
unworthy of the throne. Obferv. p. 102. This
will always happen. In every revolution brought
about by military power, the deeds of the soldiery
muff be confirmed and carried into execution with
the civil and religious formalities peculiar to the
constitution.

THIS addition to the Note may serve as a fur-

ther illustration of my own sentiments, but is not
made with any intention of entering into any con-
troverfy with the Author of Observations, &c. to
whom I am indebted for the obliging terms in
which he has expressed his remarks upon what he
had advanced. Happy were it for such as ven-
ture to communicate their opinions to the world,
if every animadversion upon them were conveyed
with the fame candid and liberal spirit: In one
particular, however, he seems to have mifappre-
hended what I meant. Pref. p. 17. I certainly
did not mention his or count Marfigli's long refi-
dence in Turkey, as a circumstance which ihould
detract from the weight of their authority. I
took notice of it, in justice to my readers, that
they might receive my opinion with distrust, as it

differed

differed from that of persons whose means of in,
formation were so far superior to mine.

NOTE XLIV. SECT. III. p. 227. [XX].

THE institution, the discipline, and privileges

of the Janizaries are described by all the authors
who give any account of the Turkiih government.
The manner in which enthusiasm was employed
in order to inspire them with courage, is thus re-
lated by Prince Cantemir: " When Amurath I.
had formed them into a body, he sent them to
Haji Bektafh a Turkilh Saint, famous for his mi-
racles and prophecies, desiring him to bestow on
them a banner, to pray to God for their success, and
to give them a name. The Saint, when they ap-
peared in his presence, put the sleeve of his gown
upon one of their heads, and fays, Let them be
called enagicheri. Let their countenance be ever
bright, their hands vicorious, their wiord keen;
let their spear always hang over the heads of their
enemies, and wherever they go, may they return
with a ihining face." History of the Ottoman
Empire, p. 38. The number of Janizaries, at
the first institution of the body, was not confider-
able. Under Solyman, in the year r521, they
amounted to twelve thousand. Since that time
their number has greatly increased, Marfigli, Etar.
&c. ch. x6, p. 63. Though Solyman poflieffed
such abilities and authority us to restrain this for-

midable

midable body within the bounds of obedience, yet
its tendency to limit the power of the Sultans
was, even in that age, forefcen by sagacious ob-
servers. Nicolas Daulphinois, who accompanied
M. D'Aramon, anbafiador fiom Henry II. of
France to Solyman, publilhed an account of his
travels, in which he describes and celebrates the
diilc;pline of the Janizaries, but at the fame time
prcdihts that they would, one day, become formi-
dable to their mas'ers, and act the fame part at
Conllantinople, as the PrTe:orian bands had done
at Rome. Collection of Voyages from the Earl
of Oxford's Library, vol. i. p. 599.

NOTE XLV. SECT. III. p. 229. [YY].

SOLY MAN !the Magnificent, towhomthe Turkiih

hiforians have given the firname of Canuni, or
instituter of rules, first brought the finances and
military eftablilhment of the Turkish Empire into
a regular form. iHe divided the military force
into the Capiculy or soldiery of the Porte, which
was properly the ifanding army, and Serrataculy
or soldiers appointed to guard the frontiers. The
chief strength of the latter confided of those who
held Timariots and Ziams. There were portions
of land granted to certain persons for life, in
much the faime manner as the military fiefs among
the nations of Europe, in return for which mili-
tary service was performed. Solyman, in his
Cn?;.l-Nam, or book of regulations, fixed with

2 great

great accuracy the extent of these lands in each
province of his Empire, appointed the precise
number of soldiers each person who held a Tima-
riot or a Ziam lhould bring into the field, and
established the pay which they should receive while
engaged in service. Count Marfigli and Sir Paul
Rycaut have given extraats from this book of re-
gulations, and it appears, that the ordinary efta-
blifhment of the Turkish army exceeded an hun-
dred and fifty thousand men. When these were
added to the soldiery of the Porte, they formed a
military power greatly superior to what any
Christian Rate could command. Marfigli Etat
Militaire, &c. p. 136. Rycaut's state of the Ot-
toman Empire, book iii. ch. 2. As Solyman, dur-
ing his acive reign, was engaged so constantly in
war, that his troops were always in the field, the
Serrataculy became almost equal to the Janizaries
themselves in discipline and valour.

IT is not surprising, then, that the authors of

the sixteenth century lhould represent the Turks
as far superior to the Chritians, both in the know-
ledge and in the pratice of the art of war. Guic-
ciardini inforns us, that the Italians learned the
art of fortifying towns from the Turks. Hiftor.
lib. xv. p. ,66. Bufbequius, who was ambassador
from Ferdinand to Solyman, and who had oppor-
tunity to observe the (Rate both of the Christ-
ian and Turkish armies, published a discourse
concerning the bell manner of carrying on war

against

against the Turks, in which he points out at great
length the immense advantages which the Infidels
pofleffed with refpe&t to discipline, and military
improvements of every kind. Buibequii opera, edit.
Elzevir. p. 393, &c. The testimony of other au-
thors might be added, if the matter were, in any
degree, doubtful.

BEFORE I conclude chere Proofs and Illuftra-

tions, I ought to explain the reason of two omif-
sions in them; one of which it is necessary to
mention on my own account, the other to obvi-
ate an obje&ion to this part of the work.

IN all my inquiries and disquisitions concerning

the progress of government, manners, literature,
and commerce, during the middle ages, as well as
in my delineations of the political constitution of
the different States of Europe at the opening of
the sixteenth century, I have not once mentioned
M. de Voltaire, who, in his Essay fur l'hbiJoir
generale, has reviewed the fame period, and has
treated of all these fubjeCs. This does not pro-
ceed from inattention to the works of that extra-
ordinary man, whose genius, no less enterprizing
than universal, has attempted almost everydifferent
species of literary composition. In many of these
he excels. In all, if he had left religion untouched,
he is inftrudive and agreeable. But as he seldom
imitates the example of modern hiltorians in citing
the authors from whom they derived their infor-

mation,

mation, I could not, with propriety, appeal to his
authority in confirmation of any doubtful or un-
known fad. I have often, however, followed him
as my guide in these researches; and he has not
only pointed out the sacs with refpe& to which it
was of importance to enquire, but the conclusions
which it was proper to draw from them. If he
had, at the fame time, mentioned the books which
relate there particulars, a great part of my la-
bour would have been unnecessary, and many of
his readers, who now confider him only as an en-
tertaining and lively writer, would find that he is
a learned and well-informed hiturian.

As to the other omifion, every intelligent

reader muff have observed, that I have not entered,
either in the historical part of this volume, or in
the Proofs and Illustrations, into the fame detail
with refpe& to the ancient laws and curtoms of the
British kingdoms, as concerning those of the other
European nations. As the capital fa&s with re-
gard to the progress of government and manners
in their own country are known to most of my
readers, such a detail appeared to me to be less
efential. Such fa&s and observations, however,
as were neceflary towards completing my design in
this part of the work, I have mentioned under the
different articles which are the subje&s of my dif-
quifitions. The state of government, in all the
nations of Europe, having been nearly the fame
during several ages, nothing can tend more to illus-

$ratc

trate tie progress of the Engli f constitution, than
a careful enquiry into the laws and customs of the
kingdoms on the Continent. This source of in-
formation has been too much negle&ed by the
English antiquaries and lawyers. Filled with ad-
miration of that happy constitution now established
in Great Britain, they have been more attentive to
its forms and principles, than to the condition
and ideas of remote times, which, in almost every
particular, differ from the present. While engaged
in perusing the laws, charters, and early historians
of the continental kingdoms, I have often been led
to think that an attempt to illustrate the progress
of the English jurisprudence and policy, by a com-
parison with those of other kingdoms in a similar
situation, would be of great utility, and might
throw much light on some points which are now
obscure, and decide others, which have been long
controverted.

INDEX

# INDEX TO THE FIRST VOLUME.

IN D E X

TO THE
FIRST VOLUME.

A

A FR IC, the (hocking devaRfations made there by the Van-
.A1 dais. 233.

alanus, his charaaer of the clergy in his time. 279.
Alfred the Great, his complaint of the ignorance of the clergy,

279.
Allodial pofrelclon of land, explained. 2 6. How fich poffl;ion

became subjet to military service, ib. Ditlinguifled from be-
neficiary tenures, 257. SHow converted into feudal tenures,
26:..

Allodium, the etymology of that word, 270.
A.mmianus, his character of the [Huns, 241, 247.
Amurath, Sultan, the body of Janizaries formed by him, 225.
Anathema, form of thac denounced againll robbers during the

middle ages, 398.
Arabia, the ancient Greek philosophy cultivated there, while los

in Europe. 387, Nott xxviii. The progrcfs of philufophy from
thence to Europr, 38Q.
Aragon, rife of the kingdom of, 175. Its union wi:h Caflile, ib.

'1 he contlitution and form of its government, io8. The pri-
vileges of its Cortes, ib. Oilice and jurifdicion of the Julhtza,
182. The regal power very confined. 133. Form ns the alle-
giance fiwre to the Kings of, ib. The power of the nobility to
controul the regal power, ' 16. Their privilege of uirn take'
away by Peter IV. ib. The eflabliflinent of the inquisition op-
poled there, 420.
Armier, (landing, the rife rs, traced, I i i. By wl:t m eans they

hecame more general in lEurope, 134.
Arms, ths p cftirion of, the molt honourable in uncivilized nations,

80.

.si. an account of the ancient Romilh (s'ea of, :24.
./imblie l.gidflative, how forme. . 43.

gn-- - eral, of lra;nce, 'hnt p iewr under :he si 'f} c' of

Kings. 197. Under th<e ft,:ii.l ;,nd tlhrr, 198. At what pe-
riod they luil their le n! ti ,e author'tf, 199.
Attila, King of the Huna, account cf hbie <eejCtljn o th P. lan

VeL . I i allia.

ambafradors, 235, N6te iii. Some account of his conquefls,
242.
Jrila, an aftembly of Castilian nobles there, solemnly try and d-.

pose Henry IV. their king, 179.
duj/ria, the bouse of, by whom founded, 212.

B

Bail/li, in the old French law, their office explained, 371.
Balaanc of power, the irft rife of, in Europe, 133. The progrefC

of, 134.
Baltic, the situ source of wealth, to the towns situated on that sea,

405. Barcerloa, its trade, riches, and privileges at the clore of the sis-

teenth century, 424.
.drons, their independence, and mutual hotilities, under the feu-

dal fyllem, 19. How affteed by the infranchifement of cities,
41. Acquire a participation in legifiative government, 43.
Their private wars for redrefi of personal injuries, 52. Methods
employed to abolilh these contentions, 54. Origin of their fu-
preme and independent jurifdiaion, 68. The bad effe&s result-
ing from these privileges, 69. The fReps taken by princes to
reduce their courts, 71. How obliged to relinquilh their judi.
cial prerogatives, 81. Of Italy, ;fubjeted to municipal laws,
396, Not. xv. Their right of territorial jurifdidion explained,
364. Their emoluments from caures decided in their courts,
366.
BeneRfis, under the feudal fyllem, a history of, 260. When they

became hereditary, 263.
Books, ant enquiry into the materiala of the ancient ones, 280. The

loss of old manuscripts accounted for, ib. The great prices they
fold for in ancient tame', 281.
Borought, representatives of, how inuroduced into national coun-

cils, 4..
.ritona, ancient, their diflrefs and dejeEtion when deserted by the

Romans, and harafled. by the Pils aad Caledonians, 233,
ANor i.
Brrthtrtbed of God, an account of that afluciation for extingui(ling

private wars, 338.
Brug., how it became the chief mart for Italian commodities du-

ring the middle ages, 404.
Burgundy, Mary, hcirefs of, the importance with which her choice

in a hufrand was confidered by all Europe, z2. The reache.
rous views of Lewis XI. of France towards her, 127. Is mar-
ried to the archduke Maximilian, 28. 'The influence of this
match on the Hate of Europe, ib.

C

,,rl/r, his account of the ancient Germans, compared with that
of Tacitus, i27.
Calatrawa, military order of, in Spain, zealous to employ their

prowess in defence of the honours of the Virgin Maiy, 4z7.
The vow uted by these knights, i6.
Cam&ray, trety of, its objet. 40. The confederacy diflblved,

Ia2.
Caimr Law, an enquiry into, 74. Progrers of eccleliafical usurp-

ations, 75. The maxims or, more equitable than the civil courts
of the middle ages, 76.
CafliU rife of the kingdom of, 175. Its union with Aragon, ib.

Its king Henry IV. folem l!y tried and deposed in an aflembly
of the nobles, 179. The conllitution and government of that
kingdom, 184. A history of the Cortes of, and its privileges,
ib. 1 he kingdom originally elehive, 421, Nolt xxxli.i
Cataloiaa, the spirited behaviour of the people there in defence of

their rights, against their king, John II. of Aragon* 178.
Cen/iiaks, a species of the Oblati* or voluntary laves, the obliga-

tions they entered into, described, 3z6.
Cauttiarii, or inferior judges in the middle ages, the extraordinary

oath required from them, 398.
Cbamps di Mar:, and d Mai, account of those afEmblies of the

ancient Gauls, 433.
Cbartmwagen, his law to prevent private wars for redress of perfaaal

injuries, 54i 334. State of Germany under his defcendata,

207.

Charar, IV Emperor, dissipates the Imperial domains, 45 6.
- -V. Emperor, an emulator of the heroick condust of his ri.

val, Francis 1. 86. His future grandeur founded on the mar-
riage of the archduke Maximilian with the hbirefs of HBuigndy,
128.
- VII. of France, the first who introduced flanding armies

in Europe, i 2. His successful extension of tne regal preroga-
tive, I 5.

-- VIII. of France, his charaler, z29. How induced to ii,-
vade Italy, ib. His relourcei and preparatiols for this enter.
prize, 1o. His rapid luccefs, 331. A combination of thl,
Italian fates formed againlt him, 133. Is forced to return back
to France, ib. The difrcieTd fiate of his revenues by this expe-
dition. ;9.
Charlevoix, his account of the North American rndians, m.:de tlif

of in a comparison between them and the :ncienc Germans, za6.
Cbart*r, of immunity or franchif, an enquiry into the nature of

thore granted by the baroii of Prance to ihe towns undes their
jurifdlcions, 3, , Nett ;i. Of communities, granted by the
kings of Fratnce, hoyv they tended to eltablilh regular g..vein-
meat, 39, 302.

I: .
2 iW'l,:.

Chbivairy, the origin of, 8:. Its beneficial effects on human man.

ners, 83. The enthusiasm of, diftinguilhed from its falutaiy
consequences 5.
Cbrifidnity, corrupted when firfi brought into Europe, 88. Its

influence in freeing mankind from the bondage of the feudal po-
licy, 3 z, Note xx.

Circles of Germany, the occasion of their being formed, 214.
Cities, the ancient flate-of, under the feudal policy, 36. The

freedom of, where firit eflablilhed, 37. Charters of communi.
ty, why granted in France by Louis le Gross, 39. Obtain the
like all over Europe, 40. Acquire political consideration, 43.
Clergy, the progress of their usurpations, 75. Their plan ofjuriC-

prudence more perfect than that of the civil courts in the middle
ages, 75. The great ignorance of, in the early feudal times of
Europe, 279.
Cleriza, slave to Willa, widow of duke Hugo, extract from the

charter of manumiflion, granted to her, 323.
Clermoxt, council of, resolves on the holy war, 28. See Peter the

Iermnit, and Cru/ades.
Ciltaire 1. intiance of the small authority he had over his army,

43'.
Clathari.cs 11. Iis account ofthe popular asemblies among the ancient

Gauls, 413.
Clovis, the founder of the French monarchy, unable to retain a fa-

cred vale taken by his army, from being ditributed by lot among
t;le rcle of the plunder, 254, Note vii.

(Cellegs, the firl ellablilhmcnt of, in Europe, 389.
Combat, j.:dicial, the prohibition of, an improvement in the ad-

minitraition of jullice, 56. The foundation and universality of
this mode of trial, 6z. The pernicious effets of, 6+. Various
expedients for abolilhing this practice, 6;. The ancient Swedish
law of, fJr words of reproach. 35o. Politive evidence, or points
of proof, rendered inefFicual by it, 355. This mode of trial
authorized by the eccleliaiticks, 357. The lalt initances of, in
the hillories of France and England, 358.
Ccmm:rere, the spirit of crufiding how fJr favourable to, at that ear-

ly period, 3 ;. The firIt etlabliflment of free corporations, 8.
Charters of community why granted by Louis I G of,, 39. The
like praAize obtains all over Europe, 4o. The Ifldtary eflfcts
of these inilitutions, ib. The low Itate of, during the middle
ages, 9z. Cause. contributing to its revival, 9;. Promoted by
the Hanfeatick league, 95. Is cultivated in tne Netherlands, 96.
Is introduced into England by Edward Ill. 97. The beneficial
consequences resulting from the revival of, ib. 'Te early culti-
vation of, in Italy, 399.
Cojnmon Law, the firit compilation of, made in E lgland by Lord

Chicef Jullice Glanville, 82z.
Crnmurniti:, Lfe Charters, Cities, Coeamne'ce and Corporatianr.

Coomine/g,

Comntea, Anne, her charaler of the Crusaders, 293.
Compafr, mariner's, when invented, and its influence on the exten-

sion of commerce, 9t.
Cempaefition for personal injuries, the motives for eftablirnirg. 334.

The cultom of, deduced from the pracice of the ancient G;r-
mans, 3;9.
Cotmprgators, introduced as evidence in the jurisprudence of the

middle ages, 58.

.Condattiri, in the Italian rolicy, what. 16o.
Conrad, count of Franconia, how he obtained el &ion to the Em-

pire, 207.
Conradin, the lafl rightful heir to the croyn of Naples of the house

of Swabia, his unhappy fate, 166.
Con/lance, tlealy of, between the emperor Frederick Barbarofna

aInd the free cities of Italy, 300.
CL'/antinrepe, its flourishing date at the time of the Cruaades, 3c.

When firit taken by the Turks, zz3. The Crufilders how look-
ed upon there, 293. The account given of th:s city by the La-
tin writers, 294.

ConfJitutions, popular, how formed, 42.
Cord6va, Gonfalvo de, secures the crown of Naples to Ferdinan4

of Aragon, 168.
Corporations, and bodies politick, the eflablilhments of, how far

favourable to the improvement of manners, 36. The privileges
of, how firRf claimed, 38. Charters of community, * hy
granted by Louis le Grots in' France, 39. The inllituiion of,
obtains all over Europe, 4c. Their effects, ib.

Cores of Aragon, its conflitution and privileges, iSo. 417.
-- of Cafflle, a history of, and an account of its cnnlitiution and

privileges, 184. The vigilance with which it guarded its piiv-..
leges againtl the encroachments of the regal po.ver, 18.
Crufadet, the first motives of undertaking, z'. The enthufalfick

zeal with which they were undertaken, z7. Si;lt promoted by
Peter the hermit, z8. The success of them, 29. The confe-
quences resulting from them, 30. Their effefs on manners, ib.
On property, 31. How advantageous to the enlargement of
the regal power of the European princes, 32. The commercial
erf'ris of, 34, 93. The univetfal frenzy for engaging in thef:
expeditiors accounted for, z85, Notr xiii. 'The privilt.gs
granted to those who engaged ;n them, 287. Stephen earl of
Chartres and Blois, his account of them, 289 IThe expence
of conducling ihem, how raised, 290. Charafter given of tl;e
Clufaders by the Greek writers, 293.

D
Dlbt, the first hint of attaching moveables for the recovery of, de.

rived from the canon law, 380.

I1 3 D biorr,

Deltwr', how cotnidcred in the rude and simple fate of ficiety4

3c5.

Diers of Germany, fume account of, 463.
Deao6r in the diflcient tculties, diffuie precedence with knights,
39C.

E.
Ectlt/fiarial jurifprodcnce, more perfct in its plan than the civil

cotre: :';f the middle age., 76.
Elcd/iflits, when, and by what degrees they claimed exemption

Itinm c vil jurifdidtion, 376. Military talents cultivated and ex-
erciitd by those of the middle ages, 34.

Edvcard ill. of England, bis endearours to introduce commerce

into his .ingdom, 96.

Eleacrs of Germanny, the rife of their privileges, 219.
El/y, St. his definition or defcripticn of a good Cbriflian, 283,

Not, xi.
Emptnrs of Germany, an inquiry into their power, jurifdieion,

and revenue, 455, Nate xlii. The ancitnt node of eltaing
them, 459.
Englad, a fumnimry view of the contefis between, and France,

o05. The conlequrnc s of its losing its continental pouefflons,
ic 8. The power of the crown, how extendec, a22. See Isrm
VII. Why so many marks of Saxon usages and language, in
comparison with those of the Ncrmans, to be found in, 236,
N6tt iv. When corporations began to be eflablihed-in, 316.
infntaces of the long cpntinuancecof personal fcrvitude there, 327.
Inquiry into the Saxon laws for putting an end to private wars,
340. The ca.ufea of the speedy decline of private wars there,
propored to the researches of Antiquarians. 344. The last in-
iances of judicial combat recorded in the hifnory of, 358. The
terrirorial jurifdicion of the barons how abolifihd, 374. Cause
of the flow progress of commerce there, 406. 1 he sirs com-
mercial r caty entered info by, 408.
Evidffrc, the impefel nature of that admitted in law-proceedings

duting .he middle ages, 57. cendeced ineffeclual by the judi-
cial c.,mbat, 355.
Eurozp, the alterations in, by the conquefs of the Romans, g .

The improvensents ,he natiors of, received in exchange fr their
liberties, iJ. Its diladvantagpe under this change of circum.
flances, 3. inquiry into the supposed populcoeiteli of the ancient
northern nations, 5. The savage deolationa exerif' d by the
Goth., Vandal., and Hunr, II. The unie'fil change occa-
sioned by their irruptions and conquets . z. The firfi rudiments
of the preterit pdicy of, to be deduced from this periol, 13.
Origin of the feudal fyltem, 14. Sec Fatudal Syjlm. The ge-
icral rbatbifim introduced with this policy, a1. At what time

4 governint

government and manners began to improve, 25. The causes ani
events whi.h contributed to this improvement, 25. See Cry-
fades, Carporrations, Pop lt. The miseries occasioned by private
wars in, 53. Methods taken to suppress them, 54. ju!dicial
combats prohibited, 56. The defets of judicial proceedings in
the middle ages, 57. The influence of fuperttition in thele
proceedings. 59. The origin of the independent territorial ju-
rifdictions of the barons, 67. The bad consequences of their ju-
dicial power, 63. The Reps taken by princes to aboliih their
courts, 71. An enquiry into the canon law, 74. Revival of!he
Roman law, 79. Effefs of the spirit of chivalry, 82. How
improved by the progress of science and cultivation of literature,
85. Christianity corrupted when firit received in, 88. Scho-
laftick theology the firt objeft of learning in, 89. Low Rate of
commerce in, during the middle ages, 9g. Commerce revives
in Italy, 94. Is promoted by the Hanfeatick league, 9;. Is cu!-
tivated in the Netherlands, 96. The effets of the progrcfs of
commerce on the polishing of manners, 97. The eft;fts of the
marriage of the heiress of Burgundy with the archduke Maximi-
lian, on the Rate of, 128. By what means landing forces be.
came gener il in, 1 '4. Consequences of the league of Cambray
to, 1 o. A view of the political conRitution of the several Iates
of, at the commencement of the fixeenth century, +6. Italy,
148. The papacy, 149. Venice, 159. Florence, 163. Naples,
164. Milan, 168. Spain, 17a. France, 197. Germany,
zc6. Turkey, 223. Intances of the small intercourse among
nations in the middle ages, 39;2

F

ftedu'a, the etymology of that word, 27 ,
Errdinand, king of Aiagon, unites the Spanish monarchy, by his

marriage with If;,blla of Caltile, 175. His schemes to exalt the
regal power, 190. Resumes former grants of land from his ba-
rons, 1qi. Unites to the crown the grand matterfhips of the
three military orders, 19z. Why he patronized the arllciation
called the i-ol Brotberbhod, against the barons, g9;.
tPodal fytlem, the origin of, deduced, X 5. The primary objet of
this policy, 16. Its deficiencies for interior government, i7.
Tenures of land, how eltabliftid under, ib. The rife of inteihne
discords among the barons under, 18. The servile utate of the
people, 19. The weak authority of the king, ii. Its influence
on the external operations of war, zo. The general extinction
of all arts and sciences effedcd by, 21. Its operation on reli.
gion, a;. Its influence on the character of the human mind,
23. At what time government and manners began to be im-
proved, z4. The cauics and events which contriuted to this
improvement, zj, See Crusades. ''he ancient (late of cities

i 4 uqnder,

under, 36. The frame of national councils under this policy,
43. How altered by the progress of civil liberty, 44. An in-
quiry into the adminiltration of jufice under, 49. Private war,
5 . Judicial combat, 57. The independent jurifdiiion of the
barons, 68. The diltindtion between freemen and vaflals un-
der, .58. How firangers were confidered and treated under,
395.
.iefr, under the feudal fyflem, a hitory of, z6c. When they

became hereditary, 263.
Fitz/epfhs, observations on his account of the Rate of London,

a i ,e time of Henry 1I. 317.

Flanderr, See Netherlandt.
Florence, a view of the conslitu'ion of, at the commencement of

the sixteenth century, 163. The influence acquired by Cosmo
di :, edici in, iJ.
france, by what means the towns in, fiR obtained charters of com-

mullity, 39. Ordinances of I ouis X. and his brother Philip in
favour of civil liberty, 48. Methods employed to fupprels pri-
vate wars, 54. St. Louis attempts to discountenance judicial
combat, 65. A view of the contefs between, and England,
106. The consequences of its recovering its provinces from
Eng!and, 1o8. The monarchy of, how frengthened by this
event, lio. The rife of standing forces in, Iai. The regal
prerogative strengthened by this measure, 1 13. The extension of
the regal prerogative vigouroufly pursued by Louis XI. 16. See
Louis XI. The effecs of the invasion of Italy by Charles VIII,
12). Sec Charles VIII National infantry eflablifhed in, 138.
Le gue of Cambray formed againit the Venetians, 141. Battle of
Ghiarradadda, 42z. An enquiry into its ancient government and
laws, 197. The power of the general assemblies under the irft
race of kings, ib. Under the second and third, 198. The
regal power confined to the king's own domains, 199. When
the general aflHmbly or fates general loft their legislative au-
thority, ib. When the kings began to aflert their legislative
,pottr, 201. When the government of, became purely monar-
chical, 202. The regal power neverthelers reRrained by the
privileges of the nobility, ib. An enquiry into the jurifdiaion
of its Falliaments, particularly that ot Pari:, 204. How the
sIllodial property of land there was altered into feudal, 267.
The progress of liberty in that kingdom traced, 318. Note xix.
The attcmnpts to ellablilh liberty tnere unfucceflful, 320. The
lJft instance of judicial combat recorded in the hiliory of, 358.
The prel;iit government of, compared wiil that of ancient
Gaul, 430, Note xxxviii. The flates general, when firR as.
feinbled, 447.
r.ancis [. of France, his charater influenced by the spirit of chi.

valry, 8j. 1 ca;uua;cd by the emperor Charles V. 86.

Fredtrick

Frederitk Barbarotfa, Emperor, the free cities of Italy unite against

him, 300. Treaty of Confiance with them, ib. Was the firt
who granted privileges to the cities in Germany, 313.

Fredum, in the ancient German usages explained, 3b1.
Freemen, how diltinguifled from vafials, under the feudal policy,

258, 275. Why otten induced to surrender their freedom, and
become slaves, 277.
aulcheriua Carnotenfis, his chara/ter of the city of ConflantinopIeT
29+.

G.
Gaul, how allodial property of land was changed into feudal

there, 267. The government of, compared with that of mo-
dern France, 430, Note xxxviii. T'he fimal' authority the
Kings of, enjoyed over their armies, illuflrated in an anecdote of
Clotaire I. 43t. Account of the popular aflemblies of. 432.
The Salic laws how enaated, 434. Were not subjed to taxation,
4; . See France.
Gefrey de Villebardauin, his account of the magnificence of Con-

itati;tinople at the time when taken by the Cruladers, z95.
Germans, ancient, an account of their usages and way of life, 247.

Their method of engaging in war, ib. A compa!ifon between
them and the North American Indians, 250. Why they had no
cities, 312, Note xvii. The pracice of compounding for per-
fonal injuries by fines, deduced from their usages, 360.
Germany, little interelled in foreign concerns at the beginning of the

fifteen h century, 107. National infantry eilabliihd in. 137.
State of, under Charlemagne and his deicendants, zc6. Conr.;d,
count ot Franconia, chosen Emperor, 207. His fituceflbis in the
Imperial dignity, ib. How the nobility of, acquired independ-
ent sovereign authority, zo2. The fatal eftrets of aggrardizing
'the clergy in, 209. The contells between the Empeior Henry
IV. and Pope Gregory VII. 210. Rifeof the factions of Guelfs
and Ghibclines, 211. Decline of the Imperial authority, ib.
The houfeot Autria, hy whom founded, z2. A total change
in the political cnnltitution of the Empire, ib. ''he slate of
anarchy in which it continued to the time of Maximilian, the im-
mediate predeceflbr of Charles V. 213. Divided into ciele5,
214. The Imperial ch;imber inflituted, ib. ''he Aulic coun-
cil reformed, 21;. A view of its political counitution at the
commencement'ot the enfling hiltory. ib. Its defects pninte:l
out, 216. The Imperial dignity and powei compared, 217.
Elcir-n of the Emperors, g19. The repugnant fortns ot civil
policy in the 1everal States of, 22n. The oppofiion between
the ficultr and eccleiiallical members of, zz2. I'he united body
hence incapable of atling with vigour, 222. When cities firit
began to be built in, 311, Note xvil. When tL. cities of, flrlt

· 8 acquircd

acquired municipal privileges, 313. The artzans of, when in,
franchised, 314. Jstwdat cities in the German juriprudence,
what, 3 ;. The great calamities occafoned there by private
wars, 346. Origin of the league of the Rhine, 347. When
private wars were finally abolidhed there, ib. Inquiry into the
power, jurifiition, and revenue of its Emperors, 453, Net
xlii The ancient mode of eleciing the Emperors, 459. Ac-
count of thedietsu 463.

GChibi/rs. See Gamfi.
G6iarradadea, the battle of, fatal to the Venetians, 14z.
GAwuille, Lord Chief Justice, the first who compiled a body of

common law, in all Europe, 38z.
Cetbs, Vandals, and Huns, over*run the Roman empire, and pre-

cipitate its don oal, 4. The tate of the countries from whence
they ifued, 5. The motives of their sirs excursions, 6. How
they came to fettle in the countries they conquered, 7. A com.
parison drawn between them and the Romans, at the period of
their irruptions, 8, &f/s. Compared with the native Ameri-
cans, so. The desolations they occaioned in Europe, I t. The
universal change made by them in the fare of Europe, i z. The
principles on which they made their fettlemcnts, o4. Origin of
the feudal system; i;. See Faudal Sytm. An inquiry into the
adminiflraticn of juflicc among, so. Their private wars, 51.
Defiroy the monuments of the Roman arts, 87. Their con-
tempt of the Romans, and hatred of their arts, 234, Nots ii.
Their aversion to literature, ii. No authentic account of their
origin, or ancient history exitting, 23;.
Goverarment, how limited by the feudal policy. 18. The effects of

tie Crulades on, 33. How asseted by the infranchifement of
cities, 41. Legislative afiemblies how formed, 43. Private
wars dellru&ive to the authority of, 54. Methods employed, to
abolish this holtile mode of redrelng injuries, 5;. How assed
by the supreme independent jurifditions of the barons, 68. The
steps towards abolifling them, 71. The origin and growti of
royal Courts of Juaice. 73. How influenced by the revival of
science and literature, 91. A view of, at the beginning of the
ffteenth century, 1oC. The power of Monarchs then very li-
nited, 1ot. Their revenues s(mall, i. Their armies unfit for
conquef, oz., The P inces hence incapable of extensive Flans
of operation, lo4. The kingdoms very little connected with
each other, zo5. How the efforts of, from this period became
more powerful and extensive, to8. The consequences of Eng.
land losing it provinces in France, to9. The achemes of Louis
XI. of France to extend the regal power, a 16. See LoeiY XI.
The power of the Englilh crown enlarged, zz. See Heary VII.
As also that of Spain, t13. How the use of landing armies be-
came general, 134. A view of the political conflitution of the

' c 'ral

several dates of Europe, at the commencement of the sixteenth
century, 48. In what refpess the charters of communities
granted by the Kings of France, tended to introduce a regular
form of, 303.

Cruce, the breeding of tilk-worms, when introduced there, 4oc.
preed Emperors, their magnificence at Conitantinoale, 93.
Grgy of Tours, remarks on the fate of Europe during the period

of which he wrote the hifltry, 24..
--- the Great, Pope, his reason for granting liberty to his
saves, 322.
- VII. Pope, the foundation of his contests with Henry IV.
Emperor of Germany, 2z o. The mean Iubsliffion he extorted
from Henry, 211. His own account of this affair, 4S4-

Guilf and Ghibeines, rife of those faaions in GermaTy, 211.
(,;itciarwdi', the hiltorian, inllance of his fuperfitious reverence

for Pope element VII. 159, Note.
Gaatbnrus, a Monk, his character Js Confantinople, at the time

when taken by the Crusaders, 394.

H.
Hanfaic league, when formed, and its influence on the extenlion

of commerce, 95, 406.
Hear.y IV. of Cattile, solemnly tried and deposed by an aftembly of

Catilian nobles, 179.
--- Emperor of Germany, the humiliating fate to which he

was reduced by Pope Gregory V II. 210, 454. serf xli.
--- VII of England, his situation at his accession to the crown,

)z2. Enables his barons to break their entail and fell their
efates, ió. Prohibits his barons keeping retainers, i. Encou-
rages agriculture and commerce, ii.
Herebasnm , the nature of this fine under the feudal policy, ex-

plained, 259.

HWrmandad, Santa, account of that infitution, 430.
Hijaory, the molt calamitous period of, pointed out, 1g.
Holy Brotherhood, an aftociation in Spain under that name, on

what occasion formed, 195.
- Land, the original inducements of the Christians to rescue it

from the hands of the Infidels, 26. See Crur4fde and Pertr tbe
Hermit.

Heiour, points of the ancient Swedish law for determining, 35o.
Ho/pitaliry, enforced by flatutes during the middle ages. 3o3.
Hurs, inltance of their enthufiaftick p:llion for war, 23;, Net iii.

Some account of their policy and manners, Zo0, 247. See
eatlt..

I.

Jaixariis, origin, and formidable nature of thore troops, 226.
mpRrial chamber of Germany instituted, z14. The occasion of

its infitution, 425.
Indians. North American, a comparison drawn between them and

the ancient Germans, z;o.
lIidurfry, the Ipirit of, how excited by the infranchifements of

c'ti -, 41.
Invfantry, the advantages of, beyond cavalry, taught to the ret of

Europe by the Swiss, 137. National bodies of, elabiilhed in
Germany, ib. In France and Spain, ib.
lihbritacrr, and right of representation, between orphan grandsons

and their uncles, how decided in the tenth century, 352.
jntrtef of money, the necefiity of admitting, in a commercial view,

402. Prepolleroufy condemned by the churchmen of the middle
ages, ib. The cause hence, of the exorbitant exactions of the
Lombard bankers, ib.
Italy, when the cities of, beganto form themlelves into bodies poli-

tilk, 38. Commerce firt improved there, and the reasons of it.
93. rhe revolutions in Europe occasioned by the invasion of,
by Charles VIII. of France, 129. The fate of, at the time of
this invasion, 13o. The rapid success of Charles, 13z. A
combination of the States of, drives Charles out of, and gives
birth to the balance of power in Europe, 133. The political
situation of, at the commencement of the sixteenth century, 148.
The papacy, 149. Venice, 159. Florence, 163. Naples,
164. Milan, z68. Evidences of the desolation made there by
the northern invaders of the Roman Empire, 242. How the
cities of, obtained their municipal privileges, 296, Note xv.
State of, under Frederick 1. 297. Treaty of Confance be-
tweet the free cities of, and the Emperor Frederick Barbarofia,
300.
7tdiomr.it of God, modes of acquittal by, in the law proceedings

during the middle ages, ,q, 348, A'otixxii.

J.udiium CrGris, method of trial by, 3+8.
J/ulius II. Pope, forms a confederacy against the Venetians at Cam-

bray, 141. Seizes part of the Venetian territories, 14z. The
confederacy difollved, i;. Turns his schemes againRt France,
143. 7riril/rudetea eccleiallical, more perfea in its plan than the civil

courts of the middle ages, 55. See Laqw.
]siice, an inquiry into the administration of, under the feudal

policy, 50. The Iteps toward the improvement of, as civil li-
ber;v advanced, 51. Redress chiefly pursued by private wars,
5z. Methods taken to fupprefa private wars, 54. Judicial
combats prohibited, 56. The defets of judicial proceed-
ings in the middle age', i. Compurgators, the nature of

tllh:

that kind of evidence, 58. Methods of trial by ordeal, or ac-.
quittal by Judgment of God, 59. Origin of the supreme inde-
pendent jurifdiaions of the feudal barons, 68. The extent and
bad effeis of their privileges, 69. The Iteps taken by monarchs
to reduce the barons courts, 7 1. The growth of royal courts of
justice, 72. Inquiry into the canon law, 74. How improved
by the revival of the Roman law, 78. When the adminiltration
of, became a diflina profefllon, 81.
Jufpiza, or supreme judge of Aragon, his office and privileges,

x 8 . An inquiry by whom this officer was eleted, 409. W ho
was eligible to this office, 410. Nature of the tribunal appoint-
ed to controul his adminifiration, 412. Instance of his extensive
power, ib.

K
King, his power how circumrcribed by the barons, under the feu-

dal system, 19. By what means the Crusades tended to enlarge
the regal authority, 33.
Koran, its influence in checking the Sultans of the Ottoman em-

pire, 226.

L
Land, how held at the eiablilhment of the feudal fyflem, 17. See

Feudal JflaM.
I-- the property of, how confidered by the ancient barbarous
nations, zS5, Note viii. Allodi4l poreflion of, explained, 2o0.
The proprietors how fubjeled to military service, z57. Allodial
and beneficiary poleffion diltinguifhed, z28. Allodial property
why generally converted into feudal, 265.

Law, when the fludy of it became a diltint employment, PI.
--- Canon, an inquiry into, 74. The maxims of, more equi-

table than the civil courts of the middle ages, 76. When firit
compiled, 379.
- Roman, how it funk into obliv"in, 78. Circumitances which

favoured the revival of it, 79. Its efitecs in improving the ad-
minifiration of juflice, ib. Its rapid progrcfs over Europe, 381,
Nett xxv.

Laauburrows, in the Scottilb law, explained, 3o4.
Liberty. civil, the rife and proerefs of, traced, 38. How favoured

by the ordinances of Louis X. of France, and his hrrther Philio,
48. The spirit of, how excited in France, 317, Note xix. The
particulars included in the charters of, granted to hutbaiilmen,
3 zt1,Nor xx. The influence of the Chrillian religion in ex;cnd-
ing, 322. The fevcral opportunities of obtaining, 33'.
Limogae, council of, its endeavot:r: to extinguish private wars,

Z T .~

.....
zjy

tiersturllt',

tieraare. the cultivadon of, greatly infirumental in civilizing the

nations of Europe, 86. Why the Arft efforts of, ill direed, 87.
The good effects nevethelets of the spirit of enquiry exerted,
89. How checked in its progrels, go. Its ionluence on man
ners and government, 91.
Liturgy, the preference between the Mufarabic and Romilh, how

ascertained in Spain, 353.
rwAr dr, the fit R bankers in Europe, o40. The motive of their
exating exorbitant interef, o42.

Le wr, its flourilhing sLate at the time of Henry II. 317.
Lesmi Ie Gross, of France, his inducement to grant privileges to

towns within bis own domains, 39. See Cbarltrs.
- St. the great attention he paid to the adminiltration ofjullice,

in appeals which came before him, 37 .
- X. of France, his ordinances in favour of civil liberty,

48.
... XI. of France, his characer, 16. His schemes for de-

prelkng the nobility, ió. Sows divisions among them, s18.
Incre;les the sanding forces, iM. Enlarges the revenues of the
crown, 19 g. His address in over-ruling the aflezrbly of fates,
ib. Extends the bounds of the French monarchy, 120. The
activity of his external operations, s 1. His treacherous base.
ners towards the heiress of hBrgundy, 126 127. The eftfes
of his conduct, 1 8.
-- XIL. his hesitation in carryingon war againr the Pope, a 9,

Nat. Affirts his right to the dutchy of Milan, and retains Lu-
dovico Sforza in prison, 171.

M

Man/srd, his druggles for the crown of Naples, 165.
MArkind, the mol calamitous period in the hiltory of, pointed

out, 11.
Maantrs, the barbarity of, under the feudal esablibments, after

the overthrow of the Roman empire, zt. When they began to
improve, 24. Effets of the Crusade on, 30. How improved
by the infranchifement of cities, 42. How improved by the
erction of royal courts of jultice, in opposition to the barons
courts, 73. Effeds of the revival of the Roman law on, 78
The beneficial tendency of the spirit of chivalry on, 82. How
influenced by the progress of science, 86, 91. How polilhtd by
the revival of commerce, 97.
Itainmiown, particulars included in the charters of, granted to

hufaudnien ur laves, 321, Note xx. The form of, 3 3,
Maximiiian, archduke of Aullria, married to Mary heirefi of Bura

gundy, 28. The influence of this match on the ILte cf Eu-
rope, i6.

3llimiiw,

Maximilian, Emperor, institutes the Imperial chamber, 214. Re-

forms the Aulick council, i;.
Mdliti, Cosmo di, the rft of the name, the influence he acquired

in Florence, 163.
Mila/, the Rate of the dutchy of, at the commencement of the

sixteenth century, 168. Rife and progress of the disputes con-
cerning the fuccefflion to, 19.
Mind, the human, a view of, under the firt eflabliihment of the

feudal policy in Europe, 4. The ara of its ultimate depref-
sion, and commencement of its improvement, id. The pro-
grefs of its operations, before the full exertion of it, 87.
Miwtcritria, a clara of the Oblati, or voluntary laves, the pious

motives of the obligations they entered into, 326.
Mora, make a conquet of Spain, 173. By what means weaken-

ed during their etabliuhment there, 174. Remarks on their
condua in Spain, 176.
Misipal privileges, how obtained by the cities of Italy, z96, No t

xv. Secured to them by the treaty of ConRtance, 302. The
favourite tate of, under the Roman government, 311.

N
Napl/, a view of the conflitution of that kingdom, at the com-

mencement of the sixteenth century, 164. The turbulent un-
fettled fate of that kingdom, i 6. State of the disputes con-
cerning the fuccefison of the crown of, ib. The pretensions of
the French and Spanish monarchs to the crown of, 167.
Narhboru, community of, preamble to the writ of summons of

Philip the Long to, 318, Nets xix.
Navigatie, proof of the imperfect date of, during the middle

ages, 404*
Neterlarin, vigorous prosecution of the manufatures of hemp

and flax there, on the revival of commerce in Europe, 96.
Nermanm, why so few traces of their usages and language to be

found in England, in comparison with those of the Saxons, 236,
Net# iv.

0

Ok/ati, or voluntary naves, the clafes of, specified, 325.
Ordeal, methods of trial by, during the middle ages, 59. The

influence of iuperftition in dictating these means, 60.
Otto, Frifingenfis, his account of the Itate of Italy under Frede-

rick I. 297.
Oteman empire, the origin, and defpotick nature of, 223. Be-

comes formidable to the Chrilian powers, 229.

Prpaty.

Papape. See Popairn.
Paptr, when firit made of the prerent maierials, 282.
Paris, an inquiry into the pre-eminent jurisdiction of its parliament

over the other parliaments of France, 204. Its origin traced,
449. Note xl. The royal edits regifiered by, before admitted
to be laws, 452.
Parliaments, or Jegiflative assemblies, how formed under the feu-

dal policy, 43. How altered by the progress of civil liberty,
44.
Psopl, their wretched lervile fate under the feudal system, 19, 46.

Releascd from their flavifl fate by the infranchifement of citles,
40. How they obtained a representation in national councilsj
45. Those who lived in the country and cultivated the ground,
an inquiry into their condition under the feudal policy, 27z,
Note ix.

Ptra, amurder in, how punished there, 363.
Peter the Hermit, excites the European princes to undertake the

Holy War, 24.
- IV. King of Aragon, defeats the leaders of the Aragonefe
union, and deltroys the privilege of there albociations, 416.
Philip the Long, preamble to his, writ of summons to the commu-

nity cf Narbonne, 3 6, Note xix.
PbilofpIby, cultivated by the Arabians, when los in Europe, 3870

Note xxviii. Its progress from them into Europe, 388.
Pilgrimages to the Holy Land, when fill undertaken, 26. See

Crujades, and Peter tie Hermit.
slacwHia, council of, the Holy War resolved on by, z28. See Peter

thd Hrnrit, and Crvfades.
Pladerr, how divided among the ancicnt northern nations, 1;. II-

lufiraie4 in an anecdote of Clovis, 254, Note vii.
Papsdm,. the highef dignity in Europe at the commencement of

tse fixteenti cEntury, 148. Origiq and progress of the papal
power, 149. The territories of the Popes unequal to the sup-
port oi their spiritual juri!dition, l 5. Their authority in their
own territories extremldy limited, 51 . Th check they received
from the Roman baron., 15z. Nicholas Rienzo attempts to efa..
biifh a democratical sovernment in Rome, and to deliroy the
papal juriidiiion, 153. The papal authority considerably
itrengthened by the Popes A exandcr VI. and Julius 11. 1;4,
See ju/ima 11. The pe manent nature of ecclefiaffical dominion,

5;S. The civil adminillration of, not uniibrm o0 conlflent, i&.
Rome the school of political intrigue during the fixtecenth cen-
tury, 1 6. The advantages derived from the union ,f Ipiritual
and temporal authority, 157. A view of the conteLls between
the popes and the Empcruis of Germany, 2 10

Populo/ufnitJ

Pr/Imf/3fi of the ancient northern nations, an inquirv into, e.
Pris/e, extraa from his account of the Roman embily to Attla

King of the Huns, 23;, yNa'siii.
Pr Cepi, his account of the cruel devafations made by the irrup-

tion of the northern nations, 236, NIAs v. 240. 241.
Proprf., the poffefion of, how secured by the French charters of

communities, ;o5.
Prewttieri, in the Venetian policy, their office, t6o.

R.
Rtkgie,, how corrupted by the northern nations eflablifhed in Eu-

rope under the feudal policy, 22. Its influence in freeing man-
kind from the feudal Servitude, 322.

Rsplkdigiu, the right of, in the law of Scotland, explained, 267;
Reproabh, words of, the ancient Swedish law of fatisfaation for, 35o.
BRt;wvuM , royal, very fnall under the feudal policy, io2. By

what means increased, 138.

Rhine, origin and intention of the league of, 347.
Rimae, Nicholas, endeavours to rescue Rome from the Papal au-

thority, and establish a democratical form of government there,
153.
Roberts, the anathema pronounced against them during the middle

ages, 398.
RadJth of Haplburgh, how he attained election to the Empire of

Germany, 212.
*mUIe , an inquiry into those advantages which enabled them to

conquer the reit of Europe, 2. The improvements they com-
mnunicated in return for their conquests, ibid. The disadvantages
the. provinces laboured under, from their dominion, 3. Their
Empire overturned by the. irruption of the barbarous nations, 4.
The concurrent causes of their ruin, 6. A comparison drawn be-
tween them and the northern nations, 9. All the civil arts eftia
blilhed by them obliterated, 21. The monuments of their arts
indufrioufly destroyed by their barbarous invaders, 85.

Rme, papal. See Poprdom.
Royal truce, an account of, 339 .

S.

Saci laws, the manner in which they were enacted, 432.
(ax.vw, why so many traces of their laws, language and cufloms to

be found in England, 236, Not iv. Inquiry into their laws for
putting an end to private wars, 34z.
Sciirce, the revival and progtes of, how far infirumental in civil-

izing the nations of Europe, 87. A summary view of the re-
vival and progress of, in Europe, 387, Note xxviii.
Sferza, Francis, the foundation of his pretensions to the dutchy of

Milan, 170. Is murdered by his uncle Ludovico, ibid.

Vo;.. II K k Sorza,

S/ors, Ludovico, his private views in engaging Charles VIII. of

Prance to invade Italy, 129 See Cbarlet VIII. Murders his
nephew Fiancis, and seizes Milan, -o. Is itripped of his do.
minions by Louis XII. of France, and dies in profun, 171.
Stip'wrrcis, the right, lords of manors claim to, whence derived,

395.
Sil, the rarity of, and the high price it bore in ancient Rome, re-

marked, 399. The breeding of silk worms, when introduced
into Greece, 400.

Slanes, le:trrs of, in the law of Scotland, what, 362.
Slaves, under the feudal policy, their wretched tate, 270. Oblati,

or voluntary slaves. the several clafres of, 325.
Seciery. civil, the rude slate of, under the feudal establishments as-

ter the d .wnfl of the Roman Empire, 21. The influence of
the Cru!ades on, 30. How improved by the eftabilfhment of
municipal communities, 35. The effeas the infranchifements
of the people had on, 49. Private wars how dellruaive to, .3.
These intefline hollilities, how fupprefled, 54. The adminiftra-
tion of jullice improved by the prohibition of judicial combats,
56. The growth of royal courts of justice, in opposition to the
barons courts, 71. How advanced by the revival of the Roman
law, 78. The efFetes of the spirit of chivalry in improving, 82.
The revival of commerce and its influences, 93,

Seayima, Sultan, his charater, -2a8.
Spain, a summary view of its situation, at the.commencement of

the fifteenth century, 86. The power of the crown of, how
extended by Ferdinand, 123. National infantry eftablilhed in,
138. Is conquered by the Vandals, 17z, and after by the Moorr,
'73. The empire of the Moorsin, how weakened, 174. Rife
of the kingdoms of Cafile and Aragon, X17. Their onion into
the Spanilh monarchy, ibid. The ancient cuftems fill retained
amidil all its revolutions, ib. Peculiarities in its conflitution and
laws remarked, 177. See dragoe and Ca/il. Various causes
which contributed to limit the regal power in, 186. The cities
of, how they attained their consideration and power, 188. The
schemes of Ferdinand and Isabella, to exalt the regal power,
19g. The grand nafterlhips of the three orders, annexed to the
crown, 192. The aisociation of the Holy Brethtrhoed, on what
occasion formed, g19. 1 he tendency of this aflociation to abridge
the territorial jurif'diions of the baron, ib. The cruel devalta-
t;ons made by the Vandals, in the invasion of that province, 237.
When the cities of, acquired municipal privileges, 31;, Net#
xviii. The long continuance of the pratice of private wars
there, 344. The total annual revenue of the nobility, in the
time of Charles V. 42s. An inquiry into the origin of corn-
munities or free cities in, 423.

$,, ~a.OS

St. 7age, the military order of, when and on what occaflon infi-

tuted, 425. Note xxxvi.

Standing armies. See drnies.
States general of Fr;nce, caules which rendered their authority

imperfeft, 19q. Wnen they loft their legislative authority, ib.
When first aflembled, 447. The form of proceeding in them,
ib.
Stephen earl of Chartres and Blois, his account of th: progress of

the Crusaders, 289.
Stiernkh.k. his account of the ancient S·vedifh law of fJtisfaflion

so ,'ords of reprnach, 35c.
Strangers. in what light confiriered, and how treated during the

middle ageS, an! u.der Lhe ftedal policy, 391.
Sugar canes, when firit brought from Asia into Europe, and thence

carried 1o America, 40o.
Sultans, Turkilh, their defpotick power, zz25. Hw nevertheless

limited, 226.
Superfittiolr, its influence in the legal proceedings during the middle

ages, 0o.
Swiss, the superior discipline of their troops, in the fifteenth cen-

tury. 136. Teach other nations the advantages of infantry over
cavalry, ib,

T.

acilus, his account of the ancient Germans compared with that of
Czefar, 246.
Tenrres, feudal, the origin of, 17. See Feudal Sy/ftr, and

Land.
T7eology, fcholaftick, the firR literary pursuits at the revival of

learning in Europe, 83.

Truce of Gcd, an account of, 336.
Tarkey, origin of, its government, 223. The defpotick genius of

this governmrnt, 22z. No' hereditary nobility in, ib. The
authority of the Sultans, how checked, 226. Origin of the
Janizaiies, ib. Becomes formidable to the Chrillian Princes,
229.

V.
Vandals, their cruel devastations in the invafinn of Spain, 2j8.

The havock made by them in Africa, z39. See Goths.
YajOalh under the feudal fyltem, a view of their nlavilh condition,

19. 46. How they obtained infranchifeinent, 47. How an-
ciently diftingiilhed from freemen, 258. Their wretched Iate
under their feudal malters, z70, Note ix.
menice, the long duration of its civil conltitution, and its flourishing

llate at the time of the league of Cambray, 140. Its polieffions
difmnmbered by the confederates, 11. Diffulves the confede-

racy,

tacy, 142. Its rife and progrei, 159. Defeas in its conti.
tution, 16o. Theexcellencyofits naval intittions, i6j. Its
extensive commerce, 162.

;firerti, rife of the family of, in Milan, 169.
Uxion of the Aragonefe nobles to controul the undue exercise of

regal power, explained, 414. This privilege abrogated by Pe-
ter IV. +16.
Unidvrfits, the firt eftablilhment of, in Europe; 389i

W.
War, a comparison between the manner of carrying on, by barba.

rous and by civilized nations. Io. How rendered feeble in its
operations by the feudal policy, 19. The profession of arms,
the mofi honourable in uncivilized nations, 80. The rife of
Ianding armies traced, ilo. By what means flanding forces
became general, 134. The superiority of infantry in how
taught, 135.

TFdrr, private, for the redrfing personal injuries, under the feu-

dal policy, an inquiry into, 51. Methods taken to abolilh this
hostile pratice, 54. Judicial combat prohibited, 56. Inquiry
into the foqrces of there curtoms, 328, Not xxi. Who entitled
to the privileges of exercising, 329. On what occasions under-
taken, 330. Who included, or bound to engage in these dif-
putes, 331. Who excluded from undertaking, 332. The cruel
manner of prosecuting them, ib. A chronological accnunt of
the expedients made use of, to lupprefs them, 333. rrc# f God,
a account of, 336. Brortbr&od f/ Godi an account of, 338.
Royal trut, what, 339. Saxon laws of England, for putting an
end to them, 342. The obfinate attachment of the Spaniards
to this prafice, 344. The calamities occaioned in Germany
by, 346.

W'lh., ancient, frangers killed with impunity by them. 396.
wilfa widow of duke Hugo, extract from her charter of manu-

million, granted to Cleriza, oneof her saves, 3z3.

W/ilbrmas, archbishop of Tyre, his account of Conltantinople, 293,
Wittikiaddi, abbot, his telimony in favour of thejudicial combatl

357. ,,

,1ID OF THE FIRST VOLUME
