THE

HI I T O R Y

OF

A ME RI C A.

V O L. III.

THE

SII S T OR Y

C A.,

By WILLIA1YI ROBERTSON, D.D.

CRINCIPAL OF THE UNIVERSITY OFr EDINBURIGH) HISTORIoORAPRER

TO HIS MAJESTY FOR SCOTLAND) AND MEMEER OF THE

ROYAL ACADEMY 97 HISTORY AT MIADRIDe

LN THREE VO LUM E S,

V O L. III.

THE SIXTH EDlTION.

L OND ON:

Printed for A. STRnaaN; T. CADELL, in, the Strandi

and J. BALFrova, at Edinburgh.

MDCCXCII.

AM E R I

STrynnbnzD laryte co dP a~c re. =. sag

sC~

,-~ r so ~ ono r a~

e g nr~e - siog e a p

C~~, nS~ia t

nes. '----Cdd

- F,

S~I31LPrS .~"·";lsi·~-;~,~·;"0 ~l~l"cr~~7;';2

serada "B4tu

t t·hslo··R' · ~'

A~~f~-;(7-C~: K-r n

,wamme ,2 o

ree"
Cote may7 &~nn~

Arre

co ioTzuofrh~vD~brfn

-Px7o ,, -oVJi

~ ='u~bSn~~fe

//ki/ra /nz ,7/ord/~ 7,/Va 7it -ett?

<// 1

# BOOK VI.

HISTORY

OF

AM~v:ER ICAn.

B O OK VI.

F R O M the time that Nugnez de B3alboa d~iscO- B O O K

vered the great Southern Ocean, and received

the first obs~cure hints concerning the opulent Sce3.?o
countries with which it might open a communica- difuovering
tion, the wishes and s~chemes of every enterprising
person in the colonies of Darien and Panama were
turned towards the wealth of those unknown re-
gions. In an age when the piPrit of adventure was
so ardent and vigorous, that large fortunes were
wasted, and the most alarming dangers braved, in
purs~uit of discoveries merely possible, the faintest
ray of hope was followed with an eager expeaation,
and the slightest information was f~uffcient to in-
spire such perfec2 confidence, as conduaed men to
the most arduous undertakings a

1 See NOTE I.

VJL.. III. AccoRn.

B O O K AccGRDIN;GLY, several armaments were fitted

VI.
c.... ... out in order to explore and take poffeflion of the

unt.?c?&~. countries to the east of Panama, but under the

rI~ come condua of leaders whose talents and resources

were unequal to the attempt b. As the excurflons
of those adventurers did not extend beyond the
limits of the province to which the Spaniards have
given the name of Tierra Firmi·, a mountainous
region covered with woods, thinly inhabited, and
extremely unhealthy, they returned with dismal
accounts concerning the diffreffes to which they
had been expos~ed, and the unpromising afpeQ of
the places~ which they had visited. Damped by
these tidings, the rage for discovery in that direc.
tion abated; and it became the general opinion,
that Balboa had founded virionary hopes, on the
tale of an ignorant Indian, ill underflood, or cal-
culated to deceive.

Undertaken BUT there were three persons fettled in Panama,
by Pizarro, on whom the circumitances which deterred others
Almagro,
and Luque. made so little impreflion, that, at the very mo-

ass4* ment when all considered Balboa's ex-pe~ations of

discovering a rich country, by fleering towards
the eait, as chimerical, they resolved to attempt
the execution of his scheme. The names of those
extraordinary men were Francis~co Pizarro, Diego
de Almagro, and Hernando Luque. Pizarro was
the natural s~on of a gentleman of an· honourable

SCalancha Coronica, p. 100.

family

family by a very low woman, and, according to B O O K
the cruel fate which often attends the offspring of L
unlawful love, had been so totally negrleaed in his 5'
youth by the author of his birth, that he seems
to have destined him never to rife beyond the con-
dition of his mother. In consequence of this unge-
nerous idea, he s~et him, when bordering on man-
hood, to keep hogs. But the aspiring- mind of
young Pizarro disdaining that ignoble occupation,
he abruptly abandoned his charge, enlisted as a
soldier, and, after s~erving some years in Italy, em-
barked for America, which, by opening such a
boundless range to aaive talents, allured every
adventurer whose fortune was not equal to his am-
bitious thoughts. There Pizarro early diftingulfh-
ed himself. With a temper of mind no less daring
than the conflitution of his body was robuff, he
was foremoff in every danger, patient under the
greatest hardships, and unfubdued by any fatigue.
Though so illiterate that he could not even read,
he was soon considered as a man formed to com-
mand. Every operation committed to his conduc?
proved f~uccefsful, as, by a happy but rare con-
junaion, he united pers~everance with ardour, and
was as cautious in executing, as he w·as bold in
forming his plans. By engaging early in a~tive
life, without any resource but his own talents and
induffry, and by depending on himself alone in his
firug-gles to emerge from obscurity, he acquired
fulch a thorough knowledge of affairs, and of
men, that he was litted to afirume a s~uperior part

B O O K inl conduaing the former, and in governing the

C~latter c.

ALMAGRO had as little to boast of his descent

as Pizarro. T'he one was a baffard, the other a
foundling. Bred, like his companion, in the
camp, he yielded not to him in any of the
soldierly qualities of intrepid talour, indefatigable
aaivity, or infulrmountable constancy in enduring
the hardsh~ips inseparable from military service in
the New Wtorld. But in Almagro there virtues
were accompanied with the openness, generosity,
and candour, natural to men whole profe~ion is
arms; in Pizarro, they were united with the ad-
dress, the craft, and the diflimulation of a politi-
cian, with the art of concealing his own pur-
pos~es, and with sagacity to penetrate into thos~e of
other men.

HERNANDO DE T UQUE WaS an cc~lelaitic, who

aaed both as priest and fchoolmaller at Panama,
and, by means which the contemporary writers
have not deferibed, had amassed riches that in-
spired him with thoughts of rising to greater emi-

nence.

*rers or Sucu were the men destined to overturn one of

:eir aProci- th'e most extensive empires on the face of the

earth. Their confederacy for this purpose was

H -errera, dec. r & 2, passim. dec. 4. lib. vi. c. 107,

Comara Hilt. c. 144~. Zar·ate, lib. iv. c. 9.

authiorifed

authorised by Pedrarias, the governor of Panama. B O O9 K
Each engaged to employ his whole fortiine in the t..------.
adventure. Pizarro, the deait wealthy of the .=s:4.
three, as he could not throw so large a fum as his
associates inlto the common flock, engaged to takie
the department of greatest fatigue and danger, and
to command in person the armament which was to
go firit upon dis~covery. Almagro offered to con-
dua the supplies of provisions and reinforcements
of troops, of which Pizarro might stand in need.
Luque was to remain at Panama to neg~ociate with
the governor, and superintend whatever was carry-
ing on for the general interest. As the s~pirit of
enthuaiafm uniformly accompanied that of ad-
venture in the New World, and by that Itrange
union both acquired an increase of force, this con-
federacy, formed by ambition and avarice, was
confirmed by the moss solemn aG of religion.
Luque celebrated mals, divided a consecrated host
into three, and reserving one part to himself, gave
the other two to his associates, of which they par-
took; and thus, in name of the Prince of Peace,
ratified a contraQ of which plunder and bloodihed
were the objeats ".

THE: attempt was begun with a force more suit- Their aret

ed to the humble condition of the three associates,, attempt.
than to the greatners of the enterprise in which they
were engaged. Pizarro set fail from Panama with Nov. 24.

d Herrera, dec. 3. lib. vi. c. 13. Zarate, lib. i. c. I.

B 3 a single

B O O K a single vessel, of finall burden, and a hundred.

VI. c-- and twelve men. B3ut in that age, so little were
Isz4' the Spaniards acqjuainted with the peculiarities of

climate in America, that the time which Pizarro
chos~e for his departure was the most improper in
the whole year; the periodical winds, which were
then set in, being direaly adverse to the course

rs"s. which he purposed to Rteer e. After beating about

for seventy days, with much danger and incessant
fatigue, Pizarro's progress towards the south-east
was not greater~ than· what a sk~ilful navigator will
now make in as many hours. He touched at fe-
veral places on the coast of Tierra Firmb, but
found every where the fame uninviting country
which former adventurers had defrcribed; the low
grounds converted into fwnamps by an overflowing
of rivers; the higher, covered with impervious
woods; few inhabitants, and those fierce and ho-
Rtile. Famine, fatigue, freqluent rencounters with
the natives, and above all, the diftempers of a
moist, s~ultry climate, combined in wasting his
slender band of followers. The undaunted refo-

Slution1 of their leader continued, however, for some

suCCes. timne, to fulfain their spirits, although no igrn had

yet appeared of discovering those golden regions to
which he had promis~ed to condua them. At
length he was obliged to abandon that inhofpi-
table coast, and retire to Chuchlama, opposite to

* H~errera, dec. 4. Ilb. ii. c. 8. Xerer, p. 179.

the pearl islands, where he hoped to receive a sup. B o o it
ply of proviflons and troops from. Panama. eJ

J525.

BirrT Almagro having failed from that port with

s~eventy men, flood direaly towards that part of
the continent where he hoped to meet with his as-
fociate. Not finding him there, he landed his f~ol-
diers, who, in s~earching for their companions, un-
derwrent the fame diff ress~es, and were exposed to the
fame dangers, which had driven them out of the
country. Repulsed at length by the Indians in a
sharp conflia, in which their leader loft one of his
eyes by the wound of an arrow, they likewise were
compelled to reimbark. Chance led them to the
place of Pizarro's retreat, where they found some
consolation in recounting to each other their ad-
ventures, and comparing 'their f~ufferings. As Al- June 24.
magro had advanced as far as the river St. Juan,
in the province of Popayan, where both the coun-
try and inhabitants appeared with a more promif-
ing afpea, that dawn of better fortune was f~uffici-
ent to determine fulch sanguine projeaors not to
abandon their faheme, notwithffandingj all that they
had fuffered in prosecuting it '.

ALMAGRO repaired to Panama, in hopes of re- Is26.

They resume

cruiting their thattered troops. But what he and the under-
Pizarro had fuffered, gave his countrymen such an taking.
unfavourable idea of the service, that it was with

r Herrera, dec. 3. lib. viii. c. rI, I2. See N O TE II.

B3 4 difficult~y

a 0 0 K d~iffculty he could levy fourscore men p. Feeble as

~-~ this reinforcement was, Almagro took the coth.
'326. niand of it, and havings joined Pizarro, they did

not hesitate about resuming their operations. As-
ter a long series of disasters and disappointments,
not inferior to thos~e wihich they had already expe-
rienced, part of the armament reached ~the Bay of
St. Al'atthew, on the coast of quito, and landing at
Tacamcz, to the south of the river of Emeraulds,
they beheld a country more champaign and fertile
than any they had yet discovered in the Southern
Ocean, the natives clad in garments of w-oollen
or cotton fluff, and adorned with several trinkets
of gold and silver.

BUT, notwithilanding. thlofe favourable appear-

ances, magnified beyond the truth, both by the
vanity of the persons who brought the report from
Tacamez, and by the fond imagination of those
who liftenled to them, Pizarro and Almnagrro durst~
not venture to invade a country so populous with a
handful of men enfeebled by fatigue and diseas~es.
SThey retired to the fmnall island of Gallo, where
Fizarro remained with part of the troops, and his
associate returned to Panama, in hopes of bringing
such a reinforcement as might enable them to take
poffeifion of the opulent territories, whole existence
seemed to be no longer doubtful h

r Zarate, lib. i. c. I.
SXerez, 18), Herrcra, dec, 3. lib. sill. c. 13-

But

Bxrr some of the adventurers, less enterprlfing, a 0v K

or less hardy than their leaders, having secretly Lv
conveyed lamentable accounts of their fufferings piza e.;,
and los~ses to their friends at Panama, Almagro met aHMf~nY bpo a
with an unfavourable reception from Pedro de los ranama.
Rios, who had succeeded Pedrarias in the govern-
ment of that settlement. After weighing the mat-
ter with that cold a conomical prudence which ap-
pears the firit of all virtues to persons whos~e limit-
ed faculties are incapable of conceiving or execut-
ing great designs, he concluded an expedition, at-
tended with s~uch certain wvafte of men, to be so
detrimental to an infant and feeble colony, that he
not only prohibited the raising of new levies, but
dispatched a vessel to bring home Pizarro and his
companions from the island of Gallo. Almag-ro
and Luque, though deeply affeated with thos~e
measures, which they could not prevent, and durst
not oppose, found means of communicating their
s~entiments privately to Pizarro, and exhorted him
not to relinquish an enterprise that was the founda-
tion of all their hopes, and the only means of re-
eftablithing their reputation and fortune, which
were both on the decline. Pizarro's mind, bent
with infiexible obstinacy on all its purpos~es, needed
no incentive to persist in the s~cheme. He per- Prerans iin
emptorily refused to obey the governor of Pana- his dedgn.
ma's orders, and employed all his address and elo-
quence in perfuadingr his men not to abandon him.
But the inlcredible calamities to which they had
been exposed were ilill so recent in their memories,

17 and

a 0 0 re and the thoughts of revifitincr their families and

L.----.. friends after a long absence, rushed with such joy

32. into their minds, that when Pizarro drew a line

upon the sand with is sword, permitting such as
wished to return home to pass over it, only thirteen
of all the daring veterans in his s~ervice had refolu-
tion to remain with their commander'.

TmIs small, but determined band, whole names

the Spanish~ hifforians record with deserved praise,
as the pers~ons to whole persevering fortitude their
country is indebted for the most valuable of all its
American poffeifions, fixed their residence in the
island of Gorgona. This, as it was farther re-
moved from the coast than Gallo, and uninhabited,
they considered as a more secure retreat, where,
unmolefied, they might wait for supplies from Pa-
nama, which they trulted that the altivity of their
associates would be able to procure. Almagro and
Luqlue were not inattentive or cold solicitors, and
their inceffadnt importunity was seconded by the
general voice of the colony, which exclaimed
loudly against the infamy .0f exposing brave men,
engaged in the public service, and chargeable with
no error but what flowed from an excess of zeal
and courage, to perish like the most odious cri.
minals in a desert island. Overcome by those en-
treatics and ex~pollulations, the governor at last
codfented to fend a frnall vess~el to their relief. But

SHerrera, dec. 3. lib. x. c. 2* 3. Zarrate, lib. i. c. 2.

Xercz, I18. Gomara Hist. c. 109.

that

that he might not seem to encouragePizarro to any B O O K
new enterprise, he would not permit one landman c
to embark on board of it. a6

BY this time, Pizarro and his companions had nard'Uhipshe

remained five months in an island, infamous for
the most unhealthy climate in that region of Ame-
rica k. During all this period, their eyes were
turned towards Panama, in hopes of succour from
their countrymen; but worn out at lengtif with
fruitles~s expe~tations, and dispirited with f~uffering
hardships of which they saw no end, they, in de-
fpair, came to a. resolution of committing them-
Pelves to the ocean on a float, rather than continue
in that detefcable abode. But, on the arrival of
the vessel from Panama, they were trans~ported with
such joy, that all their fufferings were forgotten.
Their hopes revived, and, with a rapid transition,
not unnatural among men accuffomed by their
mode of life to sudden vicifirtudes of fortune, high
confidence succeeding to extreme dejeftion, Pizarro
easily induced not only his own followers, but the
crew of the vessel from Panama, to res~ume his for-
mer scheme with fresh ardour. Instead of return-
ing to Panama, they flood towards the s~outh-east,
and more fortunate in this than in any of their paift
efforts, they, on the twentieth day after their de-
parture from Gorgona, discovered the coast of Peru. Dircovers
After touching at several villages near the thore, 'ern.

k See NOTE III.

which

a o0 0 which they found to be no wife inviting, they landed

at Tumbez, a place of some note, about three

see.· degrees south of the line, diftingruifhed for its flately

temple, and a palace of the Incas or sovereigns of the
couintry '. There the Spaniards feasted their eyes
with the first view of the opulence and civilization
of the Peruvian empire. They beheld a country
fully peopled, and cultivated with an appearance of
regular induffry; the natives decent~ly clothed, and
poffeffed of ingenuity so far f~urpafirng the other in-
habitants of the New World, as to have the use of
tame domeltic animals. But what chiefly attrated
their notice, was such a Thow of gold and silver, not
only in the ornaments of their persons and temples,
but in several vess~els and utensils for common use,
formed of those precious metals, as left no room
to doubt that they abounded with profusion in
the country. Pizarro and his companions seem-
ed now to have attained to the completion of their
most sanguine hopes, and fancied that all their
withes and dreams of rich domains, and inexhault,
ible treas~ures, would soon be realized.

Retums to But with the slender force then under his com-
Panama. Smand, Pizarro could only view the rich coutntry of

which he hoped hereafter to obtain pofefi~on. H-e
ranged, however, for some time along the coast,
maintaining every w-here a peaceable intercourse
with the natives, no less affonifhed at their new

SCalancha, p. 103*

vilitants,

vifitants, than the Spaniards were with the unifornx s o O K

VI.

appearance of opulence and cultivation which they
beheld. Having explored the country as far as asw-·
wias requisite to as~certain the importance of the dif.
covery, Pizarro procured from the inhabitants some
of' their Llamas or tame cattle, to which the Spa-
niards gave the name of sheep·, some vessels of goldl
and silver, as well as some specimens of their other
works of ing~enuity, and two young men, whom
he propos~ed to infiruft in the Castilian language,
that they might serve as interpreters in the expedi-
tion which he meditated. Wiith there he arrived
at Panama, towards the close of th~e third year fronx
the time of his departure thence m. No adventurer
of the age f~uffered hardships or encountered dan-
g~ers which eqlual those to which he was expos~ed
during this long period. 'The patience with which
he endured the one, and the fortittude with which
he faurmounted the other, exceed whatever is re-
corded in the hiffory of the New W~orld, where so
many romantic dis~plays of thos~e virtues occur.

ETEITHER~ the s~plendid relation that Pizarro gave up~s.

of the incredible opulence of the country which he ie~mes
had difrcovered, nor his bitter complaints on ac- ,ilt stro
count of that un~reasonable recal of his forces, which
had put it out of his power to attempt making any

m Herrera, dec. 3. lib. x. c. 3--6. dec. 4. lib. ii. c. 7, 8.

Vega, 2. lib. i. c. 10--14. Zarate, lib. i. c. 2. Benzo Hist.
Novi Orbis, lib. iii. c. I.

settlement

B O Oo K settlement there, could move the governor of Pa.

cl nama to fwvervre from his former plan of condu£1.

's"S. He still contended, that the colony was not in a

condition to invade such a mighty empire, and re-
fused to authorise an expedition which he foresaw
would be so alluring that it might ruin the province
in which he presided, by an etffort beyond its
firength. Hlis coldnes~s, how-ever, did not in any
degree abate the ardour of the three associates; but
they perceived that they could not carry their
scheme into execution without the countenance of
s~uperior authority, and mult s~olicit their sovereign
to grant that permilion which they could not extort
from his delegate. Wlith this view, after adjuffing

u among themselves that Pizarro sh~ould claim the

flation of governor, Almagro that of lieutenant-
governor, and Luque the dignity of bishop in the
country which they purposed to conquer, they sent
Pizarro as their agent to Spain, though their for-
tunes were now s~o much exhauffed by the repeated
efforts which they had made, that they found s~ome
difficulty in borrowings the finall fum requisite
towards equipping him for the voyage ·.

Fizarro rent PIZARRO lo08110 titue in repair~ing to court, and
Pelei.a Lo new as the scene inight be to himn, h~e appeared be-

fore the emperor with the unembarraffed dignity of
a man conscious of what his s~ervices mnerit~ed; and
he conduae~d his negociations with an insinuating

h Herreta, dec. 4. lib. ill. c. r. Vega, 2. lib. i. c. 14*

dexterity

dexterity of addtrefs, which could not have been B 0 0 K
expeaed either from his education or former ha- "-
bits of life. His feeling description of his own sus- 'sEs.
ferings, and his pompous account of the country
whicit he had discovered, confirmed by the fpeci-
mens of its produaions which he exhibited, made
fiuch an impreflion both on Charles and his ruini-
flers, that they not only approved of the intended
expedition, but seemed to be interefled in the f~uc-
ces~s of its leader. Presuming on those dis~positions
in his favour, Pizarro paid little attention to the
interest of his associates. A4s the pretensions of Negleas hi
Luque did not interfere with his own, he obtained a"rociafes,
for him the ecclesiastical dignity to which he afpir-
ed. For Almagro,· he claimed only the command
of the fortres~s which should be ereated at Tumbez.
To himself he secured whatever his boundless am-
bition could desire. He was appointed governor, July 26.
captain-general, and adelantado of all the country Reh", Gi'nU~E
which he had dis~covered, and hoped to conquer, E,~~:gad to
with s~upreme authority, civil as well as military;
and with full right to all the privileges and emolu-
ments us~ually granted to adventurers in the N~ewt
World. His jurifdi~ion wfas declared to extend
two hundred leagues along the coat to the south
of the river St. Jago; to be independent of the
governor of Panama ; and he had power to nomi-
nate all the officers who were to s~erve under him.
In return for those conceflions, which coff the court
of Spain nothing, as the enjoyment of them de-
pended upon the success of Pizarro's own efforts,

B O O~ K he engag~ed to raise two hundred and fifty men,
G-- and to provide the sh~ips, arms, and warlike flores

'3"s. requisite towards f~ubjeding,to the crown ofCaftile,

the country of which the government was allotted
him.

slenderrorce INCONSIDERABLE RS the body ofme men was which
to raire. Pizarro had undertakien to raise, his funds and cre-

dit were ~so low that he could hardly complete half
the number; and after obtaining his patents from
the crown, he was oblig7ed to fleal privately out of
the port of Seville, in order to elude the s~crutiny
of the of~cers who had it in charge to examine,
whether he had fulfilled the flipulations in his con-
traat o. Before his departure, however, he received
some s~upply of money from Cortes, who having
returned to Spanin about this time, was willing to
contribute his aid towards enabling an ancient com-
panion, w~cith wh~fofe talents and courage he was well
acquainted, to begin a career of glory similar to
that which he himself had finished P.

H-E landed at Nombre de Dios, and marched

acros~s the isthmus to Panamaz, accompanied by his
three brothers, Ferdinand, Juan, and Gonzalo, of
whom the first was born in law-ful wedlockr, the two
latter, like himself, were of illegitimate birth, and
by Francisco de Alcantara, his mother's brother.

O ITerrera, dec. 4. lib5. vil. c. 9.
P Ib:d. lib. vii. c. i0.

They

They were all in the prime of life, and of such abi. B oy, K
lities and courage, as fitted them to take a diftin- ~~
guifhed part in his subsequent tranfaaions. rS29.

ON his arrival at Panama, Pizarro found Alma- r53o.
gro so much exasperated at the manner in which he lito wt
had conduaed his negociation, that he not only Almapro.
refused to at any longer in, concert with a man, by
whol~e perfidy he had been excluded from the power
and honours to which he had a just claim, but la-
boured to form a new association, in order to
thwart or to rival his former confederate in his dif-
coveries. Pizarro, however, had more wisdom and
address- than to f~uffer a rupture so fatal to all his
schemes, to become irreparable. By offering vo-
luntarily to relinquiih the office of adelantado, and
promising to concur in soliciting that title, with an
independent government, for Almagro, he gra-
dually mnitigated the rage of an open-hearted fol-
'dier, which had been violent, but was not im-
placable. Luque, highly satisfied with havings
been f~uccefsful in all his own pretensions, cordially
seconded Pizarro's endeavours. A reconciliation
was effea-ed; and the confederacy renewed on its
original terms, that the enterpris~e thould be carried
on at the common expence of the associates, and
the profits accruing from it thould be equally di·
v~ided among them 9.

s Herrera, dec* 4. lib. vii. c. 9. Zarate, lib. i. c. 3*

Vega, 2. lib. i. c. r4.

VoL. III. C EvrN

B O O K EVEN after their re-union, and the utmost efforts

V'-Iof their interest, three fmnall vef~els, with a hun.

ne rla ma. dred and eighty soldiers, thirty-fix of whom were
ment. horsemen, compos~ed the armament which they

were able to fit out. But the affonifhing progress
of the Spaniards in America had inspired them
with such ideas of their own superiority, that Pi-

rgnr. zarro did not hesitate to fail with this contemptible
Febs uary. force to invade a great empire. Almagro was left

at Panama, as formerly, to follow him with what
reinforcement of men he thould be able to muffer.
As the season for embarking was properly chosen,
and the course of navigation between Panama and
Peru was now better known, Pizarro completed
the voyage in thirteen days; though, by the force
of the winds and currents, he was carried above a
hundred leagues to the north of Tumbez, the place
of his destination, and obliged to land his troops

Lands in in the bay of St. Matthew. WI~ithout losing a mo-
"'"*. ment, he began to advance towards the south,

taking care, however, not to depart far from the
sea-shore, both that he might easily effed a junc-
tion with the supplies which he expeded from Pa-
nama, and secure a retreat in cafe of any difailer,
by keeping as near as poifible to his thips. But
as the country in several parts on the coast of Peru
is barren, unhealthful, and thinly peopled; as the
'Spaniards had to pass all the rivers near their
Smonth, where the body of water is greatest ; and
as the imprudence of Pizarro, in attacking the na.

tives

eives when he ihould have fludied to gain their a 0r 0 r
confidence, had forced them to abandon their ha- -
bitations; famine, fatigue, and diseases of various ags.'
kinds, brought upon him and his followers cala-
mities hardly inferior to those which they had en·
dured in their former expedition. Wjhat they noti
experienced corres~ponded so ill with the alluring
defeription of the country given by Pizarro, that
many began to reproach him, and every soldier
must have become cold to the service, if even in
this unfertile region of Peru, they had not met;
with some appearances of wealth and cultivation,
which seemed to juffify the report of their leader.
At length they reached the province of Coaque ; Ap ru 4.
and, having s~urprised the prinlcipal s~ettlement of
the natives, they s~eized there vessels and ornaments
of gold and silver, to the amount of thirty thou-
sand pesos, with other booty of such value, as dif-
pelled all their doubts, and inspired the most de-
fponding with s~anguine hopes '.

PIZARRO himself was, so much delighted with His mearres

for obtaining

this rich spoil, which he considered as the firit- a reinforce-
fruits of a land abounding with treasure, that he
inflanrtly dispatched one of his thips to Panama
with a large remittance to Almagro; and another
to Nicaragua with a considerable fum to several
pers~ons of influence in that province, in hopes of
alluring adventurers, by this early display of the

f`Herrera, dec. 4. lib. vii. c. 9. lib. ii. c. I. Xeres 182.

wealth

C 2

a o o K wealth which he had acquired. Meanwhile, he

C ~~continued his march along the coast, and disdain-
'3 ing to employ any means of reducing the natives

but force, he attacked them with s~uch violence in
their scattered habitations, as compelled them
either to retire into the interior country, or to s~ub.
2nit to his yoke. This s~udden appearance of in-
vaders, whose afped and manners were fCo strange,
and whose power seemed to be so irresistible, made
the fame dreadful impreflion as in other parts of
America. Pizarro hardly met with refiffance until
he attacked the island of Puna in the bay of Guay·
quil. As that was better peopled than the country
through which he had passed, and its inhabitants
fiercer and less civilized than those of the conti-
nent, they defended thems~elves with s~uch obstinate
valour, that Pizarro sp~ent fix months in reducing
them to f~ubjeaion. From Puna he proceeded to
TIumbez, where the diftempers which raged
among his men compelled him to remain for
three months ".

WHILE. he was thus employed, he began to reap

advantage from his attention, to spread the fame

Receives of his first s~uccess at Coaque. Two different de-
conuausndto tachments arrived from N~icaragrua, which, though

adac' neither exceeded thirty men, he considered as a re-

inforcement of great con~e'quence to his feeble
band, especially as the one was under the com-

* P. Sancho ap. Ramus. ;ill P- 37', F. Herrcra, dec, 4*

lIb. vii. c. I8. li'o. ix. c. i. Zarate, lib. ii. c. 2, 3. Xeres,
p. 182, &c.

mand

mand of Sebaltian Benalcazar, and the other of B O O K
Hlernando Soto, oflicers not inferior in merit and cA
reputation to any who had f~ervred in America. 1sse.
From Tumbez he proceeded to the river Piura, MaY r6.
and in an advantageous station near the mouth of
it, he established the firfe Spaniih colony in Peru;
to which he gave the name of St. Michael.

As Pizarro continued to advance towards the

center of the Peruvian empire, he gradually re-
ceived more full information concerning its extent
and policy, as well as the situation of its adffairs at
that junaure. Wiithout some knowledge of there,
he could not have conduaed his operations with
propriety; and without a faritable attention to
them, it is impossible to account for thle progress
which the Spaniards had already made, or to un-
fold the causes of their subs~equent- success.

AT the time when the Spaniards invaded Peru, state or the

the dominions of its sovereigns extended in length, nilea
from north to south, above fifteen hundred miles
along the Pacific Ocean. Its breadth, from east
to weft, was much less considerable; being uni-
formly bounded by the vast ridge of the Andes,
firetching from its one extremity to the other.
Peru, like the reft of the New World, was origi-
nally poffeffed by small1 independent tribes, dif-
fering from each other in manners, and in their
forms of rude policy. All, however, were so
little civilized, that, if the traditions concerning

C 3 their

a 0yI M their mode of life, preserved among their des~cend.

L~J ants, deserve credit, they must be classed among
ss '· the most unimproved savages of America. Stran.

gers to every species of cultivation or regular in.
duffry, without any fixed residence, and unac·
quainted with those sentiments and obligations
which form the first bonds of social union, they
are said to have roamed about naked in the forests,
with which the country was then covered, more
like wild beasts than like men. Afttr they had
firuggled for several ages with the hardships and
calamities which are inevitable in s~uch a slate, and
when no circumflance s~eemed to indicate the ap-
proach of any uncommon effort towards improvre-
ment, we are told that there appeared on the banks
of the lake Titiaca, a man and woman ofmajeffic
form, and clothed in decent garments. T'hey de·
clared themselves to be children of the Sun, sent
by their beneficent parent, who beheld with pity
the miseries of the human race, to infirue? and to
reclaim them. At their persuasion, enforced by
reverence for the divinity in whose name they were
supposed to speak, several of the dispersed savages
united together, and receiving their commands as
heavenly injunic~ins, followed thern to Cuzco,
where they fettled, and began to lay the founda·
tions of a city.

MAhTCo CAPtlC and Mama Ocollo, for fiich

were the names of those extraordinary personages,
having thus collected some wandering tribes,

formed

formed that social union, which, by multiplying B O Op K
the desires, and uniting the efforts of the human Aj
species, excites induffry, and leads to improve- = ss=.
ment. Manco Capac infiruaed the men in agri-
culture, and other ofeful arts. Mama Ocollo
taught the women to [pin and to weave. By the
labour of the one sex, subsistence became less pre-
carious; by that of the other, life was rendered
more comfortable. After securing the objeas of
firlt necefirty in an infant slate, by providing food,
raiment, and habitations, for the rude people of
whom he took charge, Manco Capac turned his
attention towards introducing such laws and policy
as might perpetuate their happiness. By his initi-
tutions, which thall be more particularly explained
hereafter, the various relations in private life were
effablifhed, and the duties res~ulting from them
pres~cribed with such propriety, as gradually formed
a. barbarous people to decency of manners. In
public adminiffration, the funAions of persons in
authority were so precisely defined, and the f~ubordi-
nation of thos~e under their jurifdiaion maintained
with furch a fleadyr hand, that the society in which
he presided, soon afirumed the afped of a regular
and well-governed state.

TaUS, according to the Indian tradition, was

founded the empire of the Incas or Lords of Peru.
At first its extent was fmlall. The territory of
Manco Capac did not reach above eight leagues
from Cuzco. But within its narrow precinas he

C 4 exercised

a 0 0 K exercised ablolute and uncontrolled authority. His4

·---~successors, as their dominions extended, arrogated

a similar jurif~diaion over the new fubjeas which
they acquired; the despotism of Asia was not
reore complete. The Incas were not only obeyed as
monarchs, but revered as divinities. Their blood
was held to be s~acred, and, by prohibiting intere
marriages with the people, was never contaminated
by mixing with that of any other race. The fami-
ly, thus separated from the reft of the nation, was
dil~inguifhed by peculiarities in dress and orna-
znents, which it was unlawful for others to affilme.
The monarch himself appeared with enligns of roy-
alty reserved for him alone; and received from his
f~ubjeats marks of oblequious homage and refpe8,
whlich approached almost to adoration.

Bur, among the Peruvians, this unbounded

power of their monarchs seems to have been uni-
formly accompanied with attention to the good of
their fubjeas. It was not the rage of conquest, if
we may believe the accounts of their countrymen,
that prompted the Incas to extend their dominions,
but the desire of diffuiing the bleflings of civiliza-
tion, and the knowledge of the arts which they
poffeffed, among the barbarous people whom they
reduced. During a f~uccefiron of twelve monarchs,
it is said that not one deviated from this beneficent
charaaer '

SCieca de Leon, Chron. c* 44. Herrera, dec. 3. lIb. x.

c* 4. dec. 5. lib. iii. c. I7. WXHEN

WHE-EN the Spaniards first visited the coast of a 0 0 10
Peru, in the year one thousand five hundred and
twenmty-fix, Huana Capac, the twelfth monarch . ass2.
from the founder of the slate, was seated on the
throne. He is repres~ented as a prince distinguished
not only for the pacific virtues peculiar to the race,
but eminent for his martial talents. By fhis viao-
rious arms the kingdom of Quito was f~ubjeated, a
conquest of such extent and importance as almost
doubled the power of the Peruvian empire. He
was fond of residing in the capital of that valuable
province, which he had added to his dominions;
and, notwithffanding the ancient and fundamental
law of the monarchy against polluting the royal
blood by any foreign alliance, he married the
daughter of the vanquilh-ed monarch of Quito.
She bore him a son named Atahualpa, whom, on
his death at quito, which seems to have happened
about the year one thousand five hundred and
twenty-nine, he appointed his s~uccessor in that
kingdom, leaving the reft of his dominions to
H-uaf~car, his eldest son, by a mother of the royal
race. Greatly as the Peruvians revered the memory
of a monarch who had reigned with greater repu-
tation and splendour than any of his predecessors,
the deffination of Huana Capac concerning the
fu~ccefiron, appeared so repugnant to a maxim coe-
val with the empire, and founded on. authority
deemed sacred, that it was no s~ooner known at
Cluzco than it excited general disgust. Encouraged

B O O: K by thos~e sentiments of his fubjeas, Huafcar re-

LL Yquired his brother to renounce the government of

Qui'e·to, and to ackinowledge him as hris lawful
superior. But it had been the first care of Atahualpa
to gain a large ·body of troops which had accom·
panied his father to Quito. These were the flower
of the Peruvian warriors, to whose valour Huana
Capac had been inldebted for all his viaories. Re-
lying on their support, Atahualpa first eluded his
brother's demand, and then marched against him
in hostile array.

TaUS the ambition of two young men, the title

of the one founded on ancient usage, and that of
the other asserted by the veteran troops, involved
Peru in civil war, a caalamity to which, under a
fiucceffion of virtuous princes, it had hitherto
been a firang~er. In such a contest the ifrue was
obvious. TIhe force of arms triumphed over the
authority of laws. Atahualpa remainled viaorious,
Sand-made a cruel use of his viaory. Conscious of
the defed in his own title to the crown, he at-
tempted to exterminate the royal race, by putting
Sto death all the children of the Sunl descended

`LB: ~ ~from Manco Capac, whom he could seize either

by'force or firatagem. F~roml a political motive,
the life of his unfortunate rival Huakcar, who had
been takten prisoner inl a battle whlich decided
t'he fate~ of the empire, w~as proilonged fCor fomie
'time, that, by iffiinilg orders in hris name, the

usurper

tlfurper might more easily eftabliih his own au. B o 0 x
thority ". rr

1532.

WHEN Pizarro landed in the bay of St. Mat- Favourable

thew, this civil ivar raged between the two bro- grers oi.
thers in its greatest fury. Had he made any hoffile zarro.
·attempt in his former visit to Peru in the yrear one
thousand five hundred and twenty-f~even, he muit
then have encountered the force of .a powerfidl
slate, united under a monarch, poffeffed of capa-
city as well as courage, and unembarraffed with
any care that could divert him from opposing his
progress. But at this time, the two competitors,
though they received early accounts of the arrival
and violent proceedings of the Spaniards, were f0,
intent upon the operations of a war, which they
deemed more intereffing, that they paid no attention
to the motions of an enemy, too inconsiderable in
number to excite any great alarm, anld to whom,
it would be eafyr, as they imagined, to give a
check when more at leisure.

BY this fortunate coincidence of events, whereof ne avansE

himself of

Pizarro could have no foresight, and of which, it, and ad-
from his defective mode of intercourse with the vanCep.
people of the country, he remained long ignorant,
he was permitted to carry on his operations un-
molested, and advanced to the centre of a great
empire before one effort of its power was exerted

U Zarate, lib.i. c. 25. Vega, I. lib. ix. c. 12 and32-~

40. Herrera, dec* 5. lib. i. c. 2. lib. iii. c. 17.

B OVI.0 K to flop his career. During their progress, the Spar

C~-·zrniards had acquired some imperfec? knowledge of

this firuggle betwreen the two contending faaions.
The first complete information with refpec? to it,
they received from messengers whom IIualcar sent
to Pizarro, in order to solicit his aid agazinf1 Ata-
hualpa, whom he repres~ented as a rebel and an
usurper ". Pizarro perceived at once the import-
ance of this intelligence, and foresaw so clearly all
the advantages which might be derived from this
divided state of the kingdom, which he had in-
vaded, that, without waiting for the reinforcement
which he expeaed from Panama, he determined
to push forward, while intestine discord put it out
of the power of the Peruvians to attack ~him with
their whole force, and while, by taking part, as
circumnitances thould incline him, with one of the
competitors, he might be enabled with greater
ease to crush both. Enterprising as the Spaniards
of that age were in all their operations against Ame-
ricans, and diifinguiihed as Pizarro was among his
countrymen for daringr courage, we can hardly
suppose, that after having proceeded hith~erto slowly,
and with much caution, he would hav~e changed at
once his system of operation, and have ventured
upon a measure so hazardous, without s~ome new
motive or profpe8 to juffify it.

State of his As he' was obliged to divide his troops, in
forces, Sorder to leave a garrison in St.1\1ichael, fufficient

U Zarate, lib. ii. c. 3-

to defend a station of equal importance as a place a o o K
of retreat in cafe of any disaster, and as a port for J
receiving any s~upplies which thould come from as>*·
Panama, he began his march with a very slender
and ill-accoutred train of followers. They conl·
sifted of fixty-two horsemen x, and a hundrecdand
two foot-f~oldiers, of whom twenty were armed
with crofs-bows, and three with mufkiets. He dil
reded his course towards Caxamalca, a fmnall townr
at the diffance of twelve days march from St.
Michael, where Atahualpa was encamped' with
a considerable body of troops. Before he had prb-
ceeded far, an officer dispatched by the Inca met
him with a vahrable present from that prince,
accompanied with a prdffer of his alliance, and
afl~urances of a friendly reception at Caxamalca.
Pizarro, according to the usual artifice of his coun·
trymen in Almerica, pretended to come as the am·
baffador of a very powerful monarch, and declared
that he was now advancing with an intention to
offer Atahualpa his aid against those enemies who
disputed his title to the throne y.

As the objea of the Spaniards in eritering their Idas of thi

Peruvians

country was altogether incomprehensible to the ·moncerning
P~eruvians, they had formed various conjeaures fide-
concerning it, without being able to decide whe·
ther they thould confider their new guests as beings
of a s~uperior nature, who had vilited them from

X See NOTE IV.
u Ilerrera, dec* 5. lib. i. c. 3. ;Xeresz, p. 189.

some

a 0 0 r e some beneficent motive, or as formidable avengers

Ce of their crimes, and enemies to their repos~e and

's1' liberty. The continual profefirons of the Spa-

niards, that they came to enlighten them with the
knowledge of truth, and lead them in the way of
happiness, favoured the former opinion; the out.
rages which they committed, their rapacioufnels
and cruelty, were awful confirmations of the lat-
ter. While in this slate of uncertainty, Pizarro's
declaration of his pacific intentions so far removed
all the Inca's fears, that he determined to give him
a friendly reception. In cons~equence of this refo.
lution, the Spaniards were allowed to march in
tranquillity across the ~sandy desert between St.
Michael and Motuph, where the most feeble es-
fort of an enemy, added to the unavoidable dif:
tresses which they fuffered in passing through that
comfortles~s region, must have proved fatal to
them ·. From Motupa they advanced towards
the mountains which encompassed the low country
of Peru, and passed through a defile so narrow and
inacceifible, that a few men might have defended
it againit a numerous army. But here likewise,
from the fame inconsiderate credulity of the Inca,
the Spaniards met with no opposition, and tookr
quiet poff~efion of a fort ere61ed for the s~ecurity of
that importantitation. As theynowapproached near
to Caxamalca, Atahualpa renewed his profefiions
of friendship; and as an evidence of their since·

2 See NTOTE V.

rity, sent them presents of greater value than the B 0 0 I;:
former. -

ON entering Caxamalca, Pizarro took poffeflion Arrive at

of a large court, on one fide of which was a house caxamaca.
which the Spanish hifforians call a palace of the
Inca, and on the other a temple of the Sun, the
whole surrounded with a firong rampart or wall of
earth. When he had poffed his troops in this ad-
vantageous flation, he dispatched his brother Ferdi-
nand and H~ernandlo Soto to the camp of Ata-
hualpa, which was about a league difiant from the
town. Hek infiruaed them to confirm the declara-
·tion which he had formerly made of his pacific dif-
polition, and to desire an interview with the Inca,
that he might explain more fully the intention of
the Spaniards in visiting his country. They were
treated with all the refpeafu~l horpitality usual
among the Peruvians in the reception of their most
cordial friends, and Atahualpa promis~ed to visit the
Spanish commander next day in his quarters. The
decent deportment of the Peruvian monarch, the
ordpr of his court, and the reverence with which his
~ubjceas approached his person and obeyed his corn-
mands, affonifhed those Spaniards, wrho had never
met uIn America with any thing more dignified than
the petty cazique of a barbarous tribe. But their
eyes were still more powerfully attracted by the vast
profufidrn of wealth which they observed in the In-
ca's camp. The rich ornaments worn by him and
his attendants, the vessels of gold and silver in

.2I which

B O O K which the repalt offered to them was served up, the

VI. V- multitude of utensils of every kind formed of those
ass2. precious metals, opened profpeas far exceeding

any idea of opulente that a European of the fix.
teenth century could form.

Perfidious ON their return to Caxamalca, while their minds
(cheme of
Pizarro. were yet warm with admiration and desire of the

wealth which they had beheld, they gave such a
description of it to their countrymen, as confirmed
Pizarro in a resolution w~hich he had already taken.
From his own observation of American manners
during his long service in the New W~Corld, as wlell
as from the advantages which Cortes hiad derivedl
from seizing Montezuma, he knew of R hat confe-
quence it was to have the Inca in his power. For
this purpose, he formed a plan as daring as it was
perfidious. Notwithftandiing the charater that he
had afirumed of an ambassador from a powerful mo·
narch, who courted an alliance with thle Inca, and
in violation of the repeatend offers which he had
made to him of his own friendsh~ip and afi~liance,
he determined to avail himself of the unfufpicio~us
Eimplicity with which Atahualpa relied on his pro-
fefions, and to seize the person of the Inca dulring
the interview to which he had invited! him. H-e
prepared for the execution of his scheme with the
fame deliberate arrangemlent, and with as little
copundion, as if it had! refleaed no disgrace
on himself or his country·. Hec divided his cavalry
into three finall fqluadrons, under the command of

z " h i s

his brother Ferdinand, Soto, and Benalcazar; his a od #
in~fantry were formed in one body, exrcept twenty c Ncl
of moss tried courage, whom he kept near his own '5'
person to s~upport him in the dangerous service
which he reserved for himself; the artillery, con-
sifting oftwo field-pieces a and the crof~s-bowmen,
were plac~ed oppolite to the avenue by which Ata-
hualpa was to approach. All were commanded
to keep within the s~quare, and not to move until
the signal for acaion~ was given.

Ent~Y in the morning the Peruvian camp was nov. rs

all in motion. But as Atahualpa was solicitous to ,V"f fe~1:
appear with the greatest sp~lendour and magnifi-
cence in his first interview with the firangers, the
preparations for this were so tedious, that the day
was far advanced before he began his march.
Even then, left the order of the procession ihould
be deranged, he moved to slowly, that the Spa-
niards became impatient, and apprehensive that
some f~ufpiciohz of their intention might be the
cause of this delay. In order to remove this, Pi-
~zarro dispatched one of his officers with fresh aith-
rances of his friendly difpolition. At length the
Inca approached. Firit of all appeared four hun-
dred men, in an utniform dress, as harbingers to
clear the way before him. H-e himfeklf, fitting on
a throne or couch, adorned with plumes of various
colours, and almost covered with plates of gold

a Xerez, p. 194.

and

VoL. III.

a O O K anfd silver enriched with precious stones, was car.

~lfjried on the thoulders of his principal attendants,

'5~Behind him came some chief officers of his court,

carried in the fame manner. Several bands of
fingers and dancers .accompanied this cavalcade I
and the whole plain was covered with troops,
amounting to more than thirty thousand men.

strn~pge ~a· As the Inca drew near the Spanish~ quarters, fa.

g,~de vat- ther Vincent Valverde, chaplain to the expedition,

advanced with a crucifix in one hand, and a bre-
viary in the other, and in a long discourse explain-
ed to him the doarine of the creation, the fall of
Adam, the incarnation, the fufferings and refur·
reaion of Jesus ChriRt, the appointment of St.
Peter as God's vicegerent on earth, the tranfinif·
sion of his apostolic power by f~ucceflion to the
popes, the donation made to the king of Caffile
by pope Alexander of all the regions in the New
World. In consequence of all this, he required
Atahualpa to embrace the Christian faith, to ac·
knowledge the supreme jurifdialon of the pope,
and to submit to the king~ of Castile as his lawful
sovereign; promising, if he complied instantly
with this requisition, that the Castilian monarch
would protea his dominions, and permit him to
continue in the exercise of his royal authority ; but
if he should impiously refus~e to obey this summons,
he denounced war against him in his mafter's name,
and threatened him with the most dreadful effe~ts
of his vengeance.

TmIs firange har:1ngue, unfolding deep myr. a ono x.

teries, and alluding to rinknown faas, of which cA
no power of eloquence could have conveyed at Reh~y i e.h
once a diftina idea to an American, was so lamely
translated by an unskilful interpreter, little ac~
quainted with the idiom of the Spanish~ tongue, and
incapable of exprefirng himself with propriety in
the language of the Inca, that its general tenor
was altogether incomprehensible to Atahualpa.
Some parts in it, of more obvious meaning, filled
him with afkonifhment and indignation. His re-
ply, however, was temperate. He began with
obs~erving, that he was lord of the dominions over
which he reigned by hereditary f~uccefiion; and
added, that he could not conceive how a foreign
priest thould pretend to dispose of territories which
did not belong to him; that if s~uch a prepofferous
grant had been made, he, who was the rightful
poffeffor, refus~ed to confirm it ; that he had no in-
clination to renounce the religious inflitutions efta-
blifhed by his anceffors ; nor would he forsake the
service of the Sun, the immortal divinity whom he
and his people revered, in' order to worship the
God of the Spaniards, who was f~ubjea to death;
that with refpeQ to other matters contained in his
discourse, as he had never heard of them before,
anid did not now underfiand their meaning, he de-
Bired to know where the priest had learned things
so extraordinary. "' In this book," anfwvered Val-
verde, reaching out to him his breviary. The
Inca opened it eagerly, and turning over the leaves,

D 2 liste4

B O OP K lifted it to his ear : "( This," says he, " is silent;

CC ~it tells me nothing;" and threw it with disdain to

w.the ground. The enraged monk, running towards

his countrymen, cried out, "' To artns, Christians,
to arms; the word of God is ins~ulted; avenge this
profanation on those impious dogs b."

rezarro at. PIZARRO, who, during this long conference,
tacks the
havIan.,II had w~ith difficulty reffrainled his soldiers, eager to

seize the rich spoils of which they had now s~o near
a view, immediately gave the signal of assault. At
once the martial music firuck up, the cannon and
mufkiets began to fire, the horse fagllied out fiercely
to the charge, the infantry rushed on fwrord in
hand. The Peruvians, affonifhed at the s~udden·
nes~s of an attack which they did not expea, and
difmnayed with the deftruaive effeas of the fire.
arms, and the irresistible impression of the cavalry,
fled with univers~al confiernation on every fide,
without attempting either to annoy the enemy, or
to defend themselves. Pizarro, at the head of his
chosen band, advanced direaly towards the Inca;
and though his nobles crowded around him with
officious zeal, and fell in numbers at his feet, while
they vied one with another in sacrificing their own
lives, that they might cover the sacred person of
their sovereign, the Spaniards soon penetrated to

ano eizes the royal feat ; and Pizarro seizing the Inca by the

Sna. arm, dragged him to the ground,.and carried him

b See NOTE VI.

as a prisoner to his quarters. The fate of the mO. B O OS K
narch increased the precipitate flight of his follow- <..--v-.
crs. The Spaniards pursued them towards every 's32·
quarter, and with deliberate and unrelenting bar-
barity continued to slaughter wretched fugitives,
who never once offered to resist. The carnage did
not cease until the close of day. Above four thou.
sand Peruvians were killed. Not a single Spaniard
fell, nor was one wounded but Pizarro himself,
whose hand was slightly hurt by one of his own
s~oldiers, while strugg~ling eagerly to lay hold on the
Inca e.

THE phindler of the field was rich beyond any

idea which the Spaniards had yet formed concern.
ing the wealth of Peru, and they ·were so transport-
ed with the value ofthe acquisition, as well as the
greatness of their furccef~s, that they passed the night ·
in the extravagant exultation natural to indigent
adventurers on such an extraordinary change of
fortune.

AT first the captive monarch could hardly be. oejeason of

lieve a calamity which he to little expeaed to be
real. But he soon felt all the misery of his fate,
and the dejettion into which he funk was in pro-
portion to the height of grandeur from which he
had fallen. Pizarro, afraid of losing all the ad-
vantages which he hoped to derive from the post
fefiTon of such a prisoner, laboured to console him

a See NOTE VSII.

D3 4 ith

a op o with profefirons of kindness and refpea, that cor·

CC~SJ res~ponded ill with his aQious. By residing among
J5s'* the Spaniards, the Inca quickly dis~covered their

ruling pafiron, which, indeed, they were no-wise
solicitous to conceal, and by applying to that,

ass cafr of Znade aq attempt to recover his liberty. He offer?
a rancom. ed as a ransom what affonifhed the Spaniards, even

after all they now knew concerning the opulence
of his kingdom. The apartment in which he was
confined was twenty-two feet in length and sixteen
in breadth; he undertook to fill it with ve~fels of
gold as high as he could reach. Pizarro closed
eagerly with this temptipg proposal, and a line was.
drawn upon the walls of the chamber, to mark the
flipulated height to which the treas~ure was to rife.

ATAHUALPA, transported with having obtained

fbme profped of liberty, took measures inflantly
for fulfilling his part of the agreement, by sending
minefengers to Cuzco, Quito, and other places,
yvhere gold had been amassed in largest quantities,
either for adorning the temples of their gods, or the
houses of the Inca, to bring what was neceffaryy for
completing his ransom djrealy to Caxamalca,
Though Atahualpa was now in the cuffody of his
enemies, yet so much were the PEeruvians accul-
tomed to refped every mandate ifiued by their so-
yereign, that his orders were executed with the
greatest alacrity. Soothed with hopes of recover·
ing his liberty by this means, the fubjeas of the
Iaca were affadd of endangering his life by forming

any other scheme for his relief ; and though the B o o to
'E~orce of the empire was still entire, no prepara- I M
tions were made, and no army assembled to avenge .'ss>-
their own wrongs or those of their monarch d. The
Spaniards remained in Caxamalca tranquil and un-
molested. Small detachments of their number The spr.
marched into remote provinces of the empire, and, fvn
inficad of meeting with any opposition, were every provmees,
wrhere received with marks of the moit submissive
Yreped e,

INCONSIDERABLE as those parties were, and de- Almearo ar-

rives with a

firous as Pizarro might be to obtain some know- reinforce-
ledge of the interior slate of the country, he could mme.
not have ventured upon any diminution of his main
body, if he had not about this time received aR Descember,
account of Almagro's having landed at St. M~ichael
with such a reinforcement as would almost double
the number of his followers '. The arrival of this
long-expecaed succour was -not more agreeable to
the Spaniards, than alarming to the Inca. Hefawt
the power of his enemies encreaf~e; and as he knewi
neither the source whence they derived their sup;
plies, nor the means by which they were conveyed
to Peru, he could not foresee to what a height the
inundation that poured in upon his dominions
might rife, VWhile difquieted with foch apprehen- unar ~~.p
fions, he learned that fame Spaniards, in their way to death.

d Xerez, 205- e See N O TE VIII.
f Xerez, 204.. I-ervera, dec. 5. lib. iii, c. r, z,

B 0 o K to Cuzco, had vilited his brother H~ualcar in the

CI place where he kept him confined, and that the
J3 captive prince had represented to them the juffice

of his own cause, and as an inducement to efpodfe
it, had promised them a quantity of treasure greatly
beyond that which Atahualpa had engaged to pay
for his ransom. If the Spaniards thould liffen to.
this proposal, Atahualpa perceived his own de·
firuction to be inevitable; and fufipec~ing that their
insatiable thirst for gold would tempt them to lend
a favourable ear to it, he determined to sacrifice his
brother's life, that he might save his own; and
his orders for this purpose were executed, like all
his other commands, with ferupulous punclu.
ality R.

The ses- MEANWHILE, Indians daily arrived at Caxa.
niards make
;I dirilicn of malca from different parts of the kingdom, loaded

Ih'rpol. with treasure. A great part of the flipulated

quantity was now amassed, and Atahualpa aflured
the Spaniards, that the only thing which prevented
the whole from being brought in, was the remote·
ness of the provinces where it was deposited. But
such vast piles of gold presented continually to the
view of needy soldiers, had so inflained their ava-
rice, that it was impofi~ble any longer to reffrain
their impatience to obtain poffeifion of th~is rich
booty. Orders were given for melting down the

a Zarate, lib. ii. c. 6. Garnara Hist. c. I15. Herrer,

whole,

whole, except some pieces of curious fabric, re. B odp K
served as a present for the emperor. After setting 4..--v---
apart the fifth due to the crown, and a hundred 15n-
thoufagnd pesos as a donative to the soldiers which
arrived with Almagr~o, there remained one million
five hundred and twenty-eight thousand five hun-
dred pesos to Pizarro and his followers. The fe-
flival of St. James, the patron faint of Spain, was July ag.
the day chos~en for the partition of this enormous
f~um, and the manner of conduaing it firongly
marks that firange alliance of fanaticifmn with ava-
rice, which I have more than once had occasion to
point out as a firiking feature in the charaaer of
the conquerors of the New W~orld. Though affem-
bled to divide the spoils of an innocent people,
procured by deceit, extortion, and cruelty, the
tranfaaion began with a folema invocation of the
name of God ", as if they could have expe~ed the
guidance of Heaven in diffributing those wages of
iniquity. In this division above eight thousand
pesos, at that time not inferior in effeaive value
to as many pounds Sterling in the present century,
fell to the share of each hors~eman, and half that
fum to each foot soldier. Pizarro himself, and
his officers, received dividends in proportion to the
dignity of their rank.

TBE RE is no example in hillory of such a s~udden Thfe aeff~

acqluifition of wealth by military service, nor was ot

L Ierrera, dec, 5. lib, iii, c. 3*

ever

a 0~ 0 s ever a fum so great divided among so iimall a num·

L4... ber of soldiers. Many of them having received a
sss-· recompence for their services far beyond their most

sanguine hopes, were to impatient to retire from
fatigue and danger, in order to s~pend the remain-
der of their days in their native country, in eas~e and
opulence, that they demanded their discharge with
clamorous importunity. Pizarro, sensible that from
such men he could exped neither enterpris~e in ac.
tion nor fortitude in fuffering, and pers~uaded that
wherever they went, the display of their riches
would allure adventurers, less opulent but more
hardy, to his Rtandard, granted their s~uit without
reluatance, and ·permitted above sixty of them to
accompany his brother Ferdinand, whom he sent
to Spain with an account of his s~uccess, and the
present destined for the emperor a

rhe Ined THE Spaniards having divided among them the
hs li ey in treasure amass~ed for the . Inca's ransom, he infiffed
9am. with them to fulfil their promise of setting him at

liberty. But nothing was farther from Pizarro's
thoughts. During his long service in the New
World, he had imbibed those ideas and maxims of
his fellow-foldiers, which led them to confider its
inhabitants as an inferior race, neither worthy of
the name, nor entitled to the rights, of men. In
his compaa with Atahualpa, he had no other ob·
jeQ than to amuse his captive with such a profpedt

? Herrera, dec. 5. lib. iii, c. 4. Vega, p, 2. lib. i. c. 381

of recovering his liberty, as might induce him to a 0 o
lend all the aid of his authority towvards colleaing '
the wealth of his kingdom. Having now accom- 'j
plifhed this, he no longer regarded his plighted
faith; and at the very time when the credulous
prince hoped to be replaced on hipS throne, he had
s~ecretly resolved to bereave him of life. Many
circumstances seem to have concurred in prompting
him to this adion, the most criminal and atrocious
that flains the Spanish name, amidst all the deeds
of violence committed in carrying on the conquest
,of the New World.

THOUGH Pizarro had seized the Inca, in imita. He and tla

Spaniardg

lion of Cortes's condua towards the Mexican mo. mutually
narch, he did not posses~s talents for carrying on eou
the fame artful plan of policy. Deffitute of the
temper and addres~s requisite for gaining the confi-
dence of his prisoner, he never reaped all the ad-
vantages which might have been derived from be-
ing master of his person and authority. Atahualpa,
was, indeed, a prince of greater abilities and dif-
cernment than Montezuma, and s~eems to have pe-·
netrated more thor-oughly into the charaaer and
intentions of the Spaniards. Mutual sus~picion and
Idiffruit accordingly took place between them. The
stria attention with which it was necessary to guard
B captive of such importance, greatly inereafed the
fatigue of military duty. The utility of keeping
pim appeared ipconfiderable; and Pizarro felt him

B o o K as an incumbrance, from which he wished to be

~J delivered W
3533·

^imagro ALMAGRO and his followers had made a demand
and his fol.
lowners de- Of an equal share in the Inca's ransom ; and though
lire. Pizarro had beffowed upon the private men the

large gratuity which I have mentioned, and en·
deavoured to s~ooth their leader by pres~ents of great
value, they still continued diffatisfied. They were
apprehensive, that as long as Atahualpa remained
a prisoner, Pizarro's soldiers would apply whatever
treasure thould be acquired, to make up what was
wanting of the quantity flipulated for his ransom,
and under that pretext exclude them from any part
of it. They idifiied eagerly on putting the Inca
to death, that all the adventurers in Peru might
thereafter be on an equal footing 2,

stivesPIZARRO himfeilf began to be alarmed with ac-

duced Pi- COunts of forces assembling in the remote provinces
conente. of the empire, and fuf~peaed Atahualpa of havinga

lifued orders for that purpose. There fears and
suspicions were artfully increased by Philippillo,
one of the Indians whom P~izarro had carried off
from Tumbez in the y-ear one thousand five hun-
dred and twenty-leven, and whom he employed as
an interpreter. The fundion which he performed
admitting this man to familiar intercourse with the

Herrera, dec. 5. lIb. ill. c. 4.
SZarate, lib. ii. c. 7. Vega, p. 2. lib. i. c. 7. H-errera,

dec. 5. lib. iii. c. 4,

J4 captive

captive monarch, he presumed, notwithflanding a ono x
the meannes~s of his birth, to raise his affeaions to AcL
a Coya, or descendent of the Sun, one of Atahual- 5333.
pa's wives; and feeing no profped of gratifying
that pafiron during the life of ·the monarch, he err-
deavoured to fill the ears of the Spaniards with such
accounts of the Inca's secret designs and prepara-
tions, as might awak~en their jealousy, and incite
them to cut him off.

WHILE Almagro and his followers openly de-

manded the life of the Inca, and Philippillo la-
boured to ruin him by private machinations, that
unhappy prince inadvertently contributed to hasten
his own fate. During his confinement he had at-
tached himself with peculiar affeaion to Ferdinand
Pizarro and Hernando Soto; who, as they were
persons of birth and education superior to the rough
adventurers with whom they served, were accuf-
tomed to behave with more decency and attention
to the captive monarch. Soothed with this refpelt
from persons of such high rank, he delighted in
their society. But in the presence of the governor
he was always uneasy, and overawed. This dread
soon came to be mingled with contempt. Among all
the European arts, what he admired most was that
of reading and writing ; and he long deliberated
with himself, whether he thould l~egard it as a na-
tural or acquired talent. In order to determine
this, he desired one of the soldiers, who guarded
him, to write the name of God on the nail of his

thumb.

SOOK thumb. This he fhewed f~uccellively to feeveral

s- Spaniards, afkiing its meaning; and to his amaze*

'" ' ment, they all, without hesitation, returned the

f~ame anfwver. At length Pizarro entered; and on
presenting it to him, he blushed, and with some
confusion was obliged to acknowledge his igno·
rance. From that moment, Atahualpa considered
him as a mean person, less inftruaed than his own.
soldiers; and he had not addres~s enough to conceal
the sentiments with which this discovery inspired
him. To be the objea of a barbarian's s~corn, not
only mortified the pride of Pizarro, but excited
such res~entment in his breast, as added force to all
the other considerations which prompted him to
put the Inca to death m.

His trial. But in order to give some colour of juffice to

this violent aaion, and that he himself might be
exempted from flanding singly responsible for the
commiiron of it, Pizarro resolved to try the Inca
with all the formalities ·oblerved in the criminal
courts of Spain. Pizarro himself, and Almagro,
with two afift~ants, were appointed judges, with
full power to acquit or to condemn; an attorney·
general was named to carry on the pros~ecution in
the king's name; couns~ellors were chosen to as*
sift the prisoner in his defence; and clerks were
ordained to record the proceedings of court. Be·
fore this firange tribunal, a charge was exhibited

m Herrerar, dec.5.1ib. iii. c. 4. Vega, p. Ir. lib. i. c. 3d*

still mere amazing. It consisted of various ar- a 0~ 0
ticles; that Atahualpa, though a baffard, had dif- '
poffeffed the rightful owner of the throne, and 153
usurped the regal power; that he had put his bro-
ther and lawful sovereign to death; that he was
an idolater, and had not only permitted, but
commanded the offering of human sacrifices ; that
he had a great number of concubines; that lince
his imprisonment he had wasted and embezzled the
royal treasures, which now belong-ed of right to the
conquerors; that he had incited his fubjeas to
take arms against the Spaniards. On these heads
of accusation, some of which are so, ludicrous,
others so absurd, that the effrontery of Pizarro, in
making them the foundation of a s~erious proce-
dure, is not less fulrprifing than his injuffice, did
this firange court go on to try the sovereign of a
great empire, over whom it had no jurifdition.
With refped to each of the articles, witnesses were
examined; but as they delivered their evidence in
their native tongue, Philippillo had it: in his power
to give their words whatever turn best suited his
malevolent intentions. To judges predetermined
in their opinion, this evidence appeared f~ufficient.
They pronounced Atahualpa guilty, and con- ne a con.
demned him to be burnt alive. Friar Valverde demned,
proftituted the authority of his sacred funaion to
confirm this sentence, and by his signature war-
ranted it to be just. Affonifhed at his fate, Ata-
hualpa endeavoured to avert it by tears, by pro-
mises, and by entreaties, that he might be sent to

ex · Spain,

n 0~ 0 t Spain, where a monarch would be the arbiter of

L his lot. But pity never touched the unfeeling heart

asn3' of Pizarro. He ordered him to be led instantly

to execution; and, what added to the bitterness
of his last m-oments, the fame monk who had just
ratified his doom, offered to console, and attempted
to convert him. The most powerful argument
Valverde emnployed to prevail with him to embrace
the Christian faith, was a promise of mitigation in
his punishment. The dread of a cruel death ex·
torted from the trembling vidimn a desire of receiv.
ing baptism. The ceremony was performed; and

3nd execut. Atahualpa, instead of being burnt, was itrangled at
ed. the flake ".

Several ·Spa. HAPPILY for the credit of the Spanish nation,
suards pro
tea againe even among the .proffigate adventurers which it

' ent forth to conqluer and des~olate the New World,

there were persons who retained some tinaure of
the Castilian generosity and honour. Though, be·
fore the trial of Atahualpa, Ferdinand Pizarro had
set out for Spain, and Soto was sent on a separate
command at a distance from Caxamalca, this odious
tranfaalton was not carried on without cedfure
and opposition. Several officers, and among those
some of the greatest reputation and most refpedtable
families in the service, not only remonfirated, but
protefied against this measure of their general, as

n Zarate, lib. 11. c. 7. Xeres, p. 233. Vega, p. rr.

lIb. i. c* 36, 37. Gvzaara Hist. c. rI7. Herrera, dec. J.
lib. iii. c. +*

disgraceful

disgraceful to their country, as repugnant to every B 0 0 K
maxini of equity, as a violation of public faith, and
an usurpation of jurifdidtion over an independent su.3
monarch, to which they had no title. But their
laudable endeavours were vain. Numbers, and the
opinion of such as held every thing to be lawful
which they deemed advantageous, prevailed. His-
tory, however, records even the unf~uccef~sful exer-
tions of virtue with applause, and the Spanish writ-
ers, in relating events where the valour of their na-
tion is more conspicuous than its humanity, have
not failed to preserve the names of thos~e who made
this laudable effort to save their country from the
infamy of having perpetrated such a crime o.

ON the death of Atahualpa, Pizarro invelled wrobltunon

of govern-

one of his sons with the ensigns of royalty, hoping ment and or-

der in Peru.

that a young man without experience might prove
a more pafirve infirument in his hands, than an
ambitious monarch, who had been accuffoomed to
independent commind. The people of Cuzco,
and the adjacent country, acknowledged Manco
Capac, a brother of Huafcar, as Inca P. But
neither poff~effed the authority which belonged to a
s~overeign of Peru. The violent convulsions into
which the empire had been thrown, firff by the
civil war between the twno brothers, and then by
the invrafion of the Spaniards, had not only de-

*Vega, p. 11. lib. i. c. 37. Xeres, i. 235. Herrera,

dec* 5. lib. iii. c. S·.

P Vega, p. I i. lib. ii. c. 7.

VoI,. III. E ranged

E O Oo K rangred the order of the Peruvian government, but

c-s almost dissolved its frame. When they beheld

"'53 their monarch a captive in the power of strangers,

and at last f~uffering an ignominious death, the
people in s~everal provinces, as if they had been
set free from every restraint of law and decency,
brokie out into the mos1 licentious excesses s. So
Inany descendents of the Sun, after being treated
with the utmost indigllity, had been cut off by
Atahualpa, that not only their influence in the slate
diminished with their number, but the accuffomed
reverence for that sacred race sensibly decreased.
In cons~equence of this slate of things, ambitious
men in different parts of the empire aspired to in-
dep~endent authority, an~d usurped jurifdiaion to
which they had no title. The general who com-
manded for Atahualpa in Quito, s~eized the brother
anld children of his master, put them to a cruel
death, and dis~claiming any connecaion w~ith either
Inca, endeavoured! to establish a separate kingdom
for himself r.

Pizarro ad- THIE Spaniardr, with pleasure, beheld the spirit
VhncCS tO
cuzo. of discord diiffuing itself, and the vigour of go-

v·ernment relaxing amnongr the Peruvians. They
considered thos~e dis~orders as fyimptoms of a slate
hastening towards its diss~olution. Pizarro no longer
hesitated to advance towards Cuzco, and he had
received such considerable reinforcemerits, that he

<i Herrera, dec. 5. lib. ii. c. 12. lIb. iii. c. J.

SZalrate, lib. ii. c. 8. 1egra, p. It. 1lb. ii. c. 3, 4*

could

cbuld venture, ~with little danger, to penetrate so B 9vilo
far into the interior part of the country. The
account of the wealth acquired at Caxamalca '51
operated as he had foreseen. No sooner did his
brother Ferdinand, with the officers and soldiers
to whom he had given their dis~charge after the
partition of the Inca's ransom, arrive at Panama,
and dis~play their riches in the view of their
affonifhed countrymen, than fame s~pread the a':-
count with s~uch exaggeration through all the
Spanish settlem~ents on the South Sea, that the
governors of Guatimala, Panama, and Nicaragua,
could hardly reffrain the people under their jurif-
diaion, from abandoning their poiffefions, and
crowfding to that inexhauffib~le source of wealth
wr.hich seemed to be opened in Peru s. In spite of
every check and regulation, such numbers ref'orted
thither, that Pizarro bega~n his march at the head
of five hundred men, after leaving a considerable
garrison in St. Michael, under the command of
Benalcazar. The Peruvians had assembled some
large bodies of troops to oppos~e his progre~rs.
Several fierce encounters happened. But they
terminated like: all the a~ions in America; a few
Spaniards were killed or wounded; the natives
w~ere put to flight with incredible slaug~hter. At
length Pizarro forced his way to Cuzco, and took
quiet poffetiion of that capital. The riches found

*I Gomara Hist. c. 125. Vega, p. Ir. lib. it. c. . Her-

rera, dec* 5. lib. iii. c. J.

E 2 there,

B O O K there, even after all that the natives had carried off

- and concealed, either from a fuperflitious venera·

'sss' tion for the ornaments of their temples, or out of

hatred to their rapacious conquerors, exceeded in
value what had been received as Atahualpa's ran·
fom. But as the Spaniards were now accuffomed
to the wealth of the country, and it came to be
parcelled out among a greater number of adven-
turers, this dividend did not excite the fame fur-
prise either from novelty, or the largeness of the
fum that felil to the share of each individual'.

DURING the march to Cuzco, that son of Ata.

hualpa whom Pizarro treated as Inca, died; and
as the Spaniards substituted no person in his place,
the title of Manco Capac seems to have been uni-
verfally recognized U.

igt(,- WHILE his fellowV-foldiers were thus employed,
Benalcazar. Benalcazar, governor of St. Mlichael, an able and

enterprising offcer, was afhlamed of remaining in-
a~ive, and impatient to have his name diftin·
guifhed among the dis~coverers and conq~uerors of
the New World. The seasonable arrival of a fresh
body of recruits from Panama and Nicaragua, put
it in his power to gratify this patfion. Leaving a
fufficient force to protea the infant s~ettlement en-
truffed to his care, he placed hims~elf at the head
of the reft, and set out to attempt the red~uaion of

a See NOTE IX. I Herrera, dec.5. lib. v. c. 2.

Quito,

Quito, where, according to the report of the a ~o o x
natives, Atahualpa had, left the greatest part of ~l
his treasure. Notwithffanding the difiance of '53
that city from St. Michael, the difficulty of march-
ing through a mountainous country covered with
woods, and the frequent and fierce attacks of the
best troops in Peru, commanded by a sk~ilful
leader, the valour, good conduat, and perseverance
of Benalcazar s~urmounted every obstacle, and he
entered Quito with his viatorious troops. But
they met with a cruel mortification there. The
natives, now acquainted, to their sorrow, with the
predominant passion of their invaders, and know-
ing how to disappoint it, had carried off all those
treasures, the profpedt of which had prompted them
to undertake this arduous expedition, and had
s~upported them under all the dangers and hard-
thips wherewith they had to firuggle mn carrying
1t on x

BENALCAZAR WaS not the only Spanish leader Alvarado's

who attacked the kingdom of Quito. The fame exped'itin.
of its riches attralted a more powerful enemy.
Pedro de Alvarado, who had distinguished him-
self so eminently in the conqlueft of Mliexico, hav-
ing obtained the government of Guatimala as a
recompence for his valour, soon became dif~guffed
with a life of uniform tranquillity, and longed to

X Zarate, lib.ii. c* 9. Vega, p. II. lib. ii. c. 9. Her-
rera, dec* 5. lib.iv. c. I2, I2. lib.v. c. 2>3. lib. vi. c. 3*

E 3 be

B q~o 0 be again engaged in the buffle of military service,

Cc~~-3 Thfe glory anld wealth acquired by the conquerors
s'53 of Peru heightened this passion, and gave it a de.

termined direaion. Believing, or pretending to
believe, that the kingdom of quito did not lie
within the limits of the province allottei to Pi-
zarro, he resolved to invade it. The high reputa-
tion of the commander allured volu~nteers front
every quarter. Hte embarked with five hundred
men, of whom above two hundred were of s~uch
dift~naion as to serve on horseback. He landed at
Puerto Viejo, and without f~ufiicient knowvledge of
the country, or proper guides to concdua hirn,
attempted to march direaly to Quito, by follow-
ing the course of the river Guayquil, and crossing
the ridge of the Andes towards its head. But in
this route, one of the most impradticable in dll
America, his troops endured such fatigue in forclng
their way through forests and marthes on the
low grounds, and fuffered so much from exce~ive
Fold whea~ they began to ascend the mountains,
that before they reached the plain of Quito, a fif~th
part of the men arid half of their horse~s died, and
the reft were so much dispirited and worn out, as
to be almoff unfit for se~rvice 7. TIhere they rnet
with a body, not of Inldians but of Spaniards,
drawn up in hoffile array against th-m. Pizarro
having received an account of Alvarado's arm4-
Inent, had detached Anlag~ro with fomne troops to

r Se~e N'O T~ EX.

oppole

oppose this formidable invader of his jurif~dialon; B O O K"
and thes~e were joined by Benalcazar and his viao- Lcs-
rious party. Alvarado, though s~urpris~ed at the
fight of enemies whom he did not expeat, advanced
boldly to the charge. . But, by the interpoliition of
some moderate men in each party, an amicable
accommodation took place; and the fatal period,
when Spaniards suspended their conquests to em-
brue their hands in the blood of their countrymen,
was postponed a few years. Alvarado engaged to
return to his government, upon Almagro's paying
him a hundred thousand pesos to defray the expence
of his armament. Most of his followers remained
in the country; and an expedition, which threat-
ened Pizarro and his colony with ruin, contributed
to augment its firength 7-

BYr this titne Ferdinand Pizarro had landed in 15w.

Honours

Spain. The immense quantities of gold and silver tcnferred on

Pizarro and

whicli he imported ", filled the kingdom wtith no Almaglro.
Jes~s affonifhment than they had excited in Panama
and the adjacent provinces. Pizarro was received
by the emperor with the attention due to the
bearer of a present so rich, as to exceed anly idea
which the Spaniards had formed concerning the
value of their acquisitions in America, even after
they had been ten years masters oflCexico. In

2 Zarate, lib. ii. c. I0--13. Vega, p. Ir. lib. ii. c. I, 2,

9, &c. Gomara Hist. c.I26, &c. Remeial Hil. Guatimal.
lib. iiL, c. 6. Herrera, dec. 5. lib. vi. c. r, 2. 7, 8.

SSee NOGTE XI.

E 4 recompenee

B 0 0 rK recompence of his brother's services, his authority

~c~ was confirmed with new powers and privileges,
Iss4' and the addition of seventy leagues, extending

along the coast, to the southward of the territory
granted in his former patent. Almagro received
the honours which he had so long desired. The
title of Adelantado, or governor, was conferred
upon him, with jurif~diftion over two hundred
leagues of country, firetching beyond the southern
limits of the province allotted to Pizarro. Ferdi-
nand himself did not go unrewarded. H-e was ad-
mitted into the military order of St. Jago, a dif.
tin~tion always acceptable to a Spaniih gentleman,
and soon set out on his return to Peru, accompa-
nied by many persons of higher rank than had yet
served in that country b

dregnningof SOME RCCOUllt Of 111s Iegociations reached Peru

between Pri- before he arrived there hims~elf. Almagro no
Almagro. sooner learned that he had obtained the royal grant

of an independent government, than, pretending
that Cuzco, the imperial residence of the Incas,
lay within its boundaries, he attempted to render
himself master of that important flation. Juan
and Gonzalez Pizarro prepared to oppose him.
Each of the contenlding parties was supported by
powerful adherents, and the dispute was on the
point of being terminated by the fwvord, when
Francis Pizarro arrived in the capital. The recon.

b Zarate, lib. iii. e. 3. Vega, p. 11. lib. ii. c. I9. Herr

rera, dec* 5;. lib, vi, c. 13*

ciliatiorf

ciliation between him and Almagro had never been B O Op K
cordial. The trea~hery of Pizarro in engrofirng ~~
to himself all the honours and emoluments, which '5 *
ought to have been divided with his aff~ciate, was
always present in both their thoughts. The former,
conscious of his own perfidy, did not expea for-
givenefs; the latter, feeling that he had been de-
ceived, was impatient to be avenged; and though
avarice and ambition had induced them not only
to dissemble their sentiments, but even to aQ in
concert while in pursuit of wealth and power, no
sooner did they obtain poffeti~on of these, than the
fame paflions which had formed this temporary
union, gave rife to jealousy and discord. To each
of them was attached a small band of interefied
dependents, who, with the malicious art peculiar
to such men, heightened their s~uspicions, and mag-
nified every appearance of offence. But with all
tholfe feeds of enmity in their minds, and thus
assiduously cherished, each was so thoroughly ac-
quainted with the abilities and courage of his rival,
that they equally dreaded the consequences of an
open rupture. The fortunate arrival of Pizarro at
Cuzco, and the address mingled with firmnels
which he manifested in his expollulations with
Almagro and his partizans, averted that evil for
the present. A new reconciliation took place ; the
chief article of which was, that Almagro th~ould
attempt the conquest of Chili; and if he did not:
find in that province an establishment adequate to
'bjs merit and expeaations, Pizarro, by way of in-

demnification,

B O Oo K demnification, should yield up to him a part of

IC Peru. This new agreement, tho ugh confirmed with

Julft.;, the fame sacred folemnities as their firit contrast,

was obfervedl with as little fidelity a

Repulations Soon after he concluded this important tranf-
of Pizarrro. aaion, Pizarro marched back to the countries on

the sea-coast, and as he now enjoyedc an interval of
tranquillity, undiflurbed by any enemy, either
Spanish or Indian, he applied himself with that
persevering ardour, which diflinguilhes his cha-
ra~er, to introduce a form of regular government
into the extensive provinces fubjeat to his autho-
rity. Though ill qualified by his education to
enter into any difqui~tion concerning the principles
'of civil policy, and little accuff omed by his former
habits of life to attend to its arrangements, his
natural sagacity supplied the want both of science
and experience. He diffributed the country into
various diffriacs; he appointed proper magniltrates
to prelide in each; and eliablifhed regulations con-
cerningr the adminiffration ofjuffice, the collec~ion
of the royal revenue, the working of the mines,
and the treatment of the Indians, extremely simple,
but w~ell calculated to promote the public profpe-
rity. B3ut though, for the present, hie adapted his
plan to the infant slate of his colony, his aspiring
nind looked forwvard to its fuiture grandeur. Ile

c Zarate, lIb. ii. c. 13. Veg~a, p. I . lib. 11. c. 19. BEnzo,

,ib;. iii. c·. C. Jerrer~la; (eC. 5. ilb. vii. Cc. H

confidercl

Cconfdered himfrelf as laying the foundation of a B· O O K

Vl.

grect empire, and deliberated long, and with much ~
solicitude, in wEhat place he thould fix the feat of Fyou'n~da4r'on

. .of Lima.

governm~ent. Cuzco, the imperial city of the
Incas, was ficuated in a corner of the empire, above
four hundred miles from the sea, and much farther
frj anQito, a province of* whose value he had
formed an high idlea. No other s~ettlement of the
Peruvians ;vas so considerable as to merit the name
of a tMwn, or to allure the Spaniards to fix their
refidenlce in it. But, in marching through the
crc antry, F~izarro had been firuck with the beauty
and fertliity of the valley of Rimac, one of the
mot' exa~nfive and best cultivated in Peru. There,
on thce bankfs of a finall river, of the fame name
with t'-e ·· ile which it waters and enriches, at the
di',l ce: (f jix miles from Callao, the most com-
n~ 1:'2 >u hrboulr in the Pacific Ocean, he founded
: , i·,'i·h he deffined to be the capital of his

p -rner. e gave it the name of Ciudad de JaGS'm-
:' r vs, either from the circum~tance of having

1 -,the Br:it itone, at that season when the church
ed a~rtes toe feffival of the Three Kings, or, as
b: e; pr I'obabkc, in honour of Julana and Charles,
the i ~t -sovereigns of Caffile. This name it flill re-
tai among the Spaniards, in all legal and formal
deeds; but it is better kinown to foreigners by that
of Liman, a corruption of the ancient appellation of
thie valley in which it is situated. Under his in-
fpea~ion, the buildings advanced with f~uchi rapi-
dity, thlat it soon affuned the form of a city, which,

by

B o O K by a magnificent palace that he ereaed for himself,

V and by the fLately houses built by several of his

s53s officers, gave, even in its infancy, some indication

of its s~ubs~equent grandeur .

~d ~gJi " IN consequence of what had~ been agreed with

Pizarro, Almagro began his march towards Chili ;
and as he poffeffed in an eminent degree the virtues
most admired by s~oldiers, boundless liberality and
fearless courage, his flandard was followed by five
hundred and seventy men, the greatest body of
Europeans that had hitherto been ass~embled in
Peru. From impatience to finish the expedition,
or from that contempt of hardship and danger
acquired by all the Spaniards who had served
long in America, Almagrro, inflead of advancing
along the level country on the coast, chose to
march across the mountains by a route that was
shorter indeed, but almost impra~ticable. In this
attempt his troops were exposed to every calamity
which men can fuffer, from fatigue, from famine,
and from the rigour of the climate in those elevated
regions of the torrid zone, where the degree of
cold is hardly inferior to what is felt within the
polar circle. Many of them perished; and the
survivors, when they des~cended into the fertile
plains of Chili, had new difliculties to encounter.
They found there a race of men very different from
the people of Peru, intrepid, hardy, independent,

d Herrera, dec*5. lib. vi. c. r2. lib.vii. c. I3. Calancho

Coronica, lib, i. c. 37. Barnuevo, Limna fundata, ii. z94-

and

and in their bodily conititution, as well as vigour a 0 0 K
of spirit, nearly resembling the warlike tribes in Acs
North America. Though filled with wonder at 'su.
the first appearance of the Spaniards, and still
more astonished at the operations of their cavalry
and the effeas of their fire-arms, the Chilefe soon
recovered fTo far from their furprize, as not only to
defend themselves with obitinacy, but to attack
their new enemies with more determined fierceness
than any American nation had hitherto dis~covered.
The Spaniards, however, continued to penetrate
into the country, and colleaed some considerable
quantities of gold ; but were so far from thinking
of making any settlement amidst such formidable
neighbours, that, in spite of all the experience and
valour of their leader, the final issue of the expedi-
tion still remained extremely dubious, when they
wrere recalled from it by an unexpeaed revolution
in Peru =. The caus~es of this important event I
shall endeavour to trace to their source.

So many adventurers had flocked to Pern An incr,

from every Spanish colony in America, and all r~'~,,
with such high expe~tations of accumulating inde- v'ans,
pendent fortunes at once, that, to men poffeffed
with notions so extravagant, any mention of ac-
qluiring wealth gradually, and by schemes of pa-
tient induffry, would have been not only a dif-

e Zarate, lib. i~ii c. 1. Gromara HIifk. c. I3r. Vega, p. 2.

lib. ii. c. 20. Ovalle Hitt. de Chile, lib. iv. c. 15, &c.
Hlerrera, dee. 5. lib. vi. c. 9. liB. x(. c. I, &c.

appoint-

B O ~O K appoinltment, but an ins~ult. In order to find

Soccupation for men who could not with safety

rs3Ss be allowed to remain inaative, Pizarro encouraged

some of the most distinguished officers who had
lately joined him, to invade different provinces of
the empire, which the Spaniards had not hitherto
visited. Several large bodies were formed for this
purpofe;j and about the time that Almagro s~et out
for Chili, they marched into remote diffrias of

use rice, the country. No s~ooner did Manco Capac, the

Inca, obs~erve theinconfiderate s~ecurity of the Spa.·
niards in thus dis~persing their troops, and that only
a handful ojf soldiers remained in Cuzco, under
Juan and Gonzalez Pizarro, than he thought that
the happy period was at length coml~e for vindicat-
ing his own rights, for avenging the wrongs of his
country, and extirpating its oppressors. Though
firiatly watched by the Spaniards, who allowed^
him to reside in the palace of his anceffors at
Cuzco, he found means of communicating his
scheme to the persons who w~ere to be entruffed
with the execution of it. Among people ac-
cuitomed to revere their s~overeign as a divinity,
every hint of his will carries the authority of a
command; and they themselves were now con-
vinced, by the daily increase in the number of
their invaders, that the fond hopes which they
had long entertained of their v~oluntary departure
were altogether vain. Aill perceived that a vi-
gorous effort of the whole nation was requisite to
expel them, and the preparations for it were care

ried

ried on with the s~ecrecy and silence peculiar tO B O O K
Americans. IV.

AFTER some unfuccefsful attempts of the Inca andprog~rds.

to make his escape, Ferdinand Pizarro happening
to arrive at that time in Cuzco, he obtained per- lsjc·
mifiron from him to attend a great feffival which
was to be celebrated a few leagues from the capi-
tal. Under pretext of that s~olemnity, the great
men of the empire were assembled. As soon as
the Inca joined them, the flandard ofw-ar was
ere~ed; and in a short time all the fignhtingr men,
from the confines of Quito to the frontier of Chili,
wiere in arms. Mlany Spaniards, living s~ecurely -
on the settlements allotted them, wrere mafiacred.
Several detachments, as they marched carelefly
through a country which seemed to be tamely s~ub-
millive to their dominion, w-ere cut off to a man.
An army amounting (if we may believe the Spa-
nifh writers) to two hunldred thousand men, at-
tacked Cuzco, which the three brothers endea-
voured to defend with only one hundred and
seventy Spaniards. Another formidable body in-
vested Lima, and kept the governor clof'ely th~ut
up. There was no longer any communication be-
tween the two cities; the numerous forces of the
Peruvians spreading over the country, intercepted
every messenger; and as the parties in Cuzco and
Lima were equally unacquaintedi with the fate of
their countrymen, each boded the worit concerning

2I the

B O O K the other, anld imagined that they themselves were

VI.
~--J the only persons wnho had s~urvived the general ex-
'ss6' tinaion of thle Spanifhl name in Peru .

siege or Ir~ was at Cuzco, where the Inca commanded
CUZCO. in person, that the Peruvians made their chief

effort. During nine months they carried on the
siege with incessant ardour, and in var~ious forms;
and though they dis~played not the fame undaunted
ferocity as the Mexican warriors, they condudted
some of their operations in a manner which disco·
vered greater sagacity, and a genius more f~ufcep·
tible of improvement in the military art. They
not only observed the advantages which the Spa·
niards derived from their dis~cipline and their wea.
pons, but they endeavoured to imitate the former,
and turn the latter against them. They armed a
considerable body of their bravest warriors with
the swords, the spears, and bucklers, which they
had taken from the Spanilh soldiers whom they
had cut off in different parts of the country. These
they endeavoured to marshal in that regular com-
pa61 order, to which experience had taught them
that the Spaniards were indebted for their irre-
fiftible force in a~ion. Some appeared in the field
with Spanish mufkrets, and had acquired skill and
resolution enough to use them. A few of the
boldest, among whom was the Inca hims~elf, were

SVega, p. I T. lib. ii. c. 28. Zarate, lib. ill. c. 3. Cieca

de Leon, c. 82. Gomara HiR. c. (35. Herrera, dec. 5*
lib. viii. c. 5*.

mounted

rnounted on the horses which they had taken, and n O Op K
advanced brisk~ly to the charge like Spanish cava- Cc--
liers, with their lances in the reft. It was more by as;36.
their numbers, however, than by those imperfedt
essays to imitate European arts and to employ Eu-
ropean arms, that the Peruvians annoyed the Spa-
niards ". In spite of the valour, heightened by
diefpair, with which the three brothers defended
Cuzco, Manco Capac recovered poffeffion of one
half of his capital; and in their various efforts to
drive him out of it, the Spaniards loft Juan Pizar-
ro, the belt beloved of all the brothers, together
with fame other persons of note. Wiorn out with
the fatigue of incessant duty, diffreff~ed with want
of provisions, and despairing of being able any
longer to re~ift an enemy whole numbers daily in-
creased, the soldiers became impatient to abandon
Cuzco, in hopes either of joining their country-
men, if any of them yet survived, or of forcing
their way to the sea, and finding some means of
escaping from a country which had been so fatal to
the Spanish name f. While they were brooding
over those def~ponding thoughts, which their officers
laboured in vain to dispel, Almagrro appeared f~ud-
denly in the neighbourhood of Cuzco.

THE accounts transmitted to Almagoro concern- rv o

ing: the general infurre~tion of the Peruvians, were Almajyo,

* See N O TE XII.
f Herrera, dec* 5. lib. vili. c. 4*

VoL.. III. F fuela

B O Oo K s~uch as would have induced him, without hefits.
Ly tion, to relinqjulfh the conquest of Chili, and

7536.

anfdjSd mov~eS hasten tothe aid of his countrymen. But in this
dun. i-efolution he was confirmed by a motive less gene-

rous, but more interoftingo. By the fame meffen-
ger who brought him intelligence of the Inca's
revolt, he received the royal patent creating him
governor of Chili, and defining the limits of his.
jurif~dialon. Upon considering the tenor of it, he
deemed it manifeit beyond contradiEtion, that
Cuzco lay within the boundaries of his govern-
ment, and he was equally solicitous to prevent the
Peruvians from recovering poffefiron of their capi-
tal, and to wrest it out of the hands of the Pizarros.
Ftrom impatience to accomplish both, he ventured
to return by a new route ; and in marching through
the sandy plains on the coaff', he f~uffered, from
heat and drought, calamities of a new s~pecies,
hardly inferior to those in which he had been in-
volved by cold and famine on the fummits of the
Andes.

as g;. HIS arrival at Cazco was in a critical mnoment,
"On'* The Spaniards and Peruvians fixed their eyes upon

him with equal solicitude. The former, as he
did not fludy to conceal his pretensions, were at a
loss whether to welcome him as a deliverer, or to
ifake precautions against him as an enemy, The
latter, knowing the points in contest between himr
and his countrymen, flattered themselves that they
had more to hope than to dread from his opera-

2x tlons.

tions. Almagro himself, unacquainted 'with the n o 0 re
detail of the events which had happened in his
absence, and s~olicitous to learn the precis~e posture '537
of affairs, advanced towards the capital slowly,
and with great circumfpeaion. Various negocia-
tions with both parties were s~et on foot. The
Inca conduc~ed them on his part with much ad-
dress. At sirs1 he endeavoured to gain the friend·
ship of Almagro; and after many fruitless over,
tures, des~pairing of any cordial union with a Spa-
niard, he attacked him by surprise with a nume-
rous body of chosen troops. But the Spanifhh difci·
pline and valour maintained their wonted fuperiori-
ty. The Peruvians were repulsed with s~uch flaugh-
ter, that a great part of their army dispersed, and
Almagro proceeded to the gates of Culzco without
interruption.

THE Pizarros, as they had no longer to mak~e Taks pof.

fefllon of

head against the Peruvians, direfied all their at- culco.
tention towards their new enemy, and took mea-
fures to obfftrua his entry into the capital. Pru.
dence, however, reffrained both parties for some
time from turning their arms against one ·dnother,
while surrounded by common enemies, who would
tejoice in the mutual slaug~hter. DifiFerent schemes-
of accommodation were proposed. Each endea-
voured to deceive the other, or to corrupt his
followers. The generous, open, affable temper of
Almagro gained many adherents of the Pizarros,
who were difguffed with their harth domineering

F 2 manners.

B OtTO K Inanners. Encouraged by this defeaion, he ad·

L1 vanced towards the city by night, s~urpris~ed the

rs37. centinels, or was admitted by them, and invelling

the house where the two brothers resided, compel-
led them, after an obstinate defence, to surrender
at diferetion.. Almagro's claim of jurifdiaion over
Cuzco was universally acknowledged, and a form
of adminiffration established in his name B.

va war, Two or three persons only were killed in this
d first fuc*
rs of Al. firit aQ of civil hoffility ; but it was soon followed
agr'" by scenes more bloody. Francis Pizarro having

dis~persed the Peruvians who had invested Lima,
and received s~ome considerable reinforcements from
Hispaniola and Nicaragua, ordered five hundred
men, under the command of Alonfo de Alvarado,
to march to Cuzco, in hopes of relieving his bro.
thers, if they and their garrison were not already
cut off by the Peruvians. This body, which, at
that period of the Spanish power in America, muff
be deemed a considerable force, advanced near to
the capital before they knew that they had any
enemy more formidable than Indians to encounter,
It was with alloniihment that they beheld their
countrymen poffed on the banks of the river Abanl
cay to oppose their progress. Almagro, however,
wished rather to gain than to conquer them, and
by bribes and promises endeavoured to seduce their

g Zarate, lib. 111. c. 4.- Vega, p. 11. lib. ii. c. 29* 31*

Comara Hit. c. r134. Herrera, dec. 6. lib. ii. c. !--5.

leader.

leader. The fidelity of Alvarado remained un- B O ,O K
&haken; but his talents for war were not equal to c~c
his virtue. Almagro amused him with various ss7.·
movements, of which he did not comprehend the
meaning, while a large detachment of chosen J"'u It
soldiers passed the river by night, fell upon his
camp by surprise, broke his troops before they had
time to form, and took him prisoner, together
with his principal officers h

BY the sudden rout of this body, the contest but does not

between the two rivals muff have been decided, 'gow
if Almag~ro had known as well how to improve as
how to gain a viatory. Rodrigo Orgognez, an
officer of great abilities, who having served under
the conflable Bourbon, when he led the Imperial
army to Rome, had been accuffomed to bold and
decisive meas~ures, advised him instantly to ifiue
orders for putting to death Ferdinand and Gon-
2alo Pizarros, Alvarado, and a few other persons
whom he coi ld not hope to gain, and to march
direaly with his viaorious troops to Lima, be-
fore the governor had time to prepare for his de-
fence. But Almagro, though he discerned at once
the utility of the counsel, and though he had cou-
rage to have carried it into execution, f~uffered him-
self to be influenced by sentiments unlike those of a
soldier of fortune grown old in service, and by

h Zarate, lib. iiic. 6. Gom. H~it.c. I38. Vega, p. II.
lib. ii. c* 33>34. Herrera, dec. 6. lib. ii. c. 9.

scruples

F 3

B OnOo K [cruples which faited not the chief of a party who

L-M-1 had drawn his fwnord in civil war. Feelings of hu-
'5su. manity reffrained him from th~edding the blood of

his opponents; and the dread of being deemed a
rebel, deterred him from entering a province
w~hich the king had allotted to another. Though
he knew that arms must terminate the dispute be-
tween him and Pizarro, and resolved not to ihun
that mode of decision, yet, wvith a timid delicacy
prepofferous at such a jun~ture, he was to0 solicitous
that his rival thould be conlfidered as the aggressor,
that he marched quietly back to Cuzco, to wait
his approach '.

r~nutrrs or PIZARRO WaS flill unacqluaintedi with all the in-
rizarrO. terefi~ing events which had happenedl near Cuzco.

Accounts of Almagro's return, of the loss of the
capital, of thle de-,th of onle brother, of thle impri-
fonment of the ot~her two, and of the defeat of
Alvrarado, were brcught to him at once. Such a
tide of misfortunes almost overwhelmed a spirit
which had continued firm and erec2 under the
rudest sh~ocks of adversity. But the necefirty of
attending to his own safe~ty, as well as the desire
of revenge, prefervedl him from sinking under it.

His arfuct He took m~eas~ures for both with his wonted saga-
condud.t city. As he had the command of the sea-coast,

and expeded considerable supplies both of men
and military flores, it was no les~s his interest to

SHerrera, dec. 6. I~b. ii. c. ro, II.

gamn

gain time, and to avoid aaion, than it was that of a q~o o
Almagro to precipitate operations, and bring the r
contest to a s~peedy ifirue. He had recourse to arts 0'57
which he had formerly praaifed with success, and
Almagro was again weak enough to fuffer himself
to be amused with a profped of terminating their
differences by some amicable accommodation. By
varying his overtures, and ihifting his ground as
often as it faited his purpol~e, sometimes seeming
to yield every thing which his rival could. desire,
and then retraaing all that he had granted, Pizarro
dexterously protrac~ed the negociation to such a
length, that though every day was precious to
Almagro, several months elapsed without coming
to any final agreement. While the attention of
Almagro, and of the officers with whom he con-
f~ulted, was occupied in deteaing and eluding the
fraudulent intentions of the governor, Gonzalo
Pizarro and Alvarado found means to corrupt the
soldiers to whose cuffody they were committed,
and not only made their escape themselves, but
persuaded sixty of the men who formerly guarded
them to accompany their flight k.~ Fortune having
thus delivered one of his brothers, the governor
scrupled not at one aB of perfidy more to procure
the release of the other. He proposed, that every
point in controversy between Almagro and himself
thould be s~ubmitted to the decision of their fove-
reign; that until his award was known, each
ihould retain undiflurbed poffeifion of whatever

* Zarate, lib. iii. c. 8. Herrera, dec. 6. lib. ii. c. 14.

F 4 part:

B O O K part of the country he now occupied; that Ferdi·

c-- nand Pizarro thould be s~et at liberty, and return
sn-7 inflantly to Spain, together with the offcers, whorn

Almagro purpos~ed to fend thither to represent the
jullice of his claims. Obvious as the design of
Pizarro was in those propolitions, and familiar as
his artifices might now have been to his opponent,
Almagro, with a credulity approaching to infatua·
tion, relied on his sincerity, and concluded an
agreement on these terms '.

His prepa- THLE moment that Ferdinand Pizarro recovered
rations for
war. his lib~erty, the governor, no longer fettered in his

operations by anxiety about his brother's life,
threw off every disguise which his concern for it
had obliged him to affime. The treaty was for·
gotten;i pacific and conciliating meafulres were no
,more mentioned; it was in the field, he openly
declared, and not in the cabinet; by arms, and
not by negociation; that it muff now be deter-
mined who should be master of Peru. The rapi-
dity of his preparations suited s~uch a decisive ref~o-
lution. Seven hundred men were s~oon ready to
march towards Cuzco. The command of

ras·s these was given to his two brothers, in wvhom

he could perfealy confide for the execution
of his most violent schemes, as they were urged
on, not only by the enmity flowing from the
rivalfhip between their family and Almagro, but

1 Herrera, dec. 6. lib. iii. c. 9. Zarate, lIb. iii. c. 9.

Gomara Hist. 9. I40. Vega, p, Ir? lib. ii. c. 9.

;tnjmate4l

animated with the desire ofrengeance, excited by B O O K
r~ecolletion of their own recent disgrace and sus- s.........
ferings. After an unfuccefsful attempt to cros~s asjs.
the mountains in the direa road between Lima
and Cuzco, they marched towards the s~outh along
the coast as far as Nafca, and then turning to the
left, penetrated through the defiles in that branch
of the Andes which lay between them and the
capital. Almagro, inficad of hearkening to some
of his officers, who advised him to attempt the de-
fence of those difficult passes, waited the approach
of the enemy in the plain of Cuzco. Two reasons
seem to have induced him to take this resolution.
His followers amounted hardly .to five hundred,
and he was afraid of weakening such a feeble
~body by s~ending any detachment towards the
mountains. His cavalry far exceeded that of the
adverse party, both In number and discipline, and
it was only in an open country that he could avail
himself of that advantage.

THE Pizarros advanced without any obitrualon, nis army

marches to

but what arose from the nature of the desert and cuzco.
horrid regions through which they marched. As
~soon as they reached the plain, both faaions were
equally impatient to bring this long;-protraaed con4
test to an ifrue. Though countrymen and friends,
the fubjeats of the fame sovereig~n, and each with
the royal flandard dis~played; and though they be-
held the mountains that surrounded the plain in
which they were drawn up, covered uvith a vast

multitude

B O O K multitude of Indians, assembled to enjoy the spec.
Lh- tacle of their mutual carnage, and prepared to at-

e~. tack whatever party remained master of the field;

so fell and implacable was the rancour which had
taken poffeifion of every breast, that not one pa·
cific counsel, not a sing~le overture towards accom-
modation proceeded from either fide. Unfortu·
nately for Almnag-ro, he was to worn out with the
fatigues of service, to which his advanced age was
unequal, that, at this crisis of his fate, he could
not exert his w~onted accivity; and he was obliged
to commit the leading of his troops to Orgognez,
wlho, though an officer of great mlerit, did not
possess the fame ascendant either over the spirit or
affetions of the soldiers, as the chief whom they
had long been accuffomed to follow and revere.

April 6. THE conflic? was fierce, and maintained by each
Almagro ddreated, party with equal courage. On1 the sidle of Alma-

gro, were more veteran soldiers, and a larger pro.
portion of cavalry ; but there were counlterbalanced
by Pizarro's fuperio-=ity inl numbers, and by two
companies of well-dikciphlned mufkreteers, which,
on receiving an account of the ;I,,irreaion of the
Indians, the emperor had sen~t from Spain m. AsP
the use of fire-arms was not freqjuent among the
adventurers in America n, h-afiily equipped for
service, at their own ex-pence, this finaL. band of
foldliers, regularly trained and armecd, wass a no·

m Herrera, dec. 6. lib. iff. c. s.
SZa~rate, Zlp i:i. c. 8.

vehry

velty in Peru, and decided the fate of the day. B O O: K
Wherever it advanced, the weight of a heavy and
well-fuftained fire bore down hors~e and foot before B58
it; and Org~ognez, while he endeavoured to rally
and anim ate his troops, having received a dangerous
wound, the rout became general. The barbarity
of the conquerors stained the glory which they ac-
quired by this complete via'ory. The violence of
civil rage hurried on some to slaughter their coun-
trymen with indiferiminate cruelty; the meannes~s
of private revenge infligated others to single out
individuals as Ithe objeas of their vengeance. Or-
gognez and s~everal offcers of diftinaion were maf-
sacred in cold blood; above a hundred and forty
s~oldiers fell in the field; a large proportion, where
the number of combatants were few, and the heat
of the contest soon over. Almagro, though so
feeble that he could not bear the motion of a
horse, had insisted on being carried in a litter to an
eminence which overlooked the field of battle.
From thence, in the utmost agitation of mind, he
viewed the various movements of both parties, and
at last beheld the total defeat of his own troops,
with all the passionate indignation of a veteran
leader long accuffomed to viaory. He endea- and taken.
voured to save himself by flight, but was taken
pris~oner, and guarded with the firideRt vigilance "

* Zarate, lib. i~ii. c. rr, i2. Vega, p. 11. lib. 11. c. 36-

38. Herrera, dec. 6. lib. iii. c. I0-12z. lib. iv. c. I-6.

THIE

a 0 0 r e THE Indians, inflead of executing the resolution

Swhich they had formed, retired quietly after the

'sss. battle was over; and in the hiffory of the Newr

World, there is not a rnore itriking inflance of the
wonderful ascendant which the Spaniards had ac.
quired over its inhabitants, than that after feeing
one of the contending parties ruined and dispersed,
and the other weakened and fatigued, they had
not courage to fall upon their enemies, when for·
tune presented an opportunity of attacking them
with such advantage p,

r~~expe CUZCo was pillaged by the viaorious troops, wrho

found there a considerable booty, confiing partly
of the gleanings of the Indian treasures, and partly
of the wealth amassed by their antagonists from
the spoils of Peru and Chili. But so far did this,
and whatever the bounty of their leader could add
to it, fall below the high ideas of the recompence
which they conceived to be due to their merit, that
Ferdinand Pizarro, unable to gratify such extra·
vagant expeaations, had recours~e to the fame ex·
pedient which his brother had employed on a fimi·
lar occafi0s, and endeavoured to find occupation
for this turbulent assuming spirit, in order to pre·
vent it from breaking out into open mutiny. With
this view, he encouraged his most ac~ive officers to
attempt the d~icovery and reduaion of various
provinces which had not hitherto s~ubmitted to the

P Zarate, lib. iii. c. 11. Vega, p. 1I. lib. ii. c. 38*

Spaniards.

Spaniards. To every flandard ere~ed by the n ono r;
leaders who undertook any of thos~e new expedi- -
tions, volunteers resorted with the ardour and hope as38.
peculiar to the age. Several of Almagoro's soldiers
joined them, and thus Pizarro had the fatisfaaion
of being delivered both from the importunity of
his discontented friends, and the dread of his an-d
cient enemies s.

ALMAGRO himself remained for several months Almagro

in custody, under all the anguish offuipence. For tlied'
although his doom was determined by the Pizarros
from the moment that he fell into their hands,
prudence confirained them to defer gratifying their
vengeance, until the s~oldiers who had s~erved under
him, as well as several of their own followers in
whom they could not perfealy confide, had left
Cuzco. As soon as they set out upon their differ-
ent expeditions, Almagro was impeached of trea-
son, forimally tried, and condemned to die. The condemned,
s~entence affonifhed him, and though he had often
braved death with undaunted s~pirit in the field, its
approach under this ignominious form appalled
him so much, that he had recourse to abjeQ s~up-
plications, unworthy of his former fame. He be-
fought the Pizarros to remember the ancient friend-
ship between their brother and him, and how much
he had contributed to the prosperity of their fa,-
mily; he reminded them of the humanity with

s Zarate, lib. iii. c. 12. Gamara Hist. c. 14'· Herrera,

dec. 6. lib. iv. c. 7.

which,

B O O K Which, in opposition to the repeated remonfirances

VI.
~ of his own most attached friends, he had spared
'S 8 their lives when he had them in his power; he

conjulredl them to pity his age and infirmities, and
to lifufr him to pals t':e wretched remainder ofhil
days in bewailinlg his crimes, and in making hip
peace with Heaven. The intreaties, says a Spa·
nifh hifterian, of a man so much beloved, touched
mnany an unfeeling heart, and drew tears from
many a fiern eye. But the brothers remained in·
flexible. As soon as Almagro knew his fate tobe
inevitable, he met it with the dignity and fortitude

adS o~t tO of aveteran. He was firangled in prison, and as

terwards publicly beheaded. He f~uffered in the
feventy-fifth year of his age, and left one son by
an Indian womlan of Pa~nama, whom, though at
that time a prisoner in Lima, he named as foucceffeor
to his government, pursuant to a power which the
emperor had granted him I.

v2Ea.As, during the civil diffentions in Peru, all in·

tcoun ooffthe tercourfe with Spain was s~uspended, the detail of
sfn og~ the extraordinary tranfa~tions there did not soon
Z(,or reach the court. Unfortunately for the viaorious

f~aQlon, the first intelligence was brought thither
by some of Almagro's offcers, who left the coun-
try upon the ruin of their cause; and they related
what had happened, with every circumffance un·

r Zarate, lib. iii. c. I2. Gomara Hist. c. IqI. Vega, p. rI.

lib. ii. c. 39. Herrera, dec. 6. lib. iv. swg. lib. v. c. I.

favourable

f'avourable to Pizarro and his brothers. Their B O O K
ambition, their breach of the most solemn engage- cM-
ments, their violence and cruelty, were painted ' sa.
with all the malignity and exaggeration of party
hatred. F~erdinand PIlzarro, who arrived soon as-
ter, and appeared in court with extraordinary fplen-
dor, endeavoured to effadce the imprellion which
their accusations had madle, and to juffify his bro-
ther and hims~elf by representing Almag~ro as the
agfgreffor. The emperor and his miniffers, though
they could not pronounce which of the contending
~faaions was most criminlal, clearly discerned the
fatal tendency of their diffentions. It wlas obvious,
that while the leaders, entruffed w~ith the conduae
of two in ant colonies, employed the arms which
thould have been turned againfit the commonr ene-
my, in destroying one another, all attention to the
public good must cease, and th-ere was reason to
dread that the Indians might improve the advan-
tage which the disunion of the Spanliards presented
to them, and extirpate both the viaors and van-
quilhed. But the evil was more apparent than the
remedy. W~here the information which had been
received was so defedive and suspicious, and the
scene of aaion so remote, it was almoff impoflible
to chalk o'ut the line of condua that ought to be
followed; and before any plan that should be ap-
proved of in Spain could be carried into execution,
the situation of the parties, and the circumffances
of affairs, might alter so entirely as to render its
effeis extremely pernicious.

NOTruxo

B o o e NOTHING therefore remained but to fend a per·

fo~AJ in to Peru, vested with extensive and discretionary

vac sE power, who, after view~ing deliberately the pollure
Castro Tent
thither with Of affairs with his own eyes, and enqluiring upon

4,P$. the spot into the condua of the different leaders,

should be authori~sed to eflablifh the government·
in that form which he deemed most conducive to
the interest of the parent slate, and the welfare of
the colony. The man feleated for this important
charge was Chriftoval Vaca de Caffro, a judge in
the court of royal audience at Valladolid; and his
abilities, integrity, and firmness, juffified the choice.
His infiruations, though ample, were not such ar
to fetter him in his operations. According to the
different afped2 of affairs, he had power to take
upon him different charaaers. If he found the
governor flill alive, he was to afi~ume only the title
of judge, to maintain the appearance of a~ing in
concert with him, and to guard against giving any
just cause of o~ffence to a man who had merited to
highly of his country. But if Pizarro were deatl,
he was entruffed with a commillion that he might
then produce, by which he was appointed his sac·
ceffor in the government of Peru. This attention
to Pizarro, however, seems to have flowed rather
from dread of his power, than frc;m any approbation
of his measures; for at the very time that the court
seemed so s~olicitous not to irritate him, his brother
Ferdinand was arrefled at Madrid, and confined to
a prison, where he remained above twenty years'.

* Gomara Hist. c. 142. Vegra, p. I z. lib. ii. c. 40. Her-

I7 c TYHILE

WCHILE Vaca de Caitro was preparing for his n 0~ 0 r

voyage, events of great moment happened in Peru. L...--
The governor, confideringr himself, upon the death Piz di
of Almagro, as the unrivalled poffeffor of that vaRlamn hit
empire, proceeded to parcel out its territories Ooes
among the conquerors; and had this division been
made with any degree of impartiality, the extent
of country which he had to beffow, was f~ufficient to
have gratified his friends, and to have gained his
enemies. But Pizarro conduaed this tranfaaion,
not with the equity and candour of a judge atten-
tive to discover and to reward merit, but with the
illiberal spirit of a party leader. Large diffrias,
in parts of the country moR91 cultivated and popu-
lous, were set apart as his own property, or grant-
ed to his brothers, hiis adherknts and favourites.
To others, lots less valuable and inviting were as-
sig~ned. The followers ofAlmagro, amnongft whom
were many of the original adventurers to whose va-
lour and pers~everance Pizarro was indebted for his
success, were totally excluded from any portion in
those lands, towards the acquisition of which they
had contributed so largely. As the vanity of every
individual s~et an immoderate value upon his own
services, and the idea of each' concerning the re-
compende due to them ros~e gradually to a more
exorbitant height in proportion as their conquelts
extended, all who were disappointed in their ex-
peaations exclaimed loudly againit the rapacious-
ness and partiality of the governor. The partisans

VoL. III. O; of

B O O K Of AlmnagrO murmured in secret, and meditat~ed

VI. C-r revenge'.

1540.

pro,,rs o RAPID as the progress of the Spaniards in Southi

emspaniah America had been since Pizarro landed in Peru,

their avidity of dominion was not yet fagtisfied.
The offcers to whom Ferdinand Pizarro gave the
command of different detachments, penetrated into
several new provinces, and though some of thent
were exposed to great hardihips in the cold and
barren regions of the Andes, and others f~uffered
d~iffrefs not inferior amidst the woods and marihes
of the plains, they made discoveries and conquests
which not only extended their knowledge of the
country, but added conlfderably to the territories
of Spain in the New World. Pedro de Valdivia
reaff~umed` Almagro's [cheme of invading Chili,
and notwithflanding the fortitude of the natives in
defending their poff~efirons, made su~ch progres~s in
the conquest of the country, that he founded the
city of St. Jago, and gave a beginning to the efla-
blifhment of the Spanish dominion in that pro·

Remarkable vinCe . But of all the enterprizes undertaken
expedition
of Conzalo about this period, that of Gonzalo Pizarro was

tiar. the most remarkable. The governor, who feeems

to have res~olved that no person in Peru thould pof-
fess any flation of diftinguidhed eminence or autho-

a Vega, p. Iz. Tib. ii. c. z. Herrera, dec. 6. lib. villi.

c. 5-

a Zaratp, lib, iii. c. I3. Ovalle, lib. 11. c.1, &oc

rity but those of his own family, had deprived Be. a 0~ 0 s
nalcazar, the conqueror of Quito, of his com- L~
mand in that kingdom, and appointed his brother s54o,
Gonzalo to take the government of it. He in.~
firuded him to attempt the dis~covery and conquest
of the country to the east of the Andes, which,
according to the information of the Indians,
abounded with cinnamon and other valuable [pices;
Gonzalo, not inferior to any of his brothers in
courage, and no less ambitious of acquiring dif.
tinalon, eagerly engaged in this difficult_ fervrice.
He set out from Quito at the head of three hunr
dred and forty soldiers, near one half of whouti
were horsemen, with four thousand Indians to
carry their proviflons. In forcing their way
-through the defiles, or over the ridges of the
Andes, excess of cold and fatigue, to neither of
Ahich they were accuffomed, provied fatal to the
greater palrt of their wretched attendants. The unrdrApS
Spaniards, though more robuff, and inur'ed to a they endure.
variety of climates, ifufered considerably, and loft:
some men; but when they des~cended into the lovc
country their distress increased. During two
months it rained inceffantlyr, without any interifal
of fair weather long enough to dry their clothes x1
The intmenfe plains upon which they ivere nowi
entering, either altogether without inhabitants, oi
occupied by the rudest and least induffrious tribes in

a Zarate, lib. iv. .( 2.

O s the

B O O K the New World, yielded little fuubliftence. They

C~4~could not advance a flep but as they cut a road

2340. throug~h woods, or made it through marshes. Such

incessant toil, and continual fearcity of food, seem
more than fufficient to have exhauffed and dispirited
any troops. But the fortitude and perseverance of
Spaniards in the sixteenth century were infuper-
able. Allured by frequent but false accounts of
rich countries before them, they persisted in firug·
gling on, until they reached the banks of the Coca
or Napo, one of the large rivers whos~e waters
pour into the Maragnon, and contribute to its
grandeur. There, with infinite labour, they built
a bark, which they expected would prove of great
utility, in conveying them over rivers, in procur.
ing proviflons, and in exploring the country.
This was manned with fifty s~oldiers, under the
command of Francis Orellana, the officer next in
rank~ to Pizarro. The fiream carried them dbwvn
with such rapidity, that they were soon far a-head
of their countrymen, who followed slowly and with
difficulty by land.

Deserted by AT this distance from his commander, Orellana,
Orellana.

a young man of an aspiring mind, began to fancy
hims~elf independent, and transported with the pre-
dominant pallion of the age, he formed the schem~e
of distinguishing himself as a discoverer, by fol.
10wing the course of the Maragnon1, until it joined
the ocean, and by surveying the vast regions

through

through which it flows. This s~cheme ofOrel- a 0·~ 0
lana's was as bold as it was treacherous. For, if · A-
he be chargeable with the guilt of having violated = sqo.
his duty to his commlander, and with having aban-
doned his fellow-f~oldiers in a pathless desert, where
they had hardly any hopes of success, or even of
safety, but what were founded on the service which
they expeaed from the bark ; his crime is, in some
measure, balanced by the glory of having ventured
.upon a navigation of near two thous~and leagues,
through unknown nations, in a vessel hastily con-
firuaed, with green timber, and by very unfkcilful
hands, without proviflons, without a compass, or
a pilot. But his courage and alacrity supplied
every defea. Committing himnfelf fearlessly to the sails down
guidance of the fiream, the Napo bore him along; fdn.hlarap-
to the south, until he reached the great channel of
the Mlarag~non. Turning with it towards the coaff,
he held on his course in that direaion. Hle made
frequent descents on both sides of the river, some-
times ~seizing by force of arms the provisions of the
fierce s~avages seated on its banks; and s~ometimes
procuring a s~upply of food by a friendly intercourse
with more gentle t~ribesl After a long s~eries of
dangers, which he encountered with amazing for-
titude, and of diffreffes which he supported with
no less magnanimity, he reached the ocean Y, where
new perils awiaited him. There he likewise f~ur-
mounted, and, got safe to the Spanish s~ettlement in

r See NTOTE XIII.

G 3 the

a or~ o t~he island Cub~agua; from thence he failed to Spain,

M The vanity natural to travellers who visit regions
254o. unknown to the reft of mankind, and the art of an

adventurer, folicitious to magnify his own merit,
cpacurred in prompting him to mingle an extraor.
dinary proportion of the marvellous in the narra·
tive of his voyage, He pretended to have disco,
vered nations so rich, that the roofs of their
temples were covered with plates of gold ; and de:
fcribed a republic of women to warlike and power-
ful, as to have extended their dominion over a con-
fiderable traft of the fer-tile plains which he had
visited. Extravagant as those tales were, they gave
rife to an opinion, that a region abounding with
gold, difting~uilhed by the name of EIDorado, and
a community of Amazons, were tp be found in
this part of the New World; and fCuch is the pro.
penfity of manktind to believe what is wonderful
that it has been slowly and with difficulty that rea-
son and obs~ervation have exploded th~ose fables,
The voyage, however, even w~hen firipped of every
romantic embellishment, deserves to be recorded,
not only as one of the most memorable occurrences
inl that adyenturous age, but as the firil event
which led to any certain knowledge of the ex-ten-
five countries that firetch eaftlward frpm the pndes
to the ocean Y.

Y Zarate, lIb. iv. c. 4. Opmara Hfil. c. 86. Vega, p. rl.

lib. iiL. c. 4. Herrera, d~c. 6. lib. ix. c.· z-5. Rodrigucz El
1\14ragnon) y Amazonas, lib. i. c* 3·

No words can deferibe the confiernation of Pi. B oo o

zarro, when he did not find the bark at the con- M-z
fluence of the Napo and Maragnon, where he had vD~rSoo
ordered Orellana to wait for him. He would not iZarrO.
alliow himself to fuilpea that a man, whom he had
intruffed with such an important command, could
be to base and so unfeeling, as to desert him at
fach a junaure. But impating his absence front
the place of rendezvous to some unknown accident,
he advanced above fifty leagues along the banks
of the Maragnon, expeaing every moment to fee
the bark~ appear w~ith a supply of provisions. At '5se*
length he came up wilth an officer whom Orellana
had left to perfh in the desert, because he had the
courage t~o remonfirate against his perfidy. From
him he learned the extent of Orellana's crime, and
his followers perceived at once their own derperate
situation, when deprived of their only resource.
The s~pirit of the flouteft hearted veteran funk with-
in him, and all demanded to be~ led back inflantly.
Fizarro, though he aiffimed an appearance of tran-
qluillity, did not oppose their inclination. But he
was now twelve hundred miles from Quito ; and in
that long march the Spaniards .encountered hard-
thips greater than those which they had endured in
their prog~ress outward, without the alluring hopes
which then s~oothed and animated them under their
fufferings. Hunger compelled them to feed on
roots and berries, to eat all their dogs and hors~es,
to devour the most loathsome reptiles, and even to

G 4e gna"w

B 0 0 K gn2aw the leather of their faddlles and fword-belts.

ML~-~ Four thousand Inidian~s, and two hundred and ten
s54'. Spaniards, perished inl this w·ild difafthous expedi-

tion, which continued near two years ; and as fifty
men were aboard the bark with Orellana, only
fourscore got back~ to quito. There were nak~ed
likie savages, and so emlaciated with famine, or
worn out with fatigue, that they had more the ap:
pea~rance of fpe~tres than of men 7-

Number of PaUT, inflead of returning td' enjoy the repose
snaleconl-.
ttents in which his condition required, Pizarro, on entering

veru.Oluito, received accounts of a fatal event that

threatened calamities more dreadful to himt than
thos~e through which he had .passed. From the
time that his brother made that partial dix ifon of
his conquests which has been mentioned, the ad·
herents of Almagro, considering themselves as pro,
f~cribed by the party in power, no longer enter:
tained any hope of bettering their condition.
Great numbers in desp~air rtforted to Lima, where
the house of young A~lmagnro was always open to
them, arid the slender portion of his father's for-
tune, which the governor allowed him to enjoy,
was s~pent in affordin~g them fublifence. The
warm attachment with which every person who
had served under the elder Almagro devoted
himf'elf to his interests, was qjuickly transferred to

z Zarate, lib. iv. c. 2--5. Vegna, p. I I. lib. ill c. 3, 4, 5*·

E4. Hierrera, dec. 6. lib. vili. c. 7,8. lib. ix. c. 2--y. dec.
T. lib. iii. c. r4. Pizar. Varor~es, Illufrr. 349> &c.

his so, who vias now growvn up to the age of a ovrg o
mlanhood, and paireffed all the qualities which C-r
captivate the affeaions of soldiers. Of a graceful con12q~
appearanIce, dexterous at all martial exercises, bold, Ymo,~ >1
open, g~enerous, he seemed to be formed for com- their' Irader,
mand; and as his father, conscious of his own
inferiority, fr~om the total want of education, had
been ex:tremely attentive to have him infiruaed in
every science becoming a gentleman; the accom-
plifhments which he had acquired heightened the
refpeft of his followers, as theyr gave him dilftinc?ion
and eminence among illiterate adventurers. In
this young man the Allmagrians found a point of
union which they wanted, and looking up to him
as their head, were ready to undertake any thing
for his advancement. Nor w~as air~eion for Al.
magro their only incitement; they were urged on
by their own diitreffes. Mvany of them, deflitute
of common necessaries , and weary of loitering
away life, a burden to their chief, or to such of
their associates as had saved some remnant of their
fortune from pillage and confis~cation, 10nged im-
patiently for an occallon to exert their aaivity and
courage, and began to deliberate how they might
be avenged on the author of a~ll their misery.
Their freqluent cabals did not pass unobserved; conngre
and the governor was warned to be on his guard ii; ..
ag-ainst men who meditated some dlerperate deed,. zano,
and had resolution to execute it. But either fromt

a See NOTE XIV,

B Ov.0 t the native intrepidity of his mind, or from con.

CL tempt of persons whose poverty seemed to render
'4 their machinations of little consequence, he dif.

regarded the admonitions of his friends. "' Be in
no pain," said he carelessly, " about my life; it
is perfeQIly safe, as long as every man in Peru
knows that I canl in a moment cut off any head
which dares to harbour a thought againfl it." This
security gave the Almagrians full leis~ure to digeit
and ripen every part of their scheme ; and Juan de
Herrada, an officer of great abilities, who had the
charge of Almagro's education, took the direc.
tion of their consultations, with a~llthe zeal which
this conneaion inspired, and with a~llthe authority
which the ascendant that he was known to have
over the mind of his pupil gave him.

and killON Sunday, the twenty-fixth of June, at rnid·

'"*' day, the s~eas~on of tranquillity and repose in all

sultry climnates, Herrada, at the head of eighteen
of the most determined conspirators, sallied out of
Almagro's house in complete armour ; and draw-
ing their fwvords, as they advanced hastily towards
the governor's palace, cried out, "' Long live the
king, but let the tyrant die !" Thseir associates,
warned of their motions by a signal, were mn arms
at different flations ready to s~upport them. 'flhough
Pizarro was us~ually s~urrounded by fach a nume·
rous train of attendants as suited the magrnificenee
of the most opulent fubjea of the age in which he
lived, yet as he was jus: rif'en fTrom table, and mofr

of his domeltics had retired to their own apart. B 0·~ 0
ments, the conspirators passed through the two cl-Ai
outer courts of the palace unobserved. They were '"''
at the bottom of the flaircafe, before a page in
wlaiting could give the alarm to his master, who
was conversing with a few friends in a large hall.
The governor, whose fleady mind no form of dan-
ger could appal, flarting up, called for arms, and
commanded Francilco de Chaves to make fall the
door. But that officer, who did not retain t~o much
presence of raind as ~to obey this prudent order,
running to the top of the stair-case, wildly asked
the conspirators what they meant, and whither
they were going ?Inficad of answering, they flab-
bed him to the heart, and burit into the hall.
Some of the persons who were there threw them-
selves from the windows; others attempted to fly;
and a few drawing their swords, followed their
leader into an inner apartment. The conspirators,
animated with having the obje~t of their vengeance
now in view, rushed forward after them. Pizarro,
with no other arms than his sword and buckler,
defended the entry, and supported by his half-
brother Alcantar·-, and his little knot of friends,
hie maintained the unequal contest with intrepidity
worthy of his past exploits, and with the vigour of
a youthful combatant. " Courage," cried he,
'( companions, we are yet enow to make those
traitors repent of theiraudacity." But the armour
of the conspirators proteaed them, while every
thruff they mad~e took effeQ, Alcantara fell dead

SooK at his brother's feet; his other defenders wpere

m~nortally wounded. The giovernor, so weary that

'iso- he could hardly wield his [word, and no longer

able to parry the many weapons furiously aimedat
him, received a deadly thruff full in his throat,
funk to the ground, and expired.

elmaro As soon as he was slain, the affaffins ran out
~tlb:E Ile a b into the fkreets, and waving their bloody swords,

proclaimed the death of the tyrant. Above twvo
hundred of their associates having joined them,
they condu-c~ed youngr Almagro in solemn pro·
cetion through lthe city, and assembling the magi.
firates and principal citizens, compelled them to
acknowledge himn as lawfull ficceffor to his father,
in his government. The palace of Fizarro, togie·
ther with the houses of several of his adherents,
were pillaged by the soldiers, who had the fatil-
fac~ion at once of being avenged on their enemies,
and of enriching themfelves.by the sp~oils of thof
through whol~e hands all the wealth of Peru had
passed "'.

New ap- THIE boldlnefs and success of the conspiracy, as
peaarances
of dllfcord. well as the name and popular qualities of Alma.·

gro, drew many foldliers to his ftandlard. Every
adventurer of desperate fortune, all whio w'ere
diflaitisfied with Pizarro, and from the rapacioul-

h ZaLr-te, lib. iv. c. 6-8R. Gomara Hill. c. 1441 ',lj

Vega;, p.· '. lib. iii. c. F--7. Flerre'ra, <.ec. 6. lib. x. c.4·-1·
Pizarro Var. 111uRl. p. ri'3*

ners of his government in the latter years of his a o op K
life, the number of malcontents was considerable,
declared without hesitation in favour of Almnagro, '54'
and he was soon at the head of eigrht h~undred of
the most gallant veterans in Peru. As his yrouth
and inexperience disqualified him from tak~ingi the
command of them himself, he appointed H-errada
to aQ as general. But though1 Almagro speedily
colleaed s~uch a refpeaable force, the acquiescence
in his government was far fromn being general.
Pizarro had left many friends to wrhom his mremory
was dear; the barbarrous affailination of a man to
whom his country w~as so highlly indebted, filled
every impartial person with horror. The ignomi-
nious birth of Almagro, a~s well as the doubtful
title on which he founded his pretenflons, led
others to confider him as an usurper. The officers
who commanded in some provinces refused to re-
cognize his authority·, until it wa·s confirmed by
the emperor. . In others, particularly at Cuzco,
the royal flandard was ereted, and prep~r~ations
were begun in order to revenge the murder of their
ancient leader.

THOSE feeds of discord, which could not havre ^ vajdeot

lain long dormant, acquired great vigour and aai- catr~o,
vity, when the arrival of Vaca de Cariro was
known. After a long and disastrous voyage, he
was driven by fkref~s of weather into a sm~all har-
bour in the province' of Popayan ; and proceedin~g
from thence by land, after a jour ney n~o less tedious

than

a OV1 K than diffcult, he reached Quito. In his way be

Sreceived accounts of Pizarro's death, and of the

wh mes events which followed upon it. He immediately
the tidle of
governor. produced the royal commillion appointing hun

governor of Peru, with the fame privileges and
authority; and his jurif~diaion was acknowledged
without hesitation by Benalcazar, Adelantado or
lieutenant-general for the emperor in Popayali,
and by Pedro de Puelles, who, in the absence of
Gonzalo Pizarro, had the command of the troopi
left in Q~uito. Vaca de Caffro not: only affluned
the supreme authority, but thewed that he pof-
sessed the talents which the exercise of it at that
junaure required. By his influence and address he
soon assembled such a body of troops, as not only
set him above all fear of being exposed to any in·
futlt from the adverse party, but enabled him to
advance from Quito with the dignity that became
his charaaer. By dispatching: persons of confi
dence to the different settlements in Peru, witha
formal notification of his arrival and of his com·
mnil~lion, he communicated to his countrymen the
royal pleasure with refpeQ to the government of
the country. By private emissaries, he excited
~such oflicers as had discovered their disapprobation
of Almagro's proceedings, to mnanifelt their duty
to their s~overeign by s~upporting the person honour·
ed with his commillion. Those meas~ures were pro·
duaive of great effeas. Encouraged by the apl
proach of the new governor, or prepared by his
machinations, the loyal were confirmed in their

princi les,

principles, and avowed them with greater bold- a 0 0 x
ness; the timid ventured to declare their senti- ~"
ments; the neutral and -wavering, finding it ne- ''st
ceffary to chuf~e a fide, began to lean to that which
now appeared to be the fafeft, as well as the moit
juit ".

ALMAGRO observed the rapid progress of thiS Condue of

[pirit of difaffeaion to his cause, and in order to Amgo
give an effeaual check to it before the arrival of
Vaca de Caffro, hefet out at the head of his troops = s42
for Cuzco, where the most considerable body of
opponents had ereaed the royal standard, under
the command of Pedro Alvarez Holguin. During,
his march thither, Herrada, the fkiilful guide of
his youth and of his coundels, died; and from that
time his measures were conspicuous for their vio-
lence, but concerted with little sagacity, and exe-
cuted with no addres~s. H-olguin, who, with forces
far inferior to those of the opposite party, was de-
fcending towards the coast at the very time that
Almagro was on his way to Cuzco, deceived his
unexperienced adversary by a very simple firata-
gem, avoided an engagement, and effeaed a junc-
tion with Alvarado, an officer of note, who had
been the firit to declare against Almagro as an
usurper.

Soon after, Vaca de Caffro entered their camp Progrees or

With the troops which he brought from Quito, CRrzde

cBenzon, lib. iii. c. 9. Zarate, lib. iv. c. Ir. Gomalrlr·

e. 16, I47. Herrera, dec. 6, lib. x. c. I, 2, 3- 7, &cc.

B 0 0 x andc ereting the royal flandard bbfore his own

*-- tent, he declared, that as governor, he wouk? dif

's4" charge in person all the fullaionb of generaP of

their combined forces. Though formed by the
tenottr of his past life to the habits of a fedentarf
and pacific profeflion, he at once afifumed the a~i-
vity and discovered the decision of an officer long
accuffomed to command. Knowing his firength to
be nowv far s~uperior to that of the enemy, he Wtas
imnpatient to terminate the contest by a battle.
Nor did the followers of Almagro, wiho had no
hopes of obtaining a pardon for a crime so atro·
cious as the murder of the governor, decline that

Sept. 16. liode of deciflon. They met at Chupaz, about two

hundred miles from Cuzco, and fought with alll
the fierce animosity inspired by the violence of
civil rage, the rancour of private enmityr, the
eagernes~s of revenge, and the last efforts of despair.

Defeats Al- Viaory, after remaining longs doubtful, declared
mapro. at last for Vaca de Caffro. The' superior number

of his troops, his ownm inltrepidity, and the martial
f~alents of Francisco de Carvajal, a veteran office
formed under the great captain in the wars of
Italy, and who on that day laid the foundation of
his future fame in Peru, triumphed over the
bravery of his opponents, though led on by young
Almagro with a gallant spirit, worthy of a: better
cause, and deserving another fate. The carnage
was great in proportion to the number of the com·.
batants. Many of the vanquilh~ed, especially such
as vfre confdocus th'at they might be charged wiith

21' being

being accefforv to the affafination of Pizarro, rush. B 0 0 a
ing on the swords of the enemy, chose to fall likre
foldliers, rather than wait an ignominious doom. ~542.
Of fourteen hundred men, the total amount of com·
batants on both sides, five hundred lay dead on
the field, and the number of the wounded was still
greater ^.

IF the military talents displayed by Vaca de seveity of

Caffro, both in the council and in the field, fur- a swea.rcd
prifed the adventurers in P~eru, they were skill more
altonifhed at his condua after the viatory. As he
was by nature a rigid dispenser of juffice, and per-
fuaded that it required examples of extraordinary
severity to reffrain the licentious spirit of soldiers
so far removed from the feat of government, he
proceeded direaly to try his prisoners as rebels.
Forty· were condemned to f~uffer the death of trai-
tors, others were banIsh~ed from Peru. Their
leader, who made his efeape from the battle, be-
ing betrayed by some of his officers, was publicly
beheaded in Cuzco; and in him the name of
Almagro, and the spirit of the party, was ex-
tindt "

DuRImG those violent convulflons in Peru, the concunt..

emperor and his m~nuffers were intently employed emper",orh concerming

his domi-

d Zarate, lib. iv. c. I2--29. Gamara, c. 148. Vega, nions in

p. 11. lib. iit c. I--18. H-errera, dec.7. lib. i. c. I,2, J. America.
lib. iii. c. r--11.

* Zaiate, lib. iv. c. 21. Gomara, c. Iso. H-errera, dec. 7.

lib. iii. c. 12. lIb. vi. c. I.

VOL. III. H- is

B O O K inpreparing regulations, by which they hoped not

CC~4~ only to re-eft·ablifhh tranquillity there, but to intro·
'52 duce a more perfea lyfltem of internal policy into

all their settlements in the New WC~orld. It is ma·
nifeft from all the events recorded in the hiffory of
America, that rapid and extensive as the Spanilh
conquelts there had been, they were not carried
on by any regrular .exertion of the national force,
but by the occasional efforts of private adventurers.
After fitting out a few of the firlt armaments for
dis~covering new regions, the court of Spain, during
the busy reigns of Ferdinand and of Charles V.,
the former the moss intriguing prince of the age,
and the latter the most ambitious, was encumbered
with s·uch a multiplicity of f'chemes, and involved
in war with so many nations of Europe, that it had
not leisure to attend to difiant and less interesting
objeats. The care of prosecuting discovery, or of
attempting conquest, was abandoned to individuals;
and with such ardour did men push forward in
this new career, on which novelty, the spirit of
adventure, avarice, ambition, and the hope of
mleriting heaven, prompted them wiith combined
influence to enter, that in less than half a century
almoff the whole of that ettenfive empire which
Spain nowv poil~effres inl the New WTorld, was sub·
jeaecd to its dominion. As the Spanish court con.
tributed nothing towards the various expedition~s
-rinclertaken in America, it was not entitledl to claim
Inurch from their succes~s. The forereIgnty of the
Gconquered prov·inces, -irth thle fth of the gold

fixd silver, was reserved for the crown; every B O O K
thing else was seized by the associates in each ex- cL
pedition as their own right. The plunder of the 'so.
Sountries which they invaded served to indem-
nify thent for what they had exp~ended in eqluip-
ping themfeclves for the s~ervice, and the con·
Quered territory was divided among them, accord-
ing to rules which cuffom had introduced, as
permanent establishments which their f~uccefsful
valour merited. In the infancy of those s~ettlements,
when their extent as well as their value were un-
known, many irregularities escaped observation,
and it wvas found necessary to connive at many ex-
ceils. The conquered people were frequently pil-
laged with deftruaive rapacity, and their country
parcelled out among its new masters in exorbitant
shares, far exceeding the highest reconipence due
to their services. The rude conquerors of America,
;ncapable of forming their establishments upon any
general or extenlive plan of policy, attentive only
to private interest, unwilling to forego present gain
from the profped of remote or public benefit, seem
to have had no objec? but to amass futdden wealth,
without regarding what Inight be the consequences
of the means by wvhich they acquired it. But
when time at length discovered to the Spanish
court the importanlce of its American poffeifions,
the necefiity of new-modelling their whole frame
became obvious, and in place of the maxims and
praaiscs, prevalent among tailitary adventurers,

H- 2 it

a g~o o a it was found reqluifite to substitute the inflitutions

crl~ of regular government.
2542.

ONE evil in particular called for an immediate

remedy. The conqluerors of Alexico and Pera
imitated the fatal example of their countrymen
fettled in the islands, and employed thems~elves in
searching for gold and silver with the fame incon-
fiderate eagerners. Similar effets followed. The
natives employed in this labour by masters, wrhoi~n
imposing taflks had no regard either to what they
felt or to what they were able to perform, pined
away and perished so fast, that there wias reafonto
apprehend that Spain, inflead of pofeiirng count
tries peopled to such a degree as to be s~usceptible
of progreflive improvement, w-ould soon remain
proprietor only of a vast uninhabited desert.

THE emperor and his miniffers were so sensible

of this, and to solicitous to prevent the extine~ion
of the Indian race, which threatened to render their
acquisitions of no value, that from time to time
various lawvs, which I have mentioned, had been
made for se~curing to that unhappy people more
gentle and equitable treatment. But the difiance
of America from the feat of empire, the feebleness
of government in the new colonies, the avarice and
audacity of soldiers unaccuffomed to refiraint, pre·
vented there salutary regulations fr-om operating
with any considerable influence. The evil conti·

nued

nued to grow, and at this time the emperor found B O O` K
an interval of leisure from the affairs of Europe to tv x 542*
take it into attentive consideration. He cons~ulted The perSons

with whom

not only with his miniffers and the members of the he advises.
·council of the Indies, but called upon several
persons who had resided long in the New ~World, to
aid them with the result of their experience and
observation. Fortunately for the people of Ame-
rica, among there was Bartholomew de las Cafas,
who happened to be then at Madrid on a millioh
from a Chapter of his order at Chiapa f. Though,
since the mikcarriage of his former f~cheme's for the
relief of the Inldians, he had continued shut up in
his cloiffer, or occupied in religious funalons, his
zeal in behalf of the former ob~jeas of his pity
was so far from abating, that, from an increased
knowiledge of their f~ufferings, its ardour had aug-
mented. He seized eagerly this opportunity of
reviving his fa~vourite maxims concerning ,the
treatment of the Indians. With the moving· elo-
qluence natural to a man on whole mind the
scenes which he had beheld had made a deep
imprefiion, he des~cribed the irreparable waffe of
the human species in the New World, ~the Indian
race almoff totally swept away in the islands in
less than fifty years, and hastening to extin~tion on
th- continent with the fame rapid decay. ~With
the decisive tone of one firongly prepoffeffed with
the truth of his own fyfitem, he imputed all this

SRemetal His1. de Chiapa, p. 146.

H 3 to

v oo to a single cause, to the exa~tions and cruelty of
~ his countrymen, and contended that nothing could
'442. prevent the depopulation of America, but the de-

claringr of its natives to be freemen, and treating~
them as fubjeas, not as slaves. Nor did he con·
fide for the s~ucces~s of this proposal in the powers
of his oratory alone. In order to enforce them, he
compos~ed his famous treatise concerning the de.
Qruc~ion of America I, in which he relates, with
many horrid circumstances, but with apparent
marks of exagg~rerated description, the devraftation
of every province which had been visited by the
Spaniards.

His rolici- THE emperor was deeply affidted with the re
tude· to in- .
tlodue a cital of so many amions shocking to humanity.
frnfation or But as his views extended far beyond those of Las
govemnment. Cafas, he perceived that relieving the Indians from

oppreflion was but one flep towards rendering, his
~poffefions in the New World a valuable acquifi-
tion, and would be of little avail, unles~s he could
circumscribe the power and ufurpations of his own
f~ubjeats there. The conquerors ofAmerica, how-
ever great their merit had been towards their coun-
try, were mofily pers~ons of such mlean birth, and of
s~uch an abjeQ rank in society, as gave no diftinc-
tion in t'he eye of a monarch. The exorbitant
wealth with which some of them returned, gave
unbrage to an age not accuffomed to fee men in

a Remefal, p. I92. 199.

inferior

inferior condition elevated above their level, and a o, o a
rising to emulate or to s~urpass the ancient nobility -
in splendour. The territories which their leaders "s42·
had appropriated to themselves were of such enor-
mous extent h, that if the country ilhould ever be
isuproved in proportion to the fertility of the foil,
they must grow too wealthy and too powerful for
f~ubjeas. It appeared to Charles that this abuse
required a remedy no less than the other, and that
the regulations concerning both must be enforced
by a mode of government more vigorous than had
yet been introduced into America.

WITH this view he framed a body of laws, New res..

lations for

.containing many salutary appointments ·with re- thlis puipok.
sped to the conflitution and pow~ers of thefupreme
council of the Indies; concerning the flation and
jurifdicaion of the royal audiences in different parts
ofAmerica; the adminiffration of juffice; the
order of government, both ecclefiaffical and civil.
There were approved of by all ranks of men. But
toge~ther with them were iflized the following regu.
lations, which excited universal alarm, and occa-
fioned the most violent convulsions : "C That as the
repartimientos or shares of land seized by s~everal
persons appeared to be excefirve, the royal
audiences are empowered to reduce them to a
moderate extent : That upon the death of any
conqueror or planter,· the land~s and Indians granted

h See NOTE XV7.

H 4 ' to

B O OP K to hinki TIhall not descend to his widow or children,

cv but return to the crown: That the Indians shall

'5*" henceforth be exempt from personal service, and

shall not be compelled to carry the bagg~age of
travellers, to labour in the mines, or to dive in
the pearl fisheries: That the slated tribute due by
them to their superior shall be ascertained, and
they shall be paid as servants for any work; they
voluntarily perform : That all persons who are or
have been in public offices, all ecclefiaftics of every
denomination, all hospitals and monasteries, fhallbe
deprived of the lands and Indians allotted to
them, and thes~e be annexed to the crown: That
every person in Peru, who had any criminal con-
cern in the contests between Pizarro and Almagro,
thould forfeit his lands and Indians i."

a:s mini- ALL the Spaniflh miniffers who had hithert6
Itate againa been entruffed w-ith the direaion of American
tliem. affairs, and who were belt acquainted w ith the slate

of the country, remonstrated againlt those regula-
tions as ruinous to their infant colonies. They
represented, that the number of Spaniards whQ
had hitherto emigrated to the New W/orld was so
extremely fmnall, that nothing could be expeded
from any effort of theirs towards improving the
vast regions over which they were scattered; that
the faccefs of every scheme for this purpos~e raull

SHerrera, dec. 7. lib. vi. c. 5. Feragndez Hi~t. lib.i,

c. I, 2· depen4

depend upon the minifiry and service of the III B O,,O K
dians, whose native indolence and averflon to la- L5
bour, no prospect of benefit or promise of reward 52
could surmount; that the moment the right of inx-
posing a task, and ex-acing the perforniance of it,
was taken from their matters, evrery work of
induffry must cease, and all the sources from
which wealth begun to pour in upon Spain muff
be flopt for ever. But Charles, tenacious at all
times of his own opinions, and to much impressed
at present with the view of the disorders which
reigned iri America, that he was willing to ha-
zard the a~pplication even of a dangerous remedy,
persisted in his resolution of publinhing the laws.
That they might be carried into execution with
.greater vigour and authority, he authorised Fran-
cis~co Tello de Sandoval to repair to 1Wexico as
Y:tatdor or f~uperintendant of that country, and to
co-operate with Antonio de Mendoza, the viceroy,
inl enforcing them. H-e appointed Blasco Nugnez A viceror
Vela to be governor of Peru, with the title of EftP~~:,
'Viceroy; and in order to firengathen his admini-
itration, he established a court of royal audience as43.
in Lima, in which four lawyers of eminence were
to preside as judges k

THE viceroy and fuperintendant failed at the Effeas of

fame time ; and an account of the laws which they :t gg-U~
were to enforce reached America before them. spain.

k Zarate, lib. iii. c. 24. Gomanra, c. 5r. Vega, p. 23

lib. iii. c. 20.

. The

B O O~ K The entry rof Sandoval into M/exico was viewed as
....-v-.. the prelude of general ruin. The unlimited grant

" 4' of liberty to the Indians afie~ed every Spaniard in

America without dininc'tion, and there was hardly
one who mig~ht not on some pretext be included
under the other regulations, and fulffer by them.
But the colony in New Spain had now been so
long accuft~med to the reffraints of law and author
rity under thle fleady and prudent adminiffration
of Mlendoza, that how much soever the [pirit of
the new statutes was detested and dreaded, no at·
tempt was made to obitruc2 t-he publication of
them by any ac? of violence unbecoming Cubjeas.
The magiffrates and principal inhabitants, howl
ever, presented dutiful addresse~s to the viceroy
and superintendent, reprefentinlg the fatal confe.
qu~ences of enforcing them. HIappily for them,
Mendoza, by long residence in the country, was
s~o thoroughly acquainteal with! its s1late, that he
knew what- was for its interest as well as what it
could bear; and Sandoval, thougrh new in offce,
displayed a degree of moderation s~eldom poffeffed
by persons just entering upon the exercise of
power. They engbag~ed to fulpecnd, for some tim~e,
the ex-ecution of wihat was off~Ienfive in the new
laws, and not only cons~ented that a deputation of
citizens thould be sent to ESurope to lay before the
emperor the apprehensi~ons of his fubjec'ts in Newp
Spain with refpcLR to their tendency and effeas,
but they concurred with them in supporting their
s~entiments. Charles, moved by thie opinion gs

men

Inen wvhofe abilities and integrity entitled thern to B, O O K
decide concerning what fell immediately under 4.... "

..

their own view, granted such a relaxation of the ""4'
yigour of the laws as re~eflablifh~ed the colony in
its- former tranquillity '

IN Peru the florm gathered with an aspect still inPeru.

more fierce and threatening, and was not fo> soon
dis~pelled. The conquerors of Peru, of a rank
much inferior to those wvho.had fubjeaed Mexico
to the Spanilh crown, farther removed from the
ninfpeaion of the parent slate, and intoxicated with
the sudden acquisition of wealth, carried on all
their operations with greater licence and irregula-
rity than any body of adventurers in the New
World. Amidst the general fuibverflon of law
and order, occalloued by two fuccellive civil wars,
when each individu~l was at liberty to decide for
himself, wtithout any guide but his own interest or
paifions, this turbulent spirit rol~e above all sense
of f~ubordinaztion, To men thus corrupted by
anarchy, the intrqdution of regular government,
the power of a viceroy, and the authority of a re-
fpedable court of judicature, would of themselves
have appeared formidable restraints, to which they
would have s~ubmitted with reluaance. But they re-
volted with indignation againit the idea of comply-
ing with laws, by which they were to be firipped at

1 Fernandez Hist. lib. i. c. 3, 4, 5. Vega, p. I z. lib. fiLi

c. 2 , 22. Herrera, dec. 7. lib. v. c. 7. 11b. vii. c. 14, 15
Torquem. Mond. Ind. lib. v. c. 13*

once

B O O K once ofal~l they had earned to hardly durinrg many

I~PV years of service and fuffering. As the account of
s'53 the new law~s sp~read fuccefiiyely through the dif.

ferent s~ettlements, the inhabitants ran together,
the women in tears, and the men exclaiming
againlt the injluffice and ingratitude of their fove.
reign in depriving them, unheard and unconvi8ed,
of their poffefl~ons. " Is this," cried they, "' the
recompence due to persons, who, without public
aid, at their own? exp~ence, and by their own va. ,
lour, have f~ubjeaed to the crown of Caffile terri-
tories of such immense ex:tent and opulence ? Are
there the rewards bellowed for having endured un·
paralelled diffrefs, for having encoulntered every
s~pecies of danger in the s~ervice of their country?,
WVhole merit is so great, whole conduat has been
so irreproachable, that he may not be condemned
by s~ome penal clause in regulations, conceived in
terms as loose and comprehensive, as if it had
been intended that all thould be entangled in their
snare ? Every Spaniard of note in Peru has held
some public office, and all, without diftin8ion,
have been confirained to take an aaive part in the
contest between the two rival chiefs. WVere the
former to be robbed of their property because they
had done their duty ? Were the latter to be pu·
hifhed on account of what they could not avoid?
Shall the conquerors of this great empire, instead
of receiving marks of diffinaion, be deprived of
the natural consola-tion of providing for their wi.
dows and children, and leave themi to depend for

[ubliffence

faublitence on the scanty supply they can extort B QV 0 K
from unfeeling courtiers= ? We are not able now, cM
continued they, to explore unknown regions in '53
quest of more secure settlements; our conflitc*
tions debilitated with age, and our bodies cover,
ed with wounds, are no longer fit for active ser-
vice; but still we poffers vigour fufficient to assert
our just rights, and we will not tamely fuffer them
to be wrrefted from us "."

By dikcourfes of this fort, uttered with vehe- An inter-

.redfion pre·

mence, and listened to with universal approbation, vented ~by
their passions were inflamed to falch a pitch, that :hofo e.
they were prepared for the most violent measures; ca'tro.
and ~began to hold consultations in different places,
how they might oppose the entrance of the 'viceroyt
and judges, and prevent not only the execution
but the promulgation of the new laws. From thi~s,
however, they were diverted by the address of
Vaca de Caffro, who flattered them with hopes,
that, as soon as the viceroy and judges thould ar-
rive, and had leisure to examine their petitions and
remonftrances, they would concur with them in
endeavouring to procure some mitigation in the
rigour of laws which had been framed without due
attention either to the stat~e of the country, or to
the s~entiments of the people. A greater degree of
accommodation to thes~e, and even some concellions

ml Herrera, dec. 7. lib. vii. c. 14, Ii.
o Gomara, c. I52. Herrera, dec. $. lib. vi. c. 10, I a

Vega, p. u., li'b. iii. c. 20. 22. lib. iv. c. 3, 4-

B O o K on the part of government, were now becoine re.

VI. L~J cqinfite to compose the present ferment, and to

so3· iothe the coloniits into f~ubmillon, by inspiring;
them with confidence in their su~periors. B3ut wvith-·
out profound dikecrnment, conciliating· mannlers,
and flexibility of temper, fulch a plan could not be

The rpirit carried on. The viceroy poff~effed none of thefeb
of dira~Ffec-
tlon lin- Of` all the qualities that fit men for high cominand,
created by
the viceroy. he: was endowed only wvith integrity and tcourage;

the former harsh and uncomplying, the latter bdr.
dering; so frequently on rashness or abitinacy, that
in his situation they were def~e~ts rather than vir·

Mac
. tueS. From the moment that he landed at Tum.

bez, Nugnez Vela seems to have confidlered him.
self merely as an executive officer, without any dif-
cretionary power ; and, regardless of whatever he
observed or heard concerning the slate of the
country, he adhered to the letter of the regulations
with unrelenting rigour. In all the towns through
wvhich he passed, the natives were declared to be
free, every person in public office was deprived of
Shis lands and servants,; and as an example of obe.
dlience to others, he would not f~uffer a finglre In·
dian to be employed in carrying his own baggage
in his march towards Lima. tAmazement an8
consternation went before himl as he ap~proached;
and so little ~folicitous-was he to prevent these from
augmenting, that, on entering the capital, he.
Openly avowed that he came to obey thie orders
of his sovereign, not to dispens~e with his laws.
This harsh declar-ttion wias accomnpanidcc with what

rendered

u~nde~red it Riill more intolerable, haughtiness in a o~ 0 r
daeport~ment, a tone of arrogance and decision in J-
difPcourfe, and an insolence of office grievous to '543*
men little accuffomed to hold civil authority in
high refpeQ. Every attempt to procure a sus-
pension or mitigation of the new laws, the v~iceroy
considered as flowing from a spirit of difaffeation -
that tended to rebellion. Several persons of rank
were confined, and fame put to death, without
any form of trial. Vaca de Claffro was arrested,
and notwiithfitnding the dig~nity of his former
ra~nk, and his merit in having prevented a general
infurreaion in the colony, he was loaded with
chains, and shut up in the common jail o.

IBuT howrever general th~e indignation was agaaint The mat-

contents

fouch proceedings, it is probable the hand of authO- chufe Gon-
rity would have been fkrong enoug~ih to suppress it,· tlo be teIr

.leader.

or to prevent it burfiting out with open violences
if the malcontents had niot been provided with a
leader of credit and eminence to unite and to di-
rea their efforts. From the time that the purport
of the new regulations was known in 1Peru, every
Spaniard there turned his eyes towar-ds Gonzalo
Pizarro, as thle only person able to avert the ruin
with which they threatened the colonry. Fromt all
quarters, letters and addresses were s~ent to him,
conjuring him to st~and forth as their common pro-
te~or, and offering to support him in the attempt

o Zarate, lib. iv. c. 23, 24, 25. Gomara, e. 153-,--1550

Vecga, p. 'II lib. iv. c. 4·> 5. Fernandez, lib. i. c. 6--10.

with

P O O. K With their lives and fortunes. Gonzalo, though

~ inferior in talents to his other brothers, was equally
's43· amnbitious, and of courn,e no less daring. The

hthlar iour of an un·-r teful court towards his bro-
the~rs and himfl:;, dwelt continually on his mind.
Ferdinandi a flatep~rifoner i? Europe, the children
of the governor in? cuflody of Lhe viceroy, and s~ent
aboard his fleet, hidelr~f rLdu~ce to the condition
of a private citizen in a country, for the dis~covery
and conquefr of w hiih Spain was,~ indebted to his
family. There thioughts promlptedi him to f~eekr for
vengeance, and to asser~t the righis of his family,
of which he now confldere~d himself as the guar-
dian and the heir. B2ut as no Spaniard can easily
farmount that veneration for hiis' sovereign which
s~eems to be interwvoven in his frame, the idea of
marchingo in arms against the roy-al flandard filled
him with horror. He hesitated long, and was still
unresolved, when the violence of the viceroy, the
universal call of his countrymen, and the certainty
of becoming soon a viEtim himself to the severity of
the new laws, moved him to quit his residence at
Chuquifaca de la Plata, and repair to Cuzco. all
the inhabitants went out to meet him, and re-
ceived him with transports of joy as the deliverer
of the colony. In the fervour of their zeal, they
elected him procurator-general of the Spanifhh na·
tion in Peru, to solicit the repeal of the late regu·
lations. They empowered him to lay their re-
monfitrances before the royial audience in Lima,
and upon pretext of danger from the Indians,

'7 authorised

author~ised hint to march thither in arms. Under B o o rc
fan~tion of this nomination Pizarro took poffeflion
of the roylal treasure, appointed officers, levied 's*+
froldiers, fCeized a large train of artillery which
Vaca de Caffro had deposited in Gumanga, and
set out for Lima,· as if he had been advancing
against a public enemy. Difaffeaion having nowr
assumed a regular form, and being united under
a chief of fuzh diflinguilhed name, many persons
of note resorted to h~is flandard ; and a confider-
able part of the troops, raised by the viceroy to
oppof'e his progr-ess, des~erted to him in a body o.

BEFORE Pizarro reached Lima, a revolution had ourention

happened there, which encouraged him to proceed or gie.
\vith almost certainty of s~uccess. The violence of court or.
the viceroy's adminiffration was not more formi-
dable to the Spaniards of Peru, than his overbear·
ing haughtiness was odious to his associates, the
judges of the royal, audience. During their
vroyage from Spain, some fyrmptoms of cold.
ness between the viceroy and them beg~an to
appear p. But as soon as they entered upon the
exercise of their refpedtive of~fices, both parties
were to much exasperated by frequent contests,
arising from interference of jurifdition, and con-
trariety of opinion, that their mutual disg~ust soon

a Zarate, lib. v. c. . Comara, c. 156, 157. Vega, p. 11.
lib. iv. c. 4-12. Fernandez, lib. i. c. It2-17. Herrera,
dee. 7. lIb. vil. c. I8, &c. lib. viii. c. 1--;.

P Gomara, c. I7 I.

VoL. III. I grew

B Oi. K gl'ew into open enmity. The judges thwarted the

~ viceroy in every measure, set at liberty prisoners

"whom he had confined, jufitfied the nialcontents,

and applauded their remonfirances. At a time
when both departments of gov~ernment th~ould have
united against the approaching~ enemy, they were
contending with each other for superiority. The

The viceroy judges at length prevailed. Thle vriceroy, univer·
imrnorioned,
sept. as. sally odious, and abandoned even by his own

guards, was s~eized in his palace, and carried to a
des~ert illand on the coast, to be kept there until
he could be sent home to Spain.

views or THE judges, in consequence of this, having
)'Zarro. afibmed the s~upreme direaion of afilirs into their

own hands, iffied a proclamation sus~pending the
execution of the obnoxious laws, and s~ent a rnef
sag-e to Pizarro, requiring him, as they had already
granted whatever he could request, to dismis~s his
troops, and to repair to L~ima with fifteen or
twenty attendants. They could hardly exped that
a man s~o daring and ambitious would tamely com.
ply with this requfirtion. It was made, probably,
with no such intention, but only to throw a de·
cent veil over their own conduQ ; for Cepeda, the
president of the court of audience, a pragmatical
and aspiring lawyer, seems to have held a s~ecret
correspondence with Pizarro, and had already
formed the plan, which he afterwards executed,
of devoting himnfelf to his service. The imprison-

r\6 ment

rnknt of the viceroy, the usurpa~tion of the judges, B O Oo K
togecther with the universal confusion and anarchy
co~nsequent upon events so singular and unexpeaed, 's4'.
oPened new and vast profpeats to Pizarro. H-e
nowr beheld the f~upremne power with~in' his reach.
Nor did he want courage to push on towards the
objea~ which fortune presented to his view. Car-
vajal, the prompter of his resolutions, and guide
of all1 his aaions, had long fixed his eye upon it
as the only end at which Pizarro ought to aim.
Initead of the inferior funalon of procurator for
the Spanish settlements in Peru,' he openly de-
mqandedi to be governor and captain-general of the
whole province, and required the court of audi-
-ence to grant him a commition to that effea. At
the head of twelve hundred men, within a mile of
Lima, where there was neither leader nor army to
oppole him, such ·a request carried with it the au-
thority of a command. But the judges, either
from unwvillingnels to relinquish power, or from
a desire of preserving some attention to appear-
ances, hesitated, or seemed to hesitate, about com-
plying with what he demanded. Carvajal, impatient we "(omes

th'e 1over~n-

of delay, and impetuous in all his operations,mlarch- ment,
ed into the city by night, s~eized s~everal ofi~cers of
diftinc~ion obnoxious to Pizarro, and hanged them
without the formality of a trial. Next morning the
court of audience iflized a commidion in the empe-
rar's name, appointing Pizarro governor of Peru,
with full powers, civil as well as military, and he

I 2 entered

s ovro K entered the town that day with extraordinary pomp,

tLr o take poff~eiron of his new dignity s.

r544*

00. 2s. Bar amidfl the disorder and turbulence which

TheL viceroy
reCver~s hi accompanied this total diffolutionn of the frame

of government, the minds of men, set loose from
the ordinary restraints of law and authority, aded
with such capricious irregularity, that events no
less extraordinary than unc-pec~cd followed in a.
tapid fuccefiion. Pizarro nad kcarcely begun to
exercise the new powers with which he was in.
velled, wuhen he beheld formidable enemies rife up
to oppole him. The viceroy having been put on
board a vessel by the judges of the audience, in
order that he might be carried to Spain under
cuffody of Juan Alvarez, one of their own num·
ber; as soon as they were out at sea, Alvarez,
either touched with remorse ormnoved byfear,kneel·
ed down to his prisoner, declaring him from that
moment to be free, and that he hims~elf, and every
person in the ship, would obey him as the· legal
representative of their s~overeign. N~ugnez Vela
ordered the pilot of the vesse~l to shape his course
towards Tumbez, and as soon as he landed there,
erefred the royal flandard, and refuvmed his func-·
tions of viceroy. Several persons of note, to w-hom
the contagion of the seditious spirit which reigned
at Cuzco and Lima had not reached, instantly

R Zarate, 11b. v. c. 8--10. Vegar, p, 11. lib. iv. c. 13-
r9. Gomara, c. I~99-163. Fernandez, lib. i. c. 18--24.
Hlerrera, d~ec. :. lib. vili. c. Io0-20.

avowved

avowed their resolution to s~upport his authority r. B O,: K
The violence of Pizarro's government, who ob. M--
served every individual with the jealousy natural to as44·
ufurpers, and who punifuedd every appearance of
difa~ffetion with unforgiving s~everity, soon aug-
mented the number of the viceroy's adherents, as it
forced some leading men in the colony to fly to him
for refuge. While he was gathering fach firength
at Tumbez, that his forces began to assume the ap-
pearance of what was considered as an army in
Amlerica, Diego Centeno, a bold and a~tive offi-
cer, exal~perated by the cruelty and opprefiron of
Pizarro's lieutenant -governor in the province of
Charcas, formed a conspiracy against his life, cut
him off, and declared for the viceroy i,

PIZARRO, though alarmed with those appear- 'v4s.

ances of hoffility in the opposite extremes of the mrhs
empire, was not disconcerted. He reard o um
assert the authority to which he had attained, with
the spirit and condua of an officer accuftomned to
command, and marched direaly against the vice-
roy as the enemy who was nearest as well as most
formidable. As he was master of the public re-
venues in Peru, and most of the military men were
attached to his family, his troops were f'o nume-
rous, that the viceroy, unable to face them, rec

* Zarate, lib. v. c. 9. Gomara, c. 165. Fernandez, lib. i.
c. 23. H-errera, dec. $. lib. viii. c. 17.

* Zarate, lib. v. c. 8. Gomara, c. 169. Herrera, dec. 7.

lIb. ix. c. 27.

I 2 treated

B O O K treated towvards lito. P'izarro folilowed hitn;

c---v--- and in that long mlarch, thpough a wild m~oun·

t55 ain~ous country, fuarered hardih-ips and encoun.
tered diificulties, which no troops but those ac.
cuffomed to serve in America could have endured
or- surmounted ". Tlhe viceroyr had fcarrcely reached
(it~o, w.hen the vanl-guard of Pizarro's forces ap.
peared, led by Carvajal, who, though near four.
score, was as hardy and adive as any young fol.
d'ier under his command. Nugnnez Vela inflantly
abandoned a town incapable of defence, and witih
a rapidity n are resembling a flight than a retreat,
inarched into the province of P'opayan. Pizarro
continued to purfixe; but finding it imnpofirble to
overtakte him, returned to Quito. From thence
he dispatched Carvajal to oppose Centeno, who
w~as growing formidable in the s~outhern provinces
of the empire, and he himself remained there to
mlake head against the viceroy ',

nevatde~roy BY his own a~ivity, and the aflifiance of Be·

nalcazar, Nugrnez Vela, soon assembled four hun-
dired mlen in Popayran. As he retained, amidftall
his diifaftrs, the fame elevation of minld, and the
fame high ifenfe of his own dignity, he rejeaed with
disdain the advice of f~orce of his followvers, who
urgSed him to mak~e overtures of accommodatioe

II See O TE EXVI.
X Zarate·, lib. v. c. 15, 16--24. Comara, c. 167. Vega,

p. ii. lib. iv. c. 25--28. Fernlandez, lib. i. c. 3+. d0
lIier~rera, dec, 7, libJ. viii. c. 16, 20-27.

to Pizarro, declaring that it was only by the fivord a q~o K
that a contest with rebels could be decided. WTith
this intention he marched back to Quito. Pizarro, 's46*
relying on the superior number, and itill more on
the discipline and valour of his troops, advanced
resolutely to meet him. The battle was fierce and January s,
bloody, both parties fighting like men who knew
that thle poffeffion of a great empire, the fate of
their leaders, and their own future fortune, de-
pended upon the ifrue of that day. But Pizarro's
veterans pushed forward with such regrular and
well-direded force, that they soon began to make
impreflion on their enemies. The viceroy, by ex-
traordinary exertions, in which the abilities of a
commander and the courage of a soldier were
equally displayed, held viaory for some time in
f~ufpence. At length he fell, pierced with many and nain,
wounds; and the rout of his followers became
general. 'They were hotly pursued. His head
was cut ofE, and placed on the public gibbet in
Quito, which Pizarro entered in triumph. The
troops assembled by Centeno were dispersed soon
after by Carvajal, and he hims~elf -compelled to fly
to the mountains, where he remained for s~everal
months concealed in a cave. Every person in
Peru, from the frontiers of Popayan to those of
Chili, submitted to Pizarro; and by his fleet, un-
der Pedro de Hinojofa, he had not only the unri-
valled command of the South-Sea, but had taken
poffefiron of Panama, and placed 'a garrison in
Nombre' de Dios, on the opporite fide of the

I 4 isthmus,

n o~ 0 r isthmus, which rendered him matter of the only

Savenue of communication between Spain and Peru,

'4 that was used at that period y.

r oad,,. AFTER this decisive viaory, Pizarro and his

followers remained for some time at Quito, and

to <7~~l~ during the first transports of their exultation, they

ran into every excess of licentious indulgence, with
the riotous spirit usual among low adventurers
upon ebttraordinary success. But amidst this dif.
iipation, their chief and his confidents were obliged
to turn their thoughts faometimes to what was fe·
rious, and deliberated with much s~olicitude con·
cerningi the part that he oughlt now to take. Car·
vcajal, no less bold and decisive in counse~l than in
the field, had from the beginning warned Pizarro,
that in the career on which he was entering, it was
vain to think of holding a middle course; that he
mult either boldly aim at all, or attenipt nothing,
From the time that Pizarro obtained poffefion of
the government of Peru, he inculcated the fame
maxim with greater earnefinefs. Upon receiving
an account of the vi~tory at Quito, he remonfirated
with him in a tone itill more peremptory. "( You
have us~urped (f'aid he, in a letter written to Pizarro
on that occasion) the supreme power in this coun.
try, in contempt of the emperor's commillion to

Y Zarate, lib. v. c. 31, 32. Goma~ra, c. i170. Vega, p. 11.

lIb. iv. c* 33, 34. Fernandez, lIb. i. c. 51--54. Herrer,
dec. 7. lIb. x. c. 12. 19--22. dec. 8. lib. i. c. 1-3. Benzo,
lib, iiL c. J 2.

the viceroy. You have marched, in hoffile array, B Ov:O K
against the royal flandard; you have attacked the <.-c--.
repres~entative of your sovereign in the field, have 3.
defeated him, and cut off his head. Think not
that ever a monarch will forgive such insults on his
dignity, or that any reconciliation with him can be
cordial or sincere. D~epend no longer on the pre-
catious favour of another. Affhme yourself the
sovereignty over a country, to the dominion of
wthich your family has a title founded on the rights
both of dis~covery and conqueit. It is in your
power to attach every Spaniard in Peru of any
consequence inviolably to your interest by liberal
grants of lands and of Indians, or by inflituting
ranks of nobility, and creating titles of honour
fimrilar to those which are courted with so much
eagernes~s in Europe. ]By establishing orders of
knlighthood, with privileges and diflin~tions re-
fembling those in Spain, you may beffow a grati-
fication upon the officers in your service, suited to
the ideas of military men. Nor is it to your coun-
trymen only that you ought to attend; endeavour
to gain the natives. By marryring the Coya, or
daughter of the Sun next in fuccellion to the croiyn,
you will induce the Indians, out of veneration for
the blood of their antient princes, to unite with
the Spaniards in s~upport of your authority. Thus,
at the head of the antient inhabitants of Peru, as
well as of the new settlers there, you may set at
defiance the power of Spain, and repel with ease
any feeble fprte wrhich it can fend at such a dif-

tance."

c OrO K tance."' Cepeda, the lawyrer, who was now Pi·

L-- zarro's confidential couns`ellor, warmly seconded

ass6. Carvajal's exhortations, and employed whatever

learning he poff`,ied in demonitrating, that allthe
founders of great monarch~ies had been raised to
pre-eminence, not by t-he antiquity of their lineage,
or the validity of their rigrhts, but by their own
aspiring valour and personal merit 71.

Bor cure, PIZARRO lIfened attentively to both, and could

',jt nenot conceal the fatisfac?ion with which he contem·
[".'plated the objeQ that they prefentedl to his viewv,

But happily for the tranqluillity of the world, few
mecn poss~ess that superior firength of mind, and
extent of abilities, which are capable of forming
and executing fach daring· schemes, as cannot be
accomnplifhed without overturning the established
order of focietyr, and violating those maxims of
duty which men are accuffomed to hold sacred.
The mediocrity of Pizarro's talents circumscribed
his ambition within more narrow limits. Inficad
of aspiring at independent pow~er, he confined his
views to the obtaining from the court of Spain a
confirmation of the authority which he now pof·
~sessed; and for that purpose, he sent an officer of
diftinaion thither, to give such a representation of
his conduQ, and of the slate of the country, as
might induce the emperor and his miniffers, either

2 Vega, p. I1. lIb. iv. c* 40. Fernan~der, lIb. i. c* 3+

Jib, ii, c. 1* 49. Herrera, dec. 8. JIb. ii. c. r0.

from inclination or from necellity, to continue him B O ~O K
mn his pres~ent station.

r546.

WHYLE P2izarro was deliberating with refped to concela-

the part which he should take, consultations were spaoilh mi-

Infiers.

held in Spain, with no less solicitude, concerning the
measures which ought to be purs~ued in order to re-
establish~ the emperor's authority in Peru. Though
unacquainted with the last excesses of outrage to
which the malcontents had proceeded in that coun-
try, the court had received an account of the inf~ur-
re~tion against the viceroy, of his imprisonment, and
the us~urpation of the government by Pizarro. A
revolution to alarming called for an immediate inter-
polition of the emperor's abilities and authority.
But as he was fully occupied at that time ·in Ger-
many, in conduaiing the war against the famous
league of Smalkalde, one of the moit interesting and
arduous enterprises in his reign, the care of providing
a remedy for ~the disorders in Peru devolved upon
his son Philip, and the counsellors whom Charles
had appointed to af~ift him in the government of
Spain during his ablence. At first view, the ac-
tions of Pizarro and his adherents appeared s~o re-
pugnant to the duty of fubjeas towards their so-
vereign, that the greater part of the miniffers in-
sifted on declaring them inItantly to be guilty of
rebellion, and on proceedings to punish them with
exemplary rigrour. But when the fervour of their
zeal and indignation began to abate, innumerable
obitacles to the ex~ecutioix of this measure presented

themselves.

So o K

themfelves.v The veteran bands of infantry, the
fL1C trength and glory of the Spanish armies, wvere

,36 then employed in Germany. Spain, exhauffed of

Inen and tnoney by a long series of wars, in which
she had been involved by the restless ambition of
two fucceffve monarchs, could not easily equip an
armament of fufficient force to reduce Pizarro. To
transport any refpeaable body of troops to a
country so remote as Peru, appeared almoit im.
pollible. While Pizarro continued malter of the
South Sea, the direc? route by Nombre de IDios
and Panama wras impraaicable. An attempt to
anarch to Qluito by land through the new kingdom
of Granada, and the prov·ince of Popay-an, across
regions of prodigious extent, des~olate, unhealthy,or
inhabited by fierce and hoffile tribes, would be at·
tended with unsurmount-able danger and hardfbips.
The paifage to the South-Sea by the Straits of
Magellan was so tedious, so uncertain, and 10
little known in that age, that no confidence could
be placed in any effort carried on in a courfeof
navigation so remote and precarious. Nothing
then remained but to relinquish the fyltem which
the ardour of their loyalty had first f~uggefied, and
to attempt by lenient measures what could not be
effeaed by force. It was manifell, from Pizarro's
solicitude to represent his condua in a favourable
light to the emperor, that, notwithstanding the
excesses of which he had been guilty, he still re-
tained s~entiments of veneration for his s~overeign,
B3y a proper application to these, together with

r2 some

some such conceflions as tho~uld discover a s~pirit of B Ol O
moderation and forbearance in government, there L-
wa3s still room to hope that hemight be yet reclaimed, '6
or the ideas of loyalty natural to Spaniards might s~o
far revive among his followers, that they would no
longer lend their aid touphold his usurped authority.

THE fuccerS, hOWeVCY, Of thiS DegOCiation, 110 Gafra ap.

less delicate than it was imnportant, depended en- ,Pe oro
tirely on the abilities and address of the person to lifta Fre
whom it should be committed. After weighing
with much attention the comparative merit of va-
rious persons, the Span~ih miniffers fix-ed with
unanimity of choice upon Pedro de la Galca, a
priest in no higher flation than that of counsellor to
the Inquisition. Though in no public office, he
had been occasionally employed by government inl
affairs of trust and cons~equence, and had condus'-
ed them with no less sk~ill than fulccefs; displaying
a gentle and insinuating temper, ticcompanied with
much firmness ; probity, superior to any feeling of
private interefl;j and a cautious circumfpeaion inE
concerting mreaf~ures, followed by such vigour in
executing therts, as is rarely found in alliatice with
the other. There q~ualities marked him out for the
funalion to which he was deffined. The emperor,
to whom Gbafca was not unknown, warmly ap-
proved of the choice, and communicated: it to him
in a letter, containing ex-preifions of good-will and
confrdence, no les~s honourable to the prince who
wrote, than to the f~ubje~t who received it. Galca,

notwith-

B OO notwithflanding his advanced age and fteeble confLi

kc-*~tution, and though, from the apprehenflons natural

S'5U to a man, who, duringr the course of his life, had

never been out of his own country, he dreaded the
effecas of a long voyage, and of an unhealthy
climate J, did not heiitate a momenlt about cora.

His modera- plying with the will of his sovereign. But as a
s10on. proof that it wNas from this principle alonle he acted,

he refus~ed a bishopr~ic which w~as olf~ered to him,
in order that he might appear in Peru w~ith a more
dignified characaer; he would accept of no- higher-
title than that of president of the court of audience
in Lima; and declared that he would receive no
salary on account of his dis~charg~ing the duties of
that office. All he requir :d was, that the expence
of supporting his family sh~ould be defrayed by the
public, and as he was to go like a miniffer of
peace with his gown and breviary, and without
any retinue but a few domeltics, this would not
load the revenue with any enormous burden ".

BU'r while he discovered such difinterefled mo·

The powers
eommitted deration with respect to whatever related personally

to hims~elf, he demanded his offcial pow~ers in a
very different tone. He infilted, as he was to be
employed in a country so remote from~ the feat of
government, where he could nlot hav~e recourse to

a Fernandez, lib. ii. c. 17.
b Zarate, lib. vi. c. 6. Gomara, c. 174. Fer~lnandez, lib, ii.

c. I4--26. Vega, p. II. lib. v. c. I. Hlerrera, dec. 8. lib~ i.
c. 4, & c.

his f~overeigrn for new intruaions on every emer- u 0__ 0
gence; and as the whole success of his nego- L~
ciations must depencl upon the confidence which '56·
the people with whom he had to treat could place
in the extent of his powers, that he ought to be
invested with unlimlited authority; that his julrif~
diaion must reach to all perfolns and to all causes ;
that he must. be empowered to pardon, to puninh,
or to reward, as circumstances and the behaviour
of different men might require; that, in cafe of
resistance from the malcontenlts, he might be au-
thorifed to reduce them to obedience by force of
arms, to levy troops for that purpose, and to call
for afifhitnce from the governors of all the Spanifhl
settlements in America. Thes~e powers, though
manifestly conducive to the great objec~s of his
miflion, appeared to the Spanish minif-ers to be
inalienable prerog~atives of royalty, which ought
not to be delegated to a fubjea~, apd they refus~ed
to grant them. B~ut the emperor's views were
more enlarged. As from the nature of his employ-
ment, Gakca muff be entruffed with diferetionar~y
power in several points, and all his efforts might
prove inef-featual if he was circumferibed in any
one particular, Charles s~crupled not to invelt hiln
ivith authority to the full extent that he demanlded.
Highly satisfied with this fresh proof of his matter's
confidence, Gafca hastened his departure, and,
ivithout either money or troops, set out to qunell lay 2C,.
a formidable rebellion c.

c Fernandez, lib. ii. c. rti--8.

B qOO K ON his arrival at Nombre de Dios, he found

cn-lJEerman Mexia, an officer of note, poffed there,

Ju J.6j by order of Pizarro, with a considerable body of
oP nm . men, to oppose the landing of any hoffile forces.

But Gakca appeared in such pacific gulfe, with at
train to little formidable, and with a title of no
such dignity as to excite terror, that he was re
ceived with much refpea. From Nombre de DIjos
he advanced to Panama, and met wvith a fimilatl
reception from 11inojofag, whom Pizarro had en·
truffedl with the government of that town, and the
comlmand of his fleet flationed there. In both
places he held the fame language, declaring that
lie was sent by their sovereign as a messenger of
peace, not as a miniffer of vengeance; that he
came to redress all their grievances, to revoke the
laws which had excited alarm, to pardon pall
off~ences, and to re-establish order and juffice in the
government of Peru. His mild deportment, the
simplicity of his manners, the fadn~ity of his profel-
sion, and a winning appearance of candour, gainedi
credit to his declarations. The veneration due tea
person clothed with legal authority, and aaing in
vrirtue of a royal commifion, began to revive among
men accuffomed for some time to nothing more
refpeaable than an us~urped jurifdiaion. H-inojofa,
Mexia, and s~everal other officers of diftin~ion, to
each of whom Gakca applied separately, were gained
over to his interest, and waited only for some de·
cent occasion of declaring openly in his favour d

"Fernandez, lib. 11. c. 21, &c. Zarate, lib. vi. c. 6,:.

G~oma~ra, e. 275. Vega, p. 11. 11b. v. c. 3*

Tms the violence of Pzarro soon afforded them. B O O K

As soon as he heard of Gakca's arrival at Panama, J
though he received, at the fame time, an accountvo o
of the nature of his commillion, and was informed E n a or

"

of his offers not only to render every Spaniard inPeru
easy concerning what was past, by an aQ of general
oblivion; but secure with refpeat to the future
by repealing the obnoxious laws; inflead of accept-
.ing with gratitude his fovereign's gracious con-
cefiions, he was to much exasperated on finding
that he was not to be continued in his fht:ion as
governor of the country, that he inflantly resolved
to oppose the prefident's entry into Peru, and to
prevent his exercising- any jurif~dialion there. To
this desperate resolution he added another highly
prepofferous. He sent a new deputation to Spain
to juffify this conduat, and to insist, in nlame of all
the communities in Peru, for a confirmation of the
government to himself during life, as the only
means of preserving tranquillity there. The per-
sons entruffed with this firange commiflion, inti-
mated the intention of Pizarro to the president, and
required him, in his name, to depart from Panama
and return to Spain. They carried likewise secret
infkruaions to H-inojofa, direaing him to offer
Gaf~ca a present of fifty thousand pesos, if he would
comply voluntarily with what was demanded of
him; and if he thould continue obflinate, to cut
him off either by aff~afiTnation or poison e.

e Zarate, lIb. v;. c. 8. Fernandez, lib. ii. c. 33, 34-

Herrera, dec. 8. lib. ii. c. 9, 10

VoL. III. K MnqAY

B 0 0) K Ma~y circumffances concurred in pushing on

Lc Pizarro to those wild measures. Having been

clk'R~ins once accuffomed to supreme command, he could
h's neu. not bear the thoughts of descending to a private

flation. Conscious of his own demerit, he fufped-
ed that the emperor fludied only to deceive him,
and would never pardon the outrages which he had
committed. His chief confidents, no les~s guilty,
entertained the fame apprehensions. The approach
of Gaf~ca without any military force excited n9
terror, There were now above fix thousand Spa.
niards f~ettled in Peru'; and at the head of these
he doubted not to maintain his own independence,
if the court of Spain1 thould refuse to grant what
he required. But he knew not that a spirit of de·
feaion had already begun to [pread among those
whom he truffed molt. Hinojofa, amazed at Pi-
zarro's precipitate resolution of setting himself in
opposition to the emperor's commiiron, and dif-
daining to be his infirument in perpetrating the
odious crimes pointed out in his secret initruaions,
publicly recognized the title of the president to
the s~upreme authority in Peru. The oificers under
his command did the fame. Such was the con-
tagious influence of the example, that it reached
even the deputies who had been sent from Peru;
and at the time when Pizarro expe~ed to hear
either of G~alca's return to Spain, or of his death,
he received an account of his being malter of the
fleet, of Panama, and of the troops flationedl there.

r Herrera, dec. 8. iib. iii. c. I.

IRRITATED

IRRIrATED almolt to madness by events to a 0 0 It
unexpelted, he openly prepared for war; and in L~
aorder to give some colour of juffice to his arms, he Piza 0 re-;,
appointed the court of audience in Lima to pro- wair.~
ceed to the trial of Garca, for the crimes of
hav~ing s~eized his thips, fedJuced his offcers, and
prevented his deputies from proceeding in their
`voyage to Spain. Cepeda, though a~ting as a
judge in virtue of the royal cornmifiion, did not
Tecruple to proffitute the dignity of his fun~ion by
finding Gak~fa guilty of treason, anld condlemning
him to death on that account p. WTild, and even
ridiculous, as this proceeding was, it impos~ed on
tht low illiterate adventurers, with whom P-eru was
filled, by the f~erblance of a legal f~andion wiar-
tanting Pizarro to carry on hostilities against a coh-
vi~ted traitor. Soldiers accordingly resorted from
every quarter to his standard, and he wtas soon at
the head of a thousand men, the belt eq~uipped
that had ever taken the field in Peru.

GASCA, on his part, perceiving that force must Preenrawaons

be employed in order to accomplish the purpofe' pfofGla
his mission, was no less assiduous in colleaing
troops from N\icaragua, Carthagena, and other
fettlednents on the continent; and with fach fu~c-
cess, that he was soon in a condition to detach a
squadron of his fleet, with a considerable body of

g Fernandez, lib. ii. c. 55g. Vega, p. Ir. lib. v. c. 7.

Herrera, dec. 8. lib. iii. c. 6.

K 2 s~oldiers,

s 0~~ 0 it fldiers, to the coast of Peru. Their appearance

L~excited a dreadful alarm; and though they did not

2ip'Zi. attempt for some time to make any descent, they

did more effeaual service, by s~etting ashore in dif.
ferent places persons who dispersed copies of the
at of general indemnity, and the revocation of
the late edias ; and who made known every where
the pacific intentions, as wrell as mild temper, of
the president. The effeQ of spreading this in.
formation was wonderful. All who were diffatif.
fied with Pizarro's violent adminiffration, all who
retained any sentiments of fidelity to their fove-
reign, began to meditate revolt. Some openly
deserted a cause which they now deemed to be un-

Incurreasion juff. Centeno, leaving the cave in which he lay
ot centeno' concealed, assembled about fifty of his former ad·

herents, and with this feeble half-armed band ad.
vanced boldly to Cuzco. By a s~udden attack in
the night-time, in which he displayed no less mili·
tary sk~ill than valour, he rendered himself mailer
of that capital, though defended by a garrison of
five hundred men. Most of the~re having ranged
thems~elves under his banners, he had soon the
command of a refpec~able body of troops ^.

againaPIZARRO, thoutrh affonifhled at beholding one

zarro enemy approaching by sea, and another by land,
Inarches, 'at a time when he truffed to the union of all Peru

in his favour, was of a spirit more undaunted, and

h Zarate, lIb.vi. c.I3--16. Comara, c.I80,r8I. Ser·

nandez, lib. ii. c. 28;, 64C, &c.

more

more accustomed to the viciflitudes of fortune, a ol~ x
than to be disconcerted or appalled. As the dan-
ger from Centeno's operations w ts the mofl urgent, '54.
he inflantly s~et out to oppole him. Having pro-
vided horses for all his soldiers, he marched with
amaging rapidity. But every morning he found
his force diminished, by numbers who had left him
during the night; and though he became fufpi-
clous to excess, and punished without mercy all
whom he furfpeded, the rage of desertion was too
violent to be checked. Before he got within fight
of the enemy at Huarina, near the lake Titiaca,
he could not muffer more than four hundred fol-
diers. But there he juffly considered as men of
tried attachment, on whom he might depend.
They were inldeed the boldest and most desperate
of his followers, conscious like himself of crimes
for which they could hardly expeR forgiveness,
and without any hope but in the faccefs of their
arms. With these he did not hesitate to attack onoser zo,
Centeno's troops, though double to his own in
number. The royalists did not decline the com-
bat. It was the most obilinate and bloody that had
hitherto been fougrht in P~eru. At length the intre- apd defeatg
pid valour of Pizarro, and the superiority of ICar-
vajal's military talents, triumphed over numbers,
and obtained a complete viaory. The booty was
immense i, and the treatment of the vanquished
cruel. By this signal success the reputation of

a See NTOTE XVII.

K 3 Pizarro

B 0 O K P ZarIO WaS re-eflablifhed, and being now deemed

Lcc invincible in the field, his army increased daily in

2547* numb~er

Bar events happened in other parts of Peru,

which more thian counterbalanced the splendid
viaory at if uarina. Eizarro had fearcely left Lima,
when the citizens, weary of his oppreflive domi-
nion, ere~ed the royal flandard, and Aldana, with
a detachment of soldiers from the fleet, took pof-

Gacal asdb feflion of the town. About the fame time',
at reru. Gafca landed at Tumbez with five hundred

men. Encouraged by his pres~ence, every fettle-
ment; in the low country declared for the king.
The situation of the two parties was now perfealy
revelrfed; Cuzco and the adjacent provinces were
poffeffed by Pizarro; all the reft of the empire,
from Quito southward, acknowledged the juril-
di~tion of the rrefident. As his numbers augmented
fast, Gafca advanced into the interior part of the
country. Hlis behaviour still continued to be gentle
and unafiruming; he expressed, on every occalloqt,
his ardent with of terminatinlg the contest w~ithout
bloodihed. 1Vore solicitous to reclaim than to
punish, he upb~raided no man for past offences, but
received them as a father receives penitent children
returning to a sense of their duty. Though desirous

k 2'arate, lib.vii. c.2,3. Gornara, c. I8r. Vega, p.rI.

Ilb. v. c. a 8, &~c. Fer~nandez, lib. ii. c.79. Herrcra, dec. 8.
lib. iv. c. r, 2.

I Zarate, lib. vi. c. 17.

olfpeace, he did not slacken his preparations for B o2 o
war. He appointed the general rendezvous of his cc
troops in the fertile valley of lauxa, on the road '5m.
to Cuzco .. There he remained for some months, Advances

towards

not only that he might have time to make another cuzco.
attempt towards an accommodation with Pizarro,
but that he might train his new soldiers to the us~e
ofarms, and accuffom them to the discipline of
a camp, before he led them against a body of vic-
torious veterans. Pizarro, intoxicated with the
faccefs which had hitherto accompanied his arms,
and elated with havings again near a thousand
men under his command, refused to list-en to any
terms, although Cepeda, together with s~everal of
his officers, and even Carvajal himself , gave it as
their advice to close with the prefident's offer of a
general indemnity, and the revocation of the ob.
noxiiotti laws .. Gafca having tried in vain every
expedient to avoid imbruing his hands in the blood
of his countrymen, began to move towards Cuzco, rec. zg.
at the head of sixteen hundred men.

PIZAnRo, confident of vidtory, fufekred the Both parties

prepa·re for

royalists to pass all the rivers which lie between battle.
Guamanga and Cuzco without opposition, and to rsq8.
advance within four leagues of that capital, flat-
tering hims~elf that a defeat in such a lituation as

= Zarate, lIb. vii. c. 9. Fernandez, lib. ii. c. 77. 82.
a See NOTE XVIII.
* Zarate, lib. vii. c. 6. Vega, p. I I. lib. v. c. 27.

K 4 rendered

a 0 0o K rendered escape imnprac~icable would at once
s....-v-..J terminate the war. He then marched out to meet

'51s. the enemy, and Carvajal chose his ground, and

April 9. made the difpolition of the troops with the discern.

ing eye, and profound knowledge in the art of war
conspicuous in all his operations. As the two
armies moved forwards slowly to the charge, the
appearance of each was singular. In that of Pi.
zarro, composed of men enriched with the [poils
of the most opulent country in America, every
officer, and almost all the private men were clothed
in fluffs of silk, or brocade, emb~roidered with
gold and silver ; and their horses, their arms, their
flandards, were adorned with all the pride of
military pomp p. That of Gakfa, though not 10
splendid, exhibited what was no les~s firiking. He
himself, accompanied by the archbifhrop of Lima,
the btfhops ofquito and Cuzco, and a great num-·
ber of ecclefialtics, marching along the lines, bleiff
ing the men, and encouraging them to a resolute
discharge of their duty.

]Pizarro de- 'IHE~N both armies were just ready to engage,

tros,b~oydP his Cepeda set spurs to his horse, galloped off, and fur,

rendered hlimf~elf to the president. Garcilaffo de la
Vega, and other officers ofnote, followed his exam·
ple. The revolt of persons infuch high rankfiruck
all with amazement. The routual confidence on
which the union and strength of armies depend,

P Zarate, lib. vi. c. !I.

ceased

ceased at once. Diftruit and conflernation [pread a 0 0 a
from rank to rank. So~ne silently flipped away, I--
otliers threw down their arms, the greatest number 5·
went over to the royalists. Pizarro, Carvajal, and
some leaders, employred authority, threats, and
entreaties, to flop them, but in vain. In less
than half an hour, a body of men, which might
have decided the fate of the Peruvian empire,
was totally dispersed. Pizarro, feeing all irretriev-
ably loss, cried out in amazement to a few officers
who still faithfully adhered to him, " What remains
for us to do ?" " Let us rush, replied one of
them, upon the enemy's firmelt battalion, and die
like Romans." Dejeaed with such a reverse of
fortune, he had not spirit to follow this soldierly
counsel, and with a tameness: disgraceful to his
former fame, he surrendered to one of Gafca'S taken,
officers. Carvajal, endeavouring to escape, was
overtaken and seized.

GASCA, happy in this bloodless viaory, did not ~a~ut tO

slain it with cruelty. Pizarro, Carvajal, and a
small number of the most distinguished or noto-
rious offenders, -were punifhled capitally. Pizarro
was beheaded on the day after he surrendered. He
submitted to his fate with a composed dignity, and
seemed desirous to atone by repentance for the
crimes which he had committed. The end of Car-
vajal was suitable to his life. On his trial he offer--
ed no defence. When the f~eatence adjudging hinx
to be hanged was pronournced, he carelessly re-

plied,

B O O0 K plied, '' One can die but once." During the in·

~Jterval between the s~entence and execution, he dif.

s5$s. covered no sign either of remorse for the past, or

of solicitude about the future; f~coffing at all w~ho
visited him, in his ufoal sarcastic vein of mirth,
with the fame quickness of repartee and gross plea-
fantry as at any other period of his life. Cepeda,
more criminal than either, ought to have shared
the fame fate; but the merit of having deserted
his associates at s~uch a critical moment, and with
such decisive efFec?, saved hinx from immediate
punishment. He was sent, however, as a prisoner
to Spain, and died in confinement 9,

IN the minute detail which the contemporary

historians have given of the civil diff~entions that
raged in Peru, with little interruption, during ten
years, many circumflances occur so striking, and
which indicate such an uncommon state of manners,
as to merit particular attention.

No merce- THOUGH the Spaniards who first invaded Peru
mary soldiers
in the civil were of the lowest order in society, and the greater
Peru. part of those who afterwards joined them were per-

sons of desperate fortune, yet in all the bodies of
troops brought into the field by the different lead·
ers who contended for superiority, not one man

9 Zarate, lib. vii. c. 6. 7, 8. Gomara, c. 185i, 186.

Vega, p. 11. lib. v. c. 3o, &c. Fernandez, lib. ii. c. 86, &c.
Herrcra, dec. 8. lib. iv. c. I4, &0c. aded

aded as a hired s~oldier, that follows his flandard a 0 0 a
for pay. Every adventurer in Peru considered c
himself as a conqueror, entitled, by his services, to '58
an establishment in that country which had been
acquired by his valour. In the contests between
the rival chiefs, each chose his fide as he was di-
re~ted by his own judgment or affeaions. Hre
joined his commander as a companion of his for-
tune, and difdained to degrade hims~elf by receiving
the wages of a mercenary. It was to their [word,
not to pre-eminence in office, or nobility of birth,
that most of the leaders whom they followed were
indebted for their elevation; and each of their
adherents hoped, by the fame means, to open a
way for hitrrielf to the poffefiron of power and
wealth '.

BPT though the troops in Peru s~erved without Armies im-

mt· fely exv-

any regular pay, they were raised at immenfre ex- pen~ve;
pence. Aimong men accuffomed to divide the
[poils of an opulent country, the desire of obtain-
ing wealth acquired incredible for-ce. The ardour
of pursuit augmnented in proportion to the hope of
faccefs. Wher~e all were intent on the fame objeR,
and under the dcominion of the fame passion, there
was but one made of gaining mlen, or of securing
their attachment. Officers of name and influence,
besides the promise of future eitablifhments, re-
ceived in' hand large gratuities from7 the chief with

r Vega,, p. 11. lib. iv. c. 38- 41-

w-hom

B ovi.0 t whom they engaged. Gonzalo Pizarro, in order
LMr to raise a thousand men, advanced five hundred

'54s, thousand pesos s. Gaf~ca expended in levying the

troops which he led agrainft Pizarro nine hundred
thousand pesos t. The diffribution of property,
beffowed as the reward of services, was still more

.n m exorbitant. Cepeda, as the recompence of his

wmens re- perfidy and address, in pers~uading the court of
dividuals. royal audience to give the fanation of its authority

to the usurped jurifdiaion of Pizarro, receiveda
grant of lands which yielded an annual income of
a hundred and fifty thousand pesos 0. Hinojofa,
who, by his early defe~tion from Pizarro, and fur·
render of the fleet to Gr·fca, decided the fateof
Peru, obtained a diffria of country affording two
hundred thousand pesos of yearly value x. While
suc~h rewards were dealt out to the principal ofLi
cers, with more than royal munificence, propor.
tional ihares were conferred upon those of inferior
rank.

Theirpro- SUCH a rapid change of fortune produced its

luxur~y. natural effeats. It gave birth to new wants, and

new desires. Veterans, long accuffomed to hard·
ship and tail, acquired of a s~udden a taste for pro·
fuse and inconsiderate difirpation, and indulged in
all the excesse~s of' military licentious~ness. The

SFerlnrdez, lib. ii. c. 5;4-
r Zar-ate, lib. vii. c. 10. H cera, dec. 8. lib. v. c. T.
nL Comiara,) c. I64* X Vega~, p. II. lib. vi. c.3.

riot of low debauchery occupied some; a relish for B O O K
expensive luxuries spread among others 7. The J
meanest s~oldier in Peru would have thought himn- a
self degraded by marching on foot; and at a time
when the prices of hors~es in that country were ex-
orbitant, each infilted on being furnished with one
before he would take the field. But though les~s
patient under the fatigue and hardships of s~ervice,
they were ready to face danger and death with as
much intrepidity as ever; and animated by the
hope of new rewards, they never failed, on the
day of battle, to display all their ancient va-
lour.

TOGETHER with their courage, they retained Feracity

with wllich

all the ferocity by which they were originally dif chtir con-
tingulfhed. Civil dis~cord never raged with a more caried on
fell spirit than among the Spaniards in Peru. To
all the passions which us~ually envenom contests
among countrymen, avarice was added, and ren-
dered their enmity more rancorous. Eagerness to
seize the valuable forfeitures expeated upon the-
death of every opponent, thut the door against
mercy. To be wealthy, was of itself fufficient to
expose a man to accusation, or to f~ubjeat him to
punishment. On the slightest suspicions, Pizarro
condemned many of the most opulent inhabitants
inl Peru to death. Carvajal, without s~earching for
any pretext to juffify his cruelty, cut off many

7 Herrcra, dec* 5. lib.ii. c. 3. dec. 8. lib. vili. c.10.

more.

B0O K more. The number of thos~e who fuffered by the
LCV~J hand of the ex~ecutioner, was not much inferior to

s.48 what fell in the field ·; and the greater part was

condemned without the formality of any legal
trial.

and w;,me TI-IE VIolence with which the contending parties
of tarh. treated their opponents was not accompanied with

its usual attendants, attachment and fidelitp' to
those with whom they aaed. The ties of honoui,
which ought to be held sacred among soldiers, and
the principle of integrity, interwoven as thoroughly'
in the Spanish charater as in that of any nation,
seem to have been equally forgotten. Even regard
for decency, and the sens~e of thame,, were totally
101}. During their diffentions, there was hardly
a Spaniard in Peru who did not abandon the party
which he had originally espous~ed, betray the affo.
ciates with ·vhom he had united, and violate the
engagements under which he had come. The vice~
roy Nuguez Vela was ruined by the treachery of
Cepeda and the other judges of the royal audience,
who were bound by the duties of their funaion to
have supported his authority. The chief advisers
and companions of Gonzalo Pizarro's revolt, were
the sirs to foriake him, and fulbmit to his ene·
mies. His fleet was given up to Gakca, by tli
man whom he had singled out among his offcers
to entrust. with that important commland. On the

z See NOTE XIX.

day that was to decide his fate, an army of vete- B 01'lO K
rans, in fight of the enemy, threw down their arms C·a 34l8*
without firiking a blow, and deserted a leader who
had often conduaed them to viatory. Inflances
of such general and avowed contempt of the prin-
ciples and obligations which attach man to man,
and bind them together in social union, rarely oc-
cur in hiffory. It is only where men are far re-
moved from the feat of government, where the
re~trints of law and order are little felt, where the
profped of gain is unbounded, and where immense
weallth may cover the crimes by which it is ac-
quired, that we can find any parallel to the levity,
the rapaciousness, the perfidy and corruption pre-
valent among the Spaniards in Peru.

04J the death of Pizarro, the malcontents in Gaca ~de

every corner of Peru laid down their arms, and n1~
tranquillity s~eemed to be perfealy re-efiablifh~ed. (f:fs ""
But two very intereffing objeats still remained to
occupy the prefident's attention. The one w-as to
find Immediately such employment for a multitude
of turbulent and daring adventurers with which
the country was filled, as might prevent thenx
from exciting; new commotions. T'he other, to
bellow proper gratifications upon those to whol~e
loyaltyr and valour he had been indebted for his fuc-
cess. Tlhe former of these was in some measure ac-
complifhed, by appointing Pedro de Valdivia to
prosecute the conqluelt of Chili ; and by empowering
Diego Centeno to ulndertake the discovery of the

vast

B Or K vaff regions bordering on the river De la Plata,

C~13The reputation of those leaders, together with the
15s8 hopes of acquiring wealth, and of rising to confe.

qluence ini some unexplored country, alluring many
of the most indigent and der~perate soldiers to follow
their flandardis, drained off no inconsiderable por.
tion of that mutinous [pirit which Gafca dreaded.

,wag -lih THE latter was an affair of greater difficulty,
couirbhi and to be adjuffed with a more attentive and deli·
touawver~s, cate hand. The re~partimientos, or allotments of

lands and Indians which fell to be diffributed, in
consequence of the death or forfeiture of the for·
mer poffeffors, exceeded two millions of pesos of
yearly rent ". Gafca, when now abs~olute master
of this immense property, retained the fame difin-
tereited sentiments which he had originally pro·
sess~ed, and refaf~ed to reserve the fmnalleft portion
of it for himsel~f. But the number of claimants
w~as gr'eat; and whilst the vanity or avarice of
every individual fixed the value of his own services,
and effimated the recompence which he thought
due to him, the pretenflons of each were so extra.
vagant, that it was impoflible to satisfy all. Gakca
listened to them one by one, w-irh the most patient
attention; and that he might have leisure to weigh
the comparative merit of their several claims with
accuracy, he retired, with the archbish~op of Limna
and a fingrle secretary, to a village twelve leagues

a Vega, p. 11. lib. vi. c. 4*

from Cuzco. There he spent several days in allot. B O Oo K
ting to each a diffric? of lands and number of In- ~~l
dians, in proportion to his idea of their past s~er- s548.
vices and future importance. But that he might
get beyond the reach of the fierce florm of clamour
andrage, which he foresaw would burst out on the
publication of his decree, notwithflanding the im-
partial equity with which he had framed it, he s~et
out for Lima, leaving the infirument of partition
sealed up, with orders not to open it for some days
after his departure.

THE indigrnation excited by publiihing the de- AuP~g. 2o4*

cree of partition was not less than Gafca hact ex. tena t occa-
pecled. Vanity, avarice, emulation, envy, shame,
rage, and all the other pairons which most vehe-
mently agitate the minds of men when both their
honour and their interest are deeply affeaed, con-
spired in adding to its violence. It broke out with
all the fury of military insolence. Calumny,
threats, and curses, were poured out openly upon
the president. He was accused of ingfratitude, of
partiality, and of injuffice. Among soldiers
prompt to adion, such seditious discourse would
have been soon followed by deeds no less violent,
and they already began to turn their eyes towards
some discontented leaders, expe~ing themn to fland
forthin redress of their wrongs. By some vigorous
interpofitions of government, a timely check was
given to this mutinous spirit, and the danger

VoL. III. L of

a 0 0

> f another civil war was averted for the pre-

Sfent b

ses.· GASCA, however, perceiving that the flame was

Re-elta-
blirhes or- s~uppressed rather than extinguiihed, laboured with
der and go-
vemnment, the utmost affiiduity· to soothe the malcontents, by

bellowing large gratuities on some, by promifingf
repartimlientos, when they fell vacant, to others, and
by careffng and flattering all. But that the pub-
lic s~ecurity might reft on a foundation more flable
than their good affeaion, he endeavoured to
Itrengthen the hands of his successors in office, by
re-establishing- the regular adminiffration of juffice
in every part of the empire. He introduced order
and simplicity into the mocle of colle~ing the royal
revenue. He iflized regulations concerning the
treatment of the Indians, well calculated to proteea
them from oppreflion, and to provide for their in-
firuaion in the principles ofreligion, without de·
priving the Spaniards of the benefit accruing from

1sso. their labour. Having now accomplished every

objeat of his million, Gaifca, longing to return
again to a private flation, committed the govern·
ment of Peru to the court of audience, and set out

~nFeb. v for Spain. As, during the anarchy and turbulence
for Spain, of the four last years, there had been no remittance

made of the royal revenue, he carried with him

b Zarate, lib. v~i. c. 9. Gomara, c. 187. Vega, p. 11.

lib. vii. c. I, &c. Frnlandez, p. 11. lib. i. c. r, &rc. Elerrera,
dec. 8. lib. iv. c. 17, &rc.

thirteen

thirteen hundred thousand pesos of public money, a oTno 1
w~hich the ceconomy and order of his adminifkra. tc-
tion enabled him to favre, after paying all the ex. asso.
pences of the war.

He was received in his native country with uni. His recep·

tion there,

versal admiration of his abilities, and of his virtue,
Both were, indeed, highly conspicuous. Without
anny, or fleet, or public funds;j with a train so
Elmple, that only three thousand ducats were ex-
pended in equipping him 0, he s~et out to oppose
a formidable rebellion. By his address and talents
he supplied all those defelts, and seemed to create
infiruments for executing his designs. He ac-
quired such a naval force, as gave him the corn-
mand of the sea. He raised a body of men able
to cope with the veteran bands which gave law to
Peru. He vanquished their leader, on whose arms
viaory had hitherto attended, and in place of
anarchy and us~urpation, he eitablifhed the govern-
ment of laws, and the authority of the rightful so-
vereign. But the praise beffowed on his abilities
was exceeded by that which his virtue merited.
After residing in a country where wealth presented
allurements which had seduced every person who
had hitherto poffeffed power there, he returned
from that trying flation with integrity not only
untainted but unf~ufpeaed. After diffributing
among his countrymen poffeflions of greater ex-

* Fernandez, lib. ii. c. t8.

L 2 tent

B O O K tent and value than had ever been in the disposal of

nJ a f~ubjea in any age or nation, he himself remained

rsso. in his original state of poverty; and at the very

time, when he brought such a large recruit to the
royal treafhry, he was obliged to apply by petition
for a fmnall fum to discharge some petty debts
which he had contraaed during' the course of his
service d. Charles was not insensible to such difin.
terefted merit. Gafca was received by him with
the most distinguishing marks of esteem, and be·
ing promoted to the bishopric of Palencia, he
passed the remainder of his days in the tranquillity
of retirement, refpeAed by his country, honoured
by his sovereign, and beloved by all.

NOTWITHSTANDING allG-arca's wife regulations,

the tranquillity of Peru was not of long continu.
ance. In a country, where the authority of go.
vernment had been almost forgotten during the long
prevalence of anarchy and mis-rule, where there
were difappointed' leaders ripe for revolt, and fedi-
tious soldiers ready to follow them, it was not dif.
ficult to rais~e combuffion. Several f~uccefirve in·
f~urreaions desolated the country for some years.
But as those, though fierce, were only transient
florms, excited rather by the ambition and turbu-
lence of particular men, than by general or public
motives, the detail of them is not the objea of this
hiffory. These commotions in Peru, like every

d MS. penes me,

thing

thing of extreme violence either in the natural or B o o K
political body, were not of long duration, and by c--z
carrying off the corrupted humours which had 1sso.
given rife to the disorders, they contributed in the
end to firengthen the society which at firit they
threatened to destroy. During their fierce con-
tests, several of the first invaders of Peru, and many
of those licentious adventurers whom- the fame
of their s~uccess had allured thither, fell by each
other's hands. Each of the parties, as they alter-
nately prevailed in the firuggle, gradually cleared
the country of a number of turbulent spirits, by exe-
cuting, proscribing, or baniihing their opponents.
Men less enterprising, less desperate, and rnore ac-
cuffomed to move in the path offober and peace-
able induffry, fettled in Peru ; and the royal autho-
rity was gradually established as firmly there as in
the other Spanish colonies.

# BOOK VII.

THE

~H ISTORY

AMERIC A.

B O OK VII.

AS the conquest of the two great empires of a ~-r0· 0

Mexico and Peru forms the most s~plendid "

and interesting period in the hillory of America, a
view of their political inflitutions, and a defecrip-
tion of their national manners, will exhibit the
human species to the contemplation of intelli-
gent observers in a very singular flage of its pro-
grefs '.

WHEN compared with other parts of the New Mexicoann

World, Mexico and Peru may be considered as poihe thean
polished slates. Inficad of small, independent, Eh;,~,limiC
hostile tribes, fkruggling for f~ubiffence amidst
woods and marshes, firangoers to induffry and arts,
unticquainted with s~ubordination, and almost. with-
out the appearance of regular government, we find

a See NOTE XX.

L 4 colmtries

B 0 0 toK countries of great extent f~ubjeated to the dominion

~Jos one fove eign, the inhabitants collected toge·

ther in cities, the wisdom and foresight of ru·
lers employed in providing for the maintenance and
s~ecurity of the people, the emnpire of laws in some
meas~ure establish~ed, the authority of religion re·
cognized, many of the arts essential to life
brought to some degree of maturity, and the
daw~n of such as are ornamental beginning to
appear.

Their infe- BUT if the comparison be made with the people
rioe my on of the ancie~nt conltinent, the mnferiority of Ame·
of the anci-.
ent conti. rica in improvement will be conspicuous, and nel.
"ent. ther the Mexicans nor Peruvians will be entitled

to rank with those nations which merit the nameof
civilized. The people of both the great empires
in America, like the rude tribes around them,
were totally unacquainted with the of~eful metahs,
and the progres~s which they had made in extending
their dominion over the animal creation was in.
considerable. The Mexicans had gone no farther
than to tame and rear turkeys, ducks, a species of
fmnall dogs, and rabbits h. By this feeble essay of
ingenuity, the means of fubifftence were rendered
somewhat more plentiful and secure, than when
men depend solely on hunting; but they had no
idea of attempting to subdue the more robuff ani-
mlals, or of deriving any aid from their miniltry in

b Nterrera, dec. ii. lib. viL. c. i2.

carrymng

carrying on works of labour. The Peruvians seem B OV O K
to have negleaed the inferior animals, and had y
not rendered any of them domeffic except the
duck; but they were more fortunate in taming
the Llama, an animal peculiar to their country,
of a form which bears s~ome resemblance to a deer,
and some to a camel, and is of a size somewhat lar-
ger than a sheep. Under the protet~ion of man,
this species multiplied greatly. Its wool furnished
the Peruvians with clothing, its flesh with food.
it was even employed as a beast of burden, and
carried a moderate load with much patience and
docility ". It was never used for draught ; and the
breed being confined to the mountainous country,
its service, if we may judge by incidents which
occur in the early Spanish~ writers, was not very
extensive among the Peruvians in their original
slate.

IN tracing the line by which nations proceed

towards civilization, the dis~covery of the us~eful
metals, and the acquisition of dominion over the
animal creation, have been marked as fleps of ca-
pital importance in their progres~s. In our conti-
nent, long after men had attained both, society
continued in that Itate which is denominated bar-
barous. Even with all that command over nature
which there confer, many ages elapse, before in1-
duffry becomes so regular as to render f~ubif~tence

a Vega, p. I. lib. vili. c. 16. Zarate, lib. i. c. 14*

3 secure,

K

0s secure, befor·e the arts which supply the wants and
cv furnith the accommodations of life are brought to

any confideraible degree of perfeaion, and before
any idea is co nceived of various inflitutions requisite
in a well-ordlered society. The 1Wexicans and Pe·
ruvians, without knowledge of the useful metals, or
the aid of domeffic animals, laboured under difad.
vantages which must have greatly retarded their pro.
gref~s, an~d in their hig~hest slate of improvement their
power w·as to limited, and their operations to feeble,
that the~y can hardly be considered as having ad·
vanced lbeyond the infancy of civil life.

Viewk of the ASTI:R this general observation concerning the
infuitutions
and manners most fisagular and distinguishing circumitance in

rec. the slate: of both the great empires in America, I

shall encleavour to give such a view of the confiti
tution and interior police of each, as may enable us
to alcertain their place in the political s~cale, to allot
them their proper flation between the rude tribes in
the New W~orld, and the polished slates of the an·
cient, and to determine how far they had risen
above the former, as well as how much they fellbe·
low the latter.

Imperfet MVEXIco was first f~ubjeaed to the Spanish crown.
information
concernmsg But our acquaintance with its laws and manners
those: of
PNexico. is not, from that circumitance, more complete.

What I have remarked concerning the defe8ive
and inaccurate information on which we mult rely
with refped to the condition and cuffoms of the

savage

savage tribes in America, may be applied likewise B O O K
to our knowledge of the Mexican empire. Cortes, cN-
and the rapacious adventurers who accompanied
him, had not leisure or capacity to enrich either
civil or natural hiffory with new obs~ervations. They
undertook their expedition in quest of one objea,
and seemed hardly to have turned their eyes to.
wards any other. Or, if during some short inter-
val of tranquillity, when the occupations of war
ceased,( and the ardour of plunder was sus~pended,
the inflitutions and manners of the people whom
they had invaded drew their attention, the inquiries
of illiterate soldiers were conduaed with s~o little
sagacity and precision, that the accounts given by
them of the policy and order established in the
Mexican monarchyare s~uperficial, confus~ed, and in-
explicable. It is rather from incidents which they
relate occallonally, than from their own deduaions
and remarks, that we are enabled to form s~ome idea
of the genius and manners of that people. The
obscurity in which the ignorance of its conquerors
involved the annals of 1Vexico, was augmented by
the superstition of those who s~ucceeded them. As
the memory of past events was preserved among the
Mexicans by figures painted on fkrins, on cotton
cloth, on a kind of pasteboard, or on the bark of
trees, the early millionaries, unable to comprehend
their meaning, and firuck with their uncouth forms,
conceived them to be monuments of idolatry which
ought to be destroyed, in order to facilitate the con-
verflon of 1;he Indians. In obedience to an edia

issued

B O O K iIfued by Juan de Zummaraga, a Francis~can monk,

L- thefirit bishop of Mexico, as many records of the

ancient Mexican flory as could be colleaed were
committed to the flames. In consequence of this
fanatical zeal of the monks who first visited New
Spain (which their successors .soon began to la·
mlent), whatever knowledlge of remote events such
rude monuments contained was almoRt entirely loft,
and no information remained concerning the an.
cient revolutions and policy of the empire, but
what was derived from tradition, or from some frag·
ments of their hillorical paintings that escaped the
barbarous researches of Zummaraga d. From the
experience of all nations it is manifest, that the me·
mory of palt tranfa~ions can neither be long pre.
served, nor be tranfmnitted with any fidelity, by
tradition. The Mexican paintings, which arefup.
posed to have served as annals of their empire, are
few in number, and of ambiguous meaning. Thus,
amidst the uncertainty of the former, and the ob.
fcurityof the latter, we muff glean what intelligence
can be colleaed from the scanty materials feattered
in the Spanish writers #.

AccoRDING

d Acofla, lIb. vi. c. 7. Torquem. Proem. TIb. 1. lib.;if.

c. 6. lib. xiv. c. 6.

* In the first edition, I oblerved that in consequence of the

deffruaion of the ancient Mexican paintings, occafloned by the
zeal of Zummaraga, whatever knowledge they might have
conveyed was entirely loss. Every candid reader must have
perceived that the exprei~on was inaccurate; as in a fnr

'AccoRDmw to the account of the Mexicans B O O K

VII.

themselves, their empire was not of long duration. c-

. . Origin of the

Their country, as they relate, was originally pof Mexican monarchy.
sessed, rather than peopled, by fmnall independent

tribes,

lInes afterwards I mention some ancient paintings to be Ritll
extant. M. Clavigero, not satisfied with laying hold of th~is
inaccuncy, which I correCaed in the fublequent editions, la-
bours to render it more glaring, by the manner in which he
quotes the remaining part of the sentence. He reprehends
with great asperity the account which I give of the scanty
materials for writing the ancient hiffory of M/exico. Vol. I.
Accountof Writers, p. xxvi. V. II. 380. My words, how-
ever, are almost the fame with those of Torquemada, who
seems to have been better acquainted with the ancient monu-
ments of the Mexicans than any Spanish author whole works
I have seen. Lib. xiv. c. 6. M. Clavigero himself gives a
defeription of the de~ltruaion of ancient paintings in almost
the fame terms· I have used; and mentions, as an additional
reason of there being so small a number of ancient paintinge
known to the Spaniards, that the natives have become so
solicitous to preserve and conceal them, that it is " difficult,
" if not impossible, to make them part with one of them."
Vol. L 407- II- 194. No point can be more ascertained
than that few of the Mexican hifforical paintings have been
preserved. Though several Spaniards have carried on in-
quiries into the antiquities of the Mexican empire, no en-
gravings from Mexican paintings have been communicated
tothe public, except those by Purchas, Gemelli Carreri, and
Lorenzana. It affords me some fatisfaaion, that in the
course of my researches, I have dilcovered two colleations of
M~exican paintings which were unknown to former inquirers.
The cut which I published is an exas copy of the original,
and gives no high idea of the progress which the Mexicans had
made in the art of painting. I cannot conjeature what could
induce PId. Clavigero to express logue diffatisfaalion with me

for

B O O K tribes, whos~e mode of life and manners resembled

I those of the rudest fagvages which we have de.

feribed. But about a period corresponding to the
',eginning of the tenth century in the C'hriftian
;aera, s~everal tribes moved in fuccellive migrations
from unknown regions towards the north and
north-west, and fettled in different provinces of
Anahuac, the ancient name of New Spain. * These,
more civilized than the original inhabitants, jegan
to form them to the arts of s~ocial life. At length,
towards the commencement of the thirteenth cen.
tury, the Mexicans, a people more polished than
any of the former, advanced from the border of
the Californian gulf, and took poffeffion of the

for having published it without the fame colours it has in the
original painting. p. xxix. He might have recolleaed, that
neither Purchas, nor Gemelli Carreri, nor Lorenzana, thought
it necessary to colour the prints which they have publilhed,
and they have never been censured on that account. He may
reft athured, that though the colours in the paintings in the
Imperial Library are remarkably bright, they are laid on
without art, and without " any of that regard to light and
a shade, or the rules of perfpeAive," which M. Clavigero
requires. V. II. 378.· - If the public express any desire to hane
t~he seven paintingas flill in my poffeffion engraved, I am
ready to communicate them. The print published by Ge·
melli Carreri, of the route of the ancient Mexicans whenthey
travelled towards the lake on which they built the capitaldi
their empire, Churchill, Vol. IV. p. 48I, is the moftfinifhed
Inonument of art brought from the New World, and yet a very
flight infpeftion of it will satisfy every one, that the annahs
of a nation conveyed in this manner must be very meagre and

5 plains~

plains adjacent to the great lake near the centre of a o~v: K
the country. After residing there about fifty years,
they founded a town, since diflingulfhed by the
name of Mexico, which from humble beginnings
soon grew to be the most considerable city in the
New W~orld. The Mlexicans, long after they were
established in their new pofifefions, continued, like
other martial tribes in America, unacquainted with
regal dominion, and were governed in peace, and
condu~ted ih war, by s~uch as were entitled to pre-
eminence by their wisdom or their valour. But
among them, as in other itates whos~e power and
territories become exteniive, the supreme autho-
rity centered at las1 in a single person; and when
the Spaniards under Cortes invaded the country,
Mdontezuma was the ninth monarch in order who
had swayed the Mexican s~ceptre, not by hereditary
right, but by ele~tion.

Sucn is the traditional tale of the Mexicans con. very v scent
cerning the progress of their own empire. Ac-
cording to this, its duration was very short. From
the firit migration of their parent tribe, they can
reckon little more than three hundred years. From
the establishment of monarchical government, not
above a hundred and thirty-years, according to
one account e, or a hundred and ninety-f~even, ac-
cording to another computation ', had elaps~ed. If,

* Acoft. Hist. lib. tii. c. 8, &c. f Purchas Pilgr. iii.

p. 168, &c.

B o 4~ K On one hand, we suppose the Mexican slate to

~L13 have been of higher antiquity, and to have sub.

sifted during such a length of time as the Spaniih
enecounts of its civilization would naturally lead us
to conclude, it is difficult to conceive how, among
a people who poffeffed the art of recording events
by piaures, and who considered it as an essential
part of their national education, to teach their
children to repeat the hifforical songs which cele·
brated the exploits of their anceffors p, the know·
ledge of past tranfa~ions should be so slender and
limited. If, on the other hand, we adopt their
own fyfitem with refpea to the antiquities of their
nation, it is no less difficult to account either for
that improved state of faciety, or for the extensive
dominion to which their empire had attained, when
first visited by the Spaniards. The infancy of na·
tions is so long, and, even when every circumstance
is favourable to their progres~s, they advance so
fiowly towards any maturity of firength or policy,
that the recent origin of the Mexicans seems tob6es
firong presumption of some exaggeration, in the
splendid deferiptions which have been given of their
government and manners.

raassarhch UT it is not by theory or conjeaures that his·

p~fR~ogr in: tory decides with regard to the slate or charaCter of

nations. It produces faas as the foundation of
every judgment which it ventures to pronounce. In

g Herrera, dec. 3. 11b. ii. c. 18.

collecting

collec~ing those which must re-gulate our opinlion B O O K"
in the pres~ent inqjuiry, famle occur that su~ggest an ~
idea of considerable progress in civilization in the
Mexican empire, and othecrs which fLeem to indi-
cate that it had advanced but little beyond the fa-
vage tribes around it. Both shall be exhibited to
t~he view of the reader, that, from comparing them,
he may determine on which fide the evidence pre-
ponderates.

IN the Mexican empire, the right of private pro. rhe ight or
ety was perfeQly undlerflood, and effablifhed in <~l 7 al-
its full extent. Among· several savage tribes, we
have seen, that the idea of a title to the separate and
exclusive poffeflion of any ob~j ec was hardly known ;
and that among all, it was extremely limited and
ill-defined. But in M~exico, w-here agriculture and
inlduffry had made some progress, the diftination be-
tween property in land and property in goods had
taken place. Both might be transferred from one
person to another by sale or barter; both might
descend by inheritance. Ev·ery person who could
be denominated a freeman had property in land.
This, however, they held by various tenures. Some
poff~effed it in full right, and it descended to their
heirs. The title of others to their lands was de-
rived from the office or dignity which they enjoyed ;
and when deprived of the latter, they loft poss~es-
sion of the former. Both there modes of occupy-
ing land were deemed noble, and peculiar to citi-
zens of the highest class. The tenure, by which

VoL. III. Ml the

B O O~ K the great body of the people held their property,

~Iwas very different. In every diftria acertain quan-

tity of land was measured out in proportion to the
number of families. This was cultivated by the
joint labour of the whole; its produce was depo.
sited in a common florehoufe, and divided among
them according to their ref~pe~ive exigrencies. The
members of the Calpulllee, or associations, could not
alienate their share of the common eftat'e; it was
an indivisible permanent property, deftin'ed for the
s~upport of their families h. 111 COnsequence of this
di ftrib uti on ofth eterri tory of th e iate, every man had
an interest in its welfare, and the happiness of the
individual was conneaed with the public security.

*rse numher ANOTHER firiking circumffance, which diftin·
and great-
ners orch~eir guilhes the Mexican empire from those nations in

ne. America we have already described, is the num.

ber and greatness of its cities. WNhile society con·
tinues in a rude slate, the wants of men are to
few, and they stand so little in need of mutual aE
fiftance, that their inducements to crowd together
are extremely feeble. Their induffry at the fame
time is so imperfeQ, that it cannot secure fubfilt·
ence for any considerable number of families set·
tied in one spot. They live dispersed, at this pe.
riod, front choice as well as from neceflity, or at
the utmost affelmblee in small hamlets on the banks
of the river which supplies them with food, or on

h Herrera, dec. 3. lib. iv. c. ly. Torquem. Mon. Ind,

lib. xiv. c. i. Corita, MS.

the border of some plain left open by nature, or B o O K
dleared by their own labour. The Spaniards, ac- · -
cuffomed to this mode of habitation among all the
fiavage tribes with which they w·ere hitherto ac-
quainted, were aflonifh~ed, on entering New Spain,
to find the natives residing in towns of s~uch extent
as resembled those of Europe. In the firff fervour of
their admiration, they compared Zempoalla, though
a town only of the second or third size, to the ci-
ties of greatest note in their own country. WVhen,
afterwards, they visited in fuccellion Tlalcala, Cho-
lula, Tacuba, Tezeuco, and Mexico itself, their
amazement increas~ed to much, that it led them to
convey ideas of their magnitude and populous-
nelsbordering on what is incredible. Even when
there is leisure for observation, and no interest that
leads to deceive, conje61ural estimates of the num-
ber of people in cities are extremely loose, and
usually much exaggerated. It is not s~urprising,
then, that Cortez and his companions, little ac-
cultomed to such computations, and powerfully
tempted to magnify, in order to exult the merit of
their own discoveries and conquests, should have
been betrayed into this common error, and have
raised their deferiptions considerably above truth.
For this reas~on, some considerable abatement ought
to be made from their calculations of the number
of inhabitants in the Mexican cities, and we may
fix the flandard of their population much lower
than they have done; but itill they will appear
to be cities of s~uch consequence, as are not to be

M 2 found

B O-: O found but nmongr people who have made forne

Lc considerable progre~ss in the arts of faocial, life',

From th~eir accounts, we can hardly fuppofeMexico,
the capital of the empire, to have contained fewer
than sixty thousand inhabitants.~

se Da ra. TFIE fepalration of profeflons amongr the Mexi.
anions cTpo ans is a fymptome of imlprovemnent no less remark.

able. Arts, in the early agecs offociety, are so few
and so simple, that each man is fuffciently mafrer
of them all, to gratify every demand of his own
limited desires. The savage can form his bow,
point his arrows, rear his hut, and hollow his ca-
noe, without cal:ing in the aid of any hand more
fikilful than his own. Time muff have augmented
the antsnr of men and rip~ened th~eir ing!renuity, be-
fore the produa~ions of art became so comlplicated
in their f7iruaure, or so curious in their fabric, that
a particular coulrfe of education was requilite to!
wards forming the artificer to expertness in con·
trivancce and workmanifhip. In proportion as re-
finement spreads, the diftinalion of psrofefiTons in·
creases, and they branch out into more numerous
and minute fubdiviflons. AmnthMecns
this separation of the arts neceffry in life had tak~en
place to a considerable extent. T'he funalons of
the mason, the weaver, the g~oldfmnith, the painter,
and" of feveral'I' othe crafts, were carried on by dif.
ferent persons. Each was regullarly infiruaed in
his calling. To it alone his induffry was confined;
and by ailiduous application to one objjeat, together

i See NTOTE XXLI

tvith the persevering patience pecuiar to Ameri. " o 0
cans, their artizans attained to a degree of neatners LMr
and perfeaion in work, far beyond what could have
been expeaed from the rude tools which they em-
ployed. Their various produaions were brought
into commerce; and by the exchange of them in
the slated markets held in the cities, not only were
their mutual wants fulpplied k, in s~uch orderly in-
tercourfe as charaterizes an improved state of so-
cietyr, but their induitry was daily rendered perse-
vering and inlventive.

THE difrindion of ranks el'tablifhed in the Mlexi- Thle crinine-

tion of

can empire is the nexct circumflance that merits at- ranks.
tention. In f~urveyingr the savage trib~es of Ame-
rica, we observed, that consciousnes~s of equality,
and impatience of s~ubordination, are sentiments na-
tural to man in the infancy of civil life. During ·
peace, the authority of a superior is hardly felt
among them, and even in war it is but little ac.
knowledged. Strangers to the idea of property,
the difference in condition refrulting from the in.
equality of it is unknown. Birth or titles confer
no pre-eminence; it is only by personal inerit and
accomplishments that diflinal-on can be acquired.
The form of society was very dirferent among the
Mexicans. The great body of the people was in a
moss humiliating slate. A considerable number,

k Cortes Relat. ap. Ramul. 11. 239, &c. Goni. Cron. c.

79. Torquem. lib. xiii. c. 34. Herrera, dec. 2. lib. vii. c.

Iknown

M 3

Bq a 0l K known by the name of Ma7yegu1es, nearly resembling

~CYI~in condition thos~e peasants who, under various de.

nominations, were considered, during the preva·
lence of the feudtal fytem, as infiruments of labour
attached to the foil. The Maycquescould not change
their place of residence without permiflion of the
superior on whom they depended. They were
conveyed, together with the lands on which they
were fettled, from one proprietor to another; and
were bound to cultivate the ground, and to per-
form several kinds of servile work '. Others were
reduced to the lowieft: form of f~ubjeclion, that of do·
meftic servitude, and felt the utmnoft rigour of that
wretched slate. Their condition was held to be so
vile, and their lives deemed to be of so little value,
that a pers~on who killed one of thos~e slaves was
not fubjeaed to any punishment m. Even those
considered as freemen were treated by their haughty
lords as beings of an inferior species. The nobles,
poffeffed of ample territories,~ were divided into
various claires, to each of which peculiar titles of
honour belonged. Some of these titles, like their
lands, descended from father to fan in perpetual
fuccetion. Others were annexed to particular of-
fices, or conferred during life as markts of personal
difitinc~ion ". The monarch, exalted above all, en·
joyed extenive power, and supreme dignity. Thus

I Herrera, dec. 3. lib. iv. c. I7. Corita, MS.
m H-errera, dec. 3. lib. iv. c. 7.
* Herrera, dec. 3. lib.iv. c. 15. Carita, MS.

the diftinaion of~ranks was completely effablifhed, a 0 0 zc

VII.

in a line of regular subordination, reaching from ~~
the highest to the lowest member of the ·commu-
nity. Each of there knew what he could claim, and
wHhat heowed.~ The people, who were not allowed
to wear a dress of the fame fashion, or to dwell in
houses of a form similar to thos~e of the nobles, ac-
costed them with the most f~ubmillive reverence. In
the presence of their sovereign, they durit not lift
their eyes from the ground, or look him in the
faceo. The nobles thems~elves, when admitted to
an audience of their sovereign, entered bare-footed,
in ~mean garments, and, as his slaves, paid him ho-
mage approaching to adoration. This refpe60 due
from inferiors to those above them in rank, was
preferibed with such ceremonious accuracy, that it
incorporated with the language, and influenced its
genius and idiom. The Mexican tongue abounded
in expressions of reverence and courtesy. The stile
and appellations, used in the intercours~e between
equals, would have been so unbecoming in the
mouth of one in a lower sphere, when he accolled a
person in higher rank, as to be deemed an insult P.
It is only in societies, which time and the inflitution
of regular government have moulded into form,
that we find s~uch an orderly arrangement of men
into different ranks, arid such nice attention paid to
their various rights.

* H~errera, dec* 3. Tib. 11. c. 14-
I See NOTE XXII.

Ill 4 TH E

B 0vr " THE s`pirit of the Mexricans, thus familiarized

Lc--& and bended to subordin~ation, was prepared for sub.

'Their politi-
cal connaiu. mitting to monarchical government. But the de·
tion. faliptions of their policy and laws, by the Spa.

niards who overturned them, are so, inaccurate and
conitradiaory, that it is dillicult to delineate the
form of their confittitlron with any precision. Some-
times they represen~t the monarchs of Mexico as
absolute, deciding according to their pleadure,
with refpeQ to every operation of the slate. On
other occallons, we difrcover the traces of efta·
blifhed cufioms andc laws, framed in order to cir·
cumfcribe the power of the crown, and we meet
with rights and privileges of the nobles which s~eem
to be opposed as barriers againfl its encroachments.
This appearance of inconfiflency has arise~n from
inattention to the innovations of Montezuma upon
the Mexican policy. His aspiring ambition sub·
verted the-original ijyftem of government, and in-
troduced a pure defrpotifmn. H-e disregarded the
ancient laws, violated the privileges held moss
sacred, and reduced his fubjeas of every order to
the level of slaves r. The chiefs, or nobles of the
sirs1 rankr, s~ubmitted to the yokie with such reluc·
tance, that, from imnpat-ience to thake it off, and
hope of recovering their rights, many of them
courted the protea~ion of Cortes, and joined a so.
reign power againit their domeffic oppressor '. It

r Herrera, dec. 3. I11. i;. c. 14. Torquem. lIb. ii. c. 69.
S H-errer~a, d~c.2. lib!. v. c. r0, rl. Torquem lib. iv. c. 49*

isnot then under the dominion of M~ontezuma, but B 0 0 K

VII

under the government of his predecessors, that we
can discover what wras the original form and genius
of Maexuican policy. From the foundation of the
monarchy to the eclaion of Montezuma, it seems
to have fublifted with little variation. That body
of citizens, which. may be difling~uifh~ed by the
narme of nobility, formed the chief an~d most re-
fpeaable order in the slate. They were of varios
ranks, as has been already observ~ed, and their
honours were acquired and tranfmnittedl in different
manners. Their number seems to have been g~reat.
According to an author accuffomed to examine
with attention what he relates, there -were in th~e
Mi'exican empire thirty of this order, each ofw~homn
had in his territories about a hundred thousand
people, and fulbordinate to there, ther-e were about
three thousand nobles of a lower class '. The ter-
ritories belonging to the chiefs of Tezeuco and'
Tacuba, were hardly inferior in extent to those of
the Mexican monarch II. Each of there poffeffed
complete territorial jurifdi~tion, and levied taxsw
from their own vafits. But all followed the flan:~
dard of Mlexico in wvar, se~rving writh a number of
inen in proportion to their domain, and moit of
them paid tribute to its monarch as their superior
lord.

IN tracing those great lines of the M~exican con-

flitution, an image of feudal policy in its most

I Herrera, dec. 2. lib!. vili. c. 12.

U Torquem. lib. ii. 0 5~7. Corita, MlS,

17 rigidl

B O O~ K rigid form ris~es to view, and we discern its three

L- distinguishing charaderiffics, a nobility poffeffingg

almost independent authority, a people depressed
into the lowest slate of f~ubjedion, and a king en.
trusted with the executive power of the slate. Its
[~pirit and principles seem to have operated in the
New World in the fame manner, as in the ancient.
The jurifdition of the crown was extremely limit-
ed. All real and effeaive authority was retained
by the Mexican nobles in their own hands, and the
shadow of it only left to the king. Jealous to ex.
cess of their own rights, they guarded with most
vigilant anxiety againfe the encroachments of their
fosvereigns. By a fundamental law of the empire,
it was provided that the king thould not determine
concerning any point of general importance, with·
out the approbation of a council composed of the
prime nobility x. Unless he obtained their consent
he could not engage the nation in war, nor could
he dispose of the most considerable branch of tha
public revenue at pleasure; it was appropriated to
certain purposes from which it could not be di-
verted by the regal authority alone y. In order to fe.
cure full effedt to thos~e conflitutional reffraints, the
Mexican nobles did not permit their crown to de-
scend by inheritance, but dispos~ed of it by ele8ion.
The right of ele~ion seems to have been originally

X Herrera, dec* 3. lib. ii. c. 19. Id. dec. 3. lib. iv. c.16.

Corita, MS.

r Herrera, dec* 3. lib. iv. c. 17.

velted

velled in the whole body of nobility, but was after- B o o it

VlII

wards committed to fix eletors, of whom the
Chiefs of Tezeuco and Tacuba were always two.
From ref~ped for the family of their monarchs, the
choice fell generally upon some person s~prung
frorn it. But as the aaivity and valour of their
prince were of greater moment to a people perpe-
tually engaged in war, than a firiat adherence to
the order of birth, collaterals of mature age or of
diflinguifhedd merit were often preferred to those
who were nearer the throne in direa descent Z. To
this m'axim i~n their policy, the Mexicans appear
to be indebted for fulch a ~fucceflion of able and
warlike princes, as raised· their empire in a short
period to that extraordinary height of powrer,
which it had attained when Cortes landed in Nely
Spain.

WIHILE the jurif~diaion of the IMexican mO- Powfer nd

splendour of

narchs continued to be limited, it is probable that their mo-
it was exercised with little ostentation. But as ac.
their authority became more extensive, the fplen-
dour of their goveprnment augnmented. It was in
this last slate that the Spaniards beheld it; and,
firuck with the appearance of Rontezuma's court,
they describe its pomp at great length, arid with
much admiration. The number of his attendants,
the order, the silence, and the reverence with

: Acofia, lib. vi. c. 24. Herreta, dec.g 3, 11. 1. c. I J
Corita, MS.

·which

B 0 a x which they served him; the extent of his royal

~LL--~-inanflon, the variety of its apartments allotted to

differentt officers, and the ostentation with which
his grandeur was display·ed, wrhenever he permitted
his fubjecas to behold him, seem to resemble the
inagnificence of the ancient monarchics in Asia,
rather than the simplicity of the infant slates in the
New W~orld.

I Bxr it was not in the mere parade of royalty

vem~menlt, that the M~exican potentates exhibited their power,

they manifested it more beneficially in the order
stnd regularity with w~hich they conduaed the in·
ternal adminiffration and police of their dominions.
Complete jurif~idiaion, civil as well as crirninal,
over its own immediate vassals, was vefied in the
crown. Judges were appointed for each depart·
rnent, and if we may rely on the account which
the Spanish writers give of the maxims and lawvs
upon which they founded their deciflons with re·
[peQ to the diffribution of property and the punish.
mrent of crimes, justice was adminiffred in the
Mexican empire, with a degree of order and eqluity
refemlinglll whiat takei s place in societies highly
civilized.

Provison THIEIR attention in providing for the support of
for the sup.
yort out. government was not les~s ag~acious. Taxes were

laid upon land, upon the acquisitions of induffry,
and upon commodities of every h~ind expo~sed to
sa~le in the public markrets. Thiefe duties were

considerable,

were imposed according to eltabliihed rules, ~ y
and ea\ch knew wvhat thare of the common burdext
he had to bear. As the use of money was unknown,
all the taxes were paid in kind, and thus not only
the naturall prodd~ions .0f all the di~ffrent pro·
yinlces in the empire, but every [p~ecies of manufac-
tur~e, and every work of ingenuity and art, were
colle~ted in the pucbl'ic flore- houses. Fr-om thos~e the
emp~eror supplied his numerous train of attendants
in peace, and his armies during war, with food,
with clothes, and ornaments. People of inferior
condition1, neither poffeffingr land nor engaged in
commerce, were bound to the performzance of va-
rious s~ervices. By their slated labour the crowvn-
lands were cultivated, public works were carried
on, and the various houles belongring to the emperor
w-ere builk and kept in repair ".

TH-E improved sla~te of government amo~ng the Their rouse

Ilexicans is consp~icuous, not only in points essen-
tial to the being of a well-ordered faciety, but in
several regulations of inferior consequence with re-
fpeB to police. The inflitution which I have al-
ready mentione~d, of public couriers, flationed at
proper intervals, to convey intellig~ence from one
part of the empire to the other, was a refinement
in police not introduced into anly kingdom of Eu-

a Herrera, dec. 2. lib. vii. c. 13. dec* 3. lib. iv. c. I6, 17.

Sce NOTE XXIII.

~rope

a O O~ K rope at that period. The ftruture of the capital

c city in a lake, with artificial dykes, and causeways

of great length, which fervred as avenues to it front
different quarters, ereaed in the water, with no
less ingenuity than labour, s~eems to be an idea that
could not have occurred to any but a civilized
people. The fame observation may be applied to
the ftruaure of the aqueduas, or conduits, by
which they conveyed a fiream of fr-esh water, front
a considerable dillance, into the city, along one
of the causeways b. The appointment of a num·
ber of persons to clean the itheets, to light them by
fires kindled in diff~erent places, and to patrole as
watchmen duringa the night ', discovers a degree
of attention which even polifhled nations are late in
acquiring.

nheir ants. THE progres~s of the Mexicans in various arts, is

considered as the most decisive proof of their fupe-
rior refinlement. Cortes, and the early Spanish au·
thors, defecribe this with rapture, and maintain,
that the most celebrated European artiits could
not surpass or even equal them in ingenuity and
neatness of workmanship. They repref~eated men,
animals, and other objeas, by s~uch a difpolition
of various coloured feathers, as is fagid to have pro.
duced all the effeas of lig~ht and thade, and to have
imitated nature with truth and delicacy. Their

b See NOTE XXIV.
C Herrera, dec. 2. lib. viii. c. 4. Torribio, MS.

I 8 ornaments

ornaments of gold and fiver have been deferibed a o 0 re

Vil.

to be~ of a fa,~bric no les~s curious. But in' forming ~y+
any idea, from general descriptions, concerning the
sLate of arts among nations imperfealy poliihed,
we are extremely ready to ert. 1In examining the
workts of people whofce advances in improvement
are nearly the fame with our own, we view them
with a critical, and oiften with a jealous eye.
Whereas, when conscious of our own superiority,
pve survey the arts of nations comparatively rude,
wye are aitonifhed at works ex~ecuted by them un-
der such manife~t disadvantages, and, in the warmth
of our admiration, are apt to represent them as
produCtions more finished than they really are. To
the influence of this illution, without fuppoiing
any intention to deceive, we may impute- the
exaggeration offome Spanish authors, in their ac-
counts of the Mexican arts.

Ir is not from those descriptions, but from con-

fidering fach specimens of their arts as are still pre-
served, that we must decide concerning their de-
gree of merit. As the ship in .which Cortes sent
to Charles V. the most curious produaions of the
Ivlexican artisans, which were colleaed by the
Spaniards when they first pillaged the empire, was
takien by a French* corsair ", the remlains of their
ingenuity are les~s numerous than thos~e of the Pe-
ruvians. Whether any of their works with sea.

d Relac. de Cort. Ramui. iii. 294, F.

thers,

s o 0 sr thers, in imitation of painting, be flill extant in

L~vJ Spain, I have not learnled; but many of their or·

naments in gold and silver, as well as varioug
utensils employed in common life, are deposited in
the magnificent cabinet of natural and artificial
produtions, lately opened by the kiing of Spain;
and I am informed by persons on wnhofe judgment
and talle I can rely, that there boasted effortss of
their art are uncouthrepref~entations of comnton ob.
jeats, or vrery coarse images of the human and some
other forms, destitute of grace and propriety".
The jui~nefs of there obs~ervations is confirmed by
infpeting the wooden prints and copper-plat~es of
their paintings, wh~ich have be·en published by va·
rious authors. In them every figuare of men, of
quadrup~eds, or birds, as well as every reprefenta·
tion of inanimalted nature, is extremely rude and
aukwvard #. TIhe hardest Egyptian stile, fliff and

imperfed

* See NiOTE XXV.
* As a fpecimrenl of the ipirit and fille in; whIich Mi. Claviger6

makes his:!riCtures up~on my History of America, I sh~all publilh
his remarks upon this paitrae. "L Thus far Robrertfon; to
'' whom we anfwver, firit, That there is no reason to beiere
"- that those rude works were really Mexican; secon~dly,
** That ne~ither do we know whether th~ose perfonsin w~hole
<' ju~dgment he conf~iies, may be persons tit to merit our faith,
** hecau:fe we have oblerved that Ro'oertfon trusts frequlently
** to the teitimony of Gagez, Correatl, Ibagnez, and other
** fAch authors, wh~o are entireliy undeferving oferedit.-
** Thirdly, It is mor,- probablle that the ar·ms ~f copper, be.
** lieved by those intelligrent judge~s to be certainily Orie~ntdi,
** arec really- M/exican." Vol. II, 39I. - W~hen an authior,

Bur however low the Mexi;can paintings may
be ranked, when viewed merely as works of art,

a very

not entirely deffitute of integrity or diicernment, and who has
some solicitude about his own charaater, asserts that he re-
ceived his information concerning any particullar point from
persons "Lon whole judgment and tasse he can rely;" a very
slender degree of candour, one thould think, might induce
the reader to believe that he does not endeavour to impose
upon the public by an appeal to testimony altogether unworthy
of credit. My information concerning the Mexican works of
art deposited in the King of Spain's cabinet, was received
from the late Lord Grantham, ambass~ador extraordinary from
the court of London to that of Madrid, and from Mr. Arch-
deacon Wladdilove, chaplain to the embassy·; and it was upon
their authority that I pronounced the coat of armour, men-
tioned in the note, to be of Oriental fabrick. As they
were both at Madrid in their pulblic chara~ter, when the firit
edition of the Hiffory of America was published, I thought
it improper at that time to mention their names. Did their
decision concerning a matter of taste, or their teltimony con-
cerning apoint of faB, fland in need of confirmation, I might
produce the evidence of an intelligent traveller, who, in de-
scribing the royal cabinet of Madrid, takes notice that it con-
tains " specimens of Mexican and Peruvian utenfdls, vases,
" &c. in earthen-ware, wretched both in taste and execution."
Dillon's Travels through Spain, p. 77. As Gage composed
his Survey of Newr Spain with all the zeal and acrimany of a
new convert, I have paid little regard to his testimony withl
refpe61 to points relatings to religion. But as he resided in
several provinces in New Spain, which travellers seldom visit,
and as he seems to have observed their manners and laws
with an intelligent cye, I have availed myftlf of hris infor-

VoL. III. N mation

B ovu: to a very different flation belongs to them, when

G~-L~confidered as the records of their country, as hifto·

rical monuments of its policy and tranfaaions;
and they become curious as well as intereffing ob.
jeas of attention. The noblest and most beneficial
invention of which human ingeriuity can boast, is
that of writing. But the first essays of this art,
which hath contributed more than all others to the
improvement of the species, were very rude, and
it advanced towards perfeaion slowly, and by a
gradual progreflion. When the warrior, eager
for fame, wished to transmit some knowledge of
his exploits to succeeding ages; when the grati.
tude of a people to their sovereign prompted them
to hand down an account of his beneficent deeds
to pofferity; the first method -of accomplishing)
this, which seems to have occurred to them, was to
delineate, in the best manner they could, figures
representing the a~tion of which they were folici.
tous to preserve the memoi-y. Of this, which has
very properly been called pic~ure-writing ', we find
traces among some of the mos1 savage tribes of
America. When a leader returns from the field,

mation with refped to matters w·here religious opinion could
have little influence. Correal I have seldom quoted, and
never refled upon his evidence alone. T~he flation in which
Ibagnez was employed in America, as well as the credit given
to his veracity by printing hris Regno Jefuitico among the
large colleation of documents published (as I believe by au·
thority) at Madr-id, A. D. I767, juffifies me for appealing to
his authority.

SDivine Legrat. of Moses, 111i. 73-

he firips a tree of its bark, and with red paint B O OI K
kcratches upon it some uncouth figures which re- yc
present the order of his march, the number of his
followers, the enemy whom he attacked, the fealps
and captives which he brought home. To thos~e
simple annals he trusts for renown, and soothes
himself with hope that by their means he shall re-
ceive praise from the warriors of future times r.

COMPARED with those aukward essays of their
savage countrymen, the paintings of the Mexicans
may be considered as works of composition and de-
sign. They were not acquainted, it is true, with
any other method of recording tranfaaions, than
that of delineating the objeas.which they withed
to represent. But they could exhibit a more com-
plex se~ries of events in progressive orgler, and de-
feribe, by a proper disposition of figures, the oc-
currences of a king's reign from his accellion to
his death; the progres~s of an infant's education
from its birth until it attain to the years of ma-
turity; the different recompences and markrs of
diftinc~ion conferred upon warriors, in proportion
to the exploits which they had performed. Some
singular specimens of this piature-writing have
been preserved, which are juffly considered as the
mnoft curious monuments of art brought from the
New World. The most valuable of there was
p)ublished by Purchas in fixty-fix plates. It is ·di-

s SirW.JohnfonPhilof. Tranf~a6. vol.hxill. p. z43. M~em,

<kla Hontan. ii. 191. Lafitau, Ma-urede Saur. ii. 43*

N 2 vided

B O O K vided into three parts. The first contains the

VII. Shiffory of the Mlexican empire under its ten mo-

narchs. The second is a'tribute-roll, representing
what each conquered town paid into the~royal
treasury. The third is a code of their inflitutions,
domeffic, political, and military. Another fpeci.
men of Mexican painting has been publish~ed in
thirty-two plates, by the pres~ent archbishop of
Toledo. To both are annexed a full explanation
of what the figures were intended to represent,
w~hich was obtained by the Spaniards from Indians
well acepainted with their own arts. The style of
painting in all thes~e is the fame. They represent
things, not wor-ds. They exhibit imnag~es to the.
eye, not ideas to the underflanding. T'hey may,
therefore, be considered as the earliest and most
imperfe8t effaly of men in their progress tow~ards
discovering Ihe art of wr-itiirg. T'he defects in
this mode of recording tranfaaions must have been
early felt. To paint every occurrence w~as, from
its nature, a very tedious operation; and as affairs
became more complicated, and events multiplied
in any s~ociety, its annals muff have lfwelled to an
enormous bulk. Besides this, no objetscould
be delineated but those of sense; the conceptions
of the mind had no corporeal form, and as longas
pid~ure-writing could not convey an idea of these,
it must have been a very imperfedt art. The ne-
ceflity of improving it must. have rouzed and nharp.
ened invention, and the human mind holding the
facme course inl the New Wrorld as in the Old,

mnight

might have advanced by the fame fuiccefilve fleps, B O O Ke

VHI

firit, from an ac~ual piaure to the plain hierogly- J
phic; next, to the allegrorical symbol ; then to the
arbitrary charaater; until, at lengrth, an alphabet
of letters was discovered, capable of exprefirng all
the various combinations of found employed in
fliech. In the paintings of the Mexicans we, ac-
cordingly, perceive, that this progress was begun
among them. Upon an attentive infpeaion of the
plates, which I have mentioned, we may observe
some approach to the plain or simple hieroglyphic,
where some principal part or circumnitance in the
fu jet is made to stand for the whole. In the an-
nals of their kiings, publish~ed by Purchas, the
towns conqluered by each are uniformly represented
in the fame manner by a rude delineation of a
house; but in order to point out the particular
towfns which s~ubmitted to their viaorious arms,
peculiar emlblemls, sometimes natural objeas, and
sometimes artificial figures, are employred. In the
tribute-roll pubifhed by the archb~ifhlop of To-
ledo, the house, which was properly the piaure of
the town, is omitted, and the emblem alone is
employed to represent it. The Mexicans feern
even to have made some advances beyond this,
towards the use of the more figurative and fanciful
hieroglyphic. In order to des~cribe a monarch,
who had enlarged his dominions by force of arms,
they painted a target ornamented with darts, and
placed it between him and those towns which he
fubdlued. But it is only in one inflance, the no-

N 3 tation

B O O Kg tation of numbers, that we discern any attempt to

cc~--~exhibit ideas which had no torporeal form. The

Mexican painters had invented artificial marks, or
signs of convention, for this purpose. By means of
these, they computed the years of their kings
reigns, as well as the amount of tribute to be
paid into the royal treasury. The figure of a
circle represented unit, and in fmnall numbers, the
computation was made by repeating it. Larger
numbers were expressed by a peculiar mark, and
they had s~uch as denoted all integral numbers,
from twenty to eight thousand. The short dura·
tion of their empire prevented the Mexicans front
advancing farther in that long cours~e which con·
duas men from the labour of delineating real ob.
jeaQs, to the simplicity and eas~e of alphabetic
writingr. Their records, notwithftandingr some daxyn
of fach ideas as might have led to a more perfed

, fyle, can be considered as little more than a species

of piture-writing, so far improved as to mark their
s~uperiority over the savage tribes of America ; but
still s~o defedtive, as to prove that they had not pro·
ceeded far beyond the sirs1 flage in that progress
which mult be completed before any people can be
ranked among polifhled nations .

Their mode THEIR mode of computing time may be confi-

m m, dered as a more decisive evidence of their progress

in improvement. They divided their year into
eighteen months, each consisting of twenty days,

d See NOTE XXVI.

amousnmg

amounting in all to three hundred and sixty. But a o o rc
as they observed that the course of the fun was not cM
completed in that time, they added five days to
the year. There, which were properly intercalary
days, they termed supernumerary or weafl~e * and as
they did not belong to any month, no work was
done, and no sacred rite performed on them; they
were devoted wholly to festivity and pastime '. This
near approach to philosophical accuracy is a re-
markable proofthat theMexicanshad beffowedfome
attention upon inquiries and fpect.1ations, to which
men in a very rude slate never turn their thoughts #.

Suca are the molt firiking particulars in the reas inal.

cainag a

manners and policy of the Mexicans, which eX. rmall pro-

grels mn ci-

hibit them to view as a people considerably refined, virization.
But from ot her circumstances, one is apt to furpea
that their charadter, and many of their institutions,
did not differ greatly from those of the other inha-
bitants of America.

LIKE the rude tribes around them, the Mexi- nehir wars

continual

cans were incess~antly ~engaged in war, and the mo- and eroci-
tives which prompted them to hogility seem to ous.
have been the fame. They fought, in order to

* Acofla, lib. vi. c. 2.
# The Mexican mode Of computing time, and every other

particular relating to their chronology, have been conlfider-
ably elucidated by M. Clavigero, Vol. I. 288 ; Vol. II. 225,
&c. The observations an~d theories of the Mexicans concern-
ing thole fubjells discover a greater progress in ipeculative
fcieace than we find among any people la the New W~ord.

Fv 4 gratify

B O O K gratify their vengeance, by shedding the blood of

CI·~their enemies. In battle they were chiefly intent

on taking prisoners, and it was by the number of
there that they effimated the glory of viaory. No
captive was ever ranf~omed or [pared. All were
sacrificed without mercy, and their flesh devoured
with the fame barbarous joy as among the fiercest
savages. On s~ome occasions it role to even wilder
excesses. Their principal warriors covered thern-
selves with the sk~ins of the unhappy vidims, and
danced about the fIreets, boaffing of their own va-
lour, and exulting over their enemies'. Even in
their civil inflitutions we dis~cover traces of that
barbarous difpolition which their fyfitem of war
inspired. The four chief counsel~lors of the em-
pire were diftingulfhed by titles, w-hich could
have been afflumed only by a people who de-
lighted in blood". This ferocity of charadcer pre.
vailed among all1 the nations of New Spain.
The Tlafcalans, the people of Mechoacan, and
other slates at enmnity with the Mexicans, delighted
equally in war, and treated their prisoners with the
fame cruelty. In proportion as mankind combine
in facial union, and live under the influence of
equal laws and regular policy, their manners sos·
ten, s~entiments of humanity arise, and the rightS
of the species come to be understood. The fierce-
ness of w~ar abates, and even while engaged in
hoffility-, men remember what they ow~e one to

SHerrera, dec. 3. lib. i;. c. 15.. Gom. Cron. c. 2'l.
: See NO I~ E XXVH.

another.

another. The savage fights to destroy, the citizell B O O K
to conquer, The former neither pities nor spares, ".
the latter has acquired sensibility which tempers
his rage. To this s~ensibility the Mexricans ~seem
to have been perfeQ firangers, and among them
war was carried on with so0 much of its original
barbarity, that we cannot but f~ufpea their degree
of civilization to have been very imperfeQ.

THEIR funeral rites were not less bloody than Thir one.
those of the molt savage tribes. On the death of rlrts
any diftinguinhed personage, especially of the Em-
peror, a certain number of his attendants were
chosen to accompany him to the other world, and
those unfortunate vidims were put to death without
exercy, and buried in the fame tomb .

THOUGH their agriculture was more extensive nheir agri.

than that of the roving tribes who truffed chiefly igiS~m-
to their bow for food, it seems not to have sup-
plied them with furch fubfiffence as men require
when engaged in efforts of aative industry. The
Spaniards appear not to have been struck with any
superiority of the Mexicans over the other people
of America in bodily vigour. Both, according
to their observation, were of s~uch a feeble frame
as to be unable to endure fatigue, and the firength
of one Spaniard exceeded that of fevreral Indians.
This they imputed to their scanty diet, on poor
fare, fufficient to preserve life, but not to give

L flerrera, dec. 3. lib. ii. c. 1S. Gom. Cron. c. p02.

firmness

a o O re firmness to the conflitution. Such a remark could

V II. Y hardly have been made witly ref~peQ to any people

furnished plentifully with the necessaries oflife.
The difficulty which Cortes found in procuring
~fubifitence for his small body of soldiers, who
were often confirained to live on the [pontaneous
produaions of the earth, fleems to confirm the
remark of the Spanish writers, and gives no high
idea of the slate of cultivation in the Mexican
empire '.

Frahctr A PRACTICE that was universal in New Spain
roofonsis5. appears to favour this opinion. The Mexican

womnen gave fuck to their children for several
years, and during that time they did not cohabit
with their husbandS k. This precaution againlft a
burdensome increase of progeny, though necef fary,
as I have already obs~erved, among favrages, who,
Ifrom the hardships of their condition, and the pre-
carioufnefs of their f~ubliftence, find it impollible
to rear a numerous family, can hardly be supposed
to have continued among a people who lived at
ease and in abundance.

Douhts con- THE Vaflt xtent of the Mexican empire, which

~~o;i~e has been considered, and with juffice, as the most

empire. decisive proof of a considerable prog~ress in regu.

i Relat. ap, Ramui. iii. 306, A. Herrera, dec. 3. lib. iv.

e, I7. dec. 2. lib. vi. c. r6.

SGom. Cron. c. 208. Herrera, dec. 3. lib. iv. c. 16.

lar government and police, is one of those faits in a o o a

VUr

the hiffory of the New World which seems to have
been admitted without due examination or f~uffi-
clent evidence. The Spanish hifforians, in order
to magnify the valour of their countrymen, are
accuffomed to represent the dominion of Monte-
zuma as firetching over all the provinces of New
Spain from the Northern to the Southern Ocean.
But a great part of the mountainous country was
poffeffed by the Otomiesr, a fierce uncivilized
people, who seem to have been the residue of the
original inhabitants. The provinces towards the
north and weft of Mexico were occupied by the
Chichemecas, and other' tribes of· hunters. None
of these recognized the `Mexican monarch as their
superior.· Even inl the interior and more level
country, there were several cities and provinces
which had never submitted to the Mexican yoke.
Tlalcala, though only twenty-one leagues from the
capital of the empire, was an independent and ho·
flile republic. Cholula, though still nearer, had
been fubje~ted only a short time before the arrival
of the Spaniards. Tepeaca, at the difiance of
thirty leagues from Mexico, s~eems to have been
a separate slate, governed by its own laws '
1Vechoacan, the frontier of which extended within
forty leagues of Mexico, was a powerful kingdom,
temat-kable for its implacable enmity to the Mexi-

a Herrera, dec* 3, lib. x. c. I5. s1. B. Dias, c. I30.

can

R o o K can name m By there hoffile powers the Mexicab

VII. c- empire was circum~scribed on every quarter, and the

high ideas which we are apt to form of it from the
defecription of the Spanish hifforians, thouald be con-
fiderably moderated.

Little io IN cons~equence of this independence of several

n t~qh`, slates in New Spain upon the Mexican empire,

te" .PrO- there was not any considerable intercourse between

its various provinces. Even in the interior coun·
try not far difiant from the capital, there seem to
have been no roads to facilitate the communication
of one diffria~ with another; and wrhen the Spa-
niards firil attempted to penetrate into its several
provinces, they had to open their way through
forests and marfhess n. Cortes, in his adventurous
march from Mexico to Honduras in I 525, met with
obitruaions, and endured hardsh~ips, littleinferior
to those w~ith which he muff have firuggled in the
most uncivilized regions ofAmnerica. In some places
he could hardly force a passage through impervious
itvoods, and plains overflowed with water. In others
he found to little cultivation, that his troops were
frequently in danlger· of perishing by famine. Such
faas correspond ill wvith the pompous description
twhich the Spanish writers give of Mexican police
and inldullry, and convey an idea of a country
nearly fituilar to that poiffefed, by the Indian tribes

m Idecrrera, elec. 3. lib. 11. c. is
* 3. D~iaz, c. 166j. c. 176.

in North America. Here and there a trading or a n o o K
war path, as they are called in North America, led
from one settlement to another o, but g~enerally there
appeared no sign of any eirablifhed communica-
tion, fewv markis of induflry, and fewver monuments
of att.

A ritoor of this imperfec~on in their commer- Frmer

cial intercourse no less firikting, is their want of Proj'"nhis.
money, or some universal standard by which to e~i-
mate the value of commodities. The dif~coveryr of
this is among the fleps of greateA consequence in
the progress of nations. Until it has been made,
all their tranfaEtions mufr be so aukward, so ope-
rose, and so limited, that we may boldly pronounce
that they have advanced but a little way in their
career. The invention of such a commercial
flandard is of such high antiquity in our hemi-
sphere, and rises so far beyond the zera of authentic
hiltory, as to appear almost coeval with the exist-
ence of focietyr. The precious metals s~eem to have
been early employed for this purpos~e, and from
their permanent value, their divisibility, and many
other qualities, they are better adapted to serve as
a common flandard than any other futbftance of
wvhich nature has given us the command. But in
the New W~orld, where there metals abound moll,
this use of them was not k~now~n. The exigencies
~f rude tribes, or of monarchies imperfea~ly civi-
lized, did not call for it. All their comnmercial ·in-

* Hecrrera, dec, . 3;. Tib.11. c. 8.

tercourfe

rp 0 o x tercourfe was carried on1 by barter, and their igno.

C~3 rance of any common flandard by which to facili.

tate that exchange of commodities which contri.
butes to much towards the comfort of life, may be
justly mentioned as an ev·idence of the infant slate
of their policy. But even in the New W~orld the
inconvenience of wanting some general instrument
of commerce began to be felt, and some efforts
were made towards supplying that defeet. The
Mexicans, among whom the number and greatness
of their cities gave rife to a more extended com·
merce than in any other part of America, had began
to employ a common standard ofvalue, which ren·
dered fmnaller tranfaa8ions much more easy. As
chocolate was the favourite drink of persons in
every rank of life, the nuts or almonds of cacao,
of which it is composed, were of such universal
consumption, that, in their slated markets, there
were willingly received in return for commodities
of small price. Thus they came to be considered
as the infiLrument of commerce, and the value of
what one withed to dispose· of, was eff imated by the
number of nuts of the cacao, which he might ex·
peQ in exchange for it. This seems to be the ut·
most length which the Americans had advanced to-
wrards the discovery of any expedient for s~upplying
the use of money. And if the want of it is to be
held, on one hand, as a proof of their barbarity,
this expedient for Eupplyinlg that wanlt, sho~uld be
admitted, on the other, as an evidenc= no les~s fatil
fy~ing, of some progress wh~ich the M~iexicans had

madie

made in refinement and civilization, beyond the fa- a 0 0 sc

vII.

vage tribes around them. Lr

IN such a rude slate were many of the Mexican Doubts con.

provin~ces when first visited by their conquerors. fE::nHtht
Even their cities, extensive and populous as they citues.
were, seem more fit to be the habitation of,men
juff emerging from barbarity, than the residence
of a polished people. The defecription of Tlalcala
nearly resembles that of an Indian villag~e. A
number of low firaggling huts, scattered about ir-
regularly, according to the caprice of each pro-
prietor, built with turf and stone and thatched
with reeds, without any light but what they re-
ceived by a door, so low that it could not be ~en-
tered upright P. In Mexico, though, from the
peculiarity of its situation, the disposition of the
houses was more orderly., the firuflure of the
greater part was equally mean. N~or does the fa-
bric of their temples, and other public edifices, ap- Temqples,
pear to have been such as entitled them to the
high praises beffowed upon them by many Spani~h
authnors. As far as one can gather from their ob-
f~cure and inacculrate defecriptions, the great temple
~f Mexico, the moit famous in New Spain, which
hes been represented as a magnificent building,
raised to fach a height, that the ascent to it wras by
a flight of a hundred and fourteen fleps, was a
solid mass of earth of a square form, faced partly

P Hlerrera, dec. 2. lib. vi. c. Iz.

with

B o o e with st~one. Its base on each fide extended ninety
t.----. feet, and decreasing gradually as it advanced in

height, it terminated in a qluadrangle of about
thirty feet, where were placed a shrine of the deity,
and two altars on which the viaims were facri.
ficed 9. All the other celebrated temples of New
Spain exaaly resembled that of Mexico r Such
firuaures convey no high idea of progress in art
and ingenuity; and one can hardly conceive that
a form more rude and simple could have occurred
to a nation in its first eEforts towards ereaing any
great work.

and other GREATER flkill and ing~enulty were displayed,
(" ass,, if we may believe the Spanish hillorians, in the

houses of the emperor and in thos~e of the principal
nobility. There, some elegance of design was vi.
fible, and a commodious arrangement of the apart·
ments was attended to. But if buildings corre.
fponding to such descriptions had ever existed in
the Mex~ican cities, it is probable that some re.
mains of them would still be visible. From the
manner in which Cortes conduaed the siege of
M~exico, we can indeed easily account for the to-
tal deftruaiion of whatever had any appearance of
splendor in that capital. B~ut as only two cen-
turies and a half have elapsed since the conqjueft of
New Spain, it seems altogether incredible that in
a period so thort, every vestige of this boaited ele.

P Herrera, dec. 2. lib. vii. c. 17.
I See NOTE XXVIII.

gance

gance and grandeur should have difagppeared ; and n o O K

VII.

that in the other cities, particularly in those which c
did not f~uffer by the deftru~tive hand of the con-
querors, there are any ruins, which can be con-
fidered as monuments of their ancient mag~nifi-

cence.

EVEN in a village of the rudest- Indians there
are building~s of greater extent and elevation than
common dwelling;-houl~es. Such as are destined
for holding the council of the tribe, and in which
all assemble on occasions of public f~efriv~ity, may
be called flately edifices, when compared w~ith the
reft. As among the Mexicans the diftina~ion of
ranks was ef~ablifhed, and property was unequally
divided, the number of distinguished firutures in
their towrns wvould of colirfe be greater than in
other parts of America. But these seem not to
have been either so solid or magnificent as to merit
the pompous epithets which fCome Spanifhl authors
employ in deferibing them. It is probable that,
though more ornamented, and built on a larger
feale, they were ere~ed with the fame flight nIrate-
rials which the Indians employed in their common
buildings", and Time, in a space much less than
two hundred and fifty years, may have fwiept away
all remains of them'.

FaoM this enumeration of faas, it seems, upon
the whole, to be evident, that the slate of society in

*See NOTE XXIX. f See NOTE XXX.
You. III. O M/exico

B O O K $18XICO WaS considerably advanced beyond thatof

. the savage tribes which we have delineated.. But it

is no less manifeit, that with refpea to many parti.
culars, the Spanish accounts of their progress ap·
pear to be highly embelliibed. There is not a more
frequent or a more fertile source of'deceptioninde·
s~cribing the manners and arts of fagvage nations, or
of such as are imperfealy civilized, than that of ap
plying to them the names and phrases appropriated
to the inflitutions and refinements of poliihed life.
W/Then the leader of a small tribe, or the head of
a rude community, is dignified with the name of
king or et ?eror, the place of his residence cla
receive no other name but that of his palace; and
whatever his attendants may b~e, they must be called
his court. Under such appellations they acquire',
in our eftirnation, an importance and dignity which
does not belong· to them. The illusion spreads,
and giving a false colour to every part of the nar.
rative, the imnagination is so much carried awvay
with the resemblance, that it becomes difficult to
dik~ern objeas as they really are. The Spaniards,
w6hen they first touched on the Mexican coalt,
w ere so much firuck with the appearance of attain·
ments in policy and in the arts of life, far fuperiol
to those of the rude tribes with which they were
hrith~erto acquainted, that they fancied they had
at length dis~covered a civilized people in theNew
Worlsfd. This comparison between the people of
Mexico and their uncultivated neigrhbours, they ap
par to hiave kept conflantly in view, and observing

aiith admiration many things which marked the pre. B oIO KC
eminence of the former, they employ in deferibing c..-r---
their imperfea policy and infant arts, sauch terms
as are applicable to the inflitutions of men far be-
yond them in improvement. Both thes~e circun>.
flances concur in detraaing from the credit due to
the deferiptions of Mexican manners by the early
Spanifh' writers. By drawing a parallel between
thein and those of people so much less civilized,
they raised their own ideas too high. By their mode
of deferib~ing them, they conveyed ideas to others
no less exalted above truth. Later writers have
adopted the ityle of the original hifforians, and im-
proved upon it. The colours with which De Solis
delineates the charaaer and defecribes the adions of
Montezuma, the s~plendour of his court, the laws
and policy of his empire, are the fame that he muff
have employed in exhibiting to view the monarch
and inflitutions of an highly polished people.

SBut though we may admit, that the warm ima-
gination of the Spanish writers has added some
embellishment to their defecriptions, this will not
jultify the decisive and peremptory t'one, with
which several authors pronounce all their accounts
of the Mexican power, policy and laws, to be the
fi8ions of men who withed to deceive, or who de-
lighted in the marvellous. There are few historical
faas that can be ascertained by evidence more un-
ex~ceptionable, than may be produced in support
of the material articles, in the defeription of the

O 2 ' Mexican

a O o " Mexican conltitution and manners. Evre witnefies
s..-v-- relate what they beheld. Men who had resided

among the Mexicans, both before and after the
conquest, describe inflitutions and cuffoms which
were familiar to them. Persons~ of profetlions so
different that objeas muff have pres~ented them·
selves to their view under every various afpe8;
fioldiers, priests, and lawyers, all concur in their
teffimony. H~ad Cortes ventured to impose upon
his sovereign, by exhibiting to him a plature of
imaginary mannlers, there wanted not enemies and
rivals who were qualified to deteat his deceit, and
who would have rejoiced in exposing it. But ac.
cordina 'to the jult remnarkr of an author, whose in.
genuity has illuffrated, and whose eloquence he
adorned, the: hiffory of America ", this supposition
is in itself as improbable, as the attempt would
have been audacious. Who among the deftroyens
of this great empire was so enlightened by science,
or to attentive to the progress and operations of
men in social life, as to frame a fiaitious ijyfiem of
policy to well combined and so consistent, as that
which they delineate, in their accoumts of the
1Mexrican government ?Where could they have
borrowed the idea of many inflitutions in legliia·
tion and police, to which, at that period, there
was nothing parallel in the nations with which they
were acquainted ? There was not, at the beginning
of the sixteenth century, a regular establishment

* MI. I' AbbC Raynal H-ill. philot; & p olit. &c. iii. up?

of poss s for conveying intelligence to the sovereign e 0 0 r;
of any kingdom in Europe. The fame observation c
will apply to what the Spaniards relate, with re-
fpecZ to the firu~ure of the city of Mexico, the
regulations concerning its police, and various laws
eliabliihed for the adminiffration of juffice, or f~e-
curing the happiness of the community. Whoever
is accuffomed to contemnplate the progress of na-
tions, will often, at very early flages of it, dis~cover
apremature and unexpedted dawit of those ideas,
which give rife to inflitutions that are the pride
and ornament of its moss advanced period. Even
in a slate as imperfeatly polished as the Mexican
empire, the happy genius of some sagacious ob-
server, excited or aided by circumstances unknown
to us, may have introduced inflitutions which are
seldom found but in societies highly refined. But
it is almolt impoilible that thelilliterate conquerors
of the New W~orld ihould have formed in any one
inflance a conception of cuffoms and laws, beyond
2he flandard of improvement in their own age
and country. Or if Cortes had been capable of
this, what inducement had those by whom he was
superseded to continue the deception ? Why th~ould
Corita, or Motolinea, or Acoffa, have amused their
sovereign or their fellow citizens with a tale purely
fabulous ?I

IN one particular, however, the guides whom neasioin or
we must follow have represented the MC~exicans to n,,,~~i
be mlore barbarous, perhaps, than they really were.

O 3 Their

B O O K Their religious tenets, and the rites of their war.

VII. tJ hip, are deferibed by them as wild and cruelin

an extreme degree. Religion, which occupies no
considerable place in the thoughts of a savage,
whose conceptions of any s~uperior power are ob.
fcure, and his sacred rites few as well as simple,
was formed, among the Mexicans, into a regular
system, with its complete train of priests, temples,
vidims, and'feffivals. This, of itself, is a clear
proof that the slate of the Mexicans was very dif·
farent from that of the ruder American tribes.
But from the extravagance of their religious no·
tions, or the barbarity of their rites, no conclusion
can be drawn with certainty concerning the degree
of their civilization. For nations, long after their
ideas begin to enlarge, and their manners to refine,
adhere to fyfiems of superstition founded on the
crude conceptions of early ages. From the genius
of the Mexican religion we may, however, form
a molt juff conclgflon with refpea to its influence
upon the chara~ter of the people. The afpedof
f~uperflition in Mexico was gloomy and atrocions
Its divinities were clothed with terror, and de.
lighted in vengeance. They were exhibited to the
people under detestable forms, which createdhor.

fo.The figures of s~erpents, of tygers, and o

other deffrudtive animals, decorated their teml
Fear was the only principle that ins~pired their o
taries. Fasts, mortifications, and penances, allri.
gid, and many of them excruciating to an x
treme degree, were the means employed to apd

the wrath of their gods, and the Mexicans never a o o it

VII,

approached their altars without sprinkling them In.
with blood drawn from their own bodies. But, of
all offerings, human sacrifices were deemed the
most acceptable. This religious belief, mingling
with the implacable spirit of vengeance, and adding
new force to it, every captive taken in war was
brought to the temple, was devoted as a vidim to
the deity, and sacrificed with rites no less ~foiemn
than cruel . The heart and head were the portion
consecrated to the gods; the warrior, by whose
prowess the prisoner had been seized, carried off
the body to feast upon it with his friends. Under
the imprefiron of ideas so dreary and terrible, and
accuffomed daily to scenes of bloodshed rendered
awful by religion, the heart of man must harden,
and be steeled to every f~eatiment of humanity.
The spirit of the Mexicans was accordingly un-
feeling, and the genius of their religion so far
counterbalanced the influence of policy and arts,
that notwithstanding their progress in both, their
manners, initead of softening, became more fierce.
To what circumflances it was owing that super-
flition affilumed such a dreadful form among the
Mexicans, we have not f~ufficient knowledge of their
hiffory to determine. But its influence is risible,
and produced an effedt that is singular in the hiffory
of the human species. The manners of the people

X Cort. Relat. ap. Ramul. iii. 240, &c. B. Diaz, c. 82.

Acofla, lib. v. c. I3, &c. Herrera, dec. 3. lib. ii. c. rs5, &0.
Gomara Cron. c. 80, &c. See N O TE XXXI.

O 4 in.

a 0 o K in the New~Vorld who had made the greatelt pro.

Vilr cc grefs in the arts of policy, were, in fever al refpeas,

the most ferocious, and the barbari ty of some of their
curtoms exceeded even those of the savage slate.

r~eletenuons THF-E empire of Peru b~oasts of an higher anti·
anl hibi an- qluity than that of M~exico. According to the tra-
tlquity ditionary accounts colleted by the Spaniards, it

had futbfilled four hundred years, under twelve fuc·
cefirve monarchs. B3ut the knowledg~e of their
ancient flory, which the Peruvians could commu.
nicate to their conquerors, muff have been both

uncentain, imperfeQ and uncertain 2. Like the other Ame·

rican nations, they were totally unacquainted with
the art of writing, and deffitute of the orily means
by which the memory of past tranfad~ions can be
pres~erved with any degree of accuracy. Even
among people to whom the use of letters is known,
the se~ra where the authenticity of hiffory com·
mences, is much posterior to the introdu~tion of
writing. That noble invention continued, ev~ery
where, to be long f~ubfervienzt to the common bufi·
ness and wants of life, before it was employed in re·
cording events, with a view of conveyring informa·
tion from one age to another. ~But in no country
did ever tradition alone carry down hiltorical know.
ledge, in any full continued fiream, during- a pe·
riod of half the length that the monarchy of Peru
is said to hav~e fublified.

z See NOTE XXXII.

THE .Ruipo~S, or knots on cords of different cO. B OOi K

lours, w~hich are celebrated by authors fond of the <.... ...
marvellous, as if they had been regular annals of r~~~ds
the empire, imperfeatly supplied the place of writ- by (Apos,
ing. According to tl~e obs~cure defeription of them
by Acofta a,which Garcilaffo de laVega has adopted
with little variation and no improvement, the qui-
pos seem to have been a device for rendering cal-
culation more expeditious and accurate. By the
various colours different objeas were denoted, and
by each knot a diitinat number·. Thus an account
was taken, and a kind of regiffer kept, of the inha-
bitants in each province, or of the s~everal produc-
tions colleaed there for public use. But as by
these knots, however varied or combined, no moral
or abltradt idea, no operation or quality of the
mind could be represented, they contributed little
towvards preserving the memory of ancient events
and institutions. By the Mlexican paintings and
sym~bols, rude as they were, more knowledge
of remote tranfaations s~eems to have been con-
veyed, than the Peruvians could derive from their
boalted quipos. Had the latter been even of more
extensi~ve use, and better adapted to su~pply the place
of written records, they perished to generally, to-
gether with other monuments of Peruvian inge-
nuity, in the wreck occ~afoned by the Spanish~ con-
quest, and the civil wars s~ubs~equent to it, that no
accefllonn of light or knowledge comes from them.
All the zeal of Garcilaffo de la Vega, for the ho-

a HIRL lib. vi. c. 8.

n1our

B O O K Ilour of that race of monarchs from whom he de.

VB1 ~ c ~fcended, all the induffry of his researches, and the

superior advantages with which he carried them on,
opened no source of information unknown to the
Spanifhl authors who wrote before him. In his Royal
Commentaries, he confines himself to illuffratewhat
they had related concerning the antiquities and in·
flitutions of Peru b ; and his illuffrations, like their
accounts, are derived entirely from the traditionary
tales current among his countrymen.

VERY little credit then is due to the minute de.

tails which have been given of the exploits, the
battles, the conquests, and private character of the
early Peruvian monarchs. We can reft upon no·
thing in their flory, as authentic, but a few faats, to
interwoven in the system of their religion and po.
licy, as preserved the memory of them frombeing
loft; and upon the defeription of such cuffoms and
inrcitutions as continued in force at the time of the
conquest, and fell under the immediate obs~ervation
of the Spaniards. By attending carefully to these,
and endeavouring to separate them from what ap-
pears to be fabulous, or of doubtful authority, I
have laboured to form an idea of the Peruvian go.
vernment and manners.

Orggn oy THE people of Peru, as I have already ob-
thelf C1VIl
policy. 'f~erved , had not advanced beyond the rudest

b Lib. i. c. I0. C Book vi. p. 21, &rc.

form of savage life, when Manco Capac, and his B 0 0 re

VHI

consort Mama Ocollo, appeared to infiruQ and yl
civilize them. Who these extraordinary per-
fonages were, whether they imported their syst~em
of legislation and knowledge of arts from fame
country more improved, or, if natives of Peru,
how they acquired ideas so far superior to thos~e of
the people whom they addressed, are circum-
flances with refped to which the Peruvian tra-
dition conveys no information. Manco Capac
and his consort, taking advantage of the pro-
penfity in the Peruvians to superstition, and par-
ticularly of their veneration for the Sun, pretended
to be children of that glorious luminary, and to
delivrer their infiruaions in his name, and by au-
thority from him. The multitude lillened and be-
lieved. What reformation in policy and manners
the Peruvians ascribe to those founders of their
empire, and how, from the precepts of the
Inca and his consort, their ancellors gradua)1y
acquired some knowledge of those arts, and
some relish for that induffry, which render sTub-
fiitence s~ecure and life comfortable, hath been
formerly related. Those bleflings were originally
confined within narrow precinas ; but, in process
of time, the successors of Manco Capac extended
their dominion over all the regions that firetch
to the weft of the Andes from Chili to Quito,
eltablifhing in every province their peculiar policy
and religious inflitutions.

B O O K THE most singular and firiking circumitance ib

IMI the Peruvian government, is the influence of reli.

raso. gion upon its genius and laws. Religious ideas

mfake s~uch a feeble imprefiron on the mind of a
savage, that their effea upon his sentiments and
manners is hardly perceptible. Among the Mexi.
cans, religion, reduced into a regular fyllem, and
holding a considerable place in their public initi.
tutions, operated with cons~picuous efficacy in
forming the peculiar charaAer of that people.
But in Peru, the whole syst~em of civil policy was
founded on religion. The Inca appeared not only
as a legislator, but as the messenger of Heaven.
His precepts were received not merely as the in.
Jun~ions of a superior, but as the mandates of the
Deity. Hlis race was held to be sacred; and in
order to preserve it diftina, without being polluted
by any mixture of less noble blood, the sons of
Manco Capac married their own f~ifers, and no
person was ever admitted to the throne who could
not claim it by such a pure descent. To those
Childrena of thje Sun, for that was the appellation
beffowed upon all the offspring of the first Inca,
the people looked up with the reverence due to
beings of a superior order. They were deemed to
be under the immediate proteaion of the deity
from whom they iiffied, and by him every order
of the reigning Inca was supposed to be dicy
tated.

FaoM

FRolv those ideas two consequences resulted. B o 0~ a

The authority of the Inca was unlimited and abfo- c-v--...
late, in the most ·extensive meaning of the words. mnkal0
Whenever the decrees of a prince are considered as (a~S of
the commands of the Divinity, it is not only an aQ
of rebellion, but of impiety, to dis~pute or oppos~e
his wrill, Obedience becomes a duty of religion; .The able-

lute power

and as it would be prophane to co-ntrol a monarchn oni` lcnca
who is believed to be under the guidance of Heavren,
and presumptuous to advise him, nothing remains
but to futbmit with implicit respect. This muftL ne-
ceffarily be the effea of every government eftab!ifhed
on pr'etenflons of intercourse with superior pow~ers.
Such accordingly was the blind fubmillion which the
Peruvians yielded to their sovereigns. The perso~ns
of~highell rank and greatest power in their do-
minions acknowledged them to be of a more exalted
nature; and in teffimony of this, when admitted in-
to their presence, they entered with a burden upon
their thoulders, as an emblem of their s~ervitude,
and willingness to bear whatever theIncawas pleased
to impose. Among their fubjeas, force was not
requisite to second their comnmands. Every offcer
entruffed with the execution of them was revered,
and, according to the account of an intelligent ob-
server of Peruvian manners ^, he might proceed
alone from one extremity of the empire to another
without mneeting opposition; for, on producing a
fringe from the royal Borla, an ornament of the

d Zarate, lib. i.'c. 13* head

V
o1 head peculiar to the reigning Inca, the lives and

~ t-- fortunes of the people were at his disposal.

Al rmes ANOTHER Cpnfeqjuence of eftablithing govern.

.ment in Peru on the foundation of religion was,

that all crimes were punished capitally. They
were not considered as tranfgrefirons of human laws,
but as insults offered to the Deity. Each, without
any dillinaion between such as were flight and
such as were atrocious, called for vengeance, and
could be excpiated only by the blood of the offender.
Consonantly to the fame ideas, punish~ment follow·
ed the trespass with inevitable certainty, because
an offence against Heaven was deemed such an
high enormity as could not be pardoned'. Among
a people of corrupted morals, maxims of jurif.
prudence so s~evere and unrelenting, by rendering
men ferocious and desperate, would be more apt
to multiply crimes than to reffrain them. But the
Peruvians, of simple manners and unfufpicious
faith, were held in such awe by this rigid diki·
pline, that the number of offenders was extremely
finall. Veneration for monarchs, enlightened and
direaed, as they believed, by the divinity whom
they adored, prompted them to their duty; the
dread of punishment, which they were taught to
confider as unavoidable vengeance inflided by of-
fended Heav'en, withheld them from evil.

C Vega, lib. ii. c. 6.

THE iC~iRe Of fuperflition on which the Incas B 0 0 to

VII.

ingrafted their pretentions to such high authority,
was of a genius very different fr-om that eftablifhedl Mild g~enius~
among the Mvexicans. Manco Capac turned the lipion.
veneration of his followers entirely towards natural
objeQr The Sunt, as the great source of ligfht, of
joy, and fertility in the creation, attradled their
principal homage. The Moon and Stars, as co-
operating with him, were entitled to s~econdary ho-
nours. Wherever the propensity in the human
mind to acknowledge and to adore some s~uperior
power, takes this dire0;ion, and is employed in
contemplating the order and beneficence that really
exist in nature, the spirit of f~uperflition is mild.
Wherever imaginary beings, created by the fancy
and the fears of men, are s~upposed to prelide in
nature, and become the objeas of worship, fu~-
perftition always assumes a more severe and atro-
cious form. Of the latter we have an example
among the Mexicans, of the former among the
people of Peru. The Peruvians had not, in-
deed, made fach progress in observation or in-
quiry, as to have attained just conceptions of the
Deity; nor was there in their language any pro-
per name or appellation of the S-upreme Power,
wvhich intimated, that they had formed any idea of
him as the Creator and Governor of the Wvorld E.
But by direding their veneration to that glorious
l~uminary, which, by its universal and vivifyingr
energy, is the belt emnblemn of divine beneficence,

r Acoita, 11b. v. e* 3*

B O OI K thcq rites and observances which they deemed ac.

c ceptable to him were.innocent and humane. They

offered to the Sun a part of those produ8ious
which his genial warmth had called forth from the
bosom of the earth, and reared to maturity. They
fagcrificed, as an oblation of gratitude, some of the
animals which were indebted to his influence for
nourithment. They pres~ented to him choice [pe.
cimens of those work~s of ingenuity which his light
had guided the hand of man in forming. But the
Incas never flained his altars with human blood,
nor could they conceive that their beneficent father
the Sun would be delighted with such horrid vic.
tims P. Thus the Peruvians, unacquainted with
thofre barbarous rites which extinguish sensibility,
and s~uppress the feelings of nature at the fight of
human f~ufferings, were formed, by the spirit of
the firperitition which they had adopted, to a na·
tional charaaer, more gentle than that of any
people in America.

sts inacuence THE influence of this superstition operated in the
Mayii so ame manner upon their civil infitutions, and tended

to correa in them whatever was adverse to gentleness
of charaaer. The dominion of the Incas, though
the most absolute of all defpotifmns, was mitigated
by its alliance with religion. The mind was not
humbled and depressed by the idea of a forced
fubje~ion to the will of a superior; obedience,

a See NOTE XXXIII.

Ipaid to one who was believed to be clothed with a o 0 c
divine authority, was willingly yielded, anid im· c
plied no degradation. The sovereign, conscious
that the fubmifiTve reverence of his people flowed
from their belief of his heavenly descent, ivas ·con,
tinually reminded of a diftination which prompted
him to imitate that beneficent power which he
was suppos~ed to represent. In confeqluence of thos~e
impreflions, there hardly occurs in the traditional
hiffory of Peru, any inflance of rebellion against
the reigning prince, and among twelve s~uccessive
monarchs, there was not one tyrant.

EVEN the wars in which the Incas engaged, 'Were and on their

miditary

carried on with a spirit very different from that of cyaem.
Other American nations. They fought not, like
savages, to destroy and exterminate; or, like the
Mexicans, to glut blood-thirsty divinities with
human fagcrifices. They conquered, in order to
reclaim and civilize the vanquilhed, and to diffuf~e
the knowledge of their own infitiutions and arts.
Pris~oners seem not to have been expos~ed to the in-
fults and tortures, which were their lot in every
other part of the New W~orld. The Incas took~
the people whom they s~ubdued under their pro-
te~ion, and admitted them to a participation of
all the advantages enjoyed by their original sub.
jets. This pradice, so repugnant to American
ferocity, and resembling the humanity of the most
polished nations, muff be ailcribed, like other pe-
culiarities which we have observed in the Peruvian

Vot. III. P manners,

'n 0 0 a manners, to the genius of their religion. The

L-JIn1cas, considering the homage paid to any other ob.

jeQ than to the heavenly powers which they adored
as impious, were fond of gaining profelytes to their
favourite fyfitem. The idols of every conquered
province were carried in triumph to the great
temple at Cuzco h, and placed there as trophies
07 the superior power of the divinity who was the
prote~tor of the empire. The people were treated
with lenity, and infiruded in the religious tenets
of their new mafters', that the conqueror might
have the glory of having added to the number of
the votaries of his father the Sun.

Efalro.THEr itate of property in Peru was no less. fn·

penty* gular than that of religion, and contributed, like-

wife, towards giving a mild turn of charafter to
the people. All the lands capable of cultivation
were divided into three shares. One was confe·
crated to the Sun, and the produa of it was ap·
plied to the erecaion of temples, and furnishing
what was requisite towards celebrating the public
rites of religion. The second belonged to the
Inca, and was set apart as the proviflon made by
the Lcmmunity for the support of government.
T]he third and largest share was reserved for the
maintenance of the people, among whom it was
parcelled out. Neither individuals, however, nor
communities, had a right of exclusive property in

h Herrera, dec. 5. lib. v. c. 4. Vega, lib. v. c. 12,
I Herrera, dec, 5. lib. iv. c, 8.

the portion set apart for their use. They poffelfed B O O K

VII

it only for a year, at the expiration of which a new Lvs
divilion was inade in proportion to the rank, the
number, and exigencies of each family. All those
lands were cultivated by the joint induffry of the
community. TPhe people, s~ummoned by a proper
officer, repaired in a body to the fields, and per-
formed their common talk, while songs and musical
infiruments cheered them to their labour k. B
this singular diffribution of territory, as well as by Effe~s of

this,

the mode of cultivating it, the idea of a common in,
terest, and of mutual fulbferviency, was continually
inculcated. Each individual felt his connedionwith
thos~e around him, and knew that he depended on
their friendly aid for what increase he was to reap.
A slate thus conflituted may be considered as one
great family, in which the union of the members
was so complete, and the exchange of good offices
so perceptible, as to create stronger attachment,
and to bind manl to man in closer intercourse, than
fubflfted under any form of society effablifhed in
America. From this resulted gentle manners, and
mild virtues unknown in the s~avage slate, and with
which the Mexicans were little acquainted.

BDTr, though the inflitutions of the Incas w'ere Inequality
to framed as to firengthen the bonds of affeaiOof ans
among their f~ubjeas, there was great inequality in
their condition. The diftinaion of ranks was fully

k Herrera, dec* 5. lib. iv. c. 2. Vega, lib. v. c. 5-

P 2 eflablifhed

a 0 0 K established in

Peru.rr A great body of the inhabi-

Stants, under the denomination of Tanaonas, were

held in a slate of servitude. Their garb and
houses were of a form different from thos~e of free.
men. Like the Tamnemes of Mexico, they were
employed in carrying burdens, and in performing
every other work of drudgery '. Next to themin
rank, were such of the people as were free, but
distinguished by no official or hereditaryr honours.
Above them were raised, those whom the Spaniards
call Orejonaes, from the ornaments worn in their
ears. They formed what may be denominated
the order of nobles, and in peace as well as war
held every office of power or truit m. At the head
of all were the children of the Sun, who, by their
highl descent, and peculiar privileges, were as much
exalted above the Orejones, as these were elevated
above the people.

sure or art,, SecH a form of society, from the union of its

members, as well as from the diftin~tion it their
ranks, was favourable to progres~s in the arts.
But the Spaniards having been acquainted with the
improved slate of various arts in Mlexico, several
years before they discovered Peru, were not to
much firuck withl what they observed in the latter
country, and deferibe the appearances of ingenuity
there with les~s warmth of adtmiration. The Peru·

SHerrera, dec. 5·. lib,. ill. c. 4. lib. x. c. 8.
m H-errera, dec. J. lib. iv. c. r.

VIans,

vians, nevertheless, had advanced far beyond the a o o K

Vil.

Mexicans, both in the necessary arts of life, and in -V
facil as have some title to the name of elegant.

IN Peru, agriculture, the art of primary necef. Improved

. . slate of agri-

fity in facial life, was more extensive, and carried culture.
on with greater skill than in any part of America.
The Spaniards, in their progrels through the coun-
try, were so fully supplied with provrifions of every
kind, that in the relation of their adventures n e
mn~,eet with ,Cfewoftho disma·~l sce~ne of diffrefs oc
cationed by famine, in which the conquerors of
Mexico were To often involved. The quantity of
foil under cultivation was not left to the discretion
of individuals, but regulated by public authority
inproportion to the exiigencies of the community.
Even the calamity of an unfruitful f~eafoun was but
little felt, for the produat of the lands consecrated
to the Sun, as well as those set apart for the
Incas, being deposited in the ~Tambo2GS, or public
florehoul~es, it remained there as a Itated proviffoa
for tirnes of fearcity ". As the extent of cultiva-
tion was determined with such provident attention
to the demands of' the slate, the invention and in-
duffry of the Peruvians were called forth to eX-
traordinary exertions, by certain defeas peculiar
to their climate and foil. All the vast rivers that
flow from the Andes take their course eastward to
the Atlantic Ocean. Peru is watered only by some

SZarate, lib. i. c. 14. Vega, lib. i. c. 8.

P 3 fireams

B O O K itreams which rush down from the mountains like

VU1. Storrents. A great part of the low country is sandy

and barren, and never refreshed with rain. hn
order to render such an unpromifinge region fertile,
the ingenuity of the Peruvians had recours~e to va·
rious expedients. By means of artificial canals
condulted, with much patience and considerable
art, from the torrents that poured across their
country, the) conveyed a regular s~upply of mol.
fture to their fields o. They enriched the foil by
manuring it with the dung of f~ea-fowls, of which
they found an inexhauffible flore on all the islands
fEattered alonlg their coasts p, In describing the
cuffoms of any nation thoroughly civilized, such
praaices would hardly draw attention, or be men-
tioned as in any degree remarkable; but in the
hiffory of the improvident race of men in the New
W~orld, they are entitled to notice as singular proofs
of induffry and of art. The use of the plough,
indeed, was unknown to the Peruvians. They
turned up the earth with a kind of mattock of hard
wood s. Nor was this labour deemed so deg-rad·
ing as to be devolved wholly upon the women,
Both sexes joined in performing this necessary
work. Even the children of the Sun set an ex.
ample of industry, by cultivating a field near Cuzco
with their own hands, and they ·dignified this fune.

* Zarate, lib. i. c. 4, Ve~ga, lib. v. c. I, &c 24*
P Acofta, lib.iv. c.37. Vega, lib. v. c*3, See N()TE

XXXIV.

q Zarate, lib. i. c. 8,

tion, by denominating it their triumph over the B O O~ K
earth '. ~-s

THE fulperior ingenuity of the Peruvians is ob- Their build-

vious, likrewife, in the confiruaion of their houtes '"'
and public buildings. In the extensive plains
which firetch along the Pacific Ocean, where the
fkiy is perpetually ~serene, and the climate mild,
their hous~es were very properly of a fabric extreme-
ly flight. But in the higher regions, where rain
falls, where the vicissitude of feaf'ons is known,
and their rigour felt, hous~es were confirudted! with
greater solidity. They were generally of a fqluare
form, the walls about eight feet high, built with
bricks hardened in the fun, without any windows,
and the door low and firait. Simple as thes~e firuc-
tures were, and rude as the materials may s~eem
to be of which they were formed, they were to
durable, that many of them still subsist in different
parts of Peru, long after everymonument that might
have conveyed to us any idea of the dlomeic slate
of the other American nations has vanish~ed from
the face of the earth. But it was in the temples
consecrated to the Sun, and in the buildings de-
flined for the residence of their monarchs, that the
Peruvians dis~played the utmost extent of their art
and contrivance. The deferiptions of them by
s~uch of the Spanish writers as had an opportunity
of contemplating them, while, in some meas~ure,

' Veoga, lib. v. c. 2.

P 4 entire,

a 00 entire, might have appeared highly exaggerated,
cI- if the ruins which still remain, did not vouch the

truth of their relations. There ruins of sacred or
royal buildings are found in every province of the
empire, and by their frequency demonitrate that
they are monuments of a powerful people, who must
have subsisted, during a period of some extent, in
a slate of no inconsiderable improvement. They
appear to have been edifices various in their di.
mentions. Some of a moderate size, many ofim.
mense extent, all remarkable for solidity, and re.
fembling each other in the stile ofarchiteaure.
The temple of Pachacamac, together with a pa.
lace of the Inca, and a fortrels, were so conneaed
together as to form one great firuature, above half
a league in circuit. In this prodigious pile, the
fame singular tasse in building is conspicuous, as
in other works of the Peruvians. As they were
unacquainted with the us~e of the pulley, and other
mechanical powers, and could not elevate the large
stones and bricks which they employed in building
to any conflderable height, the walls of this edi.
fice, in which they seem to have made their great·
eft effort towards magnificence, did not rife above
twelve feet from the ground. Though they had
not discovered the use of mortar or of any other
cement in building, the bricks or Rlones were join.
ed with so much nicety, that the 'feams can hardly
be discerned : The apartments, as far as the dif.

* See NO TE XXXV.

tribution

tribution of thern can be traced in the ruins, were n o O P;

VHI

ill-difpof~ed, and afforded little accommodation.
There was not a single window in any part of the
building; and as no light could enter but by the
door, all the apartments of largest dimension must
either have been perfealy dark, or illuminated by
some other means. But with all there, and many
other imperfeaions that might be mentioned in
their art of building, the works of the Peruvians
which still remain, muff be considered as flupen-
dous efforts of a people unacquainted with the us~e
of iron, and convey to us an hligh idea of the
power poffeffed by their ancient monarchs.

THESE, however, were not the noblest: or most TIheir purblic

useful works of the Incas. The two great roads roads,
from Cuzco to Quito, extending in an uninter-
rupted firetch above fifteen hundred miles, are en-
titled to ftli higher praire. The one was conduQ-
ed through the interior and mountainous country,
the other through the plains on the sea-coast.
From the language of admiration in which some
of the early writers expres~s their astonishment when
they first viewed those roads, and from the more
pompous defecriptions of later writers, who labour
to support s~ome favourite theory concerning Ame-
rica, one might be led to compare this work of
the Incas to the famous military ways which re-
main as monuments of the Roman power: But in
a country where there was no tame animal except
the Llama, which was never used for draught, and

but

B O O K but little as a beast of burden, where the high

VII. Sroads were s~eldom trod by any but a human foot,

no great degree of labour or art was reqluifite in
forming them. The Peruvian roads were only
fifteen feet in breadth ', and in many places so
slightly formed, that time has effaced every veffige
of the course in wvhich they ran. In the low
country little more seems to have been done, than
to plant trees or to fix poffs at certain intervals, in
order to mark the proper rout to travellers. To
open a path through the mountainous country was
a more arduous task. Eminences were levelled,
and hollows filled up, and for the preservation of
the road it was fenced with a bank of turf. At
proper distances, Tamnbos, or florehouf~es, were
erec~ed for the accommodation of the Incad and his
attendants, in their progress through his domi.
nions. From the manner in which the road was
originally formed in this higher and more imper.
vious region, it has proved mojre durable; and
though, from the inattention of the Spaniards to
every objea but that of working their mines, no·
thing has been done towards keeping it in repair,
its course may still be traced ". Such was the ce-
lebrated road of the Inlcas; and even from this de-
Scription, diverted of every circumfiance of mani·
fest exaggeration, or of s~uspicious afpea, it mdR

aCieca, c. 60.
" Xerez, p.r89. 19r. Zarate, lIb. i. c. 13, 14. Vega,

Ebh. ix. c. 13. Boguer Voyage, p. I05. Ulloa Entretenemien·
tos, p. 365-·

be considered as a firiking proof of an extraordi. B o 0 a

VII.

nary progress in improvement and policy. To the cc-s
savage tribes of America, the idea of facilitating
communication with places at a difiance had never
occurred. To the Mexicans it was hardly known.
Even in the most civilized countries ofEurope, men
had advanced far in refinement, b-efore it became a
reg~ular objea of national police to form such roads
as render intercourse commodious. It was a capital
obje61 of Roman policy to open a communication
wpith all the provinces of their extensive empire, by
Ineans of those roads which are julilly considered as
one of the noblest monuments both of their wis~-
dom and their power. But during the long reign
of barbarifmn, the Roman roads were negleAed or
destroyed; and at the time when the Spaniards en-
tered Peru, no kingdom in Europe could boast of
any work of public utility that could be compared
with the great roads formed by the Incas.

THE formation of those roads introduced an- and bddges,

other improvement in Peru equally unknown over
all the reft of America. In its course from south
to north, the road of the Incas, was interfieaed by
all the torrents which roll from the Andes towards
the Wleffern Ocean. From the rapidity of their
course, as well as from the freqluency and violence
of their inundation, these were not fordable. Some
expedient, however, was to be fcound! for pafirng
them. The Peruvians, from their un~acquaintance
pvith the use of arches, and their inability to work in

wood,

B O O. K wood, could not confirua bridges either offlone

clrror timber. But neceflity, the parent ofinvention,

sugg-ested a device which supplied that d~efed~. They
formed cables of great strength, by twiftingf to.
gether some of the pliablewiths or clers, w~ith which
their country abounds; fix of there cables they
stretched acros~s the fiream parallel to one another,
and made them fast on each fid~e. These they
bound firmly together by interweaving finaller ropes
so close, as to form a co~mpat piece of net-work,
whichl being co~vered! with branches of trees and
earth, they passe~d along it writha tolerable security:
Proper perf~ons.were appointel to attend at each
bridge, to keep it in repair, and to assist passengers y
In the level country, where the rivers became deep
and broad and itill, they are paf'ed in 13alxar, or
floats; in the confiruction, as well as navigation
of which, the ingenuity of the Peruvians appears to
be far s~uperior to that of any people in America.
Thes~e had advanced no farther in naval fkiill than
the use of the paddle, or oar; the Peruvians ven.
tured to rais~e a msaft, and spread a fail, by means of
which their balzas not only went nimbly before the
wind, but could vere and tack with great celerityz,

Mode or re. NOR were the ingenuity and art of the Peruvians
("...8 niver confined solely to objeas of essential utility. They

x See NOTE XXXVI.
Y Sancho ap. Ram. iii* 376, B. Zarate, lib. i. c. 14. Vep,

lib. iii. c. 7, 8. Herrera, dec* 5. lib. iv. c. 3* 4-

* Ulloa Voy. i. 167, &c.

had made some progress in arts, which may be a 0

VII.

called elegant. They poffeff~ed the precious metals p
in greater abundance than anly people of America.
They obtained gold in the fame manner with the
Mexicans, by s~earching in the channels of rivers, or
washing the earth in which particles of it were con-
tained. But in order to procure silver, they ex-
erted no inconsiderable degree of sk~ill and inven-
tion. They had not, indeed, attained the art of
sinking a thaft into the bowels of the earth, and
penetrating to the riches concealed there; but they
hollowed deep caverns on the banks of rivers and
the sides of mountains, and emptied such veins as
did not dip suddenly beyond their reach. In other
places, where the vein lay near the surface, they
dug pits to such a depth, that the pers~on who
worked below could throw out the ore, or hand
it up in baikets ". They had discovered the art of
fmelting and refining this, either by the simple
application of fire, or where the ore was more
flubborn, and impregnated with foreign sub-
flances, by placing it in fmnall ovens or furnaces, on
high grounds, so artificially confiruded, that the
draught of air performed the funaion of a bel-
lows, an engine with which they were totally unac-
quainted. By this simple device, the purer ores
were fmnelted with facility, and the quantity of fil.
ver in Peru was so considerable, that many of the
utensils employed in the fun~tions of common life

a Ramufio, iii. 4r4, A.

"5 were

B O O K Were made of it b. Several of those vessels and

VII. c~-~ctrinkets are said to have merited no fmnall degree of

effimation, on account of the neatnes~s ofthework.
manship, as well as the intrinsic value of the ma·
terials. But as the conquerors of America were
well acquainted with the latter, but had fearcely
any conception of the former, most of the silver vef
f~els and trinkets were melted down, and rated ac.
cording to the weight and fineness of the metal in
the division of the spoil.

Works of rN other works of mere curoioity or ornament,
ckgance. their ingenuity has been highly celebrated. Many

specimens of thos~e have been dug out of the Guca.
cas, or motinds of earth, with which the Peruvians
covered the bodies of the dead. Among these are
mirrors of various dim~enflons, of hard thiningitones
highly polished ; veffelss of earthen ware of different
forms ; hatchets, and other infiruments, some de·
flined for war, and others for labour. Some were
of flint, some of copper, hardened to such a degree
by an unknown process, as to supply the place of
iron on several occaflons. Had the use of those
tools formed of copper been general, the progress
of the Peruvians in the arts might have been such,
as to emulate that of more cultivated nations. Bjut
either the metal was to rare, or the operation by
which it was hardened, so tedious, that their infiru·
ments of copper were few, and to extremely small,

b Acoffa, lib. iv. c. 4, 5 Vega, p. r. lib. vill.c.sy;.

JUloa Entreten. 258.

that they seem to have been employed only in a o,, o
fig'hter works. But even to such a circumfocribed Lys
life of this imperfedt metal, the Peruvians were in-
(lebted for their s~uperiority to the other people of
America in various arts c. The fame obs~ervation,
however, may be applied to them, which I for,
merly made with refpeQ to the arts of the Mexi-
cans. From ~several fpecimnens of Peruvian utensils
and ornaments, which are dlepofited in the royal ca-
binet of Madrid, and from some pres~erved in different
colleaions in other parts of Europe, I have reason
to believe that the workmanship is more to be ad-
mired on account of the rude tools with which it
was executed, than on account of its intrinsic neat-
ness and elegance ; and that the Peruvians, though
the most improved of all the Americans, were not
advanced beyond the infancy of arts.

BUT notw~ithfianding so many particulars,.which An imper-

seem to indicate an high degree of improvement in ;icof f iviliza.
Peru, other circumffances occur that s~uggest the
idea of a society Rtill in the frirt flages of its tranfi-
tion from barbarism to civilization. In all the do-
minions of the Incas, Cuzco was the only place that are cities bue
had the appearance, or was entitled to the name of czo
a city. Eve=ry where else, the people lived mofily
.in detachei habitations, dlifperfed over the country,
or, at the utmost, fettled together in sm-all vil-
lages d. But until men are brought to assemble in

C Ulloa Voy. tom. i. 381, &c. Id. Entreten. p. 369, &c.
SZarate, lib. i. c. 9, H-errera, dec. 5. lib. vi. c. 4*

* I3 nunt~erouls

8 O O K numerous bodies, and incorporated in such close

VII.

4.--v--.. union, as to enjoy frequent intercourse, and to feel

mutual dependence, they nevrer imbibe perfealy
the spirit, or assume the manners of social life. In
a country ofimmenf~e extent, with only one city, the
progress of manners, and the improvement either
of the necessary or more refined arts, muf, have
been so flowN, and carried on under such difad·
vantages, that it is more s~urprising the Peruvians
thould have advanced to far in refinement, than
that they did not proceed farther.

Ne perrea IN cons~equence of this slate of imperfell union,
feparanion of
orofemcns. the separation of profeffons in Peru was liot t

complete as among the Mexicans. The less closely
men associate, the more simple are their ananners,
and the fewer their wants. The crafts of common
and most necessary use in life do not, in such a
slate, become to complex or difficult, as to render
it requisite that men thould be trained to them by
any particular cours~e of education. All the arts,
accordingly, which were of daily and indispensable
utility, were exercis~ed by every Peruvian indiferi·
minately. None but the artists, employed in works
of mere curiosity or ornament, constituted a fepa.
rate order of men, or were diftinguilhed from other
citizens '.

f~~lcac com- FRom the want of cities in Peru, another con·
tercourts fequencefollowed. There was little commercialin.

* Acoffa, lIb. vi. c. 15. Vega, lib. v. c. 9. Herrena,

dec* 5. lib. iv. c. 4*

tercourfe

tercourfe among the inhabitants of that great em- a o ·o it
pire. The aaivity of commerce is coeval with -
the foundation of cities; and from the moment
that the members of any community fettle in con-
fiderable numbers in one place, its operations be-
come vigorous. The citizen muit depend for s~ub.
filtence on the labour of those who cultivate the
ground. They, in return, must receive some equi-
valent. Thus mutual intercourse is established, and
the produations of art are regularly exchanged for
the fruits of agriculture. In the towns of the Mexi-
can empire, slated mark~ets were held, and whatever
could fucpply any want or desire of man was an ob-
je8 of commerce. But in Peru, from the singular
mode ofdividingproperty, and the manner· in which
the people w~ere fettled, there was hardly any fpe-
cies of commerce carried on between different pro-
vinces', and the community was less acquainted
with that ac'tive intercours~e, which is at once a bond
of union, and an incentive to improvement.

But the unwarlike sp~irit of the Peruvians was unwarnie

the molt remarkable, as well as most fatal defeat in v n,:ff,~
their charaaer p. The greater part of the rude na-
tions of America opposed their invaders with un-
daunted ferocity, though with little condua or f~uc-
cess. The Mlexicans maintainled the fkruggle in
defence of their liberties, with fhlch persevering

f Vega, lib. vi. c. 8.
g Xerez, 190. Sancho ap. Ram. iii. 372. Herrera, dec.5-

lib. i. c. 3*

VOL. III. fortltude,

a 0 0 fortitude, that it was with difficulty the Spaniards

Lc-3 triumphed over them. Peru was subdued at once,

and almost without resistance; and the most favour-
able opportunities of regaining their freedom, and
of crushing their oppressors, were 10ft through the
timidity of the people. Though the traditional
hiffory of the Peruvians represents all the Incas as
warlike princes, frequently at the head of annies,
which they led to viaory and conquest; few fymp.
toms of such a martial spirit appear in any of their
operations s~ubsequent to the invasion of the Spa.
niards. The influence, perhaps, of those inflitutions
which rendered their manners gentle, gave their
minds this unmanly foftnefs ; perhaps, the conflant
serenity and mildness of the climate may have en·
ervated the vigour of their frame; perhaps, some
principle in their government, unknown to us, was
the occasion of this political debility. Wivhatever
may have been the cause, the faB is certain, and
there is not an instance in hiffory of any people to
little advanced in refinement, so totally deftituteof
military enterprize. This charater hath des~cended
to their pofferity. The Indians of Pern are nowv
more tame and depressed than any people of Ame·
rica. Their feeble [~pirits, relaxed in lifeless in·
nation, seem hardly capable of any bold or manly
exertion.

But, besides thofre capital defeas in the poli

tical sl-ate of Peru, some detached circumflances
and fats occur in the Spanilh writers, wvhich dif.

cover

cover a considerable remainder of barbarity in their B O O K

VII.

in~anners. A cruel cuffom, that prevailed in s~ome of -J
the most savage tribes, f~ublited among the Per~u-
vians. ' On the death of the Incas, and of other emi-
nent pers~ons, a considerable number of their at-
tendants was put to death, and interred around their
Guacas, that they might appear in the next world
with their former dignity, and be served with the
fame refpeQ. On the death of H-uana-Capac, the
most pjowerful of their monarchs, above a thousand
vridims were doomed .to accompany him to the
tomb h. In one particular, their manners app~ear
to have been more barbarous than those of most
rude tribes. Though acquainted with the use of
fire in preparing maize, and other vegetables for
food; they dievoured both fielh and fiih p~erfealy
raw, and affoniflhed the Spaniards, with a pratice
rep~ugnant to the ideas of all civilized people i.

Bo~r though Mvexico and Peru are the pofifefions Qgj~oro f

of Spain in the New World, which, on account ~spain i
both of their antient and present slate, have at-
trated the greatest attention ; her other dominionls
there are far from being inconsiderable, either in
extent or value. The greater part of them was re-
duced to f~ubjeaion during the first part of the fix-
teenth century, by private adventurers, who fitted
out their small armaments either in Hispaniola or in

h Acotta, lib. v. c. 7.
iXerez, p. r90. Sancho, Raxn. iil* 3:2, C. Hlerrera,

dec. 5. lib. i. c. 3*

Q2 Old

R O O K Old Spain; and were we to follow each leader in

VII. L~3 his progress, we should discover the fame daring

courage, the fame persevering ardour, the fame ra-
pacious: desire of wealth, and the fame capacity of
enduring and s~urmounting every thing in order to
attain it, which distinguished the operations ofthe
Spaniards in their greater American conquests. But,
inltead of entering into a detail, which, from the
similarity of the tranf~aaions, would appear almoll a

A brieffur- repetition of what has been already related, I shall
vey on uhm. satisfy mys~elf with s~uch a view of those provinces of

the Spanish empire in America, which have not
hitherto been mentioned, as may convey to my
readers an adequate idea of its greatners, fertility,
and opulence.

such as are I BEGIN with the countries contiguous to the two
th7 malirte great monarchies, of whose hiss ory and inflitutions I
of inexico. have given some account, and shall then briefly de-

scribe the other diffrias of Spanish America. The
jurifdiaion of the viceroy of New Spain extends
over several provinces, which were not fabjec? to

·inaloa and the dominion of the Mexicans. The countries of
onesa, c. Cinaloa and Sonora, that firetch along the east fide

of the Vermilion sea, or gulf of California, a's well
as the immense kingdoms of New Navarre and
New Mexico, which bend towards the weft and
north, did not acknowledge the s~overeignty ofnlon·
tezuma, or his predecessors. These regions, not in·
ferior in magrnitude to all the M'exican empire, are
reduced fomae to a greater, others to a less degree

offubjeaion to the Spanish yoke. They extend B O O K

VII.

through the most delightful part of the temperate
zone; their foil is, in general, remarkably fertile,
and all their produaions, whether animal or vege-
table, are most perfea in their kind. They have
all a communication either with the Pacific Ocean,
or with the Gulph of Mexico, and are watered by
rivers which n~ot only enrich them, but may become
s~ubservient to commerce. The number of Spa-
niards fettled in those vast countries, is indeed ex-
trernely fmnall. They may be said to have s~ub-
dued, rather than to have occupied them. But if
the population in their ancient establishments in
Anterica shall continue to increase, they may gra-
dually spread over those provinces, of which, how-
ever inviting, they have not hitherto been able to
take full poffeflion.

ONE circumffance may contribute to the [peedy Rich mines.

population offome diffrias. Very rich mines both
of gold and silver have been discovered in many of
the regions which I have mentioned. W·herever
thiefe are opened, and worked with s~uccess, a mul-
titude of people res~ort. In order to furpply them
with the necessaries of life, cultivation muff be in-
creased, artisans of various kinds must assemble,
and industry as well as wealth will be gradually dif-
fused. Many examples of this have occurred in
different parts of America since they fell under the
dominion of the Spaniards. Populous villages and
large towns have fudcdenly arisen amidst uninha-

13 bited

n O O Ke bited wilds and mountains; and the working of

VrI ~23minles, though far from being the most proper ob.

jea towards which the attention of an infant society
tholllId be turned, may become the means both of
promo~in~g useful aaivity, and of augmenting the

a recent number of people. A recent and sing~ular instance
~beriero-k of this has happened, which, as it is but little
errY. known in Europe, and may be produacive of great

effeas, merits attention. The Spaniards fettled in
the provinces of Cinaloa and Sonora, had been long
diflurbed by the depredations of some fierce tribres
of Indians. In the year I765, the incurflons of
those savages became so freqluent, and so deltruc-
tive, that the Spanifhl inhabitants, in despair, ap·
plied to the Marquis de Croix, viceroy of M~exico,
for such a body of troops as might enable thein to
drive those formidable invaders from their places
of retreat in the mountains. But the treasury of .
Mexico was so much exhauffed by the large sums
drawn from it, in order to s~upport the late wYar
against Great Britain, that the viceroy could afford
Sthem no aid. The ref~pec? due to his virtues, ac-
coinplifhed what his ofi~cial powver could not effec:!
H-e prevailed with the merchants of New Spain to
advance about two hundred thousand pesos for de·
fraying the expence qs the expedition. The war
was conduaed by an officer of abilities ; and after
being protra~ted for three years, chiefly by the dil-
ficulty of-purfuting the fUgitives over mountains and
through defiles which were almost impassable, it
termrlinated, in the year 177p, in the final fubmiiTon

of the tribes, which had been so long the objeat of a ovuO~ K
terror to the two provinces. In the course of this CMc
service, the Spaniards marched through countries
into which they seem not to have penetrated before
that time, and discovered mines of such value, as was
affonithing even to men acquainted with thle riches
contained in the mountains of the New World. At
Cineguilla, in the province of Sonora, they entered
a plain of fourteen leagues in extent, in which, at
the depth of only sixteen inches, they found gold in
grains of such a size, that some of them weighed
nine marks, and in fiuch quantities, that inl a thort
time, with afewlabourers, theycolleaed a thousand
marks of gold in grains, even without taktingtime to
wash the earth that had been dug;, which appeared
to be so rich, that pers~ons of skill computed that it
might yield what would be equal in value to a
million of pes~os. Before the· end of the year I 77 I, ,q:;?'e o
above fwo thousand persons were fettled in Cine- thls.
guilla, un:der the government of proper magiffrates,
and the infpeaion of several ecclefiaftics. As fEve-
rid other mines, not inferior in richness to that of
CinegFuilla, have been dis~covered, both in Sonora
and Cinaloa" kg is probable that thes~e necgleted
and thinly inhabited provinces, may fboo become
as populous and valuable as any part of the Spa~nifb
empire in America.

THE peninsula of California, on the other fidie of esuifreia,
the Vermilian sea, seems to have bteen less known U ae

L See NOTTE XXXVII,

B oV I to the ancient Mexicans, than the provinces which

C I have mentioned. It was discovered by Cortes in

the year I 536 '. During a long period it continued
to be to little frequented, that even its form was
unknown, and in mast charts it was represented as
an island, not as a peninsula m. Though the cli·
mate of this country, if we may judge from its
situation, must be very desirable; the Spaniards
have made small progress in peopling it. Towards
the close of the last century, the Jesuits, who had
great merit in exploring this negleled province,
and in civilizing its rude inhabitants, imperceptibly
acquired a dominion over it as complete as that
which they poffeffed in their mifirons in Paraguay,
and they laboured to introduce into it the fame po·
licy, and to govrern the natives by the fame maxims.
In order to prevent the court of Spain from con·
ceivingr any jealoufyi of their designs and operations,
they s~eem fludiouily to have depreciated the coun·
try, by representing the climate as s~o dir.greeabke
and unwholesome, and the foil as so barren, that
nothing but a zealous desire of converting the na-
tives, could have induced them to fettle there ".
Several public [pirited citizens endeavoured to un·
deceive their sovereigns, and to give them a bet.

and proha- ter view of California; but in vain. At length,
bility of its
improving. On the expulflon of the Jesuits from the Spanifl

dominions, the court of M/adrid, as prone at that
jun~ture to f~ufpeQ the purity of the Order's in·

I Book y. vol. ii. p* 412. m See NOTE XXXVIII.
n Venegas, Hist. of Ca~lifornia, i. 26.

tentions,

tentions, as formerly to confide in them with im. ' B o o re
plicit truss, appointed Don Joseph Galvez, wvhofe --c
abilities have since rais~ed him to the high rank of
miniffer for the Indies, to visit that peninsula. His
account of the country was favourable; he found
the pearl fishery on its coasts to be valuable, and
he discovered mines of gold of a very promifinge ap-
pearance o. From its vicinity to Cinaloa and So-
nora, it is probable, that if the population of theie
provinces shall increase in the manner which I have
supposed, California may, by degrees, receive from
them such a recruit of inhabitants, as to be no
longer reckoned among the desolate and ufelers.
diffric~s of the Spanifhh empire.

ON the east of Mexico, Yucatan and Hond~uras vaemn,,
are comprehended in the government of New g j~on.
Spain, though anciently they can hardly be said to
have formed a part of the Mexican empire. T'here
large provinces, firetching from the Bay of Cam-
peachy beyond Cape Gracias a Dios, do not, likie
the other territories of Spain in the New World,
derive their value either from the fertility of their
foil, or the richness of their mines ; but they pro-
duce in greater abundance, than any part of Ame-
rica, the log~wood tree, which, in dying s~ome co-
lours, ;s so far preferable to any other material,
that the consumption of it in E~urope is confider-
able, and it has becomie an article in commerce of
great value. During a long per-iod, no European

* Lorenzano, 349> 55·0.

nation

9 O O nation intruded upon the Spaniards in those pro.

cci vmees, or attemp: ed to obtain any share in this

branch of trade. But after the conquest- ofJa·
maica by the Englilh, it s~oon appealed what afor·
midable rival was now~·feated in thleneighlbourhood of
the Spanish~ territories. One of the first objeas
which tempted the EngSlifhl fettled in that island, was
ther great profit arising friom the logrwood trade, and
thle facility of wreffing some portion of it from the

nheir de- Spaniards. Some adventurers fr-om Jamaica made
Cline, 'the firfE attempt at Cape Catoche, the south-east pro·

mnontory of Yucatan, and by cutting logwmood there,
crrLIedT on1 ac gainfull: trafllc. WIhen most of the trees
near the coast in thiat place were felled, they re-
mnoved to the island of T'rift, in the Bay of Cam·
peachy; and in later times, theirprincipal ftationhas
been in the bay of' H-onduras. TheSpaniards, alarm.
ed at this encroachment, endeavoured by negocia·
tion, remonltrances, and open force, to prevent
the English from obtaining any footing on that
part of the American continent. But after firug·
gling against it for more than a, century, the dif·
afters of last war extorted from the Court ofl~iadrid
a reluaant cons~ent to tolerate this s~ettlement of so·
reigrners in the heart of its territories P. The pain
which this humbling concellion occasioned, seems
to have prompted the Spaniards to devise a mel
thod of rendering it of little consequence, more es.
featual than all the efforts of negrociation or vio.

P Treaty of Pari~s, Art. xvili.

lence. The logwood produced on the weft coast n o o to
of Yucatan, where the foil is drier, is in quality J
far superior to that which grows on the marsh~y
grounds where the English are fettled. By en- and revival.
couraging the cutting of this, and permitting the
importation of it into Spain without paying anly
duty 9, s~uch vigour has been given to this branch
ofcommerce, and the logwood which the English
bring to market has funk s~o much in value, that
their trade to the bay of Honduras has gradually
declined ' since it obtained a legal fanaion ; and,
it is probable, will soon be finally abandoned. In
that event, Yucatan and Honduras will become
poffieffions of considerable importance to Spain. -

STILL farther east than Honduras lie the two colt Rice
provinces of Coffa Rica and Veragua, which lik~e- 2 vq.
wife belong to the vice-royalty of New Spain; but
both have been so much negleaed by the Spaniardls,
and are apparently of s~uch fmtall value, that they
merit zio particular attention.

THE most important province depending on the chir.
vice-royalty of Peru, is Chili. The Inlcas had
eflablifhed their dominion in some of its northern
diffrifts; but in the greater part of the country,
its gallant and high spirited inhabitants maintained
th~ir independence. The Spaniards, allured by
the fame of its opulence, earlyr attempted the con-

s Real Cedula, Carnpornanes, ill. 14 9.
r See NOTE XXXIXI.

qlueft

a o 0 to quest of it under Diego Almagro; and after his

Ls death, Pedro de Valdivia refulmed the design.

Both met with fierce opposition. 'The former re-
linquifhecd the enterprize in the manner which I
have mentioned I. The latter, after having given
many displays, both of courage and military fkiill,
was cut off, together with a considerable body of
troops under his command. Francis~co deVillagra,
Valdivia's lieutenant, by his spirited condu8,
checked the natives in their career, and saved the
remainder of the Spaniards from defirudion. By
degrees, all the champaign country along the
coast was fubjefted to the Spanish dominion. The
mountainous country is Rtill poffeffed by the Puel.
ches, Araucos, and other tribes of its original in·
habitants, formidable neighbours to the Spaniards,
with whom, during the course of two centuries,
they have been obliged to maintain alinoft perpe-
tual hostility, f~ulpended only by a few intervals of
insecure peace.

ExcelenceTHAT part of Chili then, w~hich may properiv

and foil. be deemed a Spaniih province, is a narrow diffriia,

extended along the coast from the desert of Atal
camas to the island of Chiloe, above nine hundred
miles. Its climate is the most delicious in the
New W~lorld, and is hardly equalled by that of any
region on the face of the earth. Though border.
ing on the Torrid Zone, it never feels the extre·

* B~ook vi. p. 60o, &c.

mnity of heat, being s~creened on the east by the a o K
Andes, and refreshed from the well by cooling s~ea- c-l
breezes. The temperature of the air is t~o mild
and equable, that the Spaniards give it the prEW
ference to that of the s~outhern provinces in their
native country. The fertility of the foil corre-
[ponds with the benignity of the climate, and is
wonderfully accommodated to European produe-
tions. The most valuable of these, corn, wine,
and oil, abound in Chili, as if they had been lia-
tive to the country. All the fruits imported from
Europe attain to full maturity there. The animals
of our hemisphere not only multiply, but improve
in this delightful region. The horned cattle are
of larger size than those of Spain. Its breed of
horses surpasses, both in beauty and in spirit, the
famous Andalufian race, from which they sprung.
Nor has Nature exhauffed her bounty on the fur-
face of the earth; the has stored its bowels with
riches. Valuable mines of gold, of silver, of cop-
per, and of lead, have been dlifca~vered in various
parts of it.

A cOUNTRY diftinguiihed by so many blefirngs, cance on iu

we may be apt to conclude, would early become Pee ~d phe
a favourite flation of the Spaniards, and must have spaniards.
been cultivated with peculiar predilee~ion and care.
Initead of this, a great part of it ~remains unoccu-
pied. In all this extent of country, there are not
above eighty thousand white inhabitants, and about
three times that number of negroes and people of

a mixed

B O O K a Inixed race. The most fertile foil in Americai

LV lies uncultivated, and some of its molt promiling

mines remain unwrought. Strange as this negle8
of the Spaniards to avail thems~elves of advantages,
which seemed to court their acceptance, may ap·
pear, the causes of it can be traced. The only
intercourse: of Spain with its colonies in the South
Sea, was carried on during two centuries by the
annual fleet to Porto-bello. All the produce of
thes~e colonies were shipped in the ports of Callaoi
or Arica in Peru, for Panama, and carried from
thence acroifs the iithmus. All the commodities
which they received from the mother-country, were
conveyed from Panama. to the fame harbours
Thus both the exports and imports of Chili passed
through the hands of merchants fettled in Peru.
These had of course a profit on each; and in both
tranfadtions the Chilefe felt their own f~ubordina.
tion.; and having no direa intercourse with the
parent slate, they depended upon another province
for the disposal of their produaions, as well as for
the s~upply of their wants. Under such discourage-
ments, population could not increaife, and indultry

Prorpen of was destitute of one chief incitement. But nowv
me .pov that Spain, from motives which I shall mention

hereafter, has adopted a new system, and carries
on her conxmerce with the colonies in the South
Sea, by ships w-hich go round Cape Horn, a di·
rea~ intercourse is opened between Chili and the
Mlother-country. The gold, the silver, and the
other commodities of the province will be ex.

changed

changed in its own harbours for the manufatures B O O K

VHI.

of Europe. Chili may speedily rife into that im- c-J
portance among the Span~ih settlements to which
it is intitled by its natural advantages. It may
become the granary of Peru, and the other pro·
vinces along the Pacific Ocean; it may supply
them with wine, with cattle, with horses, with
hemp, and many other articles for which they now
depend upon Europe. Though the new fyfitem
has been established only a few years, those· effeas
of it begin already to be observed f. If it shall be
adhered to with any fleadinefs for half a century,
one may venture to foretel, that population, in-
dultry, and opulence will advance in this province
with rapid progress.

To the east of the Andes, the provinces of Tu- Pruovin~es oP
cuman and Rio de la Plata border on Chill, and and Rio de la

Plata.

like it were dependent on the Vice-royalty of Peru.
These regions of immense extent firetch in length
from north to south above thirteen hundred miles,
and in breadth more than a thousand. This coun- Northern

and louthlern

try, which is larger than most European kingdoms, .divilion.
naturally forms itsel~f into two great diviflons, one
on the north, and the other on the south of Rio de
la Plata. The former comprehends Paragruay, the
famous missions of the Jesuits, and several other
diltrias. BEut as disputes have long fuLbfifted be-
tween the courts of Spain and Portugal, concer~n-

tCampomanes, it. rfj.

B O OC K ing its boundaries, which, it is probable, will be

CWy· soon fmnally as~certained, either amicably, or by.the

decision of the sword, I chuf~e to reserve my ac·
count of this northern divilion, until I enter upon
the hiitory of Portugueefe America, with which
it is inltimately conne~ed; and, in relating it, I
thall be able from authentic materials, supplied
both by Spain and Portugal, to give a full and
accurate description of the operations and views of
the Jesuits, in rearing that singular fabric of po.
licy in America, which has drawn so much atten.
tion, and has been to imperfealy underitood. The
latter diviflon-of the province contains the govern.
ments of Tucuman and B3uenos-Ayres, and to thele
I shall at present confine my observations.

view ot the THE Spaniards entered this part of America by

the river De la Plata; and though a s~uccession of
cruel difalters befel them in their early attemptsto
establish their dominion in it, they were encouraged
to persist in the design, at first by the hopes ofdil-
covering mines in the interior country, and after·
wards by the necefit~y of occupying it, in order to
prevent any other nation from f~ettling there, and
penetrating by this rout into their rich poffeflions
in Peru. But except at Buenos-Ayres, they have
made no fettlem~nt of any cons~equence in all the
vast s~pace which I have mentioned. There are,
indeed, scattered over it, a few places on whidi
they have beffowed the name of towns, and to
wlaich they have endeavoured to add some dignity,

by ereaing them into bifhoprics;; but they are no a 0 0 K
better than paltry villages, each with two or three -J
hundred inhabitants. One circumstance, how-
ever, which was not originally foreseen, has con-
tributed to render this diflria~, though thinly
peopled, of considerable importance. The pro-
vince of Tucuman, togecther with the country to
the south of the Plata, instead of being covered
with wood likie other parts ojfAmerica, forms one
extensive open plain, almost without a tree. The
fail is a deep fertile mould;,watered by manyfireamns
descending from the Andes, and clothed in per-
pe~tual verdure. In this rich paflurag~e,, the horses
and cattle imported by the Spaniards from Europe
have multiplied to a degree which almost exceeds
belief. This has enabled the inhlabitants not only
to open a lucrative trade with lPeru, by supplying-
it with cattle, horses, and mules, but to carry on
a commerce no ·lefaI beneficial, by the exportation
of hides to Europe. F~rom both, the colony has
derived great advantages. But its commodious
situation for carrying on contraband trade, has
been the chief source of its prosperity. While the
court of Madrid adhered to its ancient fyfiem, with
refpec? to its communication with A~merica, the
river De la Plata lay so much out of the course of
Spanish navigation, that interlopers, almost wvith-
out any rifqjue of being either obs~erved or ob-
firu~ed, could pour in European manufadures in
fach quantities, that they not only supplied the
wants of the colony, but were conveyed into all·

VoL. III. R the;

B o o K the eastern diftrias of Peru. When the Portu-

VHr gCpC uefe in Brasil extended their settlements to the

bank~s of Rio de la Plata, a new channel was
opened, by which prohibited commodities Afloed
into the Spanish territories, with flill more facility,
and in greater abundance. This illegal traffc,
however detrimental to the parent slate, contri.
buted to the increas~e of the settlement, which has
the immediate benefit of it, and Buenos-Ayres
became gradually a populous and opulent town.
What mnay be the effea of the alteration lately
made in the government of this colony, the nature
of which th~all be described in the s~ubsequent Book,
cannot hit~herto be known.

Other terri- ALL the other territories of Spain in the New
Spa.oe World, the- islands excepted, of whose discovery

and reduaion I have- formerly given an account,
ar-e comprehended under two great diviflons; the
former denomninated the kingdom of Tierra Firme,
the provinces of which fIretch along the Atlantic,
from the eafl-ern frontier of New Spain to the
mouth of the Orinoco; the latter, the New KinR·
dom of Granada, situated in the interior country.
W/ith a fhnort view of these I shall clos~e this part of
my work.

To the east of Veragua, the }aft province fb-

jeat to the viceroy of Mexico, lies the isthmus of

ralien. Darien. Though it was in this part of the con-

tinent that the Spaniards firlt began to plant co·

lonies,

lonies, they havre made no considerable progres~s in B OnO: K
peoplingr it. As the country is extremely moun- cy
tainous, deluged with rain during a good part of
the year, remark~ably unhealthful, and contains no
mines of great value, the Spaniards would pro-
bably have abandoned it altogether, if they had
not been allured to continue by the excellence of
the harbour of Porto-bello on the one sea, and that
of Panama on the other. These have been called
the keys to the communication between the north
and south s~ea, between Spain and her mofi valuable
colonies. In consequence of this advantage, Pa-
nama has become a considerable and thriving tow-n.
The peculiar noxiousnes~s of its climate has pre-
viented Porto-bello from increasing; in the fame pro-
portion. As the intercour-se with the settlements
in the Pacific Ocean is now carried on by another
channel, it is probable that both Porto-bello and
Panama will decline, when no longer nourith~ed
and enrichled by that commerce to which they
wecre indebted for their profplerity, and even their
existence.

THEr provinces of Carthagena and Santa Mlartha carthagena
firetch to the eallward of the isthmus of Darien. reartha.
'The country still continues mountainous, but its
vallies beg-in to expand, are wz~ell waitered, and
extremely fertile. P~edro de Heredia fubje~ted this
part of America to the crown of Spain, about th~e
year r532. It is thinly peopled, and of course ill
cultiv,,ted. It produces, however, a variety of

R 2 valuable

n 0 0 K valuable drugs, and some precious 110nes, parti·

LC~d cularlyi emeralds. But its chief importance is de-

riv·ed from the harbour of Carthagena, the fafelt
andc best fortified of any in the American dominions
of Spain?. In a situation so favourable, commerce
soon beg~an to flourith. As early as the year 1544r
it feecms to halve been a town of s~ome note. B3ut
v hen Carthiagena w-as chos~en as the port in wh~ich
th~e galcons thould frirt begin to trade on their: ar·
r-is l f~rom Europe, and to wlch they w~ere di.
red~ed to return, in order to prepare for their
voyage homewsard, the commerce of its inhabitants
wa;S so muchI favoured by this arrangrement, that
it so~on bEfcame onle of the mloft populous, opulent,
and beautiulG cities in America. There is, how-
ever, reason to apprehend, that it has reached its
h~ighe~st poinlt of exaltation, and that it wvill be so
far aff-eile by the ch~ange in the Spanish system of
tradte with America, whichr has w·ithdrawnfromit
th eirabl vilits`'` .: of the galcons, as to feelat least
a temporary decline. Bjut the'wealth now colleled
there, wvill soon find or create employment for itself,
and may be turned with advantage into some new
channel. Its harbour is so safe, and so conve·
nient:ly fltuated for receiving commodities from
Europe, its merchantsj hav6 been so long accuf-
tomed to convey thes~e into all the adjacent pro.
vinces, that it is probable they will still retain this
branch of tradei, and Carthagena continue to~ be a
city of great importance,

THE province contiguous to Santa Mfarthia on B o t, K

the eaff, was first visited by Alonfo de Ojeda, in c
the year 1499 "; and the Spaniards, on their v m'Ue'".
landing there, having observed some huts in an
Indian villagre built upon piles, inl order to raffre
them above the flagnated water which covered the
plain, were led to beffow upon it the name of
Vienezuela, or Little Venice, by their usu~al pro-
penfity to find a resemblance between what theyr
discovered in America, and the~ objeLas which w~ere
familiar to them in Europe. They made some at-
tempts to fettle there, but with little su~cces~s. The
final redut~ion of the province w~as accom~piikedl
by means very different from those to which Spainl
wvas indebted for its other acquisitions in the New
World. TIhe ambition of Charles V. often en-
gagbed him in operations of s~uch variety and ex-
tent, thnat his revenues were not f~ufircient to defray
thle expen~ce of carrying them into execution.
Among oth er expe dients for suppl yi ng the deficiency
of his fulnds, he had borrowed large sUm;s from
the Velf~ers of Augfbnurgh, the most opulent
merchants~ at that time in1 Europe. B3y way of
retribution for there, or in hopes, perhaps, of ob-
taining; a new loan, he beitored upon them the
province of Venezuela, to be held as an hereditary
fief froni the crown of Castile, on condition that
within a limited time they th~ould render them-
%dves masters of the country, anld establish~ a co-

U B3ookiL. vol. i. p. ziz.

R 3 lony ,

a

ii

0 O K10 there. Under the direAion of such persons,

C-y it might have been expe~etd, that a settlement

wt~ould have been established on maxims very dif.
ferent from those of the Spaniards, and better cal-
culated to encourage such us~eful induffry, as mer.
cantile proprietors migrht hanve k~nown to be the
most certain source of prosperity and opulence.
But unfortunately they committed the execution
of their plan to some of those soldiers of fortune
with wchich Germany abounded in the sixteenth
century. There adventurers, impatient to amals
riche;, that they might fp~eedlily 'abandon a flation
whbich they foonl discove-red to be very uncomfort-
able, idlteadl of plantinlg a colony in or der to cul-
tivate anld intprove the country, wandered from
d:iffia to dif-r;ia i search of mines, plunderingR
the natives wiithl unfeeling rapacity, or oppressing
them byr the imposition of intolerable talks. In
the course: of a few years, their avarice and exac·
tions, in comparison with which those of the Spa-
niards were moderate, desolated the province t
completely, that it could hardly afford them sub.
fiftence, and the Velfers relinquished a prop~erty
from wh·iczh the inconidcerate condua of their
agnents left them no hope of ever deriving any ad·
vantage x. When the wiretched remainder of the
G~ermans deserted Venezuela, the Spaniards again
took poffeffion ofit; but, notwithstanding many

X Civedo y Bag~nos Hist. de Y'e:ezuela, p. 11, &tc.

natural

matural advantages, it is one of their moit lan. B O O1: K
puilhing and unproduc~ive settlements. My-

THE provinces of Caraccas and Cumana are the caracem:~nd

Ileft of the Spanish territories on this coast; but in
relating the origin and operations of the mer-
cantile company, in whlich an exclusive right
of trade with them has been vefied, I thall here-
after have occasion to -confider their r ate and pro-
duations.

THE New K~ingdom of Granada is entire'ly an New any%
inland country of great extent. This important ad- G·nada.
dition was made to the dominions of Spain about
the year 1536, by Sebaffian de Benalcazar and
~Gonzalo Ximenes de quefada, two of the bravest
and most accompliened officers employedl in the
conquest of America. The formner, who comm-
mandedd at that time in Quito, attacked it front
the south ; the latter made his invaflon from Santa
Mlattha on the north. As the original inhabitants
of this region were farther advanced in improve-
ment, than any people in America but the Mvexi-
cans and Peruvians v, they defended themnfelves
with great resolution and good condu~t. The abil-
lities and pers~everance of Benalcazar and Quefada
foirmounted all opposition, though not without
encountering many dsangers, and reduced the coun-
try into the form of a Spanish province,

r Book iv. vol. ii. p. r39, &c.

R 4 Tax

Iu O O K THIE New K~ingdom of Granada is so far ele-

I--~ vated above the level of the sea, that though it

approaches almost to the eqluator, the climate is
remarkably temperate. The fertility of its valhles
is not inferior to that of thle richest diffri2as in
America, and its higher grounds yield gold and
precious flones of vcarious kinds. It is not by
digging into the bowels of thie earth that this gold
is found; it is mingled with1 the foil near the fur.
fa2ce, and separated fromn it by repeated walhing
with water. This operation is carried on wholly
, by negro slaves;S for th~ough the chill subterranean

air has been discovered, by experience, to be so fatal
to them, that they cannlot be employred with advan-
tagfe in the deep silver mines, they are more capable
of performing the other species of labour than In-
dians. As the native~s in the New Kiingdom of
Granada are exempt from that service, w~hich has
waftedtheir race so rapidly in otherparts ofAmerica,
the country is Hill remiarkably populou~s. Some
diffrifts yieldgoild with: a profusion noldfs wonderful
than that in the vale of Cineguilla, which I have
formerly me;;,ioned, and it is often found in large
pcpitas, or grarins, which manifest the abundunce
in which it is produced. On a rising gSround near
Pampiona, single labourers iLove colleaed in a
day what was eq·!al in value to a thloufa~nd pesos "
A late .governor01 of Santa SEi brought with hial
to Spain a lump of pure gold, effimated to be

Z Fledrahytta H-ill. del N. Rey·no, P* 481. MLS. penes me.

worth

w~orth seven hundred and forty pounds fierling. s O, 0 a
This, which is, perhaps, the largest and finest <------
[pecimen ever found in the New World, is nowr
deposited in the royal cabinet of Madrid. But
without founding any calculation on what is rare
and exitraordinary, the value of the gold ufurally
colleced in this country, particularly in the pro-
vinces of Popayan and Choco, is of conflderable
amount. Its towns are populous and flourithing.
The number of inhabitants in almost every part of
the country daily increas~es. Cultivation and in-
duitry of various kinds begin to be encouraged,
and to prosper. A. considerable trade is carried on
wlith Carthagena, the produce of the mines, and
other commodities, being conveyed down the g~reat
river of St. Magdalen to that city. On another
quarter, the New K~ingdom of Granada has a com-
munication with the Atlantic by the river Orinoco;
but the country which firetches along its banks
towards the east, is little known, and imperfectly
pecupied by the Spaniards.

# BOOK VIII.

THE

C A.

B O OK VIII.

Ah FTER tracing the progrcefs of the Spaniards BOK o a x

inl their discoveries and conqueits during jfr,

more than half a century, I have condu~ed! them pouY adth
to that period when their authority was eftablifhedl s··nus colo-
over almoRt all the vaff regions in the New W~orld
still fubjeA to their dominion. The eff~ea of their
fettlenients upon the countries of which they rook
poff~efion, the maxims which they adoptedI in
forming their new colonies, the interior firuture
and policy of theife, together with the influence of
their progreifive improvement upon1 the parent
slate, and upon the commercial intercourse of na-
·tions, are the objeas to which we now turn our
attention.

STHE firit visible consequence of the establish- Depopulr-

. toon of A-

ments made by the Spaniards in Amlle~ica, wa~s the merica tle

. ~first effedt of

diminution of the antient inhabitants, to a degrree them.

equually

HI S TO fR Y

OF

A M E I

8 eqully atoniting ad deporable. I have already,

on--, 1 diiffrent11 occalionls, mentioned the difafrous
inlfuence~ under which the conneaion of the Ame-
ricans with the people of our hemisphere com·
menzed~, both in thie islands, and in several parts
of the~ conitinent, and hiave touched upon various
caulerts of th;eir rapid consu~mption. Wherever the
inlhabitantsr of Amelrica had resolution to take@
armsc in denci'~le of their liberty and rights, many
perithedi in the uneqlual contest, and were cut ofiF
byr thirii fier-ce invaders. B~ut the greatest defola·
tion followedl after thle sword was Th~eathed, and

as f the conquerors" were fettled in tranquiitiy. It

me,·r, andl was inl the illands, and in those provinces of the
'li c nl- con~tinlent which firieth1 from the Gulf of Tri-

nidad to thle confinles of 1\lexico, that the fatal
elffears of thle Spanifhl dominion were firlt an~d moil
fcnfibly felt. All these were occupied either by
wvanderingS tribes of hunters, or by such as had
made but fna~ll progrei's in cultivation and in-
duitry. When they w-ere compelled by their new
masters to takie up a fix~ed residence, anld to apply
to regular lazbour; wvhen taflks wezre imposed upon
them difproportioned to their firengnth, and were
exa~ed with unrelentinlg severity·, they poff~effed
not vigrour either of mind or of body to ifuiain this
unusual load of opprellion. D~ejeaion and derpair
drove many to end their lives by violence. Fatigue
and famine dellroyed more. . In all those extensive
reg-ions, the origSinal race of inhabitants wasted
away; in some it was totally extinguished. In

Mlexico,

Maexico, where a powerful and mrtrial people di. B Oil K
flinguilhed their opposition to the Spaniards by es- cz
forts of courage worthy of a better f-ate, great num-
bers fell in the field; and there, as wecll as in Peru,
frill greater numbers perifhedl under the hardships
of attending the Spanish armies in their various
expeditions and civil w~ars, worn out with the incef-
sant toil of carrying their baggagre, provi~ions, and
military flores.

Bxrr neither the rage nor cr~uelty of the Spa,- In ew,

niards were so deitruftive to the people of Mexsico '' -U
and Peru, as the inconsiderate policy wvith wihich1
they effablifhed their new settlements. heor
mer were temrporary calamitiesc, fatal to individuals ;
the latter was a permanent evil, w~hichl, w~ith gra,-
dual consumption, waited the nation. WVhen the
provinces of Mv'exico and Peru were divided among
the conquerors, each was eager to obtain a dif-
tria, from which he migiht expecT an inftanta-
neous recompence for all his services. Soldiers,
accuffomed to the careleiflhefs and dillipation of a
m~ilitary life, had neither indu~ry to carry on any
plan of regular cultivation, nor patience to w~ait
for its flowc but certain returns. Initead of set-
tling in the vallies occupied by the natives, where
the fertility of the foil would have amply rewarded
the diligence of the planter, they chose to fix. their
flations in s~ome of the mountainous regions, fre-
quent both in New Spain and in Peru. To search
for minles of gold and silver, was the chief objecht

of

B o 0 r( of their aaivity. The profpeas which this opens,

VIII. L~vl and the alluring hopes which it continually pre·

f~ents, corref~pondi wonderfully wc~ith the s~pirit of en-
terprize and adventure that animated the firit
emigrants to America in every part of their con·
duat. In order to pufhi forward those favourite
projets, so many hands were wanted, that the ser-
vice of the natives became indlifpenfably requisite.
They were according~ly compelled to abandon their
ancient habitations in the plains, and driven in
crowds to the mountains. This sudden transition
from the s~ultry climate of the vallies, to the chill
penetrating air peculiar to high lands in the torrid
zone; exorbitant labour, scanty or unwholfome
nourithment, and the delpondency occasioned by a
species of oppreflion to which they were not ac-
cuffomed, and ofC which they saw no end, affeaed
thnem nearly as much as their less induffrious coun-
trymen in the islands. T'hsy f~unk under the united
prefibre of thos~e calamities, and melted away w~ith
ahnoff equal rapidity Z. In consequence of this,
together with the introdualon of the fmnall-pox, a
maladyT unkinown inAmerica, and extremely fatal to
the nativ·es ", the number of people both in N'ew
Spain and Peru was so much reduced, that in a few
years the accounts of their ancient population ap-
p~eared almost incredible b

Z Torq~uemada, i. 6I3-
a B. Diaz, c. 124. Herrera, dec. 2. lib. x. c. 4. Ul10a

Enltreten. 2,06.

' forquem~I. 61 j. 642, 643. See NrO T E XL.

20 Suca

SUCH are the most considerable events and causes n o o K.

VIII.

which, by their combined operation, contributed c~-

Not the re-

to depopulate America. Without attending to rultorany

fyfiem of

thiere, many authors, affonifhed at the f~uddennef5 pokiyi
of the defrolation, have as~cribed this unexampled
event to a fyfitem of policy no less profound than
strocious. The Spaniards, as they pretend, con-
fcious of their 'own inability to occupy the valk
regions which they had discovered, and foreseeing-
the impof~bility of maintaining their authority over
a people infinitely superior to themselves in num-
ber, in order to preserve the poffeflion of America,
resolved to exterminate the inhabitants, and by con-
verting a great part of the country into a desert, en-
deavoured to ~fecupre their own dominion over it ".
But nations seldom extend their views to objeas 10
remote, or lay their plans so deep; and, for the ho-
nour of humanity we may oblerve, that no na-
tion ever deliberately formed such an execrable
feheme. The Spanish monarchs, far from ading
upon any su~ch fyltem of deffrudion, were uniformly
solicitous for the preservation of their new fubjeas.
With Isabella, zeal for propagating the Christian
faith, together with the desire of communicating
the knowledge of truth, and the consolations of
religoion to people destitute of spiritual light, were
more than oftetifible motives for encouraging Co-
Jumbus to attempt his difcoveries.' Upon his f~uc-
cess, the endeavoured to fulfil her pious purpore,

a See NOTE XLI.

SK and manifefired the moss tender concern to secure

cc ~~ not only religious infiruaion, but mild treatment,

to that inoffe~nfve race of men f~ubje~ed to her
crown ". Her successors adopted the fame ideas;
and, on many occasions;, which I have mentioned,
their authority was interposed in the most vigorous
exertions, to proted~ the people of America from
the oppreflion of their SpaniZh fubjeals. Their re·
g ulationls for this purpole were numerous, and often
repeatedi. Theyr were framed w~ith wisdom, and
diatated by humanity. After their poffe~!ions in
the NLew W17orld1 became to ex~tensive, as might have
excited some apprehensions of dif~ficulty ih retaining
their dominion over them, the s~pirit of thleir regu-
lationls was as mild as when their fettlemlents were
confined to the islands alone. Their solicitude to
protea the Indians seems rather to have augmented
as their acquisitions increas~ed ; and from ardour to
Saccomplifh this, they enaaed, and endeavoured to
enforce the execution of laws, wh!ich excited a for-
midable rebellion in one of their colonies, and spread
alarm and diifafeafon through all the reft. But
the avarice of individuals was too violent to be con·
trouled by the authority of laws. Rapacious and
daring adventurers, far removed from the feat of
government, little accuffomed to the restraints of
military dis~cipline while in s~ervice, and still less
dispos~ed to rerped the feeble jurifili~ion of civil
power in an inf'ant colony, des~pised or eluded every

SSee NO T2 XLII.

regulation

t'egulation that set bounds to their exadions and a 0 0 re
tyrannyr. The parent slate, wyith persevering atten- ·-
tion, ifl~ued edias to prlevent the oppreflion of the
Indians ; the coloniits, regrardlef~s of thes~e, or truRt-
ing to their diitance for impunity, continued to
confider and treat thlem as slaves. The governors
themselves, and other officers employied in the co-
10nies, s~everal of w~hom wetre as indigent and ra-
pacious as the adventurers ov·er whom they prdfided,
were too apt toradopt their contemptuous ideas of
the conquered people ; and instead of checkinig, en-
couraged or connivred at their excesses. The defo-
lation of the New Weidrld th~ould not then be charged
on the court of Spain, or be considered as the effec?
of any system of po':cy adopted there. It ought to
be imputed wholly to the indigent and often un-
principled adventurers, whose fortune it was to be
the conquerors and firlt planters of America, wh~o,
'by measu~res no le-ss inconsiderate than unjuff-, coun-
tersaed the edias of their sovereign, and have
brought disgrace upo~n their country.

'WrrH ti~l greater injuffice, have mlany authors ror tbe es-
reprefecated the intoleratingr fplirit of the Roman Assin.
Catholic religion, as the cause of exterminating the
Americans, and have accused the Spanith ecclefiaf-
tics of animnatingr their countrymen to the slaughter
of that innocent people, as idolators and enemies of
God. But the firik mili~onaries who vifiTted Ame-
rica, though weak and illiterate, were pious· men.
They early espoused the defence of the natives, and
VoL. III. S vindicated

B O OI K vrisdicated their chara~er from the afperflons of

C their conquerors, who, describing them as inca-

pable of being formed to the o~ices of civil life,
or of comprehending the do8rines of relig~ion, con-
tended, that they were a fubordinlate race of men,
on whom the hand of nature had set the mark of
s~ervitude. From the accounts which I have given
of the humane and persevering zeal of the Spanish
exiironaries, in proteding the helpless flock com-
mitted to their charge, they appear in a light which
refleas luffre upon their funalon. They were mi-
niffers of peace, who endeavoured to wrest therod
from the hands of oppreflfors. To their powerful
interpolition, the American s were indebted for every
regulation tending to mitigate the rigour of their
fate. The clergy in the Spanifhh settlements, regu-
lar as well as fCecular, are flill considered by the
Indians as their natural guardians, to w~hom they
have recourse under the hardsh~ips and exadlions to
which they are too often exposed e,

~h ~~ mmber BUT, notwithftandingr the rapid depopulationot
dians ilre- America, a very considerable number of the na·

tive race still remains both in 1Wexico and Peru,
especially in those parts wrhich were not exposed
to the firfk fury of the Spanish arms, or desolated
by the first efforts of their induffry, frll more rui-
nous. In Guatimala, Chiapa, Nicaragua, andthe
otaher delightful provinces of the Mexican empire,

* SCe NTOTE XLTII.

wBhfch firetch along the South-fea, the race of 10. n o 0 re

VIII;

dlians is flill numerous. Their settlements in some -r
places are so popu~lous, as to merit the name of ci-
ties i. In the three audiences into which New Spain
is divided, there are at least two millions of In-
dians ; a pitifull remnianlt, indieedt, of its ancient po-
pulation, but flich as fill~ forms a body of people
superior int numnber to that of all the other inha
bitants otfthis extensive countryr S. In Peru several
diffr;Bs, particularly in the k~ingdom of~uito, are
occup~iedI almost entir-ely by Indians. In other pro·
vjnces they are mingled with thle Spaniards, and iti
m~any of their settlements are ahmnof the only peri
sons who pra~if'e.the mechanic arts, and fill most
of the inferio~r fltsions ine faciety. As the inhabi-
tants bothi of Ivlexico and Peru were accuiffomed
to a fixed residence, and to a certain degr-ee of~
regu"lar induffry, less violence was requifie in
bringing them to some conformity w:ith the Euro-
pean modes of civ·il life. Butr wherever the Spa-
niards fettled among the favagne tribes. of America,
their attemp~ts to incorporate wtith thern have been
alway~s fruritlefs, antd often fatanl to the natives, Imn-
patient of refiraint, and difdaininig labour as a markr
of s~ervility, they either abandoned their origiinal
feats, and fought for independence in mountains
and forefl-s inaccefirble to their oppressors, or pe-
rifhed when reduced to a slate repugnant to theit
ancient ideas and habits. In the diffrifts adjacent

I See N~OTE XLIVi. r See NOTE~ XLV.

B O O to Carthagrena, to Panama, and to Buenos-Ayres,

CI- the desolation is more general than even in those

parts of Mexico and Peru, of which the Spaniards
havre taken moRt full pofferlion.

General B4UT the establishments of the Spaniards in the
poni oi Newv World, though fatal to its ancient inhabl.
Spain in its
colonies, tants, were made at a period when that monarchy

wsas capable of forming them to best advantage,
By the union of all its petty kingdoms, Spain was
become a powerful slate, equal to so g~reat an un.
dertaking. Its monarchs, having extended their
prerogativ·e far beyond the limits which once cir,
cumkcribed the regal power in every kingdom ds
Europe, were hardly fubjea to controul, either in
concerting or in executing their meas~ures. Eli
ev~ery wide extended empire, the form of govern-
ment mull be limple, and the sovereign authority
such, that its resolutions may be takien with promp·
titude, and may pervade the whole with fu~fficient
force. Such was the power of the Spanish mo·
narchs, when they were calledto deliberate concern-
ing the mode of establishing their dominion over
the mos1 remote provinces, wvhich had ever been
ifubeated to any European Rtate. In this delibera·
tion, they felt thems~elves under no conflitutional
restraint, and that, as independent masters of their
own resolves, they might iflhe the edit~s reqluifite
for modelling the government of the new colonies,
by~ a mere at of prerogative.

T~s early inlterpofition of the Spanish crown, in B 0 0 n
order to regulate the policy and trade of its co- ~
lonies, is a peculiarity which distinguishes their ,Eq:"~fgng
progress from that of the colonies of any other figgh~
European nation. When the Portugues~e, the Eng-
lifh, and French, took poffefi~on of the regions
in America which they now occulpy, the advan-
tages which these promised to yield were so re-
n ote and uncertain, that their colonies were fils-
fered to struggle through a hard infancy, almost
without guidance or proteaion from the parent
slate. But goldi and silver, the first produAions of
the Spanish settlements in the New W~orld, we're
more alluring, and immediately attraaed the atten-
tion of their monarchs. Though they hadd contri-
buted little to the difcoveryr, and almaft nothing
to the conquest of the New WT1orld, they inflantlyr
assumed the fanalon of its legislators, and hav-
ing acquired a species of dominion formerly un.
known, they formed a plan for exercising it, to-
which nothing (imilar occurs in the hiffory of hu-
Plan affairs.

THE fundamental maxim of Spanifhu jurifpro- AnI power
dence with refpeQ to America, is to confider what veled rnft
has been acquired there as veited in the crown, CrOwn.
rather than in the slate. B3y the bull ofAlex-
ander VI. on which, as its great charter, Spain
founded its right, all the regions that had been,
or thlould be discovered, were beffowJed as a free
gift upon Ferdinand and Isabella. Thley and their

S 3 successors

a O 0 Kt [accessors were unjforntly held to be the universal

CMc propriettors of the valt territories, which the arms

of their fubjeas conquered in the New Wocrld.
From them, all grants of land there flowed, and
to them they finally returned. Tlhe leaders who
conduc~ed thie various expeditions, the governors
who presided over the diffrent: colonies, the ofi
ficers ofjultice, and the min~iffers of religion, were
all appointed by thieir author-ity,, and removableat
their pleasure, The people whoJi1 compos~ed infant
settlements wer-e intitled to no privilegres inde.
pendent of the sovereign, or that s~erved as a bar:
rier againfr the power of the crown. It is true,
that when tow-~ns were built, and formed into bo.
dies corporate, the citizens were permitted! to ele4
their own magiffrates, who governed them by laws
w~hich the comnmunity enaded.: Even in the most
despotic slates, this feeble Epark of libertyi is not ex-
tingulfhed. But in the cities of Spanish America,
;this jurifdic~ion is merely mionicipal, and is con-
fined to the regulation of their owvn interior com-
snerce and police. In whatever relates to public
government, and the general interest, the will of the
sovereign is law. No political power origrinates
from the people. All centers in the crown, and in
the offcers of its nomination.

An the new WVHEN the conquests of the Spaniards in Ame-
dom~ilion, of
Suain rell- rica were completed, their monarchs, in ffmning
j-Ced to twYo.
plwer~oys. the plan of internal policy for their new docminions,

clivided them into two immens`e g~overnments, one

f a je )

fabjee? to the viceroy of New Spain, the other to a 0 0 x
the viceroy of Peru. The jurifdiaion of the for- c--
mer extended over all the provinces belonging to
Spain in the northern diviflon of the American
continent. Under that of the latter, was compre-
hended whatever she poffeffed in South America.
This arrangement, which, from the beginning, was
attended with many inconveniencies, became in-
tolerable when the remote provinces of each vice-
royalty began to improve in induffry and popu·
lation. The people complained of their fubjec-
tion to a fuuperior, whole place of residence was
so difiant, or to inaccessible, as almost excluded
them from any intercourse with the feat of govern-
ment. The authority of the viceroy over diffriats
so far removed from his own eye and oblervation,
was unavoidably both feeble and ill direaed. As
a remedy for thos~e evils, a third viceroyalty has
been eftablifhedd in the present century, at Santa Si
de BSogota, the capital of the new kingdom of Gra-
nada, the jurif~diaion of which extends over the
wvhole kingdom of Tierra Firme, and the province
of qu'ito 6. Those viceroys not only represent the nheir
person of their f~overeigrn, but pofef~s his regal pre- POwers.
rogatives within the precinas of their own govern-
ments, in their utmost extent. · Like him, they ex-
ercif~e supreme authority in every department of go-
vernment, civil, military, and criminal. They have
the sole right of nominating the persons w~ho hold

h Voy'. de Ulloa, i. 23> zj55=

S 4 man~y

B Orl K 812/ OFficCS of the highest importance, and the oc.
L.-v--- cafional privilege of s~upplying thos~e whichi, when

they become vacant by death, are in the royal gift,
until the successor appointed by the' king th~all ar.
rive, The external pomp of their government is
faited to its real diginity and pow er. Their courts
are formed upon the model of that at Madrid, with
horse and foot guards, a houfc~hold regularly efia-
blifhled, numerous attendants, and enligns of com-·
mand, difp~ilaying fochl magnificence, as hardly ree
tains the appearance of delegatl~ authority '.

comesS or ura h ieoscno dilchreinero
Audlrnce, BT1 le~icry ant'' ag nIe.o

the funalouns of a supreme magiitr-ate in every part
of their ext-ensive jurifdialion, they ar~e aided inl their
government by officers and tribunals funi~ilar to
thofer in Spain. The conduat of civil affairs in the
various provinices and diffi~c~ts, int~o which the Spa-
nifh dominions in America are divided, is com·
mittedi to mnagrifkrates of various orders an1d deno-
minations ; some appointed byf the kingr, others by
the viceroy, but all fab'jza to th~e command of the
latter, a~d amenable to his jurifdial~ton. The admi-
niffration ofjuffice is vested in tribunals, known by
the name ofAudiens~ces, and formed upon the model
of the court of Chancery in Spain. 'There are ele-
ven in number, and difpenife juffice to as mrany dif.
triats, into wh~ich the Spanish dominions in Ame-
rica are divided k~. The numb~er of judges in tly

i ULTloa, Voy. i. 432. Gage 61.
- See NOT'TE YIV1.

Cour

court of Audience is various, according to the ex- it o o a
tent and importance of their juri~fdi~tion. The Ita- I--
tion is, no les~s honourable than lucrative, and is
cominonly filled by persons of s~uch abilities and
merit as renders this tribunal extremely refpedable.
Both civil and criminal caus~es come under their
cognizance, and for each peculiar judges are set
apart. Though it is only in the molk despotic go- 20~D,jl'i
vernments, that the fovereign'exercifes inl person
the formidable prerogative of adminifferingo juffice
to his fub~jeas, and in absolving, or condemning,
consults no law but what is deposited in his own
breast;, though, in all the monarchies of Europe,
judicial authority is committed to magiffrates, whole
decifians are regulated by known laws and effa-
blifhed forms, the Spanifhh viceroys have often at-
tempted to intrude themselves into the fecat of jus-
tice, and with an ambition w~hich their difiance
fr~om the controul of a superior rendered bold, have
aspired at a power which their master does not ven-
ture to affumne. In order to check an us~urpation
which muff have annihilated juffice and security in
the Spaniith colonies, by fubjeating the lives and
proper~ty of all to the wiHl of a single man, the vice-
toy's have been prohibited, in the mos1 explicit
terms, bB repeated laws, from interfering in the ju-
dicial prtceedings of the courts of Audience, or
from deliverinlg an opinion, or giving a voice with
refpec? to any point litigated before them L. In

SRecop: lib. ii. tit. xy. 1. 35*. SE* 44. lib. iii. tit. ill.

1. 36, 37* ,forne

o 5II f omle particular cafes, in which any quefion of ci·
Svil right is involved, even the political regulations

of the viceroy may be brought under the review
of the court of Audience, which, in those in.
fiances, may be deemed an intermediate power
placed between him and the people, as a coniti-
tutional barrier to circumscribe his jurifdi8ion.
But as legal reffraints on a person who represents
the sovereign, and is clothed with his authority, are
little suited to the genius of Spanith policy; the
heiitation and -refervre with which it confers this
power on thle courts of Auldience are remarkable.
T'hey may advile, they mayr remonfirate; but, in
the event of a direct colli~ion betw een their opinion
and the will of the viceroy, what he determines
must be carried into execution, and nothing rs·
mains for them, but to lay the matter before the
king and the council of the Indies m. But to be
intitled to remonfirate, and inform agrainh a per·
son, before whom all others must be silent, and
tamely s~ubmit to his'decrees, is a privilege which
adds dignity to the courts of Audience. This i
farther augmented by another circumitance. Upon
the death of a viceroy, without any provision of a
successor by the king, the supreme power is veited
in the court of Audience resident in the capitalof
the vicercyalty, and the f'enior judge, assisted by
hi~s brethrel,· exercises all the func~ions of the vice·

m Solorz. de Jure Ind. lib.;v. c. 3. n.40,4zr. Recop.11ib.;i.

tit. xy. 1- 36. lib. iii. tit. Iii. 1- 34. lib. v. tit. ix.1. I.

ences, in the course of their ordinary jurifdiiaion,
as courts of juffice, their sentences ·are final in
every litigation concerning property of les~s value
than fix thous~and pesos; but when the f~ubjea in
dispute exceeds that f~um, their dechiions are s~ub-
je8 to review, and may be carried by appeal before
the royal council of the Indies o

IN this council, one of the most conflderable in council or

thle Indies,

the monarchy for dignity and power, is vested the
supreme government of all the Spanish dominions
in! America. It was firfr established by Ferdinand,
inthe year 151i, and brought into a more perfea
form by Charles V. in the year 1524.. Its jurif- Its power.
di~ionextends to every department, ecclefiaffical,
civil, military, and commercial. All laws and
Ordinances relative to the government and police
of the colonies originate there, and must be ap.
proved of by two-thirds of the members, before
they are ifrued in the name of the king. All the
offices, of which the nomination is reserved to the
crown, are conferred in this council. To it each
person employ·ed in Amrerica, from the viceroy
downwards, is accountable. It reviews their con.
duB, rewards their services, and inflias the pu.
althments due to their malverfadtions a. Before it,

n Recop. lib. ii. tit. xy. 1. 57, &c.
9 Recap.lib. v, tit. ~ili. 1. r, &c.
P RecOP.1ib. ii. tit. ii. 1. I, 2, &c.

B O O K is laid whatever intelligence, either public or fe,

VI11
- - cret, is received from America, and every scheme

of improving the adminiffration, the police, or the
commerce of the colonies, is fiibmitted to its con·
fideration. From the first inflitution of the coun·
cil of the Indies, it has been the conltant obje8 of
the catholic mnonarchs to maintainl its authority,
and to mlake such additions from time to time,
both to its powrer and its splendor, as might render
it formidable to all their f~ubjeas in the New
WCSorld. Whatever degree of public order and
virtue flill remains in that country, where so many
circumndnces conspire to relax the former, and to
corrupt the latter, may be alcribed in a great mea-
fitre to the w5ifet regulations and vigilant infpeaion
of this refpec~able tribunal .

crar an As the king is firppof~ed to be always present in

.au~. his council of the Indies, its meetings are held in

the place where he resides. Another tribunal has
been infl~ituted, in order to regulate such com·
mercial affairs as required the immediate and per·
fonal inspec~tion of thos~e appointed to superintend
them. This is called Casa de lat Contratadon, or
the house of trade, and was established in Seville,
the port to which commerce with the New World
was confined, as early as the year I 50I. It may be

us, fune. considered both as a board of trade, and as a court

of judicature. In the former capacity, it takes

9 Solorz. de Jure Ind. lib. iv. 1. 12.

cogmizance

cognizance of whatever relates to the intercourse a 0 0 zc
of Spain with America, it regulates whiat commo-
&ties ihould be exported thither, and has the in-
fpedion of fulch as are received in return. It de-
cides concerning the departure of the fleets fror the
Welt Indlies, the freight and burden of the shi~ps,
their equipment and deflination. In the latter
capacity, it judges with refped to every q~uef-
tion, civil, commercial, or criminal, arising in
confequtence of the tranfaaions of Spain wvith Ame-
rica; and in both these departments, its decisions
are exempted from the review of any court but that
of the council of the Indies r.

SUCu is the great outline of that fyfkem of- go-
vernment, which Spain has established in her
American colonies. 'To enumerate the various
fabordinate boards and officers employed in th~e
adminiffration of juffice, in colleaingr the public
revrenue, and in regulating the interior police of the
country; to describe their diff~erent funaions, and
to enquire into the mode and effea of their opera-
tions; would prove a detail no less intricate than
minute, and uninteresting.

THE firt~ objeQ of' the Spanish monarchs was to r;·n oyea,

secure the produalions of the colonies to the parent $2cl r "
slate, by an absolute prohibition of any intercourse "aC
wyith foreigrn nations. They took poffefi~on of

I Recop. lib. ix. tit. i. Veitia N~orte de la Contratacion,

lib. i. c. r.

America

B O O K America by right of conqlueft, and, conf~cious.not

Vill. -_Ionly of the feebleness of their infant settlements,

but aware of the diffcultyr in eftablithing their do·
minion over regions so extensive, or in retaininglo
many reluaant nations under the yoke, they dread-
ed the intruflon of firangers ; . they even thunned
their infpleation, and endeavoured to keep them at
a diffance froin their coasts. This spirit of jea.
lousy and exclusion, which at firlt wias natural,
and perhaps necessary, augmented as their poiffd
fions in America extended2, and the value of them
came to be more fully underflood. In consequence
ofit, a fyfiem ofcolonizing was introduced, towhich
there had h;itherto been nothing similar among man.
kind. In the ancient world, it was not ilncom.
mon to fend forth colonies. But they were of twvo
kiinds only. They were either migrations, wihich
served to disburden a slate of its s~uperfluous sub·
jeas, when they multiplied too fast for the terri·
tory which they occupied: or they were military
detachments flationed, as garrisons, in a conquered
province. The colonies of some Greek republics,
and the swarms of northern barbarians which fettled
in d~ifferent parts of Europe, were of the firlifecies.
The Roman colonies were of the second. In the
former, the connedion with the mother-country
quickly ceased, and they became independent slates.
In the latter, as the disjunaion was not complete,

RegetanionP the dependence continued. In their American
for that
purpore. settlements, the Spanish roonarchs took what was

peculiar to each, and fludied to unite them. By

sending

sending colonies to regions so remote, by establish- a o 0 K
ing in each a form of interior policy and admini- -
fIration, under diftina governors, and with peca-
liar laws, they disjoined them from the mlother-
country. B3y retaining in their own hands the
rights of legislation, as well as that of imposing
taxes, together with the power of nominating- the
persons who filled every department of` executive go-
vernment, civil or military, they s~ecured their de-
pendence upon the parent slate. Happily for Spain,
the situation of her colonies was fulch, as rendered it
poffiblee to reduce this new idea into pra~ice. Al-
moss all the countries which she had difcoverec) and
occupied, lay within the tropics. The produaions
of that large portion of the globe are different from
those of Europe, even in its mos1 southern provinces.
The qualities of the climate and of the foil naturally
turnthe induffry of such as fettle there into new chan-
nels. W'hen the Spaniards first took: poffefiron of
their dominions in America, the precious metals
whichtheyyrielded,werethe onlyobjeQ thatattraded
their attention. Evenwhen their efforts began totake
a better direaion, they employed thems~elves almost
wholly in rearing s~uch peculiar produaioans of the
climate, as, from their rarity or value, were of chief
demand in the mother-country. Allured by vast
profpeas of immediate wealth, they difdained to
wvafte their induffry onwhat was less lucrative, but of
superior moment. In order to render it impoflible to
correa this error, and to prevent themfrom makingo
any efforts in induffry which might interfere with

those

B O O those of the mother-countryr, the eftabl~ihment of

fyJ everal species of manufad~ures, and even the cul·
ture of the vine, or olive, are prohibited in the
Sp~anish colonics s, under fevrere penalties'. They
must trult entirely to the mother-country for the
obIjeas of primary necessity. Their clothes, their
furniture, their infiruments of labour, their luxu-
ries, and evenl a considerable part of the provisions
which they consume, w-ere imported from Spain.
Dur1ing~ a great part of the sixteenth century, Spain,
poffeffing an extensive commerce and flourishing
manufac~ures, could s~upply with eas~e the growing
demands of her colonies, fr-om her own flores.
The produce of their mines and plantations was
given in exchannge for these. But all that the co·
lonies received, as well as all that they gave, was
conveyed in Spanith bottoms. No vessel belong.
ing to the colonies was ever permitted to carry the
commodities of America to Europe. Even the
com-mercial intercourse of one colony with another,
wtas either absolutely prohibited, or lim~ited by
many jealous reftriaions. All that America yields
flows into the ports ofSpain; all that it consumes
mult iifr-e fr-orn theml. No foreigner can enter its
colonics without express permifflon; no vessel of
any foreign nation is received into their harbours;
and the pains of death, with confiscation of move·
ables, are denounced againit every inhabitant who

* See N O TE XLVII.
* 3,Uioa Retab. des Manus. &c. p. zo6.

pres~umes

presumes to trade with them . Thus the colonies a 0 o sc

VIII.

are kept in a slate of perpetual pupillage; and by I
the introduaion of this commercial dependence, a
refinement in policy of which Spain set the first ex.
ample to the European nations, the supremacy of
the parent slate hath been maintained over remote
colonies during two centuries and a half.

SUCH are the capital maxims to which the Spa- Slow pro2
nilh monarchs f'eem to have attended in forming posson *~po
their new settlements in America. But they could rop@Eu
not plant with the fame rapidity that they had del
firoyed; and, from many concurring causes, their
progress has been extremely flow, in filling up the
intmenf~e void which their devaffations had occa-
lioned. As fioon as the rage for disc~overy and adven-
ture began to abate, the Spaniards opened their eyes
to dangers and diffreffes, which at firit they did not
perceive, or had des~pised. The numerous hardl
thips with which the members of infant colonies
have to struggle, the diseases of unwholesome cli-
mates, fatal to the constitution of Europeans ; the
diflicultyofbringinga country, covered with forests,
into culture ; the want of hands necessary for labour
in some provinces, and the flow reward ofinduffry,
in all unless where the accidental discovery of mines
enriched a few fortunate adventurers, were evils
universally felt and magnified. Discouraged by
the view of there, the spirit of migration was to

Y Recopil. lib. ix. tit. xxvii. 1. 1. 4* 7, &c.
Yo. ZIII. T much

B O O K much damped, that sixty years after the dis~covery9

Vrrll
I , 1of the New World, the number of Spaniards in all

its provinces is computed not to have exceeded sis.
teen thousand x,

bDEgurg THE mode in which property was difrnibuted in
orproperty the Spanish colonies, and the regulations eftabliih.

ed with refpea to the tranfmillion of it, whether
by descent or by sale, were extremely unfavourable
to population. In order to promote a rapid in.
crease of people in any new settlement, property
in land ought to be divided into fmnall shares, and
the alienation of it thould be rendered extremely
easy y. But the rapaciodfnef~s of the Spanish con·
querors of the New World paid no regard to this
fundamental maxim of policy ; and, as they poF-
s~essed power, which enabled thern to gratify the
utmost extravagance of their wishes, many seized
diffrias of great extent, and held them as encomi-
enzdas. By degrees they obtained the privilege of
converting a part of there into M~ayora/gos, a
species of fief, introduced into the Spanilh tyltem
of feudal jurisprudence Z, which can neither be
divided nor alienated. Thus a great portion of
landed property, under this rigid form of en-
tail, is withheld from circulation, and descends
from father to son unimproved, and of little
value either to the proprietor or to the commu·
nity. In the account which I have given of

x See NTOTE XLVIII. r Dr. Smith'slnquiry, ii.I66.
* Recop. lib. iv. tit. iii. 1. 24.

the reclu~ion of Peru, vuarious examples occur of ·B o o it

VIII.

enormous tradts of country occupied by some of Ly
the conquerors i. The excesses in other provinces
were similar, for as the value of the lands which
the Spaniards acquired, was originally effimated ac-
cording to the nuinber of Indians which lived upon
them, America was in general so thinly peopled,
that only diffrias of great extent couild afford such
a number of labourers as might be employed in the
mines with any prof~pedt of considerable gain. The
pernicious effeas of thos~e radical errors in the dif-
tribution and nature of property in the Spanish
settlements, are felt through every depar-tment of
induitry, and may be considered as one great cause
of a progress in population so much flower than
that which has tak-en place in better confituted
colonies b

To this we may add, that the support of the en- ,nd the na

ormous and expensive fabric of their ecclefiaffical :gggg~t~e
establishment, has been a burden on the Spanish eoney.
colonies, which has greatly retarded the progress
of population and induffry. The payment of
tythes is a heavy tax on induffry; and if the ex-
ation of them be not regulated and circumscribed
by the wisdom of the civil magiffrate, it becomes
intolerable and ruinous. But, instead of any re-
itraint on the claims of ecclefaiatics, the inconfi-
derate zeal of the Spanith legislators admitted there

aBookr i. p. 139* b See NOTE XSLIX.

TI 2 into

B O .O K into America in their full extent, and at once im.

Lzs posed on their infant colonies a burden which is in

no flight degree oppreifive to society, even in its
most improved slate. As early as the year ISoI,
the payment of tythes in the colonies was enjoined,
and the mode of it regulated by law. Every ar.
'ticle of primary necellity, towards which the at-
tention of new settlers must naturally be turned, is
fubjeaed to that grievous exasion '. Nor were the
demands of the clergy confined to articles of fitnple
and easy culture. Its more artificial and operose
produ~tions, such as sugar, indigo, and cochineal,
were soon declared to be tythable d; and thus the
induffry of the planter was taxed in every flage of
its progrefis, from its rudest essay to its highest im-
provement. To the weight of this legal irnpofi-
tion, the bigotry of the American Spaniards has
made many voluntary additions. From their fond
delight in the external pomp and parade of reli·
gion, and from fuperflitious reverence for ecclefi.
aftics of every denomination, they have beffowed
profuse donatives on churches and monasteries, and
have unprofitably wasted a large proportion of that
wealth, which might have nourished and g~iven vi.
gour to produalve labour in growing colonies.

. ;~~p~ BU'r so fertile and inviting ·are the regions of
~b~~pe America which the Spaniards have occupied,

that, notwithstanding all the circumstances which

a Recop. lib. i. tit. xiv. L .z
d Recop. lib. i. tit. xiv. 1* 3 and 4*

have checked and retarded population, it has gra- n 0 0 re
dually increas~ed, and filled the colonies of Spain I:'-·lr
with citizens of various orders. Among there, the
Spaniards, who arrive from Europe, diftinguilhed
by the name of Chapetones, are the first in rank and chapetones

the firR.

power, From the jealous attention of the Spanish
courtto secure the dependence ofthe colonies on the
parent flate,all departments ofconf~equence are filled
byperf~ons s~ent frolp Europpe ; and, in order to pre-
vent any of dubious fidelity from being employ-
ed, each must bring proof of a clear descent from a
family of Old Chryians, untainted with any mixture
of Jewish or Mahometan blood, and never disgraced
by any censure of the inquisition ". In s~uch pure
hands, power is deemed to be safely lodged, and
ahnoft every public funalon, from the viceroyalty
downwards, is committed to them alone. Every
person, who by his birth, or residence in America,
may be f~ufpeaed of any attachment or interest ad-
verse to the mother-country, is the objeQ of dif-
trust to s~uch a degree, as amounts nearly to an ex-
clufion from all offices of confidence or authority f.
By this conspicuous predile~tion of the court, the
Chapetones are raised to such pre-eminence in
America, that they look down with disdain on every
other order of men.

THE charader and slate of the Creoles, or de- creoles the

fcendants of Europeans fettled in America, the recone.

* Recopil. 11b. ix. tit. xxvi. 1. r5, 16.
* See NOTE L.

second

T 3

B O O K second class offixbjeAs in the Spanish colonies,have

Vnil C enabled the Chapetones to acquire other advan-

tag~es, hardly less considerable than those which
they derive from the partial favour of government.
Though~ fa~me of the Creolian race are descended
from the conquerors of the New World ; though
others can trace up their pedigree to the noblest
families in Spain; though many are poffeffed of
ample fortunes, yet, by the enervating influence of
a sultry climate, by the rigour of a jealous govern·
ment, and b~y their despair of attaining that diftinc·
tion to which mankind naturally af'pire, the vigour
of their minds is so entirely broken, that a great
part of them waste life in luxurious indulg~encies,
mningled with an illiberal superstition flill more de·
basing. Languid and unenterprifing, the opera·
tions of an aaive extended commerce would be to
them so cumbers~ome and oppressive, that in almost
every part of America they decline engaging in it.
The interior traffic of every colony, as well as any
trade which is permitted with the neighbouring
provinces, and with Spain itself, are carried on
chiefly by the Chapetones g; who, as the recom-
pence of their induffryr, amals immens~e wealth,
while the Creoles, funk6 in sloth, are satisfied with
the revenues of their paternal estates.

Rivannip FROM this slated competition for power and
tMrl." wealth between those two orders of citizens, and

a Voy. de U~lloa, i. 27. 251. Voy'. de Frezier, 227.

the various patirons excited by a rivalfhip so inte. n o
reffing, their hatred is violent and implacable. On · &-
every occasion, symptoms of this averflon break
out, and the common appellations which each be-
flows on the other, are as contemptuous as thos~e
which flow from the most deep-rooted national an-
tipathy h. The court of Spain, from a refinement
of diffrufiful policy, cherishes those feeds of dif-
cord, and foments this mutual jealousy, which not
only prevents the two most powerful classes of its
fubjeas in the New World from combining against
the parent: slate, but prompts each, with the most
vigilant zeal, to obs~erve the motions and to coun-
tera8 the schemes of the other.

THE third class of inhabitants in the Span~ih co- A mixed

race forms

lonies is a mixed race, the offspring either of an the rhira

order of

European and a negro, or of an European and clmzens.
Indian, the former called Muzlattoes, the latter
Mleff~izos. As the court of Spain, solicitous to in-
corporate its new vassals with its ancient f~ubjefs,
early encouraged the Spaniards f~ettled in America
to marry the natives of that country, several alli-
ances of this kind were formed in their infant co-
lonies'. B~ut it has been more owing to licentious
indulgence, than to compliance with this injunc-
tion of their sovereigns, that this mixed breed has

L Gage's Survey, P* 9. Frezier, 226.
i Recopil.11ib. vi. tit. i. l. 2. Hlerrera, dec. I. lib. vr. c. f2.

1)ec. 3. lib. vii. c. z.

multiplied

T 4

v
O O multiplied so greatly, as to conititute a considerable

cr part of the population in all the Spanish fettle-

ments. The several fl~ages of descent in this race,
and the gradual variations of thade until the Afri·
can black, or the copper colour of Am~erica,
brighten into an European compleiion, are accu-
rately marked by the Spaniards, and each diltin-
guifhed by a peculiar name, Thos~e of the first
and s~econd generations are confi dered, and treated as
mere Indians and Negroes ; but in the third descent,
the charadteriflic hue OE the former dis~appears;
and in the fifth, the deeper tint of the latter is so
entirely effaced, that they can no longer be diftilF
guifhed from Europeans, and become entitled to
all their privileg;es k. It is chiefly by this mixed
race, wvhofe frame is remarkably robult and hardy,
that the mechanic arts are carried on in the Spanish
settlements, and other aalive fun~tions in society are
dis~charged, which the two hig-her classes of citizens,
from pride,10r from indolence, dis~dain to exercise \

(ft;e~s THE negroeS hold the fourth rank among the

no inhabitants of the Spaniih colonies. The intro.

dualion of that unhappy part of the human species
into America, together with their s~ervices andfuf-
~ferings there, shall be fully explained in another
place; here they are mentioned chiefly, in order
to Point out a pec:ulialrity in their fitcuation under

k Voy. de Ulloa, i. p. 2 /*
? Voy. de U110a, i. 29. Voy. de Boplguer, P. to4. Me·

}cndez, Teforos V~erdaderos, i* 354*

the Spanilh dominion. In several of their fettle- a o o g
ments, particularly in New Spain, negroes are Lc--
moitly employed in domestic service. They form
a principal part in the train of luxury, and are
cherished and caressed by their s~uperiors, to whose
vanity and pleasures they are equally s~ubservient.
Their dress and appearance are hardly less splendid
than that of their masters, whose manners they imi-
tate, and whos~e patlions they imbibe m. Elevated by
this diftin~tion, they have affilmred such a tone of
superiority over the Indians, and treat them with
flich insolence and scorn, that the antipathy be-
tween the two races has become implacable.
Even in Peru, where negroes seem to be more
numerous, and are employed in field-work as well
as domestic service, they mnaintain their ascendant
over the Indians, and the mutual hatred of one to
the other sublists with equal violence. The laws
haveinduffrioufly fomented this averflon, to which
accident gave rife, and, by most rigorous injunc-
tions, have endeavoured to prevent every inter-
course that might form a bond of union between
the two races. Thus, by an artful policy, the
6paniards derive firength from that circumfiance
in population which is the weakness of other Eu-
ropean colonies, and have Ifecured as associates and
defenders, those very persons who elsewhere are
pbje~ts of jealousy and terror n,

in Gage, p. 56. Voyr. de Ulloa, i. 45z.
SRecopil. lib. vil. tit. v. 1, 7. Herrera, dec. 8. lIb. vriL.

e, 12. Frezier, 244* Tax

B O O THE Indians form the las1, and the molt de.
~rc-rpreffed order of men in the country, which be.

The Indians
form thelant longed to their anceffors. I have already traced
irzdenrs.o i the progreis of the Spanish ideas with refpe8 to

the coniuiti?·n and trea;tment o;f that people, and
have mentioned the most important of their more
early regnul-tions, con~cerning; a matter of so much
confeqjuenlce in the adminiffration of their new do.
minions. But since the period to which I have
brought down1 the hiflory of America, the informa.
tion and experience acquired during two centuries,
have enabled the court of Spain to make such im·
provements in this part of its American ryffem, that
a thort view of the present condition of the Indians
may prove both curious and intereffing.

Their pre- By. the famous regulations of CharlesV. in 1342
tpo~o~d an which have been so often mentioned, the high

pretensions of the conquerors of the New World,
who considered its inhabitants as slaves, to whole
service they had acquired a fu~ll right of property,
were finally abrogated. From that period, the
Indians have been reputed freemen, and entitled
to the privileges of fCubjec~s. When admitted into
this rank, it was deemed juff, that they should
contribute towards the support and improvement
of the society which had adopted them as mem·
bers. But as no considerable benefit could be ex·
pected from the voluntary .efforts of men unac-
quainted with regular induffry, and averse to ]a·
bour, the court of Spain found it necessary to fix

and

and secure, by proper regulations, what it thought n o o it
reasonable to exaa from them. With this view,
an annual tax was imposed upon every male, from ofn th~~em
the age of eighteen to fifty; and at the fame time,
the nature as well as the extent of the services
which they mlight be required to perform, were
ascertained with precision. This tribute varies in
different provinces; but if we take that paid in
New Spain as a medium, its annual amount is
nearly four shillings a head; no exorbitant fum in
countries where, as at the source of wealth, the
value of money is extremely low e. The right of
levying this tribute likewise varies. In Almerica,
every Indian is either an immediate vassal of the
crown, or depends upon some f~ubjea to whom the
dithia in which he resides has been granted for a
limited time, under the denomination of an enco-
mienda. In the former cafe, about three-fourths of
the tax is paid into the royal treasury; in the lat.
ter, the fame proportion of it belongs to the holder
of the grant. When Spain first took poffeflion of
America, the greater part of it was parcelled out
among its conquerors, or thos~e who first fettled
there, and but a small portion res~erved for the
crown. As those grants which were made for two
lives only p, reverted ~fuccellively to the s~overeign, he
had it in his power either to diffufe his favours by

a_ See NO TE LI. Recopil. lib. vi. tit. v. L. 42. Hack-

luyt, vol. iii. P. 46I.

P Recopil. lib. vi. tit. vili. l* 48. Solorz. de Ind. Jure,

lib. ii. c. 16.

'grants

B O O K grants to new proprietors, or to augment his owit

VIIL. cc lrrevenue by valuable annexations n. Of these, the

latter has been frequently chosen; the number of
Indians now depending immediately on the crown,
is much greater than in the first age after the con.
quest, and this branch of the royal revenue conti·
nues to extend.

The services THE~ benefit arising from the services of the In·
demanded. dians accrues either to the crown, or to the holder

of the encomiendat, according to the fame rule ob.
frerved in the payment of tribute. Those ser
vices, however, which canl now be legally exa8.·
ed, are very different from the taflks originally im·
pos~ed upon the Indians. The nature of the work
which they must perform is defined, and an equi·
table recompence is granted for their labour. The
slated s~ervices demanded of the Indians, may be
divided into two branches. They are either em.
ployed in works of primary necessity, without which
society cannot s~ublist comfortably, or are comn.
pelled to labour in the mines, from which the
Spanish colonies derive their chief value and im.
portance. In cons~equence of the former, they are
obliged to assist in the culture of maize, and other
grain of necessary cons~umption ; in tending cattle;
in erefting edifices of public utility; in building
bridges; and in forming high roads'; but they

9 See NOTE LIT.
T Recopil. lib. vi. tit. xili. 1. 19. Solorz. de Ind. Jure, if

cannot

cannot be confirained to labour in raising vines, BOOK

VrIII

olives, and f~ugar-canes, or any species of culti-
vation, which has for its objea the gratification
of luxcury, or commercial profit '. In consequence
of the latter, the Indians are compelled to un-
dertake the more unpleasant talk, of extraaing
cre from the bowels of the earth, and of refininlg it
by fuccefiive processes, no less unwholf~ome than
operose '.

THE mode of exaaing; both these services is the The mode
Farne, and is under regulations framed with a view~ there."'"
of rendering it as little opprefirve as pofirble to the
Indians. They are called out fucceflively in divi-
fions, termed Mitas, and no person can be com-
pelled to go but in his turn. In Peru, the num-
ber called out must not exceed the seventh part of
the inhabitants in any diffria " In New Spain,
where the Indians are more numerous, it is fixed
ait four in the hundred W. During what time the
labour of such Indians, as are' imployed in agri-
culture, continues, I have not been able to learn x.
But inPeru, each Mita, or division, destined for
·the mines, remains there fix months; and while
engaged in this service, a labouter never receives
less than two shillings a day, and often earns plore
than double that funx y. No Indian, residing at a

*Recopitlib. vi. tit. xili.1. 8. Solorz.1ib>. i c. 7.NP 4r,&cr
* See NOTE LIII. Y Recop. lib.vi, tit. xii. 1, zz.
" Recopil. lib. vi. 1. 22. a See NOTE LIV.
r Ulloa Entreten. 265, 266.

2 x greater

B o o to greater difiance than thirty miles from a mine,

V1 is included in the Mita, or division employed in

working it Z; nor are the inhabitants of the low
country expos~ed now to certain deffrudion, as they
were at firit, when under the dominion of the con.
querors, by compelling them to remove from that
warm climate, to the cold elevated regions where
minerals abound =.

now so- THE Indians who live in the principal towns,

vee. are entirely fubjeQ to the Spanish laws and magi·

firates; but in their own villages, they are go.
verned by Caziques, some of whom are the de·
fcendants of their ancient lords, others are named
by the Spanish viceroys. There regulate the petty
affairs of the people under them, according to
maxims of juffice, tranfmnitted to them by tra·
dition from their ancestors. To the Indians, this
jurifdiaion lodged in s~uch friendly hands, affords
some cons~olation; and so little formidable is this
dignity to their new masters, that they often allowr
it to descend by hereditary right b. For the far·
t~her relief of men so much exposed to oppreifion,
the Spanish court has appointed an officer in every
diffria, with the title of Proteaor of the Indians.
It is his funaion, as the name implies, to assert
the rights of the Indians; to appear as their de·
fender in the courts of justice; and, by the inter·
polition of his authority, to set bounds to the en·

Z Recopil. lIb. vi. tit. xii. 1. 3*
a Ibid. i. 29. and tit. i. 1. 13. See NOTE LV.
SSolors. de Jure Ind. lib. i. c. 26. Recopil. lib. vi. tit. vil.

croachments

croachments and exaalions of his countrymen c. A B O O K

VHII

certain portion of the reserved fourth of thle annual I--
tribute, is deffined for the salary of the caziques
sad proteaors; another is applied to the main-
tenance of the clergy employed in the infiruaion of
the Indians d. Another part seems to be appro-
priated for the benefit of the Indians themselves,
and is applied for the payment of their tribute in
years of famine, or when a particular diffria~ is as-
fe~ed by any extraordinary local calamity e. Be-
sides this, proviflon is made by various laws, that
hospitals shall be founded in every new s~ettlement
for the reception of Indians f. Such hospitals have
accordingly been ereded, both for the indigent
and infirm, in Lima, in Cuzco, and in Mexico,
where the Indians are treated with tenderness and
humanity s.

Secu are the leading principles in the jurifpru-
dence and policy by which the Indians are now got
verned in the provinc~es belongleg to Spain. In
those regulations of the Span;H: monarchs, we dif~-
cover no traces of that cruel li:Lem of extermina-
tion, which they have besn charged with adopting ;
and if we admit, that the necefirty of securing s~ub-
fiftence for their colonies, or the advantages de-

C Solorz.1ib. i. c. 17. p. 201. Recop. lIb. vi. tit. vi.
d Recop. lib. vi. tit. v. L. 30. Tit. xvi. 1. r2-r5*
* Recopit. lib. vi. tit. iv. 1. I3*
' IbkL. lib. i. tit. iv. 1. I, &c.
o Voy. de Ublla, is 429* 509. Churchill, iv* 49g6.

rived

i o o kC rived from working the mines, give thern a right

Viir c to avail themselves of the labour of the Indians, we

must allow, that the attention with which they re·
gulate and recompence that labour, is provident and
Sagacious. In no code of laws is greater solicitude
displayed, or precautiors multiplied with more pru·
dent concern for the preservation, the security, and
the happiness of the fubjea, than we discover in
the colleaion of the Spaniih laws for the Indies,
But those later regulations, like the more early
edias which have been already mentioned, have
too often proved ineffeaual remedies againit the
evils which they were intended to prevent. In every
age, if the fame causes continue to operate, the
fame effeas mult follow. From the immense dif-
tance between the power entruffed with the execui
tion of laws, and that by whole authority they are
enaaed, the vigour even of the most absolute go.
vernment must relax, and the dread of a superior,
too remote to observe with accuracy, or to punill
with dispatch, must ins~ensibly abate. Notwithfrand·
ing the numerous injun~ions of the Spanish me·
narchs, the Indians flill fuffer on many occallons,
both from the avarice of individuals, and from the
exaacions of the magiffrates, who ought to have
proteaed them; unreasonable tasks are imposed;
the term of their labour is prolonged beyonid the
period fixed by law, and they groan under many of
the insults and wrongs which are the lot of a de·
pendentpeople h. FTOM iFOme information ORtvil Il

SSee NOTE LVL

tian depend, such oppreflion abounds more in Peru, a o a
thanin any other colony. But it isnotgenerah; Ac- .V'
cording to the accounts, even of those authors wvio
are most dis~pos~ed to exaggerate the f~ufferings of the
ladians, they, in fevreial provinces, enjoy not only
ease, buit affluence; they possess large farms ; they-
are mafrers of numerous herds and flocks ; and, by
the knowledge which they have acquired of Euro-
pean arts and induffry, are supplied not only with·
the necessaries, but with many luxuries of life b

AFTER explaining the form of civil gotrernment talenant.
Inthe Spanith colonies, and the slate of the va- uionf he
rious orders of pers~ons subject to it, the peculiarities colonies.
in their ecclesiastical conflitution merit confidera-
tion. Notwithstanding the f~uperititious veneration
with which the Spaniards are devoted to the Holy
See, the vigilant and jealous policy of Ferdinand
early prompted him to takie precautions agaitift the
introdution of the papal dominion into Arnerica.
With this view, he s~olicited Alexander VL; for a ReaRiainueSa

the papal

g~rant to the crown of the tythes in all the liewly. jurimdinionl.
discovered countries k, which he obtained on condi-
tion of his making proviflon for the religious in,
fIrudion of the natives. Soon after Julius II. ~oni
ferred on hint, and his s~uccessors, the right of gIa.
tronage, and the. absolute disposal of all ecclesiastical

SGage's Survey, p. 85. 90. 104. 119, &c.
SBiulla Alex. VI. A. D. 150<, ap. Solorz. de Jure Ind. it.

P* 498*

Vot.ITII, 1 benefices

a o 0~ K benefices there'. Both these pontiffs, unacquainted

4c with the value of what he demanded,' bestowed

thos~e donations with an inconsiderate liberality,
which their successors have often lamented, and
wished to recal. In consequence of those grants,
the Spanilh monarchs have become in effed the
heads of the American church. In them the ad.
mliniffration of its revenues is veiled. Their no.
mination of persons to supply vacant benefices is
inflantly confirmed by the pope. Thus, in all
Spanish America, authority of every s~pecies centers
in the Crown. There no colliflon is known be·
tween spiritual and temporal jurifdiaion. The
king is the only s~uperior, hi: name alone is heard
of, and no dependence upon any foreign power has
been introduced. Papal bulls cannot be admitted
into America, nor are they of any force there, until
they have been previonfly examined, and approved
of by the royal council of the Indies m; and if any
bull thould be surreptitiously introduced, and cir-
culated in America without obtaining that appro·
bation, ecclefialtics are required not only to prevent
it from taking effea, but to s~eize all the copies of
it, a~ld tranfinit them to the touncil of the Indies s.
To Ih's limitation of the papal jurifdi~ion, equally'
singular, whether we confider the age and nation, i
whi~ch it was devised, or the jealous attention with
which F~erdinand, and his successors, have fludied to

1 Ilulla Jullfi, i1. I98, ap. Solorz. de Jure Ind i, ga1.;.
" Recrrph lib. i. tit. ix. 1. 2. and Autas del Confejo de lal

Ind;-, chi, aRecop, lib. i. tit. vii. 1. 55*

maintain

malatain it in full force o, Spain is indebted, in a a 0 0 Ft

VllI.

gieat mleafure, for the uniform tranquillity which
has reigned in her American dominions.

THE hierarchy is established inm Ainerica in the Fno~rm na
fame form as in Spain, with its full train of arch- o ushe CohUrch
bish~ops, bishops, deans, and other dignitaries. The nmaxcolonirs.
inferior clergy are divided into three classes, un-
der the denomination of Curbas, DoRtrineros, and
Mtfontrons. The first are parith-priefts its those
parts of the ·country where the Spaniards have s~et-
tied. The s~econd have the charge of s~uch diffriats
asare inhabited by Indians f~ubjeaed to the Spanish
government, and living under its proteation. The
third are employed in infiruaing and converting
those fiercer tribes, which disdain futbmiffion to the-
Spanish yoke, and live in remote or inaccef~ible
regions, to which the Spanish arms have not pe.
zietrated. So numerous are the ecclefiaitics of
all those various orders, and fach the profuse li-
berality with which many of them are endowed,
that the revenues of the church in America are
immense. The Romith s~uperstition appears with
its utmost pomp in the New World. Churches
and convents there are magnificent, and richly
adorned; and on high fe~ivials, the display of
gold and silver, and precious Itones, is s~uch as exl
ceeds the conception of an European p. An eccle-
fiaitical eltablifhment so splendid and expensive,

' Recop. lib. i. tit. vii. 1- ~55* P~i'.
* Voy. de Ulloa, i. 4Bo. U 2 is

BOOK is unfavourable, as has been formerly obl~erved, to
VHII.
~r~-ur3 the progres~s of nfiing colonies; but in countries

where riches abound, and the people are to de·
lighted with parade, that religion muff ath~me it,
in order to attraQ their veneration, this propers
fity to ostentation has been indulged, and becomes
less pernlicious.

'gfoS THE Carly (in~itution of monasteries in the Spa.
monani~c in nifh colonies, and the inconsiderate zeal in mul·

tiplyin~g them, have been attended with confe.
quences more fatal. I~n every new s~ettlement, the
first objec? should be to encourag~e population, and
to incite every citizen to contribute towards aug.
menting the number and strength of the community,
During the youth and vigour of s~ociety, while
there is room to spread, and sustenance is proculred
with facility, mankind increase with amazing ra.·
piditye But the Spaniards had hardly takenpolfef
sion of A-merica, when, with a most prepofferous
policy, they began to erea convents, where persons
of both s~exes were shut up, under a vow to defeat
the purpose of nature, and to counteraQ the firk
of her laws. Influenced by a misguided piety,
which ascribes tranfcendant merit to a ffate of celi·
bacy, or allured by the prof~ped of that liittlefs ease,
which, in sultry climates, is deemed supreme felil
city, numbers crowded into those mansions of sloth
and f~uperflition, and are loss to society. As none
but persons of Spanish exrtrad are admitted into the
no-naiteries of the New Wo-rld, the evil is more

sensibly

sensibly felt, and every monk or nun may be con. a 0 0 re

VIII.

(idered as an aaive person wit~hdrawn from -civil r
life. The impropriety of such foundations in any
situation where the extent of territory requires ad,
ditional hands ~to improve it, is s~o obvious, that
Some catholic slates have expres~sly prohibited any
person in their colonies from taking the monaffic
vows 9. Even the Spanish monarchs, on some occa,
fions, s~eem to have been alarmed with the spread-
ing of a spirit so advers~e to the increase and pro-
fperity of their colonies, that they have endea-
voured to check it I. But the Spaniards in Ame-
rica, more thoroughly under the influence of f~ul
perflition than their countrymen in Europe, and
direaed by ecclefialtics more bigotted and illiterate,
have conceived such an high opinion of monaftie
[analty, that no regulations can reffrain their zeal ;
and, by the excess of their ill judged bounty, rec
ligious houses have multiplied to a degree no less
antazing than pernicious to society ',

IN viewing the slate of colonies, where not only ,hchat~'rcsr or

the number but influence of eccleaiatics is so great, in spanush

America

the charater of this powerful body is an objea that
-merits particular attention. A considerable part
of the secular clergy in Mexico and Peru are na-
tives of Spain. As persons long accuffomed, by

s Voy. de Ulloa, ii. 124*
I Herrera, dec. v. lib. ix. c. I, 2. Recop. lib. I. tit. ii,

1, I, 2. Tit. iv. c. 11. Solorz. lib. iii. c. 23.

s * ee NTOTE LVII.

U? S heir

B o 0 re their education, to the retirement and indolenceof

VrIII b academic life, are more incapable of aCtive enter-

prize, and les~s disposed to firike into new paths,
than anly order of men, the ecclesiastical adven.
turers by whom the American church is recruited,
are commonly fulch as, from merit or rank in life,
have little prof~peat of succes~s in their own coun-

es the fecu- try. Accordingly, the secular priests in the New

World are flill less diitinguifhed than their brethrea
in Spain, for literary accomplishments of any [e-
cies; and though, by the ample provision which
has been made for the American church, many of
its members enjoy the ease and independence which
are favourable to the cultivation of Icience, tly
body of s~ecular clergy has hardly, during two
centuries and a half, produced one author wvhole
works convey fach useful infprmation, or possess
such a degree of merit, as to be ranked among those
which attraQ the attention of enlightened nations.

>n herewv- But the greatest part of the ecclefiaitics in the Spa-

ar. nifh settlements are regulars. On the discovery of

America, a new field opened to the pious zeal of
the monastic orders; and, with a becoming alacrity,
they immediately sent forth miionaries to labourin
it. The firlt attempt to infiruQ and convert the
kmericans, was made by monks; and, as soon
as the conquest of any province was completed,
and its ecclefriafical eftablifhmentt began to assume
some form, the popes permitted the mifllonaries of
the four mendicant orders, as a reward for thejr
service~s, to accept of parochial charges in Alr~erica,

to perform all spiritual funAlons, and to receive a o o K
the tythes, and other emoliaments of the benefice, ~hl3
without depending on the jurifdiaion of the bishop
of the dioces~e, or being fubjea to his censures. In
consequence of this, a new career of ufefulners, as
well as new objeas of ambition presented them-
selves. Whenever a call is made for a fresh~ sup-
ply of miflionaries, men of the most ardent and
alpiring minds, impatient under the restraint of a
cloiffer, weary of its insipid uniformity, and fa-
tigued with the irksome repetition of its frivolous
fundions, offer their service with eagerners, and
repair to the New World in quest of liberty aixd
diftinaion. Nor do they pursue diftinaion with-
out s~uccess. The highest ecclefiaffical honours, as
well as the molt lucrative preferments in IMexico
and Peru, are often in the hands~of regulars ; and
it is chiefly to the monaltic orders that the Ame-
ricans are indebted for any portion of science which
is cultivated among them. They are almost the
only Spanish ecclefiaftics, from whom we have
received any accounts, either of the civil or na-
tural hillory of the various provinces in America.
Some of them, though deeply tinged with the in-
delible ~superstition of their profefiron, have pub-
lifhed books which give a favourable idea of
their abilities. The natural and moral hiffory
of the New World, by the Jesuit Acofta, contains
more accurate observations, perhaps, and more
(qund science, than are to be found in any de-

U 41 Icriptioq

B O O K scription of remote countries published in the fix·

VrIH. Steenth century.

roiablte But the fame disgust with monaitic life, to wnhich

manners of
romr or America is indebted for some infiruaors of worth
thenx. and abilities, filled it with others of a very differ·

ent charafter. The giddy, the profligate, the ava·
ricious, to whom the poverty and rigid discipline
of a convent are intolerable, confider a million
to America as a releale from mortification and
bondage. There they soon obtain some parochial
charge, and far removed, by their situation, from
the infpe~tion of their monaffic superiors, and ex.
empt, by their car~adaer, from the jurifdic~ion of
their diocesan ", they are hardly f~ubjec? to any
controul. According to the teftimnony of the n10ft
zealous catholics, many of the regular clergy in
the Spanish f~ettlemnents are not only destitute of
the virtues becoming their profeifion, but regard-
less of that external decorum and ref~peft for the
opinion of mankind, which preserve a semblance
ps worth where the reality is wanting. Secure
of impunity, some regulars, in contempt of their
vow of poverty, engage openly in commerce; and
are so rapaciously eager in amafirng wealth, that ,
they become the exoft grievous oppressors of the
Indians, whom it was their duty to have proteaed!
Others, with no less flagrant violation of their yow,

* Avendano Thef. Indkc. 11. 253*

of chaitity, indulge with little disguise in the most n a o it
dissolute licentious~ness· x ,Is~ll

VARIOuS s~chemes have been proposed for ·re-
drefling enormities to manifeit and tCo offenfive.
Several persons, no less eminent for piety than difr
cernment, have contended, that the regulars, in
conformity to the canons of the church, ought to
be confined within the walls of their cloiffers, and
ihould no longer be permitted to encroach on the
funalons of the s~ecular clergy. Some public-
spirited magistrates, from convi~ion of its being
necellary to deprive the regulars of a privilege be.
flowed at firit with good intention, but of which
time and experience had discovered the pernicious
effeas, openly countenanced the secular clergy in
their attempts to assert their own rights. The i6e,
prince D'Efquilache, viceroy of Peru under Phi-
lip III. took measures so decisive and effeaual
for circumscribing the regulars within their pro.
per sphere, as firuck them with general coniter-
nation Y. They had recourse to their usual arts.
They alarnied the s~uperstitious, by representing
the proceedings of the viceroy as innovations fatal
to religion. They employed all the refinements of
intrigue, in order to gain persons in power ; and
leconded by the powerful influence of the Jes~uits,
who claimed and enjoyed all the privileges which
Polonged to the Mendicant orders in America,

f See NOTE LVIII. r See NOTE LIX.

they

B 0 a K they made a deep· impreflionn on a 'bigotted prince,

Vill. LrrsA and a weak minifkiiry. The ancient pratice was

tolerated. The abuses which it occasioned conti-
nrued to increase, and the corruption of monk~s,
exempt from the reflraints of discipline, and the
infpeaion of any superior, became a disgrace to
religion. At last, as the veneration of the Spa,
niards for the monastic orders began to abate, and
the pow~er of the Jes~uits was on the decline, Ser-

""."'? dinand VI. ventured to apply the only effeaual

remedy by iliruing an ediat, prohibiting Regulars
of every denomination from taking the charge of
any parish with the cure of fouls; and declaring,
that on the demise of the present incumbeats, none
but ,Secular priests, fubjeA to the jurifdi8ion of
their diocefans, ihall be presented to vacant b'ene.
fices ". If this regulation is carried into execution
with fleadinefs in any degree proportional to the
w~isdom with which it is framed, a very considerable
reformation may take place in the eccleaftiatca
slate of Spanish America, and the f~ecslar clergy
may gradually become a refpe~able body of men,
The deportinent of many ecclefaiatics, even at pre-
feat, s~eems to be decent and exemplary, otherwise
wve can hardly suppose that they w~ould be held in
such high effimation, and posses~s such a wonder·
ful ascendant over the minds of their countryrmeq
throughout all the Sp~anish settlements.

·" Real Cedlula MVS. penes m~e.

BUTr whatever merit the Spanish ecclefniatics in a ouI a

Arnerica may possess, the s~uccess of their endea- cS
vours in communicating the knowledge of true Sers in con
religion to the Indians, has been more imperfedt 22/ann',",g:
than might have been expeated, either from the canaianity.
degree of their zeal, or from the dominion which
they had acquired over that people. For this, va.
rious reas~ons may be afirgned. The first million-
aries, in their ardour to make profelytes, admitted
the people of America into the christian church,
without previous infirudion in the doarines of re-
ligion, and even before they thems~elves had ac-
quired such knowledge of the Indian language, as
to be able to e~plain tolthe natives the mysteries of
faith, or the precepts of duty. Reffing upon a
subtle diitinalon in scholastic theology, between
that degree of affnt which is founded on a com-
plete knowledge and conviation of duty, and that
which may be yielded when both these are imper-
sea, they adopted this firange pradice, no less in-
confiltent with the spirit of a religion which ad-
dresses its~elf to the underffanding of men, than re-
pugnant to the diaates of reason. As soon as any
body of people, overawed by.dread of the Spanish
powler, moved by the example of their own chiefs,
incited by levity, or yielding from mere ignorance,
expressed the slightest desire of embracing the reli-
gion of th~eir conquerors, they were instantly bap-
tized. While this rage of converflon continued, a
single clergyman baptized in one day above five
thousand Mexicans, and did not defif until he was

alr on K O Xhauff ed by fatigue, that he was unable to lift

c~his hands ". In the course of a few years, after

the redu~ion of the Mex~ican empire, the sacra·
ment of baptifn ivas adminiffered to more thaq
four millions b. TrOfelytes adopted with foch in-
considerate haite, and who were neither infiruaed
in the nature of the tenets to which it was supposed
they had given assent, nor taught the absurdity of
those which they were required to relinquilh, re.
tained their veneration for their ancient f~uperfi.
tions in full force, or mingled an attachment to its
doatrines and rites with that slender knowledge of
Christianity which they had acquired. These fen.
timents the new converts transmitted to their pof,
terity, inio whose minds they have funk so deep,
that the Spanish ecclefaiafics, with all their indulby~,
have not been able to eradicate them. The reli.
gious inflitutions of their anceffors are still remem·
bered, and held in honour by many of the Indi,
ans, both in Mlexico and Peru ; and whenever they
think themfrives out of reach of infpeation by the
Spaniards, they affemrble and celebrate their idola.
trous nites C.

BU'r this is not the most unsurmountable ob.

flacle to the progress of Christianity among the In.·
dians. The powers of their uncultivated under,

a P. Torriblc, MS. Torquem. 1V~ond. Ind. lib. xvi. c. 6,
b Torribio, MiS. Torquem. Jib. xvi. c, 8.
C Voy. de Ulloa, i* 34'. Torquem. lib, xy. c. 23.lib,

xrd. c. 28, Gage, q71.

'5 fludings

aandings are to timited, their ob~ervations and a o o it
reflec~ions reach so little beyond the mere objeas L..·--v--
of sense, that they seem hardly to have the capa-
city of forming abi~irad ideas, and possess not lan-
guage to express them. To fulch men, the s~ublime
and spiritual doarines of Chnriflianity muff be, in
a great measure, incomprehensible. The nume-
rous and Iplendid ceremonies of the popith worship
catch the eye, please and interest them; but when
their infiru~tors attempt to explain the articles of
faith,with which those external obs~ervances are con-
necled, thougrh the Indians may listen with patience,
they so little conceive the meaning of what they
hear, that their acqluiefcence does not merit the name
ofbelief. Their indifference is skill greater than their
Incapacity. Attentive only to the prese~nt moment,
and ingroffed by the objecas before them, the In-
dians to s~eldom refiedt upon what is past, or take
thought for what is to come, that neither the pro-
mlifes nor threats of religion, make much im-
prefiion upon them ; and while their foresight
rarely extends so far as the next day, it is almolt
impofi~ble to inspire them with solicitude about:
the concerns of a future world. Allonifhed equally
at their slowne~ss of comprehension, and at their inl
s-ensibility, some of the early millionaries pro.
nounced them a tace of men so brutish, as to be
incapable of underflanding the first principles of
teligion. A council held at Lima decreed, that,
on account of this incapacity, they ought to·
be excluded from the sacrament of th~e Eucha-

B O O K rift . Though Paul III. by his famous bull,

VIII. cc~ ififued in the year 1537, declared them to be ra·

tional creatures entitled to all the privileges of
Christians '; yet, after the laple of two centuries,
during which they have been members of ths
church, so imperfeQ are their attainments in know.
ledge, that very few possess foch a portion of fpi.
iitual discernment, as to be deemed worthy of be;
ing admitted to the holy communion '. From this
idea of their incapacity and imperfe8 knowledge
of religion, when the zeal of Philip II. established
the inqlulftion in America in the year I570, the
Indians were exempted from the jurifdialion of
that severe tribunal g, and still continue under the·
infpeaion of their diocefans. Even after the most
perfea inftruation, their faith is held to be feeble
and dubious ; and though some of them have been
taught the learned languages, and have gone
through the ordinary course of academic education
with applause, their frailty is still so much fu
peaed, that few Indians are either ordained prieits,
or received into any religious order h,

*qe~d Facin this brief survey, some idea may be~fornr

niomcolonies. ed of~ the interior slate of the Spanish colonues(

The various produaions with which they supply

STorquem. lib. xvi. c. so.
* Torquem. lib. xvi. c. 25. G;arcia origin, 31r.
r Voy. de Ulloa, i. 343*
g Recop. lib. vi. tit. i. l* 3t5*
L Torqu~m. lib. xvii. c. r3. See NOTE fLX.

and enrich the mother-counf~ry, and the fyftent of a 0 0 it

VHLG

commercial intercourse between them, come next ~
in order to be explained. If the dominions of
Spain in the New World had been of such mode-
rate extent, as bore a due proportion to the pa-
rent slate, the progress of her colonizing might
have been attended with the fame benefit as that
of other nations. But when, in less than half a
century,~ her inconsiderate rapacity had s~eized on
countries larger than all Europe, her inability to
fill foch vast regions with a number of inhabitants
fufficient for the cultivation of them, was so obvi-
ous, as to give a wrong direaion to all the efforts
of the colonists. They did not form compaC: fettle-
ments, where induffry·, circumnfcribed within pro.
per limits, both in its views and oper~ations, is
condudied with that sober pers~evering fpririt, which
gradually converts whatever is in its poff~ilionn to a
proper use, and derives thence the greatest ad-
vantage, Inflead of this, the Spaniards, seduced
by the boundless profpea which opened to them,
divided their poffeffions in America into govern-
ments of great extent. As their number was too
small to attempt the regular culture of the immeanfe
provinces,which they occupied rather than peopled,
they bent their attention to a few objeAs, that al-
lured them with hopes of sudden and exorbitant
gain, and turned away with contempt from the
bumbler paths of induffry, which lead more slowly,
but with greater certaintyr, to wealth and increase
of national firengthr.

B Ovl.K Or all the methods by which riches may bC ac.
ec quired, that of s~earching for the precious metalsis
suses,"n one of the most inviting to men, who are either

unaccuffomed to the regular afidicuity with which
the culture of the earth and the operations of com·
merce must be carried on, or who are so enterprising
and rapacious as not to be satisfied with the gradual
returns of profit which they yield. Accordingly,
as soon as the several countries in America were
f~ubjeAed to the dominion of Spain, this was al.
molt the only method of acquiring wealth which
occurred to the adventurers, by whom they were
conquered. Such provinces of the continent as
did not allure thern to f~ettle, by the profpe8 of
their affording gold and silver, were totally neg·
leaed. Those in which they met with a difapi
pointment of the sang~uine expeqations they had
formed, were abandoned. Even the value of the
islands, the firit-fruits of their dis~coveries, and the
first obje~t of their attention, fimk so much in their
estimation, when the mines which had been opened
in them were exhauffed, that they were deserted
by many of the planters, and left to be occupied
by more industrious poffeffors. All crowded
to Mexico and Peru, where the quantities of
gold and silver found among -the natives, who
s~earched for them with little induffry and-lets
sh~ill, promised an unexhauff~ed flore, as the rec
compence of more intelligent and pierfevering
efforts.

DURING

DURING s~everal years, the ardour of their re; B O o K

searches was kept up by hope, rather than fuccers. cc
At leng-th, the rich silver mines of Potofi, in Peru, a l~""'f'io" _
were accidentally discovered in the year 1545 i, ~can amia-
by an Indian, as he was clambering up the inoun-
tain, in pursuit of a Li~ama which had firayed from
his flock. Soon after the mines of Sacotecas, in
New Spain, little inferior to the other in value,
were opened. From that time, fuecellive disco-
veries have been made in both colonies, and filvrer
mines are now so numerous, that the working of'
them, and of some few mines of gold in the pro-
vinces of Tierra F~irmb, and the new kingdom of
Granada, has become the capital occupation of the
Spaniards, and is reduced into a fyftein rio less
complicated than interefiting. To dlfctibe thie na-
ture: of the various ores, the mode of extra~ing
them from the bowels of the earth, and to explain,
the several protceffes by which the metals are f~epa-
rated from the f~ubffances with which they are
mingled, either by the aaion of fire, or the at-
tradlive powers of mercury, is the province of the
natural philosopher or chymift, rather than of the
hifforian.

THE exilberant profusion with wcnhich the moun- Riches

tains of the New World poured forth their treasures, whic ater ,
affonifhed mankind, who had been accuffomed hi-
therto to receive a penurious supply of the precious

iFernandez, p. i. lib. xi. c. Ir.

metails,

Vot; IJr,

B e 0 K metals, from the more s~canty flores contained in the

My- mines of the ancient hemisphere. According to

principles of computation, which appear to be ex-
tremely moderate, the quantity of gold and silver
that has been regularly entered in the ports of
Spain, is equal in value to four millions sterling
annually, reckoning from the year I492, in which
America was discovered, to the present time.
TIhis, in two hundred and eighty-three years,
amounts to eleven hundred and thirty-two millions.
Immens~e as this fum is, the Spanish writers contend,
that as much more ought to be added to it, in con·
fideration of treasure which has been extraeced from
the mines, and imported fraudulently into Spain,
without paying duty to the king. By this account,
Spain has drawn from the New W'orld a supply of
wealth, amounting at least to two thousand millions
ofpounds fierling E.

spirit toqi TH-E milleS, which have yielded this amazing
bives rice. quantity of treasure, are not worked at the expence

of the crown, or of the public. In order to encou·
rage private adventurers, the person who discovers
and works a newyein, is intitled to the property of it.
Upon laying his claim to such a discovery before the
governor of the province, a certain extent of land is
meas~ured o , and a certain number of Indians allot·
ted him,under the obligation of his openingthe mine

kL Uztariz Thear. y Praft. de Commercia, c* 3. Herrera,

dec. vili. lib. xi. c. 15. See NO TE LXI.

within

·cvithin a limited time, and of his paying the cuf. B o o K

vrI.

tomary duty to the king, for what it ihalll produce. Ly9
invited by the facility with which such gjrants are
obtained, and encouraged by some striking ex;-
amples of litecefs in this line of adventure; not
only the s~anguine and the bold, but the timnid and
diffdent enter upon it with affonifhingg ardour.
With vail objeas always in view, fed continually
with hope, and expe~ting every moment that forl
tune will unveil her s~ecret flores, and give up the
wealth wvhich they contain to their wishes, they deent
every other occupation insipid and uninteresting.
The charms of this pursuit, like the rage for deep
play, are so bewitching, and take such full poffeiron
of the mind, as even to give a new bent to the natural
temper. Under its influence, the cautious become
enterprising, and the covetous profuse. Powerful
as this charm naturally is, its force is augmented by
the arts of an order of men known in Peru by the
cant name of searchers. These are commonly per-
sons of desperate fortunes, who availing them-
selves of fonte skill in mineralogy, accompanied
with the insinuating manner, and confident pre-
tenflons peculiar to projeaors, address the wealthy
and the credulous. By plaufibole deferiptions of
the appearances which they have discovered of rich
veins hitherto unexplored ; by producingS, when re-
quifite, s~pecimens of promising ore ; by al-;rming,
with an imposing afirurance, that s~uccess is certain,
and that the expence must be trifting, they seldom
failto persuade. An association is formed ; a fmnall

X 2 fum

B O Ol~ K fuml is advanced by each copartner; the mine is

~-J Opened; the sea~rcher is entruffed with the sole di·

reaion of every operation; unforeseen difficulties
occur; new demands of money are made; but,
amidst a f~uccefflon of disappointments and delays,
hope is never ex~tinguished, and the ardour ofex-
pedation hardly abates. For it is observed, that
if any person once enter this seducing path, it is
almolt impoirble to return; his ideas alter, he
feemns to be poffeffed with another spirit, viflons
of imaginary wealth are continually before his
eyes, and he thinks, anld speaks, and dreams of
nothing elfe'.

.Fatat effes SUCu is the [pirit that muff be formed, wherever
of it. Sthe aaive exertions of any society are chiefly ern-

ployed in work~ing mines of gold and silver. No
spirit is more adverse to s~uch improvement in agri-
culture and commerce, as render a nation really
opulent. If the fjrfiem of admin~ifration in the
Spanish colonies had been founded upon principles
of found policy, the power and ingenuity of the
legislature would have been exerted with as much
ardour, inl restraining its fubjea2s from fulch perni·
clous indufrry, as is now employed in alluring
them towards it. "L Pr-ojea~s of mining," (says a
good judge of the political condua? of nations),
"i inficad of replacing the capital employed in
'L them, together with the ordinary profit of flockr,

SUlloa Entreten. p. 223*

"( commonly

"( commonly absorb both capital and profit. They n .2I: K
"L are the projeas, therefore, to which, of all --
'( others, a prudent lawgiver, who desired to in-
!( crease the capital of his nation, would least:
It chuf~e to give any extraordinary encouragement,
" or to turn towards them a greater share ofthat
(r capital than would go to them of its own ac-
" cord. Such, in reality, is the absurd confidence
" which all men have in their own good fortune,
"' that wherever there is the least probability of
"' success, too great a ihare of it is apt to go to
(' them of its own accord m.", But in the Spanish
colonies, government is fludious to cherimh a s~pirit
which it thould have laboured to depres~s, and, by
the fanc~ion of its approbation, augmnents that in-
considerate credulity, which has turned the adive
induffry of Mexico and Peru into fulch an impro-
per channel. To this may be imputed the slender
progress which Spanish America has made during
two centuries and a half, either in useful manu-
fadures, or in those lucrative branches of cultiva-
tion, which furnith the colonies of other nations
with their flaple commodities. In comparison
with the precious metals every bounty of nature
is so much despised, that this extravagant idea of
their value has mingled with the idiom of lan-
guage in America, and the Spaniards f~ettled there
denominate a, country, rich, not from the fertility
ps its foil, ·the abundance of its crops, or the exrt-

SDr. Smith)s Inqjuiry, &c. ii. 155*

X 3 berance

B O O berance of its paflures, but on account of the mi.
esy- nerals which its mountains contain. In quest of

these, they abandon the delightful plains of Peru
and Miexico, and resort to barren and uncomfort-
able regions, where they have built some of the
]lrgeft to-wns which they posses~s in the New World.
As the aaivity and enterprise of the Spaniards ori-
ginally took this direaion,I it is now so difficult to
bend them a different way, that although, from
various causes, the gain of' worlking mines is much
decreased; the fas~cination continue·s, and almost
every person, who takes any aaive: part in the
commlerce of New Spain or Peru, is flill engaged
in some adventure of this kind n,

Other com. Box though mines are the chief objec? of the
th onlll Spaniards,and the precious metals which these yield,

""""' form the principal article ill their commerce with

America; the fertile countries which they possess
there, abound with other commodities of fach
value or fecarcity, as. to attraQ a considerable de·
gree of attention. Cochinleal is a produ8ion al·
most peculiar to New Spain, of such demand in
commerce, that the sale is always certain, and it
yields s~uch profit, as amply rewards the labour
and care employed in rearinig the curious infeats of
which this valuable drug is composed, and pre-
paring it for the markiet. Quinquina, or Jesuits
Bark, the most salutary simple, perhaps, and of

" See NOTE LX'II.

most refforative virtue, that Providence, in com- a o o 1<

Vril

passion to human infirmity, has made known unto (-
man, is found only in Peru, to which it affords a
lucrative branch of commerce. The Indigo of
Guatimala is superior in quality to that of any pro-
vince in America, and cultivated to a considerable
extent. Cacoa, though not peculiar to the Spa-
nifh colonies, attains to its hig~hest slate of perfec-
tion there, and from the great cons~umption of
chocolate in Europe, as well as in America, is a
valuable cominodity. The Tobacco of Cuba, of
more exquifitefiavour than any brought from the
New W~orld; the Sugar raised in that island, in
Hispaniola, and in New Spain, together with
drugs of various kinds, may be mentioned among
the natural produaions of America, which enrich
the Spanish commerce. To these muff be added,
an article of no inconsiderable account, ~the ex-
portation of hides ; for which, as well as for many
of those which I have enumerated, the Spaniards
are rnore indebted to the wonderful fertility of the
country than to their own foresight and induffry.
The domeffic animals of Europe, particularly
horned cattle, have multiplied in the New World
with a rapidity which almoff: exceeds belief. A
few years after the Spaniards fettled there, the
herds of tame cattle became to numerous, that
their proprietors reckoned them by thousands o.

a Oviedo ap. Ramu. liit. r01, B. Hackluyt, iii. 466.

Less

B OBOI K Less attention being paid to them, as they con-

Cy tinued to encreafe, they were f~uferedd to run wild,

and spreading over a country of boundles~s extent,
under a mild climate, and covered with rich pas1
ture, their number became immense. They range
over the vast plains which extend from Buenos
Ayres, towards the Andes, in herds of thirty or
forty thousand; and the unlucky traveller who
once fills in among them, may proceed several
days before he can dif~entangile himself from among
the crowd that covers the face of the earth, and
seems to have no end. They are hardly less nu·
merous in Newv Spain, and in several other pro·
vinces : they are killed merely for the fake of their
hides; and the slaughter at certain seasons is so
great, that the fiench of the carcafes, which are
left in the field, would infe61 the air, if large
packs of wild dogs, and vare flocks of gallinawo,
or American vultures, the molt voracious of all
the feathered kind, did not inflantly devour them.
The number of those hides exported in every fleet
to Europe is very great, and is a lucrative branch
of commnerce P.

ALnosT all there may be considered as flaple

commodities peculiar to America, and different,
if we except that last mentioned, from the pro-
duetions of the moth~er-country.

P Acofla, lIb. iii. c. 33. Orallo Hilt. of Chll. Church.

ColleB. iii. 47· fep. Ibid. v. p. 680. 692. Lettres Edif. xiii.
335. F~euille, i. 249,

WHEN

tYHEN the importation into Spain of those va- B 0 0 re
rious articles from her colonies, firfk became adive bV-
and considerable, her interior induffryr and manu- 1
fatures were in a slate so prosperous, that with ive gnba
the produa of there thle was able both to purchase
the commodities of the New World, and to an-
fwer its growing demands. Under the reigns of
Feydinand and Ilabella, and Charles V. Spain was
one of the most induffrious countries in Europe.
Hier manu!'a~ures in wool, and flax, and silk,
wiere so extensive, as not only to furnish what was
Efulicient for her own cons~umption, but to afford
a surplus for exportation. When a market for
them, formerly unknown, and to w~hich the alone
had acces~s, opened in America, she had recourse
to her dometic flore, and found there an abundant
supply 9. This new employment muff naturally
have added yivacity to the spirit of induffry.
Nourithed and invigorated by it, the manufac-
tures, the population, and wealth of Spain might
have gone on increasing in the fame proportion with
the growth of her colonies. Nor was the slate of
the Spanish marine at this period less flourishing
than that of its manufaatures. In the beginning
of the sixteenth century, Spain is said to have
pofifefed above a thousand merchant fhrips ', a
number probably far superior to that of any nation
in Europe in that age. By the aid w~hich foreign
trade and domeltic induffry give reciprocally to

II See NO TE LXIII. ' Campoman~es, ii. 140.

eaclx

B O O each other in their progres~s, the augmentation of

Sboth muff have been rapid and extensive, and

Spain might have received the fame accellion of
opulence and vigour from her acquisitions in the
New World, that other powers have derived from
their colonies there.

why Ihe But various cauifs prevented this. The fame

d n a:·v thing happens to nations as to individuals. Wealth,
us'e ame. which flows in gradually, and with moderate in-

creas~e, feeds and nourishes that aaivity which is
friendly to commerce, and calls it forth into vigor·
ous and well-conduc~ed exertions; but when
opulence pours in furddenly, and with too full a
fiream, it overturns all sober plans of induitry,
and brings along with it a tasse or wha isL·' wild:'
and extravag-ant, and daring· in busin~ess or in ac-
tion. Such was the great and s~udden ·augmenta·
tion of power and revenue, that the poff~efion of
America broug~ht into Spain, and some rymptoms
of its pernicious influence upon the political opera-
tions of that monarchy soon began to appear. For
a considerable time, however, the fulpply of trea·
sure from the New World was scanty and preca-
rious, and the genius of Charles V. conduaed
public meas~ures with such prudence, that the effeis
of this influence were little perceived. But wihen
Philip II. ascended the Spanish throne, with talents
~far inferior to those of his father, and remittances
from the colonies became a regular and confider-
able branch of revenue, the fatal operation of this

rapi4

rapid change in the slate of the kingdom, both On 8 O O K
the monarch and his people, was at once confpi- I q'
cuous. Philip, pof~eiling that spirit of uncealing
assiduity, wihich often charaderif~es the ambition of
uten of moderate talents, entertained such an high
opinion of his own ref'ources, that he thought no-
thing too arduous for him to undertake. Shut up
hims~elf in the s~olitude of the Escurial, he troubled
and annoyed all the nations around him. He
wiaged open war with the Dutch and English ; he
encouraged and aided a rebellious faaion in
France; he conquered Portugal, and maintained
annies and garrisons in Italy, A~frica, and both
the Indies. By fulch a multiplicity of great and
complicated operations, purfixed with ardour
during the coixrfe of a long reign, Spain was
drained both of men and money. Under the
weak~ adminiffration of his successor, Philip III.
the vigour of the nation continued to decrease,
and funk into the loweit decline, when the incon- A.D. rsl=.
fiderate bigotry of that monarch expelled at once
near a million of his most induffrious fubjeats, at
the very time when the exhaulted slate of the
kingdom required s~ome extraordinary exertion of
political wisdom to augment its numbers, and to
revive its firength. Early in the seventeenth cen-
tury, Spain felt such a dimninution in the number
of her people, that from inability to recruit her
armies, she was obliged to contraQ her operations.
Her flourishing manufaatures were fallen into de-
cay. Her fleets, which had been the terror of all

'5 Europe,

B o 0 K Europe, were ruined, Her extenive foreign cons

Cryl merce was loft. The trade between different parts

of her own dominions was interrupted, and the
ships which attempted to carry it on, were takes
and'plundered by enemies whom thne once de-
spiled. Even ag~riculture, the primary objea of
inlduffry in every prosperous Rtate, was neglecled,
and one of the most fertile countries in Europe
hardly raised w-hat was fufficient for the support of
its own inhabitants.

Rapid de- IN pr;oportion als the population and manufac·

yideP po S tures of the p~arent slate declined, the demands of

her colonies continued to increase. The Spaniards,
like their monarch~s, intoxicated with the wealth
which poured in annually upon them, des~erted the
paths of induffry, to which they had been ac-
cuffomed, and repaired w~ith eagerness to those
regions from which this opulence iiized. By this
rage of emigration, another drain was opened, and
the firength of the colonies augmented by exhaulb·
ing that of the mother-country. All those emi-
grants, as n ell as the adventurers who had at firi
f~iettled in America, depended absolutely upon Spain
for almoit every article of necessary consumption.
En-gaged in more alluring· and lucrative pursuits,
or prev-ented by reftrainlts which government ig.q
posed, th~ey could not turn their own attention to.
wards eliablifhing the manufatures requisite for
comfortable fubifftence. They received (as I have
pbferved in another place) their clothing, their

furniture~

furniture, whatever miniffers to the ease or luxury B o,, *
of life, anld even their infiruments of labour, from
Europe. Spain, thinued of people, and decreaiing
ininduffry, was unable to fiipply their g~rowing de-
mands. She had recourse to her neighbours. The
manufaaures of the L~ow Countries, of England,
of France, and of Italy, which her wants called
into exiff ence, or animated with new vivaci~ty·, fur-
niihed in abundance whatever ihe required. In
vain did the fundamental law, concerning: the exr-
clufion of foreigners from trade with America,
oppole this innovation. Necessity, more powerful ,
than any statute, defeated its operations, and
conitrained the Spaniards themselves to concur
in eluding it. 'h'he Engliih, the French, and
Dutch, relying on the fidelity and honour of Spa-
nifh merchants, who lend their names to cover the
deceit, fend out: their manufaatures to America,
and receive the exorbitant price for which they are
fold there, eithier in fupecie, or in the rich commo-
dities of the New World. Neither the dread of
danger, nor the allurement of profit, ever induced
a Spanish faa~or to betray or defraud the person
wvho confided in him'; and that probity, which is
the pride and diftinaion of the nation, contributes
to its ruin. In a short time, not above a twentieth
part of the commodities exported to Amnerica was
of Spanifhh growth or fabric'. All the reft was
the property of foreign merchants, though entered

* Zavala Reprefentacion, p. zz6. t Campomanes, ii. z39*

B O O K in the name of Spaniards. The treasure of the

VHii. SNew World may be said henceforward not to have

belonged to Spain. Before it reached Europe, it
was anticipated_ as the price of goods purchaled
from foreigners. That wealth which, by an in-
ternal circulation, would have spread through each
vein of induffry, and have conveyed life and move·
ment to every branch of manufadure, flowed out
of the kingdom with su~ch a rapid cours~e, as neither
enriched nor animated it. On the other hand, the
artizans of rival nations, encouraged by this quick
sale of their commodities, improved so much in
skill and industry, as to be able to afford them at
a rate so low, that the manufaaures ofSpain,
which could not vie with theirs, either in quality
or cheapness of work, were flill farther depressed
This deffrudive commerce drained off the riches
of the nation faster and more completely, than
even the extravagant schemes of ambition carried
on by its monarchs. Spain was so much astonish-·
ed and diffreffred, at beholding her American trea·
f~ures vanish almost as soon as they were imported,
that Philip III. unable to supply what was requisite
in circulation, issued an edia, by which he endea·
voured to raise copper money to a value in cur·
rency nearly equal to that of silver "; and the lord
of the Peruvian and M/exican mines was reduced
to a wretched expedient, which is the last resource
of petty impoverished states.

* Uztarez, c. ro4.

Tues

TaUS the poffeflions of Spain in America have B 0 0 pt
not proved a source of population and of wealth <....-,-.
to her, in the fame manner as those of other na-
tions. In the countries of E~urope, where the f~pi-
rit of induffry fiibfifts in full vig-our, every per-
fonfettled in such colonies as are fimilar'in their
situation to those of Spain is foppofed to give em-
ployment to three or four at home in supplying
his wants x. But wherever the mother-country can-
not afford this su~pply, every emigrant may be con-
fidered as a citizen lofk to the community, and
firangers must reap all th~e benefit of anfwveringr his
demands.

SUCH has been the internal slate of Spain from Incereafc by
the close of the sixteenth century, and such her in- :ati~neRf
ability to supply the growing wants of her colo- ~I,"nource~
nies. The fatal effeas of this dis~proportion be- rCace
tween their demands, and her capacity of answer-
ing them, have been much increas~ed by the mode
in which Spain has endeavoured to regulate the in-
tercourf~e between the mother country and the co-
lonies. It is from her idea of monopolizing the
trade wfith America, and debarring her f~ubjeas
there from any communication with foreigners, that
all her jealous and fyfitematic arrangements have
arisen. There are to singular in their nature and
cons~equences as to merit a particular explanation.
In order to secure the monopoly at which the aimed,

aChild on trade and colonies.

Spain

B O d K Spain did not vest the trade with her colonies ina art

VrLr ~IJ exclusive company, a plan which has been adopted

by nations more commercial, and at a period when
mercantile policy was an objec? of greater attent
tion, and ougiht to have been better underfloodi
The Dttch gave up the whlole trade with their
colonies, both in the East and W7[eft Indies, to ex;
clufive companies. The Engifh, the French, the
Danes, have imitated their example with refpe~t
to the Eaff lndian commerce;' and the two former
have laid a similar refiraint upon some branches
of their trade with the New World. The wit of
rnan cannot, perhaps, dev~ise a method for check-
ing thie progres~s of induffry and population in a
new colony more effe~tual than this. The interest
ofthe colony, and of the exclusive compally, midit
in eve~ry point be diametrically opposite; and as
the latter poffeffes such advantages in Lhis unequal
contest, that it can prescribe at pleasure the terms
of intercourse, the former must not only buy dear
and fell cheap, but must fuffer the mortification of
having- the increase of its surplus flock discouraged
by those very persons to whlom alone it can difpol
of its produ~tions Y;

Tbis cod. SPAIN, it is probable, was preser~ved from fall-
ane 'on" ing into this error in policy, by the high ideas
seann which the early formed concerning the riches of

the New World. Gold and silver were commo;

u Smith's Inqjuiry, ii. Ip.·

dities

~ttes of too high value to vest a monopoly of a 0 o it
them in private hands. The crown wished to retain
the direaion of a commerce so inviting; and, in
order to secure that, ordained the cargo of every
thip fitted out foi. America, to be infpeded by the
officers of the Casa de Contratacionz in Seville, be-
fore it could receive a licence to make the voyage;
and that on its return, a report of the commodities
which it brought should be made to the fame board,
before it could be permitted to land them. In con-
[equence of this regulation, all the trade of Spain
with the New World centered originally in the port
of Seville, and was gradually brought into a Earm,
lawhich it has been condu~ed, with little varia-
tion, from the middle of the sixteenth century al-
inoff to our own times. For the greater security of
the valuable cargoes s~ent to America, as well as for
the more easy prevention of fraud, the comrnerce
ofSpain, with its colonies, is carried on by fleets
which fail utider itrong· convoys. These fleets con-
sifting of two sq~uadrons, one diftinguilhed by the
name of the Galeons, the other by that of the F/ota,
Sare equipped annually. Formerly they took their
departut~e from Seville; but as the port of- Cadiz
has been found more commodious, they have faith
ed from it since the year I720.

TTIE Galeons deffined to su~pply Tierra Firme, crido

by the Ga.

and the kingdoms of Peru and Chili, with almost teeom,
every article of luxury, or nleceffary confumrption,
that an opulent people can demand, touch first

VoL. III. Y at

a o,, i at Carthagena, and then at Porto-bello. Tb the

Cceyl~former, the merchants of Santa Martha, Caraccas,

the New Kingdom of Granada, and s~everal other
provinces, resort., The latter is the great martfor
the rich commerce of Peru and Chili. At the season
when the Galeons are expeded, the produa of all
the mines in there two ktingdoms,together with their
other valuable commodities, is transported by sea
to Panama. From thence, as soon as the appear-
ance of the fleet from Europe is announced, they
are conveyed acros~s the isthmus, partly on mules,
and partly down the river Chagre to Porto-bello.
This paltry village, the climate of which, fromthe
pernicious union of excefi~ve heat, continual moil-
ture, and the putrid exhalations arising from a rank
foil, is more fatal to life than any perhaps in the
known world, is immediately filled with people.
From being the residence of a few negroes and mu-
lattoes, and of a miserable garrison relieved every
three months, Porto-bello assumes s~uddenly a very
different afpech, and its fireets are crowded with
opulent merchants from every corner of Peru, and
the adjacent provinces. A fair is opened, the wealth
of America is exchanged for the manufa~lures of
Europe; and, during its prescribed term of forty
days, the richest traffic on the face of the earth ly
begun and finished, with that iimplicity of tranl-
a~ion and that unbounded confidence, which ac-

and Fleta, company extenfiVC COmmerCe a. The Flota holds

its course to Vera Cruz. The trealizres and cont·

Z See NTOTE; LXIV.

modlties

mnodities of New Spain, and the depending iro· B o 0 re
vinces, which were deposited at Puebla de los An-
geles in expeaation of its arrival, are carried thither,
and the commercial operations of Vera Cruz, con-
duaed in the fame manner withthof~e of Porto-bello,
are inferior to them only in importance and value.
Both fleets, as soon as they have completed their
cargoes from America, rendezvous at the Havanna,
and return in company to Europe.

THE trade of Spain with her colonies, while Beareas~t

of this ar-

thus fettered and reffriated, came necessarily to be rangement,
condulted with the fame spirit, and upon the fame
principles, as that of an exclurive company. Be-
·ing confined to a single port, it was of course
thrown into a few hands, and almost the whole of
it was gradually engrossed by a fmnall number of
wealthy houses, formerly in Seville, and now in
Cadiz. Thes~e by combinations, which they can
easily form, may altogether prevent that competi-
tion which preserves commodities at their natural
price; and by ading in concert, to which they are
prompted by their mutual interest, they may raise
or lower the value of them at pleas~ure. In conf~e-
quence of this, the price of European goods itt
America is always high, and often exorbitant. A
hundred, two hundred, and even three hundred
per cent. are profits not uncommon in the com.
merce of Spain with her coloniesa. From the

*B. Ulloa Retabliff part ii. p. 19 t,

Y s fame

B O O K fame ingroffing spirit it freqluently happens, that

VlnU Straders of the second order, whose warehouses do

not contain a complete asso~rtment of comm~odities
for the American market, cannot purchase from
the more opulent merchants such goods as they
want, at a lower price than that: for which they
are fold in the colonies. With the fame vigilant
jealousy that an ex~clusive company guards againtt
the intruflon of the free trader, thos~e overgrown
monopolists endeavour to check the progress of
every one whos~e encroachments they dread b. Thi3
reffraint of the American commerce to one port,
not only aff~eas its domeffic slate, but limits its
foreign operations. A mnonopolift may acquire
more, and certainly will hazard less, by a confined
trade which yields exorbitant profit, than by an
extensive commerce in which he receives only a
moderate return of gain. It is often his intereit
not to enlarge, but to circumscribe the sphere of
his aaivity; and, inficad of calling forth more
vigorous exertions of commercialinduffry, itmay
be the objea of his attention to check and set
bounds to them. By some fulch maxim, the mer·
cautile policy of Spain seems to have regulatedits
intercourfie with America. inficad of furnishing
the colonies with European goods in such quantity
as might render both the price and the profit mo.
derate; the merchants of Seville and Cadiz seem
.to have supplied them with a sparing hand, that

b Smith's Inquiry, iit I y z Campomanes, Edue. Popul.

i. 438.

the eagerners -of competition amongst customers B O, K
obliged to purchase in a scanty market, might en- U.-v****
able the Spanish faaors to dispos~e of their cargoes
with exorbitant gain. About the middle of the last
century, when the exclusive trade to America from
Seville was in its most flourifhingg slate, the burden
of the two united squadr~ons of the Galeons and
Flota, did not exceed twenty-feven thous~and five
hundred tons'. The supply which such a fleet could
carry, must have been very inadequate to the de-
mands of those populous and extenlive colonies,
which depended upon it for all the luxuries, and
many of the necessaries of life.

SPAm early became sensible of her declenflon Remedies

proposed.

from her former prosperity, and many refpeaable
and virtuous citizens employed their thoughts in
devising methods for reviving the decaying in-
duffry and commerce of their country. From the
violence of the remedies proposed, we may judge
how desperate and fatal the malady appeared.
Some, confounding a violation of police with cri-
minality against the slate, contended, that in or-
der to check illicit commerce, everyl person con-
viaed of carrying it on, thould be puniihed with
death, and confikcation of all his effeas d. Others,
forgetting the diftinaion between civil offences and
aas of impiety, insisted, that contraband trade

C Campomanes, Edue. Popul. i. 435. ii. Ilo.
d M. de Santa Cruz Commercia Suelto, p. 142*

Y 3 thould

n thi~K lould be ranked among the crimes reserved for
c~c~ the cognizance of the Inquisition; that such as

were guilty of it might be tried and punished, ac·
cording to the s~ecret and summary form in which
that dreadful tribunal exercis~es its jurifdialcon'.
Others, uninfiruaed by observing the pernicious
effeels of monopolies in every country where they
have been established, have proposed to vest the
trade with America in exclusive companies, wYhich
interest would render the moss vigilant guardians of
the Spanish commerce against the incroachment of
the interlopers ',

BESIDEs there wild projeas, many f~chemes,bet-

ter digested and more beneficial, were fuggefied.
But under the feeble monarchs, with whom the
reign of the Auffrian line in Spain clos~ed, inca-
pacity and indecillon are conspicuous in every de-
partment of government. Instead of takiing for
their model the adive adminiffration of Charles V.
they a~Fe~tcd to imitate the cautious procraffinating
wis~dom of Philip II. and destitute of his talents,
they deliberated perpetually, but deterinined no.
thing. No remedy was applied to the evils under
wihich the national commerce, domeltic as wellas
foreign, languilhed. These evils continued to in.
creaife, and Spain, with dominions more extensive
and more opulent than anly European slate, pof.

* Moncada Refiauracion politica de Efpagna, p. 4r.
r Zavalla y Augnon Reprefentacion, ac. P. 190.

sessed neither vigour, nor money h, 10r indufkry. B gg~
At length, the violence of a great national con- .---
vulflon rouzed the slumbering genius of Spain.
The efforts of the two contending parties in the
civil war, kindled by the dispute concerning the
facceffion of the crown at the beginning of this
century, called forth, in s~ome degree, the ancient
spirit and vigour of the nation. While men were
thus forming, capable of adopting sentiments more
liberal than thos~e which had influenced the coun.
cils of the monarchy during the cours~e of a ceaL-
tury, Spain derived from an unexpeaed source the
means of availing its~elf of their talents. The va-
rious powers who favoured the pretensions either
of the Auffrian or Bourbon candidate for the Spa-
niih throne, sent formidable fleets and armies to
their s~upport;. France, England, and Holland re-
mitted immens~e sums to Spain. These were
[pent iq the provinces which became the theatre
of war. Part of the American tkeafure, of which
foreigners had drained the kingdon), flowed back
thither. From this era, one of the most intelli-
g~ent Spanish authors dates the revival of the mo·
nar~chy; and, however humiliating the truth may
be, he acknowledges, that it is to her enemies his
country is indebted for the acquisition of a fund
of circulating specie, in some measure adequate to
the exigencies of the public i,

h ge NOTE LXV. * Campomanes, i* 42o.

Y 4 As

s o 0I k As soon as the Bourbons obtained quiet posses.

c~V~J flon of the throne, they dis~cerned this changela

" tbonea'd the spirit of the people, and in the slate of the nq.
Bpent re tion, and took advantage of it; for although that
monlalchs, family has not given monarchs to Spain remark·

able for superiority of genius, they have all been
·beneficent princes, attentive to the happiness o
their fabjec'ts, and solicitous to promote it. It
was, accordingly, the first objea of Philip V. to
suppres~s an innovation which had crept in during
the course of the war, and had overturned the
whole fjfitem of the Spanish commerce withAmei

by excluding 'rica, The English and Dutch, by their fupe'

(mtrad Ority in naVal power, having acquired such com.

with Pelruj s and of the sea, as to cut off all intercourse bel

tween Spain and her colonies, Spain, in order td
furnish her s~ubjeCts in America those necefllaries of
life, without which they could not exist, and as
-the only means of receiving from thence any part
of their treasure, departed so far from the usual
rigour of its maxims as to open the trade with
Pern to her allies the French. The merchants of
St. Malo, to whom Louis XIV. granted the pri·
vilege of this lucrative commerce, engaged i11 it
with vigour, and carried it on upon principles very
different from those of the Spaniards. They ~sup.
plied P'eru with European commodities at a mode-
rate price, and not its flinted quantity. The goods'
which they imported were conveyed to every pro.
vinc~e of Spanish America, in such abundance as
had never been known in any former period. If

this

this latercourfe had been continued, the exportation is o- o K
of European commodities from Spain must have IV'
<eafed, and the dependence of the colonies on the
mother-country have been at an end. The most ss
peremptory injunalous were therefore issued, pro-
hibiting; the admillion of foreign vessels into any
port of Peru or Chili le, and a Spanifhi squadron
w~as employed to clear the South Sea of intruders,
whole aid was no longer necessary.

9UTr thoug-h, on the cessation of the war, which bny ch,"",ckingrb

was terminated by the treaty of Utrecht,` Spain trade,
obtained relief front one encroachment on her
conunercial fyfiem, thee was exposed to another,
which the deemed hardly less pernicious. A5s an
inducement that might prevail with Queen Anne
to conclude a peace, which France and Spain de-
Eired with equal ardour, Philip V. not only con-
veyed to Great Britain the Afiento, or contraa for particularly
lupplying the Spanish colonies with negroes, which Irh'taf~2nbf MtheEg
h~adfonnerly been enjoyed by France, but granted companY.
it the more extraordinary privilege of s~ending an-
hually to the fair ofPorto bello, a ship of five
hundred tons, laden with European commodities.
In consequence of this, British faaories were efta-
blifhed at Carthagena, Panama, Vera Cruz, Bue-
nos Ayres, and other Spanish s~ettlements. The
veil with which Spain had hitherto covered the
slate and tranfadious of her colonies was removed.

Frezier Voy. 256. B. Ulloa Retab. ii. I04, &rc. Alcedo

y Herrera. Avifo, &c. 236,

The

st o 0 re The agents of a rival nation, residing in the towns

VIf-Iof most extensive trade, and of chief resort, had

the best opportunities of becoming acquainted with
the interior condition of the American provinces,
of oblerving their slated and occallonalwants, and
of knowing what commodities might be imported
into them with the greatest advantage. In confe-
quence of information so authentic and expedi-
tious, the merchants of Jamaica and other Eng-
lifh colonies who traded to the Spanilh main, were
enabled to assort and proportion their cargoes so
exadly to the demands of the market, that the
contraband commerce was carried on with a faci-
lity, and to an extent unknown in any former pe·
riod. This however was not the mofi fatal confe
quence of the Aifiento to the trade of Spain. The
agents of the British South-Sea company, under
cover of the importation which they were autho·
rifed to make by the ihip f~eat annually to Porto-
bello, poured in their commodities on the Spanish
continent, without limitation or reffraint. Initead
of a ship of five hundred tons, as flipulatedt in the
treaty, they usually employed one which exceeded
nine hundred tons in burden. She was accom-
panied by two or three finaller vefrels, which,
mooring in some neighbouring creek, supplied her
clandeffinely with fresh~ bales of goods, to replace
such as were fold, The inf~pe~tors of the fair, and'
officers of the revenue, gained by exorbitant pre·
fents, counived at the fraud'. Thus, partly by

'See NOTE LXVI.

the operations of the company, and partly by the B 0 o rso

Vrill

a~ivity of private interlopers, almost the whole L~
trade of Spanish America was ingroffed by sot
reigners. The immense commerce of the Ga-
leons, formerly the pride of Spain, and the envy
of other nations, si nk to nothing, and the fqua- 77 ,
dron itfrelf reduced fiom fifteen thousand to two
thous~and tons m, s~erved hardly any purpose but to
fetch home the royal revenue arising from the fiftly
on silver.

WHILE Spain obs~erved those eneroachments, Ouaran cor.

tas employed

and felt so sensibly their pernicious effeas, it was for this pur-

poie.

impollible not to make some effort to reitrain
them. Her firfL expedient was to flation ships of
force, under the appellation of Guarda CoJfas, upon
the coasts of those provinces, to which interloperS
prost frequently resorted. As private interest con-
curred with the duty which they owed to the pub-
lic, in rendering the officers who commanded those
veirels vigilant and aaive, some check was given
to the progres~s of the contraband trade, though in
dominions so extensive, and to acceirble by sea,
hardly any number of cruisers was fufficient to guard
agauit its mroads in every quarter. This interrup-
tion of an intercours~e, which had been carried on
pith so much facility, that the merchants in the
British colonies were accuffomed to confider it al,
Inoft as an allowed branch of commerce, excites

pl1cedo yHerrera, P* 359. Campomanes, i. 436.

murmurs

B O O K murmurs Plld complaints. There authorited, in some

Virl m- easure, and rendered more intereffing, byfeveral

unj uffifiable its of violence cornmitted by the eap-
tains of the Spanish Guarda Collas, precipitated

,7se. Great B3ritain into awar wvith Spain; inl consequence

of which the laftte obtained a final release from the
A9fliento, and was left at liberty to regulate the
commerce of her colonies, without being reltrained
by any engagement with a foreign powter.

ree rrre of As the formidable encroachments of the Eng·
rrepllc thrps
iarocduscd* li 1 011 their American trade, had discovered to

the Spaniards the vast consumption of European
goods in their colonies, and taught them the ad-
vantage of accommodating their importations to
the occasional demand of the various provinces,
they perceived the neceirty of devising forne me-
thod of s~upplying their colonies, different front
their ancient one, of sending thither periodical
fleets. That mode of communication had been
found not only to be uncertain, as the departure
of the Galeons and Flota was fametimes re-
tarded by various accidents, and often prevented
by the wars which raged in Europe; but long
experience had thewn it to be ill adapted to afford
.America a regular and timely s~upply of w~hat it
avanted. The fearcity of European goods in the
Spanjth fecftlements frequently became excellive;
their price role to an enormous height; the viigi-
lant eye of mercantile attention did not fail to ob.
s~erve this favourable opportunity, an ample supply

wKas poured in by interlopers from the English, the B OvII K
French, and Dutch islands; and when the GaleonS vl
at length arrived, they found the markets so glut-
ted by this illicit commerce, that there was no de.
mand for the commodities with which they were
loaded. In order to remedy this, Spain has per-
mitted a considerable part of her commerce with
America, to be carried on by regyler Jhips. Ther~e
are fitted out, 4uring the intervals between the slated
seasons when the Galeons and Flota fail, by mer-
chants in Seville or Cadiz, upon obtaining a licence
from the council of the Indies, for which they pay
at very high premium, and are deffined for those
ports in America where any extraordinary demand
is foreseen or expeaed. By this expedient, s~uch a
regular supply of the conmodities, for which there
is the greatest demand, is conveyed to the American
market, that the interloper is no longer allured by
the fame profpeB of excellive gain, or the people
in the colonies urged by the fame necellity to engage
in th~ehazardous adventures of contraband trade.

IN~ proportion as experience manifelled the ad- nheCaleena
vantages of carrying on trade in this mode, the ;rbonalhe.
numlber of regiffer ships increased; and at length,
in the year I748, the Galeons, after having been
employed upwards of two centuries, were finally
laid aside. From that period there has been no in-
tercourfe with Chili and Peru but by single ships,
dispatched from time to time as occasion requires,
and when the merchants expeat a profitable market

I4 il

n 0 0 to will open. There fhipss fail round Cape Horn, aad

S- convey direatly to the ports in the South Seathep~rb

dualons and manufaaures of E~urope, for which the
people, fettled in those countries, were formerly
obliged to repair to Porto-bello or Panama. There
towns, as has been formerly obs~erved, mfitgradually
decline, when deprived of that commerce to which
they owed their prosperity. This disadvantage how·
ever is more than compensated by the beneficial
effe~ts of this new arrangement, as the whole con·
tinent of S outh America receives new supplies ofEu·
ropean commodities, with so much regularity, and
in s~uch abundance, as must not only contribute
greatly to the happiness, but increase the population
of all the colonies fettled there. But as all the re-
gifter ships deffined for the South Seas, muff still
take their departure from Cadiz, and are obliged to
return thither ", this branch of the American com-
merce,even in its new and improved form,continues
fubjet to the reffraints of a species of monopoly,
and feels those pernicious effefts of it, which I
have already described.

seqemes re~ NOR has the attention of Snain been confined to
conmmerce, regulating the trade with its more flourishing colo·

nies, it has extended likewise to the reviving com-
merce in those settlements where it was negleded,
or had decayed. Among the new tastes which
the people of Europe have acquired, in confe·
qluence of importing the, produaions ofthofe coun-
tries which they conquered in America, that for

* Campomanes, i* 434- 440.

chocolate

thocolate is one of the most universal. The use of a o o ·p

VrIII

this liquor made with a patte, formed of the nut, rls
lr almond of the cacao-tree, compounded with
various ingredients, the Spaniards first learned
from the Mexicans ; and it has appeared to them,
and to the other European nations, so palatable,
10 nourishing, and so wholesome, that it has be-
come a commercial article of considerable import-
ance. The cacao-tree grows spontaneously in fe-
veral parts of the torrid zone; but the nuts of the
best quality, next to thos~e of Guatimala, on the
South Sea, are produced in the rich plains of
'Caraccas, a province of Tierra Firmi~. In confe-
quence of this acknowledged superiority in the
quality of eacao in that province, and its comm~u-
nication with the Atlantic, which facilitates the
conveyance to Europe, the culture of the cacao
there is more extensive than in any diffriae of Ame-
'rca. But the Dutch, by the vicinity of their
settlements in the fmnall islands of Curazoa and
Buen-Ayre, to the coast of Caraccas, gradually
ingroffed thle greatest part of the cacao trade.
The traffic with the mother-country for this va.
huable commodity ceased almost entirely; and such
was the supine negligence of the Spaniards, or the
defeas, of their commercial arrangements, that
they were obliged to receive from the hands of
foreigners this produalon of their own colonies, at
an exorbitant price. In order to remedy an ev~il by eftablh-
no less disg~raceful, than pernicious to his ubje~ts,
Philip Vr. is the year r728, granted to a body of raccas.

merchants,

E O O1I K Inerchants, an exclusive right to the commerce

LMV with Caraccas and Cumana, on condition of their

employing, at their own expence, a fufficient
number of armed vefI~els to clear the coast ofini
terlopers. .This society, diftinguilfhed 'ometimpes
by the name of the Company of Guipufcoa, front
the pr~ovince of Spain in which it is established,
and sometimes by that of the Company of Carac.
cas, from the diffrk? of America to which it trades,
has carried on its operations with such vigour and
succes~s, that Spain has recovered an -important
branch of commerce, which she had fuffered to
be wreited from her, and is plentifully supplied
with an article of extensive consumption at a mo-
derate price. Not only the parent state, but the
colony of Caraccas, has derived great advantages
from this inflitution; for although, at the first
aspect, it may appear to be one of those monopo.
lies, whose tendency is to check the spirit of in.
duffry, instead of calling it forth to new exertions,
it has been prevented from operating in this man·
ner, by several salutary regulations, framed upon
foresight of such bad effec~s, and of purpose to
obviate · them. The planters in the Caraccas are
not left to depend entirely on the company, either
for the importation of European commodities, or
the sale of their own produc~ions. The inhabi.
tants of the Canary islands have the privilege of
sending thither annually a regilter ship of confider.
able burden; and from Vera Cruz in New Spain,
a free trade is permitted in every port compre-

hended

hended in the charter of the company. In confe- n 0 0 sc
quence of this, 1;here is s~uch a competition, that
both with refpeft to what the colonies purchase,
and what they fell, the price s~eems to be fixed at
its natural and equitable rate. The company has
not the· power of railing the former, or of degrading
the latter at pleasure; and accordingly, since it
was eflablifhed, the increase of culture, of popu-
lation, and of live flock, in the province of Carac-
cas, has been very considerable ".

BUT as it is slowly that nations relInquish any Etargemene
ly~tem which time has rendered venerable, and as it illger-f
is flill more slow-ly that commerce can be diverted spain.
from the channel in wvhich it has long been aced~-
tomed to flow; Philip V. in his new regulations con-
cerning the American trade, paid sauch deference to
the ancient maxim of Spain, concerning the limita-
tion of all importation from the New World to one
harbour, as to oblige both the regiffer thips which
returned from Peru, and thos~e of the Guipur~coan
Company fi-om Caraccas, to deliver their cargoes
in the port of Cadiz. Since his reign, sentiments
more liberal and enlarged begin to spread in Spain.
The spirit of philosophical inquiry, which it is the
glory of the present age to have turned from fri-
uolous or abitrufe speculations, to the business and
affairs of men, has extended its influence beyond
the Pyrenees. In the res~earches of ingenious

* See NTOTE LXVII.

Vot. III. Z authors,

B O O~ K authors, concerning the police or commerce of

c- nations, the errors and defeats of the Spanish

fyfiiem with refpea to both met every eye, and
have not only been exposed with severity, but are
held up as a warning to other slates. The Spa·
niards, flung with the reproaches of ther~e authors,
or convinced by their arguments, and admonished
by several enlightened writers of their own coun·
try, seem at length to have discovered the de-
firuaive tendency of those narrow maxims, which,
by cramping commerce in all its operations, have
so long retarded its progress. It is to the monarch
now on the throne, that Spain is indebted for the
first public regulation formed in consequence of
such enlarged ideas.

Eflablih~- WHILE Spain adhered with rigour to her an·
gular packet Clent maxims concerning her commerce with

bot. America, i e was so much afraid of opening any

channel, by which an illicit trade might find ad.·
million into the colonies, that the almoff shut her-
self out from any intercours~e with them, but that
which was carried on by her annual fleets. There
was no eftabliihment for a regular communication
of either public or private intelligence, between
the mother-country and its American settlements.
F~rom the want of this necessary inflitution, the
operations of thle slate, as wvell as the business of
individuals, were retarded or conduaed unfkiil·
fully, and Spain often received from foreigners her
first information with ref~pe~t to very interefring

events

events in her own colonies. But though this de- B o 0 sc.
fe8 in police was sensibly felt, and the remedy for ~y
it was obvious, that jealous spirit with which the
Spanish monarchs guarded the ex~clusive trade, re-
flrained them from applying it. At length
Charles III. surmounted those considerations which
had deterred his predecessors, and in the year 1764
appointed packet-boats to be dispatched on the
firlt day of each month, from Corugna to the
Havanna or Porto-Rico. From thence letters are
conveyed in fmnaller vef~els to Vera Cruz and
Porto-bello, and trans~mitted by poss through the
kingdoms of Tierra Firmit, Granada, Peru, and
New Spain. With no less regularity packet-boats
fail once in two months to Rio de la Plata, for the
accommodation of the provinces to the east of the
Andes. Thus proviflon is made for a speedy and
certain circulation of intelligence thr-oughout the
vast dominions of Spain, fromt which eqlual advan-
tages must redound to the political and mercantile
interest of the kingdom P. With this new arrange-
ment, a scheme of extending commerce has been
more immediately conne~ted. Each of the packet-
boats, which are vefrels offome considerable bur-
den, is allowed to take in half a loading of such
commodities as are the produQ 0f Spain, and most
in demand in the ports whither they are bound.
In return for thes~e they may bringn home to Co-

P PoI1z Viage de Efpagna, vi. Prol. p. z y.

Z 2 rugna

B Oxy1 K rugna an equal quantity of American produalonsc.

CLV This may be considered as the first relaxations of

those rigid laws, which confined the trade with the
New World to a single port, and the first attempt
to admit the reft of the kingdom to some fbare
in it.

Fermitd~ee trad~e IT was soon followed by one more decisive. In
Eevelral pro- the year 1765, Charles III. laid open the trade to

the windward islands, Cuba, Hispaniola, Porto.
Rico, Margarita, and Trinadad, to his f~ubjeasia
every province of Spain. He permitted them to
fail from certain, ports in each province, which are
s~pecified in the edi~t, at any season, and with what·
ever cargo they deemed most proper, without any
other warrant than a simple clearance from the
cuffom-houfle of the place whence they took their
departure. He releas~ed them from the numerous
and opprefirve duties imposed on goods exported
to America, and in place of the whole, fubilituted
a moderate tax of fix in the hundred on the com·
modities sent from Spain. He allowed them to
return either to the fame port, or to any other
where they might hope fqSr a more advantageous
market, and there to enter the homeward cargo,
on payment of the ufital duties. This ample pri-
vilege, which at once broke thirough all the fences
which the jealous policy of Spain had been labour·

I A~ppend. ii. ala Edue. Pop. P* 3r.

ing, for two centuries and a half, to throw round its B Ovl: O
commercial intercourse with the New WVorld, was J
soon after extended to Louisiana, and to the pro-
vinces of Yucatan and Campeachy'.

THE propriety of this innovation, which may be Be~nessia

eff~ets of it,

considered as the most liberal effort of Spanish le-
gillation, has appeared from its effeas. Prior to
the edidl in favour of the free trade, Spain derived
hardly any benefit from its negleaed colonies in
flifaniola, Porto-Rico, Margarita, and Trinidad.
Its commerce with Cuba was inconsiderable, and
that of Yucatan and Campeachy was ingroff~ed al-
rnoi intirely by interlopers. But as soon as a ge-
neral liberty of trade was permitted, the inter-
course with those provinces revived, and has gone
on with a rapidity of progrefi~on, of' which there
arefew examples in the hiffory of nations. In less
than ten years, the trade of Cuba has been more
than tripled. Even in those settlements where,
from the languishing slate of induffry, greater es-
forts were requisite to reffore its nair.ity, their
commerce has been doubled. It 'is computed,
that such a number of thips is already employediin
the free trade, that the tonnage of them far exceeds
that of the Galeons and Flota, at the moll flourifhl-
ing ara of their commerce. The benefits of this
arrangement are not confined to a few merchlants,
ditablifhed in a favourite port. They are diffuf~dd
through every province of the kingdom; and by

rAppend. ii. a la Educ. PoP* 37- 54. 91.

23 openmg~

B O O K Opening a new market for their various produc.

1 ,tions and manufaeaures, muff encourage and add

vivacity to the induitry of the farmer and artificer.
Nor does the kingdom profit only by wnhat it ex-
ports, it derives advantage likewis~e from what it
receives in return, and has the profpee? of being
soon able to supply itself with several commodities
of extensive consumption, for which it. formerly
depended on foreigners. The consumption of
sugar in Spain is perhaps as great in proportion to
the number of its inhabitants, as that of any Eu·
ropean kingdom. But though poffefled of coun·
tries in the New World, whose foil and climate are
moit proper for rearing the sugar-cane; though
the domeffic culture of that valuable plant in the
kingdom of Granada was once considerable; such~
has beep the ~fatal tendency of ill-judged inflitu-
tions in America, and fuchs the preffuire of impro-
per taxes in Europe, that Spain has loft almolt
entirely this branch of induffry, which has enriched
other nations. This commodity, which has now
become an article of primary necellity inEurope,
the Spaniards were obliged to purchase of foreign·
ers, and had the mortification to fee their coun-
try drained anlnually of gr·eat sums on that ac.
count ". But if that [pirit, which the permif~lon
of free trade has put in motion, flhall persevere in
its efforts with the fame vigour, the cultivationof
sugar in Cuba and Porto-Rico may increase to
rrnuch;, that in a few years, it is probable, that

5 Uzta~iz, Cc. 94.

their growth of sugars may be equal to the demand B O O K
of the kingdom.

SPAmN has been induced, by her experience of the Free trade
beneficial consequences resulting from having re- betweenthe

GOlomles,

laxed somewhat of the rigour of her ancient laws
with refpea to the commerce of the mother-coun-
try with the colonies, to permit a more liberal in-
tercourf~e of one colony with another. B3y one of
the jealous maxims of the old fyitem, all the preh-
vinces situated on the South Seas were prohibited,
under the most severe penalties, from holding any
communication with one another. Though each
of these yield peculiar produaions, the reciprocal
exchange of which might have added to the happi-
ness of their refpeaive inhabitants, or havie facili-
tated their progres~s in induffry, so solicitous was
the Council of the Indies to prevent their recei-\ing
any supply of their wants, but by the periodical
fleets from Europe, that in order to guard against
this, it cruelly debarred the Spaniards in Peru1, in
the southern provinces of New Spain, in Guatimala,
and the New Kingdom of Granada, from s~uch a
correspondence with their fellow-fubjeals, as tended
manifestly to their mutual prosperity. Of all the nu-
merous reffri~ions devised by Spain for securing· the
exclusive trade with her American fettlemnents, none
perhaps was more illiberal, none seems to have been
more sensibly felt, or to have produced more hurt-
ful effeats. This grievance, coeval with the fettle-
ments of Spain in the countries situated on the Pa-

Z 4 cific

New rehe.
la ions con-
cemning the
Ice nmcone
sues. cific Ocean, is at last redreifed. In the year 1774,

Charles III. published an edia, granting to the four
great provinces which I have mentioned, the privi·
lege of a free trade with each other e. What may be
the effeas of opening this communication between
countries destined by their situation for reciprocal
intercourse, cannot yet be determined byexperience.
They can hardly fail of being beneficial and extensive.
'The motivres for granting this permillion are mani-
feltly no less laudable, than the principle on which it
is founded is liberal ; and both discover the progress
of a spirit in Spain, far elevated above the narrow
prejudices and maxims on which lier fyfiem for re-
gulating the trade, and conduaing the govern-
ment of her colonies, w-as originally founded.

AT the famle timne that Spain has been intent

on introducing regulations, f~uggeffed by more enT
larged views of policy, into her ijyftem of Ame-
rican commerce, fhle has not been inattentive to
the interior government of her colonies. Heretoo
there was much room for reformation and improveT
ment, and Don Joseph Galvez, who has now the
dircaionr of the department for Indian affairs in
Spain, has enjoyed the belt opportunities, not only
of oblerving the defec?s and corruption in the pg.
litical frame of the colonies, but of dis~covering
the sources of thlofe evils. After being employed

f R~eal Ceclula penes me. Pontz Viage de Efpyagna, vi,

Prolog~ro.p.z. NOTE LXVIII.

f~eveq

seven years in the New World on anl extraordinary B O O K
miifion, and with very extensive powers, as in-
[pedor-general of New Spain; after visiting in
person the remote provinces of Cinaloa, Sonora,
and California, and making s~everal important al·
terations in the slate of the police and revenue;
he began his miniffry with a general reformation
of the tribunals of juffice in America. In confe. R~efor~m~artipo n

h olt

quence of the progref's of population and wealth or juntice.
in the colonies, the business of the Courts of Au-
dience has increased to much, that the number of
judges of which they were originally compos~ed, has
beenr found inadequate to the growing labours and
duties of the office, and the salaries fettled upon them
havebeen deemedinferior tothe dignity of the station.
As a retnedy for both, he obtained a royal edidt,
eltablifhing an additional number of judges in each
court of Audience, with higher titles, and more
ample appointments ".

To the frame intelligent miniffer Spain is in- r:ew dince.

debted for a newv diffribution of governmnent in its ~':j",".o
A~merican provinces. Even since the establish-- nana.
ment oft a third vciceroyalty in the New Kingrdom
of Granada, so great is the extent of the Spanish~
dominions in the New WTorld, that several places
Fubjea to the~ jurifd~ialon of each viceroy, were at
such an enormous difiance from the capitals in
phich they resided, that xieither their attention, nor

a Gaz.eta de Mladrid, :gth Marc;h, I;·i6.

their

B O Ol K their authority, could reach so far. Some pro.

CLY1~3vinces s~ubordinate to the viceroy of New Spain,

lay above two thousand miles from Mexico. There
were countries fubea to the viceroy of Peru still
farther from Lima. The people in those remote
diffrias could hardly be said to enjoy the benefit of
civil government. The oppression and insolence
of its inferior miniffers they often feel, and rather
submit to there in silence, than involve themselves
in the expence and trouble of res~orting to the dif.
tant capitals, where alone they can find redref.

New vice- As a remedy for this, a fourth viceroyalty has

rAg e~7, been ereaed, to the jurifdialon of which are sub·
aiomea. jeaed the provinces of Rio de la Plata, Buenos.

Ayres, Paraguay, Tucuman, Potofi, Sta Cruz de
la Sierra, Charcas, and the towns of Mendoza
and St.Juan. By this well-judged arrangement, two
advantages aregained. Alltheinconvreniencies occa·
fioned by the remote situation of those provinces,
which had been long felt, and long complained of,
are, in a great measure, removed. The countries
most diffant from Lima are separated from the vice.
royalty of Peru, and united under a superior, whole
feat of government at Buenos-Ayres, will be com-
modious and accefiible. The contraband trade with
the Portuguese, which was become so extensive,
as muff havre put a final flop to the exportation of
commodities from Spain to her southern colonies,
may be checked more thoroughly, and with greater
facility, when the fupremne magiffrate, by his vi-
cinity to the places in which it is carried on, can

VICw

view its progres~s and effeas with his own eyes, a 0 0 K
I)0n Pedro Zevallos, who has been raised to this
new dignity, with appointments equal to those of
the other viceroys, is well acquainted both with
the slate and the interest of the countries over
which he is to preside, having served in them long,
and with diftinaion. By this difmnemberment,
succeeding that which took place at the eremion of
the viceroyalty of the New Kingdom of Granada,
almost two-third parts of the territories, originally
fubjea to the viceroys of Peru, are now 10pped off
fr~om their jurifdiaion.

'IHE limits of the viceroyalty of New Spain have new rovemn-
likewise been considerably circumscribed, and with g'9~"opsr
no less propriety and discernment. Four of its "ora, a~C.
most remote provinces, Sonora, Cinaloa, Califor-
nia, and New Navarre, have been formed into a
separate government. The Chevalier de Croix, who
is intruftedwith this command, is not dignified with
the title of viceroy, nor does he enjoy the appoint-
ments belonging to that rank, but his jurifdi~ion
is altogether independent on the viceroyalty of New
Spain. The ere~ion of this last government seems
to have beenf~uggefied, not only by the consideration
of the remote situation ofthof~e provinces from Mex-
ico; but by attention to the late discoveries made
there, which I have mentioned X. Countries con-
taining the richest mines of gold that have hitherto

x Book vii. p. 229.

been

B O O K been discovered in the New W7orld, and which

VIII. I~-y-3probably may aris~e into great importance, required

the immediate infpeaion of a governor, to whom
they thould be specially committed. As every con-
fideration of duty, of interest, and of vanity, must
concur in prompting those new governors to encou-
rage such exertions as tend to diffufe opulence and
prosperity through the provinces committed to their
charge, the beneficial effe~s of this arrangement
may be considerable. Many diffrias in America,
long depress~ed by the languor and feebleness natural
to provinces which compose the extremities of an
overgrown empire, may be animated with vigour
and aaivity, when brought so near the feat of power,
as to feel its invigorating influence.

Attempts to Suen, since the acceliron of the princes of the~
reform dlo-
mtanc po- HoufCe of Bourbon to the throne of Spain, has been

Sthe progress of their reg~ulations, and the gradual

expansion of their views with refpea to the coml
rnerce and government of their American colonies.
Nor has their attention been so entirely engrossed
by what related to the more remote parts of their
dominions, as to render them negleaful of what was
still more important, the reformation of domestic
errors and defeas in policy. Fully sensible of the
caus~es to which the declenflon of Spain, from her
former profcperity, ought to be imputed; they have
made it a great objea of their policy, to revive a
spirit of induffry among their fubjeas, and to give
such extent and perfeation to their manufaaures,

22 as

as may enable them to s~upply the demands of B O O K
America from their own flock, and to exclude so- Lcz
reigners from a branch of commerce which has been
so fatal to the kingdom. This they have endea-
voured to accomplish, by a variety of ediats ifirued
since the peace of Utrecht. They have granted
bounties for the encouragement of some branches
of induffry; they have lowered the taxes on others;
they have either entirely prohibited, or have loaded
with additional duties, s~uch foreign manufaatures
as come in competition with their own; they have
inflituted societies for the improvement of trade
and agriculture ; they have planted colonies of hus-
bandmen in some uncultivated diffrias of Spain,
and divided among them the waste fields; they
have had recourse to every expedient, devis~ed by
commercial wtifdom, or commercial jealoufyr, for
reviving their own induffry, and difcountenancing
that of other nations. Ther~e, however, it is not
my province to ex-plain, or to inquire into their pro-
priety and effeas. There is no effort of legislation
more arduous, no experiment in policy more un-
certain, than an attempt to revive the spirit of in-
duffry where it has declined, or to introduce it
where it is unknow~n. Nations, already poffeffed
ofextenfive commerce, enter into competition with
such advantages, derived from the large capitals
and extensive credit of their merchants, the dexte-
rity of their manufaaurers, the alertness acqluired
by habit in every department of business, that the
slate wvhich aims at rivalling, or supplanting them,

must

a I1 K mnult expea to firuggle with many difficulties, and

cc be content to advance slowly. If the quantity of

produaive induffry, now in Spain, be compared
with that of the kingdom under the last listless
monarchs of the Auffrian line, its progress must
appear considerable, and is f~ufficient to alarm the
jealousy, and to call forth the most vigorous es·
forts, of the nations now in poireflion of the lucra·
tive trade which the Spaniards aim at wresting from
them. One circumitance may render those exer-
tions of Spain an objea of more serious attention
to the other European powers. They are not to be
ascribed wholly to the influence of the crown and
its miniffers. The sentiments and spirit of the
people seem to second the provident care of their
monarchs,.and to give it greater effea. The na-
tion has adopted more liberal ideas, not only with
ref~pedt to commerce, but domeffic policy. In all
the later Spanish writers, defeas in the arrange·
ments of their country concerning both are ac-
knowledged, and remedies propos~ed, which igno·
rance rendered their anceffors incapable of discern.
ing, and pride would not have allowed them to
confess x. But after all that the Spaniards have
done, much remains to do. Many pernicious infli·
tutions and abuses, deeply incorporated with the
system of internal policy and taxation, which has
been long established in Spain, must be abolished,
before induffry and manufaaures can recover an
extensive aativity.

X See NOTE LXIX.

Snn,4

SnILL, however, the commercial regulations of a 0 0 to
Spain with refped to her colonies, are too rigid LMrr
and fyfltematical to be carried into complete exe- tr~ade.
cution. The legislature that loads trade with im-
positions too heavy, or fetters it by reffri~tions too
severe, defeats its own intention; and is only mul-
tiplying the inducements to violate its statutes,
and proposing an high premium to encourage
illicit traffic. The Spaniards, both in Europe
and America, being circums~cribed in their mutual
intercourse by the jealoufyr of the crown, or
oppressed by its exaaions, have their invention
continually on the firetch how to elude its edias.
The vigilance and ingenuity of private interest dif-
cover means of effeaingg this, which public wis-
dom cannot foresee, nor public authority prevent.
This s~pirit, counteraaing that of the laws, per-
vades the commerce of Spain with America in all
its branches ; and from the highest departments in
government, descends to the lowest. The very of-
ficers appointed to check contraband trade, are
often employed as infiruments in carrying it on;
and the boards inflituted to reffrain and pun~ih it,
are the channels through which it flows. The
kring is s~uppos~ed, by the most intelligent Spanish
writers, to be defrauded, by various artifices, of
Inore than one half of the revenue which he ought
to receive from America Y and as long as it is the
interest of so many persons to screen those artifices.

r $010rz. de Ind. Jere, ii. lb. v.

from

B O O K from deteaion, the knowledge of them will never

VIDr rc~J reach the throne. "C How many ordinances, says

L' Corita, how many infirutions, how many let·
(' ters from our sovereig~n, are sent in order tocor·
.. reat abuses, and how little are they observed,
L( and what fmnall advantage is derived from them!
ct To me the old observation appears just, that
CC where there are many physicians, and many
'C medicines, there is a want of health ; where there
'* are many laws, and many judges, there is want
C' of justice. WCe have viceroys, presidents, go·
" vernors, oydors, corrigidors, alcaldes, and thou-
"' sands of algruazils abound every where:; but not·
"' withstanding all there, public abuses continue to
" mclltiply "." Time has increased the evils which
he lamented as early as the reign of Philip II. A
spirit of corruption has infe~ed all the coloniesof
Spain in America. MLen far removed from the
feat of government; impatient to acquire wealth,
that they may return speedily from what they are
apt to confider as a slate of exile in a remote un·
healthful country; allured by opportunities too
temptingr to be resifted, and s~educed by the ex.
ample of those around them ; find their sentiments
of honour and of duty gradually relax. In private
life, they give thems~elves up to a dissolute luxury,
while in their public condua they become unmind.
ful of what they owe to their sovereign and to their
country.

Z 151S. penes me.

BEFORE

BEFORE I clos~e this account of the Span~ih ti-ade B o 0 re

VIII.

in America, there rema~ins one detached, but im-
portant branch of it, to be mentioned., Soon after Twaen New
his aclceflon to the throne, Philip II. formed a sheaidialnp
icheme of planting a colony in the Philippine Pm"eS.
tflands, which had been negleaed since the time of
their discovery; and he accomplished it ~by means
of an armament fitted out from New Spain b. M564
nila, in the island of Luconia, was the flation
chosen for the capital of this new establishment.
From it an adtive commercial intercourse began
with the Chinese, and a considerable number of
t-hat induffrious people, allured by the profped of
gain, fettled in the Philippine islands under the
Spanish prote~tion. They s~upplied the colony so
amply with all the valuablie prodd~ions and manu-
fattures of the East, as enabled it to open a trade
with~rmerica, by a course of navigation, the longest.
from land td' land on our globe. In the infancy
bs this trade, it vias carried on with Callao, or;
the coast of Peri ; b~ut experience hiavi~ng diifco-
vered the iinpi-opriety of fixing upon that as the
port of communication with Manila, the flaple
of the commei-ce between the east and weft was re-
moved from Callao to Acapulco, on the coast of
New Spaid.

AFTE R VarioUS arrangements, it has been brought
1tho a regular form. One or two thips depart anl
nually frorn Acapulco, which are permitted to carry

b o~rquem. i. lib. v. c. I4*

VbL. III. Az a out

B o 0 re out silver to the amount: of five hundred thoufanct

VIII. Spefos c, but they have hardly any thing else of value

on board; in return for which, they bring back
spices, drugs, china, and japan wares, calicoes,
chintz, muflins, silks, and every precious article,
with which the benignity of the climate, or the in-
g~enuity of its people, has enabled the East tofup-
ply the reft of the world. For some time the mer·
chants of Pertx were admitted to participate in this
traffic, and might fend annually a ship to Acapulco,
to wait the arrival of the vessels from IVanila, and
receive a proportional share of the commodities
which they imported. At length, the Peruvians
were excluded from this trade by moit rigorous
edias, and all the commodities from the Eait re·
served solely for the consumption of New Spain.

I~N consequence of this indulgence, the inhabi.

tants of that country enjoy advantages unknown
in the other Spanish colonies. The manufatures
of the East are not only more farited to a warm cli.
Inate, and more showy than those of Europe, but
can be fold at a lower price; while, at the fame
time, the profits upon them are to considerable, as
to enrich all thos~e who are employed, either in
bringing them from Manila, or vending them in
New Spain. As the interest both of the buyer and
feller concurred in favouring this branch of com·
merce, it has continued to extend in [pite of regu.

C Recop. lib. ix c* 45. 1. 6.

lations,

lations, concerted with the most anxious jealouiry to a o o
circumscribe it.~ Under cover of what the laws
permit to be imported, great quantities of India
goods are poured into the markets of New Spain d,
and when the flota arrives at Vera Cruz from
Europe, it often finds the wants of the people al-
ready supplied by cheaper and more acceptable com-
modities.

THERE is not, in the commercial arrangements
of Spain, any circumstance more inexplicable than
the permifiron of this trade between New Spain
and the Philippines, or more repugnant to its fun-
damental maxim of holding the colonies in perpe-
teal dependance on the mother-country, by pro-
hibiting any commercial intercourse that might
suggest to them the idea of receiving a supply of
their wants from any other quarter. This permif-
lion must appear still more extraordinary, from
considering that Spain herself carries on no direst
trade with her s~ettlements in the Philippines, and
grants a privilege to one of her Amlerican colonies,
which she denies to her fubjeas in Europe. It is
probable, that the colonists who originally took
poffeflionn of the Philippines, having been sent out
from New Spain, begun this intercourse with a
country which they considered, in some measure,
as their parent slate, before the court of Madrid
was aware of its consequences, or could eliablifh

'd See NOTE LXX.

A a 2 regulations

B 0 0 14 regulations in order to prevent it. Many remon-

Vill1 fc~~itrqnces have been presented againit this trade, as

detrimental to Spain, by diverting into another
channel, a large portion of that treas~ure which
ought to flow into the kingdom, as tending to
give rife to a spirit of independence in the colonies,
and to encourage innumerable frauds, against which
it is impofiible to guard, in tranfaaions so far re-
moved from the infpeaion of government. But
as it requires no flight effort of political wildom
and vigour to abolish any praaice which numbers
are interefied in supporting, and to which time has
added the fanaion of its authority, the commerce
between New Spain and Muanila seems to be as con1-
fiderable as ever, and may be considered as one
chief cause of the elegance and [plendor confpi-
cuous in this part of the Spanish dominions.

Public re- UTY HOtwithfianding this general corruptioninl
venue from.
America. the colomies of Spain, and the diminution of the

;ncome belonging to the public, occasioned by the
illicit importations made by foreigners, as well as
by the various frauds of which the colonists them-
se~lves are guilty in their commerce with the parent
slate, the Spanifhb monarchs receive a very confi-
derable revenue from their American dominions.
This arises from taxes of various kinds, which
may be divided inlto three capital branches. The
frirt contains what is paid to the king, as fove·
reign, or superior lord of the New World : to this
class belongs the duty on the gold and silver raised

from

from the mines, and the tribute exalked from the '" o 0 xt

VIll.

Indians; the former is termed by the Spaniards the cY
right of finiory, the latter is the duty of evafalage.
The second branch comprehends the numerous du-
ties upon commerce, which accompany and oppress
it in every flep of its progress, from the greatest
tranfiaftions of the wholesale merchant, to the petty
traffic of the vender by retail. The third includes
what accrues to the king, as head of the church,
and adminiffrator of ecclefiallical funds in the New
World. In consequence of this he receives the first
fruits, annates, s~poils, and other s~piritual revenues,
levied by the apostolic chamber in Europe; and is
entitled, likewis~e, to the profit arising from the sale
of the bull of Cruzado. This bull, which is pub-
lifhedevery two years, contains, an absolution from
past offences by the pope, and, among other immu-
nities, a permission to eat s~everal kinds of prohibited
food, during Lent, and on meagre days. The monks
employed in dispersing those bulls, extol their vir-
tues with all the fervour of interested eloquence;
the people, ignorant and credulous, liffen with im-
plicit assent; and every pers~on in the Spanish co-
lonies, of European, Creolian, or mixed race, pur-
chases a bull, which is deemed essential to his fal,
vation, at the rate s~et upon it by government el

WArr may be the amount of those various funds, ast ame.2une,
it is almost impofiible to determine with preci·

* See NO TE LXXI.

n O o R sion. The extent of the Spanish dominions in

I Y"._,Amlerica, the jealousy of government, whichren.

ders them inacceirble to foreigners, the mysterious
silence which the Spaniards are accuffomed to ob·
serve with refpea to the interior slate of their co-
lonies, combine in covering this fubjea with a
veil which it is not eafyr to remove. But an ac-
count, apparently no less accurate than it is cu-
rious, has lately been published of the royal re·
venue in New Spain, from which we may form
some idea with refpedt to what is colleaed in the
other provinces. According to that account, the
crown does not receive from all the departments of
taxation in New Spain above a million of our
money, from which one half muff be dedu8ed
as the expence of the provincial eftablifhment'.
Peru, it is probable, yields a fum not inferior to
this; and if we s~uppos~e that all the other regions
of America, including the islands, furniih a third
share of equal value, we ihall not perhaps be far
wide from the truth, if we conclude, that the net
public revenue of Spain, raised in America, does
not exceed a million and a half sterling. This
falls far thort of the immense sums to which sup.
politions, founded upon conjeaure, have raised
the Spanish revenue in America s.· It is remark.
able, however, upon one account. 8-pain and Por·
tugal are the only European powers,' who derive
a direat revenue frdm their colonies. All the ad.

r See NOTE LXXII. r See NOTE LXXIII.

vantage

vantage that accrues to other nations, from their n O r, 1·
American dominions, arises from the exclusive 3
enjoyment of their trade; but beside this, Spain
has brought her colonies to contribute towards in-
creasing the powrer of the slate; and in return for
proteaion, to bear a proportional share of the coml-
mon burden.

cC~ORDINGLY, the fum which I have computed

to be the amount of the Spanish revenue from
America, aris~es wholly from the taxes collec~ed
there, and is far from being the whole of what
accrues to the king from his dominions in the
New World. The heavy duties imposed on the
commodities exported from Spain to America h, as
well as what is paid by those which she sends home
in return; the tax upon the negroe-flaves, with
wvhic~h Africa supplies the New W~orld, together
writh several fmnaller branches of finance, bring
large sums into the treasury, the precise extent of
wNhich I cannot pretend to ascertain.

But if the revenue which Spain draws from Expence of

. . adrniniftra-

America be great, the expence of admmiffiration tion.
in her colonies bears proportion to it. In every
department, even of her domeltic police and
finances, Spain has adopted a fyfitem more com.
plex, and more encumbered with a variety of tri-
bunals, and a multitude of officers, than that of

SSee N OT E LXX`IV.

A a4 anY

" 111 K any European nation, in which the sovereign pof

fcj eiffes such extensive power. From the jealous firit
with which Spain watches over her American fettle·
ments, and her endeavours to guard against fraud
in provinces so remote from infpe~tion; boards
and ofmcers have been multiplied there with frill
more anxious attention. In a country where the
expence of living is great, the salaries allotted to
ev~ry per'fon in public office must be high, and
must load the revenue with an immense 'burden.
The parade of government greatly augments the
weight of it. The viceroys of Mexico, Peru, and
the New Kingdom of Granada, as representatives
of the king's pers~on, among people fond of often-
tation, maintain all the slate aild dignity ofroyalty.
Their courts are formed upon the model of thit
at Madrid, with horse and foot guards, a house·
hold regularly eliablifhed, numerous attendants,
and ensigns of power, displaying f~uch' pons, as
hardly retains the appearance of a delegated autho·
rity. All the experice incurred by supporting the
external and permanent order of government is
defrayed by the crown. The viceroys have besides
peculiar appointments faited to their exalted faa.
tion. The salaries fixed by law are indeed ex-
tremely moderate; that of the viceroy of Peru is
only thirty thousand ducats;~ and that of the vice·
roy of Mexico, twenty thousand .ducats'. Of
lte they have betn raised to forty thioufand.
e sI Recop. lib, iii. tit. ill. c. #,

THESE s~alaries, however, conflitute but a small B o o it

VHL.

part of the revenue enjoyed by the viceroys. The y
'exercife of an absolute authority extending to every
department of government, and the power of dif-
pofintg of many lucrative offices, afford them
inany opportunities of accumulating wealth. To
these, which may be considered as legal and allowed
emoluments, large sums are often added by ex-
adions, which in countries to far removed from
the f~eat of government, it is not easy to discover,
and impossible to restrain. By monopolizing some
branches of commerce, by a lucrative concern in
others, by conniving at the frauds of merchants,
a viceroy may rais~e such an annual revenue, as no
fubjeBt of any European monarch enjoys k. FTOID
the single article of presents made to him on the
anniversary of his Name-da~y (wvhich is always ob-
served as an high festival), I am informed that a
viceroy has been known to receive sixty thousand
pesos. According to a Spanish saying, the legal
revenues of a viceroy are known, his real profits
depend upon his opportunities and his conscience.
Sensible of this, the kings of Spain, as I have
formerly observed, grant a commiiron to their
viceroys only for a few years. This circumitance,
however, renders them often more rapacious, and
adds to the ingenuity and ardour wherewith they
labout to improve every moment of power which
they' know is hastening fast to a period; and fhlort

L See NO TE LXXV.

3 O O K as its duration is, it us~ually affords f~ufficient time

VIII. Sfor repairing a ihattered for tune, or for creating a

newv one. But even in situations so trying to hu·
man frailty, there are infitances of virtue that re-
mains unfeduced. In the year I772, the lVarquis
de Croix finilhed the term of his viceroyalty in
New Spain with unfufpeatcd integrity; and in-
flead of bringing home exorbitant wealth, returned
with the admiration and applause of a grate-
ful people, whom his government had rendered
happy.

N OTES

# NOTES AND ILLUSTRATIONS.

N93OTES

AND

ILLUSTRATION S.

AND

ILLUSTRATION S.

N O TE I. p. 1.

IN tracing the progress of the Spanilh arms in New

Spain, we have followed Cortes himself as our most
certain guide. His dispatches to the emperor contain a
minute account of his operations. But the unlettered
conqueror of Peru was incapable of relating his own ex-
ploits. Our information with refpeat to them, and other
tranfaations in Peru, is derived however from contemporary
anel relpe~table authors.

THE m011 early aCCOUnt Of PizarrO 3 tranfa~ti01s 111
Peru, was publilhed by Francisco de Xerez, his fecrertary.
It is a simple unadorned narrative, carried down no far-
ther than the death of Atahualpa, in '533 & for the authot
returned to Spain in !534, and soon after he landed,
printed at Seville his short Hillory of the Conqueit of
Peru, addressed to the emperor.

DoN PEDRO SANcuo, an officer who served under
Pizarro, drew up an account of his expedition, which was
tranilated into Italian by Ramufio, and insert~ed in his va-
luable colleaion, but has never been published in its ori-
ginal language. Sancho returned to Spain at the fame
time with Xerez. Great credit is due to what both these
authors relate concerning the progrels and operations of

Fizarro ;

NOTE

Pizarro; but the residence of the Spaniards in Peru had
been to thort, at the time when they left itr and their in-
tercourfe with the natives to slender, that their knowledge
of the Peruvian manners and cuffoms is very imperfell.

THE next contemporary hifforian is Pedro Cleza de

Leon, wh~o published his Cronica del Peru, at Seville, in
r553. If he had finiihed at. that he proposes in the ge.
neral division of his work, it would have been the most
complete hiflory which had been publilhed of any region
in the New World. He was well qualified to execute it,
having s~erved during seventeen years in America, and
having visited in person most of the provinces concerning
which he had occasion to write. But only the first part
of his Chronicle has been printed. It contains a deferip.-
tion of Peru, and several of the adjacent provinces, with
an account of the inflitutions and cuffoms of the natives,
and is written with so little art, and such an apparent re-
gard for truth, that one mull regret the loss of the other
parts of his work.

TuIS 100s is amply supplied by Don Auguffine Zarath,

who publiihed, in I555, his Hiftoria del Defcubrimiento
y Conquefta de la Provincia del Peru. Zarata was a man
of rank and education, and employed in Peru as comp-
troller-general of tl~e public revenue. His hiffory, whe·
ther we attend to iis matter or composition, is a bookt of
considerable merit; as he had an opportunity to be well in·
formed, and seems to have been inquisitive with refpe61to
the manners and tradfa~ions of the ~Peruvians, great credit
is due to his teffimony.

DoN DIEGO FERNANDEz published his Hilloriadel

Perul, in I57I. His fo!e objea is to relate the diffenflons
and civil wat's of the Spaniards in that empire. As he

served

served in a public flation in Peru, and was well acquainted
both with the country, and with the principal aators in
those singular scenes which he deferibes, as he poffeffed
found underflanding and great impartiality, his work may
beranked among those of the hifforians most diftinguilhed
for their induffry in research, or their capacity in judging
with refpeat to the events which they relate.

THE ]aft author who can be reckoned among the con-
temporary hillorians of the conquest of Peru, is Garci-
klaff de la Vega, Inca. For though the firlt part of his
work, intitled, Commlentarios Reales del Origen de los Incas
Rele del Peru, was not published sooner than the year
1609, feventy-fix years after the death of Atahualpa the
Idi emperor, yet as he was born in Peru, and was the
lon of an officer of diftinaion among the Spanish con-
querors, by a Coya, or lady of the royal race, on account
of which he. always took the name of Inca ; as he was
Inafer of the language spoken by the Incas, and ac-
quainted with the traditions of his countrymen, his au.
thority is rated very high, and often placed abovue that of
all the other hifforians. His work, however, is little
more than a commentary upon the Spanith writer~s of the
Peruvian flory, and composed of quotations taken from
the authors whom I have mentioned. 'I'his is the idea
which he hirplelf gives of it, Lib. i. c. 10. Nor is it in
the account of faAs only that he follows them servilely.
Even in explaining the inflitutions and rites of his an-
ceffors, his information seems not to be more perfe8t than
theirs. His explanation of the Quipos is almoff thle fame
with that of Acoffa. He produces no specimen of Peru-
vian poetry, but that wretched, one which he borrows
from Blas Valera, an early mifionary, whole memoirs
have never been publithed. Lib. ii. c. 15. As for com-
polition, arrangement, or a capacity of diftinguihing be-

Ig tween

twhen what is fabulous, what is probable, and what is
true, one searches for them in vain in the commentaries
of the Inca. His work, however, notwithilanding its
great defe61s, is not altogether defitiute of use. Some
traditions which he received from his countrymen are
preserved in it. His knowledge of the Peruvian language
has enlabled him to correat some errors of the Spanilh
writers, and he has inserted in it some curious falls, taken
from authors whole work~s were never publilhed, apdt bre
now 10fl.

NOTE: Ii. p. 7. ,.

ONE may form an idea both of the hardilps dlhicl

they endulred, and of the unhealthful climate in the'

regions which they visited, from the extraordinary mortal~t{r
that prevailed among them. Pizarro carried out xx2 inen;
Almagro 7o. In less than nine months r30 of these died.
Few fell by the sword; most of them were cot off by diF
e~ases. Kerez, p. I80.

THIS iflad, faysHerrera, is redered o umncmfo

able by the unwholefomenefs of its climate, its im.

penetrable woods, its rugged ~mountains, and the multi.
tude of infests and reptiles, that it is s~eldom any softer
epithet than that of infernal is employed in deferibing it.
The fun is almost never seen there, and throughout ·the
year it hardly ever ceases to rain. Dec. 3. lib. x. c. 3
Dampler touched at this island in the year 1685 I and his,
account of the climate is not more favourable. Vol. i.
p. 172. He, during his cruise on the coast, visited mob
of the places where Pizarro landed, and his defeription of
them throws light on the narrations of the early Spanidh
hiitorians.

i5 NOTE

N OT E IV. p. 29.

gY this time horses bad multiplied greatly in the Spanish

set~tlements on the continent. When Cortes began

his expedition in the y·ear 15r8, though his armament was
more considerable than that of Pizarro, and composed of
persons superior in rank to those who invaded Peru, he
could procure no more than sixteen horksa.

NO TE: V. p. 30.

IN the year 1740, D. Ant. Ulloa, and D. George Ju~an,
travelled from Guayquil to Motupe, by the Famle route
which Pizarro took. From the defeription of their jour-
ney, one may form an idea of the difficulty of his march.
Th~e Landy plains between St. Michael de Pieura and M/o-
tape extend 90 miles, without water, without a tree, a
plant, or any green thing, on a dreary firetch of burning
land. Voyage, tom. i. p* 399, &rc.

NOTE VI. p. 36.

THIS extravagant and unseasonable ~ifcourfe oF Val.

verde has been ced~ured by all hifforians, and with

juffice. But though he seems to have been an illiterate
and bigotted monk;, nowise resembling the good Olmedo,
who accompanied Cortes; the absurdity of his addrels to
Atahualpa muff not be charged wholly upon him. His
harangue is evidently a translation or paraphrase of that
form, concerted by a junto of Spanish divines and lawyers
in the year I509, for explaining the right of their king to
the lovereigntyr of the New World, and for dire61ing the
officers employed in America how they thould take pofrfef-
fron of any new country. See Vol. i. Note xxiii. The

VOL. III. B b sentiments

sentiments contained in Valverde's barangue mull not th~ei
be imputed to the bigotted imbecility of a particular man,
but to that of the age. But Gomara and Benzoni relate
one circumitance concerning Valverde, which, if authen-
tic, renders him an obje61, not of contempt only, but
of horror. They assert, that during -the whole a~tion,
Valverde continued to excite the soldiers to slaughter,
calling to them to firike the enemy, not with the edge,
but with the points of their [wvords. Gom. Cron. c. 113*
Benz. Hiffor. Nov. Orbis, lib. iii. c. 3. Such behaviour
was very different from that of the Roman Catholic clergy
in other parts of America, where they uniformly exerted
their influence to prote61 the Indians, and to moderate
the ferocity of their countrymen.

NOTE VII. p. 37*

r W O different iyfiems have beenl formed concerning

the condu61 of Atahualpa. The Spanish writers, in

order to juffif~r the violence of their countrymen, con-
tend, that all the Inca's profeffions of friendship were
feigned; and that his intention in agreeing to an inter-
view with Pizarro at Caxamalca, was to cut off him and
his followers at one blow; that for this Jiurpole he ad.
vanced with such a numerous body of attendants, who
had arms concealed under their garments to execute this
scheme. This is the account given by Xerez and Zarate,
and adopted by Herrera. But if it had been the plan of.
the Inca to dfitroy the Spaniards, one can hardly ima.
gine that he would have permitted them to march un·
molefied thlough the desert of Motupe, or have negleded
to defend the passes in the mountains, where they iight
have been attacked with so much advantage. If the Pe-
ruvians marched to Caxamalca with an intention to fall

upon

upon the Spaniards, it is inconceivable, that of so great a
body of men, prepared for aalion, not one thould attempt
to make refiltance, but all tamely fuffer themselves to be
butchered by an enemy whom they were armed to attack.
Atahualpa's mode of advancing to the interview, has the
afpe6 of a peaceable procemion, not of a military enter-
prize. He himself and his followers were, in their habits
of ceremony, preceded, as on days of solemnity, by un-
armed harbingers. Though rude nations are frequently
canning and false, yet, if a scheme of deception and
treachery muff be imputed either to a monarch, that had
no great reason to be alarmed at a visit from fIrangers
who solicited admifi~on into his prelence as frienlds, or to
an adventurer so daring, and so little scrupulous as Pizarro,
one cannot hesitate in determining where to fix the pre-
fumption of guilt. Even amidit the endeavours of the
Spanilh writers to palliate the proceedings of Pizarro,
one plainly perceives, that it was his intention, as well as
his interest, to seize the Inca, and that he had taken mea-
sores for that purpose previous to any ifupicion of that
monarch's designs.

GaxclLASSO DE LA VEGA, extremely iolicitous to
vindicate his countrymen, the Peruvians, fr-om the crime
of having concerted the defiru£ion of Pizarro and his fol-
lowers, and no less afraid to charge the Spaniards with
improper condu£1 towards the Inca, has framed another
fyfiem. He relates, that a man of majestic form, with
along beard, and garments reaching to the ground, hav-
ing appeared in a viflon to Viracocha, the eighth Inca, and
declared, that he was a child of the Sun, that monarch
built a temple in honour of this person, and erealed an
image of him, resembling as nearly as poirble the singular
form in which he had exhibited himlelf to his view. In·
this temple, divine honours were paid to him, by the

B b2 name

name of Viralcocha. P. i. lib;. iv. c. 21. lib. v. c. 22.
When the Spaniards firil appeared in Pern, the length of
their beards, and the drels they wore, firuck every per-
-son 10, much with their lIkeneifs to the image of Vira-
cocha, that they supposed them to be children of the
Sun, who had descended from heaven to earth. A)1 con-
cluded, that the fatal period of the Peruvian empire wnas
now approaching, andi that the thronle would be occupied
by new poffeffors. Atahualpa hims~elf, considering the
Spaniards as messengers from heaven, was 10 far from en.
tertaining any thoulghts of res~iling them, that he deter.
ruined to yield implicit obedience to their commanjds.
F~rom those sentiments flowed his profeffions of love ardd
refpe61. To those were owing the cordial receptid; of
Soto and Ferdinand Pizarro in his camp, and the ful-
rniffive reverence with which he himself advanced to1 (iTt
the Spanilh general in his quarters; but from the gross
ignorance of Philipillo, the interpreter, the dechration of
the Spaniards, and his answer to it, were to ill explained,
that by their mutual inability to comprehenld each other's
intentions, the fatal rencounter at Caxamalca, with all its
dreadful consequences, was occalloned.

IT is remarkable, that no traces of this fuperflitious

veneration of the Perovians for the Spaniards, are to be
found either in Xerez, or Sancho, or Zarate, previous
to the interview at Caxamalca; and yet the two former
served under Pizarro at that time, and the latter visited
Peru soon after the conquest. If either the Inca himlelf,
or his messengers, had addreiffd the Spaniards in thle
words which Garcilal~o puts in their mouths, they mtuff
have been firuck with such fulbmiihve declarations; and
~they would certainly have availed themselves of them to
accomplish their own designs with greater facility. Gar.
cilaffo himlelf, though his narrative of the intercourse be.

tw~een

tween the Inca and Spaniards, preceding the rencounter at
·Caxamalca, is founded on the supposition of his believing
them to ~be Viracochas, or divine beings, p. ii. lib. i.
c. zy, &ic. yet with his diual inattention and inaccuracy
be admits, in another place, that the Peruvians did not
recolle61 he resemblance between thecm and the god Vira-
cocha, until the fatal disasters rublequent to the dlefea~t
at Caxamalca, and then only began to call them Viral
cochas. P. i. lib. v. c. 21. This is confirmed by Her-
rera!, dec. 5. lib. ii. c. I2. In many different parts of
Aimerica, if we may believe the Spanish writers, their
countrymen were considered as divine beings who had de-
rfcended from Heaven. But in this inflance, as in many
which occur in the intercourse between nations whole
progress in refinement is very unequal, the ideas .0f those
who uled the expreflion were different from the ideas of
those who heard it. For such is theidiom of the Indian
hunguages, or such is the simplicity of those who Speak
them, that when they fee any thing with which they were
formlerly unacquainted, and of which they do not know
theorigin; they laiy, that it came down from Heaven.
Nugnez. Ram. iii. 327, C.

, THE account which I have given of the sentiments and
proceedings of the Peruvians, appears to be more natural
aqd confillent than either of the two preceding, and is
better supported by the fasts related by the contemporary
pitorians.

. AcCORDING to Xerez, p. 200, two thouland Peru-
vians were killed. Sancho makes the number of the slain
fix or seven thousand. Ram. iii. 274, D. i By Gar-
cilaffo's account, five thousand ivere massacred. P. ii.

ib .

. 5. The number which I have mentioned,

B b3 being

being the medium between the extremes, may probab~l
be neareRt the truth.

NO TE VIII. p. 39-

ry O T HI IN G can be a more fIriking proofof this, than

Sthat three Spaniards travelled from Caxamalca to

Cuzco. The diltance between them is fix hundred miles.
In every place throughout this great extent of country,
they were treated with all the honours which the Peru·
vians paid to their lovereigns, and even to their divinities.
Under pretext of amassing what was wanting for the ran-
fom of the Inca, they demanded the plates of gold with
which the walls of the Temple of the Sun in Cuzco were·
adorned; and though the priests were unwilling to alienate
those sacred ornaments, and the people ref ofd to violate
the thrine of their God, the three Spaniards, with their
own hands, robbedh the Temple of part of this valuable
treasure; and such was the reverence of the natives for
their persons, that though they beheld this aA of facri-
lege with affonifhment, they did not attempt to prevent or
diflurb the commission of it. Zarate, lib. ii. c. 6. Sancho
ap. Ramus. iii. 375, D.

NOTE IX, P-52*

CCORDING to Herrera, the spoil of Cuzco, after
setting apart the kin~g's ffth, was divided among 480

persons. Each received 4000 pesos. This amounts to
Is920,000 pesos. Dec. 5. lib. vi. c. 3. But as the ge-
neral, and other officers, were entitled to a share far
greater than that of the private men, the fum total muff
have risen much bey·ond what I have mentioned. G0.
m~ara, c. I23. and Zarate, lib. ii. c. 8. satisfy themselves

wuith

with ass~erting in general, that the plunder of Cuzco was
of greater value than the ransom of Atahualpa.

NOTE X. p.54.

SO expedition in the New World was conduaed with

more persevering courage than that of Alvarado, and

in none were greater hardships endured. Many of the
persons engaged in it were, like their leader, veterans
who had served under Cortes, inured to all the rigour of
American war. Such of my readers as have not an op-
portunity of peruling the firiking description of their sus-
ferings by Zarate or Herrera, may form some idea of the
nature of their march from the sea-coast to Quito, by
consulting the account which D. Ant. Ulloa gives of his
own journey in 1736, nearly in the fame route. Voy.
tom. i.p. I98, &c. or that of M. Bouguer, who pro-
ceeded froni Puerto Viejo, to Quito, by the fame road
which Alvarado took. He compares his own journey
with that of the Spanilh leader, and by the comparison,
gives a most firiking idea of the boldness and patience of
Alvarado, in forcing his way through so many obitacles.
Voyage du Perou, p. 28, &tc.

NOTE XI. p. 55*

A CC ORD ING to Herrera, there was entered on ac-

count of the king, in gold, I55>300 pesos, and 5400

markrs {each 8 ounces) of silver, besides several vessels and
ornaments, some of gold, and others of silver ; on account
of private persons, in gold 499,000 pelos, and 54,ooo
marks of silver. Dec* 5. lib. vi. c. 13-

NOTE XII. p. 65.

*PHE Peruvians not only imitated the military arts of the

Spaniards, but had recourse to devices of their own.

As the cavalry were the chief ozbje61 of their terror, they
endeavoured to render them incapable of adling, by means
df-a long thong with A fkone faitene'tl to each end. This,
when throwhi by i Ilkilful hand, tCwifted about· the horse
and its ri~der, and entangled them io as to obitru~t their mo-
tians. Herrera mentions this as an invenltion of ·their own.
Dec. 5. lIb. viii. c. 4. But as I have obferved,;vol. 11.
p. r'id, this weapon is~ common among several bayrbarous
tribes 'towar-8s t-~e -extremity of South America; aud yt is
'mmererobable, thit the Peruvians had observed The dex-
rerity with wthich they afied it in hunting, and on this oc-
cation adopted it themselves. The Spaniards were con-
fideralily annoyed by it. Herrera, ibid. · Another inflance
of te ingenuity of the Peruvians deserves mention. By
turning a river out of its channel,- tl~ey overflwedd a valley,
in wihich a body of the enemy was posted, so faddenly, that
it was with the utmost. diffculty the Spaniards made theiir
escape. H-errera, dec. 5. lib. vili. c. 5*

N:OTE, XIII. p. 85.

E R R ERA's accoulnt of Orellana's uoyage is the
moss minute, and apparently the snoff accuratte. It

was probably takren from the journal of Orellana hirdel~f.
But the dates are not diftinElly marked. His navigation
down the Cidca, or N'ape, ~begun early in Februat~y r54 I;
and he arrived at the mnouth of thle river on the 26th of
Auguff, having spent. near seven months in the voyage.
M. de la. ~Condalmine, in- the y·ear- 1743, failed front
Cuenca to Para, a settlement of the Portuguese at the

I8 mouth

mouth of the river, a navigation much Jonger than that of
Orellana, in lels than four months. Voyage, p. 79.
Bur the two adventurers were very differently provided
for the voyage. This hazardous undertakting, to which
ambition ,prompte~d Grellana, and to which the love of
fciecnce led M. de la Condauline, was undertaken in the
year r769> by Madame Godin des Odonais, from con-
jugal affealion. The .narrative of the hardships which
lhe fuffered, of the dangers to which she was exposed,
and of the diiafters which befel her, is one of the most
lingular and affedling flories in any language, exhibiting
th~ her condua a firiking piAure of the fortitude which
!diitnguithes the one sex, mingled with the sensibility and
·iender~riefs pecuiar to the other. Lettre de M. God~in, a
191. de la Condamnine.

*1.
1 NOTE XIV. p. 89.

HERRERA gives a firiking pi~ture of their indigence.

Twelve gentlemen, who had been officers of diftinc-

Zlon under Almagro, lodged in the fame hous~e, and hav-
ing but one cloak among them, it was worn alternately
by him who had occasion to appear in public, while the
reft, from the want of a decent dress, were obliged to
keep within doors. Their former friends and compa-
pions were so much afraid of giving offence to Pizarro,
that they durit not entertain or even converse with them.
Onle may conceive what was the condition, and what the
madignation of men once accuffomed to pow~er and -opu-
lence, when they felt rthemfelves poor and depilied, with-
out a roof under whrich to thlelter their heads, while they
beheld others, whole merit and services were not equal to)
theirs, living with splendour in fumnptuols- edifices.
Dec. 6. lib. viii, c. 6.

NO TE

NOTE XV. p. 103*

SE RR E R A whole accuracy entitles him to great cre-

dit, aftekrts, that Gonzalo Pizarro poffeffed domains

in the neighbourhood of Chuquefaca de la Plata, which
yielded him an annual revenue greater than that of the
archbilhop of Toledo, the best endowed fee in Europe.
Dec. 7. lib. vi. c. 3*

NOTE XVI. p. xx8.

ALL the Spaninh writers describe his march, andthe

diffreffes of both parties, very minutely. Zarate ob.

serves, that hardly any parallel to it occurs in hiflory,
either with refpe61 to the length of the retreat, or the
ardour of the pursuit. Pizarro, according to his compu.
tation, followed the viceroy upwards of three thousand
railes. Lib. v. c. 16. 26.

NOTE XVII. p. 133*

IT amounted, according to Fernandez, the bell informed

hillorian of that period, to one million four hundred

thous~and pesos. Lib. ii. c. 79.

NO TE XVIII. p. 135-

CARVAJAL, from the beginning, had been an ad.

vocate for an accommodation with Galca. Finding

Pizarro incapable of holding that bold course which he
originally fuggeited, he recommended to him a timely
fubmillion to his sovereign as the fafell measure. When
the prefident's offers were firit communicated to Carvajal,
" By our Lady (said he, in that fltrain of buffoonery
which was familiar to him) the priest iifies gracious bulls.
He gives them both good and cheap, let us not only ac·

cept

cept them, but wear them as reliques about our necks."
Pernandez, lib. ii. c. 63*

NOTE XIX. p. $z42

DURINGr the rebellion of Gonzalo Pizarro, fevetn

hundred men were killed in battle, and three hun-

dred and eighty were hanged or beheaded. Herrera,
dec. 8. lib. iv. c* 4. Above three hundred of there were
cut off by Carvajal. F'ernandez, lib. ii. c. 91. Zarate
makes the number of those put to a violent death five
hundred. Lib. vii. c. r.

NOTE XX. p. 15'.

IN my inquiries concerning the manners and policyr of

the Mexicans, I have received much information from
a large manuscript of Don Alonfo de Corita, one of the
judges in the Court of Audience of Mexico. In the
year '553, Philip II. in order to discover the mode
of levying tribute from his Indian fuibjeats, that would be
moll beneficial to the crown, and least opprefirve to them,
addressed a mandate to all the Courts of Audience in Ame-
Iica, enjoining them! to answer certain queries which he
proposed to them, concerning the ancient fonn of govern-
ment established among the various nations of Indians, and
the mode in which theyr had been accuffomed to pay taxes
to their kings or chiefs. In obedience to this mandate,
Corita, who had resided nineteen years in America, four-
teen of which he passed in New Spain, compoled the
work of which I have a copy. He acquaints his fove-
reign, that he had made it an objeEt during his residence
in America, and in all its provinces which he had visited,
to inquire diligently into the manners and cufforms of the
natives, that he had conversed for this purpole with many
aged and intelligent .Indians, and consulted leveral of the

'7 Spanish

Spanish ecclefiaitics, who underflood the Indian languages
Inoft perfeEtly, particularly fame of those who landed in
New Spain soon after the conquest. Corita appears to
be a man of some learning, and to have carried on his
inquiries with the diligence and accuracy 'to which he
pretends. Greater credit is due to his teffimony from
one circumltance. His work was n~ot compoied with a
view to publication, or in Aipport of any particular theory,
but contains simple, though full answers to queries pro·
posed to liim officiall~y. Though Herrera does not men-
tion him among the authors whom he had followed as
guides in his hiffory, I thould futppofe, from several fails
of which he takes notice, as well as from Several expref.
fions which he uses, that this memorial of Corita was not
unknown to him.

NOTE XXI. p. I164

THE early Spanilh wuriters were To hally and inaecte

rate in effimating the nlumbers of people in the pro-

v\inces and towns of America, that it is impollible to al-
certain that of Mexico itself with any~degree of precifio?.
Cortes describes the extent and populoufnels of M~exico in
general terms, which imply that it was not inferior to the
greatest cities in Europe. Gomara is more explicit, and
affirms, that there were 60,000 houles or families in
Mexico. Cron. c. 78. Herrera adopts his opinion,
D~ec. 2. lib. vii. c. 13, and the generality of wrriters fol-
low them implicitly without inquiry or scruple. Accord-
ing to this account, the inhabitants of Mexico mult
have been about 300,000. Torquemada, with his aual
propensity to the marvellous, asserts, that there were,a
hundred and twenty thousand houses or Families in Mexice,
and consequently about fix hundred thoufaud inhabitants.
L~ib. iii. c~z. 23 1ut in a,very judicious account of the

r ' Mex;'can

IMexican empire, by one of Cortes's officers, the population
is fixed at 60,000 people. Ramufio, iii, 309, A. Even
by this acqaunt, wh~ich p~robably is much nearer the trutly
than any of the foregoing, M/exico was a great city.

NOTE X;XII. p. 167.

TI is to P. Torribio de Benavente, that I am indebted
or this curious observation. Palafox, bilhop of Ciu-

dad de la Puebla Los Angeles, confirms and illuffiates it
more fully. The Mexican (say·s he) is the only language
in which a termnination indicating refpelt, fl~avas reveren-
f~ileqy yde cortefan, may be affixed to every word. By add-
ing the final syllable zin or azin to any word, it becomes
a proper exprefr~on of veneration in the mouth of an in-
ferior. If, in Fpeakiing to an equal, the word Father is
to be used, it is mta, but an inferior lays Tatzin. One
priest fpeakting to another, calls him Teopixque ; a person
of inferior rank calls him Teopixcattzin. The name of the
emperor who reigned when Cortes invaded Mexico, wars
Montezuma, but his v~assals, from reverence, pronounced
it 116ntrezumaozin. Torribio, MS. P'alaf. V~irtudes del
·Ibdio, p. 65. The Mexicans had not only reverential
houn8, but reverential verbs. The manner in whic)2
these are formed from the verbs in common use, is es-
plained by D. Jos. Aug. Aldama y Guevara in his Mexicahn
Grammar, NLo. I88. *

NOTE XXIII. P. >73*

FROM comparing Several par~ages in Corita and Her-

reia, we may colle61, ivith som~e degree of accuracy,

the various modes in which the Mexicans contributed tb.
wards thle support of government. Some persons of the
r: i o firik

brit order seem to have been exempted from the payment
of any tribute, and as their only duty to the public, were
bound to personal service in yvar, and to follow the banner
of their sovereign with their vassals. 2. The immediate
va~lfls of the crown were bound not chly to personal mill-
tary service, but paid a certain proportion of the produce of
their lands in kind. 3. Those who held offices ofhonour
or truss, paid a certain ihare of what they received in con.
sequence of holding theie, 4. Each Capull~e, or afocia.
tion, cultivated some part of the common field allotted to
it, for the behoof of the crown, and deposited the produce
in the royal granaries. 5. Some part of whatever was
brought to the public markets, whether fruits of the earth,
or the various produ~tions of their artists and manufac·
turers, was demanded for the public use, and the mer-
chants who paid this were exempted from every other tax.
6. The /l'ayeques, or ad/cripti glebd, were bound to culii.
vate certain diffridis in every province, which may be
considered as crown land~s, and brought the increase into
public florehoufes. Thus the sovereign received some
part of whatever was useful or valuable inl the country,
whether it was the natural prodution of the foil, or ac-
quired by the induffry of the people. What each contri--
buted towards the support of government, seems to have
been inconsiderable. Corita, in anfwver to one of the
queries put to the Audience of Mexico by Philip II. en-
deavours to effimate in money the value of what each citi-
zen might be fiuppofed to pay, and does not reckon it at
Inore than three or four reals, about eighteen pence or two
thillings a head.

NOTE XXIV. p. 74·

SO R TE $, who seems to have been as much allonithed

with this, as with any inflance of Mexsican ingenuity,

gives a particular defeription of it. Along one of the

cauleways,

cauleways, lays he, by which they enter thie city, are
conduffed two conduits, compoled of clay tempered~
with mortar, about two paces in breadth, and raises
about fix feet. In one of them is conveyed a fiream of
excellent water, as large as the body of a man, into the
centre of the city, and it supplies all the inhabitants plen-
tifully. The other is empty,· that when it is necessary·
to clean, or repair the former, the fiream of water may
be turned into it. As this conduit passes along two of
the bridges, where there are breaches in the causeway,
through which the salt-water of the lake flows, it is con-
veyed over them in pipes as large as the body of an ox,
then carried from the conduit to the remote quarters of
the city in canoes, and fold to the inhabitants. Relat.
aD. Iantuf 241, A.

NO TE XXV. p. 176.

1N the armoury of the royal palace of Madrid, are thewrn

faits of armour, which are called Montezuma's.

They are composed of thin Jacquered copper-plates. In
the opinion of very intelligent jtidges they are evidently
easter. The forms of the silver ornaments upon them,
reprelenting dragons, &tc. may be considered as a con-
firmation of this. They are infinitely superior in point of
workmanthip to any effort of American art. The -Spa-
niards probably received them from the Philippine islands.
The only unqueflionable [pechnen of Mexican art that I
know of in Great Britain, is a cup -of very fine gold,
which is said to have belonged to Montezuma. It weighs
5oz. 12dwt. Three drawings of it were exhibited to
the Society of Antiquaries, June I0, 1765. A man's
head is represented on this cup. On one fide the full face,
on the other the profile, on the third the back parts of the

head.

head. The relievo is said to have been produced by
punching the infiide of the cup, 10 as to make the repra.
fentation of a face on the outside. The features are gross,
but reprelented with lome degree of are, and certainly too
rude for Spanish workmanthip. This cup was purchased
by Edward earl of Orford, while he lay in the harbouir of
Cadia with the fleet under his commnand, and is now in
the poffeflion of his grandson, Lord Archer. I am indebted
for this information to myr refpeaable anld ingenious friend
Mr. Barrington.-IJn the sixth volume of the Archoologia,
p. To7, is publinhed an account of some mafkts of Terra
Cotta, brought from a burying ground on thie American
continent, about leventy miles fromn the Britilh lettlement
on th~e Mosquito thore. They are s~lid to be likenesses of
chiefs, or other eminent persons. From the defeription
and engravings of them, we have an additional proof of the'
imperfce a ate of arts among the Americans.

NOTE XXVI, p. 182.

T tE, learned reader will perceive how much lhave

been indebted, in this part of my work, to the gui-

dance of the bishop of Glouceller, who has traced the sue-
cellive fleps, by which the human mind advanced in this line
of its progrels, with much erudition, and greater ingenuity.
He is the firit, as far as I know, who formed a rational and
consistent theory concerning the various modes of writing
pra~tifed by nations, according to the various degrees of their
improvement. Div. Legation of Moses, iii. 69, &c.
Some important observations have been added by 10. le Pret
sident de Broffes, the learned and intelligent; author of the
Traiti de la Formation Mechanique des Languel, tom. i.
295, Soc.

As thle Mexican paintbi: Ure the moRt curious monu-

plents extant of ther t .Irei mode of w·riting, it will not
be improper to give some ;-ccount of th~e means by which
they were prelerved from thle general wrreck of ev~ery work
of art in Anoerica, and co~mmunicated to the Public. For
the moR early and complete colle~ioin of thiere publilhedf
by Puorcheas, we are indebted to the attenltion of thlat cul-
rious inquirer, Haklu;-t. Don Antonio Men~rdoza, vice-
isly of New Spain, hiaving deemned those painting~s a pro-
per present for Charis V. th~e thip n whi~ch th·ey wIe r
feat to. Sp~ain, was takesn by at Frenrch~ cruizer-, and they
came into thle poffetiion of Thievet, the king's g~eogr~apher,
wh~lo hraving travelled himfctif: into thle New Wiorl-d, and
deferibed one of its provinces, wvas a curiou~s obflerver of
whatev~er, tended to illuffrate thle manners of the Ame-
r-icans. On hris deathl, they were purchaledc by kInyr~!t,
at that timne chlaplain of thle Englidh amb~ailador to the
French court; and, beingq left by hlim to Pu~rchlas, wc~ere
published at thie delire of thle learned antiqua:ry Sir Hecnry
Spelmanr. Purchas, iii. Io65. Thefy were translated
from Enlglilh into French by Melchizedeck; Thevenot, and
published in hris colkcnion of voy:ages, A. D. I683*

THE second Ifpecimen of Mlexican pic?ure-wrriting, was
publilhed by Dr. Francis Gemelli Carreri, in two copperi
plites. The first is a map, or reprelentation of the pro-
grels of the ancient Mlexicans on their -firR arrival in tlhe
country, and of thle various flationis in whlich they fettled,
before they founded the capital of' their empire in the lak~e
of Mexico. The second is a Chronological Wheel, or
Circle, representing thle manner in which theyr computed
anid marked their cycle of fifty-two yecars. H-e receiv·ed
both from D~on Carlos de Siguenza y Corigorra, a diligent
colle610r of ancient Mexican documents. But as it seems
nOW to be a received opinion (founded, as far as I k~now,

VoL. III. C c en

on no good evidence) that Carreri was never out of Italy, and
that his famous Giro del M~undo is an account of a fkaitious'
voyage, I hlave not mentioned there pamntings in the text.
They have, however, manifeitly the appearance of being
Mexican produdions, and are allowed to be to by Bo.
turini, who was well qualified to determine whether they
were genuine or fuprlofititious. M. Clavigero, likewise,
admits them to be genuine paintings of the ancient Mexi-
cans. To me they always appeared to be so, though, from
my desire to reft no part of my narrative ulpon questionable
author~ityl, I did not refer to them. The flyle of painting
in the former is considerably more perfeRt than any other
s~pecimen of Mexican design ; but as the original is said to
have been much defaced by time, I fulpe8k that it has been
improvedl by fonte touches from the hand of an European
artist. Carrecri, Churchill, iv. p. 4S7. The chrono-
logical wheel is a juff delineation of the Mexican mode of
computing time, as des~cribed by Acoffa, lib. vi. c. 2.
It seems to resemble one which that Icarned Jesuit had
seen; and if it be admitted as a genuine monarnent, it
proves th~at thle M/exticans had artificial, or arbitrary cha-
raalers, whichl repres~ented several things besides numbers.
Each month is there represented by a ij mbof exprefiv~e
of some work or rite peculiar to it.

TIIE~ tilrl ic pecimen of Mexican painting was <lifoo.

vered by anothler Italian. In 1736, Lorenzo Boturini
Benaduci fct oult for New Spain, and was led by several
incidients to fludy the language of the Miexicans, and to
collee? th~e remains of their hillorical mlonuments. He
perfilled nine y'ears in his researches, with the enthufialm
of a proje~tor, and ;he patience of anl anltiquary. In 17i46,
hie publithetd at M~adr~id, Id'ea d· unar haeva Ifloria Genie-
~ral de~ la Ailerica Seplentionianl, containing an account of

*the Icfult of his inquries; and hie added to it a cataloguie

ds his American Hifforical Museum, arranged under
thirty-fix~ different heads. His idea of a New Hiffory
appears to me the work of a wyhimfical credulous man.
But his catalogue of Mexican maps, paintings, tribute-
rolls, calexidars, &tc. is much larger than one could have ex-
peated. Unfortunately a thip, in which he had sent a con-
fiderable part of them to Europe, was taken by an English
privateer during the war between Great Britain and Spain
wthich commenced in the year I739); and it is probable that
they perished by falling itato the hands of ignorant captors.
Boturini him lelf incurred the di fplea fu re of the Spanish court,
and died in an horpital at Madr~id. The hillory, of which
the Ide~a, &cc. was only a pro~pettus, was never publithed.
The remainder of his Muleum seems to have been dispersed.
Some part of it came into the poff~eflion of the prelent arch-
bilbop of Toledo, when he was primate of New Spain, and
he publilhed from it that curious tribute-roll which I have
mentioned.

THE only other collenion of Mexican paintings, as
far as I can learn, is in the Imperial Library at Vienna.
By order of their Imperial Majeflics, I have obtained such
a [pecimen of these as I desired, in eight paintings, made
with io mluch fidelity, that I am informed the copies could
hardly be diftinguiflhed from the originals. According to
a note in this Cidex Mclxi'canus, it appears to have been
a prelent from Emmanuel King9 of Portugal to Pope Cle-
hnent VII. who died A. D. r533. After passing through
the hands of several illuffrious proprietors, it fell into those
of the cardinal of Saxe-Eifenach, who presented it to the
emperor Leopold. These paintings are manifefily Mexi-
can, but they are in a style very different front any of the
formler. An engraving has been made of one of them, in
order to gratify such of my readers, as may deem this an
obje61 worthy of their attention. 1Vere it an obje61 of

C c 2 uLicient

iu~icient importance, it might, perhaps, be possible, by
recourse to th~e plates of Purchas, and the archbilhop of
Tokdo, as a key, to form plaulible conjeEtur~es concern-
ing the meanling of this piaure. Many of the figures are
ev·idently similar. A. A. are targets and darts, almoll
inl the flune formn with those published by Purchas, p. 1070,
107', S-c. B. B. are figures of temples, nearly resembling
.th~ose in P'urchlas, p. Ilc9 and II13, and in Lorenzana,
Plate II. C. is a bale of mantles, or cottory cloths, the
figure of whilch occurs in almnof every plate of Purchas
and Lorecnzana. E. E. E. feemns to be Miesican captails
in thecir war dress, the f'antallic ornaments of which re-
fcmble the figures in Purchas, p. In~o, unI, 2113- I
Thould fulppof~e this piaure to be a tribute-roll, as their
mode of noting numbers occurs freqluently. D. D.D.
&~c. According to Boturini, the mode of computation
by thle niumber of knots, was k~nown to the Mexicans as
wfell as to the Peruvians, p. 85. and the mannler in
which thle numnber of unlits is reprelented in the Mexican
painltings in my poffeflion, seems to confirm this opinion.
They plainly refemlble a ithing of k~nots on a cord or
slender rope.

SINcE I pub1ilhe7d the former EdItion, Mr.Waddi-

love, w·ho is still pleased to continue his friendly attention
to procure me informnation, has discov~ered, in the Library
of the Escurial, a volume in folio, codlilling of forty
theets of a kind of pafktboard, each the size of a common
theet of writing paper, with great variety of uncouth and
whimsical figures of Mlexican painting, inl very freth co-
lours, and with an explanation in Spanilh to most of
them. Th~e firlt twencrty-twfo theets are the signs of the
monlths, days, &c,. About the middle of each theet are
twro or more large figures for the month, surrounded by
thle signs of thle day's. The last eighteen thecets are not

tIf 1

f0 filled with figu~res. They seem to be signs of Deities,
and images of various objeAs. According to this Calen-
dar in thle Escurial, the M/exican year contained 286 days,
divided into 22 months of 13 day·s. Each day is repre-
fented by a dlifferent sign, ta!<en from some natural ob.-
jett, a serpent, a dog, a lizard, a reed, a houle, &tc.
Thle signs of days in the Calenldar of the Escur~ial are pre-
cifely the fame withl those mentioned by Boturini, Ideca,
&c. p. 45. But, if we may give credit to that Authour,
the Rlexican y~ear contained 360 days, divided into I8
months of 20 days. The order of dayis in everyr month
w~as computed, accor-ding to him, first by w'hat he calls
a ridiccennary progrelTion of day·s from one to thirteen, in
thle fame manner as in the Calendar of the Efcuirial, and
then by a septenary progreflion of days from onle to seven,
makting in all twenty. In this Calendar, not only the
signs whlich dilitnguilh each day, but thle qualiiies sup-
posed to be peculiar to each mopthl, are mark~ed. There
are certain wYeakneffes which seem to accomrpany the hu-
manl mind through every flage of its progress in oblerva-
tion andl science. Slender as was the knowledge of the
Mexicans in Allronomy·, it appears to have been already
conneaed with judicial Astrology. The fortune and cha-
ra61er-ol: persons born in each month are supposed to be
decjded by some sup~erior influence predominant at the
time of nativity. H-ence it is for-etoldl in the Calendar,
thlat all who are bornl in one month w'ili be rich, in an-
othler warlik~e, in a third l~uxurious, &~c. Th'le paftcboard,
or whatever fubilance it roav be on w~hichl th:e Calendar
in the Escurial is painted, fceems, by M~r. W-addilove's
description of it, to refembic nearly that in the Imperial
Library at Viennla. In felveral particulars, th~e figulres
bear fomre likeness to those in the plate whichl I hazve pub-
lined. The figures marked D. which induced me to
conje~ure, that thi; paintings mlighlt be a tribute-rill

C c 3~ similar

similar to there published by Pyrchas and the Archbilhop
of Toledo, Mr. Waddilove s~upposes to be signs of da~s ;
and I have fuchl confidence in the accuracy of his obfer-
vations, as to conclude his opinion to be well founded.
It appears, from the chara~ers in which the explanations
of the figures are written, that this curious monument of
Mexican art has been obtained, soon after the conquelt of
the Empire. It is singular that it thould never have been
unentioned by any Spanilh Author.

NOTE XXVII. p. I84.

SHE firfl was called, the Prince of the deathfulllance·;

the second, the Divider of Men * the third, the Shed-

der of Blood; the fourth, the Lor~d of the Dark-houle.
Acolla, Lib. vi. c. 25-

NTOTE XXVIII. p. 192.

THE Temple of Cholula, whrich wvas deemed more

holy than any in N~ew Spain, was likewise the molt

considerable. But it was not~hing more than amount of
solid ear~th. According to Torquemada, it was above a
quarter of a league in circuit at the base, and role to the
hcigh~t of for ty ftht~om. Mlon. Ind. Lib. iii. c. I9. Even
MI. Clavigero acknowledges that all the Mexican temples
were solid Rtruaures, or ear then mounts, and of confe
oulence cannot be considered as any evidenlce of their having
Inade any consider-able progrel's in the art of bujlding.
Clavigr. II. 207.

FROM infpe~ting various figLITCS Of temples 111 (11

paintings engraved byI Purchas, there seems to be rome
reason for fulfpeAing that all th~eir temples w1ere con-
)tru~ied inl the face rnanner. See Vol. iii. p. Itoq\
Ll10. 1413,

NOTE XXIX. p. 193*

NOT only in Tlafcala, and Tepeaca, but even in

Mexico itself, the houses of the people were mere

huts built with turf, or mud, or the branches of trees.
They were extremely low, and flight, and without any
furniture but a few earthen vess~els. Like the rudest In-
dians, several families resided under the fame roof, with-
out having any separate apartments. Herrera, Dec. 2.
lib. vii. c. 13. lib. x. c. 22. Dec. 3. lib. iv. c. 17.
Torquem. lib. iii, c. 23*

NOTE XXX. p. 193*

SAM informed by a person who resided long in Newv

Spain, and visited almost every province of it, that

there-is not, in all the extent of that vast emp~ire, any mo-
nument, or vellige of any building more ancient than
the conquell, nor of anly bridge or highway, except
some remains of the causeway from Guadaloupe to that
gate of Mexico by which Cortes entered the city. MIS.
penes me. The author of another account in manuifcript
oblerves, " That at this day there does not remain even
'the finalleft vestige of the exiffence of any· ancient Indian
building, public or private, either in Mexico or in any
province of New Spain. I have travelled, says he, through
all the countries adfjacen~t to them, viz, New Galicia,
New Bikcay, New lexuico, Sonora, Cinaloa, the Necw
Kingdom of Leon, and New Santandero, withoilt havr-
ing observed any monument w:orth notice, except some
ruins near an ancient village in the vralley de Caf/as
Grandes, in lat. N. 300. 46'. Irongit. 2j80. 24'. fromn
the island of Teneriffc, or 460 le: Zlues N. N. WV. from
11exico. He describes these: ruinsr mrinut1el\, and thley ap,-

C c peal

pear to be thle remains of a naltr!· building of turf and flone,
plafteredf ovtr wi:th wili.ee eartn or keer-. A Iil~ionary
informredl thatr genl*~l ·-n, that heu hat difcovereld thle ruins

of~~'

anohe edfie Gnir to thle fo~rmer, about anl handled.

lea7gues towards N. W onl thei banlks of the Rilver St,

Pedro. MS . peua m.

THESE· tehimionics d<1 vC great Credit from one CIr-

cumi~llnce, tha~t the~Y were' no:t given in fu;1·pat of any
part:ctylar jlydemn or rlheory!, but as finpl~,e aunfwers to que-
r~ies wYnich I hadl proposed. It is prob~able, howei~ver,
thiat wh-;~ri thlere gen~tlem:-i assert, thlat no3 ruinls or monul.
nIlents of anyv anlent: wol k wk.l.tevr ar~e nlow to be: dil-
cov·eled in thie ihiexican~ Enipire, theyi meant tl:at there
wiere no, such ruins or m~oluments as convcy-ed any· idea
of grande~ur or m~agnificence, in the work~ls ;f; its anicienlt

inhaitans. or it appears fromn tile tellimny o seer

Spanish au~thors, thajt in Otumb!a, Tibilea:aG~ Chaua, &c.
so~me ve3;ies of ancient bukings;77 aie s~lid v-'fibiC. Vi'la
Segnior Tn!eatro Aimer. p. r43- 308* 353. D. Fran".
Ant. Lorenzana, formecrly archbianop of hlexico, and
now of Toledo, in h~is intro~du ?lion to thlac ed:tion of thle
Cartas dz Relacion of Cortes, which he pubiifhed at
M/exico, mrenltions fons:e ruins whichl are fl;11 visible in
several of th~e towns th~rough wvhich Cortes pailed in his
way to the capital, p. 4, &c. But nieither of there au-
thors give anly defecription of them, andl they fcern to be
so very inconsiderable, as to lhow only) thlat fomre build-
ings had once bceen thlere. The large mount of earth at
Cholula, whiich the Spaniards dignified w~ith the name of
temple, Eil;l remains, bu~t withoult anyI fleps by wrhich to
ascend, or any facing of flone. It appears now lIke a
natural mount, cover-ed wlith grafrs anyli thrub~s, and pof-
sibly it was never any thinig mnore. Torq~uemn. lib. iii.
c. 19. I have received a minute deferi;ption of the re-
Inainls of a temnple near Cuernavaca, onl the road from

Mexico

Mexico to Acalpulco. It is composed of large Htones, fitted
to eachi other as nicely as thiofe in the buiidings of the
Peruvidlns, which a-c heredter rnentioned. At the foun-
datiob it for ms a square of 29- yards; but as it rise~s in
height, it diminiihes in extent, not gradual!y-, but by being
contra~ed fudldenly at regular difiances, io that it must
have refembkad the figure B in the plate. It terminated, it
is said, in a spire.

NOTE XXXI. p. 199.

HFE exaggeration of the Spanish hifforians, with re-
fpeR to the numbuer of human vi0.ims sacrificed in

Miexico, appears to be very great. According to Go-
mara, there was no year in which twenty thousand human
viahlns were not of~ered to the M/exican Divinities, and
in some y ears they amnounrted to fifty thousand. Cron.
c, 229. The skulls of those unhappy persons were ranged
in order in a biullding ere~ed for that purpoife, and two
ofCortes's officers who hadi counted them, informed Go-
mara .that their number .wyas a hundred and thirty-fix
thourand. 1bidl. c. 82. Herrera's account is still more in-
credible, that the number of viAims was 10 great, that
five thousand have been sacrificed in one day, nay, on
iome occasions, no less than twenty thousand. Dec. iii.
lib. ii. c. I6. Torquemada goes beyond both in extra-
vagance, for he asserts, that twenty thousand children, ex-
diufive of other viaimns, were slaughtered annually. Mon.
Ind. hb. vii. c. 21. The most refpe~9able authority in
favour of ~isch hlighl numbers is that ofilumurraga, thle firfL
bilhop of Miexico, who, in a letter to the chapter general
of his order, A. D. I63', asserts that the Mexicans facri-
ficed annually twenty thoufhnd viAimns. Davila. Teatro
EccleT. 126. In oppolition to all these accounts, B. de

las

las Cafas observes, that if there had been such an annual
waffe of the human species, the country could never havle
arrived at that degree of populousness, for which it was re-
markable when thle Spaniar~ds first landed there. This rea-
foning is just. If the number of viEtims in all the p ovinces
o P· \ Spain had been1 to great, nojt . y nuit popula-
tion hlave been preven·e? 'ro:-? inccatihg, but the hurnan
race muff have been exterminated in a thort time. For
besides ine walle of the species by fach numerous sacrifices,
it is oblervable that wherever the fate of captives taken in
war is either certain death or perpetual slavery, as men can
gain nothing by submitting ipeedily to an enemy, they al.
ways resist to the uttermost, and war becomes bloody and
deftwative to the last degree. Las Cafas positively aferts,
that the Mexicans never fadcrificed more than fifty or a hun-
dred persons in a y·ear. See his dispute with Sepulveda,
fubjoined to his Brev~ifima Relacion, p. 105. Cortes does
not specify what number of vi~tims was sacrificed an-
nually, but B. Diaz del Caftello relates, than an enquiry
having been made, with refipeEt to this, by the Francilcan
M/onks, who were sent into New Spain immediately after
the conquest, it was found that about two thousand five hwr
dred were sacrificed every year inl Mexico. C. 207,

NOTT XXII.p. 200.

IT is hardly necefrary to observe, that the Peruviarr

Chlronology Is not onlly -obscure, but repugnant to

conclulionls deduced from the moss accurate and extensive
observations, concerning the time that elaples during each
reign, in anyi given A~cceion of princes. The medium
hlas been found not to exceed twfenty years. A4ccording to
Acofla and Gar-ilatio de la Vega, Huana Capac, who
died about the yecar I527, was th~e tweclfthl Inca. Accord.

ing to this rule of computing the duration of the Peruvian
anonarchy ought not to have been reckoned above two
hundred and forty years; but they affirm that it had sub-
illed four hundred years. Acofta, lib. vi. c. 19. Vega,
lib. i. c. 9. By this account each reign is extended at a
medium to thirty-three y·ears, inflead of twenty, the num-
ber ascertained by Sir Isaac Newton's observations; but 10
imperfe8l were the Peruvian traditions, that though the
total is boldly mark~ed, the number of years in each reign
is unknown.

NOTE XXXIII. p. 208.

MANY of the early Spanish writers assert, thiat the

Peruvians offered humnan sacrifices. Xeres, p. 190·.

Zarate, lib. i.c. II. Acolla, lib. v. c. 9. But Garci-
aFfo de la Vega contends, that thoulgh this barbarous prac-
tice prevailed among their uncivilized anceffors, it wfas
totally abolished by the Incas, and thlat no human victim~
was ever offered in any temple of thle Sun. This affer-
tion, and the plaulible reasons with which hie confirms it,
are fufficient to refute the Spanilh writers, wh~ole accounts
seem to be founded entirely upon recpor~t, not upon w~hat
they themselves had oblerved. Vega, lib. ii. c. 4;. In
one of their feflivals, the Peruvians offered cakces of bread
molflened with blood dsawn fr~om thle armns, thle c!·e.
brows, and noses of th~eir chlildren. Id. lib. vii. c. 6. This
rite may have been derived from thieir ancient pra~tice, inl
their uncivilized slate, of sacrificing human vIic~ims.

NOTE XXXSIV. p. 214.

H EE Spaniards have adopeted both those cutoms of the
ancient Peruv~ians. Theylc hav·e preserved som-e of

the aquedu61s or canals, madle inl thle day.S of theC Incasc,

and

and have made new ones, by which they water every~ field
thlat thiey cultiv·ate. Ul10a Voyage, tom. i. 424, 477.
Tlheoy likecwife continue to ofe giuanp, or the dung of sea-
fowls, as manulre. Ulloa gives a description of the al-
molt increlible qulantity of it in the fmnall islands near
tle coaif. Ibid. 48 J.

NOTE SXXV. p. 216.

SH E: temple of Cayiam'ao, th~e palace of the Inca at

Calio in the p'iin of Lacatuinga, and that of Atun-

C~annar, are dc:'cribed by Ui~oa, tom. i. 286, &c. who
in pe-Ctc d th~em with great caret. MI. de Con~damine pub-
lified- a curious memoir concerning6 the ruins of Atun-
Cannar. Ab~m. de l'Academie de Berlin, A. D. 17-46,
p. 435. Aco~ia deferibes t;:e ruins of Cuzco, which he
had examin~ed. Lib. vi. c. 14. Garcilaii~o, in his dfual
itile, gives pompous and con!fused deficriptionls of several
temples, and otl~cr public edifices. L~ib. iii. c. i. c. 21.
lib. vi. c. 4. Don -- Zapata, in a large treatile con-
cerning Peru, whlich has not hithlerto been pubifhed, com.
municates some informatiion writh refp~ea to several monu-
ments of the ancient P-eruvians, wh~ichi have nlot been men-
tioned by other authors. MS~i. penrs me, Articulo xx.
Ulloa defecribes some of thle ancient Peruvian fortifica-
tions, whlich were likewise wvorks of great extent and foll-
dity·. Tom. i. 39;-. Three circumlalnces firuck all those
oblervers: the vast size of thle flones w-hichl the P'eruvians
employ·ed in some of their buihlingos. Acolla measured
one, whiich was thir-ty feet longJ, eigh~teen broad, an~d fix in
thicknels, and y·et, he acdds, that in thle for-tress at Cuzco,
there wtere flo~nes coniiderab~ly larger. It is difficult to
conceive howv the Pe~ruvians could mnove there, and raile
thlem to thle h~eight evenl of twelve feet. Th~e second cir-
comfiance is, the imperke~tion of the Peruvian art, when

applied

applied to working in timber. By the patience and perse-
rerance natural to Americans, stones may be formed into
any thape, merely by rubbing one againfl anothler, or by
the use of hatchets or other infiruments ma·!e of fbusec
but with such rude tools, little progress can be madle inl
carpentry. The Peruvians could not mortize twvo beamns
together·, or give any degree of union or fbilk~iy to anyr
work composed of timber. As they couldc not form
a centre, they were totally unlacquazinted with thie d~e of
arches in building, nor can the Spanish authiors conceive
how they were able to frainre a roof for th~ofc ample Itruc-
tures w~hich they: raised.

THF. third circumflance is a firik~ing proof, wh;Ich all
the monuments of the Peruvians fum·ithi, of their wantr
of ingenuity and invention, accompanied with patience
no less aflonilhing. Non~e of the flonles emplloyed inl tollue
works were formed into any particular or uniformh thape,
which could render them fit for being compa~rled together
in building. The Indians took them as they~ fell from the
mountains, or were raised out of th:e quarries. Some
were square, fomne triangular, fame convex, some concav·e.
Their art and induffry were emnployred in joining them to-
gether, by forming such hlollows in the one, as perfeBly
corresponded to the projei~tions or rilings in thle otxlc.r
This tedious operation, which might hav~e been 10 edly
abridged, by adapting the surface of the flones to edch
other, either by rubbing, or by their hatchets of copper,
would be deemed incredible, if it were not put beyond
doubt by infpe~ing the remains of those buildings. It
gives them a very singular appearance to an Fluropean
eye. There is no regular layer or firatum of buildinlg,
and no one stone resembles another in dimentions or form.
At the famne time, by the persevering, but ill-dire~led in-
duary of th:e Indians, they are all joined w-ith that mninute

nicety

nicety which I have mentioned. Ulloa made this oblerva.
tion concerning the form of the stones in the fortress of
Atun-Canuar. Voy. i. p. 387. Pineto gives a similar
description of the fortres~s of Cuzco, the most perse61 of all
the Peruvian works. Zapata MS. penes me. According to
M/. de Condamine, there were regular firata of building in
some parts of Atun-Cannar, which he remarks as singular,
and as a proof of some progress in improvement.

NOTE XXXVI. p. 420.

?H E appearance of those bridges, which bend with

their own weight, wave with the wind, and are con-

liderably agitated by the motion of every person wliopaffes
along them, is very frightful at firit. But the Spaniards
have found them to be the easiest mode of passing the tor-
rents in Peru, over wh~ich it would be difficult to throw
more solid itrublures either of stone or timber. They
form those hanging bridges to strong and broad, that
loaded mules pals alongit them. All the trade of Cuzca
is carried on by means of such a bridge over the river Apu-
rimac. Ulloa, tom. i. 358. A more simple contrivance
was employ~ed in paflingr inlaller itreams: A bgfket, in
which the traveller w~as placed, being f~ulpended from a
itrong rope firetched across the fiream, it was pulhed of
drawn from one fide to the other. Ibid.

NOTE XXXVII. p.23I*

Y information with refpelt to those events is taken
from Naoticia breve de la expedicion militar de So-

nora y Cinaloa, fu exito feliz, y vantojofo eflado, en que
por confeculentia de ello, fe ban pueffo ambas provincias,
published at Mexico, June rgth, 1771, in order to satisfy

22 the

the curiosity of the merchants, who had furnilbed the vice-
roy with money for defraying the expence of the arma-
ment. The copies of this Naticia are very rare in Ma-
drid; but I have obtained one, which has enabled me to
communicate there curious fats to the Public. Ace~prd-
ing to this account, there was found in the mine Yecorato
in Cinaloa, a grain of gold of twenty-two carats, which
weighed sixteen marks four ounces four ochavas; this was
lent to Spain1 as a pretfent fit for the king, and is now de-
polited in the roy·al cabinet at Madrid.

NOTE XXXVIII. p. 232*

THE uncertainty of geographers with refpen to this

pomnt is remarkable, for Cortes feemns to have f~ur-

veyed its coasts with great accuracy. The archbilhop of
Toledo has publish~ed, from the original, in the poffeflion
of the Marquis del Valle, the descendant of Cortes, a
map drawn in I54I, by the pilot Domingo Caffillo, in
which California is laid down as a peninsula, firetching
out nearly in the fame direaion which is now given to it
in the best maps, and the point where Rio Colorado en-
ters the gulf is marked with precision. Hist. de Neuva
Efpagna, 327*

NOTE XXXIX. p. 235-

IAM indebted for this f~a to MI. L'Abbe' Raynal,
tom. mi. I03. and upon consulting an intelligent per-

son, long fettled on the Mosquito thore, and who has been
engaged in the logwood trade, i finld that ingenious author
has been well informed. The logwood, cut near the town
of St. Francis of Campeachy, is of much better quality
than that on the other fide of Yucatan, and the English
trade in the Bay of Hlonduras is almost at an end.

NOTE

NOT~E XL. p. 254-

P.Torribio de Benevente, or Miotolinea, has enumerated

ten causes of the rapid depopulation of Mexuico, to

which he gives thle name of the 'Ten Plagues. Many of
th~ere are not peculiar to that province. I. The intro-
duoion of thle fmnall-pox. This disease was first brough~t
into New Spain in the year 1520o, by a negroe slave who
attended Narvaez in his expediltion against Cortes. Tor-
ri;bio affirins, that one half` of the people in the provinces,
v·iited with this diflemper, died. To this mortality occa-
fioned by the [mall-pox, Torquemada adds the deftruaive
effe~rs of two contagIous diftempers which raged in the
yecars r545 and. 1576. In the former 800,coo; in the
latter, above two millions perished, according to an exan
account taken by order of the viceroys. Mon. Ind. i. 642.
The finall-pox was not introduced into Peru for several
years after the invasion of the Spaniards, but there too that
diflemper proved very fatal to thle natives. Garcia Ori-
gen, p. 88. 2. The numbers w~ho were killed or died
of famine in their war with the Spaniards, particularly
(1uring thle siege of Mexico. 3. Thte great farnine that
followed af'ter the reduC'tion of M/exico, as all the people
engaged, either on one fide or other, had negle~ed the
cultivation of their lands. Somnething fimrilar to this hap-
pened in all thle other countries conquered by the ~Spa-
niards. 4. The grievous talks imnpofed by the Spaniards
upon the people belonging to their Repartimientos* 5. The
oppressive burden of taxes which they were unable to pay,
·and from which they could hope for no exemption. 6. The
numbers employed in colle6Ling the gold, carried down
by the torrents from the mountains, who were forced
fromn their own habitations, without any provision rnade
for their fubfillence, and labjeEled to all the rigour of cold

in those elevated regions. 7. The immense labour of re-
building Mexico, which Cortes urged on with fulch preci-
pitate ardour, as deflroy)ed an incredible number of people.
8. The number of people condemned to servitude, under
various pretexts, and employedl in workingo thle silver
mines. There, marked by each proprietor with a. hot
iron, like his cattle, were driven in herds to the moun-
tainls. The nature of thle labour to which they were sub-
jected there, thle noxiOLIS VapourS Of the mines, the cold-
ness of the climate, and fearcity of food, were to fatal,
that Torribio affirms, the country round several of those-
mines, particularly nlear Guaxago, was covered with~ dead
bodies, the air corrupted with~ their fiench, and 10 many
vultures, anld other voracious birds, hovered about for their
prey, that the fimn was darkened with their flight. 10. The
Spaniards, in the different expeditions which they under-
took, and by thle civil wars which they carried on, de-
firoyed many of the natives whom they compelled to serve
thern as Tarmemes, or carriers of burde~ns. This las1 mode
ofopprefiron was particularly ruinous to the P'eruvians.
From the number of Indians who perished in Gonzalo
P'izarro's expedition into thle countries to the eaff of the
Andes, one may form some idea of what they thffe~red in
timilar services, and how fast they were walled by them.
Torribio, MS. Corita in his Breve y Summaria Relacion,
illu~trates and confirms several of Torribio's obLervations,
to which he refers. MS. penes me.

NOTE XLL p. P255*

V EN Montesquieu has adopted this idea, lIb. viiL. c. i8.
But the patinon of thlat great man for ijyfiem, some-

times renderedl him inattentive to research; anld from his
capacity to refine, he was apt, in forue inflances, to over-
look obvious and just causes.

Vot. III. NOTE

N OT E XLII. p. 256.

A S TR ON G proof of this occurs in the tellament of

Isabella, where the dilcovers the moRt tender con-

cern for the humane and mild ulag~e of the Indians. Those
laudable Sentiments of the queen have been adopted into
the public law of Spain, and serve as the introdu~tion to
the regulations contained under the title of the good treat-
ment of the Indianls. Recopil. lib. vi. tit. x.

N O T E XLIII. p. 258*

IN the seventh Titl of the sirs book of the Recopilaion,

which contains the laws concerning the powers and

funalions of archbilhops and bishops, almoRt a third part
of them relates to what is incumbent upon them, as
guardians of the Indians, and points out the various me-
thods in which it is their duty to interpoie, in order to
defend themn from oppremron, either with refpe61 to their
persons or proper-ty. Not only do the laws commit to
them this honourable and humane office, but the eccle·
fiaftics of America a~tually exercise it.

IN NU M E RABL E proofs of this might be produced from

Spanilh authors. But I rat-her refer to Gage, as he was
not disposed to alcribe anty merit to the popilh clergy, to
which they were not fully entitled. Survey, p. 142, 192,
&cc. Henry Hawks, an English merchant, who resided
five years in New Spain, previous to the year 1572, gives
the fame favourable account of the popilh clergy. Hak-
luyt, iii. 466. By a law of Charles V. riot only bishops,
but other ecclefiaftics, are impowered to inform and ad-
monish the civil magiflrates, if any Indian is deprived of
his julk liberty and rights: Recop~ilac. lib. vi. tit. vi.

ley 14; and thus were conflituted legal prote~tors of the
Indians. Somie of thle Spanlilh eccleliatics refused to
,grant abfokitionl to lisch 0.the lir counltrymen as poffeffed
Encomiendans, and considered thle Indianls as fldires, or
employed them in workim;i their ninles. Gonrz. Davil.
T'eatro Eccles. i. I57·

NOTE XLIV. p. 259-

Ca C O RD IN to Gage, Ch~iapa dos Indlos contains
4000 famillies, and hie mnentions it onlly as one of the

largrft Inldicn towns in America, p. r04.

NOTE XLVf. p. 259*

]T is very diffiult to obtain an accurate account of thle

flare of population in th~ore kingdloms of Europe where

the police is most perfea, and where science has madle thle
greateit progrer~s. Inl Spanilh America, wh~ere knowledge
is flill in its infancy, and few men have ;,ifore to engage
in refearchles merely speculative, little attention hlas been
paid to this curious inqluir~.. But in1 thle year 1741, Philip
V. en~joinedl the viceroys and governlors of thle several pro-
vinces inl America, to make an a~tual farv~ey of the people
under their jurifdiaion, and to transmit a report concern-
ing their number and occupations. In consequence of
this order, the Conde de Fuen-Clara, viceroy of New
Spain, appointed D. Jos. Antonio de Villa Segnor y San-
thez, to execllte th~at commission in New Spainl. Frorn
the reports of the magiltrates in the several dillriAs, as
well as from h-is own oblervations, and long acquaintance
with most of the provinces, *Villa Segnor publilhed the
result of his inquiries in his Teatro Amler-icano. His re-
part, however, is imperffeE. Of the nine dioceles, into

D da which

tWrhich the Mexican empire has been divided, he has pub-
lifhed an account of five only, viz. the archbilhopric of
M~exico, the bilhoprics of Puebla de los Angeles, Mechoa-
can, Oaxaca, and Nova Galicia. The bilhoprics of Yu-
catan, Verapaz, Chiapa, and Guatimala, are entirely omit-
ted, though the two latter comprehend countries, in which
thle Indian race is more numerous than in any part of
New Spain. In his survey of the extensive diocele of
No0va Galicia, the situation of the different Indian villages
is deferibed, but he specifies the number of people only in
a imall part of it. The Indians of that extensive pro-
vince, in which the Spanish dominion is imperfealy efta-
blilhed, are not regiffered with the fame accuracy as in
other parts of New Spain. According to Villa Segnor, the
aaual slate of population its the five dioceles above mlen-
tioned is of Spaniards, negroes, mulattoes, and meftizos, in
the dioceles of

Families.

Miexico - - " 105,202
Los Angeles -- 30,600
Mechoacan - 30,840
Oaxtaca - - - 7,296
Nova Galicia - 6,770

J90, 08

At the rate of five to a family, the total number is 9553 54

Indian families in the diocese of Mexico I I9, rr
Los Angeles - 8,240
Mechoacan - - -· 36,196
Oaxaca -e - 44,222
N·lova Galicia - - 6,222,

294,39r

At the rate of five to a family, the total number is
l047T955. W~e may rely with g~reater certainty on this
computation of the .number of Indians, as it is taken from
the Ma~tricula, or regiffer, according to which the tribute
paid by them is colle~ied. As four diocefes of nine are
totally omitted, and in that of Nova Galicia the numbers
are imperfeEtly recorded, we may conclude, that the nurn-
ber of Indians in the Mexican empire exceeds two millions.

THE account of the number of Spaniards, &c. seems
not to be equally complete. Of many places, Villa Seg-
nor oblerves in general terms, that several Spaniards, ne-
groes, and people of mixed race, reside there, without
specifying their number. If, therefore, we make allow-
ance for there, and for all who relide in the four dioceles
emitted, the number of Spaniards, and of those of a
mixed race, may probably amount to a million and a half.
In some places, Villa Segnor diflinguifhes between Spa-
niards and the three inferior races of negroes, mulattoes,
and meltizos, and marks their number separately. But he
generally blends them together. But from the proportion
oblervable in those places, where the number of each is
marked, as well as from the account of the slate of popu-
lation in New Spain by other authors, it is manifelt that th~e
number of negroes and persons of a mixed race far exceeds
that of Spaniards. Perhaps the latter ought not to be
reck~oned above 500,000 to a million of the former.

DEFECTIVE as this account may be, I have not been
able to procure luch intelligence concerning the number
of people in Peru, as might enable me to form any con-
je~ture equally satisfying with refpeat to the degree of its
population. I have been informed, that in the yecar 176I,
the protellor of the Indians in the vicero!·aby of Per-u

D d3 computed

computed that 61 2/, r80 paid tribute to theki. AS all
females, and persons undlter age, are exempted from this
tax in Peru, thle total number of Indians ought, by that
account, to be 2,449g,120. M\S. penes mNe.

I SHAL.L mention another mode, by· which one may

compu~te, or at least form a gu~ess, concerning thle slate of
pocpulation in New Spain and P'eru. According to an ac-
cou~nt which I hlave reason to confider as accurate, the
numbler of copies of the bull of Cruzada, exported to Peru
on each new publication, is r,r7r,9)53; to Nrewe Spain
i,649>326. I am informed, thiat but few Indians pur-
chiafe: bulls, and that theyI are fold c&hiefly to, the Spanish in-
habitants, and those of mixed race, ·S0 th~at the number of
Spaniards, and peop~le of a mixed race, w~ill amount by this
mode of comrputation to at least thlree millionls.

THE number of inhabitants in many of thle owns in

Spanish America, may give us som~e idea of the exitent of
population, and correa the inlaccur-ate, but popular notion
entertained in Great Britain, concerning thle we~ak and
desolate slate of their colonies. The city of' Mexico con-
tains at least 150,000 people. It is remarkable that Tor-
quemada, whlo wrote his Aonarptuia Indiana about the
year 1612, reckons the inlhabitants of Mexico at that time
to be onlly 7000 Spaniards and 8000 Inrdians. Lib. iii.
c. 26. Puebla de los Angeles contains above 60,000 Spa-
niards, and people of a mixed race. Villa Segnor, p. 247·
Guadalaxtara conltains above 30,000, exclusive of In-
dians. Id. ii. 206. Limna contains 54,000. D. Cofme
Bueno Defcr. de Peru, 1964. Carthagena contains 2j,000.
Potofi contains 25>000. Bueno, 1967. Pop~ayan con-
tamns ·above 20,000. Ulloa, i. 287. Towns of a second
class are filll more numnerouls. ~The cities in thle mast

thlriving

thriving settlements of other European nations in America
cannot be compared with there.

Suc a are the detached accounts of the number of people
in several ,towns, which I found scattered in authors
whom I thought worthy of credit. But I have obtained
an enumeration of the inhabitants of the towns in the
province of Quito, on the accuracy of which I can rely;
and 1 communicate it to the Public, both to gratify curio-
lityr, and to reElify the miitaken notion which I have men-
tioned. St. Francis~co de Quito contains between 50 and
60,000 people of all the different races. Besides the city,
there are in the Corregimiento 29 curas or parithes effa-
blithed in the principal villages, each of which has smaller
hamlets depending upon it. The inha'Ditants of these are
molkly Indians and Meffizos. St. Juan de Paffo has be-
tween 6 and 8000 inhabitants, besides 27 dependent vil-
lages. St. Miguel de Ibarra 7000 citizens, and ten vil-
lages. the diffria of Havala between 18 and 20,000
people. The diffria of Tacunna between I0 and I2,000.
The diffriat of Ambato between 8 and 10,000, be-
sides x6 depending villages. The city of Riobamba be-
tween r6 and 20,000 inhabitants, and 9 depending vil-
lages. The diffria of Chimbo between 6 and 8000,
The city of Guyaquil from 16 to 20,000 inhabitants,
and 14· depending villages. The diffria of Atuall be-
tween 5 anld 6000, and 4. depending vilrages. The city
of Cuenza between 25j and 30,000 inhabitants, and 9
populous dependi~ng villages. The town of Laxa from
8 to I0,000 inhabitants, and 14 depending villages. This
degree of populat-ion, though slender, if we confider the
vast extent of the country, is far beyond what is com.
monly supposed. I have omitted to mention, in its pro-
per place, that Quito is the only province in Spanish

D d America

America that can be denominated a manufalluring coun.
try; hats, cotton fulufs, and coarfce woollen cloths, are
made thecre in such quantities, as to be fufticienlt not only
for thle consumption of the province, but to furnilh a con-
fidelrable article for exportation inlto other parts of Spanilh
America. 1 know not whether the unlcommon induffry
of this province tholuld be considered as the caule or the
effeEt of its populoulders. But among thle ostentatious
inhabitants of the New World, the pafiion for every
thing that comes from Europe is so violent, that I am in-
formed the manufa~tures of Quito are to much under-
valued, as to be on the decline.

NOTE XLV~I. p. 26C4.

HIESE are -efablilhed at the followving places. St.
Domingo in the isla~nd of Hispaniola, Mexico in

N~ew Spain, Lima in Peru, P'anama in Tierra Firmk,
Salntiago in Guatimala, Guadalaxara in Neir Galicia,
Sanlta Fe in the New K~ingdomn of Granada, La Plata in
thle country of Los Charcas, St. Francisco de Qdito,
St. Jago de Chili, Buenos Ay·res. To each of these are
libbjected several large provinces, and some to far re-
m~oved from the cities where the courts are fixued, that
they can deriv·e lIttle benefit f~rom their jurifdi~tion. The
Spanish w~riter~s commonly reckon up twelve courts of
Audience, but they include th~at of Manila in the Philip-
pine Islands.

N OT E XLVII. p. 272.

ON account of the dillance of Peru and Chili from

Spain, and the difficulty of carrying commodities of

thch bulk as wine and oil across the isthmus of Panama,
the Spaniards in those provinces have been permitted to

plant

plant vines and olives. But they are firiAly prohibited
from exporting wine or oil to any of the provinces on the
Pacific Ocean, which are inl such a ficuation as to receive
them from Spain. Riecop. lib. i. tit. xvii. 1. I5--18.

NOTE XLVIII. p.274.

H IS computation was made by Benzoni, A. D). I550,
lifty-eight years after the discovery of America. Hist.

N~ovi Orbis, lib. iii. c. 21. But as Benzoni wrote with
the spirit of a malcontent, disposed to detraa from the
Spaniards in ev·ery particular, it is probable that his cal-
calation is considerably too low.

NOTE XLIX. p. 275.

R Y information, with refpen to thle divilion and trant-

million of property in the Spanish colonies, is im-

perfe8t. Thle Spanish~ atithors do not explain this fully,
and have not perhaps attended fulficiently to the effec~s of
their own infitut~tions and laws. Solorzano de Jure Ind.
vol. ii. lib. ii. J. I6. explains in some Ipeafure the intro-
duaion of the tenure of M~ayorafgo, and mentions some
of its effeas. Villa Seg~nor takes notice of a singular con-
sequence of it. Hle oblerves, that in some of the best
situations in the city of Mlexico, a good deal of ground is
unoccupied, or covered only with the ruins of the houses
once ere~ted upon it; and adds, that as this ground is
held by right of Mayoraf~go, and cannot he alienated, that
desolation and thole ruins become perpetual. Theatr.
Amer. vol. i. P. 34.

N O TE L. p. 277.

HII- E R E is no law that excludes Creoles from offices
either civil or ecclefdiaic. On the contrary, there

are many C'edu~las which recommend the conferring
places of trust indiferbuilnately on the natives of Spain
and America. B3etancurt y Figueroa Derecho, &tc. p.
5, 6. B~ut notw~ithflanding foch repeated recommen-
dations, preferment in~almoft every line is conferred on
native Spaniards. A remarkable proof of this is pro-
ducedl by the au~thor last quoted. Fromn the discovery of
America to the year I637, three hundred and fixty-nine
bilhops, or archbithops, hlave been appointed to the different
dioceles in that country~, and of all that number only
twelve were Creoles, p. 40. This predileElion f'or Euro-
peans seems Hilil to continue. By a roy·al mandate, iifued
in 97i6, the chapter of the Cathedral of Mexico is dire61-
ed to nominate Eur-opean ecclefiaffics of known merit and
abilities, that the King may appoint them to supply· vacant
ben~efices. M~S. penes me.

NOTE LL. p. 283·

SO D E RA TE as this tribute m-y appear, ifch is thre
extreme poverty of the Indians in many provinces

of America, that the exafting of it is intolerably oppressive.
Pegna Itiner. par Parochos de Indios, p. I92*

NOTE LII. p. 284-

SN New Spain, on account of the extraordinary merit

and services of the Birit conquerorsS, as well as thle small

revenue arising from the country previous to the discovery
of the ruines of Sacatecas, the encomiendlas were giranted
for three, and sometimes for four lives. Recopil. lib. vi.

N OT E LIII. p. 285*

DAnt. Ulloa contends, that working in mines is not

*noxi~ous, and as a proof of this informs us, that

many Meffizos and Indians, who do not belong to any·
Repartimiento, voluntarily hire themselves as miners;
and several of thle Indians, when the legal term of their
service exipires, continue to work in the mines of choice,
Enrtretn. p. 265. But his opinion concerning the whole-
fomeners of this occupation is contrary to thle exrperience
of all ages; and wYherever men are allured by high wages,
they will engage in any species of labour, however fa-
tiguing or pernicious it may be. D. Hern. Carillo Alte-
mirano retlates a curious faEL incompatible with this
opinion. W~herever mines are wrought, says he, the num-
ber of Indiah~s decreases; but in the province of Cam-
peachy·, where there are no mines, the number of Indians
has increased more than a third since the conquest of Ame-
rica, though neither the foil nor climate be to favourable
as in Peru or Mexico. Colbert Colle61. In another
mernorial presented to Philip III. in the year I609, Cap-
tain Juan Gonzalez de Azevedo asserts, that in every
diffri61 of Peru, where the Indians are compelled to la-
bour in the mines, their numbers were reduced to the
half,,and in some places to the .third, of what it was
ander the viceroyalty of Don Fran. Toledo in 158r.
Colb. ColleBt.

NOTE LIV. p. 285.

AS labour of this kInd cannot be preferibed with legal

accuracy, the talks seem to be in a great measure

arbitrary, and like the s~ervices exvaEted by feudal superiors,
in uinea prato aut mefe, from their vassals, are extremely
burdensome, and often wantonly oppreflive. Pegna Itiner.
par Parochos de Indios.

2z NOTE

NTOTE LV. p. 286.

SH E turnl of service known in Peru by the name of

Mita, is called Tanda in New Spain. There it

continucs no longer than a week at a time. No person
is called to serve at a greater difiance from his habitation
than 24. miles. This arrangement is less oppreffivee to
the Indians than that eflablilhed in Peru. Memorial of
Hern. Carillo Altamirano. Colbert Colle61.

N OT E LVI. p. 288.

HKE firongeft proof of this may be deduced from the
laws themselves. By the multitude and variety of

regulations to prevent abuies, we may form an idea of
the number of abuses that prevail. Though the laws have,
wifely, provided that no Indian thall be obliged to serve
in any mine at a greater difiance from hris place of relidence
than thirty miles, we are informed in a memorial of D.
Hernan Carillo Altamnirano presented to the king, that the
Indians of Peru are often compelled to serve in mines at the
dillance of a hundred, a hundred and fifty, and even two
hundred leagues from their habitation. Colbert Colleft.
Mvany mines are situated in parts of the country·, so brar-
ren, and ito dillant from the ordinary habitations of the
Indians, that the necellity of procuring labourers to work
there, has obliged thle Spanish monarchs to dispense writh
their own regulations in s~everal inflances, and to permit
the viceroys to compel the people of more remote pro-
vinces to resort to thole mines. Efcalona Gazophyl.
Perub. lib. i. c. 16. But in juffice to them it thouldd be
observed, that they have been fludious to alleviate this
oppression as much as pof~ible, by enjoining thle viceroys
to employ every method, in order to induce the IndianS
to fettle in some part of the country adj'acent to the mines.
Id. ibid.

NOTE

NOTE LVII. p. 293·

TO RQU EM A DA, after a long enumeration, w-hich

has the appearance of accuracy, concludes the num-

ber of monasteries in N~ew Spain to be four hundred.
Mon. Ind. lib. xix. c. 32. The number of monasteries
in the city of Mexico alone was, in the year 1745, fifty-
five. Villa Segnor. Theat. Amer. i. 34. Ulloa reckons
up forty convents in Lima; and mentioning those for
nuns, he says, that a Small town might be peopled out of
them, the number of persons ihut up there is so great.
Voy. i. 429. Philip III. in a letter to the viceroy of
Peru, A. D. 1620, observes, that the number of con-
v~ents iix Lima was to great, that they covered more
ground than all the reft of the city. Solorz. lib. iii.
c. 23. n. 57. Lib. iii. c. 16. Torquem. lib. xy. c. 3*
The first monastery in New Spain was founded A. D.
I525, four years only after the conquest. Torq. lib. xy.
c. x6.

AcCORDIE;c to Gil Conzalez Davila, the complete

eltablilhment of the American church in all the Spaniih
fettlernents was, in the year 1649, x patriarch, 6 arch-
bilhops,' 32 bilhops, 346 prehends, 2 abbots, 5 roy·al
chaplains, 840 convents. Teatro Eclefaiatico de las
Ind. Occident. vol. i. Pref. When the order of Jesuits
was expelled from all the Spanish dominions, the colleges,
profepd houles, and refidencies, which it poff~effed in the
province of New Spain, were thirty, in Quito sixteen, in
th~e N~ew Kingdom of Granada thirteen, in Peru s~even-
teen, in Chili eighteen, in Paraguay eighteen; in all a
hundred and twelve. Colleccion General de Providencias
hafta acqui tomadas fobre eftranamento, &c. de la Com-·
pagnia, part i. p. 19. The number of Jesuits, prjiets

and

and novices in all there, amounted to 2245. MS.
penes me.

IN the year' 1644, the city of Mexico presented a peti-

tion to the king, prayinlg that no new monastery might
bie founded, and tnat the revenues of those already elta-
bliihed might be circumscribed, otherwise the religious
houles would soon acquire the property of the whole coun-
try. The petitioners requeit likewise, that the bilhops might
be laid under reffri~ions in conferring holy orders, as there
were at that time in New Spain above fix thlouland
clergymen without any living. Id. p. 16. There abules
muff have been enormous indeed, when the fuperflition
of American Spaniards was thocked, and induced to re-
monitrate againfl them.

NOTE LVIII. p. 297.

SH IS defeription of the manners of the Spanish clergy,

I sh~ould not have ventured to give, upon the tefti-

mony of protellant authors alone, as they may be fulpe~ed
of prejudice or exaggeration. Gage, in particular, who
had a better opportunity than any protellant, to view the
interior slate of Spanish America, des~cribes the corrup-
tion of the church which he had forraken, with to much
of the acrimony of a new convert, that I thould have dif-
truffed his evidence, though it communicates some very
curious and firiking fa~ts. But Benzoni mentions the
profligacy of ecclefiallics in America at a very early pe-
riod after their s~ettlement there. Hist. lib. ii. c. 19, 20.
M. Frezier, an intels gjent observer, and' zealous for his
own religion, paints the diffbolte manners of the Spanith
ecclefiallics in Pern, particularly the regulars, in fironger
colours than I have employed. Voy. p. 5 L* 2I5, &c.
Mv. Gentil confirms this account, Vo~y. i* 34. Correal

concurs

concurs with both, and adds many remark~able circum-
jfances. Voy. i. 6r. r55. 16r. I have good reason to
believe, that the manners of the regular clergy, particu-
larly in Peru, are flill exttremely indecent. A4cofia him-
self acknowledges that great corruption of mnanners had
been the consequence of permitting m~onk~s to forfakre the.
retiremnent and discipline of the cloister, and to mingle
again with the world, by undertaking the c~harge of the
Indian piarifhes. De procur. Ind. Sailute, lib. iv·. c. r3,
&tc. He mentions particularly those: vices, of which i
have taken notice, and considers the temptations to them
as 10 formidable, that he leans to the opinion of those who
hold that the regular clergy thould not be em!plotyed as
parish priests. Lib. v. c. 20. Even the advocates for
the regulars admit, that many and great enormities
abounded among' the monks of different orders, when set
free from the reffraint of monastic dilcipline; and from
the tone of their defence, one may conclude that the
charge brought aganint them was not deffitute of truth.
In the French colonies, the slate of the regular clergy is
nearly the fame as in the Spaniih settlements, and the
farne consequences have followed. M. Biet, superior of
the secular priests in Cayrenne, inquires with no less ap-
pearance of piety than of· candoxir, into the caules of this
corruption, and -imputes it chiefly to the exemption of
regulars from the jurifd lion and cedfures of their dio-
celans; to the temptatious to which they are exposed; and
to their engaging in commerce. Voy. p. 320 . It iS
remarkable that all the authors, who cent~ure the licen-
tioufnels of the Spanish regulars with the greatest fe~verityl,
concur in vindicating the condual of the Jesuits. Formed
under a dilcipline more perfec2 than that of the other mo-
naffic orders, or animated by that concern for the honour
of the society·, which takes. such full poffeffion of every
member of the order, the Jesuits,. both in Mexico and

Peru,

Peru, it is allowed, maintained a moss irreproachable de-
cency of manners. Frezier, 223. Gentdl, i. 34. The
fame praise is likewfife due to the bilhops and most of the
dignified clergy. Frez. ibid.

A VOLUME of the Gazeta de Mexiicp for the years

1728, 1729, 1730, having been communicated to me, I
find there a firiking confirmation of what I have advanced
concerning the [pirit of low illiberal fuperflition prevalent
in Spanish America. From the newspapers of any na-
tion, one may learn what are thle objec?s which chiefly
engrols its attention, and which appear to it most interest.
ing. The Gazette of Mexico is filled almost entirely with
accounts of religious funaionls, with descriptions of pro-
ceffions,, consecrations of churches, beatifications offaints,
feffivals, autos de si~, &tc. Civil or comlmercial affairs,
and even the tranfa~tions of Europe, occupy but a small
corner in this magazine of monthly intelligence. From
the titles of new books, which are regularly inserted inthis
Gazette, it appears that two-thirds of thiem are treatiles of
scholastic thleology, or of monkilh devotion.

NOTIE ·LIX. p. 297.

SOLORZANO, after mentioning the corrupt mora~ls
Sos some of the regular clergy, with that cautious re-

serve, which became a Spanish lay·man, in touching on
an fubjett to delicate; gives his opinion very explicitly,
and with much firmnels, against committing parochial
charges to monks. He produces the tellimony of leveral
refpe~able authors of his country, both divines and
lawyers, in confirmation of his opinion. De Jure Ind.
ii. lib. iii. c. 16. A Atriking proof of the alarm excited
by the attempt of the Prince d'Efquilacht to exclude the
regulars from parochial cures, is contained in the Col-

as bert

bert colleaion of papers. Several memorials were pre-
[ented to the king by the procurators for the monaffic
orders, and replies were made to there in name of the
secular clergy. An eager, and even rancorous, ipirit is
manifelt on both sides, in the condua of this dispute.

N O TE LX. p. 302.

NOT only the native Indians, but the Me//izos, or

children of a Spaniard and Indian, were originally

excluded from the priesthood, and refus~ed admii~on into
any religious order. But by a law ifibed Sept. 28th,
1588, Philip II. required the prelates of America to or-
dain such mellizos born in lawful wedtlock, as they
thould find to be properly qualified, and to permit thent
to take the vows in any monastery where they hadl gone
through a regular noviciate. Recopil. lib. i. tit. vii. 1. 7.
Some regard seems to have been paid to this law in New
Spain; bult non6 in Peru. Upon a representation of this
to Charles II. in the year 1697, he if~ued a new ediat
enforcing the observation of it, and profeifing his desire
to have all his fubjeats, Indians and meltizos as well as
Spaniards, admitted to the enjoyment of the fame privi-
leges. Such, however, was the aversion of the Spaniards
in America to the Indians, and their race, that this seems
to have produced little effe61; for, in toe year I725,
Philip V. was obliged to renew the injunEtion in a more
peremptory tone. But founfurmountable are the hatred
and contempt of the Indians among the Peruvian Spa.
niards, that the present king has been confirained to en-
force the former edias anew by a law, publilhed:l Septerw.
ber II, 1774. Real Cedula, MS. penes me..`

M. CL4.

VoL. III.

M. CLAVIGERo has contradiated what I have related

concerning the ecclefiallical slate of the Indians, particu.
larly their exclusion from the sacrament of the Eucharill, ait&~
from holy orders, either as Seculars or Regulars, in such a
manner as cannot fail to make a deep impreionl. He, from
his own knowledge, afterts, ** that in New Spain not only
are Indians permitted to partake of the sacrament of the
altar, but that Indian priests are To numerous that they may
be counted by hundreds ; and among there have been many
hundreds of reators, canons, and dodtors, and, as report
goes, even a very learned bishop. At present, there
are many priests, and not a few re~tors, among whomr
there have been three or four our own pupils." Vol. II.
348, &tc. I owe it therefore as a duty to the public, as
well as to myself, to confider each of there points with
care, and to explain the reasons which induced me to
adopt the opinion which I have published.

1 Kuzw that in the Christian church there is no dil.
tinaion of persons, but that men of every nation who
embrace the religion of Jesus, are equally entitled to
every Christian privilege which they are qualified to re.
ceive. I knew, likewise, that an opinion prevailed, not
only among most of the Spanilh laity fettled in America,
but among (* many ecclefiaftics, {I ulfe the words of
fierrera, Dec. ii. lib. ii. c. 15.) that the Indians were
stor perfdA or rational men, and were Inot polleffed of
such capacity as qualified them to partake of the sacrament
of th~e altar, or of any other benefit of our religion.", It
-was against this opinion that Las Cafas contended with
the lai~dable zeal wnhich I have deferibed in Books III. and
VI. But as the Bilhop of Darien, Do~ot Sepulvida,
and orther trepeaable eccleftiaics, vrigoroudly lupported the
comindn opinion concerning the incapacity of the Indians,

it became neceffatry, in order to determine the point, that
the authority of the Holy See thould be interposed; and
accordingly Paul III. illhed a bull A. D. 1537, in which,
after condemning the opinion of those who held that the
Indians, as being on a level with brute beasts, thould be
reduced to servitude, he declares, that they were really
men, and as such were capable of embracing the Chridtian
religion, and participating of all its blellings. My account
of this bull, notwithstanding the cavils of M. Clavigero,
muff appear just to every person who takes the trouble
of perusing it; and my account is the fame with that
adopted by Torquemada, lib. xvi. c. 25. an~d by Garcia,
Orig. P* 3rr. But even after this decirion, to low did
the Spaniards residing in America rate the capacity of the
natives, that the first council of Lima (I call it by that
name on the authority of the bell Spanish authors) dif-
countenanced the admission of Indians to the holy com-
munion. Torquem. lib. xvi. c. 20. In New Spain, the
exclusion of Indians from the sacrament was flill more ex-
plicit. Ibid. After two centuries have elapled, and not-
withitanding all the improvement that the Indians may be
supposed to have derived from their intercours~e with the
Spaniards during that period, we are informed by D. Ant.
Ulloa, that in Peru, where, as will appear in the sequel of
this note, they are fuppoled to be better inftrubled than
in New Spain, their igrporance is to prodigious that very
few are permitted to communicate, as being altogether
deltitute of the requisite capacity. Voy. L. 34', &c.
Solors;. Polit. Ind. I. 203-

Wrra refpe61 to the exclusion of Indians from the

priesthood, either as Seculars or Regulars, we may oblerve,
that while it continued to be the common opinion that the
natives of America, on account of their incapacity, phould

~Le 2 not

not be permiltted to partake of the holy sacrament, wte cani-
not suppose that they would be clothed with that sacred
chara~ter wrhich entitled them to consecrate and to dispense it.
When Torquemada composed his Manarquia Indiana, it
was almost a century after the conquest of New Spain, and
yet in his time, it wtas still the gener~al pra~tice to exclude
Indians from holy orders. Of this we have the moss
satisfying evidence. Torquemada having celebrated thle
vir~tues and graces of the Indians at great length, and with
all the complacency of a missionary,, he flarts as an ob-
je~ion to what he had asserted, '' If the Indians really
poff~er all the excellent qualities which you have deferibed,
why are they not permitted to afirume the religious habit i
Why are they not ordained priests and bish~ops, as the Jewvit
and Gentile converts were in the primitive church, efpeci-
ally as they might be employed with s~uch superior ad-
vantage to other persons in the initruation of their coun-
trymen ? Lib. xvii. c. I3-

IN answer to this objeation, which eliablifhes, in the

most unequivocal manner, what was the general pradice
at that period, Torquemada oblerves, that although by
their nlatural difpolitions the Indians are well fitted for a
subordinate situation, they are deffitute of all the qualities
requilite in any flation of dignity and authority; andthiat
they are in general so addiaed to drunkenness, that, upon
the slightest temptation, one cannot promile on their be-
havinlg with the decency fixitable to the clerical charader.
The propriety of excluding them from it, on there ac-
counts, was, he observed, 10 well jufftified by experience,
that when a foreigner of great erudition, who came from
Spain, condemned the praaice of the Mexican church,
he was convinced of his m~ilake in a public disputation
with the learned and most religious Father D. Juan de

Gaona,

Gaona, and his retra~tation is fillI extant. Torquemada,
indeed, acknowledges, as M. Clavigero observes, with
a degree of exultation, that, in his time, some Indians
had been admitted into monasteries; but, with the art of
a diiputant, he forgets to mention that Torquemada rpe-
cifies only two examples of this, and takes notice that in
both inflances those Indians had been admitted by millake.
Relying upon the authority of Torquemada with regard to
New Spain, and of Ulloa with regard to Peru, and con-
fidering the humiliating depreflion of the Indians in all the
Span~ih settlements, I concluded that they were not ad-
mitted into the ecclesiastical order, which is held in the
highest veneration all over the New Wlorld.

BUT when M. Clavigero, upon his own knowledge,

afTerted faEts to repugnant to the concidi~on I had ·formed,
I began to diffruff it, and to with for further information.
In order to obtain this, I app~lied to a Spanifhh nobleman,
high in office, and eminent for his abilities, who, on dif.
ferent occasions, has permitted me to have the honour and
benefit of corresponding with him. I have been favoured
with the following anfiver. (' What you have written
concerning th~e admillion ·of Indians into holy orders,
or into monasteries, in Book VIII. especially as it is
explained and limited in N~ote LXXXVIII, of the quarto
edition, is in general ticcurate, and conformabic to the au.
thorities which you quote. · A nd although the congre-
gation of the council resolved and declared, Feb. I3, A. D.
1682, that the circumitance of being an Indian, a mulatto,
or meffizo, did not difqlualify any person from being ad-
mitted into holy orders, if he was poff~effed of what is re-
quired by the canons to entitle him to that privilege; this
only proves such "ordinations to be legal and valid,
of which Solorzano, and the Spanish law~yers and hillorians

E e3 qu"oted

quoted by him, Pol. Ind. lib. ii. c. 29. were ped~uaded),
but it neither proves the propriety of admitting Indians
into holy orders, nor what was then the common prac-
tice, with refpeat to this , but, on the contrary, it fhewsr
that there was some doubt concerning the ordaining of In.
dians, and some repugnance to it.

(( SINJCE that time, there have been some examples of

admitting Indians into holy orders. We have now at
Madrid an aged priefl, a native of Tlalcala. His name is
D>. Juan Cerilo de Caffilla Aquibual catehutle, descended
of a Cazique converted to Chrillianity soon after the con-
quest. He fludied the ecclefiaffical kciences in a seminary
of Puebla de los Angeles. He was a candidate, never,
thelefs, for tenl years, and it required much interelt before
Bishop Abren would content to ordain him. This eccle.
flaftic is a man of unexceptionable chara~er, modest, self-
denied, and with a competent knowledge of what relates
to his clerical funalions. He came to Madrid above thirty-
four years ago, with'the sole view of soliciting admission
for the Indians into the colleges and seminaries in Newr
Spain, that if, after being well infirudted and tried, they
thould find an inclination ·to enter into the ecclefiallical
slate, they might embrace it, and perform its fusations
with the greateit benefit to their countrymen, whom they
could address in their native tongue. He has obtained va
rTious regulations favourable to his Scheme, particularly that
the firit college which became vacant in consequence of
the exclusion of the Jesuits, thould be set apart for this pur-
pole. But neither thele regulations, nor many limilar
ones inserted in the laws of the Indies, has produced any
effeA, on account of objehions and reprelentations from
the greater part of persons of chief consideration employed
in New Spain., Whether their oppoiition be well founded

cr not, is a problem difficult to resolve, and towards the
solution of which, several diftindions and modifications are
requisite.

cc AcconowcG to the accounts of this ecclefiaffic, and

the information of other persons who have resided in the
Spanih dominions in America, you may reft assured that
in the kingdom of Tierra Firm4 no such thing is known as
either an Indian secular priest or monk; and that in New
Spain there are very few eccleefiaics of Indian race. In
Peru, perhaps, the number may be greater, .as in that coun·-
try there are more Indians who polfefs the means of ac-
quiring such a learned education as is necessary .for persons
wvho aspire to the clerical charader."

N OT E LXI* P* 306.

IZTARIZ, an accurate and cautious calculator, seems

to admit, that the quantity of fiver which does not

pay duty may be slated thus high. According to Herrera,
there was not above a third of what was extra~ed from
Potofi that paid the king's fifth. Dec. viii. lib. ii. c. I5-
Solorzano aiferts likewise, that ~the quantity of silv~er
which is fraudulently circulated, is far greater than that
which is regularly flamped, after paying the fifth. De
Ind. Jure, vol. ii, lib. v. p. 846.

NOTE LXII. p. gro.

1THEN the mines of Potofi were dilcovered in the.

year I545, the veins were to near the surface, that

the ore was calily extra~ted, and to rich that it was re-

E e fined

fined with little trouble and at a small expence, merely by
the a~tion of fire. This simple mode of refininlg by fusion
alone continued until the year I574, when the ule of rner-
cury in refinling silver, as well as gold, was dilcovered.
Those mines having been wrought without interruption for
two centuries, the veins are now funk so deep, that the
excpence of extra~ting the ore is greatly increased. Be-
sides this, the richners of the ore, contrary to what hap-
pens in most other mines, has become less, as the vein
continued to dip. The vein has likewise diminished to such
a degree, that one is amazed that the Spaniards thould
persist in working it. Other rich mines have been fuc-
ceffivelyy discovered, but in general the value of the ores
has decreased to much, while the expence of extracting
them has augmented, that the court of Spain, in the
year 1736, reduced the duty payable to the king from
a fifth to a tenth. All the quicksilver used in Pemu, is ex-
traEted from the famous mine of Guancabelica, dilcovered
in the year 1563. The crown has reserved the property
of this mine to itself , and the persons who purchase the
quicksilver, pay not only the price of it, but likewise a
Jffth, as a uty to the king. But, in the year 196r, this
duty on quicksilver was abolished, on account of the in-
crease of expence· in working mines. Ulloa, Entretenli-
mientos, xii.--xy. Voyage, i. p. 505, 523. In confe.
quence of this abolition of thle ffth, and fame subsequent
abatements of price, which became necessary on account
of the increasing expence of working mines, quicksilver,
which was formerly fold at eighty pesos the quintal, is now
delivered by the king at the rate of sixty pesos. Campo-
manes Educ. Popul. ii. 132, Note. The duty on gold
is reduced to a twentieth, or five per cent, Any of my
readers, who are desirous of being acquainted with the
mode in which the Spaniards conduat the working of
their mines, and the refinement of the'ore, will find an

accurate

accurate description of the ancient method by Acolla.
Lib. iv. c. 1-13. And of their more recent improve-
ments in the metallurgic art, by Gamboa Comment. a las
ordenanz. de minas, c. 22.

NOTE LXIII. p. 3I3-

MANY remarkable proofs occur of the advanced slate

of mnduffry in Spain, at the beginning of the fix-

teenth century. The number of cities in Spain was con-
fiderable, and they were peopled far beyond the propor-
tion that was common in other parts of Europe. The
caules of this I have explained, Hist. of Cha. V. i. I58.
Wherever cities are populous, that [pecies of induffry
which is peculiar to them increases, artificers and manu-
fa~lurers abound. The effea of the American trade in
giving aaivity to these is manifest, from a singular faat.
In the year I545, while Spain continued to depend on its
own induffry, for the supply of its colonies, so much
work was bespoke from the manufa~urers, that it was
supposed they could hardly fininh it in less than fix years.
Campom, i. 406. Such a demand muff have put much
induffry in motion, agnd have excited extraordinary es.
forts. Accordingly, we are informed, that in the begin-
ning of Philip II.'s reign, the city of Seville alone, where
the trade with America centered, gave ~employment to
no fewer than I6,000 looms in silk or woollen work, and
that above I30,000 persons had occupation in carrying on
there manufaatures. Campom, ii. 472. But 10 rapid and
pernicious was the operation of the causes which I thall
enumerate, that before Philip III. ended his reign, the
looms in Sevills were reduced to 400. Uztariz, c, 7,

SINds

Sincs the publication of the firlt edition, Zhave the

fatisfa~ion to find my ideas concerning the early com-
mercial intercourse~ between Spain and her colonies con-
firmed and illuffrated by D. Bernardo Ward, of the Junts
de Comercio at Madrid, in his PfroElo Economico, Partii.
c. i. " Under the reigns of Charles V. and Philip 11." [ays
he, " the manufadures of Spain and of the Low Conn.
tries fubjeat to her dominion were in a most flourilhing
slate. Those of France and England were in their in-
fancy. The republic of the United Provinces did not then
exist. No European power but Spain had colonies of any
value in the New World. Spain could supply her fettle.
ments there with the produ~ions of her own foil, the fa.
brics wrought by the hands of her own a'rtizans, and all
Ihe received in return for there belonged to herself alone.
Then the exclusion of foreign manufaaures was proper, be.
caule it might be rendered effe~tual. Then Spain might
lay heavy duties upon goods exported to America, or
imported from it, and might impole what relhraints the
deemed proper upon a commerce enidrely in her own
hands. But when time and AucceiTve revolutions had oc.
cationed an alteration in all those circumilances, when the
inanufaaures of Spain began to decline, and the demands
of America were supplied by foreign fabrics, the original
maxims and regulations of Spain ~Flould have been accom.
modated to the changt in her situation. The policy that
walrs wife at one period, became absurd in the other."

NOTE LXIV. p.322*

NO bale of goods is ever opened, no chelt of treature

is examined. Both are received on the credit of the

persons to whom they belong; and only one initance of

ag fraud

fraud isfacorded, during the long period in which trade
was carried on with this liberal confidence. All the
coined silver which was brought from Peru to Porto-bello
in the year z654, was found to be adulterated, and to be
mingled with a fifthl part of base metal. The Spanilh
merchants, with femtiments suitable to their usual inte-
grity, fullained the whole loss, and indemnified the so.
reigners, by whom they were employed. The fraud was
dete~ted, and the treaturer of the revenue in Peru, the
author of it, was publicly burnt. B. Ulloa Retablif. de
Manut &c. liv. ii. p. Ioz.

NOTE LXV. p. 327*

SANY firiking proofs occur of the fearcity of money

in Spain. Of all the immense sams which have

been imported from America, the amount of which I
shall afterwards have occaffon to mention, Moncada as.
ferts that there did not remain in Spain, in I619, above
two hundred millions of pe/os, one half in coined money,
the other in plate and jewels. Refiaur. de Efpagna, Dife.
iii. c. r. Uztariz, who published his valuable work in
7924', contends, that in money, plate, and jewels, there
did not remain a hundred million. Theor. &cc. c. 3.
Campomanes, on the authority of a remonfirance from the
community of merchants in Toledo to Philip III. relates, as
a celrain proof how fearce cash had become, that persons
who lent money, received a third part of the fum which
they advanced as interest and premium. Edue, Popul.

NOTE LXVI. p. 330.

SHE account of the mode in which the faators of the

South Sea company condu~ted the trade in the fair

of Porto-bello, which was opened to them by the Afiento,
I have taken from Don Dion. Alcedo y Herrera, prefi-
dent of the court of Audience in Quito, and governor of
that province. Don Dionyfio was a person of such a re-
fpe~table charaaer for probity and dikcernment, that his
teffimony, in any point, would be of much weight; but
greater credit is due to it in this cale, as he was an eye-
witnels of the tranfa~tions which he relates, and was often
employed in deteating and authenticating the frauds which
he describes. It is probable, however, that his repre-
f~entation, being composed at the commencement of the
war which broke out between Great Britain and Spain, in
the year 1739, may, in some inflances, dilcover a por-
tion of the acrimonious [pirit, natural at that junalure.
His detail of faats is curious; and even English authors
confirm it in some degree, by admitting both that va-
rious frauds were pra~tifed in the tranfaaions of the an-
nual thip, and that the contraband trade from Jamaica,
and other British colonies, was become enormously great.
But for the credit of the English nation it may be ob-
served, that those fraudulent operations are not to be
considered as deeds of the company, but as the dilhonour-
able arts of their faators and agents. The company itself
failained a considerable loss by the Alliento trade, Many
of its servants acquired immense fortunes. Andredion
Chronol. dedua. ii. 388.

NOTE LXVII. p. 337*·

SEV E RAL fa61s with refpeit to the inflitution, thle

progrers, and the effeats, of this comrpany, are co-

rious, and but little known to English readers. Though
the province of Venezuela, or Caraccas, extends four
hundred miles along the coaff, and is one of the most
fertile in America; it was to much negle~ed by the
Spaniards, that during the twenty years prior to the efta-
blifhment of the company, only five ihips failed from
Spain to that province; and during r6 years, from 1906
to If22, not a fimgle filip arniVed from the Caraccas in
Spain. Noticias de Real Compania de Caraccas, p. 28.
During this period Spain must have been supplied al-
moss entirely with the large quantity of cacao, which it
consumes, by foreigners. Before the ereltion of the
company, neither tobacco nor hides were imported from
Caraccas into Spain. Id. p. ri1. Since the commercial
operations of the company began in the year 173', the
importation of cacao into Spain has increased amazingly.
During thirty years subsequent to 170I, the number of
Fanegas of cacao (each a hundred and ten pounds) im-
ported from Caraccas, was 643,2'5. During eighteen
years subsequent to I73r, the number of F~anegas imn-
ported was 8169,247; and if we suppose the importation
to be continued in the fame proportion during the re..
mainder of thirty years, it will amount to 1,448,746 Fa-,
negas, which is an increase of 805>53' Fanegas. Id.
p. I48. During eight years s~ubsequent to 1756, there
has been imported into Spain by the Company, 88,482
arrobas (each twenty-five pounds.) of tobacco; and hides
to the number of I77,354. Id. '6I. Since the publisa-
tion of the Noticias de Campania, in 1763, its trade seems
to be on the increase. During five years fublequent to

x769,

r769, it has imported I79,156 Fanegas of cacao into
Spain, 36,208 arrobas of tobacco, 75,496 hides, and
22I,432 peosin fnpecie. Campomanes, ii. 162. The laE
article is a proof of the growing wealth of the colony.
It receives calh from Mexico in return for the cacao,
with which it supplies that province, and this it remits to
Spain, or lays out in purchasing European goods. But,
besides this, the most explicit evidence is produced, that
the quantity of cacao railed in the province is double to
what it yielded in z73I; the nurnber of its live flock is
more than treble, and its inhabitants much augmented.
The revenue of the bilhop, which arises wholly from
tythes, has increased from eight to twenty thousand pesos.
Notic. p. 69. In consequence of the augmentation of
the quantity of cacao imported into Spain, its price has
<1ecreated from eighty pesos for the fanega to forty. Id.
61. Since the publication of the firit edition, I have
learned that Guyana, including all the extensive pro.
vinces situated on the banks of the Orinoco, the islands
of Trinidad and Margarita are added to the countries
with which the company of Caraccas had liberty of trade
by their former charters. Real Cedula, Nov. I9, r196.
But I have likewise been informed, that the institution
of this company has not been attr ded with all the bene-
ficial effe£1s which I have alcribed to it. In many of its
operations the illiberal and oppreflive spirit of monopoly
is flil conspicuous. But in order to explain this, it would
be necessary to enter into minute details, which Bre not
fa~ited to the nature of this work.

NOTE LXVIII. p. 344*

SHIS sirs experiment made by Spain of opening a free

trade with any of her colonies, has produced effe8s

tso remarkiable, as to merit some farther illultration. The

t0WR8

towns to which this liberty has been granted, are Cadia
and Seville, for the province of Andalutia; Alicant and
Carthagena, for Valencia and Murcia 4 Barcelona, for
Catalonia and Arragon; Santander, for Caitile; Co-
rugna, for Galicia; and Gijon, for Alburias. Append. ii.
i la Educ. Popul. p. 41. There are eithet the ports of
chief trade in their refpedtive diti~tis, or tholk most con-
veniently lituated for the exportation of their refpeative
produ~ions. The following fa~ts give a view of the in-
crease of trade in the settlements to which the new re-
gulations extend. Prior to the allowance of free trade,
the duties colleaed in the cuftom-hodfe at the Havannah
were computed to be Jo4,2o8 pesos annually. During
the five years preceding '774, they role at a medium to
308,000 pelos a year. In Yucatan, the duties have arisen
from 8,000to z5,ooo. In Hilpaniola, from 2,500 to
j,600. In Porto-Rico, from -Ipoo to 7,ooo. The tot
tal value of goods imported from Cuba into Spain, was
reckoned, in r774, to be r,500J000 peros. Edue,.
Popul. i. 450 &c.

NOTE LXIX* P* 350.

SH E two Treatises of Don Pedro Rodriguez Campo.

manes, Afcaldel real confejo y Supremo (an of Iice in

rank and powner nearly limilar to that of Attorney G~ene-
ral in England), and Dire~tor of the Royal Academy of
Hiltory, the one intitled Dilcurfo fobre el Fomento de la
Induffria Popular; the other, (Difcurfo fobre la Educa.
clon Popular de los Artefanos y fu Fomento; the former
publimhed in r7~74 and the latter in I775, afford a firik-
ing proof of ·this. Almost tvery point of importatce
wvith refpea to interior police, taxation, agriculture, ana-
taufidtures, and trader domeltic as well as foreign, is exar

ruined

Inined in the course o'f there works; and there a-re not
many authors, even in the nations most eminent for com-
mercial knowledge, who have carried on their enquiri~es
with a more thorough knowledge of those various lab-
jeas, and a more perfe8t freedom from vulgar and na-
tional prejudices, or who have. united more hlappily the
calm researches of philosophy, with th~e ardent zeal of a
public-fpirited citizen. There books are inl high effima-
tion among the Spaniards, and it is a decisive evidence of
the progress of their own ideas, that they are capable of
relishing an author whole sentiments are so liberal.

NOTE LXX. p. 355.

SH E galeon employed in that trade, initead of the fil

hundred tons, to which it is limited by law, Recop.

lib. xlv. 1. 15. is commonly fromt twelve hundred to
two thousand tons bdurden. The (hip from Acapulco,
taken by Lord Anson, initead of the 500,000 pesos per-
Initted by law, had on board I,3'3,843 pesos, besides unl
coined silver equal in value to 43,6rr pesos more. An-
fon's Voyage, 384.

NOTE LXXI. p. ggy.

THE price paid for the bull varies accord:ng to the

rank of different persons. Those in the lowest order,

who are servants or slaves, pay two reals of plate, or one
shilling; other Spaniards pay eight reals, and those in
public office, or who hold encomiendas, sixteen reals.
Solorz. de Jure Ind. vol. ii. lib. iii. c. 25. According
to Chilton, an English merchant who resided long in the
Spanish settlements, the bull of Cruzado bore an higher
price in the year '570, being thedn fold for four reals at
the loweit. Hackluyt, iii. 46r. The price f'eems tohave

varied

varied at different periods. That exrabed for the bulls
ilIzued in the last Predicacion, will appear from the ensuing
table, which will give some idea of the proportional num-
bers of the different claifes of citizens in New Spain and
Peru.

There were iss~ued for New Spain,

Bulls at to pesos each

.at 2 peros each
at I pelo each
at .2 reals each -- - -22,60'r

. - -164,220
- - -2,462,500

2,649>325

Yor Peru,

at I6 pesos 41 reals each
at 3 peros 3 reals each
at I peso 53 Teals
at 4 reals * -".
at 3 rels - - - 14,20)2

* - 78,s22

- - 4-0,325

- - 668,60 x

'I7,z>953

NOTE LXXII. p· 358·

AS Villa sSegor, to whom we are indebted for this in-

formation coixtained in his Theatro Americano, pub-

lilhed in Mexico, A. D. 1746, was accomptant-general in
one of the moit considerable departments of the royal re-
venue, and by that means had access to proper informa-
tion, his teffimony with refpe£1 to this point mnerits great
credit. No such accurate detail of the S'panith rederrtues
in any part of America has hitherto been publilhed in thle
English language, and the particulars of it may appear cu,-
rious and intereftinzg to fame of my readers,

170L. 111. FRO MI

FROM the bull of Cruzada, lIublifhed every two years,

there arises an annual revenue in pesos 150,000

From thle duty on fiver - - 7oo,ooo
From the duty on gold . 60,000
From tax on cards -- 70,000
From tax on Pulque, a drink us~ed by the

Indians - - - J6I,000

From tax on flamped paper -4I,000
From ditto on ice - 1,522
From ditto on leather - 2,500
From ditto on gunpowder - 9,550
From ditto on salt - - - 32,000
From ditto on copper of Mechochan -. J,000
From ditto on alum - - 6,500
From ditto on Juego de los gallos - 2I,I00
From the half of ecclesiastical annats -49,000
From royal ninths of bilhopricks, &c. 68,800
From the tribute of Indians -650,000
From Alcavala, or duty on sale of goods 72',875
From the Almajorifalgo, cuffom-houle 373,333
From the mint - 357,5"0

3,552,680

Tals fum amounts to 8J9,I6I1. fierling; and if we

add to it the profit accruing from the sale of 5000 qulintalS
of quicksilver, imported from the mines of Almaden, in
Spain, on the king's account, and what accrues from the
Averia, and fame other taxes which Villa Segnor does not
eflimate, the public revenue in New Spain may well be
reckoned above a million pounds fierling money. Theat.
Mex. vol. i* P. 38, &rc. According to Villa Segnor,
the total produce of the M~iexican mines amounts at a
medium to eight millions of pesos in fiver annually, and
to 59'2 mark~s of gold. Ib. p. 44. Several branches of

the

the revenue have been explained in the cours~e of the h~is
tory; some, which there was no occasion of mentioning,
require a particular illuffration. The right to the tythes
in the New World, is vefied in the crown of Spain, by
a bull of Alexander VI. Charles V. appointed them to
be applied in the following manner: One fourth is allotted
to the bilhop of the diocele, another fourth to the dean and
chapter, and other officers of the cathedral. The re-
maining half is divided into nine equal parts. Two of
thele, under the denomination of los dos Novenos reales,
are paid to the crown, and conflitute a branch of the
royal revenue. The other leven parts are applied to the
maintenance of the parochial clergy, the building and
support of churches, and other pious uses. Recopil.
lib. i. tit. xvi. Ley. 23, &c. Avendano Thefaur. Indic,
vol. i. p. 184-

THE Alcavala is a duty levied by an excise on the

sale of goods. In Spain it amounts to ten per cent. In
America, to four per cent. Solorzano Polit. Indiana,
lib. vi. c. 8, Avendano, vol. L 186.

THE Almajortfa/go, or cuffom paid in America on
goods imported and exported, may amount on an average
to fifteen per cent. Recopil. Jib, viii. tic. xiv. Ley. i.
fivendano, vol, i. 188.

THE Averia, or tax paid on account of convoys to

guard the ships failing to and from America, was first
impoled when Sir Francis Drake filled the New World
with terror by his expedition to the South Sea. It amounts
to two per cent. on the value of goods. Avendano, vol. i.
p. 189. Recopil. lib. ix. tit. ix. Ley. 43, 44-

7 f a I HAva

I HAVE not been able to procure any accurate detail of

the several branches of revenue in Pera, later than the
y·ear 16I4. From a curious manuscript, containing a
iiate of that vice-roy·alty in all its departments, presented
to the Marquis of Montes-Clares, by Fran. Lopez Ca-
ravantes, accomptant-general in the tribunal of Lima, it
appears, that the public revenue, as nearly as I can
compute the value of the money in which Caravantes
slates his accounts, amounted in ducats at 4s. IId.,
to - - - -2>372>768

Expences of government -1,242,992

Net free revenue 1,Ie9>776

The total in iterling money - £ 53,303
Expences of government -30j,568

Ne~t free revenue 277 735

Ibuffever-al articles appear to be amitted in this com-

putation, fach as the duty on flamped paper, leather, ec.
clefiatical annats, &tc. 10 that the revenue of Peru may be
well supposed equal So that of Maexico.

IN computing the expence of government in N~ew

Spain, I may take that of Pern as a fandard. There the
annual eftablilhmnent for defraying the charge of adminir
firation, exceeds one half of the revenue collecled, and
there is no reason for supposing it to be less inl New
Spain.

I H AV E obtained a calculation of the total amount of

tile public revenlue of Spain frp~ig America and the Philip-

pines,

pines, which, as the reader will perceive from the two
lalt articles, is more recent than any of the former.

Alcavalas (Excise) and Aduanas (Cul-

toms), &rc. in pesos fuertes -

Duties on gold and silver - -
Bull of Cruzada - - -
Tribute of the Indians - -
By sale of quicklilver --
Paper exported on the kiing's account,

and fold inl thle roy.al warehod~es -

Stampedl paper, tobacco, and other sm-all

duties - - -

Duty on coinage o~f, at the rate of one

real de la Plaita for each mark -

From the trade of Acapulco,, and the coast-

ing trade from province to province,

Affiento of negnroes --
F'rom the trade of Maltl·, or herb of

Paraguay, formerly monopolized by the
Jesuits - - -

Fromn other revenues formerly belonging

to thlat order -- 2>500,000

3,000,000
I,000,000
2,000,000

300,000

300,000

I,000,000

300,000

500,000
200,000

500,300

400000o

Total 12,000,000

oney £.2,700,000

Total in fierling m

DeduiQ half, as the expnc~ie of admini-

firatioo, and there remains net free
reveniue -·

- ,350,000

F f 3 NOTE

NOTE LXXIII. p. 358*

AN author, long converlant in commercial [peculation,

has computed, that from the mines of New Spain

alone, the king receives annually, as his fifth, the fum
of two millions of our money. Rarris Collea. of Voy. ii.
p. 164. According to this calculation, the total produce
of the mines must be ten millions fierling; a fum 10 ex-
orbitant, and to little corres~ponding with all accoutnts of
the annual importation from America, that the informa-
tion on which it is founded must evidently be erroneous.
According to Campomanes, the total produa of the Ame-
rican mines may be computed at thirty millions of pesos,
which, at four shillings and sixpence a peso, amounts to
7,425,000 1. fierling, the king's ~fish of which (if that
were regularly paid) would be J,485,0001 jL Bt from
this fum must be dedualed what is loss by a fraudulent
withholding of the fifth due to the crown, as well as the
fum necessary for defraying the expence of adminiffration.
Educ. Popular. vol. ii. p. 131. note. Both thcle sums
are considerable.

NOTE LXXIV. p. 359·

C C OR DIN G to Bern. de Ulloa, all foreign gloods

exported from Spain to America pay duties of various

kinds, amounting in all to more than 25 per cent. As
most of the goods with which Spain supplies her colonies
are foreign; foch a tax upon a trade so exttenfive muff
vield a considerable revenue. Retablif. de Manus. & du
Commerce d'Efp. p. J50. He computes the value of
goods excported annually .from Spain to America, to be
about two millions and a half Herling, p. 97·

N~OTE

NO TE LXXV. p. 36I.

SH E Marquis de Serralvo, according to Gage, by

a monopoly of salt, and by embarking deeply in the

Manila trade as well as in that to Spain, gained annually a
million of ducats. In one year he remitted a million of
ducats to Spain, in order to purchase from the Condb
Olivares, and his creatures, a prolongation of his go-
vernment, p. 61. He was Fuccefsful in his fait, and
continued in office from 1624 to I635, double the usual
time.

INDEX.

F f 4

# INDEX.

I N D E X.

N. B. The Roman Numerals refer to the Volume,

and the Figures to the Page.

AB TS 3 TNIA, an embassy sent to that country by

John II. king of Portugal, i. 80.

Acapulco, the nature of the trade carried on from thence to

Manila, iii. 354. Amount of the treasure on board the
thip taken by Lord Anson, 432*

Aco/la, his method of accounting for the different degrees

of heat, in the old and new continents, ii. 4r9*

Aa'air, his account of the revengeful temper of the native

Americans, ii, 459*

Adanfan, his juffification of Hanno's account of the Afri-

can seas, i* 353-

Africa, the western coast of, first explored by order of

John I. king of Portugal, i. 38. Is dis~covered from
Cape Non, to Bojador, 60. Cape Bojador doubled,
66. The countries southward of the River Senegal
discovered, 74. Cape of Good Hope seen by Bartho-
lomew Diass 79. Causes of the extreme heat of the
climate there, ii. JI. Ignorance of the ancient affro-
nomers concerming, 1. 354.

Agriculture, the slate of, among the native Americans,

ii. 117. Two principal causes of the defets of, I22.

Aguada is sent to Hispaniola, as a commissioner to infpe61

the condu61 of Columbus, i. 187.

Aguilar, Jerom de, is relieved from a long captivity

among the Indians at Cozumel, by Fernando Cortes,
u. 243*

Albuguerque, Rodrigo, his barbarous treatment of the In-

dians of Hispaniola, i- 304-

Alcavrala, in the Spanilh cuffoms, the term explained,

"u* 435- Alexander

I ND EX I.

Alexuandler the Great, his political dhara~ier, i. 20. His

motive in founding the city of Alexandria, 21. His dil-
coveries in India, 22, 23*

Alexander VI. Pope, grants to Ferdinand and Isabella of

Castile, the right of all their weffern dil~coveries, i.
r62. Sends millionaries with Columbus on his second
voy:age, 163*

Almag~ro, Diego de, his birth and chara~ter, iii. 4. Affo-

ciates with Pizarro and de Luque, in a voyage of disco-
very, ibid. His un~uccefsful attempts, 6. Is negle~ted
by Pizarro in his Spanish negociation, 16. Is recon-
ciled to him, I7. Brings reinforcements to Pizarro at
Peru, 39. Beginning of diffentions between him and
Pizarro, 56. Invades Chili, 60. Is created governor
of Chili, and marches to Cuzco, 66. Seizes Cuzco,
out of the hants of Pizarro, 67. Defeats Alvarado,
and takes him prisoner, 69. Is deceived by the artful
negociations of Francis Pizarro, 70. Is defeated by
the Pizarros, 74. Is taken prisoner, 75. Is tried and
condemned, 77. Is put to death, 78.

Abnalgro, the son, affords refuge to his father's followers

at Lima, iii. 88. His charadier, 89. Heads a con-
fpiracy against Francis Pizarro, ibid. Pizarro affaffi.
nated, 90. Is acknowledged as his fucceffor> 92. His
precarious situation, 93. Is defeated by Vaca de Caffro,
96. Is betrayed and executeds 97-

Ablmajorifafgo, in the Spanif h Amuerican culloms, the amount

of, iii. 435-

Alvarade, Alonzo, is sent from Lima, by Francis Pi-

zarro, with a body~ of Spaniards to relieve his brothers
at Cuzco, iii. 68. Is taken prisoner by Almagro, 69.
His escape, 7I.

Alvarado, Pedro de, is left by Cortez to command at :

Mexico, while he marched against Narvaez, ii. 328*
He is besieged by the Mexicans, 336. His imprudent
conduAt> 337. His expedition to Quito in Peru, iii.
53·

A8mazons, a community of, said to exist in South America,

by Francis Orellana, iii. 86.

America, the continent of, discovered by Christopher Co-

lumbus, i. 198. How it obtained this name, 214. Ser-
dinand of Castile nominates two governments in, 272.

The

I N D E X.

The propolitions offered to the natives, 273. Ill recep.
tion of Ojeda and Nicueffa among thern, 274. The
South Sea discovered by B~alboa, 290o. Rio de Plata
discovered, 302. The natives of, injuriously tr-eated
by the Spaniards, 331. The vast extent of, ii. 2.
The grand objeats it presented to view, 3. The cir-
cumfiances of, favourable for commerce and civiliza-
tion, 5. The climates of, 7, 8. Various causes of
the peculiarity of its climates, I0. Its rude and uln-
cultivated slate when first diifcovered, 15. Its ani-
mals, I8. Its infeats and reptiles, 20. Birds, 22. Ge-
tneral account of its foil, 23. Inquiry into the firfl po-
pulation of, 25. Could not be peopled by civilized na-
tions, 33. The northern extremity of, contiguous
to Asia, 38. Probably peopled by Afiatics> 47. Con-
dition and charzaer of the native inhabitants inquired
into, 49. Were more rude thlan the natives of any
other known parts of the earth, 51. The Peruvians
and Mexicans excepted, 52. The Eirit discoverers in-
capable of a judicious speculative examination, 54. The
various iyfiems of philosophers refpeEting the natives,
56. Maethod observed in thle present· review of their
bodily conflitution and circumitances, 59. The venereal
dileafe derived from this part of the world, 87. Why
so thinly inhabited, I29. The country depopulated by
continual wars, 172. Caule of the extreme coldness to~-
ward the southern extrermty of, 424. The natural un-
cultivated slate of the country described, 426. Bones
of large extina species of animals discovered under
ground near the banks of the Ohio, 427. Wihy Eu-
ropean animals degeneratethere, 428. Supposed to have
undergone a convulsive s~eparation from Asia, 432*
The vicinity of the two continents of Aia and America
clearly as~certained, 434, 435, 436, 437, 438. Causes
of the depopulation of, traced, iii. 252. This depo-
pulation not the result of any intentional lyfiem of po-
licy, 255. Nor the result of religion, 257. Number of
Indian natives flill remaining in Mexico and Peru, 258-
All the Spanim dominions there, f~ubje~ted to two vice-
roys, 262. Its third viceroyalty lately eltablilhed, 263*
See Mebxico, Peru, Canas, Pizarro, &~c.

Americansc,

SN D EX1

Ann-ricans, native, in Spanilh America, th7eir bodily coll-

ititution and complexuion, ii. 60. Their firength
and abilities, 62. Their inlenfibility with regard to
their wromen, 64. No deformities in their frame,
·iI. This circumilance accounlted for, 72. Uni-
formity of their colour, 74. A peculiar race of, de.
f~cribed, 77. The Efquirn-ux, 80. Patagonians, 81.
The existence of Patagoma~n giants y.et remammig to
be decided, 83. Their diseases, 84. Th~e veneceal
disease peculiarly theirs, 86. The powers and qua-
lities of th~eir minds, 88. Are only solicitous to
supply immediate wants, 90. Thle art of computa-
tion, scarcely known to them, 91. Have no ab-
fira61 ideas, 93. The North Americans much more
intelligent than those of the South, 95. Their aver-
sion to labour, 97. Their facial slate, roo. IDo-
tneffic union, Iro. The women~, Io3. Their womnen
not prolific, ro6. Their parental affe~iion and filial
duty, 108. Their modes of fubliftence, III. Filh-
ing, I12. Hunting, rI4. Agriculture, Ir7. The
various objeAs of their culture, ibid. Two principal
caules of the defets of their agriculture, 222. Their
want of tame animals, ibid. Their wanlt of dfeful
metals, 125. Their political inflitutions, 128. Wlere
divided into finall independent communities, ibid,~ Un-
acquainted with the idea of property, 130. Th'eir
hig~h s~ense of equality and independence, I3I. Their
ideas of fhbordination imperfe8i, 133. To wha"t tribes
thele descriptions apply, '35. Som'e exceptions, I36.
Florida, '37. The NatcheL, I38. The islands, r39*
In Bogota, ibid. Inquiry into the caus~es of these i'r--
regularities, I4r. Their art of war, I44. Their mo·
tives to hoffility, I45. Caures of their ferocity, I46.
Perpetrlity of their animofities, I48. 7 heir modes
of condudting war, 249. Are not deflitute of cou-
rage and fortitude, I5'. Incapable of military dif-
cipline, 153. Their treatment of prisoners, 194.
Their fortitude under torture, I56. Never eat h~u-
2nan flefhl but to gratify revenge, 159. How the South~
Americans treated their prisoners, 160. Their mili-
tary edulcation, 16I. Strange mecthod of ch~ufing. a
captain, among the Indians on th~e bank~s of the Olri-

noco,

I ND E X.

stoco, I62. Their numbers wasted by continual wars,
r65. Their tribes now recruit their numbers by
adopting prisoners, I66. Are never formidable in
war, to more polished nations, I67. Their arts,
drers, and ornaments, I68,I69. Their habitations, 172.
Tlheir arms, 175. Their domestic utensils, I77.
Conflma~ion of their canoes, 178. The liite~fibers
with which they apply to labour, 179. Their re-
ligion, 181. Some tribes altogether destitute of any,
J18· Remarkable diversity in their religious notions,
I88. Their ideas of the immortality of the foul, 19I.
Their modes of burial, 193. Why their physicians
pretend to be conjurers, 195. Their love of dancing,
r99. Their immoderate patlion for gaming, 202. Are
extremely addiaed to drunkennels, 203. Put their
aged and incurable to death, 208. General efrimnate of
their chara~etr, 209. Their intelleatual powers, 2IO.
Their political talents, 2rI. Powers of affeation,
2i3. Hardness of heart, 214. Their insensibility,
2I5. Taciturnity, 2r7, Their cunning, 218. Their
virtues, 220. T'heir spirit of independence, i;dia. For-
titude, ibid. Attachlment to their community, 221.
Their fatisfaaion with their own condition, 222. Ge-
neral caution with refpea to this inquiry, 225. Two
diftinguilhable classes of, 227. Exceptions as to
their charadter, 229. Their charaateriffic features
described, 439. Ini~ances o' their persevering speed,
440. An antipathy induflrioufly encouraged between
them and the negroes in America, by the Spa-
niards, iii. 280. Their present condition, 282. How
taxed, 283. Stated services demanded from them,
284. Mode of exaRing th-ere services, 285. How
governed, 286. ProteEior of the Indians, his fun~tion,
ibid. EIeafons why so fmnall a progress is made in their
converflon, 299.

Amerigo Verpucci publilhes the firRt written account of the

New World, and hence gave namne to America, i. 2I3*
His claim as a dis~coverer examined, 380.

Anacoana, a female cazique of Hispaniola, her base and

cruel usage by thle Spaniards, i. 255-

/ ndes, flo~pendous' height and extent of that range of

mountains, ii. 4. Threir height compared with othler

mOUntalfls,

I N D E X.

mountains, 4ty. Gonzalo Pizarro's remarkable expe.
dition over, iii. 82.

Ani;mals, large, very few found in America at its firfi diT.

covery, ii. 18.

Ancients, cause of the imperfee~ion of the art of navigation

amnong them, i. 6. Their geographical knowledge ex,
tremely confined, 352, 353, 354> 355, 356, 357-

Arabians peculiarly attachled to the fludy of geography,

i. 39·

Arglonauts, the expedition of, why 10 famous among the

Greeks, i. 16, 17.

AI~rithetic, or computation, the art of, hardly known to

the native Americans, ii. 91.

A/colino, father, his extraor~dinary mission to the prince of

the T~artars, i. 46.

A/iatic dircoveries made by the Rufilans, ii. 38*
Agen~,ts trade, thie nature of, explained, iii. 329. The

fr-auds in, and how put an end to, 330> 331.

Atabualpan, is left by- his fathe~r Hualcar his facceffor in

the k~ingdomn of Quiito, iii. 25. Defeats his brother
Hualcar, and ufurps the empire of Peru, 26. Sends
prefelits to Pizarro, 29. Visits Pizarro, 33. Is perfi-
dioufly seized by him, 36. Agrees with Pizarro on a
ranfom> 38. Is refuied his hlberty, 42. His behaviour
during his confinement, 45. A form of trial bellowed
on7 himr, 46. Is put to death, 48. Comparison of au-
th~orities relating to his tranf~a~tions with, and treat-
ment by, Pizarro, 370.

Audiencse of N~ew\ Spainl, board of, eflablifhed by the Em-

peror Chlarles V. ii. 41;. Courts of, their jurifdiElion,
iii. 264-

Averiam, a Spanish tac for convoy to and from Amnerica,

whien frit imposed, iii. 435. Its rate, ibid.

AZ4res, thlofe iilanlds discovered by the Portuguese, i. 72.

Ba~,na, Vako Nugnez de, fettles a colony; at Santa

10aria, in the guiph of Darie~n, i. 2i6. Receives intel-
ligence of the richl country· of Peru, 284. H-is cha-
ratler, 2-87. 1\Iarches acrofsthe iifthmus, 288. Dif-

17 COVCIS

I N D E X.

covers the Southern ocean, 290. Returns, 291. Is
superseded in his command by the appointment of Pe-
drarias Davila, 294.. Is fined by Pedrarias for former
tranfaaions, 295. Is appointed lieutenant-governor of
the countries on the South Sea, and marries Pedrarias's
daughter, 298. Is arrested and put to peath by Pedra-
rias, 300.

Bark, Jesuits, a produalon peculiar to Peru, iii. gro.
Barrere, his defeription of the confiru~tion of Indian houles,

ii. 467.

Behaim, Martin, the honour of having discovered America

fallely aleribed to him by some German authors, i* 371.
Account of him and his family, 372*

Behring and Tifchirikow, Ruffian navigators, thought to

have diicovered the north-west extremity of America
from the eastward, ii. 41. Uncertainty of their ac-
counts, 432-

Benalcazar, governor of St. Michael, reduces the kingdom

of Quito, iii* 52. Is deprived of his command by Pi-
zarro, 83*

Benjamin the Jew of Tudela, his extraordinary travels,

i. 45-

Bernaldes, inflance of the bravery of the Caribbees men-

tioned by him, ii. 473·

Bethencourt, John de, a Norman baron, conquers and pof~-

feffes the Canary islands, i. 54.

Birds, an account of those natural to America, ii. 22. The

flight of, often firetch to an immense distance from land,
i. 364*

Bgogta in America, some account of the inhabitants

of, i. 141. Caules of their tame fubm~ilion to the
Spaniards, I45. Their religious doarines and rites,
20I.

Bojador, cape, the first discovery of, i. 60. Is doubled by

the Portuguele discoverers, 66.

Befu, his account of the American war-foug, ii- 462.
Bovadilla, Francis de, is sent to Hispaniola to inquire into

the condua of Columbus, i. 220. Sends Columbus
home in irons, 222. Is degraded, 225. 230. _

Bougan~ville, his defence of the Periplus of flanno, i.

352* Bouguer,

I. N D EX.

Bouguer, M. his charaaler of the native Peruvians, ii.

445*

Bra/il, the coaff of, dilcovered by Alvarez Cabral, i. 2r6.

Remarks on the climate of, ii. 422*

Bridges, Peruvian, deferibed, iii. 398-
Buenos Ayres, in South America, some account of that

provmnce, mi. 240.

Bulls, papal, of no force in Spanith America, before exa-

mined and approved by the royal council of the Indies,
iii. 290. See Crufadoi.

Burial of the dead, American snode of, ii. 193*

Cabral, Alvarez, a Portuguese commander, dilcovers the

coast of Brasil, i. 2r6.

Cacoa, the best in quality, produced in the Spanilh Ame-

rican colonies, iii. 3Ir. The preparation of chocalate
from, derived from the Mexicans, ~33$

Cadiz, the galeons and flota, removed thither from Seville,

mn. 322.

Calpfrn~ia, the peninsula of, discovered by Fernando Cor-

tes, ii. 4r2. The true slate of this country long un-
known, iii. 23I. Why depreciated by the Jesuits,
232. Favourable account of, given by Don Joseph
Galvez, 233*

Cah~fornians, the chara~er of, by P. Venegas, ii. 448.
Campachyi, discovered by Cordova, who is repulsed by the

natives, i. 34-0.

Campomane~s, Don Pedro Rodriguez, chara~ter of his po-

litical and commercial writings, iii. 43I. His ac-
count of the produce of the Spanish American mines,
430.

Ca2nary illands ereaed into a kingdom by pope Clement VI.

i. 54. Are conquered by John de Bethencourt, ibid,

Cannibals, no people ever found to eat hluman flelh for futb.

fillence, though often for revenge, ii. I58. 462.

C~anses, American, the confiruEtion of, described, 11.

18i6,

22 Caraccas,

I NT D E X.

Caracras, elbiblifhlment of the company trading to that

coast, iii. 335. Growth of the trade, 425.

Cari~bbe islands, discovered by Columbus in his second

voyage, i. 164.

Caribbfes, their spirit peculiarly fierce, ii. 229. Their

chlaraater by M. de Chanvalon, 448. Probable con-
jeaure as tb the diftinaion in charaater between them
and the natives of the larger islands, 4741

Carpini, his extraordinary miflion to the prince of the

Tartars, i* 46-

Carthagena, the harbour of, the fafeft and best fortified

of any in all the Spanish American dominions, iii.
244.

Carthaginians, slate of commerce and navigation amotig,

i. I I. The famous voyages of Hanno and Himilco,
'3*

Carvajal, Francisco de, contributes to Vaca de Caftor's

viaory over young Almallro, iii. 96. Encourages
Gonzalo Pizarro to affixme the government of Peru,
I15. Advises Pizarro to affl~me the sovereignty of
the country, 120. Is seized by Galca, and executed,
'37*

Cafiillo, Bernal Diaz del, chara~ter of his Hilloria

Vardadera de la Conquiita de la Nueva Efpagna, iir
477-
Centeno, Diego, revolts from Gonzalo Pizarro to the

viceroy of Peru, iii. I17. Is defeated by Carvajal, and
secretes himself in a cave, I<9. Sallies out and seizes
Cuzco, 132. Is reduced by Pizarro, 133. Is em-
ployed by Gaifca to make dis~coveries in the regions
about the river Plata, r43*

CharNvalon, MC. de, his charad~er of the native Caribbees,

ii* 448*·

Chanpetones, in the Spanish American colonies, who thus

diftinguiihed, iii. 277*

Chanrles III. king of Spain, e~tablifhes packet-boats be-

twreen Spain and the colonies, iii. 338. Allows free
trade to the windward islands, 340. Grants the colo-
nies a free trade with each oither, 343*

Charler V. emperor, sends Rodierigo de Figrueroa to His~

paniola, as chief judge, to regulate the treatment of
thle Indians, i. 319. Caus~es this f~ubjeat to be debated

Vot.. III. G g before

I N D E X.

before him, 327· Equips a fuadron at the solicitation
of Ferdinand Magellanl, ii. 393. Resigns his claim on
the Moluccas to the Portuguese, 399. Appo uts Cortes
governor of New Spain> 402. Rewards him on coming
home, 4I0. Eflablifhes a board called the Audience of
New Spain, 411. His consultations on A'merican as-
fairs, iii. 97. Establish~es new regulations, 103-

Gkill, is invaded by Almagro, iii. 60. How fubjeaed

by the Spaniards, 235. Excellence of its climate and
foil, 236. Caule of its being negleated, 237. ProfpeQ
of its improvement, 238.

Chiquitos, political slate of that people, from Fernandez,

ii. 4158-

Chocolate, the use of, derived from the lMexicans, iii. 335.
Cholu/la, in Mexico, arrival of Cortes there, with some-

account of the town, ii. 288. A conspiracy against
Cortes dilcovered, and the inhabitants destroyed,
291.

Cicers, instance of his igno.ance in geography, i. 353·
Cinaloa, political slate of the people there, ii. 458. Their

mode of living, 466. Are destitute of all religion,
470. Extraordinary large grain of gold found there,
111. 399·

Cinegurilla, in the province of Sonora, late dilcoveries of

rich mines made the~re by the Spaniards, iii. 23'.
Probable effeas of these dis~coveries, ibid.

Clavigero, M. several of his objeations anfwrered, lii. 417

--423*

Clenrient VI. pope, ereats the Canary islands into a kinzg-

dom, i. 54.

Climnates, influenced by a variety of causes, ii. 8. Their

operation on mankind, 226. Inquiry into the cause of
the different degrees of heat inl, 419-

Cochineal, an important produaion, almost peculiar to

New Spain, iii. 310.

Cold, extraordinary predominance of, in the climate of

America, ii. 8. Causes of this peculiarity, 10.

Colonies, Spanish American, view of the policy and trade

of, iii. 251. Depopulation the first effeQ of them,
ibidt. Cad~es of this depopulation, 252. The small-
pox very fatal to, 254. General idea of the Spaniih
policy in, 260. Early interpolition of the regal autho-

rity

1 N D E X'.

rity in, 26r. An exclusive trade the firfil objea is~
269. Comparedl with those of ancient Greece anld
Romec, 270. The great reffriaionls they are fubjeat
to, 272. Slow progress of their populaltion from Eu-
rope, 273. Are dil~couraged by the state of property
there, 274. AndI by thle natu~re of their ecclefialtical
policy, 276. The various classe~s of people in, ibid.
Eccleliaftical conflitution of, 289. Form and endow-
ments of the church there, 291. Pernicious effeas of
monallic inflitutions there, 292. Chara~ter of the
ecclef~iatics there, 293. Produ~ions of 302. Th'e
miness 304. Th'ofe of Potofi and Sacotecas, 305*
The sp~irit with which they are worked, 306. Fatal
effeas of this ardour, 308. Other commodities that
compose the commerce of, 310. Amazing inlcreafe: of
horned cattle there, 3Ir. Advantages whlich Spain
formerly derived from them, 3r3. Why the fame ad-
vantages are not itill received> 3r4. Guarda Cofias
employed to check t'he contraband trade in, 33'·. The
use of register thips introduced, 332. And galeons
laid afide> 333. Company of the Caraccas instituted,
335. Establishment of regular packet-boats to> 338*
Free trade permitted betwveen thems 343. New· regpu-
lations in the govelmnent of, 344. Reformation of
the courts of juffice, 345. New diffribution of go-
vernments, ibidl. A fourth viceroyalty eftabifheod,
346. Attempts to reform domeffic policy, 348·
Their trade with the Philippine islands, g gS. Rev-\a
nue derived from, by Spain, 336. Expence of adimi-
niffration there, 359.· State of population in, 404*·
The number of monasteries there> 4'3. See Mexsico,
Per~u, & c.

Cohantbus, Bartholomew, is sent by his brother Chrifto-

pher to negociate with Henry VII. king of' England,
Si. r00. The misfortunes of his voyage, I05. Fol-
lows his brother to Hifpaniolas 176. Is vested with
the administration of affairss there by his brother on, his
Sreturn to Spain, 188. Founds the town of St. Do-
nungo, 200.

Cohanmbus, Christopher, birth and education of, i. 85.

H-is early voyages, 86. Marries, and fettles at Libonl,
I88. His geographical refic~tions, 91. Conceives the

G g2 idea

I N D E X.

idea of making discoveries to the westward, 93. OffErs
his services to the Genoese senate, 97. Cause` of .his
overtures being rejeaed in Portugal, 99. Applies to
the courts of Castile and England, Ioo. His proposal,
how treated by the Spanish geographers, 102. Is pa-
troniled by Juan Perez, 106. His propos~als again
rejeaed, I08. Is invited by Tiabella, and engaged in
the Spanith service, rI3. Preparations for his voyage,
I15. The amount of his equipment, I r6. Sails from
Spain, rr8. His vigilant attention to all circum-
stances during his voyage, rI2. Apprehensions of his
crew, 122. His address in quieting their cabals, I26.
Indications of their approaching land, 128. An island
dlifcovered, I29. He lands, I3I. His interview with
the nativei, 132. Names the island San Salvadore,
134. Prosecutes his discoveries southward, x35. Dif-
covers, and lands on, the island of Cuba, 236. Dif-
covers Hispaniola, r38. Suffers thipwreck, but is
sa8ved by the Indians, r39. Builds afort, I46. Re-
turns to Europe, 150. His expedient to preserve the
memory of his discoveries during a florm, I52. Ar-
rives at the Azores, 153. Arrives at Lisbon, 154*
His reception in Spain, rS5. His audience with Ser-
dtinand and Isabella, I57. His equipment for a econld
voyage, I60. Discovers the Caribbee islands, 164.
Finds his colony on Hispaniola destroyed, 165, 166,
Bfuilds a city, which he calls Isabella, I68. Visits the in-
terior parts of the !Liuntry, 170. His men discontented
aand faatious, 172, 173. Dis~covers the island of Ja-
mlaica, I 75. Meets his brother Bartholomew at Isabella,
r76. The natives ill used by his men, and begin to
be alarmed, 177, I78. He defeats the Indians, 182.
Exaccs tribute from them, r83. Returns to Spain/to
juitify his conduat, 288. Is furnished with a more
regular plan for colonization, 191.- His third voyage,
r93. Dis~covers the island of Trinidad, 197. Discovers
the continent of Atherica, 198. State of Hispaniola
on his arrival, 200. Compoles the mutiny of Roldan
and his adherents, 203. Is diffreffed by the faltious
behaviour of his men, 2r7. Complaints carried to
Spain ag~ainita~~~~a~ga~~~~~g him, 218, 219. I8 Cent home in irons,

222 Clarshis condu61, but is not restored to his

authority,

I N D E IX,

authority, 225. His folicitations negleaed,· 2g r.
Forms new schemes of dis~covery, 232. Engages in a
fourth voyage, 234. His treatment at Hispaniola,
235. Searches after a passage to the Indian ocean,
237. Is thipwrecked on the coast ofJamaica, 239.
His artifice to secure the friendship of the Indians, 243-
Is delivered, and arrives at His~paniola, 247. Returns
to Spain, 248. His deathl,250. 11is right to the ori-
ginal discovery of America defended, 369.

Columbus, Don Diego, sues out his claims to his father's

privileges, i. 267. Marries, and goes over to Hifpa-
niola, 268. Eflablifhes a pearl fiihery at Cubagua,
270. Projeats the conquest of Cuba, 279. His mea-
fures thwarted by Ferdinand, 303. Returns to Spain,
304*

Commerce, the wra from which its commencement is to

be dated, i. 3. Motives to an intercourse among dif-
tanlt nations> 5, Still flourished in the eastern empire
after the fubverflon of the weffern, 37. Revival of,
in Europe, 40.

Compaft, mariner's, navigation extended rnore by the

invention of, than by all the efforts of preceding ages,
i. 5'. By whom invented, 52*

Condlamine, M. his account of the country at the foot of

the Andes, in South America, ii. 426. His remarks
on the charader of the native Americans> 446, 447*

Congo, the kingdom of, discovered by the Portuguese,

i. 75* Confiantinople, the consequence of removing the feat of
the Roman empire to, i. 35. Continued a commer--
cial city after the extinaion of the weffern empire, 37*
Became the chief mart of Italy, 40.

Cordova, Francisco Hernandez, discovers Yucatan, i.

339. Is repulled at Campeachy, and returns to Cuba,
34r.

Corita, Alonzo, his observations on the contraband trade.

of the Spanish colonies, iii* 35'. Chara~ter of his
American memoirs, 379.

Cortes, Fernando, his birth, education, and chara~er,

ii, 233. IS by Velaf~ques appointed commander of the
armament sifted out by him against New Spain, 234*
Velasquez becomes jealous of him, 237. Yerlafquez

G g3 feuds

I N D E X.

sends orders to deprive him of his comm~ition, and lay
him under an arrest·, 238. Is proteaed by h~is troops,
240. The amount of his forces, 241. Reduces the
Indians at Tabasco, 243. 'Arives at St. Juan de
Ulua, 244. His interview with two Mexican com-
manders, 246. Sends prese~nts to Montezuma, 249.
Receives others in return, 250. His schemes, 256.
Effablifhes a form of civil government, 260. Resigns
his commiflion unlder Velasquez, and allixmes the com-
mand in the king's name, 263. His fr-iendship courted
by the Zempoallans, 264. Builds afort, 267. Con-
cludes a formal alliance with several caziques, ibid.
D~iscovers a consp~iracy among his men, and destroys
his thips, 27I. Advances into the country, 274* I"
oppose-d by the Tlalcalans, 2177 Concludes a peace
with them, 284. His rathl zeal, 286. Proceeds to
Cholula, 288. Discovers a conspiracy ag~ainst him
here, and defiroys the inhabitants, 291. Approaches
in fight of the capital city of Mexico, 292. His first
inlterview with Montezuma, 294. His anxiety at his
situation in the city of Mexico, 30I. Seizes Monte-
zuma, 30s. Orders him to befettered, 309. Reasons
of his conduat, ibid. Prevails on Montezuma to own
himself a vassal to the Spanish crown, 3r3. Amount
and division of his treas~ure, 3'5. Enrages the Mexi-
.cans by his imprudent zeal, 3r9. An armament sent
by Velasquez to s~upersede him, 323. His deliberations
onl this event, 326. Advances to meet Narvaez> 330.
Defeats Narvaez, and takes him prifoner> 334. Gains
over the Spanish s~oldiers to his interest, 335. Returns
to Mexico, 338. His improper condua on his arrival,
339. 1s resolutely attacked by the Mlexicans, 340.
Attacks them in return without succes~s, 34 r. Death of
MLontezuma, 343. His extraordinary escape from
death, 345. Abandons the city of Mexico, 346. Is
attacked by the Mexicans, 347. His great losses in
the encounter, 348. Difliculties of his retreat> 350.
Battle of Otumba, 352. Defeats the Mexicans> 354-
Mvutinous spirit of his troops, 357. Reduces the Toa-
peacans, 359. Is firengthened by several reinforce-
ments> 36r. Returns to Mexico, 362. Eitablifhess
his head-qwarters at Tezeuco, 365. Reduces or conci· liates

I N D E X.

11ates the surrounding country, 366. Cabals among
his troops, 368. His prudence in fupprefling them,
369. Builds and launches a fleet of brigantinles on thle
lake, 372. Befieges Mexico, 374. Makes a grand
assault to take the city by florm, but is repulsed, 379*
Evades the Mexican prophecy, 382. 'fakes Guati-
mozin prifoner> 386. Gains poffeffion of the city,
387. And of the whole empires 390. IDefeats an-
other attempt to supersede him in his command, 400.
Is appointed governor of New Spain, 402. His
schemes and arrangements, ib~id. Cruel treatment of
the natives, 403. His conduat fubjeaed to inquiry,
408. Returns to Spain to juffify himself, ibidl. Is re-
warded by the emperor Charles V. 410. Goes back
to Mexico with limited powers, 4.rr. Discovers Ca-
lifornias 4I2. Returns to Spain and dies, 4I3* I"-
quiry into the nature of his letters to the emperor
Charles V. 47 g. Authors who wrote of his conquest
of New Spain, 476, 477*

Council of the Indies, its power, iii. 267.
Creoles, in the Spaniih American colonies, chara~er of,

iii. 27 8.

Crog/an, Colonel George, his account of the discovery of

the bones of a large extindt species of animale in North
America, ii. 427.

Crusa~des to the Holy Land, the great political advanl

tages derived from, by the European nations, i. 42,

43* Cruzad~o, bulls of, publithed regularly every two years in
the Spanish colonies, iii. 357. Prices of, and amount
of the sale at the last publication, 4312*

Cuba, the island of, dis~covered by Christopher Columnbus,

i. I36. Is failed round by Ocam~po, 267. 'The cont
quest of, undertaken by Diego Velasquez, 278. Cruel
treatment of the cazique Hatuey, and his repartee to a
friar, 279. Columbus's enthusiastic defeription of a
harbour in, 365. The: tobacco produced there, the
finest hi all America, iii. 311.

Cubaguan, a pearl fishery eitablithed there, i. 270.
Cumnna, the natives of, revenge their ill treatmnent by the

Spaniards, i. 332. The country desolated by Diego
Ocampo, 335* G g 4 CusRco,

IN D EX.

Cus~co, the capital of the Peruvian empire, founded by

Manco Capac, iii, 22. Is seized by Pizarro, 52. Is
belieged by the Peruvians, 64. Is s~urprised by Alnian
gro, 68. Is recovered and pillaged by the P~izarros, 76,
W~as the only city in all Peru, 223,

Dancing, the love of, a favourite pafflon among the Ame,

ricans, ii. 199.

Darien, the isthmus of, defecribed, i. 286, The increase

of settlement there, obitru~ed by the noxiousness of.
the climate, iii. 242.

De &olis, his unfortunate expedition up the river Plata,

i. 302.

De Solis, Antonio, charafter of his Hifforia de la Con-

quifia de Mexico, ii. 478*

D'Efquilache~, prince, viceroy of Pers, his vigorous meaa

fures for reffraining the excesses of the regular clergy
there, iii? 297. Rendered ineffe~tual, 298.

Diaz, Bartholomew, dilcover~s the Cape of Good Hope,

i. 79.

Di/c~overt~es, the difference between thos~e made by land,

and those by sea, slated, i. 357-

Dodwuell, his obje~tions tq the Periplus of Hanno ex,

ploded, i. 35'.

Domingo, St. on the island of Flifpaniola, founded by

Bartholomew Columbus, i. 200.

Dominicans, those in Hispaniola publicly remonfirate

against the cruel treatment of the Indians! i. 305*
See Las Cafas.

prarnketnnef, firong propensity of the Americans to in-

dullge ni, i. 2I5*

Earth, the globe of, howr divided into zones by the an,

cients, i* 32*

Egyplitians, ancient, slate of commerce and navigatioq

anxong them, i. 6.

IN D EX.

El Dorado, wonderful reports of a country so called,

made by Francis Orellana, iii. 86.

,Elepharit, that animal peculiar to the torrid zone, ii. 428.
EScurial, curious calendar dis~covered in the Library there

by Mr. Waddilove, iii. 388. Defeription of that va-
luable monument of Mexican art> 389*

£4ulrmaux Indians, res~emblance between them and their

neighbours the Greenlanders, ii. 45. Some account
of, 160. 4l68.

Eugene IV. pope, grants to the Portuguese an exclusive

right to all the countries they should discover, from
Cape Nonl to the continent of India, i. 70.

Europe, how affeaed by the dismemberment of the Ro-

manl Empire by the barbarous nations, i. 36. Revival
of commerce and navigation in, 40. Political advan-
tages derived from the crusades, 43*

Ferdinand king of Ca~ile, See Columbutr and I/al ·lla.

Turns his attention at length to the regulation of
American affairs, i. 261. Don Diego de Columbus
sues out his father's claims against him, 267. Ereats
two governments on the continent of America, 272.
Sends a fleet to Darien, and supersedes Balboa, 293-
Appoints Balboa lieutenant-governor of the countries
on the South Sea, 298. Sends Dias de Solis to diicover
a weitern passage to the M~oluccass 302. Thwarts the
meas~ures of Diego Columbus, 303. His decree con-
cerning the treatment of the Indians, 307*

Fer~nander, Donl Diego, charaater of his Hiitoria del

Peru, iii. 366.

Fernandez, P. his defeription of the political Rtate of the

Chiquitos, ii. 458*

~Figuerca, Roderigo de, is appointed chief judge of His-

paniola, with a commiiron to examine into the treat-
ment of the ludian natives, i. 3r9. Makes an expe-
riment to determine the capacity of the Indians, 333.

Fllorida, discovered by Juan Ponce de Leon, i. 280. Trhe

chiefs there hereditary, ii. I35. Account of, from Al-
yaro Nugnez Cabeca de Vaca, ii. 452* F/~ota,

lEotaz, Spanish, some account of, iii. 321.
F~onfecai, bishop of Badajos, minister for Indian affairs,

obitruas the plans of colonization and discovery formed
by Columbus, i. 184. 19S. Patronizes the expedition
of Alonzo de Ojeda, 212.

Galcons, Spanish, the nature and purpose of there vessels,

iii. 321. Arrangement of their voyage, 322.

Galves, Don Joseph, sent to djfcover the true slate of

California, iii. 23 .

Gamna, Vasco de, his voyage for discovery, i. 206. Dou-

bles the Cape of Good Hope, 208. Anchors before
the city of Melinda, ibid. Arrives at Calecut in Mala-
bar, 209.

Gaminlg, strange propensity of the Americans to, ii.

202.

Gaty)·, erroneous ideas of the ancients as to the polition

of that river, i. 356.

Gafca, Pedro de la, sent to Peru as president of the Court

of Audience in Lima, iii. '25. His charaaer and
moderation, ibid. The pouw J he was vefied with,
126. Arrives at Panama, I28. Acquires poffefi~onn
of Panama with the fleet and forces there, '30. Ad-
vances towards Cuzco, 135. Pizarro's troops desert
to him, I36. His moderate use of the viaory, '37-
Devises employment for his soldiers, 143. His divi-
sion of the country among his followers, i44. The
difcontents it occasions, 145. Restores order and go-
vernment, r46, HJis reception at his return to Spain,
147-

Geminlus, initance of his ignorance in geography, i. 358-
GeogrYaphy, the knowledgfe of, extremely confined among

the ancients, i* 31. Became a favourite fludy among
the Arabians> 39.

G'ianits, the accounts of in our early travellers, uncon-

firmed by recent discoveries, i. 50. n1. 44', 443.

Grida, F~lavio, the inventor of the mariner's compals, i.

52-

Globe, its diviflon into zones by the ancients, i* 32*

.IN DE X.

Gold, why the first metal with which man was acquaint-

edl, iii. 237. Exstraordinary large grain of, found in
the minles at Cinaloa, 399-

Gomara, chara~ter of his Cronica de la Neuva Efpagna,

ii. 476.

Goodi Hope, Cape of, discovered by Bartholomew D~iaz,

i. 79.

Goverinment, no visible form of, among the native Ame-

ricans, ii. I34. Exceptions, 137-

Grarn ChaLco, account of the method of making war among

the natives of, from Lozano, ii. 460.

Granadan, new kingdom of, in America, by whom re-

ducedl to thle Spanish dominion, iii. 247. Its climate
and produce, 248. A viceroy lately established there,
263-

Greeks, ancient, progress of navigation and discovery

among them, i. 16. Their commercial intercourse
with other nations very limited, I 8, I9.

Green~land, its vicinity to North America, ii* 45*
Gr~ijlva, Juan de, sets out from Cuba on a voyage of

dis~covery, i- 342. Dilcovers and gives name to New
Spain> 343. His reas~ons for not planting a colony in
his newly dilcovered lands> 346.

Guarda Cofias employed by Spain to check illicit trade

in the American colonies, iii. 33'-

Guatnimala, the indigo there superior to any in America,

111- 311.

Guatimozin, nephew and fon-in-law of Montezuma,

succeeds Quetlavaca in the kingdom of 1Wexico, ii.
364. Repullfes the attacks of the Spaniards, in Itorm-
ing the city of Mexico, 379. Is taken prisoner by
Cortes, 386. Is tortured to discover his treafare> 389*
Is hanged, 40g.

Gurianra, D~utch, cause of the, excessive ferti~lity of the foil

there, ii, 43 r*

Hanno,0 his Periplus defended, with an account of hiS

voyage, i* 35'.

Ilatuey, a cazique of Cuba, his cruel treatment, and me-

morable repartee to a Francilcan friar, i. 279. Hawkefwrorth's

IN D EX.

I N D E X.

Hawke/woarth's voyages, account of New Holland, and

the inhabitants from, ii. 454*

Heat, the different degrees of, in the old and new

continents, accounted for, ii. 419. Eitimated,
430.

Henryy Prinlce of Portugal, his charaaer and fludies,

i. 6r. Expeditions formed by his order, 63. Applies
for a papal granlt of his new discoveries, 69. His
death, 72.

Herrada, Juan de, affaffinates~ Francis Pizarro, iii. po.

Dies, 95.

Herrera, the best hifforian of the conquest of Newr

Spain, ii, 478. His account of Orellana's voyage,
iii. 376,

Hi~paniola, the island of, discovered by Chriffopher

Columbus, i. rg8. His tranfa~ions with the na.
tivps, 139. A colony left there by Columbus, I48.
The colony destroyed, 166. Columbus builds a
city called Isabella, I68. The natives ill-uf~ed,
and begin to be alarmed, 177. Are defeated by
the Spaniards, 182, Tribute exaated from them,
183. They scheme to starve thle Spaniards, 185*
St. Domingo founded by Bartholomew Columbus,
200. Columbus sent home in irons by Bovadilla,
222. Nicholas de Ovando appointed governor, 226.
Summary view of the condu61 of the Spaniards to-
wards the natives of, 254. Unhappy fate of Anac
coana, 255. Great produce from tht mines there,
259. The inhabitants diminith, 262. The Spa-
niards recruit them by trepanning the natives of the
Lucayos, 264. Arrival of Don Diego de Columbus,
269. The natives of, almolt extirpated by slavery,
278* 304. Controverty concerning the treatment
of them, 30s. Columbus's account of the humane
treatment he received from the natives of, 366,
Curious initance of superstition in the Spanish plantets
there, ii. 427.

Holguin, Pedro Alvarez, ereats the royal standard in

Peru, in opposition to the younger Almagro, iii. 95*
Vaca de Caffro arrives and ilffumes the command,
96. 6 Homer,

I N D E Xi.

Homer, h~is account of the navigation of the ancient Greeks,

i. I 7*

Honrduras, the value of that country, owing to its pro-

duation of the logwood tree, iii. 235*

Horned cattle, amazing increase of them in Spaniih Ame-

rica, mi. 3 I .

Hor~es, aftonithment and mistakes of the Mexicans at the

first fight of them, ii. 484. Expedient of the Peru-
vians to render them incapable of amton, iii. 376.

Huana Capac, Inca of Peru, his charaaer and family,

111. 2 J.

Hu~a/car Capac, Inlca of Peru, disputes his brother Ata-

hualpa's fucceflion to Quito, iii. 26. Is defeated and
taken prisoner by Atahualpa, ibid. Solicits the ass~istance
of Pizarro against his brother, 28. Is put to death by
order of Atahualpa> 39*

famaica, discovered by Chriffopher Columnbus, i. '7 p.
Jeromne, St. three monks of that order sent by cardinal

Ximenes to Hispaniola, to regulate the treatment of the
Indians, i* 3I2. Th'eir condua under this commiflion,
3'6. Are recalled> 319.

Jesuits, acquire an absolute dorninion over California,

iii. 232. Their motives for depreciating the country,
ibid.

Jewrs, ancient slate of commerce and navigation among

them, i. I0.

Incas of Pera, received origin of their empire, iii. 23.

202. Their empire founded both in religion and po-
licy1,1' 04. S-eePeru.

Ipdia, the motives of Alexander the Great, in his expedi-

tion to, i. 21. The commerce with, how carried on
in ancient times, 27, 28. ' And when arts began to re-
vive in Europe, 40. The first voyage made'round the
Cape of Good Hope, 207·

Indians in Spanish America. See AmericanJ;.
In:dies, Weft, why Columbus's dircoveries viere ~o named,

'i, I60i.

Innocent

Inncenti IV.pope, his extraordinary mifflion to the princeof

the Tartars, i. 45, 46.

Ilquciftion, court of, when and by whom sirs1 introduced

into Portugal, i* 361.

Inferis and reptiles, why so numerous and noxious in

America, ii. 20.

John I. kinlg of Portugal, the first who sent thips to ex-

plore the western coasts of Africa, i. 5 8. His son prince
Henry engages in thes~e attempts, 6 J.

John II. king of Portugal, patronises all attempts towards

discoveries, i. 7 g. Sends an embassy to Abyflinia, 80.
His ungenerous treatment of Columbus, 99.

Iron, the reason why savag~e nations were unacquainted

with this metal, ii. I2j, a 26.

~Isabella, queen of Caffile, is applied to by Juan Perez in

behalf oE Chriffopher Columbus, i. ro6. Is again ap-
plied to by Quintanilla and Santangel, nlo. Is prevailed
on to equip him, 112. Dies, 248. Her real motives
for encouraging discoveries in America, iii. 255·

Ifabellat, the city of, in Hispaniola, built by Christopher

Columbus, i. 168.

Italy, the sirs1 country in Europe, where civilization and

arts revived after the overthrow of the Roman Empire,
i. 40. The commercial ipirit of, allive and enterpril-
ing> 42*

~Ladrone iflatids, discovered by Ferdinand Magellan, 11.

396.

Lakes, amazing size of thofet in North America, iit 4.
Las Cafas, Bartholomew, returns from Hispaniola to so·

licit the cadei of the enflavedt Indians at the court of
Spain, i* 311. Is sent back with powers by cardinal
Ximenes> 3'3. Returnsdiff~atisfied> 3'4. 3'8. Proa.
cures a new commifiion to be sent over on this fubjeat,
3J9. Recommends the scheme of supplying the colo-
nies with negroes> 322. Undertakes a new colony, 323.
His conference with the bishop of Darien before the
emperor Charles V. 328. Goes to America to carry
his schemes into execution, 330. Ciredmitances un-
iavourirble to him, 133*· His final mik~arriage, 3.34*

Revives

IN~D E 1.

I N ·D E X.

Revives his representations in favour of the Indians, at
the desire of the emperor, iii. 101. Composes a trea-
tife on the deftruaion of America, IO2.

Leon, Pedro Cieza de, charadter of his Chronica del Peru,

iii. 366.

Leryv, his defeription of the courage and ferocity of the

TIoupinambos, ii. 463*

Liman, the city of, in Peru, founded by Pizarro, iii. 59.
Ly~lon, Mr. the B3ritish miniffer at Madrid, h~is anfwner to

several interesting inquiries relating to the admiflion of
Indians into holy orders, iii. 42 r.

LogwUOOd, the commodity that gives importance to the pro-
-vinlces of Honduras and Yucatan, iii. 234. Policy of
the Spaniards to defeat the Engljih trade in, ibidb.

L0LuiS, St. king of France, his embassy to the chan of the

Tartars, i. 47*

Lazan~o, his account of the method of making war among

the natives of Gran Chaco, ii. 460.

Lugute, Hernando de, a priest, associates with Pizarro in

his Peruvian expedition, iii. 4*

Madeira, the iflandi of, first dilcovered, i. 64*
Ma~doc, prince of North Wi~ales, story of his voyage and

dilcovery of North America examined, i. 373-

Ma~gellan, Ferdinand,his account of the gigantic size of the

Patagonians, ii. 8 I. The existence of this gigantic race
yet to be decided, 83- 442, 443. His introduaion to
the court of Castile, 391. Is equipped with a squadron
for a voyage of discovery, 393. Sails through the fa-
mous firait that bears his name, 395. Discovers the
Ladrone and Philippine islands, 396. Is killed, ibid.

Magnet, its property of attra~ting iron known to the an-

cients, but not its polar inclination, i. 16. Extraordi-
nary 2dvantages res~ulting from this dif'covery, 51.

Manlo, St. account of its commerce with Spanish Ame-

rica, iii. 328.

Mtanco Capac, founder of the Peruvian empire, account of,

ml. 22, 23. 203·

Mandeville, Sir John, his eastern travels, with a charaaer

of his writings, i* 5o. Manila.

It kDEX.

Manila, the colony of, established by Philip II. of Sliahsr

iii. 353. Trade between, and South America, ibid.

1Mankindl, their difpolition, and manners formed by their'

situation, ii. 29. Hence resemblances to be traced in
very difiant places without: communication, 30. Have
uniformly attained the greatest perfeltion of their nature
in temperate regions, 226.

Marco Polo, the Venetian, his extraordinary travels in the

East, i. 4 -

Mlareft, Gabriel, his account of the country between the

111inois and Machilimakinac, ii. 455*

Man~ana, Donna, a Mexican slave, her hiffory, ii. 245*
Marinus, Tyrius, his erroneous position of China, i. 363*
Martyr, Peter, his sentiments on the first discovery of

America, i. 377*

Me/izos, in the Spanith American colonies, diftinflion be-

tween them and Mv'ulattoes, iii. 279.

JMfeals, us~eful, the original natives of America totally un·

acquainted with, ii. I25*

Mecxicans, their account of their own origin, compared

with later discoveries, ii. 47. Their paintings few inl
number, and of ambiguous meaning, iii. I56. Two
colleations of them discovered, I57, note. Deferip-
tions of their hifforical pidtures> 38I. Various exag-
gerated accounts of the number of human vi611ms fa·
crificed by them> 389. Their language furnished with
refp~eaful terminations for all its words> 381. How
they contributed to the support of government, 382*

Mexico, arrival of Fernando Cortes on the coast of, iii

245. His interview with two Mexican officers, 246.
Information s~ent to Montezuma, with some Spanish
presents, 249. Montezuma sends pres~ents to Cortes,
with orders not to approach his capital, 25o. State
of the empire at that time, 25 I. The Zempoallans
court the friendship of Cortes, 264. Several 6 .iques
enter into alliance with Cortes, 267. Charader of
the natives of Tlakcala, 27 g. The Tlnfcalans rea
duced to sue for peace, 283. Arrival of Cortes at
the capital city, 294. The city deferibed, 298. Mon-
tezuma acknowledges himself a vassal to the Spanith
crown, 3'3. Amount of the treaiure colleaed by
Cortes> 3r5. Reasons of gold being found in such

Cmall

small quantities> 316. The Mexicans enraged by the
imprudent zeal of Cortes> 319. Attack Alvarado
during the ablence of Cortes, 336. Their resolute
attack on Cortes when he returned, 340. Death of
Montezuma, 344. The city abandoned by Cortes,
346. Battle of Otumba, 352. The Trepeacans re-
diuced> 359. Preparations of the Mexicans against
the return of Cortes, 362. Cortes befieges the city
with a fleet on the lake, 375. Thle Spaniards re-
pulsed in florming the city, 37i9. Guatimozin takierl-
prisoner, 386. Cortes appointed governor, 402. His
schemes and arrangements, ibid. Inhuman treatment
of the natives, 403. Reception of the new regula-
tions there, iii. I0;. A retrofped into the form of
government, policy, and arts in, I31. Our informa-
tion concerning, very imperfelt, 194. Origin of the
monarchy, 156. Number and geteso h iis
I62. Mechanical profefilons teedfigihdfo
each other, I64.6 Diltination of ranks, 165. Politi-
cal inflitutions, 168. Power and splendor of their
monarchs, IT1. Order of government, 192. Provi-
sion for the support: of it, ibid. Police of, 173. Their
arts, r74. Their paintilngs, 177. TIheir method of com-
puting time, I82. T.heir wars continual and fero·
cious, 183. Their funeral rites, 185. Imperfe~ionl
of their agriculture, ibid. Doubts concerning the ex-
tent of the empire, 186. LCittle intercour.Se amon~g its
several provinces, I88. Ignorance of money, 189.
State of their cities, rcgr. 'remrples and otherr public
buildiings, ibid. 192 Re~igion of, 197. Causes of the
iep)opulation of this country, 252.. The fmnall-paox
very fatal there, 254. NtLumber of Indian natives rei
mainling there, 238. ~ift antd chara~ter of those au-
thors who wrote accounits of thle conquest of, ii. 476.
D~efeription of the aquedudc~ for the fuipply of thle capital
city, iii. 3&3. See Colnies.

Mlichlael, St. thei gulph of, in thle South Se~a, diroveredi and

named by Ba~lboa, i. 290. Thme colony of, citabliibled
by Fi-zarro, iii. 2r.

Migrationrs of mankind, why first made by land, i. I.
Mind,J human, the efforts of it proportione~d to the wants

of the body, ii. 96.

VtTO. III. H h An~te

I N I) E X.

Afines of South America, the great inducement to popu-

lationl, iii. 229. Some account of, 300. Their pro-
duce, 303. The spirit with which they are worked,
306.· Fatal effefts of this ardors 308. Evidence of
the pernliciouls effeasy of labouring inl them, 411. Of
1\Iexico, total produce of, to the Spanish revenue, 436,
437> 43S-

Afollurcca, Islands, thle Spaniih claims on, fold by theEm-

peror Charles V. to the Portuguese, ii. 399-

Alo~nafic infitutions, the pernlicious effecas of, in the Spa-

nifh~ American colonies, iii. 292. Number of convents
there> 4'3*

Alonfoo0NS, the periodical course of, when discovered by na-

vigators, i. 27.

Mnlltfoo, a D~ominican preacher at St. Domingo, pub-

licly remofitrates agrainlit the cruel treatment of the
Indians, i. 305-

M~ontezui~na, the first intelligence received by the Spaniards

of this prince, i* 345. Receives intelligence of the ar-
rival of Fernando Cortes in his dominions, ii. 248*
His presents to Cortes, 250. Forbids him to approach
his capital, 25I. S'taLte of his empire at this time,
,Gbid. His charaaer, 252. His perplexity at the arri-
val of the Spaniards, 253. His timidl negociations with
Cortes, 2j-4. His scheme for defiroying Cortes at
Cholula diicovered, 290. His irresolute condua, 294*
His first interview with Cortes, ibid. Is seized by
Cortes, and confined to the Spanish quarters, 306. Is
fettered, 309. Acknowledges himself a vassal to the
Spanish crown, 3r3. Remains inflexible with regard
to religion, 318. Circumitances of his death, 344-
Account of a gold cup of his, in England, iii. 384*

,Mlarltters, in the Spanish American colonies, explanation

of this diitinetion, iii. 279.

Narvaez, Pamphilo, is sent by Velafques with an arnra-

mrent to 1IR3exico, to supersede Cortes, ii- 324. 'Takes
poirciion of Zempoalla, 33r. Is defeated and taken

9 prisoner

I N D E X.

INDEX.

prlf'oner by Cortes, 334. How hle carried on his cor-
refpondence with IVontezuma, 49I*

N~atchez, an American nation, their political inflitutions,

ii. r37, 138. Causes of their tame fubmii~on to the
Spaniards, 142. Their religious doarines, I143*

Navigation!, the arts of, very slowly improved by man-

kind, i. 2. The knowledge of, prior to commercial
intercourfe> 3. Imperfea~ions of, among the an-
cients, 6. 1110re improved by the invention of the
mariner's compas~s, than by all the efforts of precedinlg
ages, 51. Thle first naval dis~coveries undertaken by
Portugal, 55-

NegrloesC, their peculiar situation under the Spanish dothli-

nion in America, iii. 280.

NewzLfouNdland~, its situation described, ii. 4I8.
New Holland, some account of the country anld inhabitants,

11. 454·

New Spainr, discovered and named by Juan de Grijalva,

i 343.· See Mexico.

Nigno, Alonf~o, his voyage to America, i. 2I4*
N\orwegialns might in ancient times have migrated to, and

colonized America, ii. 46.

Nalgnez Vela, Blas~co, appointed viceroy of Peru, to enforce

the new regulations, iii. 10g. His charaater, I10.
Commits Vaca de Caffro to prison, I I . DiffTenflons
between him and the court of audience, Ir3. Is con-
Eined, Ir4. Recovers his liberty, I16. Ref'umes his
command, ibidi. Is pursued by Gonzalo Pizarro, rI8,
Is defeated and killed by Pizarro, I 19.

Ocagpo, Diego, sent with a squadron from H~ifpantola to

desolate the country of Cumana, i. 332* 335-

Ocampo, Sebastian de, first fails round Cuba, and discovers

it to be an island, i. 267*

Ocean, though adapted to facilitate the intercours~e between

difiant countries, continued long a formidable barrier,
i. 2. See Compa/s and NavigationI.

Ojeda, Alonzo de, his private expeditrion to the Weft In-

dies, i. 212. His second voyage, 227. Obtains' a
government on the continent, 272.

H h Olmledo,

I N D E X.

Olmecdo, Father Bartholomew de, checks the rash~ zeal of

Cortes at Tlalcala in Mexico, ii. 287. Is sent by Cortes
to negociate with Narvaez, 327.

Ord~!ana, Fzrancis, is appointed to the command of a bark

built by Gonzalo Pizarro, and deserts him, iii. 84.
Sails down the Maragnon, 85. Returns to Spain with
a report of wonderful discoveries, 86. Herrera's ac-
count of his voyage, 376.

Orgognez commands Almagro's party againft~the Pizarros,

and is defeated and killed by them, iii. 75*

Orinoco, the great river of, discovered by Chriffopher Co-

lumbus, i. 1997. The amazing plenty of fishing, ii. 4p .
.Strang~e method of chufing a captain among the Indian
tribes on the banks of, 162.

Otahelte, the inhabitants of, ignorant of the art of boiling

water, ii. 469.

Otumb,lr battle of, between Cortes and the Mexicans, ii.

3352-

Ovando, Nicholas de, is sent governor to Hifpanipla, i.

228. His prudent regulations, 230. Refus~es ad-
mimfon to Columbus, on his fourth voyage, 235. His
ungenerous behaviour to Columbus, on his thip-
wreck, 241- 144. Receives him at length, and sends
him home, 247. Engages in a war with the Indians,
253. His cruel treatment of them, 254. Encou-
rages cultivation and manufaflures, 260. His method
of trepanning the natives of the Lucayos, 264. Is
recalled, 268.

PaciFic ocean, why, and by whom to named, ii- 395-
Packet boats, frirt establishment of, between Spain and her

American colonies, iii. 338*

Panaina is fettled by Pedrarias Davila, i. 30'.
Parmenides, the first who divided the earth by zones, L

360. Patagonianns, some account of, ii. 81. The reality of their
gigantic size yet to be decided, 442, 443*

Pedrarias Davila is sent with a fleet to supers~ede Balboa

in his government of Santa 1Waria on the isthmus of

6 Darien,

I N D E X.

Darien, i. 294. Treats Balboa ill, 29;. Rapacious
condua of his men, 297. Is reconciled to Balboa, and
gives him his daughter, 299. Puts Balboa to death,
300. Removes his settlement from Santa Maria to Pa-
nama, 30'.
Penguin, the name of that bird not derived from the Welch

language, i* 374·

Perez, Juan, patronises Columbus at the court of Castile,

i. r06. His solemn invocation for the success of Co-
lumbus's voyage, II8.

Periplus of Hanno, the authenticity of that work justified,

i* 374.

Peru, the first intelligence concerning this country, re-

ceived by Vasco Nugnez de Balboa, i. 285* 29r. The
coast of, first discovered by Pizarro, iii. I2. Pizarro's
second arrival, 18. His hostile proceedings against
the natives, 19. The colony of St. Michael efta-
blifhed, 2I State of the empire at the time of this
invasion, ibidi. The kiingdom divided between Huaf*
car and Atahualpa, 25. Atahualpa ufurps the govern.
ment, 27. Huakcar s~olicits afliftancee from Pizarro, 28.
Atahualpa vilits Pizarro, 33. Is seized by Pizarros 36.
Agreement for his ransom, 38, Is refus~ed his liberty,
42. Is cruelly put to death, 48. Confusion of the
empire on this event, 49. QWito reduced by Benall
cazar, 52. The city of Lima founded by Pizarro, 59.
Chili in~vaded by Almagro, 6r . Infurre~tion of the
Peruvians, 61. Almagro put to death by Pizarro, 78.
Pizarro divides the country among his followers, 81.
Progress of the Spanish arms there, 82. Francis Pi-
zarro anditinated, 90. Reception of the new regula-
tions there, r07. The viceroy confined by the court
of audience, I14. 'The viceroy defeated and killed by
Gonzalo Pizarro, II8. Arrival of Pedro de la Gakca,
r28. Reducaion andi death of Gonzalo Pizarros r37-
The civil wars there nlot carried on with mercenary fol-
diers, 138. But nevertheless gratified with immense
rewards, 140. Their profusion and luxury, ibid. Fe-
rocity of their contefits, r41. Their want of faith,
142. Inflances, I43. Divilion of, by Gafra, among
his followers, 144. A retrofpeat into the original go-
vepnment, arts, and manners of the natives, r5r. The

H h 3 high

I N D E X.

hligh antiquity they ,:retend to, 200. Their re-
cords, 201. Originl oi ,lheir civil policy, 202. This
founded inl relig~ion, 204. The authority of the Incas
ablolute anld unlimited, ibid. All crimes were pu-
nifhed capitally, 206. Mild genius of their religion,
1·07. Its influence on their civil policy, 208. And.
on their military system, 20p. Peculiar slate of pro-
perty there, 210. D~iltinaion of rankis, 211. State
of arts, 212. Imlprovedl slate of agriculture, 213-
Their buildings, 215. Their public roads, 2I7. Their
bridges, 2/9. Their mode of refaining silver ore, 220.
Work~s of elegance, 222. Their civilization1, neverthe-
less, but imperfeac, 223. . Cuzco the only place that
11ad the appearance of a city, ibidl. No perfea~ fepara-
tion of profeflions, 224. Little commercial inttrcourfe,
ibid. Thzir unwarlik~e spirit, 225. Eat their fiefh and
fish raw, 2=7. BSrief account of other provinces under
the viceroy of Necw Spain, 228. Causes of the depo-
pulation of thiis country, 252. Thle small-pox very
fatal there, 254. W'riters who gave accounts of the
conquest or' 36;. Their methlod of building, 396,
State of the r,-venue derived from, by the crown of Spain,
434.· See C/anies.r~r

Peter I. czar of Russia, i , extensive views in prosecuting

Asiatic dif~cov~eril-s, ii. 38-

phenicians, ancient, sl-ate of commerce anld navigation,

among them, i. 8. Theliir trade, how condu~ted, 35I.

Phib)p II·, of Spain his turbulent diofpoition alided by his

American treasures, iii. 3r15 Efiiablifhes the colony of
M~anila: 353*

Phih}p III. exhaults his country by inconsiderate bigotry,

m1. 3'5-

Ph~iihypine iflands,d ircovered by F~e rdinland Magrellan, ii. 396,

A colony eftalblifhed there by Phlilip II. of Spain, iii,
353. Trade betweenl, an~d America, ibidE.

P,6ic, the art of, in America, w-hy colnneaed withl divi*

nation, ui. 194.

Pinto, Chevalier, his defeription of the charaacriffic sea-

tures of the: native Americans, ii. 4-39*

Pinzonr, Vincent Yanez, commands a vessel under Co.

Jumbus in his first voyage of discovery, i. I17. Sails
to America on a private adventure with four thips, I 18,
XDilcovers Yucatan, 266,

Piearro,

IN DE X.

Pizarro, Ferdinand, is belieged in Cuzco by the Peru-

vians, iii. 65. Is s~urprised there by Almagro, 68.
Escapes with Alvarado, 7I. Defends his brother at the
court of Spains 79. Is committed to prison, 81.

Pizarro, F~rancis~co, attends Balboa, in his feettlement on

the isthmus of Darien, i.- 276. Marches under him
across the isthmus, where they diicover the South Sea,
289. His birth, education, and chara~ter, iii. 3. As-
fociates with Almagro and De Luque, in a voyage
of difcovery> 4. His ill success, 6. Is recalled, and
deferttd by most of his followers, 9. Remains on
the island of Gorgona for fuupplies, I I. Discovers the
coast of Peru, ibid. Returns to Panama, I2. Goes
to Spain to solicit reinforcements, r4. Procures the
supreme command for himself, z5. Is assisted with
money by Cortes, I6. Lands again in Peru, 18. His
hoffile proceedings against the natives, 19. Efta-
blifhes the colony of St. Michael, 21. State of the
Peruvian empire at this time, ibid. Cause: of his eafyr
penetration into the country, 27. Is applied to by
Huafcar for assistance against his viatorious brother
Atahualpa, 28. State of his forces, ibid. Arrives at
Caxamalca, 31. Is visited by the Inca, 33. His per-
fidious seizure of him, 36.· Agrees to Atahualpa's of-'
ser for his ransom, 38. Divifionl of their plunder, 40.
Refus~es Atabr·alpa his liberty, 42. His ignorance
expose to Atahualpas 46. Bellows a form of trial on
the Inca, ibid. Puts him to death, 48. Advances to
Cuzco, 50. Honours conferred on him by the Spa-
nifh~ court, 55. B3eginning of diffenflons between him
and Almagro, 56. His civil regulations, 58. Founds
the city of Lima, 59. Infurre~tion of the Peruvians,

S6r. Cuzco seized by Almagro, 68. Deludes Alma-

gro by negaciations, 70. Defeats Almagro, and takes
him prisoner, 7g. Puts Almagro to death, 78* Di-
vides the country among his followers, 81. The im-
politic partiality of his allotments, ibid. Makes his
brother Gon~zalo governor of Quito, 83. Is affaiinated
by Juan de Herrada, 91.

Pizarro, Gonzalo, is made governor of Quito, by his

brother Francis, iii. 83. His expedition over the An-
des, ibid. Is deserted by Orellana, 84. His diffrefs

11h 4 o n

I N D E X.

6n this event, 87. His difaffrous returnl to Quito, 88.
Is encouraged by the people to oppose Nugnezz Vela,
the new viceroy, III. Aflixmes thle government of
Peru, I v g Marches against the viceroy, I l y De-
feats and kills him, II8, Ir9. Is advised by Car-
vajal to assume the sovereignty of the country, 120.
Chuies to negociate with the court of Spain, 122.
Consultations of the court on his condua, r23. H-is
violent resolutions on the arrival of Pedro de la Garca,
129. Resolves to oppos~e him by violence, 13'.
Marches to reduce Centeno at Cuzco, 132. Defeats
him, I33, Is deferred by his troops on the approach
of Gafca, 136. Surrenders and is executed, 137*
His adherents men of no principle, 142.

Plata, Rio de, discovered by Dias de Solis, i. 302. Its

amazing width, ii. 4I8.

Pla~fair, Mr. Profeffor of mathematics in Edinlburgh, the

result of his comparison of the nlarrative andi charts given
in Captainl Cooke's voyages publifbed in I980; and
Mr. Coxe's account of the Ruffian discoveries, printed
in the fame year, in which the vicinity of the two con,
tinents of Asia and America is clearly ascertained, ii,
434--439*

Bliny, the naturalist, inflance of his ignorance in geogra-

phy, i, 35'9*

Pon~ce, de Leon, Juaa, discovers Florida, i. 286. Romantic

motive of his voyage, 28 I.

PPopulatio2 of the ealrth, flow progress of, i. I.
Porto Bello, discovered and named by Chriffopher Co-

lumbus, i. 238*

Porto Rico, is fettled and fubjeaed by Jsan Ponce de

Leon, i. 265,

Porto Santo, the first discovery of, i. 63*
.Povrtugal, when and by whom the court of inquisition was

sirs1 introduced intol i. 361,

Portucgue/e, a view of the circumitances that induced

gem to undertake the dis~covery of unknown coun-
tries, i* 56. 59. Firit African discoveries of, 60.
Madeira difcoveredi, 64, 65. They double Cape Boqja-
dor, 66. Obtain a papal grant of all the countries they
gould discover, 70. Cape Verd Islands and the

Azores

INDEX.

A4zores difcovered> 72. Voyage to the East Indies by
Vasco de Gama, 207*

Potof the rich silver mines there, how discovered, lii.

305. The mines of, greatly exhauffed and scarcely
worth working, 424.·

Prisoners of war, how treated by the native Americans,

11. I 54*

Propertyr, the idea of, unknown to the native Americans,

ii. I30. Notions of the Brafillians concerning, 4F56.

Protec~or of the Indians, in Spanish America, his func-

tion, iii. 287.

Ptolemy, the p~hilosopher, his geographical deferiptions

more ample and exaQ than those of his predecetrors,
i. 35. His geography tranilated by the Arabians, 39*
His erroneous polition of the Gangess 356.·

Quetlavaca, brother of Montezuma, faucceeds him asking

of Mexico, ii* 326. Conduas in person the fierce
attacks which obliged Cortes to abandon his capital,
363. Dies of the small-pox, 364·
nev"edo, Bishop of Darien, his conference with Las Ca-
fas on the treatment of the Indians, in the presence of
the Emperor Charles V. i. 327*

(sickc~lver, the property of the famous mines of, at Gua-

nacabelica, res~erved by the crown of Spain, iii. 424-
The price of, why reduced, ibid.
U2rnq~uina, or Jesuits Bark, a produaion peculiar to Peru,
m1. 3'0.
wfios, or hifferic cords of the Peravians, some account
of, iii. 2o I.
2Uito, the kingdom of, conquered by Huana Capac, Inca
of Peru, iii. 25. IS left to his son Atahualpa, ibid.
Atahualpa's general revolts after his death, 50. Is
reduced by the Spaniards under Benalcazar, 52*
Benalcazar deprived, and Gonzalo Pizarro made go-
yernor, 83*

Ramuf~o,

I N D E X.

RamuJ~o, his defence of Hanno's account of the coast of

Africa, i* 353-

Regi/ler ships, for what purpole introduced in the trade

between Spain and her colonies, iii. 332. Supersede
the use of the galeons, 333.

Religion of the native Ame~ricans, an inqluiry into, it.

18I.

Ribas, his account of the political slate of the people of

Cinaloa, ii. 466. Of their want of religion> 470.

Rio de la ~Plata, and Tucuman, account of thos~e pro-

vmeces, mi. 239-

Riv~ers, the amazing size of those in America, ii. 4.
Robifon, profeffor, his remarks on the: temperature of va-

rious climates, ii. 419*

Roldan, Francis, is left chief juffice in Hiirpaniola, by

Christopher Columbus, i. I88. Becomes the ringleader
of a mutiny, 200. Submits, 204*

Romans,.their progress in navigation and discovery, i.

25. Their military spirit averse to mechanical arts
and commerce, 26. Navigation and trade favoured
in the provinces under their government, sy. Their
extensive discoveries by land, 29. Their empire and
the sciences destroyed togethers 36.

Rubruguis, father, his embaffyr from France to the Chan

of the Tartars, i. 47*

Rufans, Asiatic discoveries made by them, ii. 38. Un-

certainty of, 432*

EacotecaJ, the rich silver mines there, when discovered,

iii. 305*

San Salvador, discovered and named by Christopher Co-

lumbus, i. 134·

Sancho, Don Pedro, account of his Hiflory of the Con-

quest of Peru, iii* 365*

Sandosal, the thocking barbarities executed by, in Mexico,

11* 404.

Sandoval,

IN D EX.

Srnda'oval, Francisco Tello de, is sent by the emperor

Charles V. to Mexico, as vifxtador of America, iii.
I09. His moderation and prudence, 106.

Savage life, a general effimate of, ii. 2I0.
Scalps, motive of the native Americans for taking them

from their enemies, ii. 461.

Serr-alvo, marquis de, his extraordinary gains during his

viceroyalty in America, iii. 439*

Seville, extraordinary increase of its manufaatures by the

American trade, iii. 425. Its trade greatly reduced,
425. The American trade removed to Cadiz> 32r.

Silver ore, method of refining it praatiied by the native

Peruvians, iii. 221.

Bonora, late dilcoveries of rich mines made there by the

Spaniards, iii. 221.

Sourl, American ideas of the immortality of, it. 191.
South Bea, first dis~covered by Vasco Nugnez de Balboa,

i. 290.

Epain, general idea of the policy of, with regard to the

American colonies, iii. 260. Early interpolition of
the regal authority in the colonies, 26r. All the
American dominions of, fubjeated to two viceroy~Ps,

26.A third viceroyalty lately eftablifhled, 263. h

colonies of, compared with those of Greece and Rome,
2'i0. Advantages the derived from her colonies, 3I3*
W~hy the does not itill derive the fame, 3r4. Rapid
decline of trade, 3It6. This declinle increased by the
mode of regulating the intercourse with America, 3'9*
Employs guarda cofias .to check illicit trade> 33'.
The use of regiffer fhiipe introduced> 332. Effablifh-
ment of the company of Caraccas> 335. Enllargement
of commercial ideas there, 337. Free trade permitted
to s~everal provinces, 340. Revenue derived fronx
America, 356. Sp~ecifications 434*

Spaniards, their curious form of taking pofefion of new-

discovered countrics, i. 382·

Strabo, a citation from, provinlg the great geographical

ignorance of the antients, i* 355. His own want of
geopraphical knowledge, 360.

Surperflition alwfays connedted with a desire of penetrating

hito the secrets of futurity, u1. 194.

SN D E .

Tafsia, Chriftoval de, is sent from Spain to Mexico, to

supersede Cortes inl his command, but fails in the at-
tempt, u. 400.

Tartars, the pollbility of their migrating to America, ii.

43*

Tla/cala in M~exico, chara~ter of the natives of, ii. 27;.5

Oppose the passage of the Spaniards, 277. Are re-
duced to sue for peace, 283-

Tobacco, that of Cuba the best flavoured of any in all

America, iii. 3'I1

Toupinambos, account of their ferocious courage from

Lery, ii. 463*

Ti-rae, free, opened between Spain and her colonies, iii.

340. Increase of the Spanish cuffoms from this mea-
fure> 430, 437.

Trade winds, the periodical course of, when discovered

by navigators, i. 27-

STravellers, ancient chara~ter of their writings, i. go.
Trinidad, the island of, discovered by Chriffopher Co-

lumbus on his third voyage, i. 197-

Tucuman, and Rio de la Plata, account of those provinces,

iii. 239-
yre, the commerce of that city, how condutaed, i* 35r*
Tyjthes of Spanish America, how applied by the court of

Spain, m*i 435*

Vaca de Cafro, Chrifioval, is sent from Spain to regulate

the government of Peru, iii. 80. Arrives at Quito,
94. Assumes the supreme authority, ibid. Defeats
young Almagro, 96. The severity of his proceedings,
97. Prevents an infurreaion concerted to oppole the
new regulations, log. Is imprisoned by the new vice-
roy, III.

Falvevrde, father Vincent, his curious harangue to Ata-

hualpa, Inca of Peru, iii. 34.· Gives his f~anaion to
the trial and condemnation of Atahualpa, 47-

IN D EX.

Vega, Garcilairo de la, chara~ter of his commentary on

the Spanifhl writers concerning Peru, ili* 367.

Vegeta~bles, their natural tendency to fertilize the foil wvhere

they grow, ni. 24, 25.

Vela/quez, Diego de, conquers the island of Cuba, i. 278.

377. His preparations for invading New Spain, ii.
231. His ditliculty in chufing a commander for the
expedition, 232, Appoints F~ernando Cortes, 233*
His motives to this choice, 235. Becomes suspicious
of Cortes, 236. Orders Cortes to be deprived of his
commiflion, and arrefied, 237> 238. Sends an arma-
ment to M~exico after Cortes, 32r.

Venegas, P. his chara~ter of the native Californianls, ii.

448*

Venreral disease, originally brought from America, i. 87.

Appears to be wearing out, ibidE. Its first rapid pro-
gref~s, ii. 444-

Vene-zuela, hiffory of that fettleement, iii. 245-
Venice, its origin as a maritime slate, i* 43. Travels of

Marco Polo, 48-

Verd, islands dis~covered by th~e Portuguese, i. 72.
Viceroys all the Spanifhl dominions in America f~ubjeated.

to two, iii. 262. A third lately effablifhed, 263·
Their powers, ibid. A fourth eftablithed> 346.

Villa Segnor, hise count of the slate of population in New

Spain, iii. 404, His detail of th~e Spanish American
revenue, 434-

Villefagnal, Antonio, one of Cortes's soldiers, foments a

mutiny among his troops, ii. 368. Is dil~covrered by
Cortes, and hanged, 369.

Ullea, Don Antonio de, his description of the charaaer-

iffic features of the native Americans, ii. 439. His
reason for the Americans not being 10 sensible of pain
as the refl of mank~ind> 464. His account of the goods
exported from Spain to America, with the duty on
them, iii. 434-

Volcanor, remarkable number of, in the northern parts of

the globe dilcovered by the Ruffians, ii. 433-

Wafer,

1 N D E. X.

W

Wanfer, Lionel, his account of a peculiar race of dimninu-

tive Americans, ii. 77. Compared with similar pro-
duaions in Africa, 78-
W~ar-fong of the native Americans, the sentiments and

terms of, ii. 462.

Women, the condition of, among the native Americans,

ii. zo2. Are not prolific, 106. Are not permitted to
join in their drunken feasts, 207. Nor to wear orna-
ments> 465.

Xerez, Francifico de, secretary to Pizarro, the earliest

writer on his Peruvian expedition, iii. 365-

Xirmens, Cardinal, his regulations for the treatment of

the Indians in the Spanith colonies, i. 3'2. Patronises
the attempt of Ferdinand Magellan, ii. 393-

Yurcatan, the province of, discovered by Pinzon and Dias

de Solis, i. 266. Deferibed> 386. From whence that
province derives its value, iii. 233. Policy of the court
of Spain with refplea to, 234-.

Zarate, Don Auguffine, charatter of his History of thle

ConqueRt of Peru, iii- 366.

Zones, the earth how divided into, by the geography of the

ancients, i. 32. By whom first to divided, 360.

Zurmmarraga, Juan de, first bishop of Mexico, the de-

firoyer of all the ancient records of the Mexican em-
pire, iii. I56.

END OF THE THIRD VOLUME.·

# Just Published, New Editions of the following BOOKS:

'Yu/l2 Publithed,

New~ Editions· of the follo~wing B O 0 S:
r. The History of Scotland, during the Reigns

of Queen M~ary and of King 'fames VI. till his
Accession to the Crown of England; with a Review
of the Scottijy Hiffory previous to that Period;
and an Appendix containing Original Papers :
2Vols. 4to. By William Robertson, D. D. 11i. Ios.

",* Another Edition, 2 Vols. 8vo. 12s.
ift Another Edition, I Vol. 8vo. 7s. 6d.
2. The History of the Reign of the Emperor

Charles V. with a View of the Progress of Society
in .Europe, from the Subverflon of the Roman
Empire to the Beginning of the Sixteenth Cen-
tury. By William Robertson, D. D. Embelliihed
with 4 Plates, elegantly engraved: 3 Vols. 4co.
3 1. 3 s.

*z* Another Edition> 4 Vols. 8vo. I 1. 4 s.
3. The History ofAmerica, Vols. I. and II. 4to.

By the fame Author. Illultrated with IVaps.
2 1. 2 s.

4. An H~ilorical Difqumittion concerning the

Knowledge which the Ancients had of India; and
the Progress of Trade with that Country prior to
the Discovery of the Passage to it by the Cape of
Good Hope: W~ith an Appendix, containing Ob-
fervations on the civil Policy, the Laws and judi-
cial Proceedings, the Arts, the Sciences, and re-
ligious Inflitutions of the Indians. By the fame.
Author. Illuffrated with Maps. I Vol* 4to.
15 s. in Boards.

# THE FOLLOWING VALUABLE BOOKS Are printed for A. STRAHAN and T.CADELL,in the Strand. 1792.HISTORY, VOYAGES, and TRAVELS.

iH~E POLLOWING -VALUABlj]E

Are printed for A. STRAuAN and T. CAnnx, in

the.Scrand.

'792.

tIssroitt, VOYAGES, and 'TitAvaLS,

PTHE Hiffory of Engl'and, from the Inv~afon of Juiits.

SGafar to the Revolution. A new Edition,

printed on fine Paper, with many Corre£1ions and Ad-
ditions; and a complete Index,. 8 vols. Royal Paper,
4to. with fine lmpreliodns of the Plates, 81. 18s. 6d.

* Another Edition on Cmall Paper> 41. ros.

1 t. Another Edition in 8 vols. 8vo. illuffrated with·

Plates, 21. 16s.1

The fliffory ofEnglandl, from the Revolution to the

Dieath of Geo,·ge 11. designed as a C'ontinuation of IV1r.
Hums's Hiffory il Juffrated with Plates. ByT. Smallett,
5 vols. Evo. 11. 25s.

The Hifforyr of Great Britain, ·from the Refloration

to the Accefmon of the House -of Hanover. By 'fames
~Macpheffon, Efg; the 2d Edition; a vols. with a Head
of the -Author, 21* 5s,

Original Papers~: containing the Secret Hiffory of

Great Britain, from the Refforation to the Accellion of
the Houle of Hanover: To which are prefixed, Extra~ts
from the Life of James II. as written by himselF; · pub-
]lhed from the Originals; 2 veo, ls.. 5s.

The Hillory of Scotland, during the Reign of Queen

Afary and of King 7ames Vl. till his Acceilion to the
Crown of England ; with a Review of the Scotti/h Hiflory
previous to that Period; and an Appendix, containing
Original Papers, 2 vols* 4.to. B y W-illiam Robertson,
D. D. 5th Edition, 11. ros.

*** Another Edition in 2 vols. 8vo. r4s.
The Hiffory of the Reign of the Emperor Obarles V.

with a View of the Progrels of Society in Europe, from
the Subverflon of the Roman Empire to the Beginning
of the sixteenth Century. By Wtiiamn Robertson, D. D.
Embelliihed with 4 Plates,- elegantly engraved : 3 vols.

31.* Another Edition in 4 vols. 8vo. If . 4s.

IA]

Rsbertfon, D. D. Illuffrated with Maps. 21. 2s.

fCt Another Edition in 3 vols. 8vo. 18s.
An Hiflorical Difquilition, concerning the KnowHledge

wvhich the Anlcients had of India, and the Progress of
the Trade with that Country, prior to the Dilcovery of
the Passage to it by the Cape of Good HoPe. With an Api
pendix containing Obs~ervations on the Civil Policy--
the Laws, aind- udicial Proceedings the Arts-the
Sciences, and religious Inltitutions of the Indians. By
#Filiam Robertjon, D). D. illouffrated with Maps. r8s.

The Hiffory.of Greece. By W~illiam MItford, Efq;

Vols. I. and II. Il* I9s. in boards.

.**The two Volumes include the Hiflory of Greece

from the earliest Accounts to the End of the Peloporr.
oefian War, anld it is intended to, continue the Hiffory
till the Redudtion of Achaia into a Province of the Ro-
rpan Empire.

The Hiflory of Ancient Greece, its Colonies, and Con-

Puef1s; from the earliest Accounts till the Divilian of
the Macedonian Emlpire in the East, including the Hilte-
ry of Literature, Philos/ophy, ~nd the F~ine Arts. By 'flij
Gillies, LL.D. FIR. 9. adorned with a Head of the
Author, and Maps adapted to the Work* 4 vols. 3&
Edition. r1. 8s.

A View of the Reign of Fredlerick II. of Prufia, with

a Parallel between that Pr~ince and Philip II. of Ma-
edlon. By 7ohn Gillics, LL. D. r'. R. S. and S. A.
E~vo. ·is.

The Hiflory of the Reign of Philip II. Kingo of Sbain.

By Robert W~tfon, LL.DI. Profeff'or of Philosophy and
Rhetoric, at the University of St. Andrew. 2d .Edit.
2 vols. 21. 2s.

*.*Another Edition in B· vols. 8v'o. Ifs.

T'he Hiffory of the Decline and Fall of the Rbman

Erispire.. By Edwarrd Gibbon, Ely. 6 vols. which com.
plete a Period of Hiffory from the Age of Trajanz and the
Anltonines, to the taking of Con/7antinrople by the Turks,
anld the Eflablifhlment at Romle of the Domninion of the
Popes, adornecd with a Head of the Auther, and Maps
adapted to the Work. 6Li 6s. Boards.

.,# T'he 4thi 5th, and 6th Vols. may be had repbtate,

to complete Sets, 3l. 3S. Boards

$+1 Another Edit. complete in r2 Vols. 8vo. gl.12 e.
Also an Abri~dgement of this Work for the Use of

young Padone. 2 Vok., 8vo, J4s.

The hroolog an Hiforyof the World, from the

Cereation to the Year of Chriff 90 lufae n5
·Copper-plate Tables, with I6 Maps of Ancient and
IVodern Geography. By the Reverend John ·Blair,
LL. D. 31 * 3s. 6d.

The Hiffory of the L~egal Polity of the doman State:

and of the~ Rife, Progrels, and Extent -of the R~omnn
Laws, By Thomas Be~ver, LL. D. 4to. 11. Is.

An Flifforical View of the Engli/b G;overnment, from

tihe Settlement of the Saxons in Britain, to the Accellion
of theHoufe of Stewart. By John Miliar, Efq; Profeffor
of Law in the U~niversity of Gla3/gow. 2d Edition. I1. Is.

Mikcellaneous State. Papers, from 15cr to r726, in

2 Vols* 4to. Collea-ed from the Museum, Haidwicke,
ahd other valuable Colledtions. 21. 2s.

Medioirs of Great Britain and Ireland, from the D'IC-

solution of the last Parliament of Charles II. until thi
C'apture of the French anld Spann Fleets at Vigo. By
Sir ~john DaRlrythple, Bart.q gd Edition, with Appendixes
complete. 3 Vols. >l. :6s. .

The Hiffory of England, from the earliest Accounts

of Time to the Death of George II. adorned with Heads
elegantly engraved. By Dr. G'old/mith. 4 Vols. Il- 4s.

An Abridgement of the above Book, by Dr; Gold-

firidth, adorned with Cuts. for the Ofre of~ Schools. 3s.6d.

The Parliamentary or Conflitutional Hiffory of Eng-

land, from the earliest Times to the Refforation of King
i'harles II. Colleaed ,from the Records, the Rolls of
Parliament, the Journals of both Houfis, the public Li-
braries, orig~inal MIanufcripts, Fearce Speeches and Traas: .
All conripired with the fevetal cotemporary· W~riter~s, and
bonneaed throughout with the Hiffory of the Times.
With a good Index, by several Hands. 24.Vols,8vo.71.73.

Grey's Deliates, being a Continuation of the above; it

io Vols'31 3·;

.Mertoirs of the Duoke of Sully, I'rinie Miiniffer ai
flenry the Grreat. Containing the Hifrory of the Life
and Reign of that Mlonarch, and his own Adminiffratiori
under him. Translated from the Frenlch. To whijch is
Added, the Trial of Ravail!ac, for the M;urder of Henrfi
the Great. A nevi Editioir. In 5 Vols. 8vo. r1. Ios.

* / Anotlier Editiosi, in 6 Vols. x2mo. )8s.
The Flifory of the Public Revenue of the Britz)h

Em~pire, from the earliest Accounts to Michaelmas 1788.
By Sir gohn Sinclair, Bart. 2 vols. 4to. 11. 6s.

Tihi: Livis of the aolof eminent Englip Poets; widil

IA 2]

Criitcal Oblervation~s on their W~orks. By Samuel Jodrn
son, LL D. 4 Vols. 11. 4s.

An Inquir), historical and critical, into the Evidence

againfrt Maryt Queen of Scots; and an Examination of
the Hifftories of D~r. R~otbrtfon and Mr. Hume, with Re-
[ped to that Evidence. By I~jiliam Tytier, Efq; F. R. S.
Ed 4th Edit. with very confiderableAdditions, tVols, 14s.

An Ecclefiaficiial Hirlory, Ancient and Miodern, from

the Birth of Christ to the Beginning of the prelent Cen-
tury. In which the Rife, Progrels, and Vari~itions of
Church Power are considered, In thelr Conne~ion with
the State of Learning and Philosop~hy, and the political
History of Europe,, during that Period. By the late
Learned fabn Lawrpnce Majlheim, D. D. Translated,
and accompanied with Notes antd Chronological T~ables,
by $rshibiald Afaclaine, D. D. A new Edition, cor-
reated and improved. 6 Vols. 21. 2s.

ftoman Antiquities; or an Account of the Manners

and Caftoms of the Romans; refp~eaingb their Govern-
anrnt, Mfagiffnray, Laws, Religion, Games, Military and
N'aval Affairs, &c. &ic. Designed chiefly to illuithate the
Latin Cladiecs. By .dlexander Adama, LL, D.

An Hiflorical and Clal~ical Dialignary, containing the

Lives and CJharatters of the most eminent and learned Per-~
fanbs in every ?ge and Nation, from the earliest Period to
the prelent Tirne. By John N~oorthouc·k. 2 VolS. x1s.

Bibliotheca Claffica; or a Claffcal Diationary, con-~

tainmnp a futll Account of all the proper Names men-
tioned' in antient Authors. To which are fub~joined
Tables of Coins, W'eights and Mteafures, in Use amoang
the Greeks and Romans. By J. Lempriere A. M. of
Plnmbroke Collge, Oxford/.

A Ph~ilosophical and P'oliti~cal History of the Settlements

and Trade of the Europeans in the Ea/ and Wef Indies,
translated frorn the Frenc~h of the Abbe Reynall. By 7,
guflamond, M. A. A new Edition, carefully r-evised, in
8 Vols. 8ra. and illulthated with Maps.- 21. 8s.

Sketches of the History of Man, by the Author of the

Elements of Criticilm, 4 Vols. xl. 8s. 3d Edition,

An Account of the Voyages undertaken by Order of

his prelent Maijefty for making Dircoveries in the
Southern Hemilphere, aniFlucceffively performed by Come
snodojre Byron, C~apt. I~ais, and Capt. Carteret, In the
.Dolphin, and Swanllow, and the Endeavour j drawn up from
the Journals which were kept by the [everalCommanders,
and from the Papers of yofeph Banks, Efqi and Dr. Solars .

der. By gohn Hawkc/w~torth, LL. D. Ill~uffrated with
Cuts, and a great Variety of Charts and Miaps (in all g2
Plates) relative to the Countries now first discovered, orr
hitherto but imperfeftly known. Price 31. Its.

.An Account of a Voyage towards the South Pole
and round the World, performed in his Majeffy's Ships
the Refoblution and Adlventure, in the Years ify2, s773s
1774, and '775. Wrlittel ·by gamers Cook, Comlman~der
of the Resolution. In which is included, Captain Fur-
neaux's Narrative of his Proceedings in the di'venture,
huring the Sep~aration of the Ships. Elepantly printed
in two Vols. Royal. Illuffrated with M2~aps and Charts,
and a Variety of Portraits of Pderfons, and Viewsrof
Places, drawn during the Voyage by Mr. Hodlges, and
pagraved by the most eminent Mast~ers. 2L, rzs.

Proceedings of-the Aflbisrition for pramatinga the Dil-

covery of the interior Parts of Afr~ica. W~ith a Map of
the Country. 8vo. 6s.

Travels through Spain,. in the Y'ears 1775, and '776*

In which several Monuments of Roman and Mdor~i Ar-
chitedtulre are illuffrated by accurate Drawings taken onl
the Spot. By Hienry· Swinburn, Efql; 2d Edit'. 2 Vols. lqs.

Travels in the two Siiis.B erySibrn

f'

in the Years 1777, '778, '779, and 1780. With a Malp
of the two Sicilies, and 22 Plates of Views, &~c. 2d Edit.
5 Vols. 11. 8s.

Travels in Switzerlatnd, in a Series of L~etters to Wi'l-

liam Adelmoth, Efq., from W~iliamn Coxe, PY. A. F. R. S.
F. A. S. KRe~or of B;.merton, &c. &tc. &c. 3 V'ols. 11-
lustrated with at large M~ap of Switzerland, and other
Plates. I1. 7s.

Trave-ls into Poland, Rt!fia, Swevden, and Dermar.F,

~interspersed with hifforical Relations and politic~al En-
quiries, illuifbated with Maps and Engravingp, By
W~liam Coxe, A. M. F. R. S. &c. 5 VJ'ols. 3d1 Ed. I1. 1Is. 6d.

A new Volume, beinig the 3d1 in 4to. and the 5th in 8vo.

of the above Work, with a Map of Southern Nior-wa~,
and other Plates. May be hnd F- parate.

An Account ~of the Krefian D1rcoveries between Asia

and Amnerica ; to which ale added, the Conquest of Si-
6e, ia, anld the H-iffory of the ~Tranfadionsn anld Commerce
betwer-a RlrFa and Chi;na. By Wkilli~am Coxe, A. Ms.
Fl. R. S. Illuffrated with Charts, and a View of a! Chi.
nefe Town. gd Edition. 7s. 6d.

A complete Translation of the Count de Bufons N·a-·

tu~ral Hilory, from the 4.th: Edition in 16ee Vos,4

with, occallonal Notes and Observations. By W;lliary
Sm;elie, Member of the Philosophical and Antiquarian
Societies of Edinburgh. Illuffrated with goo Copper
Plates. 9 Vols* 41. Is.

A Philosophical Survey of the South of Ireland, in a

Series of Letters to Jchn Watkinf/on, M. D. 7s.

SA Tour in Ireland, with general Observations on the
present State~ of that Kingdom, made in the Years 1776,
1777, and r778, and brouoht down to the End of 1779.
Ily At~hur Youngn, Efgl; F. R. S. 2 Vols 2d Edit. rqs.
SA Tour through Sicily and iMalta. In a Series of Let-
ters to WYilliam Beckford, Efg; from ·P. Btydone, F 11. S.
j Vols. Illustrated with a MLap. ad Edition. I2s.

Observations and Reflec~ions made in the Course of a

fourney through France, Italy, and Germany. By Hejt!
Lynch Piozzi. 2-Vols. 14s.

Observations made in aTour from Bengal to Perjia,

in the Year r786-7; with 4 thort Account of the Re-
mains of the celebrated Palace of Persepolis, and other
intereffing -Events. By WTilliam Friancklin, Ensign on
the Hon. Company's ~Bengal Effablifhment,` lately re-
turned from Per/ia. 2d Edition. 8vo.~ 7s.

A View of Society and Mlanners In France, Switzer-

land, and Gecrmaniy, with Anecdotes relating to some emi-
nent Charalterp., By John Moore, M. D. 2Vols. Ith
Edition. rzs.

A View of Socrety and Mapners id Italy, with Anee-

dotes relating to fame eminent Charadiers. By Jobs
Moo70rC, Mi. D. 2 VolS. 4th Edition. I4s.

A Tour through some of the Northern Parts of Europe,

particularly Copenhagen, Stockbolm, and Peterfburgh, in a
Series of etters. 3y N. rawall, Efq; M. P.3dEd. 6s.

A Journey to thle Wefl-ern Isles of Scotland. By the

Author of the Rambler. 6s.

A Journey frorn Gibr~aar to 116laga, with a View of

the Garrison and'its Environs, &c. &c. Illuffrated with
a View of each Mlunicipal T'own, and a Chart, &c. By;
Francis Gavrtr, Efq: 2 Vols. with a great Number of'
Plates. 2d Edition. 18s. in Boards.

DIVINITY.

I/aiah, a new Translation, with a preliminary Dif.

fertion, and Notes Critical Philological, and Expla-
rmatory. By RobertLowth, D. D. F. R. S. London and
*9 tlting, late Lord Bilhop of London. 2d! Edit, !Il s,

The Four Golpcls, translated from the Greek : with

prelimiinary Dissertations and Ndotes, Critical and Ex-
planatory. By reorge Camnhell, D. D. f., R. S. Princi-
pal of Marifchal College, Aberdeen. 2 Vols. 4to. 21. Jos.

Sermons on rfeveral Subjeacs. By the Right Rev.

Beiloy Porteuts, D. D. Bilhop of London. 6th Edit. 6s.-

An Introduaion to the Study of the Prophecies con-

Ferning the Christian Church, and in particular concern-
ing the Church of Papal Romne: in twelve Sermons
preached in Lino~ls-lan Chapel, at the Lteaure of the
R8ight Rev. William WYarburton, Lord Bishop of Glouce/2er.
By Richard Hurd, D. D. now L~ord Bilhop of Woircejfer.
The 3d Edition. z Vols. ·js.

Sermons preached at Lincoln's-Inn Chapel, betweett

the Years l'765 and '776; with a larger D~ilcourfe on
Chbriti's driving: the M/erchants out of the Temple, in
which the Nature and End of that famous Tranfa~ion
are explained. By Richard Hurrd, D. D. Lord Bilhop
ofIWarcpieve. 2d Edition. 3 Vols. 18s.

*.* 2d and 3d Vols. may be had separate, to complete

Sets. ios. 6d. inBoards.

Sermons by Hurgh Blair, D. D. one of the Miniffers

of the High Church, and Profeffor of Rhetoric and
Belles Lettres in the University of Edinburgh. I6th Edit.
3 Vols. 19s.

"** The gd Volume may be had separate, 6s. in Boards.
bermons by Wtilliam Leechman, D). D. late Principal

of the College of Gla/gowu; with some Account of the
Author's Life, and of his LeAures. By James Wadraw,·
D. D. 2 Vols. rqs.

Dilcourfes on various Subjeas. By Jacob Duchi',

10. A. formerly ReLaor of Chri/f-churrch and St. Peter's,
Philadelphia ; and late Chaplain to the Asylum for fe-
rnale Orphans, in the Pacifh of Lambeth, Strryl. 3d
Edition. 2 Vols. I 4s.

One hundred Sermons on praatical Subjeas, extrac~ed

chiefly from the Works o·f the Divines of the last Cen-
tury. By Dr. Burn. 4 Vols. 11. 48*

Sermonrs by the late Lauirene Sterne, ML. A. 6 Vols. I Bs.
Sermons on the Christian Doairine as received by the

~diffe~rent Denoonnations of Chr~ifians. To which are
added, Sermons on the Security and Happiness of a vir-
tuous Course, on the Go:odness of God, and on the Re-
furreaion of Lazarurs. By R. Price, D. D. LL. Ds
r, 11. S. &c. 2d Edit, wuithan .dpe~ndix. 6s.

· Sermons on various Subjeats, and preached on several
Occasions. By the late Rev. Thomas Franck!int, D. @,
4th Edition* 3 Vols. I1. 4s.

Sennons on the Relative Duties. By.the lame. 6s.
SFour Dissertations. I. On Providenlce. li. On Pray-
er. III. On the Reasons for expeqting that vircuous Men
fltall meet after Death in a State of HappineTs. IV On
the Importance of Christianity, · the Nature of Hifforical
Evidence and Miracles.- By RichardPr-ice, D. D.S. R. S.
4.th Edit. 8vo. 6s.

Sermons to young Women, By yames Fordyce, D,D.
SVols.- 6th Edit. 7s.

AddrelTes to young Men, by the fame Author.

2 Vols. 8s.

Sermons by Colin Milne, D. D. Re~tor of Narth Cha-.

fel, in Sufex, and Le~turer of St. PadlS, De·ptford. 6s.

Sermons on various Subjeats, by the late John ~Farr

qubar, A. M. carefully correated from the Author's MSS.
by George Gampbell, D. D. and Alexander Gerrard, D. D.
4th Edit·. 7.s.
· A Review of the principal Queffions in Morals. By!
,Richard Price, D. D. F'. R. S. 3d Edit. corre~ted. Is.

Mld2/ellanics, Books of Entertainment, Poetry, Is'c.

The Works of the late Right Hon. Henry St. Qobs

Lord Vilcount Bolingbrokei containinga all his Poli~tical
imd Philofophtical Works; a new an elegant Edition.
5 Vols. 4to.

*.* Another Edition in II Vols. 8vo. 21. 16s.
T he Works of Francis Bacon, Baron of Veralamr, ViT-

count St. Alban's, and Lord High Chancellor of Eng-
landl. 5 Vols. Royal Paper.

An Inquiry into the Nature and Caures of the Wealth

of Nations. By Adam Smith, LL. D). F. R. S. 3 Vols,
r1. Is. 6th Edition.

An Inquiry into the Principles of Political (IEconomy;

being an Essay on the Science of Domeffic Policy in Free
Nations; in ·which are particularly considered, Popula-
tion, Agriculture, Trade, Induffry, Money, Coin, In-
tereit, Circulation, Bansks, Exchange, Public Credit,
Taxes, &c. By Sir James Stuart, Bart. a vols. Royal
Paper. 21. 2s. Boards.

Essays and Treatises on several Subjeas. By Davrid

H-ums, Efq. with his last Corredlions and Additions,
3· vols. 4to. I1. r 6s.

"C# Another Edition, in a vols. 8vo. 14s.

MXoral and Political Dialo ues, with Letters on Chis
valry and Romance. By Richard IHurd, D D. post
Lord Bithop of W~ol-r/cfr. 3 vols. los, 6d.

An Eflady on the Hinory of Civil Society. By Adam

F~erguson, LL, D* 3d Edit. 6s.

Llements of the Science of Ethics on the Principles~

of Natural Philosophy. By John B'rue, A. M. 6s.

Effadys on the History of Mankind, in rude and cul-

tivated Ages. By James Dunbiar, LL. D. Profefolb; of
Philosophy in the King's College, and University of
Aberdeen. 6s.

Memoirs of the Literary and Philosophical Society of

AlancheJfer.l Illuffrated with Plates. 3 vols. I1. 2s,

"*z* The gd Volume may be had separate, Price Is.

in Boards.

Zeluco. Various Views o~f Human Natuire, takers

from Life and Manlners, foreign and domeltic. zd Edit.
2 vols. I4**

ProTe on ifeveral Occasions, accompanied with feme

Pieces in Verse. By G. Coh~nan. 3 vols.. '56'- lb~

SThe WVor~ks of Lucian, fromt the Gresek. y hma

Fnranlin, D). D. 4 Vols. I1- 4 *

The Theory of Mloral Sentiments. By AdamrSmlith,

LL. D. F. R. S. 5th Edition. 2 Vols. 148-
' The Elements of Moral Science. By Jame Beoank,
LL. D). ProFefobr of Moral P-hilosophy and Logic in
;Manrifchal College, Aberdeen. Vol. I. 8veo. 7s.'

`h~e Works of Az'exander PapB, Efy. with his hit

Correftions, Additions, and Improvements, as they wvere.
delivered to the Editor a little before his Death; ro-
gether with the Commenltary an~d N~otes of Dr. IRar-
burton. Adorned with Cuts. In 9 large Vols. 8vo.
21. r 4s.

The fame in 6 Vols. 12mo. 18s.
A complete and elegant Editioni of the Englilh Poetsr,

printed in 75 Packet Volumes, on a fine Writing Pap~er.
111uffrated with H-eads enrgraved by Bar to!oz;zi, Cak~wed:l,
HalI, Sher-win. &c'. Mc. witb a Putface Bji·graphical anld
Critical to each Author. lBy Samurel phlajn, L~L. D.,
2 31. 2s. 6d.

A new Edition of the Shipwreck, a Poem in three

Can~tos, by a Sailor; with twio Platier, iz.j~ a Sea Chare,
and an Elevation of a Ship, with all her Matts, Yard,
Sants, and Rigging. T'o this Ediiioa is added, an ltegy
on the Subje~t* 3s. sewed.

The Works of Saame 7enyns, Efq. including leveral

Pieces never before publi(hed To which are prefixe($
thort Sketches of the History of the Author's Family,
and also of his Life. By Chaorles Nallon Cole, Efq. with
a Hlead of the Author. 4 Vols. 11.

Leuters to and from the late Samuel 'rohnfon, LL. D.

To which are added some Poems never befoire prinited,~
Pub~ilhed from the Original in her Poffetion. By Hybr
gynch Piozzi. 2 Vols. 14s

T'he Works of Mnr. ~thom/an compleat, elegantly

printed on a fine Writing Paper, with Plates, and a
~Life ofthe Author. 3 Vols. I1. 4*

Another Edition, 3 Vols. Clown, 18s. or 2 Vols,

common. 7s.

The Seafone, in a Twelves Edition, and molk of his.

Pieces separate. Price only 2s. 6d.

Another Edition of the Seasons, in a smaller Size,

printed on a fine Writing Paper. 4s.

The Triumphs of Temper; a Poem in fix Cantos.

By I~lliam Hayley, Efq. 6th Edition. 7s 6d.

~The Mine, a dramatic Poem, 2d Edition, to which

are added two hiitoyic O~des. By John Sargent, Efq. 6s. I

Elegiac Sonnets. By Char-lotte Smith, 5th Edition,

with additional Sonnets and other Poems.

#4.* The three last mentioned Works are printed in

a mlofl beautiful and uniform Manner, and are all entm
bel'lithed with very fine Plates.

Essays on various Subjeats, principally designed for

young Ladies. fly Miss HalnnahMore. 3s. sewed. 2d
Edition.

Adelaide and Theodore, or Letters on Education :

Containing all the Principles relative to the different.
Plans of Education, tranilated from the French of Ma-
dame Ia Comteffe de Genlis* 3 Vols. Ios. 6d. 3d Edit.

The M~oral Miicellany, or a Colle~ion of feleA Pieces,

in Prole: and Verse, for the Inficu~ion and Enterttin-:
ment of Youth. 3d Edition* 3s.

An Hifforical M~ircellany. 3d Edition. 3s.
The P,;etical Mircellany; confifinilg of feleQ Pieces

from the W~orks of the following Poets, viz. iMi~lton,
Dr~yden, POpe,) Addison, Gay, &c. 2d Edition. 3s.

A Father's Legaacy to his Daughters, by the late Dr.

Gregory of Edinburrgh, with a F'ron~irpiece. 2s. sewed.

* A Volume of Letters from Dr. Berkenhouti to his Soq
at the University. 7j.

The Mirror; a Periodlical Paper, publithed at E (in-

lurgh in the Years r1779 and 1780. Velatri in SpeCule;
g3Vols. 8th Edit. .

The ~Lounger; a Periodical Paper. By the Authere

of the Mirror. 4th Edit. ios. 6d.

The Adventurer, by Dr. Hawkfwiorth, 4 Vobs. Anew;

Edition, adorned with elegant Frontiipieces. I2s.

The Rambler, in 4 Vols. A new and beautifuil Edi-

tion, wuith Frontispieces, and a Head of the Author,
4 Vols. r2s.

A complete and elegant Edition of the Works of Laul·

rence Sterne, M/. A. containing his ~Tryl~ram Shalnay, Senti-
mental Journey, Letters. &c. &rc. Adorned with Plates,
designed by Hogarth, Raooer, Edlwards, Es'c. ro Vo!S. 2E;

The Man of Feeling, a Novel : A new Edition. 3-,
The Man of the Wocrld, by the Author of the Mvad

ps Feeling. 2 Vols. 6s.

Julia de Roubigne, by the fame, 2 Vols. 6s.
Sentimental Journey, a Vols. A new Edition with

Frontirpieces* 5s.

*,* Another Edition. 3s.
Triftram Shandy, 6 Vols. r8s.
The Recels; or, a Tale of other Times. By the

Author of the Chapter of Accidents. 4th Edit* 3 Vols.
125.

Julia, a Novel; interf'perfed with some Poetical

Pieces. )y Helen MariaC~ill!iams. 2 Vols. Is.

Letters written in France in the Summer, I790, to d

Friend in England; containing various Anecdotes rela-'
tive to the French Revolution; and Memoirs of Mons.
and Mvadame du FZ-. By Helen IVfaria ~illiams. 3s. bd.

Emmeline, the Orphan of the Catice. By Charlott

Smith. 4 Vols. 3d Edition. r143.

Ethelinde; or the Recid~e of the Lake, by the lame.~

~Vols. 2d Edit. rys. 6d.

Celeffina, a Novel, by the fame. 4. Vols. 14s. 23 Edit.

L A W.,

Commentaries on the Laws of England. By Judge

Black/ione. With a Head of the Author. 4 Vols. 41*4qs.

'o* Another Edition, in 4 Vols. 8vo. I1. ros.
Tradis, chiefly relating to the Antiquities of the Laws

of Engnland. By Jud ge BlacRifone. 11. I s.

SReports of Cafes deterrnlined in the several Coulrts of
Wef~lli ndryi?cr-all from 1746 to 7179. Talken and com-

piled by the Hon. Sir Wtm. Black/ione, Knt. Publithed
hv his Executors; with an Account of his Life. 2 Vols,
Folio, 31. gs.

Cafes argued and determined in the High Court of

Chancery, in the Time of Lord Chancellor Hardwicit
from the Years 1746-7 to 1755, with Tables, Notes,
and References. By Francis Vezey, Efq. 2 Vols. I1. rs.
3d Edit.

The Attorney's Vade Mecum, and Client's Infiruaor

treating of A~ions: (Such as are o~w moss in Ule) ol
prosecuting and defending them; of the Pleadings and
Law, witti a Volume of Precedents. By John Florgan,
of the Inner Temnle, Barriller at Law, 3 Vols. 11. 2s.

The Jllffice of Peace; or complete Pardh Officer. A

gew Editioin, 4 Vols. 11. Ics. By Rich~ard Burn, LL. D.

Ecclefaiafical Law, by the Came A ·Ithor. 4 Vols. II..8s.
A new Law Diationary intended for general Use, as

wnell as for G~entlemen of the Profefiion. By Richard
Burn, LL. D. and continued to the prelent iTime hy
his Son. 2 Vols. 16s.

A Digest of the Law of Adlions at Nifj Prius. By

1/~aac Ejp~inali·, Efq. of Grafs-Inn, Barritter at Law,
a.Vols. 145*

PHYSIC.

Dometric Medicine; or a Treatise on the Prevention

and Cure of Diseases, by Regimen and Simple Medicine,
By Wmi. Bucharr, M. D. of the Royal College of Phyf}-
cians, Edinbutgh. A new I'dition. 7s 6d.

#,* This Treatile comlprehends n~ot only the Acute,

but as so the Chronic Direates; and both are treated
at much greater Length than in any Performance of
the like Nature. It likewise contains an Essay on
the Nursing and M/anagement of Children; with
Rules for preserving Health, suited to the different
Situations and Occupations of M~iankind. And
Direi~tions for the Cure of T~ounds, the Redultion
of Fraaures, ·DiflocationP, &cc.

Observations on the Epidemical Difeates in M~incrca,

from- the Year r744 to 1749.· With a thort Account of
the Climate, Produdlions, Inhabitants, and Epidemical
Diftempers of that Island. By Geo. Clegoborn, M. D.,
Leaulrer of Anatomy in the University of Du4blin. 4th
Editlon' .5s.

Firit Lines bs the Theory and PrPAtice of Philofophi-

cal Chemiffry. By John Berke~nhout, M. D. 8vo. with
Plates. 7s. 6d.

The Seats and Caules of Difeaies, investigated by

Anatomy, in five Books ; containing a great Variety of
Diffetions, with Remarks. T'ranflated from the Latin.
of John Baptifl Morganni, Chief Profeffor of Anatomy,
,and President of the Univettity of Padua. By Benjaminr
.dlexander, M. D*' 3 Vols. 4to. 11. r~s.

A full and plain Account of the Gout, from whence

will be clearly seen the Folly, or the Bafenels of all Pre-
tenders to the Cure of it, in which every Thing material
by the bell Writers on that SubjeB is taken Notice of;
and accompanied with some new and important Inlfruc-
tions for its Relief, which the Author's Experience in
the Gout above thirty Years hath indulced him to impart.
By Ferdinando Warner, L L. D). 3d Ed i c 5 s.

A new Inquiry into the Cad~es, Symptoms, and Cure

of Putrid and Inflammatory Fevers, &c. &c. By Sir
Wm~i. Fsordyce, M . D. 4s.

The Modern Pradlice of Physic; or a Method of jli-

<1icioully treating the several Disorders incident to the.
Human Body; together with a Recital of their Caules,
Symptoms, D~iagnoffics, Prognoffics,, and the Regimen
necessary to be oblerved in regard of them. 2 Vols. By
John Ball, M. D. R4 Edit. correaed and enlarged. zos.

A Colledtion of 'Cafes and Oblervations in Midwifery.

By Wm. Smellie, MI. D* 3 Vols. with Cuts. 11.. Is.

SAn Account of the Methods purfiued in the Treatment
of cancerous and fchirrous Disorders, and other Intle-
rations. By r. O. Ju/lamond,~ F. R. S. and Surgeon to
the Wrfiminjler Hofpital.' gs. sewed.

Philofophyh, ~Mathematics, iMechanics, M'c. Mcr.

Afironomy explained upon Sir I/aac Nauton's Princi-

ples, and made easy to those who have not finldied the
Mathematics. To which is added, the Method of find-

ngthe Difiance of the Planets from the Sun by the
Tanfit of VenuTj over the Sun's Disk in the Year 1761.
There Distances deduced from that Transit; and an
Account of Mr. Ilorrox's Observations of the Transit
in the Year 1639. Illuffrated with 28 Copper-plates.
A new Edition. ·8vo. gs.

An easy Introduaion to Altronomy, for young Gen-

Llemen and Ladies 3 deferibing thel~igure, Motions, and

aind Light; the Solar System; the Transit of I'enus; an

its fe n Afronmy the M~oon's Motion and Phases,

the Ecliplecs of the SnadMo h aeo h

Ebbig an Floingof the Sea, &c. 3d Edit. 5s.

Tables and Tractns relative to several Arts and Sci-

ences. 5s.

An Introdu~ion to Eleatricity, in 6 Se~tions. I. OF

Eleafricity in generat. 2. A Defecription of the Elearical
1Vachin~e* 3. A Defeription of the Appsarttis (ijelonging
to the Ma'ichine) for nrickin~g Elearical E~xperiments. 4*
How to k~now if the Machmne be idi good Ordet tfr per-
'for-ming thle Experirtsenrt, anid how to put it in O~rder if it
be not. 5. Hlow to make the EleArical Experiments,
and to preserve Buildings from Damage by Lightning.
6, Mledical Elearicity. Illuh~2ated with Plates. 4s.

Lea~ures on selecT SubjeAs, in 19echanics, Hydrofia-

tics, Prieumatics, and Optics, with the Ule of the Globes;
the Art of D~ialling, and the Calculation of the Mead
T'imes of New and Full Moons and Eciples. 7s. 6d.

Seke~t Mechanical Exercises, ithewing howv to confiru~t

aiffe~i-ent Clocks, O)rreries, and Sun-Dials, on plain and
t-aly Pririciples. With several Mikcellaneous Articles and
Tables. Illuficated with Copper-plates. To which iS
pre~fixed a thiort Account of the Life of the Author* 5s.

#*, The fix precedilig by Jaines Ferguson, F. R.' S.
SObfervations on r~everflonary Payments; on Schemed
for granting Annuities to\V idows, and to Persons in old
Age; on the M~ethod of finding the V alue of Afforanced
on Lie adSuvvo ei; and on the National D3ebt4
To which are added, new Tables of the Probabilities of
Life; and Ef~iys on the diffe~rent Rates of Human Mor-
fality in differentt Situations; the Influences of great
Towns on Population ; the niteafe of Mankind; and
other Sub~jeats in Political Arithmetic, and the Doarine
as Annuities. By Richard Pr'ice, D. D. F. R. S. A,
itew Edition. 2 Vols. 8vo. rss.

The DoEarin~e of Annuities anld AsSurances ori Liires,

aind Survivorthips, slated and explained. By W~illiarn
iafrgan, Aduary to the Society for Equitable Afib~rancesl,
on Lives and Survivorthips; to which is added an 10.
trodudioii, address~ed to the Society; also an Essay ori
the preieat State of Popuulation iix England and Wales.
By the Reverend Dr. Price. 6s.

A'griculture, Botany, Gardening, EMc.

The UniverSal Gardener and Botanist; or a general

'Dialonary of Gardening and Botany; exhibiting in Bo-
tanical Arrangement, according to the Linm~ean -Syltem,
every Tree, Shrub, 'and herbaceous Plant that meric
Culture, either for Ornathent or Curiosity, in every
Department of Gardening, coiniprifing accurate Diree-
tions, according to real Pra~tice, for the Management of
the Kitchen Garden, Fruit Garden, Pleasure Ground,
Flower Garden, Nuirfery, Plantations, Green Houle,
Hot Houle or Stove, Hot Beds, Forcing Frames, Hoc
Walls, and Forcing in general; deferibi~gr the propet
Situations, Exposures, Soils, Mlanures, and every M/a-
terial and Utensil reqluifite in the differlent Garden De-
partments; together with Pradical D~ire~tions for per-
forming the various mechanical Operations of Garden-
ing in general. By Thobmas Mawze, Gardener to his
Grace the Dukte of Lieds (Author of the Gardener's-
C'alendar). I1. ys.

The Complete Farmer; or a general Dialonary <if

Hailbandry in all its Branches; containing the various
Methods of cultivating and improving every Species of
Land, accordin~g to the Precepts of both the old and new
Huibandry. Third Edition, corre~ted and improved,
illuffrated with Copper-plates. £1* 5s.

Pradtical Essays on Agriculture. Contamning an Ac-

count of Soils, and the Manner of correatingr them ;
an Account of the Culture of all Field Plants, includ-
ing the Artificial Grasses, according to the old and new
1Vodes of Hufbundry, with every Improvemeht down
to the present Period; also an Accounit of the Culture
and Management of G;rals Lands ; together with Ob-
fervations on Enclosures, Fences, Farms and Farm-
haules, &~c. Carefully colleAed and digested from the
inoff eminent Authors, with experialental Remarks. By
James Adam, Efq. 2 Vols. v4.s.

Every Man his own Gardener; being a new and much

more complete Gardener's Calendar than any hitherto
published; containing not only an Account of what
WJork is necessary to be done in the Hot Houl~e, Green
Houle, Shrubbery, Kitchen, Flower and Fruit Gardense
for every Month in the Year, but also ample Dire~tions
for performing the laid WVork, according to the newelt

best Gardeners. In this Edition particular Dire~tions
are given with refpelt to Soil and Situation. And to the
tlrhole are added complete and useful Lills of Forest-
Trees, Flowering Shrubsi Fruit Tlrees, Evergreens;;
Annual, Biennial, and P-erennial Flowers ; Hot-house,
Green-house, and Kitchen Garden Plants; with the
Varieties of each .Sort, cultivated in the Engi/~h Gar-
dens. By Thoamas Maweo, Gardener to his Grace thl
Duke of Leeds; and other G~arderiers. 6th Edit. 5s.

The Rural (Economy of Ndorfolk; comprising the

M~anagement of Landed Eitates, anld the prelent Prac-
tice of Holbandlry in that County. By Mr. Mar/hal/4
2 Vols. 14s.

The Rural (Economy of Yorkshire, by the famec

a Vols. I4s.

Synoplis of the Natural Hillory of Great Britain and

ireland. Contai~ingr a (yfiematic Arrangement and
concise Defeription of all the Animals, Vegetablesr and
Foffils, which have hitherto 6:·en discovered in thefth
IKingdom~s, By 7ohn Be~rkenfhout, M. D. 2d Editione
a Vols. r2s,

Clavis Anglica~ Lingure Botanicae; .or a Botanical

Lexicon. In which the Terms of Botany, particularly
those occurring in the Works of Lilnnaeus, and other
modern Writers, are applied, derived, explain~ed, Conr
trafted· and exemplified. By John Ber~kenhout, M. D,
2d Edition. 6s.

Hifforical and Biographical Sketches of the Progress

of Botany in England, from its Origin to the Introc
duation of the Linnuan Syliem. By Richa~rd Pulteney,
M. D. F. R. S. 2 Volsc. >asI
