THE
H ISTORY

OF THE
R E I G N

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES V.

IN THREE VOLUMES.

R.....

T H E
HIS T O Y

OF THE

R E I G N
REIGN

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES V.

WITH

AVIEW of the PROGRESS of SOCIETY
in EUROPE, from the Subversion of the Roman Empire,

to the Beginning of the Sixtecnth Century.

IN THREE VOLUMES.

By WILLIAM ROBERTSON, D. D.

PRINCIPAL of the UNIVERSITY of EDINBURGH, and
HISTORIOGRAPHER tO hisMAJESTY for SCOTLAUD,

A NEW EDITION.

VOL. I.

D U B L I N:

Printed for W. WHITESTONE, W. SLEATER, M. HAY,
D.CHAMBERLAINE, J. POTTS, J.HOEY, L.L.

FLN., J. WILLIAMS, W. COLLES, W.
WILSON, J. PORTER, W. HALHEAD,

T. T. FAULKNER, and J. EXSHAW.

MDCCLXXVII.

# TO THE KING.

TO THE

KIN G.

S I R,
T PRESUME to lay before your Ma-

jefly the History of a Period, which,

if the abilities of the Writer were equal
to the dignity of the SubjeCt, would not
be unworthy the attention of a Monarch,
who is no less a Judge than a Patron of
Literary Merit.

HISTORY claims it as her prerogative

to offer inftrution to KINGS, as well as
to their people. What reflections the
Reign of the Emperor CHARLES V. may
suggest to Your Majefly, it becomes not
me to conjeture. But your Subjets can-
not observe the various calamities, which
that Monarch's ambition to be distinguish-
ed as a Conqueror, brought upon his do-
minions, without recollecing the felicity
of their own times, and looking up with

gratitude

gratitude to their Sovereign, who, during
the fervour of youth, and amidst the ca-
reer of victory, possessed such felf-com-
mand, and maturity of judgment, as to
set bounds to his own triumphs, and pre-
ser the bleflings of peace to the splendour
of military glory.

POSTERITY will not only celebrate the

Wisdom of Your Majetty's choice, but
will enumerate the many Virtues, which
render Your Reign conspicuous for a fa-
cred regard to all the duties incumbent on
the Sovereign of a Free People.

IT is our happiness to feel the influence

of these Virtues; and to live under the
dominion of a Prince, who delights more
in promoting the Publick Welfare, than
in receiving the just Praise of his rqyal be-
neficence. I am,

SIR,

YOUR MAJESTY's

Mofi faithful Subjet,

And most dutiful Servant,
WILLIAM ROBRTSQ.N.

# THE PREFACE.

THE
PREFACE.

O period in the history of one's own
country can be confidered as altoge-

ther uninterelting. Such tranfations as tend
to illustrate the progress of its conftituti-
on, laws or manners, merit the utmost atten-
tion. Even remote and minute events are
objects of a curiosity, which, being natural
to the human mind, the gratification of it is
attended with pleasure.

BUT, with refpeft to the history of foreign

States, we must set other bounds to our de-
fire of information. The universal progress
of science, during the two last centuries, the
art of printing, and other obvious causes,
have filled Europe with such a multiplicity of
histories, and with such vast collections of
historical materials, that the term of human
life is too short for the study or even the pe-
rufal of them. It is necessary, then, not only
for those who are called to condut the affairs

of

of nations, but for such as inquire and reason
concerning them, to remain satisfied with a
general knowledge of distant events, and to
confine their study of history in detail chiefly
to that period, in which the several States of
Europe having become intimately conneced,
the operations of one power are so felt by all,
as to influence their councils, and to regulate
their measures.

SOME boundary, then, ought to be fixed

in order to separate these periods. An era
should be pointed out, prior to which, each
country, little conneted with those around
it, may trace its own history apart; after
which, the tranfa&ions of every considerable
nation in Europe become interesting and
inftrutive to all. With this intention I un-
dertook to write the history of the Emperor
CHARLES V. It was during his adminiftra-
tion that the powers of Europe were formed
into one great political system, in which each
took a station, wherein it has since remained
M it1 less variation, than could have been ex-
pcet d after the shocks occasioned by so
many internal revolutions, and so many so-
reign wars. The great events which hap-
pcned then have not hitherto spent their force.
The political principles and maxims, then
eftablifled, till continue to operate. The

ideas

P R E F A C E.

ideas concerning the balance of power, then
introduced or rendered general, still influence
the councils of nations.

THE age of CHAxRES V. may, therefore,

be cornidered as the period at which the po-
litical state of Europe began to assume a new
form. I have endeavoured to render my ac-
count of it an introduction to the history of
Europe subsequent to his reign. While his
numerous Biographers describe his personal
qualities and actions; while the historians of
different countries relate occurrences the con-
sequences of which were local or transient; it
hath been my purpiofe te record only those
great tranfaAions in his reign, the effects of
which were universal, or Continue to be per-
manent.

As.my readers could derive little inftruc-

tion from such a history of the reign of
CHARLES V. without some information con-
cerning the fRate of Europe previous to the
sixteenth century, my desire of supplying
this has produced a preliminary volume, in
which I have attempted to point out and ex-.
plain the great causes and events, to whose
operaiion all the improvements in the poli-
tical state of Europe, from the subversion of
the Roman Empire to the beginning of the

sixteenth

sixteenth century, must be ascribed. I have
exhibited a view of the progress of society in
Europe, not only with refpe&t to interior go
vernment, laws, and manners, but with re-
fpt; to the command of the national force
requilite in foreign operations; and I have
described the political constitution of the prin-
cipal flates in Europe at the time when.
Charles V. began his reign.

IJ this part of my work I have been led

into several critical disquisitions, which be-
long more properly to the province of the
lawyer or antiquary, than to that of the his-
torian. These I have placed at the end of
the first volume, under the title of Proofs and
lUuftrations. Many of my readers will proba-
bly give little attention to such researches,
To some they may, perhaps, appear the most
curious and interesting part of the work. I
have carefully pointed out the sources from
which I have derived information, and have
cited the writers on whose authority I rely with
a minute exactness, which might appear to
border upon ostentation, if it were poflible to
be vain of having read books, many of which
nothing but the duty of examining with ac-
curacy whatever I laid before the.pubtick,
would have induced me to open. As my in-
quiries conducted me often into paths- which

were

were obscure or little frequented, such con-
sant recourse to the authors who have been
my guides, was not only necessary for au-
thenticating the facts which are the founda-
tions of my reasonings, but may be useful
in pointing out the way to such as shall here-
after hold the fame course, and in enabling
them to carry on their researches with greater
facility and success.

EVERY intelligent reader will observe one

omiflion in my work, the reason of which it
is necessary to explain. I have given no ac-
count of the conquests of Mexico and Peru,
or of the eflablifhment of the Spanish colonies
in the continent and islands of America. The
history of these events I originally intended to
have related at considerable length. But upon
a nearer and more attentive consideration of
this part of my plan, I found that the disco-
very of the new world; the state of society
among its ancient inhabitants; their character,
manners, and arts; the genius of the Euro-
pean settlements in its various provinces, to-
gether with the influence of these upon the
systems of policy or commerce in Europe,
were subje&s so splendid and important, that a
superficial view of them could afford little fa-
tisfaction; to treat of them as extensively as
they merited, must produce an episode, dif-

proportionate

proportionate to the principal work. I have
therefre referred these for a separate history;
which, if the performance now offered to the
publick shall receive its approbation, I propose
to undertake.

THOUGa, by omitting such considerable

but detached articles in the reign of Charles V.
I have circumscribed my narration within
more narrow limits, I am yet persuaded, from
this view of the intention and nature of the
work which I thought it neceflary to lay be-
fore my readers, that the plan must still ap-
pear to them too extensive, and the under-
taking too arduous. I have often felt them
to befo. But my convition of the utility
of such a history prompted me to persevere;
With what fuccefa I have executed it, the
publick must now judge. I wait, in solicitude,
for its decision; to which I ffhall submit with
a refpetful silence.

# A VIEW OF THE PROGRESS OF SOCIETY IN EUROPE, FROM THE SUBVERSION OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE TO THE BEGINNING OF THE SIXTEENTH CENTURY.

## SECTION I. View of the Progress of Society in Europe, with respect to interior Government, Laws and Manners.

VI E W

OF THE
PROGRESS OF SOCIETY

I N
EURO P E,

FROM THi
SUBVERSION OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE

TO T H
BEGINNING OF THE SIXTEENTH CENTURY.

SECTION L

Siew of the Progress of Society in Europe, with re-
sped to interior Government, Laws and Manners.
Tr WO great revolutions have happened in SEcz. 1.

the political state, and in the manners of -. -

T. the European nations. The first was f the ko.
occasioned by the progress of the Roman pow- man powD r
er; the second by, the subversion of the Ro- o Europt.
man Empire. When the spirit of conquest led
the armies of Rome beyond the Alps, they
found all the countries which they invaded, in.
habited by people whom they denominated bar-

VOL. I. B barians,

SCT. I. barians, but who were nevertheless brave and

v-- independent. These defended their antient

poffe1t6rs with obftihate valour. It was by the
superiority of their discipline, rather than of
their courage, that the Romans gained any ad-
vantage over them. A single battle did not,
as among the effeminate inhabitants of Asia,
decide the fate of a Rate. The vanquished
people refimned their arms with fresh spirit, and
their undisciplined valour, animated by the love
of liberty, supplied the want of conduct as

Tin erh-b well as of union. During those long and fierce
it .cA ftruggks for dominion or independence, the

countries of Europe were fucceflively laid waste,
a great part of their inhabitants perilhed in the
field, many were carried into slavery, and a
feeble remnant, incapable of further resistance,
submitted to the Roman power.
Th im- THE Romans having thus desolated Europe,

'chcb i' ifetthemfelves to civilize it. The form of go-
trodced. verrnment which they established in the conqur-

ed provinces, though severe, was regular, and
preserved publick tranquillity. As a consolation
for the loss of liberty, they communicated their
arts, sciences, language, and manners, to their
new fubjets. Europe began to breathe, and
to recover strength after the calamities which it
had undergone; agriculture was encouraged;
population was increased; the ruined cities
were rebuilt; new towns were founded; an ap-
pearance of prosperity succeeded, and repaired,
in some degree, the havock of war.
Tbe bd THIS Rate, however, was far from being

fth, happy, or favourable to the improvement of the
dominio,. human mind. The vanquished nations were dif-

armed by their conquerors, and overawed by
soldiers kept in pay to restrain them. They

were

were given up as a prey to rapacious governors, SacT. I.
who plundered them with impunity; and were --
drained of their wealth by exorbitant taxes, im-
poled with so little attention to the situation of
the provinces, that the impositions were often
increared in proportion to their inability to sup-
port them. They were deprived of their moR en-
terprizing citizens, who resorted to a distant
capital in quest of preferment, or of riches;
and were accustomed in all their actions to look
up to a superior, and tamely to receive his com-
mands. Under so many depressing circum-
flances, it was impossible that they could retain
vigour or generosity of mind. The martial and
independent spirit, which had distinguished their
ancestors, became extin& among all the people
fubjeced to the Roman yoke; they loft not on-
ly the habit but even the capacity of deciding
for themselves, or of acting from the impulse
of their own minds; and the dominion of the
Romans, like that of all great Empires, de-
graded and debased the human species [A].

A SOCIETY in this state could not subsist long. The irrup-

tion of the

There were defects in the Roman government, barbarou&
even in its most perfect form, which threatened ationD.
its dissolution. Time ripened there original
feeds of corruption, and gave birth to many
new disorders. A confRitution, unsound and
worn out, must have fallen in pieces of itself,
without any external shock. The violent ir-
ruption of the Goths, Vandals, Huns, and other
barbarians, hastened this event, and precipitated
the downfal of the Empire. New nations seem-
ed to arise, and to rush from unknown regions,
in order to take vengeance on the Romans for
the calamities which they had inflited on man-
kind. These fierce tribes either inhabited the

B 2 various
tA] NOTE I.

3

SECTr.I. various provinces in Germany which had never

~''' been subdued by the Romans, or were scattered

over the vast countries in the north of Europe,
and north-west of Asia, which are now occupi-
ed by the Danes, the Swedes, the Poles, the
fubjecs of the Ruffian Empire, and the Tartars.
Their condition, and tranfaltions, previous to
their invasion of the Empire, are but little known.
All our information with refpet to there is de-
rived from the Romans; and as they did not
penetrate far into countries which were at that
time uncultivated and uninviting, the accounts
of their original state given by them are ex-
tremely imperfet. The rude inhabitants them-
selves, destitute of science, and of records, with-
out leisure, or curiosity to enquire into remote
events, retained, perhaps some indiftinc me-
mory of recent occurrences, but beyond there,
all was buried in oblivion, or involved in dark-
ness, and in fable [B].

couatrfeT THE prodigious swarms which poured in upon
fm which the Empire from the beginning of the fourth
they ib century to the final extirc-tion of the Roman

power, have given rife to an opinion that the
countries whence they issued were crowded with
inhabitants; and various theories have been
formed to account for such an extraordinary de-
gree of population as hath procured there coun-
tries the appellation of The Storehouse of Na-
tions. But if we confider, that the countries
possessed by the people who invaded the Empire
were of vast extent; that a great part of these
was covered with woods and marshes that some
of the molt considerable of the barbarous nati-
ons subsisted entirely by bunting or pasturage, in
both which states of society large tra&s of land
are required for maintaining a few inhabitants;

and
[B] NOTE II.

and that all of them were strangers to the arts SFcr. I.
and industry, without which population can- -"
not increase to any great degree, it is evident,
that there countries could not be so .populous in
antient times as they are at present, when they
till continue to be less peopled than any other
part of Europe or of Asia.

BUT if tlefe circumstances prevented the The people

barbarous nations from becoming populous, ifig,,t
they contributed to inspire, or to strengthen the prizes.
martial spirit by which they were distinguished.
Inured by the rigour of their climate, or the
poverty of their foil, to hardships, which ren-
dered their bodies firm, and their minds vigo-
rous; accustomed to a course of life which was
a continual preparation for ation; and disdain-
ing every occupation but that of war; they un-
dertook, and prosecuted their military enter-
prizes with an ardour and impetuosity, of which
men softened by the refinements of more polilh-
ed times can Ccarcely form any idea [C].

THEIR first inroadsinto the Empire proceeded The mo-

rather from the love of plunder, than from the tiveRofthei
desire of new settlements. Roused to arms by sona.
rome enterprizing or popular leader, they rallied
out of their forests; broke in upon the fron-
tier provinces with irresistible violence; put all
who opposed them to the sword; carried off
the most valuable effects of the inhabitants;
dragged along multitudes of captives in chains;
wafted all before them with fire or sword; and
returned in triumph to their wilds and fastnesses.
Their success, together with the accounts which
they gave of the unknown conveniencies and
luxuries that abounded in countries better cul-
tivated, or blessed with a milder climate than

their
[C] NOTE III.

StT. I. their own, excited new adventurers, and ex-
<-' ' posed the frontier to new devastations.
Their;,- WHEN nothing was left to plunder in the ad-

g i thejacent provinces, ravaged by frequent incursions,

comeie they marched farther from home, and finding
~,xq B- it difficult, or dangerous to return, they began

to fettle in the countries which they had sub-
dued. The sudden and short excursions in
quest of booty, which had alarmed and dif-
quieted the Empire, ceased; a more dreadful ca-
lamityimpended. Great bodies of armed men,
with their wives and children, and slaves and
flocks, iflued forth, like regular colonies, in
quest of new Settlements. People who had no
cities, and seldom any fixed habitation, were so
little attached to their native foil, that they mi-
grated without relu&ance from one place to
another. New adventurers followed them. The
lands which they deserted were occupied by
The txtent more remote tribes of barbarians. These, in

;."th.r" their turn, pushed forward into more fertile

countries, and, like a torrent, continually in-
creasing, rolled on, and swept every thing be-
fore them. In less than two centuries from their
firif irruption, barbarians of various names and
lineage, plundered and took pof¢eflion of Thrace,
Pannonia, Gaul, Spain, Africa, and at las of
Italy, and Rome itself. The vast fabrick of
the Roman power, which it had been the work
of ages to perfet, was in that short period
overturned from the foundation.

Tae cir- MANY concurring causes prepared the way
cmftnnces ,. ,
:hich c- for this great revolution, and ensured success to
c."oedthethe nations which irvaded the Empire. The

:nr~fal of
the Roman Rrman commonwealth had conquered the world
Empit. by the wisdom of its civil maxims, and the ri-

gour of its military discipline. But, under the

Emperors,
6

Emperors, the former were forgotten or despised, SEct. I.
and the latter was gradually relaxed. The armies T -
of the Empire in the fourth and fifth centuries
bore scarcely any resemblance to those invincible
legions which had been victorious wherever they
marched. Instead ot freemen, who voluntarily
took arms from the love of glory, or of their
country, provincials and barbarians were bribed
or forced into service. They were too feeble,
or too proud to submit to the fatigue of military
duty. They even complained of the weight of
their defensive armour, as intolerable, and laid
it aside. Infantry, from which the armies of
ancient Rome derived their vigour and flability,
fell into contempt; the effeminate and undifci-
plined soldiers of later times could hardly be
brought to venture into the field but on horse-
back. These wretched troops, however, were
the only guardians of the Empire. The jea-
lousy of despotism had deprived the people of
the use of arms; and fubjets oppressed and ren-
dered incapable of defending themselves, had
neither spirit nor inclination to resist their in-
vaders, from whom they had. little to fear, be-
cause their condition could hardly be rendered
more unhappy. As the martial spirit became
extinct, the revenues of the Empire gradually
diminished. The taste for the luxuries of the
East increased to such a pitch in the Imperial
court, that great fums were carried into India,
from which money never returns. By the vaif
subsidies paid to the barbarous nations a still
greater quantity of species was withdrawn from
circulation. The frontier provinces, wafted by
frequent incursions, became unable to pay the
customary tribute; and the wealth of the world,
which had long centered in the capital of the
Empire, ceased to flow thither in the fame abun-
dance, or was diverted into other channels. The

limits

-7

SteT. I. limits of the Empire continued to be as extensive

as ever, while the spirit requisite for its defence
declined, and its resources were exhausted. A
vast body, languid, andalmoft unanimated, be-
came incapable of any effort to save itself, and
was easily overpowered. The Emperors, who
had the absolute direction of this disordered
system, funk in the softness of eastern luxury,
shut up within the walls of a palace, ignorant of
war, unacquainted with affairs, and governed en-
tirely by women and eunuchs, or by ministers
equally effeminate, trembled at the approach of
danger, and under circumnflances which called
for the utmost vigour in counsel as well as in
adion, discovered all the impotent irresolution
of fear and of folly.

The cr- Iw every refpeft, the condition of the barba.
cUMt ace rous nations was the reverse of that of the Ro-
Which con-
trib-ted to mans. Among them, the martial spirit was in
t he ,.r full vigour; their leaders were hardy and enter-
b~o. na- prizing; the arts which had enervated the Romans

were unknown among them; and such was the
nature of their military inRtitutions, that they
brought forces into the field without any trouble,
and supported them at little expence. The mer-
cenary and effeminate troops fationed on the
frontier, astonished at their fierceness, either fled
at their approach, or were routed in the firR on-
set. The feeble expedient to which the Empe-
rors had recourse, of taking large bodies of the
barbarians into pay, and of employing them to
repel new invaders, instead of retarding, haften-
ed the deftruaion of the Empire. They soon
turned their arms against their masters, and with
greater advantage than ever: for, by serving in
the Roman armies, they had acquired all the dif-
cipline, or icill in war, which the Romans still

retained

retained; -and, upon adding there to their native SECT. I.
ferocity, they became altogether irresistible. "

BUT though from there, and many otherThe pirit

causes, the progress and conquests of the nations with which
which over-ran the Empire, became so extreme- 'arrid
ly rapid, they were accompanied with horrible
devastations, and an incredible deftruaion of
the human species. Civilized nations which take
arms upon cool reflecion, from motives of po-
licy or prudence, with a view to guard against
some distant danger, or to prevent some remote
contingency, carry on their hostilities with so
little rancour, or animosity, that war among them
is disarmed of half its terrors. Barbarians are
strangers to such refinements. They rush into
war with impetuosity, and prosecute it with vio-
lence. Their sole objet is to make their enemies
feel the weight of their vengeance, nor does their
rage subside until it be satiated with infli&ing on
them every poflible calamity. It is with such a
spirit that the savage tribes in America carry on
their petty wars. It was with the fame spirit
that the more powerful and no leTs fierce bar-
barians in the north of Europe, and of Asia, fell
upon the Roman Empire.

WHEREVER they marched, their route was Thede..-

marked with blood. They ravaged or destroyed tion which
all around them. They made no diftindion be- tey h
tween what was sacred, and what was profane. upon E-
They refpe&ed no age, or rex, or rank. What ro".
escaped the fury of the first inundation, perished
in those which followed it. The mot fertileand
populous provinces were converted into deserts,
in which were Scattered the ruins of villages and
cities, that afforded shelter to a few miserable
inhabitants whom chance had preserved, or the
sword of the enemy, wearied with detroying.

had

'-~'~-' in the countries which they had wafted, were

expelled or exterminated by new invaders, who
coming from regions farther removed from the
civilized parts of the world, were still more fierce
and rapacious. This brought new calamities
upon mankind, which did no: cease until the
north, by pouring forth successive swarms, was
drained of people, and could no longer furnish
instruments of deftrution. Famine and pefti-
lence, which always march in the train of war,
when it ravages with such inconsiderate cruelty,
raged in every part of Europe, and completed
its sufferings. If a man were called to fix upon
the period in the history of the world,, during
which the condition of the human race was most
calamitous and afflicted, he would, without he-
fitation, name that which elapsed from the death
of Theodosius the Great, to the establishment of
the Lombards in Italy a The contemporary au-
thors who beheld that scene of desolation, labour
and are at a loss for expreflions to describe the
horror of it. be scourge of God, bTe destroyer of
nations, are the dreadful epithets by which they
distinguish the most noted of the barbarous lead-
ers; and they compare the ruin which they had
brought on the world, to the havock occasioned
by earthquakes, conflagrations, or deluges, the
most formidable and fatal calamities which the
imagination of man can conceive.

Tbe
r i- BUT no expreflions can convey so perfect an
sd~ idea of the deftruaive progress of the barbarians

bwhch tih as that which must strike an attentive observer,
,='.oe when he contemplates the total change, which
f Earope. he will discover in the state of Europe after it

began

* Theoofius died A. D. 395. the reign of Alboinus in

Lombardy begin A. D. 571; so that this period was 176
years.

A VIEW OFTHE
10

began to recover rome degree of tranquillity to- SEc?. I.
wards the close of the sixth century. The Sax- -L
ons were by that time masters of the southern,
and more fertile provinces of Britain the Franks
of Gaul; the Huns of Pannonia; the Goths of
Spain; the Goths and Lombards of Italy and the
adjacent provinces. Scarce any vestige of the
Roman policy, jurisprudence, arts, or literature,
remained. New forms of government, new laws,
new manners, new dresses, new languages, and
new names of men and countries, were every
where introduced. To make a great or sudden
alteration with refpe& to any of these, unless
where the ancient inhabitants of a country have
been almost totally exterminated, has proved an
undertaking beyond the power of the greatest
conquerors [D]. The total change which the
settlement of the barbarous nations occasioned in
the state of Europe, may, therefore, be confi-
dered as a more decisive proof, than even-the
testimony of contemporary historians, of the de-
ftrudive violence with which these invaders car-
ried on their conquests, and of the havock which
they had made from one extremity of this quar-
ter of the globe to the other [E].

IN the obscurity of the chaos occasioned by From this

this general wreck of nations, we must search ordtOfid"
for the feeds of order, and endeavour to discover law of go-
the first rudiments of the policy and laws now now °at
established in Europe. To this source, the hif-blie^dmuA
torians of its different kingdoms, have attempt- b traced.
ed, though with less attention and industry than
the importance of the enquiry merits, to trace
back the institutions and customs peculiar to their
countrymen. It is not my province to give a
minute detail of the progress of government and
manners in each particular nation, whose tranf-

aftions
[D] NOTE IV.

[E] NOTE V.

SECT. I. ations are the objet of the following history
'--' but, in order to exhibit a just view of the tRate

of Europe at the opening of the sixteenth cen-
tury, it is necessary to look back, and to con-
template the condition of the northern nations
upon their first settlement in those countries which
they occupied; it is neceflary to mark the great
steps by which they advanced from barbarism to
refinement, and to point out those general prin-
ciples and events which, by their uniform as well
as extensive operation, conduCted all of them to
that degree of improvement in policy and in
manners which they had attained at the period
when Charles V. began his reign.

The pr;- WHaE nations fubje& to despotic government
^cipe o make conrquefts, there serve only to extend the
or~hnin dominion and the power of their master. But
h~ei armies composed of freemen conquer for them-
men ia selves, not for their leaders. The people who
Lurope. overturned the Roman Empire, and fettled in its

various provinces, were of the latter class. Not
only the different nations that issued from the
north of Europe, which has always been confi-
dered as the feat of liberty, but the Huns and
Alans, who inhabited part of those countries which
have been marked out as the peculiar region of
servitude b, enjoyed freedom and independence in
such a high degree as seems to be scarcely com-
patible with a state of social union, or with the
iubordination necessary to maintain it. They fol-
lowed the chieftain who led them forth in quest
of new settlements, not by constraint but from
choice; not as soldiers whom he could order to
march, but as volunteers who offered to accom-
pany him [F]. They confidered their conquests
as a common property, in which all had a title

to
De l'cfprit des !oix, lir. 17. ch. 3. [F] NOTE VI.

to share, as all had contributed to acquire them SECT. I.
[G]. In what manner, or by what principles, -v-'
they divided-among them the lands which they
seized, we cannot now determine with any cer-
tainty. There is no nation in Europe whose re-
cords reach back to this remote period; and
there is little information to be got from the un-
inftrutive and meagre chronicles, compiled by
writers ignorant of the true end, and unacquaint-
ed with the proper objets of history.

THIS new division of property, however, to- The feudal

gether with the maxims and manners to which it grvde,,nnt
gave rife, gradually introduced a species of go- eftabliei
vernment formerly unknown. This singular in- th'°.
Aitution is now distinguished by the name of the
Feudal:fyfim: and though the barbarous nations
which framed it, fettled in their new territoriesat
different times, came from different countries,
spoke various languages, and were under the
command of separate leaders, the Feudal policy
and laws were established, with little variation,
in every kingdom of Europe. This amazing
uniformity hath induced some authors c to believe
that al these nations, notwithstanding so many
apparent circumstances of diftintion, were ori-
ginally the fame people. But it may be ascribed,
with greater probability, to the similar state of so-
ciety and of manners to which they were accuf-
tomed in their native countries, and to the fimi-
lar situation in which they found themselves on
taking pofflflion of their new domains.

As the conquerors of Europe had their acqui- Natioal

fitions to maintain, not only against such of the adoef,'bthe
ancient inhabitants as they had spared, but against of feudel

the policy.

[G] NOTE VII. c Procop. de Bello Vandal. ap
Script. Byz. edit. Ven. vol. i. p. 345.

SEcrT.. the more formidable inroads of new invaders,
'-*^ felf-defence was their chief care, and seems to

have been the Cole objet of their first institutions
and policy. Instead of those loole aflociations,
which, though they scarcely diminished their per-
fonal independence, had been sufficient for their
security while they remained in their original
countries, they saw the neceflity of confederating
more closely together, and of relinquishing some
of their private rights in order to attain publick
safety. - Every freeman, upon receiving a por-
tion of the lands which were divided, bound him-
self to appear in arms against the enemies of the
community. This military service was the con-
dition upon which he received and held his lands,
and as they were exempted from every other bur-
den, that tenure, among a warlike people, was
deemed both easy and honourable. The king
or general, who led them to conquest, con-
tinuing still to be the head of the colony,
had, of course, the largest portion allotted to him.
Having thus acquired the means of rewarding
past services, as well as of gaining new adhe-
rents, he parcelled out his lands with this view,
binding those on whom they were bestowed, to
follow his standard with a number of men in
proportion to the extent of the territory which
they received, and to bear arms in his defence.
His chief officers imitated the example of the so-
vereign, and in distributing portions of their lands
among their dependants, annexed the fame condi-
tion to the grant. Thus a feudal kingdom re-
fembled a military establishment rather than a
civil institution. The victorious army, canton-
ed out in the country which it had seized, con-
tinued ranged under its proper officers, and sub-
ordinate t6 military command. The names
of a soldier and of a freeman were fynony-

mous.

mous . Every proprietor of land, girt with a SECT. I.
sword, was ready to march at the summons of '
his superior, and to take the field against the
common enemy.

BUT though the Feudal policy seems to be so The feuda.

admirably calculated for defence against the as- gefeEtve i
faults of any foreign power, its provisions for its prvifi-

ohs for in-

the interior order and tranquillity of society were tenor order
extremely defecive. The principlesof disorder in fiety.
and corruption are discernible in that conftituti-
on under its best and most perfet form. They
soon unfolded themselves, and spreading with
rapidity through every part of the system, pro-
duced the most fatal effecs. The bond of po-
litical union was extremely feeble; the sources
of anarchy were innumerable. The monarchical
and ariftocratical parts of the constitution, hav-
ing no intermediate power to balance them, were
perpetually at variance, and juftling with each
other. The powerful vassals of the crown soon
extorted a confirmation for life of those grants
of land, which being at first purely gratuitous,
had been bestowed only during pleasure. Not
satisfied with this, they prevailed to have them
converted into hereditary possessions. One ftep
more completed their usurpations, and render-
ed them unalienable [H]. With an ambition no
less enterprizing, and more preposterous, they
appropriated to themselves titles of honour,
as well as offices of power or trust. These per-
fonal marks of diftin&ion, which the publick
admiration bestows on illustrious merit, or which
the publick confidence confers on extraordinary
abilities, were annexed to certain families, and
transmitted like fiefs, from father to son, by he-
reditary right. The crown vassals having thus

secured
d Du Carge Glofar. voc. Miles. [H] NOTE VIIL

SECT. 1. secured the pofleflion of their lands and digni-r
'«'-' ties, the nature of the Feudal institutions, which

though founded on subordination verged to in-
dependence, led them to new, and still more
dangerous encroachments on the prerogatives of
the Sovereign. They obtained the power of fu-
preme juritliction both civil and criminal with-
in their own territories; the right of coining mo-
ney; together with the privilege of carrying on
war against their private enemies in their own
name, and by their own authority. The ideas
of political fubjeetion were almost entirely loft,
and frequently scarce any appearance of feudal
subordination remained. Nobles who had ac-
quired such enormous power, scorned to confi-
der themselves as subje&s. They aspired openly
at being independent: the bonds which connect
ed the principal members of the constitution
with the crown, were dissolved. A kingdom
considerable in name and in extent, was broken
into as many separate principalities as it contain-
ed powerful barons A thousand causes of jea-
lousy and discord subsisted among them, and
gave rife to as many wars. Every country in
Europe, wafted or kept in continual alarm dur-
ing these endless contests, was filled with caf-
ties and places of strength erected for the fe-
curity of the inhabitants, not against foreign
force, but against internal hostilities. An uni-
versal anarchy detruCttive, in a great measure,
of all the advantages which men expect to
derive from society, prevailed. The people,
the mos numerous as well as the most useful
part of the community, were either reduced to
a state of atual servitude, or treated with the
fame insolence and rigour as if they had been
degraded into that wretched condition [I]. The
King, stripped of almrof every prerogative, and
without authority to enact or execute salutary

laws,

[I] NOTE IX.
r6

laws, could neither protet the innocent, nor SacT. .
punish the guilty. The nobles, superior to all '

.

restraint, harafed each other with perpetual
wars, oppressed their fellow-fubje&s, and hum-
bled or insulted their sovereign. To crown all,
time gradually fixed and rendered venerable
this pernicious sysem, which violence had efta-
blifhed.

SUCH was the Rate of Europe with refpe& to t prevent-

the interior administration of government from dliker
the seventh to the eleventh century. All the ex- from ating

. · with vigour

ternal operations of its various Rates, during in their ex
this period, were, of course, extremely feeble. tern. opc.
A kingdom dismembered, and torn with diffen- stioa.'
sion, without any common interest to rouze, or
any common head to condut its force, was
incapable of a&ing with vigour. AlmoR all
the wars in Europe, during the ages which I have
mentioned, were trifling, indecisive, and pro-
dudtive of no considerable event. They refem-
bled the short incursions of pirates or banditti,
rather than the steady operations of a regular
army. Every baron, at the head of his vassals,
carried on some petty enterprize, to which he
was prompted by his own ambition or revenge.
The fate itself, destitute of union, either re-
mained altogether inacive, or if it attempted to
make any effort, that served only to discover its
impotence. The superior genius of Charlemagne,
it is true, united all these disjointed and difcor-
dant members, and forming them again into
one body, restored to governmment that degree
of activity which diftinguilhes his reign, and
renders the tranfadions of it objets not only
of attention but of admiration to more enlight-
ened times. But this Rate of union and vigour,
not being natural to the feudal government, was
of short duration. Immediately upon his death,
the spirit which animated and sustained the vast

VOL. I. C system

SECT. 1. system which he had established, being with-
^- ~
d drawn, it broke into pieces. All the calamities

which flow from anarchy and discord, returning
with additional force, afflicted the different
kingdoms into which hisEmpire wasfplit. From
that time to the eleventh century, a succession of
uninteresting events; a series of wars, the
motives as well as the consequences of which
were equally unimportant, fill and deform the
annals of all the nationsin Europe.

the rt i To there pernicious effects of the feudal anar-
fciatr o, chy may be added its fatal influence on the cha-
society o raaer and improvement of the human mind. If
f'l' "d men do not enjoy the protection of regular go-

vernment, together with the certainty of personal
security, which naturally flows from it, they
never attempt to make progress in science, nor
aim at attaining refinement in taste, or in man-
ners. That period of turbulence, oppression,
and rapine, which havedefcribed, was ill suited
to favour improvement in any of these. In less
than a century after the barbarous nations fettled
in their new conquests, almost all the effects of
the knowledge and civility which the Romans
had spread through Europe disappeared. Not
only the arts of elegance which minister to lux-
ury, and are supported by it, but many of the
useful arts, without which life can scarcely be
confidered as comfortable, were neglected or
loft. Literature, science, taste, were words
hardly in use during the ages we are contem-
plating; or if they occur at any time, eminence
in them is ascribed to persons and productions so
contemptible, that it appears their true import
was little undertood. Persons of the highest
rank, and in the most eminent stations, could
not read or write. Many of the clergy did not
understand the breviary which they were obliged

daily

daily to recite; some of them could scarcely SECT. I.
read it [K]. All memory of past tranfations
was loft, or preserved in annals filled with
trifling eventst or legendary tales. Even the
codes of laws published by the several nations
which established themselves in the different
countries of Europe, fell into disuse, while, in
their place, customs, vague and capricious,
were substituted. The human mind negle&ted,
uncultivated, and depressed, funk into the most
profound ignorance. Europe did not produce,
during four centuries, one author who merits
to be read, either on account of the elegance of
his composition, or the justness and novelty of
his sentiments. There is hardly one invention
useful or ornamental to society of which that
long period can boast

EVEN the ChriRian religion, though its pre- upon rplit

cepts are delivered, and its institutions are fixed gi'""
in scripture with a precision which should have
exempted them from being misinterpreted or
corrupted, degenerated during those ages of
darkness into an illiberal superstition. The bar-
barous nations, when converted to Chrifianity,
changed the objec, not the spirit of their reli-
gious worship. They endeavoured to conciliate
the favour of the true God by means not unlike
to those which they had employed in order to
appease their false deities. Instead of aspiring
to fanftity and virtue, which alone can render
men acceptable to the great author of order and
of excellence, they imagined that they satisfied
every obligation of duty by a scrupulous obferv-
ance of external ceremonies [L]. Religion, ac-
cording to their conception of it, comprehended
nothing else; and the rites, by which they per-
fuaded themselves that they should gain the

C 2 favour
[K] NOTE X..

[L] NOTE XI.

SECT. I. favour of heaven, were of such a nature as
'v3 ' might have been expe&ted from the rude ideas

of the ages which devised and introduced them.
They were either so unmeaning as to be altoge-
ther unworthy of the Being to whose honour
they were consecrated; or so absurd as to be a
disgrace to reason and humanity [M}. Charle-
magne in France, and Alfred the Great in Eng-
land, endeavoured to dispel this darkness, and
gave their fubjefts a short glimpse of light and
knowledge. But the ignorance of the age was
too powerful for their efforts and inflitutions.
The darkness returned, and fettled over Europe
more thick and heavy than formerly.

the As the inhabitants of Europe during there

ch"oa~ centuries were strangers to the arts which em-
of the b- bellili a polished age, they were destitute of the
m' m'iad virtues which abound among people who conti-

nue in a simple state. Force of mind, a sense
of personal dignity, gallantry in enterprize, in-
vincible perseverance in execution, contempt of
danger and of death, are the charafteriftic vir-
tues of uncivilized nations. But these are all the
offspring of equality and independence, both
which the feudal institutions had destroyed.
The spirit of domination corrupted the nobles;
the yoke of servitude deprefled the people; the
generous sentiments inspired by a sense of equa-
lity were extinguished, and nothing remained
to be a check on ferocity and violence. Human
society is in its mos corrupted itate at that
period when men have loft their original inde-
pendence and simplicity of manners, but have
not attained that degree of refinement which
introduces a sense of decorum and of propriety
in conduct, as a reitraint on those passions which
lead to heinous crimes. Accordingly, a greater

number
[M] NOTE Xll.

number of those atrocious acions which fill SZCT. I.
the mind of man with astonishment and horror, '
occur in the history of the centuries under review,
than in that of any period of the fame extent
in the annals of Europe. If we open the history
of Gregory of Tours, or of any contemporary
author, we meet with a series of deeds of cruelty,
perfidy, and revenge, so wild and enormous as
almost to exceed belief.

Bu T, according to the observation of an ele- From the

gant and profound historian £, there is an ulti- bfghnile
mate point of depression, as well as of exaltation, ven:h cen-
from which human affairs naturally return in a trygnV'd
contrary progress, and beyond which they never manners
pass either in their advancement or decline. iegprto
When defects, either in the form, or in the ad..
ministration of government, occasion such dif-
orders in society as are excessive and intolerable,
it becomes the common interest to discover and
to apply such remedies as will most effecually
remove them. Slight inconveniencies may be
long overlooked or endured; but when abuses
grow to a certain pitch, the society must go to
ruin, or must attempt to reform them. The
disorders in the feudal system, together with the
corruption of taste and manners consequent upon
there, which had gone on increasing during a
long course of years, seem to have attained their
utmost point of excess towards the close of the
eleventh century. From that awra we may
date the return of government and manners
in a contrary direaion, and can trace a fuc-
cession of causes and events which contributed,
some with a nearer and more powerful, others
with a more remote and less perceptible influ-

ence,
E Hume's History of England, vol. ii. p. 441.

SEcr.l. ence, to abolish confusion and barbarism, and

to introduce order, regularity, and refinement.

Necefrryto IN pointing out and explaining there causes
the,:U and events, it is not necessary to Qbferve the or-
·nd -cot der of time with a chronological accuracy; it is
which con-
tribIte t of more importance to keep in view their mu-
rdrthi. tual connection and dependence, and to show
improve-

how the operation of one event, or one cause,
prepared the way for another, and augmented
its influence. We have hitherto been contem-
plating the progrefsof that darkners which spread
over Europe from its firlt approach, to the pe-
riod of greater obscuration; a more plearant ex-
ercife begins here, to observe the first dawning
of returning light, to mark the various acceflions
by which it gradually increased and advanced
towards the full splendor of day.

The ten- 1. THE Crusades, or expeditions in order td
Crfad to rescue the Holy Land out of the hands of Infi-
intoduce dels, seem to be the first event that rouzed Eu-
go,,mi, rope from the lethargy in which it had been long
and ma- funk, and that tended to introduce any change

in government, or in manners. It is natural to

The mo' the human mind to view those places which
c.rfe or have been diftinguiflhed by being the residence of
te.c ri- any illustrious personage, or the scene of any

great tranfation, with some degree of delight
and veneration. From this principle flowed the
superstitious devotion with which Christians,
from the earliest ages of the church, were ac-
customed to visit that country which the Al-
mighty had feleted as the inheritance of his fa-
-ourite people, and in which the Son of God had
accomphlhed the redemption of mankind. As
this distant pilgrimage could not be performed
without considerable expence, fatigue, and dan-
ger, it appeared the more meritorious, and

came

,came to be confidered as an expiation for almost SETr. I.
every crime. An opinion which spread with ''-
rapidity over Europe about the close of the
tenth and beginning of the eleventh century,
and which gained universal credit, wonderfully
augmented the number of credulous pilgrims,
and increased the ardour with which they under-
took this useless voyage. The thousand years
mentioned by St. John ' were supposed to be
accomplished, and the end of the world to be
at hand. A general consternation seized man-
kind; many relinquilhed their possessions, and
abandoning their friends and families, hurried
with precipitation to the Holy Land, where they
imagined that Christ would quickly appear to
judge the world G. While Palestine continued
subjet to the Caliphs, they had encouraged the
retort of pilgrims to Jerusalem, and confidered
this as a beneficial species of commerce, which
brought into their dominions gold and silver,
and carried nothing out but relicks and confe-
crated trinkets. But the Turks having con-
quered Syria about the middle of the eleventh
century, pilgrims were exposed to outrages of
every kind from these fierce barbarians". This
change happening precisely at the juncture when
the panic terror which I have mentioned render-
ed pilgrimages most frequent, filled Europe with
alarm and indignation. Every person who re-
turned from Palestine related the dangers which
he had encountered, in visiting the holy city,
and described with exaggeration the cruelty and
lexations of the Turks.

WHEN
W7VRE N

R level. x. 2. 3, 4.
G Chronic. Will. Godelli ap. Bouquet Recueil des Hifto-

riens de France, tom. x. p. 262. Vita Abbonis, ibid. p.
332. Chronic. S. Pantaleonis ap. Eccard. Corp. Scrip. me-
dii Evi, vol. . p. c9g. Annalifta Saxo, ibid. 576.

* Jo. Dan. &noepflini de facris dolorum in oriMtem x-
peditionibus, p. 4. Argent. 1726. 4to.

SEC T.. WHEN the minds of men were thus prepared,
,""~ the zeal of a fanatical monk, who conceived
diate ocA- the idea of leading all the forces of Chriftendonm
fiofthcm against the infidels, and of driving them out

of the Holy Land by violence, was sufficient to
give a beginning to that wild enterprize. Peter
the hermit, for that was the name of this mar-
tial apostle, run from province to province with
a crucifix in his hand, exciting Princes and peo-
ple to this Holy war, and wherever he came
kindled the fame enthusiastic ardour for it with
which he himself was animated. The council
of Placentia, where upwards of thirty thousand
persons were assembled, pronounced the scheme
to have been suggested by the immediate in-
fpiration of heaven. In the council of Cler-
mont, still more numerous, as Coon as the mea-
sure was proposed, all cried out with one voice,
' It is the will of God." Persons of all ranks
were finitten with the contagion; not only the
gallant nobles of that age, with their martial
followers, whom the boldness of a romantic en-
terprize might have been apt to allure, but men
in the more humble and pacific stations of life;
ecclesiastics of every order, and even women
and children, engaged with emulation in an un-
dertaking which was deemed sacred and meri-
torious. If we may believe the concurring
teftirony of contempory authors, fix millions
of persons assumed the cross', which was the
badge that diftinguilhed such as devoted them-
selves to this holy warfare. All Europe, fays
the Princess Anna Coinnena, torn up from the
foundation, seemed ready to precipitate itself
in one united body upon Asia K. Nor did the

fumes

Fulcherius Carnotenois ap. Bongarflii Gefta Dei per
Francos, vol. i. 387. edit. Han. 61 1.

Alexias.lib. x. ap. Byz. script. vol. xi. p. 224.

fumes of this enthusiastic zeal evaporate at once: S cT. I.
the frenzy was as lasting as it was extravagant.
During two centuries, Europe seems to have had
no object but to recover or keep pofleflion of the
Holy Land, and through that period vast ar-
mies continued to march thither [N].

THE first efforts of valour animated by en- The focctf

thufiafm were irresistible; part of the lesser Asia, the C
all Syria and Palestine, were wrested from the in-
fidels; the banner of the cross was displayed on
Mount Sion; Constantinople, the capital of the
Christian empire in the East, was seized by a
body of those adventurers, who had taken arms
againft'the Mahometans, and an Earl of Flan-
ders, and his descendants, kept possession of
the Imperial throne during half a century. But
though the first impression of the Crusaders was
so unexpe&ed that they made their conquests
with great ease, they found infinite difficulty in
preserving them. Eftabliflments so distant from
Europe, surrounded by warlike nations, animated
with fanatical zeal scarcely inferior to that of the
Crusaders themselves, were perpetually in dan-
ger of being overturned. Before the expiration A. D. 1,91.
of the thirteenth century, the Christians were
driven out of their Asiatic pofleffions, in acquir-
ing of which incredible numbers of men had
perished, and immense rums of money had been
wafted. The only common enterprize in which
the European nations ever engaged, and which
all undertook with equal ardour, remains a fin-
gular monument of human folly.

BUT from these expeditions, extravagant as The benef-

ci l effeas

they were, beneficial consequences followed, of th c,u-
which had neither been foreseen nor expected. ades on
In their progress toward the Holy Land, the manners.
followers of the cross marched through countries

better
[NI NOTE XIIT.

SECT. I. better cultivated, and more civilized than their

C'-'v~own. Their first rendezvous was commonly in

Italy, in which Venice, Genoa, Pisa, and other
cities, had began to apply themselves to com-
merce, and had made some advances towards
wealth as well as refinement. They embarked
there, and landing in Dalmatia, pursued their
route by land to Constantinople. Though the
military spirit had been long extind in the
eastern Empire, and a despotism of the worfl
species had annihilated almost every publick
virtue, yet Constantinople, having never felt
the deftrueive rage of the barbarous nations,
was the greatest, as well as the most beautiful
city in Europe, and the only one in which there
remained any image of the ancient elegance in
manners and arts. The naval power of the
eastern Empire was considerable. Manufa&ures
of the most curious fabrick were carried on in
its dominions. Conflantinople was the only
mart in Europe for the commodities of the East
Indies. Although the Saracens and Turks had
torn from the Empire many of its richest pro-
vinces, and had reduced it within very narrow
bounds, yet great wealth flowed into the capi-
tal from these various sources, which not only
cherished such a taste for magnificence, but
kept alive such a relish for the sciences as ap-
pears conliderable when compared with what
was known in other parts of Europe. Even in
Asia, the Europeans who had assumed the cross,
found the remains of the knowledge and arts
which the example and encouragement of the
Caliphs had diffused through their Empire. Al-
though the attention of the historians of the
Crusades was fixed on other objeEs than the
slate of society among the nations which they in-
vaded, although most of them had neither taste
nor discernment enough to describe these, they
relate, however, such signal ass of humanity

and

and generosity in the conduc of Saladin, as SECr.I.
well as some other leaders of the Mahometans,'- -
as give us a very high idea of their manners.
It was not poflible for the Crusaders to travel
through so many countries, and to behold their
various cuftomsand institutions, without acquir-
ing information and improvement. Theirviews
enlarged; their prejudices wore off; new ideas
crowded into their minds; and they must have
been sensible, on many occasions, of the rusticity
of their own manners when compared with those
of a more polished people. These impreflions
were not so flight as to be effaced upon their re-
turn to their native countries. A close inter-
course subsisted between the East and Weft
during two centuries; new armies were conti-
nually marching from Europe to Asia, while
former adventurers returned home and imported
many of the customs to which they had been fa-
miliarized by a long residence abroad. Accord-
ingly, we discover, soon after the commence-
ment of the Crusades, greater splendour in the
courts of Princes, greater pomp in publick cere-
monies, a more refined taste in pleasure and
amusements, together with a more romantic
spirit of enterprize spreading gradually over Eu-
rope; and to these wild expeditions, the effect
of superstition or folly, we owe the first gleams
of light which tended to dispel barbarity and ig-
norance.

BuT these beneficial consequences of the Cru- Their infla-

fades took place slowly; their influence upon the fiCtefpro
state of property, and consequently of power, in perty.
the different kingdoms of Europe, was more im-
mediate as well.as discernible. The nobles who
assumed the cross, and bound themselves to march
to the Holy Land, soon perceived that great fums
were necessary towards defraying the expence of

such

S cT. L such a diRant expedition, and enabling them to

appear with suitable dignity at the head of their
vassals. But the genius of the feudal system was
averse to the imposition of extraordinary taxes;
and fubjets in that age were unaccustomed to
pay them. No expedient remained for levying
the fums requisite, but the sale of their posses-
sions. As men were inflamed with romantic
expectations of the splendid conquests which
they hoped to make in Asia, and potfefled with
such zeal for recovering the Holy Land as fwal-
lowed up every other paifion, they relinquished
their ancient inheritances without any relucance,
and for prices far below their value, that they
might rally forth as adventurers in quest of new
settlements in unknown countries The Mo-
narchs of the great kingdoms in the weft, none
of whom had engaged in the first Crusade,
eagerly seized this opportunity of annexing con-
considerable territories to their crowns at small
expence L. Besides this, several great barons
who perished in the Holy war, having left no
heirs, their fiefs reverted of course to their re-
fpective sovereigns; and by these accessions of
property as well as power taken from the one
scale and thrown into the other, the regal au-
thority increased in proportion as that of the
Aristocracy declined. The absence, too, of
many potent vailals, accustomed to controul and
give law to their sovereigns, afforded them an
opportunity of extending their prerogative, and
of acquiring a degree of weight in the conftitu-
tion which they did not formerly possess. To
there circumstances, we may add, that as all
who assumed the cross were taken under the
immediate protection of the church, and its
heaviest anathemas were denounced against such

as

L Willehn. Malmibur. Guibert. Abbas ap. Bongarf. vol.
i. 481.

as should disquiet or annoy those who had de- SiCT. I.
voted themselves to this service; the private -'
quarrels and hotilities which banilhed tranquil-
lity from a feudal kingdom were suspended or
extinguihed ; a more general and steady admi-
niftration ofjutice began to be introduced, and
some advances were made towards the eftabliflh-
ment of regular government in the several king-
doms of Europe M [(].

THE commercial effects of the Crusades were Their com-

not less confiderale than those which I have feail cf-
already mentioned. The first armies under the
standard of the cross, which Peter the hermit
and Godfrey of Bouillon led through Germany
and Hungary to Cqontantinople, suffered so
much by the length of the march, as well as by
the fierceness of the barbarous people who inha-
bited thqfe countries, that it deterred others
from taking the fame route; so that rather than
encounter so many dangers, they chose to gQ
by sea. Venice, Genoga and Pisa furnished the
transports on which they embarked. The fumn
which there cities received merely for freight
from such numerous armies was immense .
This, however, was but a frmall part of what
they gained by the. expeditions to the Holy
Land; the Crusaders contrated with them for
military stores and proyigions; their fleets kept
on the coast as the armies advanced, by land;
and supplying them with whatever was wanting,
engrossed all the profits 9f that lucrative branch
of commerce. The success which attended the
arms of the Crusaders was produtive of advan-
tages still more pqmanent. Therq are chatters

yet

M Du Cange Gloflar. voc. Cruce fignatus. Guil. Abbas
ap. Bongarf. vol. i. p. 480, 48a.

[O0 NOTE XIV.
a Muratori Antiquit. Italic. mcdii avi, vol. ii. 905.

SECT. 1. yet extant, containing grants to the Venetians,
-' 1 Pifans, and Genoese, of the most extensive im-

munities in the several settlements which the
Chnftians made in Asia. All the commodities
which they imported or exported are thereby ex-
empted from every imposition; the property of
entire suburbs in some of the maritime towns,
and of large fireets in others, is vested in them;
and all questions arising among persons fettled
within their precincs, or who traded under their
protetion, are appointed to be tried by their
own laws and by judges of their own appoint-
ment . When the Crusaders seized Conftanti-
nople, and placed one of their own leaders on
the Imperial throne, the Italian States were like-
wife gainers by that event. The Venetians who
had planned the enterprize, and took a confide-
rable part in carrying it into execution, did
not neglet to secure to themselves the chief
advantages redounding from its success. They
made themselves mailers of part of the ancient
Peloponnefus in Greece, together with some of
the most fertile iflandsin the Archipelago. Many
valuable branches of the commerce, which
formerly centered in Constantinople, were tranf-
ferred to Venice, Genoa, or Pisa. Thus a fuc-
ceflion of events occasioned by the Holy war,
opened various sources, from which wealth flow-
ed in such abundance in there cities r, as enabled
them, in concurrence with another institution
which shall be immediately mentioned, to secure
their own liberty and independence.

The en- II. THE institution to which I alluded was the
blifmet r . .
of commu- forming or cities into communities, corporations,
ities - or bodies politick, and granting them the privi-
gornment lege of municipaljurifdiclion, which contri'utcd
and order. more,

more,

o Muratori Antiquit. Italic. medii zvi, vol. ii. p. 906, &c.
r Villehardouin hid. de Confant. fous I'Empereurs Fran-

cois, p. o05, &c.
30

more, perhaps, than any other cause to intro- SECT. I.
duce regular government, police and arts, and -.*
to diffuse them over Europe. The feudal go-
vernment had degenerated into a system of op-
pression. The usurpations of the nobles were
become unbounded and intolerable: they had
reduced the great body of the people into a
fiate of aAtual servitude: the condition of those
dignified with the name of freemen; was often
little preferable to that of the other. Nor was
such oppreflion the portion of those alone who
dwelt in the country, and were employed in cul-
tivating the estate of their master. Cities and Theaneiet
villages held of some great lord, on whom they itieso
depended for prote&tion, and were no less sub-
je& to his arbitrary jurifdiaion. The inhabi-
tants were deprived of the natural, and most
unalienable rights of humanity. They could
not dispose of the effets which their own indus-
try had acquired, either by a latter will, or by
any deed executed during their life % They had
no right to appoint guardians for their children
during their minority. They were not permit-
ted to marry without purchasing the content of
the lord on whom they depended -. If once
they had commenced a law-suit, they durst not
terminate it by an accommodation, because
that would have deprived the lord in whose
court they pleaded, of the perquisites due to
him on passing sentence'. Services of various
kinds, no less disgraceful than oppressive. were
exated from them without mercy or mode-
ration. The spirit of industry was checked
in some cities by absurd regulations, and in

others

Q-Dacherii Spiceleg. tom. xi. p. 374, 375. edit. in 4to. Or-
donnances des Rois de France, tom. iii. p. 204. NQ. 2. 6.

' Ordonnances des Rois de France, tom. i. p. 22. tom. iii.

p. 203 N°. i. Murat. Antiq. Ital. vol. iv. p. 20. Dacher.
Spicel. vol. xi. p. 325, 341.
s Dacher. Spicel. vol. p. ix. 18z.

3*

SECT. I. others by unreasonable exactions: nor would

' the narrow and oppressive maxims of a military

aristocracy have permitted it ever to rife to any
deree of height or vigour T.

Trtf rte BUT as soon as the cities of Italy began to
ti irft e- turn their attention towards commerce, and to
hlited in conceive some idea of the advantages which they

might derive from it, they became impatient to
mbake oft the yoke of their insolent lords, and
to establish among themselves such a free and
equal government as would render property fe-
cure, and industry flourishing. The German
Emperors, especially those of the Franconian
and Suabian lines as the feat of their govern-
ment was far distant from Italy, pofiefied a
feeble and imperfect jurifdictioa in that country.
Their perpetual quarrels either with the Popes or
with their own turbulent vassals, diverted their
attention from the interior police of Italy, and
gave constant employment to their arms. These
circumstances encouraged the inhabitants of some
of the Italian cities, towards the beginning of
the eleventh century, to assume new privileges,
to unite together more closely, and to form
themselves into bodies politick under the govern-
ment of laws eftabli(hed by common content u
The rights, wh ch many cities acquired by bold
or fortunate usurpations, others purchased from
the Emperors, who deemed themselves gainers
when they received large fums for immunities
which they were no longer able to withhold;
and some cities obtained them gratuitously from
the generosity or facility of the Princes on whom
they depended. The great increase of wealth
which the Crusades brought into Italy, occafi-
oned a new kind of fermentation and acivity in

the

T M. I'Abbl Mably obfervat. fur 'Ihif. de France, torn.
ii. p. 2. 96.

Murat. Antiquit. Ital. vol. iv. p. 5.

the minds of the people, and excited such a ge- SeCr. I.
neral paflion for liberty and independence, that '`'J-
before the conclusion of the last Crusade, all the
considerable cities in that country had either
purchased or had extorted large immunities from
the Emperors [P].

THIS innovation was not long known in Italy 1s intro-

before it made its way into France. Louis the dF"e.in
Gross, in order to create some power that might into other
counterbalance those potent vassals who controul- Europe.
ed, or gave law to the crown, first adopted the A D I0lo.
plan of conferring new privileges on the towns-"37
fituared within his own domaine. These privi-
leges were called charters of community, by which
he enfranchised the inhabitants, abolished all
marks of servitude, and formed them into cor-
porations or bodies politick, to be governed by
a council and magifirates of their own nomina-
tion. These magifirates had the right of ad-
minifteringjuftice within their own precints, of
levying taxes, of embodying and training to
arms the militia of the town, which took the
field when required by the Sovereign, under the
command of officers appointed by the commu-
nity. The great barons imitated the example of
their monarch, and granted like immunities to
the towns within their territories. They had
wafted such great fums in their expeditions to
the Holy Land, that they were eager to lay hold
on this new expedient for raising money, by the
sale of those charters of liberty. Though the
institution of communities was as repugnant to
their maxims of policy, as it was adverse to
their power, they disregarded remote confe-
quences, in order to obtain present relief. In
less than two centuries, Servitude was abolished
in moit of the towns in France, and they be-

VOL. I. D came

[Pi NOTE XV.

SECT. . came free corporations, instead of dependent

^' villages, without jurifdicion or privileges [ Q].

Much about the fame period, the great cities in
Germany began to acquire like immunities, and
laid the foundations of their present liberty and
independence [R]. The practice spread quick.
ly over Europe, and was adopted in Spain,
England, Scotland, and all the other feudal
kingdoms [S].

Its happy TiE good effects of this new inffitution were
the codi- immediately felt, and its influence on govern-
tior as the ment as well as manners was no less extensive
irhabio
nti,; than salutary. A great body of the people was

teleafed from servitude, and from all the arbitra-
ry and grievous impositions to which that wretch-
ed condition had fubjeated them. Towns, upon
acquiring the right of community, became so
many little republicks, governed by known and
equal laws. Liberty was deemed such an es-
fential and charateriftic part in their conftitu-
tion, that if any slave took refuge in one of
them, and resided there during a year without
being claimed, he was instantly declared a free-
man, and admitted as a member of the commu-
nity w.

*;-n the As one part of the people owed their liberty
r,.''o .he to the erecion of communities, another was in-

debted to them for their security. Such had
been the state of Europe during several centu-
ries, that felf-prefervation obliged every man to
court the patronage of some powerful baron, and
in times of danger his cafle was the place to
which all resorted for safety. But towns fur-
rounded with walls, whose inhabitants were re-

gularly

[Q0 NOTE XVI. [R] NOTE XViI.
[S] NOTE XVIII.
w Statut. Hunberti Bellojoci Dacher. Spicel. vol. ix. iSa.
1S5. Charta Comit. Forenf. ibid. 193.

gularly trained to arms, and bound by interest, SECT. I.
as well as by the molt solemn engagements, re-
ciprocally to defend each other, afforded a more
commodious and secure retreat. The nobles
began to be confidered as of less importance,
when they ceased to be the sole guardians to
whom the people could look up for proteation
against violence.

IF the nobility suffered some diminution of upon the

·

. ,. , i i

-i «power of

their credit and power by the privileges granted ,h crowen-
to the cities, the crown acquired an increase of
both. As there were no regular troops kept on
foot in any of the feudal kingdoms, the Mo-
narch could bring no army into the field but
what was composed of soldiers furnished by the
crown-vaffals, always jealous of the regal au-
thority; nor had he any funds for carrying on
the public service, but such as they granted him
with a very sparing hand. But when the mem-
bers of communities were permitted to bear
arms, and were trained to the use of these, this
in some degree supplied the first defet, and gave
the crown the command of a body of men in-
dependent of its great vaflals. The attachment
of the cities to their sovereigns, whom they re-
fpeted as the first authors of their liberties, and
whom they were obliged to court as the pro-
te&ors of their immunities against the domineer-
ing spirit of the nobles, contributed somewhat
towards removing the second evil, as, on many
occasions, it procured the crown supplies of mo-
ney which added new force to governmentx.

THE acquisition of liberty made such a happy upon the
change in the condition of all the members of i,^"crJ

D 2 com-

x Ordon. des Rois de France, ton. i. 602, 785, tom. ii.
318, 4z2.

S CT 1. communities, as roused them from that ina&ion
'~~' into which they had been funk by the wretch-

ednefs of their former state. The spirit of in-
duftry revived. Commerce became an object of
attention, and began to flourish. Population
increased. Independence was established; and
wealth flowed into cities which had long been
the feat of poverty and oppreflion. Wealth was
accompanied by its usual attendants, ostentation
and luxury; and though the former was inelegant
and cumbersome, and the latter indelicate, they
led gradually to greater refinement in manners,
and in the habits of life. Together with this
improvement in manners, a more regular species
of government and police was introduced. As
cities grew to be more populous, and the occa-
sions of intercourse among men increased, ita-
tutes and regulations multiplied of course, and
all became sensible that their common safety
depended on observing them with exa&nefs, and
on punishing such as violated them with promp-
titude and rigour. Laws and subordination, as
well as polished manners, taking their rife in
cities, diffused themselves insensibly through the
reft of the society.

The ina- IlI. THE inhabitants of cities having obtained
bini. of personal freedom and municipal jurisdiction, soon
quire poi- acquired civil liberty and political power. It was
,i%.l a fundamental principle in the feudal system of
of the - policy, that no freeman could be governed or
e "'A taxed unless by his own content. In consequence

of this, the valals of every baron were called to
his court, in which they established, by mutual
content, such regulations as they deemed most
beneficial to their small society, and granted
their superior such fuppliesof money, as were pro-
portional to their abilities, or to his wants. The

barons

barons themselves, conformably to the fame SECT. I.
maxim, were admitted into the supreme alsem- '
bly of the nation, and concurred with the fove-
reign in enafinglaws, or in imposing taxes. As
the superior lord, according to the original plan
of feudal policy, retained the dire& property of
those lands which he granted, in temporary pof-
feflion, to his vassals, the law, even after fiefs
became hereditary, still supposed this original
pracice to subsist, and a baron continued to be
confidered as the guardian of all who resided
within his territories. The great council of each
nation, whether distinguished by the name of
a parliament, a diet, the Cortes, or the states
general, was composed entirely of such barons,
and dignified ecclefiafticks, as held immediately
of the crown. Towns, whether fitiated within
the royal domaine, or on the lands of a subjet,
depended for protection on the lord of whom
they held. They had no legal name, no politi-
cal existence, which could entitle them to be ad-
mitted into the legislative assembly, or could give
them any authority there. But as soon as they
were enfranchised, and formed into Bodies Cor-
porate, they became legal and independent mem-
bers of the conffitution, and acquired all the
rights essential to freemen. Amoqgft there, the
most valuable, was the privilege of a decisive
voice in enacting public laws, and granting na-
tional subsidies. It was natural for cities, accuf-
tomed to a form of municipal government, ac-
cording to which no regulation could be efta-
blifhed within the community, and no money
could be raised but by their own content, to
claim this privilege. The wealth, the power and
consideration which they acquired on recovering
their liberty, added weight to their claim; and
favourable events happened, or fortunate con-

junctures

SEC. . . junctures occurred, in the different kingdoms of
.v*.- J Europe, which facilitated or forwarded their ob-

taining possession of this important right. In
England, one of thle first countries in which the
reprtfentatives of boroughs were admitted into
the great council of the nation, the barons who
A .D. 1165. took arms against Henry III. summoned them to

attend parliament, in order to add greater popu-
larity to their party, and to strengthen the bar-
rier against the encroachment of regal power.
In France, Philip the Fair, a Monarch no less
sagacious than enterprizing, confidered them as
instruments which might be employed with equal
advantage to extend the royal prerogative, to
counterbalance the exorbitant power of the no-
bles, and to facilitate the imposition of new taxes.
With these views, he introduced the deputies of
such towns as were formed into communities in-
to the states general of the nation Y. In the Em-
pire, the wealth and immunities of the Imperial
cities placed them on a level with the most con-
fiderable members of the Germanick body. Con-
fcious of their own power and dignity, they pre-
tended to the privilege of forming a separate
A.D. 1193. bench in the diet; and made good their preten-

lion Z.

n, E.pp BUT in what way soever the representatives of
,Ts,'· ocities firt gained a place in the legislature, that
Oomc~.n event had great influence on the form and ge-

nius of government. It tempered the rigour of
ariftocratical oppreflion with a proper mixture
of popular liberty: It secured to the great body
of the people, who had formerly no reprefenta-
tives, active and powerful guardians of their
rights and privileges: It eftablithed an interme-
diate power between the King and nobles, to

which

Paiauicr Recherches de la France, p. 8.edit. Par. 1633.
2 Ffefel Abrge del'hiftoire & droit d'Allenagne, p. 408.
451.

which each had recourse alternately, and which S cr. I.
at some times opposed the usurpations of the for- '
mer, on other occasions checked the encroach-
ments of the latter. As soon as the reprefenta-
tives of communities gained any degree of crer
dit and influence in the legislature, the spirit of
laws became different from what it had former.
ly been; it flowed from new principles; it was
direted towards new objects; equality, order,
the publick good, and the redress of grievances,
were phrases and ideas brought into use, and
which grew to be familiar in the statutes and ju-
rifprudence of the European nations. Almost all
the efforts in favour of liberty in every country
of Europe, have been made by this new power
in the legislature. In proportion as it rose to
consideration and influence, the severity of the
ariftocratical spirit decreased; and the privileges
of the people became gradually more extensive
as the antient and exorbitant jurisdiction of the
nobles was abridged IT1.

IV. THE inhabitants of towns having been de The peopkl

clared free by the charters of communities, that cq"'ire li-
part of the people which resided in the country, franchire-
and was employed in agriculture, began to re- m'et.
cover liberty by enfranchisement. During the
rigour of feudal government, as hath been al-
ready observed, the great body of the lower
people was reduced to servitude. They were
slaves fixed to the foil which they cultivated,
and together with it were transferred from one
proprietor to another, by sale, or by convey-
ance. The spirit of feudal policy did not favour
the enfranchisement of that order of men. It
was an eftablilhed maxim, that no vafial could
legally diminish the value' of a fief, to the de-
triment of the lord from whom he had received
it. In consequence of this, manumiflion by the

authority
[T] NOTE XIX

SECT. I. authority of the immediate master was not va-i
'-" lid: and unless it was confirmed by the fuperi-

or lord of whom he held, slaves belonging to the
fief did not acquire a complete right to their li-
berty. Thus it became necessary to ascend
through all the gradations of feudal holding from
the King, the lord Paramount . A form of
procedure so tedious and troublesome, difcou-
raged the practice of manumiflion. Domestic
or personal slaves often obtained liberty from the
humanity or beneficence of their masters, to
whom they belonged in absolute property. The
condition of slaves fixed to the foil, was much
more unalterable.

The m- BUT the freedom and independence which
tires and

,Td of one part of the people had obtained by the initi-
tiuL tution of communities, inspired the other with

the most ardent desire of acquiring the fame pri-
vileges; and their superiors, sensible of the be-
nefits which they themselves had derived from
former concessions, were less unwilling to grati-
fy them by the grant of new immunities. The
enfranchisement of slaves became more frequent;
and the Monarchs of France, prompted by ne-
ceffity no less than by their inclination to reduce
the power of the nobles, endeavoured to render it

A.D. .3s, general. Louis X. and his brother Philip, issued
d 1318. ordinances, declaring, " That as all men were

by nature free-born, and as their kingdom was
called the kingdom of the Franks, they de-
termined that it should be so in reality as well as
in name; therefore they appointed that enfran-
chifements should be granted throughout the
whole kingdom, upon just and reasonable con-
ditions '. These edits were carried into im-
mediate execution within the royal domaine.
The example of their sovereigns, together with

the

A Etabliflemens deSt. Louis, liv. ii. ch. 34. Ordon. tom i.
283. not (a).

Ordon. tom. i.p. 583, 653.

the expectation of considerable fums which they S c T. I.
might raise by this expedient, led many of the v
nobles to set their dependents at liberty; and
servitude was gradually abolished in almost every
province of the kingdom [U]. In Italy, the
eftabliflment of republican government in their
great cities, the genius and maxims of which
were extremely different from those of the feudal
policy, together with the ideas of equality, which
the progress of commerce had rendered familiar,
gradually introduced the pra&ice of enfranchi-
sing the antient predial slaves. In some provin-
ces of Germany, the persons who had been sub-
jea to this species of bondage, were released;
in others, the rigour of their state was mitigated.
In England, as the spirit of liberty gained
ground, the very name and idea of personal ser-
vitude, without any formal interposition of the
legislature to prohibit it, was totally banished.

THE effets of such a remarkable change in The effea,

the condition of so great a part of the people, the i'-"
could not fail of being considerable and exten- provement
five. The husbandman, master of his own in- of ocety.
duftry, and secure of reaping for himself the
fruits of his labour, became the farmer of the
fame fields where he had formerly been com-
pelled to toil for the benefit of another. The
odious names of malter and of slave, the most
mortifying and deprefling of all diftin&ions to
human nature, were abolished. New profpets
* )ened, and new incitements to ingenuity and
enterprize presented themselves to those who
were emancipated. The expetation of better-
ing their fortune, as well as that of raising
themselves to a more honourable condition,
concurred in calling forth their activity and ge-
nius; and a numerous class of men, who for-

merly
[U] NOTE XX.

SECT. I. merly had no political exifence, and were em-

'v--' ployed merely as instruments of labour, became

useful citizens, and contributed towards aug-
menting the force or riches of the society,
which adopted them as members.

Theitm- V. THE various expedients which were em.
mO. of ployed in order to introduce a more regular,

dua-
e equal, and vigorous administration of juRice,

firation of --'l C
jiAice,con- contributed greatly towards the improvement of
tribnte to society. What was the particular mode of dif-
pro.et pensing juflice in the several barbarous nations
of 'C. which over-ran the Roman Empire, and took

possession of its different provinces, cannot now
be determined with certainty. We may conclude
from the form of government established among
them, as well as from their ideas concerning the
nature of society, that the authority of the ma-
giitrate was extremely limited, and the inde-
pendence of individuals proportionally great.
History and records, as far as there reach back,
justify this conclusion, and represent the ideas
and exereife of justice in all the countries of Eu-
rope, as little different from those which must
take place in a flare of nature. To maintain
the order and tranquillity of society by the regu-
lar execution of known laws; to inflict ven-
geance on crimes deftrudive of the peace and
safety of individuals, by a prosecution carried on
in the name, and by the authority of the com-
munity; to confider the punishment of crimi-
nals as a public example to deter others from vi-
olating the laws; were objects of government
little understood in theory, and less regarded in
praetice. The magifRrate could hardly be said
to hold the sword of justice; it was left in the
hands of private persons. Resentment was al-
most the sole motive for prosecuting crimes; and
to gratify that passion was the end and rule in

punishing
42

puniflhing them. He who suffered the wrong, SecT. I.
was the only person who had a right to pursue "
the aggressor, and to exa&t or to remit the pu-
nifhment. From a system of judicial procedure,
so crude and defective as seems to be scarcely
compatible with the subsistence of civil society,
disorder and anarchy flowed. Superstition con-
curred with this ignorance concerning the nature
of government, in obftruaing the adminiftra-
tion of justice, or in rendering it capricious and
unequal. To provide remedies for these evils,
so as to give a more regular course to justice,
was, during several centuries, one great obje& of
political wisdom. The regulations for this pur-
pose may be reduced to three general heads: To
explain these, and to point out the manner in
which they operated, is an important article in the
history of society among the nations of Europe.

I. THE first considerable Rep towards efta-h Thi ^c8f-

blifhing an equal administration of justice, was liihing the
the abolishment of the right which individuals prifce.
claimedof waging war with each other, in their ri
own name, and by their own authority. To
repel injuries, and to revenge wrongs, is no less
natural to man than to cultivate friendship: and OriginIa
while society remains in its most simple Rate, the concerning
former is confidered as a personal right no less jif'ce.
unalienable than the latter. Nor do men in this
situation deem that they have a title to redress
their own wrongs alone; they are touched with
the injuries of those with whom they are con-
neAted, or in whose honour they are interested;
and are no less prompt to avenge them. The
savage, how imperfectly soever he may compre-
hend the principles of political union, feels
warmly the sentiments of social affection, and
the obligations arising from the ties of blood.
On the appearance of an injury or affront of-
sered to his family or tribe, he kindles into rage,

and

SECT. 1. and pursues the authors of it with the keenest
tv- J refenrmcnt. He confiders it as cowardly to ex-

pect redress from any arm but his own, and as
infamous to give up to another the right of de-
termining what reparation he should accept, or
with what vengeance he ihould reft satisfied.

rTbefek THE maxims and pratice of all uncivilized
t:O'f- P-nations, with refpec to the prosecution and pu-

war. nilhment of offenders, particularly those of the

ancient Germans, and other Barbarians who in-
vaded the Roman Empire, are perfectly conform-
able to these ideasc. While they retained their
native simplicity of manners, and continued to
be divided into small tribes or societies, the de-
fests in this imperfet system of criminal jurif-
prudence (if it merits that name) were less fen-
sibly felt. When they came to fettle in the ex-
tensive provinces which they had conquered, and
to form themselves into great monarchies; when
new objedts of ambition presenting themselves,
increased both the number and violence of their
dissensions, they ought to have adopted new
maxims concerning the redress of injuries, and
to have regulated by general and equal laws,
that which they formerly left to be direted by
the caprice of private passion. But fierce and
haughty chieftains, accustomed to avenge them-
selves on such as had injured them, did not
think of relinquishing a right which they con-
fidered as a privilege of their order, and a mark
of their independence. Laws enforced by the
authority of Princes and Magistrates who pof-
sessed little power, commanded no great degree
of reverence. The administration of justice
among rude illiterate people, was not so accu-
rate, or decisive, or uniform, as to induce men
to submit implicitly to its determinations. Every

offended

c Tacit. de Mor. German. cap. 2z. Veil. Paterc. lib. ii.
c. 118.

offended baron buckled on his armour, and SECT. i.
fought redress at the head of his vassals. His 'V _
adversary met him in like hostile array. Neither
of them appealed to impotent laws, which could
afford them no protection. Neither of them
would submit points, in which their paflions
were warmly interested, to the flow determina-
tion of ajudicial enquiry. Both trusted to their
swords for the decision of the contest. The kin-
dred and dependents of the aggressor, as well as
of the defender, were involved in the quarrel.
They had not even the liberty of remaining neu-
tral. Such as refused to as in concert with the
party to which they belonged, were not only ex-
posed to infamy, but fubjeted to legal penalties.

THE different kingdoms of Europe were torn The peri-

and afflited, during several centuries, by intef- of it.
tine wars, excited by private animofities, and
carried on with all the rage natural to men of
fierce manners, and of violent pafilons. The
estate of every baron was a kind of independent
territory, disjoined from those around it, and
the hostilities between them were perpetual.
The evil became so inveterate and deep-rooted,
that the form and laws of private war were
ascertained, and regulations concerning it made
a part in the system of jurisprudence D, in the
fame manner as if this pracice had been founded
in some natural right of humanity, or in the
original constitution of civil society.

So great was the disorder, and such the cala- variousm-

mities which these perpetual hostilities occasion- ploycd in
ed, that various efforts were made to wrest from order to
the nobles this pernicious privilege which they

claimed.

D Beaumanoir Couftumes de Beauvoifis, ch. 59, et les
notes de Thaunmdliere, p. 447.

SE -:. I. claimed. It was the interest of every sovereign

to abolish a pratice which almost annihilated
his authority. Charlemagne prohibited it by an
express law, as an invention of the devil to de-
itroy the order and happiness of society E; but
the reign of one Monarch, however vigorous
and active, was too short to extirpate a cuffom
so firmly established. Inflead of enforcing this
prohibition, his feeble successors durst venture
on nothing more than to apply palliatives. They
declared it unlawful for any person to com-
mence war, until he had sent a formal defiance
to the kindred and dependents of his adversary;
they ordained that, after the commiflion of the
trespass or crime which gave rife to a private
war, forty days must elapse before the person
injured (hould attack the vafials of his adversary;
they enjoined all persons to suspend their private
animofities, and to cease from hostilities when
the King was engaged in any war against the
enemies of the nation. The church co-operat-
ed with the civil magiitrate, and interposed its
authority in order to extirpate a practice so re-
pugnant to the spirit of Christianity. Various
councils issued decrees, prohibiting all private
wars; and denounced the heaviest anathemas
againit such as ihould disturb the tranquillity of
society, by claiming or exercising that barba-
rous right. The aid of religion was called in to
combat and subdue the ferocity of the times.
The Almighty was said to have manifested, by
visions and revelations to different persons, his
disapprobation of that spirit of revenge, which
armed one part of his creatures against the
other. Men were required, in the name of God,
to sheath their swords, and to remember the
sacred ties which united them as Christians, and
as members of the fame society. But this

juntion
Capitul. A. D. 8So. Edit. Baluz. vol. i. p. 371.

junCtion of civil and ecclesiastical authority, Sc T. I.
though strengthened by every thing most apt to
alarm and to over-awe the credulous spirit of
those ages, produced no other effec than some
temporary suspensions of hostilities, and a cef-
fation from war on certain days and seasons con-
fecrated to the more solemn ats of devotion:
The nobles continued to assert this dangerous
privilege; they refused to obey some of the laws
calculated to annul or circumscribe it; they
eluded others; they petitioned; they remonf-
trated; they struggled for the right of private
war as the highest and most honourable diftinc-
tion of their order. Even so late as the fourteenth
century, we find the nobles in several provinces
of France contending for their ancient method
of terminating their differences by the sword, in
preference to that of Submitting them to the de-
cifion of any judge. The final abolition of this
practice in that kingdom, and the other coun-
tries in which it prevailed, is not to be ascribed
so much to the force of statutes and decrees,
as to the gradual increase of the royal authority,
and to the imperceptible progress of juster senti-
ments concerning government, order, and public
security [X].

2. THE prohibition of the form of trial by The prohi-

judicial combat, was another considerable ftep biby j.
towards the introduction of such regular govern- dicial com.
ment as secured publick order and private tran- "improver
quillity. As the right of private war left many t- i, the

c i * d i .. ... *.... .- adminiira-

of the quarrels among individuals to be decided, tion of ju'-
like those between nations, by r.rms; the form ti"ce
of trial by judicial combat, which was establish-
ed in every country of Europe, baniihed equity
from courts ofjuftice, and rendered chance or
force the arbiter of their determinations. In
civilized nations, all tranfations of any impor-

tance
[X] NOTE XXI.

SrcT. I. tance are concluded in writing. The exhibition
,--v-- of the deed or initrument is full evidence of the
Defeag ;n
thejidicii fact, and ascertains with precision what each
proceeding party had stipulated to perform. But among a
of the mid- 1
dle ages, rude people, when the arts of reading and

writing were such uncommon attainments, that
to be makter of either, intitled a person to the
appellation of a clerk or learned man, scarcely
any thing was committed to writing but treaties
between Princes, their grants and charters to
their fubjeds, or such tranfations between pri-
vate parties as were of extraordinary confe-
quence, or had an extensive effect. The grea-
ter part of affairs in common life and business,
were carried on by verbal contracs or promises.
This, in many civil questions, not only made it
difficult to bring proof sufficient to establish any
claim, but encouraged falsehood and fraud, by
rendering them extremely easy. Even in crimi-
nol cafes, where a particular fat must be afcer-
tained, or an accusation be disproved, the nature
and effect of legal evidence was little understood
by barbarous nations. To define with accuracy
that species of evidence which a court had rea-
son to expeet; to determine when it ought to
insist on positive proof, and when it (hould be
satisfied with a proof from circumstances; to
compare the testimony of discordant witnesses;
and to fix the degree of credit due to each;
were discussions too intricate and subtile for the
jurisprudence of ignorant ages. In order to
avoid encumbering themselves with there, a
more simple form of procedure was introduced
into courts as well civil as criminal. In all cafes,
where the notoriety of the fat did not furnish
the clearest and most direct evidence, the per-
son accused, or he against whom an action was
brought, was called legally, or offered volun-
tarily to purge himself by oath; and upon his

declaring

declaring his innocence, he was instantly ac- SEcr.I.
quitted F. This absurd practice effectually screen- ~
ed guilt and fraud from detection orpunifh-
ment, by rendering the temptation to perjury so
powerful, that it was not easy to resist it. The
pernicious effects of it were sensibly felt; and in
order to guard against them, the laws ordained,
that oaths Ihould be administered with great
solemnity, and accompanied with every circum-
fiance which could inspire religious reverence,
or superstitious terror . This, however, proved
a feeble remedy: these ceremonious rites became
familiar, and their impression on the imagina-
tion gradually diminished; men who could ven-
ture to disregard truth, were not apt to startle
at the folemnities of an oath. Their observation
of this, put legislators upon devising a new ex-
pedient for rendering the purgation by oath more
certain and fatisfadory. They required the
person accused to appear with a certain number
of freemen, his neighbours or relations, who
corroborated the oath which he took, by swear-
ing that they believed all that he had uttered to
be true. These were called Compurgators, and
their number varied according to the importance
of the subjed in dispute, or the nature of the
crime with which a person was charged '. In
some cafes, the concurrence of no less than three
hundred of these auxiliary witnesses was requisite
to acquitthe person accused'. But even this de-
vice was found to be ineffetual. It was a point
of honour with every man in Europe, during
several ages, not to desert the chief on whom he

VOL. I. E depended,

' Leg. Burgund.Tit. 8, & 45. Leg. Aleman. Tit. .89 Leg'

Baiwar. Tit. 8. § 5. 2. &c.

G Du Cange Gloffar. voc. 7uramentum, vol. iii. p. 1607.

Edit. Benedit. " Du Cange, ibid. vol. ii. p. 1 599;

.' Spelman Gloflar. voc. Afatb. Gregot. Turon.-Hit lib.
viii. c. 9.

SECT. I. depended, and toftand.by thole with whom the
*C^7 ties of blood connected him. Whoever then

was bold enough to violate the laws, was sure of
devoted adherents, willing to abet, and eager to
serve him in whatever manner he required. The
formality of calling Compurgators, proved an
apparent, not a real security, against falsehood
and pejury; and the fentencesof courts, while
they continued to refer every point in question
to the oathof thedefendant, became so flagrantly
iniquitous as excited universal indignation against
this method of procedure".

These in SEmSIBLaE of these defects, but firangers to

~thd the remaer of correcing them, or of intro-
of appal- ducing a.more proper form, our ancestors, as
i" to - an infallible method of discovering truth, and

of guardingagainft deception, appealed to Hea-
ven, and referred every. point in dispute to be
determined, as they imagined, by the decisions
of unerring wisdom and impartial jutice. The
perfin accused, in order to prove his innocence,
submitted, in some cafes to trial, by plunging
his arm in boiling water; by lifting a red-hot
iron with his naked hand; by walking bare-foot
over burning pough-fhares; or by other experi-

prtkClirly ments equally perilousand formidable. On other
by ti. occafioms he challenged his accuser to fight him

in single combat. All these various forms of
trial were conducted with many devout ceremo-
nies; the miniters of religion were employed,
the Almighty was called upon to interpose for
the manifestation of. guilt, and for the proteeti-
on of innocence; and whoever escaped unhurt,
or came off victorious, was pronounced to be
acquitted by the judg~nt of God t.

AMONG
AmoNo

Leg. Longobard. lib. ii. tit. 55. 34.

' Muiat. Differtatio de judicii Dei Antiquit. Italic.
vol. iii. p.6t2.

AMONG all the whimsical and absurd inftituti- SECT. L
ons which owe their existence to the weakness of _"'~

The intro=

human reason, this, which submitted questions duaion of
that affected the property, the reputation, and thi'pra'ice

favoured by

the lives of men, to the determination of chance, the ruperiti.
or of bodily strength and address, appears to be ti.n of the
the most extravagant and preposterous. There age
were circumstances, however, which led the nati-
ons of Europe to confider this equivocal mode of
deciding any point in contest, as a direct appeal
to Heaven, and a certain method of discovering
its will. As men are unable to comprehend the
manner in which the Almighty carries on the
government of the universe, by equal, fixed,
and general laws, they are apt to imagine, that
in every cafe which their pafions or interest ren-
der important in their own eyes, the Supreme
Ruler of all ought visibly to display his power,
in vindicating innocence and punishing vice. It
requires no inconsiderable degree of science and
philosophy to correct this popular error. But the
sentiments prevalent in Europe during the dark
ages, instead of correting, strengthened it. Re-
ligion, for several centuries, consisted chiefly in
believing the legendary history of those faints
whose names croud and disgrace the Romish ca-
lendar. The fabulous tales concerning their mi-
racles, had been declared authentic by the bulls
of Popes, and the decrees of councils; they
made the great subjet of the infrudions which
the clergy offered to the people, and were re-
ceived by them with implicit credulity and ad-
miration. By attending to these, men were ac-
customed to believe that the eftablilhed laws of
nature might be violated on the most frivolous
occasions, and were taught to look rather for
particular and extraordinary ats of power un-
der the divine administration, than to contem-
plate the regular progress and execution of a ge-

E 2 neral

SET. I. neral plan. One fuperRfition prepared the way

'- for another; and whoever believed that the Su-

preme Being had interposed miraculously on
those trivial occasions mentioned in legends,
could not but expe& his intervention in matters
of greater importance, when solemnly referred
to his decision.

And like- WITH this superstitious opinion, the martial
t eirs

b spirit of Europe, during the middle ages, con-
'I rpii. curred in eftablilhing the mode of trial by judi-

cial combat. To be ready to maintain with
his sword whatever his lips had uttered, was the
first maxim of honour with every gentleman.
To assert their own rights by force of arms, to
inflict vengeance on those who had injured or
affronted them, were the diftin&ion and pride of
high-fpirited nobles. The form of trial by com-
bat coinciding with this maxim, flattered and gra-
tified these passions. Every man was the guar-
dian of his own honour, and of his own life;
the jutice of his cause, as well as his future re-
putation, depended on his own courage and
prowess. This mode of decision was confidered,
accordingly, as one of the happiest efforts of
wife policy; and as soon as it was introduced,
all the forms of trial by fire or water, and other
superstitious experiments, fell into disuse, or
were employed only in controversies between
persons of inferior rank. The trial by combat
was authorized over all Europe, and received in
every country with equal fatisfa&ion. Not only
questions concerning uncertain or contested sacs,
but general and abftraE points in law, were de-
termined by the issue of a combat; and the
latter was deemed a method of discovering
truth more liberal, as well as more fatisfaaory,
than that by examination and argument. Not
only might parties, whose minds were exafpe-
rated by the eagerness and the hostility of op-

position,

position, defy their antagonist, and require him SECT. I.
to make good his charge, or to prove his inno- v"
cence, with his sword; but witnefles, who had
no interest in the issue of the question, though
called to declare the truth by laws which
ought to have afforded them protection, were
equally exposed to the danger of a challenge,
and equally bound to assert the veracity of their
evidence by dint of arms. To complete the
absurdities of this military jurisprudence, even
the charater of a judge was not sacred from its
violence. Any one of the parties might inter-
rupt a judge when about to deliver his opinion;
might accuse him of iniquity and corruption in
the most reproachful terms, and throwing down
his gauntlet, might challenge him to defend his
integrity in the field; nor could he, without
infamy, refuse to accept the defiance, or decline
to enter the lifts against such an adversary.

THus the form of trial by combat, like other t become.

abuses, spread gradually, and extended to all unti'er
persons, and almost to all cafes. Ecclefiafticks,
women, minors, superannuated and infirm per-
sons, who could not with decency or justice be
compelled to take arms, and to maintain their
own cause, were obliged to produce champions,
whom they engaged, by affection or rewards, to
fight their battles. The folemnities of a judicial
combat were such as were natural in an acion,
which was confidered both as a formal appealto
God, and as the final decision of questions of the
highest moment. Every circumstance relating
to them, was regulated by the edi&ts of Princes,
and explained in the comments of lawyers, with
a minute and even fuperititious accuracy.. Skill,
in these laws and rights was the only science of

which.

53

were ambitious to attain M.

The pet;- BY this barbarous custom, the natural course
of it of proceeding, both in civil and criminal quef-

tions, was entirely perverted. Force usurped
the place of equity in courts of judicature, and
jutice was banished from her proper mansion.
Difcemment, learning, integrity, were qualities
less necessary to a judge than bodily strength and
dexterity in the use of arms. Daring courage,
and superior vigour of address were of more
moment towards securing the favourable issue of
a suit, than the equity of a cause, or the cear-
ness of the evidence. Men, of course, applied
themnfeles to cultivate the talents which they
found tobe of greatest utility: As strength of bo-
dy and addres in arms were no less requisite in
those lifts which they were obliged to enter in
defence of their private rights, than in the field
of battle, where they met the enemies of their
country, it becarr the great objec of educati-
on, as well as the chief employment in life, to
acquire these martial accomplishments; The
adminiitrtion of justice, instead of accustom-
ing men to lifen to the voice of equity, or to
reverence the decisions of law, added to the fe-
rocity of their manners, and taught them to
confider force as the great arbiter of right and
wrong.

vt, uc- THESE pernicious effects of the trial by com-
*bithio bat were so obvious, that they did not altogether
hs Prac- eftape the view of the unobferving age in which

it was introduced. The clergy, from the be-
ginning, remonstrated againfi it as repugnant to

the

M See a curious difcouore concerning the laws of judicial

combat, by Thomas of Woodtock, Duke of Gloucefler,
ir.c!e to Richard II. in Spelman's Gloffar. voc. Campus.

A VIEW OF THE
54

the spirit of Chrifianity, and fitbverfive of jus- Sec.TI.
tice and order N. Buit the msaxiins and 'paffions"-,'-a
which favoured it, had taken faoh holds of the
minds of men, that they disregarded admoni-
tions and censures, which on other occafibns
would have struck them with terror. The evil
was too great and inveterate to yield to that re-
medy, and continuing 'to inroreafe, the civil
power at length found it necessary to inierpofe.
Conscious, however, of their own linmited au-
thority, monarchs proceededwith caution; and
their first attempts to restrain, or to set any
bounds to this praaice, were extremely feeble.
One 6f the earlierf reftri&ions of this practice
which occurs in the history of turope, is that of
Henry I. of England. It extended no farther
than to prohibit the trial by combat in questions
concerning property of small valtu . Louis VI.
of France imitated his example, and ifiued an
edit to the fame effet P. St. Louis, whose ideas
as a legislator were far fuperiodr tohoft of his
age, endeavoured to introduce a rtore perfect
jurisprudence, and to frbftitute the trialby evi-
dence, in place of that by combat. But hit
regulations, with refpet to this, were confined
to his own domains; for the great vassals of the
crown possessed such independent authority, and
were so fondly attached to the antient pracice,
that he durst not venture to extend it to the whole
kingdom. Some barons voluntarily adopted his
regulations: The spirit of courts of juItice be-
came averse to the mode of decision by combat,
and discouraged it on every occasion. The no-
bles, nevertheless, thought it so honourable to
depend for the security of their lives and for-

tunes

N Du Cange Gloffar. voc. Dueltum, v. ii. p. 1675.
o Bruffel Usage des Fiefs, vol. ii. p. 962.
? Ordon. tom. i. p. x6.

SECT. I. tunes on their own courage alone, and contend-
"' v-' ed with so much vehemence for the preservation

of this .favourite privilege of their order, that
the successors of St. Louis, unable to oppose,
and afraid of offending, such powerful fitbjeAs,
were obliged not only to tolerate, but authorize
the practice which he had attempted to abo-
lifh Q In other countries of Europe, efforts
equally zealous were employed to maintain the
efRablifhed custom; and similar conceflions were
extorted from their refpetive sovereigns. It
continued, however, to be be an object of po-
licy with every monarch of abilities or vigour,
to explode the trial by combat; and various
edifts were issued for this purpose. But the ob.
servation which was made concerning the right
of private war, is equally applicable to the mode
of trial under review. No custom, how absurd
soever it may be, if it has subsisted long, or
derives its force from the manners and preju-
dices of the age in which it prevails, was ever
abolished by the bare promulgation of laws and
ltatutes. The sentiments of the people must
change, or some new power sufficient to counter-
at it must be introduced. Such a change, ac-
cordingly, took place in Europe, as science gra-
dually increased, and society advanced towards
more perfect order. In proportion as the pre-
rogative of Princes extended, and came to ac-
quire new force, a power, interested in sup.
prefling every practice favourable to the inde-
' pendence of the nobles, was introduced. The

struggle, nevertheless, subsisted for several cen-
turies; sometimes the new regulations and ideas
seemed to gain ground; Sometimes ancient ha-
bits recurred; and though, upon the whole, the
trial by combat went more and more into dif-
use, yet infta:ces of it occur, as late as the fix-

teenth
tOrdon. tom. i. p. 328, 39o, 435.

teenth century, in the history bath of France SECT. I.
and of England. In proportion as it declined, ' '
the regular administration of justice was reftor-
ed, the proceedings of courts were directed by
known laws, the study of these became an ob-
je&t of attention to judges, and the people of
Europe advanced fast towards civility, when this
great cause of the ferocity of their manners was
removed [Y].

3. BY authorizing the right of appeal from The privi-

the court of the Barons to those of the King, and peslingefr'
fubjeting the decisions of the former to the re- the courts
view of the latter, a new ftep, not less confider- no thno-
able than those which I have already mentioned, ther great
was taken towards establishing the regular, con- ruePti the
fiftent, and vigorous administration of justice. dminf"r'-

»tioo of jur-

Among all the encroachments of the feudal no- tice.
bles on the prerogative of their Monarchs, their
usurping the administration of justice with fu-
preme authority, both in civil and criminal causes,
within the precin&ts of their own estates, was the
most singular. In other nations fubjets have
contended with their Princes, and have endea-
voured to extend their own power and privileges;
but in the history of their struggles and preten-
sions, we discover nothing similar to this right
which the feudal barons claimed, and acquired.
It mufl have been something peculiar in their Origin of
genius and manners that suggested this idea, and and inde-
prompted them to insist on such a claim. Among pendent ju-

-ii*~~
1a1~
*j ~

*. - . rIlfdialon of

the rude people who conquered the various pro- the nobility.
vinces of the Roman Empire, and eftablifled
new kingdoms there, the passion of resentment,
too impetuous to bear controul, was permitted
to remain almost unrestrained by the authority
of laws. The person offended, as has been ob-
served, retained not only the right of profecut-

ing
[Y] NOTE XXII.

SECT. I. ing but of punihling his adversary. To him it

- belonged to inflict such vengeance as faxiated

his rage, or to accept of such satisfaCtion as ap-
peased it. But while fierce barbarians continued
to be the sole judges in their own cause, their
enmities were implacable and irmortal; they
set no bounds either to the degree of their ven-
geance, or to the duration of their resentment.
The excesses which this occasioned, proved (b
deftru&ive of peace and order in society, as
forced them tolthink of some remedy. At first,
arbiters intrpofed, and by persuasion or intrea-
ty prevailed on the party offended to accept of
a fine or composition from the aggressor, and to
drop all farther prosecution. But as fubmiflion
to persons who had no legal or magisterial -au-
thoity was altogether voluntary, it became ne-
ceffary to eftablAih judges with power flfficient
to enfore their own decisions. The leader
whom they were accustomed to follow and to
obey, whose courage they refpeted, and in
whose integrity they placed confidence, was the
perCon to whom a martial people natuwaly comn-
mitted this important prerogative. Every chief-
tain was the commander of his tribe in war, and
their judge in peace. Every baron led his vas-
fas to the field, and administered juftioe ,to
them in his hall. Their high-fpirited depen-
dents would not have recognized any other au-
thority, or have Submitted to any other jurif-
dikio. But in times of turbulence and vio-
lence, the exsrcife of this new funaion was at-
tended not only with trouble, but with danger.
No person could assume the chara&er of a judge,
if he did not poflfefs power sufficient to prote&t
the one party from the violence of private re-
venge, and to compel the other to accept of
such repration as he enjoined. In consideration

of

of the extraordinary efforts which this office re- SECT. I.
quired, judges, besides the fine which they ap-
pointed to be paid as a compensation to the per-
son or family who had been injured, levied an
additional fum as a recompence for their own
labour; and in all the feudal kingdoms the lat-
ter was not only as precisely ascertained, but as
regularly exaCed, as the former.

THUS, by the natural operation of cireum- The extent

fiances peculiar to the manners or political state sea of this
of the feudal nations, separate and territorial privilee.
jurifditions came not only to be established
in every kingdom, but were efiablithed in
such a way, that the interest of the barons con-
curred with their ambition in maintaining and
extending them. It was not merely a point of
honour with the feudal nobles to difpenfejuftice
to their vassals; but from the exercise of that
power arose one capital branch of their revenue;
and the emoluments of their courts were fre-
quently the main support of their dignity. It
was with infinite zeal that they asserted and de-
fended this high privilege of their order. By
this institution, however, every kingdom in Eu-
rope was split into as many separate principalities
as it contained powerful barons. Their vassals,
whether in peace or in war, were hardly sensible
of any authority, but that of their superior lord.
They felt themselves subjet to no other com-
mand. They were amenable to no other jurif-
didion. The ties which linked together these
smaller confederacies became close and firm; the
bonds of public union relaxed, or were dissolved.
The nobles iPrained their invention in devising re-
gulations which tended to ascertain and perpetu-
ate this diftinfion. In order to guard against any
appearance of Subordination in their courts to

those

SECT. I. those of the crown, they constrained their mo-
l--' narchs to prohibit the royal judges from enter-

ing their territories, or from claiming any jurif-
didtion there; and if, either through mistake,
or from the spirit of encroachment, any royal
judge ventured to extend his authority to the
vassals of a baron, they might plead their right
of exemption; and the lord of whom they held
could not only rescue them our of his hands,
but was intitled to legal reparation for the injury
and affront offered to him. The jurifdition of
the royal judges scarcely reached beyond the
narrow limits of the King's demesnes. Instead
of a regular gradation of courts, all acknow-
ledging the authority of the fame general laws,
and looking up to there as the guides of their
decisions, there were in every feudal kingdom a
thousand independent tribunals, the proceedings
of which were directed by local customs and
contradicory forms. The collision of jurifdic-
tion among these numerous courts often retard-
ed the execution of justice: The variety and
caprice of their modes of procedure must have
for ever kept the administration of it from at-
taining any degree of uniformity or perfec-
tion.

Epedelts ALL the monarchs of Europe perceived these
.' o,ri'l encroachments on their jurifdicion, and bore
mitor abo- them with impatience. But the usurpations of

"iih"' the nobles were so firmly established, and the

danger of endeavouring to overturn them by
open force was so manifest, that they were
obliged to remain satisfied with attempts to un-
dermine them. Various expedients were em-
ployed for this purpose; each of which merit
attention, as they mark the progress of law
and equity in the several kingdoms of Europe.

At

At first, Princes endeavoured to circumscribe the S cr. I.
jurifdidion of the barons, by permitting them '
to take cognizance only of smaller offences, re-
serving those of greater moment, under the ap-
pellation of Pleas of the Crown, and Royal Causes,
to be tried in the King's courts. This affeeted
only the barons of inferior note; the more
powerful nobles scorned such a diftineion, and
not only claimed unlimited jurifdiaion, but
obliged their sovereigns to grant them charters,
conveying or recognizing this privilege in the
molt ample form. The attempt, nevertheless,
was productive of some good consequences, and
paved the way for more. It turned the attention
of men towards a jurifdietion diftinet from that
of the baron whose vaflals they were; it accuf-
tomed them to the pretensions of superiority
which the crown claimed over territorialjudges;
and taught them, when oppressed by their own
superior lord, to look up to their sovereign as
their proteetor. This facilitated the introduCti-
on of appeals, by which Princes brought the de-
cifions of the barons courts under the review of
the royal judges. While trial by combat sub-
sifted in full vigour, no point decided according
to that mode, could be brought under the re-
view of another court. It had been referred to
the judgment of God; the ifiue of battle had
declared his will; and it would have been impi-
ous to have called in question the equity of the
divine decision. But as soon as that barbarous
custom began to fall into disuse, Princes encou-
raged the vaifals of the barons to sue for redress,
by appealing to the royal courts. The progress
of this praftice, however, was flow and gradual.
The first inflances of appeals were on account
of the delay, or the refiufal of jufJice in the baron's
court; and as there were countenanced by the
ideas of Subordination in the feudal constitution,

the

SEcr. I. the nobles allowed them to be introduced with-
'-v-' out much opposition. But when there were fol-

lowed by appeals on account of the injfuice or
iniquity cf tbeentence, the nobles then began to
be sensible, that if this innovation became gene-
ral, the shadow of power alone would remain in
their hands, and all real authority and jurifdic-
tion would center in those courts which possessed
the right of review. They instantly took the
alarm, remonstrated against the encroachment,
and contended boldly for their ancient privileges.
But the monarchs in the different kingdoms of
Europe pursued their plan with steadiness and
prudence. Though forced to suspend their ope-
rations on some occasions, and seemingly to
yield when any formidable confederacy of their
vaflals united against them, they resumed their
measures as soon as they observed the nobles to
be remiTs or feeble, and pufied them with vi-
gour. They appointed the royal courts, which
originally were ambulatory, and irregular with
respect to their times of meeting, to be held in
a fixed place, and at stated seasons. They were
solicitous to name judges of more distinguished
abilities than such as presided in the courts of the
barons. They added dignity to their character,
and splendour to their afiemblies. They labour-
ed to render their forms regular, and their de-
crees consistent. Such judicatories became, of
course, the objects of public confidence as well
as veneration. The people relinquifling the par-
tial tribunals of their lords, were eager to bring
every subjet of contest under the more equal
and discerning eye of those whom their fove-
reign had chosen to give judgment in his name.
Thus kings became once more the heads of the
community, and the dispensers ofjuftice to their
subjeCts. The barons, in some kingdoms, ceaf-
ed to exercise their right ofjurifdiction, because

it

it funk into contempt; in others,, it was circum- SE CT. I.
fcribed by such regulations as. rendered it inno- '-
cent, or it was entirely abolished by express
fiatutes. Thus the administration of justice
taking its rife from one source, and following
one direction, held its course in every state with
more uniformity, and with greater force [Z].

VI. THE forms and' maxims of the canon The regu-

law, which were become universally refpelable t..c.onf
from their authority in thefpiritual courts, con- lawprmote
tributed not a little towards these improvements ek dpie'
in jurisprudence which I have enumerated. If niratio..
we confider the canon law politically, and 'view
it either as a system framed on purpose to assist
the clergy in usurping powers and jurifdiltion
no less repugnant to the nature of their funtion,
than inconsistent with the order of government;
or as the chief instrument in establishing the-do-
minion of the Popes, which ifook the throne,
and endangered the liberties, of every kingdom
in Burope, we mist pronounce it one of the
most formidable engines ever formed against the
happiness of civil fdciety. But if we contem-
plate it merely as-a code of laws refpeding the
rights and property of individuals, and attend-
only to the civil effects of its decisions concern-
ing these, it will appear in a different, and a
much more favourable light. In ages of igno- The pro-
rance and credulity, the ministers of religion are lerfi fii-
the objedts of fuperRitious veneration. When usurpation.
the barbarians who over-ran the Empire first
embraced the Christian faith, they found the
clergy in po(Teflion of confiderable-power; and
they naturally transferred to those new guides
the profound submission and reverence which
they' were accustomed to yield to the priests of
thatreligion which they had forsaken. They

deemed-
IZl NOTE XIm.

63

SECT. I. deemed their persons to be as sacred as their

funtion; and would have confidered it as im-
pious to subject them to the profanejurifdiAion
of the laity. The clergy were not blind to the
advantages which the weakness of mankind as-
forded them. They eftabliihed courts, in which
every question relating to their own character,
their function, or their property was tried. They
pleaded, and obtained an almost total exemp-
tion from the authority of civil judges. Upon
different pretexts, and by a multiplicity of arti-
sices, they communicated this privilege to so
many persons, and extended theirjurifdition to
such a variety of cafes, that the greater part of
those affairs which give rife to contest and liti-
gation, was drawn under the cognizance of the
spiritual courts.

he plan of BuT in order to dispose the laity to susser these
j.rifpo- usurpations without murmuring or opposition, it
dca At was necessary to convince them, that the admi-
tht niftrration of justice would be rendered more
ivil court. perse& by the establishment of this new ju-

rifdiAion. This was not a difficult undertaking,
at the period when ecclefiafticks carried on their
encroachments with the greatest success. That
scanty portion of science which served to guide
men in the ages of darkness, was wholly engross-
ed by the clergy. They alone were accustomed
to read, to enquire, and to reason. Whatever
knowledge of ancient jurisprudence had been
preserved, either by tradition, or in such books
as had escaped the deftrudive rage of barbarians,
was possessed only by them. Upon the maxims
of that excellent system, they founded a code of
laws consonant to the great principles of equity.
Being directed by fixed and known rules, the
forms of their courts were ascertained, and their
decisions became uniform and consistent. Nor

did

did they want authority sufficient to enforce their SE CT. I.
sentences. Excommunication and other ecclefi-
aftical censures, were punishments more formi-
dable than any that civil judges could inflict in
support of their decrees.

IT is not surprising, then, that ecclefiaflical The good

jurisprudence should bcome such an objeCt of imitatiog
admiration and refped; that exemption from ,d idt.'
civiljurifdicion was courted as a privilege, and
conferred as a reward. It is not surprising, that
even to rude people, the maxims of the canon
law should appear more equal andjuft than that
ill-digeftedjurifprudence which directed all pro-
ceedings in the civil courts. According to the
latter, the differences between contending barons
were terminated, as in a slate of nature, by the
sword; according to the former, every matter
was fubjeted to the decision of laws. The
one, by permittingjudicial combats, left chance
and force to be arbiters of right or wrong, of
truth or falsehood; the other, pafled judgment
with respect to there by the maxims of equity,
and the testimony of witnesses. Any error or
iniquity in a sentence pronounced by a baron
to whom feudal jurifdition belonged, was irre-
mediable, because originally it was subje&t to
the review of no superior tribunal; the ecclesias-
tical law eltablilhed a regular gradation of courts,
through all which a cause might be carried by
appeal, until it was determined by that autho-
rity which was held to be supreme in the church.
Thus the genius and principles of the canon
law prepared men for approving those three great
alterations in the feudal jurisprudence which
I have mentioned. But it was not with respect
to there points alone that the canon law suggest-
ed improvements beneficial to society. Many
of the regulations, now deemed the barriers of
personal security, or the safeguards of private

VOL. I. F property,

nant to the maxims, of the civil jurisprudence,
known in Europe during feverai centuries, and
were borrowed from the rules and pracice of
the ecclesiastical courts. By observing the wis-
dom and equity of the decisions in there courts,
men began to perceive the necessity either of de-
serting the martial tribunals of the barons, or of
attempting to reform them [AA].

he rial VII. The revival of the knowledge and study
f~ lR of the Roman law co-operated with the causes
co·tributes which I have mentioned, in introducing more
mare liberal

.

.e. c. just and liberal ideas concerning the nature of go-
cernin jui- vernment, and the adminifration ofjuftice. A-
ter . "o mong the calamities which the devastations ot

the barbarians who broke out upon the Empire
brought upon mankind, one of the greatest was
their overturning the system of Roman jurifpru-
dence, the noblest monument of the wifdorm of
that great people, formed to subdue and to go-

The cir- vern the world. The laws and regulations of a
fom .bkh civilized community were altogether repugnant
the Romno to the manners and ideas of there fierce invaders.
Ia fell iuto
obivion. They had respect to objects, of which a rude peo-

ple had to conception; and were adapted to a
state of society with which they were entirely un-
acquainted. For this reason, wherever they set-
tled, the Roman jurisprudence soon funk into
oblivion, and lay buried for omre centuries un-
der the load of those institutions which the inha~
bitants of Europe dignified with the name of
laws. But towards the middle of the twelfth
century, a copy of Justinian's Pande&s was ac-

cirTamai- cidentaly discovered in Italy: By that time,
.. wiche the state of society was so far advanced, and the
revi.lof it. ideas of men so much enlarged and improved by

the occurrences of several centuries, during

which

[AA] NOTE XXIV.

A VIEW OP THR
66

w*hich they had continued in political union, SECT. I
that they were struck with admiration of a sys- '
tern which their ancestors could not comprehend.
Though they had not hitherto attained such a
degree of refinement, as to catch from the an-
cients a relish for true philosophy, or fpecula-
tive science though they were still insensible to
the beauty and elegance of claflical composition
they were sufficiently qualified to judge with re-
fpe& to the merit of their system of laws, in
which all the points most interesting to man-
kind, and the chief objects of their attention in
every age, were fettled with discernment, pre-
cifionand equity. All men of letters studied
this new science with eagerness; and within a
few years after the discovery of the Pandefts,
professors of civil law were appointed, who
taught it publickly in most countries of Eu-
tope.

THE effecs of having such a perfet model The efrea,

to study and to imitate were soon manifest. Men, 'f thi'po
s fioon as they were acquainted with fixed and men, and
general laws, perceived the advantage of them, ft'odiof
and became impatient to ascertain the principles justice.
and forms by which judges should regulate their
decisions. Such was the ardour with which they
carried on an undertaking of so great impor-
tance to society, that before the close of the
twelfth century, the feudal law was reduced into
a regular system; the code of canon law was
enlarged and methodized; and the loose un-
certain customs of different provinces or king-
doths were collected and arranged with an order
and accuracy acquired from the knowledge of
Roman jutifprudence. In some countries of
Europe the Roman law was adopted as subsidiary
to their own municipal law; and all cafes to
which the latter did not extend, were decided

F 2 according

SECT. 1. according to the principles of the former. In
=v-J others, the maxims as well as forms of Roman

jurisprudence mingled imperceptibly with the
laws of the country, and had a powerful, though
less sensible, influence, in improving and per-
seting them [BB].

From In THESE various improvements in the sysem of
thee rose a d .
diinai jurisprudence, and administration of justice, oc-
;i ps&- cafioned a change of manners, of great impor-

tance, and of extensive effect. They gave rife
to a diftin&cion of profeflions; they obliged men
to cultivate different talents, and to aim at dif-
ferent accomplishments, in order to qualify
themselves for the various departments and
functions which became necessary in society -.
Among uncivilhzed nitions, there is but one
profeflion honourable, that of arms. All the
ingenuity and vigour of the human mind are
exerted in acquiring military skill, or address.
The funtions of peace are few and simple;
and require no particular course of education or
study, as a preparation for discharging them.
This was the state of Europe during several
centuries. Every gentleman, born a soldier,
scorned any other occupation; he was taught
no science but that of war; even his exercises
and pastimes were feats of martial prowess. Nor
did the judicial character, which persons of noble
birth were alone entitled to assume, demand any
degree of knowledge beyond that which such
untutored soldiers pofeffed. To recollect a few
traditionary customs which time had confirm-
ed, and rendered refpetable; to mark out the
lifts of battle with due formality to observe the
ifue of the combat; and to pronounce whether

it

[BB] NOTE XXV#.
1 Dr. Ferguson's Efay on the History of Civil Society,
pr i. p. i.

it had been conducted according to the laws of SECT. I.
arms; included every thing that a-baron, who 'V
a&ed as a judge, found it necessary to inder-
stand.

BUT when the forms of legal proceeding were The effe&.

fixed, when the rules of decision were commit- so'^et'
ted to writing, and colleced into a body, law
became a science, the knowledge of which re-
quired a regular course of Rudy, together with
long attention to the pratice of courts. Mar-
tial and illiterate nobles had neither leisure nor
inclination to undertake a task so laborious, as
well as so foreign from all the occupations which
they deemed entertaining, or suitable to their
rank. They gradually relinquished their places
in courts of justice, where their ignorance ex-
posed them to contempt. They became weary
of attending to the discussion of cafes, which
grew too intricate for them to comprehend. Not
only the judicial determination of points which
were the subjet of controversy, but the condut
of all legal business and tranfa&ions, was com-
mitted to persons trained by previous study and
application to the knowledge of law. An order
of men, to whom their fellow-citizens had
daily recourse for advice, and to whom they
looked up for decision in their most important
concerns, naturally acquired consideration and
influence in society. They were advanced to
honours which had been confidered as the pecu-
liar rewards of military virtue. They were en-
trusted with offices of the highest dignity, and
most extensive power. Thus, another profeffi-
on than that of arms, came to be introduced
among the laity, and was reputed honourable.
The funcions of civil life were attended to.
The talents requisite for discharging them were
cultivated. A new road was opened to wealth

an4

69

SECT. I. and eminence. The arts and virtues of peace

' were placed in their proper rank, and receive4

their due recompence [CCJ.

The pinit VIII. WHILE improvements so important
ioiudcc with refpeA to the slate of society and the admi-
mreibaJ niftration of justice gradually made progress in
a.d m~ Europe, sentiments more liberal and generous
rameo had begun to animate the nobles. These were

inspired by the spirit of Chivalry, which, though
confidered, commonly, as a wild institution, the
effect of caprice, and the source of extravagance,
arose naturally from the state of society at that
period, and had a very serious influence in re-
fining the manners of the European nations.
Ocri of The feudal fate was a state of perpetual war,

i. rapine, and anarchy; during which the weak

and unarmed were exposed every moment to in-
fults or injuries. The power of the sovereign.
was too limited to prevent these wrongs; and the
administration of justice too feeble to redress
them. There was scarcely any protection a-
gainft violence and opprefiion, but what the va-
lour and generosity of private persons afforded.
The fame spirit of enterprise which had prompt-
ed so many gentlemen to take arms in defence
of the oppressed pilgrims in laletine, incited
others to declare thernfelves the patrons and a-
vengers of injured innocence at home. When.
the final reduction of the Holy Land under the
dominion of infidels put an end to there foreign
expeditions, the latter was the only employment
left for the activity and courage of adventurers.
To check the insolence of overgrown oppressors
to succour the diitreffed; to rescue the helpless
from captivity; to protect, or to avenge women,
orphans, and ecclesiastics, who could not bear
arms in their own defence; to redreis wrongs,

and
[CC] NOTE XXVI.

and to remove grievances; were deemed ass of SECT. I.
the highest prowess and merit. Valour, huma-
nity, courtesy, justice, honour, were the chat
raaeriftic qualities of chivalry. To these were
added religion, which mingled itself with every
paflion and institution during the middle ages,
and by infusing a large proportion of enthufiaf.
tic zeal, gave them such force, as carried them
to romantic excess. Men were trained to knight-
hood by a long previous difciplinei they were
admitted into the order by folemnities no less de-
vout than pompous; every person of noble birth
courted that honour; it was deemed a diftin&i-
on superior to royalty; and monrrchs were
proud to receive it from the hands of private
gentlemen.

THIS singular institution, in which valour, Its1bnfi.'

gallantry, and religion, were so fiaagely blend-
ed, was wonderfully adapted to the tane an ge-
nius of martial nobles; and its effeCts were loon
visible in their manners. War was carried on
with less ferocity, when humaBity came to be
deemed the ornament of knighthood no less than
courage. More gentle and polished manners
were introduced, when courtesy was recomi
mended as the most amiable of knightly virtues.
Violence and oppreflion decreased, when it was
reckoned meritorious to check and to punish
them. A scrupulous adherence to truth, with
the most religious attention to fulfil every engage
ment, became the diftinguifing characeriftic of
a gentleman, because chivalry was regarded as
the school of honour, and inculcated the most de-
licate sensibility with refpet to that point The
admiration of these qualities, together with the
high diftintions and prerogatives conferred on
knighthood in every part of Europe, infplred per-
sons of noble birth on some occasions with a fpe-

cies

71

Si cr. I. cies of military fanaticism, and led them to ex-

' t-* travagantenterprifes. But they imprinted deep-

ly in their minds the principles of generosity and
honour. These were strengthened by every
thing that can affect the senses, or touch the
heart. The wild exploits of those romantic
knights who sallied forth in quest of adventures,
are well known, and have been treated with pro-
per ridicule. The political and permanent es-
sects of the (pirit of chivalry have been less ob-
served. Perhaps, the humanity which accom-
panies all the operations of war, the refinements
of gallantry, and the point of honour, the three
chief circumstances which distinguish modern
from ancient manners, may be ascribed in a
great measure to this whimsical institution, seem-
ingly of little benefit to mankind. The senti-
ments which chivalry inspired, had a wonderful
influence on manners and conduc during the
twelfth, thirteenth, fourteenth, and fifteenth
centuries. -They were so deeply rooted, that
they continued to operate after the vigour and
reputation of the institution itself began to de-
cline. Some considerable tranfaaions, recorded
in the following history, resemble the adventur-
ous exploits of chivalry, rather than the well re-
gulated operations of found policy. Some of
the moR eminent personages, whose characers
will be delineated, were strongly tinctured with
this romatic spirit. Francis I. was ambitious
to diftinguifl himself by all the qualities of an
accomplilhed knight, and endeavoured to imi-
tate the enterprising genius of chivalry in war,
as well as its pomp and courtesy during peace.
The fame which he acquired by these splendid
acions, so far dazzled his more temperate rival,
that he departed on some occasions from his
usual prudence and moderation, and emulated

Francis
72

Francis in deeds of prowess, or of gallantry SECT. I.
[DD].

IX. THE progress of science, and the cultiva- The pro-

tion of literature, had considerable effecs in no h.ic
changing the manners of the European nations, great infln-
and introducing that civility and refinement by c rn . thc
which they are now distinguished. At the time and chbarc-
when their Empire was overturned, the Romans, teriof me.
though they had loft that correc taste which has
rendered the productions of their ancestors the
standards of excellence, and models for imitati-
on to succeeding ages, fill preserved their love
of letters, and cultivated the arts with great ar-
dour. But rude barbarians were so far from be- Ignorance
ing struck with any admiration of there unknown idlefthe ^
accomplishments, that they despised them. They
were not arrived at that fate of society, when
those faculties of the human mind, which have
beauty and elegance for their objets, begin to
unfold themselves. They were strangers to all
those wants and desires which are the parents of
ingenious invention; and as they did not com-
prehend either the merit or utility of the Roman
arts, they destroyed the monuments of them,
with induitry not inferior to that with which their
posterity have since studied to preserve, or to re-
cover them. The convulsions occasioned by
their settlement in the Empire; the frequent as
well as violent revolutions in every kingdom
which they established; together with the inte-
rior defets in the form of government which
they introduced, banished security and leisure;
prevented the growth of taste, or the culture of
science; and kept Europe, during several cen-
turies, in that state of ignorance which has been
already described. But the events and inftituti-
ons which I have enumerated, produced great

alterations
[DD] NOTE XXVII.

SE CT. I. alterations in society. As soon as their operation,

--' in restoring liberty and independence to one part

of the community, began to be felt; as soon
as they began to communicate to all the mem-
bers of society some taste of the advantages arif-
ing from commerce, from public order, and
from personal security, the human mind became
conscious of powers which it did not formerly
perceive, and fond of occupations or pursuits of
which it was formerly incapable. Towards the
beginning of the twelfth century, we discern the
first symptoms of its awakening from that le.
thargy in which it had been long funk, and ob-
serve it turning with curioLity and attention to.
wards new objects.

rhe frft ii- THE first literary efforts, however, of the EU.
ort" il ropean nations in the middle ages, were Eereme-
irca, ly ill direced. Among nations, as welU s indi-
.daCf viduals, the powers of imagination attain some
thiL degree of vigour before the intelletual facultij

are much exercised in speculative or abtrat dif-
quiftion. Men are poets before they are phik-
fophers. They feel with sensibility, and dfefsribe
with force, when they have made but littLq pro-
grefs in invetigation or reasoning. The age of
Homer and of Hesiod long preceded that of
Thales, or of %crates. But, unhappily for i-
terature, our ancestors deviating from this Course
which nature points out, plunged at once into
the depths of abtrufe and metaphysical inquiry.
They had been converted to the Christian faith,
soon after they fettled in their new conqtuefs;
but they did not receive it pure. The prefump-
tion of men had added to the simple and inftruc-
tive dotrines of Chrifianity, the theories of a
vain philosophy, that attempted to penetrate in-
to mysteries, and to decide questions which the
limited faculties of the human mind are unable

to

to comprehend, or to resolve. These over-eu- S CT. I.
rious fpelulations were incorporated with the '-'
system of religion, and came to be confidered as
the most essential part of it. As soon, then, as
curiosity prompted men to inquire and to reason,
these were the fubjefs which first presented
themselves, and engaged their attention. The
scholastic theology, with its infinite train of bold
disquisitions, and fubtlle diftinftions concerning
points which are not the object of human rea-
son, was the first producion of the spirit of in-
quiry after it began to resume some degree of ac-
tivity and vigour in Europe. It was not this cir-
cumftance alone that gave such a wrong turn to
the minds of men, when they began again to ex-
ercife talents which they had so long neglected.
Most of the persons who attempted to revive li-
terature in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries,
had received inftrudion, or derived their prin-
ciples of science from the Greeks in the eastern
Empire, or from the Arabians in Spain and Afri-
ca. Both there people, acute and inquisitive to
excess, corrupted those sciences which they culti-
vated. The former rendered theology a system
of speculative refinement, or of endless contro-
verfy. The latter communicated to philosophy
a spirit of metaphysical and frivolous subtlety.
Misled by these guides, the persons who first ap-
plied to science were involved in a maze of in-
tricate inquiries. Instead of allowing their fancy
to take its natural range, and to produce such
works of invention as might have improved their
taste, and refined their sentiments; instead of
cultivating those arts which embellish human life,
and render it comfortable; they were fettered
by authority, they were led affray by example,
and wafted the whole force of their genius in
speculations as unavailing as they were diffi-
cult.

BUT

SECT. I. BUT fruidefs and ill-dire&ted as these fpecu-

v''-- lations were, their novelty roused, and their
n er~ boldncis interested, the human mind. The ar-
-d u*bkie dour with which men pursued thole uninviting

studies, was astonishing. Genuine philosophy
was never cultivated, in any enlightened age,
with more zeal. Schools, upon the model of
those instituted by Charlemagne, were opened in
every cathedral, and almost in every monastery
of note. Colleges and universities were erected,
and formed into communities or corporations,
governed by their own laws, and invested with
ieparate and extenfivejurifdicion over their own
members. A regular course of studies was
planned. Privileges of great value were con-
ferred on mailers and scholars. Academical
tides and honours of various kinds were invented,
as a recompence for both. Nor was it in the
schools alone that superiority in science led to re-
putation and authority; it became an objet of
reipect in life, and advanced such as acquired it
to a rank of no inconsiderable eminence. Al-
lured by all these advantages, an incredible
number of Itudents resorted to those new feats
of learning, and crowded with eagerness into
that new path which was opened to fame and
diftindion.

A cIr- BUT how considerable soever these first efforts
.hkb pr- may appear, there was one circumitance which
ven-d hei prevented the effeas of them from being as ex-
c.,tfie,. tensive as they ought to have been. All the

lnguages in Europe, during the period under
review, were barbarous. They were destitute
of elegance, of force, and even of perspicuity.
No attempt had been hitherto made to improve or
to polift them. The Latin tongue wasconfecrated
by the church to religion. Custom, with authority
scarcely less sacred, had appropriated it to lite-

rature.

rature. All the sciences cultivated in the twelfth SECT. I.
and thirteenth centuries, were taught in Latin. '-
All books with refped to them were written in
that language. To have treated of any impor-
tant subjet in a modern language, would have
been deemed a degradation of it. This con-
fined science within a narrow circle. The learn-
ed alone were admitted into the temple of
knowledge; the gate was (hut againtall others,
who were allowed to remain involved in their
former darkness and ignorance.

BUT though science was thus prevented, du- itn i,,.

ring several ages, from diffusing itself through ,ence o
society, and its influence much circumscribed; merits at
the progress which it made may be mentioned, te""a.
nevertheless, among the great causes which con-
tributed to introduce a change of manners into
Europe. The ardent, though ill-judged spirit
of inquiry which I have described, occasioned a
fermentation of mind that put ingenuity and in-
vention in motion, and gave them vigour. It
led men to a new employment of their faculties,
which they found to be agreeable as well as in-
teresting. It accustomed them to exercises and
occupations which tended to soften their man-
ners, and to give them some relish for the gentle
virtues, peculiar to nations among which fci-
ence had been cultivated with success [EE].

X. THE progress of commerce had confide- The pro-

rable influence in polishing the manners of the ,e ofce
European nations, and in leading them to order, had great
equal laws, and humanity. The wants of men, p^anne
in the original and most simple state of society, and govern-
are so few, and their desires To limited, that m'n
they reft contented with the natural producti-
ons of their climate and foil, or with what they

can
[EE] NOTE XXVIII.

SECT. I. can add to these by their own rude indufiry.

-v' TThey have no superfluities to dispose of, and few

necessities that demand a supply. Every little
community subsisting on its own domestic itock,
and satisfied with it, is either unacquainted with
the states around it, or at variance with them.

O ftteof Society and manners mufl be confideraby im-
i t n- proved, and many provisions must be made for
die ag. public order and personal security, before a li-

beral intercourse can take place between diffe-
rent nations. We find, accordingly, that the
first effe& of the settlement of the barbarians in
the Empire, was to divide those nations which
the Roman power had united. Europe was bro-
ken into many separate communities. The in-
tercourfe between these divided states, ceased
almost totally during several centuries. Navi-
gation was dangerous in feasinfeffed by pirates;
not could frangers trust to a friendly reception
in the ports of uncivilized nations. Even be-
tween diltant parts of the fame kingdom, the
communication was rare and difficult. The
lawless rapine of banditti, together with the
asowed exactions of the nobles, scarcely le&
formidable and oppressive, rendered a journey of
any length a perilous enterprise. Fixed to the
spot in which they resided, the greater part of
the inhabitants of Europe loft, in a great mea-
sure, the knowledge of remote regions, and
were unacquainted with their names, their si-
tuations their climates, and their commodi-
ties [FS].

Cmne of VARIOUS causes, however, contributed to re-
'it ;L vive the spirit of commerce, and to renew, in

some degree, the intercourse between different
nations. The Italians, by their connection with
Confantinople and other cities of the Greek

empire,
[FS] NOTE XXX.

.empire, had preserved in their own country SECe. I.
some relish for the precious commodities and '"'
curious manufatures of the East. They com-
municated some knowledge of there to the coun-
tries contiguous to Italy. But this commerce
was extremely limited, nor was the intercourse
which it occasioned between different nations
considerable. The Crusades, by leading multi-
tudes from every corner of Europe into Asia,
opened a more extensive communication be-
tween the East and Weft, which subsisted for
two centuries; and though the object of these
expeditions was conquest and not commerce;
though the issue of them proved as unfortunate,
as the motives for undertaking them were wild
and enthusiastic, their commercial effects, as
hath been shewn, were both beneficial and per-
manent. During the continuance of the Crd-
fades, the great cities in Italy, and in other
countries of Europe, acquired liberty, and to-
gether with it such privileges as rendered them
refpedable and independent communities. Thus,
in every state there was formed a new order of
citizens, to whom commerce presented itself as
their proper obje&, and opened to them a cer-
tain path of wealth and dignity. Soon after
the cl6fe of the Holy War, the mariner's corn
pass was invented, which, by rendering na-
vigation more secure as well as more adven-
turous, facilitated the communication between
remote nations, and brought them neater to
each other.

THt Italian stares, during the said period, Firt smong

established a regular comrtrere with the East in the tai
the ports of Egypt, and drew from thehce all
the rich 'proits of the Indies. They ihtro-
duced into their own territories manufactutes of
Various kinds, and carried them on with great

ingenuity

SECT. I. ingenuity and vigour. They attempted new
'v'"°'arts; and transplanted from warmer climates,

to which they had been hitherto deemed peculiar,
several natural productions which now furnilh
the materials of a lucrative and extended com-
merce. All there commodities, whether im-
ported from Alia, or produced by their own
fiill, they disposed of to great advantage among
the other people of Europe, who began to ac-
quire Come taste of elegance unknown to their
ancestors, or despised by them. During the
twelfth and thirteenth centuries, the commerce
of Europe was almost entirely in the hands of
the Italians, more commonly known in those
ages by the name of Lombards. Companies or
societies of Lombard merchants fettled in every
different kingdom. They were taken under the
immediate protection of the several govern-
ments. They enjoyed extensive privileges and
immunities. The operation of the ancient bar-
barous laws concerning strangers, was suspended
with refpea to them. They became the car-
riers, the manufacturers, and the bankers of
all Europe.

Thai b WHILE the Italians, in the south of Europe,
the H°- cultivated trade with such induitry and success,
tick. the commercial spirit awakened in the North to-

wards the middle of the thirteenth century. As
the nations around the Baltic were, at that time,
extremely barbarous, and infested that sea with
their piracies, the cities of Lubeck and Ham-
burgh, Coon after they began to open some
trade with there people, found it neceirary to
enter into a league of mutual defence. They
derived such advantages from this union, that
other towns acceded to their confederacy, and,
in a short time, eighty of the most considerable
cities scattered through those vast countries which

stretch

itretch from the bottom of the Baltick to Co- SECT. I.
logne on the Rhine, joined in the famous Hanfe- '-
atick league, which became To formidable, that
its alliance was courted, and its enmity was
dreaded, by the greatest monarchs. The mem-
bers of this powerful aflociation formed the first
fyftematick plan of commerce known in the
mtiddle ages, and eonduced it by common laws
enated in their general afiemblies. They sup-
plied the reit of Europe with naval Rores, and
pitched on different towns, the most eminent of
which was Bruges in Slanders, where they efta-
blifhed staples in which their commerce was
regularly carried on. Thither the Lombards
brought the producions of India, together with
the manufa&tures of Italy, and exchanged them
for the more bulky, but not less useful, com-
modities of the North. The Hanfeatick mer-
chants disposed of the cargoes which they re-
ceived from the Lombards in the ports of the
Baltick, or carried them up the great rivers into
the interior parts of Germany.

THIS tegular intercourse opened between the comaeree

-nations in the North and South of Europe, made Rf,'inP
them sensible of their mutual wants, and created Nether-
such new and vast demands for commodities of lands;
every kind, that it excited among the inhabitants
of the Netherlands a more vigorous spirit in car-
Tying on the two great manuifactures of wool
and flax, which Seem to have been considerable
in that country as far back as the age of Char-
lemagne. As Bruges became the center of com-
munication between the Lombard and Hanfe-
atick merchants, the Flemings traded with both
in that city to such extent as well as advantage,
as spread among them a general habit of in-
4uftry, which long rendered Slanders and the

VOL. I. G adjacent

Srtc. I. adjacent provinces the most opulent, the molt
'--v populous, and best cultivated countries in Eu-

rope.
*nd in STRIucK with the flourishing state of these

nd. provinces, of which he difcemed the true cause,

Edward III. of England endeavoured to excite
a spirit of industry among his own fubjeas,
who, blind to the advantages of their situation,
and ignorant of the source from which opulence
was destined to flow into their country, were so
little attentive to their commercial intereits, as
hardly to attempt those manufatures, the ma-
terials of which they furnished to foreigners. By
alluring Flemimh artisans to fettle in his domini-
ons, as well as by many wife laws for the encou-
ragement and regulation of trade, Edward gave
a beginning to the woollen manufactures of
England, and first turned the afive and enter-
prizing genius of his people towards thole arts
which have taifed the Englith to the highest
rank among commercial nations.

The bee- THIS increase of commerce, and of inter-
s:cial reas'
of thir. course between nations, how inconsiderable so-

ever it may appear in refpe& of their rapid and
extensive progress during the last and present
age, seems vait, when we compare it with the
state of both in Europe previous to the twelfth
century. It did not fail of producing great es-
fedts. Commerce tends to wear off those preju-
dices which maintain distinction and animosity
between nations. It softens and polishes the
manners of men. It unites them by one of the
strongest of all ties, the desire of fupply;ng their
mutual wants. It disposes them to peace, by
establishing in every state an order of citizens
bound by their interest to be the guardians of
publick tranquillity. As soon asthe commercial

spirit

spirit begins to acquire vigour, and to gain an SECT. I.
ascendant in any society, we discover a new ge- e
nius in its policy, its alliances, its wars, and its
negociations. Conspicuous proofs of this occur
in the history of the Italian States, of the Hanfe-
atick league, and the cities of the Netherlands,
during the period under review. In proportion
as commerce made its way into the different
countries of Europe, they successively turned
their attention to those obje&ts, and adopted
those manners, which occupy and diftinguilh
polished nations [GG].

[GG] NOTE XXX.

A VIEW
G2

## SECTION II. View of the Progress of Society in Europe, with respect to the command of the national force requisite in foreign operations.

A
V I E W

OF THE
PROGRESS OF SOCIETY

I N

E U R O P Et
EUROPE,

FROM T H
SUBVERSION OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE,

TO THE
BEGINNING OF THE SIXTEENTH CENTURY.

SECTION II.
tiew of the Progress of Society in Europe, with

refesi to the command of the national force re-
quifite in foreign operations.

SI CT. 1: C' U CH are the events and institutions, which
vue"^-'j^3 by their powerful operation contributed,
cit ,st- gradually, to introduce more regular govern-
. Gd~ ment and more polished manners into the various
titg of nations of Europe. When we survey the tate
· =th. of society, or the charafter of individuals, at the

Ce opening of the fifteenth century, and then turn

back to view the condition of both at the time
when the barbarous tribes which overturned the

Roman

Roman power completed their settlement in their SE cT. II.
new conquests, the progress which mankind had -
made towards.order and refinement will appear
immense.

GOVERNMENT, however, was Rill far from Stilldeec.

having attained that state, in which extenive' ti" ith
monarchies at with united vigour, or carry on the corn-
great undertakings with perseverance and fuc- tnd of,
cess. Small tribes or communities, even in their force.
rudest state, may operate in concert, and exert
their utmost force. They are excited to act
not by the distant objects, or the refined fpecu-
lations, which interest or affe& men in polished
societies, but by their present feelings. The in-
fults of an enemy kindle resentment the fuc-
cess of a rival tribe awakens emulation; there
passions communicate from breast to breast, and
all the members of the community, with united
ardour, ru(h into the field in order to gratify
their revenge, or to acquire diffin&ion. But in
widely extended states, such as the great king-
doms of Europe at the beginning of the sis-
teenth century, where there is little intercourse
between the distant members of the community,
and where every great enterprize requires pre-
vious concert and long preparation, nothing can
rouse and call forth their united strength, but the
absolute command of a Despot, or the powerful
influence of regular policy. Of the former the
vast Empires in the East are an example; the
irresistible mandate of the Sovereign reaches the
most remote provinces of his dominions, and
compels whatever number of his subjects he is
pleased to summon, to follow his standard. The
kingdoms of Europe, in the present age, are an
instance of the latter; the Prince, by the less
violent, but no less effetual operation of laws
and a well regulated government, is enabled to

avail

SCCT. I. avail himself of the whole force of his state, and

to employ it in enterprizes which require ftrenu-
ous and persevering efforts.

The power BUT, at the opening of the fifteenth century,

re limit- the political constitution in all the kingdoms of
id Europe was very different from either of these

states of government. The several monarchs,
though they had somewhat enlarged the bounda-
ries of prerogative by fuccefsftsl encroachments
on the immunities and privileges of the nobility,
were possessed of an authority extremely limited.
The laws and interior police of kingdoms, though
much improved by the various events and re-
gulations which I have enumerated, were still
feeble and imperfec. In every country, a nu-
merous body of nobles, who continued to be
formidable, notwithstanding the various expedi-
ents employed to depress them, watched all the
motions of their Sovereign with a jealous atten-
tion, which set bounds to his ambition, and ei-
ther prevented his forming schemes of extensive
euterprize, or thwarted the execution of them.

Tr e THE ordinary revenues of every Prince were
u so extremely small as to be inadequate to any

great undertaking. He depended for extraor-
dinary supplies on the good-will of his fubjeds,
who granted them often with a relucant and al-
ways with a sparing hand.

Their r- As the revenues of Princes were inconfidera-
mct ble, the armies which they could bring into the
quest. field were unfit for long and effectual service.

Instead of being able to employ troops trained to
skill in arms, and to military subordination, by
regular difcipli:.e, Monarchs were obliged to
depend on such forces as their vassals conduted
to their standard in consequence of their military

tenures.

tenures. These, as they were bound to remain S CT. II.
under arms only for a short time, could not
march far from their usual place of residence;
and being more attached to the lord of whom
they held, than to the Sovereign whom they
served, were often as much disposed to counter-
as as to forward his schemes. Nor were they,
even if they had been more fubjedt to the corn
mand of the monarch, proper instruments to carry
into execution any great and arduous enterprize.
The strength of an army formed either for
conquest ordefence lies in infantry. To the fta-
bility and discipline of their legions, consisting
chiefly of infantry, the Romans, during the times
of the republick, were indebted for all their vic-
tories; and when their descendants, forgetting
the institutions which had led them to'univerfal
dominion, so far altered their military system as
to place their principal confidence in a numerous
cavalry, the undisciplined impetuosity of the bar-
barous nations who fought mostly on foot, was
sufficient, as I have already observed, to over,
come them. These nations, soon after they fetr
tied in their new conquests, uninftruced by the
fatal error of the Romans, relinquished the cuf-
toms of their ancestors, and converted the chief
force of their armies into cavalry. Among the
Romans this change was occasioned by the es-
feminacy of their troops, who could not en-
dure the fatigues of service, which their more
virtuous and hardy ancestors sustained with ease.
Among the people who established the new mo-
narchies into which Europe was divided, this in-
novation in military discipline seems to have
flowed from the pride of the nobles, who scorn-
ing to mingle with persons of inferior rank, aim-
ed at being distinguished from them in the field
as well as during peace. The institution ofchi.
valry, and the frequency of tournaments, in

which

87

SEcT. I. which knights, in complete armour, entered the
-'~ lifts on horseback with extraordinary splendour,

displaying amazing address, and force, and va-
lour, brought cavalry into still greater esteem.
The fondness for that fenrice increased to such a
degree, that, during the thirteenth and four-
teenth centuries, the armies of Europe were
composed almost entirely of cavalry. No gen-
tleman would appear in the field but on horse-
back. To serve in any other manner he would
have deemed derogatory to his rank. The ca-
valry, by way of distinction, was called The battle,
and on it alone depended the fate of every acti
on. The infantry, collected from the dregs and
refuse of the people, ill armed and worse difci-
plined, was of no account.

ey arer As these circumstances rendered the operati-
~smBg ons of particular kingdoms less considerable and
g or lefsvigorous, so they long kept the Princes of
p aso pe Europe from giving such attention to the schemes
ro't. and transaCtions of their neighbours, as led them

to form any regular system of public security.
They prevented them from uniting in confede-
racy, or from acting with concert, in order to
establish such a distribution and balance of power,
as should hinder any state from rising to a fupe-
riority, which might endanger,the general liberty
and independence. During several centuries,
the nations of Europe appear to have confidered
themselves as separate Societies, scarcely connect-
ed together by any common interest, and little
concerned in each others affairs or operations.
An extensive commerce did not afford them an
opportunity of observing and penetrating into
the schemes of every different state. They had
not ambassadors residing conflantly in every
court to watch and give early intelligence of all
its motions. The expectation of remote advan-

tages,

tages, or the profpe&t of distant and contingent SECT. U.
evils, were not sufficient to excite nations to
take arms. They only, who were within the
sphere of immediate danger, and unavoidably
exposed to injury or insult, thought themselves
interested in any contest, or bound to take pre-
cautions for their own safety.

WHOEVER records the tranfaaions of any ofThy were

the more considerable European states during nea'd with
the two last centuries, must write the history of ech other.
Europe. Its various kingdoms, throughout that
period, have been formed into one great system,
so closely united, that each holding a determinate
station, the operations of one are so felt by all,
as to influence their counsels and regulate their
measures. But previous to the fifteenth century,
unless when the vicinity of territory rendered the
occasions of discord frequent and unavoidable,
or when national emulation fomented or embit-
tered the spirit of hostility, the affairs of diffe-
rent countries are seldom interwoven. In each
kingdom of Europe great events and revolutions
happened, which the other powers beheld with
almost the fame indifference as if they had been
uninterested fpe&tators, to whom the effect of
these tranfations could never extend.

DURING the violent itruggles between France A confirrn-
and England, and notwithstanding the alarming tion of tbi

from the

progress which was made towards rendering one affirsof
Prince the master of both there kingdoms, hard- France.
ly one measure, which can be confidered as the
result of a sagacious and prudent policy, was
formed in order to guard against an event so
fatal to Europe. The Dukes of Burgundy and
Bretagne, whom their situation would not per-
mit to remain neutral, engaged, it is true, in the
contest; but in taking their part, they seem ra-

ther

SECT n ther to have followed the impulse of their paffi-
%v^^ ons, than to have been guided by any just dif-

cernment of the danger which threatened them-
selves and the tranquillity of Europe. The other
Princes, seemingly unaffeted by the alternate
fuccefles of the contending parties, left them to
decide the quarrel, or interposed only by feeble
and ineffecual negociations.
FrSm tofe NOTWITHSTANDING the perpetual hostilities

in which the various kingdoms of Spain were en-
gaged during several centuries, and the fuccef-
five occurrences which visibly tended to unite
that part of the continent into one great mo-
narchy, the Princes of Europe scarcely took a
single ftep, which discovers that they gave any
attention to that important event. They per-
mitted a power to arise imperceptibly, and to
acquire strength there, which soon became for-
midable to all its neighbours.

P"rom thfe AMIDST the violent convulsions with which
of Ger-
man. the spirit of domination in the See of Rome,

and the turbulent ambition of the German no-
bles, agitated the Empire, neither the authority
of the Popes, seconded by all their artifices and
intrigues, nor the solicitations of the Emperors,
could induce any of the powerful monarchs in
Europe to engage in their quarrel, or to avail
themselves of many favourable opportunities of
interposing with effed and advantage.

Th;. ;lac- THIS amazing inacivity, during tranfafions
fiOyd 'c-' so interesting, is not to be imputed to any inca-

lrey bylhe pacity of discerning their political consequences.
frnr. The power of judging with sagacity, and of

acing with vigour, is the portion of men in eve-
ry age. The Monarchs who reigned in the dif,
ferent kingdoms of Europe during several cen-

turies

turies were not blind to their particular interest, SECT.II.
negligent of the publick safety, or strangers to '-V
the method of securing both. If they did not
adopt that salutary system, which teaches mo-
dern politicians to take the alarm at the profpet
of distant dangers, which prompts them to check
the first encroachments of any formidable power,
and which renders each state the guardian, in
some degree, of the rights and independence of
all its neighbours, this was owing entirely to such
imperfections and disorders in the civil govern-
ment of each country, as made it impossible for
sovereigns to at suitably to those ideas which
the posture of affairs, and their own observation,
must have suggested.

BUT during the course of the fifteenth centu- aventshap.

ry, various events happened, which, by giving ingthe ,th
Princes more entire command of the force in century

which ren-

their refpetive dominions, rendered their ope- er the -
rations more vigorous and extensive. In confe- forts of n-
quence of this, the affairs of different kingdoms owerful
becoming more frequently as well as more inti- and exten-
mately connected, they were gradually accustom-
ed to at in concert and confederacy, and were
insensibly prepared for forming a system of poli-
cy, in order to establish or to preserve such a ba-
lance of power as was most consistent with the
general security. It was during the reign of
Charles the Fifth, that the ideas, on which this
system is founded, first came to be fully under-
stood. It was then, that the maxims by which
it has been uniformly maintained since that aera
were universally adopted. On this account, a
view of the causes and events which contributed
to establish a plan of policy more salutary and
extensive than any that has taken place in the con-
duCt of human affairs, is not only a neceflary
introduction to the following work, but is a
capital objet in the history of Europe.

THE

SICT. I. THE sirs event, that occasioned any confil
- R-'vJ derable alteration in the arrangement of affairs
tibce ,a in ELrope, was the annexation of the extensive

^P d'- territories, which England possessed on the con-
rii ofthtirtinent, to the crown of France. While the
an the English were mailers of several of the most ser-

. tile and opulent provinces in France, and a great

part of its most martial inhabitants was bound to
follow their standard, an English monarch con-
fidered himself rather as the rival, than as the
vassal of the sovereign of whom he held. The
Kings of France, circumscribed and thwarted
in their schemes and operations by an adversary
no less jealous than formidable, durst not ven-
ture upon any enterprize of importance or of
difficulty. The English were always at hand,
ready to oppose them. They disputed even their
right to their crown; and being able to pene-
trate, with ease, into the heart of the kingdom,
could arm against them those very hands which
ought to have been employed in their defence.
Timid counsels, and feeble efforts, were natural
to monarchs in such a situation. France, dif.
membered and over-awed, could not attain its
proper fation in the system of Europe. But the
death of Henry V. of England, happily for
France, and not unfortunately for his own coun-
try, delivered the French from the calamity of
having a foreign mailer feated on their throne.
The weakness of a long minority, the dissensions
in the English court, together with the unsteady
and languid condu& which these occasioned,
afforded the French a favourable opportunity of
recovering the territories which they had loft.
The native valour of the French nobility height-
ened to an enthufiaftick confidence, by a sup-
posed intcrpofition of heaven in their behalf;
conducted in the field by skilful leaders; and
directed in the cabinet by a prudent monarch;

was

was exerted with such vigour and success, during SECT. II.
this favourable juncture, as not only wrested v
from the Englith their new conquests, but stript
them of their ancient possessions in France, and
reduced them within the narrow precincts of
Calais, and its petty territory.

As roon as so many considerable provinces The ese&t

were re-united to their dominions, the Kings of I?,,
France, conscious of this acquisition of strength, the power
began to form bolder schemes of interior policy, pf,t,'h
as well as of foreign operations. They imme- monuchy.
diately became formidable to their neighbours,
who began to fix their attention on their measures
and motions, the importance of which they
fully perceived. From this era, France, pof-
sessed of the advantages which it derives from
the situation and contiguity of its territories, as
well as from the number and valour of its peo-
ple, rose to new influence in Europe, and was
the sirs power in a condition to give alarm to
the jealousy or fears of the fates around it.

NOR was France indebted for this increase of on thefite

of the rili-

importance merely to the re-union of the pro- trfonte,
vinces which had been torn from it. A circum- the natio
fance attended the recovery of these, which,
though less considerable, and less observed, con-
tributed not a little to giveadditionalvigour and
decision to all the efforts of that monarchy:
During the obstinate truggles between France
and England, all the defefts of the military
system under the feudal government were fen-
ibly felt. A war of long continuance languilh-
ed, when carried on by troops bound and ac-
cutorned to keep the field only fora few weeks
Armies, c~mpofed chiefly of heavy armed ca-
valry, were unfit either for the attack or the
defenceof the many towns and aftles, which it

became

SECT..I became necessary to guard or to reduce. In

''' order to obtain such permanent and effetive

force, as became requisite during these length-
ened contests, the Kings of France took into
their pay considerable bands of mercenary
soldiers, levied Sometimes among their own
fubjeds, and sometimes in foreign countries.
But as the feudal policy provided no sufficient
fund for such extraordinary service, these ad-
venturers were dismissed at the close of every
campaign, or upon any profpea of accommo-
dation; and having been little accustomed to
the restraints of discipline, they frequently turn-
ed their arms againit the country which they had
been hired to defend, and desolated it with no
less cruelty than its foreign enemies.

it occiaon A BODY of troops kept conflantly on foot,
huaitf and regularly trained to military subordination,
sanding would have supplied what was wanting in the

' feudal constitution, and have furnished Princes

with the means of executing enterprizes, to
which they were then unequal. Such an efta-
blifhment, however, was so repugnant to the
genius of feudal policy, and so incompatible
with the privileges and pretensions of the nobi-
lity, that during several centuries no monarch
was either so bold, or so powerful, as to venture
on any ftep towards introducing it. At last,
Charles VII. availing himself of the reputation
which he had acquired by his fuccefes against
the English, and taking advantage of the im-
preflions of terror which such a formidable
enemy had left upon the minds of his subjects,
executed that which his predeceffes durst not
attempt. Under pretence of keeping always on
foot a force sufficient to defend the kingdom
A.D. 1445. againit any sudden invasion of the English, he,

at the time when he disbanded his other troops,

retained

retained under arms a body of nine thoufandSecT. I.
cavalry, and of sixteen thousand infantry. He '-
appropriated funds for the regular payment of
these; he Rfationed them in different places of
the kingdom, accnrding to his pleasure; and
appointed the officers, who commanded and
disciplined them. The prime nobility courted
this service, in which they were taught to de-
pend on their sovereign, to execute his orders,
and to look up to him as the judge and rewarder
of their merit. The feudal militia, composed
of the vaflals whom the nobles could call out
to follow their standard, as it was in no de-
gree comparable to a body of soldiers regularly
trained to war, funk gradually in reputation.
The strength of armies came to be estimated on-
ly by the number of disciplined men which they
contained. In less than a century, the nobles
and their military tenants, though sometimes
summoned to the field, according to ancient
form, were confidered as an incumbrance upon
the troops with which they acted; and were
viewed with contempt by soldiers accustomed
to the vigorous and steady operationsof regular
service.

THUS the regulations of Charles the seventh, The effea

by establishing the first standing army known in of thi'
Europe, occasioned an important revolution in
its affairs and policy. By depriving the nobles
of that direction of the national military force of
the state, which had raied them to such high
authority and importance, a deep wound was
given to the feudal aristocracy, in that part
where its power seemed to be most complete.

FRANCE, by forming this body of regular

troops, at a time when there was hardly a fqua-
dron or company kept in constant pay in any

other

S cT. I. other part of Europe, acquired such advantages

' -over its neighbours, either in attack or defence,

that felf-prefervation made it necessary for them
to imitate its example. Mercenary troops were
introduced into all the considerable kingdoms on
the continent. They gradually became the only
military force that was employed or trusted. It
has long been the chief objec of policy to in-
crease and to support them. It has long been
the great aim of Princes and miniiters to difcre-
dit and to annihilate all other means of national
activity or defence,

The m. As the Kingsof France got the Rart of other
tn * powers in establishing a military force in their
oa domtiniom s, which enabled them to carry on
etemdt foreign operations with more vigour, and to

greater emtent, so they were the first who effec-
tually broke the feudal ariocracy, and humbled
the great vassals of the crown, who by their
exorbitant pawer had long citctmfcribed the
royal prerogative within very nrtow limits, and
had rendered all the efforts of the monarchs of
Europe inconsiderable. Many things concurred
to undermine, gradually, the power of the feu-
dal aristocracy in France. The wealth and pro-
perty of the nobility were greaty impaired
during the long wars which the kingdom was
obliged to maintain with the Englih. The ex-
traordinary zeal with which they exerted them-
selves in defence of their country against its an-
cient enemies, exhausted the fortunes of some
great families. As almost every province in the
kingdom was, in its turn, the feat of war, the
lands-of others were exposed to the dpredaions
of the enemy, were ravaged by the mercenary
troops which their sovereigns hired occasionally,
-but could not pay, or were desolated with rage
flill more deftrutive by the peafats, in their

different
96

different insurrections. At the fame time, the SECT. II.
neceflities of government having forced their'"
Kings upon the desperate expedient of making
great and sudden alterations in the current coin
of the kingdom, the fines, qiit-rents, and other
payments fixed by ancient custom, 'funk much
in value, and the revenues of a fief were reduced
far below the fum which it had once yielded.
During their contests with the English, in which
a generous nobility courted every station where
danger appeared, or honour could be gained,
many families of note became extin&, and their
fiefs were reunited to the crown. Other fiefs,
in a long course of years, fell to female heirs,
and were divided among them ; were diminished
by profuse donations to the church, or were
broken and split by the fuccefflon of remote
collateral heirs s.

ENCOURAGED by there manifest symptoms The pro-

of decline in that body which he wihed to de- rgul power
press, Charles VII. during the first interval of under
peace with England, made several efforts towards vn.
establishing the regal prerogative on the ruins of
the aristocracy. But his obligations to the no-
bles were so many, as well as recent, and their
services in recovering the kingdom so splendid,
as made it necessary for him to proceed with
moderation and caution. Such, however, was
the authority which the crown had acquired by
the progress of its arms against the English, and
so much was the power of the nobility dimininh-
ed, that, without any opposition, he soon made
innovations of great consequence in the confti-
tution. He not only established that formidable
body of regular troops, which has been mention-
ed, but he was the first monarch of France who,

VOL. I. H by

5 Boulainvilliers Hiiioire de Government de France,
Letue xii.

SECT. In by his royal edic, without the concurrence of

,'^;'the Stater-general of the kingdom, levied an

extraordinary subsidy on his people. He pre-
vailed likewise with his fubjets, to render feve-
ral taxes perpetual, which had formerly been
imposed occasionally, and exated during a
short time. By means of all theie, he acquired
such an increase of power, and extended his
prerogative so far beyond its ancient limits, that
from being the most dependent Prince who had
ever fat upon the throne of France, he came to
possess, during the latter years of his reign, a
degree of authority which none of his predecef-
fors had enjoyed for several agesT.

Undt THAT plan of humbling the nobility which
Ltu' Xl. Charles formed, his son Louis XI. carried on

with a bolder spirit, and with greater success.
Louis was formed by nature to be a tyrant; and
at whatever period he had been called to ascend
the throne, his reign must have abounded with
schemes to oppress his people, and to render
his own power absolute. Subtle, unfeeling,
cruel; a firanger to every principle of integrity,
and regardless of decency, he scorned all the
restraints which a sense of honour, or the desire
of fame, impose even upon ambitious men. Sa-
gacious, at the fame time, to discern his true
interest, and influenced by that alone, he was
capable of pursuing it with a persevering indus-
try, and of adhering to it with a systematic fpi-
rit, from which no object could divert, and no
danger could deter him.

,rg mefr TH x maxims of his administration were as
bumbling profound as they were fatal to the privileges of
he i-the
lity; the

T Hifloire de France par Vldly & Villaret, tom. xv. 33 ,

&c. 389. tom. xvi 324. Variations de la Monarchic Fran-
loife, tom. iii. 162.

the nobility. He filled all the departments of SECT. IL
government with new men, and often with per- 't '
ibns whom he called from the lowest as well as
most despised functions in life, and raised at
pleasure to itations of great power or trust.
These were his only confidents, whom he con-
fulted in forming his plans, and to whom he com-
mitted the execution of them: While the nobles,
accustomed to be the companions, the favourites,
and the ministers of their sovereigns, were
treated with such tfudied and mortifying neglect,
that if they would not submit to follow a court,
in which they appeared without any ihadow of
their ancient power, they were obliged to retire
to their castles, where they remained unemploy-
ed and forgotten. Not satisfied with having
rendered the nobles of less consideration, by
taking out of their hands the sole direcion of
affairs, Louis added insult to neglect; and by
violating their most valuable privileges, endea-
voured to degrade the order, and to reduce the
members of it to the fame level with other sub-
je&s. Persons of the highest rank among them,
if so bold as to oppose his schemes, or so unfor-
tunate as to awaken the jealousy of his capricious
temper, were prosecuted with rigour, from
which all who belonged to the order of nobility
had hitherto been exempt; they were tried by
judges who had no right to take cognizance of
their ations; and were fubje&ed to torture, or
condemned to an infamous death, without re-
gard to their birth or condition. The people,
accustomed to fee the blood of the most illustrious
personages shed by the hands of the common
executioner, to behold them Ihut up in dun-
geons, and carried about in cages of iron, be-
gan to view the nobility with less reverence than
formerly, and looked up with terror to the royal

H a authority,

SEcCT. . authority, which seemed to have humbled or
-/ annihilated every other power in the kingdom.

And ofdi- AT the fame time, Louis, being afraid that
thgm. opposition might rouze the nobles, whom the

rigour of his government had intimidated, or
that felf-prefervation might at last teach them to
unite, dexterously scattered among them the
feeds of discord; and indultrioufly fomented
those ancient animofities between the great fa-
milies, which the spirit ofjealoufy and emula-
tion, natural to the feudal government, had
originally kindled and fill kept alive. To ac-
compliih this, all the arts of intrigue, all the
mysteries and refinements of his fraudulent po-
licy were employed, and with such success, that
at a junture which required the most firenuous
efforts, as well as the most perfect union, the
nobles never ated, except during one Ihort rally
of resentment at the beginning of his reign,
either with vigour or with concert.

He ad to As he stripped the nobility of their privileges,
the ~r he added to the power and prerogative of the
ame. crown. In order to have at command such a

body of soldiers as might be sufficient to crufl
any force that his difaffeted subje&s could draw
together, he not only kept on foot the regular
troops which his father had raised, but took into
his pay fix thousand Swiss, at that time the best
disciplined and most formidable infantry in
Europe u. From the ealoufy natural to tyrants,
he confided in these foreign mercenaries, as the
most devoted instruments of oppreflion, and the
most faithful guardians of the power which he
had acquired. That they might be ready to
a&t on the shortest warning, he, during the latter

years

U Mem. de Comines, tom. i. p.367. Dan. Hit. de la
Milice Frangoife, tom. i. p. 182.

years of his reign, kept a considerable body-of ScT. H.
them encamped in one place w.

GR AT funds were requisite, not only to de- He ug-

fray the expence of this additional eftablithment, trevesteof
but to supply the fums employed in the various the crown
enterprizes which the restless adivity of his ge-
nius prompted him to undertake. But the pre-
rogative that his father had assumed of levying
taxes without the concurrence of the ftates-gene-
ral, which he was careful not only to retain but
to extend, enabled him to provide in some mea-
sure for the increasing chargesofgovernment.

WHAT his prerogative, enlarged as it was, His addreft

could not furnish, his address procured.. He in thf-
was the first monarch in Europe who discovered rembly of
the method of managing those great affemlies,ft'"''
in which the feudal policy had vested the power
of granting subsidies and of imposing tates. He -
first taught other Princes the fatal art of begin-
ning their attack on publick liberty, by corrupt-
ing the source from which it should flow. By
exerting all his power and address in influencing
the election of representatives, by bribing or
overawing the members, and by various changes
which he artfully made in the form of their de-
liberations, Louis acquired such an entire direc-
tion of these assemblies, that, from being the
vigilant guardians of the privileges and property
of the people, he rendered them tamely subser-
vient, in promoting the moit odious measures
of his reignx. As no power remained to set
bounds to his exactions, he not only continued
all the taxes imposed by his father, but made
immense additions to them, which amounted to

a fum

w Mem. de Comines, tom. i. p. 381.
x Mem. deComin. tom. i. p. 136. Chron. Scandal. ibid,
tom. ii. p. 71.

SECT. U.a urm that appeared aftoniflhing to his contem-
'-^-' poraries .*

He ealn NOR was it the power alone or wealth of the
,ftdS crown that Louis increased; he extended its ter-
^r-~* ritories by acquisitions of various kinds. He got

C poffiefton of Roufillon by purchase ; Provence

was conveyed to him by the will of Charles de
Anjou; and upon the death of Charles the Bold,
he seized with a strong hand Burgundy and Ar-
tois, which had belonged to that Prince. Thus,
during the course of a single reign, France was
formed into one compact kingdom; and the flea-
dy unrelenting policy of Louis XI. not only sub-
dued the haughty spirit of the feudal nobles,
but etablilhed a species of government, scarcely
less absolute, or less terrible, than eastern def-
potifm.

B .11 thee BUT fatal as his administration was to the liber-
,. the ties of his fubjets, the authority which he ac-
pver~ t quired, the resources of which he became master,

.eti, and his freedom from restraint in concerting his

.I enter- plans as well as in executing them, rendered his
P''i"t reign a&ive and enterprizing. Louis negociated

in all the courts of Europe; he observed the
motions of all his neighboursi he engaged,
either as principal, or as an auxiliary, in every
great transaction; his resolutions were prompt;
his operations vigorou., and upon every emer-
gence he could call forth into altion the whole
force of his kingdom. From the ara of his reign,
the Kings of France, no longer fettered and

circumscribed

Mem. de Comines. trm. i. p. 334.

· CharlesVII. levied taxes to the amount of t.8oo.ooo

francs; Louis XI railed 4 700,000. The former had in
paygooo cavalry and 16.ooo infantry. The latter aug-
mented the cavalry to c 5,oo0, and the infantry to 25,0o0.
Mem. de Comines, i. 384.
102

circumscribed at home by a jealous nobility, SecT. I'.
have exerted themselves more abroad, have '-v-
formed more extensive schemes of foreign con.
quests, and have carried on war with a spirit
and vigour long unknown in Europe.

THE example which Louis set was too inviting step. taken

not to be imitated by other Princes. Henry tedg the
VII. as soon as he was feated on the throne of power of
England, formed the plan of enlarging his own.'Egi'd.
prerogative, by breaking the power of the no-
bility. The circumRtances under which he un-
dertook to execute it, were less favourable than
those which induced Charles VII. to make the
fame attempt; and the spirit with which he con-
duced it, was very different from that of Louis
XI. Charles, by the success of his arms against
the Engli(h, by the merit of having expelled
them out of Co many provinces, had establish-
ed himself so firmly in the confidence of his
people, as encouraged him to make bold len-
croachments on the ancient constitution. The
daring genius of Louis broke through every bar-
rier, and endeavoured to overturn or to remove
every obstacle that stood in his way. But Hen-
rv held the sceptre by a disputed title; a po-
pllar fation was ready every moment to take
arms against him; and after long civil wars,
during which the nobility had often displayed
their power in creating and deposing Kings, he
felt that the regal authority had been so much
relaxed, that he entered into possession of a pre-
rogative so much abridged, as made it necessary
to carry on his measures deliberately, and with-
out any violent exertion. He endeavoured to.
undermine that formidable flru&ure, which he
duift not attack with open force. His schemes,
though cautious and flow in their operation, were
well concerted, and productive in the end of

great

SEcCT. I. great effects. By his laws, permitting the ba-

rons to break the entails of their estates, and to
expose them to sale; by his regulations to pre-
vent the nobility from keeping in their service
those numerous bands of retainers, which ren-
dered them formidable, and turbulent; by en-
couraging population, agriculture and comr
merce; by securing to his fubjets, during a
long reign, the enjoyment of the bletfings which
flow from the arts of peace; by accustoming
them to an administration of government, un-
der which the laws were executed with fteadi-
ness and vigour; he made imperceptibly such
alterations in the English contfitution, that he
transmitted to his successor authority so exten-
five, as rendered him one of the moit absolute
Monarchs in Europe, and capable of the great.
et and most vigorous efforts.

And in IN Spain, the union of all its crowns by the,
sp' marriage of Ferdinand and Isabella; the glory

that they acquired by the conquest of Granada,
which brought the odious dominion of the
Moors to a period; the command of the great
armies which it had been necelary to keep long
on foot, in order to accomplilh this; the wis-
dom and fleadinefs of their admin.istration; and
the address with which they availed themselves
of every incident to humble the nobility, and to
extend their own prerogative, conspired in railing
these monarchs to iuch eminence and authority,
as none of their predecessors had ever enjoyed.
Though (everal causes, which (hall. be explained
in another place, prevented their attaining the
fame extensive powers with the Kings of France
and England, and preserved the feudal conftitu-
tion in Spain longer entire, their great abi-
lities supplied the defets of their prerogative,
and improved with such dexterity all the advan-
tages which they possessed, that Ferdinand car-

ried

ried on his foreign operations, which were very SECT. I.
extensive, with extraordinary vigour and effea. -'

WHILE these Princes were thus enlarging the Events bhp.

boundaries of prerogative, and taking such steps P'hch '.l.
towards rendering their kingdoms capable of ed the fe
acing with union and with force, events oc- narchs to
curred, which called them forth to exert the eert the
new powers which they had acquired. These which they
engaged them in such a series of enterprizes and had acquir-
negociations, that the affairs of all the confider-
able nations in Europe came to be insensibly
interwoven with each other; and a great poli-
tical fyflem was gradually formed, which grew
to be an object of universal attention.

THE first event which merits notice on ac- The irfof

count of its influence in producing this change w'A'the"
in the state of Europe, was the marriage of the marriage of
daughter of Charles the Bold, the sole heiress osos thehboue
the house of Burgundy. For some years before of Brgun-
her father's death, she had been confidered as y
the apparent successor to his territories, and
Charles had made proposals of marrying her to'
several different Princes, with a view of alluring
them, by that offer, to favour the fcheies
which his restless ambition was continually
forming.

THIS rendered the alliance with her an obje&t The impor-

tance of this

of general attention; and all the advantages of t the fate
acquiring pofeifion of her territories, the most of Europe.
opulent at that time and best cultivated of any
on this fide of the Alps, were perfectly under-
flood. As soon, then, as the untimely death of A.D. 1477;
Charles opened the fucceflion, the eyes of all the Janu"a 5.
Princes in Europe were turned towards Mary,
and they felt themselves deeply interested in the
choice which ihe was about to make of the per-

son,

105

SECT. II. son, on whom (he would bestow that rich inhe-
%-yJ ritance.

vi'~ of Lou is XI. from whose kingdom several of the
.is Xl provinces which (he pofleffied had been difmem-
toiL bered, and whose dominions stretched along the

frontier of her territories, had every inducement
to court her alliance. He had, likewise, a good
title to expect the favourable reception of any
reasonable proposition he should make, with re-
fpe&t to the disposal of a Princess, who was the
vassal of his crown, and descended from the roy-
al blood of France. There were only two pro-
positions, however, which he could make with
propriety. The one was the marriage of the
Dauphin, the other that of the Count of An-
goulrne, a Prince of the blood, with the heir-
ess of Burgundy. By the former, he would
have annexed all her territories to his crown,
and have rendered France at once the most re-
fpectable monarchy in Europe. But the great
disparity of age between the two parties, Mary
being twenty, and the Dauphin only eight years
old; the avowed resolution of the Flemings, not
to chufe a master poflifeed of such power as
might enable him to form schemes dangerous to
their liberties; together with their dread of
falling under the odious and oppreflive govern-
ment of Louis, were obstacles in the way of
executing this plan, which it was vain to think
of surmounting. By the latter, the accomplish-
ment of which might have been attained with
ease, Mary having discovered some inclination
to a match with the Count of AngoulemeZ,
Louis would have prevented the dominions of
the house of Burgundy from being conveyed to
a rival power i and in return for such a splendid
eftablilhment for the Count of Angoul1me, he

must
Z Mem. de Comines, i. 358.

must have obtained, or would have extorted SCT. II.
from him concessions highly beneficial to the --y
crown of France. But Louis had been accustom-
ed so long to the intricacies of a crooked and
insidious policy, that he could not be satisfied
with what was obvious and simple; and was so
fond of artifice and refinement, that he came to
confider these as his ultimate object, not as the
means only of condu&ing affairs. From this
principle, no less than from his unwillingners
to aggrandize any of his own fubjeas, or from
his desire of oppressing the house of Burgundy,
which he hated, he neglected the course which
a Prince less able and artful would have taken,
and followed one more suited to his own
genius.

HE proposed to render himself, by force of Thefigu-

arms, master of those provinces, which Mary which he
held of the crown of France, and even to push followed
his conquests into her other territories, while he
amused her with insisting continually on the im-
prafticable match with the Dauphin. In prose-
cuting this plan, he displayed wonderful talents
and industry, and exhibited such scenes of trea-
chery, falsehood and cruelty, as are amazing
even in the history of Louis XI. Immediately
upon the death of Charles, he put his troops in
motion, and advanced towards the Netherlands.
He corrupted the leading men in the provinces
of Burgundy and Artois, and seduced them to
desert their Sovereign. He got admiflion into
some of the frontier towns by bribing the gover-
nors; the gates of others were opened to him in
consequence of his intrigues with the inhabitants.
He negociated with Mary; and, in order to
render her odious to her fubjets, he betrayed
to them her most important secrets. He carried
on a private correspondence with the two mini-

fters

SCTr.II. fters whom she chiefly trusted, and then
x' -" communicated the letters which he had received

from them to the States of Slanders, who, en-
raged at their perfidy, brought them immedi-
ately to trial, tortured them with extreme cru-
elty, and, unmoved by the tears and intreaties
of their sovereign, who knew and approved of
all that the ministers had done, they beheaded
them in her pretence A.

TM erffea WHILE Louis, by this condut, unworthy of
o. this. ehe

i:'ag'e fa great monarch, was securing the poffifon of
Marim.:in Burglndy, Artois, and the towns on the Somme,
b;'.rh of the States of Slanders carried on a negociation
Brg n.dy. with the Emperor Frederick III. and concluded
_
D. 1477. a treaty of marriage between their Sovereign and

his son Maximilian, Archduke of Austria. The
illustrious birth of that Prince, as well as the
high dignity of which he had the profpet,
rendered the alliance honourable for Mary,
while, from the distance of his hereditary ter-
ritories, and the scantiness of his revenues, his
power was so inconsiderable as did not excite
the jealousy or fear of the Flemings.

·The infi- THUs Louis, by the caprice of his temper,
on the ftte and the excels of his refinements, put the house
of Euope of Austria in possession of this noble inheritance.

By this acquisition, the foundation of the future
grandeur of Charles V. was laid; and he became
master of those territories, which enabled him to
carry on his most formidable and decisive opera-
tions againit France. Thus, too, the fame mo-
narch who first united the interior force of
France, and eftablilhed it on such a footing as
to render it formidable to the reft of Europe,
contributed, far contrary to his intention, to

raise
A Men. de Comines, liv. v. ch. 15. p. 309, &c.

raise up a rival power, which, during two cen- SECT. II.
turies, has thwarted the measures, opposed the
arms, and checked the progrcfs of his fuccef-
fors.

THE next event of consequence in the sis- Thenext

i considerable

teenth century, was the expedition of Charles event ws
VIII. into Italy. This occasioned revolutions no the inva.fi

of Italy by

less memorable; produced alterations, which ChSrls
were more immediately perceived, both in the VIl.
military and political system; rouzed the itates D. 494
of Europe to bolder efforts; and blended their
affairs and interefls more closely together. The
mild adminifiration of Charles, a weak but ge-
nerous Prince, seems to have revived the spirit The mo-
and genius of the French nation, which the ri- tivesofhis.
gid despotism of Louis XI. his father, had de-
pressed, and almost extinguished. The ardour
for military service, natural to the French nobi-
lity, returned, and their young monarch was
impatient to distinguish his reign by some fplen-
did enterprize. While he was uncertain towards
what quarter he should turn his arms, the folici-
tations and intrigues of an Italian politician, no
less infamous on account of his crimes, than emi-
nent for his abilities, determined his choice.
Ludovico Sforza, having formed the design of
deposing his nephew the duke of Milan, and of
placing himself on the ducal throne, was so
much afraid of a combination of the Italian pow-
ers to thwart this measure, and to support the
injured Prince, with whom most of them were
connected by blood or alliance, that he saw the
necessity of securing the aid of fame able pro-
teator. The King of France was the person to
whom he applied; and without disclosing to him
his own intentions, be laboured to prevail with
him to march into Italy, at the head of a power-
ful army, in order to feize:the crown of Naples,

to

SECT. n. to which he had pretensions as heir of the house
'*vY ' of Anjou. The right to that kingdom, claimed

by the Angevin family, had been conveyed to
Louis XI. by Charles of Anjou, count of Maine
and Provence. But that sagacious monarch,
though he took immediate pofleffion of those ter-
ritories of which Charles was really mailer, to-
tally disregarded his ideal title to a kingdom,
over which another Prince reigned in tranquil-
lity; and uniformly declined involving himself
in the labyrinth of Italian politicks. His son,
more adventurous, or more inconsiderate, em-
barked eagerly in this enterprize; and contemn-
ing all the remonstrances of his most experi-
enced counsellors, prepared to carry it on with
the utmost vigour.

Hire- THE power which Charles pofeiffed was so
tfi. es great, that he reckoned himself equal to this ar-
pri duous undertaking. His father had transmitted

to him such an ample prerogative, as gave him
the entire command of his kingdom. He him-
self had added considerably to the extent of his
dominions, by his prudent marriage with the
heiress of Bretagne, which rendered him master
of that province, the last of the great fiefs that
remained to be annexed to the crown. He soon
assembled forces which he thought sufficient; and
so impatient was he to enter on his career as a
conqueror, that sacrificing what was real, for
what was chimerical, he restored Roufillon to
Ferdinand, and gave up part of his father's ac-
quifitions in Artois to Maximilian, with a view
of inducing there Princes not to molest France,
while he was carrying on his operations in Italy.

His prep.- BUT so different were the efforts of the States
r .tio of Europe in the fifteenth century, from those

which we ihall behold in the course of this history,

that

that the army, with which Charles undertook SECT. II.
this great enterprize, did not exceed twenty
thousand men. The train of artillery, how-
ever, the ammunition, and warlike stores of
every kind provided for its use, were so confide-
rable as to bear some resemblance to the im-
mense apparatus of modem war .

WaHEN the French entered Italy, they met It. rctf,.

with nothing able to refifl them. The Italian
powers having remained, during a long period,
undisturbed by the invasion of any foreign
enemy, had formed a system with refpet to
their affairs, both in peace and war, peculiar to
themselves In order to adjust the interests,
and balance the power of the different states
into which Italy was divided, they were engaged
in perpetual and endless negociations with each
other, which they conducted with all the sub-
tlety of a refining and deceitful policy. Their
contests in the field, when they had recourse to
arms, were decided in mock battles, by inno-
cent and bloodless victories. Upon the first
appearance of the danger which now impended,
they had recourse to the arts which they had
fludied, and employed their utmost {kill in in-
trigue in order to avert it. But this proving
ineffectual, their effeminate mercenaries, the
only military force that remained in the country,
being fit only for the parade of service, werp
terrified at the aspec of real war,, and (hrunk
at its approach. The impetuosity of the French
valour appeared to them irrefiftable. Florence,
PiCa, and Rome opened their gates as the French
army advanced. The profpet of this dread-
ful invasion struck one King of Naples with
such pannic terror, that he died (if we may be-
lieve historians) of the fright. Another abdi-

cated
Mezeray Hist. tom. ii. . 777.

SECT. H. cated his throne from the fame pusillanimous

- spirit. A third fled out of his dominions, as

soon as the enemy appeared on the Neapolitan
frontiers. Charles, after marching thither from
the bottom of the Alps, with as much rapidity,
and almost as little opposition, as if he had
been on a progress through his own dominions,
took quiet poffeilion of the throne of Naples,
and intimidated or gave law to every power in
Italy.

Its erfea, SUCH was the conclusion of this expedition,
.cM.y which must be confidered as the first great ex-
rife to the ertion of those new powers which the Princes of
cs"0' Europe had acquired, and now began to exer-
baUce of cife. Its effects were no less considerable than
power. its success had been astonishing. The Italians,

unable to resist the impression of the enemy
which broke in upon them, permitted him to
hold on his course undisturbed. They quickly
perceived that no single power, which they
could rouse to action, was an equal match for
a monarch, who ruled over such extensive ter-
ritories, and was at the head of such a martial
people; but that a confederacy might accom-
plifh what the separate members of it durit not
attempt. To this expedient, the only one that
remained to deliver or to preserve them from the
yoke, they had recourse. While Charles incon-
fiderately wafted his time at Naples in festivals
and triumphs on account of his past fuccefes,
or was fondly dreaming of future conqueits in
the East, to the empire of which he now aspired,
they formed against him a powerful combina-
tion of almoit all the Italian Rates, supported by
the Emperor Maximilian, and Ferdinand King
of Aragon. The union of so many powers,
who suspended. or forgot all.their.particular ani-
mofiies, that they might aft in concert againit

an

an enemy who had become formidable to them SeCT. II.
all, awakened Charles from his thoughtless fecu- tv
rity. He.faw now no profpet of safety but in
returning to France. An army of thirty thou-
sand men, afiembled by the allies, was ready to
obftru& his march; and though the French,
with a daring courage, which more than coun-
terbalanced their inferiority in number, broke
through that great body, and gained a victory,
which opened to their monarch a safe passage
into his own territories, he was stripped of all
his conquests in Italy in as ihort a time as it had
taken to acquire them; and the political system
in that country resumed the fame appearance as
before his invasion.

THE sudden and decisive effet of this con- Thibbe.

comet the

federacy, seems to have inftru&ed the Princesg,,,"oja.
and statesmen of Italy as much as the irruption of." plicy.
the French had disconcerted and alarmed them.: .n thl^' i
They had extended, on this occafon, to the affairs. Erope.
of Europe, the maxims of that political science
which had hitherto been applied only to regulate
the operations of the petty states in their own:
country. They had discovered the method of
preventing any monarch from rising to such a'
degree of power, as was inconsistent with the
general liberty; and had manifested the i'mpor-
tance of attending to that great secret in modern
policy, the preservation of a proper distribution
of power among all the members of the system
into which the states of Europe are formed.
During all the wars of which Italy from that
time was the theatre, and amidst the hostile op-
perations which the imprudence of Louis XII.
and the ambition of Ferdinand of Aragon, car-
ried on in that country, with little interruption,
from the close of the fifteenth century to that
period at which the subsequent history com-

VOL. I. 1 mences,

SEeT. II. mences, the maintaining a proper balance of

L-%J power between the contending parties, became

the great objet of attention to the statesmen of
Italy. Nor was the idea confined to them.
Self-prefervation taught other powers to adopt
it. It grew to be falhionable and universal.
From this aera we can trace the progress of that
intercourse between nations, which has linked
the powers of Europe so closely together; and
can discern the operations of that provident po-
licy, which, during peace, guards against re-
mote and contingent dangers; which in war,
hath prevented rapid and deftrutive conquests.

The r THIS was not the only effet of the operati-
,ei OhSons which the great powers of Europe carried on
fDi "u-in Italy. They contributed to render general

pa. such a change, as the French had begun to

make in the state of their troops; and obliged
all the Princes, who appeared on this new thea-
tre of a&ion, to establish the military force of
their kingdoms on the fame footing with that of
France. When the feat of war came to be
remote from the countries which maintained the
contest, the service of the feudal vassals ceased
to be of any use; and the neceflity of employ-
ing troops regularly trained to arms, and kept
in confRant pay, came at once to be evident.
When Charles marched into Italy, his cavalry
was entirely composed of those companies of
Gendarmes, embodied by Charles VII. and con-
tinued by Louis XI. his infantry consisted partly
of Swiss, hired of the Cantons, and partly of
Gascons, armed and disciplined after the Swiss
model. To these Louis XII. added a body of
Germans, well known in the wars of Italy

bthe name of the Black Bands. But neither
fthefe monarchs made any account of the
feudal militia, or ever had recourse to that mi-

litary

litary force which they might have commanded, SECT. II.
in virtue of the ancient institutions in their v
kingdom. Maximilian and Ferdinand, as soon
as they began to a& in Italy, employed the fame
instruments, and trusted the execution of their
plans entirely to mercenary troops.

THIS innovation in the military system was Techthe

quickly followed by another, which the custom tEopp..
of employing Swiss in the Italian wars, was the importance
occasion of introducing. The arms and difci- ?o if' ry
pline of the Swiss, were different from those of
other European nations. During their long and
violent struggles in defence of their liberties
against the house of Austria, whose armies, like
those of other considerable Princes, consisted
chiefly of heavy-armed cavalry, the Swiss found
that their poverty, and the small number of
gentlemen residing in their country, at that time
barren and ill cultivated, put it out of their
power to bring into the field any body of horse
capable of facing the enemy. Neceflity com-
pelled them to place all their confidence in infan-
try; and in order to render it capable of with-
standing the shock of cavalry, they gave the
soldiers breast-plates and helmets as defensive
armour; together with long spears, halberts, and
heavy swords, as weapons of offence. They
formed them into large battalions, ranged in
deep and close array, so that they could present
on every fide a formidable front to the enemy C.
The men at arms could make no impression on
the solid strength of such a body. It repulsed
the Austrians in all their attempts to conquer
Swiflerland. It broke the Burgundian Gendar-
merie, which was scarcely inferior to that of
France, either in number or reputation: And

I z when
c Machiavel Art of War, b. ii. chap. ii p. 451.

SECT. II. when first called to a& in Italy, it bore down
'- -' by its irresistible force every enemy that at-

tempted to oppose it. These repeated proofs of
the decisive effe&s of infantry, exhibited on such
conspicuous occasions, restored that service to
reputation, and gradually re-established the opi-
nion, which had been long exploded, of its fu-
perior importance in the operations of war. But
the glory which the Swiss had acquired, having
inspired them with such high ideas of their own
prowels and consequence as frequently rendered
them mutinous and insolent, the princes who
employed them became weary of depending on
the caprice of foreign mercenaries, and began
to turn their attention towards the improvement
of their national infantry.

Rltionae THE German powers having the command of
efDlailed men, whom nature has endowed with that steady
in Ger- courage and persevering strength which forms
raw-' them to be soldiers, soon modelled their troops

in such a manner, that they vied with the Swiss
both in discipline and valour.
ID Frac. THE French monarchs, though more slowly,

and with greater difficulty, accustomed the impe-
tuous spirit of their people to subordination and
discipline; and were at such pains to render their
national infantry refpe&able, that as early as the
reign of Louis XII. several gentlemen of high
rank had so far abandoned their ancient ideas,
as to condescend to enter into that service D.
in Spin. THE Spaniards, whose situation made it dif-

ficult to employ any other than their national
troops in the southern parts of Italy, which was
the chief scene of their operations in that coun-

try,
D Brantome, ton. x. p. 18. Mem. de Fleuranges, p. 143.

try, not only adopted the Swiss discipline, but SET. II.
improved upon it, by mingling a proper num- Y
ber of soldiers, armed with heavy muskets, in
their battalions; and thus formed that famous
body of infantry, which, during a century and
a half, was the admiration and terror of all Eu-
rope. The Italian states gradually diminihed
the number of their cavalry, and, in imitation
of their more powerful neighbours, brought the
strength of their armies to consist in foot soldiers.
From this period, the nations of Europe have
carried on war with forces more adapted to
every species of service, more capable of acting
in every country, and better fitted both for
making conquests, and for preserving them.

As their efforts in Italy led the people of Eu- The Italian

rope to there improvements in the art of war, ,on o ,ni-
they gave them likewise the first idea of the ex- create of

the publick

pence which accompanies great and continued threv nu i
operations, and accustomed them to the burden Europe.
of those impositions, which are necessary for
supporting them. While the feudal policy sub-
sifted in full vigour, while armies were composed
of military vaffats called forth to attack fume
neighbouring power, and to perform, in a flort
campaign, the services which they owed to their
Sovereign, the expence of war was extremely
moderate. A small fubfidv enabled a Prince to
begin and to finish his greatest operations. But
when Italy became the theatre on which the
powers of Europe contended for superiority, the
preparations requisite for such a distant expedi-
tion, the pay of armies kept constantly on foot,
their subsistence in a foreign country, the sieges
to be undertaken, and the towns to be defended,
swelled the charges of war immensely, and by
creating demands unknown in lels active times,
multiplied taxes in every kingdom. The pro-

grefs

117

SECT. I. gre1f of ambition, however, was so rapid, and
'W' Princes extended their operations so fast, that it

was impossible at first to establish funds propor-
tional to the increase of expence which these oc-
cafioned. When Charles VIII. invaded Naples,
the fumrs requisite for carrying on that enterprize
so far exceeded those which France had been ac-
customed to contribute, that before he reached
the frontiers of Italy, his treasury was exhausted,
and the domestic resources, of which his exten-
five prerogative gave him the command, were
at an end. As he durst not venture to lay any
new lmpofition on his people, oppressed already
with the weight of unusual burdens, the only
expedient that remained was, to borrow of the
Genoese as much money as might enable him
to continue bib march. But he could not obtain
a sufficient fum, without consenting to pay annu-
ally the exorbitant interest of forty-two livres
for every hundred that he received E. We may
observe the fame disproportion between the es-
forts and revenues of other Princes, his contem-
poraries. From this period, taxes went on in-
creasing; and during the reign of Charles V.
such furns were levied in every ifate, as would
have appeared prodigious at the close of the
fifteenth century, and gradually prepared the
way for the more exorbitant exactions of modern
times.

The PeI'We T lHE as tranfadtion, previous to the reign of
otCamb ty
anothcr im- Charles V. that merits attention on account of
P" - its influence upon the state of Europe, is the

league of Cambray. To humble the republick
of Venice, and to divide its territories, was the
object of all the powers who united in this con-
federacy. The civil conflitution of Venice,
established on a firm basis, had suffered no con-

fiderable
S Mem. de Comines, lib. vii. c. 5. p. 440.

fiderable alteration for several centuries during SECT. IL
which, the senate conduced its affairs by max-
ims of policy no less prudent than vigorous, and
adhered to these with an uniform consistent spirit,
which gave that commonwealth great advan-
tages over other tfates, whose views and mea-
fures changed as often as the form of their go-
vernment, or the persons who administered it.
By these unintermitted exertions of wisdom and
valour, the Venetians enlarged the dominions of
their commonwealth, until it became the moit
considerable power in Italy. While their exten-
five commerce, the useful and curious manu-
fa&ures which they carried on, together with
their monopoly of the precious commodities of
the East, rendered Venice the most opulent
state in Europe.

THEIR power was the objet of terror to their The mo.

Italian neighbours. Their wealth was viewed tiv"' of
with envy by the greatest monarchs, who could
not vie with their private citizens in the magni-
ficence of their buildings, in the richness of their
dress and furniture, or in splendor and elegance
of living F. Julius II. whole ambition was fu-
perior, and his abilities equal, to those of any
Pontiff who ever fat on the Papal throne, form-
ed the idea of this league againit the Venetians,
and endeavoured, by applying to these passions
which I have mentioned, to persuade othersPrin-
ces to join in it. By working upon the fears of
the Italian powers, and upon the avarice of the
monarchs beyond the Alps, he induced them,
in concurrence with other causes, which it is not
my province to explain, to form one of the most
extensive confederacies against those haughty re-
publicans, that Europe had ever beheld.

THE

F Heliani oratio apud Goldartum in polit. Imperial. p.
980.

SlcT. U. THE Emperor, the King of France, the King
'"W- "of Aragon, the Pope, were principals in the
Tae d f league of Cambray, to which almost all the
tacnc- Princes of Italy acceded, the least considerable
derata of them hoping for some Ihare in the spoils of a

state, which they already deemed to be devoted
to deftrustion. The Venetians might have di-
verted this storm, or have broken its force; but
with a presumptuous ra(hnefs, to which there is
nothing firailar in the course of their history, they
waited its approach. The impetuous valour of
the French, rendered ineffetual all their precau-
tions for the safety of the republick; and the fa-
tal battle of Ghiarradadda entirely ruined the ar-
my, on which they relied for defence. Julius
seized all the towns which they held in the eccle-
fiaftical territories. Ferdinand re-annexed the
towns of which they had got possession on the
coast of Calabria, to his Neapolitan dominions.
Maximilian, at the head of a powerful army,
advanced towards Venice on the one fide. The
French pushed their conquests on the other. The
Venetians, surrounded by so many enemies, and
left without one ally, funk from the height of
presumption to the depths of despair; abandon-
ed all their territories on the continent; and shut
themselves up in their capital, as their last re-
fuge, and the only place which they hoped tq
preserve.

Di;rion THIS rapid success, however, proved fatal to
o'them. the confederacy. The members of it, united

while they were engaged in seizing their prey,
began to feel their ancient jealousy and animofi-
ties revive, as soon as they had a profpet of di-
viding it. When the Venetians observed these
symptoms of alienation and distrust, a ray of
hope broke in upon them; the spirit natural to
their councils returned; they resumed such wis-

dom

dom and firmness, as made Come atonement for SECT. I1.
their former imprudence and deje&ion; they re-
covered part of the territory which they had loft;
they appeased the Pope and Ferdinand by well-
timed concessions in their favour; and at length
dissolved the confederacy, which had brought
their commonwealth to the brink of ruin.

Ju LIUS, elated with beholding the effects of a New ob-

league which he himself had planned, and ima- jtbi, polic
gining that nothing was too arduous for him to andambi-
undertake, conceived the idea of expelling eve- tion'
ry foreign power out of Italy, and bent all the
force of his mind towards executing a scheme
so well suited to his vast and enterprizing ge-
nius. He directed his first attack against the
French, who, on many accounts, were more
odious to the Italians, than any of the foreigners
who had acquired dominion in their country.
By his activity and address, he prevailed on
most of the powers, who had joined in the
league of Cambray, to turn their arms against
the King of France, their former ally; and en-
gaged Henry VIII. who had lately ascended the
throne of England, to favour their operations
by invading France. Louis XII. resifted all the
efforts of this formidable and unexpeced con-
federacy, with undaunted fortitude. Hostilities
were carried on, during several campaigns, in
Italy, on the frontiers of Spain, and inPicardy,
with alternate success. Exhausted, at length,
by the variety as well as extent of his operations;
unable to withstand a confederacy which brought
against him superior force, conducted with wis-
dom, and acting with perseverance; Louis found
it necessary to conclude separate treaties of peace
with his enemies; and the war terminated with
the loss of every thing which the French had
acquired in Italy, except the castle of Milan,
and a few inconsiderable towns in that dutchy.

THE

121

SECT. II. THE various negociations carried on during
' t-' this busy period, and the different combinations
By this the
itercourre formed among powers hitherto little conneted
amog the with each other, greatly increased that inter-
tio.u.i- course between the nations of Europe, which I
°CIE have mentioned as one effect of the events in

the fifteenth century. While the greatness of
the objects at which they aimed, the distant ex-
peditions which they undertook, as well as the
length and obstinacy of the contests in which
they engaged, obliged them to exert themselves
with a vigour and perseverance unknown in the
preceding ages.

They *re THOSE active scenes which the following His-
prepared for
tib trf- tory will exhibit, as well as the variety and im-
,a iof portance of those transaCtions which distinguish
teet C. the period to which it extends, are not to be
'"-y ascribed solely to the ambition, to the abilities,

or to the rivalfhip of Charles V. and of Francis
I. The kingdoms of Europe had arrived at such
a degree of improvement in the internal admi-
niftration of government, and Princes had ac-
quired such command of the national force
which was to be exerted in foreign wars, that
they were in a condition to enlarge the sphere of
their operations, and to increase the vigour of
their efforts. Their contests in Italy, which led
them first to try the extent of the power that
they had acquired, gave rife to so many opposite
claims and pretensions, excited such a spirit of
discord and rivallhip between nations, and laid
the foundation of so many quarrels, as could
not fail of producing extraordinary convulsions
in Europe. Accordingly the sixteenth century
opened with the certain profpe& of its abound-
ing in great and intercfting events.

A VIEW

## SECTION III. View of the political Constitution of the principal States in Europe, at the Commencement of the sixteenth Century.

A
V I E W

OF THE
PROGRESS OF SOCIETY

I N
EUROPE,

PROM THE
SUBVERSION OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE,

TO THE
BEGINNING OF THE SIXTEENTH CENTURY.

SECTION III.
View of the political Conflitution of the principal

States in Europe, at the Commencement of the
sixteenth Century.

AVING thus enumerated the principal scT.imi
causes and events, the influence of which --_

extended to all the states in Europe, and con- A cofide,-
tributed either to improve their internal govern- in the co..
ment and police, or to enlarge the sphere of tutin. of
their activity, and to augment their national nations of
force; nothing remains, in order to prepare my urope.
readers for entering with full information up-

on

SET. IIT on penising the History of the Reign of Charles
'--' V. but to give forne view of the particular con-

ftitu ion and form of civil government, in each
of the nations which aded any considerable
part duri g that period. While the institutions
and occurrences, which I have endeavoured to
illuitrate, formed the people of Europe to refem-
ble each other, and conducted them from bar-
barifm to refinement, in the fame path, and
with almost equal steps, there were other cir-
cumftances which occasioned a difference in
their political establishments, and gave rife to
those peculiar modes of government, which have
produced such variety in the character and ge-
nius of nations.

Nectffuy IT is no less necefiary to become acquainted
to eplain with the latter, than to have contemplated the
the ftae of .h

'

ch,., when former. The view which I have exhibited of
beln iv. the cauies and events, whose influence was uni-
reign. versal, will enable my readers to account for the

furprizing resemblance among the nations of
Europe in their interior police, and foreign ope-
rations. But, without a diftin& knowledge of
the peculiar form and genius of their civil govern-
ment, a great part of their transactions must
appear altogether mysterious and inexplicable.
The historians of particular States, as they fel-
dom extend their views farther than to the a-
mufement or inftrucion of their fellow-citizens,
by whom they might presume that all domeftick
customs and inffitutions were perfectly under-
itood, have often neglected to descend into such
details with refpec to there, as are sufficient to
convey to foreigners full light and information
concerning the occurrences which they relate.
But a history, which comprehends the tranfac-
tions of so many different countries, would be
extremely imperfed, without a previous survey

of

of their respeCtive constitutions and political state. SE cT. IT.
It is from his knowledge of these, that the rea-
der must draw those principles, which will en-
able him to judge with discernment, and to de-
cide with certainty, concerning the condut of
nations.

A MINUTE detail, however, of the peculiar

forms and regulations in every country, would
lead to deductions of immeasurable length. To
sketch out the great lines which distinguish and
chara&erize each government, is all that the na-
ture of my present work will admit of, and all
that is necessary to illustrate the events which it
records.

AT the opening of the sixteenth century, the The ftteof

political face of Italy was extremely different tu"y
from that of any other part of Europe. Instead
of those extensive monarchies, which occupied
the reft of the continent, that delightful country
was parcelled out among many small tates,
each of which poffefled sovereign and indepen-
dentjurifdiaion. The only monarchy in Italy
was that of Naples. The dominion of the
Popes was of a peculiar species, to which there
is nothing similar either in ancient or modern
times. In Venice and Florence, a republican
form of government was established. Milan
was subjet to sovereigns, who had assumed no
higher title than that of Dukes.

THE Pope was the first of there powers in dig- The Papli
nity, and not the least considerable by the extent d';`y the

high, a in

of his territories. In the primitive church, the BEope.
unrfdi&ion of bishops was equal and co-ordinate.
They derived, perhaps, some degree of confide-
ration from the dignity of the See in which they
presided. They possessed, however, no real au-

thority

SErC. II. thority or pre-eminence, but what they acquired
""- ' by superior abilities, or superior fantity. As
Origin and
pro6cf.of Rome had so long been the feat of Empire, and
'ti Pal capital of the world, its bilhops were on that

account entitled to respect; they received it; but
during several ages they claimed and received
nothing more. From these humble beginnings,
they advanced with such an adventurous and
well-directed ambition, that they established a
spiritual dominion over the minds and sentiments
of men, to which all Europe Submitted with im-
plicit obedience. Their claim ofuniverfal jurif-
diction, as heads of the church, and their pre-
tensions to infallibility in their decisions, as fuc-
ceifors of St. Peter, are as chimerical, as they
are repugnant to the genius of the Christian re-
ligion. But on these foundations, the fuperfti-
tion and credulity of mankind enabled them to
eret an amazing superstructure. In all ecclefi-
aftical controversies, their decisions were receiv-
ed as the infallible oracles of truth. Nor was
the plenitude of their power confined to these
alone; they dethroned monarchs; disposed of
crowns; absolved fubjefts from the obedience
due to their sovereigns; and laid kingdoms un-
der interdicts. There was not a state in Eu-
rope which had not been disquieted by their am-
bition; there was not a throne which they had
not shaken; nor a Prince, who did not tremble
at their power.

Thetet;to- NOTHING was wanting to render this Empire
rift~b absolute, and to eftablilh it on the ruins of all

equate to civil authority, but that the Popes Ihould have
fpm, J- poffiefed such a degree of temporal power, as
ri'iaio. was sufficient to second and enforce their fpiritu-

al decrees. Happily for mankind, while their
spiritual jurifdietion was most extensive, and at
its greatest height, their temporal property was

extremely

extremely limited. They were powerfulPon-SECT. i.
tiffs, formidable at a distance; but they were '-
petty Princes, without any confidcrable domes-
tick force. They had early endeavoured, in-
deed, to acquire territory by arts, similar to those
which they had employed in extending their
jurisdiction. Under pretence of a donation from
Constantine, and of another from Charlemagne
or his father Pepin, they attempted to take pof-
feflion of some towns adjacent to Rome. But
these donations were fi&titious, and availed them
little. The benefations for which they are in-
debted to the credulity of the Norman adven-
turers, who conquered Naples, and to the super-
ftition of the counters Matilda, were real, and
added ample domains to the Holy See.

BUT the power of the Popesdid not increase Their sn.

in proportion to the extent of territory which thor'ty J
they had acquired. In the dominions annexed territories
to the Holy See, as well as in those subject to ixtrtel
other Princes in Italy, the sovereign of a state
was far from having the command of the force
which it contained. During the turbulence and
confusion of the middle ages, the powerful no-
bility or leaders of popular fations in Italy,
had seized the government of different towns;
and after strengthening their fortifications, and
taking a body of mercenaries into pay, they
aspired at independence; The territory which the
church had gained, was filled with petty tyrants
of this kind, who left the Pope hardly the fha-
dow of dominion.

As there usurpations almost annihilated the it wat cr-

Papal power in the greater part of the towns cunrjibed
subject to the church, the Roman barons fre-b tiontheot
quently disputed the authority of the Popes, R,"n'
even in Rome itself. In the twelfth century,

an

SECT. I. an opinion began to be propagated, " That as

v-Jr^ the funtion of ecclefiafticks was purely fpiri-

tual, they ought to possess no property, and to
claim no temporal jurisdiCtion; but, according
to the laudable example of their predecessors in
the primitive church, should subsist wholly upon
their tithes, or upon the voluntary oblations of the
people A." This doctrine being addressed to men,
who had beheld the scandalous manner in which
the avarice and ambition of the clergy '--d
prompted them to contend for wealth, and to ex-
ercife power, they listened to it with fond attenti-
on. TheRoman barons, who had felt most fenfi-
bly the rigour of ecclesiastical oppreflion, adopted
these sentiments with such ardour, that they set
A D. t43. themselves instantly to shake off the yoke. They

endeavoured to restore rome image of their an-
cient liberty, by reviving the inRtitution of the
Roman senate, in which they vested supreme au-
thority; committing the executive power some-
times to one chief senator, sometimes to two, and
Sometimes to a magistrate dignified with the
name of sTe Patrician. The Popes exerted
themselves with vigour, in order to check this
fatal encroachment on their jurifdiation. One
of them, finding all his endeavours ineffetual,
was so much mortified, that extreme grief cut
short his days. Another, having ventured to
attack the senators at the head of some armed
men, was mortally wounded in the fray ". Du-
ring a considerable period, the power of the
Popes, before which the greatest monarcbs in
Europe trembled, was circumfcrihed within such
narrow limits in their own capital, that they
durst hardly exert any at of authority without
the permifflon and concurrence of the senate.

ENCROACH-

A Otto Frifiogenfisde GeRtis Frider. Imp. lib. ii. cap. 1o.

Otto Srising. Chron. lib. vii. cap. 27, 31. Id. de Gest.

Frid. lib. i. c. 27. Muratori Annali d'ltalia, vol. ix. p
398, 404·

ENCROACHMENTS were made upon the Pa- SECT.II.
pal authority, not only by the usurpations ofb""he

· o , and by the

the Roman nobility, but by the mutinous spirit turbulence
of the people. During seventy years of the as'peope,
fourteenth century, the Popes fixed their refi- from A. D.
dence in Avignon. The inhabitants of Rome, °P D,377.
accustomed to confider themselves as the defcen-
dants of the people who had conquered the world,
and had given laws to it, were too high-fpirited
to submit with patience to the delegated autho-
rity of those persons, to whom the Popes com-
mitted the government of the city. On many
eccafions, they opposed the execution of the
Papal mandates and on the slightest appearance
of innovation or oppreflion, they were ready to
take arms in defence of their own immunities.
Towards the middle of the fourteenth century,
being infligated by Nicolas Rienzo, a man of
low birth and a seditious spirit, but of popular
eloquence and an enterprizing ambition, they
drove all the nobility out of the city, eftablilhed
a democratical form of government, eleted
Rienzo Tribune of the people, and invested him
with extensive authority. But though the fran-
tick proceedings of the Tribune soon over-turned
this new system; though the government of
Rome was reinstated in its ancient form; yet
every frcfh attack contributed to weaken the
papaljurifdition; and the turbulence of the peo-
ple concurred with the (pirit of independence
among the nobility, to circumscribe it within
very narrow bounds c. Gregory VIL. and other
domineering pontiffs, accomplished those great
things which rendered them so formidable to
the Emperors with whom they contended, not

VOL. I. K by

c HiRorie Fiorentine de Giov. Villani, lib. xii. c. 89. 104.

ap. Murat. Script. Rerun). hal. vol. xiii. Vita de Cola di
Rienzo, ap. Murat. Antiq. Iral. vol. iii. p. 399, &c. Hit.
de Nic. Rienzy., par M. de Boilpreaux, p. 91, &c.

SECT. II. by the force of their arms, or by the extent of
'-""' their power, but by the dread of their spiritual

censures, and by the effect of their intrigues,
which excited rivals, and called forth enemies
against every Prince, whom they wished to de-
press or to defiroy.

A;ex.o'r MLANY attempts were made by the Popes,
;, ,;l-: not only to humble those usurpers, who lorded
der the it over the cities in the ecclesiastical state, but to
Pie " e

break the turbulent spirit of the Roman people.
rince'. These were long unsuccessful. At last Alexan-

der VI. with a policy no less artful than flagiti-
ous, subdued and extirpated most of the great
Roman barons, and rendered the Popes maiters
of their own dominions. The enterprising am-
bition of Julius II. added conquests of no incon-
fiderable value to the patrimony of St. Peter.
Thus the Popes, by degrees, became powerful
temporal Princes. Their territories, in the age
of Charles V. were of greater extent than at pre-
sent; their country seems to have been better
cultivated, and more populous; and as they
drew large contributions from every part of Eu-
rope, their revenues far exceeded those of the
neighbouring powers, and rendered them capa-
ble of more sudden and vigorous efforts.

Dcfeas in THE genius of the papal government, how-
of ecir,- ever, was better adapted to the exercise of fpi-
·an.cl do- ritual dominion, than of temporal power. With

m refpet to the former, all its maxims were fleady

and invariable. Every new Pontiffadopted the
plan of his predecessor. By education and ha-
bit, Ecclefiafticks were so formed, that the
character of the individual was funk in that of
the profeflion; and the passions of the man were
sacrificed to the interest and honour of the order.
The hands which held the reins of administration

might

might change; but the spirit which condu&ed SE CT. III.
them was always the fame. While the measures
of other governments fluctuated, and the obje&s
at which they aimed varied, the church kept one
end in view; and to this unrelaxing constancy
of pursuit, it was indebted for its success in the
boldest attempts ever made by human ambi-
tion.

BUT in their civil administration, the Popes

followed no such uniform or consistent plan.
There, as in other governments, the charater,
the passions, and the interests of the person who
had the supreme dire&ion of affairs, occasioned
a variation both in objects and measures. As
few Prelates reached the summit of ecclefiaflical
dignity, until they were far advanced in life, a
change of matters was more frequent in the Papal
dominions than in other states, and the political
system was, of course, less flable and perma-
nent. Every Pope was eager to make the most
of the short period, during which he had the
profpe& of enjoying power, in order to aggran-
dize his own family, and to attain his private
ends; and it was often the first business of his
fucceflor to undo all that he had done, and to
overturn what he had established.

As Ecclefiafticks were trained to pacifick arts,

and early initiated in the mysteries of that policy,
by which the court of Rome extended or sup-
ported its spiritual dominion, the Popes were
apt to condut their temporal affairs with the
fame spirit; and in all their measures were more
ready to employ the refinements of intrigue,
'than the force of arms. It was in the Papal
court that address and subtlety in negociation first
became a science ; and during the sixteenth cen-

K 2 tury,

SECT li. tury, Rome was confidered as the school in
^~'-' which it might be best acquired.

As the decorum of their ecclesiastical cha-

racer prevented the Popes from placing
themselves at the head of their armies, or
taking the command in person, of the mili-
tary force in their dominions, they were
afraid to arm their subjects; and in all
their operations, whether offensive or defen-
five, they trusted entirely to mercenary
troops.

As their power and dominions could not

descend to their posterity, the Popes were less
solicitous than other Princes to form or to
encourage schemes of publick utility and im-
provement. Their tenure was only for a short
life; present advantage was what they chiefly
studied; to squeeze and to amass, not to
meliorate, was their objed. They ereEted,
perhaps, some work of ostentation, to remain
as a monument of their Pontificate; they
found it neceflary, at some times, to eftablilh
useful institutions, in order to tooth and
silence the turbulent populace of Rome; but
plans of general benefit to their fubjetts, and
framed with a view to futurity, were rarely
objects of attention in the Papal policy. The
patrimony of St. Peter was worse governed
than any part of Europe; and though a ge-
nerous Pontiff might suspend for a little, or
counter-ac the effets of those vices which
are peculiar to the adminifration of ecclefi-
afticks; the disease not only remained incu-
rable, but has gone on increasing from age
to age; and the decline of the state has kept
pace with its progress.

ONE circumfiance, farther, concerning theSiecT. I.

Papal government, is so singular, as to merit ..'
attention. As the spiritual supremacy and tern dena e frne
poral power were united in one person, and uni- advantages
formly aided each other in their operations, they uninn of
became so blended together, that it was difficult ,th:, piri.-
to separate them, even in imagination. The po- temporal
tentates, who found it necefflry to oppose the '"tho"'y.
ineaufres which the Popes pursued as temporal
Princes, could not divest themselves of the re-
verence which they imagined to be due to them
as heads of the church, and vicars of Jesus
Christ. It was with reluctance that they could
be brought to a rupture with them; they were
averse to push their operations against them to
extremity; they listened eagerly to the firfR
overtures of accommodation, and were willing to
procure it almost upon any terms. Their con-
fcioufnefs of. this, encouraged the enterprizing
Pontiffs, who filled the Papal throne about the
beginning of the fiittenth century, to engage in
schemes seemingly the most extravagant. They
rrufted, that if their temporal power was not
sufficient to carry them through with success,
the refpe& paid to their spiritual dignity would
enable them to extricate themselves with facility
and with honour D. But when popes came to

take

0Thc manner in which Louis XII. of France undertook

and carried on war against Julius H. remarkably illustrates
this observation. Louis solemnly consulted the clergy of
France, whether it was lawful to take arms against a Pope,
who had wantonly kindled war in Europe, and whom neither
the faith of treaties, nor gratitude for favours received,
nor the decorum of his ch3racer, could restrain from the
most violent aAions, to which the lust of power prompts
ambitious Princes. Though his clergy authorised the war,
yet Anne of Bretagne, his Queen, entertained (cruples with,
regard to the Lawfulness of it. The King himself, from
some fuperfition of the fame kind, carried it on faintly;
and, upon every fresh advantage, renewed his propositions

of

6SCT. Il. take part more frequently in the contests among

C'*v '- Princes, and to engage as principals or auxiliaries

in every war kindled in Europe, this veneration
for their sacred characer began to abate; and
firiking instances will occur, in the following
history, of its being almost totally extinct.

C~ftitut;io OF all the Italian powers, the republick of
pbithk of Venice, next to the Pope, was most conneced
Venice, with the reft of Europe. The rife of that corn-
di p rie monwealth, during the inroads of the Huns in
the- the fifth century; the singular situation of its ca-

pital in the small ifes of the Adriatick gulf; and
the more singular form of its civil constitution,
are generally known. If we view the Venetian
government as calculated for the order of nobles
alone, its inflitutions may be pronounced ex-
cellent; the deliberative, legislative, and exe-
cutive powers are so admirably distributed and
adjusted, that it must be regarded as a perse&
model of political wisdom. But if we confider
it as formed for a numerous body of people sub-
jet to its jurifdiaion, it will appear a rigid and
partial aristocracy, which lodges all power in the
hands of a few members of the community,
while it degrades and oppresses the reft.

DbeCe, THE spirit of government, in a commont
its gover.-

ert, pr- wealth of this species, was, of course, timid and
'tcrly jealous. The Venetian nobles distrusted their

to iti mili- own
tury opter-
tio. of peace. Mezeray, Hist. de France, sot. edit. 1685. tom.

i. 852. I shall produce another proof of this reverence for
the Papal character still more striking. Guicciardini, the
most sagacious, perhaps, of all modern historians, and the
boldest in painting the vices and ambition of the Popes, re-
prefente the death of Migliau, a Spanilh officer, who was
killed during the siege of Naples, as a punishment inflited
on him by heaven, on account of hi, having opposed the
setting of Clement VII. at liberty. Guic. Hittoria d'ltalia,
Genev. 1645. vol. ii. lib. 18. p. 467.

own fubjeas, and were afraid of allowing them SECT. Ill
the use of arms. They encouraged among them ' '
the arts of industry and commerce; they em-
ployed them in manufactures and in navigation;
but never admitted them into the troops which
the state kept in its pay. The military force of
the republick consisted entirely of foreign mer-
cenaries. The command of there was never
trusted to noble Venetians, left they should ac-
quire such influence over the army, as might en-
danger the publick liberty; or become accuf-
tomed to the exercise of such power, as would
make them unwilling to return to the condition
of private citizens. A soldier of fortune was
placed at the head of the armies of the common-
wealth; and to obtain that honour, was the
great objet of the Italian Condottieri, or leaders
of bands, who, in the fifteenth and sixteenth
centuries, made a trade of war, and raised and
hired out soldiers to different states. But the
fame suspicious policy, which induced them to
employ there adventurers, prevented their plac-
ing entire confidence in them. Two noblemen,
appointed by the senate, accompanied their ar-
my when it took the field, with the appellation
of Proveditori, and, like the field deputies of the
Dutch republick in latter times, observed all the
motions of the general, and checked and con-
trouled him in all his operations.

A COMMONWEALTH, with such civil and mi-

litary institutions, was not formed to make con-
quests. While its subjects were disarmed, and
its nobles excluded from military command, it
carried on its warlike enterprizes with great dif-
advantage. This ought to have taught the Ve-
netians to make felf-prefervation, and the enjoy-
ment of domeftick security, the objeds of their
policy. But republicks are apt to be seduced by

the

SECT. m1. the pirit of ambition, as well as Princes. When
.-V-' the Venetians so far forgot the interior defects in

their government, as to aim at extensive con-
quests, the fatal blow, which they received in
the war excited by the league of Cambray, con-
vinced them of the imprudence and danger of
making violent efforts, in opposition to the ge-
nius and tendency of their conflitution.

Ezcerlce j IT is not, however, by its military, but by its
of it. nvl1
iaittituos. naval and commercial power, that the impor-

tance of the Venetian commonwealth must be
estimated. In the latter, the real force and
nerves of the state consisted. The jealousy of
government did not extend to this department.
Nothing was apprehended from this quarter, that
could prove formidable to liberty. The senate
encouraged the nobles to trade, and to serve on
board the fleet. They became merchants and
admirals. They increased the wealth of their
country by their industry. They added to its
dominions, by the valour with which they cort-
ducted its naval armaments.

The extent THE Venetian commerce was an inexhaufli,
tl ct' ""- ble source of opulence. All the nations in Eu-

rope depended upon them, not only for the com-
modities of the East, but for various manufac-
tures fabricated by them alone, or finished with
a dexterity and elegance unknown in other coun-
tries. From this extensive commerce, the state
derived filch immense supplies as concealed these
vices in its constitution which I have mentioned;
and enabled it to keep on foot such armies, as
were not only an over-match for the force which
any of its neighbours could bring into the field,
but were sufficient to contend, for some time,
w;th the powerful monarchs beyond the Alps.
During its struggles with the Princes united

against

against it by the league of Cambray, the repub- S CT. III.
lick levied fums which, even in the present age,
would be deemed considerable; and while the
King of France paid the exorbitant interest which
I have mentioned for the money advanced to
him, and the Emperor eager to borrow, but def-
titute of credit, was known by the name of Max-
imilian the Money-less, the Venetians raised what-
ever fums they pleased, at the moderate premi-
um of five in the hundred E.

THE conifitution of Florence was perfectly The confti-

the reverse of the Venetian. It partook as much tForence.
of the democratical turbulence and licentious-
ness, as the other of ariftocratical rigour. Flo-
rence, however, was a commercial, not a mili
tary democracy. The nature of its institutions
was favourable to commerce, and the genius of
the people was turned towards it. The vast
wealth which the family of Medici had acquired
by trade; together with the magnificence, the
generosity, and the virtue of the first Cosmo,
gave him such an ascendant over the affe&ions
as well as the councils of his countrymen, that
though the forms of popular government were
preserved, though the various departments of
administration were filled by magistrates diftin-
guithed by the ancient names, and eleted in the
usual manner, he was in reality the head of the
commonwealth, and in the station of a private
citizen he possessd a supreme authority. Cosmo
_ transmitted a considerable degree of this power

to his descendants; and during the greater part
of the fifteenth century, the political state of Flo-
rence was extremely singular. The appearance

of

E Hit. de la ligue faite a Cambray par M. I'AbbM du Bos,
lib. v. Sandi Storia Civil Veneziana, lib. viii. c. 16. p. 891,

SECT. ni. of republican government subsisted, the people

v-v -' were paflionately attached to it, and on some oc-

cafions contended warmly for their privileges,
and yet they permitted a tingle family to assume
the diretion of their affairs, almost as absolutely
as if it had been formally invested with fove-
reign power. Thejealoufy of the Medici con-
curred with the commercial spirit of the Floren-
tines, in putting the military force of the repub-
lick upon the fame footing with that of the
other Italian ltates. The troops, which the
Florentines employed in their wars, confiRed
almost entirely of mercenary soldiers, furnished
by the Condottieri, or leaders of bands, whom
they took into their pay.

The co.fli- IN the kingdom of Naples, to which the so-
the kig- vereignty of the Illand of Sicily was annexed,
domof the feudal government was eftablilhed in the
xNP;La fame form, and with the fame defe&s, as in

the other nations of Europe. The frequent and
violent revolutions which happened in that mo-
narchy, had considerably increased these de-
sects, and rendered them more intolerable. The
fucceflion to the crown of Naples had been
so often interrupted or altered, and so many
Princes of foreign blood had taken pofleffion of
the throne, that the Neapolitan nobility had loft,
in a great measure, that attachment to the fa-
mily of their sovereigns, as well as that reve-
rence for their persons, which, in other feudal
kingdoms, contributed to set some bounds to
the encroachments of the barons upon the royal
prerogative and power. At the fame time, the
different pretenders to the crown, being obliged
to court the barons who adhered to them, and
on whose support they depended for the success
of their claims, they augmented their privileges
by liberal concessions, and connived at their

boldest

boldest usurpations. Even when feated on the SECT. II.
throne, it was dangerous for a Prince, who held t"-V
his sceptre by a disputed title, to venture on any
siep towards extending his own power, or cir-
cumfcribing that of the nobles.

FROM all these causes, the kingdom of Naples

was the most turbulent of any in Europe, and
the authority of its Monarchs the least extensive.
Though Ferdinand I. who began his reign in
the year one thousand four hundred and sixty
eight, attempted to break the power of the
aristocracy; though his son Alphonfo, that he
might crush it at once by-cutting off the leaders
of greatest reputation and influence amongst the
Neapolitan barons, ventured to commit one of
the most perfidious and cruel ations recorded
in history ; the order of nobles was neverthe- A.D. 147.
less more exasperated than humbled by their
measures'. The resentment which there out-
rages excited was so violent, and the power of
the malecontent nobles was still so formidable,
that to these may be ascribed, in a great degree,
the ease and rapidity with which Charles VIII.
conquered the kingdom of Naples G.

THE event which gave rife to the violent con- State of the

tests concerning the fucceffllon to the crown of cerning the
Naples and Sicily, which brought so many cala- rightoffuc-

* . , r i * i i i * i i * cellon to

mities upon there kingdoms, happened in the thir- the crown.
teenth century. Upon the death of the Emperor A. DU. ^54.
Frederick 11. Manfred his natural son aspiring to
the Neapolitan throne, murdered his brother
the Emperor Conrad (if we may believe contem-
porary historians) and by that crime obtained pof-

feflion

s Giannone, book xxviii. chap. 2. vol. ii. p. 410, &c.
G Giannone, ibid. p. 414.

SEcrT.n.fiefioa of it". The Popes, from their impla-
~'*'V' cable enmity to the house of Swabia, not only

refuied to recognize Manfred's title, but endea-
voured to excite against him Come rival capable
of wresting the scepter out of his hand. Charles
Count of Anjou, and brother of St. Louis King
of France, undertook this; and he received,
from the Popes, the investiture of the kingdom
of Naples and Sicily, as a fief held of the Holy
See. The Count of Anjou's efforts were crown-
ed with success; Manfred fell in battle; and
he took pofiefion of the vacant throne. But
soon after Charles sullied the glory which he had
acquired, by the injustice and cruelty with
which he put to death, by the hands of the exe-
cutioner, Conradin, the last Prince of the house
of Swabia, and the rightful heir of the Nea-
politan crown. The gallant young Prince as-
ferted his title, to the last, with a courage wor-
thy of a better fate. On the scaffold, he de-
clared Peter, at that time Prince, and soon
after King of Aragon, who had married Mati-
fred's only daughter, his heir; and throwing his
glove among the people, he entreated that it
might be carried to Peter as the symbol by
which he conveyed all his right to him'. The
desire of avenging the insult offered to royalty
by the death of Conradin, concurred with am-
bition in prompting Peter to take arms in sup-
port of the title, which he had acquired. From
that period, during almost two centuries, the
houses of Aragon and Anjou contended for the
crown of Naples. Amidst a succession of re-
volutions more rapid, as well as of crimes more
atrocious, than what occur in the history of al-

most

" Struv. corp. hist. Germ. i. 481. Giannone, book xviii

ch. 5.
' Giannone, book six. c. 4. § 2.

most every other kingdom, Monarchs fome-SEcT. Il.
times of the Aragonefe line, and sometimes of'""
the Angevin, were feated on the throne. At A D. 434.
length the Princes of the house of Aragon ob-
tained such firm possession of this long-difputed
inheritance, that they transmitted it quietly to a.
bastard branch of their family K.

THE race of the Angevin Kings, however, Pretefions

was not extint ; nor had they relinquished their ft ,an
title to the Neapolitan crown. The Count of Spanil
Maine and Provence, the heir of this family, Monarchs.
conveyed all his right and pretensions to Louis
XI. and to his successors. Charles VIII. as I A. .1494.
have already related, crofied the Alps at the
head of a powerful army, in order to prosecute
his claim with a degree of vigour far superior to
that, which the Princes from whom he derived
it, had been capable of exerting. The rapid
progress of his arms in Italy, as well as the
short time during which he enjoyed the fruits of
his success, are well known. Frederick, the
heir of the illegitimate branch of the Aragonefe
family, soon recovered the throne of which
Charles had difpofleffed him. Louis XII. and
Ferdinand of Aragon united against this Prince,
whom both, though for different reasons, con-
fidered as an usurper, and agreed to divide his
dominions between them. Frederick, unable to A.D. S10,.
resist the combined Monarchs, each of whom
was far his superior in power, resigned his fcep-
tre. Louis and Ferdinand, though they had con-
curred in making the conquest, differed about
the divifien of it; and from allies became ene-
mies. But Gonfalvo de Cordova, partly by the
exertion of such military talents as gave him a
just title to the appellation of the Great Captain,

which
r Giannone, book xxvi. ch. 2;

SE CT. II. which the Spanish historians have bestowed upon

vC* him; and partly by such (hamelefsand frequent

violations of the most solemn engagements, as
leave an indelible tain on his memory; strip-
ped the French of all they potfefled in the Nea-
politan dominions, and secured the peaceable
possession of them to his matter. These, toge-
ther with his other kingdoms, Ferdinand tranf-
mitted to his grandson Charles V, whose right
to possess them, if not altogether uncontroverti-
ble, seems, at least, to be as well founded as
that, which the Kings of France set in oppofi-
tion to it L.

Stateof the THERE is nothing in the political conftitu-
M'l. ., tion, or interior government of the dutchy of
the right of Milan, so remarkable, as to require a particu-
f"uteo lar explanation. But as the right of succession

to that fertile province was the cause or the
pretext of almost all the wars carried on in
Italy during the reign of Charles V, it is necef-
fary to trace their disputes to their source, and
to enquire into the pretensions of the various
competitors.

Rife sd DURING the long and fierce contests excited
prigptefa in Italy by the violence of the Guelf and Ghi-
concerning belline factions, the family of Visconti rose to
this. great eminence among their fellow-citizens of

Milan. As the Visconti had adherred uniformly
to the Ghibelline or Imperial interest, they, by
A. D. 534. way of recompence, received, from one Em-

peror, the dignity of perpetual vicars of the
Empire in Italy M: they were created by ano-
A. D. 1395. ther, Dukes of Milan, and, together with that

title

L Droits des Rois de France au Royaume de Sicile.
Mem. de Comin. Edit. de Frefnoy, tom. iv. part ii. p. 5.

" Petrarch epit. ap. Struv. corp. i. 625.

title, the possession of the city and its terri-SEcT. Ill.
tories was bestowed upon them as an hereditary ' '
fiefN. John, King of France, among other ex-
pedients for raising money, which the calamities
of his reign obliged him to employ, conde-
scended to give one of his daughters in marriage
to John Galeazzo Visconti, the first Duke of
Milan, from whom he had received considerable
fums. Valentine Visconti, one of the children of
this marriage, married her cousin, Louis Duke of
Orleans, the only brother of Charles VI. In
their marriage contrac, which the Pope con-
firmed, it was stipulated that, upon the failure
of heirs-male in the family of Visconti, the
dutchy of Milan should descend to the posterity
of Valentine and the Duke of Orleans. That
event took place. In the year one thousand four
hundred and forty-feven, Philip Maria, the last
Prince of the ducal family of Visconti, died.
Various competitors pretended to the fucceflion.
Charles Duke of Orleans pleaded his right to it,
founded on the marriage contract of his mother
Valentine Visconti. Alfonso King of Naples
claimed it, in consequence of a will made by
Philip Maria in his favour. The Emperor con-
tended that, upon the extintion of male issue in
the family of Visconti, the fief returned to the
superior Lord, and ought to be re-annexed to
the Empire. The people of Milan, smitten
with that love of liberty which prevailed among
the Italian States, declared against the dominion
of any master, and elfablifhed a republican form
of government.

BUT during the ftruggleamong so many com-

petitors, the prize for which they contended was
teized by one from whom none of them appre-

hended
N Leibnit.cod. jur. gent. diplom. vol. i. 257.

SE cT. H. hended any danger. Francis Sforza, the natural

w'V -' son of Jacomuzzo Sforza, whom his courage and

abilities had elevated from the rank of a peasant
to be one of the most eminent and powerful of
the Italian Condottieri, having succeeded his fa-
ther in the command of the adventurers who
followed his standard, had married a natural
daughter of the last Duke of Milan. Upon this
shadow of a title Francis founded his preten-
sions to the dutchy, which he supported with
such talents and valour as placed him at last on
the ducal throne. The virtues as well as abili-
ties with which he governed, inducing his sub-
jects to forget the defeets in his title, he tranf-
mitted his dominions quietly to his son ; from
whom they descended to his grandson. He was
murdered by his grand uncle Ludovico, fur-
named the Moor, who took pofeflion of the
dutchy; and his right to it was confirmed by the
investiture of the Emperor Maximilian in the
year one thousand four hundred and ninety-
four 0.

Louis XI. who took pleasure in depressing the

Princes of the blood, and who admired the
political abilities of Francis Sforza, would not
permit the Duke of Orleans to take any ftep in
pioiecution of his right to the dutchy of Milan.
Ludovico the Moor kept up such a close con-
nection with Charles VIII. that, during the
greater part of his reign, the claim of the fa-
mily of Orleanscontinued to lie dormant. But
when the crown of France devolved to Louis
XH. Duke of Orleans, he instantly asserted the
rights of his family with the ardour which it
was natural to expect. Ludovico Sforza, inca-

pable

o Ripalm. hist Mediol. lib. vi. 654. ap. Struv. corp. i.
930. Du Mont Corps Diplow. tom. iii. p. i;. 3. ibid.

pable of contending with such a rival, was SCr. III.
stripped of all his dominions in the space of a
few days. The King, clad in the ducal robes,
entered Milan in triumph; and soon after, Lu-
dovico having been betrayed by the Swiss in his
pay, was Cent a prisoner into France, and shut
up in the castle of Loches, where he lay unpitied
during the remainder of his days. In confe-
quence of one of the singular revolutions which
occur so frequently in the history of the MIila-
nefe, his son Maximilian Sforza was placed on
the ducal throne, of which he kept possession
during the reign of Louis XII. But his fuc-A.D. ziti
ceffor Francis I. was too high-fpirited and enter-
prizing tamely to relinquish the title. As soon
as he was feated upon the throne, he prepared
to invade the Milanese; and his right of fuc-
cefion to it, appears from this detail, to have
been more natural and more just than that of
any other competitor.

IT is unnecessary to enter into any detail with

refpe& to the form of government in Genoa,
Parma, Modena, and the other inferior States of
Italy. Their names, indeed, will often occur in
the following history. But the power of there
States themselves was so inconsiderable, that
their fate depended little upon their own efforts;
and the frequent revolutions which they uhder-
went, were brought about by the operations of
the Princes who attacked or defended them,
rather than by any thing peculiar in their in-
ternal conflitution.

OF the great kingdoms on this fide of the rhe eonfi.

Alps, Spain is one of the most considerable; 'government
and as it was the hereditary domain of Charles of SP*i
V. as well as the chief source of his power and
wealth, a diftin&t knowledge of its political

VOL. I. L con-

SeCTll.conftitution is of capital importance towards
k--' understanding the transaCtions of his reign.

Conquered THE Vandals and Goths, who overturned the
vnds, Roman power in Spain, established a form of

government in that country, and brought in cuf-
toms and laws, perfecly similar to those which
were introduced into the reft of Europe, by the
other vicorious tribes which acquired settlements
there. For some time, society advanced, among
the new inhabitants of Spain, by the fame steps,
and seemed to hold the fame course, as in other

aD.t73. European nations. To this progress, a sudden
and by the stop was put by the invasion of the Saracens or

o"'' Moors. The Goths could not withstand the

efforts of their enthufiaftick valour, which sub-
dued Spain, with the fame impetuous rapidity
that distinguished all the operations of their arms.
The conquerors introduced into the country in
which they fettled, the Mahometan religion, the
Arabick language, the manners of the East,
together with that taste for the arts, and that
love of elegance and splendour, which the
Caliphs had begun to cultivate among their
fubjcts.

-e Chri- SUCH Gothick-nobles, as disdained to submit
dftis y- to the Moorish yoke, fled for refuge to the inac-
rdormi- cefible mountains of Asturias. There they
aeon a comforted themselves with enjoying the exercise

of the ChrifRian religion, and with maintaining
the authority of their ancient laws. Being joined
by many of the boldest and most warlike among
their countrymen, they sallied out upon the adja-
cent settlements of the Moors in small parties;
but venturing only upon short excursions at first,
they were satisfied with plunder and revenge,
without thinking of conquest. By degrees their
flrength increased, their views enlarged, a regu-

lar
i46-

lar government was eftablilhed among them, SE c.lf.
and they began to aim at extending their terri- '
tories. While they puffed on their attacks with
the unremitting ardour excited by zeal for reli-
gion, by the desire of vengeance, and by the
hope of rescuing their country from oppreflion;
while they conduced their operations with the
courage natural to men who had no other occu-
pation but war, and who were fSrangers to all
the arts which corrupt or enfeeble the mind, the
Moors gradually loft many of the advantages, to
which they had been indebted for their first fuc-
cess. They threw off all dependence on the
Caliphs*; they negleced to preserve a close
connection with their countrymen in Africa
'their Empire in Spain was split into many small
kingdoms; the arts which they cultivated, to-
gether with the luxury to which there gave rife,
relaxed, in.rome measure, the force of their mi-
litary institutions, and abated the vigour of their
warlike spirit. The Moors, however, continued
till to be a gallant people, and poflefsed great
resources. According to the magnificent stile
of the Spanilh historians, eight centuries of al-
most uninterrupted war elapsed, and three thou-
sand seven hundred battles were fought before
the last of the Moorish kingdoms in Spain sub- 1491;
mitted to the Christian arms.

As the Christians made their conquefis upon Thb union

the Mahometans at various periods, and under fit.^t'
different leaders, etch formed the territory which donm.
he had wrested from the common enemy into
an independent State. Spain was divided into
as many separate kingdoms, as it contained
provinces; in each city of note, a petty Mo-
narch established his throne, and assumed all
the ensigns of royalty. In a series of years,

L 2 however,
Jos.Sim. Affemanni Hiftor. Ital. Scriptores, vol. iii. p. 135.

SKcT. In. however, by the usual events of intermarriages,

or legal succession, or conquest, all these inferior
principalities were annexed to the more powerful
kingdoms of Castile and of Aragon. At length,
by the fortunate marriage of Ferdinand and
Isabella, the former the hereditary Monarch of
Aragon, and the latter raised to the throne of
Castile by the affection of her fubjeas, all the
Spanish crowns were united, and descended in

,,4i. the fame line.
TheirDn- FROM this period, the political constitution

.Dd of Spain began to assume a regular and uniform

lt, :efr- appearance; the genius of government may be
all teir re- delineated, and the progress of its laws and man-
voimtu; ners may be traced with certainty. Notwith-

standing the singular revolution which the inva-
sion of the Moors occasioned in Spain, and the
peculiarity of its fate, in being so long subjected
to the Mahometan yoke, the customs introduced
by the Vandals and Goths had taken such deep
root, and were so thoroughly incorporated with
the frame of its government, that in every pro-
vince which the Christians recovered from the
Moors, we find the condition of individuals, as
well as the political constitution, nearly the fame
as in other nations of Europe. Lands were held
by the fame tenure; justice was dispensed in the
fame form; the fame privileges were claimed by
the nobility; and the fame power exercised by

which ren- the Cortes, or general assembly of the kingdom.
de-.tb.' Several circumstances contributed to secure this
Late in rome
degr Gmi- permanence of the feudal institutions in Spain,
ltor that notwithstanding the conquest of the Moors,
.ton, of which seemed to have overturned them. Such
Erope. of the Spaniards, as preserved their indepen-

dence, adhered to their ancient customs, not
only from attachment to them, but out of anti-
pathy to the Moors, to whose ideas concerning

property

property and government there customs wereSEcr. 1I-.
totally repugnant. Even among the Christians, -'
who submitted to the Moorish conquerors, and
consented to become their fubjeds, ancient cuf-
toms were not entirely abolished. They were
permitted to retain their religion; their laws
concerning private property; their forms of ad-
ministering justice; and their mode of levying
taxes. The followers of Mahomet are the only
enthufiafis, who have united the spirit of tolera-
tion with zeal for making proselytes, and who,
at the fame time that they took arms to propa-
gate the doctrine of their prophet, permitted
such as would not embrace it, to adhere to their
own tenets, and to pra&ise their own rites. To
this peculiarity in the genius of the Mahometan
religion, as well as to the desire which the Moors
had of reconciling the Christians to their yoke,
it was owing that the ancient manners and laws
in Spain survived the violent shock of a conquest,
and were permitted to subsist, notwithstanding
the introduction of a new religion and a new
form of government into that country. It is ob-
vious from all these particulars, that the Chris-
tians must have found it extremely easy to re-
eflablifh manners and government on their an-
cient foundations, in those provinces of Spain,
which they wrested successively from the Moors.
A considerable part of the people retained such a
fondness for the customs, and such a reverence
for the laws of their ancestors, that wishing to
fee them completely restored, they were not only
willing but eager to resume the former, and to
recognize the authority of the latter.

BUT though the feudal form of government, Certain pe.

with all the institutions which characerize it, was in theircon
thus preserved entire in Castile and Aragon, as ftitution and
well as in all the kingdoms which depended on lws.

these

SEcT.m. these crowns, there were certain peculiarities in
---' their political constitutions which distinguish

them from those of any other country in Europe,

Te~Io The royal prerogative, extremely limited in eve.
i~,it,4d ry feudal kingdom, was circumscribed in Spain,
tiem,. within such narrow bounds, as reduced the
wities the
people more power of the sovereign almost to nothing. The
,fim privileges of the nobility were vast in proporti.

on, and extended so far, as to border on abfo-
lute independence. The immunities of the
cities were great, they possessed considerable in-
fluence in the Cortes, and they aspired at obtain-
ing more. Such a state of society, in which
the political machine was so ill adjusted, and
the several members of the legislature so impro-
perly balanced, produced interior disorders in
the kingdoms of Spain, which rose beyond the
pitch of turbulence and anarchy, usual under
the feudal government. The whole tenor of
the Spanifi history confirms the truth of this ob-
servation; and when the mutinous spirit, to
which the genius of their policy gave birth and
vigour, was no longer refrained and overawed
by the immediate dread of the Moorish arms,
it broke out into more frequent infurre&ions
against the government of their Princes, as well
as more outrageous insults on their dignity, than
occur in the annals of any other country. These
were accompanied at some times with more li-
beral sentiments concerning the rights of the
people, at other times with more elevated no-
tions concerning the privileges of the nobles,
than were common in other nations.

uintnee of IN the principality of Catalonia, which was
tbws annexed to the kingdom of Aragon, the impa-

tience of the people to obtain redress of their
grievances having prompted them to take arms
A. D. 146. against their sovereign John II, they, by a so-

lemn

lemn deed, recalled the oath of allegiance which SEcv. IIL
they had sworn to him, declared him and his --
posterity to be unworthy of the throne P, and
endeavoured to establish a republican form of
government, in order to secure the perpetual
enjoyment of that liberty, after which they
aspired Qo. Nearly about the fame period, the
indignation of the Castilian nobility against the
weak and flagitious administration of Henry IV,
having led them to combine against him, they
arrogated, asone of the privileges belonging to
their order, the right of trying and of palling
sentence on their Sovereign. That the exercise
of this power might be as publick and solemn,
as the pretension to it was bold, they summoned
all the nobility of their party to meet at Avila; A. D. 46s.
a spacious theatre was erected in a plain without
the walls of the town, an image representing
the King was feated on a throne, clad in royal
robes, with a crown on its head, a sceptre in
its hand, and the sword of justice by its fide.
The accusation against the King was read, and
the sentence of deposition was pronounced, in
pretence of a numerous assembly. At the close
of the first article of the charge, the archbithop
of Toledo advanced, and tore the crown from
the head of the image; at the close of the
second, the Conde de Placentia snatched the
(word ofjuftice from its fide; at the close of the
third, the Conde de Benevente wrested the fcep-
tre from its hand; at the close of the last, Don
Diego Lopes de Stuniga tumbled it headlong
from the throne. At the fame instant, Don Al-

fonfo,

r Zurita Annalesde Arag. tom. iv. I13, 115, &c.
P-Feneras hist. d'Efpagne, tom. vii. p. 92. P. Orleans

revol. d'Efpagne, torn. iii. p. I55. L. Marinaus Siculus de
reb. Hifpan. apud Schotti Script. Hifpaa. vol. 429.

Siecr . .fonfo, Henry's brother, was proclaimed King of

V
~ .' Castile and Leon in his stead ".

TaH most daring leaders of faCtion would not

have ventured on there measures, nor have con-
dupted them with si,' h publick ceremony, if the
Sentiments of the people concerning the royal
dignity, had not been so formed by the laws and
policy, to which they were accustomed both in
Castile and Catalonia, as prepared them to ap-
prove of such extraordinary proceedings, or to
acquiesce in them,

Tfc esi- Ir Aragon, the form of government was mo.
u,,,adt narchical, but the genius and maxims of it were
afArano. purely republican. The Kings, who were long

elective, retained only the (hadow of power;
the real exercise of it was in the Cortes or par-
liament of the kingdom. This supreme as-
fembly was composed of four different arms or
members. The nobility of the first rank. The
Equestrian order, or nobility of the second class.
The representatives of the cities and towns,
whose right to a place in the Cortes, if we may
give credit to the historians of Aragon, was co-
eval with the constitution. The ecclesiastical
order, composed of the dignitaries of the church,
together with the representatives of the inferior
clergy'. No law could pass in this aflembly
without the assent of every single member who
had a right to vote T. Without the permiflion
of the Cortes, no tax could be imposed; no
war could be declared; no peace conclud-
ed; no money could be coined; nor any al-

teration

Marian. hist. lib. xiii. c. 9.
*Forma de celebrar Cortes en Aragon. por Geron Martel.

MarteL ibid. p. 3.

teration be made in the current specie . SEcr. m.
The power of reviewing the proceedings of all -
inferior courts, the privilege of inspecting eve-
ry department of adminifiration, and the right
of redressing all grievances, belonged to the
Cortes. Nor did those who conceived them-
selves to be aggrieved, address the Cortes in the
humble tone of supplicants, and petition for
redress; they demanded it as the birth-right of
freemen, and required the guardians of their li-
berty to decide with refpe& to the points which
they laid before them x. This sovereign court
was held, during several centuries, every year;
but, in consequence of a regulation introduced
about the beginning of the fourteenth century,
it was convoked from that period only once in
two years. After it was assembled, the King
had no right to prorogue or dissolve it without
its own content; and the session continued forty
days Y.

NOT satisfied with having ere&ted such formi- ofice rd

dable barriers against the encroachments of the j urfdia"lo
royal prerogative, nor willing to commit the juni..
guardianship of their liberties to the vigilance
and authority of an assembly, fimllar to the diets,
ftates-general, and parliaments, in which the
other feudal nations placed so much confidence,
the Aragonefe had recourse to an institution pe-
culiar to themselves, and eleced a Juftiza or
supreme judge. This magistrate, whose office
bore some resemblance to that of the Ephori
in ancient Sparta, acted as the proteEtor of the
people, and the comptroller of the Prince. The
person of the Juftiza was sacred, his power and
jurifdidion almost unbounded. He was the fu-

preme

v Hier. Blanca comment. rer. Aragon. ap. Schot. Script.

Hifpan. vol. iii. p. 750.
1 Martel. Forma de celebr. p. z.

Hier. Blanca comment. 763.

SECT. m. preme interpreter of the laws. Not only infe-
' - - nrior judges, but the Kings themselves were

bound to consult him in every doubtful cafe,
and to receive his responses with implicit defe-
rence *. An appeal lay to him from the royal
judges, as well as from those appointed by the
barons within their refpe&ive territories. Even
when no appeal was made to him, he could in-
terpofe by his own authority, prohibit the ordi-
nary judge to proceed, take immediate cogni-
zance of the cause himself, and remove the par-
ty accused to the Manifefation or prison of the
state, to which no person had access but by his
permifion. His power was exerted with no
less vigour and effect in superintending the ad-
ministration of government than in regulating
the course of jufice. It was the prerogative
of the Jufiza to infpea the conduct of the
King. He had a title to review all the royal
proclamations and patents, and to declare whe-
ther or not they were agreeable to law, and
ought to be carried into execution. He, by his
sole authority, could exclude any of the King's
ministers from the conduct of affairs, and call
them to answer for their mal-administration.
He himself was accountable to the Cortes alone,
for the manner in which he discharged the duties
of this high office, and performed funtions of
the greatest importance that could be commit-
ed to a subjet [HH] Z.

The regt IT is evident from a bare enumeration of the
curmcribed privileges of the Aragonefe Cortes, as well as of
ithin.mir- the rights belonging to the Juftiza, that a very

infall portion of power remained in the hands of

the

* Banca has preserved two responses of the Jufiiza to

James II. who reigned towards the close of the thirteenth
century. Blanca p. 748.

[HHJ NOTE XXXI.
Hier. Blanca Comment. p. 747-755.

the King. The Aragonefe seem to have been so- SECT .ll.
licitous that their Monarchs Ihould know and '" "
feel this state of impotence, to which they were
reduced. Even in swearing allegiance to their
sovereign, an aft which ought, naturally, to be
accompanied with professions of submission and
refpe&, they devised an oath, in such a form,
as to remind him of his dependence on his sub-
jets. " We," said the Juftiza to the King in
the name of his high-fpirited barons, " who are
each of us as good, and who are altogether more
powerful than you, promise obedience to your
government, if you maintain our rights and liber-
ties; but if not, not." Conformably to this oath,
they established it as a fundamental article in
their constitution, that if the King (hould violate
their rights and privileges, it was lawful for the
people to disclaim him as their Sovereign, and
to ele& another, even though a heathen, in his
place A. The attachment of the Aragonefe to
this singular constitution of government, was
extreme, and their refpeA for it approached to
superstitious veneration [II]. In the preamble
to one of their laws, they declare, that such was
the barrenness of their country, and the poverty
of the inhabitants, that if it were not on ac-
count of the liberties by which they are diftin-
guifhed from other nations, the people would
abandon it, and go in quest of a settlement on
some more fruitful region B.

IN Castile, there were not such peculiarities in Conatitu-

the form of government, as to eftablilh any re- o"e"md
markable diftin&ion between it and that of the of c.ail.
other European nations. The executive part of
government was committed to the King, but

with

A Hier. Blanca Comment. p. 720.
[11] NOTE XXXII.
Hier. Blanca. Com. p. 751.

S cT. m. with a prerogative extremely limited. The Ie-
'* -- giflative authority resided in the Cortes, which

was composed of the nobility, the dignified ec-
clefiafticks, and the representatives of the cities.
The assembly of the Cortes in Castile was very
ancient, and seems to have been coeval with the
constitution. The members of the three dif-
ferent orders, who had a right of suffrage, met
in one place, and deliberated as one collective
body; the decisions of which were regulated by
the sentiments of the majority. The right of
imposing taxes, of enacing laws, and of re-
dressing grievances belonged to this assembly;
and in order to secure the assent of the King to
such statutes and regulations as were deemed fa-
lutary or beneficial to the kingdom, it was usual
in the Cortes, to take no ftep towards granting
money, until all business relative to the publick
welfare was concluded. The representatives of
cities seem to have obtained a feat very early in
the Cortes of Castile, and soon acquired such
influence and credit, as were very uncommon,
at a period when the splendor and pre-eminence
of the nobility had eclipsed or annihilated all
other orders of men. The number of mem-
bers from cities, bore such a proportion to that
of the whole collecive body, as rendered them
extremely refpetable in the Cortes [KK]. The
degree of consideration, which they pofleffed in
A.D. 390 the state, may be estimated by one event. Up-

on the death of John I. a council of regency was
appointed to govern the kingdom during the
minority of his son. It was composed of an
equal number of noblemen, and of deputies
chosen by the cities; the latter were admitted to
the fame rank, and invested with the fame
powers, as prelates and grandees of the first

order.
[KK] NOTE XXXII.

order c. But though the members of commu- SEC. Ill.
nities in Castile were elevated above the condi- '
tion wherein they were placed in other kingdoms
of Europe; though they had attained to such
political importance, that even the proud and
jealous spirit of the feudal aristocracy could not
exclude them from a considerable hlare in go-
vernment; yet the nobles, notwithstanding these
acquisitions of the commons, continued to as-
fert the privileges of their order, in opposition
to the crown, in a tone extremely high. There
was not any body of nobility in Europe more
diitinguifhed for independence of spirit, haugh-
tiness of deportment, and bold pretensions, than
that of Castile. The history of that monarchy
affords the most striking examples of the vigi-
lance with which they observed, and of the vi-
gour with which they opposed every scheme of
their Kings, that tended to encroach on their
jurifdicion, to diminilh their dignity, or to a-
bridge their power. Even in their ordinary inter-
course with their Monarchs, they preserved such
a consciousness of their rank, that the nobles of
the first order claimed it as a privilege to be co-
vered in the royal pretence, and approached
their sovereigns rather as equals than as sub-
jects.

THE constitution of the subordinate monar-

chies, which depended on the crowns of Castile
and Aragon, nearly resembled that of the king-
dom to which they were annexed. In all of
them, the dignity and independence of the
nobles were great; the immunities and power
of the cities were considerable.

AN attentive observation of the singular fitua-
tion of Spain, as well as the various events which

occurred
c Marian. hist. lib. xviii. c. 5.

SECT. III. occurred there, from the invasion of the Moors
'-'" to the union of its kingdoms under Ferdinand
ca.n of and Isabella, will discover the causes, to which
th liita all the peculiarities in its political constitution I
authority
of the Sp. have pointed out, ought to be ascribed.
nai Mo-

As the provinces of Spain were wrested from

the Mahometans gradually and with difficulty,
the nobles, who followed the standard of any
eminent leader in these wars, conquered not for
him alone, but for themselves. They claimed
a share in the lands which their valour had torn
from the enemy, and their prosperity and power
increased, in proportion as the territory of the
Prince extended.

DURING their perpetual wars with the Moors,

the Monarchs of Spain depended so much on
their nobles, that it became necessary to conci-
liate their good will by successive grants of new
honours and privileges. By the time that any
Prince could establish his dominion in a con-
quered province, the greater part of the pro-
perty was parcelled out by him among his ba-
rons, with such jurifdition and immunities, as
raised them almost to sovereign power.

AT the fame time, the kingdoms ereced in

so many different corners of Spain, were ex-
tremely inconsiderable. The petty Monarch
was but little elevated above his nobles. They,
feeling themfe;ves to be almost his equals, ased
as such. The Kings of such limited domains
could neither command much refpet, nor pof-
fess great power; and noblemen, so nearly on
the fame level, could not look up to them with
that reverence, with which the sovereigns of
the great monarchies in Europe were viewed by
their fubjets [LL].

THESE
[LL] NOTE XXXIV.

THESE circumstances concurred in exalting SECT. II.

the nobility, and in depressing the royal autho- 'V
rity; there were other causes which raised the
cities in Spain to consideration and power.

As the open country, during the wars with

the Moors, was perpetually exposed to the ex-
curfions of the enemy, with whom no peace or
truce was so permanent as to prove any lasting
security, felf-prefervation obliged persons of all
ranks to fix their residence in places of strength.
The catles of the barons, which, in other coun-
tries, afforded a commodious retreat from the
depredations of banditti, or .from the transient
violence of any interior commotion, were un-
able to resist an enemy whose operations were
conducted with regular and persevering vigour.
Cities, in which great numbers united for their
mutual defence, were the only places in which
people could fix their residence with any kind of
safety. To this was owing the rapid growth of
those cities in Spain of which the Christians
recovered poffeflion. All who fled from the
Moorish yoke resorted to them, as to an asylum;
and there the greater part of those, who took
the field against the Mahometans, eftablilhed
their families.

EACH of there cities, during a longer or shorter

course of years, was the capital of a little slate,
and enjoyed all the advantages, which accelerate
the increase of inhabitants in every place that is
the feat of government.

THE number of cities in Spain, at the begin-

ning of the fifteenth century, was considerable,
and they were peopled far beyond the proportion
which was common in other parts of Europe, ex-
cept in Italy and the Low-Countries. The Moors

had

SECT. I. had introduced manufacures into those cities,
-v--'while under their dominion. The Christians,

who, by intermixture with them, had learned
their arts, continued to cultivate these. The
trade of several of the Spanish towns appears to
have been considerable; and the spirit of com-
merce continued to preserve the number of their
inhabitants, as the sense of danger had first in-
duced them to crowd together.

As the Spanish cities were populous, many of

the inhabitants were of a rank superior to thofc
who resided in towns in other countries of Eu-
rope. That cause, which contributed chiefly to
their population, affected equally persons of eve-
ry condition, who flocked thither promiscuously,
in order to find (helter, or in hopes of making a
Rand there against the enemy, with greater ad-
vantage than in any other fation. The persons
eleted as their representatives in the Cortes by
the cities, or promoted to offices of trust and
dignity in the government of the community,
were often, as will appear from transactions
which I (hall hereafter relate, of such confidera-
ble rank in the kingdom, as reflected lustre on
their conitituents, and on the stations wherein
they were placed.

As it was impoflible to carry on a continual

war against the Moors, without some other mi-
litary force, than that which the barons were
obliged to bring into the field, in consequence
of the feudal tenures, it became neceflary to have
some troops, particularly a body of light cavalry,
in constant pay. It was one of the privileges of
the nobles, that their lands were exempt from
the burden of taxes. The charge of supporting
the troops requisite for the public safety, fell
wholly upon the cities; and their Kings, being

obliged

obliged frequently to apply to them for aid, SECT.III.
found it neceflary to gain their favour by con-
cessions, which not only extended their immu-
nities, but added to their wealth and power.

WHEN the influence of all there circumstances,

peculiar to Spain, is added to the general and
common causes, which contributed to aggran-
dize cities in other countries of Europe, this will
fully account for the extensive privileges which
they acquired, as well as for the extraordinary
consideration to which they attained, in all the
Spanish kingdoms [MM].

By these exorbitant privileges of the nobility, MCe"rre

of ditterent

and this unusual power of the cities in Spain, the Princes in
royal prerogative was hemmed in on every fide, order to ie

tend their

and reduced within very narrow bounds. Senfi- power;
ble of this, and impatient of such restraint, dif-
ferent Monarchs endeavoured, at various junc-
tures, to enlarge their ownjurifdi&ion, and to
circumscribe that of their fubjeds. Their pow-
er, however, or their abilities were To unequal
to the undertaking, that their efforts were at-
tended with little success. But when Ferdinand part;cularli
and Isabella found themselves at the head of all of Per"d-

hnad and

the united kingdoms of Spain, and delivered from Iasbell.
the danger and interruption of domeftick wars,
they were not only in a condition to resume, but
were able to prosecute with advantage, the
schemes of extending the prerogative, which
their ancestors had attempted in vain. Ferdi-
nand's profound sagacity in concerting his mea-
fures, his perlevering industry in condudting
them, and his uncommon address in carrying
them into execution, fitted him admirably for an
undertaking which required all these talents.

VOL. I. M As

[MM] NOTE XXXV.

SECT. III. As the overgrown power and high pretenfi-

ons of the nobility were what the Monarchs of

ir"d"n'' Spain felt most sensibly, and bore with the great-
fcmers for eft impatience, the great object of Ferdinand's
the brgini policy was to reduce these within more moderate
lege and bounds. Under various pretexts, sometimes by
tPh'bfii. violence, more frequently in consequence of de-

crees obtained in the courts of law, he wrested
from the barons a great part of the lands, which
had been granted to them by the inconsiderate
bounty of former Monarchs, particularly during
the feeble and profuse reign of his predecessor
Henry IV. He did not give the entire condu&t
of affairs to persons of noble birth, who were
accustomed to occupy every department of im-
portance in peace or in war, as if it had been a
privilege peculiar to their order, to be employed
as the sole counsellors and ministers of the crown.
He often tranfaded business of great consequence
without their intervention, and committed many
offices of power and trust to new men devoted
to his interest D. He introduced a degree of state
and dignity into his court, which being unknown
in Spain, while it remained split into many small
kingdoms, taught the nobles to approach their
sovereign with more ceremony, and gradually
rendered him the object of greater deference and
refpet.

Prt»ico- THE annexing the masterships of the three
larly by an-
neing'te military orders of St. Jago, Calatrava, and Al-
grbad-=mf- cantara, to the crown, was another expedient,
terslsips of
the thre by which Ferdinand greatly augmented the re-
orde to venue and power of the Kings of Spain. These

e orders were instituted in imitation of those of the
Knights Templars and of St. John of Jerusalem,
on purpose to wage perpetual war with the Ma-
hometans, and to protect the pilgrims who vi-

fited
D Zurita anales de Arag. tom. vi. p. 2z.

fited Compoftella, or other places of eminent SECT. III
fantity in Spain. The zeal and superstition of 'VJ
the ages, 'in which they were founded, prompt-
ed persons of every rank to bestow such liberal
donations on those holy warriors, that, in a short
time, they engrofled a considerable share in the
property and wealth of the kingdom. The
mafterlhips ofthefe orders came to be stations of
the greatest power and opulence to which a Spa-
nifh nobleman could be advanced. These high
dignities were in the disposal of the Knights of
the Order, and placed the persons on whom
they conferred them almost on a level with their
sovereign [NN]. Ferdinand, unwilling that the
nobility, whom he confidered as already too for-
midable, should derive such additional credit
and influence from possessing the government of
there wealthy fraternities, was solicitous to wrest
it out of their hands, and toveft it in the crown.
His measures for accomplishing this, were wifely A. D. T476,
planned, and executed with vigour . By ad- and 493
dress, by promises, and by threats, he prevailed
on the Knights of each Order to place Isabella
and him at the head of it. Innocent VIII. and
Alexander VI. gave this eleEtion the fanaion of
papal authority F; and subsequent Pontiffs ren-
dered the annexation of these masterships to the
crown perpetual.

WHILE Ferdinand, by this measure, dimi And by cir-

nilhed the power and influence of the nobility, in' the ju-
and added new lustre or authority to the crown, rifdiaion of
he was taking other important steps with a view the nobilty

M 2 to

[NN] NOTE XXXVI.
' Marian. hist. lib. xxv. c. 5.
F Zurita anales, tom. v. p. 22. lii. Anton. NebrilTen-

sis rerum a Ferdinand & Elizabe geftarum decades. ii. apud
Schot. script. Hifpan. i. 86o.

,'v--,' which the feudal barons exercised within their

own territories, was the pride and diftindion of
their order. To have invaded openly a privilege
which they prized so highly, and in defence of
which they would have run so eagerly to arms,
was a measure too daring for a Prince of Ferdi-
nand's cautious temper. He took advantage,
however, of an opportunity which the state of
his kingdoms and the spirit of his people present-
ed him, in order to undermine what he durst
notaffault. The incefant depredations of the
Moors, the want of discipline among the troops
which were employed to oppose them, the fre-
quent civil wars between the crown and the no-
bility, as well as the undifcerning rage with
which the barons carried on their private wars
with each other, filled all the provinces of Spain
with disorder. Rapine, outrage, and murder
became so common, as not only to interrupt
conmmerce, but in a great measure to suspend all
intercourse between one place and another. That
security and proteetion which men expect from
entering into civil society, ceased almost totally.
Interior order and police, while the feudal inffi-
-tutions remained in vigour, were so little objefts
of attention, and the administration of justice
was so extremely feeble, that it would have been
vain to have expected relief from the eftablifled
laws or the ordinary judges. But the evil became
so intolerable, and the inhabitants of cities, who
were the chief fuffrers, grew so impatient of
this anarchy, that felf-prefervaton forced them
to have recourse to an extraordinary remedy.
.16o. About the middle of the thirteenth century, the

cities in the kingdom of Aragon, and after their
example those in Castile, formed themselves into
an aflociation, diftinguifed by the name of the
Holy Brotherbood. They exated a certain con-

tribution

A VIEW OF THE
164

tribution from each of the associated towns; SECT. Il-
they levied a considerable body of troops, in or- -
der to prote& travellers, and to pursue crimi-
nals; they appointed judges, who opened their
courts in various parts of the kingdom. Who
ever was guilty of murder, robbery, or of any
aft that violated the publick peace, and was
seized by the troops of the Brotherhood, was carri-
ed before judges of their nomination, who, with-
out paying any regard to the exclusive and fove.
reign jurisdiction which the lord of the place
might claim, tried and condemned the criminals.
By means of this, the prompt and impartial ad-
ministration of justice was restored; and toge-
gether with it, internal tranquillity and order
began to return. The nobles alone murmured
at this salutary institution. They complained
of it as an encroachment on one of their most
valuable privileges. They remonstrated against
it in an high tone; and, on some occasions, re-
fused to grant any aid to the crown, unless it
were abolished. Ferdinand, however, was fen,
fible not only of the good effets of the Holy
Brotherhood with refpet to the police of his
kingdoms, but perceived its tendency to abridge,
and at length to annihilate the territorial jurif-
dition of the nobility. He countenanced the
institution on every occasion. He supported it
with the whole force of royal authority; and
besides the expedients employed by him in com-
mon with the other monarchs of Europe, he
availed himself of this institution, which was pe-
culiar to his kingdom, in order to limit and
abolish that independent jurifdition of the no-
bility, which was no less inconsistent with the
authority of the Prince, than with the order of
society [00].

BUT
[00] NOTE XXXVII.

SECT. II. BUT though Ferdinand by these measures con-
'-- '" fiderably enlarged the boundaries of prerogative,
Binding a»n and acquired a degree of influence and power
hiece, he, far beyond what any of his predecessors had en-
ofsi;A tint joyed, yet the limitations of the royal authority,

,em.ly as well as the barriers against its encroachments,

continued to be many and firong. The spirit
of liberty was vigorous among the people of
Spa n; the spirit of independence was high
among the nobility; and though the love of
glory, peculiar to the Spaniards in every period
of their history, prompted them to support Ser-
dinand with zeal in his foreign operations, and to
afford him such aid as enabled him not only to
undertake but to execute great enterprizes; he
reigned over his subje&s with ajurifdidion less
extensive than that of any of the great monarchs
in Europe. It will appear from many passages
in the following history, that, during a confide-
rable part of the reign of his successor Charles
V. the prerogative of the Spanilh crown was
equally circumscribed.

Coanitut;on THE ancient government and laws in France
.me.to so nearly resembled those of the other feudal
Frnce. kingdoms, that such a detail with refpet to

them as was neceflary, in order to convey some
idea of the nature and effecs of the peculiar in-
Ritutions which took place in Spain, would be
superfluous. In the view which I have exhibited
of the means by which the French monarchs
acquired such full command of the national force
of their kingdom, as enabled them to engage in
extensive schemes of foreign operation, I have
already pointed out the great steps by which they
advanced towards a more ample possession of
political power, and a more uncontrouled exert
cife of their royal prerogative. All that now
remains is to take notice of such particulars in

the

the conflitution of France, as serve either to SecT. 11.
distinguish it from that of other countries, or "
tend to throw any light on the transaCtions of
that period to which the following history ex-
tends.

UNDER the French monarchs of the first race, Power of.e

the royal prerogative was very inconsiderable. Affemblie,
The General Assemblies of the nation, which undeathef
met annually at flated seasons, extended their King,.
authority to every department of government.
The power of electing Kings, of enacting laws,
of redressing grievances, of conferring donati-
ons on the Prince, of paffingjudgment in the
last retort, with refpea to every person and to
every cause, resided in this great convention of
the nation. Under the second race of Kings, Under the
notwithitanding the power and splendour which sCcod.
the conquests of Charlemagne added to the
crown, the general assemblies of the nations
continued to possess extensive authority. The
right of determining which of the royal family
should be placed on the throne, was vested in
them. The princes elevated to that dignity by
their suffrage were accustomed regularly to call
and to consult them with respect to every affair
of importance to the state, and without their
content no law was passed, and no new tax was
levied.

BUT, by the time that Hugh Capet, the fa- Under the

ther of the third race of Kings, took possession third.
of the throne of France, such changes had hap-
pened in the political state of the kingdom, as
considerably affected the power and jurifdition
of the general assembly of the nation. The roy-
al authority in the hands of the degenerate pof-
terity of Charlemagne, had dwindled into infig-
nificance and contempt. Every considerable

proprietor

167

SECT. m. proprietor of land had formed his territory into

a barony, almost independent of the sovereign.
The dukes or governors of provinces, the counts
or governors of towns and small districts, and
the great officers of the crown, had rendered
these dignities, originally granted only during
pleasure or for life, hereditary in their families.
Each of these had usurped all the right which
hitherto had been deemed the distinctions of roy-
alty, particularly the privileges of dispensing
justice within their own domains, of coining
money, and of waging war. Every diftrid was
governed by local customs, acknowledged a
diftind lord, and pursued a separate interest.
The formality of doing homage to their fove-
reign, was almost the only aft of fubjetion
which haughty barons would perform, and that
bound them no farther than they were willing to
acknowledge its obligation [PP].

Tre poer IN a kingdom broken into so many indepen-
ofr AG- dent baronies, hardly any common principle of
femblic less union remained; and the general assembly in
,ordeab its deliberations could scarcely confider the na-
·an exten- its
6. tion as forming one body, or eftablilh common

regulations to be of equal force in every part.
Within the immediate domains of the crown
the King might publish laws, and they were
obeyed, because there he was acknowledged as
the only lord. But if he had aimed at render-
ing these general, that would have alarmed the
barons as an encroachment upon the indepen-
dence of theirjurifdition. The barons, with
no less care, avoided the enacting of gene-
ral laws, because the execution of them must
have been veiled in the King, and would have
enlarged that paramount power, which was the
object of their jealousy. Thus under the de-

fcendants
[PP] NOTE XXXVIII.

fcendants of Hugh Capet, the States General ScT. III.
(for that was the name by which the supreme *v'
assembly of the French nation came then to be
distinguished) loft their legislative authority, or
at leaf entirely relinquished the exercise of it.
From that period, thejurifdition of the States
General extended no farther than to the impofi-
tion of new taxes, the determination of quefti-
ons with refpea to the right of succession to the
crown, the fettling of the regency when the
monarch had not fixed it by his will, and the
presenting remonstrances enumerating the griev-
ances of which the nation wished to obtain re-
dress.

As, during several centuries the monarchsof

Europe seldom demanded extraordinary fubfi-
dies of their subjects, and the other events which
required the interposition of the States rarely
occurred, their meeting in France were not fre-
quent. They were summoned occasionally by
their Kings, when compelled by their wants or
by their fears to have recourse to their aid;
but they did not, like the Diet in Germany, the
Cortes in Spain, or the Parliament in England,
form an essential member of the constitution, the
regular exertion of whose powers was requisite
to give vigour and order to government.

WHEN the States of France ceased to exer- ?becrown

cife legislative authority, the Kings began to as. q eg^'i .. -
fume it. They ventured at first on aes of le- lative in-
giflation with great reserve; and after taking thority
every precaution that could prevent their sub-
jets from being alarmed at the exercise of a
new power. They did not at once issue their
ordinances in a tone of authority and command.
They treated with their subjects; they pointed
out what was best; andallured them to comply

with

SEcT. II. with it. By degrees, however, as the preroga.
L-~'3 tive of the crown extended, and as the supreme

jurifdi&ion of the royal courts came to be efta-
blissed, the Kings of France assumed more
openly the stile and authority of law-givers; and
before the beginning of the fifteenth century,
the complete legislative power was vested in
them [QQ;J

.ad the HAVING secured this important acquisition,

es. of the steps which led to the right of imposing
t*"- taxes were rendered few and easy. The people,

accustomed to fee their sovereigns, by their sole
authority, issue ordinances which regulated points
of the greatest consequence with refpe&t to the
property of their fubjeAs, were not alarmed
when they were required, by the royal edi&s,
to contribute certain fums towards supplying
the exigencies of government, and carrying for-
ward the measures of the nation. When Charles
VII. and Louis XI. firit ventured to exercise
this new power, in the manner which 1 have al-
ready described, the gradual increase of the roy-
al authority had so imperceptibly prepared the
minds of the people of France for this innova-
tion, that it excited no commotion in the king-
dom, and seems scarcely to have given rife to
any murmur or complaint.

Co~, WHEN the Kings of France had thus engrofi-
mentof ed every power which can be exerted in govern-
c~, pre- ment; when the right of making laws, of levy-
ly ,ucbh- ing money, of keeping an army of mercenaries

in constant pay, of declaring war and of con-
cluding peace centered in the crown, the con-
ititution of the kingdom, which, under the first
race of Kings, was nearly democratical, which,
under the second race, became an aristocracy,

terminated,
[Q_] NOTE XXXIX.

terminated, under the third race, in a pure mo- SEC.r. III.
narchy. Every thing that tended to preserve -
the appearance, or revive the memory of the
ancient mixed government, seems from that pe-
riod to have been industriously avoided. During
the long and active reign of Francis I. the va-
riety as well as extent of whose operations obliged
him to lay many heavy impositions on his sub-
jeEts, the States General of France were not
once assembled, nor were the people once al-
lowed to exert the power of taxing themselves,
which, according to the original ideas of feudal
government, was a right essential to every free-,
man.

Two things, however, remained, which mo- The exer-

derated the exercise of the regal prerogative, and catire Pre-
restrained it within such bounds as preserved the frained by
constitution of France from degenerating into Iegeprothe
mere despotism. The rights and privileges claim- nobility;
ed by the nobility, must be confidered as one
barrier against the absolute dominion of the
crown. Though the nobles of France had loft
that political power which was vested in their
order as a body, they still retained the personal
rights and pre-eminence which they derived
from their rank. They preserved a conscious-
ness of elevation above other classes of citizens;
an exemption from burdens to which they were
subject; a contempt of the occupations in which
they were engaged; the privilege of assuming
ensigns that indicated their dignity; a right to
be treated with a certain degree of deference
during peace; and a claim to various diftindi-
ons when in the field. Many of there pretenfi-
ons were not founded on the words of statutes,
or derived from positive laws; they were de-
fined and ascertained by the maxims of honour,
a title more delicate, but no less sacred. These

rights,

SEcT. Im rights, eftablilhed and proteced by a principle
'"v-' equally vigilant in guarding, and intrepid in de-

fending them, are to the Sovereign himself ob-
jeats of refpe& and veneration. Wherever they
tand in its way, the royal prerogative is bound-
ed. The violence of a Despot may extermi-
nate such an order of men; but as long as it
subsists, and its ideas of personal diftinaion
remain entire, the power of the Prince has
limits G.

As in France, the body of nobility was very

numerons, and the individuals of which it was
composcd retained an high sense of their own
pre-eminence, to this we may ascribe, in a
great measure, the mode of exercising the roy-
al prerogative which peculiarly diftinguilhes the
government of that kingdom. An intermediate
order was placed between the Monarch and his
other fubjeds, and in every ad of authority it
became necessary to attend to its privileges, and
aor only to guard against any real violation of
there, but to avoid any suspicion of its being
poflible that they might be violated. Thus a
species of government was eflabiifhed in France,
unknown in the ancient world, that of a monar-
chy, in which the power of the sovereign, though
unconfined by any legal or conftitutionalre-
ftraint, has certain bounds set to it by the ideas
which one class of his fubjeAs entertain concern-
ing their own dignity.

And bi th THE jurifdiaion of the Parliaments in France,
j liapio particularly that of Paris, was the other barrier
ismeots which served to confine the exercise of the royal
ris'"y' prerogative within certain limits. The parlia-
Paii. ment of Paris was originally the court of the

Kings

De I' Esprit des Loix, liv. ii. c. 4. Dr. Ferguson's Eflay
an the Hist. o: Civil Sciety, part i. sec. 1o.

Kings of France, to which they committed the SECT IIT.
supreme administration of justice within their -v
own domains, as well as the power of deciding
with respect to all cafes brought before it by ap-
peals from the courts of the barons. When,
in consequence of events and regulations which
have been mentioned formerly, the time and
place of its meeting were fixed; when not only
the form of its procedure, but the principles on
which it decided, were rendered regular and
consistent; when every cause of importance was
finally determined there; and when the people
became accustomed to resort thither as to the
supreme temple of justice, the parliament of
Paris rose to high estimation in the kingdom, its
members acquired dignity, and its decrees were
submitted to with deference. Nor was this the
only source of the power and influence which
the parliament obtained. The Kings of France,
when they first began to assume the legislative
power, in order to reconcile the minds of their
people to this new exertion of prerogative, pro-
duced their edits and ordinances in the parlia-
ment of Paris, that they might be approved of
and registered there, before they were published
and declared to be of authority in the kingdom.
During the intervals between the meetings of
the States General of the kingdom, or under
those reigns when the States General were not
assembled, the Monarchs of France were accuf-
tomed to consult the parliament of Paris with
refpe&t to the molt arduous 'ffairs of govern-
ment, .and frequently regulated their conduAt by
its advice, in declaring war, in concluding peace,
and in other tranfadtions of publick concern.
Thus there was erected in the kingdom a tribu-
nal which became the great depository of the
Jaws, and by the uniforn tenor of its decrees,
it established principles of justice and forms of

proceeding

SECT. In. proceeding which were confidered as so sacred,
'L- -% that even the sovereign power of the Monarch

durst not venture to disregard or to violate them.
The members of this illustrious body, though
they neither possess legislative authority, nor can
be confidered as the representatives of the peo-
ple, have availed themselves of the reputation
and influence which they had acquired among
their countrymen, in order to make a fland to
the utmost of their ability against every unpre-
cedented and exorbitant exertion of the prero-
gative. In every period of the French hiRfory,
they have merited the praise of being the vir-
tuous but feeble guardians of the rights and pri-
vileges of the nation [RR].

C1 g tT- THE kingdom of France extends to the
.t ofhe confines of the German Empire, from which
man'. Charles V. derived his title of highest dignity. In

explaining the political conRfitution of this vast
and complex body at the beginning of the fix-
teenth century, I shall avoid entering into such
a detail as would involve my readers in that in-
extricable labyrinth, which it formed by the
multiplicity of its tribunals, the number of its
members, their interfering rights, and by the
endless difcuflions or refinements of the publick
lawyers of Germany with refpea to all these.

Iu ste no- THE Empire of Charlemagne was a ftruture
dr Charle-
mage and erected in so short a time that it could not be
hi dsc- permanent. Under his immediate successor it

began to totter; and it soon fell to pieces. The
crown of Germany was separated for ever from
that of France, and the descendants of Charle-
magne eftablilhed two great monarchies so situ-
ated as to give rife to a perpetual rivalfhip and
enmity between them. But the Princes of the

race
[RR] NOTE XL.

race of Charlemagne who were placed on theSecT. IlL
Imperial throne, were not altogether so degene- '-"
rate, as those of the fame family who reigned
in France. In the hands of the former the
royal authority retained some vigour, and the
nobles of Germany, though poffefled of exten-
five privileges as well as ample territories, did
not so easily attain independence. The great
offices of the crown continued to be at the dif-
pofal of the Sovereign, and during a long pe-
riod, fiefs remained in their original state, with-
out becoming hereditary and perpetual in the
families to which they had been granted.

AT length the German branch of the family Other fami-

of Charlemagne became extinct, and his feeble ed to the
descendants who reigned in France had funk in- Imperial
to such contempt, that the Germans, without dignity.
looking towards them, exercised the right inhe-
rent in a free people; and in a general assembly A. D. 9"1
of the nation elected Conrad Count of Franco-
nia Emperor. After him Henry of Saxony, and
his descendants, the three Othos, were placed, in
fucceflion, on the Imperial throne, by the sus-
frages of their countrymen. The extensive
territories of the Saxon Emperors, their eminent
abilities and enterprizing genius, not only added
new vigour to the Imperial dignity, but raised
it to higher power and pre-eminence. Otho the A. D. 95*.
Great marched at the head of a numerous army
into Italy, and after the example of Charle-
magne, gave law to that country. Every power
there recognized his authority. He created
Popes and deposed them by his sovereign man-
date. He annexed the kingdom of Italy to the
German Empire. Elated with his success, he
assumed the title of CGefar Augustus H. A Prince

born
Annalifia Saxo, &c. ap. Struv. Corp. vol. i. p. 246.

SzcT.m. born in the heart of Germany pretended to be
-'"~V' the successor of the Emperors of ancient Rome,

and claimed a right to the fame power and pre-
rogative.

·Ther r- BUT while the Emperors, by means of these
mn b- new titles, and new dominions, gradually ac-
o'dep~ quired additional authority and splendour, the
ad w-: nobility of Germany went on at the fame time
reignautbo-
rt. extending their privileges and jurifdicion. The

situation of affairs was favourable to their at-
tempts. The vigour which Charlemagne had
given to government quickty relaxed. The in-
ability of some of his successors was such, as
would have encouraged vaflals less enterprizing
than the nobles of that age, to have claimed
new rights and to have assumed new powers.
The civil wars in which other Emperors were
engaged, obliged them to pay perpetual court
to .their fubjets on whose support they depended,
and not only to connive at their usurpations, but
to permit and even to authorize them. Fiefs
gradually became hereditary. They were tranf-
mitted not only in the direct, but in the colla-
teral line. The inveititure of them was de-
manded not only by male but by female heirs.
Every baron began to exercise sovereign jurif-
dition within his own domains; and the Dukes
and Counts of Germany took wide steps to-
wards rendering their territories diftind and in-

The cer- dependent States'. The Saxon Emperors ob-
.sicS lfeirved their progress, and were aware of its ten-
ed to th dency. But as they could not hope to humble
f~mr,~. vaffilsalready grown too potent, unless they had

turned their whole force as well as attention to
that enterprize, and as they were extremely in-
tent on their expeditions into Italy, which they

could
I Pffeel. Abreg., p. 129, 152. Lib. Feudor. tit. I.

could not undertake without the concurrence of SecT. II.
their nobles, they were solicitous not to alarm' -
them by any dire& attack on their privileges and
jurifditions. They aimed, however, at under-
mining their power. With this view, they incon-
fiderately beflowed additional territories, and
accumulated new honours on the clergy, in hopes
that this order might serve as a counterpoise to
that of the nobility in any future struggle K.

THE unhappy effects of this fatal error in'Thefat'

policy were quickly felt. Under the Emperors wgrndi-
of the Franconian and Swabian lines, whom the ilg t'h
Germans by their voluntary eletion placed on A. o. 'at4.
the Imperial throne, a new face of things ap-
peared, and a scene was exhibited in Germany,
which astonished all Christendom at that time,
and in the present age appears almost incre-
dible. The Popes, hitherto dependent on the
Emperors, and indebted for power as well as
dignity to their beneficence and protetion,
began to claim a superior jurifdition; and
in virtue of authority which they pretended
to derive from heaven, tried, condemned, ex-
communicated, and deposed their former maf-
ters. Nor is this to be confidered merely as a
frantick sally of paflion in a pontiff intoxicated
with high ideas concerning the extent of priestly
domination and the plenitude of papal authority.
Gregory VII. was able as well as daring. His
presumption and violence were accompanied with
political discernment and sagacity. He had ob-
served that the Princes and nobles of Germany,
had acquired such considerable territories and
such extensive jurifdiion as rendered them not
only formidable to the Emperors, but disposed
them to favour any attempt to circumscribe

VOL. I. N their

x Pfeffel. Abregk, p. 154.

SEcT.ni. their power. He foresaw that the ecclefiafticks
'-""'of Germany, raised almost to a level with its

Princes, were ready to support any person who
would stand forth as the protector of ;heir pri-
vileges and independence. With both of these
Gregory negociated, and had secured many de-
voted adherents among them, before he ven-
tured to enter the lifts againit the head of the
Empire.

Thecontefts HE began his rupture with Henry IV. upon a
between the
Popes nd pretext that was popular and plausible. He

peror,, complained of the venality and irruption with

and the cc a-
fqeeo f whichh the Emperor had granted the investiture
th'se. of benefices to ecclefiafticks. He contended

that this right belonged to him as head of the
church; he required Henry to confine himself
within the bounds of his civil jurifdifion, and
to abstain for the future from such sacrilegious
encroachments on the spiritual dominion. All
the censures of the church were denounced
against Henry, because he refused to relinquish
those powers which his predecefolrs had uni-
formly exercised. The most considerable of the
German Princes and ecclefiafticks were excited
to take arms against him. His mother, his.
wife, his sons were wrought upon to disregard
all the ties of blood as well as of duty, and to
join the party of his enemies . Such were
the successful arts with which the court of
Rome inflamed the superstitious zeal, and con-
duded the factious spirit of the Germans and
Italians, that an Emperor, distinguished not only
for many virtues, but possessed of considerable
talents, was at length obliged to appear as a
suppliant at the gate of the castle in which the
Pope resided, and to stand there, three days,

bare-
K Annal. German. ap. Struv. i. p. 325.

bare-footed, in the depth of winter, imploring SECT. l.
a pardon, which at length he obtained with dif- A-1
ficulty [SS].

THIS at of humiliation degraded the Impe-

rial dignity. Nor was the deprellion only mo-
mentary. The contest between Gregory and
Henry gave rife to the two great factions of the
Guelfs and Ghibellines; the former of which
supporting the pretensions of the Popes, and the
latter defending the rights of the Emperor,
kept Germany and Italy in perpetual agitation
during three centuries. A regular system for The Impe-
humbling the Emperors and circumscribing their il ut'o-
power was formed, and adhered to uniformly .iy de-
throughout that period. The Popes, the free clin.
States in Italy, the nobility and ecclefiafticks
of Germany, were all interested in its success;
and notwithfcanding the return of some short
intervals of vigour, under the administration of
a few able Emperors, the Imperial authority
continued to decline. During the anarchy of A. D. 156.
the long interregnum subsequent to the death of
William of Holland, it dwindled down to no-
thing. Rodulphof Haplburgh, the founder of A. D. 173.
the house of Austria, and who first opened the
way to its future grandeur, was at length elected
Emperor, not that he might re-establish and ex-
tend the Imperial authority, but because his ter-
ritories and influence were so inconsiderable as to
excite no jealousy in the German Princes, who
were willing to preserve the forms of a confti-
tution, the power and vigour of which they had
destroyed. Several of his successors were placed
on the Imperial throne from the fame motive;
and almost every remaining prerogative was
wrested out of the hands of feeble Princes un-
able to exercise or to defend them.

N z DURING
[SS] NOTE XLI.

SECT. III. DURING this period of turbulence and con-

,J ' fulion, the confitution of the Germanick body

change in underwent a total change. The ancient names
thbe olicil of courts and magistrates, together with the
of the E- original forms and appearance of policy, were
p"e. preserved; but such new privileges and jurifdic-

tion were assumed, and so many various rights
established, that the fame species of government
no longer subsisted. The Princes, the great
nobility, the dignified ecclefiafticks, the free
cities had taken advantage of the interregnum,
which I have mentioned, to establish or to extend
.their usurpations. They claimed and exercised
the right of governing their refpecive territories
with full sovereignty. They acknowledged no
superior with refpeit to any point, relative to
the interior administration and police of their
domains. They enacted laws, imposed taxes,
coined money, declared war, concluded peace,
and exerted every prerogative peculiar to inde-
pendent States. The ideas of order and poli-
tical union which had formed the various pro-
vinces of Germany into one body were entirely
loft; and the society must have dissolved, if the
forms of feudal subordination had not preserved
such an appearance of connection or dependence
among the various members of the community,
as preserved it from falling to pieces.

Expedients TnIS bond of union, however, was extremely
r P:"tg feeble; and no principle remained in the Ger-
thi. n.te of man constitution of fuficient force to maintain
A"''. "publick order, and hardly to ascertain personal

security. From the acceflion of Rodulph of
Hapfburgh, to the reign of Maximilian, the
immediate predeceflor of Charles V. the Empire
felt every calamity which a state must endure
when the authority of government is so much
relaxed as to have loft all vigour. The causes

of

of dissension among that vast number of mem- SECT.III.
bers which composed the Germanick body, ~-
were infinite and unavoidable. These gave
rife to perpetual private wars, carried on with
all the violence of resentment when unrestrained
by superior authority. Rapine, outrage, ex-
adtions, became universal. Commerce was in-
terrupted; industry suspended; and every part
of Germany resembled a country which an ene-
my had plundered and laid desolate L. The
variety of expedients employed with a view to
restore order and tranquility, prove that the
grievances occasioned by this state of anarchy
had grown intolerable. Arbiters were appointed
to terminate the difference among the several
states. The cities united in a league, the ob-
jeCt of which was to check the rapine and ex-
tortions of the nobility. The nobility formed
confederacies, on purpose to maintain tranquil-
lity among their own order. Germany was di-
vided into several Circles, in each of which
a provincial and partial jurifdidion was efta-
blifhed, to supply the place of a publick and
common tribunal M

BUT all these remedies were so fruitless, that Particularly

they served only to demonstrate the violence oftut,,,'fthe
that anarchy which prevailed, and the inefficacy Imperial
of the means employed to corret it. At length Chamber.
Maximiliarl re-established publick order in the
Empire, by instituting the Imperial chamber, a
tribunal composed of judges named partly by
the Emperor, partly by the several States, and A. D. 1495.
vested with authority to decide finally concern-
ing all differences among the members of the

Ger-

L See above, page 53 and note xxi. Datt. de pace pub-
lica Imper. p. 25, no. 53. p 28, no. 26. p. 35, nJ. il.

"' Dart. paflim. Struv. Corp. Hilt. i. 51o, &c.

SECT. n. Germanick body. A few years after, by giving

a new form to the Aulick council, which takes
'iD ' cognizance of all feudal causes, and such as be-

long to the Emperor's immediate jurifdidtion, he
restored some degree of vigour to the Imperial
authority.

At the be- BUT notwithstanding the salutary effets of
Efiigefh there regulations and improvements, the poli-
c~tu., the tical constitution of the German Empire, at the
afcian commencement of the period of which I pro-
of froveig pose to write the history, was of a species so
tca'l peculiar, as not to resemble perfetly any form

of government known either in the ancient or
modern world. It was a complex body, formed
by the afflciation of several States, each of which
possessed obvereign and independent jurifdition
within itsown territories. Of all the members
which composed this united body, the Emperor
was the head. In his name, all decrees and re-
gulations, with refped to points of common con-
cern, were issued; and to him the power of
carrying them into execution was committed.
But this appearance of monarchical power in the
Emperor was more than counterbalanced by the
influence of the Princes and States of the Em-
pire in e'ery ad of administration. No law
extending to the whole body could pass, no re-
solution that affected the general interest could
be taken, without the approbation of the Diet
of the Empire. In this assembly, every fove-
reign Prince and State of the Germanick body
had a right to be present, to deliberate, and to
vote. The decrees or Recffes of the Diet were
the laws of the Empire, which the Emperor was
bound to ratify and enforce.

Pecea'iritie; UNDER this aspet the corftitution of the
'eos" .S Empire appears a regular confederacy, firnilar
a-*i:.U of ;to

to the Achaean league in ancient Greece, or to SECT. III.
that of the United Provinces and of the Swiss '-
Cantons in modern times. But if viewed in
another light, striking peculiarities in its po-
litical state present themselves. The Germa-
nick body was not formed by theunion of mem-
bers altogether diftint and independent. All
the Princes and States joined in this aflociation,
were originally subjed to the Emperors, and
acknowledged them as sovereigns. Besides this,
they originally held their lands as Imperial fiefs,
and in consequence of this tenure owed the Em-
perors all those services which feudal vassals are
bound to perform to their liege lord. But
though this political fubjetion was entirely at
an end, and the influence of the feudal relation
much diminished, the ancient forms and inftitu-
tions introduced while the Emperors governed
Germany with authority, not inferior to that
which the other monarchs of Europe possessed,
fill remained. Thus an opposition was efta-
blifhed between the genius of the government,
and the forms of administration in the German
Empire. The former confidered the Emperor
only as the head of a confederacy, the mem-
bers of which, by their voluntary choice, have
raied him to that dignity; the latter seemed
to imply, that he is really invested with fove-
reign power. By this circumstance, such prin- The defets
ciples of hostility and discord were interwoven itthtcon"f
in the frame of the Germanick body, as asse&ted the Empire.
each of its members, rendering their interior
union incomplete, and their external efforts fee-
ble and irregular. The effects of this vice or
disorder inherent in the conffitution of the Em-
pire was so considerable, that, without attend-
ing to them, it is impossible to comprehend
many tranfadtions in the :eign of Charles V. or

to

SEcT. Ill. to formjuft ideas concerning the genius of the

--' German government.

Aifing t THE Emperors of Germany, at the beginning
bom the sllr.
mitedpoer of the sixteenth century, were distinguished by
of he Em- the most pompous titles, and by such ensigns of

dignity as intimated their authority to be fupe-
rior to that of all other monarchs. The greatest
Princes of the Empire attended and served them
on some occasions, as the officers of their houf-
hold. They exercised prerogatives which no
other sovereign ever claimed. They retained
pretensions to all the extensive powers which
their predecefrors had enjoyed in any former
age. But at the fame time, instead ofpoffeffing
that ample domain which had belonged to the
ancient Emperors of Germany, and which
Wtretched from Basil to Cologne, along both
banks of the Rhine N, they were stript of all
territorial property, and had not a single city, a
single cast!e, a tingle foot of land, that pertain-
ed to them as heads of the Empire. As their
domain was alienated, their flated revenues were
reduced almost to nothing; and the extraordi-
nary aids, which on a few occasions they ob-
tained, were granted sparingly, and paid with.
reluctance. The Princes and States of the Em-
pire, though they seemed to recognize the Im-
perial authority, were fubjeAs only in name,
each of them possessing a complete municipal
jurildiciion within the precincs of his own ter-
ritories.

From the FROM this ill-compa&ed frame of govern-
,.ture.l ment, effe&s that were unavoidable reiulted.
their titles
-nd petee- The Emperors, dazzled with the splendour of
so'n- their titles, and the exterior signs of vast autho-

rity,
N Peffel Abrege, &c. p. 241.

rity, were apt to imagine themselves to be the SECT. IIL.
real sovereigns of Germany, and were led to aim ' '
continually at recovering the exercise of those
powers which the forms of the constitution seem-
ed to vest in them, and which their predecessors,
Charlemagne and the Othos, had actually en-
joyed. The Princes and States, aware of the
nature as well as extent of their pretensions,
were perpetually on their guard, in order to
watch all the motions of the Imperial court,
and to circumscribe its power within limits still
more narrow. The Emperors, in support of
their claims, appealed to ancient forms and in-
ftitutions, which the States held to be obsolete.
The States founded their rights on recent prac-
tice and modern privileges, which the Empe-
rors confidered as usurpations.

THIS jealousy of the Imperial authority, toge- From the

ther with the opposition between it and the rights me ine
of the States, increased considerably from the were eica-
time that the Emperors were elected, not by the ed.
collective body of German nobles, but by a few
Princes of chief dignity. During a long period,
all the members of the Germanick body as-
fembled, and made choice of the p rfon whom
they appointed to be their head. But amidst
the violence and anarchy which prevailed for
several centuries in the Empire, seven Princes
who possessed the most extensive territories, and
who had obtained a hereditary title to the great
offices of the State, acquired the exclusive pri-
vilege of nominating the Emperor. This right
was confirmed to them by the Golden Bull; the
mode of exercising it was ascertained, and they
were dignified with the appellation of Elefors.
The nobility and free cities being thus stripped
of a privilege which they had once enjoyed,
were less connected with a Prince, towards

whose

SEcr. Ill. whose elevation they had not contributed by
'-~*- their suffrages, and came to be more apprehen-

five of has authority. The Eletors, by their ex-
tensive power, and the distinguishing privileges
which they possessed, became formidable to the
Emperors, with whom they were placed almost
on a level in several aas ofjurifdition. Thus
the introduction of the Eletoral college into the
Empire, and the authority which it acquired,
intfead of diminishing, contributed to strengthen
the principles of hofttility and dilcord in the Ger-
manick constitution.

Frrm the THESE were further augmented by the vari-
dissert ous and repugnant forms of civil policy in the
..nr.ent several States which composed the Germanick
tcab ified body. It is no easy matter to render the union
in the State ' i

's

,hich co~- of independent States perfect and entire, even
Tpod th when the genius and forms of their refpeative
Cennanick
bode. governments happen to be altogether similar.

But in the German Empire, *hich was a confe-
deracy of Princes, of Ecclefiafticks, and of free
cities, it was impoflible that they could incor-
porate thoroughly. The free cities were small
republicks, in which the maxims and spirit pe-
culiar to that species of government prevailed..
The Princes and nobles, to whom fupremeju-
rifdition belonged, poffefled a fort of monarchi-
cal power within their own territories, and the
forms of their interior adminiitration nearly re-
fembled those of the great feudal kingdoms.
The interells, the ideas, the objects of States so
differently constituted, cannot be the fame. Nor
could their common deliberations be carried on
with the fame spirit, while the love of liberty
and attention to commerce were the reigning
principles in the cities; while the desire of power,
and ardour for military glory, were the govern-
ing pafl;os of the Princes and nobility.

THE
186

THE secular and ecclesiastical members of the SECT. III.

Empire were as little fitted for union as the free -
cities and the nobility. Vast territories had been ,ppofition
granted to several of the German bifhopricks ht"l" the
and abbeys; and some of the highet offices in ecclefinii-
the Empire having been anc-xed to them inali- hIerm'
enably, were held by the ecclefiafticks raised to
these dignities. The younger Cons of noblemen
of the second order, who had devoted them-
selves to the church, were commonly promoted
to there flations of eminence and power; and it
was no small mortification to the Princes and
great nobility, to fee persons raised from an in-
ferior rank to the fame level with themselves,
or even exalted to superior dignity. The edu-
cation of there churchmen, the genius of their
profession, and their connection with the court
of Rome, rendered their character as well as in-
terest different from those of the other members
of the Germanick body, with whom they were
called to aft in concert. Thus another source of
jealousy and variance was opened, which ought
not to be overlooked when we are searching into
the nature of the German constitution,

To all there causes of dissension may be ad- From the

ed one more, arising from the unequal diftribu- fera'lution
tion of power and wealth among the States of of walth
the Empire. The Eletors, and other nobles ...O the
of the highest rank, not only possessed Sovereign member..
jurifdiftion, but governed such extensive, po-
pulous, and rich countries, as rendered them
great Princes. Many of the other members,
though they enjoyed all the rights of sovereign-
ty, ruled over such petty domains, that their
real power bore no proportion to this high pre-
rogative. A well-compated and vigorous con-
federacy could not be formed of such dissimilar
states. The weaker were jealous, timid, and

unable

187

SECT. In. unable either to assert or to defend their just
'-v ~
- privileges. The more powerful were apt to as-

fume and to become oppreflive. The Ele&tors
and Emperors by turns endeavoured to extend
their own authority, by encroaching on the
rights of those feeble members of the Germanick.
body; and they, over-awed or corrupted, tame-
ly surrendered their privileges, or meanly fa-
voured the deigns formed against them [TT].

All there AFTER contemplating all these principles of
Cdr ,i disunion and opposition in the constitution of the
boday in- German Empire, it will be easy to account for
isb' 'ith the want of concord and uniformity, confpicu-
unio d ous in its councils and proceedings. That flow,
ig°o". dilatory, distrustful and irresolute spirit, which

characterizes all its deliberations, will appear na-
tural in a body, thejun&ion of whose members
was so incomplete, the different parts of which
were held together by such feeble ties, and set at
variance by such powerful motives. But the
Empire of Germany, nevertheless, comprehend-
ed countries of such vast extent, and was in-
habited by such a martial and hardy race of
men, that when the abilities of an Emperor, or
zeal for any common cause could rouze
this unwieldy body to put forth its strength,
it acted with irresistible force. In the following
history we shall find, that as the measures on
which Charles V. was most intent, were often
thwarted or rendered abortive by the spirit of
jealousy and division peculiar to the Germanick
confritution; so it was by the influence which
he acquired over the Princes of the Empire,
and by engaging them to co-operate with him,
that he was enabled to make some of the great-
eft efforts which distinguish his reign.

THE
[TTI NOTE XLII.

THE Turkish history is foblended, during the SEcT. nI.
reign of Charles V. with that of the great nations vs the

View of the

in Europe, and the Ottoman Porte interposed so Turkish go-
often, and with such decisive influence in the verlmet
wars and negociations of the Christian Princes,
that some previous account of the state of go-
vernment in that great Empire, is no less necef-
fary for the information of my readers, than
these views of the constitution of other kingdoms
which I have already exhibited to them.

IT has been the fate of the southern and more its origin.

fertile parts of Asia, at different periods, to be
conquered by that warlike and hardy race of men,
who inhabit the vast country known to the anci-
ents by the name of Scythia, and among the
moderns by that of Tartary. One tribe of these
people, called Turks or Turcomans, extended
its conquests, under various leaders, and during
several centuries, from the Ihore of the Caspian
to the Streights of the Dardanelles. Towards
the middle of the fifteenth century, there for-
midable conquerors took Conflantinople by
storm, and established the feat of their govern-
ment in that Imperial city. Greece, Moldavia,
Walachia, and the other provinces of the ancient
kingdoms of Thrace and Macedonia, together
with part of Hungary, were fubjefted to their
power.

BUT though the feat of the Turkilh govern- Its depotic

ment was fixed in Europe, and the Sultans ob- gcu"'
tained possession of such extensive dominions in
that quarter of the globe, the genius of their po-
licy was purely Afiatick; and may be properly
termed a despotism, in contradiftinetion to those
monarchical and republican forms of government
which we have been hitherto contemplating.
The supreme power was vefled in Sultans of the

Ottoman

SECT. I. Ottoman race, that blood being deemed so fa-
'-~ cred, that no other was thought worthy of the

throne. From this elevation, there sovereigns
could look down and behold all their fubjekts
reduced to the fame level before them. The
maxims of Turkish policy admit not any of those
institutions, which, in other countries, limit the
exercise, or moderate the rigour of monarchical
power: no great court with constitutional and
permanent jurifdidion to interpose both in enat-
ing laws, and in executing them: no body of
hereditary nobles, whose sense of their own pre-
eminence, whose consciousness of what is due to
their rank and character, whose jealousy of their
privileges circumscribe the authority of the
Prince, and serve not only as a barrier against
the exceffesof his caprice, but stand as an inter-
mediate order between him and the people.
Under the Turkish government, the political
condition of every subject is equal. To be em-
ployed in the service of the Sultan, is the only
circumstance that confers diftintion. Even this
diftinEion is annexed so closely to the fations in
which persons serve, that it is scarcely commu-
nicated to those who are placed in them. The
highest dignity in the Empire does not give any
rank or pre-eminence to the family of him who
enjoys it. As every man, before he is raised to
any flation of authority, must go through the
preparatory difcip!ine of a long and servile obe-
dience 0, the moment he is deprived of power,
he and his posterity return to the fame condition
with other filbjeats, and fink back into obscurity.
It is the diftinguilhing and odious charafteriftick
of Eastern defpotilm, that it annihilates all other
ranks of men, in order to exalt the monarch;
that it leaves nothing to the former, while it

gives,
° State of the Turkilh Empire by Rycaut, p. 25.

gives every thing to the latter; that it endea- SECT. III.
vours to fix in the minds of those who are sub- '~ '
je& to it, the idea of no relation between men,
but that of a master and of a slave, the former
destined to command and to puniil, the latter
formed to tremble and to obey [UU].

BUT as there are circumitances which fre- Power of

quently obftru& or defeat the salutary effeets of tiiite.d b
the best regulated governments, there are others religion;
which contribute to mitigate the evils of the
most vicious forms of policy. There can, in-
deed, be no constitutional restraints upon the
will of a Prince in a despotic government; but
there may be such as are accidental. Absolute
as the Turkish Sultans are, they feel themselves
circumscribed both by religion, the principle on
which their authority is founded P, and by the
army, the instrument which they must employ
in order to maintain it. Wherever religion in-
terpofes, the will of the Sovereign must submit
to its decrees. When the Koran hath prescribed
any religious rite; hath enjoined any moral du-
ty; or hath confirmed, by its fan&ion, any po-
litical maxim, the command of the Sultan can-
not overturn that which an higher authority hath
eftabliffed. The chiefreftri&ion, however, on
the will of the Sultans, is imposed by the mili-
tary power. An armed force must surround the and by the
throne of every Despot, to maintain his autho- military.
rity, and to execute his commands. As the
Turks extended their empire over nations, which
they did not exterminate, but reduce to subjec-
tion, they found it neceflary to render their mi-
litary eftablilhment numerous and formidable.
Amurath, their third Sultan, in order to form a the gl,,,

body zariD.

A. D. 162.

[UU] NOTE XLIII.
' Rycaut, p. 8.

StCT. nI. body of devoted troops, -that might serve as the

v- ~' immediate guards of his person and dignity, ap-

pointed his officers to.feize annually, as the Im-
perial property, the fifth part of the youth taken
in war. These, after being inftruted in the
Mahometan religion, inured to obedience by fe-
vere discipline, and trained to warlike exercises,
were formed into a body distinguished by the
name of fanizaries, or new soldiers. Every
sentiment which enthusiasm can inspire, every
mark of diftindion that the favour of the Prince
could confer, were employed in order to ani-
mate this body with martial ardour, and with a
consciousness of its own pre-eminence % The
Janizaries soon became the chief strength and
pride of the Ottoman armies; and by their num-
ber as well as reputation, were distinguished
above all the troops, whose duty it was to attend
on the person of the Sultans [XX].

,r watn THUS, as the supreme power in every society

tm oil is possessed by those who have arms in their
govern. hands, this formidable body of soldiers, destined

to be the instruments of enlarging the Sultan's
authority, acquired, at the fame time, the means
ofcontrouling it. The Janizaries in Conftanti-.
nople, like the Praetorian bands in ancient Rome,
quickly perceived all the advantages which they
derived from being ffationed in the capital from
their union under one standard; and from being
masters of the person of the Prince. The Sub
tans became no less sensible of their influence
and importance. The Capiculy, or soldiery of
the Port, was the only power in the Empire
that a Sultan or his Vifier had reason to dread.

To

QPrince Cantemir's History of the Otbman Empire, p.
87 N XV.

[XX] NOTE XLIV.

To preserve the fidelity and attachment of the SECT. Ill.
Janizaries, was the great art of government, and -
the principal objet of attention in the policy of
the Ottoman court. Under a monarch, whose
abilities and vigour of mind fit him for command
they are obsequious instruments; execute what.
ever he enjoins;. and render his power irrefifti-
ble. Under feeble Princes, or such as are un-
fortunate, they become turbulent and mutinous;
assume the tone f' friatfers; degrade and exalt
Sultans at pleasure; and: teach those to tremble,
on whose nod, at other times, life or death de-
pend.

1PROM Mahomet 1. who took Constantinople, Progret of

to Solyman, who began his reign a few months t Turksd
after Charles V. was placed on the Imperial miio.-
throne of Germany, a fucceflion of illustrious
Princes ruled over the Turkilh Empire. By
their great abilities, they kept their subjects of
every order, military as well as civil, submissive
to government; and had the absolute command
of whatever. force their vast Empire was able to
exert. Solyman, in particular, who is known to
the Chrifians chiefly as a conqueror, but is ce-
lebrated in the Turkish annals as the great law-
giver who established order and polieg in their
Empire, governed during his long reign with no
less authority than wisdom. He divided his do-
minions into several diftrits.; he appointed the
number of soldiers which each should furnish;
he appropriated a certain proportion of the lands
in every province for their maintenance; he re-
gulated, with a minute accuracy, every thing
relative to their discipline, their arms, and the
nature of their service. He put the finances of
the Empire into an orderly train of adminiftra-
tion; and though the taxes in the Turkish do-
minions, as well as in other despotic monarchies

VOL. 1. 0 of

SECT. III. of the East, are far from being considerable, he
-v-' ifupplied that defect by an attentive and severe

oeconomy.

wAh' they NOR was it only under such Sultans as Soly-
poneffed man, whose talents were no less adapted to pre-
chrifia serve interior order than to condu& the opera-
powen in tions of war, that the Turkism Empire engaged
t ,th c- with advantage in its contests with the Christian
tury. states. The long fucceflion of able Princes,

which I have mentioned, had given such vigour
and firmners to the Ottoman government, that
it seems to have attained, during the sixteenth
century, the highest degree of perfection of
which its constitution was capable. Whereas
the great monarchies in Christendom were fill
far from that state, which could enable them to
ad with a full exertion of their force. Besides
this, the Turkimh troops in that age pofleffed
every advantage which arises from superiority in
military discipline. At the time when Solyman
began his reign, the Janizaries had been em-
bodied near a century and a half, and during
that long period, the severity of their military
discipline had in no degree relaxed. The fol-
diers drawn from the provinces of the Empire,
had been kept almost continually under arms,
in the various wars which the Sultans had carried
on with hardly any interval of peace. Against
troops thus trained and accustomed to service,
the forces of the Christian powers took the field
with great disadvantage. The most intelligent
as well as impartial authors of the sixteenth cen-
tury, acknowledge and lament the superior at-
tainments of the Turks in the military art [YY].
The success which uniformly attended their

arms
[YYJ NOTE XLV.

arms in all their wars, demonstrates thejuftnefs SE CT. I.
of this observation. The Christian armies did '-
not acquire that superiority over the Turks, which
they now poflefs, until the long establishment of
standing forces had improved military discipline
among the former; and until various causes and
events, which it is not my province to explain,
had corrupted or abolished their ancient warlike
institutions among the latter.

PROOFS

PROOFS

AND
ILLUSTRATIONS.

# PROOFS AND ILLUSTRATIONS.

PROOFS

AND
ILLUSTRATIONS.

NOTE I. SECT. I. p. 3. [A].
rT nH E consternation of the Britons, when

invaded by the Pids and Caledonians
after the Roman legions were called out

of the island, may give some idea of the degree
of debasement to which the human mind was re-
duced by long servitude under the Romans. In
their supplicatory letter to Aetius, which they
call the groans of Britain, " We know not (fay
they) which way to turn us. The barbarians
drive us to the sea; and the sea forces us back
on the barbarians; between which we have only
the choice of two deaths, either to be Swallowed
up by the waves, or to be butchered by the
sword." Hiftor. Gilda. ap. Gale. Hist. Britan.
Script. p. 6.- One can hardly believe this
dastardly race to be the descendants of that gal-
lant people, who repulsed Caesar, and defended
their liberty so long against the Roman arms.

NOTE II. SECT. I. p.4. [B].

THE barbarous nations were not only illite-

rate, but regarded literature with contempt.
They found the inhabitants of all the proivnces

of

of the Empire funk in effeminacy, and averse to
war. Such a character was the objec of scorn
to an high-fpirited and gallant race of men.
"' When we would brand an enemy," fays Liut-
prandus: " with the most disgraceful and con-
tumelious appellation, we call him a Roman;
hoc fol, id eft Romani nomine, quicquid igno-
bilitatis, quicquid timiditatis, quicquid avaritiat,
quicquid luxuriae, quicquid mendacii, immQ
quicquid vitiorum eft comprehendentes." Liut-
prandi Legatio apud Murat. Scriptor. Italic.
vol. ii. pars I. p. 481. This degeneracy of
manners, illiterate barbarians imputed to their
love of learning. Even after they fettled in the
countries which they had conquered, they would
not permit their children to be instructed in any
science; "for, (said they) initruAtion in the
sciences tends to corrupt, enervate, and depress
the mind; and he who has been accustomed to
tremble under the rod of a pedagogue, will ne-
ver look on a sword or spear with an undaunted
eye." Procop. de bello Gothor. lib. i. p. 4. ap.
Scrip. Byz. edit. Venet. vol. i. A considerable
number of years elapfedi before nations so rude,
and so unwilling to learn, could produce hifto-
rians capable of recording their tranfations, or
ofdefcribing their mannersand institutions. By
that time, all memory of their ancient condition
was los, and no monument remained to guide
their first writers to an) certain-knowledge of it.
If one expeats to receive any satisfactory account
of the manners and laws of the Goths, Lom-
bards, or Franks, during their residence in those
countries where they were originallyfseated, from
Jornandes, Paulus Warnefridus, or Gregory of
Tours, the earliest and mot authentick hiftori-
ans of these people, he will be miserably difap-
pointed. Whatever imperfect knowledge has
been conveyed to us of their ancient state, we

owe

owe not to their own writers, but to the Greek
and Roman historians.

NOTE III. SECT. I. p. 5. [C].

A CIRCUMSTANCE related by Prifcus in his

history of the embassy to Attila, King of the
Huns, gives a 1friking view of the enthufiaftick
paflion of war, which prevailed among the bar-
barous nations. When the entertainment to
which that fierce conqueror admitted the Ro-
man ambafador. was ended, two Scythians ad-
vanced towards Attila, and recited a poem in
which they celebrated his victories, and military
virtues. All the Huns fixed their eyes with
attention on the bards. Some seemed to be
delighted with the verses; others remembering
their own battles and exploits, exulted with
joy; while such as were become feeble through
age, burf out into tears, bewailing the decay
of their vigour, and the state of inacivity in
which they were now obliged to remain. Ex-
cerpta ex hiftoria Prifci Rhetoris ap. Byzant.
Hiftor. Script. vol. i. p. 45.

NOTE IV. SECT. I. p. ii. [D].

A REMARKABLE confirmation of both parts

of this reasoning occurs in the history of En-
gland. The Saxons carried on the conquest of
that country with the fame deftrutive spirit,
which distinguished the other barbarous nations.
The ancient inhabitants of Britain were either
exterminated; or forced to take shelter among
the mountains of Wales; or reduced into ser-
vitude. The Saxon government, laws, man-
ners, and language were of consequence intro-
duced into Britain; and were so perfecly efta-
blilhed, that all memory of the institutions pre.

vious

201

vious to their conquest was abolished. The very
reverse of this happened in a subsequent revo-
lution. A single victory placed William the
Norman on the throne of England. The Saxon
inhabitants, though oppressed, were not exter-
minated. William employed the utmost efforts
of his power and policy to make his new sub-
jets conform in every thing to the Norman
Randard; but without success. The Saxons,
though vanquifled, were far more numerous
than their conquerors; when the two races be-
gan to incorporate, the Saxon laws and manners
gradually gained ground. The Norman infti-
tutions were unpopular and odious; many of
them fell into disuse; and in the English con-
ftitution and language, at this day, many eflen-
tial parts are manifestly of Saxon, not of Nor-
man extrat.

NOTE V. SECT. I. p. x. [E].

PRocoPIUS, the historian, declines, from a

principle of benevolence, to give any particular
detail of the cruelties of the Goths; " left,
fays he, I Mould transmit a monument and ex-
ample of inhumanity tofucceeding ages." Proc.
de bello Goth. lib. iii. cap. 1o. ap. Byz. Script.
vol. i. 126. But as the change, which I have
pointed out as a consequence of the settlement
of the barbarous nations in the countries for-
merly subjeCt to the Roman Empire, could not
have taken place, if the greater part of the an-
cient inhabitants had not been extirpated, an
event of such importance and influence merits a
more particular illuftrarion. This will justify
me for exhibiting some part of that melan-
choly fpeftacle, over which humanity prompted
Procopius to draw a veil. I (hall not, however,
ditguft my readers by a long detail; but reft

satisfied

satisfied with colle&ting some instances of the
devastations made by two of the many nations,
which fettled in the Empire. The Vandals
were the first of the barbarians who invaded
Spain. It was one of the richest and most po-
pulous of the Roman Provinces; the inhabi-
tants had been distinguished for courage, and
had defended their liberty against the arms of
Rome with greater obstinacy, and during a
longer course of years, than any nation in Eu-
rope. But so entirely were they enervated by
their fubjetion to the Romans, that the Van-
dals, who entered thekingdom A. D. 409, com-
pleted the conquest of it with such rapidity,
that in the year 41 1, there barbarians divided it
among them by cating lots. The desolation oc-
cafioned by their invasion is thus described by
Idatius, an eye-witness. " The barbarians waft-
ed every thing with hostile cruelty. The pes-
tilence was no less deftrutive. A dreadful fa-
mine raged, to such a degree, that the living
were constrained to feed on the dead bodies of
their fellow-citizens; and all those terrible plagues
desolated at once the unhappy kingdoms." Idatii
Chron. ap. Biblioth. Patrum. vol. vii. p. 1233.
edit. Lugd. 1677. The Goths having attacked
the Vandals in their new settlements, a fierce
war ensued; the country was plundered by both
parties; the cities which escaped at first, were
laid in ashes, and the inhabitants exposed to
susser every thing that the wanton cruelty of
barbarians could inflit. Idatius describes these,
ibid. p. 1235. b. 1236. c. f. A similar account
of their devastations is given by Ifidorus His-
palenfis, and the contemporary writers. Ifid.
Chron. ap.Grot. hist. Goth. 732. From Spain the
Vandals passed over to Africa, A.D. 428. Africa
was, next to Egypt, the most fertile of the
Roman Provinces. It was one of the granaries

of

of the Empire, and is called by an ancient wri-
ter, the foul of the commonwealth. Though
the army with which the Vandals invaded it
did not exceed 30,000 fighting men, they be-
came absolute maflers of the province in less
than two years. A contemporary author gives
a dreadful account of the havock which they
made: "They found a province well culti-
vated, and enjoying plenty, the beauty of the
whole earth. They carried their deftrucive
arms into every corner of it; they difpeopled it
by their devastations; exterminating every thing
with fire and sword. They did not even spare
the vines and fruit trees, that those, to whom
caves and inaccessible mountains had afforded a
retreat, might find no nourifhmentof any kind.
Their hostile rage could not be satiated, and
there was no place exempt from the effects of
it. They tortured their prisoners with the most
exquisite cruelty, that they might force from
them a discovery of their hidden treasures. The
more they discovered, the more they expected,
and the more implacable they became. Neither
the infirmities of age nor of sex; neither the
dignity of nobility, nor the Candity of the fa-
cerdotal office, could mitigate their fury; but
the more illustrious their prisoners 'ere, the
more barbarously they insulted them. The pub-
lick buildings which refifed the violence of the
flames, they levelled with the ground. They
left many cities without an inhabitant. When
they approached any fortified place, which their
undisciplined army could not reduce, they ga-
thered together a multitude of prisoners, and
putting them to the sword, left their bodies un-
buried, that the stench of the carcasses might
oblige the garrison to abandon it." Victor
Vitenfis de perfecutione Africana ap. Bibl. Pa-
trum. voL viii. p. 666. St. Auguftin, an Afri-

can,

can, and a contemporary author, gives a similar
description of their cruelties, Opera, vol. x. p.
372. edit. I6I6.-About an hundred years after
the settlement of the Vandals in Africa, Belifa-
rius attacked and difpoffeffed them. Procopius,
a contemporary historian, describes the devafta-
tion which that war occasioned. " Africa, fays
he, was so entirely difpeopled, that one might
travel several days in it without meeting one
man; and it is no exaggeration to fay, that in
the course of the war five millions of persons
perished." Proc. hist. Arcana, cap. 18. ap. Byz.
Script. vol. i. 3 5.-I have dwelt longer upon
the calamities of this province, becaule they are
described not only by contemporary authors, but
by eye-witnesses. The piefent state of Africa
confirms their testimony. Many of the most
flourishing and populous cities with which it was
filled, were so entirely ruined, that no vestiges
remain to point out where they were situated.
That fertile territory which sustained the Roman
Empire lies in a great measure uncultivated; and
that province, which Vi&tor in his barbarous
Latin called Speciofitas totius terra florentis, is
now the retreat of pirates and banditti.

WHILE the Vandals laid waste one part of

the Empire, the Huns desolated the reft of it.
Of all the barbarous tribes they were the fiercest
and most formidable. Ammianus Marcellinus,
a contemporary author, and one of the belt of
the later historians, gives an account of their
policy and manners. They nearly resembled
those of the Scythians described by the ancients,
and of the Tartars known to the moderns. In
some parts of their chara&er, and in several of
their customs, they resemble the savages in
North America; Their passion for war and
acion was extreme. " As in polished Societies

(fays

205

(fays Ammianus) ease and tranquillity are
courted, they delight in war and dangers. He
who falls in battle is reckoned happy. They
who die of old age or of disease are deemed in-
famous. They boast, with the utmost exultati-
on, of the number of enemies whom they have
slain, and as the most glorious of all ornaments,
they fasten the scalps of those who have fallen
by their hand to the trappings of their horses."
Ammian. Marc. lib. xxxi. p. 477. edit. Gronov.
Lugd. 1693.- Their incursions into the Em-
pire began in the fourth century; and the Ro-
mans, though no strangers, by that time, to
the effels of barbarous rage, were aftonilhed at
the cruelty of their devastations. Thrace, Pan-
nonia, and Illyricum were the countries which
they first laid desolate. As they had no thoughts
of fettling in Europe, their inroads were fre-
quent, and Procopius computes that in each of
these, at a medium, two hundred thousand per-
sons perished, or were carried off as slaves.
Procop. hilt. Arcan. ap. Byz. script. vol. i. 316.
Thrace, the best cultivated province in that
quarter of the Empire, was converted into a
desert, and when Prifcus accompanied the am-
bafladors sent to Attila, there were no inhabi-.
tants in some of the cities, but a few miserable
people who had taken thelter among the ruins of
the churches; and the fields were covered with
the bones of those who had fallen by the fwotd.
Prifcus ap. Byz. Script. vol. i. 34. Attila be-
came King of the Huns, A. D. 434. He is one of
the greatest and most enterprizing conquerors
mentioned in biftory. He extended his Empire
over all the vast countries, comprehended ui-
der the general names of Scythia and Germany
in the ancient! division of the world. While
he was carrying on his wars against the barba-
rous nations, he kept the Roman Empire under

perpetual
2o6

perpetual apprehensions, and extorted vast sub-
sidies from the timid and effeminate monarchs
who governed it. In the year 451, he entered
Gaul, at the head of an army composed of all
the various nations which he had subdued. It
was more numerous than any with which the
barbarians had hitherto invaded the Empire.
The devastations which he committed were
horrible; not only the open country, but the
molt flourishing cities were desolated. The ex-
tent and cruelty of his devastations are described
by Salvianus de Gubernat. Dei, edit. Baluz. Par.
1669. p. 139, &c. and by Idatius, ubi supra, p.
1235. Aetius put a stop to his progress in that
country by the famous battle of Chalons, in
which (if we may believe the historians of that
age) three hundred thousand persons perished.
Idat. ibid. Jornandes de rebus Geticis ap. Grot.
Hist. Gothor. p. 671. Amit. 1665. But next
year he resolved to attack the centre of the Em-
pire, and marching into Italy, waited it with
rage, inflamed by the sense of his late disgrace.
What Italy suffered by the Huns exceeded all
the calamities which the preceding incursions of
the barbarians had brought upon it. Conrin-
gius has collected several passages from the an-
cient hiforians, which prove that the devafta-
tions committed by the Vandals and Huns in
the countries situated on the banks of the IRhine,
were no less cruel and fatal to the human race.
Exercitatio de urbibus Germaniag, Opera, vol.
i. 488. But it is endless, it is (hocking to fol-
low these destroyers of mankind through so
many scenes of horror, and to contemplate the
havock which they made of the human species.

BuT the state in which Italy appears to have

been, during several ages, after the barbarous
nations fettled in it, is the molt decisive proof of

the

the cruelty as well as extent of their devastations,
Whenever any country is thinly inhabited, trees
and shrubs spring up in the uncultivated fields,
and Spreading by degrees form large forets; by
the overflowing of rivers, and the stagnating of
waters, other parts of it are converted into lakes
and marshes. Ancient Italy, the feat of the Ro-
man elegance and luxury, was cultivated to the
highest pitch. Butfo effectually did thedevafta-
tions of the barbarians destroy all the effecs of
their industry and cultivation, that in the eighth
century Italy appears to have been covered with
forests and marihes of vast extent. Muratori
enters into a long detail concerning the situation
and limits of there; and proves by the most au-
thentick evidence, that great tracts of territory,
in all the different provinces of Italy, were either
over-run with wood, or laid under water. Nor
did these occupy parts of the country naturally
barren or of little value, but were spread over
diftrish, which ancient writers represent as ex-
tremely fertile, and which at present are highly
cultivated. Muratori antiquitates Italicsa medii
evi, dissert. xxi. v. ii. p. I49, 153, &c. A strong
proof of this occurs in a description of the city
of Modena, by an author of the tenth century.
Murat. script. Rerum Italic. vol. ii. pars ii. p. 69,.
The slate of desolation in other countries of Eu-
rope seems to have been the fame. In many of
the most early charters now extant, the lands
granted to monafterits or to private persons, are
diftinguilhed into such as are cultivated or inha-
bited, and such as were eremi, desolate. In many
instances, lands are granted to persons because
they had taken them from the desert, ab'eremo,
and had cultivated and planted them with in-
habitants. This appears from a charter of
Charlemagne, publilhed by Eckhart de rebus
Franciz Orientalis, vol. ii. p. 864, and from ma-

ny

ny charters of his successors quoted by Du Cange
voc. Eremus. - Wherever a right of property m
land can be thus acquired, it is evident that the
country mutt be extremely desolate, and thinly
peopled. The first settlers in America obtained
pofeflion of land by such a title. Whoever was
able to clear and to cultivate a field, was recog-
nized as the proprietor. His industry merited
such a recompence. The grants in the charters
which I have mentioned flow from a similar
principle, and there must have been some re-
semblance in the Rate of the countries.

MURATORI adds, that during the eighth and

ninth centuries, Italy was greatly infcfted by
wolves and other wild beasts; another mark of
its being destitute of inhabitants. Murat. Antiq.
vol. ii. p. 163. Thus Italy, the pride of the
ancient world for its fertility and cultivation,
was reduced to the state of a country newly
peopled, and rendered habitable.

I AM sensible, not only that some of there

descriptions of the devastations which I have
quoted, may be exaggerated, but that the bar-
barous tribes, in making their settlements, did
not proceed invariably in the fame manner. Some
of them seemed to be bent on exterminating the
ancient inhabitants; others were more disposed
to incorporate with them. It is not my province
either to enquire into the causes which occafi-
oned this variety in the conduct of the conque-
rors, or to describe the state of those countries
where the ancient inhabitants were treated most
mildly. The sacs which I have produced are
sufficient to prove that the deftruaion of the hu-
man species, occasioned by the hostile invasions
of the northern nations, and their subsequent

VOL. 1. P settlements

fcttlements was much greater than many au-
thors seem to imagine.

NOTE VI. SECT. I. p. 12. iF].

I HAVE observed, Note II. that our only cer-

tain infurmation concerning the ancient state of
the barbarous nations must be derived from the
Greek and Roman writers. Happily an account
of the institutions and customs of one people, to
which those of all the reft seem to have been in
a great measure similar, has been transmitted to
us by two authors, the most capable, perhaps,
that ever wrote, of oberving them with profound
discernment, and of describing them with pro-
priety and force. The reader muf perceive that
I have Cafar and Tacitus in my eye: The for-
mer givesa Ihort account of the ancient Germans
in a few chapters of the sixth book of his Com-
mentaries: The latter wrote a treatise expressly
on that subject. These are the most precious and
inftrulive monuments of antiquity to the pre-
sent inhabitants of Europe. From them we
learn,

r. THAT the fRate of Society among the anci-

ent Germans was of the rudest and most simple'
form. They subsisted entirely by hunting or by
pasturage. Caef lib. vi. c. 2a. They neglected
agriculture, and lived chiefly on milk, cheese, and
fle(h. Ibid. c. 2z. Tacitus agrees with him in
most of there points; de morib. Germ. c. 14, 15,
23. The Goths were equally negligent of agri-
culture. Prifc. Rhet. ap. Byz. Script. v. i. p. 31.
B. Society was in the fame Rate among the Huns,
who disdained to cultivate the earth, or to touch
a.plcugh. Amm. Marcel. lib. xxxi. p. 475. The
fame manners took place among th eAlans; ibid.
P- 477. While society remains in this simple

f-ate,
210

fiate, men by uniting together (carcely relinquilh
any portion of their natural independence. Ac-
cordingly we are informed, 2. That the autho-
rity of civil government was extremely limited
among the Germans. During times of peace
they had no common or fixed magifRrate, but
the chief men of every diftric dispensed justice,
and accommodated differences. Caf. ibid. c.
23. Their Kings had not absolute or unbound-
ed power; their authority confited rather in the
privilege of advising, than in the power of com-
manding. Matters of small consequence were
determined by the chief men; affairs of impor-
tance by the whole community. Tacit. c. 7,
i . The Huns, in like manner, deliberated in
common concerning every business of moment
to the society; and were not subjec to the ri-
gour of regal authority. Amm. Marcel. lib.
xxxi. p. 474. 3. Every individual among the
ancient Germans was left at liberty to chufe
whether he would take part in any military en-
terprize which was proposed; there seems to
have been no obligation to engage in it imposed
on him by publick authority. " When any of
the chief men proposes any expedition, such as
approve of the cause and of the leader rife up,
and declare their intention of following him;
those who de not fulfil this engagement, are
confidered as deserters and traitors, and are look-
ed upon as infamous." Caf. ibid. c. 23. TaA
citus plainly points at the fame custom, though
in terms more obscure. Tacit. c. I . 4. As
every individual was so independent, and makfer
in so great a degree of his own ations, it be-
came, of consequence, the great object of eve-
ry person among the Germans, who aimed at
being a leader, to gain adherents, and attach
them to his person and interest. These adhe-
rents Caesar calls Ambalai and Clientes, i. e. re-

P 2 tainers

tainers or clients; Tacitus, Comites, or compani.
ons. The chief diftin&ion and power of the
leaders, consisted in being attended by a nume-
rous band of chosen youth. This was their pride
as well as ornament during peace, and their de-
fence in war. The leaders gained or preserved
the favour of these retainers by presents of ar-
mour, and of horses; or by the profuse, though
inelegant hospitality, with which they entertain-
ed them. Tacit c. 14, 15. 5. Another con-
sequence of the personal liberty and indepen-
dence which the Germans retained, even after
they united in society, was their circumscribing
the criminal jurisdiction of the magistrate within
very narrow limits, and their not only claiming
but exercising almost all the rights of private re-
fentment and revenge. Their magistrates had
not the power either of imprisoning, or of in-
fliAing any corporal punishment on a free man.
Tacit. c. 7. Every perfbn was obliged to avenge
the wrongs which his parents or friends had sus-
tained. Their enmities were hereditary, but
not irreconcilable. Even murder was compen-
fated by paying a certain number of cattle.
Tac. c. a . Apartofthefine wentto theKing,
or fate, a part to the person who had been in-
jured, or to his kindred. Ibid. c. 12.

THOSE particulars concerning the institutions

and mannersof the Germans, though well known
to every person conversant in ancient literature,
I have thought proper to arrange in this order,
and to lay before such of my readers as may be
lers acquainted with there sacs, both because
they confirm the account which I have given of
the Rate of the barbarous nations, and because
they tend to illustrate all the observations 1 ihall
have occasion to make concerning the various
changes in their government and customs. The

laws

laws and customs introduced by the barbarous
nations into their new settlements, are the best
commentary on the writings of Caffar and Taci-
tus; and their observations are the best key to a
perfect knowlege of there laws and customs.

ONE circumstance with refpet to the teftimo-

nies of Cefar and Tacitus concerning the Ger-
mans, merits attention. Cafar wrote his brief
account of their manners more than an hundred
years before Tacitus composed his treatise De
moribus Germanorum. An hundred years make
a considerable period in the progress of national
manners, especially if, during that time, those
people who are rude and unpolilhed have had
much communication with more civilized states.
This was the cafe with the Germans. Their in-
tercourfe with the Romans began when Caesar
crossed the Rhine, and increased prodigiously
during the interval between that event and the
time when Tacitus flourilhed. Besides this, there
was a considerable difference between the state
of society among the different tribes of Germans.
The Suiones were so much improved, that they
began to be corrupted. Tac. cap. 44. The
Fenni were so barbarous, that it is wonderful
how they were able to subsist. Ibid. cap. 46.
Whoever undertakes to describe the manners of
the Germans, or to found any political theory
upon the state of society among them, ought
carefully to attend to both there circumstances.

BEFORE I quit this subje&t, it may not be im-

proper to observe, that though successive altera-
tions in their institutions, together with the gra-
dual progres of refinement, have made an en-
tire change in the manners of the various peo-
ple who conquered the Roman Empire, there is
fill one race of men nearly in the fame political

lituation

213

situation with theirs when they first fettled in
their new conquests: I mean the various tribes
and nations of Savages in North America. It
cannot then be confidered either as a digression,
or as an improper indulgence of curiosity, to
enquire, whether this similarity in their political
fate has occasioned any resemblance between
their charader and manners. If the likeness
turns out to be striking, it is a stronger proof
that ajuft account has been given of the ancient
inhabitants of Europe, than the testimony even
of Cafar or of Tacitus.

r. THE Americans subsist chiefly by hunting

and fishing. Some tribes neglec agriculture
entirely. Among those who cultivate some small
spot near their huts, that, together with all
works of labour, is performed by the women.
P. Charlevoix Journal Hiftorique d'un Voyage
de L'Amerique, 4°. Par. 1774, p. 334. In such
a state of society, the common wants of men
being few, and their mutual dependence upon
each other small, their union is extremely im-
perfect and feeble, and they continue to enjoy
their natural liberty almost unimpaired. It is
the first idea of an American, that every man is
born free and independent, and that no power
on earth hath any right to diminish or circum-
scribe his natural liberty. There is hardly any
appearance of subordination either in civil or
domestic government. Every one does what he
pleases. A father and mother with their chil-
dren, live like persons whom chance has brought
together, and whom no comrron bond unites.
Their manner of educating their children is fui-
table to this principle. They never chastise or
punish them, even during their infancy.' As
they advance in years, they allow them to be en'
tirely masters of their own actions, and refpon-

fible

fible to nobody. Id. p. 272, 273. -'- 2. Th'
power of their civil magistrates is extremely
limited. Among most of their tribes, the Sachem
or chief is elective. A council of old men is
chosen to aflift him, without whore advice
he determines no affair of importance. ThE
Sachems neither poflefs nor claim any great
degree of authority. They propose and intrear
rather than command. The obedience of their
people is altogether voluntary. Id. pz266, 2647
- 3. The savages of America engage in any'
military enterprize, not from confiraint, but
choice. When war is resolved, a cfief arises
and offers himself to be the leader. Such as
are willing (for they compel no person) stand
up one after another, and sing their war tong.
But if after this, any of there (hould ,efufe ti'
follow the leader, to whom they havtc engaged,'
his life would be in danger, and he would be'
confidered as the most infambus6f:a 'll men.
Id. p. 217, 21 8. - 4. Such as engage to'follow
any leader, expe&t to be treated by. him with
great attention and refpecA; and hle is obliged
to make them presents of considerable value. Id.
p. 218. -5. Among:the Americans, the ma-
giftrate has scarcely any criminal judfridition.
Id. p. 272. Upon receiving any injury, the
person or family offended, may infli& what pu-
nifhment they please on the person who was the
author of it. Id. p. 274. Their resentment and
desire of vengeance are exceflfive and implacable.
Time can neither extinguish nor abate it. It is
the chief inheritance parents leave to their chil-
dren; it is transmitted from generation to gene-
ration, until an occasion be found of satisfying
it. Id. p. 309. Sometimes, however, the offend-
ed party is appeased. A compensation is paid
for a murder that has been committed. The'
relations of the deceased receive it; and it con-

fils

2!5

ifts most commonly of a captive taken in war
who being substituted in place of the person who
was murdered, affimes his name, and is adopted
into his family. Id. p. 274. The resemblance
holds in many other particulars. It is fuficient
for my purpose to have pointed out the similarity
ofthofe great features which distinguish and cha-
ra&erize both people. Bochart, and other phi-
ologifts of the last century, who, with more
erudition than science, endeavoured to trace the
migrations of various nations, and who were apt,
upon the flightet appearance of resemblance, to
find an ainity between nations far removed from
each other, and to conclude that they were
descended from the fme ancestors, would
hardly have failed, on viewing such an amazing
fmilarity, to.pronounce with confidence, "That
the Gemana and Americans muf be the fame
people." But a philosopher will satisfy himself
with obfeving, " That the charaoters of nations
depend on the tate of ociety in which they live,
and on the political inoitutions eftablilhed among
themn and dat the human mind, whenever it
is placed in the lame ituation, will, in ages the
mot distant, and in oountries the most renote,
affame the fame form, and be diingtifiled by
the fame manner."

I HAVE pufled the comparison betwee~ tho

Germans and Americans no farther than was
necefary for the illiuration of my fubje&. I
do not pretend that the fate of society in the
two countries was perfestly limilar. Many of
the German tribes wer,: mwre civilized than the
Americans. Some of ttem were not unacquaint-
ed with agriculture; almoR all of them had
flocks of tame catle, and depended for thechief
part of their fubfitence upon these. Mot of
the American tribes subsist by hunting and are

in

in a ruder and more simple state than the ancient
Germans. The resemblance, however, between
their condition, is greater perhaps than any that
history affords an opportunity of observing be-
tween two races of uncivilized nations, and this
has produced a furprizing similarity of man-
ners.

NOTE VII. SECT. I. p. 13. [G].

THE booty gained by an army belonged to

the army. The King himself had no part of it
but what he acquired by lot. A remarkable in-
fiance of this occursin the history of the Franks.
The army of Clovis, the founder of the French
monarchy, having plundered a church, carried
off, among other sacred utensils, a vase of ex-
traordinary size and beauty. The bilhop sent
deputies to Clovis, beseeching him to restore the
vase, that it might be again employed in the fa-
cred services to which it had been consecrated.
Clovis desired the deputies to follow him to
Soissons, as the booty was to be divided in that
place, and promised, that if the lot should give
him the disposal of the vase, he would grant
what the bishop desired. When he came to
Soissons, and all the booty was placed in one
great heap in the middle of the army, Clovia
intreated, that before making the division, they
would give him that vase over and above his
share. Al appeared willing to gratify the King,
and to comply with his requef, when a fierce
and haughty loldier lifted up his battle-axe, and
striking the vase with the utmost violence, cried
out with a loud voice, " You fiall receive no-
thing here but that to which the lot gives you a
right." Gregor. Turon Hiftor. Francorur, lib.
ii. c. 27. p. 70. Par. 16.o.

NOTE

NOTE VIII. SECT. I. p. 15. [H].

THE history of the establishment and progress

of the feudal system, is an interesting object to
all the nations of Europe. In some countries,
th:irjurifprudence and laws are fill in a great
measure feudal. In others, many forms and
practices established by custom, or founded on
statutes, took their rife from the feudal law, and
cannot be understood without attending to the
ideas peculiar to it. Several authors of the high-
eft reputation for genius and erudition, have en-
deavoured to illustrate this subjet, but they
have left many parts of it obscure. I (hall en-
deavour to trace, with precision, the progress and
variation of ideas concerning property in land
among the barbarous nations; and shall attempt
to point out the causes which introduced these
changes, as well as the effects which followed
upon them. Property in land seems to have
gone through four successive changes among the
people who fettled in the various provinces of
the Roman Empire.

I. WHILE the barbarous nations remained in

their original countries, their property in land
was only temporary, and they had no certain li-
mits to their pofleflions. After feeding their
flocks in one diftri&, they removed with them,
their wives and families, to another; and aban-
doned that likewise in a short time. They were
not, in consequence of this imperfect pecies of
property, brought under any positive or formal
obligation to serve the community; all their ser-
vices were purely voluntary. Every individual
was at liberty to chute how far he would contri-
bute towards carrying on any military enterprize.
If he followed a leader in any expedition, it was

from
218

from attachment, not from a sense of obligation.
The clearest proof of this has been produced in
Note VI. While property continued in this slate,
we can discover nothing that bears any refem-
blance to a feudal tenure, or t9 the fubordina-
tion and military service which the feudal system
introduced.

II. UosN fettling in the countries which they

had subdued, the vi&orious troops divided the
conquered lands. Whatever portion of them
fell to a soldier, he seized as the recompence due
to his valour, as a settlement acquired by his own
sword. He took possession of it as a freeman in
full property. He enjoyed it during his own life,
and could dispose of it at pleasure, or transmit
it as an inheritance to his children. Thus pro-
perty in land became fixed. It was at the fame
time allodial, i. e. the possessor had the entire
right of property and dominion; he held of no
sovereign or superior lord, to whom he was
bound to do homage, and perform service. But
as there new proprietors were in some danger
(as has been observed in the text) of being dif-
turbed by the remainder of the ancient inhabi-
tants, and in frill greater danger of being at-
tacktd by successive colonies of barbarians as
fierce and rapacious as themselves, they saw the
neceflity of coming under obligations to defend
the community, more explicit than those to
which they had been fubje& in their original ha-
bitations. On this account, immediately upon
their fixing in their new settlements, every free-
man became bound to take arms in defence of
the community, and if he refused or negle&ed
so to do, was liable to a considerable penalty. I
do not mean that any contract of this kind was
formally concluded, or mutually ratified by any
legal solemnity. It was established by tacit con-

lent,

219

sent, like the other compa&ts which hold society
togther. Their mutual security and preferva-
tion made it the interest of all to recognize its
authority, and to enforce the observation of it.
We can trace back this new obligation an the
proprietors of land, to a very early period in the
history of the Franks. Chilperic, who began his
reign A.D. 562, exated a fine, bannos jufit
xigi, from certain persons who had refused to
accompany him in an expedition. Gregor. Tu-
ron. lib. v. c. 26. p. 211. Childibert, who be,
gan his reign A. D. 576, proceeded in the fame
manner against others who had been guilty of a
like crime. Id. ib. vii. c. 42. p. 342. Such a
fine could not have been exa&ed while property
continued in its first fate, and military service
was entirely voluntary. Charlemagne ordained
that every freeman who poffefled five manfi,
i. e. sixty acres of land, in property, should march
in person against the enemy. Capitul. A. D.
807. Louis le Debonnaire, A. D. 815, granted
lands to certain Spaniards who fed from the Sa-,
racens, and allowed them to fettle in his territo.
ner, on condition that they (hould fcnre in the
army like oter free mn. Capitul. voL i. p. 500.
By land possessed in property, which is mention.
ed in the law of Charlemagne, we are to under-
iand, according to the file of that age, allodial
land; al and proprietas adam and proprium
being words perfectly fynonimous. Du Cange
voce A.odi. The dearest proof of the diftinc-
tion between allodial and beneficiary pofefilon,
is contained in two charters publilhed by Mura-
tori, by which it appears that a person might
posies onepart of his estate as allodial, which
he could dispose of at pleasure; the other as a
beneficium, of which he had only the ufufru&t,
the proprty returning to the superior Lord on
his demise. Antiq. Ital. medii avi, vol. i. p.

559i

559, 565. The fame diftin&ion is pointed out
in a Capitulare of Charlemagne, A. D. 812. edit.
Baluz. vol. i. p. 49r. Count Everard, who
married a daughter of Louis le Debonnaire, in
the curious testament, by which he disposes of
his vast estate among his children, distinguishes
between what he poffefled proprietate, and what
he held benefcio, and it appears that the greater
part was allodial. A. D. 837. Aub. Mirei
Opera Diplomatica Lovan. 1723. p. 19.

IN the fame manner Liber bomo is commonly

opposed to VaIfus or Vaffallus; the former de-
notes an allodial proprietor, the latter one who
held of a superior. These r men were under
an obligation to serve the tate; and this duty
was confidered as so sacred, that free men were
prohibited from entering into holy orders unless
they had obtained the consent of the sovereign.
The reason given for this in the Ratute is re-
markable: " For we are informed that some do
so, not so much out of devotion, as in order to
avoid that military service which they are bound
to perform. Capitul. lib i. § 114. If upon
being summoned into the field, any freeman re-
fused to obey, a full Herebannum, i. e. a fine of
sixty crowns, was to be exated from him ac-
cording to the law of the Franks." Capit. Car.
magn. ap. Leg. Longob. lib. i. tit. 14. § 13. p.
539. This expression, according to thelaw of
the Franks, seems to imply that both the obliga-
tion to serve, and the penalty on those who dif-
regarded it, were coeval with the laws made by
the Franks at their first settlement in Gaul. This
fine was levied with such rigour, " That if any
person convicted of this crime was insolvent, he
was reduced to servitude, and continued in that
state until such time as his labour (houtd amount
to the value of the berebannm.' Ibid. The Em-

peror

peror Lotharius rendered the penalty till more
severe; and if any person poffefling such an ex-
tent of property as made it incumbent on him to
take the field in person, refused to obey the
summons, all his goods were declared to be for-
feited, and he himself might be punished with
banihment. Murat. Script. Ital. vol. i. pars ii. p.
153.

II. PROPERTY in land having thus become

fixed and subjed to military service, another
change was introduced, though slowly, and ftep
by ftep. We learn from Tacitus, that the
chief men among the Germans endeavoured to
attach to their persons and interests certain ad-
herents whom he calls Comites. These fought
under their flandard, and followed them in all
their enterprizes. The fame custom continued
among them in their new settlements, and those
attached or devoted followers were called fideles
antruftiones, bomines in trufa Dominica, leudes.
Tacitus informs us, that the rank of a Comes
was deemed honourable; De roorib. Germ. c.
13. The composition, which is the standard
by which we must judge of the rank and con-
dition of persons in the middle ages, paid for.
the murder of one in trufJe Dominica, was triple
to that paid for the murder of a freeman. Leg.
Salicor. Tit. 44. § i. & a. While the Germans
remained in their own countr3 they courted the
favour of there Comites by presents of arms
and horses, and by hospitality. See Note VI.
As long as they had no fixed property in land,
there were the only gifts that they could bestow,
and the only reward which their followers de-
fired. But upon their fettling in the countries
which they conquered, and when the value of
property came to be understood among them,
instead of those flight presents, the Kings and
chieftains bestowed a more substantial recom-

pence

pence in land on their adherents. There grants
were called beneficia, because they were gratui-
tous donations; and bonores, because they were
regarded as marks of diRlin&ion. What were
the services originally exacted in return for these
beneficia cannot be determined with absolute pre-
cifion; because there are no records so ancient.
When allodial possessions were first rendered feu-
dal, they were not, at once, fubjeted to all the
feudal services. The transition here, as in all
other changes of importance, was gradual. As
the great object of a feudal vassal was to obtain
protecion, when allodial proprietors first con-
sented to become vassals of any powerful leader,
they continued to retain as much of their ancient
independence as was confifent with that new
relation. The homage which they did to the
superior of whom they chore to hold, was called
bomngium planum, and bound them to nothing
more than fidelity, but without any obligation
either of military service, or attendance in the
courts of their superior. Of this bomagium pla-
num some traces, though obscure, may fill be
discovered. Bruffel, tom. i. p. 97. Among the
ancient writs publilhed by D. D. De Vic &
Vaifette hist. de Langued. are a great many
which they call homagia. They seem to be an
intermediate itep between the homagium planum
mentioned by Bruffel, and the engagement to
perform complete feudal service. The one
party promises protecion, and grants certain
cafiles or lands; the other engages to defend the
person of the granter, and to assist him likewise
in defending his property as often as he Shall be
summoned to do so. But there engagements are
accompanied with none of the feudal formalities,
and no mention is made of any of the other
feudal services. They appear rather to be a
mutual contract between equals, than the en-

gagement

223

gagement of a vaflul to perform Cervices to a
superior d. Preuves de 1hist. de Lang. tom.
ii. 173. & paflim. As loon as men were ac-
customed to these, the other feudal services
were gradually introduced. M. de Montesquieu
confiders these benefci asfiefs, which originally
fubje~ed those who held them to military ser-
vice. L'Efpr.des Loix, 1. xxx. c. 3. & 6. M.
L'abbe de Mably contends that such as held
these were at firit fubjefted to no other service
than what was incumbent on every free man.
Observations fur l'hiftoire de France, I. 356.
But upon compairing their proofs and reason-
ingsand conjectures, it seems to be evident,
that as every free man, in consequence of his
allodial property, was bound to serve the com-
munity under a severe penalty, no good reason
can be assigned for conferring there beneficia, if
they did not fubje& such as received them to
some new obligation. Why mhould a King have
tripped himfedf of his domain, if he had not
expe~ed, that, by parcelling it out, he might
acquire a right to services to which he had for-
merly no title ? We may then warrantably con-
dude, " That as allodial property fubjeced
those who pofeflfed it to serve the community,
so Hial fubjeced such as held them, to per-
fonal service and fidelity to him from whom
they received these lands. These beneficia were
granted originally only during pleasure. No
circumstances relating to the customs of the
middle ages is better ascertained than this ; and
innumerable proofs of it might be added to those
produced in L'Efprit des Loix, L xxx. c. I6.
and by Du Cange voc. befium & f dwm.

IV. BUT the pofetlion of benefices did not

continue long in this fate. A precarious te-
nure, during pleasure, was not sufficient to fiusf

such

such as held it; and by various. means, they
gradually obtained the confirmation of their be-
nefices during life. Feudor. lib. tit. i. Du
Cange produces several quotations from ancient
charters and chronicles in proof of this; Gloss.
voc. Beneficium. After thisit was easy toobtain
or extort charters rendering beneficia hereditary,
firit in the dire& line, then in the collateral, and
at last in the female line. Leg. Longob. lib. iii.
tit. 8. Du Cange, voc. Beneficium.

IT is no easy matter to fix the precise time

when each of there changes took place. M.
1'Ab. Mably conjetures with some probability,
that Charles Martel first introduced the pra&ice
of granting beneficia for life: Obfervat. tor. i.
p. o3, I60; and that Louis le Debonnaire was
among the first who rendered them hereditary,
is evident for the authorities to which he refers,
Id. 429. Mabillon, however, has published a
placitum of Louis le Debonnaire, A. D. 860,
by which it appears, that he still continued to
grant some beneficia only during life. De re
Diplomatica, lib. vi. p. 353. In the year 889,
Odo King of France granted lands to Ricabodo
fideli fuojure beneficiario & fructuario during his
own life; and if he (hould die, and a son were
born to him, that right was to continue during
the life of his son. Mabillon, ut supra, p. 556.
This was an intermediate ftep between fiefs
merely during life, and fiefs hereditary to per-
petuity. While beneficia continued under their
first form, and were held only during pleasure,
he who granted them not only exercised the Do-
mininus or prerogative of superior Lord, but he
retained the property, giving his vaflal only the
ufufruet. But under the latter form, when they
become hereditary, although feudal lawyers con-
tinued to define a beneficium agreeably to its

VOL. 1. Q original

225

original nature, the property was in effec taket
out of the hands of the superior lords, and
lodged in those of the vassal. As soon as the
reciprocal advantages of the feudal mode of te-
nure came to be understood by superiors as well
as vafials, that species of holding became so
agreeable to both, that not only lands, but ca-
fual rents, such as the profits of a toll, and fare
paid at ferries, &c. the salaries or perquisites of
offices, and even pensions themselves, were grant-
ed and held as fiefs; and military service was
promised and exacted on account of there. Mo-
rice Mem. pour fervir de preuves a l'hit. de Bre.
tagne, tom. ii. 78. 69. Bruffel, tom. i. p. 41.
How absurd soever it may seem to grant or to
hold such precarious and casual property as a
fief, there are inftanccs of feudal tenures fill
more singular. The profits arising from the
tnafles said at an altar, were properly an eccle-
fiaftical revenue, belonging to the clergy of the
church or monastery which performed that duty;
but these were sometimes seized by the power-
ful barons. In order to ascertain their right to
them, they held them as fiefs of the church,
*nd parcelled them out in the fame manner as
other property to their fub-vaffals. Bouquet.
recueil des hist vol. x. 238. 480. The fame'
spirit of encroachment which rendered fiefs he-
reditary, led the nobles to extort from their so-
vereigns hereditary grants of offices. Many of
the great offices of the crown became hereditary
in most of the kingdoms in Europe; and so
conscious were monarchs of this spirit of ufur-
pation among the nobility, and so solicitous to
guard against it, that, on some occasions, they
obliged the persons whom they promoted to any
office of dignity, to grant an obligation that
neither they, nor their heirs, hould claim it as
belonging to them by hereditary right. A re-

markable

markable instance of this is produced, Mem. de
I'Acad. des Infcript. tom. xxx. p. 595. Another
occurs in the Thefaur. anecdot. published by
Martene & Durand, vol. i. p. 873. -This revo-
lution in property occasioned a change corref-
ponding to it in political government; the great
vaflals of the crown, as they acquired such ex-
tensive poffeflions, uurped a proportional degree
of power, deprefied the jurifdi&ion of the crown,
and trampled on the privileges of the people. It
is on account of this conne&ion, that it becomes
an objec of importance in history to trace the
progress of feudal property; for, upon discovering
in what state property was at any particular pe-
riod, we may determine with precision what was
the degree of power porfeffed by the King or by
the nobility at that juncture.

ONE circumstance more, with refpet to the

changes which property underwent, deserves
attention. I have (hewn, that when the various
tribes of barbarians divided their conquests in
the fifth and sixth centuries, the property which
they acquired was allodial; but in several parts
of Europe, property had become almost entirely
feudal by the beginning of the tenth century.
The former species of property seems to be so
much better and more desirable than the latter;
that such a change appears furprizing, especially
when we are informed that allodial property was
frequently converted into feudal, by a voluntary
deed of the possessor. The motives which de-
termined them to a choice so repugnant to the
ideas of modern times concerning property, have
been investigated and explained by M. de Mon-
tefquieu with his usual discernment and accuracy,
lib. xxxi. c. 8. The most considerable is that of
which we have an hint in Lambertus Ardenfis, an
ancient writer quoted by Du Cange, voce Alodis.

Q2z la

In those times of anarchy and disorder which
became general in Europe after the death of
Charlemagne, when' there was scarcely any
union among the different members of the com-
munity, and individuals were exposed, single
and undefended by government, to rapine and
opprefllion, it became necessary for every man
to have a powerful protector, under whose ban-
ner he might range himself, and obtain security
against enemies whom he could not singly op-
pose. For this reason he relinquished his allodial
independence, and fubje&ed himself to the
feudal services, that he might find safety under
the patronage of some refpeatable superior. In
some parts of Europe, this change from allodial
to feudal property became so general, that he
who possessed land had no longer any liberty of
choice left. He was obliged to recognize some
liege lord, and to hold of him. Thus Beaa-
manoir informs us, that in the counties of Cler-
montand Beauvois, if the Lord or Count disco-
vered any lands within his jurisdiction, for
which no service was performed, and which
paid to him no tax or customs, he might in-
ftantly seize it as his own; for, fays he, accord-
ing to our cuttom no man can hold allodial pro-.
perty. Couft. ch. 24. p. 123. Upon the fame
principle is founded a maxim, which has at
length become general in the law of France,
Nulle terrefans Seigneur. In other provinces of
France, allodial property seems to have remain-
ed longer unalienated, and to have been more
highly valued. A vast number of charters,
containing grants, or sales, or exchanges of al-
lodial lands in the province of Languedoc, are
publilhed, Hist. gener. de Langued. par-D.D.
De Vic & Vaifette, tom. ii. During the ninth,
tenth, and great part of the eleventh century,
the property in that province seems to have been

entirely

entirely allodial; and scarcely any mention of
feudal tenures occurs in the deeds of that coun-
try. The slate of property, during these cen-
turies, seems to have been perfetly similar in
Catalonia, and the country of Roussillon, as ap-
pears from the original charters published in the
Appendix to Petr. de la Marca's treatire de Marca
five limite Hifpanico. Allodial property seems
to have continued in the Low Countries, to a
period till later. During the eleventh, twelfth,
and thirteenth centuries, this species of property
appears to have been of considerable extent.
Miraei opera Diplom. vol. i. 34, 74, 75, 83, 817,
296, 842, 847, 578. Some vestiges of allodial
property appear there as late as the fourteenth
century. Ibid. 218. Several sass, which prove
that allodial property subsisted in different parts
of Europe long after the introduction of feudal
tenures, and which tend to illusrate the diftinc-
tion between these two different species of pof-
session, are produced by M. Houard. Anciennes
Loix des Fransois, conservees dans les Coutumes
Angloifes, vol. i. p. 192, &c. The Rotions of
men with refpct to property, vary according to
the diversity of their understandings, and the
caprice of theig passions. At the fame time that
f9me persons were fond of relinquishing allodial
pOrty, in. order to hold .it by feudal tenure,
otliers eem to have ;heen solicitous to convert
their fiefs into allodial tproperty. An inftance-of
this ccurs in. cmharter.;of Louis le 3ebpnnair¢,
pu~bjised' ky ;cd, CComrmentarii e rebus
Francae Orie-talis~ vnl. ii. p.. 885. -Another
ocQurs in the yar l299. Reliquia MSS. omnis
avi, by Ludwigt voL i. p. .ag. andeven ones
late as the year ,.337. Ibid. vol. vii. p, 40. The
fme thing took place in the Low Countries.
MibrasiPper. I. 52.

IN tracing these various revolutions of proper-

ty, I have hitherto chiefly confined myself to
what happened in France, because the ancient
monuments of that nation have either been more
carefully preserved, or have been more clearly
illufrated than those of any people in Europe.

IN Italy, the fame revolutions happened in

property, and succeeded each other in the fame
order. There is -Come ground, however, for
conjecturing that allodial property continued
longer in estimation among the Italians, than a-
mong the French. It appears, that many of
the charters granted by the Emperors in the
ninth century, conveyed an allodial right to land.
Murat. antiq. med. avi, v. i. p. 575, &c. But
in the eleventh century, we find some examples
of persons who resigned their allodial property,
and received it back as a feudal tenure. Id. p.
61o, &c. Muratori observes, that the word
feumdm, which came to be substituted in the
place of beneficium, does not occur in any au-
thentic charter previous to theeleventh centuy.
Id. 594 A charter of King Rotert of France,
A. D. oo8, is the earliest deed in which I have
met with the word sedum. Bouquet recueil des
hiftoriens de Gaule & de la France, torn. x. p.
593. b. This word occurs indeed in an edi&,
A. D. 790, published by Bruffel, vol. i. p. 77.
But the authenticity of that deed has been call:
ed in question; and perhaps the frequent-frueóf
the word feudum in it, is an additional ref(on'f6o
doing so. -The account which l'have givefiof
the nature both of allodial and feudal poffeffin.s
receives some confirmation 'from the etymrolog
of the words themselves. Adde or allodiumis
compounded of the German particle an 'ndt. :t
i. e. land obtained by lot. Wachteri Glbffar.
Germanicum, voc. Allodium, p. 35. It appears

from
230

from the authorities produced by him and by
Du Cange, voc.fors, that the. northern nations
divided the lands which they conquered in this
manner. Feodum is compounded ofod poffefi-
on or estate, and feo wages, pay; intimating
that it was stipendiary and granted as a recom-
pence for service. Wachterus ibid. voc.feodum,
p. 441.

THE progress of the feudal system among the

Germans was perfecly similar to that which we
have traced in France. But as the Emperors of
Germany, especially after the Imperial crown
passed from the descendants of Charlemagne to
the house of Saxony, were far superior to the con-
temporary Monarchs of France, in abilities, the
the Imperial vaflals did not aspire so early to in-
dependence, nor did they so soon obtain the pri-
vilege of pofTefling their benefices by hereditary
right. According to the compilers of the Libri
Feudorum, Conrad II. or the Salic, was the first
Emperor, who rendered fiefs hereditary. Lib,
i. tit. I. Conrad began his reign A. D. 1024.
Ludovicus Pius, under whose reign grants of
hereditary fiefs were frequent in France, fuc-
ceeded his father, A. D. 814. Not only was
this innovation so much later in being introduced
among the vassals of the German Emperors, but
even after Conrad had established it, the law
continued favourable to the ancientpracice, and
unless the charter of the vffaal bore expressly
that the fief descended to his heirs, it .waspre-
fumed to be granted only during life. Lib. feud.
ibid. Even after the alteration made by Conrad,
it was not uncommon in Germany to grant fiefs
only for life; a charter of this kind occurs as late
as the year 1376. Charta ap. Boehmer.Princip.
Jur. feud. p. 361. The transmission of fiefs to
collateral and female heirs, took place very

slowly

slowly among the Germans. There is extant a
charter, A. D. 120o, conveying the right of
succession to females but it is granted as an ex.
traordinary mark of favour, and in reward of
uncommon services. Boehmer. ibid. p. 365.
In Germany, as well as in France and Italy, a
considerable part of the lands continued to be al-
lodial long after the feudal mode of tenure was
introduced. It appears from the Codex Diplo-
maticus Monafterii Buch, that a great part of
the lands in the marquisate of Mifnia was still
allodial aólateasthe thirteenth century. N° 31,
56, 37, 46, &c. ap. Scriptores hist. German.
cura Schoetgenii & Kreyfigii. Altenb. 1755. vol,
ii. 183, &c. Allodial property seems to have
been common in another diftri& of the fame pro-
vince, during the fane period. Reliquia Diplo-
matice San&imonial, Beutiz. N0 17, 36, 58,
ibid. 374, &c.

NOTE IX. SECT.I.. 1. . [I].

As I fall have occasion, in another note, to

reprefnt the condition of that part of the people
who dwelt in cities, I will confine myfielf in this
to confider the fate of the inhabitants of the
country. The persons neployed in cultivating
thegroundduring the ages under review maybe
divided into three clafles; 1. &r'vi or slaves. This
seems to have been the most numerous class, and
consisted either of captives taken in wa, or of
persons the property in whom was acquired in
some one of the various methods enunmerated by
DuCange, voc. frms, v. 6. p. 447. The wretch-
ed condition of this numerous race of-mea wil
appear from several cireunmfances. i. Thei
nmaters had absolute dominion over theirperfons.
They had the power of putifhing their slaves ca-
pitally, without the intervention of any judge.

This

This dangerous right they pofeffed not only in
the more early periods, when their manners were
fierce, but it continued as late as the twelfth
century. Joach. Potgiefferus de fatu fervorum.
Lemgov. 1736. 4to. lib. ii. cap. i. § 4, 1o, 13,
24. Even after thisjurifdi&ion ofmaifers came
to be restrained, the life of a slave was deemed
to be of so little value, that a very flight com-
penfation atoned for taking it away. Idem, lib.
iii. c. 6. If maiters had power over the lives of
their slaves, it is evident that almost no bounds
would be set to the rigour of the punishments
which they might inflict upon them. The codes
of ancient laws prescribed punishments for the
crimes of slaves different from those which were
inflicted on free men. The latter paid only a
fine or compensation, the former were fubjeted
to corporal punishments. The cruelty of these
was in many initances excessive. Slaves might
be put to the rack on very flight occasions. The
laws with refpeft to these points are to be found
in Potgiefferus, lib. iii. cap. 7. 2. If the domi-
nion of maiters over the lives and persons of
their slaves was thus extensive, it was no less so
over their a&tions and property. They were not
originally permitted to marry. Male and female
slaves were allowed and even encouraged to co-
habit together. But this union was not confidered
as a marriage; it was called contubernium, not
nuptia or matrimonium. Potgieff. lib. ii . c. § i
This notion was so much established, that during
several centuries after the barbarous nations em-
braced the Christian religion, slaves, who lived as
hulband and wife, were notjoined together by
any religious ceremony, and did not receive the
nuptial benediction from a priet. Ibid..§ io,
1 . When this conjunction between slaves came
to be confidered as a lawful marriage, they were
not permitted to marry without the content of

their

their matier; and such as ventured to do so
without obtaining that, were punished with great
severity, and Sometimes were put to death.
Potgieff. ibid. §i 2, &c. Gregor. Turon. hiftor.
lib. v. c. 3. When the manners of the Euro-
pean nations became more gentle, and their ideas
more liberal, slaves who married without their
maRter's content, were fubjeded only to a fine.
Potgieff. ibid. § 20. Du Cange Glofi voc.
Forimaritagium. 3. All the children of slaves
were in the fame condition with their parents,
and became the property of the mafier. Di
Cange Gloss. voc. fervus, vol. vi. 450. Murat.
antiq. Ital. vol. i. 766. 4, Slaves were so entirely
the property of their maters, that they could fell
them at pleasure. While domeftick slavery con-
tinued, property in a slave was fold in the fame
manner with that which a person had in any other
moveable. Afterwards slaves became adfcripti
glebe, and were conveyed by sale, together
with the farm or estate to which they belonged.
Potgieffrms has collected the laws and charters
which illustrate this well-known circumstance in
the condition of slaves. Lib. ii. c. 4. 5. Slaves
had a title to nothing but subsistence and clothes
from their master; all the profits of their labour
accrued to him. If a master, from indulgence,
gave his slaves any pecrlium or fixed allowance
for their subsistence, they had no right of pro-
perty in what they saved out of that. All that
they accumulated belonged to their matier.
Potgieff. lib. ii. c. io. Murat. antiq. Ita.-p. 768.
Du Cange, voc.fer~vs, voL vi. p. 451. Con-
formably to the fame principle, all the effets of
slaves belonged to their master at their death,
and they could not dispose of them by testament.
Potgieff lib. ii. c. i v. 6. Slaves were distinguish-
ed from free men by a peculiar dress. Amohg
all the barbarous nations, long hair was a mark

of

of dignity and of freedom, slaves were for that
reason obliged to (have their heads; and by this
diftin&ion, how indifferent soever it may be in
its own nature, they were reminded every mo-
ment of the inferiority of their condition. Potgief.
lib. iii. c. 4. For the fame reason it was enafted,
in the laws of almost all the nations of Europe,
that no slave should be admitted to give evidence
against a free man in a cuqrt of justice. Du
Cange, voc. fervu., vol vi. p. 451. Potgieff.
lib. iii. c. 3,

2. tillani. THEY were likewise adfcriptiglebe

or villa, from which they derived their name,
and were transferable along with it. Du Cange,
voc. villanus. But in this they differed from
saves, that they paid a fixed rent to their master
for the land which they cultivated; and after
paying that, all the fruits of their labour and
industry belonged to themselves in property.
This diftintion is marked by Piere de Fontaine's
Confeil. Vie de St. Louis par Joinville, p. i 9,
edit. de Du Cange. Several cafes decided agree-
ably to this principle are mentioned by Murat,
Ibid. 773,

3. THIS las class ofperfons employed in agri.

culture were free men. These are diftinguilled
by various names among the writers of the mid-
dle ages, Arimanni, conditionales, originarii, tri-
butales, &c. These seem to have been persons
who poflelled some small allodial property of
their own, and besides that, icultivated some
farm belonging to their more wealthy neighbours,
for which they paid a fixed rent; and bound
themselves likewise to perform several small ser-
vices in prato vel in mefre, in arutura vel in vinea,
such as ploughing a certain quantity of their
landlord's ground, assisting him in harvest and

vintage

vintage work, &c. The clearet proof of this
may be found in Muratori, v. i. p. 712. and in
Du Cange under the refpedive words above-.
mentioned. I have not been able to discover
whether these arimanni, &c. were removable at
pleasure, or held their farms by lease for a cer-
tain number of years. The former, if we may
judge from the genius and maxims of the age,
seems to be most probable. These persons, how-
ever, were confidered as free men in the most
honourable sense of the word; they enjoyed all
the privileges of that condition, and were even
called to serve in war; an honour to which no
slave was admitted. Murat. Antiq. vol. i. p. 743.
vol. ii p. 446. This acoount of the condition
of there three different classes of persons, will
enable the reader.to apprehend the full force of
an argument which I shall produce in confir-
mation of what I have iaid in the text concern-
ing the wretched Rate of the people during the
middle ages, Notwithstanding the immense
difference between the first of these clafTes and
the third, such was the fIprit of tyranny which
prevailed among the great proprietors of land,
and so various their opportunities of opprefling
those who were fettled on their estates, and of-
rendering their condition intolerable, that many
free men, in despair; renounced their liberty,
and .volutarily surrendered, tbemfelves as slaves
to .their powerful maffers. This' they did, in
onder thit their mastes .might become more
immediately interested toefford them protection,
together with the means of subsisting therpfelvye
and theii families. The forms of such a fur-
render, .or obnaxiatio, as it was then called, are
preserved by Marculfus, lib. ii. c. 28; and by
the anonymous author published by M. Bignon,
together with the colleaion offormue compiled
by Marculfus, c. 6. In both, the reason given

for

for the obnoxiatio, is the wretched and indigent
condition of the person who gives up his liberty.
It was fill more common for free men to fur-
render their liberty to bilhops or abbots, that
they might partake of the security which the
vasals and slaves of churches and monasteries
enjoyed, in consequence of the fuperflitious
veneration paid to the faint under whose imme-
diate protetion they were supposed to be taken.
Du Cange, voc. oblatus, vol. iv. p. 1286. That
condition must have been miserable indeed,
which could induce a free man voluntarily to
renounce his liberty, and to give up himself as
a slave to the disposal of another. The number
of slaves in every nation of Europe was prodi-
gious. The greater part of the inferior class of
people in France were reduced to this slate, at
the commencement of the third race of Kings.
L'efpr. des Loix, liv. xxx. c. i. The fame
was the cafe in England.- Brady Pref. to Gen.
Hist. Many curious fats with refpet to the
ancient state of villains or slaves in England, are
published in Observations on the flatutes, chiefly
the more ancient, 2d edit. p. 244.

NOTE X. SECT. I.P .

22. [K].

INNUMERABLE proofs of this might be pro.

duced. Many charters granted by persons of
the highest rank are preserved, from which it
appears that they could not subscribe their name.
It was usual for persons who could not write, to
make the sign of the cross, in confirmation of a
charter. Several of there remain, where Kings
and persons of great eminence affix fignum cru-
cis manu propria pro ignoratione literarum. Du
Cange, voc. Crux, vol. iii. p. tlgi. From
this is derived the phrase of signing instead of
subscribing a paper. In the ninth century, Her-

baud

237

baud Comes Palatii, though supreme judge of
the Empire by virtue of his office, could not
subscribe his name. Nouveau Traiti de Diplo-
matique par deux Benedictins, 4to. tom. ii. p.
422. As late as the fourteenth century, Du
Guefclin, constable of France, the greatest man
in the state, and one of the greatest men of his
age, could neither read nor write. St. Palaye
Memoires fur I ancienne Chevalerie, t. ii. p. 82.
Nor was this ignorance confined to laymen; the
greater part of the clergy was not many degrees
superior to them in science. Many dignified
ecclefafticks could not subscribe the canons of
those councils, in which they fat as members.
Nouv. Traite de Diplom. tom. ii. p. 424. One
of the questions appointed by the canons to be
put to persons who were candidates for orders
was this, "Whether they could read the gof-
pels and epistles, and explain the sense of them
at least literally ?" Regino Prumienfis ap. Bruck.
Hist. Philof. v. iii. p. 631. Alfred the Great
complained, that from the Humber to the
Thames there was not a priest who understood
the liturgy in his mother-tongue, or who could
tranilate the eaieft piece of Latin; and that
from the Thames to the sea, the Ecclefiafticks
were fRill more ignorant. Aferus de rebus ge-
tis Alfredi, ap. Camdeni. Anglica, &c. p. 25.
The ignorance of the clergy is quaintly dc-
fcribed by an author of the dark ages. " Potius
dedidi gule quam Gloffae; potius colligunt
libras quam legent libros; libentius intuentur
Martham quam Marcum; malunt legere in
Salmone quam in Solomone. Alanus de art.
Predicat. ap. Lebeuf. Dissert. tom. ii. p. 21.
To the obvious causes of such universal igno-
rance, arising from the state of government and
manners, from the seventh to the eleventh cen-
tury, we may add the scarcity of books during

that

that period, and the difficulty of rendering them
more common. The Romans wrote their books
either on parchment or on paper made of the
Egyptian papyrus. The latter being the cheapest,
was of course the most commonly used. But
after the Saracens conquered Egypt in the
seventh century, the communication between
that country and the people fettled in Italy or in
other parts of Europe, was almost entirely broken
off, and the papyrus was no longer in use among
them. They were obliged, on that account, to
write all their books upon parchment; and as
the price of that was high> books became ex-
tremely rare and of great value. We may
judge of the scarcity of the materials for writing
them from one circumstance. There still remain
several manuscripts of the eighth, ninth, and
following centuries, wrote on parchment, from
which some former writing had been erased, in
order to substitute a new compofiiion in its place.
In this manner, it is probable, that several works
of the ancients perilhed. A book of Livy or of
Tacitus might be erased, to make room for the
legendary tale of a faint, or the superstitious
prayers of a missal. Murat. Antiq. Ital. v. iii. p.
833. P. de Montfaucon affirms, that the greater
part of the manuscripts on parchment which he
has seen, those of an ancient date excepted, are
written on parchment from which some former
treatise had been erased. Mem. de l'Acad. des
infcript. tom. ix. p. 325. As the want of mate-
rials for writing, is one reason why so many of
the works of the ancients have perilhed, it ac-
counts likewise for the small number of manu-
scripts of any kind, previous to the eleventh
century, when they began to multiply from a
cause which (hall be mentioned. Hist. Liter.
de France, tom. vi. p. 6. Many circumitances
prove the scarcity of books during these ages.

Private
*s

Private persons seldom possessed any books what-
ever. Even monasteries of considerable note had
only one missal. Murat. Antiq. v. ix. p. 789.
Lupus, abbot of Ferrieres, in a letter to the Pope,
A. D. 855, beseeches him to lend him a copy
of Cicero de Oratore & Qnintilian's Institutions;
1 for," fays he, " although we have parts of
those books, there is no complete copy of them
in all France. Murat. Ant. v. iii. p. 835. The
price of books became so high, that persons of a
moderate fortune could not afford to purchase
them. The countess of Anjou paid for a copy
of the Homilies of Haimon, bishop of Halber-
ftadt, two hundred sheep, five quarters of wheat,
and the fame quantity of rye and millet. Hiftoire
Literaire de France par des Religieux Benedifins,
tom. vii. p. 3. Even so late as the year 147',
when Louis XI borrowed the works of Rafis,
the Arabian physician, from the faculty of me-
dicine in Paris, he not only deposited in pledge
a considerable quantity of plate, but was obliged
to procure a nobleman tojoin with him as surety
in a deed, binding himself under a great for-
feiture to restore it. Gabr. Naude Addit. a 1'
hiftoire de Louys XI. par Comines. edit. de
Frefnoy, tom. iv. p. 281. Many curious cir-.
cumftances with respect to the extravagant price
of books in the middle ages, are collected by
that industrious compiler, to whom I refer such
of my readers as deem this small branch of lite-
rary history an object of curiosity. When any
person made a present of a book to a church or
a monastery, in which were the only libraries
during these ages, it was deemed a donative of
such value, that he offered it on the altar pro
rredio ainmmdu~ , in order to obtain the for-
givenefsof his fins. Murat. vol. iii. p. 836. Hill.
Liter. de France, tom. vi. p. 6. Nouv. Trait. du
Diplomat par deux Beneditins, 4to. tom. i. p.

481.

481. In the eleventh century, the art of making
paper in the manner now become universal, was
invented; by means of that not only the number
of manuscripts increased, but the study of the
sciences wis wonderfully facilitated. Murat. ib.
p. 871. The invention of the art of making
paper, and the invention of the art of printing,
are two considerable events in literary history.
It is remarkable that the former preceded the
first dawning of letters and improvement in
knowledge towards the close of the eleventh
century; the latter ushered in the light which
spread over Europe at the sara of the Refor-
mation.

N T E XI. SECT. I. P. 19. [L].

ALL the religious maxims and practices of the

dark ages are a proof of this. I shall produce
one remarkable testimony in confirmation of it,
from an author canonized by the church of
Rome, St. Eloy or Egidius, bilhop of Noyon,
in the seventh century. " He is a good Christian
who comes frequently to church; who presents
the oblation which, is offered to God upon the
altar; who doth not taste of the fruits of his own
indultry until he has consecrated a part of them
to God; who, when the holy festivals approach,
lives chastely even with his own wife during fe-
veral days, that with a safe conscience he may.
draw near to the altar of God; and who, in the
last place, can repeat the Creed and the Lord's
Prayer. Redeem then your fouls from deftruaion
while you have the means in your poweri offer.
presents and tythes to churchmen; come more
frequently to church; humbly implore the pa-.
tronage of the faints; for if you observe these
things, you may come with security in the day
of retribution to the tribunal of the eternal judge,

VOL. I. R and

and fay, "Give to us, O Lord, for we have
given unto thee." Dacherii Specilegium Vet.
Script . ii. p. 94. The learned and judicious
tranlator of Dr. Mofheim's Ecclesiastical His-
tory, from one of whose additional notes I have
borrowed this paflage, subjoins a very proper
refleftion; " We fee here a large and ample
description of a good Christian, in which there is
notthe least mention of the love of God, refig-
nation to his will, obedience to his laws, or of
justice, benevolence, and charity towards men."
Molf. Eccles. Hist. v. i. p. 324.

N O T E XII. SECT. I. p. 20. [M].

IT is no inconsiderable misfortune to the church

of Rome, whose doctrine of infallibility renders
all such institutions and ceremonies as have been
once universally received, immutable and ever-
lasting, that she must continue to observe, in en.
lightened times, those rites which were introduced
duing the ages of darknefsand credulity. What
delighted and edified the latter, must disgust and
shock the former. Many of these rites appear
manifestly to have been introduced by a super-
ftition of the lowest and most illiberal species.
Many of them were borrowed, with little vari-
ation, from the religious ceremonies eftabliihed
among the ancient Heathens. Some were so
ridiculous, that if every age did not furniih in-
fiances of the fascinating influence of fuperffi-
tion, as well as. of the whimsical forms which it
assumes, it must appear incredible that they
should ever be received or tolerated. In several
churches of France, they celebrated a fetival
in commemoration of the Virgin Mary's flight
into Egypt. It was called the feast of the Ass.
A young girl richly dressed, with a child in her
arms, was set upon an ass superbly caparisoned.

The

The ass was led to the altar in solemn procef-
sion. High Mass was said with great pomp.
The ass was taught to kneel at proper places;
a hymn no less childish than impious was sung
in his praise: And when the ceremony was ended,
the priest, instead of the usual words with which
he dismissed the people, brayed three times like
an ass; and the people, instead of their usual
response, We bless the Lord, brayed three times
in the fame manner. Du Cange, voc. Feftum.
v. iii. p. 424. This ridiculous ceremony was
not, like the festival of fools, and some other
pageants of those ages, a mere farcical enter-
tainment exhibited in a church, and mingled, as
was then the custom, with an imitation of some
religious rites; it was an a& of devotion, per-
formed by the minifers of religion, and by the
authority of the church. However, as this prac-
tice did not prevail universally in the Catho-
lick church, its absurdity contributed at last to
abolish it.

NOTE XIII. SECT. I. p. 25. [N].

As there is no event in the history of man;

kind more singular than that of the crusades,
every circumstance that tends to explain, or to
give any rational account of this extraordinary
frenzy of the human mind, is interesting. I have
afterted in the text, that the minds of men were
prepared gradually for the amazing effort which
they made in consequence ofthe exhortations of
Peter the hermit, by several occurrences pre-
vious to his time. A more particular detail of
this curious and obscure part of history, may
perhaps appear to some of my readers to be of
importance. That the end of the world wasex-
peted about the close of the tenth and beginning
of the eleventh century; and that this occasion-

R 2 ed

ed a general alarm, is evident from the authors
to whom I refer in the text. This belief was so
universal and so strong, that it mingled itself
with their civil tranfations. Many charters, in
the latter part of the tenth century, begin in this
manner: " Apropinquante mundi termino," &c.
As the end of the world is now at hand, and by
various calamities and judgments the signs of
its approach are now manifest. Hilt. de Lan-
gued. par D.D. de Vic Vaifette, tom. ii. Preuves,
p. 86, 89, go, 117, 158, &c. Oae effe&of
this opinion was, that a great number of pilgrims
resorted to Jerusalem, with a resolution to die
there, or to wait the coming of the Lord; Kings,
Earls, Marquiffes, Bishops, and even a great
number of women, besides persons of inferior
rank, flobked to the Holy Land. Glaber. Ro-
dulph. Hifl. chez Bouquet Recueil, tom. x. p.
50, 5a. Another hiflorian mentions a vast ca-
valcade of pilgrims who accompanied the count
of Angouleme to Jerusalem in the year o126.
Chronic. Ademari, ibid. p. 162. These pilgrims
filled Europe with lamentable accounts of the
state of ChriRfians in the Holy Land. Willerm.
Tyr. Hilt. ap. Gest. Dei per Franc. vol. ii. p.
636. Guibert. Abbat. Hilt. ibid. vol. i. p. 476.
Besides this, it was ufualior many of the Chris-
tian inhabitants of Jerusalem, as well as of other
cities in the Eatl, to travel as mendicants through
Europe; and by describing the wretched condi-
tion of the professors of the Christian faith un-
der the dominion of Infidels, to extort charity,
and to excite zealous persons to make some
attempt in order to deliver them from oppreflion.
Baldrici Archiepifcopi Hiftor. ap. Getfa Dei,
&c. vol. i. p. 86. In the year 986, Gerbert,
archbishop of Ravenna, afterwards Pope Silvef-
ter II. addressed a letter to all Chriflians in the
name of the church of Jerusalem. It is eloquent

and
244

and pathetic, and contains a formal exhortation
to take arms against the Pagan oppressors, in or-
der to rescue the holy city from their yoke. Ger-
berti Epiltolae ap. Bouquet, Recuei), tom. x. p.
426. In consequence of this spirited call, some
fubjets of the republick of Pisa equipped a fleet,
and invaded the territories of the Mahometans in
Syria. Murat. Script. Rer. Italic. vol. iii. p.
400. The alarm was taken in the East, and an
opinion prevailed, A. D. Ioio, that all the forces
of Christendom were to unite, in order to drive
the Mahometans out of Palestine. Chron. Ade-
mari ap. Bouquet, tomrn. x. p. 152. It is evident
from all these particulars, that the ideas which
led the Crusaders to undertake their wild enter-
prize were gradually formed; so that the univer-
fal concourse to the standard of the cross when
erected by Urban II. will appear less surprising.

IF the various circumstances which I have

enumerated in this note, as well as in the history,
are sufficient to account for the ardour with
which such vast numbers engaged in such a dan-
gerous undertaking, the extensive privileges and
immunities granted to the persons who assumed
the cross, serve to account for the long continu-
ance of this spirit in Europe. i. They were ex-
empted from prosecutions on account of debt
during the time of their being engaged in this
holy service. Du Cange, voc. Crucis privilegium,
v. ii. p. 1 194. - 2. They were exempted from
paying interest for the money which they had
borrowed. Ibid.- 3. They were exempted
either entirely, or at leait during a certain time,
from the payment of taxes. Ibid. Ordonances
des Rois de France, tom. i. p. 33. -4. They
might alienate their lands without the content of
the superior lord of whom they held. Ib.- 5.
Their persons and effects were taken under the

protecion

245

protection of St. Peter, and the anathemas of
the church were denounced against all who
lhould molest them, or carry on any quarrel or
hostility against them, during their absence, on
account of the holy war. Du Cange, Ib. Gui-
bertus Abbas ap. Bongarf. i. p. 480, 482.-
6. They enjoyed all the privileges of Ecclesias
ticks, and were not bound to plead in any civil
court, but were declared fubjeft to the spiritual
jurifdiion alone. Du Cange, Ib. Ordon. des
Rois, tom. i. p. 34, 174.- 7. They obtained
a plenary remifion of all their fins, and the gates
of heaven were set open to them, without requir-
ing any proof of their penitence, but their en-
gaging in this expedition, and thus gratifying
their favourite passion, the love of war. Guibert.
Abbas, p. 480. When we behold the civil and
ecclesiastical powers vying with each other, and
firaining their invention in order to devise expe-
dients for encouraging and adding strength to
the spirit of fuperflition, can we be surprised
that it ihould become To general as to render it
infamous, and a mark of cowardice to decline
engaging in the holy war ? Willierm Tyrienfis
ap. Bongarf. vol. ii. p. 641. The hiftoriesof
the Crusades written by modern authors, who
are apt to substitute the ideas and maxims ds
their own age in the place of those which influ-
enced the persons whose aaions they attempt to
relate, convey a very imperfec notion of the
spirit at that time predominant in Europe. The
original historians, who were animated them-
selves with the fame paflions which poffefled
their contemporaries, exhibit to us a more ftrik-
ing piture of the times and manners which they
describe. The enthusiastic rapture with which
they account for the effects of the Pope's dif-
course in the council of Clermont; the exulta-
tion with which they mention the numbers who

devoted

devoted themselves to this holy warfare; tle'
confidence with which they rely on the divine.
protection; the extafy of joy with which they
describe their taking possession of the holy city,
will enable us to conqeive in some degree the
extravagance of that zeal which agitated the
mindsof men with such violence, and will fug-
gef as many singular reflections to a philosopher,
as any occurrence in the history of mankind.
It is unnecessary to select the particular passages
in the several historians which confirm this ob-
servation. But left these authors may be sus-
peted of adorning their narrative with any ex-
aggerated description, I (hall appeal to one of
the leaders who conducted the enterprize. There
is extant a letter from Stephen, the earl of Char-
tres and Blois, to Adela his wife, in which he
gives her an account of the progress of the Cru-
faders. He describes the Crusaders as the cho-
fen army of Christ, as the servants and soldiers
of God, as men who marched under the imme-
diate protection of the Almighty, being condut-
ed by his hand to victory and conquest. He
speaks of the Turks as accursed, sacrilegious,
and devoted by heaven to deftru&ion; and when
he mentions the soldiers in the Christian army
who had died, or were killed, he is confident
that their fouls were admitted directly into the
joys of Paradise. Dacherii Specilegium, vol. iv.
P. 257.

THE expence of condu&ing numerous bodies

of men from Europe to Asia, must have been
exceflive, and the difficulty of raising the necef-
fary fums must have been proportionally great,
during ages when the publick revenues in every
nation of Europe were extremely small. Some
account is preserved of the expedients employed
by Humbert II. Dauphin of Vienne, in order to

levy

levy the money requisite towards equipping him
for the Crusade, A. D. 1346. These I hall menti-
on, as they tend to shew the considerable influence
which the Crusades had, both on the state of pro-
perty and of civil government. i. He exposed
to sale part of his domains; and as the price
was destined for such a sacred service, he ob-
tained the consent of the French King, of whom
there lands were held, ratifying the alienation.
Hist. de Dauphine, tom. i. p. 332, 335.-2.
He issued a proclamation, in which he promised
to grant new privileges to the nobles, as well as
new immunities to the cities and towns, in his
territories, in consideration of certain fums which
they were inRfantly to pay on that account. Ibid.
tom. ii. p. 512. Many of the charters of com-
munity, which I thall mention in another note,
were obtained in this manner.-3. He exa&ed
a contribution towards defraying the charges of
the expedition from all his fubjets, whether ec-
clefiafticks or laymen, who did not accompany
him in person to the East. Ibid. tom. i. p. 335.
- 4. He appropriated a considerable part of
his usual revenues for the support of the troops
to be employed in this service. Ibid. tom. ii. p.
518-- 5. He exacted considerable fums not
only of the Jews fettled in his dominions, but
also of the Lombards and other bankers who
had fixed their residence there. Ibid. tom. i. p.
338. tom. ii. 528. Notwithstanding the variety
of there resources, the Dauphin was involved in
such expence by this expedition, that on his re-
turn he was obliged to make new demands on
his fubjets, and to pillage the Jews by fresh ex-
actions. Ibid. tom. i. p. 344, 347. When the
count de Foix engaged in the first Crusade, he
raised the money neceflary for defraying the ex-
pences of that expedition, by alienating part of
his territories. Hist. de Langued. par D. D. de
Vic & Vaifette, tom. ii. p. 287. In like man-

ner
24.

ner Baldwin, count of Hainault, mortgaged or
fold part of his dominions to the bithop of
Liege, A. D. 1096. Du Mont Corps Diploma-
tique, tom. i. p. 59. At a later period, Baldwin,
count of Namur, fold part of his estate to a mo-
naftery, when he intended to assume the cross,
A. D. I239. Mirei Oper. i. 313.

NOTE XIV. SECT. I. p. 29. [0].

THE usual method of forming an opinion

concerning the comparative state of manners in
two different nations, is by attending to the
fads which historians relate concerning each of
them. Various passages might be feleted from
the Byzantin historians, describing the splendor
and magnificence of the Greek Empire. P. de
Montfaucon has produced from the writings
of St. Chrysostom a very full account of the
elegance and luxury of the Greeks in his age.
That father in his sermons enters into filch de-
tails concerning the manners and customs in his
contemporaries, as appear strange in discourses
from the pulpit. P. de Montfaucon has collet-
ed these descriptions, and ranged them under
different heads. The court of the more early
Greek Emperors seems to have resembled those
of Eastern monarchs, both in magnificence and
in corruption of manners. The Emperors in
the eleventh century, though inferior in power,
did not yield to them in ostentation and fplen-
dor. Memoires de l'Acad. des Infcript. tom.
xx. p 197.- But we may decide concerning
the comparative state of manners in the Eastern
Empire, and among the nations in the weft of
Europe, by another method, which, if not more
certain, is at least more friking. As Conftan-
tinople was the place of rendezvous for all the
armies of the crusaders, this brought together
the people of the east and weft as to one great

interview.

249

interview. There are extant leveral contempo,
rary authors, both among the Greeks and Latins,
who were witnesses of this singular congress of
people, formerly itrangers, in a great measure,
to each other. They describe, with simplicity
and candour, the impression which that new
fpeftacle made upon their own minds. This
may be confidered as the most lively and just
picture of the real character and manners of
each people. When the Greeks speak of the
Franks, they describe them as barbarians, fierce,
illiterate, impetuous, and savage. They affumea
tone of superiority, as a more polished people, ac-
quainted with the arts both of government and
of elegance, of which the other were ignorant.
It is thus Anna Comnena'defcribes the man-
nersof the Latins, Alexias, p. 224. 231. 237.
ap. Byz. Script. vol. xi. She always treats them
with contempt as a rude people, the very men-
tion of whose names was sufficient to contami-
nate the beauty and elegance of history, p. 229.
Nicetas Choniatas inveighs against them with
fill more violence, and gives an account of
their ferocity and devastations, in terms not un-
like those which preceding historians had em-
ployed in describing the incursions of the Goths
and Vandals. Nicet. Chon. ap. Byz. Script. vol.'
iii. p. 302, &c. But, on the other hand, the
Latin hiforians were struck with aftonilhment
at the magnificence, wealth, and elegance which
they discovered in the Eastern Empire. "
what a vast city is Constantinople (exclaims Ful-
cherius Carnotenfis, when he first beheld it) and
how beautiful! How many monasteries are there
in it, and how many palaces built with wonder-
ful art! How many manufacures are there in
the city amazing to behold! It would be afto-
nilhing to relate how it abounds with all good
things, with gold, silver, and stuffs of various

kinds;

kinds; for every hour (hips arrive in its port
laden with all things necessary for the use of
man." Fulcher. ap. Bongars. vol. i. p. 386.
Willermus Archbishop of Tyre, the most intel-
liaent historian of the crusades, takes frequent
occasion to describe the elegance and splendor
of the court of Constantinople, and adds, that
what theyobferved there exceeded any idea which
they could have formed of it, noftrarum enim
rerum modum & dignitatem excedunt, Willerm.
Tyr. ap. Bong. vol. ii. p. 657. 664. Benjamin
the Jew, of Tudela in Navarre, who began his
travels A. D. 1173, appears to have been e-
qually astonished at the magnificence of the
city, and gives a description of its splendour, in
terms of high admiration. Benj. Tudel. chez
les Voyages faits en i 2, 13, &c. siecles par Ber-
geron, p. Io, &c. Guntherus, a French monk,
who wrote a history of the conquest of Con-
ftantinople by the crusaders in the thirteenth
century, speaks of the magnificence of that
city in the fame tone of admiration; " Struc-
turam autem .Edificiorum in corpore civitatis,
in ecclefiis videlicet, & turribus, & in domibus
magnatorum, vix ullus vel defcribere poteft, vel
credere defcribenti, nifi qui ea oculata fide cog-
noverit." Hist. Conftantinop. ap. Canifii Le&iones
Antiquas, fol. Antw. 1725, vol. iv. p. 14. Geof-
frey de Villehardouin, a nobleman of high rank,
and accustomed to all the magnificence then
known in the weft, describes, in similar terms,
the astonishment and admiration of such of his
fellow-foldiers who beheld Constantinople for the
first time: "They could not have believed,
fays he, that there was a city To beautiful and
rich in the whole world. When they viewed its
high walls, its lofty towers, its rich palaces, its
superb churches, all appeared so great, that they
could have formed no conception of this fove-

reign

reign city, unless they had seen it with their
own eyes." Hiftoire de la Conquete de Conflant.
p. 49. From these undi(guifed representations
of their own feelings, it is evident, that to the
Greeks, the Latins appeared to be a race of
rude, unpolifhed barbarians; whereas the latter,
how much soever they might contemn the un-
warlike characer of the former, could not help
regarding them as far superior to themselves in
elegance and arts.-That the state of govern-
ment and manners was much more improved in
Italy than in the other countries of Europe, is
evident not only from the faets recorded in his-
tory, but it appears that the more intelligent
leaders of the crusaders were firuck with the
difference. Jacobus de Vitriaco, a French hifr
torian of the holy war, makes an elaborate pa-
negyric on the charaters and manners of the
Italians. He views them as a more polished
people, and particularly celebrates them for
their love of liberty, and civil wisdom; "in
confiliis circumfpedi, in re fua publica procu-
randa diligentes & fludiofi; fibi in pofterum
providentes; aliis fubjici renuentes; ante omnia
libertatem fibi defendentes; sub uno quem eli-
gunt capitaneo, communitati fuae jura, & in-.
itituta diEtantes, & fimiliter observantes." His-
tor. Hierofol. ap. Gefta Dei per Francos, vol,
ii. p. 1085.

NOTE XV. SECT. I. p. 33. [P];

THE different lteps taken by the cities of Italy,

in order to extend their power and dominion, are
remarkable. As soon as their liberties were efta-
blilhed, and that they began to feel their own
importance, they endeavoured to render them-
selves masters of the territory round their walls.
Under the Romans, when cities enjoyed muni-

cipal
252

cipal privileges and jurifdition, the circum-
jacent lands belonged to each town, and were
the property of the community. But as it was
not the genius of the feudal policy to encourage
cities, or to (hew any regard for their possessions
and immunities, there lands had been seized,
and shared among the conquerors. The barons
to whom they were granted, ereted their castles
almost at the gates of the city, and increased
their jurifdition there. Under pretence of re-
covering their ancient property, many of the
cities in Italy attacked there troublesome neigh-
bours, and difpoffeffing them, annexed their
territories to the communities, and made thereby
a considerable addition to their power. Several
instances of this occur in the eleventh, and be-
ginning of the twelfth centuries. Murat. antiq.
Ital. vol. iv. p. I59, &c. Their ambition in-
creasing together with their power, the cities
afterwards attacked several barons situated at a
greater distance from them, and obliged these
to engage that they should become members of
their community; that they (hould take the
oath of fidelity to their magistrates; that they
should sub, e their lands to all burdens and
taxes imposed by common consent; that they
should defend the community against all its
enemies; and that they should reside within the
city during a certain specified time in each
year. Murat. ibid. 163. This fubjetion of
nobility to the municipal government eftablilhed
in cities, became almost universal, and was often
extremely grievous to persons accustomed to
confider themselves as independent. Otto Fri-
fingenfis thus describes the state of Italy under
Frederick I. " The cities so much affect li-
berty, and are so solicitous to avoid the insolence
of power, that almost all of them have thrown
off every other authority, and are governed

by

by their own magistrates. Insomuch that all
that country is now filled with free cities, each
of which have compelled their bilhops to reside
within their walls; and there is scarcely any no-
bleman, how great soever his power may be, who
is not subjet to the laws and government of
some city. De Gdcfis Frider. I. Imp. Iib. ii. c. 3.
p. 453. In another place he observes of the Mar-
quis of Montserrat, that he was almost the only
Italian baron, who had preferred his indepen-
dence, and had not become subjec to the laws
of any city. See also Muratori Antichita
Eftenfi, vol. i. p. 411, 412. That state into
which some of the nobles were compelled to
enter, others embraced from choice. They ob-
served the high degree of security as well as of
credit and etimation which the growing wealth
and dominion of the great communities pro-
cured to all the members of them. They were
desirous to partake of there, and to put them-
selves under such powerful protection. With
this view they voluntarily became citizens of
the town to which their land was most conti-
guous, and abandoning their ancient castles,
took up their residence in the cities at leaf du-
ring part of the year. Several deeds are fill ex-
tant, by which some of the most illustrious fa-
milies in Italy are associated as citizens of dif-
ferent cities. Murat. ib. p. 65, &c. A char-
ter by which Atto de Macerata is admitted as a
citizen of Ofimo, A. D. 1I98. in the Marcha
di Ancona, is fill extant. In this he stipulates,
that he will acknowledge himself to be a bur-
gefs of that community; that he will, to the
utmost of his power, promote its honour and
welfare; that he will obey its magistrates; that
he will enter into no league with its enemies,
that he will reside in the town during two
months in every year, or for a longer time, if

required
t54

required by the magistrates. The community,
on the other hand, take him, his family and
friends, under their protection, and engage to
defend him against every enemy. Fr. Ant.
Zacharias Anecdota medii aevi. Aug. Taur.
1755. fol. p. 66. This privilege was deemed so
important, that not only laymen, but ecclefi-
afticks of the highest rank, condescended to be
adopted as members of the great communities,
in hopes of enjoying the safety and dignity
which that conferred. Murat. ib. 179. Before
the institution of communities persons of noble
birth had no other residence but their castles.
They kept their petty courts there; and the
cities were deserted, having hardly any inha-
bitants but slaves or persons of low condition.
But in consequence of the pra&ice which I have
mentioned, cities not only became more popu-
lous, but were filled with inhabitants of better
rank; and a custom, which still subsists in Italy,
was then introduced, that all families of diftinc-
tion reside more constantly in the great towns,
than is usual in other parts of Europe. As cities
acquired new consideration and dignity by the
acceflion of such citizens, they became more so-
licitous to preserve their liberty and indepen-
dence. The Emperors, as sovereigns, had an-
ciently a palace in almost every great city of
Italy; when they visited that country they
were accustomed to reside in there, and the
troops which accompanied them were quartered
in the houses of the citizens. This the citizens
deemed both ignominious and dangerous. They
could not help confidering it as receiving a
master and an enemy within their walls. They
laboured therefore to get free of this fubjetion.
Some cities prevailed on the Emperors to engage
that they would never enter their gates, but take
up their residence without the walls: Chart.

Hen.

Hen. IV. Murat. ib. p. 24. Others obtained
the Imperial licence to pull down the palace si.
tuated within their liberties, on condition that
they build another in the suburbs for the recep.
tion of the Emperor. Chart. Hen. IV. Murat.
ib. p. 25. These various encroachments of the
Italian cities alarmed the Emperors, and put
them on (chemes for re-establishing the Imperial
jurisdiction over them on its ancient footing.
Frederick Barbarofa engaged in this enterprize
with great ardour. The free cities of Italy joined
together in a general league, and flood on their
defence; and after a long contest, carried on
with alternate success, a solemn treaty of peace
was concluded at Constance, A. D. 1183, by
which all the privileges and immunities, granted
by former Emperors to the principal cities in
Italy, were confirmed and ratified. Murat. dif-
fert. XLVIII. This treaty of Constance was con-
fidered as such an important article in the jurif-
prudence of the middle age, that it is usually
published together with the Libra Feudorum at
the end of the Corpus Juris Civilis. The treaty
fecuredprivileges of great importance to the
confederate cities; and though it reserved a con-
fiderable degree of authority and jurifdiaion to'
the Empire, yet the cities persevered with such
vigour in their efforts in order to extend their
immunities, and the conjunctures in which they
made them were so favourable, that, before the
conclusion of the thirteenth century, mos of
the great cities in Italy had shaken off all marks
of subjection to the Empire, and were become
independent sovereign republicks. It is not re-
quifite that I should trace the various steps by
which they advanced to this high degree of
power to fatal to the Empire, and so beneficial
tothe cause of liberty in Italy. Muratori, with
his usual industry, has colleted many original

papers

papers which illufirate this curious and little
known part of history. Murat. Antiq. Ital.
Dissert. L. See also Jo. Bapt. Villanova hist.
Laudis Pompeii five Lodi in Graev. Thef. Anti-
quit. Ital. vol. iii. p. 888.

NOTE XVI. SECT. I. p. 34. [QJ.

LONG before the inflitution of communities

in France, charters of immunity or Franchise
were granted to some towns and villages by the
Lords on whom they depended. But these are
very different from such as became common in
the twelfth and thirteenth centuries. They did
not erect these towns into corporations; they
did not eftablilh a municipal government; they
did not grant them the privilege of bearing arms.
They contained nothing more than a manumif-
sion of the inhabitants from the yoke of fervi-
tude; an exemption from certain services which
were oppressive and ignominous; and the efta-
blifhment of a fixed tax or rent which they were
to pay to their Lord in place of impositions which
he could formerly lay upon them at pleasure.
Two charters of this kind to two villages in the
county of Roufillon, one A. D. 974, the other
A. D. 1025, are frill extant. Petr. de Marca
Marca, five limes Hifpanicus. app. p. gog. 1038.
Such conceflions, it is probable, were not un-
known in other parts of Europe, and may be
confidered as a ftep towards the more extensive
privileges conferred by Louis the Gross on the
towns within his domains. The communities in
France never aspired to the fame independence
with those in Italy. They acquired new privi-
leges and immunities; but the right of sovereign-
ty remained entire to the King or baron within
whose territories the respective cities were situ-
ated, and from whom they received the charter

VOL. I. S of

of their freedom. A great number of there char-
ters, granted both by the Kings of France, and
by their great vassals, are published by M.
D'Achery in his' Specilegium, and many are
found in the collection of the Ordonnances des
Rois de France. These convey a very itriking
representation of the wretched condition of cities
previous to the infitution of communities, when
they were subjet to the judges appointed by the
superior Lords of whom they held, and had
scarcely any other law but their will. Each con-
cefion in these charters must be confidered as a
grant of some new privilege which the people
did not formerly enjoy, and each regulation as
a method of redressing some grievance under
which they formerly laboured. The charters of
communities contain likewise the first expedients
employed for the introduction of equal laws
and regular government. On both these ac-
counts they merit particular attention; and there-
fore, initead of referring my readers to the
many bulky volumes in which they were scat.
tered, I shall give them a view of some of the
most important articles in these charters, ranged
under two general heads. I. Such as refpe&t
personal safety. II. Such as refpeft the security
of property.

I. DURING that state of turbulence and dif-'

order which the corruption of the feudal go,
vernment introduced into Europe, personal safety
was the chief object of every individual; and
as the great military barons alone were able to
give sufficient protection to their vassals, this was
one great source of their power and authority.
But, by the institution of communities, effectual
provision was made for the safety of individuals
independent of the nobles. For, I. the funda-
mental article in every charter was, that all the

members

members of it bound themfelvesby oath to aflift,
defend, and stand by each other againit all ag-
greffors, and that they should not susser any
person to injure, distress, or molest, any of their
fellow-citizens. D'Acher. Spicel. x. 642. xi.
341, &c.-2. Whoever resided in any town
which was made free, was obliged, under a fe-
veze penalty, to accede to the community, and
to take part in the mutual defence of its mem-
bers. D'Acher. Spic. xi. 344.-3. The commu-
nities had the privilege of carrying arms; of
making war on their private enemies; and of
executing by military force any sentence which
their magistrates pronounced. D'Ach. Spicel.
x. 643, 644. xi. 343.-4. The practice of ma-
king fatisfation by a pecuniary compensation
for murder, assault, or other ads of violence,
most inconsistent with the order of society, and
the safety of individuals, was abolished; and
such as committed these crimes were punished
capitally, or with rigour adequate to their guilt.
D'Ach. xi. 362. Miraei opera Diplomatica, i.
292.-5. No member of a community was bound
tojuftify or defend himself by battle, or com-
bat; but if he was charged with any crime, he
could be conviEted only by the evidence of wit-
neffes, and the regular course of legal proceed-
ings. Miraus, ibid. D'Ach. xi. 375, 349. Or-
don. tom. iii. 265.-6. If any man fufpefted
himself to be in danger from the malice or en-
mity of another, upon his making oath to that
effect before a magistrate, the person fufpeded
was bound under a severe penalty to give fecu-
rity for his peaceable behaviour. D'Ach. xi.
346. This is the fame species of security which
is itill known in Scotland under the name of
Lawburrows. In France it was first introduced
among the inhabitants of communities; and ha-
ving been found to contribute considerably to-

S 2 wards

wards personal safety, it was extended to all the
other members of the society. Eftabliffemens
de St. Louis, liv. i. cap. 28. ap. Du Cange vie
de St. Louis, p. 5.

II. THE provisions in the charters of commur

nities concerning the security of property, are
not less considerable than those refpeting pert
fonal safety. By the ancient law of France, no
person could be arrested or confined in prison on
account of any private debt. Ordon. des Rois
de France, tom. i. p. 72. 80. If any person
was arrested upon any pretext, but his having
been guilty of a capital crime, it was lawful to
rescue him out of the hands of the officers who
had seized him. Ordon. iii. p. I7. Freedom
from arrest on account of debt, seems likewise
to have been enjoyed in other countries. Gude-
nus Sylloge Diplom. 473. In society, while it
remained in its rudef and most simple form,
debt seems to have been confidered as an obli-
gation merely personal. Men had made rome
progress towards refinement, before creditors
acquired a right of seizing the property of their
debtors in order to recover payment. The ex-
pedients for this purpose were all introduced ori-
ginally in communities, and we can trace the
gradual progress of them. i. The simplest and
moit obvious species of security was, that the'
person who fold any commodity Ihould receive
a pledge from him who bought it, which he re-
flored upon receiving payment. Of this custom
there are vestiges in several charters of commu-
nity. D'Ach. ix. 185. xi. 377.- 2. When
no pledge was given, and the debtor became
refratory or insolvent, the creditor was allowed
to seize his effets with a strong hand, and by
his private authority; the citizens of Paris are
warranted by the royal mandate, " ut ubicum-

que,

tlue, et quocumque modo poterunt, tantum ca-
piant, unde pecuniam fibi debitam integre &
plcnarie habeant, & inde fibi invicem adjutores
exiftant." Ordon. &c. tom. i. p. 6. This rude
prat¢ice, suitable only to the violence of a state
of nature, was tolerated longer than one can
conceive to be possible in any society where
laws and order were at all known. The ordo-
nance authorizing it was iflued A. D. 1134;
and that which corre&ts the law, and prohibits
creditors from seizing the effe&s of their debt-
ors, unless by a warrant from a magistrate, and
under his infpetion, was not published until the
year 135. Ordon.tom.ii.438. It is proba-
ble, however, that men were taught, by ob-
serving the disorders which the former mode of
proceeding occasioned, to correct it in practice
long before a remedy was provided by a law to
that effect. Every discerning reader will apply
this observation to many other customs and
practices which I have mentioned. New customs
are not always to be ascribed to the laws which
authorize them. These statutes only give a legal
fantion to such things as the experience of man-
kind has previously found to be proper and be-
neficial.--3. As soon as the interposition of
the magistrate become requisite, regular provi-
sion was made for attaching or distraining the
moveable effects of a debtor and if his move-
ables were not sufficient to discharge a debt, his
immoveable property, or estate in land, was li-
able to the fame distress, and was fold for the
benefit of his creditor. D'Ach. ix. p. 184, 185.
i. p. 348. 380. As this regulation afforded the
most comp!eat security to the creditor, it was
confidered as so severe, that humanity pointed
out several limitations in the execution of it.
Creditors were prohibited from seizing the wear-
ing apparel of their debtors, their beds, the

door

26i

door of their house, their instruments of hus-
bandry, &c. D'Ach. ix. 184. xi. 377. Upon
the fame principles, whthe he power of ditrain-
ing effects became more general, the horse and
arms of a gentleman could not be seized. D'Ach.
ix. t85. As hunting was the favourite amuse-
ment of martial nobles, the Emperor Lodovicus
Pius prohibited the seizing of a hawk on ac-
count of any composition or debt. Capitul. lib.
iv. § 21. But if the debtor had no other move-
ables, even these priviledged articles might be
seized.-4. In order to render the security of
property compleat within a community, every
person who was admitted a member of it, was
obliged to buy or build a house, or to pur-
chafe lands, within its precincts, or at least to
bring into the town a considerable portion of his
moveables per qui jufticiari poit, si quidforti in
cum querele evenerit. D'Ach. xi. 326. Ordon.
i. 367. Libertates S. Georgii de Efperanchia.
Hist. de Dauphine, tom. i. p. 26.-5. That fe-
curity might be as perfect as pofible, in some
towns the members of the community seem to
have been bound for each other. D'Ach. x.
644.-6. All questions with refped to property
were tried within the community, by magif-
trates and judges which the citizens elected or
appointed. Theirdecifionswere more equaland-
fixed than the sentences which depended on the
capricious and arbitrary will of a baron, who
thought himself superior to all laws. D'Ach.
x. 644. 646. xi. 344& pafim. Ordon. iii. 204.
-7. No member of a community could be bur-
dened by any arbitrary tax; for the superior
lord, who granted the charter of community,
accepted of a fixed census or duty in lieu of all
demands. Ordon. t. iii. 204. Libertates de
Calma. Hill. de Dauphine, tom. i. p. 19. Li-
bert. St. Georgii de Efperanchia, ibid. p. 26.

Nor

Nor could the members of a community be dif-
tressed by an unequal imposition of the fum to
he levied on the community. Regulations are
inserted in the charters of some communities
concerning the method of determining the quota
of any tax to be levied on each inhabitant.
D'Ach. xi. 350, 365. St. Louis publilhed an
ordonance concerning this matter, which ex-
tended to all the communities. Ordon. t. i. 186.
These regulations are extremely favourable to
liberty, as they vest the power of proportioning
the taxes in a certain number of citizens chefen
out of each parish, who were bound by so-
lemn oath to decide according to justice.-
That the more perfect security of property was
one great obje& of those who instituted com-
munities, we learn, not only from the nature of
the thing, but from the express words of several
charters, of which I shall only mention that
granted by Alienor, Queen of England and
Dutchess of Guienne, to the community of Poi-
tiers, "' ut fua propria melius defendere poffint,
& magis integre cuflodire."' Du Cange voc.
Communia, v. ii. p. 863.-Such are some of the
capital regulations eftablilhed in communities du-
ring the twelfth and thirteenth centuries. These
may be confidered as the first rudiments of law
and order,, and contributed greatly to introduce
regular government among all the members of
society. As soon as communities were instituted,
high sentiments of liberty began to appear.
When Humbert, lord of Beaujeu, upon grant-
ing a charter of community to the town of Belle-
-i!le, exaAed of the inhabitants an oath of fide-
lity to himself and fucceflors, they stipulated,
on their part, that he ihould swear to maintain
their franchires and liberties; and for their greater
security, they obliged him to bring twenty gen-
tlemen to take the fame oath, and to be bound

together

263

together with him. D'Ach. ix. 183. In the
lame manner the lord of Moirens in Dauphine
produced a certain number of persons as his
sureties for the observation of the articles con-
tained in the charter of community to that
town. These were bound to surrender them-
selves prisoners to the inhabitants of Moirens, if
their liege lord should violate any of their fran-
chifes, and they promised to remain in custody
until he should grant them redress. Hilf. de
Dauphine, tom. i. p. 17. If the mayor or chief
magistrate of a town did any injury toa citizen,
he was obliged to give security for his appear-
anceinjudgment in the fame manner as a pri-
vate person, and if cast, was liable to the fame
penalty. D'Ach. ix. 183. These are ideas of
equality uncommon in the feudal times. Com-
munities were so favourable to freedom, that
they were distinguished by the name of Liber-
tates. Du Cange, v. ii. p. 863. They were at
first extremely odious to the nobles, who fore-
saw what a check they must prove to their power
and domination. Guibot Abbot of Nogent calls
them execrable inventions, by which, contrary
to law and justice, slaves withdrew themselves
from that obedience which they owed to their
masters. Du Cange, ib. 862. The zeal with
which some of the nobles and powerful ecclefi-
afticks opposed the eftabliflhment of communi-
ties, and endeavoured to circumscribe their pri-
vileges, was extraordinary. A triking instance
of this occurs in the contests between the arch-
bishop of Reims, and the inhabitants of that
community. It was the chief business of every
archbilhop, during a considerable time, to a-
bridge the rights andjurifdi&ion of the commu-
nity; and the great object of the citizens, efpe-
cially when the fee was vacant, to maintain, to
recover, and to extend their own jurifdi&ion.

Hiftoire

Hiftoire civile & politique de la ville de Reims
par M. Anquetil torn. i. p. 287, &c.

THE observations which I have made concern-

ing the state of cities, and the condition of their
inhabitants, are confirmed by innumerable pas-
fages in the historians and laws of the middle
ages. It is not improbable, however, that some
cities of the first order were in a better state, and
enjoyed a superior degree of liberty. Under the
Roman government, the municipal government
established in cities was extremely favourable to
liberty. The jurifdifion of the senate in each
corporation, and the privileges of the citizens,
were both extensive. There is reason to believe,
that some of the greater cities which escaped the
deftrutive rage of the barbarous nations, still
retained their ancient form of government, at
least in a great measure. They were governed
by a council of citizens, and by magistrates whom
they themselves ele&ed. Very strong prefump-
tions in favour of this opinion, are produced by
M. l'Abb6 De Bos. Hist. Crit. de la Mon.
Franc. tom. i. p. 18, &c. tom. ii. p. 524. edit.
1742. It appears from some of the charters of
community to cities, granted in the twelfth and
thirteenth centuries, that these only confirm the
privileges pofleffed by the inhabitants previous to
the establishment of the community. D'Acher.
Spicileg. vol. xi. p. 345. Other cities claimed
their privileges as having possessed them without
interruption from the times of the Romans. Hilt.
Crit. de la Mon. Franc. tom. ii. p. 33. But the
number of cities which enjoyed such immunities
was so small, as in no degree to diminilh the
force of my conclusions in the text.

NOTE

NOTE XVII. SECT. I. p. 34. [R].

HAVING given a full account of the establish-

ment as well as effets of communities in Italy
and France, it will be necefiary to inquire with
some attention into the progress of cities and of
municipal government in Germany. The anci-
ent Germans had no cities. Even in their ham-
lets or villages they did not build their houses
contiguous to each other. Tac. de Mor. Germ.
cap. 6. They confidered it as a badge of ser-
vitude to be obliged to dwell in a city surround-
ed with walls. When one of their tribes had
shaken off the Roman yoke, their countrymen
required of them, as an evidence of their having
recovered liberty, to demolish the walls of a town
which the Romans had built in their country.
Even the fiercest animals, said they, lose their
spirit and courage when they are confined. Tac.
Hiftor. lib. iv. c. 64. The Romans built feve-
ral cities of note on the banks of the Rhine. But
in all the vast countries from that river to the
coasts of the Baltick, there was hardly one city
previous to the ninth century of the Christian
aera. Conringius Exercitatio de Urbibus Ger-
manie, Oper. vol. i. § 25, 27, 31, &c. Hei-
neccius differs from Conringius with refpet to
this. But even after allowing to his arguments
and authorities their utmost force, they prove
only that there were a few places in those ex-
tensive regions on which some historians have
bestowed the name of towns. Elem. Jur. Ger-
man. lib. i. § 102. Under Charlemagne, and
the Emperors of his family, as the political state
of Germany began to improve, several cities
were founded, and men became accustomed to
affocitte and to live together in one place.
Charlemagne founded two archbilhopricks and

nine

nine bifhopricks in the most considerable towns
of Germany. Aub. Mliraei Opera Diplomatica,
vol. i. p. 6. His fucceflors increased the num-
ber of these; and as bishops fixed their residence
in these cities, and performed religious functions
there, that induced many people to fettle in them.
Conring. ibid. § 48. But Henry, firnamed the
Fowler, who began his reign A. D. 920, must
be confidered as the great founder of cities in
Germany. The Empire was at that time infest-
ed by the incursions of the Hungarians and other
barbarous people. In order to oppose them,
Henry encouraged his fubjets to fettle in cities,
which he surrounded with walls and towers.
He enjoined or persuaded a certain proportion of
the nobility to fix their residence in the towns,
and thus rendered the condition of citizens more
honourable than it had been formerly. Witti-
kindus Annal. lib. i. ap. Conring. § 82. From
this period the number of cities continued to in-
crease, and they became more populous and
more wealthy. But cities were still destitute of
municipal liberty orjurifdition. Such of them
as were situated in the Imperial demesnes, were
fubjeft to the Emperors. Their Comites, Mi,
and otherjudges, presided in them, and dispensed
justice. Towns situated on the eftte of a baron,
were part of his fief, and he or his officers exer-
cifed a similar jurifdi&ion in them. Conring.
ibid. § 73, 74. Heinec. Elem. Jur. Germ. lib.
i. § 104. The Germans borrowed the institution
of communities from the Italians. Knipfchil-
dius Tra&atus Politico Hiftor. Jurid. de Civita.
tum Imperialum Juribus, vol. i. lib. i. cap. 5.
N°. 23. Frederick Barbaroflawas thefirft Em-
peror who, from the fame political consideration
that influenced Lewis the Gross, multiplied com-
munities in order to abridge the power of the
nobles. Pfeffel Abregde 1'Hiftoire & du Droit

Publique

267

Publique d'Allemagne, 4to. p. 297. From the
reign of Henry the Fowler, to the time when the
German cities acquired full poffelfion of their im-
munities, various circumstances contributed to
their increase. The eRablihmnent of bifhopricks
(already mentioned) and the building of cathe-
drals, naturally induced many people to fettle
there. It became the custom to hold councils
and courts of judicature of every kind, ecclefi-
aftical as well as civil, in cities. In the eleventh
century, many slaves were enfranchised, the
greater part of which fettled in cities. Several
mines were discovered and wrought in different
provinces, which drew together such a concourse
of people, as gave rife to several cities. Con-
ring. § 105. The cities began, in the thirteenth
century to form leagues for their mutual defence,
and for repressing the disorders occasioned by
the private wars among the barons, as well as
by their exations. This rendered the condition
of the inhabitants of cities more secure than that
of any order of men, and allured many to be-
come members of their communities. Conring.
§ 94. There were inhabitants of three different
ranks in the towns of Germany: The nobles,
or familiae, the citizens, or liberi, and the arti-
fans, who were slaves, or homines proprii. Knipf-
child. lib. ii. cap. 29. N°. 13. Henry V. who
began his reign A. D. 0o6, enfranchised the
slaves who were artizans or inhabitants in several
towns, and gave them the rank of citizens, or
liberi. Pfeffel, p. 254. Knipfch. lib. ii. c. 29.
N°. 1 3, i9. Though the cities in Germany
did not acquire liberty so early as those in France,
they extended their privileges much farther. Ail
the Imperial and free cities, the number of which
is considerable, acquired the full right of being
immediate; by which term, in the German jurif-
prudence, we are to understand, that they are

fubje/
268

fubjeEt to the Empire alone, and possess within
their own precincts all the rights of compleat
and independent sovereignty. The various pri-
vileges of the Imperial cities, the great guardi-
ans of the Germanic liberties, are enumerated
by Knipfchild, lib. ii The most important ar-
ticles are generally known, and it would be im-
proper to enter into any disquisition concerning
minute particulars.

NOTE XVIII SECT. I. p. 34. [S].

THE Spanish historians are almost entirely si-

lent concerning the origin and progress of com-
munities in that kingdom; Co that I cannot fix,
with any degree of certainty, the time and man-
ner of their first introduction there. It appears,
however, from Mariana, vol. ii. p. 221, fol.
Hagae 1736, that in the year i350, eighteen
cities had obtained a feat in the Cortes of Castile.
From the account which shall be given of their
constitution and pretensions, SeA. III. of this
volume, it is evident that their privileges and
form of government were the fame with those of
the other feudal corporations; and this, as well
as the perfect similarity of political institutions
and tranfadions in all the feudal kingdoms, may
lead us to conclude, that communities were in-
troduced there in the fame manner, and proba-
bly about the fame time, as in the other nations
of Europe. In Aragon, as I shall have occasion
to observe in a subsequent note, cities seem early
to have acquired extensive immunities, together
with a share in the legislature. In the year i x 8,
the citizens of Saragossa had not only attained
political liberty, but they were declared to be
of equal rank with the nobles of the second class;
and many other immunities, unkfiown to per-
sons in their rank of life in other parts of Eu-

rope,

rope, were conferred upon them. Zurita Ana-
les de Aragon, tom. i. p. 44. In England, the
eftablifment of communities or corporations
was posterior to the Conquest. The practice
was borrowed from France, and the privileges
granted by the crown were perfectly similar to
those which I have enumerated But as this
part of history is well known to most of my
readers, I (hall, without entering into any cri-
tical or minute discussion, refer them to authors
who have fully illustrated this interesting point
in the English history. Brady's Treatise of
Boroughs. Madox Firma Burgi, chap. i. seCt.
ix. Hume's History of England, vol. i. ap-
pend. i. and ii. It is not improbable that rome
of the towns in England were formed into cor-
porations under the Saxon Kings, and that the
charters granted by the Kings of the Norman
race were not charters of enfranchisement from
a Rate of slavery, but a confirmation of privi-
leges which they already enjoyed. See Lord
Lyttelton's History of Henry II. vol. ii. p. 317.
The Englilh cities, however, were very incon-
fiderable in the twelfth century. A clear proof
of this occurs in the history to which I lat re-
ferred. Fitzftephen, a contemporary author,
gives a description of the city of London in the
reign of Henry II. and the terms in which he
speaks of its trade, its wealth, and the fplen-
dour of its inhabitants, would suggest no inad,
equate ide of its state at present, when it is the
greatest and most opulent city of Europe. But
all ideas of grandeur and magnificence are
merely comparative. It appears from Peter of
Blois, Archdeacon of London, who flourished in
the fame reign, and who had good opportunity
of being well informed, that this city, of which
Fitzftephen gives such a pompous account, con-
tained no more than forty thousand inhabitants.

Ibid.
270

ibid. 315, 316. The other cities were small in
proportion, and in no condition to extort any
cxtenfive privileges. That the constitution of
the boroughs in Scotland, in many circumifan-
ces, resembled that of the towns in France and
England, is manifest from the Leges Burgorum
annexed to the Regiam Majeftatem.

NOTE XIX. SECT. I. p. 39. [T].

SOON after the introduction of the third estate '

into the national council, the spirit of liberty
which that excited in France began to produce
conspicuous effets. In several provinces of
France, the nobility and communities formed
associations, whereby they bound themselves to
defend their rights and privileges against the for-
midable and arbitrary proceedings of the King.
The Count de Boulainvilliers has preserved a
copy of one of there associations, dated in the
year 1314, twelve years after the admission of
the deputies from the towns into the States Ge-
neral. Hiftoire de I'ancien gouvernement de la
France, torn. ii. p. 94. The vigour with which
the people aflerted and prepared to maintain
their rights, obliged their sovereign to refped
them. Six years after this aflociation, Philip the
Long issued a writ of summons to the cornmuni-
ty of Narbonne, in the following terms: " Phi-
lip, by the Grace, &c. to our well-beloved, &c.
As we desire with all our heart, and above all
other things, to govern our kingdom in peace
and tranquillity, by the help of God; and to
reform our said kingdom in so far as it stands in
need thereof, for the publick good, and for the
benefit of our fubjeats, who in times past have
been aggrieved and opprefied in diverse manners
by the malice of sundry persons, as we have
learned by common report, as well as by the in-

formation

formation of good men worthy of credit; and
we having determined in our council which we
have called to meet in our good city, &c. to
give redress to the utmost of our power, by all
ways and means poflible, according to reason
and justice, and wiliing that this hould be done
with solemnity and deliberation by the advice of
the prelates, barons, and good towns of our
realm, and particularly ofyo.u, and that it Ihould
be tranfated agreeably to the will of God, and
for the good of our people, therefore we com-
mand," &c. Mably, Obfervat. ii. App. p. 386.
I shall allow there to be only the formal words of
a public and legal style; but the ideas are fingu-
lar, and much more liberal and enlarged than one
could expec in that age. A popular monarch of
Great Britain could hardly address himself to par-
liament, in terms more favourable to publick
liberty. There occurs in the history of France a
striking instance of the progress which the prin-,
ciples of liberty had made in that kingdom, and
of the influence which the deputies of towns had
acquired in the States General. During the ca-
lamities in which the war with England, and the
captivity of King John, had involved France, the
States General made a bold effort to extend their
own privileges andjurifdifion. The regulations
established by the States held A. D. 1355, con-
cerning the mode of levying taxes, the admini-
itration of which they vested not in the crown,
but in commiflioners appointed by the States,
concerning the coining of money; concerning
the redress of the grievance of purveyance; con-
cering the regular administration ofjuftice; are
much more suitable to the genius of a republican
government than that of a feudal monarchy.
This curious statute is published, Ordon. t. iii.
p. i 9. Such as have not an opportunity to con-
fult that large colletion will find an abridgment

of

of it, in Hist. de France par Villaret, tom. ix.
p. i30. or in Hiftoire de Boulainv. tom. ii. r23.
The French historians represent the bilhop of
Laon, and Marcel Provost of the merchants of
Paris, who had the chiefdirecion of this assem-
bly, as seditious tribunes, violent, interested,
ambitious, and aiming at innovations subversive
of the constitution and government of their
country. That may have been the cafe, but
these men poffefled the confidence of the people;
and the measures which they proposed as the
most popular and acceptable, plainly prove that
the spirit of liberty had spread wonderfully, and
that the ideas which then prevailed in France
concerning government were extremely liberal.
The States General held at Paris A. D. 355,
consisted of about eight hundred members, and
above one half of these were deputies from towns.
M. Secoufle Pref. a Ordon. tom. iii. p.'48. It
appears that in all the different assemblies of the
States, held during the reign of John, the re-
presentatives of towns had great influence, and
in every refpec the third State was confidered
as co-ordinate and equal to either of the other
two. Ibid. passim. These spirited efforts were
made in France long before the House of Com-
mons in England acquired any considerable in-
fluence in the legislature. As the feudal system
was carried to its utmost height in France sooner
than in England, so it began to decline sooner in
the former than in the latter kingdom. In Eng-
land, almost all attempts to eftablilh or to extend
the liberty of the people have been successful; in
France they have proved unfortunate. What
were the accidental events, or political causes
which occasioned this difference, it is not my
present business to enquire.

VOL. I. T NOTE

NOTE XX. SECT. I.p. 41. [U].

Iw a former Note, N' VIII. I have enquired

into the condition of that part of the people
which was employed in agriculture, and have
represented the various hardships and calamities

f their situation. When charters of liberty and
manumission were granted to such persons, they
contained four conceflions corresponding to the
four capital grievances to which men' in a state
of servitude are subjeCt. i. The right of dif-
posing of their persons by sale or grant was re.
linquifted. 2. Power was given to them of con-
veying their property and effects by will or any
other legal deed. Or if they happened to die
intestate, it was provided that their property
should go to their lawful heirs in the fame man-
ner as the property of other persons. 3. The
evices and taxes which they owed to their fu-
perior or liege lord, which were formerly arbitrary
and imposed at pleasure, are precisely afcer-
tained. 4 They are allowed the privilege of
marrying whatever person they chose, as for-
merly they could contra&t no marriage without
their Lord's permifiion, and with no person but
one of his slaves. All these particulars are found
united in the charter granted Habitatoribus Mon-
tis-Britonis, A.D. 1376. HiRt. de Dauphine, tom.
i. p. 81. Many circumstances concurred with
those which I have mentioned in the text in pro-
curing them deliverance from that wretched
tate. The gentle spirit of the Christian religion;
the doctrines which it teaches, concerning the
original equality of mankind; its tenets concern-
ing the divine government, and.the impartial
eye with which the Almighty regards men of
every condition, and admits them to a partici-
pation of his benefits, are all inconfiient with

servitude.
274

servitude. But in this, as in many other instances,
considerations of interest, and the maxims of
false policy, led men to a condut inconsistent
with their principles. They were so sensible,
however, of the inconsistency, that to set their
fellow Christians at liberty from servitude, was
deemed an a& of piety highly meritorious and
acceptable to heaven. The humane spirit of the
Christian religion struggled with the maxims and
manners of the world, and contributed more
than any other circumstance to introduce the
practice of manumission. When Pope Gregory
the Great, who flourished toward the end of the
sixth century, granted liberty to some of his
slaves, he gives this reason for it; "Cum re-
demptor nofter, totius conditor naturm, ad hoc
propitiatus humanam carnem voluerit afiumere,
ut divinitatis fuae gratia, dirempto (quo teneba-
mur captivi) vinculo, priftina nos reftitueret
libertati; falubriter agitur, si homines, quos ab
initio liberos natura protulit, & jus gentiumjugo
fubftituit fervitutis, in ea, qui nati fuerant, ma-
numittentis beneftcio libertati reddantur." Gre-
gor. Magn. ap. Potgief. lib. iv. c. i. § 3. Seve-
ral laws or charters, founded on reasons similar to
this, are produced by the fame author. Accord-
ingly a great part of the charters of manumission,
previous to the reign of Louis X. are granted pro
amore Dei, pro remedio animae, & pro mercede
anima. Murat. Antiq. Ital. vol. . i. p. 849, 850.
Du Cange, voc. manammio. The formality of
manuminion was executed in a church, as a reli-
gious solemnity. The person to be set free was
led round the great altar with a torch in his hand,
he took hold of the horns of the altar, and there
the solemn words conferring liberty were pro-
nounced. Du Cange, lb. vol. iv. p. 467. I
thall transcribe a part of a charter of a manu-
mnifoon granted A. D. o156; both as it contains

T a

a full account of the ceremonies used in this
form of manumifflon, and as a specimen of the
imperfe&t knowledge of the Latin tongue in that
barbarousage. It is granted by Willa the widow
of Hugo the Duke and Marquis, in favour of
Clariza one of her slaves. " Et ideo nos Domine
Wille indite cometiffe--libera et abfolvo te
Cleriza filia Uberto -pro timore omnipotentis
Dei, & remedio luminarie anime bone memorie
quondam supra fcripto Domini Ugo glorioffimo,
ut quando illum Dominus de hac vita migrare,
julTerit, pars iniqua non abeat poteitatem ullam,
fed anguelus Domini noftri Jesu Chrifti colocare
dignitur ilium inter fan&os diletos suos; &
beatus Petrus princips apoftolorum, qui habed
poteitatem omnium animarum ligandi et abfol-
vendi, ut ipfi abfolvat anima ejus de peccatis
fui, & aperiad ilium janua paradifi; pro eadem
vero rationi, in mano mite te Benzo prefbiter,
ut vadat tecum in ecclesia fan&i Bartholomzi
apoftoli; traad te tribusvicibus circa altare ipfius
ecclesia cum careo apprehenfum in manibus
tuis & manibus fuis; deinde exite ambulate in
via quadrubio, ubi quatuor vie fe deviduntur.
Statimq; pro remedio luminarie anime bone me-
morie quondam supra fcripto Domini Ugo, et
ipfi prefbiter Benzo fecit omnia, & dixit. Ecce
quatuor vie, ite et ambulate in quacunq; partem
tibi plaucuerit, tam sic supra fcripta Cleriza, qua
nofque tui heredes, qui ab ac hora in antea nati,
vel procreati fuerit utriufq; fexus, &c." Murat.
ib. p. 853. Many other charters might have
been fele&ed, which, in point of grammar or
style, are in no wife superior to this. Manurif-
sion was frequently granted on death-bed or by
latter-will. As the minds of men are at that
time awakened to sentiments of humanity and
piety, these deeds proceeded from religious mo-
tives, and are granted pro redemptiont anira, in

order

order to obtain acceptance with God. Du Cange
ubi supra, p. 470. & voc. fervus, vol. vi. p.
451. Another method of obtaining liberty was
by entering into holy orders, or taking the vow
in a monastery. This was permitted for rome
time; but so many flavesefcaped, by this means,
out of the hands of their matiers, that the prac-
tice was afterwards restrained, and at last pro-
hibited, by the laws of almost all the nations of
Europe. Murat. ib. p. 842. Conformably to
the fame principles, Princes, on the birth of a
son, or upon any other agreeable event, appoint-
ed a certain number of slaves to be enfranchised,
as a testimony of their gratitude to God for that
benefit. Marculfi Form. lib. i. cap. 39, There
are several forms of manumiflion publi(hed by
Marculfus, and all of them are founded on re-
ligious considerations, in order to procure the
favour of God, or to obtain the forgiveness of
their fins. Lib. ii, c. 23, 33, 34. edit. Baluz.
The fame observation holds with refpe&t to the
other collecions of Formula annexed to Mar-
culfus. As sentiments of religion induced some
to grant liberty to their fellow Christians who
groaned under the yoke of servitude; so mistaken
ideas concerning devotion led others to relinquish
their liberty. When a person conceived an ex-
traordinary respect for the faint who was the
patron of any church or monastery in which he
was accustomed to attend religious worship, it
was not unusual among men, poffefled with an
excess of superstitious reverence, to give up
themselves and their posterity to be the slaves of
the faint. Mabillon. de re Diplomat. lib. vi.
632. The obtati or voluntary Oaves of churches
or monaftenes were very numerous, and may
be divided into three different classes. The first
were such as put themselves and effecs under
.the protection of a particular church or monas-

tery,

277

tery, binding themselves to defend its privileges
and property against every aggressor. These
were prompted to do so not merely by devotion,
but in order to obtain that security which arose
from the proteEtion of the church. They were
rather vasals than slaves, and sometimes persons
of noble birth found it prudent to secure the pro.
te&tion of the church in this manner. Persons
of the second class bound themselves to pay an
annual tax or quit-rent out of their estates to a
church or monafery. Besides this, they some-
times engaged to perform certain services. They
were called cenfuaes. Thelaft class confiftedof
such as actually renounced their liberty, and be.
came slaves in the ftrit and proper sense of the
word. These were called minifreriales, and en-
slaved their bodies, as tome of the charters bear,
that they might procure the liberty of their
fouls Potgiefierus de ftatu fervorum, lib. i. cap.
i. § 6, 7. How zealous the clergy were to en-
courage the opinions which led to this pracice,
will appear from a clause in a charter by which
one gives up himself as a slave to a monastery,
·' Cum fit omni carnali ingenuitate generofius
extremum quodcumq; Dei fervitium, scilicet
quod terrena nobilitas multos plerumq; vitiorum
servos facit, fervitus vero Chrifti nobiles virtuti-
bus reddit, nemo autem fani capitis virtutibus
vitia comparaverit, claret pro certo eum efle
generofiorem, qui fe Dei fervitio praebuerit pro-
niorem. Quod ego Ragnaldus intelligens, &c."
Another author fays, " Eligens magis efle fervua
Dei quam libertus flculi, firmiter credens &
fciens, quod fervire Deo, regnare eft, summa-
que ingenuitas fit in qua fervitus comparabatur
Chrifti, &c." Du Cange, voc. oblatus, vol. iv.
p. 1286, 1287. It does not appear, that the
enfranchisement of slaves was a frequent prac-
tice while the feudal system preserved its vigour.

On

On the contrary, there were laws which {et
bounds to this praCtice as detrimental to society.
Potgiefl. lib. iv. c. 2. § 6. The inferior order of
men owed the recovery of their liberty to the
decline of that arifocratical policy, which lodged
the most extensive power in the hands of a few
members of the society, and deprefled all the
reft. When Louis X. issued his ordonance, te-
veral slaves had been so long accustomed to ser-
vitude, and their minds were so much debAsed
by that unhappy situation, that they refused to
accept of the liberty which was offered them.
D'Ach Spicel. vol. xi. p. 387. Long after the
reign of Louis X. several of the French nobility
continued to assert their ancient dominion over
their slaves. It appears from an ordonance of
the famous Bertrand de Guefclin, Constable of
France, that the custom of enfranchifidg themr
wasconfidered as a pernicious innovation. Morice
Mem. pour fervir des preuves a 1'hist. de Bret.
tom. ii. p. Ioo, In Come instances, when the
predial slaves were declared to be freemen, they
were still bound to perform certain services to
their ancient masters and were kept in a state
different from other fubjests, being reftrited
either from purchasing land, or becoming mem-
bers of a community within the precincts of the
manor to which they formerly belonged. Mar-
tene & Durand. Thefaur. Anecdot. vol. i. p.
914. This, however, Seems not to have been
common. -There is no general law for the ma-
numiffion of slaves in the Statute-book of Eng-
land similar to that which has been quoted from
the Ordonances of the Kings of France. Though
the genius of the English constitution seems early
to have favoured personal liberty, personal ser-
vitude, nevertheless, continued long in England
in some particular places. In the year 1514, we
find a charter of Henry VIII. enfranchising two

slaves

279

slaves belonging to one of his manors. Rym.
Fceder. vol. xiii. p. 470. As late as the year
1574, there is a commiifion from Queen Eliza-
beth with refpet to the manumifion of certain
bondmen belonging to her. Rymer. in Obfer,
vat on the statutes, &c. p. 251.

NOTE XXI. SECT. I. p. 47. [X].

THERE is no custom in the middle ages more

singular than that of private war. It is a right of
so great importance, and prevailed so universally,
that the regulations concerning it make a confi-
derable figure in the system of laws during the
middle ages. M. de Montesquieu, who has un-
ravelled so many intricate points in feudal jurif-
prudence, and thrown light on so many customs
formerly obscure and unintelligible, was not led
by his subjet to confider this. I Ihall therefore
give a more minute account of the cufloms and
regulations which directed a practice so contrary
to the present ideas of civilized nations concerning
government and order. i. Among the ancient
Germans, as well as other nations in a similar
state of society, the right of avenging injuries was
a private and personal right, exercised by force
of arms, without any reference to an umpire, or
any appeal to a magistrate for decision. The
dearest proofs of this were produced Note VI.
2. This practice sublisted among the barbarous
nations after their settlement in the provinces of
the Empire which they conquered; and as the
causes of dissention among them multiplied, their
family feuds and private war became more fre-
quent. Proofs of this occur in their early his-
torians. Greg. Turon. hist. lib. vii. c. a. lib. viii.
c. 8. lib. x. c. 27. and likewise in the codes of
their laws. It was not only allowable for the re.
lations to avenge the injuries of their family, but

it
280

it was incumbent on them. Thus by the laws
of the Angli and Werini, ad quemcunque here-
ditas terra pervenerit, ad ilium veftis bellica id
eft lorica & ultio proximi, & folatio leudis, debet
pertinere, tit. vi. § 5. ap. Lindenbr. Leg. Salic.
tit. 63. Leg. Longob. lib. ii. tit. . §4. § .- 3.
None but gentlemen, or persons of noble birth,
had the right of private war. All disputes among
slaves, villani, the inhabitants of towns, and free-
men of inferior condition, were decided in the
courts of justice. All disputes between gentlemen
and persons of inferior rank were terminated in
the fame manner, The right of private war sup-
posed nobility of birth, and equality of rank in
the contending parties. Beaumanoir Couftumes
de Beauv. ch. lix. p. 300. Ordon. des Rois de
France, tom. ii. 395. § xvii. 508. § xv. &c. The
dignified ecclefiafticks likewise claimed and exer-
cifed the right of private war; but as it was not
altogether decent for them to prosecute quarrels
in person, advocati or vidames were chosen by the
several monasteries and bilhopricks. These were
commonly men of high rank and reputation, who
became the protetors of the churches and con-
vents by whom they were elected, espoused their
quarrels, and fought their battles; armis omnia
quae erant ecclefiae viriliter defendebant, et vigi-
lanter protegebant. Bruffel Usage des Fiefs, tom.
i. p. 144 Du Cange, voc. advocatus. On many
occasions, the martial ideas to which ecclefiafticks
of noble birth were accustomed, made them for-
get the pacifick fpirit'of their profession, and led
them into the field in person at the head of their
vafials, " flamma, ferro, cede, possessiones eccle-
fiarum prelati defendebant." Guido Abbas ap.
Du Cange, Ib. p. 179.-4. It was not every in-
jury or trespass that gave a gentleman a title to
make war upon his adversary. Atrocious ats of
violence, insults and affronts publickly commit-

ted,

ted, were legal and permitted motives for taking
arms against the authors of them. Such crimes
as are now punilhed capitally in civilized nati-
ons, at that time justified private hostilities.
Beauman. ch. lix. Du Cange Diflert. xxix. fur
Joinville, p. 331. But though the avenging of
injuries was the only motive that could legally
authorise a private war, yet disputes concerning
civil property often gave rife to hostilities, and
were terminated by the sword. Du Cange Dif-
fert. p. 332-5. All persons present when any
quarrel arose, or any at of violence was corm
mitted, were included in the war which it oc.
cafioned; for it was supposed to be impossible
for any man in such a situation to remain neu-
tral, without taking fide with one or other of
the contending parties. Beauman. p. 300. -6.
All the kindred of the two principals in the war
were included in it, and obliged to espouse the
quarrel of the chieftain with whom they were
connected, Du Cange, ib. 332. This was founded
on the maxim of the ancient Germans," fufcipe-
re tam inimicitias feu patris, feu propinqui, quam
amicitias, necefle eft;" a maxim natural to all
rude and simple nations, among which the form
of society, and political union, strengthens such
a sentiment. The method of ascertaining the
degree of affinity which obliged a person to take
part in the quarrel of a kinsman was curious.
While the church prohibited the marriage of per-
sons within the seventh degree of affinity, the
vengeance of private war extended as far as this
absurd prohibition, and all who had such a remote
conection with any of the principals were in-
volhed in the calamities of war. But when the
church relaxed somewhat of its rigour, and did
not extend its prohibition of marrying beyond the
fourth degree of affinity, the fame restriction took
place in the conduc of private war. Beauman.

303.

303. Du Cange Dissert. 333.-7. A private war
could not be carried on between two full brothers,
because both have the fame common kindred, and
consequently neither had any persons bound to
stand by him against the other, in the contest;
but two brothers of the half blood might wage
war, because each of them has a diftinc kindred.
Beauman. p. 299.-8. The vassals of each prin-
cipal in any private war were involved in the con-
test, because by the feudal maxims they were
bound to take arms in defence of the cheiftain
of whom they held, and to assist him in every
quarrel. As soon, therefore, as the feudal tenures
were introduced, and this artificial connection was
eftablilhed between vafils and the baron of whom
they held, vassals came to be confidered as in the
fame state with relations. Beauman. 303.-9.
Private wars were very frequent for several cen-
turies. Nothing contributed more to increase
those disorders in government, or to encourage
such ferocity of manners as reduced the nations
of Europe to that wretched state which diftin-
guiffied the period of history which I am re-
viewing. Nothing was such an obstacle to the
introduction of a regular administration of jus-
tice. Nothing could more effectually difcouragc
industry, or retard the progress and cultivation
of the arts of peace. Private wars were carried
on with all the deftrufive rage, which is to be
dreaded from violent refcntment when armed
with force, and authorised by law. It appears
from the statutes prohibiting or restraining the
exercise of private hostilitics, that the invasion
of the most barbarous enemy could not be more
desolating to a country, or more fatal to its inha-
bitants, than those intestine wars. Ordon. t. i. p.
701. tom. ii. 395, 408, 507, &c. The contem-
porary historians describe the excesses committed
in prosecution of these quarrels in such terms as

excite

excite afonifhment and horror. I shall mention
only one pafiage from the history of the Holy
War, by Guibert Abbot of Nogent: " Erat eo
tenmpore maximis ad invicem hofilitatibus, toti-
us Francorum regni fafa turbatio; crebra ubi-
que latrocinia, viarum obfeflio; audiebantur
pafiim, immo fiebant incendia infinita; nullis
preter Cola & indomita cupiditate exiftentibus
caufis extruebanter pralia; & ut brevi totum
claudam quicquid obtutibus cupidorum fubja-
cebat, nufqaam attendendo cujus effet, preda
patebat." Gefta Dei per Francos, vol. i. p.
482.

HAVING thus colleted' the chief regulations

which custom had etablifhed concerning the
right and exercise of private war, I shall enu-
merate, in chronological order, the various expe.
dients employed to aboliih or refirain this fatal
custom. i. The firfi expedient employed by the
civil magistrate in order to set Come bounds to the
violence of private revenge, was the fixing by
law the fine or composition to be paid for each
different crime. The injured person was origi-
nally the sole judge concerning the nature of the
wrong which he had suffered, the degree of ven-
geance which he should exa&, as well as the
species of atonement or reparation with which he
Ihould reft satisfied. Resentment became of
course as implacable as it was fierce. It was of-
ten a point of honour not to forgive, nor to be
reconciled. This made it necessary to fix those
compositions which make so great a figure in the
laws of barbarous nations. The nature of crimes
and offences was estimated by the magistrate,
and the fum due to the person offended was as-
certained with a minute, and often a whimsical
accuracy. Rotharis, the legislator of the Lom-
bards, who reigned about the middle of the

seventh

seventh century discovers his intention both in
ascertaining the composition to be paid by the
offender, and in increasing its value; it is, fays
he, that the enmity may be extinguished, the pro-
fecution may cease, and peace may be restored.
Leg. Langob. lib. i. tit. 7. § o1.- 2. About the
beginning of the ninth century, Charlemagne
firuck at the root of the evil, and ena&ed,
" That when any person had been guilty of a
crime, or had committed an outrage, he should
immediately submit to the penance which the
church imposed, and offer to pay the compofi-
tion which the law prescribed; and if the injured
person or his kindred should refuse to accept of
this, and presume to avenge themselves by force
of arms, their lands and properties should be for-
feited." Capitul. A. D. 802. edit. Baluz. vol. i.
371. - 3. But in this, as well as in other regu-
lations, the genius of Charlemagne advanced
before the spirit of his age. The ideas of his
contemporaries concerning regular government
were too imperfet, and their manners too fierce
to submit to this law. Private wars, with all
the calamities which they occasioned, became
more frequent than ever after the death of that
great monarch. His successors were unable to
refrain them. The church found it necessary
to interpose. The most early of these interpofi-
tions now extant, is towards the end of the tenth
century. In the year 99o, several bishops in the
south of France assembled, and published various
regulations, in order to set some bounds to the
violence and frequency of private wars; if any
person within their dioceses should venture to
transgress, they ordained that he mhould be ex-
cluded from all Christian privileges during his
life, and be denied Christian burial after his
death. Du Mont Corps Diplomatique, tom. i.
p. 41. These, however, were only partial re-
medies; and therefore a council was held at

Limoges'

285

Limoges, A. D. 994. The bodies of the falnts,
according to the custom of those ages, were
carried thither; and by these sacred relicks men
were exhorted to lay down their arms, to extin-
guilh their animofities, and to swear that they
would not for the future violate the publick
peace by their private hostilities. Bouquet Re-
cueil des Hiftor. vol. x. p. 49, 147. Several
other councils issued decrees to the fame effett.
Du Cange Dissert. 343.- 4 But the authority
of councils, how venerable soever in those ages,
was not sufficient to abolish a custom which flat-
tered the pride of the nobles, and gratified their
favourite paflions. The evil grew so intolerable,
that it became neceflary to employ supernatural
means for fupprefling it. A bishop of Aqui-
taine, A. D. 1032, pretended that an angel had
appeared to him, and brought him a writing
from heaven, enjoining men to cease from their
hostilities, and to be reconciled to each other.
It was during a season of public calamity that
he publilhed this revelation. The minds of men
were disposed to receive pious impreflions, and
willing to perform any thing in order to avert
the wrath of heaven. A general peace and cef-
fation from hostilities took place, and continued
for seven years; and a resolution was formed,
that no man should in times to come attack or
molest his adversaries during the seasons set apart
for celebrating the great festivals of the church,
or from the evening of Thursday in each week
to the morning of Monday in the week ensuing,
the intervening days being confidered as parti-
cularly holy, our Lord's passion having happen-
ed on one of these days, and his Resurrection
on another. A change in the dispositions of men
so sudden, and which produced a resolution so
unepeed, was confidered as miraculous; and
the rfpite from hoftilitis which followed upon

it,

it, was called The Truce of God. Glaber. Ro-
dulphus Hiftor. lib. v. ap. Bouquet. vol. x. p. 59.
This, from being a regulation or concert in one
kingdom, became a general law in Christendom,
and was confirmed by the authority of the Pope,
and the violators were fubjeaed to the penalty of
excommunication. Corpus Jur. Canon. Decre-
tal. lib. i. tit. 34. c. i. Du Cange Gloflar. voc.
Treuga. An at of the council of Toulujes in
Roussillon, A. D. 1041, containing all the tipu-
lations required by the truce of God, is publish-
ed by Dom de Vic & Dom Vaifette Hist. de
Languedoc, tom. ii. Preuves, p. o26. A cefla-
tion from hostilities during three complete days
in every week, allowed such a considerable space
for the paflions of the antagonists to cool, and
for the people to enjoy a respite from the calami-
ties of war, as well as to take measures for their
own security, that, if this truce of God had
been exatly observed, it must have gone far
towards putting an end to private wars. This,
however, seems not to have been the cafe; the
nobles, disregarding the truce, prosecuted their
quarrels without interruption as formerly. Qua
nimirum tempeftate, univerfae provincia adeo
devaftationis continuae importunitate inquietan.
tur, ut ne ipfa, pro obfervatione divina pacis,
profefla facramenta cuftodiantur. Abbas Ufper-
genfis apud Datt de pace imperii publica, p. r3.
N0 35. The violent spirit of the nobility could
not be restrained by any engagements. The
complaints of this were frequent; and bishops,
in order to compel them to renew their vows
and promires of ceasing from their private wars,
were obliged to enjoin their clergy to suspend
the performance of divine service, and the ex-
ercife of any religious funtion within the pa-
rifles of such as were refratory and oblfinate.
Hist. de Langue~ par D. D. de Vic &Vaiette,

tom.

tom. ii. Preuves, p. x 8. - 5. The people,
eager to obtain relief from their sufferings, call-
ed in a second time a pretended revelation to
their aid. Towards the end of the twelfth cen-
tury, a carpenter in Guienne gave out, that
Jesus Christ, together with the blefied Virgin,
ad appeared to him, and having commanded
him to exhort mankind to peace, had given
him, as a proof of his million, an image of the
Virgin holding her son in her arms, with this
inscription, Lamb of God, wbo taket away the
fiu of the vorld, gve us peace. This low fa-
natick addrefied himself to an ignorant age,
prone to credit what was marvellous. 'He was
received as an inspired meflenger of God; Many
prelates and barons afTembled at Puy, and took
an oath, not only to make peace with all their
own enemies, but to attack such as refused to
lay down their arms, and to be reconciled to
their enemies. They formed an association for
this purpose, and assumed the honourable name
of tbe Broterhood of God. Robertusde Monte
Michaele ap. M. de Lauriere Pref. tom. i. Or-
don. p. 29. But the influence of this fuperRfi-
tious terror or devotion was not of long conti-
nuance.- 6. The civil magistrate was obliged
to exert his authority in order to check a cuf-
tom which threatened the difiolution of govern-
ment Philip Augustus, as some imagine, or St.'
Louis, as is more probable, published an ordo-
nance, A. D. 1245, prohibiting any person to
commence hostilities against the friends and vas-
iils of his adversary, until forty days after the
commission of the crime or offence which gave
rife to the quarrel; declaring, that if any man
presumed to transgress this statute, he flould be
confidered as guilty of a breach of the publick
peace, and be tried and punilhed by the judge
ordinary as a traitor. Ordon. tom. i. p. 56. This

was

was called the Royal Truce, and afforded time for
the violence of refentment'to subside, as well as
leisure for the good offices of such as weie willing
to compose the difference. The happy.: eff'ets of
this regulation seem to have been confiderable,:if
we may judge from the solicitude of succeeding
monarchs to enforce it. - 7. In order to reftraiti
the exercise of private war ;fill farther, 'Philip the
Fair, towards the close of the fame century, A. D
1296, published an ordonance c-ionaMtding all
private hostilities to cease, while he wis engaged
in war against the enemies. of thie'latef; Ordoni
tom. i. p. 3z8,'39o, This regulation, which seems
to be almost essential to the exifterice'aftd'prefer-
vation of society, ua s'often rehewed: by'his sic-
ceffors, and being erforced by the rtga altho:
rity, proved a confiderabl¢ ch¢ck:t :the deftruc
tive contefts:of.the nobles. Both thele¥egdlati-
ons, introduced - fi::ihit Fiarer". iw adopted
by the other natiohns of EuropE. " T8- 'he evil;
however; was f'-invrteit'ate: thetididnot'yield
to all these remedies. : No fodrieti: s' :ublick
peace eftablilfedhit any kingdorti.an: thbe bai
rons renewed their private ho6tiltesi '.t'hey nt
only:ftruggled to:rmnaintain :this pernicious right.
but to secure the exercife-i f it without iny re-
traint.' Upobtnthe death ofPhilip the'Fair, the
nobles of different provinces' in 'tFance formed
associations, and presented remonstrances to his
successor, demanding the repeal- oft:fltal laws,.
by which he had abridged the privileges of their
order. Among these, the right .f private war
is always mentlotied-a/one of the niioft valuable;
and they claim, that the retraint m'pofed by
the truce of God, the royal truce, as well as
that arising from the ordonance of the year I 296,
Should be taken 'off. In some instances, the
two sons of Philip, who mounted the throne
successively, eluded their demands; in others,

VOL. I. U they

they were obliged to make conceflions. ' Ordon.
tor. i. p. 551,, 557, 561, 573. The ordo-
nances to which I here refer, are of such
ength that I cannot insert them; but they are
xttremely curious, and. may be peculiarly in-
#trudive to an Englilh reader, as they throw
confiderabic lght on that-period of English his-
tory, in which the attempts to circumscribe the
egal prergtive were-carried on, not .by the
people irmggling for liberty, but by the no
conten4igg. for power. It is not neceffaryto
produce any: evidence of the continuance and
freq uec of private wars under the fucceflors of
Philip the Fair. -9. A pratice somewhat fini-
ly to the royal truce was introduced, in order
to ftrengh -aMd-extend it Bonds of aflurance,
or, mutual; feeurity, were demanded from, the
parties at- iF;a eby .wJbh: they obliged them-
selves to h~ tinm all hofilites, either during
a time mreptionejn. th boud, or for ever; aod
becacne 4bjet;to heavy pena ltis, if they vio
lated this obgao. These bonds were so
times grntld-voluntarily, but more frequently
xated ;by dhe authority of the civil magifte.
Upon . pt~itoa from. the party who felt himfeif
weakest, the magiftrte fuswoaed his advcrfry
to appear in court, and obliged him to gji
a bond of assurance. If, .ter. that, he com-
mitted any farher hofitilits, he became sub-
jet to all the penalties of treason, This retrt
on private war was knomwn in the age of St.
Louis. fltabliflemen, liy. i. c. 28. It- w
frequent i_ Bretagne; and what is very remark-
able, such bonds ofaffurance were given mutu-
ally betweq vafials and the lord of whom they
held. Oliverde Cliftn grants one to the Dule
of Bretagne, his. sovereign. Morice Mem. pour
fervir de preuves i l'hift. de Bret. tom. i. p. 846.
ii p. 37x. Many examples of bonds of ss-

furance

furance in the other provinces of France are col-
leIed by Bruifel. tom. ii. p. 856. The nobles of
Burgundy remonstrated against this practice, and
obtained exemption from it as an encroachment
on the privileges of their order. Ordon. tom. i. p.
558. This mode of security was first introduced
in cities, and the good effecs of it having been
felt there, was extended to the nobles. See Note
XVI. - lo. The calamities occasioned by pri-
vate wars became at Come times Co intolerable,
that the nobles entered into voluntary aflociati-
ons, binding themselves to refer all matters in
dispute, whether concerning civil property, or
points of honour, to the determination of the
majority of the associates. Morice Mem. pour
fervir de preuves a l'hift. de Bret. tom. ii. p. 728.
-i . But all these expedients proving ineffectu-
al, Charles VI. A. D. 1413, issued an ordonance
expressly prohibiting private wars on any pretext
whatsoever, with power to the judge ordinary
to compel all persons to comply with this injunc-
tion, and to punith such as mhould prove refrac-
tory ordifobedient, by imprisoning their persons,
seizing their goods, and appointing the officers
of juRice, Mageurs & Gafleurs, to live at free
quarters on their estate. If those who were difo-
bedient to this edit could not be personally ar-
refted, he appointed their friends and vafial to be
seized, and detained until they gave surety for
keeping the peace; and be abolilhed all laws, cuf-
toms, or privileges, which might be pleaded in
opposition to this ordonance. Ordon. tom. x. p.
138. How flow is the progrefsofreafon and of
civil order! Regulations which to us appear so
equitable, obvious, and simple, required the es-
forts of civil and ecclesiastical authority, during
several centuries, to introduce and eiablifh
,them. Even posterior to this period, Louis XL
wtas obliged to abolish private wars in Dauphine,

Uz by

by a particular edit, A. D. 1451. Du Cange
Differr. p. 348.

THIS note would swell to a disproportional

bulk, if I should attempt to inquire, with the
fame minute attention, into the progress of this
pernicious custom in the other countries of Eu-
rope. In England, the ideas of the Saxons con-
cerning personal revenge, the right of private
wars, and the composition due to the party of-
fended, seem to have been much the fame with
those which prevailed on the Continent. The
law of Ina de Vindicantibus, in the eighth cen-
tury, de bomicidio, Lamb. p. 72. & de inimictiis,
p. 76; and those of Edward the Confessor, in
the eleventh century, de temporibus &E de dibus
pacis, or Treuga Dei, Lamb. p. 126, are per.
featly similar to the ordonnces of the French
Kings their contemporaries. The laws of Ed-
ward, de pace rigis, are still more explicit than
those of the French Monarchs, -and, by several
provisions in them, discover that a more perfeft
police was eftablifled in England at that period.
Lambard. p. 128. fol. verf. Even after the con-
quest, private wars, and the regulations for pre-
venting them, were not altogether unknown, as
appears from Madox Formulare Anglicanurn,
N°. CXLV. and from the extracts from Dooms-
day Book, published by Gale ScriptoresHit.
Britan. p. 759, 777. The well known clause in
the form of an English inditment, which, as
an aggravation of the criminal's guilt, mentions
his having ifraulted a person, who was in the
peace of God and of the King, seems to be
borrowed from the Treuga or Pax Dei and the
Pax Regis, which I have explained. But after the
conquest, the mention of private wars among
the nobility, occurs more rarely in the English
history, than in that of any other European na-

tion,

tion, and no laws concerning them are to be
found in the body of their flatutes. Such a
change in their own manners, and such a vari-
ation from those of their neighbours, is remark-
able. Is it to be ascribed to the extraordinary
power that William the Norman acquired by
right of conquest, and transmitted to his fuc-
ceffors, which rendered the execution of justice
more vigorous and decisive, and thejurifdi&ion
of the King's court more extensive than under
the Monarchs on the Continent ? Or, was it
owing to the settlement of the Normans in Eng-
land, who, having never adopted the practice of
private war in their own country, abolished it in
the kingdom which they conquered? It is aftert-
ed in an ordonance of King John of France, that
in all times past, persons of every rank in Nor-
mandy have been prohibited to wage private
war, and the pracice has been deemed unlawful.
Ordon. tom. ii. p. 407. If this fat were certain,
it would go far towards explaining the peculiarity
which I have mentioned. But as there are some
English Acts of Parliament, which, according to
the remark of the learned author of the Obfer-
vations on the Statutes, chiefly the more ancient,
recite falsehoods, it may be added, that this is
not peculiar to the laws of that country. Not-
withstanding the positive assertion contained in
this publick law of France, there is good reason
for confidering it as a statute which recites a
falfhood. This, however, is not the place for
discussing that point. It is an inquiry not un-
worthy the curiosity of an English antiquary.

IN Castile, the pernicious practice of private

war prevailed, and was authorized by the cuf-
toms and law of the kingdom. Leges Tauri tit.
76. cum commentario Anton. Gomezii, p. 551.
As the Castilian nobles were no less turbulent
than powerful, their quarrels and hostilities in-

volved

293

volved their country in many calamities. Innu-
merable proofs of this occur in Mariana. In
Aragon, the right of private revenge was like-
wife authorized by law, exercised in its full ex-
tent, and accompanied with the fame unhappy
consequences. Hieron. Blanca Comment. de
rebus Arag. ap. Schotti. Hifpan. illuftrat. vol. iii.
p. 733. Lex Jacobi I. A. D. 1247. Fueros &
Obfervancias del Reyno de Aragon, lib. ix. p.
182. Several confederacies between the Kings
of Aragon and their nobles, for the restoring of
peace, founded on the truce of God, are fiill
extant. Petr. de Marca. Marca fivi Limes His.
panic App. 1303, i388, 1428. As early as the
year i 65, we find a combination of the King
and court of Aragon, in order to abolish the
right of private war, and to punish those who
presumed to claim that privilege. Anales de
Aragon por Zurita, voL i. p. 73. But the evil
was so inveterate, that as late as A. D. 1519.
Charles V. was obliged to publish a law enforce-
ing all former regulations tending to suppress this
practice. Fueros & Obfervanc. lib. ix. 183. b.

THE Lombards, and other northern nations

who fettled in Italy, introduced the fame maxims
concerning the right of revenge into that coun-
try, and these were followed by the fame effects,
As the progress of the evil was perfectly similar
to what happened in France, the expedients em-
ployed to check its career, or to extirpate it si-
nally, resembled those which I have enumerated.
Murat. Ant. Ital. vol. ii. p. 306.

IN Germany the disorders and calamities oc-

cafioned by the right of private war were greater
and more intolerable than in any other country
of Europe. The Imperial authority was so much
shaken and enfeebled by the violence of the

civil

civil wars, excited by the contests between the
Popes and the Emperors of the Franconian and
Suabian lines, that not only the nobility but the
cities acquired almost independent power, and
scorned all subordination and obedience to the
laws. The frequency of thefefaid&, or private
wars, are often mentioned in the German An-
nals, and the fatal effets of them are most pa-
thetically described. Datt, de pace Imper. pub.
lib. i. cap. v. nO. 30. &8 passim. The Germans
early adopted the Treuga Dei, which was first
eftablilhed in France. This, however, proved
but a temporary and ineffectual remedy. The
disorders multiplied so fast, and grew so enor-
mous, that they threatened the dissolution of
society, and compelled the Germans to have re-
course to the only remedy of the evil, viz. an
absolute prohibition of private wars. The Em-
peror William published his edict to this pur-
pose, A. D. 1255, an hundred and sixty years
previous to the ordonance of Charles VI. in
France. Datt, lib. i. cap. 4. n°. 2o. But neither
he nor his successors had authority to secure the
observance of it. This gave rife to a practice
in Germany, which conveys to us a striking
idea both of the intollerable calamities occasion-
ed by private wars, and of the feebleness of
government during the twelfth and thirteenth
centuries. The cities and nobles entered into
alliances and associations, by which they bound
themselves to maintain the public peace, and to
make war on such as (hould violate it. This
was the origin of the league of the Rhine, of
Suabia, and of many smaller confederacies dif-
tinguifhed by various names. The rife, pro-
grefs, and beneficial effecs of those associations
are traced by Datt with great accuracy. What-
ever degree of publick peace, or of regular ad-
ministration was preserved in the Empire, from

the

295

the beginning of the twelfth century to the close
of the fifteenth, Germany owes to these leagues.
During that period, political order, refpet for
the laws, together with the equal adminiftrati n
of justice, made considerable progress in Ger-
many. But the final and perpetual abolition of
the right of private war was not accomplilhed
until A. D. 1495. The Imperial authority was
by that time more firmly established, the ideas
of men, with respect to government and fubor-
dination, were become more just. That barba-
rous and pernicious privilege which the nobles
had so long possessed, was declared to be incom-
patible with the happiness and existence of so-
ciety. In order to terminate any differences
which might arise among the various members
of the Germanick body, the Imperial chamber
was infRituted with fupremejurifdi&ion, to judge
without appeal in every question brought before
it. That court has fubfited since that period,
forming a very respectable tribunal, of essential
importance in the German constitution. Datt,
lib. iii, iv, v. Pfeffel Abrege de l'Hiftoire du
Droit, &c. p. 556.

N O T E XXII. SECT. I. p. 57. [Y1.

IT would be tedious and of little use to enu-

merate the various modes of appealing to the
justice of God, which fuperflition introduced
during the ages of ignorance. I (hall mention
only one, because we have an account of it in a
placitum or trial in the presence of Charlemagne,
from which we may learn the imperfect manner
in which justice was administered even during
his reign. In the year 775, a contest arose be-
tween the bishop of Paris and the abbot of St.
Denys, concerning the property of a (mall ab-
bey. Each of them exhibited deeds and re-

cords,

cords, in order to prove the right to be in them.
Initead of trying the authenticity, or confider-
ing the import of these, the point was referred
to the judicium crucis. Each produced a person,
who, during the celebration of mass, stood be-
fore the cross with his arms expanded; and he
whose representative first became weary, and
altered his position, loft the cause. The person
employed by the bishop on this occasion had
less strength or less spirit than his adversary, and
the question was decided in favour of the abbot.
Mabillon de re Diplomat. lib. vi. p. 498. If a
Prince so enlightened as Charlemagne counte-
nanced such an absurd mode of decision, it is no
wonder that other monarchs should tolerate it so
long. M. de Montesquieu has treated of the trial
by judicial combat at considerable length. The
two talents which distinguish that illustrious au-
thor, industry in tracing all the circumstances of
ancient and obscure inflitutions, and sagacity in
penetrating into the caures and principles which
contributed to eftablith them, are equally con-
fpicuous in his observations on this fubje&. To
these I refer the reader, as they contain most of
the principles by which I have endeavoured to
explain this pracice. De l'Efprit des Loix, lib.
xxviii. It seems to be probable, from the re-
marks of M. de Montesquieu, as well as from
the fa&s produced by Muratori, tom. iii. Dissert.
xxxviii. that the appeals to the justice of God
by the experiments with fire and water, &c.
were prafifed by the people who fettled in the
different provinces of the Roman Empire, be-
fore they had recourse to the judicial combat.
The judicial combat, however, was the most
ancient mode of terminating any controversy
among the barbarous nations in their original
settlements. This is evident from Velleius Pa-
terculus, lib. ii. c. 118. who informs us, that all

questions,

297

the beginning of the twelfth century to the close
of the fifteenth, Germany owes to there leagues.
During that period, political order, refpe& for
the laws, together with the equal adminiftrati n
of jutlice, made considerable progress in Ger-
many. But the final and perpetual abolition of
the right of private war was not accomplished
until A. D. I495. The Imperial authority was
by that time more firmly eftablilhed, the ideas
of men, with refpe& to government andfubor-
dination, were become more just. That barba-
rous and pernicious privilege which the nobles
had so long poflefled, was declared to be incom-
patible with the happiness and existence of so-
ciety. In order to terminate any differences
which might arise among the various members
of the Germanick body, the Imperial chamber
was instituted with fupremejurifdiclion, to judge
without appeal in every question brought before
it. That court has subsisted since that period,
forming a very refpeEtable tribunal, of eflential
importance in the German constitution. Datt,
lib. iii, iv, v. Pfeffel Abrege de l'Hiftoire du
Droit, &c. p. 556.

N O T E XXII. SErT. I. p. 57. [Y].

IT would be tedious and of little use to enu-

merate the various modes of appealing to the
justice of God, which superstition introduced
during the ages of ignorance. I fhali mention
only one, because we have an account of it in a
placitum or trial in the presence of Charlemagne,
from which we may learn the imperfec manner
in which justice was administered even during
his reign. In the year 775, a contest arose be-
tween the bishop of Paris and the abbot of St.
Denys, concerning the property of a small ab-
bey. Each of them exhibited deeds and re-

cords,
296

cords, in order to prove the right to be in them.
Instead of trying the authenticity, or confider-
ing the import of these, the point was referred
to the judicium crucis. Each produced a person,
who, during the celebration of mass, stood be-
fore the cross with his arms expanded; and he
whose representative first became weary, and
altered his position, loft the cause. The person
employed by the bishop on this occasion had
less strength or less spirit than his adversary, and
the question was decided in favour of the abbot.
Mabillon de re Diplomat. lib. vi. p. 498. If a
Prince so enlightened as Charlemagne counte-
nanced such an absurd mode of decision, it is no
wonder that other monarchs Ihould tolerate it so
long. M. de Montesquieu has treated of the trial
by judicial combat at considerable length. The
two talents which distinguish that illustrious au-
thor, industry in tracing all the circumstances of
ancient and obscure institutions, and sagacity in
penetrating into the causes and principles which
contributed to eftablith them, are equally con-
fpicuous in his observations on this subjet. To
there I refer the reader, as they contain most of
the principles by which I have endeavoured to
explain this practice. De l'Efprit des Loix, lib.
xxviii. It seems to be probable, from the re-
marks of M. de Montesquieu, as well as from
the faAs produced by Muratori, tom. iii. Difiert.
xxxviii. that the appeals to the justice of God
by the experiments with fire and water, &c.
were pradifed by the people who fettled in the
different provinces of the Roman Empire, be-
fore they had recourse to the judicial combat.
The judicial combat, however, was the most
ancient mode of terminating any controversy
among the barbarous nations in their original
settlements. This is evident from Velleius Pa-
terculus, lib. ii. c. 118. who informs us, that all

questions,

297

questions, which were decided among the Ro-
mans by legal trial, were terminated among the
Germans by arms. The fame thing appears in
the ancient laws and customs of the Swedes,
quoted by Jo. 0. Stiernh66k de jure Sueonum &
Gothorum vetufto, 4to. Holmiae, 168 . lib. i.
c. 7. It is probable, that when the various tribes
which invaded the Empire were converted to
Christianity, their ancient custom of allowing
judicial combats appeared to glaringly repugnant
to the precepts of religion, that, for some time,
it was abolithed, and by degrees, several cir-
cumflances which I have mentioned, led them
to resume it.

IT seems likewise to be probable, from a law

quoted by Stiernhbok in the treatise which I have
mentioned, that the judicial combat was origi-
nally permitted, in order to determine points re-
fpeeting the personal character, or reputation of
individuals, and was afterwards extended not
only to criminal cafes, but to questions con-
cerning property. The words of the law are:
" If any man shall fay to another these reproach-
ful words, " you are, not a man equal to other

men," or, "' you have not the heart of a
"rman ;" and the other (hall reply, "I am a man

as good as you;" let them meet on the

highway. If he who gave offence appear, and
the person offended absent himself, let the latter
be deemed worse than he was called; let him
not be admitted to give evidence in judgment
either for man or woman, and let him not have
the privilege of making a testament. If the per-
son offended appear, and he who gave the of-
fence be absent, let him call upon the other
thrice with a loud voice, and make a mark upon
the earth; and then let him who absented him-
self be deemed infamous, because he uttered

words
298

words which he durst not support. If both (hall
appear properly armed, and the person offended
(hall fall in the combat, let a half compenfatinn
be paid for his death. But if the person who
gave the offence (hall fall, let it be imputed to
his own rashness. The petulance of his tongue
hath been fatal to him. Let him lie in the field
without any compensation being demanded for
his death." Lex Uplandica ap Stiern. p. 76.
Martial people were extremely delicate with re-
spect to every thing that affected their reputati-
on as soldiers. By the law of the Salians, if
any man called another an hare, or accused him
of having left his (hield in the field of battle, he
was ordained to pay a large fine. Leg. Sal. tit.
xxxii. § 4. 6. By the law of the Lombards, if
any one called another arga, i. e. a good for no-
thing fellow, he might immediately challenge
him to combat. Leg. Longob. lib. i. tit. v.

i§ . By the law of the Salians, if one called

another cenitus, a term of reproach equivalent to
arga, he was bound to pay a very high fine.
Tit. xxxii. § i. Paulus Diaconus relates the
violent impression which this reproachful expref-
sion made upon one of his countrymen, and the
fatal effects with which it was attended. De
geftis Longobard. lib. vi. c. 24. Thus the
ideas concerning the point of honour, which we
are apt to confider as a modern refinement, as
well as the practice of duelling, to which it gave
rife, are derived from the notions of our ancef-
tors, while in a state of society very little im-
proved.

As M. de Montesquieu's view of this fubjeft

did not lead him to confider every circumstance
relative to judicial combats, I (hall mention rome
particular fats neceflary for the illustration of
what I have said with refpet to them. A re-

markable

markable instance occurs of the decision of an
abftraa point of law by combat. A question
arose in the tenth century concerning the right of
reprefetation, which was not then fixed, though
now universally eftablifted in every part of Eu-
rope. " It was a matter of doubt and dispute,
(faith the historian) whether the sons of a son
ought to be reckoned among the children of the
family, and succeed equally with their uncles, if
their father happened to die while their grand-
father was alive. An afTembly was called to. de-
liberate on this point; and it was the general
opinion, that it ought to be remitted to the exa~
mination and decision of judges. But the Em-
peror following a better course, and desirous of
dealing honourably with his people and nobles,
appointed the matter to be decided by battle be-
tween two champions. He who appeared in be-
half of the right of children to represent their
deceased father was victorious; and it was efta-
blfled, by a perpetual decree, that they hould
hereafter share in the inheritance together with
their uncles." Wittickindus Corbeinfis, lib. An-
nal. ap. M. de Lauriere Pref. Ordon. vol. i. p.
xxxiii. If we can suppose the caprice of folly to
lead men to any action more extravagant than
this of fettling a point in law by combat, it must
be that of referring the truth or falsehood of a
religious opinion to be decided in the fame man-
ner. To the disgrace of human reason, it has
been capable even of this extravagance. A
question was agitated in Spain, in the eleventh
century, whether the Mufarabic Liturgy and ri-
tual which has been used in the churches of Spain,
or that approved of by the See of Rome, which
differed in many particulars from the other, con-
tained the form of worship most acceptable to
the Deity. The Spaniards contended zealously
for the ritual of their anceflors. The Popes

urged
300

urged them to receive that to which they had
given their infallible fantion. A violent contest
arose. The nobles proposed to decide the con-
troverfy by the sword. The King approved of
this method of decision. Two knights in corn-
pleat armour entered the lifts. John Ruys de
Matanca, the charipion of the Mufarabic Li-
turgy, was victorious. But the Queen and
Archbishop of Toledo, who favoured the other
form, insisted on having the matter submitted to
another trial, and had interest enough to prevail
in a request, inconsistent with the laws of com-
bat, which being confidered as an appeal to God,.
the decision ought to have been acquiefed in as
final. A great fire was kindled. A copy of
each Liturgy was cast into the flames. It was
agreed that the book which stood this proof, and
remained untouched, should be received in all
the churches of Spain. The Mufarabic Liturgy
triumphed likewise in this trial, and, if we may
believe Roderigo de Toledo, remained unhurt by
the fire, when the other was reduced to ashes.
The Queen and Archbishop had power or art
sufficient to elude this decision also, and the use
of the Mufarabic form of devotion was permit-
ted only in certain churches. A determination
no less extraordinary than the whole transaction.
Rodr. de Toledo, quoted by P. Orleais, Hist.
de Revol. d'Efpagne, tom. i. p. 217. Mariana,
lib. i. c. 18. vol. i. p. 378.- A remarkable
proof of the general use of trial by combat, and
of the praedileftion for that mode of decision oc-
curs in the laws of the Lombards. was a
custom in the middle ages, that any person might
chufe the law to which he would be fubjeted;
and by the prescriptions of that law -he was
obliged to regulate his tranfadtions, without be-
ing bound to comply with any pracice autho-
rized by other codes of law. Persons who had

fubjeaed

301

fubjeted themselves to the Roman law, ana
adhred to the ancientjurifprudence, as far as
any knowledge of it was retained in those ages
of ignorance, were exempted from paying any
regard to the forms of proceedings eftablilhed by
the laws of the Burgundians, Lombards, and
other barbarous people. But the Emperor Otho,
in direct contradiction to this received maxim,
ordained, " That all persons, under whatever
law they lived, even although it were the Roman
law, should be bound to conform to the edias
concerning the trial by combat." Leg. Longob.
lib. ii. tit 55. § 38. While the judicial combat
subsisted, proof by charters, contracts, or other
deeds became ineffectual; and even this species
of evidence, calculated to render the proceedings
of courts certain and decisive, was eluded.
When a charter or other instrument was pro-
duced by one of the parties, his opponent might
challenge it, affirm that it was false and forged,
and offer to prove this by combat. Leg. Lon-
gob. ib. § 34- It is true, that among the rea-
sons enumerated by Beaumanoir, on account of
which judges might refuse to permit a trial by
combat, one is, " if the point in contest can be
clearly proved or ascertained by other evidence."
Couft de Beauv. ch. 63. p. 323. But that re-
gulation removed the evil only a single flep. For
the party who fufpedted that a witness was about
to depose in a manner unfavourable to his caufc,
might accuse him of being suborned, give him
the lie, and challenge him to combat; if the
witness: wa vanquished in battle, no other evi-
dence was admitted, and the party by whom he
was fummoaed to appear loft his cause. Leg.
Baivar. tit. 16. § 2. Leg. Burgund. tit. 45.
Beauman. ch. 6 . p. 3 5. The reason given
for obliging a witness to accept of a defiance,
and to defend himself by combat, is remarkable,

and
3oz

and contains the fame idea which is till the foun-
dation of what is called the point of honour;
* for it is just, that if any one affirms that he
perfecly knows the truth of any thing, and of-
sers to give oath upon it, that he should not he-
fitate to maintain the veracity of his affirmation
in combat." Leg. Burgund. tit. 45.

THAT the trial by judicial combat was efta-

blilhed in every country of Europe, is a fact
well known, and requires no proof. That this
mode of decision was frequent, appears not only
from the codes of ancient laws which established
it, but from the earliest writers concerning the
practice of law in the different nations of Europe.
They treat of this custom at great length; they
enumerate the regulations concerning it with
minute accuracy; and explain them with much
solicitude. It made a capital and extensive arti-
cle in jurisprudence. There is not any one sub-
jed in- thdr system of law which Beaumanoir,
Defontaines, or the compilers of the Affifes de
Jerufidemrfeem to have confidered as of greater
importance; and' none on which they have ba-
stowed 6 much attention. The fame obferva.
tion will hold with refpe& to the early authors
of other nations. It appears from Madox, that
trials of this kind were so frequent in England,
that fines, paid on there occasions, made no in-
confidetable branch of the King's revenue. Hist.
of the. Excheq. vol. i. p. 349, A very curious
account of a judicial combat between Mefire
Robert deBeaumanoir, and Mefire Pierre Tour-
nemine, in pretence of the duke of Bretagne,
A. D. 1385, is published by Morice Mem. pour
fervir de preuves i Phif. de Bretagne, tom. ii.
p. 498. All the formalities observed in suchex-
traordinary proceedings are there described more
minutely, thaa in any ancient monument which

I have

I have had an opportunity of confidering. Tour-
nemine was accused by Beaumanoir of having
murdered his brother. The former was van-
quilhed, but was saved from being hanged upon
the spot, by the generous intercession of his an-
tagonift. A good account of the origin of the
laws concerning judicial combat, is published in
the history of Pavia, by Bernardo Sacci, lib. ix.
c. 8. in Grav. Thef. Antiquit. ItaL vol, iii. p.
743.

THIS mode of trial was to acceptable,- that

ecclelafticks, notwithstanding the prohibitions
of the church, were constrained not only oo con-
nive at the practice, but to authorize- it. A
remarkable instance of this is produced by Pas-
quier Recherches, lib. iv. ch. i. v. 3 't.-"The
abbot Wittikindus, whose words I have pro.
duced in this note, confidered the determination
of a point in law by combat, as the ,best and
mot honourable mode of decision. hrI:theyear
978, ajudicial combat was fought in the pre-
fence of the Emperor Henry. The archbilop
Aldebert advised him to terminate a contest
which had arisen between two noblemen iof: his
court, by this mode of decision. The r vaquifh-
ed combatant, though a person of high rank,
was beheaded on the spot. Chrenic. Ditmari
Epifc. Merib. chez Bouquet Recueil .des Hist.
to6 x. p. 121. Questions concerning the pro-
perty of churches and monasteries, were:decided
by-combat. In the year961, a controverfy..con-
cerning the church of St. Medard, whether it
belonged to the abbey of Beaulieu, was -termi-
nated byjudicial combat. Bouquet,Recueil des
Hit. tom. ix. p. 729. Ibid. p. 61z, &c. The
Emperor Henry L declares, that his law autho-
rizing the pracice of judicial combats, was en-
acted with consent and applause of many faith-

ful

ful bishops. Ibid. p. 231. So remarkably did
the martial ideas of those ages prevail over the
genius and maxims of the canon law, which in
other instances had such credit and authority
with ecclefiafticks. A judicial combat was ap-
pointed in Spain, by Charles V. A. D. 1522.
The combatants fought in the Emperor's pre-
fence, and the battle was conducted with all the
rites prescribed by the ancient laws of chivalry.
The whole tranfadion is described at great length
by Pontus Heuterus Rer. Auftriac. lib. viii. c.
17. p. 205.

THE lafi instance which occurs in the history

of France, of a judicial combat authorized by
the magistrate, was the famous one between M.
Jarnac and M. de la Chaiftaignerie, A. D. 1547:
A trial by combat was appointed in England,
A. D. 1571, under the infpefion of thejudges
in the court of Common Pleas; and though it
was not carried to the fame extremity with the
former, Queen Elizabeth having interposed her
authority, and enjoined the parties to compound
the matter, yet in order to preserve their honour,
the lifts were marked out, and all the forms pre-
vious to the combat were observed with much
ceremony: Spelm. Glof. voc. Campus# p. 103.
In the year 163r, a judicial combat was appoint-
ed between Donald Lord Rea, and David Ram-
fay, Efq; by the authority of the Lord high
Constable, and Earl Marshal of England; but
that quarrel likewise terminated without blood-
shed, being accommodated by Charles I. An-
other instance occurs seven years later. Rulh-
worth in Observations on the Statutes, &c. p.
266.

VOL. 1. 0'

NOTE
VOL. I,

X

NOTE XXIII. SECT. I. p. 63. [Z].

THE text contains the great outlines which

mark the course of private and public jurifdiltion
in the several nations of Europe. I shall here
follow more minutely the various fleps of this
progress, as the matter is curious and important
enough to merit this attention. The payment of
a fine by way of fatisfation to the person or fa-
mily injured, was the sirs device of a rude peo-
ple, in order to check the career of private re-
fentment, and to extinguilh those faide, or
deadly feuds which were prosecuted among them
with the utmot violence. This cufom may be
traced back to the ancient Germans, Tacit. de
Morib. Germ. c. 21. and prevailed among other
uncivilized nations Maany examples of this are
colleced by the ingenious and learned author of
Historical Law-Trafts, vol. i. p. 41. These
fines were ascertained and levied in three different
manners. At firfl they were fettled by volun-
tary agreement between the parties at variance.
When their rage began to subside, and they
felt the bad effects of their continuing in enmity,
they came to terms of concord, and the fatisfac-
tion made was called a compofitin, implying that
it was fixed by mutual content. De l'Efprit des
Loix, lib. xxx. c. 9. It is apparent from some
of the more ancient codes of laws, that when
these were compiled, matters till remained in
that simple fate. In certain cafes, the person
who had'committed an offence, was left exposed
to the resentment of those whom he had injured,
until he Ihould recover their favour, quoquo
modo potuerit. Iex Frifion. tit. l. § i. The
next mode of levying there fines was by the fen-
tence of arbiters. An arbiter is called in the
Regiam majeftatem amicabilis compositor, lib.

xi.
306

xi. c. 4. § to. He could estimate the degree of
offence with more impartiality than the parties
interested, and determine with greater equity
what fatisfation ought to be demanded. It is
difficult to bring an authentic proof of a custom
previous to the records preserved in any nation
of Europe. But one of the Formulas Andega-
venfes compiled in the sixth century, seems to
allude to a tranfation carried on not by the au-
thority.of a judge, but by the mediation of arbi-
ters. Bouquet Recueil des Hiftor. tom. iv. p.
566. But as an arbiter wanted authority to en-
force his decisions, judges were appointed with
compulsive power to oblige both parties to ac-
quiefce in their decisions. Previous to this labt
ltep, the expedient of paying compositions was
an imperfect remedy against the pernicious
effeas'of private resentment. As soon as this
important change was introduced, the magif-
trate, putting himself in place of the person in.
jured, ascertained the composition with which
he ought to reft satisfied. Every possible injury
that could occur in the intercourse of human
society, was confidered and estimated, and the
compoIitions due to the person. aggrieved were
fixed with such minute attention as discovers, in
mot cafes, amazing discernment and delicacy,
in some instances, unaccountable caprice. Be-
fides the composition payable to the private par-
ty, a certain fum, called afredum, was paid to
the King or state, as Tacitus. expresses it, or to
the fifcus, in the language of the barbarous laws.
Some authors, blending the refined ideas of
modem policy with their reasonings concerning
ancient tranfaations, have imagined that the fre-
dum was a compensation due to the community,
on account of the violation of the publick peace.
But it is manifestly nothing more than the price
paid to the magistrate for the protecion which

X 2 he

307.

he afforded againit the violence of resentment.
The ena&ing of this was a considerable fRep to-
wards improvement in criminal jurisprudence.
In some of the more ancient codes of laws, the
fredaare altogether omitted, or so seldom men-
tioned, that it its evident they were but little
known. In the latter codes, the fredum is as
precisely specified as the composition. In com-
mon cafes it was equal to the third part of the
composition. Capitul. vol. i. p. 52. In some
extraordinary cafes, where it was more difficult
to protet the person who had committed vio-
lence, the fredum was augmented. Capitul. vol.
i. p. 515. These freda made a considerable
branch in the revenues of the barons; and
wherever territorial jurifdieion was granted, the
royal judges were prohibited from levying any
freda. In explaining the nature of the fredum,
I have followed, in a great measure, the opini-
on of M. de Montesquieu, though I know that
several learned antiquaries have taken the word
in a different sense. De I'Efprit des Loix, liv.
xxx. c. 20, &c. The great objet of judges
was to compel the one party to give, and the
other to accept, the fatisfafion prescribed. They
multiplied regulations to this purpose, and en-
forced them by grievous penalties, Leg. Lon-
gob. lib. i. tit . 9 .

34. b. tit. 37. § 1, 2. Capi-

tul. vol. i. p. 371. § 22; The person who re-
ceived a composition was obliged to cease from
all farther hostility, and to confirm his reconcili-
ation with the adverse party by an oath. Leg.
Longob. lib. i. tit. 9. § 8. As an additional and
more permanent evidence of reconciliation, he
was required to grant a bond of security to the
person from whom he received a composition,
absolving him from all farther prosecution. Mar-
culfus, and the other collectors of ancient writs,
have preservcd several different forms of fich

bonds.

bonds. Marc. lib. xi. § 18. Append. § 23.
Form. Sirmondicae, § 39. The Letters of Slanes,
known in the law of Scotland, are perfe&lv
similar to these bonds of security. By the letters
of Slanes, the heirs and relations of a person
who had been murdered, bound themselves, in
consideration of an Affytbment or composition
paid to them, to forgive, " pass over, and for
ever" forget, and in oblivion inter all rancour,
malice, revenge, prejudice, grudge and resent-
ment, that they have or may conceive against
the aggressor or his posterity, for the crime
which he had committed, and discharge him of
all ation, civil or criminal, against him or his
estate, for now and ever. System of Stiles by
Dallas of St. Martin's, p. 86z. In the ancient
form of letters of Stanes, the private party not
only forgives and forgets, but pardons and grants
remission of the crime. This practice, Dallas,
reasoning according to the principles of his own
age, confiders as an encroachment on the rights
of sovereignty, as none, fays he, could pardon
a criminal but the King. Ibid. But in early and
rude times, the prosecution, the punishment,
and the pardon of criminals, were all deeds of
the private person who was injured. Madox has
publiflhed two writs, one in the reign of Edward
I. the other in the reign of Edward III. by which
private persons grant a release or pardon of all
trespasses, felonies, robberies, and murders
committed. Formul. Anglican. NO 702, 705.
In the las of these nftruments, some regard
seems to be paid to the rights of the bove-
reign, for the pardon is granted en quant que
n nous eft. Even after the authority of the
magistrate is interposed in puniihing crimes,
the punishment of criminals is long confider-
ed chiefly as a gratification to the refertment
of the persons who have been injured. In Persia,
a murderer is Rill delivered to the relations of

the

the person whom he has slain, who put him to
death with their own hands. If they refuse to
accept of a fum of money as a compensation,
the sovereign, absolute as he is, cannot pardon
the murderer. Voyages de Chardin III. p. 417.
edit. 1735. 4to. Voyages de Tavernier, liv. v.
c. 5, 10. Among the Arabians, though oneof
the firt polished people in the East, the fame
custom fill fubfifs. Description de l'Arabie pat
M. Nieubuhr, p. 28. By a law in the kingdom
of Aragon as late as the year 1564, the punish.
ment of one condemned to death cannot be mi-
tigated but by consent of the parties who have
been injured. Fueros & Obfervancias del Reyno
de Aragon, p. 204. 6.

IF, after all the engagements to cease from en-

mity which I have mentioned, any person re.
newed hostilities, and was guilty of any violence,
either towards the person from whom he had re-
ceived a composition, or towards his relations
and heirs, this was deemed a molt heinous crime,
and punished with extraordinary rigour. It was
an aft of direc rebellion againit the authority of
the magistrate, and was repressed by the inter-
position of all his power. Leg. Longob. lib. i.
tit. 9.§ 8,34. Capit. voL i. p. 371. § 22. Thus
the avenging of injuries was taken out of private
hands, a legal composition was established, and
peace and amity were restored under the infpec-
tion, and by the authority of a judge. It is
evident, that at the time when the barbarians
fettled in the provinces of the Roman Empire,
they had fixed judges established among them
with compulsive authority. Persons vested with
this character are mentioned by the earliest his-
torians. Du Cange, voc. iudices. The right
of territorial jurifdition was not altogether an
usurpation of the feudal barons. There is good

reason

reason to believe, that the powerful leaders who
seized different diftri&ts of the countries which
they conquered, and kept possession of them as
allodial property, aflumed at the fame time the
right ofjurifdi&ton, and exercised it within their
own territories. Thisjurifdlition was supreme,
and rxlended to all causes. The clearef proofs
of this are produced by M. Bouquet Le Droit
publique de France eclairci, &c. tom. i. p. 206,
&c. The privilege of judging his own vassals,
appears to have been originally a right inherent
in every baron who held a fief. As far back as
the archives of nations can conduct us with any
certainty, we find the jurildi&ion and fief united.
One of the earliest charters to a layman which I
have met with, is that of Ludovicus Pius, A. D.
814. And it contains the right of territorial ju-
rifdidion, in the most express and extensive
terms. Capitul. vol. ii. p. i405. There are
many charters to churches and monasteries of a
more early date, containing grants of similar
jurifdi&ion, and prohibiting any royal judge to
enter the territories of those churches or monas-
teries, or to perform any at of judicial authority
there. Bouquet, Recueil des Hist. tom. iv. p.
628, 631, 633. tom. v. p. 703, 710, 752, 762.
Muratori has published many very ancient char-
ters containing the fame immunities. Antiq. Ital.
Dissert. lxx. In most of there deeds, the royal
judge is prohibited from exacting the Freda due
to the possessor of territorial jurifdition, which
shews that they constituted a valuable part of
the publick revenue at that juncture. The ex-
pence of obtaining a sentence in a court of justice
during the middle ages was so considerable, that
this circumstance alone was sufficient to render
men unwilling to decide any contest in judicial
form. It appears from a charter in the thirteenth
century, that the baron who had the right of

justice,

justice, received the fifth part of the value of
every subjet, the property of which was tried
and determined in his court. If, after the com-
mencement of a law-suit, the parties terminated
the contest in an amicable manner, or by arbi-
tration, they were nevertheless bound to pay the
fifth part of the subjec contelted to the court
before which the suit had been brought. Hist.
deDauphine, Geneve, 1722. tom. i. p. 22. Si-
milar to this is a regulation in the charter of li-
berty granted to the town of Friburg, A. D.
1120. If two of the citizens shall quarrel, and
if one of them shall complain to the superior
Lord or tohisjudge, and after commencing the
suit, shall be privately reconciled to his advert
fary; the judge, if he does not approve of this
reconciliation, may compel him to insist in his
law-suit; and all who were present at the recon.
ciliation Ihall forfeit the favour of the superior
Lord. Hiftoria Zaringo Badenfis. Aut:or. Jo.
Dan. Schoepflinus. Carollr. 1765. 4to. vol. v. p.
55.

WHAT was the extent of that jurifdicion

which those who held fiefs possessed originally,
we cannot now determine with certainty. It is
evident that, during the disorders which prevail-
ed in every kingdom of Europe, the great vas-
fals took advantage of the feebleness of their
Monarchs, and enlarged theirjurifdiacions tothe
utmost. As early as the tenth century, the
more powerful barons had usurped the right, of
deciding all causes, whether civil or criminal.
They had acquired the High rutlice as well as
the Lnv. Eftabl. de St. Louis, lib. i. c. 24, 25.
Their sentences were final, and there lay no ap-
peal from them to any superior court. Several
striking instances of this are collected by Brulfels
Traite des Fiefs, liv. iii . c., 12, 13. Not

satisfied
312

satisfied with this, the more potent barons got
their territories erected into Regalities, with al-
most every royal prerogative and jurifdiftion.
Instances of these were frequent in France.
Bruff. ib. In Scotland, where the power of the
feudal nobles became exorbitant, they were very
numerous. Historical Law Trats, vol. i. tract
vi. Even in England, though the authority of
the Norman Kingscircumfcribed thejurifdiaion
of the barons more than in any feudal kingdom,
several counties palatine were erected, into which
the King's judges could not enter, and no writ
could come in the King's name, until it received
the feal of the county palatine. Spelman. Glof.
voc. Comites Palatini; Blackstone's Commenta-
ries on the Laws of England, vol. iii. p. 78.
These lords of regalities had a right to claim or
rescue their vassals from the King's judges, if
they assumed any jurifdition over them. Bruf-
fel, ubi supra. In the law of Scotland this pri-
vilege was termed the right of repledging; and
the frequency of it not only interrupted the
course ofjuftice, but gave rife to great disorders
in the exercise of it. Hifl. Law TraAs, ib. The
jurifdition of the counties palatine was produc-
tive of like inconveniences in England.

THE remedies provided by Princes against the

bad effects of these usurpations were various, and
gradually applied. Under Charlemagne and
his immediate descendants, the regal prerogative
till retained great vigour, and the Duces, Comites,
and Myi Dominici, the former of whom were
ordinary and fixed judges, the latter extraordi-
nary and itinerant judges, in the different pro-
vinces of their extensive dominions, exercised a
jurifdiAion co-ordinate with the barons in some
cafes, and superior to them in others. Du
Cange, voc. Dux, Comites & Miff. Murat. An-

tiq.

313

tiq. Dissert. viii. & ix. But under the feeble
race of Monarchs who succeeded them, the au-
thority of the royal judges declined, and the ba-
rons usurped that unlimited jurifidition which
has been described. Louis VI. of France at-
tempted to revive the funcion of the MNi Do-
minici under the title of Juges de Exempts; but
the barons were become too powerful to bear
such an encroachment on their jurifdition, and
he was obliged to desist from employing them.
Henaut. Abrege Chron. tom ii. p. 730. His
fucceflbrs (as has been observed) had recourse
to expedients less alarming. The appeal to de-
fate de Droit, or on account of the refusal of
juflice, was the sirs which was attended with
any considerable effe&. According to the max-
ims of feudal law, if a baron had not as many
vaflals as enabled him to try by their peers the
parties who offered to plead in his court, or if he
delayed or refused to proceed in the trial, the
cause might be carried, by appeal, to the court
of the superior lord of whom the baron held, and
tried there. De l'Efprit des Loix, liv. xxviii. c.
a8. Du Cange, voc. defrcius ufritiar. The
number of Peers or afleffors in the courts of Ba-
rons was frequently very considerable. It ap-
pears from a criminal trial in the court of the
viscount de Lautrec, A. D. 1299, that upwards
of two hundred persons were present, and assist-
ed in the trial, aqd voted in palling judgment.
His. de Langued. par D. D. De Vic & Vaifette,
tom. iv. Preuves, p. 1 14. But as the right of
jurifdition had been usurped by many inconfi-
derable barons, they were often unable to hold
courts. i This gave frequent occasion to such
appeals, and rendered the practice familiar. By
degrees, such appeals began to be taken from
the courts of the more powerful barons; and it
is evident, from a decision recorded by Bruffel,

that

that the royal judges were willing to give coun-
tenance to any pretext for them. Traite des
Fiefs, tom. i.p. 235, 26i. This species of ap-
peal had less effeEt in abridging thejurifdition
of the nobles, than the appeal on account of the
injustice of the sentence. When the feudal mo-
narchs were powerful, and their judges possessed
extensive authority, such appeals seem to have
been frequent. Capitul. vol. i. p. 175, i8o;
and they were made in a manner suitable to the
rudeness of a simple age. The persons aggriev-
ed resorted to the palace of their sovereign, and
with outcries and loud noise called to him for
redress. Capitul. lib. iii. c. 59. Chronic. Law-
terbergienfe ap. Mencken. Script. German. voL
ii. p. 284. b. In the kingdom of Aragon, the
appeals to the Juftiza or supreme judge were
taken in such a form as supposed the appellant to
be in immediate danger of death, or of some vio-
lent outrage; he rulhed into the presence of the
judge, crying with a loud voice, Avi, Avi, Suer-
za, Fuerza, thus imploring (as it were) the in-
ftant interposition of that supreme judge in order
to save him. Hier. Blanca Comment. de rebus
Aragon. ap. Script. Hispanic. Piftorii, vol. iii.
p. 753. The abolition of the trial by combat
facilitated the revival of'appeals of this kind.
The effects of this Subordination, which appeals
established, in introducing attention, equity, and
consistency of decision into courts of judicature,
were soon conspicuous; and almost all causes of
importance were carried to be finally determined
in the King's courts. Bruffiel, tom. i. 252. Va-
rious circumstances, which contributed towards
the introduction and frequency of fuck appeals
are enumerated. De l'Efprit de Loix, liv. xxviii.
c. 27. Nothing, however, was of such effea
as the attention which monarchs gave to the
constitution and dignity of their courts ofjuftice.

It

315

It was the ancient custom for the feudal monarchs
to preside themselves in their courts, and to ad-
mninifterjuftice in person. Marculf. lib. i. § 25.
Murat. Dissert. xxxi. Charlemagne, whilst he
was drefling, used to call parties into his pre,
fence, and having heard and confidered the sub-
jeat of litigation, gave judgment concerning it.
Eginhartus vita Caroli magni, cited by Madox
Hist. of Exchcquer, vol. i. p. i9. This could
not fail of rendering their courts refpeatable St,
Louis, who encouraged to the utmost the prac-
tice of appeals, revived this antient custom, and
administered justice in person with all the anci-
ent simplicity. " I have often seen the faint,"
fays Joinville, " fit under the shade of an oak
in the wood of Vincennes, when all who had any
complaint, freely approached him. At other
times he gave orders to spread a carpet in a gar-
den, and feating himself upon it, heard the
causes that were brought before him." Hist. de
St. Louis, p. 13. edit. 1761. Princes of infe-
rior rank, who pofleffed the right of justice,
fbmetimes dispensed it in person, and presided in
their tribunals. Two instances of this occur
with refpeft to the Dauphines of Vienne. Hist.
de Dauphine, tom. i. p. 18. tom. ii. p. 257.
But as Kings and Princes could not decide every
cause in person, nor bring them all to be deter-
mined in the fame court they appointed Baillis,
with a right of jurifdi&ion, in different diftri&s
of their kingdom. These possessed powers some-
what similar to those of the ancient Comites. It
was towards the end of the twelfth century, and
beginning of the thirteenth, that this office was
firit instituted in France. Bruffel, liv. ii c. 35.
When the King had a court eftablifbed in diffe-
rent quarters of his dominions, this invited his
fubjeas to have recourse to it. It was the pri-
vate interest of the Baillis, as well as an object

of

of publick policy, to extend their jurifdi&ion.
They took advantage of every defeat in the
rights of the barons, and of every error in their
proceedings, to remove caufesout of their courts,
and to bring them under their own cognizance.
There was a distinction in the feudal law, and
an extremely ancient one, between the high jus-
tice and the low. Capitul. 3. A. D. 812. § 4.
A. D. 815. § 3. Eftabl. de St. Louis, liv. I. c.
40. Many barons possessed the latterjurifdicti-
on who had no title to the former. The former
included the right of trying crimes of every kind,
even the highefti the latter was confined to
petty treflpafles. This furnished endless pretexts
for obltruaing, restraining, and reviewing the
proceedings in the baron courts. Ordon. ii. 457.
§.25. 458. § 29.-- A regulation of greater
importance succeeded the institution of Baifis.
The King's supreme court or parliament was
rendered fixed as to the place, and constant as
to the time, of its meetings. In France, as well
as in the other feudal kingdoms, the King's court
of justice was originally ambulatory, followed
the person of the monarch, and was held only
during some of the great festivals. Philip Au-
guftus, A. D. 1305, rendered it Sedentary at
Paris, and continued its terms during the greater
part of the year. Pafquier Recherches, liv. ii,
c. 2 and 3, &c. Ordon. tom. i. p. 366. § 62.
He and his successors veiled extensive powers in
that court; they granted the members of it feve-
ral privileges and diftinaiohs which it would be
tedious to enumerate. Pafquier, ib. Velly hist. de
France, tom. vii. p. 307. Persons eminent for
integrity and {kill in law were appointed judges
there. Ib. By degrees the final decision of all
causes of importance was brought into the par-
liament of Paris, and the other parliaments
which administered justice in the King's name,

in

It was the ancient custom for the feudal monarchs
to preside themselves in their courts, and to ad-
minifterjuftice in person. Marculf, lib. i. § 25.
Murat. Dissert. xxxi. Charlemagne, whilst he
was drefling, used to call parties into his pre,
kfnce, and having heard and confidered the sub-
jet of litigation, gavejudgment concerning it.
Eginhartus vita Caroli magni, cited by Madox
Hist. of Exchrquer, vol. i. p. gl. This could
not fail of rendering their courts refpeftable. St,
Louis, who encouraged to the utmost the prac-
tice of appeals, revived this antient custom, and
adminifteredjuftice in person with all the anci-
ent simplicity. " I have often seen the faint,"
fays Joinville, " fit under the shade of an oak
in the wood of Vincennes, when all who had any
complaint, freely approached him. At other
times he gave orders to spread a carpet in a gar-
den, and feating himself upon it, heard the
causes that were brought before him." Hist. de
St. Louis, p. 13. edit. 1761. Princes of infe-
rior rank, who possessed the right of justice.
fbmetimes dispensed it in person, and presided in
their tribunals. Two intances of this occur
with refpeA to the Dauphines of Vienne. Hillt.
de Dauphine, tom. i. p. 18. tom. ii. p. 257.
But as Kings and Princes could not decide every
cause in person, nor bring them all to be deter-
mined in the fame court they appointed Baillis,
with a right of jurifdi&ion, in different diftriCta
of their kingdom. Thefepoffeffed powersfome-
what similar to those of the ancient Comites. It
was towards the end of the twelfth century, and
beginning of the thirteenth, that this office was
first instituted in France. Bruifel, liv. ii c. 35.
When the King had a court eftablif(ed in diffe-
rent quarters of his dominions, this invited his
fubjeats to have recourse to it. It was the pri-
vate interest of the Baillis, as well as an object

of

of publick policy, to extend their jurisdiction.
They took advantage of every defec in the
rights of the barons, and of every error in their
proceedings, to remove causes out of their courts,
and to bring them under their own cognizance.
There was a diftintion in the feudal law, and
an extremely ancient one, between the highjuf-
tice and the low. Capitul. 3. A. D. 812. § 4.
A. D. 815. § 3. Eftabl. de St. Louis, liv. a. c.
40. Many barons possessed the latter jurifdicti-
on who had no title to the former. The former
included the right of trying crimes of every kind,
even the highest; the latter was confined to
petty treffpaffes. This furnished endless pretexts
for obftruting, refiraining, and reviewing the
proceedings in the baron courts. Ordon. ii. 457.
§ 25. 458. § 29.--A regulation of greater
importance succeeded the institution of BaiU/is.
The King's supreme court or parliament was
rendered fixed as to the place, and constant as
to the time, of its meetings. In France, as well
as in the other feudal kingdoms, the King's court
of justice was originally ambulatory, followed
the person of the monarch, and was held only
during some of the great festivals. Philip Au-
guftus, A. D. 1305, rendered it sedentary at
Paris, and continued its terms during the greater
part of the year. Pafquier Recherches, liv. ii.
c. z and 3, &c. Ordon. tom. i. p. 366. § 62.
He and his successors vested extensive powers in
that court; they granted the members of it feve-
ral privileges and diftinaiohs which it would be
tedious to enumerate. Pafquier, ib. Velly hist. de
France, tom. vii. p. 307. Persons eminent for
integrity and {kill in law were appointed judges
there. Ib. By degrees the final decision of all
causes of importance was brought into the par-
liament of Paris, and the other parliaments
which administered justice in the King's name,

in

in different provinces of the kingdom. This
jurifdiEtion, however, the parliament of Paris
acquired very fowly; and the great vassals of
the crown made violent efforts in order to ob-
ftruA the attempts of this parliament to extend
its authority. Towards the close of the, thir-
teenth century, Philip the Fair was obliged to
prohibit his parliament from taking cognizance
of certain appeals brought into it from the courts
of the Count of Bretagne, and to recognize his
right of supreme and final jurifdidion. Me-
moires pour fervir de Preuves a l'Hiftoire de
Bretagne par Morice, tom. i. p. 1037. 1074
Charles VI. at the end of the following century
was obliged to confirm the rights of the Dukes
of Bretagne in more ample form. Ibid. tor. ii.
p. 580, 581. So violent was the oppdfition of
the barons to this right of appeal, which they
confidered as fatal to their privileges and -power,
that the authors of the Enyclopedic have men-
tioned several instances in which barons put to
death, or mutilated such persons as ventured to
appeal from the sentences pronounced in their
courts, to the parliament of Paris, tom. xii.
Art. Parlment, p. 25.

THE progress of jurifdi&ion in the -other feu-

dal kingdoms was in a great measure similar to
that which we have traced in France: In Eng-
land, the territorial jurifdition of the barons
was both ancient and extensive. Leg. Edw.
Cons. N 5 and 9. After the Norman conquest
it became more strictly feudal; and it is evident
from faas recorded in the Englilh history, as
well as from the institution of Counties Palatine,
which I have already mentioned, that the ufur-
pations of the nobles in England were not in-
ferior those of their contempories on the con-
tinent. The fame expedients were employed to

circumscribe

circumscribe or abolish those dangerous jurif-
diftions. William the Conqueror established a
constant court in the hall of his palace; from
which the four courts now entrusted with the
administration of justice in England took their
rife. Henry II. divided his kingdom into fix
circuits, and sent itinerant judges to hold their
courts in them at stated seasons. Blackstone's
Commentaries on the Laws of England, vol.
iii. p. 57. Justices of peace were appointed in
every county by subsequent monarchs; to
whofejurifdition the people gradually had re-
course in many civil causes. The privileges of
the Counties Palatine were gradually limited;
with refpet to some points they were abolished;
and the administration of justice was brought
into the King's courts, or before judges of his
appointment. The several steps taken for this
purpose are enumerated in Dalrymple's History
of Feudal Property, chap. vii.

IN Scotland the usurpations of the nobility

were more. exorbitant than in any other feudal
kingdom. Theprogrefs of their encroachments,
and the methods taken by the crown to limit or
aboliih their territorial and independant jurif-
ditions, both which. I had occasion to confider
and explain in a former work, differed very
little from those of which I have now given the
detail. History of Scotland, vol.i. p. 45 .

I SHOULD perplex, myself and my readeis iii

the labyrinth of German jurisprudence, were I.
to attempt to delineate the progress of. juirf-
di&ion in the Empire,, with' a minute acciracy.
It is sufficient to observe,' that the authority
which the Aulick council and.Imperial chamber
now possess, took its rife from the famie abate
of territorial jurifdi6tion, and was acquired in

the

the lame manner that the royal courts attained
influence in other countries. All the important
fa&s with refpet to both there particulars may
be found in Phil. Datt, de pace publica Imperii,
lib. iv. The capital articles are pointed out in
Pfeffel Abrege de I'Hiftoire & Droit publique
d'Allemagne, p. 556, 58I; and in Traitd du
Droit publique de 1'Empire, par M. le Coq. de
Villeray. The two last treatises are of great
authority, having been composed under the eye
of M. Schoepflin of Strafburg, one of the ablef
publick lawyers in Germany,

NOTE XXIV. SECT. I. p. 66. [AA].

It is not easy to fix with precision the period

at which Ecclefiaticks first began to claim ex-
emption from the civiljurifdiaion. It is certain,
that during the early and purest ages of the
church, they pretended to no such immunity.
The authority of the civil magistrate extended
to all persons, and to all causes. This salt has
not only been clearly established by Protestant
authors, but is admitted by many Roman Ca-
tbolicks of eminence, and particularly by the
writers in defence of the liberties of the Gal-
lican church. There are several original papers
published by Muratori, which (hew that, in the
ninth and tenth centuries, causes of the greatest
importance relating to ecclefiaticks were still
determined by civil judges. Antiq. Ital. vol.
v. diflrt. Ixx. Proofs of this are produced
likewise by M. Houard, Anciennes Loix des
Francois, &c. vol. i. p. 209. Ecclefiafticks did
not shake off all at once their fubjeaion to civil
courts. This privilege, like their other usurp-
ations, was gained slowly, and ftep by flep.
This exemption seems at firt to have been
merely an as of complaisance, flowing from

veneration
320

veneration for their character. Thus from a
charter of Charlemagne in favour of the church
of Mans, A. D. 796, to which M. l'Abbe de
Soy refers in his Notice de Diplomes, tom. i. p.
201, that monarch directs his judges, if any
difference should arise between the administrators
of the revenues of that church and any person
whatever, not to summon the adminiifrators to
appear in mallo publico; but first of all to meet
with them, and to endeavour to accommodate
the difference in an amicable manner. This in-
dulgence was in process of time improved into
a legal exemption; which was founded on the
fame superstitious respect of the laity for the
clerical character and function. A remarkable
instance of this occurs in a charter of Frederick
Barbarola, A. D.. 1 72, to the monastery of
Altenburg. He grants them judiciam non tan-
turn fanguinolentis plage, fed vita & mortis;
he prohibits any of the royal judges from dif-
turbing theirjurifdiction; and the reason which
he gives for this ample concession is, nam quo-
rum, ex Dei gratia, ratione divini minifterii onus
leve oft, & jugum suave; nos penitus nolumus
illius oppreffionis contumelia, vel manu Laica
fatigara. Mencken. Script. rer. Germ. vol. iii.
p. o1067.

IT is not necessary for illustrating what is con-

tained in the text, that I should describe the
manner in which the code of the canon law was
compiled, and shew that the doctrines in it most
favourable to the power of the clergy, are found-
ed on ignorance, or supported by fraud and for-
gery. The reader will find a full account of
there in Gerard. Van. Maftricht, HiftoriaJuris
Eccleliaftici, & in Science de Government par
M. Real, tom. vii. c. i. & 3. § 2, 3, &c. The
history of the progress and extent of ecclefiafti-

VOL. I. Y cal

cal jurifdiAion, with an account of the arts
which the clergy employed in order to draw
causes of every kind into the spiritual courts, is
no less curious, and would throw great light up-
on many of the customs and infiitutions of the
dark ages; but it is likewise foreign from the
present subject. Du Cange in his Glofliry, voc.
Curia Cbrifiiaitatis, has collected moR of the
causes with refpe&t to which the clergy arrogated
an exclusive jurisdiction, and refers to the au-
thors, or original papers, which confirm his ob-
servations. Giannore in his Civil History of
Naples, lib. xix. § 3. has ranged these under
proper heads, and scrutinizes the pretensions of
the church with his usual boldness and discern
ment. M. Fleury observes, that the clerg
multiplied the pretexts for extending the autho-
rity of the spiritual courts, at such a rate, that
it was in their power to withdraw every perfoa
and every cause fiom thejurifdiction of the civil
magistrate. His eccles. tom. xix. Disc. Preliml.
16. But bow ill founded soever the jurifdiftion
of the clergy may be, or whatever might be the
abuses to which their manner of exercising it
gave rife, the principles and forms of their ju-
rifprudence were far more perfec than that which
was known in the civil courts. It is probable
that eccleifafticks never submitted, during any
period of the middle ages, to the laws contained
in the codes of the barbarous nations, but were
governed entirely by the Roman law. They re-
gulated all their tranfaftions by such of its max-
ims as were preserved by tradition, or were con-
-tained in the Theodoian code, and other books
extant among them. This we learn from a cur-
tom which prevailed universally in those ages.
Every person was permitted to chufe among the
various codes of laws then in force, that to
which he was willing to conform. In any tranf-

ation

Etion of importance, it was usual for the per-
sons contracting to mention the law to which
they submitted, that it might be known how
any controversy that should arire between them
was to be decided. Innumerable proofs of this
occur in the charters of the middle ages. But
the clergy confidered it as such a valuable pri-
vilege of their order to be governed by the Ro-
man law, that when aty per'on entered into holy
orders, it was usual for him to renounce the
laws to which he had been formerly subject, and
to declare that he now submitted to the Roman
law. Conftat' me Johannem clericum, filiurr
quondam Verandi, qui profeifus fum, ex natione
mea, lege vivere Langobardorum, fed tamen,
pro honore ecclefiafico, lege nunc videor viverd
Romana. Charta, A.D. 1072. Farulfus pref-
byter qui profeffus fum, more facerdotii mei;
lege vivere Romana. Charta, A. D. 1075. Mug
ratori Antichita Eftenfi. vol. i.'p. 78. See like-
wife Houard Anciennes Loix des Fransois, &c,
vol. i. p. 203.

THE code of the canon law began to be com.r

piled early in the ninth century. Mem. de
I'Acad. des Infcript, tom. xviii. p. 346, &c. It
was above two centuries after that before any
colletion was made of those customs, which
were the rule of judgment in the courts of the
barons. Spiritual judges decided, of course,
according to written and known laws; lay
judges, left without any fixed guide, were di-
reated by loose traditionary customs. But be-
fides this general advantage of the canon law,
its forms and principles were more consonant to
reason, and more favourable to the equitable
decision of every point in controversy, than those
which prevailed in lay courts. It appears from
Notes XXI. and XXII. concerning private

Y 2 wars,

wars, and the trial by combat, that the whole
spirit of ecclefiattical jurisprudence was adverse
to these sanguinary customs which were deftruc-
tive of justice; and the whole force of ecclefi-
aftical authority was exerted to abolish them,
and to substitute trials by law and evidence in
their room. Almost all the forms in lay courts
which contribute to establish, and continue to
preserve order in judicial proceedings, are bor-
rowed from the canon law. Fleury Infit. du
droit canon. part iii. c. 6. p. 52. St. Louis in his
Eftabliffemens confirms many of his new regu-
lations concerning property, and the adminiftra-
tion of justice, by the authority of the canon
law, from which he borrowed them. Thus,
for instance, the firit hint of attaching move-
ables for the recovery of a debt, was taken from
the canon law. Eftabl. liv. ii. c. 21. and 40.
And likewise the ceffio bonorum, by a person
who was insolvent. ibid. In the fame manner,
he efiabli(hed new regulations with refpe&t to the
effects of persons dying intestate, liv. i. c. 89.
These, and many other salutary regulations, the
Canonists borrowed from the Roman law. Many
other examples might be produced of more per-
sect jurisprudence in the canon law than was
known in lay courts. For that reason it was
deemed an high privilege to be fucbjt to eccle-
fialtical jurifdition. Among the many immu-
nities, by which men were allured to engage in
the dangerous expeditions for the recover of the
Holy Land, one of the most considerable was
the declaring such as took the Cross to be sub-
ject only tothe spiritual courts. SeeNote XIII.
and Du Cange, voc. crucis privilegia.

NOTE

N O T E XXV. SECT. I. p. 68. [BB.]

THE rapidity with which the knowledge and
fudy of the Roman law spread over Europe, is
amazing. The copy of the Pandeds was found
at Amalphi, A. D. 137. Irnerius opened a
college of civil law at Bologna a few years after.
Giann. Hist. Book xi. c. 2. It began to be taught
as a part of academical learning in different parts
of France before the middle of the century.
Vacarius gave lectures on the civil law at Oxford,
as early as the year 1147. A regular system of
feudal law, formed plainly in imitation of the
Roman code, was composed by two Milanese
lawyers about theyear 1150. Gratian publilhed
the code of canon law, with large additions
and emendtiaons, about the fame time. The
earliest collecion of those customs, which served
as the rules ofdecifion in the courts ofjuftice, is
the/ lifes de Jerusalem. They were compiled,
as the preamble informs us, in the year 0og9,
and are called Jus Confuetudinarium quo rege-
batur regnum 'orientale. Willerm. Tyr. lib.
xixc. c.a. But peculiar circumstances gave oc-
cafion to. this early compilation. The vitorious
Crusaders fettled as a colony in a foreign country,
and adventurers from all the different nations of
Europe composed this pew society. It was necef-
fary, on that account, to ascertain the laws and
customs which were to regulate the transactions
of buftnefs, and. the administration of justice
among them. But in no country of Europewas
there, at that time, any collecion of customs,
nor had any attempt been made to render law
fixed. The first undertaking of that kind was
by Glanville, Lord Chief Justice of England, in
his Tratlatus de Legibus & Confuetudinibus
Anglia, composed about the year i I8x. The:

Regiam

325

Regiam Majeftatem in Scotland, ascribed to
David L seems to be an imitation, and a fefvile
one of Glanville. Several Scottish Antiquaries,
under the influence of that pious credulity, which
disposes men to aflent, without helitation, tO
whatever they deem for the honour of their na.
tive country, contend zealously that thel Regiam
Majeftatem is a production prior to the treatise
of Glanville; and have brought themselves to
believe that a nation in a superior state of im-
provement botrowed its laws and nftitutions,
from one considerably less advanced in its politi-
cal progress'. Tbeinternal evidence (were it my
province to examine 'it) by which this thtory
might.be rehited, is, in my opinion, decisive.
The xtemnat circumstances which have reduced
Scottish autha~o into this mistake, have bee'nex-
plained widh f. much preciion and: candour by
Sir David Dalrymple, in hid ELamiijationofi fdne
of the arglments for the'high antiquity of Re,
giam Majeftatem Edin. .s7', 41o, 'that it isJ
be hoped the controversy will not be 'gain
revived. Pierre de iintaiaes, :whootells us dat
he was the first: who had attempted such a worl;
in France, composed his: GCfrn which.contrai
an acc t.nt o.fthe ctifdms ofth,.couhtry of Ve.
mandois, in te'reign.,'f si4, which begai

A. D.. M2z.6z.,:~tiua

r,'rth 'author b the.

Coufinmes de BeavO~,r std'Ldboout the- fice
time. The Efiblifeimens ofSt.Louis,';s.ti. '
inga large!colletion of the cuftotb ,which pre.
vailed within the ioyal domainsi. werepublihfie
by the authority of that mQoarch. As soon as
men became acquainted with the advantages or
having written Cuftorns and 'lasls to which they
could have recourse on every odcaiion,. the ane-
thod of collecting them becamte iommon. .Glarlq
VII. of FRance, by an ordorlance, A.D, itD453
appointed the customary laws' in every. provinc

of

of Frapce to be collected and arranged. Velley
and Villaret. Hiftoire, tom. xvi. p. 1 3. His
successor, Louis XI. renewed the injuntion.
But this salutary undertaking hath never been
fully executed, and the French jurisprudence re-
mains more obscure and uncertain than if these
prudent regulations of their monarchs had taken
effec. A pradice was eftabifhed in the middle
ages, which affords the clearest proof that judges,
while they had no other rule to dired their de-
crees but unwritten and traditionary customs,
were often at a loss how to find out the facts and
principles, according to which they were bound
to decide. They were obliged in dubious cafes
to call a certain number of old men, and to lay
the cafe before them, that they might inform
them what was the practice or custom with re-
gard to the point. This was called Enquefe par
tourbe. Du Cange, voc. Turba. The effets
of the revival of the Roman jurisprudence have
been explained by M. de Montesquieu, liv: xxviii.
c. 42, and by Mr. Hume, Hilt. of England, vol.
ii. p. 441. I have adopted many of their ideas.
Who can pretend to review any subject which
such writers have confidered, without receiving
from them light and information ? At the fame
time I am convinced that the knowledge of the
Roman law was not so entirely loft in Europe
during the middle ages, as is commonly believ-
ed. My subject does not require me to examine
this point. Many Rfriking fats with regard to
it are collected by Donato Antonio d'Afti Dall'
Ufo e autorite della regione civile nelle provin-
cie dell' Imperio Occidentale. Nap. 175i. 2
vol. 8vo.

THAT the civil law is intimately connected

with the municipal jurisprudence in several coun-
tries of Europe, is a fad so well known, that it

needs

327

needs no illustration. Even in England, where
the common law is supposed to form a system
perfettly distinct from the Roman code, and al.
though such as apply in that country to the fludy
of the common law boast of this diftintion with
some degree ofaffecation, it is evident that many
of the ideas and maxims of the civil law are in,
corporated into the Englifhjurifprudence, This
is well illustrated by the ingenious and learned
author of Observations on the StatuteS, chiefly
the more ancient. ad edit. p. 66.

NOT E XXVI. SECT. I. . 70. [CC],

THE whole history of the middle ages makea

it evident, that war was the sole profession of
gentlemen, and the only object attended to in
their education. Even after some change in
manners began to take place, and the civil arts
of life had acquired some reputation, the ancient
ideas with refpe&E to the accomplilhments necef-
fary for a person of noble birth, continued long
in force. In theMemoires de Fleuranges, p. 9,
&c. we have an account of the youthful exercises
and occupations of Francis I. and they are alto-
gether martial and athletic. That father of let-
ters owed his relilh for them, not to education,
but to his own good sense, and good taste. The
manners of the superior order of ecclesiastics
during the middle ages, furnish the strongest
proof that the diRtinftion of profeflions was hardly
known in Europe. The fun&ions and charac-
ter of the clergy are obviously very different from
those of laymen and among the inferior orders
of churchmen, this constituted a diftin& charac-
ter separate from that of other citizens. But the
dignified eccleliaftics, who were frequently of
noble birth, were above such a diRfindion; they
retained the idea of what belonged to.therm as

gentlermen,

gentlemen, and in spite of the decrees of Popes,'
or the canons of councils, they bore arms, led
their vassals to the field, and fought at their head
in battle. Among them the priesthood was
scarcely a separate profession the military accom-
plilhments which they thought essential to them
as gentlemen, were cultivated; the theological
science, and pacific virtues suitable to their fpi-
ritual function, were neglete ad ad depied.

As soon as the science of law became a labo-

rious study, and the* practice of it a separate
profeflion, such as rose to eminence in it obtain-
ed honours formerly appropriated to soldiers.
Knighthood was the most illustrious mark of
diftinstion during several ages, and conferred
privileges to which rank or birth alone were not
entitled. To this high dignity persons eminent
for their knowledge of law were advanced, and
by that, were placed on a level with those whom
their military talents had rendered conspicuous.
Miles Jufitit, Miles Literatus, became common
titles. Matthew Paris mentions such knights as
early as A.D. 1251. Ifa judge attained a cer-
tain rank in the courts of jutlice, that alone gave
him a right to the honour of knighthood. Pas-
quier Recherches, liv. xi. c. 16. p, x30. Differ-
tations hiftoriques fur la Chevalerie par Honora
de Sainte Marie, p. 164, &c. A profeflion that
led to offices, which enobled such as held them,
grew into credit, and the people of Europe be-
came accustomed to fee men rife to eminence by
civil as well as military talents.

N O T E XXVII. SECT. I. p. 73. [DD].

THE chief intention of theie notes, was to

bring at once under the view of my readers,
such faCts and circumstances as tend to illustrate

or

329

or confirm what is contained in that part of the
history to which they refer. When these lay
scattered in many diffrent authors, and were
taken from books not generally known, or which
it would be disagreeable to consult, I thought it
would be of advantage to colled them together.
But when every thing necefary for the proof or
illustration of my narrative or reasonings may
be found in any one book which is generally
known, or deserves to be so, I (hall satisfy my-
self with referring to it. This is the cafe with
refpeft to Chivalry. Alrmoft every faa which I
have mentioned in the text, together with many
other curious and inftru&ive particulars concern-
ing this singular institution, may be found in
Memoires fur l'ancienne Chevalerie confider6e
comme un eftablifiement politique & militare,
parM. de la Curne de St. Palaye.

NOTE XXVHI -SEC. IE . p. 77. [EE].

THE fubjedt of my enquiries does not call me

to write a history of the progress of science. The
fats and observations which I have produced,
are sufficient to illufrate the effets of its pr-
grefs upon manners and the state of society.
While science was altogether extint in the wef-
tern parts of Europe, it was cultivated in Con-
ftantinople and other parts of the Grecian Em-
pire.: ut the subtile genius of the Greeks turned
aknoft entirely to theological disputation. The
Latins borrowed that spirit from them; and many
of the controversies which flill occupy, and di-
vide theologians, took their rife among the
Greeks, from whom the other Europeans de-
rived a considerable part of their knowledge.
See the testimony of AEneas Sylvius, ap. Conrin-
gium de antiq. academicis, -p. 43. Hiftoire li-
teraire de France, tom. vii. p. 113, &c. torn.

ix.

ix. p. 151, &c. Sool after the Empire of the
Caliphs was eftablifhed.in the East, fume illus-
trious princes arose among them, who erkcou-
raged science. But when the Arabians turned
their attention to the literature cultivated by the
ancient Greeks and Romans, the chaste and cor-
redt taste of their works of genius appeared frigid
and unanirnated to a people of a more warm
imagination. It was impoflible for them to ad-
mire the poets and historians of Athens, or of
Rome; but they were sensible of the merit of
their philosophers. The operations of the intel-
let are more fixed and uniform than those of
the fancy or taste. Truth makes an impreffiorn
nearly the fame in every place; the ideas of
what is beautiful, elegant, or sublime, vary ir
different climates, The Arabians, though they
neglected.Homer, translated the most eminent of
the Greek philosophers into their own language;
and, guided by their precepts and discoveries,
applied thnmfelves with great ardour to the study
of geometry, astronomy, medicine, dialectics,
and metaphysics. In.the three former they made
confidenable and useful improvements, which
have contributed not a little to advance those
fcienees to that high degree of perfetion which
they have attained. In the two latter, they chose
Aristotle for their guide, and refining on the
subtle and distinguishing spirit which charade-
rizes his philosophy, they rendered it altogether
frivolous or0 unintelligible .The. schools efta-
blified in the East for teaching and cultivating
these fcierncs, were in high reputation. They
communicated.. their love of science to their
cauntryrmn,\,who conquered Asia and Spain;
and the schools instituted there were little inferior
in fame.to tofe in the East. Many of the per-
sons who diftingui(hed thernelves by their pro-
ficiency in science in the twelfth and thirteenth

centuries,

centuries, were educated among the Arabians.
Bruckerus colle~s many instances of this, Hiftor.
Philof: v. iii. p. 68I, &c. Almost all the men
eminent for fience during several centuries,
were inftruaed in the philosophy of the Arabians.
The firit knowledge of the Aristotelian philofo-
phy in the middle ages, was acquired by tranf-
htions of his works out of the Arabick. The
Arabian commentators were deemed the moR
skilful and authentic guides in the study of his
system. Conring. antiq. acad. Diff. iii p. 95,
&c. Supplem. p. 241, &c. Murat. antiquit. Ital.
voL iii. p. 932, &c. From them the School-
men derived the genius and principles of their
philosophy, which contributed so much to re-
tard the progress of true science.

THE eftabliliment of Colleges or Universities

is a remarkable ara in literary history. The
schools in cathedrals and monasteries confined
themselves chiefly to the teaching of grammar.
There were only one or two masters employed in
that office. But in colleges, professors were ap-
pointed to teach all the different partsof science.
The course or order of education was fixed. The
time that ought to be allotted to the study of
each fience was ascertained. A regular form of
trying the proficiency of Rudents was prescribed;
and academical titles and honours were conferred
on such as aquitted themselves with approbati-
on. A good account of the origin and nature
of these is given by Seb. Bacmeifterus Antqui-
tates Roftochienfes, five, Hiftoria Urbis & Aca-
demia Roftoch. ap. Monumenta inedita Rer.
Germ. per E. J. de Weftphalen, vol iii. p. 781.
Lips. 1743. The firftobfcure mention of these
academical degrees in the University of Paris
(from which the other universities in Europe
have borrowed most of their customs and infti

tutions)
33Z

tutions) occurs A. D. 1215. Crevier. hist. de
l'univ. de Paris, tom. i. p. 296, &c. They
were completely established A. D. 1231. Ib.
248. It is unnecefiary to enumerate the several
privileges to which batchelors, maiters, and doc-
tors were entitled. One circumstance is fuffici-
cient to demonstrate the high degree of eftima-
tion in which they were held. Doctors in the
different faculties contended with knights for
precedence, and the dispute was terminated in
many instances by advancing the former to the
dignity of knighthood, the high prerogatives of
which I have mentioned. It was even afierted,
that a doctor had a right to that title without
creation. Bartolus taught - docorem atu-
aliter regentem in jure civili per decennium effi-
ci militem ipso faao. Honore de St. Marie Dif-
fert. p. 165. This was called Chevalerie de lec-
tures, and the persons advanced to that dignity,
milites Clerici. These new establishments for
education, together with the extraordinary ho-
nours conferred on learned men, greatly en-
creased the number of scholars. In the year
1262, there were ten thousand students in the
university of Bologna; and it appears from the
history of that university, that law was the only
science taught in it at that time. In the year
1340, there were thirty thousand in the university
of Oxford. Speed's Chron. ap. Anderson's Chro-
nol. Deduction of Commerce, vol. i. p. 172. In
the fame century, ten thousand persons voted in
a question agitated in the university of Paris; and
as graduates alone were admitted to that privi-
lege, the number of students must have been
vastly great. Velly Hist. de France, tom. xi.
p. 147. There were indeed few universities in
Europe at that time; but such a number of ftu-
dents may nevertheless be produced as a proof
of the extraordinary ardour with which men

turned

turned to the study of science in thofe.ages; it
shows likewise that they already began to con-
fider other profeflions than that of a soldier as
honourable and useful

NOTE XXIX. Sci. IL p. 78. CFF].

THE great variety of fubjefts which' I have

endeavoured to illustrate, and the extent of this
upon which I now enter, will jufify my adopt-
ing the words of M. de Montesquieu, when he
begins to treat of commerce. " The subjeC
·' which follows would require to be discussed
' more at large; but the nature of this work

does not permit it. I with to glide on a tran-

U quil stream; but I am hurried along by a
"torrent."

MANY proofs occur in history of the little in-

tercourfe between nations during the middle ages.
Towards the close of the tenth century, CouiJt
Bouchard intending to found a monastery at St.
Maur des Fofies, near Paris, applied to an abbot
of Clugny in Burgundy, famous for his fantity,
intreating him to condu& the monks thither.
The language in which he addrefled that holy
man is singular: He tells him, that he had un-
dertaken the labour of such a great journey that
he was fatigued with the length of it, therefore
hoped to obtain his request, and that hisjour-
ney into such a distant country should not be in
vain. The answer of the abbot is still more ex-
traordinary: He refused to comply with his de-
fire, as it would be extremely fatiguing to go
along with him into a strange and unknown re-
gion. Vita Burchardi venerabilis Comitis ap.
Bouquet Rec. des HiRl. vol. x. p. 351. Even so
late as the beginning of the twelfth century,
the monks of Ferriers, in thediocefe of Sens, did

not

not know that there was such a city as Tournay
in Slanders; and the monks of St. Martin of
Tournay were equally unacquainted with the
situation of Ferriers. A tranfaftion in which
they were both concerned, made it necefrary for
them to have some intercourse. The mutual
interest of both monasteries prompted each to
find out the situation of the other. After a
long search, which is particularly described, the
discovery was made by accident. Herimannus
Abbas de ReRauratione de St Martini Torna-
cenfis ap. Dacher. Spicel. vol. xii. p. 400. The
ignorance of the middle ages, with refpe& to the
situation and geography of remote countries,
was fill more remarkable. The moTt ancient
geographical chart which now remains as a mo-
nument of the state of that science in Europe
during the middle ages, is found in a manu-
script of the Chronique de St. Denys. There
the three parts of the earth, then known, are so
represented, that Jerusalem is placed in the mid-
dle of the globe, and Alexandria appears to be
as near to it as Nazareth. Mem. de PAcad. des
Belles Lettres, torn. vi. p. 85. There seem
to have been no inns or houses of entertainment
for the reception of travellers during the middle
ages. Murat. Antiq. Ital. vol. iii. p. 581, &c.
This is a proof of the little intercourse which
took place between different nations. Among
people whose manners are simple, and who are
seldom visited by strangers, hospitality is a vir-
tue of the first rank. This duty of hospitality
was so necessary in that state of society which took
place during the middle ages, that it was not
confidered as one of those virtues which men may
pra&tife or not, according to the temper of their
minds, and the generosity of their hearts. Hof-
pitality was enforced by statutes, and such as
neglected this duty were liable to punishment.

Quicunque

. 335

turned to the study of science in thofeages; it
shows likewise that they already began to con-
fider other profeflions than that of a soldier as
honourable and useful

NOTE XXIX. SECT. L. p. 78. [FS];

THE great variety of fubjeats which I have

endeavoured to illustrate, and the extent of this
upon which I now enter, will justify my adopt-
ing the words of M. de Montesquieu, when he
begins to treat of commerce. " The subjed
" which follows would require to be discussed
" more at large; but the nature of this work
" does not permit it. I wi(h to glide on a tran-
" quil stream; but I am hurried along by a
" torrent."

MANY proofs occur in history of the little inm

tercourfe between nations during the middle ages.
Towards the close of the tenth century, Count
Bouchard intending to found a monastery at St.
Maur des Fosses, near Paris, applied to an abbot
of Clugny in Burgundy, famous for his fandity,
intreating him to condua the monks thither.
The language in which he addressed that holy
man is singular: He tells him, that he had un-
dertaken the labour of such a great journey 'that
he was fatigued with the length of it, therefore
hoped to obtain his request, and that hisjour-
ney into such a distant country (hould not be in
vain. The answer of the abbot is fill more ex-
traordinary: He refused to comply with his de-
fire, as it would be extremely fatiguing to go
along with him into a strange and unknown re-
gion. Vita Burchardi venerabilis Comitis ap.
Bouquet Rec. des Hist. vol. x. p. 351. Even so
late as the beginning of the twelfth century,
the monks of Ferriers, in the diocese of Sens, did

not

not know that there was such a city as Tournay
in Slanders; and the monks of St. Martin of
Tournay were equally unacquainted with the
situation of Ferriers. A tranfaation in which
they were both concerned, made it neceflary for
them to have some intercourse. The mutual
interest of both monasteries prompted each to
find out the situation of the other. After a
long search, which is particularly described, the
discovery was made by accident. Herimannus
Abbas de Reftauratione de St Martini Torna-
cenfis ap. Dacher. Spicel. vol. xii. p. 400. The
ignorance of the middle ages, with refpe& to the
situation and geography of remote countries,
was fill more remarkable. The most ancient
geographical chart, which now remains as a mo-
nument of the state of that fciencc in Europe
during the middle ages, is found in a manu-
script of the Chronique de St. Denys. There
the three parts of the earth, then known, are so
represented, that Jerusalem is placed in the mid-
dle of the globe, and Alexandria appears to be
as near to it as Nazareth. Mem. de l'Acad. des
Belles Lettres, tom. xvi. p. 185. There seem
to have been no inns or houses of entertainment
for the reception of travellers during the middle
ages. Murat. Antiq. Ital. vol. iii. p. 581, &c.
This is a proof of the little intercourse which
took place between different nations. Among
people whose manners are simple, and who are
seldom visited by strangers, hospitality is a vir-
tue of the first rank. This duty of hospitality
was so necessary in that state of society which took
place during the middle ages, that it was not
confidered as one of those virtues which men may
pratife or not, according to the temper of their
minds, and the generosity of their hearts. Hof-
pitality was enforced by statutes, and such as
negleced this duty were liable to punishment.

Quicunquc

Quicunque bofpiti venienti ledtum, nut focum
negaverit, trium folidorum inlatione mulftetur,
Leg. Burgund. tit. xxxviii. § i. Si quis homini
aliquo pergenti in itinere mansionem vetaverit
fetaginta folidos componant in publico. Capital.
lib. vi. § 82. This increase of the penalty, at a
period so long after that in which the laws of the
Burgundians were published, and when the Rate
of society was much improved, is very remark-
able. Other laws of the fame purport are collet-
ed by Jo. Fred. Polac. Syfema Jurifprud. Ger-
manicz, Lips. 1733, p. 75. The laws of the
Slavi were more rigorous than any that he men-
tions; they ordained " That the moveables of an
inbofpitable person should be confiscated, and his
house burned. They were even so solicitous for
the entertainment of strangers, that they permit-
ed the landlord to feal for the support of his
guest." Quod noctu furatus fueris, cras appone,
hofpitibus. Rerum Mecleburgicar. lib. viii. a
Mat. Jo. Beehr. Lips. 1751. p. 50. In confe-
quence of there laws or of that state of society
which made it proper to enat them, hospitality
abounded while the intercourse among men was
inconsiderable, and secured the stranger a kind
reception under every roof where he chore to
take helter. This too, proves clearly, that the
intercourse among men was rare; for as soon as
this increared, what was a pleasure became a
burden, and the entertaining of travellers was
converted into a branch of commerce.

BCT the laws of the middle ages afford a proof

fill more convincing of the small intercourse be-
tween different nations. The genius of the Feu-
dal system, as well as the spirit of jealousy which
always accompanies ignorance, concurred in dif-
couraging strangers from fettling in any country.
If a person removed from one province in a king-

dom

dom to another, he was bound within a year and
day to acknowledge himself the vatfal of the
baron in whose estate he fettled; if he neglected
to do so, he became liable to a penalty; and if
at his death he neglected to leave a certain le-
gacy to the baron within whose territories he re-
fided, all his goods were confibcated. The hard-
Ihips imposed on foreigners fettling in a strange
country, were fill more intolerable. In more
early times, the superior lord of any territory in.
which a foreigner fettled, might seize his person,
and reduce him to servitude. Very striking in-
stances of this occur in the history of the middle
ages. The cruel depredations of the Normans
in the ninth century, obliged many inhabitants
of the maritime provinces of France to fly into
the interior part of the kingdom. But instead
of being received with that humanity to which
their wretched condition entitled them, they
were reduced to a state of servitude. Both the
civil and ecclesiastical powers found it neceflary
to interpose, in order to put a stop to this bar-
barous practice. Potgieffer, de Statu Servor. lib.
i. c. x. §. 16. In other countries, the laws per-
mitted the inhabitants of the maritime provinces
to reduce such as were Shipwrecked on their
coat to servitude. Ibid. § 17. This barbarous
custom prevailed in many countries of Europe.
The pra&ice of seizing the goods of persons who
had been shipwrecked, and ofconfifcating them
as the property of the lord on whose manor they
were thrown, seems to have been universal. De
Wefiphalen Monum. inedita Rer. Germ. vol. iv.
p. 907, &c. et Du Cange, voc. Laganum, Beehr.
Rer. Mecleb. lib. p. 512. Among the ancient
Welsh, three forts of persons, a madman, a
stranger, and a leper, might be killed with im-
punity. Leges Hoel Dda, quoted in Obfervat.
on the Statutes chiefly the more ancient, p. 22.
VOL. I, Z M. de

337

M. de Lauriere produces several ancient deeds
which prove that in different provinces of France,
firangers became the slaves of the lord on whose
lands they fettled. Glofiaire du Droit Francois,
Art. Aubain, p. 92. Beaumanoir fays, "that
there are several places in France, in which if a
Itranger fixes his residence for a year and day, he
becomes the slave of the lord of the manor."
Couft. de Beauv. ch. 45. p. 254. As a pratice
so contrary to humanity could not subsist, the
superior lords found it necessary to reft satisfied
with levying certain annual taxes from aliens,
or imposing upon them some extraordinary du-
ties or services. But when any itranger died,
he could not convey his effect by will; and all
his real as wellas personal estate fell to the King,
or to the lord of the barony, to the exclusion of
his natural heir. This is termed in France
Droit d'Aubaine. Pref. de Laurier. Ordon. tom.
i. p. 15. BrufiTe. tom. ii. p. 94 Du Cangc,
voc. Abai. Pafquer Rccherches, p. 367. This
prtaice of confiscating the effects of strangers
upon their death was very antient It is menti-
oned, though very obscurely, in a law of Char.
lemagne, A. D. 813. Capitul. Baluz. p. 57.
§ 5. Not only persons who were born in a so-
reign country were futbjet to the Proit dcrA-
baine, but in Come countries such as removed
from one diocese to another, or from the lands'
of one baron to another. Bruffel. voL ii. p. 947,
949. It is hardly poffble to conceive any law
more unfavourable to the intercourse between
nations. Something similar to it, however, may
be found in the ancient laws of every kingdom
in Europe. With refpe& to Italy, fee Murat.
Ant. vol. ii. p. 4. It is no fmal disgrace to the
French jurisprudence, that this barbarous, inhof-
pitable custom, should fill remain in a nation
so highly civilized.

TaH
338

THE confusion and outrage which abounded

under a feeble form of government, incapable of
framing or executing salutary laws, rendered the
communication between the different provinces
of the fame kingdom extremely dangerous. It
appears from a letter of Lupus, abbot of Ser-
rieres, in the ninth century, that the highways
were so much infested by banditti, that it was
neceflary for travellers to form themselves into
companies or caravans, that they might be safe
from the assaults of robbers. Bouquet Recueil
des Hist. vol. vii. p. 515. The numerous regub
lations published by Charles the Bald in the fame
century, discover the frequency of these difor-
ders; and such acs of violence were become so
common, that by many they were hardly con-
fidered as criminal. For this reason the inferior
judges, called Centenarii, were required to take
an oath, that they would neither commit any
robbery themselves, nor protect such as were
guilty of that rime. Capitul. edit. Baluz. vol.
ii. p. 63, 68. The historians of the ninth and
tenth centuries give pathetic descriptions of these
disorders. Some remarkable pafiages to this
purpose are collected by Mat. Jo. Beerh. Rer.
Mecleb. lib. viii. p. 603. They became so fre-
quent and audacious, that the authority of the
civil magistrate was unable to repress them. The
ecclesiastical juriSdiition was called in to aid it.
Councils were held with great solemnity, the bo-
dies of the faints were brought thither, and in
presence of their sacred reliques, anathemas were
denounced against robbers, and violators of the
publick peace. Bouquet Recueil des Hist. tom;
x. p. 360, 43', 536. One of these forms of
excommunication, issued A. D. 988, is fill pre-
served, and is so singular, and composed with
eloquence of such a peculiar kind, that it will
4ot perhaps be deemed unworthy of a place

Z 2 here.

here. After the usual introducion, and men-
tioning the outrage which gave occasion to the
anathema, it runs thus; "Obtenebrefcant oculi
veftri, qui concupiverunt; arefcant manus, qua
rapuerunt; debilitentur omnia membra, qua ad-
juverunt. Semper laboretis, nec requiem inve-
niatis, fra&uque veftri laboris privemini. For-
midetis, & paveatis, i facie perfequentis, & non
perfequentis hoftis, ut tabefcendo deficiatis. Sit
portio veftra cum Juda traditore Domini, in
terra mortis et tenebrarum; donec corda veftra
ad fatisfa&ionem plenam convertantur.- Ne
ceflent a vobis ha: maledidiones, fcelerum vef-
trorum perfecutrices, quamdiu permanebitis in
peccato pervafionis. Amen, Fiat, Fiat." Bou-
quet. Ib. p. 517.

NOTE XXX. SECT. I. p. 83. [GG].

WITH respect to the progress of commerce

which I have described, p. 83, rc. it may be
observed, that the Italian states carried on rome
commerce with the cities of the Greek empire,
as early as the age of Charlemagne, and im-
ported into their own country the rich commo-
dities of the cast. Murat. Antiq. Ital. vol. ii. p.
882. In the tenth century, the Venetians had
opened a trade with Alexandria in Egypt. Ibid.
The inhabitants of Almalphi and Pisa had like-
wife extended their trade to the fame ports.
Murat. Ib. p. 884. 885. The effects of the
Crusades in increasing the wealth and commerce
of the Italian fates, and particularly that which
they carried on with the East, I have explained
page zgth of this volume. They not only im-
ported the Indian commodities from the East,
but established manufadtures of curious fabric
in their own country. Several of these are enu-
merated by Muratori in his Dissertations con-

cerning
340

ceming the arts and the weaving of the middle
ages. Antiqu. Ital. vol. ii. p. 349, 399. They
made great progress, particularly in the manu-
facture of silk, which had long been peculiar to
the eastern provinces of Asia. Silk stuffs were
of such high price in ancient Rome, that only a
few persons of the firRi rank were able to purchase
them. Under Aurelian, A. D. 27o, a pound
of silk was equal in value to a pound of gold.
Abfit ut auro fila penfentur; Libra enim auri
tunc libra ferici suit. Vopifcus in Aureliano.
Justinian, in the sixth century, introduced the
art of rearing silk-worms into Greece, which
rendered the commodity somewhat more plen-
tiful, though still it was of such great value, as
to remain an article of luxury or magnificence,
reserved only for persons of the first order, or
for public folemnities. Roger I. King of Sicily,
about the year r 130, carried off a number of
artificers in the silk trade from Athens, and set-
tling them in Palermo, introduced the culture of
silk into his kingdom, from which it was com-
municated to other parts of Italy. Gianon.
HiR. of Naples, b. xi. c. 7. This seems to
have rendered silk so common, that about the
middle of the fourteenth century, a thousand
citizens of Genoa appeared in one proceflion clad
in silk robes. Sugar is likewise a production of
the East. Some plants of the sugar-cane were
brought from Asia; aild the first attempt to
cultivate them in Sicily was made about the
middle of the twelfth century. From thence
they were transplanted into the southern pro-
vinces of Spain.. From Spain they were carried
to the Canary and Madeira isles, and at length
into the new world. Ludovico Guicciardini, in
enumerating the goods imported into Antwerp,
about the year 1.560. mentions the sugar which
they received from Spain and Portugal as a con-

fiderable

341

fiderable article. He describes that as the pro.
duc of the Madeira and Canary islands. Def-
critt. de Paefi Bassi, p. 8o, 181. The sugar-
cane was introduced into the Weft-Indies before
that time; but the cultivation of it was not so
considerable as to furnish an article in commerce.
In the middle ages, though sugar was not raised
in such quantities, or employed for so many
purposes, as to become one of the common ne-
ceflaries of life, it appears to have been a con-
liderable article in the commerce of the ItaliaR
fates.

THESE various commodities with which the

Italians furnished the other nations of Europe,
procured them a favourable reception in every
kingdom. They were eftablihed in France in
the thirteenth century with most extensive im-
munities. They not only obtained every indul.
gence favourable to their commerce, but perfo-
nal rights and privileges were granted to them,
which the natives of the kingdom did not enjoy.
Ordon. tom. iv. p. 668. By a special proviso,
they were exempted from the droit d'aubaine.
Ibid. p. 670. As the Lombards engrofled the
trade of every kingdom in which they fettled,
they became masters of its cash. Money of
course was in their hands not only a sign of the
value of their commodities, but became an ob-
ject of commerce itself. They dealt largely as
bankers. In an ordonance, A. D. 1295, we
find them tiled mercatores and camp/ores. They
carried on this as well as other branches of their
commerce with somewhat of that rapacious spirit
which is natural to monopolizers, who are not
retrained by the concurrence of rivals. An ab-
surd opinion, which prevailed in the middle ages,
was, however, in some measure, the cause of
their exorbitant demands, and may be pleaded
in apology for them. Commerce cannot be car-

ried

ried on with advantage, unless the persons who
lend a fum are allowed a certain premium for the
use of their money, as a compensation for the
risk which they run in permitting another to
traffick with their stock. The premium is fixed
by law in all commercial countries, and iscalled
the legal interest of money. But the Fathers of
the church preposterously applied the prohibi-
tions of usury in (cripture to the payment of
legal interest, and condemned it as a fin. The
fchoolmen, misled by Aristotle, whose sentiments
they followed implicitly, and without examina-
tion, adopted the fame error, and enforced it.
Blackstone's Commentaries on the laws of Eng-
land, vol. ii. p. 455. Thus the Lombards found
themselves engaged in a traffick which was
deemed criminal and odious. They were li-
able to punishment if detected. They were not
satisfied, therefore, with that moderate premium
which they might have claimed if their trade
had been open and authorized by law. They ex-
a&ed a fum proportional to the danger and in-
famy of a discovery. Accordingly, we find that
it was usual for them to demand twenty per
cent. for the use of money in the thirteenth cen-
tury. Murat, Antiq. Ital. vol. i. p. 893. About
the beginning of that century, the Countess of
Slanders was obliged to borrow money in order
to pay her huiband's ransom. She procured the
fum requisite, either from Italian merchants or
from Jews. The loweftintereft which the paid
to them was above twenty per cent. and some of
them exaaed near thirty. Martene and Durand.
Thefaur. Anecdotorum, vol. i. p. 886. In the
fourteenth century, A. D. i 31 1, Philip IV. fixed
the interest which might be legally exated in the
fairs of Champagne at twenty per cent. Ordonan.
tom. ik p. 484. The interest of money in Aragon
was somewhat lower. James I. A. D. I 242, fixed
it by law at eighteen per cent. Petr. de Marca.

Mar:a

343

Marca five Limes Hifpan. app 1433. As late as
the year 40oo, it appears that the interest of mo-
ney in Placentia, was at the rate of forty per
cent. This is the more extraordinary, because
at that time the commerce of the Italian States
was become considerable Memorie Storiche de
Piacenza, tom. viii. p. 0o4. Piac. 1760. It ap.
pears from Lud. Guicciardini, that Charles V.
had fixed the rate of interest in his dominions in
the Low-Countries at twelve per cent. and at the
time when he wrote, about the year 560, it was
not uncommon to exact more than that fum.
He complains of this as exorbitant, and points
out its bad effects both on agriculture and com-
merce. Defcritt. di Paefi Bafli, p. 172. This
high interest of money, is alone a proof that the
profits on commerce were exorbitant.-The
Lombards were likewise established in England
in the thirteenth century, and a considerable
street in the city of London still bears their name.
They enjoyed great privileges, and carried .on
an extensive commerce, particularly as bankers.
See Anderson's Chronol. Deduction, vol. i. p.
137, i6o, 204, 231, where the statutes or o-
ther authorities which confirm this are quoted.
But the chief mart for Italian commodities was
at Bruges. Navigation was then so imperfet,
that a voyage between the Baltick and Mediter-.
ranean could not be performed in one summer.
For that reason, a magazine or storehouse half
way between the commercial cities in the north,
and those in Italy, became necessary. Bruges
was pitched upon as the modt convenient station.
That choice introduced vast wealth into the
Low-Countries. Bruges was at once the staple
for English wool; for the woollen and linen ma-
nufa&ures of the Netherlands; for the naval
stores, and other bulky commodities of the
North; and for the Indian commodities, as well
as domeflick productions imported by the Ita-

lian

lian States. The extent of its commerce in
Indian goods with Venice alone, appears from
one fat. In the year 1318, five Venetian
galeaffes, laden with Indian commodities, ar-
rived at Bruges, in order to dispose of their
cargoes at the fair. These galeaffes were
vessels of very considerable burden. L. Guic.
Defcritt. di Paefi Bassi, p. 174. Bruges was
the greatest emporium in all Europe. Many
proofs of this occur in the historians and re-
cords of the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries.
But inftcad of multiplying quotations, I (hall
refer my readers to Anderson, vol. i. p. 12, 137,
213, 246, &c. The nature of this work pre-
vents me from entering into any long details;
but there are some detached faas which give
an high idea of the wealth both of the Flemish
and Italian commercial states. The Duke of
Brabant contracted his daughter to the Black
Prince, son of Edward 111. of England, A. D.
1339, and gave her a portion which would a-
mount to three hundred thousand pounds of
our present money. Rymer's Feedera, vol. v.
p. 3. John Galeazzo Visconti Duke of Milan
concluded a treaty of marriage between his
daughter and Lionel Duke of Clarence, Ed-
ward's third son, A. D. 1367, and granted her
a portion equal to two hundred thousand pounds
of our present money. Rymer Feeder. vol. vi.
p. 547. These exorbitant tums, so far exceed-
ing what was then granted by the most power-
ful monarchs, and which appear extraordinary
even in the present age, when the wealth of Eu-
rope is so much increased, must have arisen
from the riches which flowed into these coun-
tries from their extensive and lucrative com-
merce. The first source of wealth to the towns
situated on the Baltick sea, seems to have been
the herring-fifhery; the floals of herrings fre-
quenting at that time the coast of Sweden and

Denmark,

Denmark, in the fame manner as they now re-
fort to the British coasts. The effects of this
fishery are thus described by an author of the
thirteenth century. The Danes, fays he, who
were formerly clad in the poor garb of sailors,
are now clothed in scarlet, purple and fine linen.
For they abound with wealth flowing from their
annual fiflery on the coast of Schonen; so that
all nations resort to them, bringing their gold,
silver, and precious commodities, that they may
purchase herrings, which the divine bounty be-
flows upon them. Arnoldus Lubecenfis ap,
Conring. de Urbib. German. § 87.

THE Hanfeatick league is the mot powerful

commercial confederacy known in history. Its
origin towards the close of the twelfth century,
and the objects of its union, are described by
Knipfcildt Tratatus Hiftorico Politico Juridicus
de Junbus Civitat. Imper. lib. i. cap. 4. An-
derfon has mentioned the chief faets with refpe&
to their commercial progress, the extent of the
privileges which they obtained in different coun-
tries, their successful wars with several mo-
narchs, as well as the spirit and zeal with which
they contended for those liberties and rights
without which it is impoflible to carry on com-
merce to advantage. The vigorous efforts of a
society of merchants attentive only to commercial
objets, could not fail of diffusing new and more
liberal ideas concerning justice and order in every
country of Europe where they fettled.

IN England, the progress of commerce was

extremely flow; and the causes of this are ob-
vious. During the Saxon heptarchy, England,
split into many petty kingdoms, which were
perpetually at variance with each other, exposed
to the fierce incurlions of the Danes, and other
northern pirates, and funk in barbarity and ig-

norance,

342

norance, was in no condition to cultivate com-
merce, or to pursue any system of useful and
salutary policy. When a better profpe&t began
to open by the union of the kingdom under one
monarch, the Norman conquest took place.
This occasioned such a violent shock, as well
as such a sudden and total revolution of proper-
ty, that the nation did not recover from it dur-
ing several reigns. By the time that the conifi-
tution began to acquire some stability, and the
English had so incorporated with their conquer-
ors as to become one people, the nation engaged
with no less ardour than imprudence in support
of their monarch's pretensions to the crown of
France, and long wafted its vigour and genius
in its wild efforts to conquer that kingdom.
When by ill success, and repeated disappoint-
ments, a period was at last put to this fatal
frenzy, and the nation beginning to enjoy Come
repose, had leisure to breathe and to gather new
trength, the defcru&ive wars between the houses
of York and Lancaster broke out, and involved
the kingdom in the worst of all calamities.
Thus, besides the common obftrutions of com-
merce occasioned by the nature of the feudal
government, and the state of manners during
the middle ages, its progress in England was re-
tarded by peculiar causes. Such a succession of
events adverse to the commercial spirit was sus-
ficient to have checked its growth, although
every other circumfiance had favoured it. The
English were accordingly one of the last nations
in Europe who availed themselves of their natu-
ral commercial advantages. Before the reign of
Edward III. all the wool of England, except a
frmall quantity wrought into coarse cloths for
home consumption, was fold to the Flemings or
Lombards, and manufactured by them. Though
Edward, A. D. 1326, began to allure some of

the

Denmark, in the fame manner as they now re-
fort to the Britih coasts. The effects of this
fishery are thus described by an author of the
thirteenth century. The Danes, fays he, who
were formerly clad in the poor garb of sailors,
are now clothed in scarlet, purple and fine linen.
For they abound with wealth flowing from their
annual fimery on the coast of Schonen; so that
all nations resort to them, bringing their gold,
silver, and precious commodities, that they may
purchase herrings, which the divine bounty be-
sows upon them. Aroldus Lubecenfia ap,
Conring. de Urbib, German. § 87.

THE Hanfeatick league is the most powerful

commercial confederacy known in history. Its
origin towards the close of the twelfth century,
and the objects of its union, are described by
Knipfcildt Tratatus Hiftorico Politico Juridicus
de Junbus Civitat. Imper. lib. i. cap. 4. An-
derfon has mentioned the chief fats with refpet
to their commercial progress, the extent of the
privileges which they obtained in different coun-
tries, their successful wars with several mo-
narchs, as well as the spirit and zeal with which
they contended for those liberties and rights
without which it is impoflible to carry on com-
merce to advantage. The vigorous efforts of a
society of merchants attentive only to commercial
o~jecs, could not fail of diffusing new and more
liberal ideas concerning justice and order in every
country of Europe where they fettled.

IN England, the progress of commerce was

extremely flow; and the causes of this are ob-
vious. During the Saxon heptarchy, England,
split into many petty kingdoms, which were
perpetually at variance with each other, exposed
to the fierce incursions of the Danes, and other
northern pirates, and funk in barbarity and ig-

norance,
346

342

norance, was in no condition to cultivate com-
merce, or to pursue any system of useful and
salutary policy. When a better profpec began
to open by the union of the kingdom under one
monarch, the Norman conquest took place.
This occasioned such a violent shock, as well
as such a sudden and total revolution of proper-
ty, that the nation did not recover from it dur-
ing several reigns. By the time that the confti-
tution began to acquire Come stability, and the
Engli(h had so incorporated with their conquer-
ors as to become one people, the nation engaged
with no less ardour than imprudence in support
of their monarch's pretensions to the crown of
France, and long wafted its rigour and genius
in its wild efforts to conquer that kingdom.
When by ill success, and repeated disappoint-
ments, a period was at last put to this fatal
frenzy, and the nation beginning to enjoy some
repose, had leisure to breathe and to gather new
strength, the deftrutive wars between the houses
of York and Lancaster broke out, and involved
the kingdom in the worst of all calamities.
Thus, betides the common obftruftions of com-
merce occasioned by the nature of the feudal
government, and the state of manners during
the middle ages, its progress in England was re-
tarded by peculiar causes. Such a succession of
events adverse to the commercial spirit was sus-
ficient to have checked its growth, although
every other circumstance had favoured it. The
English were accordingly one of the last nations
in Europe who availed themselves of their natu-
ral commercial advantages. Before the reign of
Edward III. all the wool of England, except a
small quantity wrought into coarse cloths for
home consumption, was fold to the Flemings or
Lombards, and manufactured by them. Though
Edward, A. D. 1326, began to allure some of

the

the Flemish weavers to fettle in England, it was
long before the Englilh were capable of fabricat-
ing cloth for foreign markets, and the export of
unwrought wool fill continued to be the chief
article of their commerce. Anderson pafiim. -
All foreign commodities were brought into Eng.
land by the Lombard or Hanfeatick merchants.
The English ports were frequented by ships both
from the north and south of Europe, and they
tamely allowed foreigners to reap all the profits
arising from the supply of their wants. The first
commercial treaty of England on record, is that
with Haquin King of Norway, A. D. 1217.
Anders. vol. i. p. io8. But they did not ven-
ture to trade in their own ships to the Baltick
until the beginning of the fourteenth century.
lb. 151. It was after the middle of the fifteenth,
before they sent any (hip into the Mediterranean.
Ib. p. 177. Nor was it long before this period
that their vessels visited the ports of Spain or
Portugal. But though I have pointed out the
flow progress of the English commerce as a fad
little attended to, and yet meriting confidera-
tion; the concourse of foreigners to the ports of
England, together with the communication a-
mong all the diferent countries in Europe,
which went on increasing from the beginning of
the twelfth century, is sufficient to jutify all the
observations and reasonings in the text concern-
ing the influence of commerce on the state of
manners, and of society.

N O T E XXXI. SECr. III p. 154. [HH].

I HAVE not been able to discover the precise

manner in which the Juftiza was appointed.
Amon g the claims of the junta or union formed
against James I. A D. 1264, this was one; that
the King should not nominate any person to be

Juftiza,

Jutliza, without the consent or approbation of
the ricos-hombres or nobles. Zurita Anales de
Aragon, vol. i. p. 180. But the King in his
answer to their remonstrance asserts, " that it
was eftablilhed by immemorial practice, and
was conformable to the laws of the kingdom,
that the King, in virtue of his royal prerogative,
should name the Juftiza." Zurita, Ibid. 18i.
Blanca, 656. From another passage in Zurita
it appears, that while the Aragonefe enjoyed the
privilege of the union, i. e. the power of confe-
derating against their sovereign as often as they
conceived that he had violated any of their rights
and immunities, the Juftiza was not only no-
minated by the King, but held his office during
the King's pleasure. Nor was this pratice at-
tended with any bad effects, as the privilege of
the union was a sufficient and effeaual check to
any abuse of the royal prerogative. But when
the privilege of the union was abolilhed as dan-
gerous to the order and peace of society, it was
agreed that the Juftiza (hould continue in office
during life. Several Kings, however, attempt-
ed to remove the Juftizas who were obnoxious
to them, and they sometimes succeeded in the
attempt. In order to guard against this en-
croachment, which would lave destroyed the
intention of the institution, and have rendered
the Juftiza the dependant and tool of the crown,
instead of the guardian of the people, a law was
enaced in the Cortes, A. D. 1442, ordaining
that the Juftiza should continue in office during
life, and Ihould not be removed from it unless
by the authority of the Cortes. Fueros & Ob.
fervancias del Reyno de Arag. lib. i. p. 22. By
former laws the person of the Juftiza had been
declared sacred, and he was responsible only to
the Cortes. Ibid. p. 15. b. Zurita and Blanca,
who both published their histories while the Jus-

tiza

349

the Flemish weavers to fettle in England, it was
long before the English were capable of fabricat-
ing cloth for foreign markets, and the export of
unwrought wool still continued to be the chief
article of their commerce. Anderson passim. -
All foreign commodities were brought into Eng.
land by the Lombard or Hanfeatick nerchants.
The Englilh ports were frequented by ships both
from the north and south of Europe, and they
tamely allowed- foreigners to reap all the profits
arising from the fipply of their wants. The first
commercial treaty of England on record, is that
with Haquin King of Norway, A. D. 1217.
Anders. vol. i. p. o08. But they did not ven-
ture to trade in their own ships to the Baltick
until the beginning of the fourteenth century.
Ib. 151. It was after the middle of the fifteenth,
before they Cent any ship into the Mediterranean.
Ib. p. 177. Nor was it long before this period
that their veflels visited the ports of Spain or
Portugal. But though I have pointed out the
flow progress of the Englilh commerce as a fat
little attended to, and yet meriting confidera-
tion; the concourse of foreigners to the ports of
England, together with the communication a-
mong all the dierent countries in Europe,
which went on increasing from the beginning of
the twelfth century, is sufficient tojuftify all the
observations and reasonings in the text concern-
ing the influence of commerce on the Rate of
manners, and of society.

N O T E XXXI. SEcr. III. p. I54. [HH].

I HAVE not been able to discover the precise

manner in which the Juftiza was appointed.
Among the claims of the junta or union formed
against JTrnes I. A D. 1264, this was one; that
the King should not nominate any person to be

Jufiiza,

Juftiza, without the content or approbation of
the ricos-hombres or nobles. Zurita Anales de
Aragon, vol. i. p. 180. But the King in his
answer to their remonstrance asserts, " that it
was established by immemorial practice, and
was conformable to the laws of the kingdom,
that the King, in virtue of his royal prerogative,
should name the Juftiza." Zurita, Ibid. 18i.
Blanca, 656. From another passage in Zurita
it appears, that while the Aragonefe enjoyed the
privilege of the union, i. e. the power of confe-
derating against their sovereign as often as they
conceived that he had violated any of their rights
and immunities, the Juftiza was not only no-
minated by the King, but held his office during
the King's pleasure. Nor was this pratice at-
tended with any bad effects, as the privilege of
the union was a sufficient and effectual check to
any abuse of the royal prerogative. But when
the privilege of the union was abolished as dan-
gerous to the order and peace of society, it was
agreed that the Juftiza should continue in office
during life. Several Kings, however, attempt-
ed to remove the Juftizas who were obnoxious
to them, and they sometimes succeeded in the
attempt. In order to guard against this en-
croachment, which would lave destroyed the
intention of the institution, and have rendered
the Juftiza the dependant and tool of the crown,
instead of the guardian of the people, a law was
ena&ed in the Cortes, A. D. 1442, ordaining
that the Juftiza ihould continue in office during
life, and (hould not be removed from it unless
by the authority of the Cortes. Fueros & Ob,
fervancias del Reyno de Arag. lib. i. p. 22. By
former laws the person of the Juftiza had been
declared sacred, and he was responsible only to
the Cortes. Ibid. p. 15. b. Zurita and Blanca,
who both published their histories while the Jus-

tiza

349

tiza of Aragon retained the full exercise of his
privileges and jurifdiaion, have neglected to ex-
plain several circumstances with regard to the
office of that refpe&ablemagiftrate, because they
addressed their works to their countrymen, who
were well acquainted with every particular con-
cerning the functions of a judge, to whom they
looked up as to the guardian of their liberties.
It is vain to consult the later historians of Spain,
about any point, with refpe&t to which the excel-
lent biftorians whom I have named are silent.
The ancient constitution of their country was
overturned, and despotism eftablilhed on the ruin
of its liberties, when the writers of this and the
preceding century composed their histories; and
on that account they had little curiosity to know
the nature of those institutions to which their an-
celtors owed the enjoyment of freedom, or they
were afraid to describe them with much accu-
racy. The spirit with which Mariana, his conti-
nuator Miniana, and Ferreras, write their his-
tories, is very different from that of the two his-
torians of Aragon, from whom I have taken
my account of the coafnitutioa of that king-
dom.

Two circurnmances concerning the Juftiza,

besides those which I have mentioned in the text,
are worthy of observation, i. None of the ricos-
hombres, or noblemen of the first order, could
be appointed Juftiza. He was taken out of the
second class or cavalleros, who answer nearly to
gentlemen or commoners in Great Britain. Fu-
eros & Obfervanc. del Reyno, &c. lib. i. p. 21.
b. The reason was, By the laws of Aragon, the
ricos-hombres were not fubje& to capital punish-
ment; but as it was neceflary for the security of
liberty, that the Juftiza ihould be accountable
for the manner in which he executed the high

trust

trust reposed in him, it was a powerful restraint
upon him to know that he was liable to be pu-
nifhed with the utmost rigour. Blanca, p. 657,
756. Zurita, tom. ii. 229. Fueros & Obferv-
anc. lib. ix. p. 182. b. 183. It appears too,
from many passages in Zurita, that the Juftiza
was appointed to check the domineering and op-
preffive spirit of the nobles, as well as to set
bounds to the power of the monarch, and there-
fore he was chosen from an order of citizens
equally interested in opposing both.

2. A MAGISTRATE possessed of such valt

powers as the Juftiza, might have exercised them
in a manner pernicious to the state, if he himself
had been subjet to no controul. A conftituti-
onal remedy, however, was provided against
this danger. Seventeen persons were chosen by
lot in each meeting of the Cortes. Thee form-
ed a tribunal called the court of inquisition into
the office of Juftiza. This court met at three
stated terms in each year. Every person had li-
berty of complaining to it of any iniquity or ne-
gled of duty in the Jufiza, or in the inferior
judges, who ated in his name. The Juftiza and
his deputies were called to answer for their con-
duc. The members of the court passed fen-
tence by ballot. They might punish by degra-
dation, confiscation of goods, or even with death.
The law which erected this court, and regulated
the forms of its procedure, was enated A. D.
1461. Zurita Anales, iv. io2. Blanca Corm
ment. Rer. Aragon. 770. Previous to this pe-
riod, inquiry was made into the condut of the
Juftiza, though not with the fame formality. He
was from the first institution of the office, subjec
to the review of the Cortes. The conRfant dread
of such an impartial and revere inquiry into hia
behaviour, was a powerful motive to the vigilant

and

and faithful discharge of his duty. A remark.
able instance of the authority of the Juftiza when
opposed to that of the King, occurs in the year
1386. By the constitution of Aragon, the eldest
son or heir apparent of the crown poflefled confi-
derable power andjurifdi&tion in the kingdom.
Fucros & Obfervan. del Reyno de Arag. lib. i.
p. x6. Peter IV. infligated by a second wife,
attempted to deprive his son of this, and enjoin:
ed his fubjedos to yield him no obedience. The
Prince immediately applied to the Juftiza; " the
safe-guard and defence, fays Zurita, againfi all
violence and oppreflion." The Juftiza granted
him thermo de derecho, the effet of which was,
that upon his giving surety to appear in judg-
ment, he could not be deprived of any immuni-
ty or privilege, which he poffefled, but in con-
sequence of a legal trial before the Juftiza, and
of a sentence pronounced by him. This was
published throughout the kingdom, and.not-
withstanding the proclamation in contradition
to this which had been issued by the King, the
Prince continued in the exercise of all his rights,
and his authority was universally recognized.
Zurita Anales de Aragon, tom. ii. 385.

NOTE XXXII. SECT. H. p. 155. [11].

I HAVE been induced, by the concuring tefti-

mony of many refpedable authors, to mention
this as the constitutional form of the oath of alle-
giance, which the Aragonefe swore to their So-
vereigns. I must acknowledge, however, that I
have not found this singular oath in any Spanish
author whom I have had an opportunity to con-
fult. It is mentioned neither by Zurita, nor
Blanca, Argenfola, nor Sayas, who were all
historiographers appointed by the Cortes of Ara-
gon to record the tranfations of the kingdom.

All

All there writers poffifs a merit which is very rare
among historians. They are extremely accurate
in tracing the progress of the laws and conftitu-
tion of their country. Their silence with refpec
to this, creates rome suspicion concerning the ge-
nuinenefs of the oath. But as it is mentioned by
so many authors, who produce the ancient Spa-
nifh words in which it is expressed, it is probable
that they have taken it from some writer of cre-
dit, whose works have not fallen into my hands.
The spirit of the oath is perfectly agreeable to
the genius of the Aragonefe constitution. Since
the publication of the first edition, the learned
M. Totze, Professor of History at Batzow in the
Duchy of Mecklenburgh, has been so good as to
point out to mea Spanilh author of great autho-
rity, who has publihhed the words of this oath;
It is Antonio Perez, a native of Aragon, fecre-
tary to Philip II. The words of the oath are,
"Nos, quevalemos tanto como vos, os haze-
mos mueftro Rey y Senor, con tal que nos
guardeys nueftros fueros, y libertades, y si No,
No. Las Obras y Relaciones de Ant. Perez.
8vo. par Juan de la Planche, 1631. p. 143."

THE privilege of Union, which I have men-

tioned in the preceding note, and alluded to in
the next, is indeed one of the most singular which
could take place in a regular government; and
the oath that I have mentioned expresses nothing
more than this constitutional privilege entitled
the Aragonefe to perform. If the King or his
ministers violated any of the laws or immunities
of the Aragonefe, and did not grant immediate
redress in consequence of their representations
and remonrfiances, the nobles of the first rank,
or Ricos-bombres de natura & de mefnada, the
equestrian order, or the nobility of the second
class called Hidalgb &? Infancisnes, together with
the magistrates of cities, might, either in the

VOL. 1. A a Cortea

Cortes, or in a voluntary assembly, join in uni-
on, and binding themselves, by mutual oaths
and the exchange of hoitages, to be faithful to
each other, they might require the King, in the
name and by the authority of this body corpo-
rate, to grant them redress. If the king refused
to comply with their request, or took arms in
order to oppose them, they might. in virtue of
the privilege of union, instantly withdraw their
allegiance from the King, refute to acknowledge
him as their Sovereign, and proceed to elect
another Monarch; nor did they incur any guilt,
or become liable to any prosecution on that ac-
count. Blanca Corn. Rer. Arag. 661, 669. This
union did not resemble the confederacies in other
feudal kingdoms. It was a conffitutional affo-
ciation, which pretended to legal privileges,
which issued its mandates under a common feal,
and proceeded in all its operations by regular and
ascertained forms. This dangerous right was not
only claimed, but exercised. In the year 1287,
the Aragonefe formed an union in opposition to
Alfonso III. and obliged that King not only to
comply with their demands, but to ratify appri-
vilege so fatal to the power of the crown. Zurita
Anales, tom. i. p. 322. In the year 1347, an
union was formed against Peter IV. with equal
success, and a new ratification of the privilege
was extorted. Zurita, tom. ii. p. 202. But soon
after, the King having defeated the leaders of
the union in battle, the privilege of union was
finally abrogated in the Cortes, and all the laws
or records which contained any confirmation of
it, were cancelled or destroyed. The King, in
presence of the Cortes, called for the a , where-
by he had ratified the union, and having wound-
ed his hand with his poniard, he held it above
the record: " That privilege, fays he, which
"has been so fatal to the kingdom, and so in-

" jurious
354

"jurious to royalty, should be effaced with the
" blood of a King." Zurita, tom. ii. p. 229.
The law abolilhing the union is published. Sue-
ros & Obfervanc. lib. ix. p. 178. From that pe-
riod the Juftiza became the conflitutional guardi-
an of publick liberty, and his power and jurif-
diction occasioned none of those violent convul-
sions which the tumultuary privileges of the uni-
on was apt to produce. The constitution of
Aragon, however, fill remained extremely free,
One source of this liberty was from the early ad-
mission of the representatives of cities into the
Cortes. It seems probable, from Zurita, that
burgefles were constituent members of the Cor-
tes from its first institution. He mentions a
meeting of the Cortes, A. D. 1133, in which
the procuradores de las ciudades y villas were pre-
sent. Tom. i. p. 51. This is the constitutional
language in which their presence is declared in
the Cortes, after the journals of that court were
regularly kept. It is probable, that an historian
so accurate as Zurita, would not have used these
words, if he had not taken them from some
authentick record. It was more than a century
after this period before the representatives of ci-
ties formed a constituent part in the supreme as-
femblies of the other European nations. The free
spirit of the Aragonefe government is confpicu-
ous in many particulars. The Cortes not only
opposed the attempts of their Kings to increase
their revenue, or to extend their prerogative, but
they claimed rights and exercised powers which
will appear extraordinary even in a country ac-
customed to the enjoyment of liberty. In the
year 286, the Cortes claimed the privilege of
naming the members of the King's council and
the officers of his household, and they seem to
have obtained it for some time. Zurita, tom. i:
p. 303, 307. It was the privilege of the Cortes

Aa a to

355

to name the officers who commanded the troops
rifed by her authority. This seems to be evi-
dent from a paflage in Zurita. When the Cor-
tes, in the year 1503, raised a body of troops
to be employed in Italy, it passed an aft em-
powering the King to name the officers who
should command them. Zurita, tom. v. p. 274;
which plainly implies that without this warrant,
it did not belong to him in virtue of his pre-
rogative. In the Fueros & obfervancias del
Reyno de Aragon, two general declarations of
the rights and privileges of the Aragonefe are
published; the one in the reign of Pedro L A.
D. 1283, the other in that of James II. A. D.
x325. They are of such length, that I can-
not insert them; but it is evident from these,
that not only the privileges of the nobility, but
the rights of the people, personal as well as poli-
tical, were, at that period, more exteofive, and
better understood, than in any kingdom in Eu.
rope. Lib. i. p. 7, 9. The oath by which the
King bound himself to observe those rights and
liberties of the people, was very solemn. Ibid.
p. 14. b. & p. IS. The Cortes of Aragon dif-
covered not only the jealousy and vigilance,
which are peculiar to free fates, in guarding
the efiential parts of the constitution, but they
were scrupulously attentive to observe the mot
minute forms and ceremonies to which they
were accufomed. According to the efablifhed
laws and cuRoms of Aragon, no foreigner had
liberty to enter the hall in which the Cortes as-
fembled. Ferdinand, in the year 1481, ap-
pointed his Queen, Isabella, regent of the king-
dom, while he was absent during the course of
the campaign. The law required that a regent
should take the oath of fidelity in presence of
the Cortes; but as Isabella was a foreigner, be-
fore she could be admitted, the Cortes thought

it
356

it necefiary to pass an a& authorizing the ser-
jeant-porter to open the door of the hall, and to
allow her to enter; " so attentive were they,
" fays Zurita, to observe their-laws and forms,
( even such as may seem most minute." Tom.
iv. p. 313.

THE Aragonefe were no less solicitous to fe-

cure the personal rights of individuals, than to
maintain the freedom of the constitution; and
the spirit of their statutes with refpe&t to both
was equally. liberal. Two faas relative to this
matter merit observation. By an express fRa-
tute in the year 1325, it was declared to be un-
lawful to put any native Aragonefe to the tor-
ture, If he could not be convieted by the tef-
timony of witnesses, he was instantly abfolvedi
Zurita, tom. ii. p. 66. Zurita records the re-
gulation with the fatisfation natural to an hifto-
rian, when he contemplates the humanity of:his:
countrymen. He compares the laws of Aragotf
to those of Rome, as both exempted citizens-
and freemen from such ignominious -and cruel
treatment, and had recourse to it only in the:
trial of slaves. Zurita fad reason tobeftow such
an encomium on the laws of his country. Tor-.
ture was at that time permitted by the laws of
every other nation in Europe. Evenn inEngland,;
from which the mild spirit of legislation has
long banished it, torture was not, at that time,"
unknown. Observations on the Statutes, chiefly
the more ancient, &c; p. 66.

THE other fa& Ihews, that the fame spirit

which influenced the legislature prevailed among
the people. In the year 1485, the religious
zeal of Ferdinand and Isabella prompted them to
introduce the inquisition into Aragon. Though
the Aragonefe were no less fuperfitioufly at-

tached

tached than the other Spaniards to the Roman
Catholick faith, and no less desirous to root out
the feedsof error and heresy which the Jews and
Moors had scattered, yet they took arms'againft
the inquisitors, murdered the chief inquisitor,
and long opposed the eftablilhment of that tri-
bunal. The reason which they gave for their
condut was, that the mode of trial in the in-
quifition was inconsistent with liberty. The cri-
minal was not confronted with the witnesses, he
was not acquainted with what they deposed a-
gainit him, be was subjected to torture, and the
goods of persons condemned were confiscated.
Zurita Anales, tom. iv. p. 341.

THa form of government in the kingdom of

Valencia, and principality of Catalonia, which
were annexed to the crown of Aragon, was like-
wife extremely favourable to liberty. The Va-
Ienciansenjoyed the privilege of union in the fame
manner with the Aragonefe. But they had no
magitrate resembling the Juftiza. The Catalo-
nians were no less jealous of their liberties than
the two other nations, and no leTs bold in assert-
ing them. But it is not neceflary, for illustrating
the following history, to enter into any farther
detail concerning the peculiarities in the confti-
tutionofthefe kingdoms.
N O TE XXXIII. SECT. Ill..p. 156. [KK].

I HAVE searched in vain among the historians

of Castile for such information as might enable
me to trace the progress of laws and government
in Castile, or to explain the nature of the confti-
tution with the fame degree of accuracy where-
with I have described the political state of Ara-
gon. It is manifest, not only from the historians
of Castile, but from its ancient laws, particular-

ly

ly the Fuero Juzgo, that its monarchs were ori-
ginally elective. Ley 2, 5, 8. They were
chosen by the bishops, the nobility, and the peo-
ple, ibid. It appears from the fame venerable
code of laws, that the prerogative of the Caftili-
an monarchs was extremely limited. Villaldi-
ego, in his commentary on these laws, produces
many fats and authorities in confirmation of
both these particulars. Dr. Geddes, who was
well acquainted with Spanish literature, com-
plains that he could find no author, who gave a
diftin& account of the Cortes or supreme aflem-
bly of the nation, or who described the manner
in'which it was held, or mentioned the precise
number of members who had a right to fit in
it. He produces, however, from Gil Gonzales
d'Avila, who published a history of Henry II.
the writ of summons to the town of Abula, re-
quiring it to chufe representatives to appear in
the Cortes which he called to meet A. D. 1390o
From this we learn, that Prelates, Dukes, Mar-
quifles, the Masters of the three military orders,
Condes and Riccos-hombres, were required to at-
tend. These composed the bodies of ecclesias
ticks and nobles, which formed two members of
the legislature. The cities which sent members
to that meeting of the Cortes were forty-eight.
The number of representatives, (for the cities
had right to chufe more or fewer according to
their refpe5ive dignity) amounting to an hundred
and twenty-five. Geddes' Miscellaneous Tra&s,
vol. i. 331. Zurita having occasion to mention
the Cortes which Ferdinand held at Toro, A. D.
1505, in order to secure to himself the govern-
ment of Castile after the death of Isabella, re-
cords, with his usual accuracy, the names of the
members present, and of the cities which they
represented. From that lift it appears, that on-
ly eighteen cities had deputies in this assembly.

Anales

Anales de Aragon, tom. vi. p. 3. What wad
the occalion of this great difference in the num-
her of cities represented in there two meetings
of the Cortes, I am unable to explain.

N O T E XXXIV. SECT. III. p. 158. ILL].

A GREAT part of the territory in Spain was

engrossed by the nobility. L. Marinatus Siculus,
who compored his treatise De Rebus Hifpaniae
during the reign of Charles V. gives a catalogue
of the Spanith nobility, together with the yearly
rent of their estates. According to his account,
which he affirms was as accurate as the nature of
the subjet would admit, the (um total of the
annual revenue of their lands amounted to one
million four hundred and eighty-two thoafand
ducats. If we make allowance for the vast dif-
ference in the value of money in the fifteenth
century from that which it now bears, and con-
fider that the catalogue of Marinaus includes
only the itulados, or nobility whose families
were distinguished by some honorary title, their
wealth mutl appear very great L Marinaeus ap.
Schotti Scriptores Hifpan. vol. i. p. 323. The
Commons of Castile, in their contests with the
crown, which I Ihall hereafter relate, complain
of the extensive property of the nobility as ex-
tremely pernicious to the kingdom, In one of
their manifeflos they aflert, that from Vallado-
lid to St. Jago in Galicia, which was an hundred
leagues, the crown did not possess more than
three villages. All the reft belonged to the no-
bility, and could be fubjeded to no publick bur-
den. Sandov. Vida del Emperor. Carl. V. vol.
i. p. 422. It appears, from the teflimony of au-
thors quoted by Bovadilla, that these vail poses-
lions were bellowed upon the Riccos-bombres,
bidlgaos, and cavallros, by the Kings of Cftile

ia

in reward for the afliftance which they had re-
ceived from them in expelling the Moors. They
likewise obtained, by the fame means, a confide-
rable influence in the cities, many of which an-
ciently depended upon the nobility. Politica
para Corregidores. Amb. 1750. fol. vol. i. 44o,
442.
NOTE XXXV. SECT. III p. i6. [MM].

I HAVE been able to discover nothing certain,

as I observed, Note XVIII. with refpeA to the
originof communities or free cities in Spain. It
is probable, that as soon as the considerable towns
were recovered from the Moors, the inhabitants
who fixed their residence in them, being persons
of diftintion and credit, had all the privileges
of municipal government and jurifdi6tion confer-
red upon them, Many itriking proofs occur of
the splendour, wealth, and power, of the Spanish
cities. Hieronymus Paulus wrote a description
of Barcelona in the year 1491, and compares the
dimensions of the town to that of Naples; and
the elegance of its buildings, the variety of its
manufatures, and the extent of its commerce,
to Florence. Hieron. Paulus ap. Schottum Script.
Hifp. ii. 844. Marineus describes Toledo as a
large and populous city. A great number of its
inhabitants were persons of quality and of illus-
trious rank. Its commerce was great. It ap-
plied particularly to the manufactures of silk and
wool; and the number of inhabitants employed
in there two branches of trade, amounted nearly
to ten thousand. Marin. ubi supr. p. 3o8. I
know no city, fays he, that I would prefer to
Valladolid for elegance and splendour. Ibid. p.
312. We may form.fome estimate of its popu-
loufnefs from the following circumstances: The
citizens having taken arms in the year 1516, in

order

Anales de Aragon, torn. vi. p. 3. What wad
the occasion of this great difference in the num-
ber of cities represented in these two meeting§
of the Cortes, I am unable to explain.

N O T E XXXIV. SECT. III. p. 158. ELL].

A GREAT part of the territory in Spain was

engrossed by the nobility. L Marinaus Siculus,
who composed his treatise De Rebus Hifpanixa
during the reign of Charles V. gives a catalogue
of the Spanilh nobility, together with tde yearly
rent of their estates. According to his account,
which be affirms was as accurate as the nature of
the subject would admit, the fum total of the
annual revenue of their lands amounted to one
million four hundred and eighty-two thousand
ducats. If we make allowance for the aft dif-
ference in the value of money in the fifteenth
century from that which it now bears, and con-
fider that the catalogue of Marina:us includes
only the itiulados, or nobility whose families
were diftinguilhed by Tome honorary title, their
wealth must appear very great. L Marinaus ap.
Schotti Scriptores Hitpan. vol. i. p. 323. The
Commons of Castile, in their contefs with the
crown, which I Ihall hereafter relate, complain
of the extensive property of the nobility as ex-
tremely pernicious to the kingdom, In one of
their manifetos they aflcrt, that from Vallado-.
lid to St. Jago in Galicia, which was gn hundred
leagues, the crown did not possess more than
three villages. All the reft belonged to the no-
bility, and could be fubjeaed to no publick bur-
den. Sandov. Vida del Emperor. Carl. V. vol.
i.p. 4 2. It appears, from the testimony of au-
thors quoted by Bovadilla, that there vaiR poses-
lions were bellowed upon the Riccos-bombres,
bidalgoa, and cvalleros, by the Kings of Castile,

in

in reward for the assistance which they had re-
ceived from them in expelling the Moors. They
likewise obtained, by the fame means, a confide-
rable influence in the cities, many of which an-
ciently depended upon the nobility. Politica
para Corregidores. Amb. 1750. fol. vol. i. 44o,
442.
NOTE XXXV. SECT. II p. I16. [MM].

I HAVE been able to discover nothing certain,

as I observed, Note XVIII. with refpee to the
originof communities or free cities in Spain. It
is probable, that as Coon as the considerable towns
were recovered from the Moors, the inhabitants
who fixed their residence in them, being persons
of diftintion and credit, had all the privileges
of municipal government and jurifdidion confer-
red upon them. Many striking proofs occur of
the splendour, wealth, and power, of the Spanish
cities. Hieronymus Paulus wrote a description
of Barcelona in the year 1491, and compares the
dimensions of the town to that of Naples; and
the elegance of its buildings, the variety of its
manufatures, and the extent of its commerce,
to Florence. Hieron. Paulus ap. Schottum Script.
Hifp. ii. 844. Marinaus delcribes Toledo as a
large and populous city. A great number of its
inhabitants were persons of quality and of illus-
trious rank. Its commerce was great. It ap-
plied particularly to the manufactures of silk and
wool; and the number of inhabitants employed
in these two branches of trade, amounted nearly
to ten thousand. Marin. ubi supr. p. 308. I
know no city, fays he, that I would prefer to
Valladolid for elegance and splendour. Ibid. p.
312. We may form.fome eltimate of its popu-
loufnefs from the following circumitances: The
citizens having taken arms in the year 1516, in

order

order to oppose a measure concerted by cardi-
nal Ximenes, they mustered in the city, and in
the territory which belonged to it, thirty thou-
sand fighting men. Sandov. Vida del Emper.
CarL V. ton. i. p. 81. The manufatures car-
ried on in the towns of Spain were not intended
merely for home consumption, they were ex.
ported to foreign countries, and that commerce
was a considerable source of wealth to the inha-
bitants. The maritime laws of Barcelona are
the foundation of mercantile jurisprudence in
modern times, as the Leges Rhodiae were among
the ancients. All the commercial dates in Italy
adopted there laws, and regulated their trade
according to them. Sandi Storia Civile Venezi-
ana, vol. ii. 865. It appears from several ordon-
nances of the Kings of France, that the mer-
chants of Aragon and Castile were received on
the fame footing, and admitted to the fame
privileges with those of Italy. Ordonances des
Roys, &c. tom. ii. p. 135, iii. 166, 504, 635,
Cities in such a flourishing state became a re-
fpeatable part of the society, and were entitled
to a considerable share in the legislature. The
magistrates of Barcelona aspired to the highest
honour a Spanilh fubje& can enjoy, that of
being covered in the presence of their Cove-
reign, and of being treated as grandees of the
kingdom. Origin de la dignidad de Grande
de Castilla, por don Alonfo Carillo. Madr. 1657,
p. 18.

NOTE XXXVI. SECT. II.. 163. [NN].

Tnz military order of St. Jago, the mos ho-

nourable and opulent of the three Spanish orders,
was intituted about the year 1 17. The bull of
confirmation by Alexander III. is dated A. D.
176. At that time a considerable part of Spain

was

was subjet to the Moors, and the whole country
much exposed the depredations not only of the
enemy, but of banditti. It is no wonder, then,
that an institution, the objet of which was to
oppose the enemies of the Christian faith, and to
restrain and punish those who disturbed the pub-
lick peace, should be extremely popular, and
meet with general encouragement. The wealth
and power of the order became so great, that
one historian fays, that the Grand Master of St.
Jago was the person in Spain of greatest power
and dignity next to the King. )El. Anton. Ne-
briirenfis, ap. Schott. Scrip. Hifp. i. 812. Ano-
ther observes, that the order poTfeled every
thing in Castile that a King would molt desire to
obtain. Zurita Anales, v. 22. The knights
took the vows of obedience, of poverty, and of
conjugal chastity. By the former they were
bound implicitly to obey the commands of their
grand master. The order could bring into the
field a thousand men at arms. JEl. Ant. Ne-
bref. p. 813. If these men at arms were accom-
panied,. as was usual in that age, this was a for-
midable body of cavalry. There belonged to
this order eighty-four commanderies, and two
hundred priories and other benefices. Difierta-
tions fur la Chevalerie par Hon. de St. Marie,
p. 262. It is easy to fee how formidable to his
sovereign the command of these troops, the ad-
ministration of such revenues, and the disposal
of so many offices, must have rendered a sub-
je&. The other two orders, though inferior to
that of St. J.go in power and wealth, were ne-
verthelefs very considerable. When the con-
quest of Granada deprived the knights of St.
Jago of those enemies against whom their zeal
was originally direted, superstition found out a
new obje&, in defence of which they engaged to
employ their courage. To their usual oath,

they

they added the followingclaufe: " We do swear
to believe, to maintain, and to contend in pub-
lick and in private, that the Virgin Mary, the
mother of God, our Lady, was conceived with-
out the fain of original fin." This singular ad-
dition was made about the middle of the seven-
teenth century. Honore de St. Marie Differta-
tions, &c. p. 263-This singular engagement is
not peculiar to the order of St. Jago. The mem-
bers of the second military order in Spain, that
of Calarava, equally zealous to employ their
prowels in defence of the honours of the Befled
Virgin, have likewise professed themselves her
true knights. Their vow, conceived in terms
more theologically accurate than that of St.
Jago, may afford rome amusement to an English
reader. " I vow to God, to the Grand Master,
and to you who here represent his person. that
now, and for ever, I will maintain and contend,
that the Virgin Mary Mother of God, our Lady,
was conceived without original fin, and never
incurred the pollution of it; but that in the
moment of her happy conception, and, of the
union of her foul with her body, the Divine
Grace prevented and preserved her from origi-
nal guilt, by the merits of the paflion and death
of Christ our Reedemer, her future son, foreseen
in the Divine Council, by which she was truly
redeemed, and by a more noble kind of redemp-
tion than any of the children of Adam. In the
belief of this truth, and in maintaining the ho-
nour of the most Holy Virgin, through the
strength of Almighty God, I will live and die."
Definiciones de la Orden de Calatrava, conforme
al Capitulo General en 1652, fol. Madr. 1748.
p. 153. Though the church of Rome hath pru-
dently avoided to give its fantion to the doc-
trine of the immaculate conception, and the two
great monaftick orders of St. Dominic and St.

Francis

Francis have espoused opposite opinions concern-
ing it, the Spaniards are such ardent champions
for the honour of the Virgin, that when the pre-
sent King of Spain instituted a new military
order in the year 1771, in commemoration of
the birth of his grandson, he put it under the
immediate protetion of the mcft Holy Mary in
the mystery of her immaculate conception. Con-
ftitutiones de la Real y diftinguida Orden.
Efpanola de Carlos III. p. 7. As this zeal for
the honour of the Virgin has some resemblance
to that species of refined gallantry, which was
the original objet of chivalry, one fees a reason
for its being adopted by the military orders,
while the spirit of chivalry retained some vigour.
But in the present age, it must excite some fur-
prize to fee the institution of an illustrious order
connected with a doctrine so extravagant and
destitute of foundation.
NOTE XXXVII. SECT. III. p. 165. [00].

I HAVE frequently had occasion to take notice

of the defe&ts in police during the middle ages,
occasioned by the feebleness of government, and
the want of proper Subordination among the dif-
ferent ranks of men. I have obfervedin a former
Note, that this greatly interrupted the inter-
course between nations, and even between dif-
ferent places in the fame kingdom. The de-
scription which the Spanish historians give of the
frequency of rapine, murder, and every at of
violence, in all the provinces of Spain, are
amazing, and present to us the idea of a society
but little removed from the disorder and turbu-
lence of that which has been called a state of
nature. Zurita Anales de Arag. i. 175. .El. Ant.
NebrilTenfis rer. a Ferdin. geftar. Hist. ap. Schot-
tum, 1I. 849. Though the excess of there dif-

orders

orders rendered the institution of the Santa
Hermandad necessary, great care was taken
at first to avoid giving any offence or alarm to
the nobility. The jurifdiaion of the judges
of the Hermandad was expressly confined
to crimes which violated the publick peace. All
other offences were left to the cognizance of the
ordinary judges. If a person was guilty of the
most notorious perjury, in any trial before a
judge of the Hermandad, he could not punihi
him, he was obliged to remit the cafe to the or-
dinary judge of the place. Commentaria in
Regias Hifpan. Conifitut. per Alph. de Azevedo,
pars v. p. 220, &c. fol. Duaci, 16a1. Notwith-
standing tbefe restrictions, the barons were fen-
iible how much the Hermandad would encroach
on their jurifdiaion. In CaRile, rome opposition
was made to the institution i but Ferdinand had
the address to obtain the consent of the Constable
to the introduction of the Hermandad into that
part of the kingdom where his estate lay; and
by that means, as well the popularity of the
institution, he surmounted every obstacle that
flood in its way. EIl. Ant. Nebriffen. 851. In
Aragon, the nobles combined against it with
greater spirit; and Ferdinand, though he sup-
ported it with vigour, was obliged to make
some concessions in order to reconcile them.
Zurita Anales de Arag. iv. 356. The power
and revenue of the Hermandad in Castile seems
to have been very-great. Ferdinand, when pre-
paring for the war against the Moors of Grana-
da, required of the Hermandad to furnish him
sixteen thousand beasts of burden, together with
eight -thousand men to conduct them; and he
obtained what he demanded. )El. Ant. Nebrif.
88 . The Hermandad has been found to be of so
much use in preserving peace, and reftraiinig or
dete&ting crimes, that it is till continued in

Spain;

Spain; but as it is no longer necessary either
for moderating the power of the nobility,
or extending that of the crown, the vigour
and authority of the inflitution diminishes gra-
dually.
NOTE XXXVIII. SECT. III . . 68. [PP].

NOTHING is more common among Antiqua-

ries, and there is not a more copious source of
error, than to decide concerning the institutions
and manners of past ages, by the forms and
ideas which prevail in their own times. The
French lawyers in the seventeenth and eighteenth
centuries, having found their sovereigns in pof-
session of absolute power, seem to think it a
duty incumbent on them, to maintain that such
unbounded authority belonged to the crown in
every period of their monarchy. "' The go-
vernment of France," fays M. de Real very
gravely, " is purely monarchical at this day, as
it was from the beginning. Our Kings were abfo-
lute originally as they are at present." Science
du Government, tom. ii. p. 3 . It is impofiible,
however, to conceive two tates of civil society
more unlike to each other, than that of the
French nation under Clovis, and that under
Louis XV. It is evident, from the codes of laws
of the various.tribes which fettled in Gaul and
the countries adjacent to it, as well as from the
history of Gregory of Tours, and other early
annaliis, that among all there people the form
of government was extremely rude and simple,
and that they had scarcely begun to acquire the
first rudiments of that order and police which
are necefiary in extensive societies. The King
or leader had the command of soldiers or com-
panions, who followed his standard from choice,
not by confraint. I have produced the clearest

evidence

evidence of this, Note VI. An event related
by Gregory of Tours, lib. iv. c. 14. affords the
most friking proof of the dependence of the
early French Kings on the sentiments and incli-
nations of their people. Clotaire I. having march-
ed at the head of his army, in the year 553,
against the Saxons, that people, intimidated at
his approach, sued for peace, and offered to pay
a large umr to the offended monarch. Clotaire
was willing to close with what they proposed
but his army infifed to be led forth to battle.
The King employed all his eloquence to per-
fude them to accept of what the Saxons were
ready to pay. The Saxons, in order to soothe
them, increased their original offer. The King
renewed his solicitations But the army enraged,
rufled upon the King, tore his tent in pieces,
dragged him out of it, and would have slain
him on the spot, if he had not consented to lead
them initantly againit the enemy.

IF the early monarchs of France poffefted

such limited authority, even while at the head
of their army, their prerogative during peace
will be found to be till more confined. They
ascended the throne not by any hereditary right,
but in consequence of the election of their sub-
jets. In order to avoid an unneceflary number
of quotations, I refer my readers to Hotto-
manni Franco-gallia, cap. vi. p. 47. edit. 1573,
where they will find the fullest proof of this
from Gregory of Tours, Amoinus, and the
rnoft authentick historians of the Merovingian
Kings. The effec of this ele&tion was not to
invest them with absolute power. Whatever
related to the general welfare of the nation, was
submitted to publick deliberation, and deter-
mined by the suffrage of the people, in the an-
nual assemblies called Les Champs de Mars and

Les

Les Champs de Mai. These assemblies were
called Champs, because, according to the custom
of all the barbarous nations, they were held in
the open air, in some plain capable of containing
the vast number of persons who had a right to
be present. Jo. Jac. Sorberus de Comitiis vete-
rum Germanorum, vol. i. § 19, &c. They
were denominated Champs de Mars and de
Mai, from the months in which they were held:
Every freeman seems to have had a right to be
present in these assemblies. Sorberus, ibid. §

,33, &c. The ancient annals of the Franks
describe the persons who were present in the as-
fembly held A. D. 788, in there words: In pla-
cito Ingelheimenfi conveniunt pontifices, majo.
res, minores, facerdotes, reguli, duces, comites,
praefefti, cives, oppidani, Apud Sorber. § 304.
There every thing that concerned the happiness
of their country, fays an ancient historian, every
thing that could be of benefit to the Franks,
was confidered and enjoyed. Fredegarius ap.
Du Cange Gloffar. voc. Campus Martii. Chlo-
tharius II. describes the business, and acknow-
ledges the authority of these assemblies. They
are called, fays he, that whatever relates to the
common safety may be confidered and resolved
by common deliberation; and whatever they
determine, to that I will conform. Amoinus
de Gest. Franc. lib. iv. c. i. ap. Bouquet Recueil.
iii. i 16. The Statutory clauses, or words of le-
giflative authority in the decrees ilfued in there
aflemblies, run not in the name of the King
alone. " We have treated, fays Childebert, in
a decree, A. D. 532, in the assembly of March,
together with our Nobles concerning some as-
fairs, and we now publish the conclusion, that
it may come to the knowledge of all." Childeb.
Decret. ap. Bouquet Recueil desHiftor. tom. iv.
p. y. "We have agreed together with our vassals."

VOL. 1. B b Ibid.

Ibid. § 2. " It is agreed in the airembly in which
we were all united." Ibid. § 4. The Salic laws,
the most venerable mnonurent of French jurif-
prudence, were enated in the fame manner.
Ditaverunt Salicarn legem proceres infius gentis,
qui tune temporis apud earn etant Redores.
Sunt autem eledi de pluribus viri quatuor-qui
per tres Mallos convenientes, omnes caufarum
origines follicite difcurrendo, tratlantes de fin-
gulis judicium decreverunt hoc modo. Praef.
Leg. Salic. ap. Bouquet. Ibid p. 122. Hoc
decretum eft apud regem & principes ejus, &
apud cun&um populum chtiftianum, qui infra
regnum Merwingorum confiftunt Ibid. p. 124.
Nay, even in their charters, the Kings of the
first race are careful to specify that they were
granted with the consent of their vaftals. Ego
Childebertus Rex uni cum confenfu & voluntate
Francorum, &tc. A. D. 558. Bouquet, ibid.
622. Chlotharius III. un cum patribus notris
epifcopis, optimatibus, caterifque palatii noftri
miniRris, A. D. 664. Ibid. 648. De con-
fenfu fidelium noftrorum. Mably Obferv. tom.
i.p. 239. The historians likewise describe the
funcions of the King in the national assemblies
in such terms, as imply that his authority there
was extremely small, and that every thing de-
pended on the court itself. Ipfe Rex (fays
the author of Annales Francorum, speaking
of the Field of March) fedebat in fella regia,
circumftante exercitu, praecipiebatque is, die
illo, quicquid a Francis decretum erat. Bou-
quet Recueil, tom. ii. p. 647.

THAT the general aflemblies exercised fu-

preme jurisdiction over all persons, and with re-
fpet to all causes, is so evident as to stand in
need of no proof. The trial of Brunehaut, A. D.
613, how unjust soever the sentence against
her may be, as related by Fredegarius, Chron.

cap.

cap. 42. Bouquet, ibid. 430, is in itself fufli-
cient proof of this. The notorious violence and
iniquity of the sentence, serve to demonstrate
the extent of jurifdiaion which this assembly
possessed, as a Prince so sanguinary as Chlothaire
11. thought the fantion of his authority would
be sufficient to justify his rigorous treatment
of the mother and grandmother of so many
Kings,

WITH refpct to conferring donatives on the

Prince, we may observe, that among nations
whose tnanners and political institutions are fim-
pie, the publick, as well as individuals, having
few wants, they are unacquainted with taxes;
and free uncivilized tribes disdain to submit to
any fated imposition. This was remarkably the
cafe of the Germans, and of all the various peo-
ple that issued from that country. Tacitus pro-
nounces two tribes not to be of German origin,
because they submitted to pay taxes. De Morib.
Germ. c. 43. And speaking of another tribe,
according to the ideas prevalent in Germany, he
fays, " they were not degraded by the imposition
of taxes." Ibid. c. 29. Upoai their settlement
in Gaul, we may conclude, that while elated
with the consciousness of vicory, they would
not renounce the high-fpirited ideas of their an-
ceftors, or voluntarily submit to a burden which
they regarded as a badge of servitude. The
evidence of the earliest tecords and historians
juftiy this conclusion. M. de Montesquieu, in
the twelfth and-fubfequent chapters of the thir-
teenth book of I'Efprit des Loix, and M. de
Mably Obfervat. fur l'Hif. de France, tom. i.
p. 247. have investigated this:faCt with great at-
tention, and have proved clearly that the pro-
perty of freemen among the Franiks was not
subjet to any stated tax. That the state re-

B b a quired

quired nothing from persons of this rank but mi-
litary service at their own expence, and that
they should entertain the King in their houses
when he was upon any progress through his do-
minions, or his officers when sent on any publick
employment, furnishing them with carriages and
horses. Monarchs subsisted almost entirely up-
on the revenues of their own domains, and up.
on the perquisites ariling from the adminiftra-
tion of justice, together with a few small fines
and forfeitures exacttd from such as had been
guilty of certain trespasses. It is foreign from
my subjet to enumerate there. The reader
may find them in Obfervat. de M. de Mably,
vol. i. p. 267.

WHEN any-extraordinary aid was granted by

freemen to their sovereign, it was purely volun-
tary. In the annual assembly of March or May,
it was the custom to make the King a present
of money, of horses, or arms, or of some other
thing of value. This was an ancient custom,
and derived from their ancestors the Germans.
Mos eft civitatibus, ultro ac viritim conferri
principibus vel armentorum vel frugum, quod pro
honore acceptum, etiam neceffitatibus fubvenit.
Tacit. de Mor. Germ. c. 1. These gifts, if
we may form a judgment concerning them from
the general terms in which they are mentioned
by the ancient historians, were considerable, and
made no small part of the royal revenue. Many
pafliges to this purpose are produced by M. du
Cange, Dissert. iv. fur Joinville, 153. Sometimes
a conquered people specified the gift which they
bound themselves to pay annually, and it was
exadted as a debt if they failed. Annales Me-
tenses, ap. Du Cange, ibid. p. 155. It is pro-
bable that the first ftep towards taxation was to
ascertain the value of there gifts which were ori-

ginally

PROOFS AND ILLUSTRATIONS. 373

ginally gratuitous, and to compel the people to
pay the fum at which they were rated. Still,
however, some memory of their original was
preserved, and'the aids granted to monarchs in
all the kingdoms of Europe were termed bene-
volences or free-gifts.

THE Kingsof the second race in France were

railed to the throne by the eletion of the peo-
ple. Pepinus Rex pius, fays an author who
wrote a few years after the tranfation which he
records, per authoritatem Papa, & unctionem
fanti chrifmatis, & eletionem omnium Fran-
corum in regni folio fublimatus eft. Claufula de
Pepini confecratione ap. Bouq. Recueil des His-
tor. tom. v. p. 9. At the fame time, as the
chief men of the nation had transferred the
crown from one family to another, an oath was
exated of them, that they Ihould maintain on
the throne the family which they had now pro-
moted; ut nunquam de alterius lumbis regem
in avo przefumant eligere. Ibid. p. Io. This
oath the nation faithfully observed during a
considerable space of time. The posterity of
Pepin kept possession of the throne; but with
refpe& to the manner of dividing their domini-
ons among their children, Princes were obliged
to consult the general assembly of the nation.
Thus Pepin himself, A. D. 768, appointed his
two sons, Charles and Carlomanus, to reign as
joint sovereigns; but he did this, uni cum con-
fenfu Francorum & procerum fuorum feu &
epifcoporum, before whom he laid the matter
in their general afiembly. Conventus apud
fan&um Dionyfium, Capitular. vol. i. p. 187.
This destination the French confirmed in a sub-
sequent aflembly, which was called upon the
death of Pepin; for, as Eginhart relates, they
not only appointed them Kings, but by their

authority

authority they regulated the limits of their re,
fpedive territories. Vita Car. Magni ap. Bou-
quet Recueil, tom. v. p. go. In the fame man-
ner, it was by the authority of the supreme
aflemblies that any dispute which arose among
the descendants of the royal family was deter.
mined. Charlemagne recognizes this important
part of their jurifdition, and confirms it in his
charter concerning the partition of his domini-
ons; for he appoints, that, in cafe of any un-
certainty with refpe&t to the right of the several
competitors, he whom the people (hall chufe,
lhall succeed to the crown. Capitular. vol. i.
442.

UYDIR the second race of Kings, the afTerm-

bly of the nation, diftinguilhed by the name of
Conventus, Malli, Placita, were regularly assem-.
bled once a year at least, and frequently twice
in the year. One of the most valuable monu-
ments of the history of France is the treatise of
Hincmarus, archbishop of Rheims, de ordine
Palattii. He died A. D. 88g. only fixty-eight
years after Charlemagne, and he relates in that
short discourse the fads which were communi-
cated to him by Adalhardus, a minister and
confident of Charlemagne. From him we learn
that this great monarch never failed to hold the
general assembly of his subjects every year. In
quo placito generalitas univerforumn majorum
tam clericorum quam laicorum conveniebat,
Hincm. oper. edit. Sirmondi, vol. ii. c. 29. 211.
In there atfemblies, matters which related to the
general safety and tate of the kingdom were
always discussed, before they entered upon any
private or leis important business. Ibid. c. 33.
p. 213. His immediate fuccefiors imitated his
example, and tranfaded no affair of importance
without the advice of their great council.

UNDER

UNDER the second race of Kings, the genius

of the French government continued to be in a
good measure democratical. The nobles, the
dignified ecclefiafticks, and the great officers of
the crown, were not the only members of the
national council; the people, or the whole body
of freemen, either in person or by their reprer
fentatives, had a right to be present in it. Hinc-
marus, in describing the mannner of holding
the general assemblies, fays, that if the weather
was favourable, they met in the open air, but,
if otherwise, they had different apartments allot-
ted to them, so that the dignified clergy were fe-
parated from the laity, and the comites vel hujuf-
modi principes fibimet honorificabiliter a caerera
multitudine fegregarentur. Ibid. c. 35. p. 1 14.
Agobardus, archbishop of Lyons, thus describes
a national council in the year .833, wherein he
was present. QPi ubique conventus extitit ex
reverendiflimis epifcopis, & magnificentiffimis
viris inlutribus, collegio quoque abbatum &
comitum, promifeumeque aetatis & dignitatis po-
pulo. The.ctera multitudo of Hin.cmarus is the
fame with the populu. of Agobardus, and both
describe the inferior order of freemen, the fame
who were afterwards known in France by the
name of the third estate, and in England by the
name of commons. The people, as well as the
members of higher dignity, were admitted to .a
share of the legislative power. Thus, by a law,
A. D. 803, it is ordained, " that the question
ihall be put to the people with refpe& to every
new law, and if they shall agree to it, they
shall confirm it by their signature." Capit. vol.
i, 394. There are two capitularia which convey
to us a full idea of the part which the people had
in the administration of government. When
they felt the weight of any grievance, they had
a xiglt to petition the f9vereign for redress. One

of

375

of there petitions, in which they desire that ec-
clefiafticks might be exempted from bearing
arms, and from serving in person against the
enemy, is still extant. It is addressed. to Char-
lemagne, A. D. 803, and exprefled in such
terms as could have been used only by men con-
fcious of liberty, and of the extensive privileges
which they poflfefed. They conclude with re-
quiring him to grant their demand, if he wished
that they fhculd any longer continue faithful
fubje&ts to him. That great monarch, instead
of being offended or surprised at the boldnels of
their petition, received it in a most gracious
manner, and signified his willingness to comply
with it. But sensible that he himself did not
possess legislative authority, he promises to lav
the matter before the next general assembly, tha;
such things as were of common concern to al
might be there confidered and eftablilhed by
common content. Capitul tom. i p. 405.-
409. As the people by their petitions brought
matters to be proposed in the general assembly,
we learn from another capitulare the form in.
which they were approved there, and enated
as laws. The propositions were read aloud, and
then the people were required to declare whether
they aflented to them or not. They signified
their assent by crying three times, " We are fa-
tisfied," and then the capitulare was confirmed
by the subscription of the monarch, the clergy,
and the chief men of the laity. Capitul. tom. i.
p. 627. A. 822. It seems probable, from a capi-
tulare of Carolus Calvus, A. D. 85 , that the
sovereign could not refuse his assent to what
was proposed and established by his fubjeds in
the general assembly. Tit. ix. § 6. Capitul.
vol. ii. p. 47. It is unnecefTary to multiply quo-
tations concerning the legislative power of the
national assembly of France under the second

race,

race, or concerning its right to determine with
regard to peace and war. The uniform style
of the Capitularia is an abundant confirmation
of the former. The reader who desires any
farther information with refpe& to the latter,
may consult Les Origines ou l'Ancien Gouver-
nement de la France, &c. tom. iii. p. 87, &c.
What has been said with refpet to the admif-
sion of the people or their representatives into the
supreme alfembly merits attention, not only in
tracing the progress of the French government,
but on account of the light which it throws
upon a similar question agitated in England,
concerning the time when the commons be-
came part of the legislative body in that king-
dom.
NOTE XXXIX. SECT. IlI. p. 170. [QQJ:

THAT important change which the conftitu-

tion of France underwent, when the legislative
power was transferred from the great council of
the nation to the King, has been explained by
the French antiquaries with leTs care, than they
bellow in illustrating other events in their history.
For that reason I have endeavoured with greater
attention to trace the steps which led to this
memorable revolution. I shall here add Come
particulars which tend further to illustrate it.
The Leges Salicm, the Leges Burgundionum,
and other codes published by the several tribes
which fettled in Gaul, were general laws ex-
tending to every person, to every province and
diftri&t where their authority was acknowledged.
But they seem to have become obsolete; and
the reason of their falling into disuse is very ob-
vious. Almost the whole property of the nation
was allodial when these laws were framed. But
when the feudal institutions became general,

and

377

and gave rife to an infinite variety of questions
peculiar to that species of tenure, the ancient
codes were of no use in deciding with regard to
these, because they could not contain regulations
applicable to cafes which did not exist at the
time when they were compiled. This confide-
rable change in the nature of property made it
necefiary to publi(h the new regulations con-
tained in the Capitularia. Many of these, as
is evident from the perusal of them, were pub-
lick laws extending to the whole French nation,
in the general assembly of which they were
enaaed. The weakness of the greater part of
the monarchs of the second race, and the difor-
der into which the nation was thrown by the
depredations of the Normans, encouraged the
barons to usurp an independent power formerly
unknown in France. The nature and extent
of that jurifdi&tion which they assumed, I have
formerly confidered. The political qniqn qs the
kingdom was at an end, its ancient constitution
was dissolved, and only a feudal relation fubfit-
ed between the King and his vaflals. The regal
jurifdidion extended no further than the domains
of the crown. Under the last Kings of the fe-
cond race, these were reduced almost to nothing.
Under the first Kings of the third race, they
comprehended little more than the patrimonial
estate of Hugh Capet, which he annexed to
the crown. Even with this acceflion, they con-
tinued to be very narrow. Velly, Hit. de France,
tomr. iii. p. 32. Many of the most considerable
provinces in France did not at first acknowledge
HugH Capet as a lawful Monarch. There are
till extant several charters, granted during the
first years of his reign, with this remarkable
clause in the form of dating the charter; "Deo
*' regnante, regeexpedante," regnantedomino
noftro Jesu Chrifto, Francis autem contra jus

regnum

regnum ufurpante Ugone rege. Bouquet Re-
cueil, tom. x. p. 544. A Monarch whose title
was thus openly disputed, was not in a conditi-
on to assert the royaljurifdiaion, or to limit that
of the barons.

ALL these circumstances rendered it easy for

the barons to usurp the rights of royalty within
their own territories. The capitularia became no
less obsolete than the ancient laws; local cuf-
toms were every where introduced, and became
the sole rule by which all civil tranfations were
condu&ed, and all causes were tried. The
wonderful ignorance, which became general in
France during the ninth and tenth centuries,
contributed to the introdu&ion of customary
law. Few persons, except ecclefiafticks, could
read; and as it was not in the power of such il-
literate persons to have recourse to written laws,
either as their guide in business, or their rule in
adminifteringjuftice, the customary law univer-
sally prevailed.

DURING this period, the general afiembly of

the nation seems not to have been called, nor to
have once exerted its legislative authority. Lo-
cal customs regulated and decided every thing.
A striking proof of this occurs in tracing the
progress of the French jurisprudence. The last
of the Capitularia colleced by M. Baluze, was
iflued in the year 921, by Charles the Simple.
An hundred and thirty years elapsed from that
period to the publication of the firif ordonance
of the Kings of the third race, contained in the
great colleAion of M. Lauriere, and the first or-
donance which appears to be an aft of legiflati-
on extending to the whole kingdom, is that of
Philip Augustus, A. D. i 19o. Ordon. tom. i.
p. i, i8. During that long period of one hun-

dred

dred and fixty-nine years, all tranfa&ions were
direted by local customs, and no addition was
made to the statutory law of France. The or-
donances, previous to the reign of Philip Au-
guftus, contain regulations, the authority of
which did not extend beyond the King's do-
mains

VARIOUS initances occur of the caution with

which the Kings of France ventured at first to
exercise legislative authority. M. 1'Ab. de Mab-
ly produces an ordonance of Philip Augustus,
A. D. 1206, concerning the Jews, who, in that
age, were in some measure the property of the
lord in whose territories they resided. But it is
not so much an act of royal power, as a treaty
of the King with the countess of Champagne,
and the comte de Dampierre; and the regulati-
ons in it seem to be established not by his autho-
rity, but by their content. Obfervat. fur 'hist.
de France, ii. p. 355. In the fame manner an
ordonance of Louis VIII. concerning the Jews,
A. D. 1223, is a contrac between the King
and his nobles, with refpet to their manner of
treating that unhappy race of men. Ordon.
tom. i. p. 47. The Eftabliflemens of St. Louis,
though well adapted to serve as general laws to
the whole kingdom, were not published as such,
but only as a complete code of customary law,
to be of authority within the King's domains.
The wisdom, the equity, and the order, confpi-
cuous in that code of St. Louis, procured it a
favourable reception throughout the kingdom.
The veneration due to the virtues and good in-
tentions of its author, contributed not a little to
reconcile the nation to that legislative authority,
which the King began to assume. Soon after
his time, the idea of the King's poflefling fu-
preme legislative power became common. If,

fays

fays Beaumanoir, the King makes any establish-
ment specially for his own domain, the barons
may nevertheless adhere to their antient cuf-
toms; but if the establishment be general, it
ihall be current throughout the whole kingdom,
and we ought to believe that such eltablifhments
are made with mature deliberation, and for the
general good. Cout. de Beauvoifis, c. 48. p.
265. Though the Kings of the third race did
not call the general assembly of the nation, dur-
ing the long period from Hugh Capet to Philip
the Fair, yet they seem to have consulted the
bishops and barons who happened to be present
in their court, with refpec to any new law which
they publilhed. Examples of this occur, Ordon.
tom. i. p. 3 & 5. The practice seems to have
continued as late as the reign of St. Louis, when
the legislative authority of the crown was well
established. Ordon. tom. i. p. 58. A. D. 1246.
Thisattention paid to the barons facilitated the
Kings acquiring such full poffeflion of the legis-
lative power, as enabled them afterwards to ex-
ercife it without observing that formality.

THE aflemblies, distinguished by the name of

the States General, were firfi called A. D. 1302,
and were held occasionally from that period to
the year 1614, since which time they have not
been summoned. There were very different
from the ancient assemblies of the French nation
under the, Kings of. the first and second race.
There is no point with refpe& to which the
French antiquaries are more generally agreedy
than in maintaining that the States General had
no fuffyrage in the passing of laws, and poffefled
no proper legislative jurifdiaion. The whole
tenor of the French history confirms this opini-
on. The form of proceeding in the States
General was this. The King addressed himself

to

38t

to the whole body aflembled in one place, and
laid before them the affairs on account of which
he had summoned them. The deputies of each
of the three orders, of nobles, of clergy, and- of
the third estate, met apart, and prepared their
caber or memorial, containing their answer to
the propositions which had been made to them,
together with the representations which they
thought proper to lay before the King. These
answers and representations were confidered by
the King in his council, and generally gave rife
to an ordonance. These ordonances were not
addressed to the three estates in common. Some-
times the King addrefled an ordonance to each
of the estates in particular. Sometimes he men-
tioned the assembly of the three eftateg. Some-
times mention is made only of the assembly of
that estate to which the ordonance is addrefied.
Sometimes no mention at all is made of the as-
fembly of etates, which suggested the propriety
of enating the law. Preface au tom. iii. des
Ordon. p. xx. Thus the States General had
only the privilege of advising and remonftrat-
ing; the legislative authority resided in the King
alone.

NOTE XL. SECT. iII. p. 174. [RR],

IP the parliament of Paris be confidered only

as the supreme court ofjuftice, every thing re-
lative to its origin and jurifdidion is clear and
obvious. It is the ancient court of the King's
palace, new-modelled, rendered sedentary, and
invested with an extensive and ascertained jurif-
dition. The power of this court, while em-
ployed in this part of its fun&ions, is' not the
objet of present consideration. The pretenfi-
ons of the parliament to controul the exercire
of the legiilative authority, and its clainm of a

right

right to interpose with refpe&t to publick affairs
and the political administration ds the kingdom,
lead to inquiries attended with greater difficulty.
As the officers and members of the parliament of
Paris were anciently nominated by the King,
were paid by him, and on several occasions were
removed by him at pleasure, (Chroniq. Scanda-
leufe de Louis Xl. chez les Mem. de Comines,
tom. ii. p. 5 . Edit. de M. Lenglet de Frefnoy)
they cannot be confidered as representatives of
the people, nor could they claim any ihare in
the legislative power as afting in their name.
We muff search for some other source of this
high privilege. The parliament was originally
composed of the most eminent persons in the
kingdom. The peers of France, ecclefiaiicks
of the highest order, and noblemen of illuftri-
ous birth were members of it, to whom were
added some clerks and counsellors learned in the
laws. Pafquier Recherches, p. 44, &c. Ency-
clopedic, tom. xii. Art. Parlement, p. 3, 5. A
court thus constituted was properly a committee
of the States General of the kingdom, and was
composed of those barons and fideles, whom the
Kings of France were accustomed to consult
with regard to every aft ofjurifdi&ion or legifla-
tive authority. It was natural therefore, during
the intervals between the meetings of the States
General, or during those periods when that as-
fembly was not called, to consult the parlia-
ment, to lay matters of publick concern before
it, and to obtain its approbation and concur-
rence, before any ordonance was published, to
which the people were required to conform. 2.
Under the second race of Kings, every new law
was reduced into proper form by the Chancellor
of the kingdom, was proposed by him to the
people, and when enated, was committed to
him to be kept among the publick records, that

he

be might give authentick copies of it to all who
Ihould demand them. Hincm. de ord. palat.
c. 16. Capitul. Car. Calv. tit. xiv. § 1i. tit.
xxxiii. The chancellor presided in the parlia-
ment of Paris at its first institution. Encyclo-
pedie, tom. iii. art. Cbancelier, p. 88. It was
therefore natural for the King to continue to em-
ploy him in his ancient functions of framing,
taking into his custody, and publilhing the or-
donances which were issued. To an ancient
copy of the Capitularia of Charlemagne, the fol-
lowing words are subjoined. Anno tertio Cle-
mentiflimi domini nofri Caroli Augufti, sub ip-
so anno, hac facta Capitula funt, & confignata
Stephano comiti, ut haec manifefta faceret Pari-
fiis mallo publico, & illa legere faceret coram
Scabineis, quod ita & fecit, & omnes in uno'
confenferunt, quod ipfi voluiffent obfervare us-
que in pofterum, etiam omnes Scabinei, Epif-
copi, Abbates, Comites, manu propria fubter
fignaverunt. Bouquet Recueil, tom. v. p. 663.
MaSus signifies not only the publick aiembly
of the nation, but the court ofjuftice held by
the comes, or missus dominicus. Scabini were
the judges, or the afleffors of the judges in that
court. Here then seems to be a very early in-
fance, not only of laws being published in a
court of justice, but of their being verified or
confirmed by the subscription of the judges. If
this was the common pracice, it naturally in-
troduced the verifying of edicts in the parlia-
ment of Paris. But this conjecture I propose
with that diffidence, which I have felt in all my
reasonings concerning the laws and institutions
of foreign nations. 3. This supreme court of
justice in France was dignified with the appella-
tion of parliament, the name by which the ge-
neral assembly of the nation was distinguished
towards the close of the second race of Kings;

and

and men, both in reasoning and in condu&,
are wonderfully influenced by the similarity of
names. The preserving the ancient names of
the rnagiftrates established, while republican go-
vernment subsisted in Rome, enabled Augutfus
and his fuccefrors to assume new powers, with
less observation, and greater ease. The bestow-
ing the fame name in France upon two courts,
which were extremely different, contributed not
a little to confound their juriididion and func-
tions.

ALL these circumstances concurred in leading

the Kings of France to avail themselves of the
parliament of Paris, as the instrument of recon-
ciling the people to their exercise of legislative
authority. The French, accustomed to fee all
new laws examined and authorised before they
were published, did not sufficiently diftinguilh
between the effet of performing this in the na-
tional aslembly, or in a court appointed by the
King. But as that court was composed of re-
fpetable members, and well skilled in the laws
of their country, when any new edic received
its fancion, that was sufficient to dispose the
people to implicit fubmffion.

WHEN the practice of verifying and regifjering

the royal ediEts in the parliament of Paris be-
came common, the parliament contended that
this was necessary in order to give them legal
authority. It was established as a fundamental
maxim in French jurisprudence, that no law
could be published in any other manner; that,
without this formality, no edia or ordonnance
could have any effect& that the people were not
bound to obey it, and ought not to confider it
as an edict or ordonnance, until it was verified in
the supreme court, after free deliberation.

VOL. L C c Roche-

Roche-flavin des Parlemens de France, 4to.
Gen. 1621. p. 921. The parliament, at dif-
ferent times, hath with great fortitude and in-
tegrity opposed the will of their sovereigns; and
notwithstanding their repeated and peremptory
requisitions and commands, hath refused to
verify and publilh such ediCts as it conceived to
be oppreflive to the people, or subversive of
the constitution of the kingdom. Roche-flavin
reckons, that between the year 1562, and the
year 1589, the parliament refused to verify more
than an hundred edicts of the Kings. Ibid. 925.
Many instances of the spirit and constancy with
which the parliaments of France opposed perni-
cious laws, and asserted their own privileges, are
enumerated by Limnaus Notitia Regni Fran-
cia, lib. i. c. 9. p. 224.

BUT the power of the parliament to maintain

and defend this privilege, bore no proportion to
its importance, or to the courage with which the
members aferted it. When any monarch was
determined that an edict should be carried into
execution, and found the parliament inflexibly
resolved not to verify or publith it, he could
easily supply this defeft by the plenitude of his
regal power. He repaired to the parliament in
person, he took polfeflion of his feat of justice,
and commanded the editl to be read, verified,
registered, and publithed in his presence. Then,
according to another maxim of French law,
the King himself being present, neither the par-
liament, nor any magistrate whatever, can ex-
ercife any authority, or perform any funtion.
Adveniente Principe, ceffat magiftratus. Roche-
flavin, ibid. p. 928, 929. Encyclopedie, tom.
ix. Art. Lit de Justice, p. 581. Roche-flavin
mentions several instances of Kings who atually
exerted this prerogative, so fatal to the residue

of
386

of the rights and liberties transmitted to the
French by their ancestors. Pafquier produces
some instances of the fame kind. Rech. p. 61.
Limnaeus enumerates many others, which the
length to which this note has swelled, prevents
me from inserting at length, though they tend
greatly to illustrate. this important article in
the French history, p. 245. Thus by an exer-
tion of prerogative, which though violent, seems
to be constitutional, and is justified by innume-
rable precedents, all the efforts of the parlia-
rhent to limit and controul the King's legislative
authority, are rendered ineffectual.

I HA V not attempted to explain the conftitu-

tion orjurifdition of any parliament in France,
but that of Paris. All of them are formed up-
on the model of that mos ancient and respect-
able tribunal, and all my observations concern-
ing it will apply with full force to them.

NOTE XLI. SECT. III. . 179. [SS].

THE humiliating posture, in which a great

Emperor implored absolution, is an event so fin-
gular, that the words in which Gregory himself
describes it, merit a place here, and convey a
firiking picture of the arrogance of that Pontiff.
Per triduum, ante portam caftri, depofito omni
regio cultu, miferabiliter, ut pote difcalceatus, &
laneis indutus, perfiftens, non prius cum multo
fletu apoftolicae miferationis auxilium, & confo-
lationem implorari deftitit, quam omnes qui ibi
aderant, & ad quos rumor ille pervenit, ad tan-
tam pietatem, & compaffionis mifericordiam
movit, ut pro eo multis precibus & lacrimis in-
tercedentes, omnesquidem infolitam noftra men-
tis duritiem mirarentur; nonulli vero in nobis
non apoftolicae fedis gravitatem, fed quasi tyran-

C c 2 nica

387

nice feritatis crudelitatem etfe clamarunt. Epift.
Gregor. ap. Memorie della Contefla Matilda da
Fran. Mar. Fiorentini. Lucca, 1756. vol. i. p.
174.

NOTE XLII. SECT. HI. p. 188. [TT].

As I have endeavoured in the history to trace

the various steps in the progress of the conftitu.
tion of the Empire, and to explain the peculia-
rities in its policy very fully, it is not neceflary
to add much by way of illutration. What ap-
pears to be of any importance, I lhall range
under diftin&t heads.

I. WITH refpec to the power, jurifdition and

revenue of the Emperors; a very just idea of
there may be formed by attending to the view
which Pfeffel gives of the rights of the Empe-
rors at two different periods. The first at the
close of the Saxon race, A. D. o124. These,
according to hisenumeration, were the right of
conferring all the great ecclesiastical benefices in
Germany; of receiving the revenues of them
during a vacancy; of Mort-main, or of fuc-
ceeding to the effets of ecclefiafticks who died
intestate: The right of confirming or of annul-
ling the eleations of the Popes: The right of
assembling councils, and of appointing them to
decide concerning the affairs of the church:
The right of conferring the tite of King upon
their vaflals: The right of granting vacant
fiefs: The right of receiving the revenues of
the Empire, whether arising from the Imperial
domains, from imposts and tolls, from gold or
silver mines, from the taxes paid by the Jews,
or from forfeitures: The right of governing
Italy as its proper sovereigns: The right of
ereting free cities, and of eftablihing fairs in

them :

them: The right of aifembling the diets of the
Empire, and of fixing the time of their du-
ration: The right of coining money, and of
conferring that privilege on the Rates of the
Empire: The right of administering both high
and low justice within the territorities of the
different fates. Abrege, p. i60. The other
period is at the extintion of the Emperors of the
families of Luxemburg and Bavaria, A.D. 1437.
According to the fame author, the Imperial pre-
rogatives at that time were, the right of confer-
ring all dignities and titles, except the privilege
of being a fate of the Empire: The right of
Preces primarie, or of appointing once during
their reign a dignitary in each chapter or reli-
gious house: The right of granting difpenfa-
tions with respect to the age of majority. The
right of erecting cities, and of conferring the
privilege of coining money: The right of cal-
ling the meetings of the diet, and of presiding
in them. Abreg6, &c. p. 507. It were easy
to shew that M. Pfeffel is well founded in all
these aftertions, and to confirm them by the tef-
timony of the most refpe&able authors. In the
one period, the Emperors appear as mighty so-
vereigns with extensive prerogatives; in the
other, as the heads of a confederacy with very
limited powers.

THa revenues of the Emperors decreased till

more than their authority. The early Empe-
rors, and particularly those of the Saxon line,
besides their vast patrimonial or hereditary terri-
tories, poffefied an extensive domain both in
Italy and Germany, which belonged to them as
Emperors. Italy belonged to the Emperors as
their proper kingdom, and the revenues which
they drew from it were very considerable. The

first

first alienations of the Imperial revenue were
made in this country. The Italian cities having
acquired wealth, and aspiring at independence,
purchased their liberty fror. different Empe.
rors, as I have observed Note XV. The fums
which they paid, and the Emperors with whom
they concluded there bargains, are mentioned by
Cafp. Klockius de .Erario Norimb. 167 . p. 58,
&c. Charles IV. and his son Wenceslaus, diffi-
pated all that remained of the Italian branch of
the domain. The German domain lay chiefly
upon the banks of the Rhine, and was under the
government of the Counts Palatine. It is not
easy to mark out the boundaries, or to estimate
the value of this ancient domain, which has
been so long incorporated with the territories of
different Princes. Some hints with refpet to
it may be found in the glossary of Speidelius,
which he has entitled Speculum Juridico-Philo-
logico-politico Hiftoricum Obfervationum, &c.
Norimb. 1673, vol. i. 679. 1045. a more full
account of it is given by Klockius de JErario, p.
84. Besides this, the Emperors poffefled confide-
rable diftrias of land lying intermixed with the
eftatesof the Dukes and barons. They were
accustomed to visit these frequently, and drew
from them what was sufficient to support their
court during the time of their residence. An-
nalifte, ap. Struv. tom. i. 6 11. A great part
of these were seized by the nobles during
the long interregnum, or during the wars
occasioned by the contests between the Em-
perors and the court of Rome. At the fame
time that such encroachments were made on the
fixed or territorial property of the Emperors,
they were robbed almost entirely of their casual
revenues; the Princes and barons appropriating
to themselves taxes and duties of every kind,
which had usually been paid to them. Pfeffel
Abrege, p. 374. The profuse and inconfide-

rate

rate ambition of Charles IV. squandered what-
ever remained of the Imperial revenues after
so many defalcations. He, in the year 1376,
in order to prevail with the Eletors to chufe
his son Wenceslaus King of the Romans,
promised each of them an hundred thousand
crowns. But being unable to pay so large a
fum, and eager to secure the elecion to his son,
he alienated to the three ecclesiastical Electors,
and to the Count Palatine, such countries as fill
belonged to the Imperial domain on the banks
of the Rhine, and likewise made over to them
all the taxes and tolls then levied by the Empe-
rors in that diftrid. Trithemius, and the au-
thor of the Chronicle of Magdeburgh, enume-
rate the territories and taxes which were thus ali-
enated, and represent this as the last and fatal
blow to the Imperial authority. Struv. Corp.
vol. i. p. 437. From that period, the (hreds of
the ancient revenues pofleired by the Emperors
have been so inconsiderable, that, in the opinion
of Speidelius, all that they yield would be so
far from defraying the expence of supporting
their household, that they would not pay the
charge of maintaining the post eftablilhed in the
Empire. Speidelii Speculum, &c. vol. i. p. 680.
These funds, inconsiderable as they were, con-
tinued to decrease. Granvelle, the minister of
Charles V. afterted in the year 1546, in pre-
fence of several of the German Princes, that
his master drew no money at all from the Em-
pire. Sleid. History of the Reformation, Lond.
1689. p. 372. The fame is the cafe at present.
Traitt de droit Publique de 1'Empire, par M. Ie
Coq. de Villeray, p. 55. From the reign of
Charles IV. whom Maximilian called the pest of
the Empire, the Emperors have depended en-
entirely on their hereditary dominions, as the

only

only source of their power, and even of their
subsistence.

2. The ancient mode of elecing the Empe-

rors, and the various changes which it under-
went, require some illustration. The Imperial
crown was originally attained by election, as
well as those of most monarchies in Europe. An
opinion long prevailed among the antiquaries and
publick lawyers of Germany, that the right of
chufing the Emperors was vested in the arch-
biWhops of Mentz, Cologne, and Treves, the
King of Bohemia, the Duke of Saxony, the
Marquis of Brandenburgh, and the Count Pala-
tine of the Rhine, by an edic of Otho IIL con-
firmed by Gregory V. about the year 996. But
the whole tenor of history contradias this opi-
nion. It appears, that from the earliest period
in the history of Germany, the person who was
to reign over all, was eleaed by the suffrage
of all. Thus Conrad I. was elected by all the
people of the Franks, fay some annalists; by
all the princes and chief men, fay others; by
all the nation, fay others. See their words,
Struv. Corp. 21 . Conringius de German. Imper.
Rep. Acroamata Sex. Ebroduni 1654, p. 103.
In the year 1024, posterior to the supposed re-
gulations of Otho III. Conrad II. was eleced by
all the chief men, and his election was approved
and confirmed by the people, Struv. Corp. 284.
At the election of Lotharius II. A. D. 1 1 25, fix-
ty thouland persons of all ranks were present.
He was named by the chief men, and their no-
mination was approved by the people. Struv.
ibid. p. 357. The first author who mentions
the seven Electors is Martinus Polonus, who
flourished in the reign of Frederick II. which
ended A. D. 1250. We find, that in all the
ancient eletions to which I have referred, the

Princes

Princes of the greatest power and authority were
allowed by their countrymen to name the per-
son whom they wished to appoint Emperor, and
the people approved or disapproved of their no-
mination. This privilege of voting first is called
by the German lawyers the right of Prataxation,
Pfeffel Abrege, p. 316. This was the firit origin
of the exclusive right which the Eletors acquir-
ed. The Elecors possessed the most extensive terri-
tories of any Princes in the Empire; all the great
offices of the Rfate were in their hands by heredi-
tary right; as soon as they obtained or engrofled
so much influence in the election as to be al-
lowed the right of prataxation, it became un-
necefiary for the inferior ecclefiafticks and ba-
rons to attend, when they had no other function
but that of confirming the deed of these more
powerful Princes by their assent. During times
of turbulence, they could not retort to the place
of election without a numerous retinue of arm-
ed vassals, the expence of which they were obli-
ged to defray out of their own revenues. The
rights of the seven Electors were supported by
all the descendants and allies of their powerful
families, who shared in the splendor and influence
which they enjoyed by this diftinguilhing privi-
lege. Pfeffel Abrege, p. 376. The seven Elec-
tors were confidered as the representatives of all
the orders which composed the highest class of
German nobility. There were three archbishops,
chancellors of the three great diftrits into which
the Empire was anciently divided; one King;
one Duke; one Marquis; and one Count. All
there circumstances contributed to render the in-
trodution of this considerable innovation into
the constitution of the Germanick body extreme-
ly easy. Every thing of importance, relating to
this branch of the political state of the Empire, is
well illustrated by Onuphrius Panvinius, an Au-
guftinian Monk of Verona, who lived in the reign

of

ri Charles V. His treatise, if we make some al-
lowance for that partiality which he expresses in
favour of the powers which the Popes claimed in
the Empire, has the merit of being one of the
first works in which a controverted point in his-
tory is examined with critical precision, and with
a proper attention to that evidence which is de-
rived from records, or the testimony of contem-
porary historians. It is inserted by Goldaftus in
his Politica Imperialia, p. 2.

As the Electors have engrossed the sole right

of chufing the Emperors, they have assumed
likewise that of deposing them. This high
power the Electors have not only presumed to
claim, but have ventured, in more than one
instance, to exercise. In the year 1298, a part
of the Electors deposed Adolphus of Nassau and
substituted Albert of Austria in his place. The
reasons on which they found their sentence, [how
that this deed flowed from fatious, not from
publick-fpirited motives Struv. Corp. vol. i. p.
540. In the first year of the fifteenth century,
the Electors deposed Wenceslaus, and placed the
Imperial crown on the head of Rupert Eletor
Palatine. The act of deposition is fill extant.
Goldafti Conftit. vol. i. p. 379, It is pronounced
in the name and by the authority of the Electors,
and confirmed by several prelates and barons of
the Empire, who were present. These exerti-
ons of the electoral power demonfirate that the
Imperial authority was funk very low.

THE other privileges of the Ele&ors, and the

rights of the elecoral college are explained by
the writers on the publick law in Geimany.

3. WITH refpea to the diets or general as-
femblies of the Empire, it would be necessary,

if

if my object were to write a particular history of
Germany, to enter into a minute detail, con-
cerning the forms of aflembling it, the persons
who have a right to be present, their division
into several Colleges or Benches, the objects of
their deliberation, the mode in which they car-
ry on their debates or give their suffrages, and
the authority of their decrees or recesses. But
in a general history it is sufficient to observe,
that, originally, the diets of the Empire were
exactly the fame with the aflemblies of March
and of May, held by the Kings of France.
They met, at least, once a year. Every free-
man had a right to be present. They were as-
femblies, in which a monarch deliberated with
his subjeCts, concerning their common interest.
Arummus de comitiis Rom. German. Imperii,
4to, Jenae, i660, cap. 7. NO. 20, &c. But
when the Princes, dignified ecclefiafticks, and
barons, acquired territorial and independentju-
rifdiction, the diet became an assembly of the
separate states, which formed the confederacy
of which the Emperor was head. While the
constitution of the Empire remained in its pri-
mitive form, attendance on the diets was a du-
ty, like the other services, due from feudal sub-
jets to their sovereign, which the members
were bound to perform in person; and if any
member who had a right to be present in the
diet negleted to attend in person, he not only
loft his vote, but was liable to an heavy penal-
ty. Arumaus de Comit. c. 5. NO 40. Where-
as, from the time that the members of the diet
became independent states, the right of suffrage
was annexed to the territory or dignity, not to
the person. The members, if they could not,
or would not attend in person, might fend their
deputies, as Princes fend ambassadors, and they
were entitled to exercise all the rights belong-

ing

395

ing to their constituents. Ibid. NO 42, 46, 49.
By degrees, and upon the fame principle of con-
fidering the diet as an assembly of independent
itates, in which each confederate had the right of
fuffiage, if any memnber possessed more than
one of these states or charaters which entitle to
a feat in the diet, he was allowed a proportional
number of suffrages. Pfeffel Abrege, 62a. From
the lame cause the Imperial cities, as soon as
they became free, and acquired supreme and in-
dependent jurifdiaion within their own territo-
ries, were received as members of the diet The
powers of the diet extend to every thing relative
to the common concern of the Germanick body,
or that can interest or affe& it as a confederacy.
The diet takes no cognizance of the intripr ad-
ministration in the different States, unless that
happens to disturb or threaten the general safety.

4. WITH refpe& to the Imperial chamber,'the

jurifdition of which has been the great source
of order and tranquillity in Germany, it is ne-
ceflary to observe, that this court was instituted
in order to put an end to the calamities occasion-
ed by private wars in Germany. I have already
traced the rife and progress of this pracice, and
pointed out its pernicious effets as fully as their
extensive influence during the middle ages me-
rited. In Germany, private wars seem to have
been more frequent and producive of worse
consequences than in the other countries of Eu-
rope. There are obvious reasons for this. The
nobility of Germany were extremely numerous,
and the causes of their dissention multiplied in
proportion. The territorial jurifdiftion which
the German nobles acquired, was more complete
than that poffefled by their order in other nati-
ons. They became, in reality, independent
powers, and they claimed all the privileges of

that

that character. The long interregnum from A;
D. 1255 to A. D. 1273, accustomed them toan
uncontrouled licence, and led them to forget
that Subordination which is necessary in order to
maintain public tranquillity. At the time the
other monarchs of Europe began to acquire such
an increase of power and revenues, as added
new force to their government, the authority
and revenues of the Emperors continued gradu-
ally to decline. The diets of the Empire, which
alone had authority tojudge between such mighty
barons, and power to enforce its decisions, met
very seldom. Conring. Acroamata, p. 234. The
diets when they did assemble were often com-
posed of several thousand members, Chronic.
Constant. ap. Struv. Corp. i. p. 546, and were
mere tumultuary alTemblies, ill-qualified to de-
cide concerning any question of right. The
feflion of the diets continued only two or three
days, Pfeffel Abrege, p. 244, so that they had
no time to hear or discuss any cause that was in
the smallef degree intricate. Thus Germany
was left, in some measure without any court of
judicature, capable of repressing the evils of pri-
vate war.

ALL the expedients which were employed in

other countries of Europe in order to restrain
this practice, and which I have described, Note
XXI. were tried in Germany with little effe&t.
The confederacies of the nobles and of the ci-
ties, and the division of Germany into various cir-
cles, which I mentioned in that Note, were found
likewise insufficient. As a last remedy the Ger.
mans had recourse to arbiters whom they called
Aufiregs. The barons and states in different
parts of Germany joined in conventions, by
which they bound themselves to refer all contro-
verfies, that might arise between them, to the de-

termination

termination of Auflrge, and to submit to their
sentences as final. These arbiters are named
Sometimes in the treaty of convention, an in-
stance of which occurs in Ludewig Reliquia:
Manufcr. omnis aevi, vol. ii. 212; sometimes
they were chosen by mutual content; Sometimes
they were appointed by neutral persons; and
sometimes the choice was left to be decided by
lot Datt. de Pace publica Imperii, lib. i. cap.
27. NO 6, &c. Speidelius Speculum, &c. voc.

ufitreg.. p. 95. Upon the introdution of this

pratice, the publick tribunals ofjuftice became,
in a great measure, ufelef, and were almost en-
tirely deserted.

Im order to re-eftablifl the authority of go-

vernment, Maximilian instituted the Imperial
chamber, at the period which I have mentioned.
This tribunal consisted originally of a president,
who was always a nobleman of the first order,
and of sixteen judges. The president was ap-
pointed by the Emperor, and the judges, partly
by him, and partly by the States, according to
forms which it is unneceflary to describe. A
fum was imposed, with their own content, on
the States of the Empire, for paying the salaries
of the judges, and officers in this court. The
Imperial chamber was established firit at Franc-
fort on the Maine. During the reign of Charles
V. it was removed to Spires, and continued in
that city above a century and a half. It is now
fixed at Wetzlar. This court takes cognizance
of all questions concerning civil right between
the States of the Empire, and paffesjudgment
in the last resort, and without appeal. To it
belongs, likewise, the privilege of judging in
criminal causes, which may be confidered as con-
nected with the preservation of the publick peace.
Pfefel Abrege, 560.

ALL

ALL causes relating to points of feudal right

orjurifdition, together with such as refpeet the
territories which hold of the Empire in Italy,
belong properly to the jurifdition of the Aulick
council. This tribunal was formed upon the
model of the antient court of the palace inftitut-
ed by the Emperors of Germany. It depended
not upon the States of the Empire, but upon the
Emperor; he having the right of appointing at
pleasure all the judges of whom it is composed.
Maximilian, in order to procure some compen-
fation for the diminution of his authority, by
the powers vested in the Imperial chamber, pre-
vailed on the diet A. D. 1512, to give its con-
sent to the establishment of the Aulick council.
Since that time, it has been a great object of
policy in the court of Vienna to extend the jurif-
diction, and support the authority of the Aulick
council, and to circumscribe and weaken thole
of the Imperial chamber. The tedious forms
and dilatory proceedings of the Imperial cham-
ber have fumifhed the Emperors with pretexts
for doing so. Lites Spirae, according to the
witticism of a German lawyer, spirant, fed nun-
quam exrpirant. Such delays are unavoidable
in a court composed of members named by
States, jealous of each other. Whereas the
judges of the Aulick council, depending on one
matter, and being responsible to him alone, are
more vigorous and decisive. Puffendorf. de
Statu Imper. German. cap. v. § 20. Pfeffel
Abrege, p. 58r.

NOTE XLIII. SECT. III. p. 191. [UU].

THE description which I have given of the

Turkish government is conformable to the ac-
counts of the most intelligent travellers who have
visited that Empire. The count de Marfigli, in

his

399

his treatise concerning the military state of the
Turkish Empire, ch. vi. and the Author of Ob-
fervationson thereligion, laws, government and
manners of the Turks, published at London
1768, vol i. p. 8r. differ from other writers
who have described the political constitution of
that powerful monarchy. As they had oppor-
tunity, during their long residence in Turkey,
to observe the order and justice conspicuous in
several departments of administration, they seem
unwilling to admit that it should be denominated
a defpotifin. But when the form of government
in any country is represented to be defpotick,
this does not suppose that the power of the mo-
narch is continually exerted in acts of violence,
injustice, and cruelty. Under governments of
every species, unless when some frantick tyrant
happens to hold the sceptre, the ordinary ad-
minifiration must be conformable to the princi-
ples of juflice, and if not active in promoting
the welfare of the people, cannot certainly have
theirdeftruaion forits objea. A state in which
the sovereign possesses the absolute command of
a vast military force, together with the disposal
of an extensive revenue; in which the people
have no privileges, and no part either immedi-
ate or remote in legislation; in which there is
no body of hereditary nobility, jealous of their
own rights and diftinAions, to stand as an inter.
mediate order between the Prince and the peo-
ple, cannot be distinguished by any name but
that of a despotism. The refRraints, however,
which I have mentioned, arising from the Capi-
caly, and from religion, are powerful. But they
are not such as change the nature or denomina-
tion of the government. When a defpotick
Prince employs an armed force to support his
authority, he commits the supreme power to
their hands. The Pratorian bands in Rome de-

throned,

throned, murdered, and exalted Princes, in the
fame wanton manner with the soldiery of the
Porte at Constantinople. But notwithflanding
this, the Roman Emperors have been confidered,
by all political writers, as poisesing defpotick
power;

THE Author of Observations on the religion;

law, government, and manners of the Turks, in
a preface to the second edition of his work, hath
made some remarks on what is contained in this
Note, and that part of the text to which it re-
sers. It is with diffidence I set my opinion in
opposition to that of a person, who has observed
the government of the Turks with attention;
and has described it with abilities. But after
a careful review of the subjet, to me the Turk-
i(h government still appears of such a species;
as can be ranged in no class, but that to which
political writers have given the name of defpo-
tiin. There is not in Turkey any constitutional
reitraint upon the will of the sovereign, or any
barrier to circumscribe the exercise of his power,
but the two which I have mentioned; one as-
forded by religion, the principle upon which the
authority of the Sultan is founded the other
by the army, the inflrument which he must em-
ploy to maintain his power. The Author repre-
sents the Ulcma, or body of the law, as an in-
termediate order between the monarch and the
people. Pref. p. 30. But whatever restraint the
authority of the Ulcma may impose upon the so-
vereign, is derived from religion. The Moulabs,
out of whom the Mufti and other chief officers
of the law must be chosen, are ecclefiafticks.
It is as interpreters of the Koran or Divine Will
that they are objets of veneration. The check,
then, which they give to the exercise of arbi-
trary power is not different from one of those

VOL. I. D d of

of which I took notice. Indeed, this restraint
cannot be very considerable. The Mufti, who
is the head of the order, as well as every infe-
rior officer of law, is named by the Sultan, and
removable at pleasure. The strange means em-
ployed by the Ulcma in 1746, to obtain the
difmiflion of a minister whom they hated, is a
manifest proof that they possess but litde confli-
tutional authority which can serve as a restraint
upon the will of the sovereign. Obfervat. p.
92. of zd edit. If the author's idea bejuft, it
is aftonilhing that the body of the law (hould
have no method of remonstrating against the
errors of administration, but by setting fire to
the capital.

THE Author seems to confider the Capiculy,

or soldiery of the Porte, neither as formidable
instruments of the Sultan's power, nor as any re-
ftraint upon the exercise of it. His reasons for
this opinion are, that the number of the Capi-
culy is small in proportion to the other troops
which compose the Turkilh armies, and that in
time of peace they are undisciplined. Pref. zd.
edit. p. 23, &c. But the troops stationed in a
capital, though their number be not great, are
always masters of the sovereign's person and
power. The praetorian bands bore no proportion
to the legionary troops in the frontier provinces.
The soldiery of the Porte are more numerous,
and must pollefs the fame power, and be equally
formidable, sometimes to the Sovereign, and
oftener to the people. However much the dif-
cipline of the Janizaries may be neglected at pre-
sent, it certainly was not so, in that age to which
alone my description of the Turkish government
applies. The Author observes, Pref. p. 29. that
the Janizaries never deposed any Sultan of them-

selves,

selves, but that some form of law, true or false, has
been observed, and that either the Mufti, or
some other minister of religion, has announced to
the unhappy prince the law which renders him
unworthy of the throne. Obferv. p. 102. This
will always happen. In every revolution brought
about by military power, the deeds of the soldiery
must be confirmed and carried into execution
with the civil and religious formalities peculiar
to the constitution.

THIS addition to the Note may serve as a fur-

ther illustration of my own sentiments, but is not
made with any intention of entering into any
controversy with the Author of Observations,
&c. to whom I am indebted for the obliging
terms in which he has exprefled his remarks upon
what he had advanced. Happy were it for such
as venture to communicate their opinions to the
world, if every animadversion upon them were
conveyed with the fame candid and liberal spirit !
In one particular, however, he seems to have
misapprehended what I meant. Pref. p. 17. I
certainly did not mention his or count Marfigli's
long residence in Turkey as a circumstance,
which should detrat from the weight of their
authority. I took notice of it, injustice to my
readers, that they,might receive my opinion with
distrust, as it differed from that of persons whose
means of information were so far superior to
mine.

N O T E XLIV. SECT. III. p. 192. [XX]'

THE institution, the discipline, and privi-

leges of the Janizaries are described by all the
authors who give any account of the Turkish
government. The manner in which enthuliafm
was employed in order to inspire them with cou-

D d 2 rage

tage is thus related by Prince Cantemir: " When
Amurath I. had formed them into a body, he
sent them to HajiBektafh, a Turkish Saint, fa-
mous for his miracles and prophecies, desiring
him to bestow on them a banner, to pray to God
for their success, and to give them a name. The
Saint, when they appeared in his presence, put
the sleeve of his gown upon one of their heads,
and laid, Let them be called rengicberi. Let
their countenance be ever bright, their hands
victorious, their swords keen; let their spears
always hang over the heads of their enemies,
and wherever they go, may they return with a
flining face." History of the Ottoman Empire,
p. 38. The number of Janizaries, at the first
inrititution of the body, was not considerable,
Under Solymani, in the year 521, they amount-
ed to twelve thousand. Since that time their
number has greatly increased. Marfigli, Etat;
&c. ch. 16. p. 68. Though Solyman possessed
such abilities and authority as to restrain this for-
midable body within the bounds of obedience,
yet its tendency to limit the power of the
Sultans was, even in that age, foreseen by fa-
gacious observers. Nicolas Daulphinois, who
accompanied M. D'Aramon ambassador from
Henry II. of France to Solyman, published an
account of his travels, in which he describes
and celebrates the discipline of the Janizaries;
but at the fame time predicts that they would,
one day, become formidable to their masters,
and as the fame part at Constantinople, as the
Praetorian bands had done at Rome. Colletion
of Voyages from the Earl of Oxford's Library,
vol. i. p. 599.

NOTE

NOT E XLV. SECT. III. . 194. [YY]:

SOLYMAN the Magnificent, to whom the

Turkish historians have given the firname of
Canuni, or infiituter of rules, first brought the
finances and military eftablilhment of the Turk-
imh Empire into a regular form. He divided the
military force into the Capiculy, or soldiery of the
Porte,. which was properly the standing army,
and Serrataculy, or soldiers appointed to guard
the frontiers. 'The chief strength of the latter
confifed of those who held Timariots and Ziams.
These were portions of land granted to certain
persons for life, in much the fame manner as
the military fiefs among the nations of Europe;
in return for which military service was per-
formed. Solyman. in his Canun-Nami, or book
ps regulations, fixed with great accuracy the ex-
tent of there lands in each province of his Em-
pire, appointed the precise number of soldiers
each person who held a Timariot or a Ziam
should bring into the field, and eftablilhed the
pay which they should receive, while'engaged in
service. Count Marfigli and Sir Paul Rycaut
have given extracts from this book of regula-
tiins, and it appears, that the ordinary efta
blifhment of the Turkish army exceeded an hun-
dred and fifty thousand men. When there were
added to the soldiery qfthe Porte, they formed
a military power greatly superior to what any
Christian tate could command. Marfigli Etat
Militaire, &c. p. 136. Rycaut's state of the
Ottoman Empire, book iii. ch. 2. As Solyman,
during his active reign, was engaged so con-
ftantly in war, that his troops were always in
the field, the Serrataculy became almost equal
to the Janizaries themselves in discipline and
Valour.

IT

4o5

IT is not surprising, then, that the authors of

the sixteenth century should represent the Turks
as far superior to the Christians, both in the
knowledge and in the pratice of the art of war.
Guicciardini informs us, that the Italians learned
the art of fortifying towns from the Turks.
Hiftor. lib. xv. p. 266. Butbequius, who was
ambaflador from Ferdinand to Solyman, and
who had opportunity to observe the slate both
of the Chriflian and Turkish armies, published
a discourse concerning the best manner of carry-
ing on war against the Turks, in which he
points out at great length the immense advan-
tages which the Infidels pofleffed with refpeA to
discipline, and military improvements of every
kind. Bufbequii opera, edit. Elzevir. p. 393,
&c. The testimony of other authors might be
added, if the matter were, in any degree, doubt-
fuL

BEFORE I conclude these Proofs and Illuftra-

tions, I ought to explain the reason of two omif-
sions in them; one of which is neceflary to men-
tion on my own account, the other to obviate
an objection to thispart of the work.

IN all my inquiries and disquisitions concern-

ing the progress of government, manners, litera-
ture and commerce during the middle ages, as
well as in my delineations of the political conlti-
tution of the different States of Europe at the
opening of the sixteenth century, I have not
once mentioned M. de Voltaire, who, in his
Essay fur Pbi/oire generale, has reviewed ths
fame period, and has treated of all there sub-
jeds. This does not proceed from inattention
to the works of that extraordinary man, whose
genius, no less enterprizing than universal, has
attempted almost every different species of lite-

rary

rary cmpofirion. In many of there he excels.
In all, if he had left religion untouched, he is
inftrutive and agreeable. But as he seldom
imitates the example of modern -hiflorians in
citing the authors from whom they derived their
information, I could not, with propriety, ap-
peal to his authority in confirmation of any
doubtful and unknown fad. I have often,
however, followed him as my guide in there re-
searches; and he has not only pointed out the
faCts with respect to which it was of importance
to inquire, but the conclusions which it was pro-
per to draw from them. If he had, at the fame
time, mentioned the books which relate there
particulars, a great part of my labour would
have been unnecessary, and many of his readers
who now confider him only as an entertaining
and lively writer, would find that he is a learn-
ed'and well-informed historian,

As to the other omission; every intelligent

reader must have observed, that I have not en-
tered, either in the historical part of this volume,
or in the Proofs and Illustrations, into the fame
detail with refpe& to the ancient laws and cuf-
toms of the British kingdoms, as concerning
those of the other European nations. As the ca-
pital fads with regard to the progress of govern-
ment and manners in their own country are
known to most of my readers, such a detail ap-
peared to me to be less essential. Such fats
and observations, however, as were necessary
towards completing my design in that part of
the work, I have mentioned under the different
articles which are the fubjeds of my difquifiti-
ons. The state of government, in all the na-
tions of Europe, having been nearly the fame
during several ages, nothing can tend more to
illustrate the progress of the Englilh constitution,

than

than a careful inquiry into the laws and customs
of the kingdoms on the Continent. This source
of information has been too much negle&ed by
the Englih antiquaries and lawyers. Filled with
admiration of that happy constitution now efta-
blifhed in Great Britain, they have been more
attentive to its forms and principles, than to the
condition and ideas of remote times, which, in
almost every particular, differ from the present.
While engaged in perusing the laws, charters,
and early historians of the continental king-
doms, I have often been led to think that an
attempt to illustrate the progress of the Englilh
jurisprudence and policy, by a comparison with
those of other kingdoms in a similar situation,
would be of great utility, and might throw
much light on some points which are now ob-
fcure, and decide others, which have been long
controverted.

INDEX

# INDEX TO THE FIRST VOLUME.

I N

D E

TO T HE
FIRST VOLUME.

A

4 FR IC , the (hocking deva(tations
- made there by the Vandals, so4.

Jdlrau, his charater of the clergy in

his time, 238.
lfred the Great, his complaint of the
ignorance of the clergy, 138.

Alledial poffelon of land, explained,

t19. How such pofeffion became
subjee to military service, i. Dif-
tinguified from beneficiary tenures,
lso. How converted into feudal te-
nuret, 1%6.

Alldi/ss, the etymology of that word,
130. .Ammian,, his charader of the Hunt,

o20, lit.

Amsaratb, Sultan, the body of Janizarice

formed by him, s92.

Anaatheb, form of that denounced a-

gaini robbers during the middle ages,
340.

Arabia, the ancient Creek phildfophy

cultivated there, while loft in Europe,
330, NVer xxviii. The progress of
philosophy from thence to Europe,
333.

Adragn, rife of the kingdom of, 148.

Its union with Calile ib. The coo-
ftitution and form of its government,
st. The privileges of its Cortes,
if. Office and jurifdiaion of the Jus-

tiea, 153. The regal power very
cofined, 1s4. Form of the alle-
giance swore to the Kings of, 55.
The power of the nobility to controul
the regal power, 354. Their privi-
lege of union taken away by Peter
IV. ib. The eftablilhmentof theln-
quifition opposed there, 358.

Arairs, (landing, the rife of, traced, 94.

By what means they became more ge-
neral in Europe, 114.

Armt, the profeflon of, the moaf ho-

nourable in uncivilized nations 68.
fj, an account of the ancient Romilk
feaR of, 241.

A.Jfmris, legislative, how formed, 36.
----- >, general of France, their

power under the frll race of Kings,
167. Under the second and third, ib.
At what period they loft their legilla,
tive authority, 169.

Attila, King of the Huns, account of

his reception of the Roman ambafia.
dors, os, NVote iii. Some account
of his conquests, 2o6.

Aril/, an afTembly of Cadilian nobles

there, solemnly try and depose Henry
IV. their King, 151.

AJiria, the houlc of, by whom found-
ed, 179.

Stil~t,
X

B

Bscir, in the old French law, their of-

fire explained, 316.

Balasce of power, the frft rife of. in

Europe, 113. The progref of. 114.

Ealtic, the si6 t furce of wealth, to

the towns situatcd on that sea, 34t.

Barcel.a, its trade, riche and privi-

leges at the close of the fifteenth cen-
tury, 361.

B;rers their independence, and mutual

hotlTiitiesuder the feudal lyrem. 16.
How affe ed by the iDfrarhiferment
i ciifre, 34. Acquire a participation
in Iegiflative governmert, 37 T eir
rriatte wa.r so, redrefi cf perlonal in-
i.-;er, 4r- Met.ods employed to a-
b. lb these conterIlor., 46. Origin
es their uipreme and independent ju-
ri.:tion, c8. The bad effeas result-
ine from these pr.vilrges, 59. The
steps taken by Princes to reduce their
courts, 60. Hw obliged to relin-
quofi b her judicial preiegaties. 69.
Of Italy, fu4bjred to munic-pal law.,
153. KNte xv. Their ribt of territo-
rial jurifdidion epiained, 311. Their
emolurment from caufee decided in
their courts, ib.

BeauJrs, under the feudal fylem, a

hillory of, 123. When they became
hereditary, z35.

~5, an inquiry into the materials of

the ancient ones, 138. The Loss of
old manufcripta accounted for, 139.
The great prices they fold for in an-
cient times, 140.

BSrrsmgs. representatives of, how intro-

duced into nationaL councils, 38.

Srita, ancient, their d.ftrefs and dejec-

tion when ieferted by the Roman,
and harafed by the Pid and Caledo-
nians. 199, iote i.

erc:tertsd If Gcl, an accouot of that

affoliation for extimguilhiog private
wars, aS

JBrser, how it became the chief mart

for Italian commodities daring the
middle ages 344-

Br.assy. Mary, heiress of, the impor-

tame with wh ch her choice in a bus-
band was confidered by all Europe,
1o5. The treacherous vews of Lewis
XI. of France towards her, o07. Is
married to the Archduke Maxim;iian,
o18. The influence ot this match on
the fate of Europe, óA.

C

Cafar, his accooot of tle ancient Ger-

manD, comrared vith that of Tacitur,
1.1).

Calatrava, military order of, in Spain,

zealous to employ their prowefr in
defence of the honours of the Virgin
Mary, 364. The vow used by there
knights, ,b.

Cambray, treaty of, its object, 118.

The confederacy dissolved, izl.

Cam.c Law, an enquiry into, 63. Pro-

grefsof ecclefiftical ufurpationi, 64.
The maxims of, more equitable thtn
the civil courts of the miudle ages,
65

CaJfie, rife of the kingdom of, 148. Its

union with Aiagor, i. Its King
Henry IV. folemly tried and deposed
in an assembly o. the nobles, Ipi.
The uonilitution and government of
that kiigdom, 55 A biftorv of the
Cortes .f, and its priviieeee, 156.
The kingdom originally elective, 358,
Nsle xxxiii.

Catal/ia, the fpiri:ed behaviour of the

people there in defence of their rightas
against their King John I1 of Aragon,

'51. CcaJialis, a species of the Oblati, or vo-
luntary fives, the obl gations they
e-tereo into defribed, 277.

Ce-ateart, or inferior judges in the mid-

die ages, the extraordinary oath re-
quired from them, 339.

Camtsp tde Marr, andde ai, ccount of

tholfe afemblie of the ancient Gauls,
369.

Coarlemage, his law to prevent private

wars for lediefa of perlonal injuries,
46, a85. State of Germany under his
defcendantm 175.

Cbaries IV. Emperor, difipates the Im-

perial domains, 390.

- --- V. Emperor, an emulator of

the heroick conduc of his rival, Fran.
ces 1. 71. His future grandeur found-
ed on the marriage of the Archduke
Maximilian with the heiress of Bur-
gundy, lo8.

- -- Vll. of France, the firl who

introduced flanding armies in Europe,
94. His fucceltful extension of the
regal prerogative, 97.

----· VI. of France, his cbaraaer,

109. How induced to invade Italy, ib.
Hil resources and preparations for this
enterprize, l o. His rapid success,
a t. A combination of the Italian
fates formed against him, is. Is
forced to return back to France, ib.
The difireffed fste of his revenues by
thisexpedition, 118.

Clarlvtx, his account of the North

Amer can Indians, made use of in a
comnparifon between them and the an-
cient Gczslans, X14.

Ckarters,

Charters, of immunities or franchise, an

inquiry into the cature of those grant-
ed by the barons of France to the
towns under their jurifdidion, 257,
Note xvi. Of communities, granted
by the Kings of France, how they
tended to eflablifh regular government,
33, 158.

Chivalry, the origin of, 7o. Its benefi-

cial effeas on human manners, ib.
Theenfhufiafm ol, diRinguifhed from
its salutary consequences, 71.

CbrifJianiry, corrupted when i6rR brought

into Europe, 75. Its influence in free-
ing mankind from the bondage of the
feudal policy, 174, Note xx.

Circles of Germany, the occalion of their

being formed, 81a.

Cities, the ancient state of, under the

feudal policy, 31 The freedom of,
where sirs eflabli(hed, 31. Charters
of community, why granted in France
by Louis Ie Grol, 33. Obtain the
like all over Europe, ib. Acquire poe
litical consideration, 36.

Cltrgv, the progress of their ufurpati-

on., 64. Their plan of jurisprudence
more perfea than that of the civil
courts in the middle ages, ib. The
great ignorance of. in the early feudal
times of Europe, 138.

Clerima, dave to Willa, widow of Duke

Hugo, extras fiom the charter of ma-
numiffion, granted to her, 276.

Clrrmost, council of, resolves on the holy

war, 14 See Peter the hermit, and
Crusades.

Clotaire 1. instance of the small authority

he had over his army, 368.

Clotharias II. his account of the popular

assemblies among the ancient Gauls,
369.

Cloail, the founder of the French mo-

narchy, unable to retain a faced vase
taken by his army, from being diftri-
buted by lot among the reRf of the
plunder, 217, Nate vii.

Colleges, the firt ellablifhment of, in

Europe, 331.

Combat, judicial, the prohibition of, an

improvement in the adminifration of
justice, 47. The foundation and uni-
verfality of this mode of trial, 52.
The pernicious effects of, 54. Various
expedients for abolilhing this practice,
ib. The ancient Swedish law of, for
words of reproach, 298 Pufitive evi-
dence, or points of proof, rendered in-
effetual by it, 301. This mode of
trial authorized by the ecclefia(ticks,
304. The las inifances of, in the
histories of France and England, 305.

Commerce, the spirit of crnfading how far

favrurable tr, at that early period, 19.
The frtl eflabilhment offree corpora-
tion., 31. Charters of community why
pranted by Louis le Gros., 33. The
lIke pracice obtains all over Europe,
35. The salutary effect of thele in-
Rlitutions, ib. The low date of, du-
ring the middle ages, 78. Causer con-
tributing to its revival, tb. Promroed
by the Hanfeatick league, 80 Is cul-
tivated in the Netherlands, 81. Is in-
troduced into England by Edward III.
81. The beneficial coniequelces re-
fulting from the revival of, ib. The
early cultivation of, in Italy, 340.

Common Law, the firt compilation of,

made in England by Lord Chief Jus-
tice Glanville, 315.

Commnrties, fee Charters, Cities, Com-

merce, and Corporatioot.

Comrena, Anne, her charater of the

Crusaders, o50.

Compass, mariner's, when invented, and

its influence on the extension of com-
merce, 7 .

Compoftion for personal injuries, the mo-

tive for eftablilhing, 185. The cuf-
tom of, dedued from the pratice of
the ancient Germans, 306.

Compargators, introduced as evidence

in the jurisprudence of the middle
ag, s, 49.

Condottieri, in the Italian policy, what,

535.

Conrad, count of Franconia, how he ob-

tained eletion to the Empire, 175.

Conradin, the lalt rightful heir to the

crown of Naples of the houle of Swa-
bia, his unhappy fate, 14o.

Ceo.nlce, treaty of, between the Em-

peror Frederick Barbaroufl, and the
free cities of Italy, 256.

CoNi1antisople, its flouri(hing late at the

time of the Crusade, 16. When firit
taken by the Turks, sg9. The Cru-
faders how looked upon there, 150.
The account given of this city by the
Latin Writers, a s.

Cajnflittinls, popular, how formed, 36.
Cordova, Gonfalvo de, secures the crown

of Naples to Ferdinand of Aragon,
142.

Corporations, and bodies politick, the

ellablihments of, how far favourable
to the improvement of manners, 31.
The privileges of, were firR claimed,
31. Charters of community, why
granted by Louis Ie Grols in France,
ib. The inflitution of, obtains all
over Europe, 34. Their effeks, ib.

Corter,

Certn of Aragon, its coofitution and

privilrger 15:, 355.

C-sr of C.ltile, hbitry of, and an ac-

count ot its coltitotion and privileges,
156 The vigilance with which it
guarded its privileges agaift the en-
croachments of the regal power, ir.

GCrfJt, the fidt motives of undertak-

ing, ii. The enthufiAftick zeal with
which they were undertaken, 13.
Firit promcted by Peter the hermit,
%4. The fuccef of them. n S. The
consequence- resulting from them, ib.
Their effcai uo manners. ib. O
property, 16 How advantugeou to
the enlargement of the regal powcr of
the Europesc princes, 17. The com-
mercial effc. of, 19. 79. The uni-
Verfol frenzy f.r engaging in these ex-
prditions accuunted for, 143, Ntle xzii.
The privileges granted to those who
engaged in them, a4s. Stephen earl
of Chartres and Bloi, his account of
them, 147. The expencea of con-
duaing them, bhw raised, 148. Cha-
raer given of the Cru~ules by th
Greck writers, 1o.

D

Dh&, the first hint of ttaching move-

shles for the recovery of, derived irum
the cno~ law, 314.

Dertr, how coinUered in the rude and

tmple slate of society, 160

Dits of Germany, some acc-Ont of, 395.
DrSrsi in the different faculties difpnfe
pecedence with kaight, 331.

E

Ec.fufical jurisprudence, more perfect

is its plan than te civil comrt. of the
middle ager 64.

k;rckfiri, whben, and by what degrees

they climed excmption from civil ju-
ridia'ion, 311. Military talents cul-
tivated and exercised by thole of the
middle age., 318.

ZJ~ar 111. of Eng'and, his endaevonrs

to inroduce commerce into his king-
dom, 83.

Lt.eSrs of Gernm y, the rife of their pri-

vileges, s85.
Sb, St. his definition or description of
a good Cbrifian. 14, a11 te xi.

Emfer rs of Germany, an inquiry into

their frwer, jurifditon,. and revenue,
388, Nite alii. The ancient mode of
cledting them, 39:-

. LLzZ, a funmmiry view of the conteflt

between, and France, 89. The con-
fequnoces of it loring its continental
polc ins, 9a. he power of the

TO THE

crown, how extended, lo4. See lHerp
VII. Why so many marks of Saxon
osages and language, in comparifog
with those of the Normans, to be
found in, *oz. Nte iv. When cor-
porations began to be eflablifled in,
170. Inflances of the long continu-
ance of personal servitude there, 179.
Inquiry into the Saxon law for put-
ting an end to private wars, g90.
The canses of the speedy decline of
private warn there, pro.psed to the
refearhe f Antiquarians, 293. Thle
l)s inttances of judicial combat re-
corded in the hittory of, 305. The
territorial jariidiaion of the baions
how abolifed 319. Canfe of the
flow progrelf of commerce there, 346.
The lrft commercial treaty entered
into by, 348.

Eideace, the imperfeQ nature of that

admitted in law-proceedings during
the mddle ages, 48. Rendered inef-
fedlal by the judicial combat, 301.

Erp.t, the alteraiions in, by the cor-

'quoet of tie Romans, 2. The im-
provements the nations of received in
exchbsge for their'liberties, i. Its
disadvantages ender this change of cir-
u6mftnces, 3. InqiL.ry into the sup-
posed populoufnels of the ancient
northir.p nations, The ravage de-
folations exercised by the Gothb, Van-
dals' and Huns, . The 'universal
Fhange occaloned by their irruptions
and conqueflt, so The firA rudi-
ments of the prcfent policy of, to be
dednced from this period, I . Origin
of the feudal fylfem, 13. See Fredal
S;te. The general barbaiinm intro-
duced with this policy, 18 ' At what
time government and manners began
to improve, a.' The caufeb and e-
vent which contributed to this' im-
provement, i. ' ee Crfades, Corf-
ratie, Pelre. The mileries occafi-
oned by private watr in, 45. Methoda
taken to'fpptefs them, it. Judicial
combats prqbibited, 47. The defeas
of judicial proceedings in the middle
ages, 48.' The infuence of fuperfli-
tion in there proceedings, 5o. The
origin of the independent territo-
rial jnrifdiaiona ot the baroas, 57.
bad consequences of 'their judicial
power, 59. The flepa taken by
princes to abolifi their courtr, 6o.
An inquiry into the canon law, 63.
Revival of the Roman law, 67. Es-
seas of the spirit of chivalry, 70. How
improved 'by the progrefa of fciec~
and cultivatio of literature, 73

Cbhrti~aiy

Chriftianty corrupted when frft re-
ceived in, 71. Scbolatick theology
the frft objea of learning in, 7 5. Low
late of commerce in, during the mid-
dle ages, 78. Commerce revives il
Italy, 79. Is promoted by the Hanfe-
stick league, 8o. Is cultivated in the
Netherlands, 81. The effeas of the
progreft of commerte, on the polishing
of manners, 82. The effeas of the
marriage of the heiress of Burgundy
with the archduke Maximilian, on the
Rate of, go8. By what means iand-
ing forces became general in, 114.
Consequences of the league ot Cam-
bray to, t 8. A view of the political
confitution of the several lates of, at
the commencement of the sixteenth
century, Ix3. Italy, t15. The pa-
pacy, i.. Venice, 134. Florence,
137. Naples, 138. Milan, 141. Spain,
145. France, 167. Germany, 174.
Turkey, 189. Intances of the small
intercourse among nations in the mid-
die ager, 334, 335.

F

Fie/dm, the etymology of that word, 13t.
Fordiwald, King of Aragon, unites the

Spandh monarchy by his marriage
with Isabella of Castile, 48. His
schemes to exalt the regal power, 161.
Resumes tormer grants of land from
his barons, 166. Unites to the crown
the grand mafter(hips of the three mi-
litary order, ib. Why he patronized
the association called the Hoy1 Brother.
bsed, againli the barons, 165

Ftedal fyltem, the origin of, deduced,

13. The primary obje& of this policy,
14. Its deficiencies for interior go-
verment, 15. Tenures of land, how
eftablihed under, 16. The rife of
intelline difcordb among the barons un-
der, ib. The servile Rate of the peo-
ple, ib. The weak authority of the
King, 17. Its influence on the exter-
nal operations of war, ib. The gene-
ral extincion of all arts and Iciences
effeaed by, 18. Its operaton on re-
ligion, 19. Its influence on the cha-
raCer of the human mind, to. At
what time government and manners
began to be improved, it. The
caules and events which contributed to
this improvement, 2. See Crajader.
The ancient nate of cities under, 31.
The frame of national councils under
this policy, 36. How altered by the
progrefl of civil liberty, 37. An in-
quiry into the adminiflration ofjullice
under, 4. Private war, 43. Judicial

combat, 47. The independent jrif-
diaions of the-barons, 58. The dii-
tinaion between free men and valfals
under, to. How frsngers werecon-
fidered and treated under, 338.

Fieft, under the feudal fyfnem, a hiRory

of, 221. When they became heredi-
tary, 225.

Fitszierbrt, observations on his account

of the Rate of London, at the time of
Henry I. 170.

Flamaer. See Nelterlaids.
FPirence, a view of the confRitution of,

«t the commencement of the sixteenth
century, 137. The influence acquir-
ed by Cosmo di Medici in, ib.

Frface, by what means the towns in,

f6rf obtained charters of community,
33. Ordinances of Louis X. and his
brother Philip in favour of civil liberty,
40. Methods employed to fupprcfs
private wars, 46 St. Louis attempts
to discountenance judicial combat, 55.
A view of the conteRt between, and
England, 90. The consequences of
its recovering its provinces from Eng-
land, 91. The monarchy of, how
firengthened by this event, 93. The
The rife of sanding forces in, 94.
The regal prerogative trengthened by
this measure, 95. The extension of
the regal prerogative vigorously pur-
sued by Louis XI. 98. See Laii XI.
The effecs of the invasion of Italy by
Charles VII. og9. See Charls VIII.
National infantry efablifhed in, 116.
L-ague of Cambray formed againfl the
Venetians, so. Battle of Ghiarrad-
adda, ib. An inquiry into its ancient
government and law%, 167. The
power of the general alfemblies under
the firR race of Kings, ib. Under the
second and third, ib. The regal nou.rr
confined to the King's own domains,
169. When the general assembly or
lates general los their leginlative au-
thority, ib. When the Kings began
to assert their legilative power, 170.
When the government of, became
purely monarchical, t7t. The regal
power nevertheless relrained by the
privileges of the nobility, ib. An in-
quiry into the jurifdiclion of its par-
liaments, particularly that of Paril,
172. How the allodial property or
land there was altered into feudal, 128.
The progrefa of liberty in that kingdrno
traced, z71, ANot xix. The attemrts
to etabli(h liberty there unfuccel.ful,
173. The la inflance of judicial
combat recorded in the hiltory of, 305.
The prese t government of, compared

with

with that of antent Gaul, 367. KAte
xzzrTii. The fatecs-general, when first
assembled, 374.

F,.stn, I of France, his charater in-

fluenced by the (pirit of chivalry, 71.
is emauated by the Emperor Charles
V. b.

FrfLrri Barbarofla, Emperor, the free

cit:'e of Italy unate against him, 156.
Treaty of Conflance with them, Jb.
WVs the £rft who granted privileges
to the cities in Germany, 267.

fretrs, in the antient German usages,

explained, 307

Frearh bow diftirnguihed from valfals,

under the feudal polic, 1zo, 235.
Why often induced to surrender their
freedom, and become naves, 136;

Fercbrims Carotenfis, his charader of

the city of Conflantioople, 250.

Gacl, how allodial property of land was

changed into feudal there, tz8. The
government of, compared with that of
modern France, 367, Note xxxviii.
The small acthbrity the Kings of,
enjoyed over their armies illustrated
in an anecdote of Clotaire I. 368.
Account of the popular assemblies of,
369. The salic la.s how enaced,
370. Were not subjea to taxation,
37t. See Fra,vce

Ge.rrey de Ydlesrdsaia, his account of

the magnificence of Confantinople at
the time when taken by the Crusaders,

Cer~ar, ancient, an account of their

usages and .ay of life, irl. Their
method of enagir.g in war, :b. A
comparison between them and the
I;orth American Idinan., 114 Why
they had no citiri, 266, ;:te xvii.
The praitice of compounding for per-
fo.al injcries by finer, dcduced Irum
their utagec. 3c6.

Germ *y, lirtle 'nrerefed in foreign con-

cern; at the ueginnir.g .f the fifteenth
century 90g Natonial infantry eRa-
blflheo in, 106. Srae of under Char-
lemagne and hii dc.Cendant, 174.
Conrad, count .,f Franconia, chrtln
Empeior, 175 H;s fucceiTors in the
Imperial digityy. i3. How the nibi-
lity of, acquired in.erpndent fovreeign
anthor t, 176. The fatal effe, of
*gg-andzing the clergy in. 17. l he
contefl between th, Em. eror Henry
IV. and Pope Gregory VII. 17i Rile
of the fadion, of Guclft and Ghibe-
lines, 179- Decline of the Imperial
autority, ib. The houfc of Aufria,

by whom founded, ib. A total change
in the political conltitution of the Em-
pire, IRo. The (late of anarchy in
which it continued to the time of
Maximilian, the immediate predecessor
of Charles V. ib. Divided into circles
18t. The Imperial chamber infiitut-
ed,-ib. The Aulic council reformed,
s1a. A view of its political conltitu-
tion at the commencement of the en-
fning hiflory, ib. Its defe&t pointed
out, 183. The Imperial dignity and
power compared, 184. Eleaion of
the Emperors, 1.85 The repugnant
forms of civil policy in the several
States of, 186 The opposition be-
tween the fecolar and ecclefialical
members of, 187. The united body
hence incapable of sting with vigour
t88. When cities firfi began to be
built in, z66, NAte xvii. When the
cities of, first acquired municipal pri-
vileges, 167. The artiz&rs of, when
infianchifed, x68. Immediate cities
in the German jnrifprudence, what,
ib. The great calamities occasioned
there by private wars, 2g5. Origin
of the league of the Rhine, ib. When
private wars were finally abolished
there, 296. Inquiry into the power,
jurifdiaion, and revenue of its Empe-
rors, 388, Note xlii. The ancient
mode of elecing the Emperors, 392.
Accr unt of the diets, 395.

Gbibeliaes. See GCelfs.
Gbiarradadda, the battle of, fatal to

the Venetians, 1o.

GClavile, Lord Chief Justice, the first

who crmpiled a body of common law,
in al Eu:ope, 325.

GstCs, Vandals, and Huns, over-run the

Roman empire, and precipitate its
dawnfal, 3. The aate of the coun-
tries from whence they issued, 4. The
motives of their sirs excursions, 5.
How they c¢me to fettle in the coun-
tries they conquered, 6. A compari-
son drawn between them ard the Ro-
mans, 2t the period of their irruptions,
7 &? q. Compared with the native
Amer[cans, 9. The defoltions they
occasionri in Europe, b. The uni-
re-lt! cE.age mase by them in the
Itate of Europe, so. The principles
on which they made their settlements
i 0 Oigin of the feudal l)lem, i3.
See FcvdalSjfie. An inquiry into
the amniftratiou of jultlce among,
41. heir private was,43 DeRroy
the monuments oithe Roman arts, 73.
Their contempt of the Romans, and
hatred of their arts, '99, Nate ii.

Their

Their aversion to literature, ib. No
authentic account of their origin, or
ancient biftory, existing, oo.

Gmveratmet, how limited by the feudal

policy, .15 The effels of the Cru-
fades on, 17. How affeced by the
infranchifement of cities, 35. Legis-
lative assemblies how formed, 37
Private wars deltruotive to the autho-
rity of, 46. Methods empl yed to
abolish this hostile mode of redressing
injuries, 6. Huw affeaed by the fu-
preme independent jurifdiaions ot the
barons, 58. The Iteps toward abo-
lilhing them, 60. The origin and
growth of royal courts of juflice, 6x.
How influenced by the revival of fci-
ence and literature, 77. A view of,
at the beginling of the fifteenth cen-
tury, 8S. The power of Monarchs
then very limited, 86. Their reve-
nues small, i6 Their armies unfit
for conquest, ib. The Princes hcpce
incapable of extensive plans of opera-
tion, 88. The kingdoms very little
conneced with each other, 89. How
the efforts of, from this period, be-
came more powerful and extensive,
92. The conlequences of E gland
losing its provinces in France, 93.
The schemes of Louis XI. of France
to extend the regal power, 98. See
Le.wi XI. The power of the English
crown enlarged, 104. See enry VII.
As also that of Spain, ib. How the
use of (landing armies became general,
114. A view of the political conlti-
tution of the several Rates of Europe,
at the commencement of the sixteenth
century, 125. In what refpetAs the
charters of communities, granted by
the Kings of France, tended to intro-
duce a regular form of, 158.

Greece, the breeding of silk-worms, when

introduced there, 341.

Greek Emperors, their magnificence at

Contlantinople, 150.

Gregory of Tours, remarks on the slate

of Europe during the period of which
he wrote the history, a1.

Gregcry the Great, P'pe, his reason foi

granting liberty to his naves, 175.

Gregory VII. Pope, the foundation o

his contests with Henry IV. Emperol
of Germany, 178. The mean lub
mission he extorted from Henry, ib
His own account ot this affair, 387.

Gcelf, and Ghibelines, rife of those sac

tions in Germany, 179.

GCicciardisi, the billoriar, instance o

his fuperltitious reverence fur Pope
Cliemet VII. 134, Noit.

Guttheras, a Monk, his charader of

Contantinople, at the time when ta-
ken by the Crusaders, s0o.

H

Haafeatick league, when formed, and its

influence on the extension of com-
merce, 81. 346.
Ienry IV. of CaRile, solemnly tried and

depoled by an assembly of Caftilia
nobles,. S't.

-- Emperor of Germany, the hn-

miliating Rate to which he was redu-
ced by Pope Gregory VII. 178, 357,
Note xli.

- VII. of England, his situation at

his acceflion to the crown, 103. En-
ables his baron, to break their entails
and fell their eRate., 104. Prohibits
his barons keeping retainers, ib. En-
courages agriculture and commerce,
ih.

Herebuanan, the nature ofthis fine un-

der the feudal pilicy, explained, 21t.

Heroandad, Santa, account of that in-

ftitulion, 366.

Hi/flry, the most calamitous period of,

pointed out, to.

Holy Brotherhood, an afrociation in Spain

under that name, on what occafon
formed. 164.

- Land, the original inducements of

the ChriRians to rescue it from the
hands of the Infidels, t2. See Cru-
fade, and Peter the Hermit.
onr, points of the ancient Swedilo
law for determining, ai9.

Hofpitalitr, enforced by IRatutes during

the middle ages, 335.

Hans, instance of their enthufiaftick pas-

sion for war, o01, Note iii. Som ac-
count of their policy and manners,
so5, a . See Got8s.

1.

aniezries, origin and formidable nature
of those troops, 19z

Imperial chamber of Germany, infitut-

ed, tit. The occasion of its intli-
tution, iS.

Indians, North American, a comparifoa

drawn between them and the ancient

f Germans, 1,4.
r Iadratr,, the Ipirit of, how excited by

the infranchilements of cities, 35.
nfantry, the advantages of, beyond ca-

valry, taught to the relt of Europe by
the Swifr, !S5. National bodiea of,
eftablilied in Germany, i 16. Ia

~f France and Spain, ib.
eInberitance, and right of representation,

between orphan grandsons and their

uncle«,

nles, bow decided in the tenth can- baron courts, 60. The growth of
tqy, 300. royal courts of juilice, 61. Inquiry
Ltnr of money, the necessity of ad- it the canon law, 63. How im-
miting. in a commercial view, 341. proved by the revival of the Roman
Prepofieroudy condemned by the law, 66. When the adminiitratio
churchmen of the middle ages, 343- of, became a diftina profefBon, 69.
The cause, hence, of the eiorbitant 7«flir,, or fopreme judge of Aragon,
eracisns of the Lombard bankers, i6. his office and privileges, 153. An

Il/.s, when the cities of, began to form inquiry by whom this officer was eled-

tbemfelvea into bodies politick, 31. ed, 348. Who was eligible to this
Commerce first impoved there, and office, 350. Nature of the tribuilal
the reasons of it, 78. The revolo- appointed to controul his adminifira-
tions in Europe occlinned by the in- tion, 35. Inflance of hit extetqive
vaho of, by Charle VIIL of Frace; power, 351.
to09 The fRte of, at the time of
thisinraoa, io. Therapidfocces K
of Charles, i%. A combination of JXI*, his power how circumscribed by
the fate of, drives Charles out of, and tre bsrons, under the feudal system,
gives birth to the balance of power in 16. By what means the Crusades
Europe, a3. The political situation tended to enlarge the regal authority,
of, at the commencement of the fix- 8.
teetb century, tzS. The papacy, r, itt influence in checking the S.
sa6. Venice, 134 Florence, 37. tans of the Ottoman empire, 191.
Naples, 138. Milan, 4z. Evidencea
of the desolation made there by the L
northern invadr of the Roman Em- Lif, how held at the eftablilbment of
pire, to7. How the cities of, oh- the feudal system, 14. See Fa.lA
tained their municipal privileges, %t%, Sjycm.
V rr . State of, under Frederick I. - the property of, how confidered
53- Treat of Coollance, between b the ancient barblrous nation, iS.
the free cities of, and the Emperor Nte viii.. Allodial poeflion of, ex-
Frederick Barbroffa, 156. plained, 1i9. The proprietors how

7ltgsrt of God, modes of acquittal by, fubjeaed to military service, ió. Al-

in the law proceedings during the lodial and beneficiary poffeflon diltin-
middle ages, 5o, 196, Nate xli. guilbed, nao. Allodial property why
7 cums Cn~i, method of trial by, 196. generally converted into feudal, 117.

shr 11 Pope, forms a confederacy Lr, when the fludy of it became a
ageio~n the Venetians at Cambray, I 9. diftin ernploryment, 69.
Siies part oftheVenetian territories, - Canon, an inquiry into 63. The
iso. The confederacy difolved, 1 . maxims of, more equitable than the
Trns his schemes againf France, i. civil courts of the middle ages, 65S

7rifprvA ce, ecclefiatlical, more per- When firt compiled, 313.

fed in its plan than the civil courts of - Roman, bow it funk into oblivion,
the midle ages, 46. See La. 66. CircumRances which favoured

7.fice, an inquiry into the admnllration the revival of it, 67. Its effes in

of, uder the feudal policy, 41. The improving the adminifiration of jus-
steps toward the improvement of, as tice, ió. It& rapid progref over Eu-
civil liberty advanced, 43. Redress rope, 314s Nlte xxv.
chiedy purlned by private wars, 44 Latb.rrevl, in the Scottilh law, ex-
Methods taken to suppress privte plained, 259

ar,-46. Judicial combas prohibit- L.bertj, civil, the tire ani progress of,
ed, 47. The defeas of judical pro- traced, 31. How favoured by the
ceedings in the middle ager, 48. ordinances of Luis X. of Prance, and
Compurators, the nature of that kind his brother Philip, 40. The spirit of,
of evidence, 49. Methods of trial by how excited in France, 171, NIte xix.
ordeal, or acquital by Judgment ,f The particulart included in the char-
God, 5o. Origin of the supreme in- ters of, granted to husbandmen, Z74,
dependent jurifdiaions of the feudal NVte xx. The influence of the Chris-
baroos, 57. The extent and bad tian religion in extending, 175. The
effecs of their privileges. 59. The several opportunitiesof obtaining, z79
Leps taken by monarchs to reduce the Llmaser

LiaMn, couil of, its endeavour to

extinguil private wars, 186.

Literalar., the cultivation of, greatly

instrumental in civilizing the nationsof
Europe, 73. Why the frft efforts of,
ill direced, 74. The good effees e-
verthelefs of the spirit of intuiry ex.
erted, 7. How checked in its pro-
grefs, 76. Its influence op manners
and government, 77.

Lit ar, the preference between the

Mularabic, and Romihi, how ascertain-
ed in Spain, 301.

Limbardr, the sirs bankers in Europe,

341. The motive of their exacing
exorbitant interelt, 343.

Loedn, it flouri(ting iate at the time

of Henry II, 17s.

Lrnt le GrofT, of France, his induce.

ments to grant privileges to towns
within bis own dominionO, 33. See
Charter#.

Luir, St. the great attention he paid to

the adminifration of jutlice, in ap-
peals which came before him, 316.

Lotis X. of France, his ordonances in fa-

vour of civil liberty, 49.

Leis XI. of France, his charater, 98.

His fchemne for deprcfing the nobility,
ib. Sow divisions among them, loo.
Increases the flanding forces, ib. En-
larges the revenues of the crown, aot.
His address in overruling the assembly
of tates, ib. Extends the bounds of
the French monarchy, ion. The ac-
tivity of his external operations, ib.
His treacherouo baseness towards the
heirefa of Burgundy, o16. The es-
seas of his condut, 1o8.

Loair XII. his hesitation in carrying on

war against the Pope, 133. Note.
Afrerts his right to the dutchy of Mi-
Ian, and retains Ludovico Sfort in
prison, 144.

M.

.lawfred, his fruggles for the crown of

Nsples, 139.

iMafAkis, the nmo calamitous period in

the history of, pointed out, lo.
fairerr, the barbarity of, under the
feudal eftcabihmintr, after the over-
throw of the Roman empire, 18.
When they began to improve, 1i.
Ef'c&s of the Crusades ono i. How
improved by the infranchifement of
ities, 36. How improved by the
erearon of royal courts of jutlice, in
opposition to the barons courtr, 61.
Effeas of the revival of the Roman
law on, 66. The beneficial tendency
VOL. 1.

of the Ipiritofchivalry on, 70. How
Influenced by the progrefa of science,
.73, 77. How poliUhed by the revival
of commerce, 81.

MAfanmifa, particular inclpded in the

charters of, granted to hoflbadmed
or aves, 174, Nltt xx. The form
of, 175.

MaxiSmiliar, archuke of uftria, mar-

ried to Mary heirefa of Burgundy, tl8.
The influence of this match on the
state of Europe, ib.

Maximiliau, Emperor, intitutea the Im-

perial chamber, 81t. Reforms the
Aulick council, 181.

Medici, Cosmo di, the firR of the name,'

the influene he acquired in Florence,
537.

Milan, the fate of the duchy of, at the

commencement of the sixteenth cen-
tury, 141. Rife and progress of the
difpules concerning the succession to,
il.

Mfind, the human, a view of, under the

sirs eftblilhmcent of the feudal policy
in Europe, io. The ara of its ulti-
mate depreflion, and commencement
of its improvement, a1. The pro-
grefs of in operations, before the full
exertion of it, 73.

Miaisierialis, a claf of the Oblati, or

voluntary aives, the pious motives of
the obligations they entered into, %78.

MpWor, make a conquest of Spain, 146.

By what means weakened during their
eftablifiment there, 147. Remarks
on their conduct in Spain, 49.

Mnricipal priiilegeo, how obtained by

the cities of Italy, ag. NVote xv.
Secured to them by the treaty ot Con-
fance, in6. The favoqrite fate of,
under the Rouan government, 165.

N..

Nplóe:r, a view of the constitution of

that kingdom, at the commencement
of the ixteenth century, 138. The
turbulent unsettled Rate of that king-
dom, 139. State of the disputes con-
cerning the fucceflion of the crown of,
ib. The pretensions of the French
and Spanihb msonarchs to the crown of,

141. Narbrase, community of, preamble to
the writ of lummons of Philip the
l.ong to a, No7, te xix.

Navigatisn, proof ot the imperfe& tat

of, during the middle ages, 344.

Neltbrlandr, vigorous profccution of the

manufatures of wool and flax ther:,'
Ee :l

ethe eemieal of c erce in Europe,
m.
2~,.r why so few trle of their

l asdend hape to be buda in

all il rm eaarif with those of
dso Sas sat. Nite iv.

0.

edi er voluary f ve, the clais

i, e~id, 177.-
Orula, methods of tril by, during the

dde ges 50o The influence of

fapediti in ditting thee mer,
St.
O., Fri~agen i, his account of the

oate of Italy unr d er Fredrk L 13.

Ortasa empire, the origin and defpo-

tick mure of, 8. Bccome fomi-
dabl to the Chrifin powers, 194.

P.

PoaPo. See PtdA.
Prpcr, wra fir made of the present

sterib, 141.
rir ta i quiry ioto the pre-emment
jrio of its parliament over the
other piraments of France, 17, 173.
lts ori trcd 31. Nte xL The
oyl edias regitered by, before d-
miled to be laws 384.
Prmestr, . or legifiatve afermblies

bow armed ner the feudal policy,
36. w altered by the proref of
civ limerty, 37.
tt their wretched servile arte under
te feudal fyIem, i, 39. Releascd
frm their lavri tlate by the infran-
chblfmant of.cities, 34. How they
obuined a representation in national
coails, 38. Those who li-vd in the
coutry and culliated :he ground, an
inqiry into their condition under the
fedal policy, 131. NVte ix.
erfa, murder in, how puni(ied there,
309.

Peter the Hermit. excites the Eurorean

Priccr to undertake the Holy War,
24-

- IV. King of Aragon, defeats the

leader of the Aragonele union, and
defroys the privilege of these afsci;a-
tos0, 354, 355;

Pihbp the Loeg, preamble to his writ of

fammoo s to the community ot Nar-
boane, 11. Arte lis.
ib.ckpsj. cultivated by the Arabint,
whien los in Europe, 331. )Nte xxviii.
Its prgrefs from tiem into Europe, ib.
Plgfmgrs to the Holy if.d. when fir:

cudertaken, 11. See Crj.Jde, and
Pr!er tt lit, i.t
F)Icrwtcste, ,LLc(l of, the H')' War re-

solved on hy, 14. See Peter tit Sr-
wit, and Crfss.
PuInrr, how divided among the ancient

nortern nations, L Illftrrated in
an anecdot of Clovis, 17. Nute vii.

Poperw, the bigher dignity'in Europe

at the commencement of the sixteenth
century, tag. Origin and progreft of
the papal power, z16. The territo-
ries of the Popes unequal to the fop-
port of their spiritual jurifdiaion, if.
Their authority in their own territo.
ries extremely limited, 17. The
check they received from the Roman
baronr, 118. Nicolas Kienao attempts
to efabliis a democratical government
in Rome, and to destroy the papal ju-
rildifion, 129 The papal authority
considerably frengthened by the Popes
Alexander VL and Julius II. 130. See
7,lis 1l. The permanent nature of
ecclefiftical dominion, 3i. The civil
Idminitration of, not uniform or con-
fitent, 31. Rome the school of po-
litical inrrigue during the sixteenth
century. if. The advantages derived
from the union of spiritual and terp-
poral authority, t.13 A view of the
contefh between the Popes and the
Emperors of Germany, 178.

Pplsaufeis oft the ancient northern na-

tiona, an nquiry into, 4.

Prifcie, extra& from his account of the

Roman embaffl to Attila King of the
Hun%, ant. Nrte iii.

Prwui.u, his account of the cruel de-

vitiation of the northern nations. Note
V. 1ot, 103.

]srl,, the pofifbfion of, how secured

by the French chtrters of comrnmui-
tier, a1o.

Presitiri, in the Venetian policy, their
ofice, 335.

R.

iRelgiar, how corrupted by the northern

nations eflabilhed in Europe under
the feudal policy, *9. Iti influence
in freeing mankind trom the feudil
servitude, 175.

Rrpledfis., the right of, in the law of

Scotiand, explained, 313.

Repriocl, words of, the ancient Swedi(s

law of fatisfa ion for, 198.

Revesre, royal, very small under the

feudal policy, 89. By «w.at meansin-
cresaed, 118.

Ridse, origin and intention of the league

of, 195.

Rriear, Nicholas endeavours to rescue
Rome from the Pparl authority, and

eRltblil

eflablimh a democratical form of go-
vernment there, 129.

ReSbter the anathema pronounced a-

gainft them during the middle ages,
340.
.Rodop of Hapfrurgh, how he attained

elecion to the Empire of Germany,
'79.

Raimai, in inquiry into those advantages

which enabled them to conquer the
reft of Europe, a. The improvements
they communicated in return for their
conquefr, ib. The disadvantages the
provinces laboured under, from their
dominion, ib. Their Empire over-
turned by the irruption of the barba-
rou nations, 3. The concurrent
cafoes of their ruin, g. A compari-
son drawn between them and the
northern nations, t. All the civil
arts eftabilhed by them obliterated,
;8. The monmrients of their arts
indultrioully destroyed by their barba-
rous invaders, 73.

Rete, papal. See sdsaF .
oeyao truce, an account of, 180,

S.

8alic laws, the manner in which they

were enae~d, 370.
fs.xar, why so many trace of their laws,

language and cufloms to be found in
England, 2o1. Notr iv. Inquiry into
their laws for putting in end to pri-
vate wa'r, 291.

&irece, the revival and progress of, how

far infirumental in civilizing the nati-
ons of Europe, 73. A summary view
of the reviral and progrefr of in Eu-
rope, 330. Nltr xxviii.

Sfrsia, Francis, the foundation of his

pretndion. to thedutchy of Milan, 144.
Is murdered by his uncle Lodovico, i.

SJseo., Ludovico, his private views in

engsging Cha let VIII. of France to
invade tsly, 109. See Charles VIII.
Murders his nephew Francis, and
feizea Milan, 144. Is Rripped of his
dominions by Louis XII. of France,
and dies in prison, 145.

Slifirecks. the rightl lords of manors

ciiim to, whence derived, 337.

Silk, the rarity of, and the high paice it

bore in ancient Rome, remarked, 341.
The breeding of silk worms, when in-
troduced into Greece, ib.

SIaeas, letters of, in the law of Scotland,

what, 309.

Slaws under the feudal policy, their

wretched late, 131. Oblati, or vo-
luntary naves, the several clafles of,
177.

&ScitrJ, civil, the rude fate of, under

the feudal eftablilmnente after the
downfall of the Roma n Empire, rg.
The influence of the Cruftdes on, *6.
How improved by the eftablifiunentof
municipal communities, 30. The es-
feat the infranehifements of the peo-
ple had on 41. Private wars how de-
ftruCive to, 45. These intestine hof-
tilities, how fupprefed, 46. The ad-
minifiration ofjlftice improved by she
prohibition of judicial combts, 47.
The growth of royal courts of jusaie,
in opposition to the barons courts, 61.
How advanced by the revival of the
Roman law, 66. The effects of the
spirit of chivalry in improving, 70.
The revival of commerce and its in-
fluences, 76.

SllmaOt, Sptan, his character, 191.
pin, a summary view of its fituaion,
at the commencement of the fifteenth
century, 73. The power of the crown
of, how extended by Ferdinand, o04.
National infantry etablifled 'in, s8.
Is conquered by the Vandals, 46. and
after by the Moors, 47. The empire
of the Moors in, how weakened, ió.
Rife of the kingdoms of Calile and
Aragon, t48. Their union into the
Spanih monarchy, ii. The ancient
customs Rill retained amidlt all its re-
volutions, it. Pecularities in its con-
flution and laws remarked, 149. See
draeg and CoJ.il. Various caufle
which contributed to limit the regal
power in, 158. The lties of, bow
they attained to their consideration and
power, i 59 The schemes of Ferdi.
sand and fisbella, to exalt the regal
power, 161. The grand mafler(hiis
of the three orders annexed to the
crown. 16z. The association of the
Holy Brotherkosd, on what occafiou
formed, t64. 'Ihe tendency of this
association to abri;,ge the teritorial ja-
rildiiionsof the brons, 165. The cri-
el devilations made by the Vandals,
in the inoafion of that province, ao3.
When the cities of, acquired munici-
pal privileges 6, 6, Nlte xviii. The
long continuance of the pra-ice of
private wars there, 193. The totsl
annual revenue of the nobility in the
time of Charles V. 360. An inquiry
into the origin of communities or frec
cities in, 36t.

St. oJag, the military order of, whea

and on what occiafon instituted, 36a.
Note xxxvi.

Stadirg armies. See rmies.
Stateo general of France, caules which

rendered

riede~i their u rity perfec., ed by the ccefaerte, ao. Diffolye'
aS. When they l their legisive the coafe ,

d . t. It rife and

*inty, if. Wh e S&t f an.ed, prge, Defed in its cooti
36. The fom of proca dgia tiem, te , 13S. The excellentc of its
5ii. naa*m l inaitutinu, 136. It extefive

&f~ eal of C and o, i commerce, i. .

a·co t drf te po f the bCa CrbLf- ifw ,rife of the amily of, in Miln,
de, 547 141.
as~ . ei nt f the ma t U

di. of the An oefoble to co-

Swedi lw of hamfitioe. for words trmuil tb d eercile of refl ow-
of reprnc, i . er, expli 3s

d i

T privilege ab-

nrSerr, a tatl Ct ed ,ud

sroted, ad gted Peter [V. il.

1hw tred dari the middl ges, Uurpionr, t ih rt cftbli: mea of
a-d _d thefed pdoicy, 337. i g , 33s.

& -lrcu,~ bao firdlin

bo ht -fom .

Ah 1r Europe, uad tb e critd TyWr, a comparile beme the mrn-
to Amrc~ 34'. er of euiwog e,'b bbarrous and
&LAa, Turki, their defpotick power, by cvilaed nais 9 Ho render-

9go. How terhdlel r~ede , .

9. ed feeble i itn opertio~ by the sec-

~lu itt b ilpr o in the legl pro-. di policy, i6. The pro~ieoa of
c p daring tbhe dd ages. ;t. sma, the molt bhoao ble is unci-
Wf, the f ieor diaplioc of their rilized natiao, 6(. The rife of ftad-
t.ro in the óftes ceotuy, 1 S. ing armies traced, . By what meas
Teach d~-rnim thed dv~ of fhding force became erl, A 14.

ry orerc , 116. lbThe fuperirity of iantry in, bow

-~tT.

.

. sht, i15, 16.

r , it cca Ms the acieGO - Wars, private, for the redreCg per-

m~dam~r with thba of COfr, onal injaries, under the feudal policy,
ILo. an inqiry into, 45. Jdicial So
F l and Land . sourc t of tbefe cat io. Nare

Ttsl . ahh l k. dthe brt literay xii. ' hbo ib'ded to theprivilege

pmf at the retivl of leeeipig in of eilas. O wht occi-
Ero ,m 74. M Unodrtk, r4. Who included,
rr~r GaL, m tcoot of, *S. or boad to engge in these dispute,
-r3, orib of, its oaernmt, Il», ah. . Who excluded from undertaking.
Tke defpt geaim of thsi goern- i3. The cril tpu r of profecut.

ent if. INooereditl nobi:ity in, ing them, i. Achmrooloical acrout
go. The utbority of the Safar, of the expedient made ule of, to so-
bow checked, 9s . OriginoftheJa- pref them, 8£4. Trerr of God an
nmer s 19r. Becomes formidab!e to accout of, a8S: BrodArrld f GC
he Chriafi Princes, 4. nrccount of, 88. iUjld r, ubt,

V.

. S?9 SaXo laws of Eoglsod for put-

rdA., their cruel o in

evafto in be gn to

d them, o9r Tbhe obti-

inafa* of Spain, o3. The haulk rzte atiachmeit of the Spaniard to
me by them in Afria, ,4. See this pratice. 193.. The calamities

*Oath. occfia6ed in Genrmay b 94.

rJ w uader the feudal frem, a view r4Ib, ncient, firugers killd with im-

.f their fs.iBr cood~iio, 39. How puoiti by them, 337.
Ihb eobhri indfrmchifem t, 40. W;ig, widow of duke Hugo, extraL
How aciently difiloaihedf from e- fom her chtrter of manumission,
me, st. Tbeir wretched late an- granted to Cleriz, one of her flves,
der their fedal maten, 13Ns . MNt ix.l 6.

rrr., the lon duratio of in citil c- W lrr , rchbilhop o, Ty'e, his Sc-

Ilitaao, and its ourilhig fnte t count of Cooftntinople, X5S.
the time o the league of Cambry, Wirtitti , abbot, his tefimony in fa-
l:, nag. It pole~ difmmber- your of the judicial combat, 304.

END OF THE F

ST VOLUME.
