THE
HISTORY

OF THE
R E I G N

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES V.

VOL. II.

VOL. m.

) 1

- /

T'msarsi-

rht~r '
='n.~e~ ur

THE
HISTORY

OF THE
REIGN

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES V.

WITH
A VIEW of the PROGRESS of SOCIETY

in EURO E, from the Subversion of the Roman Empire,

to the Beginning of the Sixteenth Century.

IN THREE VOLUMES.

By WILLIAM ROBERTSON, D. D.

PRINCIPAL of the UNIVERSITY of EDINBURGH, and
H!ISTORIOGRAPHER to his MAJ ESTY for SCOTLAND.

A NEW EDITION.

V O L. IlI

D U B L IN:
Printed for W. WHITESTONE, W. SLEATER, M. HAY,

D. CHAMRERLAINE, J. POTTS, J. HOEY, L. L.

FLINN, J. WILLIAMS, W. COLLES, W.
WILSON, J. PORTER, W. HALLHEAD,

T. T. FAULKNER, and J. EXSIAw.

MDCCLXXVII.

# BOOK VII.

AL

THE
HISTORY

T H E
H I S T O R Y

OF THE
R E I G N

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES V.

BOOK VII.

T HE calamities which the Emperor fuf-BooKi.
T sered in his unfortunate enterprize againft-v-'-
Algiers were great; and the account of thefe,Re'541.
which augmented in proportion as it spread athotilitieBb
a greater distance from the scene of his dif-tranc,n
afters, encouraged Francis to begin hotilities, for i.
on which he had been for some time resolved.
But he did not think it prudent to produce, as
the motives of this resolution, either his ancient
pretensions to the dutchy of Milan, or the Em-
peror's difingenuity in violating his repeated
promises with regard to the restitution of that
country. The former might have been a good
ieafon against concluding the truce of Nice,
but was none for breaking it; the latter could
not be urged without exposing his own credulity
as much as the Emperor's want of integrity.
A violent and unwarrantable action of one of
the Imperial generals, furnished him with a rea-

VOL. III. B son

BoKVIl. son to justify his taking arms, which was of

V--'greater weight than either of these, and such
54 as would have roused him, if he had been as

desirous of peace as he was eager for war.
Francis, by signing the treaty of truce at Nice,
without consulting Solyman, gave (as he fore-
saw) great offence to that haughty Monarch,
who confidered an alliance with him as an ho-
nour of which a Christian prince had cause to
be proud. The French King's friendly inter-
view with the Emperor in Provence, followed
by such extraordinary appearances of union and
confidence as accompanied Charles's reception
in France, induced the Sultan to fufpet that
the two rivals had at last forgotten their ancient
enmity, in order that they might form such a
general confederacy against the Ottoman power,
as had been long wished for in Christendom, and
often attempted in vain. Charles, with his
usual art, endeavoured to confirm and strengthen
these suspicions, by inftruting his emissaries at
Constantinople, as well as in those courts with
which Solyman held any intelligence, to repre-
sent the concord between him and Francis to be
so entire, that their sentiments, views, and pur-
suits, would be the fame for the future'. It
was not without difficulty that Francis effaced
these impreflions; but the address of Rincon,
the French ambassador at the Porte, together
with the manifest advantage of carrying on hof-
tilities against the house of Austria in concert
with France, prevailed at length on the Sultan
to enter into a closer conjunction with Francis
than ever. Rincon returned into France, in
order to communicate to his master a scheme of
the Su!tan's, for gaining the concurrence of the
Venetians in their operations against the com-

mon
* Mem. de Ribier. tom. i. p. 502.

mon enemy. Solyman having lately concludedBooVlr.'
a peace with that republic, to which the media-'¥"
tion of Francis, and the good offices of Rincon 5
had greatly contributed, thought it not impof-
fible to allure the senate by such advantages, as,
together with the example of the French Mo-Themurder
narch, might overbalance any scruples arifingbfardor,;i.
either from decency or caution that could ope-pretext for
rate on the other fide. Francis, warmly ap-thi
proving of this measure, dispatched Rincon
back to Constantinople, and, directing him to go
by Venice along with Fregofo, a Genoese exile,
whom he appointed his ambassador to that re-
publick, empowered them to negociate the mat-
ter with the senate, to whom Solyman had sent
an envoy for the fame purpose'. The marquis
del Guafto, governor of the Milanese, an officer
of great abilities, but capable of attempting and
executing the most atrocious actions, got intel-
ligence of the motions and destination of there
ambassadors. As he knew how much his maf-
ter wished to discover the intentions of the
French King, and of what consequence it was
to retard the execution of his measures, he em-
ployed some soldiers belonging to the garrison
of Pavia to lie in wait for Rincon and Fregofo
as they failed down the Po, who murdered them
and most of their attendants, and seized their
papers. Upon receiving an account of this bar-
barous outrage, committed, during the sub-
fiftence of a truce, against persons held sacre dby
the most uncivilized nations, Francis's grief for
the unhappy fate of two servants whom he loved
and trusted, his uneasiness at the interruption of
his schemes by their death, and every other pas-
sion, were swallowed up and loft in the indigna-
tion which this insult on the honour of his crown

B 2 excited.
' Hill. de Venet. de Paruta, iv. 125.

Boo VII. excited. He exclaimed loudly againt Guafto,

'v' who, having drawn upon himself all the infamy
iS' of aflaffination without making any discovery of

importance, as the ambassadors had left their in-
flrutions and other papers of consequence be-
hind them, now boldly denied his being accef-
fary in any wife to the crime. He sent an ambaf-
fador to the Emperor, to demand suitable repa-
ration for an indignity, which no prince, how
inconsiderable soever or pusillanimous, could
tamely endure: And when Charles, impatient
at that time to set out on his African expedi-
tion, endeavoured to put him off with an eva-
five answer, he appealed to all the courts in
Europe, etting forth the heinousness of the in-
jury, the spirit of moderation with which he had
applied for redress, and the iniquity of the Em-
peror in disregarding this just requet.

NOTWITHSTANDING the confidence with

which Guafto asserted his own innocence, the ac-
cufations of the French gained greater credit than
all his protestations; and Bellay, the French
commander in Piedmont, procured, at length,
by his industry and address, such a minute de-
tail of the tranfafion, with the testimony of so
many of the parties concerned, as amounted al-
most to a legal proof of the marquis's guilt. In
consequence of this opinion of the publick, con-
firmed by such strong evidence, Francis's com-
plaints were universally allowed to be well found-
ed, and the steps which he took towards renew-
ing hostilities, were ascribed not merely to am-
bition or resentment, but to the unavoidable ne-
ceflity of vindicating the honour of his crown".

HOWEVER just Francis might esteem his
own cause, he did not trust so much to that, as

to
¢ Bellay, 367, &c. Jovii Hist lib.xl. 268.

to neglet the proper precautions for gaining BooVll.
other allies besides the Sultan, by whose aid he
might counterbalance the Emperor's superior '54'.
power. But his negociations to this effet were
attended with very little success. Henry VIII.
eagerly bent at that time upon schemes against
Scotland, which he knew would at once dissolve
his union with France, was inclinable rather to
take part with the Emperor, than to contribute in
any degree towards favouring the operations
against him. The Pope adhered inviolably to his
ancient system of neutrality. The Venetians,
notwithstanding Solyman's solicitations, imitated
the Pope's example. The Germans, satisfied
with the religious liberty which they enjoyed,
found it more their interest to gratify than to
irritate the Emperor; so that the Kings of Den-
mark and Sweden, who on this occasion were
first drawn in to interest themselves in the quar-
rels of the more potent Monarchs of the south,
and the duke of Cleves, who had a dispute with
the Emperor about the poffeflion of Gneldres,
were the only confederates whom Francis secured.
But the dominions of the two former lay at such
a distance, and the power of the latter was so in-
considerable, that he gained little by their alli-
ance.

FR ANCIS, however, supplied all defets by his Francis'bin-

own aivity. Being afflited at this time with drry.ing
a distemper, the effet of his irregular pleasures, for r,
and which prevented his pursuing them with the
fame licentious indulgence, he applied to bufi-
ness with more than his usual industry. The
fame cause which occasioned this extraordinary
attention to his affairs, rendered him morose and
difatisfied with the ministers whom he had hi-
therto employed. This accidental peevishness
being harpened by reflecting on the false

steps

BooKVII. feps into which he had lately been betrayed,

~

as well as the insults to which he had been
541 exposed, some of those inwhom he had hitherto

placed the greatest confidence felt the effects of
this change in his temper, and were deprived
of their offices. At last he disgraced Montmo-
rency himself, who had long directed affairs as
well civil as military with all the authority of a
minftler no less beloved than trusted by his maf-
ter; and Francis being fond of shewing that the
fall of such a powerful favourite did not asset
the vigour or prudence of his administration,
this was a new motive to redouble his diligence
in preparing to open the war by some splendid
and extraordinary effort.

H'4:. FRANCIS accordingly brought into the field

fie . r five armies. One to act in Luxembourg under
ito the the duke of Orleans, accompanied by the duke

of Lorraine as his inftru&or in the art of war.
Another, commanded by the dauphin, marched
towards the frontiers of Spain. A third, led by
Van Roffem the marshal of Gueldres, and com-
posed ciefly of the troops of Cleves, had Bra-
bant allotted for the theatre of itsoperations. A
fourth, of which the duke of Vendome was ge-
neral, hovered on the borders of Slanders. The
lafl, confifling of the forces cantoned in Pied-
mont, as destined for the admiral Annibaut.
The dauphin and his brother were appointed to
command where the chief exertions were intend-
ed, and the greatest honour to be reaped; the army
of the former amounted to forty thousand, that
of the latter to thirty thousand men. Nothing
appears more surprising than that Francis did
not pour with these numerous and irresistible
armies into the Milanese, which had so long been
the objec of his wishes as well as entei'prizes;
and that he should choofc rather to turn almost

his

his whole strength into another direction, and BooK VI.
towards new conquests. But the remembrance ",-
of the disasters which he had met with in his
former expeditions into Italy, together with the
difficulty of supporting a war carried on at such
a distance from his own dominions, had gra-
dually abated his violent inclination to obtain
footing in that country, and made him willing
to try the fortune of his arms in another quarter.
At the fame time he expected to make such a
powerful mpreffion on the frontier of Spain,
where there were few towns of any strength,
and no army assembled to oppose him, as might
enable him to recover poffellion of the county
of Roufillon, lately dismembered from the
French crown, before Charles could bring into
the field any force able to obftrut his progress.
The necessity of supporting his ally the duke of
Cleves, and the hope of drawing a considerable
body of soldiers out of Germany by his means,
determined him to ad with vigour in the Low-
Countries.

THE dauphin and duke of Orleans opened Jne-

Their ope-

the campaign much about the fame time; the r,,,ons.
former laying siege to Perpignan, the capital of
Roufillon, and the latter entering Luxembourg.
The duke of Orleans pulhed his operations with
the greatest rapidity and success, one town fall-
ing after another, until no place in that large
dutchy remained in the Emperor's hands but
Thionville. Nor could he have failed of over-
running the adjacent provinces with the fame
cafe, if he had not voluntarily ftopt short in this
career of vidory. But a report prevailing, that
the Emperor had determined to hazard a battle
in order to save Perpignan, on a sudden the
duke, prompted by youthful ardour, or moved,
perhaps, by jealousy of his brother, who he

both

Bool VI both envied and hated, abandoned his own con-
" quests, and hastened towards Roufillon, in order

154z- to divide with him glory the viory.

ON his departure, some of his troops were dif-

banded, others deserted their colours, and the
reft, cantoned in the towns which he had taken,
remained inactive. By this condut, which
leaves a dishonourable imputation either on his
understanding or his heart, or on both, he not
only renounced whatever he could have hoped
from such a promising commencement of the
campaign, but gave the enemy an opportunity
of recovering, before the end of summer, all
the conquests which he had gained. On the
Spanifl frontier, the Emperor was not so incon-
fiderate as to venture on a battle, the loss of
which might have endangered his kingdom.
Perpignan, though poorly fortified, and briskly
attacked, having been largely supplied with
ammunition and provisions by the vigilance of
DoriaD, was defended so long and so vigorously
by the duke of Alva, the persevering obstinacy
-of whose temper fitted him admirably for such
service, that at lat the French, after a siege of
three months, wafted by diseases, repulsed in
several afaults, and despairing of success, relin-
quifhed the undertaking, and retired into their
own country'. Thus all Francis's mighty pre-
parations, either from some defec in his own
conduc, or from the superior power and pru-
dence of his rival, produced no effects which
bore any proportion to his expence and efforts, or
such as gratified, in any degree, his own hopes,
or answered the expectation of Europe. The
only solid advantage of the campaign was the

acquisition

'Sigonii Vita A. Doria, p. 1ig9. 'Sandov. Hist.
tom. ii. 315.

acquisition of a few towns in Piedmont, whichBooK VII.
Bellay gained rather by tratagem and address, ' '
than by the force of his arms .

MEANWHILE the Emperor and Francis, w43.

though both considerably exhausted by such tio for
great but indecisive efforts, discovering no abate- "'he
ment of their mutual animosity, employed all
their attention, tried every expedient, and turned
themselves towards every quarter, in order to
acquire new allies, together with such a rein-
forcement of strength as would give them the
superiority in the ensuing campaign. Charles,
taking advantage of the terror and resentment of
the Spaniards, upon the sudden invasion of their
country, prevailed on the Cortes of the several
kingdoms to grant him subsidies with a more li-
beral hand than usual. At the fame time, he
borrowed a large fum from John king of Por-
tugal, and, by way of security for his repay-
ment, put him in possession of the Molucca
isles in the East Indies, with the gainful com-
merce of precious spices, which that sequestered
corner of the globe yields. Not satisfied with
this, he negociated a marriage between Philip
his only son, now in his sixteenth year, and
Mary daughter of that Monarch, with whom
her father, the most opulent prince in Europe,
gave a large dower; and having likewise per-
fuaded the Cortes of Aragon and Valencia to
recognise Philip as the heir of these crowns, he
obtained from them the donative usual on such
occasions0. These extraordinary supplies en-
abled him to make such additions to his forces
in Spain, that he could detach a great body into

the

Sandov. His. ii. 318. Bellay, 387, &c. Ferrer. ;r.

237. Ferreras, ix. 238. 241. Jovii HiR. lib. xlii.
298. 6.

PooKVII. the Low-Countries, and yet reserve as many as
~'^Y~ were sufficient for the defence of the kingdom.
'143' Having thus provided for the security of Spain,

and committed the goverment of it to his son,
M7. he failed for Italy, in his way to Germany. But

how attentive soever to raise the funds for carry-
ing on the war, or eager to grasp at any new
expedient for that purpose, he was not so incon-
fiderate as to accept of an overture which Paul,
knowing his necessities, artfully threw out to
him. That ambitious Pontiff, no less sagacious
to discern, than watchful to seize opportunities
of aggrandizing his family, solicited him to
grant Octavio his grandchild, whom the Empe-
ror had admitted to the honour of being his son-
in-law, the investiture of the dutchy of Milan;
in return for which he promised such a vail fum
of money as would have gone far towards supply-
ing his present exigencies. But Charles, as well
from unwillingness to alienate a province of so
much value, as from disgust at the Pope, who
had hitherto refused to join in the war against
Francis, rejected the proposal. His diffatisfac-
tion with Paul at that juncture was so great, that
he even refused to approve his alienating Parma
and Placentia from the patrimony of St. Peter,
and fettling them on his on and grandson as
a fief to be held of the Holy See. As no
other expedient for raising money among the
Italian states remained, he consented to with-
draw the garrisons which he had hitherto kept
in the citadels of Florence and Leghorn; in con-
fideration for which, he received a large present
from Cosmo di Medici, who by this means fe-
cured his own independence, and got poliihon
of two forts, which werejuftly called the fetters
of Tuscany H.

BUT

"Adriani Iftoria, i. I95. Sleid. 312. Jovii Hill. lib.
x:.i. p. 301. Vita di Cos. Medici di Baldini, p. 34.

Bu T Charles, while he seemed to have turned BooK VII.

his whole attention towards raising the fums ne-
ceffary for defraying the expences of the year, The 1543.
had not been negligent of objets more distant, ror"'nego-
though no less important, and had concluded a with Henry
league offensive and defensive with Henry VIII. V.
from which hederived, in the end, greater ad-
vantage than from all his other preparations.
Several flight circumstances, which have already
been mentioned, had begun to alienate the as-
sections of that Monarch from Francis his pre-
sent ally, and new incidents of greater moment
had occurred to increase his disgust and animosity.
Henry, desirous of establishing an uniformity inHenr's
religion in Great'Britain, as well as fond ofwithFrance
making proselytes to his own opinions, had ,adds-
formed a scheme of persuading his nephew the
King of Scotland to renounce the Pope's fupre-
macy, and to adopt the fame system of reforma-
tion, which he had introduced into England.
This measure he pursued with his usual eager-
ness and impetuosity, making such advantage-
ous overtures to James, whom he confidered as
not over scrupulously attached to any religious
tenets, that he hardly doubted of success. His
propositions were accordingly received in such
a manner, that he flattered himself with having
gained his point. But the Scottish ecclefiafticks,
foreseeing the ruin of the church to be the con-
ft-quence of the King's union with England; and
the partisans of France, no less convinced that
it would put an end to the influence of that
crown upon the publick councils of Scotland,
combined together, and by their ininuations de-
feated Henr 's scheme at the very moment when
he expected it to have taken effect. Too
haughty to brook such a disappointment, which
he imputed as much to the arts of the French

as

BooKVInas to the levity of the Scottilh Monarch, he
'-v"took arms against Scotland, threatening to sub-
1543 due the kingdom, since he could not gain the

friendhip of its King. At the fame time, his
resentment at Francis quickened his negociations
with the Emperor, an alliance with whom he
was now as forward to accept as the other could
be to offer it. During this war with Scotland,
and before the conclusion of his negociations
with Charles, James V. died, leaving his crown to
Mary his only daughter, an infant a few days old.
Upon this event, Henry altered at once his whole
system with regard to Scotland, and abandoning
all thoughts of conquering it, aimed at what
was more advantageous as well as more practi-
cable, an union withthat kingdom by a marriage
between Edward his only son and the young
Queen. But here, too, he apprehended a vi-
gorous opposition from the French fation in
Scotland, which began to bestir itself in order
to thwart the measure. The necessity of cruih-
ing this party among the Scots, and of prevent-
ing Francis from furnishing them any effetual
aid, confirmed Henry's resolution of breaking
with France, and pushed him on to put a finilh-
ing hand to the treaty of confederacy with the
Emperor.

Feb. . IN this league were contained, first of all, ar-
A^ls.ce tides for securing their future amity and mutual
che,,,d defence; then were enumerated the demands
Htnry. which they were respectively to make upon

Francis; and the plan of their operations was
fixed, if he should refute to grant them satis-
fation. They agreed to require that Francis
hould not only renounce his alliance with Soly-
man, which had been the source of infinite ca-
lamities to ChrifRendom, but also that he hould

make

make reparation for the damages which thatBooK VII.
unnatural union had occasioned; that he hould' *"
restore Burgundy to the Emperor; that he '543
should desist immediately from hostilities, and
leave Charles at leisure to oppose the common
enemy of the Christian faith; and that he mhould
immediately pay the ums due to Henry, or
put some towns in his hands as security to that
effe&. If, within forty days, he did not com-
ply with there demands, they then engaged to
invade France each with twenty thousand foot
and five thousand horse, and not to lay down their
arms until they had recovered Burgundy, toge-
ther with the towns on the Somme, for the Em-
peror; and Normandy and Guienne, or even the
whole realm of France, for Henry'. Their
heralds, accordingly, et out with there haughty
requisitions; but not being permitted to enter
France, could not perform their commiflion; and
the two Monarchs held themselves fully en-
titled to execute whatever wasftipulated in their
treaty.

FRANCIS on his part was not less diligent in Francis's

preparing for the approaching campaign. Hav- nwit'ocsoliyn
ing early observed the symptoms of Henry's dif- 1
gufl and alienation, and finding all his endeavours
to sooth and reconcile him ineffectual, he knew
his temper too well not to expect that open hof-
tilities would quickly follow upon this cessation
of friendlhip. For this reason he redoubled his
endeavours to obtain from Solyman such aid as
might counterbalance the great acceflion of
flrength which the Emperor would receive by
his alliance with England. In order to supply
the place of the two ambafladors who had been
murdered by Guafto, he sent as his envoy, first

to
Rym. xiv. 768. Herb. 238.

BooVII. to Venice, and then to Conflantinople, Paulin,
-.-J a captainof foot, a man of a daring active spirit,
'43' andon account of these qualities thought wor-

thy of this ervice, to which he was recommend-
ed by Bel!ay, who had trained him to the arts
of negociation, and made trial of his talents and
addrels on several occasions. Nor did he belie
the opinion conceived of his courage and abili-
ties. Hastening to Constantinople, without re-
garding the dangers to which he was exposed,
he urged his master's demands with such bold-
ness, and availed himself of every circumstance
with such dexterity, that quickly he removed all
the Sultan's difficulties. As ome of the Bashaws,
swayed either by their own opinions, or influenced
by the Emperor's emissaries, who had made
their way even into this court, had declared in
the Divan against acting in concert with France,
he found means either to convince or silence
them K. At last he obtained orders for Barba-
roffa to fail with a powerful fleet, and to regu-
late all his operations by the directions of the
French King. Francis was not equally success-
ful in his attempts to gain the princes of the
Empire. The extraordinary rigour with which
he thought it necessary to punilh such of his
subjects as had embraced the ['roteftant opinions,
in order to give ome notable evidence of his
own zeal for the Catholick faith, and to wipe off
the imputations to which he was liable from his
confederacy with the Turks, placed an infupe-
rable barrier between him and such of the Ger-
mans as interest or inclination would have
prompted most readily to join him L. His chief
advantage, however, over the Emperor, he de-
rived on this, as on other occahions, from the

contiguity

Sandov. Hiftor. tom. ii. 346. Jovii Hist. lib. xli. 285,
&c 3oo, &c. Brantome. L Seck. lib. iii. 403.

contiguity of his dominions, as well as from the BooKVII.
extent of the royal authority in France, which ' '
exempted him from all the delays and difap- 543
pointments unavoidable wherever popular as-
femblies provide for the expences of government
by occasional and frugal subsidies. Hence his do-
meftick preparations were always carried on with
vigour and rapidity; while those of the Em-
peror, unless when quickened by some foreign
supply, or some temporary expedient, were to
the lalt degree flow and dilatory.

LONG before any army was in readiness to Operati.on

in the Low-

oppose him, Francis took the field in the Low- countries.
Countries, against which he turned the whole
weight of the war. He made himself master of
Landrecy, which he determined to keep as the
key to the whole province of Hainault; and or-
dered it to be fortified with great care. Turning
from thence to the right, he entered the dutchy of
Luxembourg, and found it in the fame defence-
less state as in the former year. While he was thus
employed, theEmperor, having drawn together
an army, composed of all the different nations
fubjedt to his government, entered the territories
of the Duke of Cleves, on whom he had vowed
to inflict exemplary vengeance. This prince,
whose conduct and situation were similar to that
of Robert de la Mark in the firrf war between
Charles and Francis, resembled him likewise in
his fate. Unable, with his feeble army, to face
the Emperor, who advanced at the head of forty-
four thousand men, he retired at his approach;
and the Imperialists being at liberty to at as
they pleated, immediately invested Duren. That The Empe-
town, though gallantly defended, was won by mafterof
afault, all the inhabitants put to the sword, and the Dutchy

of Cleve.
the place itself reduced toafhes. This dreadful Auguaft4.

example

BooK Vll. example of severity firuck the people of the coun-

try with such general terror, that all the other
1543- towns, even such as were capable of resistance,

sent their keys to the Emperor; and before a.
body of French detached to his afliftance could
come up, the duke himself was obliged to make
his fubmilfion to Charles in the most abject man-
ner. Being admitted into the Imperial pre-
fence, he kneeled, together with eight of his prin-
cipal fubjeds, and implored mercy. The Em-
peror allowed him to remain in that ignominious
pofRure, and eying him with an haughty and
implacable look, without deigning to answer a
single word, remitted him to his ministers. The
conditions, however, which they prescribed were
not so rigorous as he had reason to have expected
Spt. 7- after such a reception. He was obliged to re-

nounce his alliance with France and Denmark;
to resign all his pretensions to the dutchy of
Gueldres; to enter into perpetual amity with
the Emperor and King of the Romans. In re-
turn for which, all his hereditary dominions were
restored, except two towns which the Emperor
kept as pledges of his fidelity during the con-
tinuance of the war, and he was re-inflated in
his privileges as a prince of the Empire. Not
long after, Charles, as a proof of the incerity of
his reconcilement, gave him in marriage one of
the daughters of his brother Ferdinand M.

Brtigs HAVING thus chafifed the presumption of
L'd~'' the Duke of Cleves, detached one of his allies

from Francis, and added to his dominions in the
Low-Countries a considerable province which
lay contiguous to them, Charles advanced to-
wards Hainault, and laid siege to Landrecy.

There,

" Harad Annal. Brabant, . i. 623. Recoeil des Trai-
tea, t. ii. 226.

There, as the firit-fruits of his alliance with BooxVII.
Henry, he was joined by fix thousand Englilh -'
under Sir John Wallop. The garrison, consist- 543
ing of veteran troops commanded by De la
Lande and Defe, two officers of reputation,
made a vigorous resistance. Francis approached
with all his forces to relieve the place; Charles
covered the siege; both were determined to
hazard an engagement; and all Europe expet-
ed to fee this contest, which had continued so
long, decided at last by a battle between two
great armies, led by their refpe&ive Monarchs in
person. But the ground which separated their
two camps was fiuch, as put the disadvantage
manlifeftly on his fide who should venture to at-
tack, and neither of them chore to run that
rifque. Amidst a variety of movements, in or-
der to draw the enemy into this snare, or to
avoid it themselves, Francis, with admirable
conduct, and equal good fortune, threw first a
supply of fresh troops, and then a convoy of
provisions into the town; so that the Emperor,
despairing of success, withdrew into winter-quar-
ters N, in order to preserve his army from being
entirely ruined by the rigour of the season.

DURING this campaign, Solyman fulfilled his November.

engagements to the French King with great punc- vSdem^ un-
tuality. Hehimfelf marched into Hungary with gay.
a numerous army; and as the princes of the Em-
pire made no great effort to save a country which
Charles, by employing his whole force against
Francis, seemed willing to sacrifice, there was
no appearance of any body of troops to oppose
his progress. He besieged, one after another,
Quinque Ecclefiae, Alba, and Gran, the three
molt considerable towns in the kingdom, of

VOL. III. C which

' Bellay, 405, &.

Boot VII. which Ferdinand had kept pofreffion. The first

was taken by storm; the other two surrendered;
1543- and the whole kingdom, a small corner except-

ed, was fubjeded to the Turkish yoke0. About

Brbwof'T' the fame time, Baibaroll failed with a fleet of
dercent on
Italy. an hundred and ten gallies, and coasting along

the shore of Calabria, made a descent at Rheg-
gio, which he plundered and bunt; and ad-
vancing from thence to the mouth of the Tiber,
he rtopt there to water. The citizens of Rome,
ignorant of his destination, and filled with ter-
ror, began to fly with such general precipitation,
that the city would have been left deserted, if
they had not resumed courage upon letters from
Pauiin the French envoy, alluring them that no
violence or injury would be offered by the Turks
to any ate in alliance with the King his maf-
terP. From Ostia, Barbarossa failed to Marseilles,
and being joined by the French fleet with a body
of land forces on board, under the count d' En-
guien, a gallant young prince of the house of
Bourbon, they directed their course towards
Nice, the sole retreat of the unfortunate duke
And ao0. of Savoy. There, to the astonishment and scan-

dal of all Christendom, the Lilies of France and
Crescent of Mahomet appeared in conjunction
against a fortress on whch the Cross of Savoy
wasdifplayed. The town, however, wasbravely
defended against their combined force by Mont-
fort, a Savoyard gentleman, who stood a general
aftault, and repulsed the enemy with great loss,
before he retired into the castle. That fort situ-
ated upon a rock, on which the artillery made
no imprefiion, and which could not be under-
mined, he held out so long, that Doria had
time to approach with his fleet, and the marquis

del

* fluanhaff. Hiftor. Hung. 1. xv. 167. Jovii Hist. 1.
xliii. 3c4, &c. Pallavic. 160.

del Guafto to march with a body of troops BooKiVI1
from Milan. Upon intelligence of this, the --3
French and Turks raised the siege°-; and Francis sept. 8.
had noteven the consolation of success, to render
the infamy, which he drew on himself by calling
in such an auxiliary, more tolerable.

FROM the small progress of either party du- Prepar.-
ring this campaign, it was obvious to what a ns for *

new cam-

length the war might be drawn out between two paign.
princes, whose power was so equally balanced,
and who, by their own talents ora&ivity, could
so vary and multiply their resources. The trial
which they had now made of each other's strength
might have taught them the imprudence of per-
fillting in a war, wherein there was greater ap-
pearance of their diftrefling their own dominions
than of conquering those of theiradverfary, and
should have disposed both to wish for peace. If
Charles and Francis had been influenced by con-
fiderations of interest or prudence alone, this,
without doubt, must have been the manner in
which they would have reasoned. But the personal
animosity, which mingled itself in all their quar-
rels, had grown to be so violent and implacable,
that, for the pleasure of gratifying it, they dif-
regarded every thing else; and were infinitely
more solicitous how to hurt their enemy, than
how to secure what would be of advantage to
themselves. No sooner then did the season
force them to suspend hofftilities, than, without
paying any attention to the Pope's repeated en-
deavours or paternal exhortations to re-establish
peace, they began to provide for the operations
of the next year with new vigour, and an ativity
increasing with their hatred. Charles turned his

C 2 chief

o- Guichenon Hiftoire de Savoye, t. i. p. 651. Bellay,
425, &C.

Bo VII. chief attention towards gaining the princes of

C'c~' the Empire,' and endeavoured to rouse the for-
'543 midable but unwield) strength of the Germanick
Airs of body against Francis. In order to undertand

. the propriety of the steps which he took for that

purpose, it is neceflary to review the chief tranf-
actions in that country since the diet of Ratisbon
in the year one thousand five hundred and forty-
nine.

M«ric of MUCH about the time that assembly broke up,
Sxny fuc
ced, hit , Maurice succeeded his father Henry in the go-
ther. vernment of that part of Saxony which belonged

to the Albertine branch of the Saxony family.
This young prince, then only in his twentieth
year, had, even at that early period, begun to
discover the great talents which qualified him
for acting such a distinguished part in the as-
fairs of Germany. As soon as he entered upon
the administration, he itruck out into such a
new and singular path, as hewed that he aimed,
from the beginning, at something great and un-

The iew. common. Though zealously attached to the
and c"Odu Protestant opinions both from education and
...n.g principle, he refused to accede to the league of
Pri":"- Smalkalde, being determined, as he said, to

maintain the purity of religion which was the
original objeCt of that confederacy, but not to
entangle himself in the political interests or com-
binations to which it had given rife. At the
fame time, foreseeing a rupture between Charles
and the confederates of Smalkalde, and perceiv-
ing which of them was most likely to prevail in
the contest, instead of that jealousy and distrust
w^hich the other Protestants expressed of all the
Emperor's designs, he affected to place in him
an unbounded confidence; and courted his fa-
vour with the utmost afliduity. When the other
protelfants, in the year fifteen hundred and forty-

two,

two, either declined affifing Ferdinand in Hun- Boot VII:
gary, or afforded him reluEtant and feeble aid, *'
Maurice marched thither in person, and rendered
himself conspicuous by his zeal and courage.
From the fame motive, he had led to the Em-
peror's afliftance, during the last campaign, a
body of his own troops; and the gracefulness of
his peribn, his dexterity, in all military exercises,
together with his intrepidity which courted and
delighted in danger, did not distinguish him
more in the field, than his great abilities and
insinuating address won upon the Emperor's
confidence and favour'. While by this con-
dud, which appeared extraordinary to those
who held the fame opinions with him concern-
ing religion, Maurice endeavoured to pay court
to the Emperor, he began to discover some de-
gree of jealousy of his cousin the Ele&or of
Saxony. This, which proved in the sequel so
fatal to the Elector, had almost occasioned an
open rupture between them; and oon after
Maurice's accession to the government, they
both took arms with equal rage, upon account
of a dispute about the right of jurifdition over
a paultry town situated on the Moldaw. They
were prevented, however, from proceeding to
action by the mediation of the Landgrave of
Hefle, whose daughter Maurice had married, as
well as by the powerful and authoritative ad-
monitions of Luthers.

AMIDST these tranfaCions, the Pope, though The Pope

extremely irritated at the Emperor's conceflions prop'fe t
to the Protestants in the diet of Ratisbon, was so ril council
warmly solicited on all hands, by such as were T"n
molt devoutly attached to the See of Rome, no

less

Sleid. 317. Seek. 1. iii. 371. 386. 428. ' Seid. 292.
Sock. 1. iii. 403.

BOi VII. less than by those whose fidelity or designs he

"'2 J fufpe&ed, to summon a general council, that he
1543 found it impossible to avoid any longer calling

that assembly. The impatience for its meeting,
and the expectations of great effets from its de-
cifions, seemed to grow in proportion to the dif-
ficulty of obtaining it. He fiill adhered, how-
ever, to his original resolution of holding it in
some town of Italy, where, by the number of
ecclefiafticks, retainers to his court, and de-
pending on his favour, who could repair to it
without difficulty or expence, he might influence
and even diret all its proceedings. This pro-
position, though often reje&ed by the Germans,
he inftruded his nuncio to the diet held at Spires,
Much . in the year one thousand five hundred and

forty-two, to renew once more; and if he found
it gave no greater satisfaction than formerly, he,
as a last concession, empowered him to propose,
for the place of meeting, Trent, a city in the
Tyrol, subjet to the King of the Romans, and
situated on the confines between Germany and
Italy. The Catholick princes in the diet, after
giving it as their opinion that the council might
have been held with greater advantage in Ratif-
bon, Cologne, or some of the great cities in the
Empire, approved of the place which the Pope
had named. The Protestants unanirnoufly ex-
pressed their dla-tisfaftion, and protested that
they would pay no regard to a council held
without the precints of the Empire, called by
the Pope's authority, and in which he assumed
the right of presiding T.

Mi 2:. THE Pope, without taking any notice of their
srns jt objections, publilhed the bull of intimation,
1O iCe: named three cardinals to preside as his legates,

and appointed them to repair to Trent before

the
Sleid. 291. Seck. . iii. 283.

the first of November, the day he had fixed for BooxVII.
opening the council. But if Paul had desired i'
the meeting of a council as fmcerely as he pre-54
tended, he would not have pitched on such an
improper time for calling it. Instead of that
general union and tranquillity, without which
the deliberation of a council could neither be
conduced with security, nor attended with au-
thority, fich a fierce war was just kindled be-
tween the Emperor and Francis, as rendered it
impossible for the ecclesiastics from many parts
of Europe to retort thither in safety. The le-
gates, accordingly, remained several months at
Trent; but as no person appeared there, except
a few prelates from the ecclesiastical state, the
Pope, in order to avoid the ridicule and con- Obliged to
tempt which this drew upon him from the ene- e
mies of the church, recalled them and prorogued
the council u.

UNHAPPILY for the authority of the papal The mpe-

fee, at the very time that the German Protest- r 'pr outR
ants took every occasion of pouring contempt ants.
upon it, the Emperor and King of the Romans
found it necessary not only to connive at their
conduc, but to court their favour by repeated
acts of indulgence. In the fame diet of Spires,
wherein they had protested in the most difre-
fpe&ful terms against alfembling a council at
Trent, Ferdinand, who depended on their aid
for the defence of Hungary, not only permitted
that protestation to be inserted in the records of
the diet, but renewed in their favour all the
Emperor's concefions at Ratisbon, adding to
them whatever they demanded for their farther
security. Among other particulars, he granted
a fuifpenfion of a decree of the Imperial chamber

against
F. Paul, p. 97. lacid. 296.

BooiVn1. against the city of Goflar, one of those which

- had entered into the league of Smalkalde, on
1543. account of its having seized the ecclesiastical re-

venues within its domains, and enjoined Henry
duke of Brunswick to desist from his attempts
to carry that decree into execution. But Henry,
a furious bigot, and no less obflinate than rash
in all his undertakings, continuing to disquiet
the people of Goflar by his incursions, the Elec-

Tbheir i- tor of Saxony and Landgrave of Hesse, that
geedingp. they might not susser any member of the Smal-

kaldick body to be oppressed, assembled their
forces, declared war in form against Henry, and
in the space of a few weeks, Dtripping him entirely
of his dominions, drove him as a wretched exile
to take refuge in the court of Bavaria. By this
aft of vengeance, no less evere than sudden,
they filled all Germany with dread of their
power, and the confederates of Smalkalde ap-
peared, by this first effort of their arms, to be
as prompt as capable to proteCt those who had
joined their aflociation x.

EMBOLDENED by so many conceflionsin their

favour, as well as by the progress which their
opinions daily made, the princes of the league
of Smalkalde took a solemn protest against the
Imperial chamber, and declined itsjurifdicion
for the future; because that court had not been
visited or reformed according to the decree of
Ratisbon, and continued to discover a most in-
decent partiality in all its proceedings. Not
long after this, they ventured a ftep farther;
and protesting againfl the recess of a diet held
at Nuremberg, which provided for the defence

of

x Sleid. 296. Commenmoratio fucc;nqa caufarum Belli,

&c. a Smalcaldicis contra Henr. Brunfw ab iifdem edita;
ap. Scardium. tom. ii. 307.

of Hungary, refused to furnish their contingent BooKVII.
for that purpose, unless the Imperial chamber ' '
were reformed, and full security were granted Ar1I543.
them in every point with regard to religion Y. '543.

SUCH were the lengths to which the Protef- Dietat

ants had proceeded, and such their confidence in 544.
their own power, when the Emperor returned
from the Low-Countries, to hold a diet, which
he had summoned to meet at Spires. The re-
sped due to the Emperor, as well as the import-
ance of the affairs which were to be laid before
it, rendered this assembly extremely full. All
the Eleftors, a great number of Princes eccle-
fiaftical and secular, with the deputies of mos
of the cities, were present. Charles soon per-
ceived that this was not a time to offend thejea-
lous spirit of the Protestants, by asserting in any
high tone the authority and doctrines of the
church, or by abridging, in the smallest article,
the liberty which they now enjoyed; but that,
on the contrary, if he expected any support
from them, or wished to preserve Germany from
intestine disorders while he was engaged in a
foreign war, he must ooth them by new con-
ceflions, and a more ample extension of their re-
ligious privileges. He began, accordingly, with
courting the Elector of Saxony and Landgrave
of Hesse, the heads of the Protestant party; and
by giving up some things in their favour, and
granting liberal promises with regard to others,
he secured himself from any danger of opposition
on their part. Having ascertained this capital The Empe-
point, he then ventured to address the diet with ror solicits

its aid a-

greater freedom. He began by representing his glint
own zeal, and unwearied efforts with regard to France

two
Y Sieid. 304. 307. Seek. . iii. 404. 416.

Boo VI. two things most essential to Christendom, the
'-"' procuring of a general council i order to

544- compose the religious difientions which had un-

happily arisen in Germany, and the providing
some proper means for checking the formidable
progress of the Turkish arms. But that his pious
endeavours had been entirely defeated by the
unjustifiable ambition of the French King, who
having wantonly kindled the flame of war in
Europe, which had been so lately extinguished
by the truce of Nice, rendered it impossible for
the fathers of the church to assemble in council,
or to deliberate with security; and obliged him
to employ those forces in his own defence, which,
with greater fatisfadion to himself, as well as
more honour to Christendom, he would have
turned againif the Infidels. That Francis, not
thinking it enough to have called him off from
opposing the Infidels, had, with unexampled
impiety, invited them into the heart of Christen-
dom, and, joining his arms to theirs, had openly
attacked the duke of Savoy, a member of the
Empire. That Barbarossa's fleet was now in
one of the ports of France, waiting only the re-
turn of spring to carry terror and desolation to
the coast of Ibme Christian ltate. That in such
a ituation it was folly to think of distant expe-
ditions againif the Turk, or of marching to op-
pose his armies in Hungary, while such a power-
ful ally received him into the center of Europe,
and gave him footing there. That prudence
dictated to oppose the nearest and most immi-
nent danger, first of all, and by humbling the
power of France, to deprive Solyman of the
advantages, which he derived from the unnatu-
ral confederacy formed between him and a Mo-
narch, who still arrogated the name of Most
Chriflian. That, in truth, a war against the
French King and the Sultan ought to be con-

fidered

fidered as the fame thing; and that every ad- Boo VI.
vantage gained over the former, was a severe
and sensible blow to the latter. That, there-
fore, he now demanded their aid against Francis,
not merely as an enemy of the Germanick body,
or of him who was its head, but as an avowed
ally of the Infidels, and a public enemy to the
Christian name.

IN order to give greater weight to this violent

invective of the Emperor, the King of the Ro-
mans stood up, and related the rapid conquests
of the Sultan in Hungary, occasioned, as he
said, by the fatal necessity imposed on his bro-
ther of employing his arms against France.
When he had finished, the ambassadors of Savoy
gave a detail of Barbarossa's operations at Nice,
and of the ravages which he had committed on
that coast. All there, added to the general in-
dignation which Francis's unprecedented union
with the Turks excited in Europe, made such
an impreflion on the diet as the Emperor wished,
and disposed most of the members to grant him
such effectual aid as he had demanded. The
ambassadors whom Francis had sent to explain
the motives of his conduct, were not permitted
to enter the bounds of the Empire; and the
apology which they published for their malter,
vindicating his alliance with Solyman, by ex-
amples drawn from scripture, and the practice
of Christian princes, was little regarded by men,
irritated already or prejudiced against him to
such a degree, as to be incapable of allowing
their proper weight to any arguments in his be-
half.

SUCH being the favourable disposition of the His va

Germans, Charles perceived that nothing could infoo
now obftrut his gaining all that he aimed at, gan the

but Proteftints.

BooKVII. but the fears and jealousies of the Protestants,
--*' which he determined to quiet by granting every
'544 thing that the utmost solicitude of these paflions

could desire for the security of their religion.
Wi;h thisview, he consented to a recess, whereby
all the rigorous edicts hitherto issued against the
Protestants were suspended; a council either
general or national to be assembled in Germany
was declared necessary, in order to re-establish
peace in the church; until one of these should
be held, (which the Emperor undertook to
bring about as soon as polible) the free and
publ.ck exercise of the roteftant religion was
authorized; the Imperial chamber was to give
no molestation to the Protestants, and when the
term, for which the present judges in that court
were eleted, hould expire, persons duly qua-
lified were then to be admitted as members,
without any diftintion on account of religion.

Aid el'ted In return for these extraordinary ats of indul-
by tche diet.

gence, the Protestants concurred with the other
members of the diet, in declaring war against
Francis n name of the Empire; in voting the
Em peror a body of twenty-four thousand foot, and
feur thousand horse, to be maintained at the
publick expence for fix months, and to be em-
ployed againfi France; and at the fame time
the diet imposed a poll-tax to be levied through-
out all Germany, on every person without ex-
ception, for the support of the war against the
1uiks.
r, :C: C H A R L E , while he gave the greatest attention

' to the r'ir.ute and intricate detail of particulars

I;r,,rk nCceTirv tm\vards cnducting the deliberations
"'-- of a rn::rrurs and divided aTlcmbly to fuich a

'ucctlifu! peri;d, nociated a separate peace
Xiihl the King us Denmark; who, though he
Iha hi:hcr:o pericrmtd nothing coniderable in

consequence

consequence of his alliance with Francis, had it BooKVII.
in his power, however, to make a formidable ----
diversion in favour of that monarchZ. At the 544'
fame time, he did not neglect proper applications
to the King of England, in order to roue him
to more vigorous efforts againt their common
enemy. Little, indeed, was wanting to accom-
plifh this; for such events had happened in
Scotland as inflamed Henry to the molf violent
pitch of resentment against Francis. Having
concluded with the parliament of Scotland a
treaty of marriage between his son and their
young queen, by which he reckoned himself
secure of effecting the union of the two king-
doms, which had been long desired, and often
attempted without success by his predecessors,
Mary of Guise the Qeen-mother, cardinal
Beauton, and other partisans of France, found
means not only to break off the match, but to
alienate the Scottilh nation entirely from the
friendship of England, and to strengthen its
ancient attachment to France. Henry, how-
ever, did not abandon an obje& of so much
importance; and as the humbling of Francis,
besides the pleasure of taking revenge upon an
enemy who had disappointed a favourite mea-
sure, appeared the most effectual method of
bringing the Scots to accept once more of the
treaty which they had rejected, he was so eager
to accomplish this, that he was ready to second
whatever the Emperor could propose to be at-
tempted againt that monarch. The plan, ac-
cordingly, which they concerted, was such, if
it had been punctually executed, as must have
ruined France in the first place, and would have
augmented so prodigiously the Emperor's power

and
z Dumont Corps Diplom. t. iv. p. ii. p 274.

Boo VII. and territories as might in the end have proved

C'5' fatal to the liberties of Europe. They agreed
1544.

to invade France each with an army of twenty-
five thousand men, and without losing time in
besieging the frontier towns, to advance direEtly
towards the interior provinces, and to join their
forces near Paris A.

The French MEANWHILE, Francis flood alone in oppofi-
take the
i^,'hr.Pied- tion to all the enemies whom Charles was muster-

. ing against him. Solyman had been the only

ally who did not desert him; but the afliftance
which he received from him had rendered him
so odious to all Christendom, that he resolved
rather to forego all the advantages of his friend-
ship, than to become, on that account, the ob-
ject of general deteflation. For this reason, he
dismissed Barbarossa as soon as winter was over,
who, after ravaging the coast of Naples and Tuf-
cany, returned to Constantinople. As Francis
could not hope to equal the forces of his rival,
he endeavoured to supply that defe& by dif-
patch, which was more in his power, and to get
l-nr c.- the flart of him in taking the field. Early in

the spring the count d' Enguien invested Carig-
nan, a town in Piedmont, which the marquis
del Guafto the Imperial general having surprised
the former )ear, confidered as of so much im-
portance, that he had fortified it at great ex-
pence. The count pushed the siege with such
vigour, that Guafto, fond of his own conquest,
and feeing no other way of saving it from fall-
ing into the hands of the French, resolved to
hazard a battle in order to relieve it. He began

Trhe rmpc- his march from Milan for this purpose, and as
l,,h to he was at no pains to conceal his intention, it
rcleircii. was soon known inthe Frenchcamp. Enguien,

a gallant
Hcrbert, 245. Bellay, 448.

a gallant and enterprising young man, wished Boo VII.
paflionately to try the fortune of a battle; his
troops desired it with no less ardour; but the
preremptory injuncion of the King not to ven-
ture a general engagement, flowing from a pru-
dent attention to the present situation of affairs,
as well as from the remembrance of former dit-
afters, restrained him from venturing upon it.
Unwilling, however, to abandon Carignan,
when it was just ready to yield, and eager to dif-
tingui(h his command by ome memorable ac-
tion, he dispatched Monluc to court, in order to
lay before the King the advantages of fighting
the enemy, and the hopes which he had of vic-
tory. The King referred the matter to the
council; all the ministers declared, one after an-
other, against fighting, and supported their fen-
timents by reasons extremely plausible. While
they were delivering their opinions, Monluc,
who was permitted to be present, discovered
such visible and extravagant symptoms of im-
patience to speak, as well as such diffatisfation
with what he heard, that Francis, diverted with
his appearance, called on him to declare what
he could offer in reply to sentiments which
seemed to be as just as they were general. Upon
this Monluc, a plain but spirited soldier, and
of known courage, represented the good condi-
tion of the troops, their eagerness to meet the
enemy in the field, their confidence in their of-
ficers, together with the everlasting infamy which
the declining of a battle would bring on the
French arms; and he urged his arguments with
such lively impetuosity, and such a flow of mili-
tary eloquence, as gained over to his opinion,
not only the King, naturally fond of daring ac-
tions, but several of the council. Francis, catch-
ing the fame enthusiasm which had animated his
troops, suddenly started up, and having lifted

his

-or VII. his hands to heaven, and implored the divine
-- - protection, he then addrcffed himself to Mon-
15414 luc, "Go, fays he, return to Piedmont, and

fight in the name of God ."

Bit:e of No sooner was it known that the King had
cco:,'. given Enguien leave to fight the Imperialists,

than such was the martial ardour of the gal-
lant and high-fpirited gentlemen of that age,
that the court was quite deserted, every per-
son desirous of reputation, or capable of ser-
vice, hurring to Piedmont, in order to ihare,
as volunteers, in the danger and glory of
the action. Encouraged by the arrival of so
many brave officers, Enguien immediately pre-
pared for battle, nor did Guafto decline the
combat. The number of cavalry was almost
equal, but the Imperial infantry exceeded the
Ap.ll 1. French by a least ten thousand men. They

met near Cerifoles, in an open plain, which
afforded to neither any advantage of ground, and
both had full time to form their army in proper
ordr. lThe shock was such as might have been
expected btween veteran troops, violent and ob-
lna:e. The French cavalryrufhing forward tothe
charge w itl their usual vivacity, bore down every
thing that opposed them; but, on the other hand,
the Iteady and disciplined valour of the Spanish
i n!antry ha\ ing forced the body which they en-
countered to give way, victory remained in sus-
pence, ready to declare for whichever general
I cu!d make the heft use of that critical moment.
Guaflo, engaged in that part of his army which
m\..s thrown into disorder, and afraid of falling
into the hands of the French, whose vengeance
he dreaded on account of the murder of Rincon
and Fregofo, loft his presence of mind, and for-
rot to order a large body of reserve to advance;
v; ,creas Enguien, with admirable courage and

equal
X Memoires de Monluc.

equal conduct, supported, at the head of his BoOK
gens d'armes, such of his battalions as began to 0 ,4
yield; and at the fame time he ordered the
Swiss in his service, who had been victorious
wherever they fought, to fall upon the Spaniards.
This motion proved decisive. All that followed
was confusion and slaughter. The marquis del
Guafto, wounded in the thigh, escaped only by
the swiftness of his horse. The victory of the
French was complete, ten thousand of the Im-
perialifts being slain, and a considerable num-
ber, with all their tents, baggage and artillery,
taken. On the part of the conquerors, their
joy was without allay, a few only being killed,
and among these no officer of diftinaion .

THIS splendid action, beside the reputation feaa of;it.

with which it was attended, delivered France
from an imminent danger, as it ruined the army
with which Guafto had intended to invade the
ountry between the Rhone and Saone, where
here were neither fortified towns nor regular
orces to oppose his progress. But it was not
n Francis's power to pursue the vicory with
uch vigour as to reap the advantages which it
might have yielded; for though the Milanese
remained now almost defenceless; though the
inhabitants, who had long murmured under the
rigour of the Imperial government, were ready
to throw off the yoke; though Enguien, fluihed
with success, urged the King to seize this happy
opportunity of recovering a country, the ac-
quifition of which had been long his favourite
objet; yet, as the Emperor and King of Eng-
land were preparing to break in upon the oppo-
site frontier of France with superior force, it

VOL. III. D became

Bellay, 429, &c. Memoires de Monluc. Jovii his.
!. xliv, p. 327. 6.

Boot VI. became necessary to sacrifice all thoughts of con-
t'^ quest to the public safety, and to recall twelve

544' thousand of Enguien's best troops to be em-

ployed in defence of the kingdom. Enguien's
subsequent operations were, of consequence, so
languid and inconsiderable, that the redution
of Carignan and some other towns in Piedmont,
was all that he gained by his great vicory at
Cerifoles c.

Operatiom THE Emperor, as usual, was late in taking
in tbe Lw- the field; but he appeared, towards the begin-
coantries.

ning of June, at the head of an army more nu-
merous, and better appointed than any which
he had hitherto led against France. It amounted
almost to fifty thousand men and part of it hav-
ing reduced Luxembourg and some other towns
in the Netherlands, before he himself joined it,
he now marched with the whole towards the
J-n.. frontiers of Champagne. Charles, according

to his agreement with the King of England,
ought to have advanced directly towards Paris;
and the dauphin, who commanded the only
army to which Francis trusted for the security
of his dominions, was in no condition to oppose
him. But the success with which the French
had defended Provence in the year one thousand
five hundred and thirty-fix, had taught them
the most effetual method of distressing an in-
vading enemy. Champagne, a country abound-
ing more in vines than corn, was incapable of
maintaining a great army; and before the Em-
peror's approach, whatever could be of any use
to him had been carried off or destroyed. This
rendered it necessary for him to be master of
some places of strength, in order to secure the
convoys on which alone he now perceived that

he
c Bellay, 438, &c.

he must depend for fbfiftence; and he found Boo VII.
the frontier towns so ill provided for defence,
that he hoped it would not be a work either of 544
much time or difficulty to reduce them. Ac-
cordingly Ligny and Commercy, which he.firft
attacked, surrendered after a hort refitance.
He then invested St. Difier, which, though it The Eme.
commanded an important pass on the Marne, s'orDir.
was destitute of every thing neceflary for sustain- July 8.
ing a siege. But the count de Sancerre and M.
de la Lande, who had acquired such reputa-
tion by the defence of Landrecy, generously
threw themselves into the town, and undertook
to hold it out to the last extremity. The Em-
peror soon found how capable they were of mak-
ing good their promise, and that he could not
expet to take the town without besieging it in
form. This accordingly he undertook; and as
it was his nature never to abandon any enterprise
in which he had once engaged, he perfited in
it with an inconsiderate obstinacy.

THE King of England's preparations for the Henryvill.

campaign were complete long before the Em- 1"e, B"
peror's; but as he did not choose, on the one
hand, to encounter alone the whole power of
France, and was unwilling, on the other, that
his troops hould remain inactive, he took that
opportunity of chastising the Scots, by fending
his fleet, together with a considerable part of his
infantry, under the earl of Hertford, to invade
their country. Hertford executed his commis-
sion with vigour, plundered and burned Edin-
burgh and Leith, laid waste the adjacent coun-
try, and reimbarked his men with such dispatch,
that they joined their sovereign soon after his
landing in France. When Henry arrived in that July 14.
kingdom, he found the Emperor engaged in
the liege of St. Difier; an ambaflador, however,

D z whom

Bool V. whom he sent to congratulate the English Mo-
"'*'^ narch on his safe arrival on the continent, soli-

'544 cited him to march, in terms of the treaty, di-

retly to Paris. But Charles had set his ally such
an ill example of fulfilling the conditions of their
confederacy with exatnefs, that Henry, obferv-
ing him employ his time and forces in taking
towns for his own behoof, saw no reason why
he should not attempt the reduction of some
places that lay conveniently for himself. With-
out paying any regard to the Emperor's remon-
firances, he immediately invested Bologne, and
commanded the Duke of Norfolk to press the
siege of Montreuil, which had been begun be-
fore his arrival, by a body of Flemings, in con-
juntion with some Englilh troops. While
Charles and Henry shewed such attention each
to his own interest, they both neglected the
common cause. Instead of the union and con-
fidence requisite towards conducting the great
plan that they had formed, they early discovered
a mutual jealousy of each other, which, by de-
grees, begot distrust, and ended in open hatredD.

CalIIat de- BY this time, Francis had, with unwearied
Discs . industry, drawn'together an army, capable, as

well from the number as from the valour of the
troops, of making head against the enemy. But
the dauphin, who still ated as general, pru-
dently declining a battle, the loss o which
would have endangered the kingdom, satisfied
himself with haralling the Emperor with his
light troops, cutting off his convoys, and laying
waste the country around him. Though ex-
tremely distressed by these operations, Charles
still pressed the siege of St. Difier, which San-
cerre defended with atonilhing fortitude and

conduct.
Herbert.

conduct. He flood repeated assaults, repulsing Boo Vl.
the enemy in them all; and undismayed even by I '
the death of the brave de la Lande, who was 544.
killed by a cannon-ball, he continued to hew
the fame bold countenance and obstinate refolu-
tion. At the end of five weeks, he was ill
capable of holding out some time longer, when
an artifice of Granvelle's induced him to fur-'
render. That crafty politician, having inter-
cepted the key to the cypher which the Duke of
Guise used in communicating intelligence to San-
cerre, forged a letter in his name, authorizing San-
cerre to capitulate, as the King, though highly
satisfied with his behaviour, thought it impru-
dent to hazard a battle for his relief. This let-
ter he conveyed into the town in a manner which
could raise no suspicion, and the governor fell
into the snare. Even then, he obtained such
honourable conditions as his gallant defence
merited, and among others a ceflation of hofti-
lities for eight days, at the.expiration of which
he bound himself to open the gates, if Francs,
during that time, did not attack the Imperial
army, and throw fresh troops into the towne.
Thus Sancerre, by detaining the Emperor o
long before an inconsiderable place, afforded his
sovereign full time to assemble all his forces, and
what rarely falls to the lot of an officer in such
an inferior command, acquired the glory of
having saved his country.

As oon as St. Difier surrendered, the Empe- August 7.

ror advanced into the heart of Champagne; but ro'r pe-
Sancerre's obitinate reftance had damped his trte. into

the heart of

sanguine hopes of penetrating to Paris, and led France.
him seriously to reflect on what he might expect
before towns of greater trength, and defended

by
'Brantome, tom. vi. 489.

Boo rV.I by more numerous garrisons. At the fame time,

ClJ '
* the procuring subsistence for his army was at-
i544 tended with great difficulty, which increased in

proportion as he withdrew from his own frontier.
He had loft a great number of his best troops
in the siege of St. Difier, and many fell daily
in lkirmifhes, which it was not in his power to
avoid, though they wafted his army insensibly,
without leading to any decisive aion. The
season advanced apace, and he had not yet the
command either of a sufficient extent of territory,
or of any such considerable town as rendered it
safe to winter in the enemy's country. Great
arrears too were due to his soldiers, who were
upon the point of mutinying for their pay, while
he knew not from what funds to satisfy them.
All there considerations induced him to liften to
the overtures of peace, which a Spanilh Domi-
nican, the confefior of his filler the Queen of
France, had secretly made to his confessor, a
monk of the fame order. In consequence of this,
plenipotentiaries were named on both fides, and
began their conferences in Chaufse, a small vil-
lage near Chalons. At the fame time, Charles,
either from a desire of making one great final
effort against France, or merely to gain a pre-
text for deserting his ally and concluding a fe-
parate peace, sent an ambaflador formally to
require Henry, according to the stipulation in
their treaty, to advance towards Paris. While
he expeted a return from him, and waited the
iflue of the conferences at Chaufse, he continued
to march forward, though in the utmost distress
from scarcity of provisions. But at last, by a
fortunate motion on his part, or through some
neglect or treachery on that of the French, he
surprised first Efpernay and then Chateau
Thierry, in both which were considerable maga-
zines. No sooner was it known that these towns,

the

the latter of which is not two days march from BoorVII.
Paris, were in the hands of the enemy, than "'"
that great capital, defenceless, and susceptible 544.
of any violent alarm in proportion to its great-
ness, was filled with consternation. The in-
habitants, as if the Emperor had been already
at their gates, fled in the wildest confusion and
despair, many fending their wives and children
down the Seine to Rofien, others to Orleans,
and the towns upon the Loire. Francis himself,
more afflited with this than with any other
event during his reign, and sensible as well of
the triumph that his rival would enjoy in insult-
ing his capital, as of the danger to which the
kingdom was exposed, could not refrain from
crying out, in the first emotion of his surprise
and sorrow, " How dear, O my God, do I pay
for this crown, which I thought thou hadst
granted me freely !" But recovering in a mo-
ment from this sudden sally of peevilhnefs and
impatience, he devoutly added, " Thy will,
however, be done;" and proceeded to issue the
necessary orders for opposing the enemy with
his usual activity and presence of mind. The
dauphin detached eight thousand men to Paris,
which revived the courage of the affrighted citi-
zens; he threw a rong garrison into Meaux,
and by a forced march got into Ferte between
the Imperialifis and the capital.

UPON this, the Emperor, who began again Obliged to

to feel the want of provisions, perceiving that return.
the dauphin fill prudently declined a battle,
and not daring to attack his camp with forces so
much hattered and reduced by hard service,
turned suddenly to the right, and began to fall
back towards Soissons. Having about this time

received
Brantome, tom. vi, 381.

Boo VII. received Henry's answer, whereby he refused to

v"^ ' abandon the sieges of Bologne and Montreuil,
1 44 of both which he expeaed every moment to get

poffeiion, he thought himself absolved from all
obligations of adhering to the treaty with him,
and at full liberty to consult his own interest in
what manner soever he pleased. He consented,
therefore, to renew the conference, which the
surprise of Efpernay had broken off. To con-

Pec be- dlude a peace between two princes, one of whom
td hS~s greatly desired, and the other greatly needed it,
concluded did not require a long negociation. It was signed
at Crpy. at Crefpy, a small town near Meaux, on the

eighteenth of September. The chief articles of
it were, That all the conquefis which either
party had made since the truce of Nice shall be
reflored; That the Emperor (hall give in mar-
riage to the Duke of Orleans, either his own
eldet daughter, or the second daughter of his
brother Ferdinand; That if he chose to bestow
on him his own daughter, he shall fettle on her
all the provinces of the Low-Countries, to be
erected into an independent state, which shall de-
scend tothe male issue of the marriage; That if he
determined to give him his niece, he Ihall, with
her, grant him the invefiture of Milan and its
dependencies; That he (hall within four months
declare which of these two Princesses he had
pitched upon, and fulfil the refpeaive condi-
tions upon the consummation of the marriage,
which (hall take place within a year from the date
of the treaty; That as soon as the Duke of Or-
leans is put in poffefion either of the Low-
Countries or Milan, Francis hall restore to
the Duke of Savoy all that he now possesses of
his territories, except Pignerol and Montmilian;
That Francis (hall renounce all pretensions to the
kingdoms of Naples, or to the sovereignty of
Flandersand Artois, and Charles {hall give up

his

his claim to the dutchy of Burgundy and county BOOK VII.
of Charolois; That Francis shall give no aid to
the exiled King of Navarre; That both Mo- 544
narchs shall join in making war upon the Turk,
towards which the King shall furnifl, when re-
quired by the Emperor and Empire, fix hundred
men at arms, and ten thoutand foot .

BESIDES the immediate motives to this peace, Motives of

arising from the distress of his army through "c"itnd
want of provisions; from the difficulty of re-
treating out of France; and the impollibility of
securing winter-quarters there; the Emperor
was influenced by other considerations, more
distant, indeed, but not less weighty. The Pope
was offended to a great degree, as well as at his
concessions to the Protestants in the late diet, as
at his consenting to call a council, and to admit
of publick disputations in Germany, w ithaviewof
determining the Doctrines in controversy. Paul
confidering both there steps as sacrilegious en-
croachments on the jurifdition as well as privi-
leges of the holy See, had addressed to the Em-
peror a remonstrance rather than a letter on this
subjet, written with such acrimony of language,
and in a tyle of such high authority, as disco-
vered more of an intention to draw on a quar-
rel than of a desire to reclaim him. This ill
humour was not a little inflamed by the Empe-
ror's league with Henry, which being contracted
with an heretick, excommunicated by the apo-
itolick fee, appeared to the Pope a profane alli-
ance, and was not less dreaded by him, than
that of Francis with Solyman. Paul's son and
grandson, highly incensed at the Emperor for
having refuted to gratify them with regard
to the alienation of Parma and Placentia, con-

tributed

o Recueil des Traitez, t. i. 227. Belius de Caufis Pacis
Crepiac. in Atis Erudit. Lips. 1763.

BooVn. tributed by their suggestions to four and disgust

^'

V him ill more. To all which was added the
'544 powerful operation of the flattery and promises

which Francis inceflantly employed to gain him.
Though from his desire of maintaining a neutra-
lity, the Pope had hitherto suppressed his own
resentment, had eluded the artifices of his own
family, and resifted the solicitations of the
French King, it was not safe to rely much on
the steadiness of a man whom his paflions, his
friends, and his interest combined to shake.
The union of the Pope with France, Charles
well knew, would instantly expose his domi-
nions in Italy to be attacked. The Venetians,
he foresaw, would probably follow the example
of a Pontiff, who was confidered as a model of
political wisdom among the Italians; and thus,
at a juncture when he felt himself hardly equal
to the burden of the present war, he would be
overwhelmed with the weight of a new confede-
racy against him". At the fame time, the
Turks, almost unresisted, made such progress
in Hungary, reducing town after town, that
they approached near to the confines of the
Auirian provinces'. Above all these, the ex-
traordinary progress of the Protestant doctrines
in Germany, and the dangerous combination
into which the Princes of that profession had en-
tered, called for his immediate attention. Al-
most one half of Germany had revolted from the
eftablilhed church; the fidelity of the reft was
much haken; the nobility of Austria had de-
manded of Ferdinand the free exercise of reli-
gion ; the Bohemians, among whom some
feeds of the dotrines of Huss flill remained,
openly favoured the new opinions; the arch-

bilhop

F. Paul, oo. Pallavic. 163. Ienhafli Hit.
Hung. 177. Slid. 285.

bishop of Cologne, with a zeal rare among eccle- BooK VII.
fiafticks, had begun the reformation of his dio- '--
cefe ; nor was it possible, unless some timely and 1544.
effectual check were given to the spirit of inno-
vation, to foresee where it would end. He him-
self had been a witness, in the late diet, to the
peremptory and decisive tone which the Protest-
ants had now assumed. He had seen how, from
confidence in their number and union, they
had forgotten the humble style of their sirs peti-
tions, having grown to such boldness as openly
to despise the Pope, and to hew no great reve-
rence for the Imperial dignity itself. If, there-
fore, he wished to maintain either the ancient
religion or his own authority, and would not
choose to dwindle into a mere nominal head of the
Empire, some vigorous effort was requisite,
which could not be made during a war that re-
quired the greatest exertion of his strength
against a foreign and powerful enemy.

SUCH being the Emperor's inducements to

peace, he had the address to frame the treaty of
Crefpy so as to promote all the ends which he
had in view. By coming to an agreement with
.Francis, he took from the Pope all profpe of
advantage in courting the friendship of that
Monarch in preference to his. By the proviso
with regard to a war with the Turks, he not
only deprived Solyman of a powerful ally, but
turned the arms of that ally against him. By
a private article, not inserted in the treaty that
it might not raise any unseasonable alarm, he
agreed with Francis that both ihould exert all
their influence and power in order to procure a
general council, to afert its authority, and to
exterminate the Protestant heresy out of their
dominions. This cut off all hope of afliftance
which the confederates of Smalkalde might ex-

pect

Bo V. ped from the French King"; and left their soli-
34 citations, or his jealousy of an ancient rival,

shou:d hereafter tempt Francis to forget this en-
gagement, he left him embarrassed with a war
against England, which would put it out of his
power to take any part in the affairs of Ger-
many.

wrcon- HENRY, poflefled at all times with an high
ie b.e idea of his own power and importance, felt, in
Frnce nd the most sensible manner, the neglect with which
Engiad the Emperor had treated him in concluding a

separate peace. But the situation of his affairs
was such as omewhat alleviated the mortifica-
tion which this occasioned. For though he was
obliged to recall the Duke of Norfolk from the
Sept. 4. siege ofMontreuil, because the Flemish troops

received orders to retire, Bologne had furren-
dered before the negociations at Crefpy were
brought to an issue. While elated with vanity
on account of this conquest, and inflamed with
indignation against the Emperor, the ambafla-
dors whom Francis ent to make overtures of
peace, found him too arrogant to grant what was
moderate or equitable. His demands were in-
deed extravagant, and made in the tone of a
conqueror; that Fancis should renounce his
alliance with Scotland, and not only pay up
the arrears of former debts, but reimburse the
money which he had expended in the present
war. Francis, though sincerely desirous of
peace, and willing to yield a great deal in order
to obtain it, being now free from the preflure
of the Imperial arms, rejeAed thee ignominious
propositions with disdain; and Henry departing
for England, hostilities continued between the
two nations'".

THE

Seck. . iii. 496. Mem. de Ribier, t. i. p. 572,
Herbert, 244.

THE treaty of peace, how acceptable foeverBooK VII.

to the people of France, whom it delivered from
the dread of an enemy who had penetrated into The Sda
the heart of the kingdom, was loudly com-hidi -
plained of by the dauphin. He confidered it as the peac
a manifest proof of the King his father's extra- of cref.
ordinary partiality towards his younger brother,
now Duke of Orleans, and complained that
from his eagemefs to gain an establishment for a
favourite son, he had sacrificed the honour of
the kingdom, and renounced the most ancient
as well as valuable rights of the crown. But as
he durst not venture to offend the king by re-
fusing to ratify it, though extremely desirous at
the fame time of securing to himself the privi-
lege of reclaiming what was now alienated so
much to his detriment, he secretly protested, in
pretence of ome of his adherents, againit the
whole tranfaftion; and declared whatever he
should be obliged to do in order to confirm it,
null in itself, and void of all obligation. The
parliament of Thouloufe, probably by the in-
ltigation of his partisans, did the fame N. But
Francis, highly pleated as well with having de-
livered his fubjets from the miseries of an inva-
sion, as with the profped of acquiring an inde-
pendent ettlement for his son at no greater price
than the renouncing conquests to which he had
no just claim; titles which had hitherto proved
the source of expence or disasters to the nation;
and rights grown obsolete and of no value
ratified the treaty with great joy. Charles,
within the time prescribed by the treaty, declared
his intention of giving Ferdinand's daughter in
marriage to the duke of Orleans, together with
the dutchy of Milan as her dowry °. Every

circumstance

" Recueil de Traitez, t. ii. 235. 238. Recneil de
Traitez, t. ii. 238.

BooiVII circumitance seemed to promise the continuance
*' ' of peace. The Emperor, cruelly affliaed with

544 the gout, appeared to be in no condition to un-

dertake any enterprise where great activity was
requisite, or much fatigue to be endured. He
himself felt this, or wished at least that it should
be believed; and being so much disabled by this
excruciating distemper, when a French ambaf-
fador followed him to Brussels, in order to be
present at his ratification of the treaty of peace,
that it was with the utmost difficulty he signed
his name, he observed, that there was no great
danger of his violating there articles, as a hand
that could hardly hold a pen, was little able to
brandish a lance.

The Empe THE violence of his disease confined the Em-
fehmes peror several months in Brussels, and was the
ithre apparent cause of putting off the execution of
ermny. the vast schemes which he had formed in order

to humble the Protestant party in Germany.
But there were other reasons for this delay. For,
however prevalent the motives were which de-
termined him to undertake this enterprise, the
nature of that great body which he was about
to attack, as well as the situation of his own
affairs, made it neceflary to deliberate long, to
proceed with caution, and not too suddenly to
throw aside the veil under which he had hi-
therto concealed his real sentiments and schemes.
He was sensible that the Protestants, conscious
of their own strength, but under continual ap-
prehensions of his designs, had all the boldness
of a powerful party joined to the jealousy of a
feeble fation; and were no less quick-fighted
to discern the first appearance of danger, than
ready to take arms in order to repel it. At the
fame time, he continued involved in a Turkish
war ; and though, in order to deliver himself

from

from this incumbrance, he had determined to Book VII.
fend an envoy to the Porte with molt advantage- '-
ous andeven submissive overtures of peace, the '544.
resolutions of that haughty court were so uncer-
tain, that before these were known, it would
have been highly imprudent to have kindled
the flames of civil war in his own domini-
ons.

UPON this account, he appeared dissatisfied ThePope

with a bull issued by the Pope immediately after g"enerl
the peace of Crefpy, summoning the council to council to
assemble at Trent early next spring, and exhort- Trent.
ing all Christian Princes to embrace the oppor- Novem. 9.
tunity that the present happy interval of tran-
quillity afforded them, of fuppreffling those he-
rceies which threatened to subvert whatever was
sacred or venerable among Christians. But after
such a flight expreflion of dislike, as was necef-
fary in order to cover his designs, he determined
to countenance the council, which might be-
come no inconsiderable instrument towards ac-
complifhing his projects; and therefore not only
appointed ambassadors to appear there in his
name, but ordered the ecclefiafticks in his domi-
nions to attend at the time prefixed P.

SUCH were the Eriperor's views, when the 545.

Imperial diet, after several prorogations, was W'o'm
opened at Worms. The Protestants, who en- March 4.
joyed the free exercise of their religion by a very
precarious tenure, having no other security for
it than the recess of the last diet, which was to
continue in force only until the meeting of a
council, wilhed earnestly to establish that im-
portant privilege upon some firmer basis, and
to hold it by a perpetual, not a temporary title.

But,
F. Paul, 104.

Boo.lL. But, inifead of offering them any additional fe-

curity, Ferdinand opened the diet with obferv-
4 ing, that there were two points, chiefly, which

required consideration, the prosecution of the
war against the Turks, and the slate of religion;
that the former was the most urgent, as Soly-
man, after conquering the greatest part ps Hun-
gary, was now ready to fall upon the Auflrian
provinces; that the Emperor, who, from the
beginning of his reign, had neglected no oppor-
tunity of annoying this formidable enemy, and
with the hazard of his own person had refirted
his attacks, being animated still with the fame
zeal, had now consented to stop hort in the
career of his success against France, that, in
conjunction with his ancient rival, he might
turn his arms with greater vigour against the
common adversary of the Christian faith; that
it became all the members of the Empire to fe-
cond those pious endeavours of its head; that,
therefore, they ought, without delay, to vote
him such effectual aid as not only their duty but
their interest called upon them to furnish that
the controversies about religion were Co intricate,
and of uch difficult difcufion, as to give no
hope of its being possible to bring them at pre-

Fcrdinnd sent to any final issue; that by perseverance and
reJu.rethe repeated olicitations theEmperor had at length

sknow prevailed on the Pope to call a council, for
edge tbe which they had so often wished and petitioned;

that the time appointed for its meeting was now
come, and both parties ought to wait for its de-
crees, and submit to them as the decisions of the
universal church.

THE popish members of the diet received this

declaration with great applause, and signified
their entire acquiescence in every particular

which

which it contained. The Protelants expressed Boox VII.
great surprise at propositions, which were so '*
manifestly repugnant to the recess of the former 1545'
diet; they infifed that the questions with regard
to religion, as firit in dignity and importance,
ought to come first under deliberation; that,
alarming as the progress of the Turks was to all
Germany, the securing the free exercise of their
religion touched them ill more nearly, nor
could they prosecute a foreign war with spirit,
while solicitous and concerned about their do-
meftick tranquillity; that if the latter were once
rendered firm and permanent, they would con-
cur with their countrymen in pushing the for-
mer, and yield to none of them in activity or
zeal. But if the danger from the Turkish arms
was indeed so imminent, as not to admit of such
a delay as would be occasioned by an immediate
examination of the controverted points in reli-
ion, they required that a diet should be in-
antly appointed, to which the final settlement
f their religious disputes should be referred
nd that in the mean time the decree of the for-
er diet concerning religion should be explained
n a point which they deemed essential. By the
ecefs of Spires it was provided, that they should
enjoy unmolested the publick exercise of their re-
ligion, until the meeting of a legal council; but
as the Pope had now called a council, to which
Ferdinand had required them to submit, they
began to fufpet that their adversaries might
take advantage of an ambiguity in the terms of
the recess, and pretending that the event therein
mentioned had taken place, might pronounce
them to be no longer entitled to the fame indul-
gence. In order to guard against this interpre-
tation, they renewed their former remonstrances
against a council called to meet without the
bounds of the Empire, summoned by the Pope's

VOL. III. E authority,

BootVII. authority, and in which he assumed the right of
~'"' presiding; and declared that, notwithstanding

'54;- the convocation of any such illegal assembly,

they fill held the recess of the late diet to be in
full force.

Emprorr- AT other juncures, when the Emperor
wamat thought it of advantage to sooth and gain the

Proteflants, he had devised expedients for giv-
ing them fatisfaaion with regard to demands
seemingly more extravagant; but his views at
present being very different, Ferdinand, by his
command, adhered inflexibly to his first propo-
fitions, and would make no concessions which
had the most remote tendency to throw difcre-
dit on the council, or to weaken its authority.
The Protestants, on their part, were no less in-
flexible; and, after much time spent in fruitless
endeavours to convince each other, they came
to no conclusion. Nor did the presence of the
Emperor, who upon his recovery arrived at
.y is. Worms, contribute in any degree to render the

Protestants more compliant. Fully convinced
that they were maintaining the cause of God
and of truth, they shewed themselves superior
to the allurements of interest, or the suggestions
of fear, and in proportion as the Emperor re-
doubled his solicitations, or discovered his de-
signs, their boldness seems to have increased.

Tbe rotef- At last they openly declared, that they would
inlm d', not even deign to vindicate their tenets in pre-
conn.xion fence of a council, allembled not to examine,
council of but to condemn them; and that they would pa)

ren no regard to an acmbly held under the influence

of a Pope, who had already precluded himself
from all title to a as a judge, by his having
stigmatized their opinions with the name of he.

refy

rely, and denounced against them the heaviest BooVI.
censures, which, in the plenitude of his usurped 5
power, he could inflit 5

WHILE the Protestants, with such union as Conduaof

well as firmness, rejected all ihtercourfe with the Mauriceof
council, and refused their assent to the Imperial thi diet.
demands in refpe& to the Turkish war, Mau-
rice of Saxony alone (hewed an inclination to
gratify the Emperor with regard to both.
Though he professed an inviolable regard for
the Protestant religion, he assumed an appear-
ance of moderation peculiar to himself, by which
he confirmed the favourable sentiments which the
mperor already entertained of him, and gra-
ually paved the way for executing the ambi-
ious designs which always occupied his acive
nd enterprising mind R. His example, how-
ver, had little influence upon such as agreed
ith him in their religious opinions; and Charles
rceived that he could not hope either to pro-
re present aid from the Protestants against the
urks, or to quiet their fears and jealousies on
count of their religion. But as his chemes
ere not yet ripe for execution, nor his prepara-
ions o far advanced that he could force their
ompliance, or punish their obstinacy, he art-
Illy concealed his own intentions. That he Augun 4.
ight augment their security, he appointed a
ict to be held at Ratisbon early next year, in
rder to adjust what was now left undetermined;
nd previous to it, he agreed that a certain num-
er of divines of each party should meet, in
rder to confer upon the points in dispute s.

E z BUT

Q Sleid 343, &c. Seek. iii. 543, &c. Thuan. Hiftor.
ii. ii. p. 56. R Seck. iii. 571. ' Sleid. 351.

BooVII. BUT how far soever this appearance of a de-
"- fire to maintain the present tranquillity might
TheP5"tf- have imposed upon the Protestants, the Empe-
tbt, b ror was incapable of such uniform and thorough
th Empc- diflimulation, as to hide altogether from their
.o.. view the dangerous designs which he was medi-

tating againit them. Herman count de Wied,
Archbishop and Eleor of Cologne, a prelate
conspicuous for his virtue and primitive fimpli-
city of manners, though not more distinguished
for learning than the other descendants of noble
families, who in that age possessed most of the
great benefices in Germany, having become a
proselyte to the dotrines of the Reformers, had
begun in the year one thousand five hundred
and forty three, with the affifance of Melanchon
and Bucer, to abolilh the ancient superstition in
his diocese, and to introduce in its place the
rites established among the Protestants. But
the canons of his cathedral, who were not pof-
sessed with the fame spirit of innovation, and
who foresaw how fatal the levelling genius of the
new fed would prove to their dignity and wealth,
opposed, from the beginning, this unprecedented
enterprize of their Archbishop with all the zeal
flowing from reverence for old inflitutions,
heightened by concern for their own interest.
This opposition, which the Archbishop confi-
dered only as a new argument to demonitrate
the neceflity of a reformation, neither shook his
resolution nor slackened his ardour in profecut-
ing his plan. The canons, perceiving all their
endeavours to check his career to be ineffectual,
solemnly protested against his proceedings, and
appealed for redress to the Pope and Emperor,
the former as his ecclesiastical, the latter as his
civil superior. This appeal being laid before the
Emperor, during his residence at Worms, he
took the canons of Cologne under his imme-

diate

diate protetion; enjoined them to proceed with BOOK VII
rigour against all who revolted from the eta- I 545
blifhed church; prohibited the Archbishop to
make any innovation in his diocese; and fum-
moned him to appear at Brufels within thirty
days, to answer the accusations which should be
preferred against him T.

To this clear evidenceof his hostile intentions

against the Protestant party; Charles added other
proofs still more explicit. In his hereditary do-
minions of the Low-Countries, he persecuted all
who were fufpeted of Lutheranifm with unre-
enting rigour. As soon as he arrived at Worms,
e silenced the Protestant preachers in that city.
e allowed an Italian monk to inveigh against
he Lutherans from the pulpit of his chapel,
nd to call upon him, as he regarded the favour
f God, to exterminate that pestilent heresy.
e dispatched the embassy, which has been
Iready mentioned, to Constantinople, with over-
res of peace, that he might be free from any
pprehenfions of danger or interruption from
hat quarter. Nor did any of these steps, or
eir dangerous tendency, escape the jealous ob-
rvation of the Protestants, or fail to alarm
heir fears, and to excite their solicitude for the
afety of their fed.

ME AN W H I LE, Charles's good fortune, which Death of

predominated on all occalions over that of his the Duke
rival Francis, extricated him out of a difficulty,
from which, with all his sagacity and address,
he would have found it no easy matter to have
disentangled himself. Just about the time when sept. .
the Duke of Orleans should have received Ser-
dinand's daughter in marriage, and together

with
leid. 310. 340. 351. Seckend. iii. 443. 553

BOOKVn. with her the possession of the Milanese, he died
'cv' of a pestilential fever. By this event, the Em-

'545 peror was freed from the necessity of giving up

an important province into the hands of an ene-
my, or from the indecency of violating a recent
and solemn engagement, which must have occa-
sioned an immediate rupture with France. He
affected, however, to express great sorrow for
the unimely death of a y oung prince, who was
to have been so nearly ailled to him ; but he care-
ful!) aoided entering into any fresh discussions
concerning the Milanese ; and would not liften
to a proposal which came from Francis of new-
modelling the treaty of Crefpy, so as to make
hinim ome reparation for the advantages which
he had loft by the demise of his son. In the
more ative and vigorous part of Francis's reign,
a declaration of war would have been the certain
and inltantaneous confcquence of fich a flat re-
fufal to comply with a demand seemingly so
equitable; but the declining slate of his own
health, the exhausted condition of his kingdoms,
together with the burden of the war againfi
England, obliged him, at present, to diflimble
his resentment, and to put off thoughts of re-
venge to some other junture. In consequence
of this event, the unfortunate Duke of Savoy
loft all hope of obtaining the reffitution of his
territories; and the rights or claims relinquished
by the treaty of Crefpy, returned in full force
to the crow n of France, to serve as pretexts for
future wars .

Thn Pcre UPON the first intelligence of the Duke of
tiLhic of Orleans's death, the confederates of Smalkalde
,*n and flattered thern-lves that the essential alterations
: i... i.. which it ocafioned could hardly fail of pro-

ducing
u Eelarii Colnllmnt. 769. Paruta, lHit. Venet. iv. p. 177.

ducing a rupture, which would prove the means BooK VII.
of their fatety. But they were not more difap-
pointed with regard to this, than in their ex-
peations from an event which eemed to be hie
certain prelude of a quarrel between the Empe-
ror and the Pope. When Paul, whole pallion
for aggrandizing his family increased as he ad-
vanced in years, and as he saw the dignity and
power which they derived immediately from him
becoming more precarious, found that he could
not bring Charles to approve of his ambitious
fchemesi he ventured to grant his ion Peter
Lewis the invefliture of Parma and Placentia,
though at the risk of incurring the displeasure
of the Emperor. At a time when a great part
of Europe inveighed openly against the corrupt
manners and exorbitant power of Ecclefiafticks,
and when a council wasfummoned to reform the
disorders in the church, this indecent grant of
uch a principality, to a son ofwhofe illegitimate
irth the Pope ought to have been alhamed, and
hofc licentious morals all good men deteffed,
ave general offence. Some Cardinals in the
mperial interest remonstrated against such an
unbecoming alienation of the patrimony of the
church; the Spanish ambassador would not be
present at the bolemnity of his enfeofment; and
upon pretext that these cities were part of the
Milanese state, the Emperor peremptorily re-
sued to confirm the deed of investiture. But
both the Emperor and Pope being intent upon
one common objet in Germany, acrificed their
particular paliions to tliat publick cauie, and lup-
prefled the emotions of jcaloufy or resentment
which were rising on this occasion, that they
might jointly purfile what each fteemed of
greater importance x.

ABOUT
' a~at L" 1111. Ve~et. i V, I S. P--d~il Isa.

BooK v. ABOUT this time the peace of Germany was

'545. disturbed by a violent but short eruption of
Henry , Henry Duke of Brunswick. This Prince,
runfwic. though fill tript of his dominions, which the
* i'n 'Ger- Emperor held in sequestration, until his differ-
'JW* ences with the confederates of Smalkalde hould

be adjusted, pofieffed however so much credit
in Germany, that he undertook to raise for the
French king a considerable body of troops to be
employed in the war againit England. The
money stipulated for this purpose was duly ad-
vanced by Francis; the troops were levied; but
Henry, initead of leading them towards France,
suddenly entered his own dominions at their
head, in hopes of recovering them before any
army could be assembled to oppose him. The
confederates were not more surprised at this un-
expeted attack, than the King of France was
astonished at a mean thievish fraud, so unbecom-
ing the character of a Prince. But the Land-
grave of Hefle, with incredible expedition, col-
lecEed as many men as put a flop to the progress
of Henry's undisciplined forces, and being joined
by his fon-in-law Maurice, and by some troops
belonging to the Elector of Saxony, he gained
such advantages over Henry, who was rah and
bold in forming his schemes, but feeble and un-
determined in executing them, as obliged him
to disband his army, and to surrender himself, to-
gether with his eldest son, prisoners at discretion.
He was kept in close confinement, until a new
reverse of affairs procured him liberty Y.

1546. As this defeat of Henry's wild enterprise add-

Tb.on of ed new reputation to the arms of the Protest-
tbc Pati- ants, the eformation of the Palatinate brought
.."". a great acceflicn of strength to their party.

Frederick,
t'Slid. 352. Seek. iii. 567.

Frederick, who succeeded his brother Lewis in BooKVIl.
that EleEorate, had long been fufpefed of a T i
secret propensity to the doctrines of the Re-
formers, which, upon his accession to the prin-
cipality, he openly manifested. But as he ex-
peded that omething effectual towards a gene-
ral and legal establishment of religion, would be
the fruit of o many diets, conferences, and ne-
gociations, he did not, at first, attempt any pub-
lick innovation in his dominions. Finding all Jan. to.
these issue in nothing, he thought himself called,
at length, to countenance by his authority the
system which he approved of, and to gratify the
wishes of his fubjets, who, by their intercourse
with the Protestant flates, had universally im-
bibed their opinions. As the warmth and im-
petuofity which accompanied the spirit of re-
formation in its first efforts, had romewhat abat-
ed, this change was made with great order and
regularity; the ancient rites were abolished, and
new forms introduced, without any at of vio-
lence, or symptom of discontent. Though
Frederick adopted the religious system of the
Protestants, he imitated the example of Mau-
rice, and did not accede to the league of Smal-
kalde z.

A FEW weeks before this revolution in the Thecouncil

Palatinate, the general council was opened with Trt *
the accustomed folemnities at Trent. The eyes
of the Catholick states were turned with much
expectation towards an assembly, which all had
confidered as a natural and adequate remedy for
the disorders of the church when they first broke
out; though many were afraid that it was now
too late to hope for great benefit from it, when
the malady, by being suffered to make progress

during
z Sleid. 356. Seck. . iii. 616.

Boos VII. during twenty-eight years, had become invete-

'- rate, and grown to such extreme violence. The

Pope, by his last bull of convocation, had ap-
pointed the first meeting to be held in March.
But his views, and those of the Emperor, were so
different, that almost the whole year was spent
in negociations. Charles, who foresaw that the
rigorous decrees of the council against the Pro-
teftants would oon drive them, in felf-defence
as well as from resentment, to some desperate
extreme, laboured to put off its meeting until
his warlike preparations were so far advanced,
that he might be in a condition to second its de-
cifions by the force of his arms. The Pope,
who had early ent to Trent the legates who were
to preside in his name, knowing to what con-
tempt it would expose his authority, and what
suspicions it would beget of his intentions, if the
fathers of the council should remain in a state of
inactivity, when the church was in such danger
as to require their immediate and vigorous inter-
position, insisted either upon translating the coun-
cil to ome city in Italy, or upon suspending alto-
gether izs proceedings at that juncture, or upon
authorizing it to begin its deliberations immedi-
ately. The Emperor rejected the two former
as equally offensive to the Germans of every de-
nomination; but finding it impoflible to elude
the latter, he proposed that the council should
begin with reforming the disorders of the church,
before it proceeded to examine or define articles
of faith. This was the very thing which the
court of Rome dreaded most, and which had
porr,pted it to employ fd many artifices in order
to prevent the meeting of such a dangerous ju-
dicator\. Paul, though more compliant than
tome of his predeceflors with regard to calling
a council, was no lels jealous than they had been
us its jrifdiction, and aw what mtter of

triumph

triumph such a method of proceeding would BooKVI.
afford the hereticks. He apprehended confe- "~ '
quences not only humbling but fatal to the 1546.
papal fee, if the council came to confider an in-
quest into abuses as their only bufines ; or if
inferior prelates were allowed to grazify their
own envy and peevishness, b prescribing rules
to those who were exalted above them in dignity
and power. Without listening, therefore, to
this insidious proposal of the Emperor, he in-
llructed his legates to open the council.

THE first feflion was spent in matters of form. Jan. 18.

In a subsequent one, it was agreed that the itssrcted
framing aconfeffion of faith, wherein hould be
contained all the articles which the church re-
quired its members to believe, ought to be the
first and principal business of the council; but
that, at the fame time, due attention hould be
given to what was neceflaPy towards the refor-
mation of manners and discipline. From this
first symptom of the spirit with which the coun-
cil was animated, from the high tone of autho-
rity which the legates who prelided in it aftimed,
and from the implicit deference with which mnot
of the members followed their directions, the
Protestants conjetured with cafe what decisions
they might expet. It aftonihed them, howe-
ver, to fee forty prelates, (for no greater num-
ber were yet assembled) assume authority as re-
presentatives of the universal church, and pro-
ceed to determine the most important points of
doctrine in its name. Sensible of this indecen-
cy, as well as of the ridicule with which it might
be attended, the council advanced slowly in itsdc-
liberations, and all its proceedings were for fomie
time languishing and feeble A. As loon as the

corni-crates
^ F. Paul, 12o, &c. Fallavic. p. So, &c.

Boo VI. confederates of Smalkalde received information

""' of the opening of the council, they published a
54& long manifesto, containing a renewal of their

protest against its meeting, together with the
reasons which induced them to decline its jurif-
diftions'. The Pope and Emperor, on their
part, were so little solicitous to quicken or add
vigour to its operations, as plainly discovered
that some object of greater importance occupied
and interested them

Apprehea- THE Proteflants, as they were not inattentive,
rof-,, or unconcerned fpeftators of their motions, en-

tertained every day more violent suspicions of
their intentions, and received intelligence from
different quarters of the machinations carrying
on against them. The King of England in-
formed them, that the Emperor having long
resolved to exterminate their opinions, would
not fail to employ this interval of tranquillity
which he now enjoyed, as the most favourable
juncture for carrying his design into execution.
The merchants of Augsburg, which was at that
time a city of extensive trade, received advice,
by means of their correspondents in Italy, among
whom were some who secretly favoured the
Protestant cause , that a dangerous confederacy
againit it was forming between the Pope and
Emperor. In confirmation of this, they heard
from the Low-Countries that Charles had issued
orders, though with every precaution which
could keep the measure concealed, for raising
troops both there and in other parts of his do-
minions. Such a variety of information, corro-
borating all that their own jealousy or obferva-
tion led them to apprehend, left the Proteitants

little
* Seck. 1. iii. 6c2, &c.

1 Scc. . iii. 79.

little reason to doubt of the Emperor's hostile Boo VII.
intentions. Under this impreflion, the depu- '"
ties of the confederates of Smalkalde assembled Theird.
at Frankfort, and by communicating their intel- liberation.
ligence and sentiments to each other, recipro-
cally heightened their sense of the impending
danger. But their union was not such as their
situation required, or the preparations of their
enemies rendered necessary. Their league had
now subsisted ten years. Among so many mem-
bers whose territories were intermingled with
each other, and who, according to the custom
of Germany, had created an infinite variety of
mutual rights and claims by intermarriages, al-
liances, and contracts of different kinds, sub-
jects of jealousy and discord had unavoidably
arisen. Some of the confederates, being con-
nected with the Duke of Brunswick, were highly
disgusted with the Landgrave, on account of the
rigour with which he had treated that rash but
unfortunate Prince. Others taxed the Eletor of
Saxony and Landgrave, the heads of the league,
with having involved the members in unne-
ceffary and exorbitant expences by their profuse-
ness or want of economy. Theviews, like-
wife, of those two great Princes, who, by their
superior power and authority, influenced and
directed the whole body, being extremely dif-
ferent, rendered all its motions languid, at a
time when the utnoft vigour and dispatch were
requisite. The Landgrave, of a violent anden-
terprifing temper, but not forgetful, amidst his
zeal for religion, of the usual maxims of human
policy, insisted that, asthe danger which threat-
ened them was manifest and unavoidable, they
Ihould have recourse to the most effectual expe-
dient for securing their own safety, by courting

the

BooK VII. the protection of the Kings of France and Eng-
%v`--- land, or by joining in alliance with the Protest-

546. ant cantons of Switzerland, from whom they

might expect such powerful and present afliftance
as their lituation demanded. The elector, on
the other hand, with the most upright intentions
of any Prince in that age, and with talents which
might have qualified him abundantly for the
adminiflration of government in any tranquil
period, was pofleffed with such superstitious ve-
neration for all the parts of the Lutheran system,
and such bigotted attachment to all its tenets, as
made him averse to an union with those who
differed from him in any article of faith, and
rendered him very incapable of undertaking its
defence in times of difficulty and danger. He
seemed to think, that the concerns of religion
were to be regulated by principles and maxims
totally different from those which apply to the
common affairs of life; and being swayed too
much by the opinions of Luther, who was not.
only a firanger to the rules of political conduct,
but defpiled them; he often discovered an un-
complx ing spirit, that proved of the greatest de-
triment to the cause which he wished to support.
Influenc:d, on this occasion, by the evere and
rigid notions of that Reformer, he refused to
enter into any confederacy with Francis, because
he was a persecutor of the truth; or to solicit
the friendship of Henry, because he was no less
impious and profane than the Pope himself; or
even to join in alliance with the Swiss, because
they differed from the Germans in several essential
articles of faith. This dissention, about a point
of such consequence, produced its natural es-
feds. Each secretly censured and reproached
the other. The Landgrave confidered the Elec-
tor as tEttered by narrow prejudices, unworthy
of a Prince called to at a chief part in a fene

of

of such importance. The Elector fufpeded him BooKVIL.
of loose principles and ambitious views, which '
corresponded ill with the sacred cause wherein 1546.
they were engaged. But though the Eledor's
fcrnples prevented their timely application for
foreign aid; and the jealousy or discontent of
the other Princes defeated a proposal for re-
newing their original confederacy, the term
during which it was to continue in force being
on the point of expiring; yet the sense of their
common danger induced them to agree with
regard to other points, particularly that they
would never acknowledge the assembly at Trent
as a lawful council, nor susser the Archbishop
of Cologne to be oppressed on account of the
steps which he had taken towards the reforma-
tion of his diocese.

THE Landgrave, about this time, desirous of The;r ne-

penetrating to the bottom of the Emperor's in- ggoiao"
tentions, wrote to Granvelle, whom he knew to Empcr.
be thoroughly acquainted with all his master's
schemes, informing him of the several parti-
culars which raised the suspicions of the Pro-
teftants, and begging an explicit declaration
of-what they had to fear or to hope. Gran-
velle, in return, assured them that the intelli-
gence which they had received of the Empe-
ror's military preparations was exaggerated,
and all their suspicions destitute of foundation;
that, though in order to guard his frontiers
against any insult of the French or English,
he had commanded a small body of men to
be raised in the Low-countries, he was as
solicitous as ever to maintain tranquillity in
Germany E.

BUT the Emperor's aions did not corre-
fpond with these profeflions. For, instead of

appointing
DSeck. 1. iii. 565. 570. 63. Sleid. 355. Sleid 356.

BooVII appointing men of known moderation and a
L^r7 ~ pacifick temper to appear in defence of the Ca-

tholick doctrires at the conference which had
been agreed on, he made choice of fierce bigots,
attached to their own fyfiem with a blind ob-
ftlnacy, that rendered all hope of reconcile-
ment desperate. Malvenda, a Spanish divine,
who took the conduct of the debate on the part
of the Catholicks, managed it with all the subtle
dexterity of a cholaftick metaphysician, more
studious to perplex his adversaries than to con-
vince them, and more intent on palliating error
than on discovering truth. The Protestants filled
with indignation, as well at his sophistry as at
some regulations which the Emperor endea-
voured to impose on the disputants, broke off
the conference abruptly, being now fully con-
vinced that, in all his late measures, the Em-
peror could have no other view than to amuie
them, and to gain time for ripening his own
Ichemes F.

Sleid 358 Seek. . iii. 6zo.

THE

# BOOK VIII.

THE
HI S TO R Y

OF THE
R E I G N

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES V.

BOOK VIII.

W HILE appearances of danger daily BooK
WV increased, and the tempest which had Vnl
been so long a gathering was ready to break ,
forth in all its violence against the Protestant Deth4
church, Luther was saved, by a seasonable Lther.
death, from feeling or beholding its deftrudtive
rage. Having gone, though in a declining state
of health, and during a rigorous feaon, to his
native city of Eyfleben, in order to compose, by
his authority, a dissention among the counts of
Mansfield, he was feided with a violent inflam-
mation in his fomach, which in a few days put Feb. a.
an end to his life, in the fixty-thifd year of his
?e. As he was raised up by Providence to be
rhe author of one of the greatest and rmot in-
'reRfing revolutions recorded in history, there

not any person, perhaps, whole char~&ter has

.en drawn with such opposite colours. In his
',vn age, one party, struck with horror and in-

VOL. III. F flamed

B o o flamed with rage, when they saw with what a
VIII. daring hand he overturned every thing which
1546. they held to be sacred, or valued as beneficial,

imputed to him not only all the defets and vices
of a man, but the qualities of a daemon. The
other, warmed with the admiration and grati-
tude, which they thought he merited as the re-
fiorer of light and liberty to the ChriRian
church, ascribed to him perfections above the
condition of humanity, and viewed all his ac-
tions with a veneration bordering on that which
fliould be paid only to those who are guided by
HM ch. the immediate inspiration of Heaven. It is his

' own conduct, not the undiftinguifhing censure

or the exaggerated praise of his contemporaries,
that ought to regulate the opinions of the present
age concerning him. Zeal for what he regarded
as truth, undaunted intrepidity to maintain his
own system, abilities both natural and acquired
to defend his principles, and unwearied induRry
in propagating them, are virtues which ihine so
conspicuously in every part of his behaviour, that
even his enemies must allow him to have pof-
sessed them in an eminent degree. To there may
be added, with equal justice, such purity and
even austerity of manners, as became one who
assumed the charater of a Reformer; such fanc-
tity of life as suited the dodtrine which he de-
livered; and such perfect disinterestedness as
affords no flight presumption of his sincerity.
Superior to all felfif considerations, a stranger
to the elegancies of life, and despising its plea-
fures, he left the honours and emoluments of
the church to his disciples, remaining satisfied
himself in his original state of professor in the
university, and pastor of the town of Wittem-
berg, with the moderate appointments annexed
to these offices. His extraordinary qualities
were allayed with no inconsiderable mixture of
human frailty and human palions. These, how-

ever,

ever, were of such a nature, that they cannot B o o
be imputed to malevolence or corruption of VIII.
heart, but seem to have taken their rife from the 1546.
fame source with many of his virtues. His mind,
forcible and vehement in all its operations,
roused by great obje&s, or agitated by violent
palions, broke out, on many occasions, with
an impetuosity which astonishes men of feebler
spirits, or such as are placed in a more tranquil
situation. By carrying some praise-worthy dif-
positions to excess, he bordered sometimes on
what was culpable, and was often betrayed into
actions which exposed him to censure. His
confidence that his own opinions were well
founded, approached to arrogance; his courage
in aferting them, to rashness; his firmnel in
adhering to them, to obstinacy; and his zeal in
confuting his adversaries, to rage and scurrility.
Accustomed himself to confider every thing as
Subordinate to truth, he expected the fame de-
ference for it from other men; and, without
making any allowances for their timidity or pre-
judices, he poured forth against such as difap-
pointed him in this particular, a torrent of in-
vedive mingled with contempt. Regardless of
any diftintion of rank or character when his
docrines were attacked, he chastised all his ad-
verfaries indiscriminately, with the fame rough
hand; neither the royal dignity of Henry VIII.
nor the eminent learning and abilities of Eras-
mus, screened them from the fame gross abuse
with which he treated Tetzel or Eccius.

BUT there indecencies of which Luther was
guilty, must not be imputed wholly to the vio-
lence of his temper. They ought to be charged
in part on the manners of the age. Among a
rude people, unacquainted with those maxims,
which, by putting continual restraint on the

F 2 paflions

Bo o passions of individuals, have polished society
vili. and rendered it agreeable, disputes of every kind
546. were managed with heat, and strong emotions

were uttered in their natural language, without
reserve ordelicacy. At the fame time, the works
of learned men were all composed in Latin, and
they were not only authorized, by the example
of eminent writers in that language, to use their
antagonists with the most illiberal scurrility;
but, in a dead tongue, indecencies of every
kind appear less hocking than in a living lan-
guage, whose idioms and phrases seem gross,
because they are familiar.

IN pafling judgment upon the characters of

men, we ought to try them by the principles
and maxims of their own age, not by those of
another. For, although virtue and vice are at
all times the fame, manners and customs vary
continually. Some parts of Luther's behaviour,
which to us appear most culpable, gave no -dif-
gust to his contemporaries. It was even by foie
of those qualities, which we are now apt to
blame, that he was fitted for accomplishing the
great work which he undertook. To rouse
mankind, when funk in ignorance or superstition,
and to encounter the rage of bigotry, armed
with power, required the utmost vehemence of
zeal, as well as a temper daring to excess. A
gentle call would neither have reached, nor have
excited those to whom it was addressed. A
spirit more amiable, but less vigorous than Lu-
ther's, would have hrunk back from the dan-
gers, which he braved and surmounted. To-
wards the close of Luther's life, though without
any perceptible declension of his zeal or abilities,
the infirmities of his temperincreafed upon him,
so that he grew daily more peevish, more iraf-
cible, and more impatient of contradiction.

Having

Having lived to be witness of his own amazing Bo o
success; to fee a great part of Europe embrace V.
his dotrines; and to mhake the foundation of S46.
the papal throne, before which the mightiest
Monarchs had trembled, he discovered, on some
occasions, symptoms of vanity and felf-applaufe.
He must have been indeed more than man, if,
upon contemplating all that he actually accom-
plifhed, he had never felt any sentiment of this
kind rising in his breast *.

SOME time before his death he felt his strength

declining, his constitution being worn out by a
prodigious multiplicity of business, added to
the labour of discharging his ministerial function
with unremitting diligence, to the fatigue of
conflant study, betides the composition of works
as voluminous as if he had enjoyed uninterrupt-
ed leisure and retirement. His natural intrepi-
dity did not forsake him at the approach of
death; his last conversation with his friends was
concerning the happiness reserved for good men

in

* A remarkable inflance of this, as well as of a certain

singularity and elevation of sentiment, is found in his Last
Will. Though the effects which he had to bequeath were
very inconsiderable, he thought it necessary to make a
Teflament, but corned to'frame it'with the usual legal
formalities. Notus um, fays he, in coelo, in terra, & inferno,
& auaoritatem ad hoc sufficientem habeo, ut mihi soli cre-
datur, cum Deus mihi, homini licet, damnabili, et mifera-
bili peccatori, ex paterna mifericordia Evangelium filii fui
crediderit, dederitque ut in eo verax & fidelis fuerim, ita
ut multi in mundo illud per me acceperint, & me pro Doc-
tore veritatis agnoverint, fpreto banno Papa, Czfaris, Re-
gum, Principum & facerdotum, immo omnium damonum
odio. Quidni, igitur, ad dispositionem hanc, in re exigua,
fufficiat, si adfit manus meea teftimonium, & dici pollit,
hac fcripfit D. Martinus Luther, Notarius Dei, & testis
Evangelii ejus. Sec. 1. iii. p. 65r.

B o O in a future world, of which he spoke with the

mVI. fervour and delight natural to one who expected
6 and wished to enter soon upon the enjoyment of

it . The account of his death filled the Roman
Catholick party with excessive as well as indecent
joy, and damped the spirits of all his followers;
neither party sufficiently confidering that his
doctrines were now so firmly rooted, as to be in
a condition to flourilh independent of the hand
which sirs had planted them. His funeral was
celebrated by order of the Eletor of Saxony with
extraordinary pomp. He left several children by
his wife Catharine a Boria, who survived him.
Towards the end of the last century, there were
in Saxony some of his descendants in decent and
honourable stations B.

The Empe- THE Emperor, meanwhile, pursued the plan

"t'"n of dissimulation with which he had set out, em-

srmfe a ploying every art to amuse the Protestants, and
deceive the
Proteftatn. to quiet their fears and jealousies. For this
Mch 18. purpose he contrived to have an interview with

the Landgrave of Hesse, the most ative of all
the confederates, and the most suspicious of his
designs. To him he made such warm profef-
sions of his concern for the happiness of Ger-
many, and of his aversion to all violent mea-
fures; he denied in such express terms, his hav-
ing entered into any league, or having begun
any military preparations which hould give
cause of alarm to the Protestants, as seem to
have dispelled all the Landgrave's doubts and
apprehensions, and sent him away fully satisfied
of his pacifick intentions. This artifice was of
great advantage, and effectually answered the
purpose for which it was employed. The Land-
grave upon his leaving Spires, where he had
been admitted to thip interview, went to Worms,

where
Sleid. 362. Seek. lib. iii. 632, &c. · 'eck. 1. iii. 651.

where the Smalkaldick confederates were aflem- B o o K
bled, and gave them such a flattering represent- VIII.
ation of the Emperor's favourable disposition 1546.
towards them, that they, too apt, as well from
the temper of the German nation as from the
genius of all great associations or bodies of men,
to be flow, and dilatory, and undecifive in their
deliberations, thought there was no necellity of
taking any immediate measures against danger,
which appeared to be distant or imaginary e.

SUCH events, however, soon occurred, as Proceedings

Raggered the credit which the Protestants had of thecou-
given to the Emperor's declarations. The the Protest
council of Trent, though frill composed of a *
small number of Italian and Spaniih prelates,
without a single deputy from any of the king-
doms which it aflumed the right of binding by
its decrees, being ashamed of its long inaci-
vity, proceeded now to fettle articles of the
greatest importance. Having begun with exa-
mining the first and chief point in controversy
between the church of Rome and the Reformers,
concerning the rule which hould be held as fu-
preme and decisive in matters of faith, the
council, by its infallible authority, determined,
" That the books to which the designation of April 8.
Apocryphal hath been given, are of equal au-
thority with those which were received by the
Jews and primitive Chritians into the sacred
canon; that the traditions handed down from
the apoftolick age, and preserved in the church,
are entitled to as much regard as the doctrines
and precepts which the inspired authors have
committed to writing; that the Latin tranfla-
tion of the Scriptures, made or revised by St.
Jerome, and known by the name of the Vulgate
translation, should be read in churches. and

appealed
c Sleid. Hilt. 367. 373.

Bo o x appealed to in the schools as authentick and ca-
VIII. nonical. Against all who disclaimed the truth
1546. of these tenets, anathemas were denounced in

the name and by the authority of the Holy
Ghost. The decision of there points, which
undermined the main foundation of the Lu-
theran system, was a plain warning to the Pro-
teftants what judgment they might expec when
the council hould have leisure to take into con-
fidFr: .-. the particular and subordinate articles
oi thei. creed

THIS discovery of the council's readiness to

condemn the opinions of the Protestants, was
soon followed by a striking infance of the
Pope's resolution to punish such as embraced
them. The appeal of the canons of Cologne
against their Archbishop having been carried to
Rome, Paul eagerly seized on that opportunity,
both of displaying the extent of his own autho-
rity, and of teaching the German ecclefiafticks
the danger of revolting from the eftablilhed
church. As no person appeared in behalf of
the Archbihiop, he was held to be convicted of
Apfl i6. the crime of heresy, and a Papal bull was

iflued, depriving him of his ecclesiastical dig-
nity, inflieing on him the sentence of excom-
munication, and absolving his fubjeas from the
oath of allegiance which they had taken to him
as their civil superior. The countenance which
he had given to the Lutheran heresy was the
only crime imputed to him, as well as the only
reason assigned to justify the extraordinary rigour
of this decree. The Protestants could hardly
believe that Paul, how zealous soever to defend
the eftablithed system, or to humble those who
in-aded it, would have ventured to proceed to
such extremities againif a Prince and Elector of

the
'F. Paul. 41. Pallat. 2o6.

the Empire, without having previously secured B o o
such powerful protection as would render his VII.
censure something more than an impotent and L-6
despicable ally of resentment. They were of
course deeply alarmed at this entence against
the Archbishop, confidering it as a sure indica-
tion of the malevolent intentions not only of
the Pope, but of the Emperor, against the
whole party e.

UPON this fresh revival of their fears, with Charlec

such violence as is natural to men rouzed from ,bout oc
a false security, and conscious of their having hofiilities
been deceived, Charles saw that it was now ne- gotcnfi^t,
ceffary to throw aside the veil, and to declare
openly what part he determined to aft. By a
long series of artifice and fallacy, he had gained
so much time, that his measures, though not
altogether ripe for execution, were greatly ma-
tured. The Pope, by his proceedings against
the Eletor of Cologne, as well as by the de-
cree of the council, had precipitated matters
into such a fiutation, as rendered a breach be-
tween the Emperor and the Protestants almost
unavoidable. Charles had now no choice left
him but either to take part with them in over-
turning what the See of Rome had determined,
or to support the authority of the church openly
by force of arms. Nor did the Pope think it Negocite,
enough to have brought the Emperor under a withe
neceflity of acting; he pressed him to begin his
operations, by promising to second him with
such vigour as could not well fail of securing
his success. Transported by his zeal against
heresy, Paul forgot all the prudent and cautious
maxims of the Papal See, with regard to the
danger of extending the Imperial authority
beyond due bounds; and in order crush the

Lutherans,
$Sleid. 354. F.Paul, 155. Pallavic. 224.

Bo o Lutherans, he was willing to contribute towards
vIL. raising up a master that might one day prove

6. formidable to himself as well as to the reft of

Italy.
concludea BUT, besides the certain expectation of aflift-

iot~^,uh ance from the Pope, Charles was now secure

from any danger of interruption to his designs
by the Turkish arms. His negociations at the
Porte, which he had carried on with great afli-
duity since the peace of Crefpy, were on the
point of being terminated in such a manner as
he desired. Solyman, partly in compliance with
the French King, who, in order to avoid the
disagreeable obligation of joining the Emperor
against his ancient ally, laboured with great zeal
to bring about an accommodation between
them; and partly from its being neceflary to
turn his arms towards the east, where the Per-
sians threatened to invade his dominions, con-
sented without difficulty to a truce for five years.
The chief article of it was, That each should
retain poffeflion of what he now held in Hun-
gary; and Ferdinand, as a sacrifice to the pride
of the Sultan, submitted to pay an annual tri-
bute of fifty thousand crowns .

cG;in, M- BUT it was upon the aid and concurrence of

,r..""1 the Germans themselves that the Emperor re-
Pricce Of lied with the greatest confidence. The Germa-
Ge;.mny. nick body, he knew, was of such vast strength,

as to be invincible if it were united, and that
it was only by employing its own force that he
could hope to subdue it. Happily for him, the
union of the several members in this great sys-
tem was so feeble, the whole frame was o

loosely

Ifiuanhaffii Hilt. Hung. 80. Mem. de Ribier, tom. i.
582.

loosely compacted, and its different parts tended Bo o
so violently towards eparation from each other, V11.
that it was almost impoflible for it, on any im- 546.
portant emergence, to join in a general or vi-
goious effort. In the present junture, the
sources of discord were as many and as various
as had been known on any occasion. The Ro-
man Catholicks, animated with zeal in defence
of their religion proportional to the fierceness
with which it had been attacked, were eager to
second any attempt to humble those innovators
who had overturned it in many provinces, and
endangered it in more. John and Albert of
Brandenburg, as well as several other Princes,
incensed at the.haughtinefs and rigour with
which the Duke of Brunswick had been treated
by the confederates of Smalkalde, were impa-
tient to rescue him, and to be revenged on them.
Charles observed, with satisfaction, the work-
ing of those passions in their minds; and count-
ing on them as sure auxiliaries whenever he
should think it proper to at, he found it, in
the mean time, more necessary to moderate than
to inflame their rage.

SUCH was the situation of affairs, such theHod,

discernment with which the Emperor foresaw diettRa-
and provided for every event, when the diet of
the Empire met at Ratisbon. Many of the
Roman Catholick members appeared there in
person, but most of the confederates of Smal-
kalde, under pretence of their being unable to
bear the expence occasioned by the late unne-
ceffary frequency of such aflemblies, sent only
deputies. Their jealousy of the Emperor, to-
gether with an apprehension that violence might,
perhaps, be employed, in order to force their
approbation of what he hould propose in the
diet, was the true cause of their absence. The

speech

B o o speech with which the Emperor opened the diet
VII. was extremely artful. After professing, in com-
546. mon form, his regard to the prosperity of the

Germanick body, and declaring, that, in order
to bestow his whole attention upon the re-efta-
blifhment of its order and tranquillity, he had
at present abandoned all other cares, rejected
the molt prefling olicitations of his other ub-
jetAs to reside among them, and postponed as-
fairs of the greatest importance; he tool notice,
with some disapprobation, that his difinterelted
example had not been imitated; many mem-
bers of chief consideration having neglected to
attend an assembly to which he had repaired with
such manifest inconvenience to himself. He
then mentioned their unhappy dissentions about
religion; lamented the ill luccefs of his pail
endeavours to compose them; complained of
the abrupt dissolution of the late conference,
and craved their advice with regard to the belt
and most effeculal method of restoring union to
the churches of Germany, together with that
happy agreement in articles of faith, which their
ancestors had found to be of no less advantage
to their civil interest, than becoming their Chris-
tian profellion.

BY this gracious and popular method of con-

fulting the members of the diet, rather than of
obtruding upon them any opinion of his own,
betides the appearance of great moderation,
and the merit of paying much refpedt to their
judgment, the Emperor dxtroufly avoided dif-
covering his own sentiments, and reserved to
himself, as his only part, that of carrying into
execution what they should recommend. Nor
was he less secure of such a decision as he wished
for, -by referring it wholly to themselves. The
Roman Catholick members, prompted by their

own

own zeal, or prepared by his intrigues, joined Boor
immediately in representing that the authority VII
of the council now met at Trent ought to be 546
final in all matters of controversy; that all
Christians Ihould submit to its decrees as the in-
fallible rule of their faith; and therefore they
besought him to exert the power, with which
he was inverted by the Almighty, in protecting
that assembly, and in compelling the Protestants
to acquiesce in its determinations. The Protelt-
ants, on the other hand, presented a memorial,
in which, after repeating their objections to the
council of Trent, they proposed, as the only
effectual method of deciding the points in dif-
pute, that either a free general council should
be assembled in Germany, or a national council
of the Empire should be called, or a fele&
number of divines should be appointed out of
each party to examine and define articles of
faith. They mentioned the recefles of several
diets favourable to this proposition, and which
had afforded them the profped of terminating
all the differences in this amicable manner;
they now conjured the Emperor not to depart
fiom his former plan, and by offering violence
to their consciences, to bring calamities upon
Germany, the very thought of which must fill
every lover of his country with horror. The
Emperor receiving this paper with a contemptu-
ous smile, paid no farther regard to it. Having
already taken his final resolution, and perceiv-
ing that nothing but force could compel them
to acquiesce in it, he dispatched the Cardinal of June,.
Trent to Rome, in order to conclude an alliance
with the Pope, the terms of which were already
agreed on; he commanded a body of troops,
levied on purpose in the Low-Countries, to ad-
vance towards Germany; he gave commiflions
to several officers for railing men in different

parts

Bo o K parts of the Empire; he warned John and Al-
VIII. bert of Brandenburg, that now was the proper
146. time of exerting themselves, in order to rescue

their ally, Henry of Brunswick, from capti-
vity .

The Pro ALL these things could not be tranfaced
aimed. without the observation and knowledge of the

Protestants. The secret was now in many
hands; under whatever veil the Emperor still
affected to conceal his designs, his officers kept
no such mysterious reserve, and his allies and
subjects spoke out his intentions plainly. Alarm-
ed with reports of this kind from every quar-
ter, as well as with the preparations of war which
they saw begun, the deputies of the confede-
rates demanded audience of the Emperor, and,
in the name of their maiers, required to know
whether there military preparations were car-
ried on by his command, and for what end and
against what enemy ? To a question put in such
a tone, and at a time when facts were become
too notorious to be denied, it was necessary to
give an explicit answer. Charles owned the
orders which he had issued, and professing his
purpose not to molest any on account of reli-
gion who should at as dutiful fubjeas, de-
ciared that he had nothing in view but to main-
tain the rights and prerogatives of the Imperial
dignity, and, by punishing Come facious mem-
bers, to preserve the ancient constitution of the
Empire from being impaired or dissolved by
their irregular and licentious conduct. Though
the Emperor did not name the persons whom he
charged with such high crimes, and destined to
be the objecs of his vengeance, it was obvious
that he had the Elector of Saxony, and Land-
grave of Hesse in view. Their deputies confi-
dering what he had said as a plain declaration

of
'Sleid. 374 Seck. iii. 65S.

of his hostile intentions, immediately retired B or
from Ratisbon G VII.

1546.

THE Cardinal of Trent found it no difficult The Empe-

matter to treat with the Pope, who, having at rwi te
length brought the Emperor to adopt that plan Pope.
which he had long recommended, assented with
eagerness to every article that he proposed. The July it.
league was signed a few days after the Cardi-
nal's arrival at Rome. The pernicious herefies
which abounded in Germany, the obstinacy of
the Protestants in rejecting the holy council
assembled at Trent, and the necessity of main-
taining found doctrine, together with good or-
der in the church, are mentioned as the mo-
tives of this union between the contracting par-
ties. In order to check the growth of these
evils, and to punifi such as had impiously con-
tributed to spread them, the Emperor, having
long and without success made trial of gentler
remedies, engaged instantly to take the field
with a sufficient army, that he might compel
all who disowned the council, or had apofta-
tized from the religion of their forefathers; to
return into the bosom of the church, and sub-
mit with due obedience to the Holy See. He
likewise bound himself not to conclude a peace
with them during fix months without the Pope's
consent, nor without afligning him his hare in
any conquests which hould be made upon them;
and that even after this period he hould not
agree to any accommodation which might be
detrimental to the church, or to the interest of
religion. On his part, the Pope ffipulated to
deposit a large fum in the bank of Venice to-
wards defraying the expence of the war; to
maintain, at his own charge, during the space
of fix months, twelve thousand foot, and h\-,

Sleid. 376.

Boo parts of the Empire; he warned John and Al-
VIII. bert of Brandenburg, that now was the proper
, 546 time of exerting themselves, in order to rescue

their ally, Henry of Brunswick, from capti-
vity .

The Pr. ALL these things could not be tranfaded
shaed. without the observation and knowledge of the

Protestants. The secret was now in many
hands; under whatever veil the Emperor still
affeced to conceal his designs, his officers kept
no such mysterious reserve, and his allies and
subjects spoke out his intentions plainly. Alarm-
ed with reports of this kind from every quar-
ter, as well as with the preparations of war which
they saw begun, the deputies of the confede-
rates demanded audience of the Emperor, and,
in the name of their malters, required to know
whether these military preparations were car-
ried on by his command, and for what end and
against what enemy ? To a question put in such
a tone, and at a time when faas were become
too notorious to be denied, it was necessary to
give an explicit answer. Charles owned the
orders which he had issued, and profefling his
purpefe not to molest any on account of reli-
gion who should a as dutiful fubjecs, de-
cared that he had nothing in view but to main-
tain the rights and prerogatives of the Imperial
dignity, and, by punishing rome factious mem-
bers, to preserve the ancient constitution of the
Empire from being impaired or dissolved by
their irregular and licentious condut. Though
the Emperor did not name the persons whom he
charged with such high crimes, and destined to
be the objects of his vengeance, it was obvious
that he had the Eletor of Saxony, and Land-
grave of Hesse in view. Their deputies confi-
dering what he had aid as a plain declaration

of
'Sleid. 74. Secek iii. 65S.

of his hostile intentions, immediately retired Boot
from Ratilbon G. VI.

1546.

THE Cardinal of Trent found it no difficult The Empe-

matter to treat with the Pope, who, having at ror' tet
length brought the Emperor to adopt that plan Pope.
which he had long recommended, assented with
eagerness to every article that he proposed. The July t6.
league was signed a few days after the Cardi-
nal's arrival at Rome. The pernicious herefies
which abounded in Germany, the obstinacy of
the Protestants in rejecting the holy council
assembled at Trent, and the necessity of main-
taining found doctrine, together with good or-
der in the church, are mentioned as the mo-
tives of this union between the contracting par-
ties. In order to check the growth of there
evils, and to punish such as had impiously con-
tributed to spread them, the Emperor, having
long and without success made trial of gentler
remedies, engaged instantly to take the field
with a sufficient army, that he might compel
all who disowned the council, or had apofta-
tized from the religion of their forefathers; to
return into the bosom of the church, and sub-
mit with due obedience to the Holy See. He
likewise bound himself not to conclude a peace
with them during fix months without the Pope's
consent, nor without afligning him his [hare in
any conquests which ihould be made upon them;
and that even after this period he should not
agree to any accommodation which might be
detrimental to the church, or to the interest of
religion. On his part, the Pope stipulated to
deposit a large fum in the bank of Venice to-
wards defraying the expence of the war; to
maintain, at his own charge, during the space
of fix months, twelve thousand foot, and si-'

hunilud
o Sleid. 376.

Boot hundred horse; to grant the Emperor, for one
Vll. year, half of the ecclesiastical revenues through-
k--ó out Spain, to authorize him, by a bull, to alie-

nate as much of thelands, belonging to religious
houses in that country, as would amount to the
fum of five hundred thousand crowns; and to
employ not only spiritual censures, but military
force, against any Prince who should attempt to
interrupt or defeat the execution of this treaty H.

Endaonon NOTWITHSTANDING the explicit terms in
fiill to con-
cl hi in- which the extirpation of heresy was declared to
tention be the objet of the war which was to follow
from the
ptaints. upon this treaty, Charles still endeavoured to

persuade the Germans that he had no design to
abridge their religious liberty, but that he aimed
only at vindicating his own authority, and re-
pressing the insolence of such as had encroached
upon it. With this view, he wrote circular
letters, in the fame strain with his answer to the
deputies at Ratibon, to most of the free cities,
and to several of the Princes who had embraced
the Protefant dotrines. In these he complained
loudly, but in general terms, of the contempt
into which the Imperial dignity had fallen, and
of the presumptuous as well as disorderly beha-
viour of ome members of the Empire. He
declared that he now took aims, not in a reli-
gious, but in a civil quarrel; not to oppress any
who continued to behave as quiet and dutiful
fubjets, but to humble the arrogance of such
as had thrown off all ience of that fubordina-
tion in which they were placed under him as
head of the Germanick body. Gruss as this de-
ception was, and manifest as it might have ap-
peared to all who confidered the Emperor's
conduct with attention, it became necessary for
him to make trial of its effect; and such was

the

Sleid. 381. Pallay. 255. Dumont Corps Diplom. 11.
80

the confidence and dexterity with which he em- B o o r
ployed it, that he derived the most solid advan- Vll.
tages from this artifice. If he had aowed at 1546.
once an intention of overturning the Protestant
church, and of reducing all Germany under its
former ifate of ubjedion to the Papal See, none
of the cities or Princes who had embraced the
new opinions could have remained neutral after
such a declaration, far less could they have
ventured to assist the Emperor in such an en-
terprize. Whereas by concealing, and even
disclaiming any intention of that kind, he not
only saved himself from the danger of being
overwhelmed by a general confederacy of all
the Protestant states, but he furnished the timid
with an excuse for continuing inacive, and the
designing or interested with a pretext for join-
ing him, without exposing themselves to the in-
famy of abandoning their own principles, or
having an aive hand in suppressing them.
At the fame time the Emperor well knew, that
if by their assistance, he were enabled to break
the power of the Eleaor of Saxony and Land-
grave, he might afterwards prescribe what terms
he pleated to the feeble remains of a party
without union or leaders, who would then re-
gret, too late, their mistaken confidence in him
and their inconsiderate desertion of their afro-
ciates.

THE Pope, by a sudden and unforeseen dif- The Pope

play of his zeal, had well nigh disconcerted this hiPocer
plan which the Emperor had formed with so
much care and art. Proud of having been the
author of such a formidable confederacy againtt
the Lutheran heresy, and happy in thinking
that the glory of extirpating it was reserved for
his Pontificate, he published the articles of his
league with the Emperor, in order to demon-

Vot.. III. G firate

B o o ftrate the pious intention of their confederacy,
Vm. as well as to display his own zeal, which
546. prompted him to make such extraordinary es-

forts for maintaining the faith in its purity.
Not satisfied with this, he soon after issued a
bull, containing moRl liberal promires of indul-
gence to all who flould engage in this holy en-
terprize, together with warm exhortations to
such as could not bear a part in it themselves,
to incrcafe the fervour of their prayers; and the
severity of their mortifications, that they might
draw down the blefling of Heaven upon those
who undertook it'. Nor was it zeal alone
which pushed the Pope to make declarations so
inconsistent with the account which the Em-
peror himself gave of his motives for taking
arms. He was much scandalized at Charles's
dissimulation in such a cause; at his seeming
to be ashamed of owning his zeal for the
church-; and at his endeavours to make that
pass for a political contest, which he ought to
have gloried in as a war which had no other ob-
jet than the defence of religion. With as
much solicitude, therefore, as the Emperor la-
boured to disguise the purpose of the confede-
racy, did the Pope endeavour to publilh their
real plan, in order that they might come at
once to an open rupture with the Protestants,
that all hope of reconcilement might be cut off,
and that Charles might be under fewer tempta-
tions, and have itlefs in his power than at pre-
sent, to betray the interests of the church by
any accommodation beneficial to himself K.

THE Emperor, though not a little offended
at the Pope's indiscretion or malice in making

this

'Du Mont. Corps Diplom.
Hi. i. 6.

F. Paul, 188. Tuan.

this discovery, continued boldly to pursue his Bo o
own plan, and to assert his intentions to be no Vl.
other than what he had originally avowed. Se- 156
veral of the Protestant fates, whom he had
previously gained, thought themselves juflified,
in ome measure, by his declarations, for aban-
doning their associates, and even for giving
afliflance to him.

BUT these articles did not impose on the The prepl-

greater and founder part of the Protestant con- p'rtoten,,
federates. They clearly perceived it to be for their
against the reformed religion that the Emperor fence.
had taken arms, and that not only the fiuppref-
sion of it, but the extintion of the German
liberties, would be the certain consequence of
his obtaining such an entire superiority as would
enable him to execute his schemes in their full
extent. They determined, therefore, to prepare
for their own defence, and neither to renounce
those religious truths, to the knowledge of which
they had attained by means so wonderful, nor
to abandon those civil rights which had been
transmitted to them by their ancestors. In or-
der to give the necessary directions for this pur-
pose, their deputies met at Ulm, soon after their
abrupt departure from Ratisbon. Their delibe-
rations were now conduted with such vigour and
unanimity, as the imminent danger which
threatened them required. The contingent of
troops, which each of the confederates was to
furnish, having been fixed by the original treaty
of union, orders were given for bringing them
immediately into the field. Being sensible, at
last, that through the narrow prejudices of
some of their members, and the imprudent fe-
curity of others, they had neglected too long to
strengthen themselves by foreign alliances, they

G 2 now

B o o now applied with great earnestness to the Vene-
Viii. tiansand Swiss.
1546
They Colicit To the Venetians they represented the Em-
vel'tl. peror's intention of overturning the present sys-

tem of Germany, and of railing himself to
abfo!ute power in that country by means of
foreign force furnished by the Pope; they
warned them how fatal this event would prove
to the liberties of Italy, and that by suffering
Charles to acquire unlimited authority in. the
one country, they would oon feel his dominion
to be no less defpotick in the other; they be-
fought them, therefore, not to grant a passage
through their territories to those troops, which
ought to be treated as common enemies, be-
cause by subduing Germany they prepared
chains for the reft of Europe. These reflections
had not escaped the sagacity of those wife re-
publicans. They had communicated their fen-
timents to the Pope, and had endeavoured to
divert him from an alliance, which tended to
render irrefftible the power of a potentate,
whose ambition he already knew to be bound-
less. But they had found Paul so eager in the
prosecution of his own plan, that he disregard-
ed all their remonstrances L. This attempt to
alarm the Pope having proved unsuccessful,
they would do nothing more towards preventing
the dangers which they foresaw; and in return
to the application from the.confederates of Smal-
kalde, they informed them, that they could not
obstruct the march of the Pope's troops through
an open country, but by levying an army strong
enough to face them in the field; and that this
would draw upon themselves the whole weight
of his as well as of the Emperor's indignation.
For the fame reason they declined lending a

fum
L Adriani Iforia di fuoi tempi, liv. v, p. 332.

fum of money, which the Ele&tor of Saxony B o o
and Landgrave proposed to borrow of them Vl.,
towards carrying on the war. 546.

THE demands of the confederates upon the or the

Swiss were not confined to the obftruing of the Swi
entrance of foreigners into Germany; they re-
quired of them, as the nearest neighbours, and
closest allies of the Empire, to interpose with
their wonted vigour for the preservation of its
liberties, and not to stand as inactive fpedtators,
while their brethren were oppressed and enslaved.
But with whatever zeal the reformed Cantons
might have been disposed to at when the cause
of the Reformation was in danger, the Helve-
tick body was fodivided with regard to religion,
as rendered it unsafe for the Protestants to take
any ftep without consulting their aflociates;
and among them the emiflaries of the Pope and
Emperor had such influence, that a resolution
of maintaining an exact neutrality between the
contending parties, was the utmost which could
be procured N.

BEING disappointed in both there applications, of Franci

the Protestants, not long after, had recourse to ry Vil.
the Kings of France and England; the ap-
proach of danger either overcoming the Elector
of Saxony's scruples, or obliging him to yield
to the importunities of his aflociates. The situ-
ation of the two Monarchs flattered them with
hopes of success. Hostilities between them had
continued for ome time after the peace of Cref-
py. But becoming weary at last of a war, at-
tended with no glory or advantage to either,
they had lately terminated all their differences

by

M Sleid. 381. Paruta Iflor. Venet. tom. iv. 180. Lam-

bertus Hortenfius de bello Germanico, spud Scardium,
vol. ii. p. 547. Sleid. 392.

B o by a peace concluded at Campe near Ardres.
V111J- Francis having with great difficulty procured
56. his allies, the Scots, to be included in the treaty,

in return for that concession he engaged to pay
a great fum, which Henry demanded as due to
him on several accounts, and left Bologne in
the hands of the English, as a pledge for his
faithful performance of that article. But though
the re-establishment of peace seemed to leave
the two Monarchs at liberty to turn their atten-
tion towards Germany, so unfortunate were
the Protestants, that they derived no immediate
advantage from this circumstance. Henry ap-
peared unwilling to enter into any alliance with
them, but on such conditions as would render
him not only the head, but the supreme direc-
tor of their league; a pre-eminence which, as
the bonds of union or interest between them
were but feeble, and as he differed from them
so widely in his religious sentiments, they had
no inclination to admit . Francis, more power-
fully inclined by political considerations to as-
ford them assistance, found his kingdom so
much exhausted by a long war, and was so
much afraid of irritating the Pope, by entering
into close union with excommunicated Here-
ticks, that he durR not undertake the pro-
te&ion of the Smalkaldick league. By this ill-
timed caution, or fuperRtitious deference to fcru-
ples, to which at other times he was not much
addicted, he loft the most promising opportu-
nity of mortifying and diftrefling his rival, which
presented itself during his whole reign.

P[rotelnts BUT, notwithstanding their ill success in their
f, id ith . negociations with foreign courts, the confede-
geat my. rates found no difficulty at home, in bringing a

sufficient
Rymer, xv. 93. Herbert, 258.

sufficient force into the field. Germany abound- BK
ed at that time in inhabitants; the feudal inffi- VIII.
tutions, which fubfited in full force, enabled 546.
the nobles to call out their numerous vassals,
and to put them in motion on the fhoreft warn-
ing: the martial spirit of the Germans, not
broken or enervated by the introduction of com-
merce and arts, had acquired additional vigour
during the continual wars in which they had
been employed, for half a century, either in
the pay of the Emperors, or Kings of France.
Upon every opportunity of entering into ser-
vice, they were accustomed to run eagerly to
arms; and to every fandard that was erected,
volunteers flocked from all quarters P. Zeal
seconded, on this occasion, their native ardour.
Men on whom the doctrines of the Reforma-
tion had made that deep impression which ac-
companies truth when first discovered, prepared
to maintain it with proportional vigour; and
among a warlike people, it appeared infamous
to remain inactive, when the defence of religion
was the motive for taking arms. Accident com-
bined with all these circumstances in facilitating
the levy of soldiers among the confederates. A
considerable number of Germans, in the pay of
France, being dismissed by the King on the
profpzSt of peace with England, joined in a
body the standard of the Protestants Q- By such
a concurrence of causes, they were enabled to
assemble in a few weeks an army composed of
seventy thousand foot and fifteen thousand horse,
provided with a train of an hundred and
twenty cannon, eight hundred ammunition
waggons, eight thousand beaffs of burden, and
fix thousand pioneers R. This army, one of the

moit

Seck. 1. iii. 16r. "- Thuan. 1. i. 68. ' Thuan.

1. i. 61. Ludovici ab Avila & Zuniga Commentarioruti
de bel. Germ, lib, duo, Antw. 15;o. izmo. p. i3, a.

Boo K most numerous, and undoubtedly the best ap-
ill, p pointed of any which had been levied in Europe
1546. during that century, was not raised by the united

effort of the whole Protestant body. The Ele&or
of Saxony, the Landgrave of Hesse, the Duke
of Wurtemberg, the Princes of Anhalt, and the
Imperial cities of Aufbourg, Ulm, and Straf-
burg, were the only powers which contributed
towk ards this great armament: The Electors of
Cologne, of Brandenburgh, and the Count Pa-
latiae, overawed by the Emperor's threats, or
deceived by his professions, remained neuter.
John marquis of Brandenburg Bareith, and Al-
bert of Brandenburg Anfpach, though both
early converts to Lutheranifm, entered openly
into the Emperor's service, under pretext of
having obtained his promise for the security of
the Protestant religion; and Maurice of Saxony
soon followed their example.

The ine- THE number of their troops, as well as the
quality of
the Epe- amazing rapidity wherewith they had aflembled
tor,, force them, atonifhed the Emperor, and filled him
to thirs. with the most disquieting apprehensions. He

was, indeed, in no condition to resist such a
mighty force. Shut up in Ratisbon, a town of
no great strength, whose inhabitants being most-
ly Lutherans, would have been more ready to
betray than to assist him, with only three thou-
sand Spanilh foot, who had served in Hungary,
and about five thousand Germans, who had
joined him from different parts of the Empire,
he must have been overwhelmed by the approach
of such a numerous army, which he could not
fight, nor even hope to retreat from in safety.
The Pope's troops, though in full march to his
relief, had hardly reached the frontiers of Ger-
many; the forces which he expeced from the
Low-Countries had not yet begun to move, and

were

were even far from being complete s. His situ- B o o
ation, however, called for more immediate fuc- VIII.
cour, nor did it seem practicable for him to wait 1546
for such diflant auxiliaries, with whom his junc-
tion was so precarious.

BUT it happened fortunately for Charles, that They im-
the confederates did not avail themselves of the prudetly

negoclare

advantage which lay so full in their view. In inflead of
civil wars, the first steps are commonly takena'"ng"
with much timidity and hesitation. Men are
solicitous, at that time, to put on the semblance
of moderation and equity ; they strive to gain
partisans by seeming to adhere ftridtly to known
forms; nor can they be brought, at once, to
violate those established institutions, which in
times of tranquillity they have been accustomed
to reverence; hence their proceedings are often
feeble or dilatory when they ought to be most
vigorous and decisive. Influenced by those
considerations, which, happily for the peace of
bociety, operate powerfully on the human mind,
the confederates could not think of throwing off
that allegiance which they regularly owed to the
head of the Empire, or of turning their arms
against him without one solemn appeal more to
his candour, and to the impartial judgment of
their fellow-fubjets. For this purpose, they July 15.
addressed a letter to the Emperor, and a mani-
fefto to all the inhabitants of Germany. The
tenour of both was the fame. They represented
their own conduct with regard to civil affairs
as dutiful and fubmiflive; they mentioned the
inviolable union in whirc? they had lived with
the Emperor, as well as the many and recent
marks of his good-will and gratitude where-
withal they had been honoured; they aferted
religion to be the sole cause of the violence

which
' Sleid. 389. Avila, 8, a.

Boo K which the Emperor now meditated against them;

'V... and in pro of of this produced many arguments
i5+6 to convince those who were so weak as to be

deceived by he artifices with which he endea-
voured to cover his real intentions; they de-
clared their own resolution to risk every thing
in maintenance of their religious rights, and
foretold the diflolution of the German conftitu-
tion, if the Emperor should finally prevail
againfR them T

Tr, Empe- CHARLES, though in such a perilous situation
the, nder as might have inspired him with moderate senti-
the bn of ments, appeared as inflexible and haughty as if
j n'ir'' his affairs had been in the most prosperous state.

His only reply to the address and manifesto of
the Protestants, was to publilh the ban of the
Empire against the Elector of Saxony and Land-
grave of Hesse, their leaders, and against all
who should dare to afllf them. By this fen-
tence, the ultimate and most rigorous one which
the German jurisprudence has provided for the
punishment of traitors, or enemies to their coun-
try, they were declared rebels and outlaws, and
deprived of every privilege which they enjoyed.
as members of the Germanick body; their goods
were confiscated; their fubjets absolved from
their oath of allegiance; and it became not only
lawful but meritorious to invade their territories.
The nobles, and free cities, who framed or per-
sected the constitution of the German govern-
ment, had not been o negligent of their own
safety and privileges as to trust the Emperor
with this formidable juirifdicion. The autho-
rity of a diet of the Empire ought to have been
interposed before any of its members could be
put under the ban. But Charles overlooked
that formality, well knowing that, if his arms

were

Sid. 34.
90

were crowned with success, there would remain B o O K
none who would have either power or courage VIII.
to call in question what he had done . The 4
Emperor, however, did not found his sentence
against the Elector and Landgrave on their re-
volt from the eftablilhed church, or their con-
duct with regard to religion; he asseted to aflign
for it reasons purely civil, and those too exprefled
in such general and ambiguous terms, with-
out specifying the nature or circumstances of
their guilt, as rendered it more like an a of
defpotick power than of a legal and limited jurif-
didion. Nor was it altogether from choice, or
to conceal his intentions, that Charles had re-
course to the ambiguity of general expreflions;
he durst not mention too particularly the causes
of his sentence, as every action which he could
have charged upon the Eletor and Landgrave
as a crime, might have been employed with
equal justice to condemn many of the Protestants
whom he frill pretended to confider as faithful
fubjedts, and whom it would have been ex-
tremely imprudent to alarm or disgust.

THE confederates, now perceiving all hopes They de-

of accommodation to be at an end, had only to ,e
choose whether they would submit without re- Charls.
fcrve to the Emperor's will, or proceed to open
hostilities. They were not destitute of publick
spirit and resolution to make the proper choice.
A few days after the ban of the Empire was
published, they, according to the custom of that
age, ent a herald to the Imperial camp with a
solemn declaration of war againit Charles, to
whom they no longer gave any other title than
that of pretended Emperor, and renounced all al-

legiance,

u Sleid. 386. Du Mont. Corps Diplom. iv. p. . 314.
Pfeffel Hilt. Abrege du Droit Publ. 168. 736. 158.

B o o legiance, homage, or duty, which he might
V1L. claim, or they had hitherto yielded to him. But
546. previous to this formality, part of their troops had

Their rfit begun to ad. The command of a considerable
o"eratiO' body of men raised by the city of Augsburg

having been given to SebafRian Schertel, a fol-
dier of fortune, who by the booty that he got
when the Imperialists plundered Rome, to-
gether with the merit of long service, had ac-
quired wealth and authority which placed him
on a level with the chief of the German nobles:
that gallant veteran resolved before he joined the
main body of the confederates, to attempt some-
thing suitable to his former fame and to the ex-
pectation of his countrymen. As the Pope's
forces were hastening towards Tyrol, in order
to penetrate into Germany by the narrow pafles
through the mountains which run across that
country, he advanced thither with the utmost
rapidity, and seized Ehrenberg and Cuffltein,
two strong castles which commanded the prin-
cipal defiles. Without flopping a moment, he
continued his march towards Infpruck, by get-
ting pofleffion of which he would have obliged
the Italians to stop hort, and with a small body
of men could have resifted all the efforts of the
greater armies. Caflealto, the governor of
Trent, knowing what a fatal blow this would
be to the Emperor, all whose designs must have
proved abortive if his Italian auxiliaries had
been intercepted, raied a few troops with the
utmost difparch, and threw himself into the
town. Schertel, however, did not abandon the
enterprize, and was preparing to attack the
place, when the intelligence of the approach of
the Italians, and an order from the Elector and
Landgrave obliged him to desist. By his retreat
the pages were left open, and the Italians en-
tered Germany without any opposition, but

from

from the garrisons which Schertel had placed in B o o K
Ehrenberg and CufflRein, and there having no VIII.
hopes of being relieved, surrendered, after a 546.
short refiltance x *

NOR was the recalling of Schertel the only nd ill con-

error of which the confederates were guilty. As dua.
the supreme command of their army was com-
mitted, in terms of the league of Smalkalde, to
the Eletor of Saxony and Landgrave of Hesse
with equal authority, all the inconveniences
arising from a divided and co-ordinate autho-
rity, which is always of fatal consequence in the
operations of war, were immediately felt. The
Eletor, though intrepid in his own person to
excess, and most ardently zealous in the cause,
was flow in deliberating, uncertain as well as
irresolute in his determinations, and constantly
preferred measures which were cautious and safe,
to such as were bold or decisive. The Land-
grave, of a more aive and enterprising nature,
formed all his resolutions with promptitude,

wished

' Seckend. lib. ii. 70. Adriani Itoria di fuoi tempi,

lib. 335. *Seckendorf, the industrious author of the
Comnmentarius Apologeticus de Lutheranifino, whom I
have so long and safely followed as my guide in German
affairs, was a descendant from Schertel. With the care
and solicitude of a German, who was himfelfof noble birth,
Seckendorf has publilhed a long digreflion concerning his
ancestor, calculated chiefly to fliow how Schertel was en-
nobled, and his posterity allied to many of the moR ancient
families in the Empire. Among other curious particulars,
he gives us an account of his wealth, the chief source of
which was the plunder he got at Rome. His landed estate
was fold by his grandsons for fix hundred thousand florins.
By this we may form some idea of the riches amassed by the
Condottieri, or comnmanders of mercenary bands in that age.
At the taking of Rome Schertel was only a captain.
Seckend. lib. ii. 73.

Boo wished to execute them with spirit, and uni-
.VIL forrmly preferred such schemes as tended to

546c bring the contest to a speedy issue. Thus their

maxims, with regard to the conduct of the war,
differed as widely as those by which they were
influenced in preparing for it. Such perpetual
contrariety in their sentiments gave rife, imper-
ceptibly, tojealoufy and the spirit of contention.
These multiplied the dissensions flowing from the
incompatibility of their natural temper, and
rendered them more violent. The other mem-
bers of the league confideing themselves as in-
dependent, and subjec to the Eletor and Land-
grave, only in consequence of the articles of a
voluntary confederacy, did not long retain a
proper veneration for commanders, who pro-
ceeded with so little unanimity; and the nume-
rous army of the Protestants, like a vast ma-
chine whcfe parts are ill compaced, and which
is destitute of any power sufficient to move and
regulate the whole, aed with no consistency,
vigour, or effect.

The Pope's THE Emperor, who was afraid that, by re-
te ri- maining at Ratisbon, he might render it impoffi-
ror. ble for the Pope's forces to join him, having

boldly advanced to Landshut on the Ifer, the
confederates loft some days in deliberating whe-
ther it was proper to follow him into the terri-
tories of the Duke of Bavaria, a neutral Prince.
When at last they surmounted that scruple, and
began to move towards his camp, they suddenly
abandoned the design, and hastened to attack
Ratisbon, in which town Charles could leave only
a small garrison. By this time the papal troops,
amounzing fully to that number which Paul
had ltipulated to furnilh, had reached Landshut,
and were oon followed by fix thousand Spa-
niards of the veteran bands stationed in Naples.

The

The confederates, after Schertel's spirited but Boo
fruitless expedition, seem to have permitted these VIII.
forces to advance unmoleted to the place of 3546.
rendezvous, without any attempt to attack either
them or the Emperor fepaiately, or to prevent
their junction '. The Imperial army amounted
now to thirty-fix thousand men, and was fill
more formidable by the discipline and valour of
the troops, than by their number. Avila, com-
mendador of Alcantara, who had been present
in all the wars carried on by Charles, and had
served in the armies which gained the memorable
vicory at Pavia, which conquered Tunis, and
invaded France, gives this the preference to
any martial force he had ever seen assembled Y.
Odavio Farnese, the Pope's grandson, assisted
by the ablest officers formed in the long wars
between Charles and Francis, commanded the
Italian auxiliaries. His brother, the Cardinal
Farnese, accompanied him, as papal legate;
and in order to give the war the appearance of
a religious enterprize, he proposed to march at
the head of the army, with a cross carried before
him, and to publish Indulgences wherever he
came, to all who should give them any assistance,
as had anciently been the practice in the Cru-
fades against the Infidels. But this the Emperor
ftritly prohibited, as inconsistent with all the
declarations which he had made to the Germans
of his own party; and the legate perceiving, to
his astonishment, that the exercise of the Protest-
ant religion, the extirpation of which he con-
fidered as the sole object of the war, was pub-
lickly permitted in the Imperial camp, oon re-
turned in disgust to Italy Z.

THE

t Adriani IRoria di fuoi tempi, lib. v. 340.
1i. z F. Paul, 191.

Y Avila,

B o o K THE arrival of these troops enabled the Em-.

1m.L peror to end such a reinforcement to the garri-

ion of Ratisbon, that the confederates, relinquish-
ing all hopes of reducing that town, marched
towards Ingoldftadt on the Danube, near to
which Charles was now encamped. They ex-
claimed loudly against the Emperor's notori-
ous violation of the laws and conflitution of
the Empire, in having called in foreigners to
lay waste Germany, and to oppress its liberties.
As in that age, the dominion of the Roman See
was so odious to the Protestants, that the name
of the Pope alone was sufficient to inspire them
with horror at any enterprize which he counte-
nanced, and to raise in their minds the blackest
suspicions, it came to be universally believed
among themi, that Paul, not satisfied with at-
tacking them openly by force of arms, had dif-
perfed his emissaries all over Germany, to ret on
fire their towns and magazines, and to poison the
wells and fountains of water. Nor did this ru-
mour spread only among the vulgar, being ex-
travagant as well as frightful enough to make a
deep impression on their incredulity; even the
leaders of the party, blinded by their prejudices,
published a declaration, in which they accused
the Pope of having employed such Antichriftian
and diabolical arts against them A. These senti-
ments of the confederates were confirmed, in
some measure, by the behaviour of the papal
troops, who, thinking nothing too rigorous to-
wards Hereticks anathematized by the church,
were g'ilty of great excesses in the Lutheran
territories, and aggravated the calamities of war,
by mingling with it all the cruelty of bigotted
zeal.

A Sleid. 399.

THE first operations in the field, however, Bo o

did not correspond with the violence of those VI.
pallions which animated individuals. The Em- 1546
peror had prudently taken the resolution of The cone-
avoiding an ation with an enemy so far uperior vdetet'd
in number B, especially as he foresaw that nothing wards tbe

Impcrial

could keep a body composed of so many and r'y
such dillimilar members, from falling to pieces,
but the prelling to attack it with an inconfide-
rate precipitancy. The confederates, though it
was no lets evident that to them every moment's
delay was pernicious, were still prevented by the
wveaknefs or division of their leaders from exert-
ing that vigour, with which their situation, as
well as the ardour of their soldiers, ought to have
inspired them. On their arrival at Ingoldffadt, Aug. s9.
they found the Emperor in a camp not remark-
able for strength, and surrounded only by a flight
entrenchment. Before the camp lay a plain of
such extent, as afforded sufficient space for
drawing out their whole army, and bringing it
to at at once. Every consideration Ihould have
determined them to have seized this opportunity
of attacking the Emperori and their vast fupe-
riority in numbers, the eagerness of their troops,
together with the liability of the German in-
fantry in pitched battles, afforded them the most
probable expecation of victory. The Land-
grave urged this with great warmth, declaring
that if the sole command were veiled in him, he
would terminate the war on that occasion, and
decide by one general action the fate of the two
parties. But the Elector, refleAing on the va-
lour and discipline of the enemy's forces, ani-
mated by the pretence of the Emperor, and con-
duded by the best officers of the age, would
not venture upon an action, which he thought
to be so doubtful, as the attacking such a body

VOL. III. H of

Avila, 78, a

Boot of veterans on ground which they themselves
vnm. had chosen, and while covered by fortifications
,546 which, though imperfeEt, would afford them no

small advantage in the combat. Notwithftand-
ing his hesitation and remonstrances, it was
agreed to advance towards the enemy's camp
in battle array, in order to make trial whe-
ther by that insult, and by a furious can-
nonade which they began, they could draw the
Imperialists out of their works. But the
Emperor had too much sagacity to fall into

The Empe- this snare. He adhered to his own system with
r° battle inflexible constancy; and drawing up his fol-

diers behind their trenches, that they might be
ready to receive the confederates if they should
venture upon an assault, calmly waited their ap-
proach, and carefully restrained his own men
from any excursions or skirmishes which might
bring on an engagement. Meanwhile, he rode
along the lines, and addrefling the troops of the
different nations in their own language, encou-
raged them by the chearfulnefs of his voice and
countenance; he exposed himself in places of
greatest danger, and amidst the warmest fire of
the enemy's artillery, the most numerous that
had hitherto been brought into the field by any
army. Roused by his example, not a man
quitted his ranks; it was thought infamous to
discover any symptom of fear when the Emperor
appeared so intrepid; and the meanest soldier
plainly perceived, that their declining the com-
bat at present was not the effect of timidity in
their general, but the result of a well weighed
caution. The confederates, after firing several
hours on the Imperialists, with more noise and
terror than execution, feeing no profpet of al-
luring them to fight on equal terms, retired to
their own camp. The Emperor employed the
night with such diligence in strengthening his

works,

works, that the confederates, returning to the B oK'
cannonade next day, found that, though they had V.
now been willing to venture upon such a bold 1546.
experiment, the opportunity of making an at-
tack with advantage was loR C.

AFTER such a discovery of their own feeble-The Fie-

ness or irresolution, and of the prudence as well 'ih "te'
as firmness of the Emperor's condut, the con- mperor.
federates turned their whole attention towards
preventing the arrival of a powerful reinforce-
ment 9f ten thpufand foot, and four thousand
horse, which the count de Burqn was bringing
to the Eiperqr from the Low-Countries. But
though that general had to traverse such an ex-
tent of country; though his route lay through
the territqries .of several flates warmly difpoed
to favour the confederates; though they were
apprized of his approach, and by their vafi fu-
periority in numbers might easily have detached
a force sufficient to overpower him, he advanced
with such rapidity, and by such well concerted
movements, while they opposed him with such
remissness, and so little military Ikill, that he
conducted this body to the Imperial camp with- sept. Ie.
out anylofs D.

UPON the arrival of the Flemings, in whom

he placeo great confidence, the Emperor altered,
in ome degree, his plan of operations, and be-
gan to aft more upon the offensive, though he
still avoided a battle with the utmost industry.
He made himself malter of Neuburg, Dillingen,
and Donawert on the Danube; of Nordlingen,
and several other towns, situated on the most
considerable flreams which fall into that mighty

H 2 river.

c S!eid. 39;, 397. Avila, 27, a. Lamb. Hortenf. ap.
Scard. ii. u Sleid. 403.

Bool of veterans on ground which they themselves
VII. had chosen, and while covered by fortifications
1546. which, though imperfect, would afford them no

small advantage in the combat. Notwithftand-
ing his hesitation and remonstrances, it was
agreed to advance towards the enemy's camp
in battle array, in order to make trial whe-
ther by that insult, and by a furious can-
nonade which they began, they could draw the
Imperialifis out of their works. But the
Emperor had too much sagacity to fall into

The Empe- this snare. He adhered to his own system with
,b t"nt" inflexible constancy; and drawing up his fol-

diers behind their trenches, that they might be
ready to receive the confederates if they hould
venture upon an aflault, calmly waited their ap
proach, and carefully restrained his own men
from any excursions or kirmilhes which might
bring on an engagement. Meanwhile, he rode
along the lines, and addrefling the troops of the
different nations in their own language, encou-
raged them by the chearfulnefs of his voice and
countenance; he exposed himself in places of
greatest danger, and amidst the warmest fire of
the enemy's artillery, the most numerous that
had hitherto been brought into the field by any
army. Roused by his example, not a man
quitted his ranks; it was thought infamous to
discover any symptom of fear when the Emperor
appeared so intrepid; and the meanest soldier
plainly perceived, that their declining the com-
bat at present was not the effect of timidity in
their general, but the result of a well weighed
caution. The confederates, after firing several
hours on the Imperialists, with more noise and
terror than execution, feeing no profpeA of al-
luring them to fight on equal terms, retired to
their own camp. The Emperor employed the
night with such diligence in strengthening his

works,

works, that the confederates, returning to the Boo
cannonade next day, found that, though they had VlII
now been willing to venture upon such a bold 156.
experiment, the opportunity of making an at-
tack with advantage was log c.

AFTER such a discovery of their own feeble- The Fle-

ne.s or irresolution, and of the prudence as well '-oIP'
as firmness of the Emperor's condut, the con- Emperor.
federates turned their whole attention towards
preventing the arrival of a powerful reinforce-
ment of ten thousand foot, and four thousand
horse, which the count de Buren was bringing
to the Epercqr from the Low-Countries. But
though that general had to traverse such an ex-
tent of country; though his route lay through
the territqries.of several fiates warmly disposed
to favour the confederates; though they were
apprized of his approach, and by their vast fu-
periority in numbers might easily have detached
a force sufficient to overpower him, he advanced
with such rapidity, and by such well concerted
movements, while they opposed him with such
remifinefs, and so little military kill, that be
conduced this body to the Imperial camp with- Sept. oe.
out any loss .

UPON the arrival of the Flemings, in whom

he placed great confidence, the Emperor altered,
in ome degree, his plan of operations, and be-
.gan to at more upon the offensive, though he
still avoided a battle with the utmost indultry.
He made himself master of Neuburg, Dillingen,
and Donawert on the Danube; of Nordl;ngen,
and several other towns, situated on the most
considerable treams which fall into that mighty

H 2 river.

S!eid. 395, 397. Avila, 27, a. Lamb. Hortenf. ap.
Scard. ii. D Sleid. 403.

Bo o river. By this he got the command of a great
^VII extent of country, though not without being
1. obliged to engage in everal harp encounters,

of which the success was various, nor without
the most imminent danger oftener than once of
being drawn into a battle. In this manner the
whole autumn was spent; neither party gained
any remarkable superiority over the oher, and
nothing was yet done towards bringing the war
to a period. The Emperor had often foretold,
with confidence, that discord and the want of
money would compel the confederates to disperse
that unwieldy body, which they had neither
abilities to guide, nor funds to fupporte; but
though he waited with impatience for the ac-
complifhment of his predicion, there was no
profped of that event being at hand. Mean-
while he himself began to susser from the want
of forage and provisions; even the Catholick
provinces being so much incensed at the intro-
dution of foreigners into the Empire, that they.
supplied them with relucance, while the camp
of the confederates abounded with a profusion
of all necessaries, which the zeal of their friends
in the adjacent countries furnished with the ut-
most liberality and good-will. Great numbers
of the Italians and Spaniards, unaccustomed to
the climate or food of Germany, were become
unfit for service through sickness . Confider-
able arrears were now due to the troops, who
had scarcely received any money from the be-
ginning of the campaign; the Emperor, ex-
periencing on this as well as on former occasions,
that his jur.fdiCtion was more extensive than his
revenues, and that the 'former enabled him to

assemble

Belli Smalkaldici Commentarius Graco fermone scrip-

tus a Joach. Camerario, ap. Freherum, vol. iii. p. 479.
r Camerar. ap. Freher. 483.

afermble a greater number of soldiers, than the Bo o
latter were sufficient to pay. Upon all these VII.
accounts, he found it diflicult to keep his army 1546.
in the field ; ome of his ablest generals, and
even the Duke of Alva himself, persevering and
obstinate as he usually was in the prosecution of
every measure, advising him to disperse his
troops into winter-quarters. But as the argu-
ments urged against any plan which he had
adopted, rarely made much impreflion upon the
Emperor, he paid no regard to their opinion,
and determined to continue his efforts in order
to weary out the confederates; being well affur-
ed that if he could once oblige them to separate,
there was little probability of their uniting again
in a body . Still, however, it remaineda doubt-
ful point, whether his steadiness was most likely
to fail, or their zeal to be exhausted. It was
still uncertain which party, by firit dividing its
force, would give the superiority to the other;
wvhen an unexpected event decided the contest,
and occasioned a fatal reverse in the affairs of
the confederates.

MAURICE of Saxony having insinuated him- state of
self into the Emperor's confidence, by the arts .,is.
which have already been described, no sooner
saw hostilities ready to break out between him
and the confederates of Smalkalde, than vast
profpecs of ambition began to open upon him.
That portion of Saxony, which descended to
him from his ancestors, was far from satisfying
his aspiring mind; and he perceived with plea-
fire the approach of civil war, as amidit the
revolutions and convulsions occasioned by it, op-
portunities of acquiring additional power or
dignity, which at other times are bought in
vain, present themselves to an entcrprifing

spirit.
e Thuan. 83.

Bo 0o spirit. As he was thoroughly acquainted with
VIi. the itate of the two contending parties, and
1546. the qualities of their leaders, he did hot hesitate

long in determining on which fide the greateit
advantages erte to be expected. Having re-
volved all these things in his own mind, and
having taken his final resolution of joining the
Emperor, he prudently determined to declare
early in his favour; that by the merit of this,
he might acquire a title to a proportional te-
compenfe. With this view, he had repaired to
Ratilbon in the month of May, under pretext
of attending the diet and after many confer-

Hi leaie ences with Charles or his minifers, he, ith
Emprr. the most myfteribus secrecy, concluded a treaty,

in which he engaged to coilcur in alifting the
Emperor as a faithful subje&t, and Charles, in
return, flipulated to bellow oi him all the
spoils of the Elector of Saxony, his dignities as
well as territories H. History hardly records any
treaty that can be confidered as a more manj-
fest violation of the most powerful principles
which ought to influence human acions. Mau-
rice, a professed Protestant, at a time when the
belief of Religion, as well as zeal for its interests,
took strong possession of every mind, binds hitn-
self to contribute his afliflance towards carrying
on a war which had manifestly no other object
thah the extirpation of the Protestant do&trides.
He engages to take arms against his father-in-
law, and to firip his nearest relation of his ho-
nours and dominions. He joins a dubious friend
against a known benefator, to whom his obli-
gations were both great and recent. Nor was
the Prince who ventured upon all this, one of
those audacious politicians, who, provided they

can

X Hari Annal. Brabant. vol. i. 638. Struvii Corp.
1048. Thuan. 84.

can accomplilh their ends, and secure their Beeo
interest, avowedly disregard the most sacred Il.
obligations, and glory in contemning whatever 1546
is honourable or decent. Maurice's conduc, if
the whole mult be ascribed to policy, was more
artful and masterly; he executed his plan in
all its parts, and yet endeavoured to preserve,
in every ftep which he took, the appearance of
what was fair, and virtuous, and laudable. It
is probable, from his subsequent behaviour, that,
with regard to the Protestant religion at least,
his intentions were upright; that he fondly
trusted to the Emperor's promises for its security;
but that, according to the fate of all who refine
too much in policy, and who tread in dark and
crooked paths in attempting to deceive others,
he himself was, in some degree, deceived.

His first care, however, was to keep there Hisartiiice

engagements with the Emperor closely con- concalhis
cealed: and o perse a maiter was he in the intentios.
art of diflimulatiQn, that the confederates, not-
withstanding his declining all connexions with
them, and his remarkable afliduity in paying
court to the Emperor, seemed to have enter-
tained no suspicion of his designs. Even the
Elcaor of Saxony, when he marched at the be-
ginning of the campaign to join his associates,
committed his dominions to Maurice's protec-
tion, which he, with an infiduous appearance of
friendship, readily undertook'. But scarcely
had the Ele&tor taken the field, when Maurice
began to consult privately with the King of the
Romans how to invade those very territories,
with the defence of which he was entrusted.
Soon after, the Emperor sent him a copy of the
Imperial ban denounced against the Eletor and
Landgrave. As he was next heir to the for-

mer,
Struvii Corp. o046.

B o o mer, and particularly interested in preventing
VIII. firangers from getting his dominions into their
5 4 pofelfion, Charles required him, not only for

his own fake, but upon the allegiance and duty
which he owed to the head of the Empire, in-
ftantly to seize and detain in his hands the for-
feited estates of the Eletor; warning him, at
the fametime, that if he negleced to obey these
commands, he hould be held acceflary to the
crimes of his kinsman, and be liable to the fame
punishment .

THIS artifice, which it is probable Maurice

himself suggested, was employed by him in or-
der that his conduct towards the Ele&or might
seem a matter of necessity but not of choice; an
act of obedience to his superior, rather than a
voluntary invasion of the rights of his kinsman
and ally. But in order to give some more fpe-
cious appearance to this thin veil with which he
endeavoured to cover his ambition, he, soon
after his return from Ratitbon, had called toge-
ther the States of his country; and representing to
them that a civil war between the Emperor and
confederates of Smalkalde was now become un-
avoidable, desired their advice with regard to
the part which he flould act in that event. They
being prepared, no doubt, and tutored before-
hand, as well as desirous of gratifying their
Prince, whom they both esteemed and loved,
gave such counsel as they knew would be most
agreeable; advising him to offer his mediation
towards reconciling the contending parties; but
if that were rejected, and he could obtain proper
security for the Proteitant religion, they deliver-
ed it as their opinion that, in all other points, he
cught to Yield obedience to the Emperor.
Upon receiving the Imperial rescript, together

with
Sleid. 39j. Thuan. 84.

with the ban against the Elector and Landgrave, B o o
Maurice summoned the states of his country a 1 1.
second time; he laid before them the orders 546.
which he had received, and mentioned the pu-
nifhment with which he was threatened in cafe
of disobedience; he acquainted them that the
confederates had refused to admit of his medi-
ation, and that the Emperor had given him the
most satisfactory declarations with regard to re-
ligion; he pointed out his own interest in fecur-
ing pofleffion of the electoral dominions, as well
as the danger of allowing strangers to obtain an
establishment in Saxony; and upon the whole,
as the point under deliberation respected his
filbjets no less than himself, he desired to know
their sentiments how he should steer in that dif-
ficult and arduous conjuncture. The states, no
less obsequious and complaisant than formerly,
relying on the Emperor's promises as a perfet
security for theirreligion, proposed that, before he
had recourse to more violent methods, they would
write to the Elector, exhorting him, as the best
means, not only of appeasing the Emperor, but
of preventing his dominions from being seized
by 'foreign or hostile powers, to give his con-
sent that Maurice should take poffeflion of them
quietly and without opposition. Maurice him-
self seconded their arguments in a letter to the
Landgrave, his father-in-law. Such an extra-
vagant proposition was rejected with the scorn
and indignation which it deserved; The Land-
grave, in return to Maurice, taxed him with
his treachery and ingratitude towards a kinf-
man to whom he was so deeply indebted; he
treated with contempt his affectation of execut-
ing the Imperial ban, which he could not but
know to be altogether void, by the unconftitu-
tional and arbitrary manner in which it had been
ifiled he besought him, not to fuffcr himself

to

BooK to be so far blinded by ambition, as to forget

the obligations of honour and friendship, or to
1546. betray the Protefiant religion, the extirpation

of which out of Germany, even by the acknow-
ledgement of the Pope himself, was the great
object of the present war L.
He i uade BUT Maurice had proceeded too far to be di-

..e

o' th verted from purluing his plan by reproaches or

:-a-' oi arguments. Nothing now remained but to exe-
.-=.r.. cute with vigour, what he had hitherto carried

on by artifice and dillimulation. Nor was his
boldness in action inferior to his fubitety in con-
trivance. Having aiFembled about twelve thou-
sand men, he suddenly invaded one part of the
electoral provinces, while Ferdinand, with an
army composed of Bohemians and Hungarians,
over-ran the other. Maurice, in two harp en-
counters, defeated the troops which the Eleor
had left to guard his country; and improving
these advantages to the utmost, made himself
mailer of the whole Electorate, except Wittem-
berg, Gotha, and Eisenach, which being places
of considerable strength, and defended by sus-
ficient garrisons, refused to open their gates.
The news of there rapid conquests soon reach-
ed the Imperial and confederate camps. In the
former, their satisfaction with an event, which
it was foreseen would be produetive of the most
important consequences, was expressed by every
polfible demonstration of joy. The latter was
filled with aflonifhment and terror. The name
of Maurice was mentioned witi execration, as
an apostate from religion, a betrayer of the
German liberty, and a..contemner of the most
sacred and natural ties. Every thing that the
rage or invention of the party could uggeft, in
order to blacken and render him odious invec-

tives,
L Skeid. 40o, &c. Thuan. 85. Camerar. 484.

tives, satires and lampoons, the furious decla- Bo n
rations of their preachers, together with the VIli.
rude wit of their authors, were all employed ,56.
against him. While he, trusting to the arts
which he had so long pracifed, as if his ac-
tions could have admitted of any serious juftifi-
cation, published a manifesto, containing the
fame frivolous reasons for his condut, which
he had formerly alleged in the meeting of his
states, and in his letter to the Landgrave 1.

THE Elector, upon the first intelligence of Theconfe-

Maurice's motions, proposed to return home k"e.
with his troops for the defence of Saxony. But tu. of
the deputies of the league, assembled at Ulm, datiom t
prevailed on him, at that time, to remain with the Empe-
the army, and to prefer the success of the com-
mon cause before the security of his own domi-
nions. At length the sufferings and complaints
of his subjects increased so much, that he dif-
covered the utmost impatience to set out, in or-
der to rescue them from the oppreflion of Mau-
rice, and from the cruelty of the Hungarians,
who having been accustomed to that licentious
and tnercilefs species of war which was thought
lawful against the Turks, committed, wherever
they came, the wildest ats of rapine and vio-
lence. This desire of the Elecor was so natu-
ral and so warmly urged, that the deputies at
Ulm, though fully sensible of the unhappy con-
sequences of dividing their army, durst not re-
fuse their content, how unwilling soever to grant
it. In this perplexity, they repaired to the
camp of the confederates at Giengen on the
Brenz, in order to consult their constituents.
Nor were they less at a loss what to determine
in this prefling emergence, But, after having
confidered seriously the open desertion of some of

their
Sleid. 409, 410.

B x theirallies;the fcandalouslukewarmnefsofothers,

111. who had hitherto contributed nothing towards
1546. the war; the intolerable load which had fallen,

of consequence, upon such members as were
molt zealous for the cause, or most faithful to
their engagements; the ill success of all their
endeavours to obtain foreign aid; the unusual
length of the campaign; the rigour of the sea-
son; together with the great number of soldiers,
and even officers, who had quitted the service
on that account; they concluded that no-
thing could save them. but either the bringing
the contest to the immediate decision of a
battle by attacking the Imperial army, or an
accommodation of all their differences with
Charles by a treaty. Such was the despondency
and dejaetion which now ppecfled the party,
that of there two they choe what was most
feeble and unmanly, empowering a minister of
the Eledor of Brandenburg to propound over-
tures of peace in their name to the Emperor.
,tbh he No sooner did Charles perceive this haughty

confederacy, which had so lately threatened to
drive him out of Germany, condescending to
make the first advances towards an agreement,
than concluding their spirit to be gone, or their
union to be broken, he immediately assumed
the tone of a conqueror ; and, as if they had
been already at his mercy, would not hear of
a negociation, but upon condition of the Eletor
of Saxony's consenting previously to give up
himself and his dominions absolutely to his dif-
pofal . As nothing more intolerable or igno-
minious could have been prescribed, even in
the worst situation of their affairs, it is no won-
der that this proposition was rjected by a party,
humbled and disconcerted rather than subdued.

But
w Hortenfius, ap. Scard. i. 485.

But though they refused to submit tamely to Bo o
the Emperor's will, they wanted spirit to pur- aVI.
sue the only plan which could have preserved 1546.
their independence; and forgetting that it was
the union of their troops in one body which had
hitherto rendered the confederacy formidable,
and had more than once obliged the Imperialists
to think of quitting the field, they inconfide-
rately abandoned this advantage, which, in
spite of the diversion in Saxony, would still The troops
have kept the Emperor in awe; and yielding to federacyfe-
the Elector's entreaties, consented to his pro- pirate.
pofal of dividing the army. Nine thousand
men were left in the dutchy of Wurtemberg, in
order to protec that province, as well as the
free cities of Upper Germany; a considerable
body marched with the Eleaor towards Saxony;
but the greater part returned with their refpec-
tive leaders into their own countries, and were
dispersed there °.

THE moment that the troops separated, the Almost all

confederacy ceased to be the object of terror; bhers o it
and the members of it, who, while they corn- ubmit to
posed part of a great body, had felt but little tmEr.
anxiety about their own security, began to
tremble when they reflected that they now ood
exposed singly to the whole weight of the Em-
peror's vengeance. Charles did not allow them
leisure to recover from their consternation, or
to form any new schemes of union. As soon
as the confederates began to retire, he put his
army in motion, and though it was now the
depth of winter, he resolved to keep the field,
in order to make the most of that favourable
juncture for which he had waited so long. Some
mnall towns, in which the enemy had left gar-
rilons, immediately opened their gates. Nor-

lingen,
o Sleid. 411.

Boo lingen, Rotenberg, and Hall, Imperial cities,
11l" submitted soon after. Though Charles could
46. not prevent the Elector from levying, as he

retreated, large contributions upon the archbi-
shop of Mentz, the abbot of Fulda, and other
ecclefiafiicks P, this was more than balanced by
the fubmiflion of Ulm, one of the chief cities
of Suabia, highly distinguished by its zeal for
the Smalkaldick league. As soon as an example
was set of deserting the common cause, the reft
of the members became instantly impatient to
follow it, and seemed afraid left others, by
getting the start of them in returning to their
duty, should, on that account, obtain more
favourable terms. The Eletor Palatine, a
weak Prince, who, notwithstanding his profef-
sions of neutrality, had, very preposterously,
-sent to the confederates four hundred horse,
body so inconsiderable as to be scarcely any ad-
dition to their strength, but great enough to
render him guilty in the eyes of the Emperor,
made his acknowledgments in the most abjef
manner. The inhabitants of Augsburg, shaken
by £o many instances of apoftacy, expelled the
brave Schertel out of their city, and accepted
iuch conditions as the Emperor was pleated to
grant them.

THE Duke of Wurtemberg, though among

the first who had offered to submit, was obliged
to sue for pardon on his knees; and even after
this mortifying humiliation, obtained it with
.4;. difficulty % Mlemmingen, and other free ci-

ties in the circle of Suabia, being now aban-
doned by all their former aflociates, found it
necessary to provide for their own safety, by
throwing themselves on the Emperor's mercy.
Strafburg and Frankfort on the Maine, cities

far
' T,'-,a. s . _ Me!n. de Ribier, tom. 9.

far remote from the feat of danger, discovered B o o K
no greater steadiness than those which lay more VII
exposed. Thus a confederacy, lately so power- 1547
fill as to Ihake the Imperial throne, fell to
pieces, and was dissolved in the space of a few
weeks; hardly any member of that formidable
combination now remaining in arms, but the
Eledtor and Landgrave, whom the Emperor,
having from the beginning marked out as the
victims of his vengeance, was at no pains to re-
concile. Nor did he grant those who fubmit-The rigor-
ted to him a generous and unconditional par- ions im
don. Conscious of his own superiority, he poredbythe
treated them both with haughtiness and rigour. Empo
All the Princes in person, and the cities ;by
their deputies, were compelled to implore
mercy in the humble posture of supplicants.
As the Emperor laboured under great difficul-
ties from the want of money, he imposed heavy
fines upon them, which he levied with most
rapacious exaftnefs. The Duke of Wurtem-
berg paid three hundred thousand crowns; the
city of Augsburg an hundred and fifty thou-
sand; Ulm an hundred thousand; Franckfort
eighty thousand; Memmingen fifty thousand
and the reft in proportion to their abilities, or
their different degrees of guilt. They were
obliged, betides, to renounce the league of
Smalkalde; to furnilh afliftance, if required,
towards executing the Imperial ban against the
Elecor and Landgrave; to give up their artil-
lery and warlike stores to the Emperor; to ad-
mit garrisons into their principal cities and
places of strength; and, in this disarmed and
dependent situation, to expect the final award
which the Emperor should think proper to pro-
nounce when the war came to an issue R. But,

amidst

RSleid. 411, &c. Thuan. lib. iv. p. 125. Mem. de
Ribier, ton. i. 606.

B o o amidst the great variety of articles dictated by

vi Charles on this occasion, he, in conformity to
547- -his original plan, took care that nothing relat-

ing to religion hould be inserted; and to such
a degree were the confederates humbled or
over-awed, that, forgetting the zeal which had
so long animated them, they were solicitous
only about their safety, without venturing to
infilt on a point, the mention of which they saw
him avoiding with so much industry. The in-
habitants of Memmingen alone made some fee-
ble efforts to procure a promie of protection in
the exercise of their religion; but were checked
so severely by the Emperor's ministers, that they
instantly fell from their demand.

THE Elector of Cologne, whom, notwith-

flanding the sentence of excommunication ifued
against him by the Pope, Charles had hitherto
allowed to remain in poffelfion of the archiepif-
copal fee, being now required by the Emperor
to submit to the censures of the church, this
virtuous and disinterested prelate, unwilling to
expose his fubjets to the miseries of a war on
Ja, s5. his own account, voluntarily resigned that high

dignity. With a moderation becoming his age
and character, he chose to enjoy truth together
with the exercise of his religion in the retirement
of a private life, rather than to disturb society
by engaging in a doubtful and violent imrggle
in order to retain his office .

ThcElalor ME A WHILE, theEletorof Saxony reached the
S..rn^.d frontiers of his country unmolested. As Maurice
cnovrs could ailcmble no force equal to the army which
i.5n of accompanied him, he, in a hort time, not only

recovered polfefion of his own territories, but
over-ran Mifnia, and firippcd his rival of all

that
'Sleid. 41S. Thun. !ib. iv. 1-8.

that belonged to him, except Dresden and Leip- B o o
tic, which, being towns of rome strength, could Vll.
not be suddenly reduced. Maurice, obliged to i'S7.
quit the field, and to Ihut himself up in his
capital, dispatched courier after courier to the
Emperor, representing his dangerous situation,
and soliciting him with the most eameft impor-
tunity to march immediately to his relief. But
Charles, busy at that time in prescribing terms
to such members of the league as were daily re-
turning to their allegiance, thought it sufficient
to detach Albert Marquis of Brandenburgh-An-
fpach with three thousand men to his assistance.
Albert, though an enterprising and acive of-
sicer, was unexpectedly surprised by the Elec-
tor, who killed many of his troops, dispersed
the remainder, and took him prisoner T. Mau-
rice continued as much exposed as formerly;
and if his enemy had known how to improve
the opportunity which presented itself, his ruin
must have been immediate and unavoidable.
But the Elector, no less flow and dilatory when
invested with the sole command, than he had
been formerly when joined in authority with a
partner, never gave any proof of military ai-
vity but in this enterprize against Albert. In-
stead of marching directly towards Maurice,
whom the defeat of his ally had greatly alarmed,
he inconsiderately listened to overtures of ac-
commodation, which his artful antagonist pro-
posed with no other intention than to amuse
him, and to flacken the vigour of his opera-
tions.

SUCH, indeed, was the posture of the Em-
peror's affairs that he could not march instantly

VOL. III. I to
TAvila, 99. 6. Mem. de Ribier, tom. i. 620.

Bo o to the relief of his ally. Soon after the fepa-

VIi_. ration of the confederate army, he, in order to
1,47 cafe himself of the burden of maintaining a

The Empe- superfluous number of troops, had dismissed
rot prevent- t o )
ed fr.m .- the count of Buren with his Flemings , ima-
,ki.g thegining that the Spaniards and Germans, toge-
L.ndrave. ther with the papal forces, would be fully sus-

ficient to crush any degree of vigour that yet
remained among the members of the league.
But Paul, growing wife too late, began now to
discern the imprudence of that measure, from
which the more sagacious Venetians had endea-
voured in vain to dissuade him. The rapid
progress of the Imperial arms, and the ease
with which they had broken a combination that
appeared no less firm than powerful, opened his
eyes at length, and made him not only forget
at once all the advantages which he had ex-
peted from such a complete triumph over he-
refy, but placed, in the itrongeft light, his own
impolitick conduct, in having contributed to-
wards acquiring for Charles such an immense
increase of power, as would enable him, after
opprelfing the liberties of Germany, to give law
with absolute authority to all the flates of Italy.
The moment that he perceived his error, he

Tit, Pop endeavoured to corret it. Without giving the
:ecall, his
cps. ' Emperor any warning of his intention, he or-

dered Farnese, his grandson, to return instantly
to Italy with all the troops under his command,
and at the fame time recalled the licence which
he had granted Charles, of appropriating, to his
own use, a large hare of the church-lands in
Spain. He was not defitute of pretences to
justify tis abrupt desertion of his ally. The
term of fix months, during which the ftipula-
tions in their treaty were to continue in force,

was

Avila, 83. 6. MiRm. de Ribier. torn. i. 592.
114

was now expired; the league, in opposition to oo
which their alliance had been framed, seemed to, i..
be entirely diflipated; Charles, in all his nego- 1547.
ciations with the Princes and cities which had
submitted to his will, had neither consulted the
Pope, nor had allotted him any part of the con-
quefls which he had made, nor had communi-
cated to him any fiare in the vast contributions
which he had railed. He had not even made any
provision for the suppression of heresy, or the
re-eitablifhment of the catholick religion, which
were Paul's chief inducements to bestow the
treasures of the church so liberally in carrying
on the war. These colours, however specious,
did not conceal from the Emperor that fe-
cret jealousy which was the true motive of the
Pope's conduA. But, as Paul's orders with
regard to the march of his troops were no less
peremptory than unexpected, it was impoflible
to prevent their retreat. Charles exclaimed
loudly against his treachery, in abandoning him
i: unfealbnably, while he was prosecuting a war
undertaken in obedience to the Papal injunc-
tions, and from which, if successful, so much
honour and advantage would redound to the
chucrh. To complaints he added threats and
expostulations. But Paul remained inflexible;
his troops continued their march towards the
ecclesiastical slate; and in an elaborate memo-
rial, intended as an apology for his behaviour,
he discovered new and more manifest symptoms
of alienation from the Emperor, together with
a deep-rooted dread of his power . Charles,
weakened by the withdrawing of so great a body
from his army, which was already much dimi-
nithed by the number of garrisons that he had
been obliged to throw into the towns which had
:apitulated, found it necessary to recruit his

I 2 forces
'F. Paul, 208. Pallavic. par. ii. p. 5. Thuan. 1z6.

Boo v forces by new levies, before he could venture to
vm- march in person towards Saxony.

'547-
A conpira- THE fame and splendor of his success could
t"th"e - not have failed of attrading such multitudes of
veCentof soldiers into his service from all the extensive
Geno. territories now subjet to his authority, as must

have soon put him in a condition of taking the
field against the Ele&or; but the sudden and
violent eruption of a conspiracy at Genoa, as
well as the great revolutions which that event,
extremely mysterious in its first appearances,
seemed to portend, obliged him to avoid en-
tangling himself in new operations in Germany,
until he had fully discovered its source and ten-
dency. The form of government which had
been etablifhed in Genoa, at the time when
Andrew Doria restored liberty to his country,
though calculated to obliterate the memory of
former dissensions, and received at first with
eager approbation, did not, after a trial of near
twenty years, give universal fatisfadion to those
turbulent and fatious republicans. As the en-
tire administration of affairs was now lodged in
a certain number of noble families, many en-
vying them that pre-eminence, wished for the

The objea restitution of a popular government, to which
FthtC. they had been accustomed; and though all re-

verenced the disinterested virtue of Doria, and
admired his talents, not a few were jealous
of that ascendant which he had acquired in the
councils of the commonwealth. His age, how-
ever, his moderation, and love of liberty, as-
forded ample security to his countrymen that he
would not abuse his power, nor stain the clof
of his days by attempting to overturn that fa
brick, which it had been the labour and prid(
of his life to eret. But the authority and in
fluence which in his hands were innocent, the)
easily saw would prove deitrudive, if usurpec

bj

by any citizen of greater ambition, or less vir- B o o K
tue. A citizen of this dangerous characer VIII.
had actually formed such pretensions, and with 1547.
some profped of success. Giannetino Doria,
whom his grand uncle Andrew destined to be
the heir of his private fortune, aimed likewise
at being his successor in power. His temper
haughty, insolent, and overbearing to such a
degree as would hardly have been tolerated in
one born to reign, and altogether insupportable
in the citizen of a free fate. The more saga-
cious among the Genoese already feared and
hated him as the enemy of those liberties for
which they were indebted to his uncle. While
Andrew himself, blinded by that violent and
undifcerning affection which persons in ad-
vanced age often contract for the younger
members of their family, set no bounds to the
indulgence with which he treated him; seeming
less solicitous to secure and perpetuate the free-
dom of the commonwealth, than to aggrandize
that undeferving kinsman.

BUT whatever suspicion of Doria's designs, or

whatever diffatisfaftion with the system of admi-
niitration in the commonwealth, these circum-
stances might have occasioned, they would have
ended, it is probable, in nothing more than
murmurings and complaints, if John Lewis Si-
efco count of Lavagna, observing this growing
disgust, had not been encouraged by it to at-
tempt one of the boldest actions recorded in
hiltory. That young nobleman, the richest and Fierco
mos illustrious subjeCt in the republick, po- "La.^gn
fefed, in an eminent degree, all the qualities the hed of
which win upon the human heart, which com- ra'v""
mand refped, or secure attachment. He was
graceful and majeftick in his person; magnifi-
cent to profufionr of a generosity that prevent-

ed

b o o ed the wishes of his friends, and exceeded the
VII. expectations of strangers; of an insinuating ad-
^^V3 dress, gentle manners, and a flowing affability.

But under the appearance of there virtues, which
seemed to form him for enjoying and adorning
civil life, he concealed all the dispositions which
mark men out for taking the lead in the most
dangerous and dark conspiracies; an insatiable
and restless ambition, a courage unacquainted
with fear, and a mind that disdained fubordi-
nation. Such a temper could ill brook that
station of inferiority, wherein he was placed in
the republick; and as he envied the power
which the elder Doria had acquired, he was
filled with indignation at the thoughts of its de-
scending, like an hereditary pofieffion, to Gian-
netino. These various passions, preying with
violence on his turbulent and aspiring mind,
determined him to attempt overturning that
domination to which he could not submit.

Intriues AT first he thought of an alliance with Frah-
wloPn^rep cis, and even proposed it to the French ambaf-
tht confpi- fador at Rome, as the most effectual means of

accomplishing this; and after expelling Doria,
together with the Imperial fation, by his afffit-
ance, he resolved to put the republick once more
under the protection of that Monarch, hoping
in return for that service to be entrusted with
the principal {hare in the administration of go-
vernment. But having communicated his scheme
to a few chosen confidents, from whom he kept
nothing secret, Verrina, the chief of them, a
man of desperate fortune, capable alike of ad-
vising and executing the most audacious deeds,
remonstrated with earnestness against the folly
of exposing himself to the most imminent dan-
ger, while he allowed another to reap all the
fruits of his success; and exhorted him warmly

to
118

to aim himfelfat that pre-eminence in his coun- B o
try, to which he was destined by his illustrious VII.
birth, was called by the voice of his fellow- 547
citizens, and would be raised by the zeal of his
friends. This discourse opened such vafi pro-
fpeas to Fiefco, and so suitable to his genius,
that abandoning his own plan, he eagerly
adopted that of Verrina. The other persons
prel'ent, though sensible of the hazardous na-
ture of the undertaking, did not choof to con-
demn what their patron had lo warmly Approved.
It was instantly resolved, in this dark.eabal, to
fafaflinate the two Dorias, as well as the prin-
cipal persons of their party, to overturn the
established system of governmenti and to place
Fiefco on the ducal throne of Genoa. Time,
however, and preparations were requisite to
ripen such a design for execution; and while
he was employed in carrying on these, Fiefco
made it his chief care to guard against every
thing that might betray his secret, or create sus-
picion. The disguise he assumed, was of all
others the most impenetrable. He seemed to
be abandoned entirely to pleasure and diffipa-
tion. A perpetual gaiety, diversified by the
pursuit of all amusements becoming his age
and rank, engrossed, in appearance, the whole
of his time and thoughts. But amidst this
hurry of diflipation, he prosecuted his plan with
the most cool attention, neither retarding the
design by a timid hesitation, nor precipitating
the execution by an excess of impatience. He
continued his correspondence with the French
ambassador at Rome, though without commu-
nicating to him his real intentions, that by his
means he might fecuwe the protecion of the
French arms, if hereafter he hould find it ne-
cefflary to call them to his aid. He entered
into a close confederacy with Farnese Duke of

Parma,

B o o Parma, who being disgusted with the Emperor
viii. for refusing to grant him the investiture of that

dutchy, was eager to promote any measure that
tended to diminish his influence in Italy, or to
ruin a family so implicitly devoted to him as
that of Doria. Being sensible that, in a mari-
time itate, the acquisition of naval power was
what he ought chiefly to aim at, he purchased
four galleys from the Pope, who probably was
not unacquainted with the design which he had
formed, and did not disapprove of it. Under
colour of.fitting out one of there galleys to fail
on a cruise againll the Turks, he not only as-
fembled a good number of his own vaflials, but
engaged in his service many bold adventurers,
whom the truce between the Emperor and Soly-
man had deprived of their usual occupation and
subsistence.

WHILE Fiefco was taking these important

feps, he preserved so admirably his usual ap-
pearance of being devoted entirely to pleasure
and amusement, and paid court with such art-
ful address to the two Dorias, as imposed not
only on the generous and unfufpicious mind of
Andrew, but deceived Giannetino, who, con-
fcious of his own criminal intentions, was more
apt to distrust the designs of others. So many
instruments being now prepared, nothing re-
mained but to strike the blow. Various consul-
tations were held by Fiefco with his confidents,
in order to fettle the manner of doing it with
the greatest certainty and effect. At first, they
proposed to murder the Dorias and their chief
adherents, during the celebration of high mass
in the principal church; but as Andrew was
often absent from religious folemnities, on ac-
count of his great age, that design was laid
aside. It was then concerted that Fiefco should

invite

invite the uncle and nephew, with all their Boo
friends whom they had marked out as victims, Vii.
to his house; where it would be easy to cut ,547.
them off at once without danger or resistance;
but as Giannetino was obliged to leave the town
on the day which they had chosen, it became
necessary likewise to alter this plan. They at
last determined to attempt by open force, what
they found difficult to effe& by firatagem, and
fixed on the night between the second and third
of January, for the execution of their enterprize.
The time was chosen with great propriety; for
as the Doge of the former year was to quit his
office, according to custom, on the first of the
month, and his successor could not be elected
sooner than the fourth, the republick remained
during that interval in a fort of anarchy, and
Fiefco might with less violence take poffeflion
of the vacant dignity.

THE morning of that day Fiefco employed in The confri-

visiting his friends, passing some hours among fermbto
them with a spirit as gay and unembarrafled as exccute
at other times. Towards evening, he paid court their plan.
to the Dorias with his usual marks of refpe&,
and surveying their countenance and behaviour
with the attention natural in his situation, was
happy to observe the perfect security in which
they remained, without the least foresight or
dread of that storm which had been To long a
gathering, and was now ready to burst over
their heads. From their palace he hastened to
his own, which flood by itself in the. middle
of a large court, surrounded by a high wall.
The gates had been set open in the morning,
and all persons, without diftintion, were al-
lowed to enter, but firong guards posted within
the court suffered no one to return. Verrina,
meanwhile, and a few persons trusted with the
secret of the conspiracy, after conducting Si-

efco's

B Oo efco's vaflals, as well as the crews of his galleys,
V11I. into the palace in small bodies, with as little
54- noise as pollible, dispersed themselves through

the city, and, in the name of their patron, in-
vited to an entertainment the principal citizens
whom they knew to be disgusted with the ad-
ministration of the Dorias, and to have inclina-
tion as well as courage to attempt a change in
the government. Of the vast number of per-
sons who now filled the palace, a few only knew
for what purpose they were assembled; the reft,
afonifhed at finding, instead of the preparations
for a feast, a court crowded with armed men,
and apartments filled with the infiruments of
war, gazed on each other with a mixture of cu-
riofity, impatience, and terror.

Fiefco's e- WH ILE their minds were in this state of sus-
,iohm penfe and agitation, Fiefco appeared. With a

look full of alacrity and confidence, he address-
ed himself to the persons of chief diftindion,
telling them, that they were not now called to
partake of the pleasure of an entertainment, but
to join in a deed of valour, which would lead
them to liberty and immortal renown. He set
before their eyes the exorbitant as well as into-
lerable authority of the elder Doria, which the
ambition of Giannetino, and the partiality of
the Emperor to a family more devoted to him
than to their country, wes about to enlarge and
to render perpetual. This unrighteous domi-
nation, continued he, you have it now in your
power to subvert, and to eftablith the freedom
of your country on a firm basis. The tyrants
must be cut off. I have taken the most effec-
tual measures for this purpose. My associates
are numerous. I can depend on allies and pro-
tectors if necessary. Happily the tyrants are as
secure as I have been provident. Their insolent

contempt

contempt of their countrymen has banified the B o
suspicion and timidity which usually render the Vinl.
guilty quick-fighted to discern, as well as saga- 547-
cious to guard againfl the vengeance which they
deserve. They will now feel the blow, before
they suspect any hostile hand to be nigh. Let
us then sally forth, that we may deliver our
country by one generous effort, almost unac-
companied with danger, and certain of success.
These words, uttered with that irrefifible ser-
vour which animates the mind when roused by
great objets, made the desired imprefflon on
the audience. Fiefco's vassals, ready to execute
whatever their mafler should command, received
his discourse with a murmur of applause. To
many whose fortunes were desperate, the licence
and confusion of an infurreion afforded an
agreeable profped. Those of higher rank and
more virtuous sentiments, durst not discover the
surprise or horror with which they were firuck at
the proposal of an enterprize no less unexpected
than atrocious as each of them imagined the
other to be in the secret of the'confpiracy,
and saw himself surrounded by persons who
waited only a signal from their leader to perpe-
trate the greatest crime. With one voice then
all applauded, or feigned to applaud, the under-
taking.

FIEsco having thus fixed and encouraged his s; inter-

associates, before he gave them his laftorders, he vi" wib
hastened for a moment to the apartment of his
wife, a lady of the noble house of Cibo, whom
he loved with tender affection, and whose beauty
and virtue rendered her worthy of his love.
The noise of the armed men who crowded the
court and palace, having long before this
reached her ears, she concluded some hazardous
enterprize to be in hand, and she trembled for

her

B o o her husband. He found her in all the anguish
viIi. of uncertainty and fear; and as it was now im-
1547. poflible to keep his design concealed, he in-

formed her of what he had undertaken. The
profped of a scene o full of horror as well as
danger, completed her agony; and foreboding
immediately in her mind the fatal issue of it, he
endeavoured, by her tears, her entreaties, and
her despair, to divert him from his purpose.
Fiefco, after trying in vain to ooth and to in-
spire her with hope, broke from a situation into
which an excess of tenderness had unwarily fe-
duced him, though it could not shake his refo-
lution. " Farewell, he cried, as he quitted the
apartment, you 'hall either never fee me more,
or you hall behold to-morrow every thing in
Genoa subjet to your power."

Tteyittick As oon as he rejoined his companions, he
he city. allotted each his proper station; some were ap-

pointed to assault and seize the different gates
of the city; ome to make themselves masters
of the principal streets or places of strength:
Fiefco reserved for himself the attack of the
harbour where Doria's gallies were laid up, as
the pofl of chief importance, and of greatest
danger. It was now midnight, and the citizens
slept in the security of peace, when this band of
conspirators, numerous, desperate, and well arm-
ed, rushed out to execute their plan. They fur-
prifed some of the gates, without meeting with
any refifance. They got poffellion of others after
a sharp conflia with the soldiers on guard. Ver-
rina, with the galley which had been fitted out
against the Turks, blocked up the mouth of
the Darfena or little harbour where Doria's fleet
lay. All possibility of escape being cut off by
this precaution, when Fiefco attempted to enter
the galleys from the shore to which they were
made fafi, they were in no condition to make

resistance,

resistance, as they were not only unrigged and B o
disarmed, but had no crew on board, except vI.
the slaves chained to the oar. Every quarter of 1547
the city was now filled with noise and tumult,
all the streets resounding with the cry of Fiefco
and Liberty. At that name, so popular and be-
loved, many of the lower rank took arms, and
joined the conspirators. The nobles and parti-
fans of the aristocracy, astonished or affrighted,
shut the gates of their houses, and thought of
nothing but of securing them from pillage. At
laRt, the noise excited by this scene of violence
and confusion, reached the palace of Doria;
Giannetino flarted immediately from his bed,
and imagining that it was occasioned by rome
mutiny among the ailors, rushed out with a
few attendants, and hurried towards the har-
bour. The gate of St. Thomas, through which
he had to pass, was already in the poffeflion of
the conspirators, who, the moment he entered,
fell upon him with the utmost fury, and mur-
dered him on the spot. The fame must have
been the fate of the elder Doria, if Jerome de
Fiefco had executed his brother's plan, and had
proceeded immediately to attack him in his pa-
lace; but he, from the fordid consideration of
preventing its being plundered amidst the con-
fusion, having forbid his followers to advance,
Andrew got intelligence .f his nephew's deat has
wellas of his own danger; and mountingon horse-
back, saved himself by flight. Amidst this gene-
ral consternation, a few senators had the courage
to assemble in the palace of the republick Y. At
firit, some of the most daring among them at-
tempted to rally the scattered soldiers, and to at-
tack a body of the conspirators; but being repulf-
ed with loss, all agreed that nothing now remained,
but to treat with the party which seemed to be
irresistible. Deputies were accordingly ent to

learn
' II palazza della Signoria.

Boo c learn of Fiefco what were the concessions with
VIII. which he would be satisfied, or rather to submit
,4- to whatever terms he should please to prescribe.

Cine of BUT y this time Fiefco, with whom they
their rd-
ctrge. were empowered to negociate, was no more.

Just as he was about to leave the harbour, where
every thing had ucceeded to his wish, that he
might join his victorious companions, he heard
some extraordinary uproar on board the Ad-
miral galley. Alarmed at the noise, and fear-
ing that the slaves might break their chains,
and overpower his aflociates, he ran thither;
but the plank which reached from the shore to
the vessel happening to overturn, he fell into the
sea, whilst he hurried forward too precipitately.
Being loaded with heavy armour, he funk to
the bottom, and perished in the very moment
when he mufl have taken full possession of every
thing that his ambitious heart could desire.
Verrina was the firfl who discovered this fatal
accident, and foreseeing, at once, all its confe-
quences, concealed it with the utmost industry
from every one but a few leaders of the confpi-
racy. Nor was it difficult, amidst the darkness
and confusion of the night, to have kept it fe-
cret, until a treaty with the senators (hould have
put the city in the power of the conspirators.
All their hopes of this were disconcerted by the
imprudence of Jerome Fiefco, who, when the
deputies of the senate inquired for his brother,
the count of Lavagna, that they might make
their proposals to him, replied with a childish
vanity, " I am now the only person to whom
that title belongs, and with me you must treat."
These words diCcovered as well to his friends as
to his enemies what had happened, and made
the impreffon which might have been expected
upon both. The deputies, encouraged by this

event,

event, the only one which could occasion such a B o o
sudden revolution as might turn to their advan- VIll.
rage, assumed instantly, with admirable presence 547.
of mind, a new tone, suitable to the change in
their circumstances, and made high demands.
While they endeavoured to gain time by pro-
tracting the negociation, the reft of the senators
were busy in aflembling their partisans, and in
forming a body capable of defending the palace
of the republick. On the other hand, the confpi-
rators, astonished at the death of a man whom
they adored and trusted, and placing no confi-
dence in Jerome, a giddy youth, felt their courage
die away, and their arms fall from their hands.
That profound and amazing secrecy with which
the conspiracy had been concerted, and which
had contributed hitherto so much to its success,
proved now the chief cause of its miscarriage.
The leader was gone, the greater part of those
who acted under him, knew not his confidents,
and were strangers to the object at which he
aimed. There was no person among them
whose authority or abilities entitled him to as-
fume Fiefco's place, or to finish his plan ; after
having loft the spirit which animated it, life and
ativity deserted the whole body. Many of the
conspirators withdrew to their houses, hoping
that amidst the darkness of the night they had
passed unobserved, and might remain unknown.
Others fought for safety by a timely retreat; and
before break of day, mos of them fled with pre-
cipitation from a city, which, but a few hours be-
fore, was ready to acknowledge them as masters.

NEXT morning every thing was quiet in Ge- Tranquilli-

noa; not an enemy was to be seen few marks bihed n
of the violence of the former night appeared, Genoa
the conspirators having conducted their enter-
prize with more noise than bloodfled, and gain-

ed

B o o ed all their advantages by surprise, rather than

, by force of arms. Towards evening, Andrew

Doria returned to the city, being met by all the
inhabitants, who received him with acclamations
of joy. Though the disgrace as well as danger
of the preceding night, were frelh in his mind,
and the mangled body of his kinsman till before
his eyes, such was his moderation as well as
magnanimity, that the decree iflued by the fe-
nate against the conspirators, did not exceed that
jult measure of severity which was requisite for
the support of government, and was dictated
neither by the violence of resentment, nor the
rancour of revenge Z.

The Empe- AFTER taking the neceflary precautions for
or *alrm ed
a th co- preventing the flame, which was now so happily
fpiicv. extinguished, from breaking out anew, the first

care of the senate was to fend an ambaflador to
the Emperor, to give him a particular detail of
what had happened, and to beg his assistance
towards the reducion of Montobbio, a strong
fort on the hereditary estate of the Fiefci, in
which Jerome had shut himfslf up. Charles was
no less alarmed than aftonified at an event so
strange and unexpected. He could not believe
that Fiefco, how bold or adventurous soever,
durrf have attempted such an enterprize, but on

foreign

Thuan. 93. Sigonii vita Andrea Doria, 1196. La

Conjuration du Compte de Fiefque, par Cardin. de Retz.
Adriani Iltoria, lib. vi. 369. Foliete Conjuratio Jo; Lud.
Fiefci ap. Grav. Thef. Ital. i. 883.

6 It is remarkable, that Cardinal de Retz, at the age of

eighteen, composed a history of this conspiracy, containing
such a discovery of his admiration of Fiefco and his enter-
prize, that it is not furprizing that a minifler, so jealous
and discerning as Richlieu, hould be led, by the perusal of
it, to predict the turbulent and dangerous spirit of that
young Ecclefiaftick. Mem. de Retz, tom. i. p. 13.

foreign fuggeffion, and from the hope of foreign B o o K
aid. Being informed that the Duke of Parma VIlI.
was well acquainted with the plan of the con- 547
fpirators, he immediately supposed that the Pope
could not be ignorant of a measure, which his
son had countenanced. Proceeding from this to
a farther conjecture, which Paul's cautious max-
ims of policy in other instances rendered ex-
tremely probable, he concluded that the French
King must have known and approved of the
design; and he began to apprehend that this
spark might again kindle the flame of war which
had raged so long in Italy. As he had drained Sulpenda
his Italian territories of troops on account oso" n^
the German war, he was altogether unprovided Gcermnr.
for refiring any hostile attack in that country;
and on the first appearance of danger, he must
have detached thither the greatest part of his
forces for its defence. In this situation of as-
fairs, it would have been altogether imprudent
in the Emperor to have advanced in person
againRt the Elector, until he should learn with
some degree of certainty whether such a scene
were not about to open in Italy, as might put it
out of his power to keep the field with an army
sufficient to oppose him.

VOL. III.

THE
K

# BOOK IX.

THE
HISTOR Y

OF THE
R E I G N

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES V.

BOOK IX.
B0ooi0 . HE Emperor's dread of the hostile inten-

IC 1 tions of the Pope and French King did

Frea..- not proceed from any imaginary or ill-grounded
ions of ihe afpicion. Paul had already given the rongefi
posera proofs both of his jealousy and enmity. Charles
fccefs. could not hope, that Francis, after a rivallhip

of so long continuance, would behold the great
advantages which he had gained over the con-
federate Protestants, without feeling his ancient
emulation revive. He was not deceived in this
conjecture. Francis had observed the rapid pro-
grefsof his arms with deep concern; and though
hitherto prevented, by circumstances which have
been mentioned, from interposing in order to
check them, he was now convinced that, if he
did not make some extraordinary and timely
effort, Charles must acquire such a degree of
power as would enable him to give law to the
reft of Europe. This apprehension, which did

not

not take its rife from the envy of rivalhip alone, BODK IX.
but was entertained by the wisest politicians of '
the age, suggested various expedients which L+7
might serve to retard the course of the Emperor's
vitories, and to form by degrees such a combi-
nation againfl'him as might put a stop to his
dangerous career.

WITH this view, Francis inftruCded his emif- Netei

saries in Germany to employ all their address in ?Proebiun;
order to revive the courage of the confederates,
and to prevent them from fibmitting to the Em-
peror. He made liberal offers of his assistance
to the Eletr and Landgrave, whom he knew
to be the most 2ealous as well as the most po*er-
ful of the whole body; he used every argument,
and proposed every advantage, which could either
confirm their dread of the Emperor's designs,
or determine them not to imitate the inconfide-
rate credulity of their aflociates, in giving up
their religion and liberties to his disposal. While
he took this ftep towards continuing the civil
war which raged in Germany, he endeavoured,
likewise, to stir up foreign enemies againit the
Emperor. He solicited Solyman to seize this withSoly-
favourable opportunity of invading Hungary,' '
which had been drained of all the troops necef-
fary for its defence, in order to form the army
against the confederates of Smalkalde. He ex-
horted the Pope to repair, by a vigorous and
seasonable effort, the error of which he had been
guilty in contributing to raise the Emperor to
filch a formidable height of power. Finding ;ith the
Paul, both from the consciousness of his ow'n pvd,,
mistake, and his dread of its consequences, abun-
dantly disposed to liften to his exhortations, he
availed himself of this favourable disposition
which the Pontiff began to discover, as an argu-
ment to gain the Venetians. He endeavoured

K 2 to

BooK IX. to convince them that nothing could save Italy,
'-"' and even Europe, from oppression and servitude,
'547' but their joining with the Pope and him, in giv-

ing the first beginning to a general confederacy,
in order to humble that ambitious potentate,
whom they had all equal reason toldread.

wth the HAVING set on foot these negociations in the
r^ti southern courts, he turned his attention next
and Eg- towards those in the north of Europe. As the

King of Denmark had particular reasons to be
offended with the Emperor, Francis imagined
that he would not be backward to approve of
the league which he had projected; and left
considerations of caution or prudence ihould
restrain him from joining in it, he attempted to
overcome there, by offering him the young
Queen of Scots in marriage to his son A. As
the ministers who governed England in the
name of Edward VI. had openly declared them-
selves converts to the opinions of the Reform-
ers, as loon as it became safe upon Henry's.
death to lay aside that disguise which his unfor-
giving bigotry had forced them to aflume,
Francis flattered himself that their zeal would
not allow them to remain inadive speCtators of
the overthrow and deftution of those who
profefled the fame faith with themselves. He
hoped, that notwithstanding the struggles of sac-
tion incident to a minority, and the profpe of
an approaching rupture with the Scots, he might
prevail on them likewise to take part in the com-
mon cause B.

W HILE Francis employed such variety of ex-
pedients, and exerted himself with such extra-

ordinary

* Mem. de Ribier, i. 600. 6o6. a Mem. de Ribier,
i. 635.

ordinary activity, to route the different ftatesBoovlX.
of Europe against his rival, he did not neglect ''
what depended on himself alone. He levied 547
troops in all parts of his dominions; he collected
military flores; he contrated with the Swiss
cantons for a considerable body of men; he put
his finances in admirable order; he remitted con-
fiderable fums to the Elecor and Landgrave;
and took all the other steps necessary towards
commencing hostilities, on the shortest warning,
and with the greatest vigour c.

OPERATIONS so complicated, and which re- The Empe.

quired the putting so many instruments in mo- alg'ed
tion, did not escape the Emperor's observation.
He was soon informed of Francis's intrigues in
the several courts of Europe, as well as of his
domeitick preparations; and sensible how fatal
an interruption a foreign war would prove to
his designs in Germany, he trembled at the pro-
fpet of that event. The danger, however, ap-
peared to him as unavoidable as it was great.
He knew the insatiable and well-direced am-
bition of Solyman, and that he always choe
the eafon for beginning his military enter-
prises with prudence equal to the valour with
which he conducted them. The Pope, as
he had good reason to believe, wanted not
pretexts to justify a rupture, nor inclination
to begin hostilities. He had already made
Come discovery of his sentiments, by expref-
sing a joy altogether unbecoming the head
of the church, upon receiving an account of
the advantage which the Eletor of Saxony had
gained over Albert of Brandenburg; and as he
was now secure of finding, in the French King,
an ally of sufficient power to support him, he
was at no pains to conceal the violence and ex-

tent
c Memn. de Ribier, i. 595.

Bo IX. tent of his enmity ". The Venetians, Charles

was well assured, had long observed the growth
s547' of his power with jealousy, which, added to the

solicitations and promises of France, might at
last quicken their flow counsels, and overcome
their natural caution. The Danes and Engliih,
it was evident, had both peculiar reason to be
diigufted, as well as firong motives to ad against
him. But above all, he dreaded the ative emu-
lation of Francis himself, whom he confidered as
the foul and mover of any confederacy that could
be formed against him; and, as that Monarch
had afforded protection to Verina, who failed
direCtly to Marseilles upon the micarriage of
Fiefco's conspiracy, Charles expeced every mo-
ment the commencement of those hostile opera-
tions in Italy, of which he conceived the infur-
recion in Genoa to have been only the prelude.

Utcntai BUT while he remained in this state of fu-
hope f m
to dein- penfe. and solicitude, there was one circumstance
mg Rite of which afforded him fme profpe& of escaping
healh. the danger. The French King's health began

to decline. A disease, the effet of his intem-
perance and inconsiderate pursuit of pleasure,
preyed gradually n his constitution. The pre-
parations for war, as well as the negociations in
the different ccurts, began to l niguifh, together
with the Monarch who gave spirit to both.
Mirch. The Genoese, during that interval, reduced

Montobbio, took Jerome Fiefco prisoner, and
putting him to death, together with his chief
adherents, extinguifled all remains of the con-
fpiracy. Several of the Imperial cities in Ger-
many, despairing of timely afliftance from
France, ubmitted to the Emperor. Even the
Landgrave eemed disposed to abandon the Elec-
tor, and to bring matters to a speedy accommo-

dation,
Mea. de Ribier, torn. i. 637.

dation, on such terms as he could obtain. In BooK IX.
the mean time, Charles waited with impatience -
the issue of a distemper, which was to decide "547
whether he must relinquilh all other schemes, in
order to prepare for refitling a combination of
the greater part of Europe against him, or whe-
ther he might proceed to invade Saxony, with-
out interruption or fear of danger.

THE good fortune, Co remarkably propitious

to his family, that some historians have called it
the Star of the e of Alria, did not desert
him on this occasion. Francis died at Ram-Death of
bouillet, on the last day of March, in the fifty- Fr^acis,and
third year of his age, and the thirty-third oso hischa-
his reign. During twenty-eight years of thatr i P and
time, an avowed rivalfhip subsisted between with
him and the Emperor, which involved not only Cbhrle.
their own dominions, but the greater part of
Europe in wars, prosecuted with more violent
animoity, and drawn out to a greater length
than had been known in any former period.
Many circumstances contributed to both. Their
animosity was founded in opposition of in-
terest, heightened by personal emulation, and
exasperated not only by mutual injuries, but by
reciprocal insults. At the fame time, whatever
advantage one flermed to possess towards gaining
the afcedant, was wonderfully balanced by
some favourable circumstance, peculiar to the
other. The Emperor's dominions were of great
extent, the French King's lay more compa6t;
Francis governed his kingdom with absolute
power; that of Charles was limited, but he sup-
plied the want of authority by addreis: the troops
of the former were more impetuous and enter-
prifing; those of the latter better disciplined,
and more patient of fatigue. The talents and
abilities of the two Monarchs were as different

as

Bo IX. as the advantages which they poffefled, and con-
'- ' tributed no less to prolong the contest between
'547- them. Francis took his resolutions suddenly,

prosecuted them at firt with warmth, and push-
ed them into execution with a most adventurous
courage; but being defitute of the perseverance
necessary to surmount difficulties, he often aban-
doned his designs, or relaxed the vigour of pur-
suit, from impatience, and sometimes from le-
vity. Charles deliberated long, -and determined
with coolness; but having once fixed his plan,
he adhered to it with inflexible obstinacy, and
neither danger nor discouragement could turn
him aside from the execution of it. The success
of their enterprizes was as different as their cha-
racers, and was uniformly influenced by them.
Francis, by his impetuous ativity, often dif-
concerted the Emperor's best laid schemes;
Charles, by a more calm but steady prosecution
of his designs, check'd the rapidity of his rival's
career, and baffled or repulsed his most vigorous
efforts. The former, at the opening of a war'
or of a campaign, broke in upon his enemy with
the violence of a torrent, and carried all before
him; the latter, waiting until he saw the force
of his rival begin to abate, recovered in the
end not only all that he had loft, but made new
acquisitions. Few of the French Monarch's at-
tempts towards conquest, whatever promising
aspect they might wear at first, were conducted
to an happy issue; many of the Emperor's en-
terprizes, even after they appeared desperate and
impracticable, terminated in the most prosperous
manner. Francis was dazzled with the fplen-
dour of an undertaking; Charles was allured
by the prospect of its turning to his advantage.

THE degree, however, of their comparative
merit and reputation, has not been fixed either

by

by a firit scrutiny into their abilities for govern- BooK IX.
ment, or by an impartial consideration of the 'c
greatness and success of their undertakings, ' 547
and Francis is one of those Monarchs who
occupies a higher rank in the temple of Fame,
than either his talents or performances entitle
him to hold. This pre-eminence he owed to
many different circumstances. The fuperio-
rity which Charles acquired by the victory of
Pavia, and which from that period he pre-
served through the remainder of his reign, was
so manifer, that Francis's struggle against his
exorbitant and growing dominion was viewed
by most of the other powers, not only with the
partiality which naturally arises for those who
gallantly maintain an unequal contest, but with
the favour due to one who was refifling a com-
mon enemy, and endeavouring to set bounds to
a Monarch equally formidable to them all. The
characters of Princes, too, especially among
their contemporaries, depend not only upon
their talents for government, but upon their
qualities as men. Francis, notwithstanding the
many errors conspicuous in his foreign policy
and domeftick adminifRration, was nevertheless
humane, beneficent, generous. He possessed
dignity without pride; affability free from mean-
ness; and courtesy exempt from deceit. All
who had access to him, and no man of merit
was ever denied that privilege, refpeaed and
loved him. Captivated with his personal qua-
lities, his fubjedts forgot his defects as a Mo-
narch, and admiring him as the most accom-
plithed and amiable gentleman in his dominions,
they hardly murmured at ats of male-admini-
Rration, which, in a Prince of less engaging dif-
positions, would have been deemed unpardon-
able. This admiration, however, must have

been

Boos IX. been temporary only, and would have diedaway,
'5- ' with the courtiers who bellowed it; the illusion
'547- arising from his private virtues must have

ceased, and posterity would have judged of his
publick condut with its usual impartiality; but
another circumstance prevented this, and his
name hath been transmitted to posterity with in-
creasing reputation. Science and the arts had,
at that time, made little progress in France.
They were just begining to advance beyond the
limits of Italy, where they had revived, and
which had hitherto been their only feat. Francis
took them immediately under his protection, and
vied with Leo himself, in the zeal and munr
ficence with which he encouraged them. He
invited learned men to his court, he conversed
with them familiarily, he employed them in bu-
finess, he raised them to offices of dignity, and
honoured them with his confidence. That race
of men, not more prone to complain when de-
nied the respect to which they fancy themselves
entitled, than apt to be pleased when treated'
with the diftincton which they confider as their
due, thought they could not exceed in gratitude
to uch a benefa&or, and strained their inven-
tion, and employed all their ingenuity in pane-
gyrick. Succeeding authors, warmed with their
decriptions of Francis's bounty, adopted their
enconmiums, and refined upon them. he ap-
pellation of Father of Letters, bellowed upon
Francis, hath rendered hismemory facted among
historians; and they seem to have regarded itas
a fort of impiety to uncover his infirmities, or to
point out his defects. Thus Francis, notwith-
sanding his inferior abilities, and want of fuc-
cess, hath more than equalled the fame of
Charles. The virtues which he pofesTed as a
man, have entitled him to greater admiration

and

and praise, than have been bestowed upon the BooK IX
extensive genius, and fortunate arts of a more'
capable, but less amiable rival. 1547'

BY his death, a considerable change was made Esea of

in the state of Europe. Charles, grown old in deat,.
the arts of government and command, had now
to contend only with younger Monarchs, who
could not be regarded as an equal match for
him, who had stood the encounter with Henry
VIII. and Francis I. and come off with honour
in all those different contests. By this event, he
was eased of all his disquietude, and was happy
to find, that he might begin with safety those
operations against the Elector of Saxony, which
he had hitherto been obliged to suspend. He
knew the abilities of Henry II. who had just
mounted the throne of France, to be greatly
inferior to those of his father, and foresaw that
he would be o much occupied for some time
in displacing the late King's ministers, whom he
hated, and in gratifying the ambitious demands
of his own favourites, that he had nothing to
dread, either from his personal efforts, or from
any confederacy which this unexperienced Prince
could form.

BUT as it was uncertain how long such an chrles

interval of ecurity might continue, Charles de- gaint the
termined instantly to improve it; and as soon as Eleaor of
he heard of Francis's demise, he began his march Saxony.
from Egra on the borders of Bohemia. But the ApMi 13.
departure of the papal troops, together with
the retreat of the Flemings, had so much dimi-
nifhed his army, that fix.zen thousand men were
all he could assemble. With this inconsiderable
body he set out on an expedition, the event of
which was to decide what degree of authority

he

Boos IX. he should poflefs from that period in Germany:
'--3~' but as this little army consisted chiefly of the
'1547 veteran Spanifl and Italian bands, he did not,

in trusting to them, commit much to the deci-
sion of chance; and even with so mall a force,
he had reason to entertain the most sanguine
hopes of success. The EleAor, it is true, had
levied an army greatly superior in number; but
neither the experience and discipline of his
troops, nor the abilities of his officers, were to
be compared with those of the Emperor. The
EleEtor, beides, had already been guilty of an
error, which deprived him of all the advantage
which he might have derived from his fupe.
riority in number, and was alone sufficient to
have occasioned his ruin. Instead of keeping
his forces united, he detached one great body
towards the frontiers of Bohemia, in order to
facilitate his junction with the malecontents of
that kingdom, and cantoned a considerable part
of what remained in different places of Saxony,
where he expected the Emperor would make
the first imprefion, vainly imagining that these
open tcwns, with small garrisons, might be ren-
dered tenable againf an enemy.

Pcg-fs of THE Emperor entered the souther frontier
i. ;; of Saxony, and attacked Altorf upon the Elfter.

The folly of the measure which the Elecor had
taken was immediately seen, the troops posted
in that town surrendering without refitance; and
those in all the other places between that and
the Elbe, either imitated their example, or fled
as the Imperialifls approached. Charles, that
they might not recover from the panick with
which they seemed to be struck, advanced with-
out losing a moment. The Eletor, who had
fixed his head-quarters at Meiflen, continued
in his wonted state of fluAation and uncertain-

ty.

ty. He even became more undetermined, inBooK IX.
proportion as the danger drew near, and called -'v
for prompt and decisive resolutions. Sometimes 547
he ated, as if he had resolved to defend the
banks of the Elbe, and to hazard a battle with
the enemy, as Coon as the detachments which he
had called in were able to join him. At other
times, he abandoned this as rash and perilous,
seeming to adopt the more prudent counsels of
those who advised him to endeavour at protract-
ing the war, and for that end to retire under
the fortifications of Wittemberg, where the Im-
perialifis could not attack him without manifest
disadvantage, and where he might wait, in
safety, for the succours which he expected from

lecklenburgh, Pomerania, and the Protestant
cities on the Baltic. Without fixing upon either
of these plans, he broke down the bridge at
Meifen, and marched along the east bank of the
Elbe to Muhlberg. There he deliberated anew,
and, after much hesitation, adopted one of these
middle schemes, which are always acceptable to
feeble minds incapable of deciding. He left a
detachment at Muhlberg to oppose the Imperi-
alifts, if they should attempt to pass at that place,
and advancing a few miles with his main body,
encamped there in expectation of the event, ac-
cording to which he proposed to regulate his
subsequent motions.

CHARLES, meanwhile, pushing forward in-Paresthe

cellantly, arrived the evening of the twenty-Elbc
third of April on the banks of the Elbe, opposite
to Muhlberg. The river, at that place, was
three hundred paces in breadth, above four feet
in depth, its current rapid, and the bank poffeif-
ed by the Saxons was higher than that which
he occupied. Undismayed, however, by all

these

Book IX. these obstacles, he called together his general
'- ~' officers, and, without asking their opinions, com-
'547 municated to them his intention of attempting

next morning to force his passage over the river,
and to attack the enemy wherever he could come
up with them. They all expressed their afto-
nifhment at such a bold resolution; and even
the Duke of Alva, though naturally daring and
impetuous, and Maurice of Saxony, notwith-
flanding his impatience to cruth his rival the
Elector, remonfrated earneflly against it. But
the Emperor, confiding in his own judgment
or good fortune, paid no regard to their argu-
ments, and gave the orders necessary for execut-
ing his designs.

EARLY in the morning, a body of Spanifl

and Italian foot marched towards the river, and
began an inceflant fire upon the enemy. The
long heavy mufleets used in that age, did execu-
tion on the opposite bank; and many of the fol-
diers, hurried on by a martial ardor in order to
get nearer the enemy, ruhfed into the fiream,
and advancing breaft-high, fired with a more
certain aim, and with greater effet. Under
cover of their fire, a bridge of boats was begun
to be laid for the infantry; and a peasant hav-
ing undertaken to conduc the cavalry through
the river by a ford with which he was well ac-
quainted, they also were put in motion. The
Saxons posted in Muhlberg endeavoured to ob-
ftru& these operations, by a brisk fire from a
battery which they had erected; but as a
thick fog covered all the low grounds upon
the river, they could not take aim with any
certainty, and the Imperialists suffered very
little; at the fame time the Saxons being much
galled by the Spaniards and Italians, they set on
fire some boats which had been collected near

the

the village, and prepared to retire. The Im- BOOK IX.
perialifts perceiving this, ten Spanish soldiers '
instantly stript themselves, and holding their 547
swords with their teeth, swam across the river,
put to flight such of the Saxons as ventured to
oppose them, saved from the flames as many
boats as were sufficient to complete their own
bridge, and by this spirited and successful acion,
encouraged their companions no less than they
intimidated the enemy.

BY this time, the cavalry, each trooper hav-

ing a foot soldier behind him, began to enter
the river, the light horse marching in the front,
followed by the men at arms, whom the Empe-
ror led in person, mounted on a Spanilh horse,
dressed in a sumptuous habit, and carrying ajave-
lin in his hand. Such a numerous body Airug-
gling through a great river, in which, accord-
ing to the dire&ions of their guide, they were
obliged to make several turns, sometimes tread-
ing on a firm bottom, sometimes swimming,
presented to their companions, whom they left
behind, a fpetacle equally magnificent and in-
terefli ng ". Their courage, at last, surmount-
ed every obstacle, no man betraying any fymp-
tom of fear, when the Emperor hared in the
danger no less than the meanest soldier. The
moment that they reached the opposite fide,
Charles, without waiting the arrival of the reft
of the infantry, advanced towards the Saxons
with the troops which had passed along with
him, who, flushed with their good fortune, and
despising an enemy who had neglected to op-
pose them, when it might have been done with
such advantage, made no account of their fupe-
rior numbers, and marched on as to a certain
vitory.

DURING
"Avila, xiS. a.

BooK IX. DURING all these operations, which neceffa-
' ' rily consumed much time, the Eleor remained
I1 c1O4iud inactive in his camp; and from an infatuation
of the Elec- which appears to be so amazing, that the best

informed historians impute it to the treacherous
arts of his generals, who deceived him by false
intelligence, he would not believe that the Em-
peror had pafled the river, or could be so near
at hand E. Being convinced, at last, of his fa-
tal mistake, by the concurring testimony of eye-
witnesses, he gave orders for retreating towards
Wittemberg. But a German army, encumbered,
as usual, with baggage and artillery, could not
be put suddenly in motion. They had just be-
gun to march when the light troops of the ene-
my came in view, and the Eletor saw an en-

Blme of gagement to be unavoidable. As he was no
IMuihauf. less bold in action than irresolute in council, he

made the disposition for battle with the greatest
presence of mind, and in the most proper man-
ner; taking advantage of a great forest to cover
his wings, so as to prevent his being surround-'
ed by the enemy's cavalry, which were far more
numerous than his own. The Emperor, like-
wife, ranged his men in order as they came up,
and riding along the ranks, exhorted them with
few but efficacious words to do their duty. It
was with a very different spirit that the two ar-
mies advanced to the charge. As the day, which
had hitherto been dark and cloudy, happened
to clear up at that moment, this accidental cir-
cumftance made an impreflion on the different
parties corresponding to the toneof their minds;
the Saxons, furprized and disheartened, felt
pain at being exposed fully to the view of the

enemy;

' Camerar. ap. Freher. iii. 493. Struv. corp. hit.
Germ. 1047, 1049.

enemy; the Imperialists, being now secure that Boox IX.
the Protestant forces could not escape from -7
them, rejoiced at the return of fun-lhine, as a 547
certain presage of victory. The shock of battle
would not have been long or doubtful, if the
personal courage which the Eledor displayed,
together with the activity which he exerted from
the moment that the approach of the enemy
rendered an engagement certain, and cut of all
polfibility of hesitation, had not revived in some
degree the spirit of his troops. They repulsed
the Hungarian light horse who began the at-
tack, and received with firmness the men at
arms who next advanced to the charge; but as
these were the flower of the Imperial army, were
commanded by experienced officers, and fought
under the Emperor's eye, the Saxons oon be-
gan to give way, and the light troops rallying
at the fame time and falling on their flanks, the
tiight became general. A small body of chosen The Eleaor
Ioldiers, among whom the Elector had fought defted',
in person, ill continued to defend themselves, priroaeI
and endeavoured to save their master by retiring
into the forest; but being surrounded on every
fide, the Eletor, wounded in the face, exhaust-
ed with fatigue, and perceiving all resistance to
be vain, surrendered himself a prisoner. He
was conduaed immediately towards the Empe-
ror, whom he found jufi returned from the pur-
suit, standing on the field of battle in the full
exultation of success, and receiving the congra-
tulations of his officers, upon this complete vic-
tory obtained by his valour and conduct.
Even in such an unfortunate and humbling situ-
ation, the Elector's behaviour was equally mag-
nanimous and decent. Sensible of his condition,
he approached his conqueror without any of the
lullennefs or pride, which would-have been im-
VOL. 111. L proper

Boo IX. proper in a captive; and conscious of his own
- 7. dignity, he descended to no mean fubmiflion,

unbecoming the high station which he held
among the German Princes. " The fortune of
war, said he, has made me your prisoner, most
gracious Emperor, and I hope to be treated"

-Here Charles harshly interrupted him:

Hi huis "And am I then, at last, acknowledged to be
reception
by tIeEm- Emperor ? Charles of Ghent was the only title
ptror. you lately allowed me. You hall be treated as

you deserve." At these words, he turned from
him abruptly with an haughty air. To this
cruel repulse, the King of the Romans added
reproaches in his own name, using expressions
fill more ungenerous and insulting. The Elec-
tor made no reply; but, with an unaltered
countenance, which discovered neither astonish-
ment nor dejedion, accompanied the Spanilh
soldiers appointed to guard him '.

Charles' THIS decisive victory cost the Imperialists
sfth only fifty men. Twelve hundred of the Saxons
ietory. were killed, chiefly in the pursuit, and a greater

number taken prisoners. About four hundred
kept in a body, and escaped to Wittemberg,
together with the elecoral Prince, who had
likewise been wounded in the ation. After
refting two days in the field of battle, partly to
refrelh his army, and partly to receive the de-
puties of the adjacent towns, which were impa-
tient to secure his protection by submitting to
his will, the Emperor began to move towards
Wittemberg, that he might terminate the war
at once, by the reduction of that city. The

unfortunate

Sleid. hit. 4z6. Thuan. 136. Hortenius de Bello

German. ap. Scard. vol. ii. 498. Defcript. Pugnz Mul-
berg. ibid. p. 5og. P. Henter. Rer. Aufdr. lib. ii.
c. 13. p. 298.

unfortunate Elector was carried along in a fortBooK IX.
of triumph, and exposed every where, as a cap-"'
tive, to his own subjects; a fpe&tacle extremely '547.
a+iting to them, who both honoured and loved
him; though the insult was so far from fubdu-
ing his firm spirit, that it did not even ruffle the
wonted tranquillity and composure of his mind.

As Wittemberg, the residence, in that age, lnvftswit.

of the electoral branch of the Saxon family, was temberg.
one of the strongest cities in Germany, and
could not be taken, if properly defended, with-
out great difficulty, the Emperor marched
thither with the utmost dispatch, hoping that
while the conifernation occasioned by his vitory
was still recent, the inhabitants might imitate
the example of their countrymen, and submit
to his power, as oon as he appeared before
their walls. But Sybilla of Cleves, the EleEtor's
wife, a woman no less diftinguified by her abi-
lities than her virtue, instead of abandoning
herself to tears and lamentation upon her hus-
band's misfortune, endeavoured, by her ex-
ample as well as exhortations, to animate the
citizens. She inspired them with such refolu-
tion, that, when summoned to surrender, they
returned a vigorous answer, warning the Em-
peror to behave towards their sovereign with
the refped due to his rank, as they were deter-
mined to treat Albert of Brandenburg, who was
fill a prisoner, precisely in the fame manner
that he treated him. The spirit of the inhabi-
tants no less than the strength of the city seemed
now to render a siege in form neceflary. After
fich a signal victory it would have been disgrace-
ful not to have undertaken it, though at the lime
time the Emperor was destitute of every thing
requisite for carrying it on. But Maurice re-

L 2 moved

Boox IX. moved all difficulties, by engaging to furnish

"Z provisions, artillery, ammunition, pioneers, and
1547. whatever else should be needed. Trusting to

this, Charles gave orders to open the trenches
before the town. It quickly appeared, that
Maurice's eagerness to reduce the capital of
those dominions, which he expected as his re-
ward for taking arms against his kinsman, and
deserting the Protestant cause, had led him to
promise what exceeded his power to perform.
A battering train was, indeed, carried safely
down the Elbe from Dresden to Wittemberg;
but as Maurice had not sufficient force to pre-
serve a secure communication between his ter-
ritories and the camp of the besiegers, Count
Mansfeldt, who commanded a body of elefto-
ral troops, destroyed a convoy of provisions and
military stores, and dispersed a band of pioneers
deitined for the service of the Imperialists. This
put a stop to the progress of the siege, and con-
vinced the Emperor, that as he could not rely
on Maurice's promises, recourse ought to be
had to some more expeditious as well as more
certain method of getting possession of the
town.

The E-pe- THE unfortunate Elecor was in his hands;
rseo'~u and Charles was ungenerous and hard-hearted
iriment enough to take advantage of this, in order to
for.'"c- make an experiment whether he might not bring

about his design, by working upon the tender-
ness of a wife for her hulband, or upon the piety
of children towards their parent. With this
view, he ummnoned Sybilla a second time to
open the gates, letting her kuiow that if he
again refused to comply, the Eletor hould
answer with his head for her obstinacy. To
convince her that this was not an empty threat,
he brought his prisoner to an immediate trial.
The proceedings against him were as irregular

as

as the itratagem was barbarous. InRfead of BooK IX.
consulting the states of the Empire, or remit- ''^*
ting the cause to any court, which, according 547
to the German constitution, might have legally
taken cognizance of the Elector's crime, he sub-
jeted the greatest Prince in the Empire to the
jurifdiAion of a court-martial, composed of
Spanish and Italian officers, and in which the
unrelenting Duke of Alva, a fit instrument for
any a of violence, presided. This strange M.y lo.
tribunal founded its charge upon the ban of the
Empire which had been issued against the pri-
soner, a sentence pronounced by the sole autho-
rity of the Emperor, and destitute of every
legal formality which could render it valid;
but presuming him to be thereby manifestly
conviced of treason and rebellion, the court-
martial condemned him to susser death by being
beheaded. This decree was intimated to the
Eledor while amusing himself in playing at
Chefs with Ernest of Brunswick his fellow-
priioner. He paused for a moment, though The Elec.
without discovering any symptom either of ni8ty5.
furprize or terror; and after taking notice of
the irregularity as well as injustice of the Em-
peror's proceedings; " It is easy, continued he,
to comprehend his scheme. I must die, because
Wittemberg will not surrender; and I shall lay
down my life with pleasure, if, by that facri-
fice, I can preserve the dignity of my house,
and transmit to my posterity the inheritance
which belongs to them. Would to God, that
this sentence may not assec my wife and chil-
dren more than it intimidates me! and that they,
for the fake of adding a few days to a life al-
ready too long, may not renounce honours and
territories which they were born to possess G!"
He then turned to his antagonist, whom he
challenged to continue the game. He played

with
0 Thuan. i. 142.

BooK IX with his usual attention and ingenuity, and hav-
'^ ~' ing beat Ernest, expressed all the fatisfa&ion

'547. which is commonly felt on gaining such vito-

ries. After this he withdrew to his own apart-
meit, that he might employ the reft of his time
in such religious excrcifes as were proper in his
situation H.

The diftie IT was not with the fame indifference, or
,ilf'. composure, that the account of the Elecor's

danger was received in Wittemberg. Sybilla,
who had supported with such undaunted forti-
tude her husband's misfortunes, while he ima-
gined that they could reach no farther than to di-
minifh his power or territories, felt all her refolu-
tion fail as soon as his life was threatened. So-
licitous to save that, she dcfpifed every other
consideration; and was willing to make any
sacrifice, in order to appease an incensed con-
queror. At the fame time, the Duke of Cleves,
the Elector of Brandenburg, and Maurice, to
none of whom Charles had communicated the
true motives of his violent proceedings againt
the Ele&or, interceded warmly with him to
spare his life. The first was prompted to do so
merely by compaflion for his sifter, and regard
for his brother-in-law. The two other dreaded
the universal reproach that they would incur,
if after having boasted so often of the ample
security which the Emperor had promised them
with refpec to their religion, the first effect of
their union with him should be the public exe-
cution of a Prince, who was justly held in re-
verence as the most zealous protecor of the Pro-
teftant cause. Maurice, in particular, foresaw
that he must become the objedt of detestation to
the Saxons, and could never hope to govern
them with tranquillity, if he were confidered by
them as accessary to the death of his nearest

kinsman,
Struvii corpus, lo1o.

kinfmari, in order that he might obtain posses- BooK IX.
sion of his dominions.

1547.

WHILE they, from such various motives, so- His treaty

licited Charles, with the most earnest importu- Cihles
nity, not to execute the sentence; Sybilla, and by which
his children, conjured the Eletor, by letters herfut"
as well as messengers, to scruple at no concef- Eleaorate;
sion that would extricate him out of the present
danger, and deliver them from their fears and
anguish on his account. The Emperor, per-
ceiving that the expedient which he had tried
began to produce the effec that he intended,
fell by degrees from his former rigour, and al-
lowed himself to soften into promises of cle-
mency and forgiveness, if the Eletor would
shew himself worthy of his favour by submit-
ting to reasonable terms. The Eletor, on whom
the consideration of what he might susser himself
had made no impression, was melted by the tears
of a wife whom he loved, and could not resist the
intreaties of his family. In compliance with May o
their repeated solicitations, he agreed to articles
of accommodation, which he would otherwise
have rejected with disdain. The chief of them
were, that he hould resign the Eletoral dig-
nity, as well for himself as for his posterity,
into the Emperor's hands, to be disposed of en-
tirely at his pleasure; that he hould instantly
put the Imperial troops in possession of the cities
of Wittemberg and Gotha; that he should set
Albert of Brandenburg at liberty without ran-
fom; that he hould submit to the decrees of
the Imperial chamber, and acquiesce in what-
ever reformation the Emperor should make in
the conflitution of that court; that he should
renounce all leagues against the Emperor or
King of the Romans, and enter into no alliance
for the future, in which they were not compre-

hended,

Boos IX. hended. In return for these important concef.
'' sions, the Emperor not only promised to spare

1547 his life, but to fettle on him and his posterity

the city of Gotha and its territories, together
with an annual pension of fifty thousand florins,
payable out of the revenues of the Eletorate;
and likewise to grant him a fum in ready money
to be applied towards the discharge of his debts.

asdremlins Even these articles of grace were clogged with
prifronr. the mortifying condition of his remaining the

Emperor's prisoner during the reft of his life'.
To the whole, Charles had subjoined, that he
should submit to the decrees of the Pope and
council with regard to the controverted points
in religion; but the Elecor, though he had
been persuaded to sacrifice all the objecs which
men commonly hold to be the dearest and most
valuable, was inflexible with regard to this
point; and neither threats nor intreaties could
prevail to make him renounce what he deemed
to be truth, or persuade him to at in oppofi-
tion to the dictates of his conscience.

Merince As oon as the Saxon garrison marched out

tfi fr of Wittemberg, the Emperor fulfilled his en-
th, Eeao- gagements to Maurice, and in reward for his
ral dominh-
*. at merit in having deserted the Protestant cause,

and having contributed with such success to-
wards the dissolution of the Smalkaldick league,
he gave him pofieffion of that city, together
with all the other towns in the Elecorate. It
was not without reluctance, however, that he
made such a sacrifice; the extraordinary success
of his arms had begun to operate, in its usual
manner, upon his ambitious mind, suggesting
new and vast projects for the aggrandizement of

his

' Seid. 427. Thuan. i. 42. Da Mont Corps Di-
plom. iv. p. Ii, 332.

his family, towards the accomplishment of which Boo IX.
the retaining of Saxony would have been of the '--
utmost consequence. But as this scheme was '547
not then ripe for execution, he durst not yet
venture to disclose it; nor would it have been
either safe or prudent to have offended Maurice,
at that junture, by such a manifest violation
of all the promises, which had seduced him to
abandon his natural allies.

THE Landgrave, Maurice's father-in-law, was Negocia-

still in arms; and though now left alone to ',itheLad
maintain the Proteflant cause, was neither a grave.
feeble nor contemptible enemy. His dominions
were of considerable extent; his subjects ani-
mated with zeal for the reformation; and if he
could have held the Imperialists at bay for a
hort time, he had much to hope from a party
whose firength was still unbroken, whose union
as well as vigour might return, and which had
reason to depend, with certainty, on being es-
feaually supported by the King of France.
The Landgrave thought not of any thing o
bold or adventurous; but being seized with the
fame consternation which had taken possession
of his associates, he was intent, only, how to
procure favourable terms from the Emperor,
whom he viewed as a conqueror, to whose will
there was a necessity of submitting. Maurice
encouraged this tame and pacifick spirit, by mag-
nifying, on the one hand, the Emperor's power;
by boasting, on the other, of his own interest
with his victorious ally; and by representing
the advantageous conditions which he could not
fail of obtaining by his interceflion for a friend,
whom he was o solicitous to save. Sometimes
the Landgrave was induced to place such un-
bounded confidence in his promises, that he was
impatient to bring matters to a final accommo-

dation.

BooK IX. dation. On other occasions, the Emperor's ex-
- --* orbitant ambition, restrained neither by the

547- scruples of decency, nor the maxims of justice,

together with the recent and shocking proof'
which he had given of this in his treatment of
the Eletor of Saxony, came so full into his
thoughts, and made such a lively impression on
them, that he broke off abruptly the negocia-
tions which he had begun; seeming to be con-
vinced that it was more prudent to depend for
safety on his own arms, than to confide in
Charles's generosity. But this bold resolution,
which despair had suggested to an impatient
spirit, fretted by disappointments, was not of
long continuance. Upon a more deliberate fur-
vey of the enemy's power, as well as his own
weakness, his doubts and fears returned upon
him, and together with them the spirit of nego-
ciating, and the desire of accommodation.

The condi- MAURICE, and the Ele&or of Brandenburg,
' ,

Pbby ated as Mediators between him and the Em-

the Em- peror; and after all that the former had vaunt-
eror. ed of his influence, the conditions prescribed to

the Landgrave were extremely rigorous. The
articles with regard to his renouncing the league
of Smalkalde, acknowledging the Emperor's
authority, and submitting to the decrees of the
Imperial chamber, were the fame which had
been imposed on the Ele&or of Saxony. Be-
fides these, he was required to surrender his per-
son and territories to the Emperor; to implore
for pardon on his knees; to pay an hundred
and fifty thousand crowns towards defraying
the expence of the war ; to demoliih the fortifi-
cations of all the towns in his dominions ex-
cept one; to oblige the garrison which he
placed in it to take an oath of fidelity to the
Emperor; to allow a free passage through his

territories

territories to the Imperial troops as often as it BooK IX.
shall be demanded; to deliver up all his artil- '""-
lery and ammunition to the Emperor; to set at 54
liberty, without ransom, Henry of Brunswick,
together with the other prisoners whom he had
taken during the war; and neither to take arms
himself, nor to permit any of his fubjefts to serve
against the Emperor or his allies for the fu-
ture

THE Landgrave ratified these articles, though Towhich

with the utmost reluctance, as they contained he "ub"'"
no itipulation with regard to the manner in
which he was to be treated, and left him en-
tirely at the Emperor's mercy. Neceflity, how-
ever, compelled him to give his assent. Charles,
who had assumed the haughty and imperious
tone of a conqueror, ever since the reduction of
Saxony, insisted on an unconditional fubmiflion,
and would permit nothing to be added to the
terms which he had prescribed, that could in
any degree limit the fulness of his power, or re-
strain him from behaving as he saw meet to-
wards a Prince whom he regarded as absolutely
at his disposal. But though he would not vouch-
safe to negociate with the Landgrave, on such
a footing of equality, as to susser any article to
be inserted among those which he had dicated
to him, that could be confidered as a formal
stipulation for the fccurity and freedom of bis
person; he, or his ministers in his name, gave
the Elecor of Brandenburg and Maurice such
full fatisfa&ion with regard to this point, that
they aflured the Landgrave that Charles would
behave to him in the fame way as he had done
to the Duke of Wurtemberg, and would allow
him, whenever he had made his fubmiflion, to
return to his own territories. Upon finding the

Landgrave
Slcid. 430. Thuan. 1. iv. 146.

BoK IX. Landgrave to be fRill possessed with his former
*' suspicions of the Emperor's intentions, and un-
547- willing to trutl verbal or ambiguous declara-

tions, in a matter of such essential concern as
his own liberty, they sent him a bond signed by
them both, containing the most solemn obliga-
tions, that if any violence whatsoever were of-
sered to his person, during his interview with
the Emperor, they would instantly surrender
themselves to his sons, and remain in their
hands to be treated by them in the fame manner
as the Emperor mhould treat him L.

He rpairs THis,together with the indispensable obligation
rialramp ofperformingwhatwascontained in the articles of

which he had accepted, removed his doubts and
cruples, or made it neceflary to get over them.
He repaired, for that purpose, to the Imperial
camp at Hall in Saxony, where a circumstance
occurred which revived his suspicions and in-
creased his fears. Just as he was about to enter
the chamber of presence, in order to make his
publick fubmiflion to the Emperor, a copy of
the articles which he had approved of was put
into his hands, in order that he might ratify
them anew. Upon perusing them, he perceived
that the Imperial ministers had added two new
articles; one importing, that if any dispute
should arise concerning the meaning of the for-
mer conditions, the Emperor should have the
right of putting what interpretation upon them
he thought most reasonable the other, that
the Landgrave was bound to submit implicitly
to the decisions of the council of Trent. This
unworthy artifice, calculated to furprize him
into an approbation of articles, to which he
had not the most distant idea of assenting, by
proposing them to him at a time when his mind

was
L Du Moat Corps Diplom. iv. p. i . 336.

was engrossed and disquieted with the thoughts Boor IX.
of that humbling ceremony which he had to '-"
perform, filled the Landgrave with indignation, '547
and made him fly out into all those violent ex-
pressions of rage to which his temper was prone.
With some difficulty, the Elecor of Branden-
burg and Maurice prevailed at length on the
Emperor's ministers to drop the former article
as unjust, and to explain the latter in such a
manner, that he could agree to it, without
openly renouncing the Protestant religion.

THIS obstacle being surmounted, the Land-The mrn-

grave was impatient to finish a ceremony which, ne 'Ewh'-
how mortifying soever, had been declared ne-ror received
ceflary towards his obtaining pardon. The im'
Emperor was feated on a magnificent throne,
with all the ensigns of his dignity, surrounded
by a numerous train of the Princes of the Em-
pire, among whom was Henry of Brunswick,
lately the Landgrave's prisoner, and now, by a
sudden reverse of fortune, a fpetator of his
humiliation. The Landgrave was introduced
with great solemnity, and advancing towards
the throne, fell upon his knees. His chancel-
lor, who walked behind him, immediately read,
by his master's command, a paper which con-
tained an humble confession of the crime where-
of he had been guilty; an acknowledgment
that he had merited on that account the most
severe punishment; an absolute resignation of
himself and his dominions to be disposed of at
the Emperor's pleasure; a submissive petition
for pardon, his hopes of which were founded
entirely on the Emperor's clemency; and it
concluded with promises of behaving, for the
future, like a subjed, whose principles of loyalty
and obedience would be confirmed, and would
even derive new force from the sentiments of

gratitude

Boo l X. gratitude which must hereafter fill and animate

-'- his heart. While the chancellor was reading
'547 this abje& declaration, the eyes of all the spec-

tators were fixed on the unfortunate Landgrave;
few could behold a Prince, so powerful as well
as high-fpirited, suing for mercy in the posture
of a fippliant, without being touched with
commiseration, and perceiving serious reflec-
tions arise in their minds upon the inflability
and eniptinefs of human grandeur. The Em-
peror viewed the whole tranfadion with an
haughty unfeeling composure; and preserving a
profound silence himself, made a sign to one of
his secretaries to read his answer; the tenor of
which was, That though he might have jufily
infliced on him the grievous punishment which
his crimes deserved, yet, prompted by his own
generosity, moved by the solicitations of several
Princes in behalf of the Landgrave, and influ-
enced by his penitential acknowledgments,
he would not deal with him according to the
rigour of justice, and would subjet him to no
penalty that was not specified in the articles
which he had already subscribed. The moment
the secretary had finished, Charles turned away
abruptly, without deigning to give the unhappy
suppliant any sign of compaflion or reconcile-
ment. He did not even desire him to rife from
his knees; which the Landgrave having ven-
tured to do unbidden, advanced towards the
Emperor with an intention to kifs his hand,
flattering himself, that his guilt being now fully
expiated, he might presume to take that liberty.
But the Eletor of Brandenburg perceiving that
this familiarity would be offensive to the Em-
peror, interposed, and desired the Landgrave to
go along with him and Maurice to the Duke of
Alva's apartments in the castle.

HE

HE was received and entertained by thatBooKIX.
nobleman with the refpet and courtesy due to ''
such a guest. But, after upper, while he was He ide-
engaged in play, the Duke took the Elector ti.ned
and Maurice aside, and communicated to them prioncr.
the Emperor's orders, that the Landgrave must
remain a prisoner in that place unde: the cuf-
tody of a Spaniih guard. As they had not
hitherto entertained the most distant suspicion
of the Emperor's sincerity or rectitude of in-
tention, their furprize was excessive, and their
indignation not inferior to it, on discovering
how greatly they had been deceived themselves,
and how infamously abused, in having been made
the instruments of deceiving and ruining their
friend. They had recourse to complaints, to
arguments, and to intreaties, in order to save
themselves from that disgrace, and to extricate
him out of the wretched situation into which he
had been betrayed by too great confidence in
them. But the Duke of Alva remained inflex-
ible, and pleaded the necessity of executing the
Emperor's commands. By this time it grew
late, and the Landgrave, who knew nothing of
what had passed, nor dreaded the snare in which
he was entangled, prepared for departing, when
the fatal orders were intimated to him. He
was fruck dumb at first with astonishment, but
after being silent a few moments, he broke out
into all the violent expressions, which horror at
injustice accompanied with fraud naturally fug-
gests. He complained, he expoftulated, he ex-
claimed; sometimes inveighing against the Em-
peror's artifices as unworthy of a great and
generous Prince; ometimes censuring the cre-
dulity of his friends in trusting to Charles's infi-
dious promises; sometimes charging them with
meanness in stooping to lend their afliftance to-
wards the execution of such a perfidious and dif-

honourable

BooKlX. honourable scheme; and in the end he required
.,- them to remember their engagements to his
'547 children, and inflantly to fulfil them. They,

after giving way for a little to the torrent of his
paflion, solemnly asserted their own innocence
and upright intention in the whole tranfation,
and encouraged him to hope, that, as soon as
they law the Emperor, they would obtain re-
drels of an injury, which affected their own ho-
nour, no less than it did his liberty. At the
fame time, in order to soothe his rage and im-
patience, Maurice remained with him during the
night, in the apartment where he was con-
fined .

The£ieaor NEXT morning, the Elector and Maurice ap-
of Brsad- plied jointly to the Emperor, representing the
Miice so- infamy to which they would be exposed through-
hcjr in vim
fr bhi, Ii out Germany, if the Landgrave were detained
bert.- in custody; that they would not have advised,

nor would he himself have consented to an inter-
view, if they had suspected that the loss of his
liberty was to be the consequence of his fubmif-
sion; that they were bound to procure his re-
lease, having plighted their faith to that effet,
and engaged their own persons as sureties for his.
Charles listened to their earnest remonstrances
with the utmost coolness. As he now stood no
longer in need of their services, they had the
mortification to find that their former obfequi-
oufnefs was forgotten, and little regard paid to
their intercession. He was ignorant, he told
them, of their particular or private tranfadions
with the Landgrave, nor was his conduct to be
regulated by there; though he knew well what
he himself had promised, which was not that the

Landgrave

Sieid. 433. Thuan. 1. iv. 147. Struv. Corp. Hifi.
Germ. ii. 1052.

Landgrave Ihould be exempt from all restraint, Boor X.
but that he should not be kept a prisoner du- ?1J
ring lifet. Having said this with a peremp- 1547
tory and decisive tone, he put an end to the con-
ference; and they feeing no probability, at that
time, of making any impreflion upon the Em-
peror, who seemed to have taken his resolution
deliberately, and to be obstinately bent on ad-
hering to it, were obliged to acquaint the un-
fortunate prisoner with the ill success of their
endeavours in his behalf. This disappointment
threw him into a new and more violent transport
of rage; so that to prevent his proceeding to some
desperate extremity, the Elecor and Maurice
promised that they would not quit the Emperor,
until, by the frequency and fervour of their im-
portunity, they had extorted his consent to set

VOL. III. M him

t According to several hiltorians of great name, the
Emperor, in his treaty with the Landgrave, Ripulated that
he would not detain him in any prison. But in executing
the deed, which was written in the German tongue, the
Imperial ministers fraudulently substituted the word ewiger
instead of einiger; and thus the treaty, in place of a promise
that he hould not be detained in any prison, contained only
an engagement that he flould not be detained in perpetual
imprisonment. But authors, eminent for historical know-
ledge and critical accuracy, have called in question the truth
of this common fory. The silence of Sleidan with regard
to it, as well as its not being mentioned in the various me-
morials which he has published concerning the Landgrave's
imprisonment, greatly favour this opinion. But as.feveral
books, which contain the information necessary towards dif-
cuffing this point with accuracy, are written in the Ger-
man language, which I do not underfand, I cannot pretend
to inquire into this matter with the fame precision, where-
with I have endeavoured to fettle some other controverted
fats which have occurred in the course of this history. See
Sruv. Corp. 1052. Molheim's Eccles. Hilf. vol. ii, p. 16t,
162. Engl. Edition.

Boo IX. him free. They accordingly renewed their
"'r solicitations a few days afterwards, but found
"547 Charles more haughty and intratable than be-

fore, and were warned that if they touched again
upon a fubje& so disagreeable, and with regard
to which he had determined to hear nothing far-
ther, he would instantly give orders to convey
the prisoner into Spain. Afraid of hurting the
Landgrave by an officious or ill-timed zeal to
serve him, they not only defited, but left the
court, and as they did not chue to meet the first
sallies of the Landgrave's rage upon his learning
the cause of their departure, they informed the
of it by a letter, wherein they exhorted him to
fulfil all that he had promised to the Emperor,
as the most certain means of procuring a speedy
release.

Hi imp- WH A TEVER violent emotions their abandon-
de re- ing his cause in this manner occasioned, the
f"ait. Landgrave's impatience to recover liberty made

him follow their advice. He paid the um
which had been imposed on him, ordered his
fortresses to be razed, and renounced all alli-
ances which could give offence. This prompt
compliance with the will of the conqueror pro-
duced no effect. He was still guarded with the
fame vigilant severity; and being carried about,
together with the degraded Eletor of Saxony,
wherever the Emperor went, their disgrace and
his triumph was each day renewed. The forti-
tude as well as equanimity, with which the
Elecor bore there repeated insults, were not
more remarkable than the Landgrave's fretful-
ness and impatience. His active impetuous
mind could ill brook restraint; and reflection
upon the hameful artifices by which he had
been decoyed into that situation, as well as in-
dignation at the injustice with which he was fill

detained

detained in it, drove him often to the wildei BooxIX.
excesses of paflion.

THE people of the different cities, to whom The rigour

Charles thus wantonly exposed those illustrious peror's Ex-
prisoners as a publick fpe&acle, were sensibly aion i
touched with such an insult offered to the Ger- cerm"ny.
manick body, and murmured loudly at this in-
decent treatment of two of its greatest Princes.
They had soon other causes of complaint, and
such as asseted them more nearly. Charles pro-
ceeded to add opprefflon to insult, and arrogat-
ing to himself all the rights of a conqueror, ex-
ercifed them with the utmofi rigour. He or-
dered his troops to seize the artillery and mili-
tary stores belonging to such as had been mem-
bers of the Smalkaldick league, and having col-
leted upwards of five hundred pieces of can-
non, a great number in that age, he sent part of
them into the Low-Countries, part into Italy,
and part into Spain, in order to spread by this
means the fame of his success, and that they
might serve as monuments of his having sub-
dued a nation, hitherto deemed invincible. He
then levied, by his sole authority, large fums as
well upon those who had served him with fide-
lity during the war, as upon such as had been in
arms against him; upon the former, as their
contingent towards a war, which having been
undertaken, as he pretended, for the common
benefit, ought to be carried on at the common
charge; upon the latter, as a fine by way of
punishment for their rebellion. By these exac-
tions he amassed above one million fix hundred
thousand crowns, a fum which appeared pro-
digious in the sixteenth century. But so gene-
ral was the conflernation which had seized the
Germans upon his rapid success, and such their
dread of his vitorious troops, that all implicitly

M a obeyed

Boo IX. obeyed his commands; though, at the fame

'"- time, these extraordinary tretches of power
,547- greatly alarmed a people, jealous of their privi-

leges, and habituated during several ages to
confider the Imperial authority as neither ex-
tensive nor formidable. This discontent and
resentment, how industriously soever they con-
cealed them, became universal; and the more
these paflions were restrained and kept down for
the present, the more likely were they to burst
out soon with additional violence.

Ferdinand's WHILE Charles gave law to the Germans like
encroach-

ents on a conquered people, Ferdinand treated his sub-
the 'lbertiets js in Bohemia with still greater rigour. That
of his Bo- .J in
hemi.nfub- kingdom possessed privileges and immunities as

extensive as those of any nation in which the
feudal institutions were established. The pre-
rogative of their Kings was extremely limited,
and the crown itself elecive. Ferdinand, when
placed on the throne, had confirmed their liber-
ties with every solemnity prescribed by their ex-
ceflive solicitude for the security of a conftitu-
tion of government to which they were ex-
tremely attached. He soon began, however, to
be weary of a jurifdition so much circumfcrib-
ed, and to despise a sceptre which he could not
transmit to his posterity; and notwithstanding
all his former engagements, he attempted to
overturn the constitution from its foundations;
that instead of an elecive kingdom he might
render it hereditary. But the Bohemians were
too high-fpirited tamely to relinquish privi-
leges which they had long enjoyed. At the
fame time, many of them having embraced the
doctrines of the Reformers, the feeds of which
John Huss and Jerome of Prague had planted
in their country about the beginning of the pre-
ceding century, the desire of acquiring religious

liberty

liberty mingled itself with their zeal for theirBooK IX.
civil rights; and there two kindred passions "'
heightening, as usual, each other's force, preci- '547
pirated them immediately into violent measures.
They had not only refused to serve their fpve-
reign against the confederates of Smalkalde, but
having entered into a close alliance with the
Elector of Saxony, they had bound therrmtelves,
by a solemn association, to defend their ancient
constitution; and to persist, until they should
obtain such additional grants as they thought
necefiary towards perfecting the present model
of their government, or rendering it more per-
manent. They chose Caspar Phlug, a noble-
man of diftindion, to be their general; and
raited an army of thirty thousand men to enforce
their petitions. But either from the weakness
of their leader, or from the dissensions in a great
unwieldy body, which, having united hastily,
was not thoroughly compaded, or from ome
other unknown cause, the subsequent operations
of the Bohemians bore no proportion to the zeal
and ardour with which they took their first refo-
lutions. They uffered themselves to be amused
so long with negociations and overtures of dif-
ferent kinds, that before they could enter
Saxony, the battle of Muhlberg was fought,
the Eledtor deprived of his dignity and terri-
tories, the Landgrave confined to close custody,
and the league of Smalkalde entirely diflipated.
The fame dread of the Emperor's power which
had seized the reft of the Germans, reached
them. As oon as their sovereign approached
with a body of Imperial troops, they initantly
dispersed, thinking of nothing but how to atone
for their past guilt, and to acquire ome hope
of forgiveness, by a prompt submission. But
Ferdinand, who entered his dominions full of
that implacable resentment which inflames Mo-

narchs

Bool IX. narchs whose authority has been despised, was

L-~" not to be mollified by the late repentance and
r547 involuntary return of rebellious subjeCts to their

duty. He even heard, unmoved, the intreaties
and tears of the citizens of Prague, who ap-
peared before him in the posture of suppliants,
and implored for mercy. The sentence which
he pronounced against them was rigorous to ex-
tremity; he abolished many of their privileges,
he abridged others, and new-modelled the con-
ftitution according to his pleasure. He con-
demned to death many of those who had been
most active in forming the late association against
him, and puniihed still a greater number with con-
fifcation of their goods, or perpetual banishment.
He obliged all his fubjeds, of every condition,
to give up their arms to be deposited in forts
where he planted garrisons; and after disarming
his people, he loaded them with new and exor-
bitant taxes. Thus by an ill-conduted and
unsuccessful effort to extend their privileges, the
Bohemians not only enlarged the sphere of the
royal prerogative, when they intended to have
circumscribed it, but they almost annihilated
those liberties which they aimed at establishing
on a broader and more secure foundation N.
Diet held t THE Emperor, having now humbled, and,

g as he imagined, subdued the independent and

stubborn spirit of the Germans, by the terror of
arms and the rigour of punishment, held a diet
at Augsburg, in order to compose finally the
controversies with regard to religion, which had
so long disturbed the Empire. He durst not,
however, trust the determination of a matter so
interesting to the free suffrage of the Germans,

broken

Sleid. 408. 419. 434. Thuan. 1. iv. 129. 50o. Struv.
Corp. ii.

broken as their minds now were to fubjeaion. BOK IX.
He entered the city at the head of his Spanish "'
troops, and assigned them quarters there. The 547
reft of his soldiers he cantoned in the adjacent
villages; so that the members of the diet, while
they carried on their deliberations, were fur-
rounded by the fame army which had overcome
their countrymen. Immediately after his publick
entry, Charles gave a proof of the violence
with which he intended to proceed. He took
possession by force of the cathedral, together with
one of the principal churches; and his priests
having, by various ceremonies, purified them
from the pollution with which they supposed the
unhallowed ministrations of the Protestants to
have defiled them, they re-established, with great
pomp, the rites of the Romish worship °.

THE concourse of members to this diet was The Empe.

W · ror exhorts

extraordinary; the importance of the affairs them to
concerning which it was to deliberate, added to submit to

the General

the fear of giving offence to the Emperor by council.
an absence which lay open. to mifconfruction,
brought together almost all the Princes, nobles,
and representatives of cities who had right to fit
in that assembly. The Emperor, in the speech
with which he opened the meeting, called their
attention immediately to that point, which
seemed chiefly to merit it. Having mentioned
the fatal effecs of the religious dissensions which
had arisen in Germany, and taken notice of his
own unwearied endeavours to procure a general
council, which alone could provide a remedy
adequate to there evils, he exhorted them to
recognise its authority, and to stand to the
award of an assembly, to which they had ori-
nally appealed, as having the sole right of judg-
ment in the cafe.

BUT
° Sid. 435. 437-

BOoK IX. BUT the council, to which Charles wilhed

.1. them to refer all their controversies, had, by

vi4.u 're- this time, undergone a violent change. The
o t~ion in fear and jealousy with which the Emperor's firt

tc"ounc. successes against the confederates of Smalkalde

had inspired the Pope, continued to increase.
Not satisfied with attempting to retard the pro-
grefs of the Imperial arms, by the sudden recal
of his troops, Paul began to confider the Empe-
ror as an enemy, the weight of whose power he
must soon feel, and against whom he could not
be too hasty in taking precautions. He foresaw
that the immediate effec of the Emperor's ac-
quiring absolute power in Germany, would be
to render him entirely master of all the decisions
of the council, if it should continue to meet in
Trent. It was dangerous to allow a Monarch,
so ambitious, to get the command of this for-
midable engine, which he might employ at plea-
sure to limit or overturn the papal authority.
As the only method of preventing this, he de-
termined to translate the council to some city
more immediately under his own jurifdiAion,
and at a greater distance from the terror of the
Emperor's arms, or the reach of his influence.
An incident fortunately occurred, which gave
this measure the appearance of being neceflary.
One or two of the fathers of the council, toge-
ther with some of their domefticks, happening to
die suddenly, the physicians, deceived by the
symptoms, or suborned by the Pope's legates,
pronounced the distemper to be infectious and
pestilential. Some of the prelates, firuck with
a panick, retired; others were impatient to be

M.rch ... gone; and after a short consultation, the coun-
'Trinfted cil was translated to Bologna, a city fubje to
r Trent
oBo;.o.. the Pope. All the bishops in the Imperial in-

terest, warmly opposed this resolution, as taken
wri:hout necessity, and founded on false or frivo-

lous

lous pretexts. All the Spanish prelates, and BooK IX.
moit of the Neapolitan, by the Emperor's ex-
press command, remained at Trent; the reft, 1547
to the number of thirty-four, accompanying the
legates to Bologna. Thus a schism commenced,
in that very assembly, which had been called to
heal the divisions of Christendom; the fathers
of Bologna inveighing against those who staid at
Trent, as contumacious and regardless of the
Fope's authority; while the other accused them
of being so far intimidated by the fears of ima-
ginary danger, as to remove to a place where
their consultations could prove of no service to-
wards re-establishing peace and order in Ger-
many %

THE Emperor, at the fame time, employed Symptoms

all his interest to procure the return of the coun- betweenthe
cil to Trent. But Paul, who highly applauded Pope and
his own sagacity in having taken a ftep which
put it out of Charles's power to acquire the di-
retion of that assembly, paid no regard to a
request, the obje& of which was o extremely
obvious. The summer was consumed in fruit-
less negociations with refped to this point, the
importunity of the one and the obstinacy of the
other daily increasing. At last an event hap-
pened which widened the breach irreparably,
and rendered the Pope utterly averse from lift-
ening to any proposal that came from the Em-
peror. Charles, as has been already observed,
had Co violently exasperated Peter Lewis Far-
nefe, the Pope's son, by refusing to grant him
the investiture of Parma and Placentia, that he
had watched ever since that time with all the
vigilance of resentment for an opportunity of
revenging that injury. He had endeavoured to
precipitate his father into open hostilities against

the
- F. Paul, 248, &c.

BooK IX. the Emperor, and had earnefily solicited the
'---' King of France to invade Italy. His hatred and
'547 resentment extended to all those whom he knew

that the Emperor favoured; he persecuted Gon-
zaga, governor of Milan, with ill offices, and
had encouraged Fiefco in his attempt upon
the life of Andrew Doria, because both Gonzaga
and Doria possessed a great degree of the Em-
peror's esteem and confidence. His malevolence
and secret intrigues were not unknown to the
Emperor, who could not be more desirous to
take vengeance on him, than Gonzago and Doria
were to be employed as his instruments in in-
flicting it. Farnese, by the profligacy of his
life, and by enormities of every kind, equal to
those committed by the worst tyrants who have
disgraced human nature, had rendered himself
so odious, that they thought any violence what-
ever might be attempted against him. They
soon found, among his own fubjeds, persons who
were eager, and even deemed it meritorious to
lend their hands in such a service. As he, ani-
mated with the jealousy which usually poffefles
petty sovereigns, had employed all the cruelty
and fraud, whereby they endeavour to supply
their defect of power, in order to humble and
extirpate the nobility subjed to his government,

rThe ,rffi- five noblemen of the greatest diftintion in Pla,
th: oe' centia, combined to avenge the injuries, which
fa. they themselves had suffered, as well as those

which he had offered to their order. They
formed their plan in conjunction with'Gonzaga;
but it remains uncertain whether he originally
suggested the scheme to them, or only approved
of what they proposed, and co-operated in carry-
ing it on. They concerted all the previous feps
with such foresight, conducted their intrigues
with such secrecy, and displayed such courage
in the execution of their design, that it may be

ranked

ranked among the most audacious deeds of that Book IX-
nature mentioned in history. One body of the
conspirators furprized, at mid-day, the gates of Sept. .47
the citadel of Placentia where Farnese resided,
overpowered his guards, and murdered him.
Another party of them made themselves masters
of the town, and called upon their fellow-citi-
zens to take arms, in order to re-affume their
liberty. The multitude ran towards the citadel,
from which three great guns, a signal concerted
with Gonzaga, had been fired; and before they
could guess the cause or the authors of the tu-
mult, they saw the lifeless body of the tyrant
hanging by the heels from one of the windows
of the citadel. But so universally detestable had
he become, that not one expressed any sentiment
of concern at such a fad reverse of fortune, or
discovered the least indignation at this ignomi-
nious treatment of a sovereign Prince. The
exultation at the success of the conspiracy
was general, and all applauded the actors in it,
as the deliverers of their country. The body
was tumbled into the ditch that surrounded the
citadel, and exposed to the insults of the rab-
ble; the reft of the citizens returned to their
usual occupations, as if nothing extraordinary
had happened.

BEFORE next morning, a body of troops ar-The impe-
riving from the frontiers of the Milanese, where ', trop
they had been posted in expeAation of the event, son of
took poffefion of the city in the Emperor's Placent"
name, and reinstated the inhabitants in the pof-
ieflion of their ancient privileges. Parma, which
the Imperialists attempted likewise to furprize,
was saved by the vigilance and fidelity of the
officers whom Farnese had intruted with the
command of the garrison. The death of a son

whom,

Boos IX. whom, notwithtanding his infamous vices, Paul
'- loved with an excess of parental tenderness,
'547- overwhelmed him with the deepest aflidtion;

and the loss of a city, of such consequence as
Placentia, greatly embittered his sorrow. He
accused Gonzaga, in open consistory, of having
committed a cruel murder, in order to prepare
the way for an unjust usurpation, and immedi-
ately demanded of the Emperor fatisfaftion for
both; for the former, by the punishment of Gon-
zaga; for the latter, by the reltitution of Placen-
tia to his grandson Oetavio, its rightful owner.
But Charles, who, rather than quit a prize of
such value, was willing not only to expose him-
self to the imputation of being accellary to the
crime which had given an opportunity of seizing
it, but to bear the infamy of defrauding his
own fon-in-law of the inheritance which belong-
ed to him, eluded all his solicitations, and
determined to keep poflellion of the city, toge-
ther with its territories %

The Pope THIS resolution, flowing from an ambition so
,lulnco rapacious, as to be retrained by no confidera-
the Fred tion either of decency or juflice, transported
th- vD. the Pope so far beyond his usual moderation and

caution, that he was eager to take arms against
the Emperor, in order to be avenged on the mur-
derers of his son, and to recover the inheritance
wrested from his family. Conscious, however,
of his own inability to contend with such an
enemy, he warmly solicited the French King and
the republick of Venice to join in an offensive
league against Charles. But Henry was intent
at that time on other objects. His ancient allies,
the Scots, having been defeated by the Englilh

in

o F. Paul, 257, Pallavic. 42, 45. Thuan. iv. 156.

Men. de Ribier, 59. 67. Natalis Comitis Hiftor. lib. iii.
p. 64.

in one of the greatest battles ever fought be-BooK IX.
tween these twt rival nations, he was about to-' "
fend a numerous body of veteran troops into 1547.
that country, as well to preserve it from being
conquered, as to gain the acquisition of a new
kingdom to the French monarchy, by marrying
his son the Dauphin to the young Queen of
Scotland. An undertaking accompanied with
such manifest advantages, the success of which
appeared to be so certain, was not to be relin-
quifhed for the remote profped of benefit from
an alliance depending upon the precarious
life of a Pope of fourscore, who had nothing
at heart but the gratification of his own pri-
vate resentment. Instead, therefore, of rush-
ing headlong into the alliance proposed, Henry
amused the Pope with such general profef-
sions and promises, as might keep him from
any thoughts of endeavouring to accommodate
his differences with the Emperor, but at the
fame time avoided any such engagement as
might occasion an immediate rupture between
Charles and himself, or precipitate him into a
war for which he was not prepared. The Ve-
netians, though much alarmed at feeing Pla-
centia in the hands of the Imperialists, imitated
the wary conduEt of the French King, as it
nearly resembled the spirit with which they
themselves usually carried on their negocia-
tions R

BUT, though the Pope found that it was not The diet of

in his power to kindle immediately the flames of fttiousfor
war, he did not forget the injuries, which he the return

of the coun.

was obliged for the present to endure; resent- ciltoTrent.
ment fettled deeper in his mind, and became

more

Mem. de Ribier, ii. 63. 71. 78. 8. 95. Paruta Ior.
di Venez. 199. 203. Thuan. iv. 160.

BooK IX. more rancorous in proportion as he felt the dif-

~'" ' ficulty of gratifying it. It was, while these fen-
547- timents of enmity were in full force, and the

desire of vengeance at its height, that the diet of
Augsburg, by the Emperor's command, petition-
ed the Pope, in name of the whole Germanick
body, to enjoin the prelates who had retired to
Bologna, to return again to Trent, and to renew
their deliberations in that place. Charles had
been at great pains in bringing the members to
join in this request. Having observed a confi-
derable variety of sentiments among the Protest-
ants with refpet to the submission which he had
required to the decrees of the council, some of
them being altogether intractable, while others
were ready to acknowledge its right ofjurifdic-
tion upon certain conditions, he employed all
his address in order to gain or to divide them.
He threatened and over-awed 'the Elector Pala-
tine, a weak Prince, and obnoxious to vengeance
on account of the atfiftance which he had given
to the confederates of Smalkalde. The hope of
procuring liberty for the Landgrave, together
with the formal confirmation of his own eleao-
ral dignity, overcame Maurice's scruples, or
prevented him from opposing what he knew
would be agreeable to the Emperor. The Elec-
tor of Brandenburgh, less influenced by religi-
ous zeal than any Prince of that age, was ealily
induced to imitate their example, in aflenting to
all that the Emperor required. The deputies
of the cities remained still to be brought over.
They were more tenacious of their principles,
and though every thing that could operate either
on their hopes or fears was tried, the utmost
that they would promise was, to acknowledge the
jurifdidion of the council, if effectual provision
were made for ecuring to the divines of all
parties free access to that aembly, with entire

liberty

liberty of debate ; and if all points in contro- BooK IX.
verfy were decided according to scripture and '-"--
the usage of the primitive church. But when '547
the memorial containing this declaration was
presented to the Emperor, he ventured to put
in practice a very extraordinary artifice. With-
out reading the paper, or taking any notice of
the conditions on which they had insisted, he
seemed to take it for granted that they had corn- oa-. 9
plied with his demand, and gave thanks to the
deputies for their full and unreserved fubmif-
sion to the decrees of the council. The de-
puties, though atonifhed at what they had
heard, did not attempt to set him right, both
parties being better pleased that the matter
should remain under this state of ambiguity,
than to push for an explanation, which must
have occasioned a dispute, and would have led,
perhaps, to a ruptures.

HAVING obtained this seeming fubmiflionThe ope

from the members of the diet to the authority demund.
of the council, Charles employed that as an
argument to enforce their petition for its return
to Trent. But the Pope, from the fatisfadion
of mortifying the Emperor, as well as from his
own aversion to what was demanded, resolved,
without hesitation, that this petition hould be
rejected; though, in order to avoid the impu-
tation of being influenced wholly by resentment,
he had the address to throw it upon the fathers
at Bologna, to put a direc negative upon the
request. He referred to their consideration the
petition of the diet; and they, ready to confirm
by their assent whatever the legates were pleased
to dictate, declared that the council could not, Dec. 2o.
in consistence with its dignity, return to Trent,
unless the prelates who, by remaining there, had

discovered
'F. Paul, 259. Sleid. 440. Thuan. tom. i. 155.

Boor IX. discovered a fchifmatick spirit, would first repair

' to Bologna, and join their brethren; and that

even after theirjuntion, the council could not
renew its consultations with any prospect of be-
nefit to the church, if the Germans did not prove
their intention of obeying its future decrees to
be sincere, by ielding immediate obedience to
those which it had already past T.

The Empe- THIS answer was communicated to the Empe-
,iP, the ror by the Pope, who at the fame time exhorted
ncl of him to comply with demands which appeared to

be so reafenable. But Charles was better ac-
quainted with the duplicity of the Pope's cha-
rader than to be deceived by such a gross arti-
fice ; he knew that the prelates of Bologna durst
utter no sentiment but what Paul inspired; and,
therefore, overlooking them as mere inftru-
ments in the hand of another, he confidered their
reply as a full discovery of the Pope's inten-
tions. As he could no longer hope to acquire
such an ascendant in the council as to render it
subservient to his own plan, he saw it to be ne-
ceflary that Paul fould not have it in his power
to turn against him the authority of so venerable

,st4. an assembly. In order to prevent this, he sent
Julrry 16. two Spanish lawyers to Bologna, who, in the

presence of the legates, protested, That the
translation of the council to that place had been
unneceflary, and founded on false or frivolous
pretexts; that while it continued to meet there,
it ought to be deemed an unlawful and fchifma-
tical conventicle; that all its decisions ought of
course to be held as null and invalid; and that as
the Pope, together with the corrupt ecclefiafticks
who depended on him, had abandoned the care
of the church, the Emperor, as its protecor,
would employ all the power which God had

committed
T F. Paul, 250. Pallav. ii. 49-

committed to him, in order to preserve it from Booi IX.
those calamities with which it was threatened. -
A few days after, the Imperial ambaflador at 1548.
Rome demanded an audience of the Pope; and Januarya3.
in pretence of all the Cardinals, as well as foreign
ministers, protested against the proceedings of
the prelates at Bologna, in terms equally harsh
and difrefpedful .

IT was not long before Charles proceeded to The Empe-

carry these threats, which greatly alarmed both rfParctos
tie Pope and council at Bologna, into execu-rereas'
tion. He let the diet know the ill success of his 'e'Gor-"
endeavours to procure a favourable answer to ma-y.
their petition, and that the Pope, equally re-
gardlefs of their entreaties, and of his services
to the church, had refused to gratify them by
allowing the council to meet again at Trent;
that, though all hope of holding this assembly
in a place, where they might look for freedom
of debate and judgment, was not to be given
up, the prospect of it was, at present, distant
and uncertain; that, in the mean time, Ger-
many was torn in pieces by religious diflenfions,
the purity of the faith corrupted, and the minds
of the people disquieted with a multiplicity of
new opinions and controversies formerly un-
known among Christians; that, moved by the
duty which he owed to them as their overeign,
and to the Church as its protecor, he had em-
ployed some divines, of known abilities and
learning, to prepare a system of doctrine, to
which all hould conform, until a council, such
as they wified for, could be convocated. This
yftem was compiled by Pflug, Helding and
Agiricola, of whom the two former were digni-

VOL. 1. N taries

F. Paul, 264. Pallav. 51. Sleid. 446. GoldatRi Confit.
IImperial. i. 561.

I77

Boo IX. taries in the Romish church, but remarkable

-v`'J for their pacifick and healing spirit; the last was
548. a Protestant divine, fufpeted, not without rea-

son, of having been gained by bribes and pro-
mises, to betray or mislead his party on this
occasion. The articles presented to the diet of
Ratisbon in the year one thousand five hundred
and forty-one, in order to reconcile the contend-
ing parties, served as a model for the present
work. But as the Emperor's situation was much
changed since that time, and he found it no
longer necessary to manage the Protestants with
the fame delicacy as at that juncure, the con-
ceflions in their favour were not now so nume-
rous, nor did they extend to points of so much
consequence. The treatise contained a com-
plete system of theology, conformable in almost
every article to the tenets of the Romish church,
though expressed, for the most part, in the
softest words, or in scriptural phrases, or in teims
of studied ambiguity. Every doctrine, how-
ever, peculiar to Popery, was retained; and all
the rites, which the Protefiants condemned as
inventions of men introduced into the worlhip
of God, were enjoined. With regard to two
points only, some relaxation of their rigour was
granted, and some latitude in pracice admit-
ted. Such ecclefiafticks as had married, and
would not put away their wives, were allowed,
nevertheless, to perform all the functions of their
ficred office; and those provinces which had
been accustomed to partake of the cup, as well
as of the bread in the sacrament of the Lord's
Supper, were fill indulged the privilege of re-
ceiving both. Even these were declared to be
conceflions for the fake of peace, and granted
only for a season, in compliance with the weak-
ness or prejudices of their countrymen x.

THIS

F. Paul, 27o. Pallav. ii.6o. Sleid. 453, 457. Strau
Corp. 1054. Goldaft. Conitit. Imper. i. 518.

THIS system of doctrine, known afterwards Boox IX.
by the name of the Interim, because it contained 8
temporary regulations, which were to continue Thi, which
no longer in force than until a free general wh..^.id
council could be held, the Emperor presented he lays b
to the diet, with a pompous declaration of his Fore th*
sincere intention to re-establish tranquillity and May 5.
order in the church, as well as of his hopes that
their adopting these regulations would contri-
bute greatly to bring about that desirable event.
It was read in presence, according to form. As
soon as it was finished, the archbishop of Mentz,
president of the elecoral college, role up hastily,
and having thanked the Emperor for his un-
wearied and pious endeavours in order to restore
peace to the church, he, in name of the diet,
signified their approbation of the system of
doctrine which he had prepared, together with
their resolution of conforming to it in every par-
ticular. The whole assembly was amazed at a
declaration so unprecedented and unconftitu-
tional, as well as at the Eledcor's presumption
in pretending to deliver the sense of the diet,
upon a point which had not hitherto been the
subjet of consultation or debate. But not one
member had the courage to contradi& what the
EleEtor had said; some being overawed by nd xtort(
fear, others remaining silent through complai- iraPpfri
fance. The Emperor held the archbishop's de-
claration to be a full conflitutional ratification
of the Interim, and prepared to enforce the ob-
fervance of it, as a decree of the EmpireY.

DUR ING this diet, the wife and children of the New and
Landgrave, warmly seconded by Maurice of Sa- fitlcto
xony, endeavoured to interest the members in be- for the
half of that unhappy Prince, who fill languilhed g^v's li
in confinement. But Charles, who did not chufe r-.

N 2 to
Sleid. 460. F. Paul, 273. Pallay. 63.

Bo o IX. to be brought under the necessity of rejecing
%r^ any request that came from such a refpeftable
L548 body, in order to prevent their representations,

laid before the diet an account of his tranfac-
tions with the Landgrave, together with the
motives which had at first induced him to detain
that Prince in custody, and which rendered it
prudent, as he alleged, to keep him till under
reitraint. It was no easy matter to give any
good reason for an ation, incapable of being
justified. But he thought the most frivolous
pretexts might be produced in an assembly will-
ing to be deceived, and afraid of nothing so
much as to discover that it saw his conduct in its
true colours. His account of his own condut
was accordingly admitted to be fully fatisfatory,
and after some feeble intreaties that he would
extend his clemency to his unfortunate prisoner,
the Landgrave's concerns were no more men-
tioned z.

IN order to counterbalance the unfavourable

impression which this inflexible rigour might
leave in their minds, Charles, as a proof that
his gratitude was no less permanent and un-
changeable than his resentment, invested Mau-
rice in the electoral dignity, with all the legal
formalities. The ceremony was performed,
with extraordinary pomp, in an open court, so
near the apartment in which the degraded Elec-
tor was kept a prisoner, that he could view it
from his windows. Even this insult did not
ruffle his usual tranquillity; and tumi;g his
eyes that way, he beheld a prosperous rival re-
ceiving thoef ensigns of dignity of which he had
been stripped, without uttering one sentiment

unbecoming
Sleid. 441.

unbecoming the fortitude which he had pre-Boo IX.
served amidit all his calamities A.

1548.

IMMEDIATELY after the dissolution of the diet, Thelnterim

the Emperor ordered the interim to be pub-, qully dif-
lilhed in the German as well as Latin language. by Protef.
It met with the usual reception of conciliating pIns d.
schemes, when proposed to men heated with dif-
putation; both parties declaimed against it with
equal violence. The Protestants condemned it
as a system containing the grossest errors of
Popery, disguised with To little art, that it could
impose only on the most ignorant, or on those
who by wilfully (hutting their eyes favoured the
deception. The Papists inveighed against it, as
a work in which some dotrines of the church
were impiously given up, others meanly conceal-
ed, and all of them delivered in terms calculated
rather to deceive the unwary, than to inftmif
the ignorant, or to reclaim such as were enemies
to the truth. While the Lutheran divines fiercely
attacked it, on one hand, the general of the Do-
minicans with no less vehemence impugned it,
on the other. But at Rome, as oon as the con-
tents of the Interim came to be known, the in-
dignation of the courtiers and ecclefiafticks rose
to the greatest height. They exclaimed against
the Emperor's profane encroachment on the
sacerdotal function, in presuming, with the con-
currence of an assembly of laymen, to define
articles of faith, and to regulate modes of wor-
hlip. They compared this rash deed to that of
Uzzah, who, with an unhallowed hand, had
touched the ark of God; or to the bold at-
tempts of those Emperors, who had rendered

their

A Thuan. Hill. lib. v. 176. Struv. Corp. 1054. Invef-
titura Mauritii a Mammerano Lucemburgo delcripta ap.
S;ardium, ii. 5o8.

Boo IX. their memory detestable, by endeavouring to

8'48. model the Christian church according to their
54 pleasure. They even asseted to find out a re-

semblance between the Emperor's conduc and
that of Henry VIII. and expressed their fear of
his imitating the example of that apostate, by
usurping the title as well as jurifdition belong-
ing to the head of the church. All, therefore,
contended with one voice, that as the founda-
tions of ecclesiastical authority were now shaken,
and the whole fabrick ready to be overturned by
a new enemy, ome powerful method of de-
fence must be provided, and a vigorous resist-
ance mufl be made, at the beginning, before
he grew too formidable to be opposed.

The senti- THE Pope, whose judgment was improved
mets of
the Poie by longer experience in great tranfations, as
withregard well as by a more extensive observation of hu-

man affairs, viewed the matter with more acute
discernment, and derived comfort from the very
circumstance which filled them with apprehen-
sion. He was astonished, that a Prince of such
superior sagacity as the Emperor, should be so
intoxicated with a single victory, as to imagine
that he might give law to mankind, and decide
even in those matters, with regard to which they
are most impatient of dominion. He saw that,
by joining any one of the contending parties in
Germany, Charles might have had it in his
power to have oppressed the other, but that the
presumption of success had now inspired him
with the vain thought of his being able to do-
mineer over both. He foretold that a system
which all attacked, and none defended, could
not be of long duration; and that, for this rea-
son, there was no need of his interposing in
order to haften its fall; for as oon as the
powerful hand which now upheld it was with-

drawn,

drawn, it would fink of its own accord, and be Boos IX.
forgotten for ever. '

1548.

THE Emperor, fond of his own plan, adhered The Emp-e

to his resolution of carrying it into full execu- rcomenlrc
tion. But though the Eledor Palatine, the with the
Elecor of Brandenburg, and Maurice, influ- Interin
enced by the fame considerations as formerly,
seemed ready to yield implicit obedience to
whatever he should enjoin, he met not every
where with a like obsequious submission. John
Marquis of Brandenburg Anfpach, although he
had taken part with great zeal in the war against
the confederates of Smalkalde, refused to re-
nounce doctrines which he held to be sacred;
and reminding the Emperor of the repeated
promises which he had given his Protestant allies
of allowing them the free exercise of their reli-
gion, he claimed, in consequence of these, to
be exempted from receiving the Interim. Some
other Princes, also, ventured to mention the
fame scruples, and to plead the fame indul-
gence. But on this, as on other trying occa-
sions, the firmness of the Ele&or of Saxony
was most difiinguifhed, and merited the highest
praise. Charles, well knowing the authority of
his example with all the Protestant party, la-
boured, with the utmost earnestness, to gain his
approbation of the Interim, and by employing
sometimes promises of setting him at liberty,
sometimes threats of treating him with greater
harlhnefs, attempted alternately to work upon
his hopes and his fears. But he was alike re-
gardlefs of both. After having declared his
fixed belief in the dotrines of the Reformation,
" I cannot now, said he, in my old age, aban-
don the principles, for which I early contended;
nor, in order to procure freedom during a few

declining
' Sleid. 468. F. Paul, 271, 277. Pallay. ii. 64.

Boo, IX. declining years, will I betray that good cause,

on account of which I have suffered so much, and
1548. am till willing to susser. Better for me to en-

joy, in this solitude, the esteem of virtuous men,
together with the approbation of my own con-
science, than to return into the world, with the
imputation and guilt of apoftacy, to disgrace
and embitter the remainder of my days." By
this magnanimous resolution, he set his country-
men a pattern of condu&t, so very different from
that which the Emperor wilhed him to have ex-
hibited to them, that it drew upon him frelh
marks of his displeasure. The rigour of his con-
finement was increased; the number of his ser-
vants abridged; the Lutheran clergymen, who
had hitherto been permitted to attend him, were
difmified; and even the books of devotion,
which had been his chief consolation during a
tedious imprisonment, were taken from himc.
The Landgrave of Hefl, his companion in
misfortune, did not maintain the fame con-
ftancy. His patience and fortitude were both
so much exhausted by the length of his confine-
ment, that, willing to purchase freedom at any
price, he wrote to the Emperor, offering not
only to approve of the Interim, but to yield an
unreserved submission to his will in every other
particular. But Charles, who knew that what-
ever course the Landgrave might hold, neither
his example nor authority would prevail on his
children or subjects to receive the Interim, paid
no regard to his offers. He was kept confined
as ftriAly as ever; and while he suffered the
cruel mortification of having his condu& set in
contrast to that of the Elector, he derived not
the smallef benefit from the mean ftep which
exposed him to such deserved censure".

BUT
c Sleid. 462.

D Sleid. 462.

BUT it was in the Imperial cities that CharlesBooK IX.
met with the mot violent opposition to the In-.' '
terim. These small commonwealths, the citi-rThe fee
zens of which were accustomed to liberty and cties ftrug

gle gsinal

independence, had embraced the doctrines of eceiving
the Reformation, when first published, with re- thenterim.
markable eagerness; the bold spirit of innova-
tion being peculiarly suited to the genius of free
government. Among them, the Protestant
teachers had made the greatest number of pro-
felytes. The most eminent divines of the party
were fettled there as pastors. By having the di-
retion of the schools and other seminaries of
learning, they had trained up disciples, as well
initruaed in the articles of their faith, as zeal-
ous to defend them. Such persons were not to
be guided by ekample, or swayed by authority;
but having been taught to examine and to de-
cide in matters of controversy, thought that they
were both qualified and entitled to judge for
themselves. As soon as the contents of the In-
terim were known, they, with one voice, joined
in refuting to admit it. Aug(burg, Ulm, Straf-
burg, Constance, Bremen, Magdeburg, toge-
ther with many other towns of less note, presented
remonstrances to the Emperor, setting forth the
irregular and unconstitutional manner in which
the Interim had been enacted, and beseeching
him not to offer such violence totheir consciences,
as to require their assent to a form of doctrine
and worhip, which appeared to them repugnant
to the express precepts of the divine law. But
Charles, having prevailed on Co many Princes of
the Empire to approve of his new model, was
not much moved by the representations of those
cities, which, how formidable soever they might
have proved if they could have been formed into
ane body, lay so remote from each other, that it

was

B o o IX. was easy to oppress them separately, before it was

1 8 possible for them to unite.
1548,

Compllied I N order to accomplish this, the Emperor
,by ,e," saw it to be requisite that his measures hould be

vigorous, and executed with such rapidity as to
allow no time for concerting any common plan
of opposition. Having laid down this maxim
as the rule of his proceedings, his first attempt
was upon the city of Augsburg, which, though
overawed by the pretence of the Spanish troops,
he knew to be as much dissatisfied with the In-
terim as any in the Empire. He ordered one
body of these troops to seize the gates; he post-
ed the reft in different quarters of the city; and
Aug. 3. assembling all the burgesses in the town, he, by

his sole absolute authority, published a decree,
abolithing their present form of government,
dissolving all their corporations and fraternities,
and nominating a small number of persons, in
whom he vested for the future the right of ad-
ministration. Each of the persons, thus chosen,
took an oath to observe the Interim. An ad of
power, so unprecedented as well as arbitrary,
which excluded the body of the inhabitants from
any hare in the government of their own com-
munity, and fubjeded them to men who had no
other merit than their servile devotion to the Em-
peror's will, gave general disgust; but as they
durst not venture upon resistance, they were
obliged to submit in silence E. From Augsburg,
in which he left a garrison, he proceeded to
Ulm, and new modelling its government with
the fame violent hand, he seized such of their
pastors as refused to subscribe the Interim, com-
mitted them to prison, and at his departure car-
ried them along with him in chains . By this
severity, he not only secured the reception of

the
Sleid. 469.

r Sleid. 472,

the Interim in two of the most powerful cities, BooK IX.
but gave warning to the reft what such as con-
tinued refractory had to expet. The effec of £548.
the example was as great as he could have
wished, and many towns, in order to save them-
selves from the like vengeance, found it necef-
fary to comply with what he enjoined. This
obedience, extorted by the rigour of authori-
ty, produced no change in the sentiments of
the Germans, and extended no farther than to
make them conform so far to the letter of the
law, as was barely sufficient to screen them from
punishment. Their preachers accompanied those
ceremonies, the observation of which the Interim
prescribed, with such an explication of their
tendency, as served rather to confirm than to
remove the scruples of their hearers with regard
to them. The people, many of whom had
grown up to mature years since the establishment
of the reformed religion, and had been accuf-
tomed to no other form of publick worlhip, be-
held the pompous pageantry of the popish ser-
vice with contempt or horror; and in most
places the Romimh ecclefiafticks, who returned to
take poffeflion of their churches, could hardly
be protected from insult, or their ministrations
from interruption. Thus, notwithstanding the
apparent compliance of so many cities, the in-
habitants being accustomed to freedom, sub-
mitted with reluctance to the power which now
oppressed them. Their understanding as well
as inclination revolted against the doctrines and
rites imposed on them; and though, for the
present, they concealed their indignation and
resentment, it was evident that these passions
could not always be kept under refiraint, but
would break out at last in effects proportional
to their violence G

CHARLES,
O Mem. de Ribier, ii. i28. Sleid. 491.

Boor IX. CHARLES, meanwhile, highly pleased with
~'- -having bended the stubborn spirit of the Ger-

1s48.

'hn P8p mans to such general submission, departed for
dileciftsl the Low Countries, fully determined to compel
the C ,.ciIl
senciaed the cities, which fill tood out, to receive the In-
t Boiog". terim. He carried his two prisoners, the Eletor

of Saxony and Landgrave of Hesse, along with
him, either because he durst not leave them be-
hind him in Germany, or because he wished to
give his countrymen the Flemings this illuftri-
ous proof of the success of his arms, and the
extent of his power. Before Charles arrived at
ept. 7. Bruliels he was informed that the Pope's le-

gates at Bologna had dismissed the council by
an indefinite prorogation, and that the prelates
assembled there had returned to their refpetive
countries. Necellity had driven the Pope into
this measure. By the secession of those who
had voted againlt the translation, together with
the departure of others, who grew weary ofcon-
tinuing in a place where they were not suffered
to proceed to business, so few and such incon-
fiderable members remained, that the pompous
appellation of a General Council could not,
with decency, be beflowed any longer upon
them. Paul had no choice but to dissolve an
assembly which was become the objeft of con-
tempt, bnd exhibited to all Christendom a moll
glaring proof of the impotence of the Romish
See. But unavoidable as the measure was, it
lay open to be unfavourably interpreted, and
had the appearance of withdrawing the remedy
at the very time when those for whose recovery
it was provided, were prevailed on to acknow-
ledge its virtue, and to make trial of is efficacy.
Charles did not fail to put t: is construCtion
on his conduct; and by an artful comparison of
his own efforts to suppress heresy, with Paul's
fcandalcus inattention to a point so eflential, he

endeavoured

endeavoured to render the Pontiff odious to all BooK IX.
zealous Catholicks. At the fame time, he corn- ~
nanded the Prelates of his fation to remain at '548
Trent, that the Council might still appear to
have a being, and might be ready, whenever it
was thought expedient, to resume its delibera-
tions for the good of the church a.

THE motive of Charles's journey to the Low- The Epe

Countries, beside gratifying his favourite pallion his rfo
of travelling from one part of his dominions to Ph'ipi'
another, was to receive Philip his only son, who Conntrici.
was now in the twenty-firft year of his age,
and whom he had called thither, not only that
he might be recognized by the States of the
Netherlands as heir-apparent, but in order to
facilitate the execution of a vast scheme, the ob-
jet of which, and the reception it met with,
lhall be hereafer explained. Philip, having
left the government of Spain to Maximilian,
Ferdinand's eldest son, to whom the Emperor
had given the Princess Mary his daughter in
marriage, embarked for Italy, attended by a
numerous retinue of Spanilh nobles'. The
squadron which escorted him, was commanded
by Andrew Doria, who, notwithfanding his
advanced age, insisted on the honour of per-
forming, in person, the fame duty to the on,
which he had often discharged towards the fa-
ther. He landed safely at Genoa; from thence Nov. iS.
he went to Milan, and proceeding through
Germany, arrived at the Imperial court in Bruf- -549
fels. The States of Brabant, in the first place, April .
and those of the other provinces in their order,
acknowledged his right of succession in common
form, and he took the customary oath to pre-

serve

t Ochoa, Carolea, 36z.
' alla. . it. 7z.

BoolX. serve all their privileges inviolate K. In all

' ' the towns of the Low-Countries through which
Is4 ' Pnilip palTed, he was received with extraordi-

nary pomp. Nothing that could express the
refpet of the people, or contribute to his
amusement, was neglected; pageants, tourna-
ments, and publick fpetacles of every kind,
were exhibited with that expensive magnificence
which commerical nations display, when, on
any occasion, they depart from their usual max-
ims of frugality. But amidst there scenes of
festivity and pleasure, Philip's natural severity
of temper was discernable. Youth itself could
not render him agreeable, nor his being a
candidate for power form him to courtesy. He
maintained a haughty reserve in his behaviour,
and discovered such manifest partiality towards
his Spanish attendants, together with such an
avowed preference to the manners of their coun-
try, as highly disgusted the Flemings, and gave
rife to that antipathy, which afterwards occa-
sioned the revolution so fatal to him in that part
of his dominions L.

CHARLES was long detained in the Nether-

lands by a violent attack of the gout, which
returned upon him so frequently, and with such
increasing violence, that it had broken to a great
degree the vigour of his conflitution. He, ne-
verthelefs, did not flacken his endeavours to
enforce the Interim. The inhabitants of Straf-
bourg, after a long struggle, found it neceflary
to give obedience; those of Constance, who had
taken arms in their own defence, were compell-
ed by force not only to conform to the Interim,

but

Harzi annal. Brabant. 6;. Mem. deRibier, ii. 29.
L'Evefque Mem. de Card. Granvcllc, i. ai.

but to renounce their privileges as a free city, BooK IX.
to do homage to Ferdinand as Archduke of "
Austria, and, as his vaflals, to admit an 54.
Austrian governor and garrison M. Magdeburg,
Bremen, Hamburg, and Lubeck, were the only
Imperial cities of note that still continued re-
fratory.

"Sleid. 474. 491.

THE

# BOOK X.

THE

H I S T 0 R Y
HISTORY

OF THE
R E I G N

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLESV.

BOOK X.

Booi . 'H I L E Charles laboured, with such
Th-'- VV unwearied industry, to overcome the
Tk4-s. obfinacy of the Proteflants, the effects of
schemes his steadiness in the execution of his plan
ti.t the were rendered less considerable by his rupture

with the Pope, which daily increased. The
firm resolution which the Emperor seemed to
have taken against restoring Placentia, together
with his repeated encroachments on the eccle-
fiaflical jurifdiion, not only by the regulations
contained in the Interim, but by his attempt
to re-assemble a council at Trent, exasperated
Paul to the utmost, who, with the weakness in-
cident to old age, grew more attached to his
family, and more jealous of his authority, as he
advanced in years. Pulhed on by these pas-
sions, he made new efforts to draw the French
King into an alliance against the EmperorA:
But finding that Monarch, notwithstanding his

hereditary
A Mem. de Ribicr. ii. 230.

hereditary enmity to Charles, and dread of his Booc X.
growing power, as unwilling as formerly to
involve hinmfelf in immediate hostilities, he was 49
obliged to contrac his views, and to think of
preventing future encroachments, since it was
not in his power to inflict vengeance on account
of those which were past. For this purpose,
he determined to recall his grant of Parma and
Placentia, and after declaring them to be re-
annexed to the Holy See, to indemnify his
grandson Otavio by a new establishment in the
ecclefiaflical itate. By this expedient, he hoped
to gain two points of no small consequence.
He, first of all, rendered his possession of Par-
ma more secure ; as the Emperor would be cau-
tious of invading the patrimony of the church,
though he might seize without scruple a town be-
longing to the house of Famefe. In the next place,
he would acquire a better chance of recovering
Placentia, as his solicitations to that effect
might decently be urged with greater importu-
nity, and would infallibly be attended with
more weight, when he was confidered not
as pleading the cause of his own family, but
as an advocate'for the interest of the church.
But while Paul was priding himself in this de-
vice, as a happy refinement in policy, Odavio,
an ambitious and high-fpirited young man, who
could not bear with patience to be spoiled of
one half of his territories by the rapaciousness
of his father-in-law, and to be deprived of the
other by the artifices of his grandfather, took'
measures in order to prevent the execution of
a plan fatal to his interest. He set out secretly
from Rome, and having first endeavoured to
furprize Parma, which attempt was frustrated
by the fidelity of the governor to whom the
Pope had entrusted the defence of the town, he
made overtures to the Emperor, of renouncing
VOL. III. O all

Boos X. all connexion with the Pope, .and of depending

C''V entirely on him for his future fortune. This
'549. unexpected defection of one of the Pope's own

family to an enemy whom he hated, irritated,
.almost to madness, a mind peeviih with old
age; and there was no degree of severity to
which Paul might not have proceeded against a
grandson whom he reproached as an unatural
apostate. But happily for O&avio, death pre-
vented his carrying into execution the harsh
resolutions which he had taken with refpe to
him, and put an end to his pontificate in the
sixteenth year of his administration, and the
eighty-fecond of his age *.

As

Among many iIanceC of the credulity or weakLne

of historians in attributing the death of illustrious person.
ages to extraordinary causes, this is one. Almoit all the
historians of the sixteenth century affirm, that the death of
Paul III. was occasioned by the violent paflions which te
behaviour of his grandson excited; that being informed,
while he was refreshing himself in one of his gardens near
Rome, of 0tavio' attempt on Parma, as well as of his
negociations with the Emperor by means of Gonzaga, he
fainted away, continued ome hours in a swoon, then be-
came feverilh, and died within three days. This is the
account given of it by Thuanus, lib. vi. s t. Adriani
Iftor. di fuoi tempi, lib. vii. 480. and by Father Paul, 280
Even cardinal Pallavicini, better informed than any writer
with regard to the events which happened in the pal
conrt, and when not warped by prejudice or system, more
accurate in relating them, agrees with their narrativein its
chiefcircumftances. Palav. b. ii. 74. Paruta, who wrotehis
history by command of the senate of Venice, relates it in
the fame manner. Hiilorici Venez. vol. iv. 212. But
there was no occasion to search for any extraordinary cause
to account for the death of an old man of eighty-two.
There remains an authentick account of this event, in
which we find none of those marvellous circumstances 61

which

'As this event had been long expected, there BOOK X.
was an extraordinary concourse of Cardinals at 5o' '
Ronme; and the various competitors having
had time to form their parties, and to concert
their measures, their ambition and intrigues pro-

0 2 tra&ed

which the historians are so fond. The cardinal of Ferrara,
who was entrusted with the affairs of France at the court
of Rome, and M. D'Urfe, Henry's ambassador in ordinary
there, wrote an account to that Monarch of the affair of
Parma, and of the Pope's death. By there it appears, that
Ofavio's attempt to furprize Parma, was made on the
twentieth of October; that next day in the evening, and not
while he was airing himself in the gardens of Monte-Ca-
vallo, the Pope received intelligence of what he had done;
that he was seized with such a transport of palion, and
cried so bitterly, that his voice was heard in several apart-
ments of the palace; that next day, however, he was so well
is to give an audience to the cardinal of Ferrara, and to go
through business of different kinds; that Ohavio wrote a
letter to the Pope, not to cardinal Farnese his brother, in-
timating his resolution of throwing himself into the arms
of the Emperor; that the Pope received this on the twenty-
irft without any new symptoms of emotion, and returned
an answer to it; that on the twenty-fecond of O&tober, the
day on which the cardinal of Ferrara's letter is dated, the
Pope was in his usual state of health. Mem. de Ribier. ii.
247. By a letter of M. D'Urfe, Nov. 5. it appears that
the Pope wa in such good health, that on the third of that
month he had celebrated the anniversary of his coronation
with the usual folemnities. Ibidem, 251- By another let-
ter from the fame person, we learn, that on the sixth of
November a catarrh or defluxion fell down on the Pope's
lungs, with such dangerous symptoms, that his life was im-
mediately despaired of, Ibid. 252. And by a third letter,
we are informed, that he died November the tenth. In
none of there letters is his death imputed to any extraor-
dinary cause. It appears, that more than twenty days
elapsed between Oavio's attempt on Parma, and the death'
of his grandfather, and that the disease was the natural
effect of old age, not one of those occasioned by violence of
pailion.

Boo, X. traded the conclave to a great length. The
`*v- Imperial and French factions strove, with emu-
'55o lation, to promote one of their own number

and had, by turns, the profpe& of success. But
as Paul during a long Pontificate had raised
many to the purple, and those chiefly persons
of eminent abilities, as well as zealously devoted
to his family, Cardinal Farnese had the com-
mand of a powerful and united squadron, by

Feb. 7th. whose address and firmness he exalted to the
The elec-
ti^h o papal throne the Cardinal di Monte, whom
Juliu in. Paul had employed as his principal legate in

the council of Trent, and trusted with his mos
secret intentions. He assumed the name of
Julius III. and, in order to express his gratitude
towards his benefactor, the first a of his ad-
ministration was to put Oftavio Farnese in pof-
session of Parma. When he was told of the
injury which he did to the Holy See by eliena-
ting a territory of such value, he brifldy replied,
" That he would rather be a poor Pope, with
the reputation of a gentleman, than a rich one,
with the infamy of having forgotten the obli-
gations conferred upon him, and the promies
which he had made ." But all the lustre of this
candour or generosity he quickly effaced by an

Hi.scizc- ation most shockingly indecent. According
er and'"n-to an ancient and established pracice, every

Pope upon his election claims the privilege of
bestowing, on whom he pleases, the Cardinal's
hat, which falls to be disposed of by his being
invested with the triple crown. Julius, to the
astonishment of the sacred college, conferred
this mark of diflincion, together with ample
ecclesiastical revenues, and the right of bear-
ing his name and arms, upon one Innocent, a
youth of sixteen born of obscure parents, and

known
Mem. de Ribier.

known by the name of Ape, from his having BOOK X.
been trusted with the care of an animal of that "
species, in the Cardinal di Monte's family. I550
Such a prostitution of the highef dignity in the
church would have given offence, even in those
dark periods, when the credulous fupeilition
of the people emboldened ecclefiafticks to ven-
ture on the most flagrant violations of decorum.
But in an enlightened age, when, by the pro-
grefs of knowledge and philosophy, the obli-
gations of duty and decency were better under-
flood, when, a blind veneration for the Pontifical
charater was every where abated, and one half
of Christendom in open rebellion against the
Papal See, this action was viewed with horror.
Rome was immediately filled with libels and
pasquinades, which imputed the Pope's extra-
vagant regard for such an unworthy object to
the most criminal passions. The Protestants
exclaimed against the absurdity of supposing
that the infallible spirit of divine truth could
dwell in a breast so impure, and called more
loudly than ever, and with greater appearance
of justice, for the immediate and thorough re-
formation of a church, the Head of which was
a disgrace to the Christian name c. The reft
of the Pope's conduct was of a piece with this
first specimen of his dispositions. Having now
reached the summit of ecclesiastical ambition,
he seemed eager to indemnify himself, by an
unrestrained indulgence of his desires, for the
felf-denial or dissimulation which he had thought
it prudent to practise while in a subordinate
station. He became careless, to so great a de-
gree, of all serious business, that he could seldom
be brought to attend to it, but in cafes of

extreme

'Sleid.492. F. Paul. 28z. Pallav. ii. 6. Thuan.
lib. vi. 215.

Booc X. extreme necessity; and giving up himself to
' ' amusements and dissipation of every kind, he
1550. imitated the luxurious elegance of Leo, rather

than the severe virtue of Adrian, the latter of
which it was neceflary to display, in contending
with a set which derived great credit from the
rigid and austere manners of its teachers D.

His iews THE Pope, however ready to fulfil his en-
and pro-
cediogs gagements to the family of Farnese, discovered
Itbref'pa no inclination to observe the oath, which each
to the ge-
neralcon- cardinal had taken when he entered the con-
Cil cave, that if the choice should fall on him, he

would immediately call the council to re-affume
its deliberations. Julius knew, by experience,
how difficult it was to confine such a body of
men within the narrow limits which it was the
interest of the church of Rome to prescribe;
and how easily the zeal of some members, the
rashness of others, or the suggestions of the
Princes dn whom they depended, might preci-
pitate a popular and ungovernable assembly into
forbidden inquiries, as well as dangerous deci-
sions. He wished, for thee reasons, to have
eluded the obligation of his oath, and gave an
ambiguous answer to the first proposals which
were made to him by the Emperor, with regard
to that matter. But Charles, either from his
natural obttinacy in adhering to the measures
which he had once adopted, or from the mere
pride of accomplihing what was held to be al-
most impossible, persisted obstinately in his refo-
lution of forcing the Protestants to return into
the bosom of the church. Having persuaded
himself, that the authoritative decisions of the
council might be employed with efficacy in com-
bating their prejudices, he, in consequence ol
that persuasion, continued to solicit earnefti)

thai
DS. Paul, a8i.

that a new bull of convocation might be issued; BooK X.
and the Pope could not, with decency, rejet -
that request. When Julius found that he could 'S50'
not prevent the calling of a council, he endea-
voured to take all the merit of having procured
the meeting of an assembly, which was the objec
of such general desire and expe&ation. A con-
gregation of Cardinals, to whom he referred the
conlideration of what was necessary for restoring
peace to the church, recommended, by his di-
rection, the speedy convocation of a council, as
the most effectual expedient for that purpose;
and as the new herefies raged with. the greatest
violence in Germany, they proposed Trent as
the place of its meeting, that, by a near infpe&tion
of the evil, the remedy might be applied with
greater discernment and certainty of success.
The Pope warmly approved of this advice, which
he himself had ditated, and sent nuncios to the
Imperial and French courts, in order to make
known his intentions E.
ABOUT this time, the Emperor had summoned A diet at

Augsburg

a new diet to meet at Augsburg, in order to en- to enfolce
force the observation of the Interim, and to pro- theInt'eim.
cure a more authentick at of the Empire, ac-
knowledging the jurifdition of the council, as
well as an explicit promise of conforming to its
decrees. He appeared there in person, together June r5.
with his son the Prince of Spain. Few of the
Eledors were present, but all sent deputies in
their name. Charles, notwithstanding the def-
potick authority with which he had given law in
the Empire during two years, knew that the
spirit of independence among the Germans was
not entirely subdued, and for that reason took
care to over-awe the diet by a considerable body
of Spanish troops which escorted him thither.

The
F. Paul, 281. Pallav. ii. 77.

Boo X. The first point, submitted to the consideration
'^-~' of the diet, was the necessity of holding a coun-

55O- cil. All the Popish members agreed, without

dffic.ilty, that the meeting of that aflembly
should be renewed at Trent, and promired an
implicit acquiescence in its decrees. The Pro-
teftants, intimidated and disunited, must have
followed their example, and the resolution of
the diet would have proved unanimous, if Mau-
rice of Saxony had not begun at this time to dif-
close new intentions, and to a a part very diffe-
rent from that which he had so long aflumed.

Maurce BY an artful diflmnulation of his own senti-
begins to
fordefigns ments; by address in paying court to the Em-
.aiRft the peror; and by the seeming zeal with which he
Emperor forwarded all his ambitious schemes, Maurice

had raised himself to the Elecoral dignity; and
having added the dominions of the elder branch
of the Saxon family to his own, he was become
the most powerful prince in Germany. But
his long and intimate union with the Emperor,
had afforded him many opportunities of obferv-
ing narrowly the dangerous tendency of his
schemes. He saw the yoke that was preparing
for his country; and from the rapid as well as
formidable progress of the Imperial power, was
convinced that but a few steps more remained
to be taken, in order to render Charles as abfo-
lute a Monarch in Germany as he had become
in Spain. The more eminent the condition was
to which he himself had been exalted, the more
solicitous did he naturally become to maintain
all its rights and privileges, and the more did
he dread the thoughts of descending from the
rank of a Prince almost ndependent, to that of
a vassal subject to the will of a master. At the
fame time, he perceived that Charles was bent
on exacing a rigid conformity to the docrines

and

and rites of the Romish church, instead of allow- B o oK X.
ing liberty of conscience, the promise of which '--
had allured several Protestant Princes to assist 1'50
him in the war against the confederates of Smal-
kalde. As he himself, notwithstanding all the
compliances which he had made from motives
of interest, or an excess of confidence in the
Emperor, was sincerely attached to the Lutheran
tenets, he determined not to be a tame fpedator
of the overthrow of a system which he believed
to be founded in truth.

THIS resolution, flowing from the love ofThepoliti

liberty, or zeal for religion, was strengthened w^ ihotn"
by political and interested considerations. In fluenced
that elevated flation, in which Maurice was now him
placed, new and more extensive profpets opened
to his view. His rank and power entitled him
to be the head of the Protestants in the Empire.
His predecelfor, the degraded EleCtor, with in-
ferior abilities, and territories less considerable,
had acquired such an ascendant over the coun-
cils of the party ; and Maurice neither wanted
discernment to fee the advantage of this pre-
eminence, nor ambition to aim at attaining it.
But he found himself in a situation which ren-
dered the attempt no less difficult, than the ob-
ject of it was important. On the one hand, the
connexion which he had formed with the Em-
peror was so intimate, that he could scarcely
hope to take any ftep which tended to dissolve
it, without alarming his jealousy, and drawing
on himself the whole weight of that power, which
had crushed the greatest confederacy ever formed
in Germany. On the other hand, the calami-
ties which he had brought on the Protestant
party were so recent, as well as great, that it
seemed almost impossible to regain their confi-
dence, or to rally and re-animate a body of men,

after

BooK X. after himself had been the chief instrument in
*'-~' breaking their union and vigour. These con-

'55o. fiderations were sufficient to have discouraged

any person of a spirit less adventurous than
Maurice's. But to him the grandeur and vastness
of the enterprize were allurements; and he bold-
ly resolved on measures, the idea of which a
genius of an inferior order could not have con-
ceived, or would have trembled at the thoughts
of the danger that attended the execution of
them.

Tr cpli- His pafions concurred with his interest in
c~whild confirming this resolution; and the resentment
with tefe. excited by an injury, which he sensibly felt,

added new force to the motives for opposing the
Emperor, which found policy suggested. Mau-
rice, by his authority, had prevailed on the Land-
grave of Hesse to put his person in the Empe-
ror's power, and had obtained a promise from
the Imperial minifiters that he should not be
detained a prisoner. This had been violated in
the manner already related. The unhappy Land-
grave exclaimed as loudly against his fon-in-law
as against Charles. The Princes of Hesse re-
quired Maurice inceflantly to fulfil his engage-
ments to their father, who had loft his liberty
by trusting to him; and all Germany fufpe&ed
him of having betrayed, to an implacable enemy,
the friend whom he was most bound to protect.
Roused by these solicitations or reproaches, as
well as prompted by duty and affection to his
father-in-law, Maurice had employed not only
entreaties but remorftrances in order to procure
his release. All these Charles had disregarded;
and the Ihame of having been first deceived,
and then flighted, by a Prince whom he had
served with zeal as well as success, which merited
a very different return, made such a deep impref-

sion

flon on Maurice, that he waited with impatience BOOK X.
for an opportunity of being revenged.

155o.
THE utmost caution a well as delicacy were The cau.

tion and ad-

requisite in taking every ftep towards this end; idref with
as he had to guard, on the one hand, against which hc
giving a premature alarm to the Emperor ; hisachemcs
while, on the other, fomethingconfiderable and
explicit was necessary to be done, in order to
regain the confidence of the Protestant party.
Maurice had accordingly applied all his powers
of address and dissimulation to attain both these
points. As he knew Charles to be inflexible
with regard to the fubmiiiion which he required
to the Interim, he did not hesitate one moment
whether he hould establish that form of doc-
trine and worship in his dominions: But being
sensible how odious it was to his subjects, instead
of violently imposing it on them by the mere
terror of authority, as had been done in other
parts of Germany, he endeavoured to render
their obedience a voluntary deed of their own.
For this purpose, he had assembled the clergyHeenforce
of his country at Leipfick, and had laid theh in Saxony
Interim before them, together with the reasons
which made it neceflary to conform to it. He
had gained some of them by promises, others
he had wrought upon by threats, and all were
intimidated by the rigour with which obedience
to the Interim was extorted in the neighbouring
provinces. Even MelanAhon, whose merit of
every kind entitled him to the first place among
the Protestant divines, being now deprived of
the manly counsels of Luther, which were wont
to inspire him with fortitude, and to preserve
him steady amidst the storms and dangers that
threatened the church, was seduced into unwar-
rantable concessions, by the timidity of his tem-
per, his fond desire of peace, and his excessive

complaisance

B30o X. complaisance towards persons of high rank. By
'c ` his arguments and authority, no less than by

I lo. Maurice's arts, the assembly was prevailed on to

declare, that, in points which were purely indif-
ferent, obedience was due to the commands of
a lawful superior. Founding upon this maxim,
no less uncontrovertible in theory, than danger-
ous when carried into practice, especially in reli-
gious matters, they proceeded to class, among
the number of things indifferent, several doc-
trines, which Luther had pointed out as gross
and pernicious errors in the Romit creed; and
placing in the fame rank many of those rites
which distinguished the Reformed from the
Popish worship, they exhorted their people to
comply with the Emperor's injunctions con-
cerning there particulars F.

Makes pr. By this dextrous conduct, the introduction
fcffins . of the Interim excited none of those violent
2eli for he
P-otlt.m convulsions in Saxony, which it occasioned in
rligin other provinces. But though the Saxons sub-

mitted, the more zealous Lutherans exclaimed
against Melanthon and his associates, as false
brethren, who were either so wicked as to apof-
tatize from the truth altogether; or so artful
as to betray it by subtle diftintions; or o
feeble-fpirited as to give it up from pusillanimity
and criminal complaisance to a prince, capable
of sacrificing to his political interest that which
he himself regarded as most sacred. Maurice,
being conscious what a colour of probability
his past conduct gave to those accusations, as
well as afraid of lofiig entirely the confidence

of

'Sleid. 481, 485. Jo. Laur. Mofhemii Inftitutionum

Hist. Eccleflafica, lib. iv. Helmft. 1755. 410. p. 748. Jo.
And. Schmidii Hilloria Intcrimiftica, p. 70, &c. Helmft.
1730.

of the Protestants, issued a declaration contain- BooK X.
ing professions of his zealous attachment to the -"
Reformed religion, and of hisrefolution to guard '550'
against all the errors or encroachments of the
Papal fee0.

HAVING gone so far in order to remove the At the rme

fears and jealousies of the Protestants, he found 'the Emp
it necessary to efface the impreflion which such or.
a declaration might make on the Emperor.
For that purpose, he not only renewed his pro-
fellions of an inviolable adherence to his al-
liance with him, but as the city of Magde-
burg till persisted in rejecting the Interim, he
undertook to reduce it to obedience, and in-
ftantly set about levying troops to be employed
in that service. This damped all the hopes which
the Proteflants begun to conceive of Maurice,
in consequence of his declaration, and left them
more than ever at a loss to guess at his real in-
tentions. Their former suspicion and distrust
of him revived, and the divines of Magdeburg
filled Germany with writings in which they
represented him as the most formidable enemy
of the Protestant religion, who treacherously
assumed an appearance of zeal for its interest,
that he might more effecually execute his
schemes for its deftrution.

THIS charge, supported by the evidence of Protefta

lgainft the

recent facts, as well as by his present dubious mode of
conduct, gained such universal credit, that proceeCdin
Maurice was obliged to take a vigorous ftep in cil.
his own vindication. As soon as the re-affem-
bling of the council at Trent was proposed in
the diet, his ambassadors protested that their
master would not acknowledge its authority,
unless all the points which had been already

decided
° Sleid. 485.

Book X. decided there were reviewed, and confidered as

' entire; unless the Protestant divines had a full
I55.0 hearing granted them, and were allowed a de-

cifive voice in the council; and unless the Pope
renounced his pretensions to preside in the
council, engaged to submit to its decrees; and
absolved the bishops from their oath of obe-
dience, that they might deliver their sentiments
with greater freedom. These demands, which
were higher than any that the Reformers had
ventured to make, even when the zeal of their
party was warmest, or their affairs mod pro-
fperous, counterbalanced, in some degree, the
impreflion which Maurice's preparations against
Magdeburg had made upon the minds of the
Protestants, and kept them in fufpence with
regard to his designs. At the fame time, he
had address enough to represent this part of his
condut in such a light to the Emperor, that
it gave him no offence, and occasioned no inter-
ruption of the ftrit confidence which fubfited
between them. What the pretexts were which
be employed in order to give such a bold de-
claration an innocent appearance, the contem-
porary hiflorians have not explained; that they
imposed upon Charles is certain, for he still
continued not only to prosecute his plan as well
concerning the Interim as the council, with th
fame ardour, but to place the fame confidence in
Maurice, with regard to the execution of both.

The det THE Pope's resolution concerning the council
,eeto not being yet known at Augsburg, the chief
on the ty business of the diet was to enforce the obfer-
of r'g&- vation of the Interim. As the senate of Mag-

deburg, notwithstanding various endeavours
to frighten or to sooth them into compliance,
not only persevered obitinately in their oppofi-
tion to the Interim, but began to strengthen

the

the fortifications of their city, and to levy BooK X.
troops in their own defence, Charles required '"
the diet to assist him in quelling this audacious '55
rebellion against a decree of the Empire. Had
the members of the diet been left to aft agree-
ably to their own inclination, this demand
would have been rejected without hesitation.
All the Germans who favoured, in any degree,
the new opinions in religion, and many who
were influenced by no other consideration than
jealousy of the Emperor's growing power, re-
garded this effort of the citizens of Magdeburg,
as a noble stand for the liberties of their country.
Even such as had not resolution to exert the
fame spirit, admired the gallantry of their enter-
prize, and wiihed it success. But the presence
of the Spaniih troops, together with the dread
of the Emperor's displeasure, over-awed the
members of the diet to such a degree, that,
without venturing to utter their own senti-
ments, they tamely ratified, by their votes,
whatever the Emperor was pleated to prescribe.
The rigorous decrees, which Charles had issued
by his own authority against the Magdeburgers,
were confirmed; a resolution was taken to raise
troops in order to besiege the city in form;
and persons were named to fix the contingent in
men or money to be furnished by each state.
At the fame time, the diet petitioned that Appint
Maurice might be entrusted with the command Mauin
of that army, to which Charles gave his con-
sent with great alacrity, and with high enco-
miums upon the wisdom of the choice which
they had made H. As Maurice conducted all
his schemes with profound and impenetrable
secrecy, it is probable that he took no ftep
avowedly in order to obtain this charge. The
recommendation of his countrymen was either

purely
*Sleid. 503, 512.

Boot X. purely accidental, or flowed from the opinion

-^"' generally entertained of his great abilities; and
550' neither the diet had any foresight, nor the Em-

peror any dread of the consequences which fol-
lowed upon this nomination. Maurice accepted
without hesitation the trust committed to him,
intfantly discerning the important advantages
which he might derive from it.

Theco'n- MEANWHILE, Julius, in preparing the bull
ad to for the convocation of the council, observed
..r -T.t' all those tedious forms which the court of Rome
ar Trent.
Decemer. can employ, with wonderful dexterity, to retard

any disagreeable measure. At last it was pub-
lilhed, and the council summoned to meet at
Trent on the firfi day of the ensuing month of
May. As he knew that many of the Germans
rejected or disputed the authority and jurifdiaion
which the Papal fee claims with refpe to
general councils, he took care, in the preamble
of the bull, to assert, in the strongest terms, his
own right, not only to call and preside in that
aflembly, but to direct its proceedings; nor
would he soften these expreflions, in any de-
gree, in compliance with the repeated folicita-
tions of the Emperor, who foresaw what offence
they would give, and what conftrution might
be put on them. They were censured, accord-
ingly with great severity, by several members
of the diet; but whatever disgust or suspicion
they excited, such absolute diredion of all their

ss,. deliberations had the Emperor acquired, that
Feb. '3 he procured a recess, in which the authority of

the council was recognised, and declared to be
the proper remedy for the evils which at that
time afflicted the church; all the Princes and
flates of the Empire, such as had made inno-
vations in religion, as well as those who adhered
to the system of their forefathers, were required

to

to fend their representatives to the council; the BooKX.
Emperor engaged to grant a fafe-condu& to S-'
such as demanded it, and to secure them an '
impartial hearing in the council; he promised
to fix his residence in some city of the Empire,
in the neighbourhood of Trent, that he might
proted the members of the council by his pre-
fence, and take care that, by conduting their
deliberations agreeably to scripture and the
dotrine of the fathers, they might bring them
to a desirable issue. In this recess, the obfer-
vation of the Interim was more ftritly enjoined
than ever; and the Emperor threatened all who
had hitherto neglected or refused to conform to
it, with the severest effets of his vengeance, if
they persisted in their disobedience'.
DURING the meeting of this diet, a new at- Another

fritiler at-

tempt was made in order to procure liberty to t,,pt to
the Landgrave. That Prince, no-wise recon- r i."reth
ciled by time to his situation, grew every day librty.
more impatient of restraint. Having often ap-
plied to Maurice and the Elecor of Branden-
burgh, who took every occasion of soliciting the
Emperor in his behalf, though without any
effed, he now commanded his sons to summon
them, with legal formality, to perform what
was contained in the bond which they had
granted him, by surrendering themselves to be
treated with the fame rigour as the Emperor
had used him. This furnished them with a
frelh pretext for 'renewing their application to
the Emperor, together with an additional argu-
ment to enforce it. Charles firmly resolved not
to grant their request; though at the fame time
being extremely desirous to get rid of their

VOL. III. P incessant

'Sleid. 512. Thuan. lib. vi. 233. Goldali Conftit. Im-
ptriales, vol. ii. 340.

BooX. incefiant importunity, he endeavoured to pre-
r'~' vail on the Landgrave to give up the obligation
'5S1' which he had received from the two Eletors.

But that Prince refusing to part with a security
which he deemed eential to his safety, the
Emperor boldly cut the knot which he could
not untie; and by a publick deed annulled the
bond which Maurice and the Ele&or of Bran-
denburg had granted, absolving them from all
their engagements to the Landgrave. No pre-
tension to a power so pernicious to society as
that of abrogating at pleasure the most sacred
laws of honour, and most formal obligations
of publick faith, had hitherto been formed by
any but the Roman Pontiffs, who, in confe-
quence of their claim of infallibility, arrogate
the right of dispensing with precepts and duties
of every kind. All Germany was filled with
aftoniflhent, when Charles assumed the fame
prerogative. The state of fubjeation, to which
the Empire was reduced, appeared to be more
rigorous as well as intolerable than that of the
most wretched and enslaved nations, if the Em-
peror by an arbitrary decree might cancel those
solemn contracs, which are the foundation of
that mutual confidence whereby men are held
together in social union. The Landgrave him-
self now gave up all hopes of recovering his
liberty by the Emperor's content, and endea-
voured to procure it by his own address. But
the plan which he had formed to deceive his
guards being discovered, such of his attendants
as be had gained to favour his escape were put
to death, and he was confined in the citadel of
Mechlin more closely than ever .

ANOTHER
1 Sleid. 504. Than. 1. vi. 234, 235.

ANOTHER transaction was carried on during Booi X.
this diet, with refpe& to an affair more nearly xA
interesting to the Emperor, and which oc(a- cbhl.;
sioned likewise a general alarm among the Pl'af p
Princes of the Empire. Charles, though formed imperili
with talents which fitted him for conceiving and s^ fe"
conduting great designs, was not capable, as Phiip.
has been often observed, of bearing extraor-
dinary success. Its operation on his mind was
so violent and intoxicating, that it elevated him
beyond what was moderate or attainable, and
turned his whole attention to the pursuit of vast
but chimerical objets. Such had been the
effeCt of his victory over the confederates of
Smalkalde. He did not long reft satisfied with
the substantial and certain advantages which
were the result of that event; but despising these,
as poor or inconsiderable fruits of such great
success, he had aimed at bringing all Germany
to an uniformity in religion, and at rendering
the Imperial power delpotick. These were ob-
jeas extremely splendid, indeed, and alluring
to an ambitious mind; the pursuit of them,
however, was attended with manifest danger,
and the attainment of them very precarious.
But the steps which he had already taken to-
wards them, having been accompanied with such
success, his imagination, warmed with contem-
plating this vast design, overlooked or despised
all remaining difficulties. As he conceived the
execution of his plan to be certain, he began to
be solicitous how he might render the pofieflion
of such an important acquisition perpetual in
his family, by transmitting the German Empire,
as well as the kingdoms of Spain, and his do-
minions in Italy and the Low-Countries, to
his son. Having long revolved this flattering
idea in his mind, without communicating it,
even to those ministers whom he most trusted,

P 2 he

Booi X. he had called Philip out of Spain, in hopes that
t'1-' his presence would facilitate the carrying for-

155' ward the scheme.

The obft- GREAT obstacles, however, and such as
food its would have deterred any ambition less accuf-
w*ay tomed to overcome difficulties, were to be fur-

mounted. He had in the year one thousand
five hundred and thirty imprudently affifed in
procuring his brother Ferdinand the dignity of
King of the Romans, and there was no proba-
bility that this Prince, who was still in the
prime of life, and had a son grown up to the
years of manhood, would relinquifl, in favour
of his nephew, the near profpea of the Im-
perial throne, which Charles's infirmities and
declining state of health opened to himself.
This did not deter the Emperor from venturing
to make the proposition; and when Ferdinand,
notwithstanding his profound reverence for his
brother, and obsequious submission to his will
in other instances, rejeted it in a peremptory
tone, he was not discouraged by one repulse.
He renewed his applications to him by his
sifter, Mary Queen of Hungary, to whom Ser-
dinand flood indebted for the crowns both of
Hungary and Bohemia, and who, by her great
abilities, tempered with extreme gentleness of
disposition, had acquired an extraordinary in-
fluence over both the brothers. She entered
warmly into a measure, which tended so mani-
feftly to aggrandize the house of Austria; and
flattering herself that (he could tempt Ferdinand
to renounce the reversionary poffefion of the
Imperial dignity for an immediate eftablifl-
ment, he aflured him that the Emperor, by
way of compensation for his giving up his
chance of succession, would instantly bestow

upon

upon him territories of very considerable value, BooK X.
and pointed out in particular those of the' "
Duke of Wurtemberg, which might be con- '
fifcated upon different pretexts. But neither
by her address nor intreaties, could he induce
Ferdinand to approve of a plan, which would
have degraded him from the highest rank
among the Monarchs of Europe to that of a
subordinate and dependent prince. He was, at
the fame time, more attached to his children,
than by a rash concession, to frustrate all the
high hopes in prospect of which they had been
educated.

NOTWITHSTANDING the immovable firmness Hitende-t
which Ferdinand discovered, the Emperor did rut
not abandon his cheme. He flattered himself these.
that he might attain the object in view by ano-
ther channel, and that it was not impoflible to
prevail on the Eletors to cancel their former
choice of Ferdinand, or at least to elect Philip
a second King of the Romans, substituting him
as next in succession to his uncle. With this
view he took Philip along with him to the diet,
that the Germans might have an opportunity
to observe and become acquainted with the
Prince, in behalf of whom he courted their in-
terest; and he himself employed all the arts of
address or insinuation to gain the Electors, and
to prepare them for lending a favourable ear
to the proposal. But no sooner did he venture
upon mentioning it to them,. than they, at
once, saw and trembled at the consequences with
which it would be attended. They had long
felt all the inconveniences of having placed at
the head of the Empire a Prince whose power
and dominions were so extensive; if they should
now repeat the folly, and continue the Imperial

crown,

Boo X. crown, like an hereditary dignity, in the fame

-'
' family, they foreiaw that they would give the
'S'- son an opportunity of carrying on that system

of oppreflion, which the father had begun and
would put it in his power to overturn whatever
was yet left entire in the ancient and venerable
fabrick of the German conRfitution.

Phi;l;p' THE character of the Prince, in whose favour
dirfgre- this extraordinary proposition was made, ren-
hbe to the dered it still less agreeable. Philip, though pof-

fefled with an insatiable desire of power, was a
firanger to all the arts of conciliating good-will.
Haughty, reserved, and severe, he, initead of
gaining new friends, disgusted the ancient and
most devoted partizans of the Austrian interest.
He scorned to take the trouble of acquiring the
language of the country to the government of
which he aspired; nor would he condescend to
pay the Germans the compliment of accom-
modating himself, during his residence among
them, to their manners and customs. He al-
lowed the Eletors and most illustrious Princes
in Germany, to remain in his presence uncovered,
affecting a Ifately and distant demeanour, which
the greatest of the German Emperors, and even
Charles himself, amidst the pride of power and
victory, had never assumed L. On the other hand,
Ferdinand, from the time of his arrival in Ger-
many, had fludied to render himself acceptable
to the people, by a conformity to their manners,
which seemed to flow from choice; and his son
Maximilian, who was born in Germany, pofleffed,
in an eminent degree, such amiable qualities as
rendered him the darling of his countrymen,
and induced them to look forward to his elec-

tion

L Frediman Andrea Zulich Diffcrtatio politico-hiflorica
de Nzvis politicis Caroli V. Lips. 1706. 4t0. p. a1.

tionasa moftdefirableevent. Their efeem and BooK X.
affection for him, fortified the resolution which '-
found policy had suggested; and determined '55'
the Germans to prefer the popular virtues of
Ferdinand and his son, to the stubborn austerity
of Philip, which interest could not soften, nor
ambition teach him to disguise. All the Elec- Charle
tors, the ecclesiastical as well as secular, con- relinquih
curred in expressing such strong disapprobation this cheme.
of the measure, that Charles, notwithstanding
the relutance with which he gave up any point,
was obliged to drop the scheme as impracticable.
By his unseasonable perfeverence in pushing it,
he not only filled the Germans with new jealousy
of his ambitious designs, but laid the founda-
tion of rivalfhip and discord in the Austrian
family, and forced his brother Ferdinand, in self-
defence, to court the Elecors, particularly Mau-
rice of Saxony, and to form such connexions
with them, as cut off all profpe& of renewing
the proposal with success. Philip, sowered by
his disappointment, was ent back to Spain, to
be called thence when any new scheme of am-
bition should render his presence necessary M.

HAVING relinquilhed this plan of domeftick ThePope

ambition which had long occupied and engrofed ror form P
him, Charles imagined that he would now have ddig"p".r
leisure to turn all his attention towards his m. .nd
grand scheme of establishing uniformity of reli- Placentia.
gion in the Empire, by forcing all the contend-
ing parties to acquiesce in the decisions of the
council of Trent. But such was the extent of
his dominions, the variety of connexions in
which this entangled him, and the multiplicity
of events to which these gave rife, as seldom

allowed

A Sleid. 505. Thuan. 180. 238. Memoir. de Ribier, ii.
219, 281, 314. Adriani Iftor. lib. vili. 507. 52o.

Boox X. allowed him to apply his whole force to any

one object. The machine which he had to con-
55ss. duct was so great and complicated, that an un-

foreseen irregularity or obstruction in one of the
inferior wheels, often disconcerted the motion
of the whole, and disappointed him of the molt
considerable effects which he expected. Such
an unlocked-for occurrence happened at this
juncture, and created new obstacles to the exe-
cution of his schemes with regard to religion.
Julius III. though he had confirmed Otavio
Farnese in the poffeflion of the dutchy of Parma,
during the first effusions of his joy and gratitude
on his promotion to the papal throne, oon be-
gan to repent of his own generosity, and to be
apprehensive of consequences which either he
did not foresee, or had disregarded, while the
sense of his obligations to the family of Farnese
was recent. The Emperor fill retained Pla-
centia in his hands, and had not relinquilhed
his pretensions to Parma as a fief of the Empire.
Gonzaga, the governor of Milan, having, by
the part which he took in the murder of the
late Duke Peter Ludovico, offered an insult to
the family of Farnese, which he knew could
never be forgiven, had, for that reason, vowed
its deftrution; and employed all the influence
which his great abilities, as well as long services,
gave him with the Emperor, in persuading him
to seize Parma by force of arms. Charles, in
compliance with his solicitations, and that he
might gratify his own desire of annexing Parma
to the Milanese, listened to the proposal; and
Gonzaga, ready to take encouragement from the
slightest appearance of approbation, began to
assemble troops, and to make other preparations
for the execution of his scheme.

OCTAVIO,

OCTAVIO, who saw the impending danger, Boor X.

found it necessary, for his own safety, to increase 'v'
the garrison of his capital, and to levy soldiers oa' 5'
for defending the reft of the country. But as Frnei'
the expence of such an effort far exceeded his afit.nc of
scanty revenues, he represented his situation to France.
the Pope, and implored that protection and aflift-
ance which was due to him as a valtil of the
church. The Imperial minister, however, had
already pre-occupied the Pope's ear; and by
diifourfing continually concerning the danger
of giving offence to the Emperor, as well as the
imprudence of supporting Odavio in an ufurpa-
tion so detrimental to the Holy See, had totally
alienated him from the family of Farnese. Octa-
vio's remonstrance and petition met, of confe-
quence, with a cold reception; and he, despair-
ing of any afliflance from Julius, began to look
round for protection from some other quarter.
Henry I. of France was the only Prince powerful
enough to afford him this protection, and fortu-
nately he was now in a situation which allowed
him to undertake it. He had brought his tranf-
adions with the two British kingdoms, which
had hitherto diverted his attention from the as-
fairs of the Continent, to such an issue as he de-
fired. Thishe had effected partly by the vigour
of his arms, partly by his dexterity in taking
advantage of the political factions which raged
in both kingdoms to such a degree, as rendered
the councils of the Scots violent and preci-
pitate, and the operations of the English feeble
and unsteady. He had procured from the Eng-
lifh favourable conditions of peace for his allies
the Scots; he had prevailed on the nobles of
Scotland not only to affiance their young Queen
to his son the Dauphin, but even to fend her
into France, that he might be educated under
his eye; and had recovered Boulogne, together

with

Boo X. with its dependencies, which hadbeen conquered
'- ' by Henry VIII.

1551.

H"etue HAVING gained points of so much confe-
HearyII. quence to his crown, and disengaged himself

with such honour from the burden of support-
ing the Scots, and maintaining a war against
England, Henry was now at full leisure to pur-
sue the measures which his hereditary jealousy
of the Emperor's power naturally suggested. He
listened, accordingly, to the first overtures which
Octavio Farnese made him; and embracing
eagerly an opportunity of recovering footing in
Italy, he inftandy concluded a treaty, in which
he promised to espouse his cause, and to furnish
him all the assistance which he desired. This
tranfaation could not be long kept secret from
the Pope, who foreseeing the calamities which
must follow if war were rekindled so near the
ecclesiastical state, immediately issued monitory
letters, requiring Oftavio to relinquish his new
alliance. Upon his refusal to comply with the
requisition, he soon after pronounced his fief to
be forfeited, and declared war against him as a
disobedient and rebellious vassal. But as with his
own forces alone, he could not hope to subdue
Odavio while supported by such a powerful ally
as the King of France, he had recourse to the
Emperor, who being extremely solicitous to pre-
vent the establishment of the French in Parma,
ordered Gonzaga to second Julius with all his

occifion troops. Thus the French took the field as the
topiltl allies of Odavio; the Imperialists as the pro-
bretu-ee tedors of the Holy See; and hostilities com-
Ch.!es "d menced between them, while Charles and Henry

themselves till asseted to give out that they
would adhere inviolably to the peace of Crefpy.
The war of Parma was not diftinguifmed by any
memorable event. Many small rencounters hap-

pened

pened with alternate success; the French ravaged Boox X.
part of the ecclesiastical territories; the Impe-
rialifis laid waste the Parmesan; and the latter, '5I
after having begun to besiege Parma in form,
were obliged to abandon the enterprize with
disgrace N.

BUT the motions and alarm which this war, Retard the

or the preparations for it, occasioned in Italy, he'.''ucil.
prevented most of the Italian prelates from re-
pairing to Trent on the firit of May, the day
appointed for re-assembling the council; and
though the papal legate and nuncios retorted
thither, they were obliged to adjourn to the first
of September, hoping such a number might
then assemble, that they might with decency be-
gin their deliberations. At that time, about
sixty prelates, mostly from the ecclesiastical ifate
or from Spain, together with a few Germans,
convened . The fefion was opened with the Henr pv-
accustomed formalities, and the fathers were the coniic.
about to proceed to business, when the abbot of
Bellozane appeared, and presenting letters of
credence as ambassador from the French King,
demanded audience. Having obtained it, he
protested, in Henry's name, againit an assembly
called at such an improper juncture, when a war,
wantonly kindled by the Pope, made it impof-
fible for the deputies from the Gallican church
to resort to Trent in fafety,-or to deliberate con-
cerning articles of faith and discipline with the
requisite tranquillity; he declared, that his
master did not acknowledge this to be a general
or oecumenick council, but must confider, and
would treat it, as a particular and partial con-

vention.

w Adriani Iftor. lib. viii. 505. 514. 524. Seid. 513.

Paruta, p. zzo. Lettere del Caro fcritte al nome del Card.
Farnese, tom. ii. p. 1i, &c. o F. Paul, 268.

BooKX- vention'. The legate affeced to despise this
'- ' protest; and the prelates proceeded, notwith-

5' standing, to examine and decide the great points

in controversy concerning the sacrament of the
Lord's Supper, penance, and extreme unction.
This measure of the French Monarch, however,
gave a deep wound to the credit of the council,
at the very commencement of its deliberations.
The Germans could not pay much regard to an
aflembly, the authority of which the second
Prince in Chriflendom had formally disclaimed,
or feel any great reverence for the decisions of a
few men, who arrogated to themselves all the
rights belonging to the representatives of the
church universal, a title to which they had such
poor pretensions.

Violac, of THE Emperor, nevertheless, was straining his
or' Ero- authority to the utmost, in order to eftablilh the
cetdingt reputation and jurifdition of the council. He
foefzats. had prevailed on the three ecclefiafiical Eletors,

the prelates of greatest power and dignity in the
church next to the Pope, to repair thither in
person. He had obliged several German bishops
of inferior rank, to go to Trent themselves, or
to fend their proxies. He granted an Imperial
fafe-condut to the ambafadors nominated by
the EleAor of Brandenburg, the duke of Wur-
temberg, and other Proteflant flates, to attend
the council; and exhorted them to fend their
divines thither, in order to propound, explain,
and defend their dotrine. At the fame time,
his zeal anticipated the degrees of the council;
and as if the Protestant doctrines had already
been condemned, he took large steps towards
exterminating them. With this intention, he
called together the ministers of Augsburg; and
after interrogating them concerning several con-
troverted points, enjoined them to teach nothing

with
' SV'd. 8. Thuan. 28z. F. Paul, 301.

with refpe& to these, contrary to the tenets of BooK X.
the Romish church. Upon their declining to
comply with a requisition so contrary to the dic- 'S'
tates of their consciences, he commanded them
to leave the town in three days, without reveal-
ing to any person the cause of their banishment;
he prohibited them to preach for the future in
any of the countries subjec to the Imperial
jurifdiion; and obliged them to take an oath
that they would puncually obey these injunc-
tions. They were not the only vitlims to his
zeal. The Protestant clergy, in molt of the
cities in the circle of Swabia, were eje&ed with
the fame violence; and in many places, such ma-
giftrates as had distinguished themselves by their
attachment to the new opinions, were dismissed
with the mofi abrupt irregularity, and their of-
sices filled, in consequence of the Emperor's ar-
bitrary appointment, with the molt bigotted of
their adversaries. The Reformed worlhip was
almost entirely suppressed throughout that exten-
five province. The ancient and fundamental
privileges of the free cities were violated. The
people were compelled to attend the miniltration
of priests, whom they regarded with horror as
idolaters; and to submit to the jurifdi&ion of
magistrates, whom they detested as usurpers Q

THE Emperor, after this discovery, which His endea.

was more explicit than any that he had hitherto fuppor'tthe
made, of his intention to subvert the German council.
constitution, as well as to extirpate the Pro-
teftant religion, set out for Infpruck in the November.
Tyrol. He fixed his residence in that city, as
by its situation in the neighbourhood of Trent,
and on the confines of Italy, it appeared a
commodious station, whence he might infpea
the operations of the council, and observe the

progress
Q'Sleid. 516. 528. Thuan. 276.

BooX X. progress of the war in the Parmesan, without
c X 0losing fight of such occurrences as might hap-
1551' pen in Germany .

The fige DURING these tranfa&ions, the siege of Mag-
^M.gde- deburg was carried on with various success.

At the time when Charles proscribed the citi-
zens of Magdeburg, and put them under the
ban of the Empire, he had exhorted and even
enjoined all the neighbouring flates to take
arms against them, as rebels and common ene-
mies. Encouraged by his exhortations as well
as promises, George of Mecklenburg, a younger
brother of the reigning Duke, an ative and
ambitious Prince, collected a considerable num-
ber of those soldiers of fortune who had accom-
panied Henry of Brunswick in all his wild
enterprizes; and though a zealous Lutheran
himself, invaded the territories of the Magde-
burgers, hoping that, by the merit of this ser-
vice, he might procure some part of their do.
mains to be allotted to him as an establishment.
The citizens, unaccustomed as yet to endure
patiently the calamities of war, could not be
restrained from sallying out in order to save
their lands from being laid waste. They at-
tacked the duke of Mecklenburg with more
resolution than condut, and were repulsed with
great laughter. But as they were animated
with that unconquerable spirit, which flows from
zeal for religion co-operating with the love of
civil liberty, far from being disheartened by
their misfortune, they prepared to defend them-
selves with vigour. Many of the veteran fol-
diers who had served in the long wars between
the Emperor and King of France, crowding to
their standards under able and experienced offi-
ers, they acquired military skill by degrees,

and
Sleid. 39.

and added all the advantages of that to the BooK X.
efforts of undaunted courage. The duke of'""
Mecklenburg, notwithstanding the evere blow '55'
which he had given the Magdeburgers, not
daring to invert a town ftrongty fortified, and
defended by such a garrison, cohtinued to ra-
vage the open country.

As the hopes of booty drew many adven- Miarce

turers to the camp of this young Prince, Mau- tcommk
rice of Saxony began to be jealous of the power of the .rmy
which he poffefled by being at the head of such ieon the
a numerous body, and marching towards Mag- fige.
deburg with his own troops, assumed the
supreme command of the whole army, an
honour to which his high rank and great abili-
ties, as well as the nomination of the diet, gave
him an indisputable title. With this united
force he invested the town, and began the siege
in form; claiming great merit with the Emperor
on that account, as, from his zeal to execute
the Imperial decree, he was exposing himself
once more to the censures and maleditions of
the party with which he agreed in religious fen-
timents. But the approaches to the town went
on slowly; the garrison interrupted the besiegers
by frequent sallies, in one of which the duke of
Mecklenburg was taken prisoner, levelled part
of their works, and cut off the soldiers in
their advanced posts. While the citizens of
Magdeburg, animated by the discourses of their
pastors, and the soldiers encouraged by the ex-
ample of their officers, endured all the hard-
lhips of a siege without murmuring, and de-
fended themselves with the fame ardour which
they had at first discovered; the troops of the
besiegers a&ed with extreme remissness, repining
at every thing that they suffered in a service which
they disliked. They broke out, more than

once,

Boo X. progress of the war in the Parmesan, without

l ofing fight of such occurrences as might hap-

5' pen in Germany

The siege DURING these tranfations, the siege of Mag-
tM'gd' deburg was carried on with various success.

At the time when Charles proscribed the citi-
zens of Magdeburg, and put them under the
ban of the Empire, he had exhorted and even
enjoined all the neighbouring states to take
arms against them, as rebels and common ene-
mies. Encouraged by his exhortations as well
as promises, George of Mecklenburg, a younger
brother of the reigning Duke, an ative and
ambitious Prince, colleted a considerable num-
ber of those soldiers of fortune who had accom-
panied Henry of Brunswick in all his wild
enterprizes; and though a zealous Lutheran
himself, invaded the territories of the Magde-
burgers, hoping that, by the merit of this ser-
vice, he might procure ome part of their do-
mains to be allotted to him as an eftablimhment.
The citizens, unaccustomed as yet to endure
patiently the calamities of war, could not be
refirained from allying out in order to save
their lands from being laid waste. They at-
tacked the duke of Mecklenburg with more
resolution than conduct, and were repulsed with
great slaughter. But as they were animated
with that unconquerable spirit, which flows from
zeal for religion co-operating with the love of
civil liberty, far from being disheartened by
their misfortune, they prepared to defend them-
selves with vigour. Many of the veteran fol-
diers who had served in the long wars between
the Emperor and King of France, crowding to
their standards under able and experienced offi-
cers, they acquired military kill by degrees,

and
Sleid. 329.

and added all the advantages of that to the BOOK X.
efforts of undaunted courage. The duke of'"
Mecklenburg, notwithitanding the severe blow 155l
which he had given the Magdeburgers, not
daring to invest a town Ifrongly fortified, and
defended by such a garrison, continued to ra-
vage the open country.

As the hopes of booty drew many adven- Maurce

turers to the camp of this young Prince, Mau- ^commsn
rice of Saxony began to be jealous of the power of the .rmy
which he possessed by being at the head of such redon the
a numerous body, and marching towards Mag- tSge.
deburg with his own troops, assumed the
supreme command of the whole army, an
honour to which his high rank and great abili-
ties, as well as the nomination of the diet, gave
him an indisputable title. With this united
force he invested the town, and began the siege
in form; claiming great merit with the Emperor
on that account, as, from his zeal to execute
the Imperial decree, he was exposing himself
once more to the censures and maledictions of
the party with which he agreed in religious fen-
timents. But the approaches to the town went
on slowly; the garrison interrupted the besiegers
by frequent sallies, in one of which the duke of
Mecklenburg was taken prisoner, levelled part
of their works, and cut off the soldiers in
their advanced posts. While the citizens of
Magdeburg, animated by the discourses of their
pastors, and the soldiers encouraged by the ex-
ample of their officers, endured all the hard-
hips of a siege without murmuring, and de-
fended themselves with the fame ardour which
they had at first discovered; the troops of the
besiegers ated with extreme remissness, repining
at every thing that they suffered in a service which
they disliked. They broke out, more than

once,

Boor X- once, into open mutiny, demanding the arrears
k-'~ of their pay, which, as the Germans sent in
1551' their contributions sparingly, and with great

reluctance, towards defraying the expences of
this war, amounted to a considerable fum s.
Maurice, too, had particular motives, though
luch as he durst not avow at that jundure,
x hich induced him not to push the siege with
vigour, and made him chufe rather to continue
at the head of an army exposed to all the impu-
tations which his dilatory proceedings drew
upon him, than to precipitate a conquest that
might have brought him some accession of re-
putation, but would have rendered it neceflary
to disband his forces.

FTe city AT lafi, the inhabitants of the town begin-
usdri,,. ning to susser distress from want of provisions,

and Maurice finding it impossible to protract
matters any longer without filling the Emperor
with such suspicions as might have disconcerted
all his measures, he concluded a treaty of capi-
tulation with the city upon the following con-
ditions; that the Magdeburgers should humbly
implore pardon of the Emperor; that they
mhould not for the future take arms, or enter
NKoTb. 3. into any alliance againfi the house of Austria;

that they should submit to the authority of the
Imperial chamber; that they should conform
to the decree of the diet at Augsburg with
refped to religion; that the new fortifications
added to the town mould be demolilhed; that
they should pay a fine of fifty thousand crowns,
deliver up twelve pieces of-ordnance to the
Emperor, and et the duke of Mecklenburg,
together with their other prisoners, at liberty,
without ranfem. Next day their garrison

marched
'Tbuan. 277. Seid. 514.

marched out, and Maurice took poffeflion of BooKX.
the town with great military pomp. 1

BEFORE the terms of capitulation were set- M:rice',

tied, Maurice had held many conferences with jneture.
Albert count Mansfeldt who had the chief
command in Magdeburg. He consulted like-
wife with count Heideck, an officer who had
served with great reputation in the army of the
league of Smalkalde, whom the Emperor had
proscribed on account of his zeal for that cause,
but whom Maurice had, notwithstanding, fe-
cretly engaged in his service, and admitted into
the most intimate confidence. To them he
communicated a scheme, which he had long
revolved in his mind, for procuring liberty to
his father-in-law the Landgrave, for vindicating
the privileges of the Germanick body, and set-
ting bounds to the dangerous encroachments
of the Imperial power. Having deliberated
with them concerning the measures which might
be necefiary for securing the success of such an
arduous enterprize, he gave Mansfeldt secret
aflurances that the fortifications of Magdeburg
fliould not be destroyed, and that the inha-
bitants should neither be disturbed in the exer-
cile of their religion, nor be deprived of any
of their ancient immunities. In order to engage
Maurice more thoroughly from considerations
of interest to fulfil these engagements, the senate
of Magdeburg elected him their Burgrave, a
dignity which had formerly belonged to the
elecoral house of Saxony, and which entitled
him to a very ample jurifdicion not only on the
city but in its dependencies T.

VOL. III. Q -- THUS

T Sleid. 528. Thuan. 276. Obfidionis Magdeburgici
Defcriptio per Sebaft. Beffelmeierum, ap. Scard ii. i518.

Boo y. THUS the ctizens of Magdeburg, after en-
'7c73 during a siege of twelve months, and firuggling
The van-. for their liberties, religious and civil, with an
tged h ,de. invincible fortitude, worthy of the cause in which
rived fromr .
his negoci it was exerted, had at last the good fortune to
te ,hgd conclude a treaty, which left them in a better
burgers. condition than the reft of their countrymen,

whom their timidity or want of publick spirit
had betrayed into such mean fubmiflions to the
Emperor. But while a great part of Germany
applauded the gallant conduct of the Magde-
burgers, and rejoiced in their having escaped
the deftmion with which they had been threat-
ened, all admired Maurice's address in the con-
duct of his negociation with them, as well as
the dexterity with which he converted every
event to his own advantage. They saw, with
amazement, that after having afflited the Mag-
deburgers during many months with all the
calamities of war, he was at last, by their vo-
luntary election, vested with supreme authority
in that city which he had so lately besieged;
that after having been so long the object of their
satirical invectives as an apostate, and an enemy
to the religion which he professed, they seemed
now to place unbounded confidence in his zeal
and good-will . At the fame time, the publick
articles in the treaty of capitulation were so
perfectly conformable to those which the Em-
peror l-ad granted to the other Protestant cities,
and Maurice took such care to magnify his
merit in haiing reduced a place which had
defended itself with so much obstinacy, that
Charlcs, far from lufpecting any thing fraudu-
lent or collusive in the terms of accomodation,
ratified them without hesitation, and absolved
the Magdeburgcls from the sentence of ban
s hich had been denounced against them.

THC
r Arrnodi vira Maurit. apud Menken, ii. 1227.

THE only point that now remained to em- BOK X.
barrals Maurice was how to keep together the '

1551.

veteran troops which had served under him, as His Sepedi-
well as those which had been employed in the ent for

keeping an

defence of the town. For this, too, he found rmy oa
an expedient with singular art and felicity. His ft'
schemes against the Emperor were not yet so
fully ripened, that he durit venture to disclose
them, and proceed openly to carry them into
execution. The winter was approaching, which
made it impoflible to take the field immediately.
He was afraid that it would give a premature
alarm to the Emperor, if he Ihould retain such
a considerable body in his pay until the season
of action returned in the spring. As soon then
as Magdeburg opened its gates, he sent home
his Saxon fubjeets, whom he could command to
take arms and re-assemble on the horteft warn-
ing; and at the fame time, paying part of the
arrears due to the mercenary troops, who had
followed his standard, as well as to the soldiers
who had served in the garrison, he absolved
them from their refpefive oaths of fidelity, and
dilbanded them. But the moment he gave them
their discharge, George Duke of Mecklenburg,
who was now set at liberty, offered to take
them into his service, and to become surety for
the payment of what was still owing to them.
As utch adventurers were accustomed often to
change masters, they inflantly accepted the
offer. Thus these troops were kept united,
and ready to march wherever Maurice should
call them, while the Emperor, deceived by this
artifice, and imagining that the Duke of Meck-
lenbarg had hired them with an intention to
aflert his claim to a part of his brother's terri-
toles by force of arms, suffered this tranf-

Q_2 aftion

Boo X. at&ion to pass without observation, asif it had
'-' been a matter of no consequence x.

1551.

HAVING ventured to take these steps which

were of so much consequence towards the exe-
cution of his schemes, Maurice, that he might
divert the Emperor from observing their ten-
dency too narrowly, and prevent the suspicions
which that mufl have excited, saw the neceflity
of employing some new artifice in order to en-
gage his attention, and to confirm him in his
present security. As he knew that the chief
objet of the Emperor's solicitude at this junc-
ture, was how he might prevail with the Pro-
teftant States of Germany to recognise the au-
thority of the council of Trent, and to fend
thither ambafladors in their own name, as well
as deputies from their refpeaive churches, he
took hold of this predominating paflion in order
to amuse and to deceive him. He asseted a
wonderful zeal to gratify Charles in what he
desired with regard to this matter; he nomi-
nated ambafladors, whom he empowered to
attend the council; he made choice of Me-
lansthon and some of the most eminent among
his brethren to prepare a confession of faith,
and to lay it before the aflembly. After his
example, and probably in consequence of his
solicitations, the Duke of Wurtemburg, the city
of Strafburg, and other Protestant States, ap-
pointed ambassadors and divines to attend the
council. They all applied to the Emperor for
his fafe-conduct, which they obtained in the
most ample form. This was deemed sufficient
for the security of the ambafladors, and they

proceeded

x Thuan. 268. Struv. corp. hist. Germ. Io64. Arnoldi

vita Maurilii spud Menken, ii. 1227.

His ddrefs
in concel-
ing his in-
tennons
from the
Emperor.

proceeded accordingly on their journey; but BooK X
a separate fafe-condu&t from the council itself f~
was demanded for the Protestant divines. The 'S5'
fate of John Huss and Jerome of Prague, whom
the Council of Constance, in the preceding cen-
tury, had condemned to the flames without
regarding the Imperial fafe-conduA which had
been granted them, rendered this precaution
prudent and necessary. But as the Pope was
no less unwilling that the Protestants should be
admitted to an hearing in the council, than the
Emperor had been eager in bringing them to
demand it, the legate, by promises and threats,
prevailed on the fathers of the council to de-
cline ifluing a fafe-condut in the fame form
with that which the council of Basil had granted
to the followers of Huss. The Protestants, on
their part, insisted upon the council's copying
the precise words of that instrument. The Im-
perial ambassadors interposed, in order to obtain
what would satisfy them. Alterations in the
form of the writ were proposed; expedients
were suggested; protests and counter-protefts
were taken: the legate, together with his affo-
ciates, laboured to gain their point by artifice
and chicanei the Protestants adhered to theirs
with firmness and obstinacy. An account of
every thing that passed in Trent was transmitted
to the Emperor at Infpruck, who, attempting,
from an excess of zeal, or of confidence in his
own address, to reconcile the contending par-
ties, was involved in a labyrinth of inextricable
negociations. By means of this, however, Man-
rice gained all that he had in view; the Em-
peror's time was wholly engrossed, and his
attention diverted; while he hirrfelf had leiilre
to mature his schemes, to carry on his intrigues,
and to finish his preparations, before le threw

eff'

Boot X. off the mask, and struck the blow which he had

-"y folong meditatedY.
1551.

The aStirs BUT previous to the history of Maurice's
aof He. operations, some account must be given of a

new revolution in Hungary, which contributed
not a little towards their producing such extra-
ordinary effects. When Solyman, in the year
154i, by a stratagem, which suited the base
and insidious policy of a petty usurper, rather
than the magnanimity of a mighty conqueror,
deprived the young King of Hungary of the
dominions which his father had left him, he
had granted that unfortunate Prince the country
of Transylvania, a province f his paternal
kingdom. The government of this, together
with the care of educating the young King, for
he ill allowed him to retain that title, though
he had rendered it only an empty name, he
committed to the Qleen and Martinuzzi bilhop
of Waradin, whom the late king had appointed
his sons guardians and regents of his dominions,
at a time when those offices were of greater
importance. This co-ordinate jurifdition occa-
sioned the fame diflentions in a small princi-
pality as it would have excited in a great king-
dom; an ambitious young Queen, conscious of
her capacity for governing, and an high-fpirited
prelate, fond of power, contending who should
engross the greatest hare in the administration.
Each had their partizans among the nobles; but
as Martinuzzi, by his great talents, began to
acquire the ascendant, Isabella turned his own
arts against him, and courted the protection of
the Turks.

.o..-' TTHE ncighbouring Bafhas, jealous of the
.n u's bifflop's power as well as abilities, readily pro-

*Irr t ~on i mised

Sleid. 26. 529. F. Paul, 323. 338. Thuan. 86.

mifed her the aid which she demanded, and BooK X.
would soon have obliged Martinuzzi to have 'V
given up to her the sole direction of affairs, if 55'
his ambition, fertile in expedients, had not fug-
gested to him a new measure, and one that
tended not only to preserve but to enlarge his
authority. Having concluded an agreement
with the Queen, by the mediation of ome of
the nobles, who were solicitous to save their
country from the calamities of a civil war, ihe
secretly dispatched one of his confidents to
Vienna, and entered into a negociation with
Ferdinand. As it was no difficult matter to
persuade Ferdinand, that the fame man whole
enmity and intrigues had driven him out of a
great part of his Hungarian dominions, might,
upon a reconciliation, become equally inftru-
mental in recovering them, he listened eagerly
to the sirs overtures of an union with that pre-
late. Martinuzzi allured him by such prospects
of advantage, and engaged, with so much con-
fidence, that he would prevail on the most
powerful of the Hungarian nobles to take arms
in his favour, that Ferdinand, notwithstanding
his truce with Solyman, agreed to invade Tran-
fylvania. The command of the troops destined
for that service, confilting of veteran Spanith
and German soldiers, was given to Caftaldo
Marquis de Piadena, an officer formed by the
famous Marquis de Pescara, whom he strongly
resembled both in his enterprising genius for
civil business, and in his great knowledge in
the art of war. This army, more formidable
by the discipline of the soldiers, and the abili-
ties of the general, than by its numbers, was
powerfully seconded by Martinu2zi and his
facion among the Hungarians. As the Turkilh
Baihas, the Sultan himself being at the head of
his army on the frontiers of Persia, could not

afford

BooK X. afford the Queen such immediate or effectual

0- assistance as the exigency of her affairs required,
s551' she quickly loft all hopes of being able to retain

any longer the authority which he possessed as
regent, and even began to despair of her son's
safety.

Thef rcer MARTINUZZI did not susser this favourable
fl mer - opportunity of accomplishing his own designs

to pass unimproved, and ventured, while he
was in this state of dejetion, to lay before her
a proposal, which at any other time he would
have rejected with disdain. He represented how
impoflible it was for her to refdt Ferdinand's
victorious arrms; that even if the Turks hould
enable her to make head against them, he
would be far from changing her condition to
the better, and could not confider them as deli-
verers, but as masters, to whose commands he
must submit; he conjured her, therefore, as she
regarded her own dignity, the safety of her son,
or the security of Christendom, rather to give
up Transylvania to Ferdinand, and to make
over to him her son's title to the crown of
Hungary, than to allow both to be usurped by
the inveterate enemy of the Christian faith. At
the fame time, he promised her, in Ferdinand's
name, a compensation for herself, as well as for
her son, suitable to their rank, and propor-
tional to the value of what they were to facri-
f.ce. Isabella, deserted by some of her adhe-
rents, distrusting others, destitute of friends,
and surrounded by Caftaldo's and Martinuzzi's
troops, subscribed these hard conditions, though
with a reluctant hand. Upon this, she furren-
dered such places of strength as were ill in
her poffeflion, he gave up all the ensigns of
royalty, particularly a crown of gold, which, as
the Hungarians believed, had descended from

heaven,

heaven, and conferred on him who wore it an BOOK X.
undoubted right to the throne. As he could -'
not bear to remain a private person, in a country '551'
where he had once enjoyed sovereign power,
she instantly set out with her son for Silesia, in
order to take pofieffion of the principalities of
Oppelan and Ratibor, the invetilture of which
Ferdinand had engaged to grant her son, and
likewise to bestow one of his daughters upon
him in marriage.

UPON the resignation of the young King, Appointed

Martinuzzi, and after his example the reft of .r.."o.-
the Transylvanian grandees, swore allegiance to Hun.gry
Ferdinand; who, in order to testify his grateful rubjea
sense of the zeal as well as success with which Ferdinand.
that prelate had served him, affected to diftin-
guifh him by every poflible mark of favour and
confidence. He appointed him governor of
Transylvania, with almost unlimited authority;
he ordered Caftaldo to pay the greatest deference
to his opinion and commands; he increased his
revenues, which were already very great, by new
appointments; he nominated him archbishop
of Gran, and prevailed on the Pope to raise
him to the dignity of a Cardinal. All this often-
tation of good-will, however, was void of fin-
cerity, and calculated to conceal sentiments the
most perfectly its reverse. Ferdinand dreaded
Martinuzzi's abilities; distrusted his fidelity,
and foresaw, that as his extensive authority en-
abled him to check any attempt towards cir-
cumfcribing or abolishing the extensive privi-
leges which the Hungarian nobility poffefled,
he would stand forth, on every occasion, the
guardian of the liberties of his country, rather
than aft the part of a viceroy devoted to the
will of his sovereign.

FOR

BOOK X. FOR this reason, he secretly gave it in charge
''-- ' to Caftaldo to watch his motions, to guard
FedL) against his designs, and to thwart his meaflres.
b Psj :o But Martinuzzi, either because he did not per-
Igs.him. ceive that Caftaldo was placed as a spy on his

actions, or because he delpifed Ferdinand's in-
fidious arts, affun.ed the direction of the war
against the Turks with his usual tone of autho-
rity, and conducted it with great magnani-
mi:y, and no less success. He recovered some
places of which the Infidels had taken posses-
sion; he rendered their attempts to reduce others
abortive ; and established Ferdinand's authority
not only in Transylvania, but in the Bannat of
Temewar, and several of the countries adjacent.
In carryingon these operations, he often differed
in sentiments from Caftaldo and his officers, and
treated the Turkilh prisoners with a degree not
only of humanity, but even of generosity, which
Caftaldo loudly condemned. This was repre-
f.nted at Vienna as an artful method of court-
ing the friendihip of the Infidels, that, by fe-
curing their- protedion, he might hake off all
dependence upon the sovereign whom he now
acknowledged. Though Martinuzzi, in jufti-
fication of his own conduCt contended that it
was impolitick to exasperate an enemy prone to
revenge by unnecessary severities, Caflaldo's ac-
cufations gained credit with Ferdinand, prepof-
fesTed already against Martinuzzi, and jealous
of every thing that could endanger his own au-
thority in Hungary, in proportion as he knew
it to be precarious and ill established. These
liifpicions Cafialdo confirmed and firengthened,
by the intelligence hich he transmitted con-
tinually to his confidents at Vienna. By mifre-
preftnting what was innocent, and putting the
xsorft confirudion on what seemed dubious in
Maarinuzzi's conduct ; by imputing to him de-

signs

signs which he never formed, and charging him BooK X.
with ations of which he was not guilty; he at'
last convinced Ferdinand, that, in order to pre- 5
serve his Hungarian crown, he must cat off that
ambitious prelate. But Ferdinand, foreseeing
that it would be dangerous to proceed in the
regular course of law against a subject of such
exorbitant power, as enabled him to let his fove-
reign at defiance, determined to employ vio-
lence, in order to obtain that fatisfadtion which
the laws were too feeble to afford him.

HE issued his orders accordingly to Caftaldc, He is atal

who willingly undertook that infamous service. hi,'en'Y
Having communicated the design to some Italian mind.
and Spanish officers whom he could trust, and
concerted with them the plan of executing it,
they entered Martinuzzi's apartment, early one Dec. iS.
morning, under pretence of presenting to him
some dispatches which were to be sent off imme-
diately to Vienna; and while he perused a paper
with attention, one of their number struck him
with his poignard in the throat. The blow was
not mortal. Martinuzzi started up with the in-
trepidity natural to him, and grappling the a-
fallin, threw him on the ground. But the other
conspirators rushing in, an old man, unarmed,
and alone, unable long to sustain such an un-
equal conflit, funk under the wounds which
he received from so many hands. Their dread
of the foreign troops restrained the Tranfylva-
nians from rising in arms, in order to take ven-
geance on the murderers of a prelate who had
long been the object of their love as well as
veneration. They spoke of the deed, however, TheefreX
with horror and execration; and exclaimed ofthaio.
against Ferdinand, whom neither gratitude for
recent and important services, nor reverence for
a character confidered as sacred and inviolable

among

BooK X. among Christians, could restrain from shedding

the blood of a man, whose only crime was at-
'55'- tachment to his native country. The nobles,

detesting the jealous as well as cruel policy of a
court, which, upon uncertain and improbable
surmises, had given up a person, no less confpi-
cuous for his merit than his rank, to be but-
chered by aflfalins, either retired to their own
estates, or if they continued with the Auitrian
army, grew cold to the service. The Turks,
encouraged by the death of an enemy whose abi-
lities they knew and dreaded, prepared to renew
hostilities early in the spring; and instead of the
security which Ferdinand had expeted from the
removal of Marinuzzi, it was evident that his
territories in Hungary were about to be attacked
with greater vigour, and defended with less zeal,
than everA.

Mu -e BY this time, Maurice having almost finilbed
r ^..c his intrigues and preparations, was on the point
si he of declaring his intentions openly, and of taking
Ki,. the field against the Emperor. His first care,

after he came to this resolution, was to disclaim
that narrow and bigotted maxim of the confe-
derates of Smalkalde, which had led them to
hiun all connexion with foreigners. He had
observed how fatal this had been to their cause;
and inftruted by their error, he was as eager
to court the protetion of Henry II. as they had
been solicitous to prevent the interposition of
Francis I. Happily for him, he found Henry
in a disposition to liften to the first overture on
his part, and in a situation which enabled him
to bring the whole force of the French monarchy
into action. Henry had long observed the pro-

grefs

A Sleid. 535. Thuan. lib. ix. 309, &c. Ifuanhaffi His.

Regn. Hungarici, lib. xvi. 189, &c. Mem. de Ribicr. ii.
s7;. Natalis Comitis Hiftoria, lib. iv. 84, &c.

grefs of the Emperor's arms with jealousy, andBooK X.
wihed to distinguish himself by trying hise""r
strength againfc the fame enemy, whom it had 55'
been the glory of his father's reign to oppose.
He had laid hold on the first opportunity in
his power of thwarting the Emperor's designs,
by taking the duke of Parma under his protec-
tion; and hostilities were already begun, not
only in that dutchy but in Piedmont. Having
terminated the war with England by a peace,
no less advantageous to himself than honourable
for his allies the Scots, the restless and enter-
prizing courage of his nobles was impatient to
display itself on some theatre of action more
conrpicuous than the petty operations in Parma
or Piedmont afforded them.

JOHN DE FIEssE, bishop of Bayonne, whom Histrety

with him.

Henry had sent into Germany, under pretence
of hiring troops to be employed in Italy, was
empowered to conclude a treaty in form with
Maurice and his aflociates. As it would have
been very indecent in a King of France to
have undertaken the defence of the Protestant
church, the interests of religion, how much so-
ever they might be affeAed by the treaty, were
not once mentioned in any of the articles. Re-
ligious concerns, they pretended to commit en-
tirely to the disposition of divine providence;
the only motives afligned for their present con-
federacy against Charles, were to procure the
Landgrave liberty, and to prevent the fubver-
sion of the ancient conititution and laws of the
German Empire. In order to accomplish there
ends, it was agreed, that all the contracting
parties should, at the fame time, declare war
againit the Emperor; that neither peace nor
truce should be made but by common content,
nor without including each of the confederates;

that

BooK X. that, in order to guard against the inconveni-

,-,. encies of anarchy, or of pretensions to joint
55 'command, Maurice thould be acknowledged as

head of the German confederates, withabfolute
au;horirty in all military affairs; that Maurice
and his alociates hould bring into the field
leven thousand horse, with a proportional num-
ber of infantry ; that towards the subsistence of
this armv, during the three first months of the
war, Henry hould contribute two hundred and
forty thousand crowns, and afterwards sixty
tho;fand crowns a-month, as long as they con-
tinued in arms; that Henry hould attack the
Emperor on the fide of Lorrain with a powerful
army; that if it were found requisite to elet a
new Emperor, such a person hould be nomi-
nated as shall be agreeable to the King of
France . This treaty was concluded on the
fifth of October, some time before Magdeburg
surrendered, and the preparatory negociations
were conducted with such profound secrecy, that
of all the Princes who afterwards acceded to it,
Maurice communicated what he was carrying
on to two only, John Albert, the reigning duke
of Mecklenburg, and William of Hefle, the
Landgrave's eldefl son. The league itself was no
less anxiously corcealed, and with such fortunate
care, that no rumour concerning it reached the
ears of the Emperor or his min;ifers; nor do
the\ eremr to have conceived the most diflant
lil'picion of such a tranfacdion.

AT the fame time, with a solicitude which

r .,.- w -as ca-efu] ro draw some accession of strength
"' Er.-.-.. iom ever quarter, Maurice applied to Edward

V!. cf England, and requested a fublidy of four
lundred tl:cuand crowns for the support of a

confederacy

' PR-cueil des Trnrez. torn. 5. 58. Thuan. Eb. viii.
2-9.

confederacy formed in defence of the Protestant BOOK X.
religion. But the factions which prevailed in'""
the English court during the minority of that '55'
Prince, and which deprived both the councils
and arms of the nation of their wonted vigour,
left the English ministers neither time nor incli-
nation to attend to foreign affairs, and prevented
Maurice's obtaining that aid, which their zeal
for the Reformation would have prompted them
to grant him c.

MAURICE, however, having secured the pro- Demands

teetion of such a powerful Monarch as Henry 11. . "
proceeded with great confidence, but with equal Landgrave
caution, to execute his plan. As he judged it ft liberty.
necessary to make one effort more, in order to
obtain the Emperor's content that the Land-
grave should be set at liberty, he sent a solemn December.
embassy, in his own name, and in that of the
Ele&or of Brandenburg, to Infpruck. After
resuming, at great length, all the facts and ar-
guments upon which they founded their claim,
and representing, in the strongest terms, the
peculiar engagements which bound them to be
so afiduous in their olicitations, they renewed
the request in behalf of the unfortunate prisoner,
which they had so often preferred in vain. The
Elector Palatine, the Duke of Wurtem berg, the
Dukes of Mecklenburg, the Duke of Deux-
ponts, the Marquis of Brandenburg Bareith,
and the Marquis of Baden, by their embaffa-
dors, concurred with them in their suit. Let-
ters were likewise delivered to the fame effect
from the King of Denmark, the Duke of Bava-
ria, and the Dukes of Lunenburg. Even the
King of the Romans joined in this application,
being moved with companlion towards the Land-
grave in his wretched situation, or influenced,

perhaps,
c Burnet's Hist. of the Reform. vol. ii. Append. 37.

Boor X. perhaps, by a secret jealousy of his brothers

power and designs, which, since his attempt to
S''' alter the order of lucce.Tion in the Empire, he

had come to view with other eyes, and dreaded
to a great degree.

BUT Charles, constant to his own system with

regard to the Landgrave, eluded a demand
urged by such powerful intercessors; and having
declared that he would communicate his refolu-
tion concerning the matter to Maurice as soon
nrs he arrived at Infpruck, where he was every
day expcded, he did not deign to descend into
any more particular explication of his inten-
tions D. This application, though of no benefit
to the Landgrave, was of great advantage to
Maurice. It served to justify his subsequent
proceedings, and to demontrate the neceflity of
employ ing arms in order to extort that equitable
concellion, which his mediation or intreaty could
not obtain. It was of use, too, to confirm the
Emperor in his security, as both the solemnity
of the application, and the solicitude with which
so many Princes were drawn in to enforce it,
led him to conclude, that Maurice placed all his
hopes of restoring the Landgrave to liberty, in
gaining his consent to dismiss him.
X;z:. i A URI C E employed artifices ill more refined

...to to conceal his machinations, to amuse the Em-

-rn'.e r peror, and to gain time. HeaffeAed to be more
Trr..:. Isblicitous than ever to find out ome expedient

for removing the difficulties with regard to the
fafe-condut for the Protestant divines appointed
to attend the council, so that they might repair
thither without any apprehension of danger.
H;s ambassadors at Trent had frequent con-
ferences concerning this matter with the Impe-

rial
DSleid. 53i. Thuan. lib. viii. a2o.

rial ambassadors in that city, and laid open their BooK X.
(entiments to them with the appearance of theV-"
most unreserved confidence. He was willing, '552.
at lati, to have it believed, that he thought all
differences with refped to this preliminary ar-
ticle were on the point of being adjusted; and
in order to give credit to this opinion, he com-
manded MelanAhon, together with his bre-
thren, to set out on their journey to Trent. At
the fame time, he held a close correspondence
with the Imperial court at Infpruck, and re-
newed on every occasion his profeflions not only
of fidelity but of attachment to the Emperor.
He talked continually of his intention of going
to Infpruck in person; he ordered a house to be
hired for him in that city, and to be fitted up
with the greatest dispatch for his reception E.

BUT, profoundly skilled as Maurice was inTheEmpe

the arts of deceit, and impenetrable as heceives om
thought the veil to be under which he con-f"icion

concerning

cealed his designs, there were several things inh itcn.
his conduct which alarmed the Emperor amidftl"in"
his security, and tempted him frequently to
fufpea that he was meditating omething extra-
ordinary. As thele suspicions took their rife
from circumstances inconsiderable in themselves,
or of an ambiguous as well as uncertain nature,
they were more than counterbalanced by Mau-
rice's address; and the Emperor would not,
lightly, give up his confidence in a man, whom
he had once trusted and loaded with favours.
One particular alone seemed to be of such con-
sequence, that he thought it necefary to de-
mand an explanation with regard to it. The
troops, which George of Mecklenburg had
taken into pay after the capitulation of Mag-
deburg, having fixed their quarters in Thurin-

VOL. III. R gia,

' Arnoldi vita Maurit. ap. Menken, ii. 1229.

BooX. gia, lived at discretion on the lands of the rich

ISS-~ ecclefiafticks in their neighbourhood. Their li-

cence and rapaciousness were intolerable. Such
as felt or dreaded their exations, complained
loudly to the Emperor, and represented them
as a body of men kept in readiness for some
desperate enterprize. But Maurice, partly by
extenuating the enormities of which they had
been guilty, partly by representing the impofli-
bility of dilbanding these troops, or of keeping
them to regular discipline, unless the arrears
ilill due to them by the Emperor were paid,
either removed the apprehensions which this
had occasioned, or as Charles was not in a con-
dition to satisfy the demands of these soldiers,
obliged him to be silent with regard to the
matter F.

Maorie TTHE time of ation was now approaching.
rao,'. " Maurice had privately dispatched Albert of

Brandenburg to Paris, in order to confirm his
league with Henry, and to haften the march of
the French army. He had taken meafiures to
bring his own fubjets together on the first fum-
mons; he had provided for the security of
Saxony while he should be absent with the
army; and he held the troops in Thuringia, on
which he chiefly depended, ready to advance on
a moment's warning. All there complicated
operations were carried on without being dif-
covered by the court at Infpruck; and the Em-
percr remained there in perfect tranquillity,
bulied entirel) in counteracting the intrigues of
the Pope's legate at Trent, and in fettling the
cenditions on w iich tle Protcftant divines hould
be admitted into the council, as if there had
nut been any tra; L..ion of greater moment in
a.! Ltioni .

THIS
' Seid. 549. Thuan. 3;9.

THIS credulous security in a Prince, who by BOOK X.

hisfagacity inobferving the conduc of all around -
him, was commonly led to an excess of difruft, c, -'
may seem unaccountable, and has been imputed lacces
to infatuation. But besides the exquisite ad- which con
dress with which Maurice concealed his inten- deceive the
tions, two circumstances contributed to the Endhisr'
delusion. The gout had returned upon Charles minister.
soon after his arrival at Infpruck, with an in-
crease of violence; and his constitution being
broken by such frequent attacks, he was seldom
able to exert his natural vigour of mind, or to
confider affairs with his usual vigilance and
penetration; and Granvelle, bihop of Arras,
his prime minister, though one of the most
subtle statesman of that, or perhaps of any age,
was on this occasion the dupe of his own craft.
He entertained such an high opinionof his own
abilities, and held the political talents of the
Germans in such contempt, that he despised all
the intimations given him concerning Maurice's
secret machinations, or the dangerous designs
which he was carrying on. When the Duke of
Alva, whose dark suspicious mind harboured
many doubts concerning the EleAor's sincerity,
proposed calling him immediately to court to
answer for his condut, Granvelle replied with
great scorn, That these apprehensions were
groundless, and that a drunken German head
was too gross to form any scheme which he
could not easily penetrate and baffle. Nor did
he aume this preremptory tone merely from
confidence in his own discernment; he had
bribed two of Maurice's ministers, and received
from them frequent and minute information
concerning all their master's motions. But
through this very channel, by which he expected
to gain access to all Maurice's counsels, and
ev:tl to his thoughts, such intelligence was con-

R 2 veyed

Boo.X. gia, lived at discretion on the lands of the rich
%.-~~ ecclefiafticks in their neighbourhood. Their li-

cence and rapaciousness were intolerable. Such
as felt or dreaded their exactions, complained
loudly to the Emperor, and represented them
as a body of men kept in readiness for rome
desperate enterprize. But Maurice, partly by
extenuating the enormities of which they had
been guilty, partly by representing the impofli-
bility of disbanding these troops, or of keeping
them to regular discipline, unless the arrears
flill due to them by the Emperor were paid,
either removed the apprehensions which this
had occasioned, or as Charles was not in a con-
dition to satisfy the demands of there soldiers,
obliged him to be silent with regard to the
matter '.

Molite THE time of ation was now approaching.
;;," ,r Maurice had privately dispatched Albert of

Brandenburg to Paris, in order to confirm his
league with Henry, and to haften the march of
the French army. He had taken meafires to
bring his own fubjedts together on the first fum-
mons; he had provided for the security of
Saxony while he should be absent with the
arm); and he held the troops in Thuringia, on
which he chiefly depended, ready to advance on
a moment's warning. All there complicated
operations were carried on without being dif-
covered by the court at Infpruck; and the Em-
peror remained there in perfect tranquillity,
busid entirely in counteracting the intrigues of
the Pope's legate at Trent, and in fettling the
conditions on . iiclh the Protcftant divines should
be admitted into the council, as if there had
nut been any traa!taion of greater moment in
a! . tion.

THIS
' Sleid. 549. Tuan. 33g.

THIS credulous security in a Prince, who by BOOK X.

hisfagacity inobferving the conduet of all around '--
him, was commonly led to an excess of distrust, cr55
may seem unaccountable, and has been imputed fltaces
to infatuation. But betides the exquisite ad- which con
dress with which Maurice concealed his inten- deceive the
tions, two circumstances contributed to the Endph'ro
delusion. The gout had returned upon Charles miniflers.
soon after his arrival at Infpruck, with an in-
crease of violence; and his constitution being
broken by such frequent attacks, he was seldom
able to exert his natural vigour of mind, or to
confider affairs with his usual vigilance and
penetration; and Granvelle, bishop of Arras,
his prime minister, though one of the most
subtle statesman of that, or perhaps of any age,
was on this occasion the dupe of his own craft.
He entertained such an high opinion of his own
abilities, and held the political talents of the
Germans in such contempt, that he despised all
the intimations given him concerning Maurice's
secret machinations, or the dangerous designs
which he was carrying on. When the Duke of
Alva, whose dark suspicious mind harboured
many doubts concerning the Elector's sincerity,
proposed calling him immediately to court to
answer for his conduct, Granvelle replied with
great scorn, That these apprehensions were
groundless, and that a drunken German head
was too gross to form any scheme which he
could not easily penetrate and baffle. Nor did
he assume this preremptory tone merely from
confidence in his own discernment; he had
bribed two of Maurice's ministers, and received
from them frequent and minute information
concerning all their master's motions. But
through this very channel, by which he expeted
to gain access to all Maurice's counsels, and
even to his thoughts, such intelligence was con-

R 2 veyed

Boo X. veyed to him as completed his deception.
C~'zJ Maurice fortunately discovered the correfpon-

dence of the two traitors with Granvelle; but
instead of punishing them for their crime, he
dexterously availed himself of their fraud, and
turned his own arts against the bishop. He
affected to treat these ministers with greater
confidence than ever; he admitted them to his
consultations; he seemed to lay open his heart
to them; and taking care all the while to let
them be acquainted with nothing but what it
was his interest should be known, they tranf-
mitted to Infpruck such accounts as possessed
Granvelle with a firm belief of his sincerity as
well as good intentionsG. The Emperor him-
self, in the fulness of security, was so little
moved by a memorial, in name of the ecclefi-
aftical Eletors, admonilhing him to be on his
guard against Maurice, that he made light of
this intelligence; and his answer to them
abounds with declarations of his entire and con-
sident reliance on the fidelity as well as attach-
ment of that PrinceH.

Nie Ce AT last Maurice's preparations were com-
feld iagnf pleted, and he had the fatisfadion to find that
he Empe- his intrigues and designs were still unknown.

But, though now ready to take the field, he
did not lay aside the arts which he had hitherto
employed; and by one piece of craft more, he
deceived his enemies a few days longer. He
gave out, that he was about to begin that jour-
ney to Infpruck of which he had so often
talked, and he took one of the ministers whom
Granvc!le had bribed, to attend him thither.
After travelling poll a few stages, he pretended
to be indiipoaed by the fatigue of the journey,

and
* Melil' Memoirs, fol. edit. p. 2. H Sleid. 535.

and dispatching the fufpeded minister to make BooK X.
his apology to the Emperor for this delay, and "'
to assure him that he would be at Inpruck '552'
within a few days; he mounted on horseback,
as oon as this spy on his ations was gone, rode
fiull speed towards Thuringia, joined his army, March r8.
which amounted to twenty thousand foot and
fi\e thousand horse, and put it immediately in
motion*.

AT the fame time he publilhed a manifesto Publishes

containing his reasons for taking arms. These jaiffto
were three in number; That he might fecurehis condat.
the Protestant religion, which was threatened
with immediate deftrutioni That he might
maintain the constitution and laws of the Em-
pire, and save Germany from being fubjeted
to the dominion of an absolute monarch; That
he might deliver the Landgrave of Hefle from
the miseries of a long and unjust imprisonment.
By the first, he roused all the favourers of the
Reformation, a party formidable by their zeal
as well as numbers, and rendered desperate by
oppreflion. By the second, he interested all the
friends of liberty, Catholicks no less than Pro-
teftants, and made it their interest to unite with
him in asserting the rights and privileges com-
mon to both. The third, betides the glory
which he acquired by his zeal to fulfil his en-
gagements to the unhappy prisoner, was become
a cause of general concern, not only from the
compafion which the Landgrave's sufferings

excited,

Melv. Mem. p. 13. These circumfances concerning

the Saxon ministers whom Granvelle had bribed, are not
mentioned by the German historians; but as Sir James
Melvil received his information from the Elecor Palatine,
and as they are perfectly agreeable to the rel of Maurice's
condut, they .may be confidered as authentick.

Boo X. excited, but from indignation at the injustice
'V-' and rigour of the Emperor's proceedings against

1552. him. Together with Maurice's manifesto, ano-

ther appeared in the name of Albert Marquis
of Brandenburg Culmbach, who had joined
him with a body of adventurers whom he had
drawn together. The fame grievances which
Maurice had pointed out are mentioned in it,
but with an excess of virulence and animosity
suitable to the character of the Prince in whose
name it was published.

He i pow- THE King of France added to there a mani-
rstd tP fefto in his own name; in which, after taking
the French notice of the ancient alliance between the French
King. and German nations, both descended from the

fame ancestors; and after mentioning the appli-
cations, which, in consequence of this, fomeof
the most illustrious among the German Princes
had made to him for his protecion; he declared
that he now took arms to re-eflablifh the an-
cient constitution of the Empire, to deliver
some of its princes from captivity, and to fccure
the privileges and independence of all the mem-
bers of the Germanick body. In this mani-
fefto, Henry assumed the extraordinary title of
Protescor of tbe Liberties of Germany, and of its
captive Princes; and there was engraved on it
a cap, the ancient symbol of freedom, placed
between two daggers, in order to intimate to
the Germans, that this blelling was to be ac-
quired and ecured by force of arms'.

";.i-,. MAU-RICE had now a very different part to
::-^ ~ld. act; but his flexible genius was capable of ac-

ccmodating itself to every situation. The
moment he took arms, he was as bold and en-

terprizing

'Sleid. 549. Thuan. lib. x. 339. Mem. de Ribier, ii.
--I.

terprizing in the field, as he had been cautious BOOK X.
and crafty in the cabinet. He advanced by "
rapid marches towards the Upper Germany. '55'
All the towns in his way opened their gates to
him. He reinstated the magistrates whom the
Emperor had deposed, and gave polleflion of
the churches to the Protestant miiiifters whom
he had ejeted. He directed his march to
Augsburg; and as the Imperial garrison, which
was too inconsiderable to think of defending it,
retired immediately, h took poffeflion of that
great city, and made the fame changes there April .
as in the towns through which he had paflfd K.

No words can express the Emperor's astonish- The Empe-

ment and confiernation at events so unexpected. nilhment
He saw a great number of the German Princes and dif'rcfs.
in arms against him, and the reft either ready
to join them, or wishing success to their enter-
prize. He beheld a powerful Monarch united
with them in close league, seconding their ope-
rations in person at the head of a formidable
army, while he, through negligence and cre-
dulity, which exposed him no less to scorn than
to danger, had neither made nor was in con-
dition to make any effectual provision either for
crushing his rebellious fubjedts, or refifing the
invasion of the foreign enemy. Part of his
Spanish troops had been ordered into Hungary
againit the Turks; the reft had marched back
to Italy upon occasion of the war in the dutchy
of Parma. The bands of veteran Germans had
been dismissed, because he was not able to pay
them; or had entered into Maurico's service
after the siege of Magdeblbrg; and he remained
at Infpruck with a body of foldicrs hardiy fRrong

enough
Sleid. 555. Thuan. 342.

Booi X. enough to guard his own person. His treasury
%-"^ was as much exhaufled, as his army was re-

duced. He had received no remittances for
some time from the new world. He had for-
feited all credit with the merchants of Genoa
and Venice, who refutied to lend him money,
though tempted by the offer of exorbitant in-
terest. Thus Charles, though undoubtedly the
most considerable potentate in Christendom, and
capable of exerting the greatest firength, as his
power, notwithitanding the violent attack made
upon it, was frill unimpaired, found himself in
a situation which rendered him unable to make
such a sudden and vigorous effort as the junc-
ture required, and was necessary to have saved
him from the present danger.

EndeivCrls IN this situation, the Emperor placed all his
togain time
by .n ge hopes on negociating; the only resource of
ctio.- such as are conscious of their own weakness.

But thinking it inconfillent with his dignity to
make the firlf advances to subje&s who were in
arms against him, he avoided that indecorum
by employing the mediation of his brother Ser-
dinand. Maurice confiding in his own talents
to conduc any negociation in such a manner as
to derive advantage from it, and hoping that
by the appearance of facility in hearkening to
the first overture of accommodation, he might
amuse the Emperor and tempt him to flacken
the acivity with which he was now preparing
to defend himself, readily agreed to an inter-
view with Ferdinand in the town of Lintz in
Aufhia: and having left his army to proceed
on its march under the command of the Duke
of Mecklenburg, he repaired thither.
P 'r"''s MEANWHILE the King of France punctually

fuisled his engagements to his allies. He took

the

the field early with a numerous and well ap- Book X.
pointed army, and marching directly into Lor- t
rain, Toul and Verdun opened their gates at55
his approach. His forces appeared next before
Metz; and that city by a faudulent firatagem
of the Conflable Montmorency, who having
obtained permission to pass through it with a
small guard, introduced as many troops as were
sufficient to overpower the garrison, was like-
wife seized without bloodshed. Henry made
his entry into all there towns with great pomp;
he obliged the inhabitants to swear allegiance
to him, and annexed those important conquests
to the French Monarchy. He left a strong
garrison in Metz. From hence he advanced
towards Alsace, in order to attempt new con-
quests, to which the success that had hitherto
attended his arms invited himt.

THE conference at Lintz did not produce The neg-

c ions be-

any accommodation. Maurice, when he con-tween the
sented to it, seems to have had nothing in view Empe.or
but to amuse the Emperor; for he made such rice of no
demands both in behalf of his confederates, ea
and their ally the French King, as he knew
would not be accepted by a Prince, too haughty
to submit, at once, to conditions dictated by
an enemy. But however firmly Maurice ad-
hered during the negociation to the interests of
his associates, or how steadily soever he kept
in view the objects which had induced him to
take arms, he often professed a firong incli-
nation to terminate the differences with the Em-
peror in an amicable manner. Encouraged by
this appearance of a pacifick disposition, Ferdi-
nand proposed a second interview at Paffau on
the twenty-fixth of May, and that a truce

should
Thuan. 349.

BooK X. should commence on that day, and continue to

the tenth of June, in order to give them leisure

;;'' for adjusting all the points in dispute.
LMaIiSce UPON this, Maurice rejoined his army on the

ninth of May, which had now advanced to
i:ruCk. Gundelfingen. He put his troops in motion

next morning; and as sixteen da s yet remained
for action before the commencement of the
truce, he resolved, during that period, to ven-
ture upon an enterprize, the success of which
would be so decisive, as would render the nego-
ciations at Paffau extremely hort, and entitle
him to treat upon his own terms. He foresaw
that the Frofpect of a cessation of arms, which
was to take place so soon, together with the
opinion of his earnestness to re-establish peace,
with which he had artfully amused Ferdinand,
could hardly fail of inspiring the Emperor with
such falle hopes, that he would naturally become
remits, and relapse into some degree of that
icurity which had already been so fatal to
him. Relying on this conjecure, he marched
directly at the head of his army towards In-
Ipruck, and advanced with the most rapid
motion that could be given to so great a body
of troops. On the eighteenth he arrived at
Fieflen, a post of great consequence, at the
entrance into the Trolefe. There he found
a body of eight hundred men, whom the Em-
peror had afembled, rongly intrenched, in
order to oppose his progress. He attacked them
intLnIlv- with such violence and impetuolity
that they abandoned their lines precipitantly,
and falling back on a second body ported near
Ruetcn. communicated the panick terror with
which they them^clves had been seized, to thofc
troops, so that they likewise took to flight, after
a feeble resistance.

ELATED

ELATBD with this success, which exceeded his BoOK X.

most sanguine hopes, Maurice prefled forward -v
to Ehrenberg, a castle situated on an high and Takes the
sleep precipice which commanded the only pars cahfle of

Ehren-

through the mountains. As this fort had been bcrgh.
surrendered to the Protestants at the beginning
of the Smalkaldick war, because the garriobn was
then too weak to defend it, the Emperor, fen-
fible of its importance, had taken care, at this
junEture, to throw into it a body of troops sus-
ficient to maintain it against the greatest army.
But a shepherd, in pursuing a goat which had
strayed from his flock, having discovered an
unknown path by which it was poflible to ascend
to the top of the rock, came with this season-
able piece of intelligence to Maurice. A small
band of chosen fdldiers, under the command of
George of Mecklenburg, was instantly ordered
to follow this guide. They set out in the even-
ing, and clambering up the rugged track with
infinite fatigue as well as danger, they reached
the summit unperceived; and at an hour which
had been concerted, when Maurice began the
afault on the one fide of the castle, they ap-
peared on the other, ready to scale the walls,
which were feeble in that place, because it had
been hitherto deemed inaccessible. The gar-
rifon, struck with terror at the fight of an
enemy on a quarter where they had thought
themselves perfetly secure, immediately threw
down their arms. Maurice, almost without
bloodshed, and which was of greater confe-
quence to him, without loss of time, took pof-
feflion of a place, the reduction of which might
have retarded him long, and have required the
utmost efforts of his valour and {killM.

MAURICE
X Arnoldi vita Maurit. 123.

BOK X. MABRICE was now only two daysmarch from
~'- Infpruck, and without losing a moment he
A ,tiros ordered his infantry to advance thither, having
...rorS left his cavalry, which was unserviceable in that
^. mountainous country, a Fieffen, to guard the

mouth of the pass. He propoied to advance with
tlich rapidity as to anticipate any accounts of
the loss of Ehrenbergh, and to surprise the Em-
peror, together with his attendants, in an open
town incapable of defence. But just as his
troops began to move, a battalion of mercenaries
mutinied, declaring that they would not stir
until they had received the gratuity, which,
according to the custom of that age, they
claimed as the recompense due to them for
having taken a place by aflault. It was with
great difficulty as well as danger, and not with-
out ome considerable loss of time, that Maurice
quieted this infurretion, and prevailed on the
soldiers to follow him to a place where he pro-
mied them such rich booty as would be an
ample reward for all their services.

Th, Emre- To the delay, occasioned by this unforeseen
,n:;I" accident, the Emperor owed his safety. He
:rm Ins- was informed of the approaching danger late
r:L. " in the evening, and knowing that nothing could

save him but a speedy flight, he instantly left
Inlpruck, without regarding the darkness of
the night, or the violence of the rain which
happened to fall at that time; and notwith-
standing the debility occasioned by the gout,
which rendered him unable to bear any motion
but that of a litter, he travelled by the light of
torches, taking his way over the Alps, by roads
alimot impallable. His courtiers and atten-
dants followed him with equal precipitation, ome
of them on such horses as they could hastily
procure, many of them on foot, and all in the

utmost

utmost confusion. In this miserable plight, very BOOK X.
unlike the pomp with which Charles had appear----
ed during the five preceding years as the con- 1552'
queror of Germany, he arrived at length with his
dejeced train at Villach in Carinthia, and scarce-
ly thought himself secure even in that remote
inaccellible corner.

MAURICE entered Infpruck a few hours after M-rieu

the Emperor and his attendants had left it; and .o.
enraged that the prey Ihould escape out of his
hands when he was just ready to seize it, he pur-
sued them some miles; but finding it impollible
to overtake persons, to whom their fear gave
speed, he returned to the town, and abandoned
all the Emperor's baggage, together with that of
his ministers, to be plundered by the soldiers;
while he preserved untouched every thing be-
longing to the King of the Romans, either be-
cause he had formed some friendly connexion
with that Prince, or because he wished to have
it believed that such a connexion ubfifted be-
tween them. As there now remained only three
days to the commencement of the truce, (with
such nicety had Maurice calculated his opera-
tions) he set out for Paffau, that he might meet
Ferdinand on the day appointed.

BEFORE Charles left Infpruck, he withdrew TheEmt-

ror lets the

the guards placed on the degraded Elector of Eleaorof
Saxony, whom, during five years, he had car- Slty .
ried about with him as a prisoner; and set him
entirely at liberty,. either with an intention to
embarrass Maurice by letting loose a rival, who
might dispute his title to his dominions and -
dignity, or from a sense of the indecency of
detaining him a prisoner, while he himself run
the risk of being deprived of his own liberty.
But that Prince, feeing no other way of efcap-
ing than that which the Emperor took, and

abhorring

BooK X. abhorring the thoughts of falling into the hands
'YV' of a kininan, whom he justly confidered as the
'Ssz' author of all his misfortunes, chose rather to

accompany Charles in his flight, and to expec
the final decision of his fate from the treaty
which was now approaching.

The coun- TH ESE were not the only effe&s which Mau-
bcTrent rice's operations produced. It was no sooner
,, c.:,- kno\ n at Trent that he had taken arms, than a
Irncllo. general consternation seized the fathers of the

cu.incil. The German prelates immediately re-
turned home, that they might provide for the
faiety of their refpeaive territories. The reft
were extremely impatient to be gone; and the le-
gate, who had hitherto disappointed all the endea-
sours of the Imperial ambassadors to procure
an audience in the council for the Protestant
divines, laid hold with joy on such a plausible
pretext for difmifling an assembly, which he
had found it so difficult to govern. In a con-
gregation held on the twenty-eighth of April,
a decree was issued proroguing the council du-
ring two years, and appointing it to meet at the
expiration of that time, if peace were then re-
eftablilhed in Europe N. This prorogation, how-
ever, continued no less than ten years; and the
proceedings of the council, when re-assembled
in the ear one thousand five hundred and sixty-
two, fall not within the period prescribed to this
hifiory.

The effra THE convocation of this assembly had been
its dc- paflionately desired by all the flates and Princes

in Chritlendom, who, from the wisdom as well
as piety of prelates representing the whole body
of the faithful, expected some charitable and
efficacious endeavours towards composing the
dissensions which unhappily had arisen in the

church.
F. Paul, 353.

church. But the several Popes by whose au- BOOK X.
thority it was called, had other objeds in view. ' '
They exerted all their power or policy to attain S55z'
these; and by the abilities as well as address of
their legates, by the ignorance of many of the
prelates, and by the servility of the indigent
Italian bishops, acquired fucl influence in the
council, that they diEtated all its decrees, and
framed them not with an intention to restore
unity and concord to the church, but to establish
their own dominion, or to confirm those tenets,
upon which they imagined that dominion to be
founded. Dotrines, which had hitherto been
admitted upon the credit of tradition alone, and
received with some latitude of interpretation,
were now defined with a scrupulous nicety, and
confirmed by the fandion of authority. Rites,
which had formerly been observed only in de-
ference to custom supposed to be ancient, were
established by the decrees of the church, and
declared to be essential parts of its worship.
The breach, instead of being closed, was wi-
dened, and made irreparable. In place of any
'attempt to reconcile the contending parties, a
line was drawn with such fludied accuracy, as
ascertained and marked out the dilfindion be-
tween them. This still serves to keep them at
a distance; and, without some signal interpo-
fition of Divine Providence, must render the
reparation perpetual.

OUR knowledge of the proceedings of this Chhraer

afembly, is derived from three different authors. ria of this
Father Paul of Venice wrote his hitory of the council.
Council of Trent, while the memory of what had
passed there was recent, and ome who had been
members of it were fill alive. He has exposed
the intrigues and artifices by which it was con-
duaed, with a freedom and feverity-vhich have
given a deep wound to the credit of the council.

He

Boor X. He has described its deliberations, and explained
'--^'its decrees, with fich perspicuity and depth of
5;' thought, with such various erudition and such

force of reason, as have juflly entitled his work
to be placed among the molt admired historical
compofiilons. About half a century thereafter,
the Jesuit Pallavicini published his history of
the council, in opposition to that of Father Paul,
and by employing all the force of an acute and
refining genius to invalidate the credit, or to
confute the reasonings of his antagonist, he la-
bours to prove, by artful apologies for the pro-
ceedings of the council, and subtile interpre-
tations of its decrees, that it deliberated with
impartiality, and decided with judgment as well
as candour. Vargas, a Spanish docor of laws,
who was appointed to attend the Imperial am-
baffadors at Trent, ent the bishop of Arras a
regular account of the tranfations there, ex-
plaining all the arts which the Legate employed
to influence or over-awe the council. His let-
ters have been published, in which he inveighs
against the papal court with the asperity of cen-
sure, which was natural to a man whose fitua-
tion enabled him to observe its arts thoroughly,
and who was obliged to exert all his attention
and talents in order to disappoint them. But
whichioever of these authors an intelligent per-
fcn takes for his guide, in forming a judgment
concerning the spirit of the council, he must dif-
cover so much ambition as well as artifice among
fume of the members, so much ignorance and
corruption among others ; he must observe such
a large infusion of human policy and passions,
mingled with such a scanty portion of that fim-
plicity of heart, fantity of manners, and love
of truth, which alone qualify men to determine
what doctrines are worthy of God, and what
w.orflip is acceptable to him; that he will find

it

it no easy matter to believe, that any extraordi- BooKX.
nary influence of the Holy Ghoit hovered over
this assembly, and dicated its decrees. 1552

WHILE Maurice was employed in negociat- TheFrench

endeivour

ing with the King of the Romans at Lintz, or to urprire
in making war on the Emperor in the Tyrol, Strafburgh;
the French King had advanced into Alsace as
far as Strafburgh ; and having demanded leave
of the Senate to march through the city, he
hoped that, by repeating the fame fraud which
he had pradtifed at Metz, he might render him-
lelf master of the place, and by that means fe-
cure a passage over the Rhine into the heart of
Germany. But the Strafburghers, inftruted and
put on their guard by the credulity and misfor-
tune of their neighbours, shut their gates; and
having aembled a garrison of five thousand
soldiers, repaired their fortifications, rafed the
houses in their suburbs, and determined to defend
themselves to the utmost. At the fame time
they sent a deputation of their most refpeable
citizens to the King, in order to divert him from
making any hostile attempt upon them. The
Eledtors of Treves and Cologn, the Duke of
Cleves, and other Princes in the neighbourhood,
interposed in their behalf; beseeching Henry
that he would not forget so soon the title which
he had generously assumed; and instead of being
the Deliverer of Germany, become its Oppressor.
The Swiss Cantons seconded them with zeal,
soliciting Henry to spare a city which had long
been connected with their community in friend-
ship and alliance.

POWERFUL as this united intercession was, it but without

would not have prevailed on Henry to forego a
prize of so much value, if he had been in a con-
dition to have seized it. But, in that age, the

VOL. III. S method

BootX. method of subsisting numerous armies at a dif-
%--*~ tance from the frontiers of their own country,

was imperfectly underflood, and neither the re-
venues of the Princes, nor their experience in the
art of war, were equal to the great and compli-
cated efforts which such an undertaking required.
The French, though not far removed from their
own country, began already to susser from scar.
city of provisions, and had no sufficient maga-
zines collected to support them during a siege,
which must necessarily have been of great
length o. At the fame time, the Queen of Hun-
gary, governess of the Low-Countries, had as-
fembled a considerable body of troops, which,
under the command of Martin de Roffem, laid
waste Champagne, and threatened the adjacent
provinces of France. These concurring circum-
stances obliged the King, though with reluctance,
to abandon the enterprize. But being willing
to acquire ome merit with his allies, by this
retreat which he could not avoid, he pretended
to the Swiss that he had taken the resolution
merely in compliance with their request P; and
then, after giving orders that all the horses in
his army should be led to drink in the Rhine,
as a proof of his having pushed his conquests so
far, he marched back towards Champagne.

Tl.e orr.- W IILE the French King and the main army
c.rT'' Al- of the confederates were thus employed, Albert
l.:^ea- of Brandenburg was entrusted with the com-
"'s mand of a separate body of eight thousand men,

conlifting chifly of mercenaries who had re-
forted to his standard, rather from the hope of
plunder, than the expetation of regular pay.
That Prince, flcing himfeif at the head of such
a number of dcfpcrate adventurers, ready to

follow

o Tuan. 351, 352. 'Sleid. 7. Brantome,
tol. vii. 39.

follow wherever he should lead them, soon be- BOOK X.
gan to disdain a slate of subordination, and to X--
form such vati schemes of aggrandizing himself, 552'
as seldom occur, even to ambitious minds, unless
when civil war or violent fations route them
to bold exertions, by alluring them with imme-
diate hopes of success. Full of there aspiring
thoughts, Albert made war in a manner very
different from the other confederates. He en-
deavoured to spread the terror of his arms by
the rapidity of his motions, as well as the ex-
tent and rigour of his devastations; he exa&ed
contributions wherever he came, in order to
amass such a fum of money, as would put it
in his power to keep his army together; he
laboured to get poffellion of Nuremberg, Ulm,
or some other of the free cities in upper Ger-
many, in which, as a capital, he might fix the
feat of his power. But, finding these cities on
their guard, and in a condition to refilt his at-
tacks, he turned all his rage against the popish
ecclefiafticks, whose territories he plundered
with such wanton and merciless barbarity, as
gave them a very unfortunate imprellion of
the spirit of that reformation in religion, with
zeal for which he pretended to be animated.
The bishops of Bambergh and Wurzburgh, by
their fation, lay particularly exposed to his
ravages; he obliged the former to transfer to
him, in property, almost one half of his exten-
five diocese; and compelled the latter to ad-
vance an mmenfe fumn in order to save his coun-
try from ruin and defolauon. During all those
wild allies, Albert paid no regard either to
Maurice's orders, whole commands as General-
illimo of the league he had engaged to obey,
or to the remonstrances of the other confede-
rates; and manifestly discovered, that he at-
tended only to his own private emolument, with-

S 2 out

Boo X. out any solicitude bout the common cause, or

' the general objects which had induced them to
S take arms %

The reo- MAURICE having ordered his army to march
cDtf back into Bavaria, and having published a pro-
PaiaFn. clamation enjoining the Lutheran clergy and

instructors of youth, to resume the exercise of
their functions in all the cities, schools, and uni-
verfities from which they had been ejected, met
Ferdinand at Paflau on the twenty-fixth day of
May. As matters of the greatest consequence
to the future peace and independence of the
Empire were to be fettled in this congress, the
eyes of all Germany were fixed upon it. Be-
fides Ferdinand and the imperial ambafladors,
the Duke of Bavaria, the bilhops of Saltzburgh
and Aichtadt, the ministers of all the Electors,
together with deputies from moit of the con-
fiderable Princes and free cities, resorted to
Paflau. Maurice, in name of his associates,
and the King of the Rcmans as the Emperor's
representative, opened the negociation. The
Princes who were present, together with the de-
puties of such as were abfcnt, ated as intercef-
fors or mediators between them.

he tr, MA UR I C E, in a long discourse, explained the
M,,ri.c motives of his own conduct. After having enu-
propole. merated all the unconflitutional and oppressive

acts of the Emperor's administration, he, agree-
ably to the manifesto which he had publilhed
when he took arms againit him, limited his de-
mands to three articles. That the Landgrave
of Hesse should be immediately set at liberty;
That the grievances in the civil government of
the Empire fhculd be redressed; and that the
Protestants flould be allowed the publick exer-

cife
-Seid. 561. Thuan. 357.

cife of their religion without molestation. Ser- BOOK X.
dinand and the Imperial ambafladors discovering ' '
their unwillingness to gratify him with regard to
all these points, the mediators wrote a joint letter
to the Emperor, beseeching him to deliver Ger-
many from the calamities of a civil war, by
giving such satisfaction to Maurice and his party
as might induce them to lay down their arms;
and at the fame time they prevailed upon Mau-
rice to grant a prolongation of the truce for a
short time, during which they undertook to pro-
cure the Emperor's final answer to his demands.

THIS request was presented to the Emperor Powerfully

in the name of all the Princes of the Empire, by the
Popish as well as Protestant, in the name of such Pri.ces of
as had lent an helping hand to forward his am- heEmpire.
bitious schemes, as well as of those who had
viewed the progress of his power with jealousy
and dread. The uncommon and cordial unani-
mity with which they concurred at this junc-
ture in enforcing Maurice's demands, and in re-
commending peace, flowed from different causes.
Such as were most attached to the Roman catho-
lick church could not help observing, that the
Protestant confederates were at the head of a
numerous army, while the Emperor was but
just beginning to provide for his own defence.
They foresaw that great efforts would be required
of them, and would be necessary on their part,
in order to cope with enemies, who had been
allowed to get the flart so far, and to attain
such formidable power. Experience had taught
them, that the fruit of all these efli-cts would be
reaped by the Emperor alone, and the more
complete any victory proved which they should
gain, the faster would they bind their own set-
ters, and render them the more intolerable.
These refleions made them cautious how they

contributed

Boo X. contributed a second time, by their indiscreet
' 'J zeal, to put the Emperor in possession of power
1553. which would be fatal to the liberties of their

country. Notwithstanding the implacable fierce-
ness of the spirit of bigotry in that age, they
chose rather that the Protestants hould acquire
that security for their religion which they de-
manded, than by aflifting Charles to oppress
them, to give such additional force to the Impe-
rial prerogative, as would overturn the conftitu-
tion of the Empire. To all thee considerations,
thedread of feeing Germany laid waste by a civil
war, added new force. Many flates of the Em-
pire already felt the defirudive rage of Albert's
arms, others dreaded it, and all wished for an
accommodation between the Emperor and Mau-
rice, which they hoped would save them from
that cruel scourge.

Te m SUCH were the reasons that induced so many
isce ....d Princes, notwithstanding the variety of their po-
he Em- litical interests, and the opposition in their re-
Ftrorat thi ,. . '
,j~i. ligious sentiments, to unite in recommending to

the Emperor an accommodation with Maurice,
not only as a salutary, but as a necessary mea-
sure. The motives which prompted Charles to
desire it, were not fewer or of less weight. He
was perfectly sensible of the superiority which
the confederates had acquired through his
own negligence; and he now felt the infuffi-
ciency of his own resources to oppose them.
His Spanish fubjets, disgusted at his long ab-
fence, and weary of endless wars, which were of
no benefit to their country, refused to furnilh
him any considerable supply either of men or
money; and although by his address or impor-
tunity he might have hoped to draw from them
at las more effectual aid; that, he knew, was
too distant to be of any service in the present

exigency

exigency of his affairs. His treasury was drain- BooK X.
ed; his veteran forces were dispersed, or dif- "
banded; and he could not depend much either 155Z.
on the fidelity or courage of the new levied fol-
diers whom he was colleting. There was no
hope of repeating with success the fame artifices
which had weakened and ruined the Smalkaldick
league. As the end at which he aimed was now
known, he could no longer employ the specious
pretexts, which had formerly concealed his am-
bitious designs. Every Prince in Germany was
alarmed and on his guard; and it was vain to
think of blinding them a second time to such
a degree, as to make one part of them inftru-
ments to enslave the other. The spirit of a
confederacy, whereof Maurice was the head,
experience had taught him, to be very different
from that of the league of Smalkalde; and
from what he had already felt, he had no reason
to flatter himself that its counsels would be as
irresolute, or its efforts as timid and feeble. If
he should resolve on continuing the war, he
might be assured, that the most considerable
ifates in Germany would take part in it against
him; and a dubious neutrality was the utmost
he could expec from the reft. While the con-
federates found full employment for his arms
in one quarter, the King of France would seize
the favourable opportunity, and push on his
operations in another, with almost certain fuc-
cess. That Monarch had already made con-
quests in the Empire, which he was no less eager
to recover, than impatient to be revenged on
him for aiding his malecontent subjes. Though
Henry had now retired from the banks of the
Rhine, he had only varied the scene of hofti-
lities, having invaded the Low-Countries with
all his forces. The Turks, routed by the soli-
citations of the French King, as well as ftimu-

lated

Boox X. lated by resentment againfi Ferdinand for having
h-- violated the truce in Hungary, had prepared a
I55Z. powerful fleet to ravage the coasts of Naples and

Sicily, which he had left almost defenceless, by
calling thence the greatest part of the regular
troops to join the army which he was now as-
fembling.

Ferdinand FERDINAND, who went in person to Villach,
p~otcan in order to lay before the Emperor the result
..co-. of the conferences at Paflau, had likewise rea-

sons peculiar to himself for desiring an accom-
modation. These prompted him to second,
with the greatest earnestness, the arguments
which the Princes assembled there had employed
in recommending it. He had observed, not
without secret fatisfacion, the fatal blow that
had been given to the defpotick power, which
his brother had usurped in the Empire. He
was extremely solicitous to prevent Charles from
recovering what he had loft, as he foresaw that
he would immediately resume with fresh eager-
ness, and with a better chance of success, his
favourite scheme of transmitting that power to
his son by excluding him from the right of fuc-
cession to the Imperial throne. On this ac-
count, he was willing to contribute towards
circumscribing the Imperial authority, in order
to render his own poffefiion of it certain. Be-
fides, Solyman, exasperated at the loss of Tran-
fylvania, and still more at the fraudulent arts
by which it had been seized, had ordered into
the field an arm) of an hundred thousand men,
which having defeated a great body of Ferdi-
nand's troops, and taken several places of im-
portance, threatened not only to complete the
conquest of the province, but to drive him out
of that part of Hungary which was still subjet
to his jurifdidion. He was unable to resist

such

such a mighty enemy; his brother, while engaged BOOK X.
in a domeftick war, could afford him no aid; '
and he could not even hope to draw from Ger- '552-
many the contingent, either of troops or money,
usually furnished to repel the invasions of the
Infidels. Maurice, having observed Ferdinand's
perplexity with regard to this last point, had
offered, if peace were re-established on a secure
foundation, that he would march in person with
his troops into Hungary against the Turks.
Such was the effect of this well-timed proposal,
that Ferdinand, destitute of every other profped
of relief, became the most zealous advocate
whom the confederates could have choien to
urge their claims, and there was hardly any
thing that they could have demanded which he
would not have chosen to grant, rather than
have retarded a pacification, to which he trusted ·
as the only means of saving his Hungarian
crown.

WHEN so many causes conspired in rendering Circunm-

an accommodation eligible, it might have been which re-
expected that it would have taken place imme- tard it.
diately. But the inflexibility of the Emperor's
temper, together with his unwillingness at once
to relinquih objects which he had long pur-
sued with such earnestness and alliduity, coun-
terbalanced, for ome time, the force of all the
motives which disposed him to peace, and not
only put the event at a distance, but seemed
to render it uncertain. When Maurice's de-
mands, together with the letter of the mediators
at Paffau, were presented to him, he peremp-
torily refused to redress the grievances which
were pointed out, nor would he agree to any
stipulation for the immediate security of the
Protestant religion, but proposed referring both
these to the determination of a future diet. On

his

BootX. his part, he required that inflant reparation

" mhould be made to all who, during the present
55 war, had suffered either by the licentiousness of

the confederate troops, or the exations of their
leaders.

M:;ricc'; MAURICE, who was well acquainted with the
-'ions Emperor's arts, immediately concluded that he
facilitate . had nothing in view by these overtures but to

amuse and deceive; and therefore, without
listening to Ferdinand's intreaties, he left Paffau
abruptly, and joining his troops which were
encamped at Mergentheim, a city in Franconia,
belonging to the knights of the Teutonick order,
he put them in motion, and renewed hofilities.
As three thousand men in the Emperor's pay
had thrown themselves into Frankfort on the
* Maine, and might from thence infest the neigh-

bouring country of Hefie, he marched towards
Jiy '7. that city, and laid siege to it in form. The

brilknefs of this enterprize, and the vigour with
which Maurice carried on his approaches against
the town, gave such an alarm to the Emperor,
as disposed him to lend a more favourable ear
to Ferdinand's arguments in behalf of accom-
modation. Firm and haughty as his nature
was, he found it necelfary to bend, and figni-
sied his willingnels to make conceflions on his
part, if Maurice, in return, would abate some-
what of the rigour of his demands. Ferdinand,
as loon as he perceived that his brother began
to yield, did not desist from his importunities,
until he prevailed on him to declare what was
the utmoff that he would grant for the security
of the confederates. Having gained this diffi-
cult point, he instantly dispatched a mefenger
to Maurice's camp, and imparting to him the
Emperor's final resolution, conjured him not to
fruitrate his endeavours for the re-establishment

of

of peace; or, by an unseasonable obstinacy on BOOK X.
his fide, to diiappoint the wishes of all Germany .o
for that salutary event.

MAURICE, notwithstanding the prosperous Marice

situation of his affairs, was strongly inclined to an cc.o-
liften to his advice. The Emperor, though modaLion.
over-reached and surprised, had now begun to
assemble troops, and however flow his motions
might be, while the first effedts of his confter-
nation remained, he was sensible that Charles
must at last ad with vigour proportional to the
extent of his power and territories, and lead into
Germany an army formidable by its numbers,
and still more by the terror of his name, as well
as the remembrance of his past vitories. He
could scarcely hope that a confederacy com-
posed of so many members would continue to
operate with sufficient union and perseverance to
resist the confitent and well-direted efforts of
an army, at the absolute disposal of a leader
accuflomed to command and to conquer. He
felt already, although he had not hitherto ex-
perienced the hock of any adverse event, that
he was the head of a disjointed body. He saw,
from the example of Albert of Brandenburg,
how difficult it would be, with all his address
and credit, to prevent any particular member
from detaching himself from the whole, and
how impoflible to recal him to his proper rank
and ubordination. This filled him with appre-
henfions for the common cause. Another con-
fideration gave him no less disquiet with regard
to his own particular interests. By setting at li-
berty the degraded Eletor, and by repealing
the aft depriving him of his hereditary honours
and dominions, the Emperor had it in his power
to wound him in the most sensible part. The
efforts of a Prince beloved by his ancient sub-

jec2s,

267

Booi X. jecs, and revered by all the Protestant party,
.v ' in order to recover what had been unjustly taken

'15;. from him, could hardly have failed of exciting

commotions in Saxony, which would endanger
all that he had acquired at the expence of so
much diflimulation and artifice. It was no less
in the Emperor's power to render vain all the
solicitations of the confederates in behalf of the
Landgrave. He had only to add one a of
violence more to the injuflice and rigour with
which he had already treated him; and he had
accordingly threatened the sons of that unfortu-
nate Prince, that if they persisted in their pre-
sent enterprize, instead of feeing their father re-
stored to liberty, they Ihould hear of his having
suffered the punishment which his rebellion had
merited R

Tht.rece HAVING deliberated upon all there points
onl^,n with his associates, Maurice thought it more

,i P~.s. prudent to accept of the conditions offered,

though less advantageous than those which he
had proposed, than again to commit all to the
doubtful illue of war . He repaired forthwith
ACg . to Paliau, and signed the treaty of peace; of

which the chief articles were, That before the
twe!fh day of August, the confederates shall
lay down their arms, and disband their forces;
Tlha on or before that day the Landgrave shall
be fee at liberty, and conveyed in safety to his
cafile of Rheinfels; That a diet shall be held
within fix months, in order to deliberate con-
cerning the most proper and effectual method of
preventing for the future all disputes and diffen-
sions about religion; That, in the mean time,
neither the Emperor, nor any other Prince, hall,

upon

Sleid. 571. Sleid. Hil. 563, &c. Thuan.
lib. x. 359, &c.

upon any pretext whatever, offer any injury or BooK X.
violence to such as adhered to the confellion of""
Augsburg, but allow them to enjoy the free '5
and undisturbed exercise of their religion ; That
in return, the Protestants shall not molest the
Catholicks either in the exercise of their eccle-
fiaftical jurisdiction, or in performing their reli-
gious ceremonies; That the Imperial chamber
shall administer justice impartially to persons of
both parties, and Protestants be admitted indif-
criminately with the Catholicks to fit as judges
in that court; That if the next diet should not
be able to terminate the disputes with regard to
religion, the flipulations in the present treaty, in
behalf of the Protestants, shall continue for ever
in full force and vigour; That none of the con-
federates shall be liable to any action on account
of what had happened during the course of the
war That the consideration of those encroach-
ments which had been made, as Maurice pre-
tended, upon the conflitution and liberties of the
Empire, shall be remitted to the approaching
diet; That Albert of Brandenburg shall be com-
prehended in the treaty, provided he hall ac-
cede to it, and disband his forces before the
twelfth of August T.

SUCH was the memorable treaty of Paffau, Refe*ions

that overturned the vast fabrick, in erecting pec" and
which Charles had employed so many years, and upon tie
had exerted the utmost efforts of his power and Maurice.
policy ; that annulled all his regulations with
regard to religion; defeated all his hopes of
rendering the Imperial authority absolute and
hereditary in his family; and eftablifled the
Protestant church, which had hitherto subsisted
precariously in Germany, through connivance,
or by expedients, upon a firm and fcuLre basis.

Maurice
? Recueil des Traitez, ii. 261.

BooiX. Maurice reaped all the glory of having con-

~- certed and completed this unexpected revo-
'55z' lution. It is a singular circumrtance, that the

Reformation should be indebted for its security
and full establishment in Germany, to the fame
hand which had formerly brought it to the
brink of deftruaion, and that both events should
have been accomplished by the fame arts of
dissimulation. The end, however, which Mau-
rice had in view, at those different juncures,
seem to have been more attended to than the
means by which heattained them; and he was
now as universally extolled for his zeal and
publick spirit, as he had lately been condemned
for his indifference and intereted policy. It is
no less worthy of observation, that the French
King, a monarch zealous for the Catholick
faith, hould employ his power in order to
protect and maintain the Reformation in the
Empire, at the very time when he was perse-
cuting his own Protestant subjects with all the
fierceness of bigotry, and that the league for this
purpose, which proved so fatal to the Romish
church, should be negociated and signed by a
Roman Catholick bihop. So wonderfully doth
the wisdom of God superintend and regulate the
caprice of human pallions, and render them sub-
servient towards the accomplishment of his own
purpoies.

Little at- LITTLE attention was paid to the interests of
tention paid
to the the French King during the negociations at
French Paflau. Maurice and his associates, having
Kine i.
ihis tmty. gained what they had in view, discovered no

great Solicitude about an ally, whom, perhaps,
they reckoned to be overpaid for the assistance
which he had given tlemn, by his acquisitions
in Lorrain. A fhcrt ciaufe which they pro-
cured to be inferred in the treaty, importing

that

that the King of France might communicate to BooK X.
the confederates his particular pretensions or''"
causes of hostility, which they would lay before '5ss
the Emperor, was the only sign that they gave
of their remembering how much they had been
indebted to him for their success. Henry ex-
perienced the fame treatment, which every Prince
who lends his aid to the authors of a civil war
may expe&t. As soon as the rage of facion
began to subside, and any profpe& of accom-
modation to open, his services were forgotten,
and his associates made a merit with their fove-
reign, of the ingratitude with which they aban-
doned their protector. But how much soever
Henry might be enraged at the perfidy of his
allies, or at the impatience with which they
hastened to make their peace with the Emperor
at his expence, he was perfectly sensible that it
was more his interest to keep well with the Ger-
manick body, than to resent the indignities of-
sered him by any particular members of it. For
that reason he dismissed the hostages which he
had received from Maurice and his associates,
and asseted to talk in the fame strain as former-
ly, concerning his zeal for maintaining the an-
cient conflitution and liberties of the Empire.

T T-T r

# BOOK XI.

THE
HI S T O R Y

OF THE
R E I G N

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES V.

BOOK XI.
Boot XI. / S ofon as the treaty of Paflau was signed,

r1- j\ Maurice, in consequence of his engage-

Ass2. ments with Ferdinand, marched into Hungary
M.,ice at the head of twenty thousand men. But the
obin vast superiority of the Turkilh armies, the fre-
gasin the quent mutinies both of the Spanish and German
Turhk. soldiers, occasioned by their want of pay, toge-

ther with the dissensions between Maurice and
Caftaldo, who was piqued at being obliged to
resign the chief command to him, prevented his
performing any thing in that country suitable to
his former fame, or of great benefit to the King
of the RomansA.

The Lnd- WXHEN Maurice set out for Hungary, the
sHe'T- Prince of Hesse parted from him with the forces
ccv-rs hs under his command, and marched back into his

' own country, that he might be ready to receive

his
Iftuanhaflii Hifl. Hungar. 288. Thuan. lib. x. 371.

his father upon his return, and give up to him Boox IX.
the reins of government which he had held du--" '"
ringhisabfence. But fortune was not yet weary
of persecuting the Landgrave. A battalion of
nercenary troops, which had been in the pay of
Helle, being seduced by Reifenberg their colo-
nel, a soldier of fortune, ready to engage in any
enterprize, secretly withdrew from the young
Prince as he was marching homewards, and join-
ed Albert of Brandenburg, who fill continued
in arms against the Emperor, refusing to be in-
cluded in the treaty of Paffau. Unhappily for
the Landgrave, an account of this reached the
Netherlands, just as he was dismissed from the
citadel of Mechlin where he had been confined,
but before he had got beyond the frontiers of
that country. The Queen of Hungary, who
governed there in her brother's name, incensed
at such an open violation of the treaty to which
he owed his liberty, commanded him to be
arrested, and committed him again to the custody
of the fame Spanish captain who had guarded
him for five years with such severe vigilance.
Philip beheld all the horrors of his imprison-
ment renewed, and his spirits subsiding in the
fame proportion as they had risen during the
hort interval in which he had enjoyed liberty,
he funk into despair, and believed himself to be
doomed to perpetual captivity. But the matter
being explained to the Emperor's full fatisfac-
tion, that the revolt of Reifenberg's mercenaries
could be imputed neither to the Landgrave nor
to his son, he gave orders for his release; and
Philip at last obtained the liberty for which he
had so long languished B. But though he re-
covered his freedom, and was reinstated in his
dominions, his sufferings seem to have broken
the vigour, and to have extinguished the acivity

VOL. III. T of

* Sleid. 573. Belcarii Comment. 834.

Bo oKXI. of his mind: From being the boldest as well as

mos enterprising Prince in the Empire, he be-
came the most timid and cautious, and passed
the remainder of his days in a pacifick indo-
lence.

Likewise THE degraded Eletor of Saxony, likewise,
the Eleaor ,
of s..a.y. procured his liberty in conlequence of the treaty

of Paflau. The Emperor having been obliged
to relinquish all his chemes for extirpating the
Protestant religion, had no longer any motive
for detaining him a prisoner; and being ex-
tremely solicitous, at that jundure, to recover
the confidence and good-will of the Germans,
whose altance was efential to the success of
the enterprize which he meditated against the
King of France, he, among other expedients
for that purpose, thought of releasing from im-
prifonment a Prince whose merit entitled him no
less to esteem, than his sufferings rendered him
the objeA of compailion. John Frederick took
possession accordingly of that part of his terri-
tories which had been reserved for him, when
Maurice was invested with the Eledoral dignity.
As, in this ituation he continued to display
the fame virtuous magnanimity for which he had
been conspicuous in a more prosperous and fplen-
did fate, and which he had retained amidst all
his sufferings, he lived several years in that high
reputation to which he had so just a tide.

The E-pe- THE loss of Metz, Toul, and Verdun, had
ror resolves * '
ton~kc made a deep impreflion on the Emperor. Ac-
rwar upo customed to terminate all his operations against

France with advantage to himself, he thought
that it nearly concerned his honour not to alleo:
Henry the superiority in this war, or to susser
his own adminitlratlon to be stained with the
infamy of having permitted territories of such

consequence

consequence to be dismembered from the Em- Bo OK XI.
pire. This was no less a point of interest than '
of honour. As the frontier of Champagne was 55
more naked, and lay more exposed than that of
any province in France, he had frequently, du-
ring his wars with that kingdom, made inroads
upon it with great success and effect; but if
Henry were allowed to retain his late conquests,
France would gain such a formidable barrier on
that fide, as to be altogether secure, where for-
merly she had been weakest. On the other
hand, the Empire had now loft as much, in
point of security, as France had acquired; and
being firipped of the defence which those cities
afforded it, lay open to be invaded on a quarter,
where all the towns having been hitherto con-
fidered as interior, and remote from any enemy,
were but slightly fortified. These considerations
determined Charles to attempt recovering the
three towns of which Henry had made himself
master; and the preparations which he had made
against Maurice and his afrociates, enabled him
to carry his resolution into immediate execu-
tion.

As soon, then, as the peace was concluded at Hi prept-

Paffau, he left his inglorious retreat at Villach, hi pr-
and advanced to Auglburg, at the head of a pore.
considerable body of Germans which he had
levied, together with all the troops which he had
drawn out of Italy and Spain. To these he
added several battalions, which having been in
the pay of the confederates, entered into his
service when difmllfed by them; and he pre-
vailed likewise on ome Princes of the Em-
pire to join him with their vassals. In order
to conceal the destination of this formidable
army, and to guard againit alarming the French
so as to put them on preparing for their de-

T 2 fence,

Book XI. fence, he gave out that he was to march forth-
'"-" with into Hungary, in order to second Maurice
15s5a in his operations against the Infidels. When

he began to advance towards the Rhine, and
could no longer employ that pretext, he tried
a new artifice, and spread a report, that he took
this route in order to chastise Albert of Branden-
burg, whose cruel exations in that part of the
Empire called loudly for his interposition to
check them.

T pre- BUT the French having grown acquainted,
the'FrfO at las, with arts by which they had been so
fr the d- often deceived, viewed all Charles's motions
fe."' o with diftrufl. Henry immediately discerned the

true object of his vat preparations, and resolved
to defend the important conquerts which he had
gained with vigour equal to that with which they
were about to be attacked. As he foresaw that
the whole weight of the war would be turned
against Metz, by whose fate that of Toul and

The Duke Verdun would be determined, he nominated Fran-
ppsid cis of Lorrain, Duke of Guise, to take the com-
onorof mand in that city during the siege, the issue of
:Ae tow. which would equally asset the honour and in-

terest of his country. His choice could not
have fallen upon any person more worthy of
that trust. The Duke of Guise poieffed, in a
high degree, all the talents of courage, saga-
city, and presence of mind, which render men
eminent in military command. He was largely
endowed with that magnanimity of foul which
delights in bold enterprizes, and aspires to fame
by splendid and extraordinary aions. He re-
paired with jo to the dangerous fiation assigned
him, as to a theatre on hich he might display
his great qualities under the immediate eye of
his countr)men, all ready to applaud him. The
martial genius of the French nobility in that

age,

age, which confidered it as the greatest reproach BoOK XI.
to remain inactive, when there was any oppor- 155
tunity of signalizing their courage, prompted
great numbers to follow a leader who was the
darling as well as the pattern of every one that
courted military fame. Several Princes of the
blood, many noblemen of the highest rank, and all
the young officers who could obtain the King's
permission, entered Metz as volunteers. By their
pretence they added spirit to the garrison, and
enabled the Duke of Guise to employ, on every
emergency, persons eager to diftinguilh them-
selves, and fit to conduct any service.

BuT with whatever alacrity the Duke of Guise Preparesfor

undertook the defence of Metz, he found every defence.
thing, upon his arrival there, in such a situation,
as might have induced any person of less intrepid
courage to despair of defending it with success.
The city was of great extent, with large suburbs;
the walls were in many places feeble and with-
out ramparts; the ditch narrow ; and the old
towers, which projected inflead of bastions, were
at too great distance from each other to defend
the space between them. For all these defects
he endeavoured to provide the best remedy,
which the time would permit. He ordered the
suburbs, without sparing the monasteries or
churches, not even that of St. Arnulph, in which
several Kings of France had been buried, to be
levelled with the ground; but in order to guard
against the imputation of impiety, to which such
a violation of so many sacred edifices, as well
as of the ashes of the dead might expose him,
he executed this with much religious ceremony.
Having ordered all the holy vestments and uten-
fils, together with the bones of the Kings, and
other persons deposited in these churches, to be
removed, they were carried in solemn proceflion

to

Boo Xl. to a church within the walls, he himself walking

V"' before them uncovered, with a torch in his hand.
Iss He then pulled down such houses as'ftood near

the walls, cleared and enlarged the ditch, re-
paired the ruinous fortifications, and ereced new
ones. As it was neceflary that all these works
mhould be finished with the utmost expedition,
he laboured at them with his own hands: the
officers and volunteers imitated his example, and
the soldiers ubmitted with cheerfulness to the
most severe fatigues, when they saw that their
superiors did not decline to bear a part in these
together with them. At the fame time he com-
pelled all useless persons to leave the place; he
filled the magazines with provisions and mili-
tary frores; burnt the mills, and destroyed the
corn and forage for several miles round the
town. Such were his popular talents, as well
as his arts, of acquiring an ascendant over the
minds of men, that the citizens seconded him
with no less ardour than the soldiers; and every
other passion being swallowcd up in the zeal to
repulse the enemy, with which he inspired them,
they beheld the ruin of their eftatcs, together
with the havock which he made among their
pub!ik and private buildings, without an) emo-
tion of refentmentc.

C:!ir ,. - MEANTIME the Emperor, having colleted
.'.... all his forces, continued his march towards

Metz. As he passed through the cities on the
Rhine, he saw the dismal effects of that licen-
tious and wasteful war which Albert had carried
on in these parts. Upon his approach, that
Prince, though at the head of twenty thousand
men, withdrew into Lorrain as if he had in-
tended to join the French King, whole arms he
had quartered with his own in all his standards

and
c Thuan. xi. 387.

and ensigns. Albert was not in a condition to Boo XI.
cope with the Imperial troops , which amounted Ly
at least to sixty th6ufand men, forming one of "52
the most numerous and best appointed armies
which had been brought into the field during
that age, in any of the wars among Christian
Princes.

THE chief command, under the Emperor, was ivcas the

committed to the Duke of Alva, allifted by the town-
Marquis de Marignano, together with the moll
experienced of the Italian and Spanish generals.
As it was towards the end of Otober, these
intelligent officers represented the great danger
of beginning, at such an advanced season, a
siege which could not fail to prove very tedious.
But Charles adhered to his own opinion with
his usual obstinacy; and being confident that he
had made fich preparations, and taken such
precautions, as would ensure success, he ordered
the city to be inverted. As soon as the Duke
of Alva appeared, a large body of the French
sallied out and attacked his van-guard with
great vigour, put it in confusion, and killed or
took prisoners a considerable number of men.
By this early specimen which they gave of the
conduct of their officers, as well as the valour
of their troops, they shewed the Imperialists
what an enemy they had to encounter, and how
dear every advantage must cost them. The
place, however, was completely invested, the
trenches were opened, and the other works
begun.

THE attention both of the besiegers and be-Bothpartie,

fieged was turned for ome time towards Albert to g.i. Al-
of Brandenburg, and they trove with emu-be of

Branden-
lation which should gain that Prince, who ftillburg.

hovered
" Natal. Comitis, Hilt. 127.

Boo xl. hovered in the neighbourhood, flutuating in all
^^' the uncertainty of irresolution, natural to a
155' man, who, being swayed by no principle, was

allured different ways by contrary views of in-
terest. The French tempted him with offers
extremely beneficial; the Imperialifis scrupled
at no promise which they thought would make
an impreflion upon him. After much hefita-
tion he was gained by the Emperor, from whom
he expeced to receive advantages, which were
both more immediate and more permanent. As
the French King, who began to fufpe his in-
tentions, had appointed a body of troops under
the Duke of Aumale, brother to the Duke of
Guise, to watch his motions, Albert fell upon
them unexpectedly with such vigour that he
ov. 4 routed them entirely, killed many of the offi-

cers, wounded Aumale himself, and took him
prisoner. Immediately after this victory, he
marched in triumph to Metz, and joined his
army to that of the Emperor. Charles, in
reward for this service, and the great accession
of strength which he brought him, granted
Albert a formal pardon of all pall offences, and
confirmed him in the poffeflion of the territories
which he had violently usurped during the war .

e zii.nT THE Duke of Guise, though deeply asseted
ct,heDLke with his brother's misfortune, did not remit, in

GC ife; any degree, the vigour with which he defended
,a. g the town. He harassed the besiegers by fre-

quent allies, in which his officers were so eager
to diftinguith themselves, that his authority
being hardly sufficient to restrain the impe-
tuofity of their courage, he was obliged at dif-
ferent times to (hut the gates, and to conceal
the keys, in order to prevent the Princes of the
blood, and noblemen of the first rank, from
exposing themselves to danger in every ally.

He
Sleid. 575. Thuan. lib. xi. 389. 392.

He repaired in the night what the enemy's BOOR Xl.
artillery had beat down during the day, or -v"
erected behind the ruined works new fortifica- I55
tions of almost equal strength. The Impe-
rialifts, on their part, pulhed on the attack with
great spirit, and carried forwards at once, ap-
proaches against different parts of the town.
But the art of attacking fortified places was not
then arrived at that degree of perfection to
which it was carried towards the close of the
sixteenth century, during the long war in the
Netherlands. The besiegers, after the unwea-
ried labour of many weeks, found that they
had made but little progress; and although
their batteries had made breaches in different
places, they saw, to their astonishment, works
suddenly appear, in demolishing which their
fatigues and dangers would be renewed. The
Emperor, enraged at the obfiinate resistance
which his army met with, left Thionville, where
he had been confined by a violent fit of the
gout, and though still so infirm that he was ob-
liged to be carried in a litter, he repaired to Nov. 6.
the camp, that by his presence he might ani-
mate the soldiers, and urge on the attack with
greater spirit. Upon his arrival new batteries
were eredted, and new efforts were made with
redoubled ardour.

BUT, by this time, the winter had set in with The difrer

great rigour; the camp was alternately deluged of the a'r
with rain or covered with fiow; at the lame
time provisions were become extremely scarce,
as a body of French cavalry, which hovered in
the neighbourhood, often interupted the con-
vo s, or rendered their arrival difficult and un-
certain. Diseases began to spread among the
soldiers, especially among the Italians and Spa-
niards, unaccustomed to such inclement wea-
ther; great numbers were disabled from serving,

and

BooK XI. and many died. At length, such breaches were
l ~'

T made as seemed practicable, and Charles re-
Iss1' solved to hazard a general assault, in spite of

all the remonirances of his generals concerning
the imprudence of attacking a numerous gar-
rifon, conduted and animated by the most
gallant of the French nobility, with an army
weakened by diseases, and disheartened with ill
success. The Duke ofGuife, fufpeting the Em-
peror's intentions from the extraordinary hurry
which he observed in the enemy's camp, ordered
all his troops to their refpettive posts. They ap-
peared immediately on the walls, and behind
the breaches, with such a determined coun-
tenance, o eager for the combat, and so well
prepared to give the allailants a warm recep-
tion, that the Imperialifis, instead of advancing
to the charge when the word of command was
given, flood motionless, in a timid dejected
silence. The Emperor, perceiving that he could
not trust troops whole spirits were o much
broken, retired abruptly to his quarters, com-
plaining that he was now deserted by his fol-
diers, ho deserved no longer the name of menS.

The Fmpc- DEEPLY as this behaviour of his troops mor-
t,. method tified and assetcd Charles, he would not hear
oi ttack. of abandoning the fi-ge, though he saw the

necel.t) of changing the methodof attack. He
fulptnded the fur) of his batteries, and pro-
posed to proceed by the more ftcure but tedious
method of sapping. But as ir ftiil continued
to rain or to nIow almost incellantly, such as
were employed in this service endured incre-
dible haidfhips; and the duke of Guise, whose
industry was not inferior to his valour, discover-
ing all their mines, counrerworked them, and
prevented their effe. At last, Charles finding

it
r Thuan. 397.

it impossible to contend any longer with the Boo XI.
rigour of the season, and with enemies whom 1t
he could neither overpower by foice, nor sub-
due by art, while at the fame time a contagious
distemper raged among the troops, and cut off
daily great numbers of the officers as well as
soldiers, yielded to the solicitation of his gene-
rals, who conjured him to save the remains of
his army by a timely retreat; "Fortune,"
fays he, " I now perceive, resembles other fe-
males, and choofes to confer her favours on
young men, while he forsakes those who are
advanced in years."

UPON this, he gave orders immediately to Dec. 6.

raise the siege, and submitted to the disgrace of °bliged 'o
abandoning the enterprise, after having con- ege.
tinued fifty-fix days before the town, during
which time he had loft upwards of thirty thou-
sand men, who died of diseases, or were killed
by the enemy. The duke of Guise, as oon as
he perceived the intention of the Imperialifis,
took measures to prevent their retiring unmo-
lefted, and sent out several bodies both of
cavalry and infantry to infest their rear, to pick
up stragglers, and to seize every opportunity of
attacking them with advantage. Such was the
confusion with which they made their retreat,
that the French might have annoyed them in
the moit cruel manner. But when they sallied Ruin of the
out, a fpetacle presented itself to their view, Irmnyand
which extinguilhed at once all hostile rage, and humanityof
melted them into tenderness and compassion. he Fe.
The Imperial camp was filled with the sick and
wounded, with the dead and the dying. In
all the different roads by which the army retired,
numbers were found, who, having made an
effort to escape, beyond their strength, were left,
when they could go no farther, to perish with-

out

BooK X. out afiftance. This they received from their
*'"'y enemies, and were indebted to them for all the

'5Z kind offices which their friends had not the

power to perform. The duke of Guise imme-
diately ordered proper refreshments for such as
were dying of hunger; he appointed surgeons
to attend the ick and wounded; he removed
such as could bear it into the adjacent villages;
and those who would have suffered by being
carried so far, he admitted into the hospitals
which he had fitted up in the city for his own
soldiers. As soon as they recovered, he ent
them home under an escort of soldiers, and
with money to bear their charges. By these
acts of humanity, which were uncommon in that
age, when war was carried on with greater ran-
cour and ferocity than at present, the duke of
Guise completed the fame which he had acquired
by his gallant and successful defence of Metz,
and engaged those whom he had vanquished to
vie with his own countrymen in extolling his
nameG.
Bad fit.- To there calamities in Germany, were added

prrft' such unfortunate events in Italy, as rendered
· mai in this the most difafirous year in the Emperor's

life. During his residence at Villach, Charles
had applied to Cosmo di Medici for the loan
of to hundred thousand crowns. But his
credit at that time was so low, that in order to
obtain this inconsiderable fum, he was obliged
to put him in poffellion of the principality of
Piombino, and by giving up that, he loft the
footing which he had hitherto maintained in

Tuscany;

' Sleid. 575. Thuan. lib. xi. 389, &c. Pere Daniel,

Hist. de France, tom. iii. 392. Pere Daniel's account of
this siege is taken from the journal of the Sieur de Salignac,
who was present. Natal. Comit. Hiftor. 129.

Tuscany, and enabled Cosmo to assume, for the BOOK XI.
future, the tone and deportment of a Prince L-
altogether independant. Much about the time 55'
that this indigence conitrained him to part with
this valuable territory, he loft Sienna, which was
of till greater consequence, through the ill
conduct of Don Diego de Mendoza".

SIENN A, like mot of the great cities in Italy,'Th" re'l

had long enjoyed a republican government, un-
der the protection of the Empire; but being
torn in pieces by the dilfenfions between the
nobility and the people, which divided all the
Italian commonwealths, the faction of the peo-
ple, which gained the ascendant, besought the
Emperor to become the guardian of the admi-
niftration which they had eftablithed, and ad-
mitted into their city a small body of Spanish
soldiers, whom he had sent to countenance the
execution of the laws, and to preserve tran-
quillity among them. The direction of these
troops was given to Mendoza, at that time
ambaflador for the Emperor at Rome, who per-
fuaded the credulous multitude, that it was
necefary for their security against any future
attempt of the nobles, to allow him to build a
citadel in Sienna; and as he flattered himself that
by means of this fortress he might render the
Emperor master of the city, he pushed on the
works with all possible dispatch. But he threw
off the mask too soon. Before the fortifications
were completed, he began to indulge his na-
tural haughtiness and severity of temper, and
to treat the citizens with great insolence. At
the fame time the soldiers in garrison being paid
as regularly as the Emperor's troops usually
were, lived almost at discretion upon the inha-

bitants,
Thuan. lib. xi. 376.

Boo XI. bitants, and were guilty of many ads of licenti-
'~' oufnefs and oppreflion.
1552.

TheSitnefc THESE injuries awakened the Sienefe to a
itnce of sense of their danger. As they saw the neceflity
Frace. of exerting themselves, while the unfinished for-

tifications of the citadel left them any hopes of
success, they applied to the French ambaflador
at Rome, who readily promised them his mailer's
protection and affifance. At the fame time,
forgetting their domeitick animofities when such
a mortal blow was aimed at the liberty and
existence of the republick, they ent agents to
the exiled nobles, and invited them to concur
vi ith them in saving their country from the ser-
vitude with which it was threatened. As there
was not a moment to lose, measures were con-
certed speedily, but with great prudence; and
were executed with equal vigour. The citizens
rose suddenly in arms; the exiles flocked into
the town from different parts with all their par-
tifans, and what troops they could draw toge-
ther; and several bodies of mercenaries in the
pay of France appeared to support them. The
Spaniards, though furprized, and much inferior
in number, defended themselves with great
courage; but feeing no profped of relief, and
having no hopes of maintaining their station
long in a half-finifhed fortress, they soon gave
it up. The Siennefe, with the utmost alacrity,
levelled it with the ground, that no monument
might remain of that odious structure, which
had been raised in order to enslave them. At
the fame time renouncing all connexion with
the Emperor, they sent ambafladors to thank
the King of France as the restorer of their
liberty, and to intreat that he would secure to

them

them the perpetual enjoyment of that blessing by Boo XI.
continuing his protection to their republick'. t.

5 52.

To there misfortunes, one still more fatal had Decent f

almost succeeded. The severe administration ithe'klg-
of Don Pedro de Toledo, viceroy of Naples, don of
having filled that kingdom with murmuring and Npkc.
disaffection, the Prince of Salerro, the head of
the malecontents, had fled to the court of
France, where all who bore ill-will to the Em-
peror or his minifiers, were sure of finding pro-
te:tion and aifance. That nobleman, in the
usual flyle of exiles, boasting much of his par-
tifans, and of his great influence with them,
prevailed on Henry to think of invading Na-
ples, from expectation of being joined by all
those with whom the Prince of Salerno held
correspondence, or who were dissatisfied with
Toledo's government. But though the first
hint of this enterprise was suggested by the
Prince of Salerno, Henry did not choose that
its fucces hould entirely depend upon his being
able to fulfil the promises which he had made.
He applied for aid to Solyman, whom he court-
ed, after his father's example, as his most vigor-
ous auxiliary against the Emperor, and olicited
him to second his operations by fending a
powerful fleet into the Mediterranean. It was
not difficult to obtain what he requested of the
Sultan, who, at this time, was highly incensed
against the house of Austria, on account of the
proceedings in Hungary. He ordered an hun-
dred and fifty hips to be equipped, that they
might fail towards the coast of Naples, at what-
ever time Henry Ihould name, and might co-

operate

' Pecci Memoriede Sienna, vol. iii. p. 230. 261. Thuan.

375. 377, &c. Paruta. HiR. Venet. 67. Mem. de Ribier,
424, &c.

BooXlI. operate with the French troops in their attempts

-~ upon that kingdom. The command of this
52 fleet was given to the corsair Dragut, an officer

trained up under Barbarofla, and scarcely in-
ferior to his master in courage, in talents, or in
good fortune. He appeared on the coast of
Calabria at the time which had been agreed on,
landed at several places, plundered and burnt
several villages; and at last catling anchor in
the bay of Naplcs, filled that city with confter-
nation. But as the French fleet, detained by
some accident, which the contemporary hifo-
rians have not explained, did not join the Turks
according to concert, they, after waiting twenty
dais, without hearing any tidings of it, set fail
for Conflantinople, and thus delivered the vice-
roy of Naples from the terror of an invasion,
which le was in no condition to have refuted K.

tIs<3 As the French had never given so severe a
,r nfly check to the Emperor in any former campaign,
affeaed they expressed immoderate joy at the success of
with the
slate hi. their arms. Charles himself, accustomed to a
afl«r. long series of prosperity, felt the blow moil fen-

sibly, and retired from Metz into the Low-Coun-
tries, much dejected with the cruel reverse of
fortune which asseted him in his declining age,
when the violence of the gout had increased to
such a pitch, as entirely broke the vigour of his
constitution, and rendered him peevish, difficult
of access, and often incapable of applying to
bulinefs. But whenever he enjoyed any interval
of cafe, all his thoughts were bent on revenge,
and he deliberated, with the utmost solicitude,
concerning the mot proper means of annoying
France, and of effacing the stain which had ob-
fcured the reputation and glory of his arms.
All the schemes concerning Germany, which

had
· Thuan. 3-5. 380 Mem. de Ribier, ii. 403. Gianene.

had engrossed him so long, being disconcerted Bo XL
by the peace of Paffau, the affairs of the Em- "

.

pire become only secondary objeds of attention; 1553
and enmity to France was the predominant pas-
sion which chiefly occupied his mind.

THE turbulent ambition of Albert of Bran- Theolent

. .r proceedings

denburg excited violent commotions, which dif- ofAlbert of
turbed the Empire during this year. That Bmden-
Prince's troops having shared in the calamities
of the fege of Metz, were greatly reduced in
number. But the Emperor, prompted by gra-
titude for his distinguished services on that oc-
cafion, or perhaps with a secret view of foment-
ing divisions among the Princes of the Empire,
having paid up all the money due to him, he
was enabled with that fum to hire so many of
the soldiers dismissed from the Imperial army,
that he was soon at the head of a body of men
as numerous as ever. The bishops of Bam-
berg and Wurtzburg having solicited the Im-
perial chamber, to annul, by its authority, the
iniquitous conditions which Albert had com-
pelled them to sign, that court unanimously
found all their engagements with him to be
void in their own nature, because they had been
extorted by force; enjoined Albert to renounce
all claim to the performance of them; and if
he should persist in such an unjust demand, ex-
horted all the Princes of the Empire to take
arms against him as a disturber of the publick
tranquillity. To this decision, Albert opposed
the confirmation of his tranfa&ions with the two
prelates, which the Emperor had granted him
as the reward of his having joined the Imperial
army at Metz; and in order to intimidate his
antagonists, as well as to convince them of his
resolution not to relinquish his pretensions, he
put his troops in motion, that he might secure

VOL. III. U the

Boo Xl. the territory in question. Various endeavours
%-~" were employed, and many expedients proposed,
553' in order to prevent the kindling a new war in

Germany. But the fame warmth of temper
which rendered Albert turbulent and enterpri-
zing, inspiring him with the most sanguine hopes
of success, even in his wildest undertakings, he
disdainfully rejeted all reasonable overtures of
accommodation.

He i con- UPON this, the Imperial chamber issued its
,eid b decree against him, and required the Ele&or of
chamber. Saxony, together with several other Princes

mentioned by name, to take arms in order to
carry it into execution. Maurice, and those
associated with him, were not unwilling to un-
dertake this service. They were extremely soli-
citous to maintain publick order by supporting
the authority of the Imperial chamber, and
saw the necessity of giving a timely check to the
usurpations of an ambitious Prince, who had no
principle of ation but regard to his own in-
terest, and no motive to dire& him but the im-
pulse of ungovernable pafions. They had good
reason to fufpeet, that the Emperor encouraged
Albert in his extravagant and irregular proceed-
ings, and secretly afforded him assistance, that,
by raising him up to rival Maurice in power,
he might, in any future broil, make use of his
afliftance to counterbalance and control the
authority which the other had acquired in the
Empire

Apri .

T THESE considerations united the most power-

y fomed ful Princes in Germany in a league against Al-

gMi hi

, bert, of which Maurice was declared general-

of which
M.nrice iffimo.
wu head.

L Sleid. 585. Mem. de Ribier, ii. 44z. Arnoldi vita
Maurit. ap. Menken, ii. a242.

iffimo. This formidable confederacy, however, Boox XI.
wrought no change in Albert's sentiments; but .'
as he knew that he could not resist so many 553
Princes, if he hould allow them time to aflemble
their forces, he endeavoured, by his ativity, to
deprive them of all the advantages which they
might derive from their united power and num-
bers; and for that reason marched directly against
Maurice, the enemy whom he dreaded most.
It was happy for the allies, that the conduct of
their affairs was committed to a Prince of such
abilities. He, by his authority and example,
had inspired them with vigour; and having car-
ried on their preparations with a degree of rapi-
dity, of which confederate bodies are seldom
capable, he was in condition to face Albert be-
fore he could make any considerable progress.

THEIR armies, which were nearly equal in He ttcks

number, each confifing of twenty-four thousand Albert,
men, met at Sieverhaufen, in the dutchy of Lu-
nenburgh; and the violent animosity against
each other, which polTeffed two leaders, did
not susser them to continue long inactive. The
troops, inflamed with the fame hostile rage,
marched fiercely to the combat; they fought with
the greatest obstinacy; and as both generals
were capable of availing themselves of every
favourable occurrence, the battle remained long
doubtful, each gaining ground upon the othe
alternately. At last vitory declared for Mau ind defels
rice, who was superior in cavalry, and Albert's hi, *"'
army fled in confusion, leaving four thousand
dead in the field, and their camp, baggage and
artillery, in the hands of the conquerors. The
allies bought their victory dear, their best troops
suffered greatly, two sons of the Duke of Brunf-
wick, a Duke of Lunenburgh, and many other
persons ofdiftintion, were among the number of

U a the

Boo XI. the slain. But all these were soon forgotten; for
--"' Maurice himself, as he led up to a second charge a
bst .it3ed body of horse which had been broken, received a
in h bat- wound with a piftol-bullet in the belly, of which

he died two days after the battle, in the thirty-
second year of his age, and in the sixth after his
attaining the electoral dignity.
Hischic- OF all the personages who have appeared in

the history of this afive age, when great occur-
rences, and sudden revolutions, called forth ex-
traordinary talents to view, and afforded them
full opportunity to display themselves, Maurice
may justly be confidered as the most remarkable.
If his exorbitant ambition, his profound diffi-
mulation, and his unwarrantable usurpation of
his kinsman's honours and dominions, exclude
him from being praised as a virtuous man; his
prudence in concerting his measures, his vigour
in executing them, and the uniform success with
which they were attended, entitle him to the
appellation of a great Prince. At an age, when
impetuosity of spirit commonly predominates
over political wisdom, when the highest effort
even of a genius of the first order is to fix on
a bold scheme, and to execute it with prompti-
tude and courage, he formed and conducted an
intricate plan of policy, which deceived the most
artful Monarch in Europe. At the very junc-
ture when the Emperor had attained to almost
unlimited despotism, Maurice, with power seem-
ingly inadequate to such an undertaking, com-
pelled him to relinquish all his usurpations, and
establish not only the religious but civil liber-
ties of Germany on such foundations as have

hitherto

X Hiftoria pugnz infelicis inter Maurit. & Albert. Thon.

Wintzero auiore apud Scard. ii. 59 Sleid. 583. Rufcelli
* epiflresaux Princes, 154. Arnoldi vita Maurit. 1245.

hitherto remained unshaken. Although, at one Boo XI.
period of his life, his conduct excited the jealousy '*
of the Protestants, and at another, drew on him '53
the resentment of the Roman Catholicks, such
was his masterly address, that he was the only
Prince of the age who, in any degree, possessed
the confidence of both, and whom both lamented
as the most able as well as faithful guardian of
the constitution and laws of his country.

THE consternation which Maurice's death oc- Albeit cot.

cafioned among his troops, prevented them from acI t"h
making the proper improvement of the vic-
tory which they had gained. Albert, whose ac-
tive courage, and profuse liberality, rendered
him the darling of such military adventurers as
were little solicitous about the justice of his cause,
soon re-assembled his broken forces, and made
frelh levies with such success, that he was
quickly at the head of fifteen thousand men,
and renewed his depredations with additional
fury. But Henry of Brunswick having taken
thecommand of the allied troops, defeated him
in a second battle, scarcely less bloody than the sept. i,.
former. Even then his courage did not fink,
nor were his resources exhausted. He made
several efforts, and ome of them very vigorous,
to retrieve his affairs: But being laid under the
ban of the Empire by the Imperial chamber;
being driven by degrees out of all his hereditary
territories, as well as those which he had usurped;
being forsaken by many of his officers, and
overpowered by the number of his enemies, he
fled for refuge into France. After having been, He isdriven
for a considerable time, the terror and scourge out of o".
of Germany, he lingered out some years in an
indigent and dependant state of exile, the mise-
ries of which his restless and arrogant spirit en-

dured

BooKXI. dured with the most indignant impatience.

' Upon his death without issue, his territories,

,,m s,,, which had been seized by the Princes who took
1557. arms against him, were restored, by a decree of

the Emperor, to his collateral heirs of the house
of Brandenburg N.

Msnrice's MAURICE having left only one daughter,
gue Src who was afterwards married to William Prince
eanimn of Orange, by whom he had a son who bore his
diity. grandfather's name, and inherited the great

talents for which he was conspicuous, a violent
dispute arose concerning the fucceflion to his
honours and territories. John Frederick, the
degraded elector, claimed the electoral dignity,
and that part of his patrimonial estate of which
he had been violently stripped after the Smal-
kaldick war. Augustus, Maurice's only brother,
pleaded his right not only to the hereditary pof-
lfflions of their family, but to the electoral dig-
nity, and to the territories which Maurice had
acquired. As Augustus was a Prince of con-
fiderable abilities, as well as of great candour
and gentleness of manners, the flates of Saxony,
forgetting the merits and sufferings of their for-
mer master, declared warmly in his favour. His
pretensions were powerfully supported by the
King of Denmark, whose daughter he had mar-
ried, and zealously espoused by the King of the
Rornans, out of regard to Maurice's memory.
The degraded Eledor, though secretly favoured,
by his antient enemy the Emperor, was at last
obliged to relinquilh his claim, upon obtaining
a small addition to the territories which had been
allotted to him, together with a stipulation, fecu-
ring to his family the eventual fucceflion, upon
a failure of male heirs in the Albertine line.
That unfortunate, but magnanimous Prince

died
Sleid. 592. 594. 599. Strun. Corp. bit. Germ. o107.

died next year, soon after ratifying this treaty of Boot Xl;
agreement, and the Eletoral dignity is still pof-
fefed by the descendants of Augustus°.

DURING there tranfadions in Germany, war Hftilit,

was carried on in the Low-Countries with con- Coutrie.
fiderable vigour. The Emperor, impatient to
efface the stain which his ignominious repulse at
Metz left upon his military reputation, had an
army early in the field, and laid siege to Terou-
ane. Though the town was of such import-
ance, that Francis used to call it one of the two
pillows on which a King of France might sleep
with security, the fortifications were in disrepair:
Henry, trusting to what had happened at Metz,
thought nothing more was necessary to render
all the efforts of the enemy abortive, than to
reinforce the garrison with a considerable num-
ber of the young nobility. But d'Efle, a vete-
ran officer who commanded them, being killed,
and the ImperaliRfs pushing the siege with great
vigour and perseverance, the place was taken Juneai.
by aflault. That it might not fall again into
the hands of the French, Charles ordered not
only the fortifications but the town to be rafed,
and the inhabitants to be dispersed in the adja-
cent cities. Elated with this success, the lm-
perialifis immediately inveted Hefdin, which,
though defended with great bravery, was like-
wife taken by afault, and such of the garrison
as escaped the sword were made prisoners. The
Emperor entrusted the condut of this siege to
Emanuel Philibert of Savoy, Prince of Pied-
mont, who, on that occasion, gave the first dif-
play of those great talents for military command,
which soon entitled him to be ranked among the
first generals of the age, and facilitated his re-
establishment in his hereditary dominions, the

greater
Sleid. 587. Thuan. 409. Struv. Corp. hist. Germ.

Boo XL greater part of which having been over-run by

Francis in his expeditions into Italy, were still

sS53' occupied by Henry '.

Tep~I TE loss of these towns, together with o
p~iia many persons of diftintion, either killed or
dirieP t taken by the enemy, was no inconsiderable cala-
King. mity to France, and Henry felt it very sensibly;

but he was ftil more mortified at the Em-
peror's having afiumed his wonted superiority
in the field o soon after the blow at Metz,
which the French had represented as fatal to
his power. He was ashamed, too, of his own
remissness and excelfive security at the opening
of the campaign; and, in order to repair that
error, he assembled a numerous army, and led
it into the Low-Countries.

RousBD at the approach of such a formidable

enemy, Charles left Brussels, where he had been
shut up so closely during seven months, that it
came to be believed in many parts of Europe
that he was dead; and though he was so much
debilitated by the gout that he could hardly
bear the motion of a litter, he hastened to join
his army. The eyes of all Europe were turned
with expe~ation towards those mighty and ex-
afperated rivals between whom a decisive battle
was now thought unavoidable. But Charles
having prudently declined to hazard a general
engagement, and the violence of the autumnal
rains rendering it impossible for the French to
under :ke any siege, they retired, without having
performed any thing suitable to the great pre-
parations which they had mader

THE

' Tban. 411. Hari Annales Brabant. 669. -Harzus,
67- Thuan. 414.

THE Imperial arms did not make the fame BooxXl.
progress in Italy. The narrowness of the Em- 'k "

15S3.

peror's finances seldom allowed him to as with TheS Ipe-
vigour in two different places at the fame time rialinifln.
and having exerted himself to the utmost in in taly,
order to make a great effort in the Low-Coun-
tries, his operations on the other fide of the
Alps were proportionally feeble. The viceroy
of Naples, in conjuncion with Cosmo di Me-
dici, who was greatly alarmed at the intro-
dudion of French troops into Sienna, endea-
voured to become master of that city. But,
instead of reducing the Siennefe, the Imperialists
were obliged to retire abruptly, in order to
defend their own country, upon the appearance
of the Turkilh fleet, which threatened the coast
of Naples; and the French not only eablified
themselves more firmly in Tuscany, but, by
the assistance of the Turks, conquered a great
part of the island of Corsica, subjet, at that
time, to the Genoese R.

THE affairs of the hoife of Aufiria declined and in

no less in Hungary during the course of this Hungiy.
year. As the troops which Ferdinand kept in
Transylvania received their pay very irregularly,
they lived almost at discretion upon the inha-
bitants; and their insolence and rapaciousness
greatly disgusted all ranks of men, and alienated
them from their new sovereign, who, intead of
protecting, plundered his subjects. Their in-
dignation at this, added to their desire of re-
venging Martinuzzi's death, wrought so much
upon a turbulent nobility, impatient of injury,
and upon a fierce people prone to change, that
they were ripe for revolt. At that very junc-
ture, their late Qeen Isabella, together with
her son, appeared in Transylvania. Her am-

bitious
Thuan. 417.

BooXI. bitious mind could not bear the solitude and
"' inadivity of a private life; and repenting

quickly of the ceflion which he had made of
the crown in the year one thousand five hun-
dred and fifty-one, he left the place of her
retreat, hoping that the diflatisfation of the
Hungarians with the Auflrian government
would prompt them once more to recognise her
son's right to the crown. Some noblemen of
great eminence declared immediately in his fa-
vour. The Bafha of Belgrade, by Solyman's
order, espoused his cause, in opposition to Ser-
dinand; the Spanish and German soldiers, in-
flead of advancing against the enemy, mutinied
for want of pay, declaring that they would

Fcrcniad march back to Vienna; so that Caftaldo, their
obigd to general, was obliged to abandon Transylvania
Tranifl- to ltabella and the Turks, and to place himself
"a·iiL at the head of the mutineers, that by his autho-

rity he might restrain them from plundering
the Austrian territories, through which they
paifed5.

Solyman's FERDINAND'S attention was turned so entirely
d~.ea. towards the affairs of Germany, and his trea-

fures so much exhausted by his late efforts in
Hungar-, that he made no attempt to recover
this valuable province, although a favourable
opportunity for that purpose presented itself, as
Solyman was then engaged in a war with Persia,
and involved besides in domeftick calamities which
engroflfd and disturbed his mind. 'Solyman,
though distinguished, by many accomplishments,
from the other Ottoman Princes, had all the
paflions peculiar to that violent and haughty
race. He was jealous of his authority, sudden
as well as furious in his anger, and fulceptible
of all that rage of love, which reigns in the

East,
Thban. 4jo.

East, and often produces the wildest and mot Bo o X.
tragical effects. His favourite mistress was a"
Circafflian slave of exquisite beauty, who bore Tbeah3i.
him a son called Muftapha, whom, both on chlbitory
account of his birth-right and merit, he detined MuRipha.
to be heir of his crown. Roxalana, a Ruf-
fian captive, loon supplanted the Circaflian, and
gained the Sultan's heart. Having the address
to retain the conquest which she had made, he
kept poffelfion of his love without any rival for
many years, during which he brought him
several sons and one daughter. All the happi-
ness, however, which he derived from the un-
bounded sway that ihe had acquired over a
monarch whom one half of the world revered
or dreaded, was embittered by perpetual reflec-
tions on Muftapha's accession to the throne,
and the certain death of her sons, who, he fore-
saw, would be immediately sacrificed, according
to the barbarous jealousy of Turkish policy, to
the safety of the new Emperor. By dwelling
continually on this melancholy idea, he came
gradually to view Mutapha as the enemy of
her children, and to hate him with more than
a step-mother's ill will. This prompted her to
wish his deftrution, in order to secure for one
of her own sons the throne which was destined
for him. Nor did he want either ambition to
attempt such a high enterprise, or the arts re-
quifite for carrying it into execution. Having
prevailed on the Sultan to give her only daughter
in marriage to Ruftan the Grand Vifier, the
disclosed her scheme to that crafty minister, who
perceiving that it was his own interest to co-
operate with her, readily promised his assistance
towards aggrandizing that branch of the royal
line, to which he was o nearly allied.

As

BOOK XI- As soon as Roxalana had concerted her mea-
'- fCures with this able confident, he began to

55s3- affect a wonderful zeal for the Mahometan reli-

gion, to which Solyman was superstitiously at-
tached, and proposed to found and endow a
royal mosque, a work of great expence, but
deemed by the Turks meritorious in the highest
degree. The Mufti, whom he consulted, ap-
proved much of her pious intention; but, having
been gained and inftru&ed by Ruftan, told her,
that he being a slave could derive no benefit
herself from that holy deed, for all the merit of
it would accrue to Solyman, the master whose
property he was. Upon this she seemed to be
overwhelmed with sorrow, and to fink into the
deepest melancholy, as if he had been disgusted
with life and all its enjoyments. Solyman, who
was absent with the army, being informed of
this dejetion of mind, and of the cause from
which it proceeded, discovered all the solicitude
of a lover to remove it, and by a writing under
his hand declared her a free woman. Roxalana
having gained this point, proceeded to build
the Mosque, and re-affumed her uual gaiety
of spirit. But when Solyman, on his return to
Conltantinople, ent an eunuch, according to
the custom of the seraglio, to bring her to par-
take of his bed, she, seemingly with deep re-
gret, but in the most peremptory manner, de-
clined to follow the eunuch, declaring that what
had been an honour to her while a slave, became
a crime as he was now a free woman, and that
the would not involve either the Sultan or her-
self in the guilt that must be contrated by such
an open violation of the law of their prophet.
Solyman, whose passion this difficulty, as well
as the affected delicacy which gave rife to it,
heightened and inflamed, had recourse imme-
diately to the Mufti for his diretion. He

replied,

replied, agreeably to the Koran, that Roxalana's Boot XI.
scruples were well founded; but added artfully, ''
in words which Ruftan had taught him to use, 5
that it was in the Sultan's power to remove
these difficulties by espousing her as his lawful
wife. The amorous monarch closed eagerly
with the proposal, and solemnly married her,
according to the form of the Mahometan ritual;
though, by doing so, he disregarded a maxim of
policy which the pride of the Ottoman blood
had taught all the Sultans since Bajazet I. to
confider as inviolable. From his time, none of
the Turkish monarchs had married, because,
when he was vanquished and taken prisoner by
Tamerlane, his wife had been abused with bar-
barous insolence by the Tartars. That no fimi-
lar calamity might fubjeEt the Ottoman family
to the like disgrace, the Sultans admitted none
to their bed but slaves, whole dishonour could
not bring any such stain upon their bouse.

BUT the more uncommon the ftep was, the

more it convinced Roxalana, of the unbounded
influence which he had acquired over the Sul-
tan's heart; and emboldened her to prosecute,
with greater hope of success, the scheme that
she had formed in order to destroy Muftapha.
This young Prince having been entrusted by
his father, according to the practice of the Sul-
tans in that age, with the government of several
different provinces, was at that time invested
with the administration in Diarbequir, the an-
cient Mesopotamia, which Solyman had wrested
from the Persians, and added to his empire. In
all these different commands, Muftapha had
condu&ed himself with such cautious prudence
as could give no offence to his father, though,
at the fame time, he governed with so much
moderation as well as justice, and displayed such

valour

BooK XI. valour and generosity, as rendered him equally

v'
y the favourite of the people and the darling of
'553- the soldiery.

THERE was no room to lay any folly or vice

to his charge, that could impair the high opi-
nion which his father entertained of him. Rox-
alana's malevolence was more refined; he
turned his virtues against him, and made use
of these as engines for his deflrution. She
often mentioned, in Solyman's presence, the
splendid qualities of his son; mIe celebrated his
courage, his liberality, his popular arts, with
malicious and exaggerated praise. As soon as
she perceived that the Sultan heard these enco-
miums, which were often repeated, with un-
easiness; that suspicion of his son began to
mingle itself with his former efleem; and
that by degrees 'he came to view him with
jealousy and fear, she introduced, as by acci-
dent, some discourse concerning the rebellion of
his father Selim against Bajazet his grandfather:
The took notice of the bravery of the veteran
troops under Muftapha's command, and of the
neighbourhood of Diarbequir to the territories
of the Persian Sophi, Solyman's mortal enemy.
By there arts, whatever remained of paternal
tendemefs was entirely extinguished, and such
pafiions were kindled in the breast of the Sultan,
as gave all Roxalana's maignant suggestions
the colour not only of probability but of truth.
A deep-rooted hatred succeeded, now, to his
suspicions and fear of Muftapha. He appointed
spies to observe and report all his words and
actions , he watched and flood on his guard
against him as his most dangerous enemy.

HAVING thus alienated the Sultan's heart
from Muftapha, Roxalana ventured upon ano-

ther

ther ftep. She entreated Solyman to allow her BooK XI.
own sons the liberty of appearing at court, 's
hoping that by gaining access to their father, '553.
they might, by their good qualities and dutiful
deportment, insinuate themselves into that place
in his affection which Muftapha had formerly
held; and, though what he demanded was
contrary to the practice of the Ottoman family
in that age, the uxorious monarch granted her
request. To all there female intrigues Ruftan
added an artifice still more subtle, which com-
pleted the Sultan's delusion, and heightened
hisjealoufy and fear. He wrote to the Baflaws
of the provinces adjacent to Diarbequir, in-
ftruaing them to fend him regular intelligence
of Muftapha's proceedings in his government,
and to each of them he gave a private hint,
flowing in appearance from his zeal for their
interest, that nothing would be more acceptable
to the Sultan than to receive favourable ac-
counts of a on whom he destined to sustain the
glory of the Ottoman name. The Balhaws
ignorant of his fraudulent intention, and eager
to pay court to their sovereign at such an easy
price, filled their letters with studied but fatal
panegyricks of Muftapha, representing him as
a Prince worthy to succeed such an illustrious
father, and as endowed with talents which
might enable him to emulate, perhaps to equal
his fame. These letters were industriously
shewn to Solyman, at the seasons when it was
known that they would make the deepest im-
preflion. Every expression in recommendation
of his Ton wounded him to the heart; he sus-
peAed his principal officers of being ready to
favour the most desperate attempts of a Prince
whom they were so fond to praise; and fancying
that he saw them already assaulting his throne
with rebellious arms, he determined, while it

was

Boom Xl. was yet in his power, to anticipate the blow, and

to secure his own safety by his son's death.
'553-

FOR this purpose, though under pretence of

renewing the war against Persia, he ordered
Ruftan to march towards Diarbequir at the head
of a numerous army, and to rid him of a son
whose life he deemed inconiftent with his own
safety. But that crafty minister did not choose
to be loaded with the odium of having executed
this cruel order. As soon as he arrived in Syria
he wrote to Solynian, that the danger was so
imminent as called for his immediate presence;
that the camp was full of Mufapha's emissaries;
that many of the soldiers were corrupted; that
the affecions of all leaned towards him; that
he had discovered a negociation which had been
carried on with the Sophi of Persia in order to
marry Muftapha with one of his daughters;
that he already felt his own talents as well as
authority to be inadequate to the exigencies of
such an arduous conjuncture; that the Sultan
alone had sagacity to discern what resolution
(hould be taken in those circumstances, and
power to carry that resolution into execution.

THIS charge of courting the friendship of the

Sophi, Roxalana and Ruftan had reserved as
the last and most envenomed of all their calum-
nies. It operated with the violence which they
expected from Solyman's inveterate abhorrence
of the Persians, and threw him into the wildest
transports of rage. He set out inflantly for
Syria, and hastened thither with all the preci-
pitation and impatience of fear and revenge.
As soon as he joined his army near Aleppo, and
had concerted measures with Ruftan, he ent
a Chiaus or messenger of the court to his son,
requiring him to repair immediately to his pre-

fence.

fence. Muftapha, though no stranger to his BOK X,
fcep-mother's machinations, or to Ruftan's ma-
lice, or to his father's violent temper, yet rely- 553
ing on his own innocence, and hoping to dif-
credit the accusations of his enemies by the
promptitude of his obedience, followed the
messenger without delay to Aleppo. The mo-
ment he arrived in the camp, he was introduced
into the Sultan's tent. As he entered it, he
observed nothing that could give him any
alarm; no additional crowd of attendants, no
body of armed guards, but the fame order and
silence which always reign in the Sultan's apart-
ments. In a few minutes, however, several
mutes appeared, at the fight of whom Mufta-
pha knowing what was his doom, cried with a
loud voice, 'Lo, my death!" and attempted
to fly. The mutes rushed forward to seize him;
he refilled and truggled, demanding with the
utmost earnestness to fee the Sultan; and de-
fpair, together with the hope of finding pro-
te&tion from the soldiers, if he could escape out
of the tent, animated him with such extra-
ordinary ftrcngth, that, for some time, he baffled
all the efforts of the executioners. Solyman
was within hearing of his son's cries, as well as
of the noise which the Rtruggle occasioned. Im-
patient of this delay of his revenge, and firuck
with terror at the thoughts of Muftapha's efca-
ping, he drew aside the curtain which divided
the tent, and thrufling in his head darted a
fierce look towards the mutes, and with wild
and threatening gestures seemed to chide them
for sloth and timidity. At fight of his father's
furious and unrelenting countenance, Muftapha's
strength failed, and his courage forsook him;
the mutes fastened the bow-string about his
neck, and in a moment put an end to his life.

VOL. III. X THE

Bo zXI. THE dead body was exposed before the Sul-
k~' tan's tent. The soldiers gathered round it, and
'553 contemplating that mournful object with afto-

nifhment, and sorrow, and indignation, were
ready, if a leader had not been wanting, to
have broke out into the wildest excesses of rage.
After giving vent to the firit exprefflons of their
grief. they retired each man to his tent, and
fl:uting themselves up, bewailed in secret the
cruel fate of their favourite; nor was there one
of them who tafted food or even water during
the remainder of that day. Next morning the
fame solitude and silence reigned in the camp;
and Solyman, being afraid that ome dreadful
florm would follow this fullen calm, in order to
appease the enraged soldiers, deprived Ruftan
of the feals, ordered him to leave the camp,
and raised Achmet, a gallant officer much beloved
in the army, to the dignity of Vifier. This
change, however, was made in concert with
Ruftan himself; that crafty minister suggesting
it as the only expedient which could save him-
self or his matler. But within a few months,
when the resentment of the soldiers began to
subside, and the name of Muftapha to be for-
gotten, Achmet was ifrangled by the Sultan's
command, and Ruftan reinflated in the office
of Vifier. Together with his former power, he
re-affumed the plan for exterminating the race
of Muflapha which he had concerted with
Roxalana; and as they were afraid that an only
oIn whom Muftapha had left, might grow up to
avenge his death, they redoubled their activity,
and by employing the fame arts against him
which they had pra&ised against his father, they
inspired Solyman with the fame fears, and pre-
vailed on him to issue orders for putting to death
that young innocent Prince. These orders were
executed with barbarous zeal, by an eunuch,

who

who was dispatched to Bursa, the place whereBoo XL
the Prince resided; and no rival was left to
dispute the Ottoman throne with the sons of 553.
Roxalana T.

SUCH a tragical scene, produtive of so deep Charlespro.

distress, seldom occurs but in the history of the rjab.
great monarchies of the East, where the force tween hi
of the climate works up and sublimes all the Mryof
pallions of the human mind into the greatest England.
fury, and the absolute power of sovereigns n-
ables them to at with uncontroled violence;
while it palsed in the court of Solyman, and en-
gaged his whole attention, Charles was pursuing,
with the utmost ardour, a new scheme for ag-
grandizing his family. About this time, Ed-
ward the Sixth of England, after a short reign,
in which he displayed such virtues as filled his
fubjets with sanguine hopes of being happy
under his government, and made them bear with
patience all that they suffered from the weakness,
the dissensions and the ambition of the miniflers
who assumed the administration during his mi-
nority, was seized with a lingering distemper
which threatened his life. The Emperor no
sooner received an account of this, than his am-
bition, always attentive to seize every oppor-
tunity of acquiring an increase of power or of
territories to his son, suggested the thought of
adding England to his other kingdoms, by the
marriage of Philip with the Princess Mary, the
heir of Edward's crown. Being apprehensive,
however, that his son, who was then in Spain,
might decline a match with a Princess in her

X thirty-

Augerii Giflenii Bufbequii Legationis Turcicz Epifto-

Iz iv. Franc. 1615. p. 37. Thuan. lib. z1. p. 432. Meni.
de Ribier, ii. 457. Mauroceni hiftor. Vcneta, lib. vii.
p. 6o.

BooKXI. thirty-eighth year, and eleven years older than
\y*' himfelfu; Charles determined, notwithstanding

53 his own age and infirmities, to make offer of

himself as a husband to his cousin.

To whbcb BUT though Mary was so far advanced in
Philip gi es
Si cofert. years, and destitute of every charm either of

person or of manners that could win affection, or
command esteem, Philip, without hesitation,
gave his consent to the match proposed by his
father, and was willing, according to the usual
maxim of Princes, to sacrifice his inclination to
his ambition. In order to ensure success, the
Emperor, even before Edward's death, began to
take such steps as might facilitate it. Upon
Edward's demise, Mary mounted the throne of
England the pretensions of the lady Jane Gray
proving as unfortunate as they were ill founded x.
Charles ent immediately a pompous embafly
to London to congratulate Mary on her accession
to the throne, and to propose the alliance with

The feoti- his son. The Queen, dazzled with the profpe&
Msrandof of marrying the heir of the greatest Monarch in
the EtngFl Europe fond of uniting more closely with her
witb egArrd
to it. mother's family, to which he had been always

warmly attached and eager to secure the power-
ful aid which she knew would be necessary to-
wards carr)ing on her favourite scheme of re-
establishing the Romish religion in England,
listened in the molt favourable manner to the
proposal. Among her fubjeds, it met with a
very different reception. Philip, it was well
known, contended for all the tenets of the church
of Rome with a anguinary zeal which exceeded
the measure even of Spanish bigotry: this
alarmed all the numerous partisans of the Re-
formation. The Catilian haughtiness and re-

serve

v Palav. hist. Concil. Trid. v. ii. c. 3. 150.
Carte's hist. of England, iii. 287.

serve were far from being acceptable to the BooK Xl.
Englifi, who, having several times seen their V
throne occupied by persons who were born sub- 1553
jeds, had become accustomed to an unceremo-
nious and familiar intercourse with their fove-
reigns. They could not think, without the ut-
most uneasiness; of admitting a foreign Prince
to the influence of the councils, which the
hutband of their Queen would naturally possess.
They dreaded, both from Philip's overbearing
temper, and from the maxims of the Spaniih
monarchy which he had imbibed, that he would
infuse ideas into the Queen's mind, dangerous
to the liberties of the nation, and would intro-
duce foreign troops and money into the king-
dom, to aflift her in any attempt against them.

FULL of these apprehensions, the house of Tefhome

Commons, though in that age extremely obfe- remonstrate
quious to the will of their Monarchs, presented tg'iat it.
a warm address against the Spanilh match;
many pamphlets were published, representing
the dangerous consequences of the alliance with
Spain, and describing Philip's bigotry and ar-
rogance in the most odious colours. But Mary,
inflexible in all her resolutions, paid no regard
to the remonstrances of her Commons, or to the
sentiments of the people. The Emperor, hav-
ing secured, by various arts, the ministers whom
(he trusted most, they approved warmly of the
match, and large fums were remitted by him in
order to gain the reft of the council. Cardinal
Pole, whom the Pope, immediately upon Mary's
acceflion, had dispatched as his legate into Eng-
land, in order to reconcile his native country
to the fee of Rome, was detained by the Empe-
ror's command at Dillinghen in Germany, left
by his presence he should thwart Philip's pre-
tensions, and employ his interest in favour of

his

Boos XI. his kinsman Courtnay Earl of Devonshire, whom

' 'the English ardently wiihed their sovereign to

553. choose for a husband .

The mar- As the negociation did not admit of delay,
concude. it was carried forward with the greatest rapidity,

the Emperor agreeing, without hesitation, to
every article in favour of England, which Mary's
ministers either represented as neceflary to sooth
the people and reconcile them to the match, or
that was suggested by their own fears andjealoufy
of a foreign master. The chief articles were,

1s54. that Philip, during his marriage with the Queen,
januaryl. hould bear the title of King of England, but

the entire adminifiration of affairs, as well as
the role disposal of all revenues, offices, and
benefices, hould remain with the Queen; that
the heirs of the marriage should, together with
the crown of England, inherit the dutchy of
Burgundy and the Low-Countries; that if
Prince Charles, Philip's only son by a former
marriage, should die without issue, his children
by the Queen, whether male or female, should
succeed to the crown of Spain and all the Em-
peror's hereditary dominions; that, before the
consummation of the marriage, Philip Ihould
swear solemnly, that he would retain no domeftick
who was not a subjet of the Queen, and would
bring no foreigners into the kingdom that might
give umbrage to the Englilh; that he would
make no alteration in the constitution or laws
of England; that he would not carry the
Queen, or any of the children born of this mar-
riage, out of the kingdom; that if the Queen
should die before him without issue, he would
immediately leave the crown to the lawful heir,
without claiming any right of administration
whatever; that in consequence of this mar-

riage,
Y Carte, iii. 288.

riage, England should not be engaged in any Boo XI
war subsisting between France and Spain; and L"'
that the alliance between France and England '554
should remain Z.

BUT this treaty, though both the Emperor Dircontent

and Mary's minister's employed their utmost ad- hen'.PP,'f
dress in framing it so as to please the English, was the Engliih.
far from quieting their fears and jealousies.
They saw that words and promises were a feeble
security against the encroachments of an am-
bitious Prince, who, as oon as he got possession
of the power and advantages which the Queen's
husband mutl necessarily enjoy, could easily
evade any of the articles which either limited his
authority or obftruded his schemes. They were
convinced that the more favourable the con-
ditions of the present treaty were to England,
the more Philip would be tempted to violate
them; and they dreaded that England, like
Naples, Milan, and the other countries annexed
to the Spanish crown, would soon feel the into-
lerable weight of its oppreflive dominion, and
be constrained, as these had been, to waste its
wealth and vigour in wars wherein it had no
interest, and from which it could derive no ad-
vantage. These sentiments prevailed so gene-
rally, that every part of the kingdom was filled
with discontent at the match, and with indig-
nation against the advisers of it. Sir Thomas Wyat' in-
Wyat, a gentleman of some note, and of good fureio.
intentions towards the publick, took advantage
of this, and routed the inhabitants of Kent to
arms, in order to save their'country from a so-
reign yoke. Such numbers retorted in a short
time to his fiandard; he marched to London

with

'Rymer's Feed. vol. . . 377. 393. Mem. de Ribier,
ii. 498.

Booz XI. with such rapidity ; and the Queen was so ut-
''Y'' terly unprovided for defence, that the asped of
S54' affairs was extremely threatening; and if any

nobleman of diftin&ion had joined the male-
contents, or had yat pofeffled talents equal,
in any degree, to the boldness of his enterprize,
the infurre&ion mufl have proved fatal to
Mary's power. But all his measures were con-
certed with so little prudence, and executed with
such irresolution, that many of his followers
forsook him; the reft were dispersed by an hand-
ful of men; and he himself was taken prisoner,
without having made any effort worthy of the
cause that he had undertaken, or suitable to the
ardour with which he engaged in it. He suffered
the puniflhent due to his rashness and rebellion.,
The Queen's authority was confirmed and in-
creased by her success in defeating this incon-
fiderable attempt to abridge it. The lady Jane
Gray, whose title the ambition of her relations
had set up in opposition to the Queen's, was,
notwithstanding her youth and innocence,
brought to the scaffold. The lady Elizabeth,
the Queen's filter, was observed with the most
jealous attention. The treaty of marriage was
ratified by the parliament.

Trbear- PHILIP landed in England with a magni-
ridge cele-
b: ad. ficent retinue, celebrated his nuptials with great

solemnity; and though he could not lay aside
his natural severity of pride, or assume gracious
and popular manners, he endeavoured to con-
ciliate the favour of the English nobility by his
extraordinary liberality. In cafe that hould fail
of acquiring him such influence in the govern-
ment of the kingdom as he aimed at obtaining,
the Emperor kept a body of twelve thousand
men on the coast of Slanders, in readiness to
embark for Engiand, and to support him in all
his enterprizes.

EMBOLDENED

EMBOLDENED by all these favourable circum- BOOK Xl.

stances, Mary pursued the scheme of extirpat- 'v--
ing the Proteflant religion out of her domi- Mry4
nions, with the most precipitate zeal. The laws meafuresto
of Edward the Sixth, in favour of the Reforma- the Prote-
tion, were repealed, the Protestant clergy ejedt- t,' iEtigi
ed; all the forms and rites of the Popish wor- land.
ship were re-established; the nation was so-
lemnly absolved from the guilt which it had
contraaed during the period of its apoftacy,
and was publickly reconciled to the church of
Rome by cardinal Pole, who, immediately after
the Queen's marriage, was permitted to con-
tinue his journey to England, and to exercifc
his legantine fundions with the most ample
power. Not satisfied with having overturned
the Protestant church, and having established
her own system on its ruins, Mary insisted that
all her fubjeds hould conform to the fame
mode of worship which she preferred; should
profess their faith in the fame creed which he
had approved; and abjure every practice or
opinion that was deemed repugnant to either of
them. Powers altogether unknown in the Eng-
lilh constitution, were veiled in certain persons
appointed to take cognizance of heresy, and
they proceeded to exercise them with more than
inquisitorial severity. The profpet of danger,
however, did not intimidate the principal teachers
of the Protestant doctrines, who believed that
they were contending for truths of the utmost
consequence to the happiness of mankind. They
boldly avowed their sentiments, and were con-
demned to that cruel death which the church of
Rome reserves for its enemies. This flocking
punishment was inflited with that barbarity
which the rancour of false zeal alone can inspire.
The English, who are inferior in humanity to no
people in Europe, and remarkable for the mild-

ness

BooXl. ness of their publick executions, beheld, with
~'^^ aftonidhment and horror, persons who had filled
'54 the most respectable ftaiions in their church, and

who were venerable on account of their age,
their piety, and their literature, condemned to
endure torments to which even the most atro-
cious criminals were not fubjedted.
Thb o.l- THIS extreme rigour did not accomplish the

'^.d htoh end at which Mary aimed. The patience and
iuiBoI- fortitude with which these martyrs for the Re-

formation submitted to their sufferings, the he-
roick contempt of death expressed by persons of
every rank, and age, and sex, confirmed many
more in the Protestant faith, than the threats of
their enraged persecutors could frighten into a-
poftacy. The business of such as were entrusted
with trying of hereticks multiplied continually,
and appeared to be as endless as it was odious.
The Queen's ablest ministers became sensible
how impolitick, as well as dangerous, it was to
irritate the people by the frequent spectacle of
publick executions, which they detested as no less
unjust than cruel. Even Philip was so tho-
roughly convinced of her having run to an ex-
cess of rigour, that on this occasion he assumed
a part to which he was little accustomcd, becom-
ing an advocate for moderation and lenity A.

The .ng- BUT notwithstanding this attempt to ingra-
ot lilip tiate himself with the English, they discovered

a constant jealousy and distrust of all his inten-
tions; and when some members, who had been
gained by the court, ventured to move in the
house of Commons that the nation ought to
alift the Emperor, the Queen's father-in-law,

in

* Godwin's Annals of Q: Mary ap. Kennct, v. ii. p. 329.
Burnet's hifi. of Refor. ii. 298. 305.

in his war againfi France, the proposal was re- BooK IX.
jeeed with general diflatisfaaion. A motion
which was made, that the parliament hould 55
give its content that Philip might be quickly
crowned as the Queen's husband, met with
such a cold reception, that it was instantly
withdrawn B

THE King of France had observed the pro- The French

/- i

ry 1 , * . * T^ Kingalam-

grefs of the Emperor's negociation in Eng- edag, e
land with much uneasiness. The great accef- ,match he-

t wees, Phi

sion of territories as well as reputation which Wip and
his enemy would acquire by the marriage of Maly.
his son with the Queen of such a powerful
kingdom, was obvious and formidable. He
easily foresaw that the English, notwithstanding
all their fears and precautions, would be soon
drawn in to take part in the quarrels on the
continent, and be compelled to a in subser-
viency to the Emperor's ambitious schemes.
For this reason, Henry had given it in charge
to his ambassador at the court of London, to
employ all his address in order to defeat or re-
tard the treaty of marriage ; and as there was
not, at that time, any Prince of the blood in
France, whom he could propose to the Queen
as a husband, he inftruced him to co-operate
with such of the English as wished their fove-
reign to marry one of her own fubjets. But
the Queen's ardour and precipitation in closing
with the first overtures in favour of Philip,
having rendered all his endeavours ineffectual,
Henry was so far from thinking it prudent to
give any aid to the English malecontents, though
earnestly solicited by Wyat and their other
leaders, who tempted him to take them under
his protection, by offers of great advantage to
France, that he commanded his ambassador to

congratulate
' Carte's hist. of England, iii. 314.

Book XI. congratulate the Queen in the warmest terms

i-sq4 upon the fupprellion of the infurretion.

Hisprepa- BUT, notwithstanding these external profef-
titions tor t
a .io... sions, Henry dreaded so much the consequence
pagpe. of this alliance, which more than compensated

for ail the Emperor had loft in Germany, that
he determined to carry on his military ope-
rations, both in the Low-Countries and in Italy,
with extraordinary vigour, in order that he
might compel Charles to accept of an equitable
peace, before his daughter-in-law could fur-
mount the aversion of her fubjets to a war on
the continent, and prevail on them to aflift the
Emperor either with money or troops. For
this purpose, he exerted himself to the utmost
in order to have a numerous army early assem-
bled on the frontiers of the Netherlands, and
while one part of it laid waste the open country
of Artois, the main body, under the Conflable
Montmorency, advanced towards the provinces
of Liege and Hainault by the forest of Ar-
dennes.

Te pro- THE campaign was opened with the siege of
gref of of
Lis rm. Mariemburgh, a town which the Queen of

Hungary, the governess of the Low-Countries,
had fortified at great expence; but, being defti-
tute of a sufficient garrilon, it surrendered in
fix days. Henry, elated with this success, put
!c.e .L himself at the head of his army, and inverting

Bouvines, took it by assault, after a short re-
fiftance. With equal facility he became master
of Dinant; and then turning to the left, bent

The Empe- his march towards the province of Artois. The
'.i ",ot- vas films which the Emperor had remitted into
rac it. England, had so exhausted his treasury, as to

render his preparations, at this juncture, flower
and more dilatory than usual. He had no body

of

of troops to make head against tie French at Boo Xl.
their first entrance into his territories; and'""
though he drew together all the forces in the 'l54
country in the utmost hurry, and gave the
command of them to Emanuel Philibert of Sa-
voy, they were in no condition to face an enemy
so far superior in number. The Prince of
Savoy, however, by his aAivity and good con-
dut, made up for his want of troops. By
watching all the motions of the French at a di-
stance, and by chufing his own polls with skill,
he put it out of their power either to form any
siege of consequence, or to attack him. Want
of subsistence oon obliged them to fall back
towards their own frontiers, after having burnt
all the open towns, and having plundered the
country through which they marched, with a
cruelty and licence more becoming a body of
light troops than a royal army led by a great
monarch.

BUT Henry, that he might not dismiss his TheFrenc

army without attempting Come conquest adequate
to the vast preparations, as well as sanguine
hopes, with which he had opened the campaign,
invested Renti, a place deemed in that age of
great importance, as, by its situation on the
confines of Artois and the Boulonnais, it co-
vered the former province, and protected the
parties which made incursions into the latter.
The town, which was strongly fortified and
provided with a numerous garrison, made a gal-
lant defence: but being warmly pressed by a
powerful army, it must soon have yielded. The
Emperor, who at that time enjoyed a short in-
terval of ease from the gout, was so solicitous
to save it, that, although he could bear no other
motion but that of a litter, he instantly put him-
self at the head of his army, which, having re-

ceived

BOOK XI. ceived several reinforcements, was now strong
'--"'enough to approach the enemy. The French

5 were eager to decide the fate of Renti by a

battle, and expetled it from the Emperor's ar-
rival in his camp. But Charles avoided a ge-
neral action with great industry; and as he had
nothing in view but to save the town, he hoped
to accomplish that, without exposing himself to
the consequences of such a dangerous and doubt-
ful event.

An aaion NOTWITHSTANDING all his precautions, a
th'tw: dispute, about a poll which both armies endea-

vi. oured to seize, brought on an engagement
Aug. 13 which proved almofi general. The Duke of

Guile, who commanded the wing of the French
which flood the brunt of the combat, displayed
valour and conduct worthy of the defender of
Metz; the Imperialists, after an obstinate ftrug-
gle, were repulsed; the French remained makiers
of the poll in dispute; and if the Conflable,
either from his natural caution and slowness, or
from unwillingness to support a rival whom he
hated, had not delayed bringing up the main
body to second the impression which Guise had
made, the rout of the enemy must have been
complete. The Emperor, notwithstanding the
loss which he had fultained, continued in the
fame camp; and the French, being straitened
for provisions, and finding it impofiible to carry
on the siege in the face of an hostile army,
quitted their intrenchments. They retired
openly, courting the enemy to approach, rather
than ihunning an engagement.

The Impt- BUT Charles, having gained his end, suffered

dpin- them to march offunmolefted, As soon as his
ardy. troops entered their own country, Henry threw

garrisons into the frontier towns, and dismissed

the

the reft of the army. This encouraged the Im- BooK Xl.
perialifts to push forward with a confiderable'v
body of troops into Picardy, and by laying 554
waste the country with fire and sword, they
endeavoured to revenge themselves for the ra-
vages which the French had committed in Hai-
nault and Artois c. But, as they were not able
to reduce any place of importance, they gained
nothing more than the enemy had done by this
cruel and inglorious method of carrying on the
war.

THE arms of France were ill more unfuc- Affirso

cefsful in Italy. The footing which the French Itly.
had acquired in Sienna, occasioned much un-
easiness to Cosmo di Medici, the modt saga-
cious and enterprising of all the Italian Princes.
He dreaded the neighbourhood of a powerful
people, to whom all who favoured the ancient
republican government in Florence would have
recourse, as to their natural protectors against
that absolute authority which the Emperor had
enabled him to usurp; he knew how odious he
was to the French, on account of his attach- Cotmodi

Medici's

ment to the Imperial party ; and he foresaw schemes
that, if they were permitted to gather strength with reard
in Sienna, Tuscany would oon feel the effects
of their resentment. For these reasons, he
withed with the utmost solicitude for the expul-
sion of the French out of the Siennefe, before
they had time to eftablilh themselves thoroughly
in the country, or to receive such reinforcements
from France as would render it dangerous to
attack them. As this, however, was properly
the Emperor's bnfinefs, who was called by his
interest as well as honour to dislodge those
formidable intruders into the heart of his do-
minions, Cosmo laboured to throw the whole

burden
C Thuan. 460. &c. Harxi Ann. Brab. 674.

BooK XI. burden of the enterprise on him; and on that

account had given no assistance, during the former
1'54' campaign, but by advancing some small fums

of money towards the payment of the Imperial
troops.

HeD "ri- BUT as the defence of the Netherlands en-
thempe- groled all the Emperor's attention, and his

remittances into England bad drained his trea-
fury, it was obvious that his operations in Italy
would be extremely feeble; and Cosmo plainly
perceived, that if he himself did not take part
openl) in the war, and a with vigour, the
French would scarcely meet with any annoy-
ance. As his situation rendered this resolution
neceflary and unavoidable, his next care was to
execute it in such a manner, that he might de-
rive from it some other advantage, beside that
of driving the French out of his neighbourhood.
With this view, he dispatched an envoy to
Charles, offering to declare war againit France,
and to reduce Sienna at his own charges, on
condition that he should be repaid whatever he
mould expend in the enterprise, and be per-
mitted to retain all his conquests until his de-
mands were fully satisfied. Charles, to whom,
at this juncture, the war against Sienna was an
intolerable burden, and who had neither expe-
dient nor resource that could enable him to carry
it on with proper vigour, closed gladly with
this overture; and Cosmo, well acquainted with
the low fate of the Imperial finances, flattered
himfeif that the Emperor, finding it impoflible
to reimburse him, would susser him to keep
quiet poffelion of whatever places he should
conquer .

FULL
D Adriani Iftoria dc fuoi tempi, vol. i. 65z.

FULIL of these hopes, he made great prepa- Boo XI.

rations for war; and as the French King had--"
turned the strength of his arms against the Entern5.to
Netherlands, he did not despair of assembling wrwith
such a body of men as would prove more than
a sufficient match for any force which Henry
could bring into the field in Italy. He endea-
voured to obtain aliftance from the pope, or at
least to secure his remaining neutral, by giving
one of his daughters to that Pontiff's nephew.
He attempted to detach the Duke of Orsini,
whose family had been long attached to the
French party, from his ancient confederates, by
beRlowing on him another of his daughters; and
what was of greater consequence than either of
these, he engaged John James Medecino, Mar- Give tbhe

- L:- *command of

quis of Marignano, to take the command of his his army to
army . This officer, from a very low condition Medeino.
in life, had raised himself, through all the ranks
of service, to high command, and had displayed
talents and acquired reputation in war, which
entitled him to be placed on a level with the
greatest generals of that martial age. Having
attained a station of eminence so difpropoe-
tionate to his birth, he laboured with a fond
solicitude to conceal his original obscurity, by
giving out that he was descended of the family
of Medici, to which honour the casual refem-
blance of his name was his only pretension.
Cosmo, happy that he could gratify him at such
an easy rate,, flattered his vanity in this point,
acknowledged him as a relation, and permitted
him to aftime the arms of his family: Mede-
cino, eager to serve the head of that family-of
which he now confidered himself as a branch,
applied with wonderful zeal and assiduity to r4ife
troops; and as, during his long service, he had
acquired great credit with the leaders of those

VOL. III. Y mercenary

L Adriani Ifloria, vol. i. p. 663.

Boo XI. mercenary bands which formed the strength
'-v' of Italian armies, he engaged the most eminent

'554. of them to follow Cosmo's standard.

PStroz- To oppose this able general, and the formi-
witsh dable army which he had assembled, the King
C~mmrof of France made choice of Peter Strozzi, a Flo-
thie Prench
s·my i rentine nobleman, who had resided long in
tly.r France, as an exile, and who had risen by his

merit to high reputation, as well as command
in the army. He was the son of Philip Strozzi,
who, in the year one thousand five hundred
and thirty-feven, had concurred with such ardour
in the attempt to expel the family of Medici
out of Florence, in order to re-eftabliih the an-
tient republican form of government; and who
had perifled in the undertaking. The son in-
herited the implacable aversion to the Medici
as well as the fame enthufiaftick zeal for the
liberty of Florence which had animated his
father, whose death he was impatient torevenge.
Henry flattered himself that his army would
make rapid progress under a general whose zeal
to promote his interet was routed and seconded
by such powerful passions; especially as he had
allotted him, for the scene of afion, his native
country, in which he had many powerful par-
tifans ready to facilitate all his operations.

nr impr- BUT how specious soever the motives might ap-
b"i.s ce. pear which induced Henry to make this choice,

it proved fatal to the interests of France in Italy.
Cosmo, as soon as he heard that the mortal enemy
of his family was appointed to take the com-
mand in Tuscany, concluded that the King of
France aimed at omething more than the pro-
*teaion of the Siennefe, and aw the necessity of
making extraordinary efforts, not merely to re-

duce

duce Sienna, but to save himself from deftruc- BooK Xl.
tion . At the fame time, the Cardinal of Ser- ,
rara, who had the entire direction of the French 554
affairs in Italy, confidered Strozzi as a formid-
able rival in power, and in order to prevent his
acquiring any increase of authority from success,
he was extremely remiss in supplying him either
with money to pay his troops, or with provi-
sions to support them. Strozzi himself, blinded
by his resentment against the Medici, pushed on
his operations with the impetuosity of revenge,
rather than with the caution and prudence be-
coming a great general.

AT first, however, he attacked several towns The bratl

in the territories of Florence with such vigour 0Mo*'"i
as obliged Medecino, in order to check his
progress, to withdraw the greater part of his
army from Sienna, which he had invested before
Strozzi's arrival in Italy. As Cosmo sustained
the whole burden of military operations, the
expence of which must soon have exhausted his
revenues; as neither the viceroy of Naples nor
governor of Milan were in condition to afford
him any effectual aid; and as the troops which
Medecino had left in the camp before Sienna
could attempt nothing againif it during his ab-
fence; it was Strozzi's business to have pro-
trated the war, and to have transferred the feat
of it into the territories of Florence; but the
hope of ruining his enemy by one decisive blow,
precipitated him into a general engagement not
far from Marciano. The armies were nearly Augft 3.
equal in number; but a body of Italian cavalry,
in which Strozzi placed great confidence, having
fled without making any resistance, either through I. wh'ch
the treachery or cowardice of the officers who thrdef^chad
commanded it, his infantry remained exposed

Y2 to
Pecci Memoric di Sicnna, vol. iv. p. 103, &c.

Boa XI. to the attacks of all Medecino's troops. En-
^"^- couraged, I;owever, by Strozzi's presence and
1554. example, who, after receiving a dangerous wound

in endeavouring to rally the cavalry, placed
himself at the head of the infantry, and mani-
fested an admirable presence of mind, as well
as extraordinary valour, they flood their ground
with great fiimnefs, and repulsed such of the
enemy as ven:ured to approach them. But
those gallant troops being surrounded at last on
every fide, and torn in pieces by a battery of
cannon which Medecino brought to bear upon
them, the Florentine cavalry broke in on their
flanks, and a general rout ensued. Strozzi,
'faint with the los of blood, and deeply affe&ed
with the fatal consequences of his own rahnefs,
found the utmost diffi t ult) in making his escape
with a handful of men 6.

M' .no ' MEDECINO returned imnmediately to the siege
sie.ma, of Sienna with his victorious forces; and as

Strozzi could not, after the greaterf efforts of
activity, colled as many men as to form the ap-
pearance of a regular army, he had leisure to
carry on his approaches against the town with-

Wi.hi, .out molestation. But the Siennefe, instead of
g..' '.'d- finking into despair 'upon this cruel disappoint-
e .c..ln. mert of their only hope of obtaining relief, pre-
" "t'" pared to defend themlelves to the utmost extre-

mity, with that undaunted fortitude, which the
love of liberty alone can inpire. This gene-
rous resolution was warmly seconded by Motfluc,
sho commanded the French garrison in th
tebn. The active and enter,prising courage
which he had displayed on many occasions, had
procur(d him this command i and as he 'had
ambiiin which aspired at the highest military
dignitis, without any pretensions to attain them

but
Pecci Memorie della Sienna vol. iv. p. tS7.

but what he could derive from merit, he de- Bo Xr;
termined to diftinguflh his defence of Sienna by ^
extraordinary efforts of valour and perseverance. 554
For this purpose, he repaired and ftr-ngthen-
ed the fortifications with unwearied industry; he
trained the citizens to the use of arms, and ac-
customed them to go through the fatigues and
dangers of service in common with the soldiers;
and as the enemy were extremely ftrid in guard-
ing all the avenues to the city, he ufbanded
the provisions in the magazines with the modl
parsimonious ceconomy, and prevailed on the
soldiers, as well as the citizens, to refirit them-
selves to a very moderate daily allowance for
their subsistence. Medecino, though his army
was not numerous enough to storm the town by
open force, ventured twice to assault it by fur-
prise; but he was received each time with so
much spirit, and repulsed with such loss, as dif-
couraged him from repeating the attempt, and
left him no hopes of reducing the town but by
famine.

WITH this view, he fortified his own camp Medecino

with great care, occupied all the posts of strength siege into a
round the place, and having entirely cut off the blockade.
besieged from any communication with. the ad-
jlcent country, he waited patiently until necef-
fity should compel them to open their gates.
But their enthufiaftick zeal for liberty made the
citizens despise the distresses occasioned by the
scarcity of provisions, and even supported them
long under all the miseries of famine Mon-
luc, by his example and exhortations, taught
his soldiers to vie with them in patience and ab-
ftinence; and it was not until they had with-
stood a siege of ten months, until they had
eaten up all the horses, dogs, and other ani-
mals in the place, and-were reduced almost to

their

Boo, Xl. their lat morsel of bread, that they proposed a
*-'c capitulation. Even then they demanded honour-
1555' able terms; and as Cosmo, though no stranger

to the extremity of their condition, was afraid
that despair might prompt them to venture
upon rome wild enterprize, he immediately
granted them conditions more favourable than
they could have expected.

Apil it. THE capitulation was made in the Emperor's
eged by name, whoengaged to take the republicofSienna
fleto° under the protection of the Empire; he pro-
Capitau. mifed to maintain the ancient liberties of the

city, to allow the magistrates the full exercise
of their former authority, to secure the citizens
in the undisturbed poffeflion of their privileges
and property; he granted an ample and unli-
mited pardon to all who had borne arms against
him; he reserved to himself the right of placing
a garrison in the town, but engaged not to re-
build the citadel without the content of the citi-
zens. Monluc and his French garrison were
allowed to march out with all the honours of
war.

Mqo-fthe MEDECINo observed the articles of capitula-
^-oeMo.tion, as far as depended on him, with great ex-
t-Acino; aanefs. No violence or insult whatever was

offered to the inhabitants, and the French garrison
was treated with all the refped due to their spirit
and bravery. But many of the citizens fufpeting,
from the extraordinary facility with which they
had obtained such favourable conditions, that
the Emperor, as well as Cosmo, would take the
first opportunity of violating them, and disdain-
ing to possess a precarious liberty, which de-
pended on the will of another, abandoned the
place of their nativity, and accompanied the
French to Monte-Alcino, Porto Ercole, and

other

other small towns in the territory of the repub- Bo00 Xl
lick. They eftabli(hed, in Mont6-Alcino, the
fame model of government to which they had adetabifl
been accustomed at Sienna, and appointing ma- tr g
giftrates with the fame titles and jurifdidtion, so- there.
laced themselves with this image of their ancient
liberty.

THE fears of the Siennefe concerning the fate Hardlhipsto

of their country were not imaginary, or their ihteh f
suspicion of the Emperor and Cosmo ill-founded; Sienna were
for no sooner had the Imperial troops taken po f- bjeaed
session of the town than Cosmo, without regard-
ing the articles of capitulation, not only dif-
placed the magistrates who were in office, and
nominated new ones devoted to his own interest,
but commanded all the citizens to deliver up
their arms to persons whom he appointed to
receive them. They submitted to the former
from neceflfity, though with all the reluctance
and regret which men accustomed to liberty feel
in obeying the first commands of a master.
They did not yield the fame tame obedience to
the latter; and many persons of diftin&ion, ra-
ther than degrade themselves from the rank of
freemen to the condition of slaves, by surrender-
ing their arms, fled to their countrymen at
Monte-Alcino, and chose to endure all the hard-
ships, and encounter all the dangers which they
had reason to expec in that new station, where
they had fixed the feat of their republick.

COSMO, not reckoning himself secure while Cormoat-

such numbers of implacable and desperate ene- who hadie-
mies were fettled in his neighbourhood, and re- tired.
tained any degree of power, solicited Medecino
to attack them in their different places of retreat,
before they had time to recruit their strength
and spirits, after the many calamities which they

had

Boo K X. had suffered. He prevailed on him, though his

--* army was much weakened by hard duty during
555s- the siege of Sienna, to invest Porto Ercole; and

the fortifications being both flight and incom-
plete, the besieged were soon compelled to open
Jane 3. their gates. An unexpected order, which Me-

declno received from the Emperor to detach the
greater part of his troops into Piedmont, pre-
vented farther operations, and permitted the
Siennefe exiles to reside for some time undisturbed
in Monte-Alcino. But their unhappy coun-
trymen who remained at Sienna, were not yet at
the end of their sufferings; for the Emperor,
instead of adhering to the articles of capitula-
tion, granted his son Philip the investiture of
that city and all its dependencies; and Francis
de Toledo, in the name of their new master,
proceeded to fettle the civil and military govern-
ment, treated them like a conquered people,
and fubjeded. them to the Spanish yoke, with-
out paying any regard whatever to their privi-
leges or efablifhed forms of policy H.

Oerations THE Imperial army in Piedmont had been
mPnvd- so feeble, for some time, and its commanders

so inacive, that the Emperor, in order to give
vigour to his operations in that quarter, found
it neceflary not only to call off Medecino's
troops from Tuscany while in the career of
conquest, but to employ in Piedmont a general
of such reputation and abilities, as might coun-
terbalance the great military talents of the Ma-
rechal Briffac, who was at the head of the French
forces in that country.

Hz

Sleid. 617. Thuan. lib. xv. 5:6. 537. Joan. Came-

rrii adnot. rer. prtipnurum ab anno 155oad 1561 ap.
Freherum, vol. iii. p. 564. Pecci Memorie della Sienna,
iv. 164, &c.

HE pitched on the Duke of Alva for that BooK XI

purpose, but it was as much the effect of a _
court intrigue, as of his opinion of the Duke's Charei p-
merit, which led him to this choice. Alva had oint, the
long attended Philip with the utmost afliduity, Alva gene-
and had endeavoured to work himself into his r,^iffre
confidence by all the insinuating arts of which his
haughty and inflexible nature was capable. As
he nearly resembled that Prince in many sea-
tures of his charater, he began to gain much
of his good-will. Ruy Gomez de Silva, Philip's
favourite, who dreaded the progress which this
formidable rival made in his master's affecions,
had the address to prevail with the Emperor to
name Alva to this command. The Duke, though
sensible that he owed this diftintion to the ma-
licious arts of an enemy, who had no other aim
than to remove him at a distance from court,
was of such punctilious honour, that he would
not decline a command that appeared dangerous
and difficult, but, at the fame time, so haughty,
that he would not accept of it but on his
own terms, insisting on being appointed the
Emperor's Vicar-general in Italy, with the u-
preme military command in all the Imperial and
Spanish territories in that country. Charles
granted all his demands; and he took pof-
feflion of his new dignity with almost unlimited
authority.

His firfi operations, however, were neither Hieopea-

proportioned to his former reputation and the !iotncn'
extensive powers with which he was invested, able.
nor did they come up to the Emperor's expec-
tations. Briffac had under his command an
army which, though inferior in number to the
Imperialists, was composed of chosen troops,
which having grown old in service in that
country, where every town was fortified, and

every

BwK XI. every castle capable of being defended, were

p perfetly acquainted with the manner of carry-
's5 ing on war there. By their valour, and his own

good conduct, Briflic not only defeated all the
attempts of the Imperialists, but added new con-
quests to the territories of which he was formerly
maRter. Alva, after having boarfed, with his
usual arrogance, that he would drive the French
out of Piedmont in a few weeks, was obliged
to retire into winter quarters, with the ignominy
of being unable to preserve entire that part of
the country of which the Emperor had hitherto
kept poffellion'.

As the operations of this campaign in Pied-

mont were indecisive, those in the Netherlands
were inconsiderable, neither the Emperor nor
King of France being able to bring into the
field an army firong enough to undertake any

A rfpi- enterprie ofmoment. But what Charles wanted
mr Mt- in force, he endeavoured to supply by a bold
to .het - Rratagem, the fuccefsof which would have been

equal to that of the most vigorous campaign.
During the siege of Metz, Leonard, Father Guar-
dian of a convent of Franciscans in that city,
had insinuated himself far into the esteem and
favour of the Duke of Guise, by his attach-
ment to the French. Being a man of an active
and intriguing spirit, he had been extremely
useful both in animating the inhabitants to sus-
tain with patience all the hard(hips of the siege,
and in procuring intelligence of the enemies de-
signs and motions. The merit of those impor-
tant services, together with the warm recom-
mendations of the Duke of Guise, secured him
such high confidence with Vielleville, who was

appointed

'Thnan. lib. xv. 529. Guichenon Hilt. de Savoye,
:om. i. 670.

appointed governor of Metz when Guise left the BooK Xl.
town, that he was permitted to converse or cor-
respond with whatever persons he choxe, and 55
nothing that he did created any suspicion. This
monk, from the levity natural to bold and pro-
jeding adventurers; or from resentment against
the French, who had not beltowed on him such
rewards as he thought due to his own merit; or
tempted, by the unlimited confidence which was
placed in him, to imagine that he might carry
on and accomplish any cheme with perfet fe-
curity, formed a design of betraying Metz to
the Imperialists.

HE communicated his intentions to the Thepl

Queen-dowager of Hungary, who governed the o it
Low-Countries in name of her brother. She
approving, without any scruple, an ad of trea-
chery, from which the Emperor might derive
such signal advantage, affited the Father Guar-
dian in concerting the most proper plan for
ensuring its success. They agreed that the
Father Guardian mhould endeavour to gain his
monks to concur in promoting the design ; that
he hould introduce into the convent a certain
number of chosen soldiers, disguised in the habit
of friars that when every thing was ripe for
execution, the governor of Thionville hould
march towards Metz in the night with a con-
fiderable body of troops, and attempt to scale
the ramparts; that while the garrison was em-
ployed in resisting the assailants, the monks
(hould set fire to the town in different places;
that the soldiers who lay concealed should tally
out of the convent, and attack those who de-
fended the ramparts in the rear. Amidst the
universal terror and confusion, which events so
unexpected would occasion, it was not doubted
but that the Imperialists might become matters

of

Boo XI. of the town. As a recompense for this service,
~'7 ' the Father Guardian stipulated that he ihould

be appointed bifhopof Met; and ample rewards
were promied to such of his monks as hould
be most active in co-operating with him.
'tsprcFi. THE Father Guardian accomplilhed what he

had undertaken to perform with great secrecy
and dilpatch. By his authority and arguments,
as well as by the proipet of wealth and honours
which he set before his monks, he prevailed on
all of them to enter into the conspiracy. He
in!,oduced into the convent, without being sus-
ptded, as many soldiers as were thought fuffi-
cient. The governor of Thionville apprized
in due time of the design, had assembled a
proper number of troops for executing it; and
the moment approached, which probably would
have wrefied from Henry the most important
of all his conquests.

b disco- BUT, happily for France, on the very day that
med. was fixed for striking the blow, Vielleville, an

able and vigilant officer, received information
from a spy whom he entertained at Thionville,
that certain Franciscan friars retorted frequently
thither, and were admitted to many private
conferences with the governor, who was carry-
ing on preparations for ome military enterprize
with great dispatch, but with a most mysterious
secrecy. This was sufficient to awaken Vielle-
vYlle's lulpicions. Without communicating these
to any person, he instantly visited the convent
of Franciicans; detected the soldiers who were
concealed there; and forced them to discover
as much as they knew concerning the nature
of the enterprile. The Father Guardian, who
had gnne to Thionville that he might put the
lait hand to his machinations, was seized at the

gate

gate as he returned; and he, in order to save BooKcXI.
himself from the rack, revealed all the circum-
stances of the conspiracy.

VIELLEVILLE not satisfied with having seized Abod of

the traitors, and having fiuftrated their schemes, dee,,ed.
was solicitous to take advantage of the disco-
veries which he had made, so as to be revenged
on the Imperialists. For this purpose, he
marched out with the best troops in his garrison,
and placing these in ambush near the road, by
which the Father. Guardian had informed him
that the governor of Thionvile would approach
Metz, he fell upon the imperialists with great
fury, as they advanced in perfect security, with-
out fulpeCting any danger to be near. Con-
founded at this sudden attack, by an enemy
whom they expected to' surprise, hey made
little refifance; and a great part of the troops
employed in this"fervice- among which were
many persons of diftintlion, was killed or tken
prisoners. Before next morning, ViellevlIe re-
turned to Metz its triumplh.

No resolution ias :taken for some time con- The conrpi-

cerning the fate of the Fatl-r Guardian and his rnitld.p
monks, the framers and conductors of this dan-
gerous confpiiracy.' Regard fr the honrbur of
a body Co numerous andi re'pectable as the
Francikats, and unwilingnefs to ass6rd a 'ub-
je&'of triumph to the tnemies of the Romish
church by' their disgrace, seen to' have occa-
fioned,this delay. But at length,'the necessity
of inflicting exemplary pnihtnent upon them,
in order to deter others frot6 venturing to com-
mit the fame crime, became so evident, that
orders were issued to proceed to their trial.
Their guilt was made apparent by the clearefl
evidence; and sentence of death was passed

upon

BooK Xl. upon the Father Guardian together with twenty

"' monks. On the evening previous to the day
155S' fixed for their execution, the jailor took them

out of the dungeons in which they had hitherto
been confined separately, and slut them all up
in one great room, that they might confess
their fins one to another, and join together in
preparing for a future state. But as soon as
they were left alone, instead of employing them-
flves in the religious exercises suitable to their
condition, they began to reproach the Father
Guardian, and four of the senior monks who
had been mos ative in educing them, for
their inordinate ambition, which had brought
such misery on them, and such disgrace upon
their order. From reproaches they proceeded
to curses and execrations, and at last, in a
frenzy of.rage and despair, they fell upon them
with such violence, that they murdered the
Father Guardian on the spot, and so disabled
the'other four, that it became neceflary to carry
them next morning in a cart, together with the
dead body of the Father Guardian, to the place
of execution. Six of the youngest were par-
doned, the reft suffered the punishment which
their crime merited '.
A friitl THOUGH both parties, exhausted by the length

Zf0t of the war, carried it on in this languishing

.dzb8* manner, neither of them shewed any disposition
AC**' to litfen to overtures of peace. Cardinal Pole

indeed laboured with all the zeal becoming his
piety and humanity, to re-eflablifh concord
.mong the Princes of Christendom. He had
not only persuaded his mistress, the Qeein of

England,

K Than. lib. xv. p. 522. Belcar. Corn. Rer. Gal. 866

Memoires do Marech. Vielleville, par M. Charloix, tom-
iii. p. 249, &c. p. 347. Par. 1757.

England, to enter warmly into his sentiments BooK XI.
and to offer her mediation to the contending
powers, but had prevailed both on the Emperor 1555'
and King of France to fend their plenipoten-
tiaries to a village between Gravelines and
Ardres. He himself, together with Gardiner
bishop of WincheRler, repaired thither, in order
to preside as mediators in the conferences, which
were to be held for adjusting all the points in
difference. But though each of the monarchs
committed this negociation to some of their mi-
nifters, in whom they placed the greatest confi-
dence, it was oon evident that they came toge-
ther with no sincere desire of accommodation. M* It.
Each proposed articles so extravagant that they
could have no hopes of their being accepted.
Pole, after exerting, in vain, all his zeal, ad-
dress, and invention, in order to persuade them to
relinquish such extravagant demands, and to con-
sent to the substitution of more equal condi-
tions, became sensible of the folly of wafting
time, in attempting to reconcile those, whom
their obstinacy rendered irreconcilable, broke
off the conference, and returned into England L.

DURING there transactions in other parts of Aaii f

Europe, Germany enjoyed such profound tran- Germay.
quillity, as afforded the diet full leisure to deli-
berate, and to establish proper regulations con-
cerning a point of the greatest consequence to
the internal peace of the Empire. By the treaty
of Paffau in one thousand five hundred and
fifty-two, it had been referred to the next diet
of the Empire to confirm and perfet the plan
of religious pacification, which was there agreed
upon. The terror and confusion with which

the

Thuan. lib. x. p.. 523. Mem. de Ribier, tom. ii.
. 613.

Boor X. the violent commotions excited by Albert of
'--' Brandenburg had filled the Empire, as well
3555- as the conflant attention which Ferdinand was

obliged to give to the affairs of Hungary, had
hitherto prevented the holding a diet, though it
had been summoned, soon after the conclusion
of the treaty, to meet at Auglburg.

Diet held at Bu T as a diet was now necefiry on many ac-
.and F,-, counts, Ferdinand, about the beginning of this
nad'. year, had repaired to Augsburg. Though few

ipc o
i. f the Princes were present, either in person or

by their. deputies, he opened the assembly by a
speech, in which he proposed a termination
of the dissensions, to which the new tenets and
controversies with regard to religion had given
rife, not only to the first and great business of
the diet, but as the point which both the Em-
peror and he had most at heart. He represented
the innumerable obstacles which the Emperor
had to surmount before he could procure the
convocation of a general council, as well as the
fatal accidents which had for some time retarded,
and had at last suspended the consultations of
that aembly. He observed, that experience
had already taught them how vain it was to
expect any remedy for evils, which demanded
immediate redress, from a general council, the
aflembling of which would either be prevented,
or its deliberations be interrupted by the diffen-
sions and hostilities of the Princes of Chrifien-
dom1; That a national council in Germany,
which, as some imagined, might be called with
greater ease, and deliberate with more perfedt
security, was an assembly of an unprecedented
nature, the jurifdition of which was uncertain
in its extent, and the form of its proceedings
undefined; That in his opinion there remained
but one method for composing their unhappy

differences,

differences, which though it had been oftenBooxXI.
tried without success, might yet prove effectual, '-'
if it were attempted with a better and more '555.
pacifick spirit than had appeared on former occa-
sions, and that was to choose a few men of
learning, abilities, and moderation, who, by dif-
culling the disputed articles in an amicable con-
ference, might explain them in such a manner
as to bring the contending parties either to unite
in lIntiment, or to differ with charity.

THIS speech being printed in common form, Surpicions

and 'ear

and dispersed over the Empire, revived the fears orthe Pro.
and jealousies of the Protestants; Ferdinand, teftant.
they observed with much surprise, had not once
mentioned, in his address to the diet, the treaty
of Paffau, the ipulations in which they con-
fidered as the great security of their religious
liberty. The suspicions to which this gave rife
were confirmed by the accounts which they
daily received of the extreme rigour with which
Ferdinand treated their Protestant brethren in
his hereditary dominions, and, as it was natural
to confider his actions as the surest indication
of his intentions, this diminished their confi-
dence in those pompous profeflions of mode-
ration or of zeal for the re-establishment of
concord, to which his practice was so utterly
repugnant.

THE arrival of the Cardinal Morone, whom There in-

the Pope had appointed to attend the diet as 'he'rivbl
his nuncio, completed their conviction, and of nucio
left them no room to doubt that some dan- op to the
gerous machination was forming against the diet
peace or safety of the Protestant church. Ju-
lius, elated with the unexpected return of the
English nation from apoftacy, began to flatter
himself that, the fpiritof mutiny and revolt hav-

VOL. III. Z ing

Boo-XI. ving now spent its force, the happy period was
h~' come when the church might resume its ancient

authority, and be obeyed by the people with
the fame tame submission as formerly. Full of
there hopes he had sent Morone to Auglburg,
with infiruaions to employ his eloquence in
order to excite the Germans to imitate the laud-
able example of the English, and his political
address in order to prevent any decree of the
diet to the detriment of the catholick faith. As
Morone inherited from his father, the chan-
cellor of Milan, uncommon talents for nego-
ciation and intrigue, he could hardly have failed
of embarrafling the measures of the Protestants
in the diet, or of defeating whatever they aimed
at obtaining in it for their farther security.

The death BuT an unforeseen event delivered them from
otjiusn. all the danger which they had reason to appre-

hend from Morone's presence. Julius, by
abandoning himself to pleasures and amuse-
ments, no less unbecoming his age than his cha-
rater, having contracted such habits of diffi-
pation, that any serious occupation, especially
if attended with difficulty, became an intole-
rable burden to him, had long resiled the soli-
citations of his nephew to hold a consistory,
because he expected there a violent opposition
to his schemes in favour of that young man.
But when all the pretexts which he could invent
for eluding this request were exhausted, and at
the fame time his indolent aversion to business
continued to grow upon him, he feigned indif-
position rather than yield to his nephew's im-
portunity; and that he might give the deceit a
greater colour of probability, he not only con-
fined himself to his apartment, but changed his
usual diet and manner of life. By perlifting
too long in acing this ridiculous part, he con-

trated

traited a real disease, of which he died in a few BooK XI.
days, leaving his infamous mihion, the Cardinal '-
de Monte, to bear his name, and to disgrace the March 53.
dignity which he had conferred upon him M.
As oon as Morone heard of his death, he set Thenuncio
out abruptly from Augsburg, where he had 'et utfor
resided cnly a few days, that he might be pre-
sent at the election of a new Pontiff.

ONE cause of their suspicions and fears being Ferdinand's

thus removed, the Protetants oon became fen- wising to
fible that their conjectures concerning Ferdi- 'tfthe
nand's intentions, however specious, were ill-
founded, and that he had no thoughts of vio-
lating the articles favourable to them in the
treaty of PaTfau. Charles, from the time that
Maurice had defeated all his schemes in the
Empire, and overturned the great system of
religious and civil despotism, which he had
almost established there, gave little attention to
the internal government of Germany, and per-
mitted his brother to pursue whatever measures
he judged mos salutary and expedient. Ferdi-
nand, less ambitious and enterprising than the
Emperor, instead of resuming a plan which
he, with power and resources so far superior,
had failed of accompli(hing, endeavoured to
attach the Princes of the Empire to his family
by an administration uniformly moderate and
equitable. To this he gave, at present, par-
ticular attention, because his situation at this
juncture rendered it necessary to court their fa-
vour and support with more than uual assiduity.

CHARLES had again resumed his favourite Charlshad
projec of acquiring the Imperial crown for his r'ml'dhi

Z 2 son tering the

fuccefflon to
the Empire.

i Onuphr. Panvinius de vitis Pontificum, p. 320.
Thluan. lib. xv. 517.

Boot XI. son Philip, which the ill reception it had met

v'-' with when first proposed had obliged him to
s'555 intermit, but had not perliladed him to relin-

quifh. This led him warmly to renew his
requefi to his brother that he would accept of
some compensation for his prior right of fuc-
ceflion, and sacrifice that to the grandeur of the
house of Auitria. Ferdinand, who was as little
disposed, as formerly, to give such an extra-
ordinary proof of felf-denial, being sensible that,
in order to defeat this scheme, not only the
mofi inflexible firmness on his part, but a vi-
gorous declaration from the Princes of the Em-
pire in behalf of his title, were requisite; was
willing to purchase their favour by gratifying
them in every point that they deemed interest-
ing or eflential.

The Turki ON the' other hand, the Turks, after having
toi.d.e wrested from him great part of his Hungarian
Hu.gsry. territories, were ready to attack the provinces

fiill subjet to his authority with a formidable
army, againfi which he could bring no equal
force into the field, unless the diet mhould grant
him immediate and extraordinary aid. For this
he could not hope, if the internal peace of the
Empi.e were not established on a foundation
solid in itself, and which should appear, even
to the Protestants, so secure and o permanent,
as might not only allow them to engage in a
distant war with safety, but encourage them to
as with vigour.

Heidairm- A STEP taken by the Protestants themselves,
lepi,,en a short time after the opening of the diet, ren-
by P- p. dered him still more cautious of giving them

any new cause of offence. As soon as the pub-
lication of Ferdinand's speech awakened the

fears
.

fears and suspicions which have been mentioned, Boo XI.
the Electors of Saxony and Brandenburg, to-
gether with the Landgrave of Hefle, met at 55
Naumburgh, and confirming the ancient treaty
of confraternity which had long united their
families, they added to it a new article, by
which the contrating parties bound themselves
to adhere to the confeflion of Augsburg, and to
maintain the doctrine which it contained in their
respective dominions N.

FERDINAND, influenced by all these confide- Ferdinand

zealous to

rations, employed his utmroft address in con- promotean
duCting the deliberations of the diet, so as not acommo-
to excite the jealousy of a party on whose friend- dat
hip he depended, and whose enmity, as they
had not only taken the alarm, but had begun
to prepare for their defence, h'e had so much
reason to dread. The members of the diet
readily agreed to Ferdinand's proposal of taking
the state of religion into consideration, previous
to any other business. But, as oon as they
entered upon it, both parties discovered all the
zeal and animosity which a subject so interesting
naturally engenders, and which the rancour of
controversy, together with the violence of civil
war, had inflamed to the highest pitch.

THE Protestants contende, that the security Thepreten-

Slons of the

which they claimed in consequence of the treaty catholick
of Paffau should extend, without limitation, to and Prote'-
all who had hitherto embraced the doctrine of aOt.
Luther, or who hould hereafter embrace it.
The Catholicks, having first of all alerted the
Pope's right as the fiupreme and final judge with
refpet to all articles of faith, declared that
though, on account of the present situation of
the Empire, and for the fake of peace, they

were
'Chytrzi Saxonia, 480.

BooK XI. were willing to confirm the toleration granted,

i' ~' by the treaty of Paflau, to such as had adopted
S5 the new opinions; they must insist that this in-

dulgence should not be extended either to
those cities which had conformed to the in-
terim, or to such ecclefiafticks as should for
the future apoitatize from the church of Rome.
It was no easy matter to reconcile such opposite
pretensions, which were supported, on each fide,
by the molf elaborate arguments, and the greatest
acrimony of expression, that the abilities or zeal
of theologians, long exercised in disputation,
could fugget. Ferdinand, however, by his
address and perseverance; by softening some
things on each fide; by putting a favourable
meaning upon others; by representing incef-
fantly the necessity as well as the advantages of
concord; and by threatening, on some occasions,
when all other considerations were disregarded,
to diflolve the diet, brought them at length to
a conclusion in which they all agreed.

Sept. . CONFORMABLY to this, a Recess was framed,
The len approved of, and publilhed with the usual for-
ctbiiiahed. malities. The following are the chief articles

which it contained: That such Princes and
cities as have declared their approbation of the
Confeflion of Augsburg, hall be permitted to
profess the doctrine and exercise the worship
which it authorises, without interruption or mo-
leflation from the Emperor, the King of the
Romans, or any power or person whatsoever;
That the Protefants, on their part, mhall give
na disquiet to the Princes and States who adhere
to the tenets and rites of the Church of Rome;
That, for the future, no attempt shall be made
towards terminating religious differences, but
by the gentle and pacifick methods of persuasion
and conference; That the Popish ecclefiaficks

shall

(hall claim no spiritual jurifdidion in such flates Bbok Xl.
as receive the Confeflion of Augfburgh; That g
such as had seized the benefices or revenues of 5
the church, previous to the treaty of Paflau,
shall retain poffeflion of them, and be liable
to no persecution in the Imperial chamber on
that account; That the supreme civil power in
every fate hall have right to establish what
form of doctrine and worlhip it shall deem pro-
per, and if any of its fubjets refuse to conform
to these, hall permit them to remove with all
their effects wherever they please ; That if any
prelate or ecclefiaftick hall hereafter abandon
the Romilh religion, he shall instantly relinquish
his diocese or benefice, and it hall be lawful
for those in whom the right of nomination is
vested, to proceed immediately to an election,
as if the office were vacant by death or tranfla-
tion, and to appoint a successor of undoubted
attachment to the ancient fyflem°.

SUCH are the capital articles in this famous Recieaions

. on the pro-

Recess, which is the basis of religious peace in gres of the
Germany, and the bond of union aong its Prinip, of
various states, the entiments of which are so o o.
extremely different with refpet to points the
most interesting as well as important. In our
age and nation, to which the idea of Toleration
is familiar, and its beneficial effects well known,
it may seem firange, that a method of termi-
nating their dissensions, so suitable to the mild
and charitable spirit of the Chriflian religion,
did not sooner occur to the contending parties.
But this expedient, however salutary, was so
repugnant to the sentiments and practice of
Christians during many ages, that it did not
lie obvious to discovery. Among the ancient
heathens, all whose deities were local and tute-

lary,
' Scid. 6zo. F. Paul, 368. Pallav. P. 11. 161

BoozXI. lary, diversity of sentiment concerning the ob-
,~' ject or rites of religious worhip seems to have
'555' been no source of animosity, because the ac-

knowledging veneration to be due to any one
God, did not imply denial of the existence or
the power of any other God; nor were the
modes and rites of worship established in one
country incompatible with those which other
nations approved of and observed. Thus the
errors in their system of theology were of such
a nature as to be produtive of concord; and
notwithitanding the amazing number of their
deities, as well as the infinite variety of their
ceremonies, a sociable and tolerating spirit sub-
sised almost universally in the pagan world.

BUT when the Chriltian revelation declared

one Supreme Being to be the sole object of re-
ligious veneration, prescribed the form of wor-
ship moll acceptable to him, whoever admitted
the truth of it held, ofconfequence, every other
mode of religion to be absurd and -impious.
Hence the zeal of the first converts to the Chris-
tian faith in propagating its doctrines, and the
ardour with which they laboured to overturn
every ocher form of worship. They employed,
however, for this purpose no methodg but such
as suited the nature of religion. By the force
of powerful arguments, they convinced the un-
derftandings of men; by the charms of superior
virtue, they allured and captivated their hearts.
At length the civil power declared in favour of
Christianity ; and though numbers, imitating
the example of their superiors, crowded into the
church, many still adhered to their ancient super-
itions. Enraged at their obstinacy, the mini-
fters of religion, whose zeal was still unabated,
though their fanaitv and virtue were much di-
minifhed, forgot so far the nature of their own

miilion,

milion, and of the arguments which they ought Boox XI.
to have employed, that they armed the Imperial v'
power against there unhappy men, and as they
could not persuade, they tried to compel them
to believe.

AT the fame time, controversies concerning

articles of faith multiplied, from various causes,
among Christians themselves, and the fame un-
hallowed weapons which had first been used
againfi the enemies of their religion, were turned
againfi each other. Every zealous disputant
endeavoured to interest the civil magistrate in
his cause, and each in his turn employed the
secular arm to cru(h or to exterminate his oppo-
nents. Not long after, the bishops of Rome
put in their claim to infallibility in explaining
articles of faith, and deciding points in contro-
verfy; and, bold as the pretension was, they,
by their artifices and perseverance, imposed on
the credulity of mankind, and brought them to
recognise it. To doubt or to deny any doc-
trine to which these unerring inftrutors had
given the fandion of their approbation, was
held to be not only a refifing of truth, but an
aft of rebellion against their sacred authority;
and secular power, of which by various arts
they had acquired the absolute direction, was
instantly employed to avenge both.

THUS Europe had been accustomed, during

many centuries, to fee speculative opinions pro-
pagated or defended by force ; the charity and
mutual forbearance which Christianity recom-
mends with ob much warmth, were forgotten,
the sacred rights of conscience and of private
judgment were unheard of, and not only the
idea of toleration, but even the word itself, in
the sense now affixed to it, was unknown. A

right

Boos Xl. right to extirpate error by force, was universally
'- ' allowed to be the prerogative of such as pof-

' SS fefed the knowledge of truth; and as each party

of Christians believed that they had got posses-
sion of this invaluable attainment, they all
claimed and exercised, as far as they were able,
the lights which it was supposed to convey.
The Roman catholicks, as their system refted on
the decisions of an infallible judge, never doubted
that truth was on their fide, and openly called
on the civil power to repel the impious and
heretical innovators who had risen up againfi it.
The Protestants, no less confident that their
doctrine was well founded, required, with equal
ardour, the Princes of their party to check such
as presumed to impugn or to oppose it. Luther,
Calvin, Cranmer, Knoy, the founders of the re-
formed church in their refpe&ive countries, in-
flicted, as far as they had power and opportunity,
the fame punishments which were denounced
againif their own disciples by the church of
Rome, upon such as called in queflion any article
in their creeds. To their followers, and per-
haps to their opponents, it would have appeared
a f)mptom of diffidence in the goodnes of their
cause, or an acknowledgment that it was not
well founded, if they had not employed in its
defence all those means which it was supposed
truth had a right to employ.

IT was towards the close of the seventeenth

century, before Toleration, under its present
form, was admitted first into the republick of the
United Provinces, and from thence introduced
into England. Long experience of the calami-
ties flowing from mutual persecution, the influ-
ence of free government, the light and humanity
acquired by the progress of science, together
with the prudence and authority of the civil ma-

giitrate,

gifirate, were all requisite in order to etablifh a BooK Xl.
regulation, so repugnant to the ideas which all -'"
the different feLs had adopted, from mistaken
conceptions concerning the nature of religion
and the rights of truth, or which all of them
had derived from the erroneous maxims efta-
blifhed by the church of Rome.

THE Recess of Augsburg, it is evident, was Advantages

founded on no such liberal and enlarged senti- otheP re
ments concerning freedom of religious inquiry to the L-
or the nature of Toleration. It was nothing hr;
more than a scheme of pacification, which poli-
tical considerations alone had suggested to the
contending parties, and regard for their mutual
tranquillity and safety had rendered necessary.
Of this there can be no fironger proof than an
article in the Recess itself, by which the benefits
of the pacification are declared to extend only
to the Catholicks on the one fide, and to such as
adhered to the confession of Augsburg on the
other. The followers of Zuinglius and Calvin
remained, in consequence of that exclusion,
without any protection from the vigour of the
laws denounced against hereticks. Nor did they
obtain any legal security, until the treaty of
Westphalia, near a century after this period,
provided, that they hould be admitted to enjoy,
in as ample a manner as the Lutherans, all the
advantages and protecion which the Recess of
Augsburg affords.

BUT if the followers of Luther were highly dd toth1e

pleated with the security which they acquiredctl
by this Recess, such as adhered to the ancient
system had no less reason to be satisfied with
that article in it, which preserved entire to the
Roman catholick church the benefices of such
ecclefiaticks as should hereafter renounce its

dotrines.

Boo Xl. do&rines. This article, known in Germany by
%-- the name of the EcclefJfical Reservation, was
15S' apparently so conformable to the idea and to

the rights of an eftablilhed church, and it
seemed so equitable to prevent revenues, which
had been originally appropriated for the main-
tenance of persons attached to a certain system,
from being alienated to any other purpose, that
the Protestants, though they forelaw its confe-
quences, were obliged to relinquish their oppo-
fition to it. As the Roman catholick Princes of
the Empire have taken care to fee this article
exactly observed in every cafe where there was
an opportunity of putting it in execution, it has
proved the great barrier of the Romish church
in Germany against the Reformation; and as,
from this period, the fame temptation of interest
did not allure ecclefiafticks to relinquish the eita-
blifhed fsflem, there have been few of that
order, who have loved truth with such difin-
terefled and ardent affedion, as for its fake to
abandon the rich benefices which they had in
pofeifion.

Marcellnu DURING the fitting of the diet, Marcellus
It. ele&ed
p.ad Cervino, Cardinal of Santa Croce, was elected
Apri 9. Pope in the room of Julius. He, in imitation of

Adrian, did not change his name on being ex-

W.cha- alted to the papal chair. As he equalled that
"aC. Pontiffin purity of intention, while he excelled

him much in the arts of government, and still
more in knowledge of the state and genius of
the papal court; as he had capacity to discer
what reformation it needed, as well as what it
could bear; such regulations were expected
from his virtue and wisdom, as would have re-
moved many of its grofleft and most flagrant
corruptions, and have contributed towards re-
conciling to the church, such as from indigna-
tion at there enormities had abandoned its com-

munion.

munion. But this excellent Pontiff was only Boo XI.
shown to the church, and immediately hatched "-'
away. The confinement in the conclave had
impaired his health, and the fatigue of tedious
ceremonies upon his acceflion, together with too
intense and anxious application of mind to the
schemes of improvement which he meditated,
exhausted so entirely the vigour of his feeble
constitution, that he sickened on the twelfth, and His deah.
died on the twentieth day after his eletion P.

ALL the refinements in artifice and intrigue, Theeaioa

peculiar to conclaves, were displayed in that°'ofP&uv.
which was held for electing a successor to Mar-
cellus; the Cardinals of the Imperial and French
factions labouring, with equal ardour, to gain
the necessary number of suffrages for one of
their own party. But, after a struggle of no
long duration, though conduced with all the
warmth and eagerness natural to men contend-
ing for so great an object, they united in chufing
John Peter Caraffa, the eldest member of the Miy 3.
sacred college, and the son of Count Montorio,
a nobleman of an illustrious family in the king-
dom of Naples. The address and influence of
Cardinal Farnese, who favoured his pretensions,
Caraffa's own merit, and perhaps his great age,
which soothed all the disappointed candidates,
with the near profped of a new vacancy, con-
curred in bringing about this speedy union of
suffrages. In order to testify his refpet for the
memory of Paul III. by whom he had been
created Cardinal, as well as his gratitude to the
family of Farnese, he assumed the name of
Paul IV.

THE choice of a prelate of such a singular m;r;reand
charader, and who had long held a course ex-chrtlae.

tremely
'Thuan. 520. F. Paul, 365. Onuph. Panvin. 52i, &c.

Boi Xl. tremely different from that which usually led to
'-"--' the dignity now conferred upon him, filled the

55' Italians, who had nearer access to observe his

manners and deportment, with astonishment,
and kept them in fufpence and solicitude with
regard to his future condu&t. Paul, though
born in a rank of life which, without any other
merit, might have secured to him the h;gheft
ccdefiaftical preferments, had from his early
years applied to itudy with all the assiduity of
a man, who had nothing but his personal accom-
plilhments to render him conspicuous. By
means of this he not only acquired profound
fldll in fcholaftick theology, but added to that
a considerable knowledge of the learned lan-
guages and of polite literature, the fludy of
which had been lately revived in Italy, and was
pursued at this time with great ardour. His
mind, however, naturally gloomy and severe,
was more formed to imbibe the four spirit of
theformer, than to receive any tindture of ele-
gance or liberality of fentimcnt from the latter;
so that he acquired rather the qualities and
padions of a recuse ecclefiatick, than the talents
ncceffary for the conduct of great affairs. Ac-
cordingly, when he entered into orders, although
several rich benefices were betlowed upon him,
and he was early employed as nuncio in dif-
ferent courts, he oon became difgufed with
that course of life, and languished to be in a
finration more suited to his taste and temper.
With rtis view he resigned at once all his eccle-
fiaftical preferments; and having instituted an
order of regular priefis, whom he denominated
Theatines, from the name of the archbifhoprick
which he had held, he aflbciated himself as a
member of their fraternity, conformed to all the
rigorous rules to which he had fubjeced them,

and

and preferred the solitude of a monaftick life, Boo XI.
with the honour of being the founder of a new
order, to all the vast objets which the court of 55
Rome presented to his ambition.

IN this retreat he remained for many years,

until Paul III. induced by the fame of his
fandtity and knowledge, called him to Rome,
in order to consult with him concerning the
measures which might be most proper and
effectual for the suppressing of herely, and re-
establishing the ancient authority of the church.
Having thus allured him from his solitude, the
Pope, partly by his entreaties, and partly by
his authority, prevailed on him to accept of a
Cardinal's hat, to re-affume the benefices which
he had resigned, and to return again into the
usual path of ecclesiastical ambition which he
seemed to have relinquished. But, during two
fucceflive Pontificates, under the firfl of which
the court of Rome was the most artful and inte-
refled, and under the second the most dissolute
of any in Europe, Caraffa retained his mo-
naftick austerity. He was an avowed and bitter
enemy not only of all innovation in opinion, but
of every irregularity in practice; he was the
chief infirument in eftablilhing the formidable
and odious tribunal of the Inquisition in the pa-
pal territories; he appeared a violent advocate,
on all occasions, so r the jurifdi&ion and difci-
pline of the church, and a severe censurer of
every measure which seemed to flow from mo-
tives of policy or interest, rather than from zeal
for the honour of the ecclesiastical order, and
the dignity of the Holy See. Under a prelate
of such a character, the Roman courtiers ex-
peted a evere and violent Pontificate, during
which the principles of found policy would be
sacrificed to the narrow prejudices of priestly

zeal;

Booi XI. zeal; while the people of Rome were apprehen-
'-' five of feeing the fordid and forbidding rigour
'555' of monaftick manners substituted in place of the

gaiety or magnificence to which they had long
been accutlomed in the papal court. These ap-
prehensions Paul was extremely solicitous to re-

The sft move. At his first entrance upon the admini-
aPfh" fttration he laid aside that austerity which had
,on. hitherto distinguished his person and family, and

when the master of his jhoufehold inquired in
what manner he would chute to live, he haughti-
ly replied, "As becomes a great Prince." He
ordered the ceremony of his coronation to be
conducted with more than usual magnificence;
and endeavoured to render himself popular by
several ads of liberality and indulgence towards
the inhabitants of Rome %

The excer, His natural severity of temper, however,
of his t would have soon returned upon him, and would
tohis D- have juflified the conjectures of the courtiers,
be"L as well as the fears of the people, if he had

not, immediately after his election, called to
Rome two of his nephews, the sons of his bro-
ther the Count of Montorio. The eldest he
promoted to be governor of Rome. The
youngest, who had hitherto served as a soldier
of fortune in the armies of Spain or France,
and whose disposition as well as manners were
fill more foreign from the clerical character
than his profession, he created a Cardinal, and
appointed him legate of Bologna, the second
office in power and dignity which a Pope can
bestow. These marks of favour, no lets sudden
than extravagant, h accompanied with the most
unbounded confidence and attachment; and for-

getting

"-Platina, p. 327. Caftaldo Vita di Paolo IV. Rom.
1615. p. 70.

getting all his former severe maxims, he seemed BooiXI.
to have no other object than theaggrandizing "
of his nephews. Their ambition, unfortunately Theirambi-
for Paul, was too aspiring to be satisfied with ji°'"
any moderate acquisition. They had seen the
family of Medici raised, by the interest of the
Popes of that house, to supreme power in Tuf-
cany; Paul I. had, by his abilities and address,
secured the dutchies of Parma and Placentia to
the family of Farnese. They aimed at ome
efiablilhment for themselves, no less considerable
and independent ; and as they could not expect
that the Pope would carry his indulgence to-
wards them so far as to secularize any part of
the patrimony of the church, they had no pro-
sped of attaining what they wished, but by
dismembering the Imperial dominions in Italy,
in hopes of seizing some portion of them. This
alone they would have deemed a sufficient reason
for sowing the feeds of discord between their
uncle and the Emperor.

BUT Cardinal Caraffa had, besides, private Rerons of

reasons which filled him with hatred and enmity with the
to the Emperor. While he served in the Spaniflh Empeor.
troops he had not received such marks of ho-
nour and diftin&ion as he thought due to his
birth and merit. Disgusted with this ill-ufage,
he had abruptly quitted the Imperial service
and entering into that of France, he had not
only met with such a reception as soothed his
vanity, and attached him to the French interest,
but by contracting an intimate friendlhip with
Strozzi, who commanded the French army in
Tuscany, he had imbibed a mortal antipathy to
the Emperor as the great enemy to the liberty
and independence of the Italian states. Nor
was the P)pe himfif indisposed to receive im-
pfeflions unfavourable to the Emperor. The

VoL. II. A a opposition

BoozXI. opposition given to his election by the Cardinals

' of the Imperial faction, left in his mind deep
5S5. resentment, which was heightened by the re-

membrance of ancient injuries from Charles or
his miniftrs.

They ,e, OF this his nephews took advantage, and
de..ou to empio) ed various devices, in order to exasperate
p f 'th' him be)ond a potlibility of reconciliation. They
the Empc- aggravated every circumstance which could be

ro deemed any inclination of the Emperor's difla-

tisfadtion with his promotion; they read to him
an intercepted letter, in which Charles taxed the
Cardinals of his party with negligence or inca-
pacit) in not having defeated Paul's election:
They pretended, at one time, to have discovered
a conspiracy formed by the Imperial minister
and Cosmo di Medici against the Pope's life;
they alarmed him, at another, with accounts of
a plot for affaflinating themselves. By these
artifices, they kept his mind, which was natu-
rally violent, and become suspicious from old
age, in such perpetual agitation, as precipitated
him into measures, which otherwise he would.
have been the first person to condemn a. He
seized rome of the Cardinals who were moit at-
tached to the Emperor, and confined them in
the cattle of St. Angelo he persecuted the Co-
lonnas and other Roman barons, the ancient
retainers to the Imperial faction, with the utmof
severity; and discovering on all occasions his
difirft, fear, or hatred to the Emperor, he
began at last to court the friendship of the
French King, and seemed willing to throw him-

self

Ripanontii HiR. Patrie, lib. iii. 1146. Ap. Grav.

Tbef. vol. ii. Mew de Ribier, ii. 61S. Adriani Ifor. i,
906

self absolutely upon him for support and pro- BoosX.
tedion. 55.

THIS was the very point to which his nephews Iducc him

wihed to bring him, as most favourable to their tKioguoft
ambitious schemes; and as the accomplihment France.
ofthefedepended on their uncle's life, whose
advanced age did not admit of losing a moment
unnecessarily in negociations, instead of treating
at second-hand with the French ambassador at
Rome, they prevailed on the Pope to dispatch
a person of confidence diredtly to the court of
France, with such overtures on his part as they
hoped would not be rejected. He proposed an
alliance offensive and defensive between Henry
and the Pope; that they should attack the
dutchy of Tuscany and the kingdom of Naples
with their united forces; and if their arms
should prove successful, that the ancient re-
plblican form of government hould be re-efta-
blifhed in the former, and the investiture of the
latter should be granted to one of the French
King's sons, after reserving a certain territory
which should be annexed to the patrimony of
the church, together with an independent and
princely establishment for each of the Pope's
nephews.

THE King, allured by these specious projets, Coontble

gave a most favourable audience to the envoy. M,,"mo-
But when the matter was proposed in council, Iethe alli-
the constable Montmorency, whose natural cau- thcP,.
tion and aversion to daring enterprises increased
with age and experience, remonstrated with
great vehemence against the alliance. He put
Henry in mind how fatal to France every expe-
dition into Italy had been during three fucceflive
reigns, and if such an enterprise had proved
too great for the nation even when its strength

Aa 2 and

BOOK XI. and finances were entire, there was no reason to

t"` Phope for success, if it should be attempted now,
555. when both were exhausted by extraordinary

efforts during wars, which had lated, with little
interruption, almost .half a century. He repre-
sented the manifest imprudence of entering into
engagements with a Pope of fourscore, as any
fyftm which refted on no better foundation
than his life, must be extremely precarious, and
upon the event of his death, which could not
be distant, the face of things, together with the
inclination of the Italian States, must instantly
change, and the whole weight of the war be
left upon the King alone. To these confidera-
tions he added the near profpea which they now
had of a final accommodation with the Emperor,
who having taken the resolution of retiring from
the world, wished to transmit his kingdoms in
peace to his son; and he concluded with re-
presenting the absolute certainty of drawing the
arms of England upon France, if it Ihould ap-
pear that the re-establishment of tranquillity in
Europe was prevented by the ambition of its
Monarch.

'Th Doke THESE arguments, weighty in themselves,
oG,,f- and urged by a minister of great authority,

would probably have determined the King to
decline any connexion with the Pope. But the
Duke of Guise and his brother the Cardinal of
Lorrain, who delighted no less in bold and
dangerous undertakings than Montmorency
Thunned dhem, declared warmly for an alliance
with the Pope. Th: Cardinal expected to be
entrusted with the conduct of the negociationE
in the court of Rome to which this alliance
would give rife; the uke hoped to obtain the
command of the army which would be ap-
pointed to invade Naples; and confiderine

themfelve

themselves as already in there Ctations, vafl pro- Boo K XI.
jets opened to their aspiring and unbounded ""
ambition. Their credit, together with the in- '5$S
fluence of the King's mistress, the famous Diana
of Poitiers, who was, at that time, entiely de-
voted to the interest of the family of Gtife,
more than counterbalanced all Montmorency's
prudent remonstrances, and prevailed on an in-
considerate Prince to liften to the overtures of
the Pope's envoy.

THE Cardinal of Lorrain, as he had expeted, Cardinal of

was immediately sent to Rome with full powers Lonegociate
to conclude the treaty, and to concert measures with the
for carrying it into execution. Before he could Po°e.
reach that city, the Pope, either from reflecing
on the danger and uncertain issue of all military
operations, or through the address of the Impe-
rial ambassador, who had been at great pains to
sooth him, had not only begun to lose much of
the ardour with which he had set on foot the ne-
gociation with France, but even discovered great
unwillingness to continue it. In order to rouse
him from this fit of despondency, and to rekindle
his former rage, his nephews had recourse to
the arts which they had already pratifed with
so much success. They alarm-d him with new
representations of the Emperor's hnftile inten-
tions, with fresh accounts which they had receiv-
ed of threats uttered against him by the Impe-
rial ministers, and with new discoveries which
they pretended to have made of conspiracies
formed, and just ready to take effect against his
life.

BUT these artifices, having been formerly Pul enrag-

tried, would not have operated a second time edi.t he
with the fame force, nor have made the impref- of thedietof
sion which they wished, if Paul had not been Augfurg;

excited

BOK X. excited by an offence of that kind which he

was least able to bear. He received advice of
s55 the recess of the diet of Augsburg, and of the

toleration which was thereby granted to the
Proteltants, and this threw him at once into
such rranfports of paflion against the Emperor
and King of the Romans, as carried him head-
long into all the violent measures of his nephews.
Full of high ideas with refpea to the papal
prerogative, and animated with the fiercest zeal
against heresy, he confidered the liberty of de-
ciding concerning religious matters, which had
been aflumed by an assembly composed chiefly
of laymen, as a presumptuous and unpardon-
able encroachment on that jurifdi&ion which
belonged to him alone; and regarded the indul-
gencewhich had been given to the Protestants
as an impious at of that power which the diet
had usurped. He complained loudly of both
to the Imperial ambassador. He insisted that
the recess of the diet hould immediately be
declared illegal and void. He threatened the
Emperor and King of the Romans, in cafe they.
should either refuse or delay to gratify him in
this particular, with the feverefi effe&s of his
vengeance. He talked in a tone of authority
and command which might have suited a pontiff
of the twelfth century, when a papal decree
was fuflicient to have haken, or to have over-
turned the throne of the greatest Monarch, but
which was altogether improper in that age,
especially when addrefled to the minister of a
Prince who had so often made Pontiffs more
formidable feel the weight of his power. The
ambalTador, however, heard all his extravagant
propofirions and menaces with much patience,
and endeavoured to sooth him, by putting him
in mind of the extreme distress to which the
Emperor was reduced at Infpruck, of the en-

gagements

gagements which he had come under to the Boo XI.
Protestants, in order to extricate himelf of the k
neceflity of fulfilling there, and of accomo- '555
dating his condu& to the situation of his affairs.
But weighty as these considerations were, they
made no impreflion on the mind of the haughty
and bigotted pontiff, who instantly replied, that
he would absolve him by his apoftolick autho-
rity from those impious engagements, and even
command him not to perform them that in
carrying on the cause of God and of the church,
no regard ought to be had to the maxims of
worldly prudence and policy; and that the ill
success of the Emperor's schemes in Germany
might justly be deemed a mark of the divine
displeasure against him, on account of his hav-
ing paid little attention to the former, while he
regulated his conduct entirely by the latter.
Having said this, he turned from the ambafla-
dor abruptly without waiting for a reply.

His nephews took care to applaud and cheriffh iand ,rpe-

rated ,y his

there sentiments, and easily wrought up his nephews,
arrogant mind, fraught with all the monkish
ideas concerning the extent of the papal fupre-
macy, to such a pitch of resentment against the
house of Auitria, and to such an high opinion
of his own power, that he talked continually
of his being the successor of those who had de-
posed Kings and Emperors; that lie was exalted
as head over them all, and would trample such
as opposed him under his feet. In this difpofi- Dec. 1;.
tion, the Cardinalof Lorrain found the Pope, t'nUd Y,
and easily persuaded him to sign a treaty, which France.
had for its obje& the ruin of a Prince against
whom he was so highly exasperated. The fti-
pulations in the treaty were much the fame as
had been proposed by the Pope's c voy at Paris;
and it was agreed to keep the whole tranfation

secret

Boe Xl. secret until their united forces hould be ready

to take the fields.

1555-

TheeE - DURING the negociation of this treaty at
ror re(olvec
toregn hi Rome and Paris, an event happened which
heRdit seemed to render the fears which had given rife

to it vain, and the operations which were to
follow upon it unnecefary. This was the Em-
peror's resignation of his hereditary dominions
to his son Philip together with his resolution
to withdraw entirely from any concern in bus-
ness or the affairs of this world, in order that
he might spend the remainder of his days in
retirement and solitude. Though it requires
neither deep refleation nor extraordinary discern-
ment to discover that the state of royalty is not
exempt from cares and disappointment; though
moR of those who are exalted to a throne find
solicitude, and satiety, and disgust to be their
perpetual attendants in that envied pre-emi-
nence, yet, to descend voluntarily from the
supreme to a subordinate station, and to relin-
quilh the poffeflion of power in order to attain
the enjoyment of happiness, seems to be an effort
too great for the human mind. Several inflances,
indeed, occur in hiRory, of Monarchs who have
quitted a throne, and have ended their days in
retirement; but they wereeither weak Princes
who took this resolution rathly, and repented of
it as soon as it was taken; or unfortunate
Princes from whole hands some strong rival
had wrested their feeptre, and compelled them
to descend with reluctance into a private station.
Dioclelian is perhaps the only Prince capable
of holding the reins of government, who ever
resigned them from deliberate choice, and who

continued

1 Pallay. lib. xiii. p. 163. F. Paul, 365. Thuan. lib. xv.
525. lib. xvi. 540. Mem. de Ribier, ii. 609, &c.

continued during many years to enjoy theBoo Xl.
tranquillity' of retirement without fetching one
penitent igh, or casing back one look of de- 555
lire, towards the power or dignity which he had
abandoned.

No wonder, then, that Charles's resignation Tlhemotive

should fill all Europe with aftonithment, and of thisre.
give rife, both among his contemporaries, and
among the historians of that period, to various
conjectures concerning the motives which deter-
mined a Prince, whose ruling passion had been
uniformly the love of power, at the age of fifty-
fix, when objedts of ambition operate with full
force on the nind, and are pursued with the
greatest ardour, to take a resolution so singular
and unexpected. But while many authors have
imputed it to motives so frivolous and fantafti-
cal, as can hardly be fippofed to influence any
reasonable mind; while others have imagined
it to be the result of ome profound scheme of
policy; historians more intelligent, and better
informed, neither ascribe it to caprice, nor search
for m) Iterious feclets of state, where simple and
obvious caufts will fully account for the Empe-
ror's condut. Charles had been attacked early
in life with the gout, and notwithstanding all the
precautions of the most skilful physicians, the
violence of the distemper increased as he ad-
vanced in age, and the fits became every year
more frequent, as well as more intolerable. Not
only was the vigour of his constitution broken,
but the faculties of his mind were impaired by
the excruciating torments which he endured.
During the continuance of the fits, he was alto-
gether incapable of applying to business; and
even when they began to abate, as it was only
at intervals that he could attend to what was fe-
rious, he gave up a great part of his time to

trifling

Boo XI. trifling and even childish occupations, which
'-^' served to relieve or to amuse his mind, enfeebled
'55S and worn out with excess of pain. Under

these circumstances, the conduct of such affairs
as occurred, of course, in governing so many
kingdoms, was a burden more than sufficient
but to push forward and complete the vast
schemes, which the ambition of his more ative
years had formed, or to keep in view and carry
on the fame great system of policy, extending to
every nation in Europe, and conneted with the
operations of every different court, were func-
tions which so far exceeded his strength, that
they oppressed and overwhelmed his mind. As
he had been long accustomed to view the bufi-
ness of every department, whether civil, or
military, or ecclesiastical, with his own eyes, and
to decide concerning it according to his own
ideas, it gave him the utmost pain when he.felt
his infirmities increase so fall upon him, that he
was obliged to commit the conduc of all affairs
to his ministers. He imputed every inisforture
which besel him, and every miscarriage that
happened, even when the former was unavoid-
able, and the latter accidental, to his inability
to take the inspection of business himself. He
complained of his hard fortune, in being op-
posed, in his declining years, to a rival, who
was in the full vigour of life, and that while
Henr) could take and execute all his resolutions
in person, he should now be reduced, both in
council and in action, to rely on the abilities of
other men. Having thus grown old before his
time, he wifely judged it more decent to conceal
his infirmities in some solitude. than to expose
them any longer to the publick eye; and pru-
dently determined not to forfeit the fame, or
oI.e the acquisitions of his better years, by ftrug-
gling, with a vain obstinacy, to retain the reins

of

of government, when he was no longer able to Book X.
hold them with feadiners, or to guide them with , "
address *.

BUT though Charles had revolved this cheme Circu,'fh-

ces which

in his mind for several years, and had commu- had retard-
nicated it to his sifters the dowager Queens ofed it
France and Hungary, who not only approved
of his intention, but offered to accompany him
to whatever place of retreat he hould chufe;

several

* Dom Levefque, in his memoirs of Cardinal Granvelle.

gives a reason for the Emperor's resignation, which, as I re-
collea, is not mentioned by any other historian. He fays,
that the Emperor having ceded the government of the king-
dom of Naples and the dutchy of Milan to his fon,uponhis
marriage with the Queen of England ; Philip, notwithfRand-
ing the advice and intreaties of his father, removed most of
the ministers and officers whom he had employed in those
countries, and appointed creatures of his own, to fill the
places which they held. That he aspired openly, and with little
delicacy, to obtain a share in the administration of affairs in
the Low-Conntries. That he endeavoured to thwart the
Emperor's measures, and to limit his authority, behaving
tow:rds him sometimes with inattention, and sometimes with
haughtiness. That Charles finding that he muff either yield
to his son, or openly contend with him, in order to avoid
these, which were both disagreeable and nortifying to a fa-
ther, he took therefolution of resigning his crowns, and of re-
tiring from the world, vol. i. p. 24, &c. Dom Levefque de-
rived his information concerning these curious sacs, which he
relates very briefly, from theoriginal papers of Cardinal Gran-
velle. But as that vast collection of papers, which has been
preserved and arranged by L'Abbe Boizot of Befanyon,
though one of the most valuable historical monuments of the
sixteenth century, and which cannot fail of throwing much
light on the tranfaaions of Charles V. is not published, I
cannot determine what degree of credit fiould be given to
this account of Charles's resignation. I have therefore taken
no notice of it in relating this event.

BOOK XI. several things had hitherto prevented his carry-
'-"" ing it into execution. He could not think of

loading his son with the government of so many
kingdoms, until he should attain such maturity
of age, and of abilities, as would enable him
to sustain that weighty burden. But as Philip
had now reached his twenty-eighth year, and
had been early accustomed to business, for which
he discovered both inclination and capacity, it
can hardly be imputed to the partiality of pa-
ternal affection, that his scruples, with regard
to this point, were entirely removed; and that
he thought he might place him, without further
hesitation or delay, on the throne which he was
about to abandon. His mother's situation had
betn another obftrucion in his way. For al-
though she had continued almost fifty years in
confinement, and under the fame disorder of
mind which concern for her husband's death
had brought upon her, yet the government of
Spain was fiill veiled in her jointly with the
Emperor; her name was inlerted, together with
his, in all the pubiick writs issucd in that king-
dom; and such was the fond attachment of the
Spaniards to her, that the) would probably have
scrupled to recogniie Philip as their sovereign,
unlecs the had conl:ntsd to assume him as her
partner on the throne. Her utter incapacity for
business, rendered it impolilble to obtain her con-
sent. But her death, which happened this year,
removed this difficulhy; and as Charles, upon
that event, became sole Monaich of Spain, it
left the fuccellion open to his Ion. The war
with France had likewise been a reason for re
raining the adminiflration of affairs in his own
hand, as he was extremely solicitous to have
terminated it, that he might have given up his
kingdoms to his on at peace with all the world.
But as Henry had discovered no disposition to

close

close with any of his overtures, and had even Bon, XI.
rejeded popofals of peace, which were equal ' '
and moderate, in a tone that seemed to indicate 555
a six-d purpose of continuing hostilities, he saw
that i was vain to wait longer in expecsation
of an event, which, however desirable, was al-
together uncertain.

As this, then, appeared to be the proper heform^-

jundture for executing the scheme which he had which be
long meditated, Charles resolved to resign his executedit.
kingdoms to his son, with a solemnity suitable
to the importance of the tranfation, and to per-
form this last aft of sovereignty with such for-
mal pomp, as might leave a lasting impreflion
on the minds not only of his fubjedts but 6f
his fuccefor. With this view he called Philip
out of England, where the peevish temper of
his Queen, which increased with her despair of
having issue, rendered him extremely unhappy;
and the jealousy of the English left him no
hopes of obtaining the direcion of their affairs.
Having assembled the States of the Low-Coun-
tries at Brussels, on the twenty-fifth of Otober,
Charles feated himself, for the last time, in the
chair of state, on one fide of which was placed
his son, and on the other his filter the Queen
of Hungary, regent of the Netherlands, with
a splendid retinue of the grandees of Spain and
princes of the Empire standing behind him.
The president of the Spuncil of Slanders, by
his command, explained, in a few words, his
intention in calling this extraordinary meeting
of the States. He then read the instrument of
resignation, by which Charles furrendrcd to his
son Philip all his territories, jurifdi6tion, and
authority in the Low-Countries, absolving his
fubjets there from their oath of allegiance to
him, which he required tlem to transfer to

Philip

BooK XI. Philip his lawful heir, and to serve him with the
'-" ' fame loyalty and zeal which they had manifested,
Ss'- during so long a course of years, in support of

his government.

CHARLES then rose from his feat, and lean-

ing on the flioulder of the Prince of Orange,
becautc he wa:: unable to stand without support,
he addrefied himself to the audience, and from
a paper which he held in his hand, in order to
alift his memory, he recounted, with dignity,
but without ostentation, all the great things
which he had undertaken and performed since
the commencement of his administration. He
observed, that, from the seventeenth year of his
age, he had dedicated all his thoughts and at-
tention to publick objects, reserving no portion
of his time for the indulgence of his ease, and
very little for the enjoyment of private plea-
sure; that either in a pacifick or hostile manner,
he had visited Germany nine times, Spain fix
times, France four times, Italy seven times, the
Low Countries ten times, England twice, Africa
as often, and had made eleven voyages by ea;
that while his health permitted him to discharge
his duty, and the vigour of his constitution was
equal, i any degree, to the arduous office of
governing such extensive domin ns, he hid
never shunned labour, nor repined under fatigue;
that now, when his health was broken, and his
vigour exhausted by the rage of an incurable
distemper, his growing infirmities admonished
him to retire; nor was he so fond of reigning,
as to retain the sceptre in an impotent hand,
which was no longer able to proted his fubjefts,
or to render them happy; that inflead of a so-
vereign worn out uwith diseases, and scarcely half
alive, he gave them one in the prime of life, ac-
customcd already to govern, and who added to

the

the vigour of youth all the attention and saga- BOK X.
city of maturer )ears; that if, during the course 'V
of a long administration, he had committed any S
material error in government, or if, under the
pressure of so many and great affairs, and amidit
the attention which he had been obliged to give
to them, he had either negleced or injured any
of his fubjets, he now implored their forgive-
ness ; that, for his part, he hfould ever retain a
grateful sense of their fidelity and attachment,
and would carry the remembrance of it along
with him to the place of his retreat, as his sweetest
consolation, as well as the best reward for all
his services, and in his last prayers to Almighty
God would pour forth his ardent wishes for
their welfare.

THEN turning towards Philip, who fell on his

knees and kissed his father's hand, " If, fays
he, I had left you by my death this rich inhe-
ritance, to which I have made such large addi-
tions, some regard would have been justly due
to my memory on that account; but now when
I voluntarily resign to you what I might have
frill retained, I may well expect the warmef
expressions of thanks on your part. With
these, however, I dispense, and hall confider
your concern for the welfare of your fubjedts,
and your love of them, as the best and most
acceptable testimony of your gratitude to me.
It is in your power, by a wife and virtuous ad-
ministration, to juflify the extraordinary proof
which I, this day, give of my paternal affection,
and to demonstrate that you are worthy of the
confidence which I repose in you. Preserve an
inviolable regard for religion; maintain the
Catholick faith in its purity ; let the laws of your
country be sacred in your eyes; encroach not
on the rights and privileges of your people;

and

BooK XT. and if the time hall ever come, when you Ihall
'--'' with to enjoy the tranquilliy of private life,

1555' may you have a son endowed with such quali-

ties, that you can resign your sceptre to him,
with as much satisfaction as I give up mine
to )ou."

As soon as Charles had finished this long ad-

dress to his fubjets and to their new sovereign,
he funk into the chair, exhausted and ready to
faint with the fatigue of such an extraordinary
effort. During this difcoure, the whole audi-
ence melted into tears, some from admiration
of his magnanimity, others softened by the ex-
prelfions of tenderness towards his son, and of
love to his people; and all were asseted with
the deepest sorrow at losing a sovereign, who
had distinguished the Netherlands, his native
coun:r), with particular marks of his regard
and attachment.

PHILIP then arose from his knees, and after

retuning thanks to his father, with a low and
submissive voice, for the royal gift which his
unexampled bounty had bestowed upon him,
he addrefied the alembly of the States, and re-
gretting his inability to speak the Flemilh lan-
guage with such facility as to express what he
felt on this interesting occasion, as well as what
he owed to his good subjects in the Nether-
lands, he begged that they would permit Gran-
velle, bishop of Arras, to deliver what he had
given him in charge to speak in his name.
Granvelle, in a long discourse, expatiated on
the zeal with which Philip was animated for the
good of his fubjets, on his resolution to devote
all his time and talents to the promoting of
their hnppinefs, and on his intention to imitate
his father's example in distinguishing the Nether-

lands

lands with peculiar marks of his regard. Mas, Booi XI.
a lawyer of great eloquence, replied, in name'""
of the States, with large profellions of their 1555.
fidelity and affection to their new sovereign.

THEN Mary, Queen-dowager of Hungary, '556.

resigned the regency, with which fle had been
entrusted by her brother during the space of
twenty-five years. Next day Philip, in pre-Jauar 6.
fence of the States, took the usual oaths to
maintain the rights and privileges of his sub-
jdcIs; and all the members, in their own name,
and in that of their constituents, swore alle-
giance to him T.

A FEW weeks thereafter, Charles, in an

assembly no less splendid, and with a ceremo-
nial equally pompous, resigned to his on the
crowns of Spain, with all the territories depend-
ing on them, both in the old and in the new
world. Of all these vast poffeflions, he reserved
nothing for himself but an annual pension of
an hundred thousand crowns, to defray the
charges of his family, and to afford him a small
fumn for ads of beneficence and charity u.

VOL. III. Bb As
T Godleveus Relatio Abdicationis Car. V. ap. Goldaft.

Polit. Imper. p. 377. Stradade Bello Belgico, lib. i. p. .

u The Emperor's resignation is an event not only of iuch

importance, but of such a nature, that the precise date of
it, one would expec, lhould have been alcertained by hifto-
rians with the greatef accuracy. There is, however, an
amazing and unaccountable diverfiry among them with re-
gard to this point. All agree, that the deed by which
Charles transferred to his son his dominions in the Nether-
lands, bears date at Brussels the 25th of Otober. San-
doval fixes on the a8th of October as the day on which the
ceremony of resignation happened, and he was present at
the tranlaócion, vol. ii. p. 59z. Godleveus, who publilhed
a treatise de Abdicatione Caroli V. fixes the publick cere-

mony

Boo XI. As he had fixed on a place of retreat in

1-5' Spain, hoping that the dryness of the air and

Refo.eto warmth of the climate in that country might
ix hirefi- mitigate the violence of his disease, which had
dence ineen
spin. been

mony, as well as the date of the instrument of resignation,
on the z5th. Pere Barre, I know not on what authority,
fixes it on the 24th of November, Hidl. D'Alem. viii. 976.
Herrera agrees with Godleveus in sentiment, tom. i. I55.
as likewise does Pallavicini, whole authority with refpeet
to dates, and every thing where a minute accuracy is re-
quifite, is of great weight, Hid. lib. xvi. p. 168. Hifto-
rians differ no left with regard to the day on which Charles
resigned the crown of Spain to his son. According to M.
de Thou, it was a month after his having resigned his do-
minions in the Netherlands, i. e. about the zSth of Novem.
her, Thuan. lib. xvi. p. 571. According to Sandoval, it
was on the 16th of January, 1556, Sand. ii. 603. Antonic
di Vera agrees with him- Epitome del Vida del Car. V.
p. ito. According to Pallavicini, it was on the 17th,
Pal. lib. xvi. p. 168. and with him Herrera agrees. Vida
del D. Felipe, tom. i. p. 233. But Ferreras fixes it on the
irft day of January, Hist. Gener. tom. ix. p. 37t. M. di
Beaucaine supposes the resignation of the crown of Spait
to have been executed a few days after the resignation o
the Netherlands, Corn. de Reb. Gall. p. 879. It is re
markable, that in the treaty of truce at Vaucelles, thougl
Charles had made over all his dominions to his son foim
weeks previous to the conclusion of it, all the stipulation
are in the Emperor's name, and Philip is only designei
King of England and Naples. It is certain Philip was no
proclaimed King of Castile, &c. at Valladolid sooner tha
the 24th of March, Sandov. ii. p. 606; and previous t
that ceremony, he did not choose, it would seem, to aflum
the title of King of any of his Spanih kingdoms, or t
perform any a& of royal jurifdidion. In a deed annexe
to the treaty of truce, dated April 19, he assumes the titl
of King of Castile, &c. in the usual style of the Spanil
monarchs in that age. Corps Dipl. tom. iv. Appeno
p. 8 .

been much increased by the moisture of the air BooK XI.
and the rigour of the winters in the Nether-
lands, he was extremely impatient to embark 1556
for that kingdom, and to disengage himself
entirely from business, which he found to be
impollible while he remained in Brussels. But Obliged to
his physicians remonitrated so strongly against rm"iinf
his venturing to sea at that cold and boisterous in the Ne-
fcafon of the year, that he consented, though therland,.
with reluctance, to put off his voyage for ome
months.

BY yielding to their entreaties, he had the Promote

fatisfadtion, before he left the Low-Countries, 'h. ,gFo-
of taking 'a considerable ftep towards a peace pece.
with France, which he ardently wished for, not
only on his on's account, but that he might
have the merit, when quitting the world, of re-
establishing that tranquillity in Europe, which
he had banished out of it almost from the time
that he assumed the administration of affairs.
Previous to his resignation, commiflioners had
been appointed by him and by the French
King, in order to treat of an exchange of pri-
loncrs. In their conferences at the abbey of
Vaucelles, near Cambray, an expedient was
accidentally proposed for terminating hostilities
between the contending monarchs, by a long
truce, during the fubfiftance of which, and
without difcufiing their refpetive claims, each
should retain what was in his poffeflion. Charles,
fenlible how much his kingdoms were ex-
haufted by the expensive and almost conti-
nual wars in which his ambition had engaged
him, and eager to gain for his son a short in-
terval of peace, that he might establish him-
self firmly on his throne, declarcd warmly for
closing with the overture, though manifestly
dishonourable as well as disadvantageous; and

B b such

Boo XI. fich was the refpet due to his wisdom and

£556 experience, that Philip, notwithstanding his un-

willingness to purchase peace by such concef-
sions, did not presume to urge his opinion in
opposition to that of his father.

A truce HENRY could not have hesitated one moment
cocluded. about giving his consent to a truce on such

conditions, as would leave him in quiet pof-
session of the greater part of the Duke of Savoy's
dominions, together with the important con-
quests which he had made on the German fron-
tier. But it was no easy matter to reconcile
such a ftep with the engagements which he had
come under to the Pope, in his late treaty with
him. The Constable Montmorency, however,
refrefented in such a striking light, the impru-
dence of sacrificing the true interests of his
kingdom to these ra(h obligations, and took
such advantage of the absence of the Cardinal
of Lorrain, who had seduced the King into his
alliance with the Caraffas, that Henry, naturally
fluctuating and unsteady, and apt to be influ-
enced by the advice last given him, authorized
his ambassadors to sign a treaty of truce with
5th Feb. the Emperor for five years, on the terms which

had been proposed. But that he might not
seem to have altogether forgotten his ally the
Pope, who he foresaw would be highly exafpe-
rated, he, in order to sooth him, took care that
he should be expressly included in the truce .

Rift;lcby THE Count of Lalain repaired to Blois, and
.Ihs" the Admiral Coligny to Brussels, the former to

be present when the King of France, and the
latter when the Emperor and his on, ratified

the

" Mem. de Ribier, ii. 626. Corps Diplom. tom. iv.
App. S.

the treaty, and bound themselves by oath to BooK XI.
observe it Y. When a account of the con- ,S
ferences at Vaucelles, and of the conditions ofThe pope's
truce which had been proposed there, were first o"nimd
carried to Rome, it gave the Pope no manner diarefs.
of disquiet. He trusted so much to the honour
of the French monarch, that he would not
allow himself to think that Henry could forget
so soon, or violate so Shamefully, all the ftipu-
lations in his league with him. He had such
an high opinion of the Emperor's wisdom, that
he made no doubt' of his refusing his consent to
a truce on such unequal terms; and on both
these accounts he confidently pronounced that
this, like many preceding negociations, would
terminate in nothing. But later and more cer-
tain intelligence soon convinced him that in
political affairs no reasoning is more fallacious,
than, because an event is improbable, to con-
clude that it will not happen. The sudden
and unexpected conclusion of the truce filled
Paul with astonishment and terror. The Car-
dinal of Lorrain durst not encounter that storm
of indignation, to which he knew that he should
be exposed from the haughty Pontiff, who had
so good reason to be incensed but departing
abruptly from Rome, he left to the Cardinal
Tournon the difficult talk of attempting to

B b 3 sooth

' One of Admiral de Coligny's attendants, who wrote

to the court of France an account of what happened while
they resided at BrufTels, takes notice, as an inltance of
Philip's inpolitenefs, that he received the French ambaffa-
dor in an apartment hung with tapestry, which represented
the battle of Pavia, the manner in which Francis I. was
taken prisoner, his voyage to Spain, with all the mortifving
circurmtances of his captivity and imprifonnient at Madrid.
lem. de Ribier, i. 634.

BooXI. sooth Paul and his nephews. They were fully
*~" ' sensible of the perilous situation in which they
s55s. now stood. By their engagements with France,

which were no longer secret, they had highly
irritated Philip. They dreaded the violence of
his implacable temper. The Duke of Alva, a
minister fitted, as well by his abilities as by the
severity of his nature, for executing all Philip's
rigorous schemes, had advanced from Milan
to Naples, and began to assemble troops on
the frontiers of the EcclefiafticalState. While
they, if deserted by France, must not only re-
linquilh all the hopes of dominion and fove-
reignty to which their ambition aspired, but
remain exposed to the resentment of the Spanilh
monarch, without one ally to protet them
againlf an enemy with whom they were so little
able to contend.

He ato UNDER these circumstances, Paul had recourse
tempts to
rekindle the to the arts of negociation and intrigue, of which

the Papal court knows how well to avail itself,
in order to ward off any calamity threatened by
an enemy superior in power. He affeced to
approve highly of the truce, as an happy expe-
dient for putting a flop to the effusion of
Christian blood. He expressed his warmest
wishes that it might prove the forerunner of
a definitive peace. He exhorted the rival Princes
to embrace this favourable opportunity of set-
ting on foot a negociation for that purpose, and
offered, as their common father, to be mediator
between them. Under this pretext, he ap-
pointed Cardinal Rebiba his nuncio to the court
of Bruflels, and his nephew Cardinal Caraffa,
to that of Paris. The publick inftrution s giv n
to both were the fame; that they hould use
their utmost endeavours to prevail with the two
monarchs to accept of the Pope's mediation,

that,

that, by means of it, peace might be re-e{ta- BooK XI.
blified, and measures might be taken for assem- . 6
bling a general council. But under this fpe-
cious appearance of zeal for attaining objects so
desirable in themselves, and so becoming his
sacred charater to pursue, Paul concealed very
different intentions. Caraffa, besides his publick
instructions, received a private commission to
solicit the French king to renounce the treaty
of truce, and to renew his engagements with
the Holy See, and he was impowered to spare
neither entreaties, nor promises, nor bribes, in
order to gain that point. This, both the uncle
and the nephew confidered as the real end of
the embassy ; while the other served to amuse
the vulgar, or to deceive the Emperor and his
son. The Cardinal, accordingly, set out in- h. May.
ftantly for Paris, and travelled with the greatest
expedition, while Rebiba was detained some
weeks at Rome; and when it became necessary
for him to begin his journey, he received secret
orders to protract it as much as pollible, that
the issue of Caraffa's negociation might be
known before he should reach Brussels, and ac-
cording to that, proper directions might be
given to him with regard to the tone which he
should assume, in treating with the Emperor
and his son Z

CAR APFA made his entry into Paris with ex- His negoi-

traordinary pomp; and having preftnted a con- that pr-
fecrated sword to Henry, as the protedor, on pose.
whose aid the Pope relied in the present exi-
gency, he besought him not to disregard the
entreaties of a parent in distress, but to employ
that weapon which he gave him in his defence.

This

' Pallay. lib. xiii. p. 169. Burnet His. of Reform. ii.
App. 309.

Boo Xl. This he represented not only as a duty of filial

pier, but as an at of juflice. As the Pope,
5s- fromr confidence in the aftance and support

which his late treaty with France entitled him
to expect, had taken such steps as had irritated
the King of Spain, he conjured Henry not to
ftffer Paul and his family to be crufled under
the weight of that resentment which they had
drawn on themselves merely by their attachment
to France. Together with this argument, ad-
dressed to his generosity, he employed another,
which he hoped would work on his ambition.
He affirmed, that now was the time, when, with
the most certain profpet of success, he might
attack Philip's dominions in Italy; that the
flower of the veteran Spanish bands had perified
in the wars of Hungary, Germany, and the
Low-Countries; that the Emperor had left his
son an exhauted treasury, and kingdoms
drained of men that he had no longer to con-
tend with the abilities, the experience, and good
fortune of Charles, but with a monarch scarcely
feated on his throne, unpradifed in command,
odious to many of the Italian fates, and dreaded
by all. He promised, that the Pope, who had
already levied soldiers, would bring a confider-
able army into the field, which, when joined by
a sufficient number of French troops, might,
by one brisk and sudden effort, drive the Spa-
niards out of Naples, and add to the crown of
France a kingdom, the conquest of which had
been the great objec of all his predeceffrs du-
ring half a century, and the chief motive of
all their expeditions into Italy.

Their es- EVERY word Caraffa spoke made a deep im-
J'lyl. prellion on Henry; conscious, on the one hand,

that the Pope had just cause to reproach him
with having violated the laws not only of gene-

rofity

rofity but of decency, when he renounced his Boo Xl.
league with him, and had agreed to the truce ~6
of Vaucelles; and eager, on the other hand, 55
not only to distinguish his reign by a conquest,
which three former monarchs had attempted
without success, but likewise to acquire an efta-
blifhment of such dignity and value for one
of his Cons. Reverence, however, for the oath,
by which he had so lately confirmed the truce
of Vaucelles; the extreme old age of the Pope,
whose death might occasion an entire revolution
in the political system of Italy; together with
the representations of Montmorency, who re-
peated all the arguments he had used against
the first league with Paul, and pointed out
the great and immediate advantages which
France derived from the truce ; kept Henry
for Come time in fufpence, and might poflibly
have outweighed all Caraffa's arguments. But
the Cardinal was not such a novice in the arts
of intrigue and negociation, as not to have ex-
pedients ready for removing or surmounting all
there obstacles. To obviate the King's scruple
with regard to his oath, he produced powers
from the Pope to absolve him from the obli-
gation of it. By way of security against any
danger which he might apprehend from the
Pope's death, he engaged that his uncle would
make such a nomination of Cardinals, as hould
give Henry the absolute command of the next
election, and enable him to place in the Papal
chair a person entirely devoted to his interest.

IN order to counterbalance the effect of the

Constable's opinion and influence, he employed
not only the ative talents of the Duke of Guise,
and the eloquence of his brother the Cardinal
of Lorrain, but the address of the Queen, aided

by

Booi Xl. by the more powerful arts of Diana of Poitiers,

who, unfortunately for France, co-operated with
Catharine in this point, though he took plea-
sure, on almost every other occasion, to thwart
and mortify her. They, by their united soli-
citations, easily swayed the King, who leaned
of his own accord to that fide towards which
they wished him to incline. All Montmorency's
prudent remonstrances were disregarded; the
nuncio absolved Henry from his oath; and he
signed a new league with the Pope, which re-
kindled the flames of war both in Italy and in
the Low-Countries.

Ja a g, As soon as Paul was informed by his nephew
violent . that there was a fair prospect of his succeeding
,e~iig in this negociation, he dispatched a messenger
Philip. after the nuncio Rebiba, with orders to return

to Rome, without proceeding to Brussels. As
it was now no longer necessary to preserve that
tone of moderation, which suited the character
of a mediator, and which he had affected to
assume, or to put any farther restraint upon his
resentment against Philip, he boldly threw off
the malk, and took such violent steps as ren-
dered a rupture unavoidable. He seized and
imprisoned the Spanish envoy at his court. He
excommunicated the Colonnas; and having
deprived Marl Antonio, the head of that fa-
mily, of the dukedom of Paliano, he granted
that dignity, together with the territory annexed
to it, to his nephew the Count of Montorio.
He ordered a legal information to be presented
in the consistory of Cardinals against Philip,
setting forth, that he, notwithstanding the fidelity
and allegiance due by him to the Holy See, of
which he held the crown of Naples, had not
only afforded a retreat in his dominions to the

Colonnas,

Colonnas, whom the Pope had excommunicated BOOK XII.
and declared rebels, but had furnifled them ' '
with arms, and was ready, in conjunction with 55
them, to invade the Ecclesiastical State in an
hostile manner; that such conduc in a vaflal
was to be deemed treason against his liege lord,
the punishment of which was the forfeiture of
his fief. Upon this the consistorial advocate
requested the Pope to take cognizance of the
cause, and to appoint a day for hearing of it,
when he would make good every article of the
charge, and expec from his justice that sentence
which the heinousness of Philip's crimes merited.
Paul, whose pride was highly flattered with the
idea of.trying and paling judgment on so great
a King, assented to his requefi; and as if it had July T7.
been no less easy to execute than to pronounce
sentence, declared that he would consult with
the Cardinals concerning the formalities requi-
site in conducting the trial .

BuT while Paul allowed his pride and resent- Philip's fu-

ment to drive him on with such headlong im- Pf'pt,"
petuofity, Philip discovered an amazing mode-
ration on his part. He had been taught by the
Spanish ecclefiafticks, who had the charge of his
education, a profound veneration for the Holy
See. This entiment, which had been early
infused, grew up with him as he advanced in
years, and took full possession of his mind,
which was naturally thoughtful, serious, and
prone to superstition. When he foresaw a rup-
ture with the Pope approaching, he had filch
violent scruples with refpet to the lawfulnes
of taking arms againit the Vicegerent of Christ,
and the common father of all Christians, that
he consulted ome Spanish divines upon that

point.
A Pallav. lib. xiii. 171-

BooK XII. point. They, with the usual dexterity of casuists

-"`~ in accommodating their responses to the cir-
556. cumftances of those who apply to them for

direction, assured him, that, after employing
prayers and remonstrances in order to bring the
Pope to reason, he had full right, both by the
laws of nature and of Christianity, not only to
defend himself when attacked, but to begin
hostilities, if that were judged the most proper
expedient for preventing the effe&s of Paul's
violence and injustice. Philip nevertheless con-
tinued to deliberate and delay, confidering it as
a most cruel misfortune, that his administration
ihould open with an attack on a person, whose
sacred funtion and charater he so highly
refpeAed B.

The Dke AT last the Duke of Alva, who, in compli-
of Alva
,fk te ance with his master's scruples, had continued
Seld agist to negociate long after he mould have begun to
the pp. at, finding Paul inexorable, and that every

overture of peace, and every appearance of
hesitation on his part, increased the Pontiff's.
set. 5- natural arrogance, took the field and entered

the ecc!efia.ical territories. His army did not
exceed twelve thousand men, but it was com-
posed of veteran soldiers, and commanded chiefly
by those Roman barons, whom Paul's violence
had driven into exile. The valour of the
troops, together with the animosity of their
leaders, who fought in their own quarrel, and to
recover their own estates, supplied the want of
numbers. As none of the French forces were
,et arrived, Alva soon became master of the
Campagna Romana; some cities being furren-
dered through the cowardice of the garrisons,
which consisted of raw soldiers, ill disciplined,

and
Ftrrer. Hist. de Efpagne, ix. 373. Herrera, i. 308.

and worse commanded; the gates of othersBoo XlL
being opened by the inhabitants, who were 16'
eager to receive back their ancient masters.
Alva, that he might not be taxed with impiety
in seizing the patrimony of the church, took
poifcflion of the towns which capitulated in
the name of the college of cardinals, to which,
or to the Pope that hould be chosen to succeed
Paul, he declared that he would immediately
restore them.

THE rapid progress of the Spaniards, whose Atrucbe-

,. , i

"

j i /* T» tweenthe

light troops made inroads to the gates of Rome, Pope and
filled that city with confernation. Paul, though 'il-
inflexible and undaunted himself, was obliged
to give way so far to the fears and solicitations
of the Cardinals, as to fend deputies to Alva in
order to propose a cefration of arms. The Pope
yielded the more readily, as he was sensible of
a double advantage that might be derived
from obtaining that point. It would deliver
the inhabitants of Rome from their present
terror, and would afford time for the arrival of
the succours which he expeted from France.
Nor was Alva unwilling to close with the over-
ture, both as he knew how desirous his master
was to terminate a war, which he had under-
taken with relucance, and as his army was lo
much weakened by garrisoning the great number
of towns which he had reduced, that it was
hardly in a condition to keep the field without
frelh recruits. A truce was accordingly con- No.,
eluded, firfi for ten, and afterwards for forty
days, during which, various schemes of peace
were proposed, and perpetual negociations weie
carried on, but with no sincerity oa the part'of
the Pope. The return of his nephew the C ;-
dinal to Rome, the receipt of a confide:'.bic

tu;,

Boo Xl. (um remitted by the King of France, the arrival

5' 6 of one body of French troops, together with
556s. the expectation of others which had begun their

march, rendered him more arrogant than ever,
and banished all thoughts from his mind, but
those of war and revenge c.

' Pallay. lib. xiii. 177. Thuan. lib. xvii. 88. Mem. de
Ribier, ii. 664.

THE

# BOOK XII.

THE
HIS TORY

OF THE
R E I G N

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES V.

BOOK XII.
W H I L E there operations or intrigues Boo Xll.

kept the Pope and Philip busy and '-v
attentive, the Emperor disentangled himself b556

Charles's

finally from all the affairs of this world, and set new t-
out for the place of his retreat. He had hitherto t'mP,"e',t
retained the imperial dignity, not from any un- effionofthe
willingness to relinquish it, for, after having re- Empre.
signed the real and extensive authority that he
enjoyed in his hereditary dominions, to part with
the limited and often ideal jurifdiion which
belongs to an ele&ive crown, was no great facri-
fice. His sole motive for delay was to gain a
few months, for making one trial more, in order
to accomplish his favourite scheme in behalf of
his on. At the very time Charles seemed to be
most sensible of the vanity of worldly grandeur,
and when he appeared to be quitting it not only
with indifference, but with contempt, the vast
schemes of ambition, which had so long occu-

pied

BOOK Xn. pied and engrossed his mind, still kept poffeflion

* of it. He could not think of leaving his son
565 in a rank inferior to that which he himself had

held among the Princes of Europe. As he had,
some years before, made a fruitless attempt to
secure the Imperial crown to Philip, that by
uniting it to the kingdoms of Spain, and the
dominions of the house of Burgundy, he might
put it in his power to prosecute, with a better
profpeA of success, those great plans, which his
own infirmities had obliged him to abandon, he
was still unwilling to relinquish this flattering
project as chimerical or unattainable.

W1kth NOTWITHST A NDING the repulse which he had
Pover un-
c,,'fuL formerly met with from his brother Ferdinand,

he renewed his solicitations with fresh im-
portunity; and, during the summer, had tried
every art, and employed every argument, which
he thought could induce him to quit the Impe-
rial throne to Philip, and to accept of the in-
vefliture of some province, either in Italy, or
in the Low-Countries as an equivalent . But
Ferdinand, who was so firm and inflexible with.
regard to this point, that he had paid no regard
to the solicitations of the Emperor, even when
they were enforced with all the weight of autho-
rity which accompanies supreme power, received
the overture, that now came from him in the
situation to which helad descended, with greater
indifference, and would hardly deign to liiten
to it. Charles, ashamed of his own credulity
in having imagined that he might accomplilh
that now, which he had attempted formerly
without ficcefs, defilled finally from his scheme.
He then resigned the government of the Em-
pire; and having transfeied all his claims of
obedience and allegiance from the Germanick

body
* Ambafii Ics des Noaills, tom. v. 356.

body, to his brother the King of the Romans, BoolKXI.
he executed a deed to that effea, with all the 5
formalities requisite in such an important tranf- Apit 7.
acion. The instrument of resignation he com-
mitted to William Prince of Orange, and em-
powered him to lay it before the college of
electors .

NOTHING now remained to detain Charlescharles

fete out for

from that retreat for which he languished. srai.
The preparations for his voyage having been
made for some time, he set out for Zuitburg in
Zealand, where the fleet had orders to rendez-
vous. In his way thither he passed through
Ghent, and after flopping there a few days, to in-
dulge that tender and pleasant melancholy, which
arises in the mind of every man in the decline
of life, on visiting the place of his nativity, and
viewing the scenes and objecs familiar to him
in his early youth, he pursued his journey, ac-
companied by his son Philip, his daughter the
archdutchefs, his fiRters the dowager Queens of
France and Hungary, Maximilian his fon-in-
law, and a numerous retinue of the Flemish
nobility. Before he went on board, he difmifled
them, with marks of his attention or regard,
and taking leave of Philip. with all the tender-
ness of a father who embraced his son for the
last time, he set fail on the seventeenth of Sep-
tember, under convoy of a large fleet of Spanilh,
Flemilh, and English hips. He declined a pref-
ling invitation, from the Queen of England, to
land in some part of her dominions, in order
to refrefl himself, and that she might have the
comfort of feeing him once more. It cannot
surely, said he, be agreeable to a Queen to re-
ceive a visit from a father-in-law, who is now
nothing more than a private gentleman.

VOL. III. C c His

Goldaft. Conftit. Imper. pars i. 576.

BooK XII. pied and engrossed his mind, still kept pofeflion
'""^" of it. He could not think of leaving his son

in a rank inferior to that which he himself had
held among the Princes of Europe. As he had,
some years before, made a fruitless attempt to
secure the Imperial crown to Philip, that by
uniting it to the kingdoms of Spain, and the
dominions of the house of Burgundy, he might
put it in his power to prosecute, with a better
profpec of success, those great plans, which his
own infirmities had obliged him to abandon, he
was still unwilling to relinquish this flattering
project as chimerical or unattainable.

Whbh NOTWITHSTANDING the repulse which he had
c^efnsL formerly met with from his brother Ferdinand,

he renewed his solicitations with fresh im-
portunity; and, during the summer, had tried
every art, and employed every atgument, which
he thought could induce him to quit the Impe-
rial throne to Philip, and to accept of the in-
veftiture of some province, either in Italy, or
in the Low-Countries as an equivalent'. But
Ferdinand, who was so firm and inflexible with
regard to this point, that he had paid no regard
to the solicitations of the Emperor, even when
they were enforced with all the weight of autho-
rity which accompanies supreme power, received
the overture, that now came from him in the
situation to which he had descended, with greater
hidiffirence, and would hardly deign to liten
to it. Charles, alhamed of his own credulity
in having imagined that he might accomplish
that now, which he had attempted formerly
without fccefs, defifed finally from his scheme.
He then resigned the government of the Em-
pire; and having transferted all his claims of
obedience and allegiance from the Germanick

body
* Aibafi. les des Noailles, tom. . 356.

body, to his brother the King of the Romans, BooKXII.
he executed a deed to that effet, with all the 56.
formalities requisite in such an important tranf- Aogft 17.
acion. The instrument of resignation he com-
mitted to William Prince of Orange, and em-
powered him to lay it before the college of
electors .

NOTHING now remained to detain Charles ,bchles

sets out for

from that retreat for which he languished. sp.n.
The preparations for his voyage having been
made for some time, he set out for Zuitburg in
Zealand, where the fleet had orders to rendez-
vous. In his way thither he passed through
Ghent, and after stopping there a few days, to in-
dulge that tender and pleasant melancholy, which
arises in the mind of every man in the decline
of life, on visiting the place of his nativity, and
viewing the scenes and objecs familiar to him
in his early youth, he pursued his journey, ac-
companied by his son Philip, his daughter the
archdutchefs, his fifRers the dowager Queens of
France and Hungary, Maximilian his fon-in-
law, and a numerous retinue of the Flemish
nobility. Before he went on board, he dismissed
them, with marks of his attention or regard,
and taking leave of Philip with all the tender-
ness of a father who embraced his son for the
last time, he set fail on the seventeenth of Sep-
tember, under convoy of a large fleet of Spanish,
Flemish, and English ships. He declined a pref-
sing invitation, from the Queen of England, to
land in some part of her dominions, in order
to refresh himself, and that she might have the
comfort of feeing him once more. It cannot
surely, said he, be agreeable to a Queen to re-
ceive a visit from a father-in-law, who is now
nothing more than a private gentleman.

VOL. III. C c His

Goldaft. Conflit. Imper. pars i. 576.

BOl XII. His voyage was prosperous, and he ar-
'V- ' rived at Laredo in Biscay on the eleventh

1556
HJ. I day after he left Zealand. As soon as he
ad recep- landed, he fell prostrate on the ground; and

confidering himself now as dead to the world,
he kissed the earth, and said, " Naked came I
out of my mother's womb, and naked I now
return to thee, thou common mother of man-
kind." From Laredo he pursued his journey to
Burgos, carried by his attendants sometimes in
a chair, and ometimes in a horse litter, suffering
exquisite pain at every ltep, and advancing with
the greatest difficulty. Some of the Spanish
nobility repaired to Burgos, in order to pay court
to him, but they were so few in number, and
their attendance was so negligent, that Charles
observed it, and felt, for the first time, that he
was no longer a Monarch. Accuitomed from
his early youth to the dutiful and officious refpea
with which those who possess overeign power
are attended, he had received it with the cre-
dulity common to Princes, and was weak enough
to be mortified, when he now discovered, that
he had been indebted to his fortune, for much.
of that obsequious regard which he had fondly
thought was paid to his personal qualities. But
though he might have soon learned to forget the
levity of his fubjefts, or to have despised their
neglet, he was more deeply affliced with his
son's ingratitude, who, forgetting already how
much he owed to his father's bounty, obliged
him to remain some weeks at Burgos, before he
paid him the first moiety of that small pension,
which was all that he had reserved of so many
kingdoms. As without this fum, Charles could
not dismiss his domeRficks with such rewards
as their services merited, or his generosity had
destined for them, he could not help exprefling

both

both surprise and diffatisfadion c. At last the BOOK XII.
money was paid, and Charles having dismissed 6
a great number of his domefticks, whose attend- 55
ance he thought would be superfluous or cum-
berfome in his retirement, he proceeded to Val-
ladolid. There he took a last and tender leave
of his two fillers, whom he would not permit
to accompany him to his solitude, though they
entreated it with tears, not only that they might
have the consolation of contributing by their
attendance and care to mitigate or to sooth his
sufferings, but that they might reap infiruCion
and benefit by joining with him in those pious
exercises, to which he had coniecrated the re-
mainder of his days.

FROM Valladolid he continued his journey to The place

Plazencia in Estremadura. He had paffedh,.'
through this place a great many years before,
and having been struck at that time with the de-
lightful situation of the monastery of St, Juftus,
belonging to the order of St. Jerome, nct many
miles distant from the town, he had then ob-
served to some of his attendants, that this was a
spot to which Dioclefian might have retired with
pleasure. The impression had remained so frong
on his mind, that he pitched upon it as the
place of his retreat. It was feated in a vale of
no great extent, watered by a small brook, and
surrounded by riing grounds, covered with lofty
trees; from the nature of the foil, as well as the
temperature of the climate, it was esteemed the
most healthful and delicious situation in Spain.
Some months before his resignation he had sent
an architect thither, to add a new apartment to
the monastery, for his accommodation ; but he
gave firit orders that the stile of the building
Ihouild be such as suited his present station, ra-

C c 2 ther
Strada de Bello Belg. lib. i. 9.

BooKXII. ther than his former dignity. It consisted only

-' 7' of fix rooms, four of them in the form of Friars
556 cells, with naked walls; the other two, each

twenty feet square, were hung with brown cloth,
and furnished in the most simple manner. They
were all on a level with the ground; with a
door on one fide into a garden, of which Charles
himself had given the plan, and had filled it
with various plants, which he intended to cul-
tivate with his own hands. On the other fide
they communicated with the chapel of the mo-
naftery, in which he was to perform his devo-
tions. Into this humble retreat, hardly suss-
cient for the comfortable accommodation of a
private gentleman, did Charles enter, with twelve
domelticks only. He buried there, in solitude
rb. z4. and silence, his grandeur, his ambition, toge-

ther with all those vail projects, which, during
half a century, had alarmed and agitated Europe,
filling every kingdom in it, by turns, with the
terror of his arms, and the dread of being sub-
jeded to his power D.

Contrai THE contrast between Charles's conduc and
th behi- that of the Pope at this juncture, was so ob-
our of vious, that it firuck even the most careless ob-
Charles and r
thePope. servers; nor was the comparison which they

made much to Paul's advantage. The former,
a conqueror, born to reign, long accustomed tc
the splendor which accompanies supreme power
and to those busy and interesting icenes in whici
an active ambition had engaged him, quittec
the world, at an early period of life, that hi
might close the evening of his days in tranquil
lity, and secure Ibme interval for fober thought
and serious recollection. The latter, a priefl

whi

Sandov. ii. 607 & Zniga, o. Thuan. lib. xvi
609.

who had passed the early part of his life in the BooKXII.
hade of the schools, and in the study of the ' ' ~
speculative sciences, who was seemingly so de- 557
tached from the world, that he had Ihut himself
up for many years in the solitude of a cloyfter,
and who was not raised to the papal throne until
he had reached the extremity of old age, dif-
covered at once all the impetuosity of youthful
ambition, and engaged in vafl schemes, in order
to accomplish which, he scrupled not to scatter
the feeds of discord and to kindle the flames of
war in every corner of Europe. But Paul, re-
gardlefs of the opinion or censures of mankind,
held on his own course with his wonted arro-
gance and violence. These, although they
seemed already to have exceeded all bounds,
rose to still a greater height, upon the arrival of
the duke of Guise in Italy.

TH AT which the two Princes of Lorrain fore- The duke
saw and desired, had happened. The duke of fdsuire
Guise was entrusted with the command of the French r-
army appointed to march to the Pope's assist- it'ly.
ance. It consisted of twenty thousand men, of
the best troops in the service of France. So
high was the Duke's reputation, and such the
general expedation of beholding ome extraor-
dinary exertion of his courage and abilities in a
war into which he had precipitated his country,
chiefly with the design of obtaining a field where
he might display his own talents, that many of
the French nobility, who had no command in
the troops employed, accompanied him as volun-
teers. This army passed the Alps in a rigorous
season, and advanced towards Rome, without
any opposition from the Spaniards, who, as they
were not strong enough to a& in different parts,
had colle&ed all their forces in one body on

the

BooKXIl. the frontiers of Naples, for the defence of that
^^ kingdom.

1557.

The Po. EMBOLDENED by the approach of the French,
niliti, the Pope let loose all the fury of his resentment

against Philip, which, notwithstanding the na-
'lp tural violence of his temper, prudential con-

fiderations had hitherto obliged him to keep
under some restraint. He named commiflion-
ers, whom he empowered to pass judgment in
the suit, which the consistorial advocate had
commenced against Philip, in order to prove
that he had forfeited the crown of Naples, by
Feb. . taking arms against the Holy See, of which he

was a vadal. He recalled all the nuncios refi-
dent in the courts of Charles V. of Philip, or of
any of their allies. This was levelled chiefly
April 9 against Cardinal Pole, the papal legate in the

court of England, whose great merit, in having
contributed so successfully to reconcile that
kingdom to the church of Rome, together with
the expecation of farther services he might
perform, was not sufficient to screen him from
the resentment which he had incurred by his
zealous endeavours to re-eftablilh peace between
the house of Austria and France. He com-
manded an addition to be made to the anathe-
mas annually denounced against the enemies of
the church on Maundy-Thurfday, whereby he
inflicted the censure of excommunication on the
authors of the late invasion of the ecclesiastical
territories, whatever their rank or dignity might
be; and, in consequence of this, the uual
prayers for the Emperor were omitted next day
in the Pope's chapel B.

rm.ir.try BUT while the Pope indulged himself in those
osDIc- wild and childish sallies of rage, either he ne-

gleded,
'Pal. lib. xiii. 18o. Mem. de Ribier, ii. 678.

gle&ed, or found that it exceeded his power, Boox XII.
to take such measures as would have rendered his ,''
resentment really formidable, and fatal to his 557
enemies. For when the Duke of Guise entered
Rome, where he was received with a triumphal
pomp, which would have been more suitable if
he had been returning from having terminated
the war with glory, than when he was going to
begin it with a doubtful chance of success, he
found none of the preparations of war in such
forwardness asCaraffa had promised, or he had ex-
peed. The papal troops were far inferior in
number to the quota stipulated; no magazines
sufficient for their fubfitence were formed; nor
was money for paying them provided. The Ve-
netians, agreeably to that cautious maxim which
the misforunes of their itate had first led them to
adopt, and which was now become a funda-
mental principle in their policy, declared their
resolu'tion to preserve an exa& neutrality, with-
out taking any part in the quarrels of Princes,
so far superior to themselves in power. The
other Italian states were either openly united in
ieague with Philip, or secretly wilhed success to
his arms against a Pontiff, whose inconsiderate
ambition had rendered Italy once more the feat
of war.

THE duke of Guise perceived that the whole Duke of

weight of the war would devolve on him; and rations.p
became sensible, though too late, how impru-
dent it is to rely, in the execution of great
enterprizes, on the aid of feeble allies. Pushed
on, however, by the Pope's impatience for
action, as well as by his own desire of perform-
ing omething of what he had so confidently un-
dertaken, he marched towards Naples, and be- April is.
gan his operations. But the success of these
fall far hort of his former reputation, of what

the

Boo XII. the world expeced, and what he himself had
k'-' promised. He opened the campaign with the
J557s liege of Civitella, a town of some importance on

the Neapolitan frontier. But the obstinacy with
which the Spanish governor defended it baffled
all the impetuous efforts of the French valour,
and obliged Guise, after a siege of three weeks,
to retire from the town with disgrace. He en-
deavoured to wipe off that stain, by advancing
boldly towards the duke of Alva's camp, and
offering him battle. But that prudent com-
mander, sensible of all the advantages of stand-
ing on the defensive before an invading enemy,
declined an engagement, and kept within his in-
trenchments; and adhering to his plan with the
steadiness of a Castilian, eluded, with great ad-
dress, all Guise's stratagems to draw him into
action . By this time sickness began to waste
the French army; violent dilfenfions had arisen
between Guise and the commander of the Pope's
forces; the Spaniards renewed their incursions
into the ecclesiastical ltate; the Pope, when he
found, instead of the conquefs and triumphs
which he had fondly expeted, that he could
not secure his own territories from depredation,
murmured, complained, and began to talk of
peaeo. The duke of Guise, mortified to the last
degree with having a&ed such an inglorious part,
not only solicited his court either to reinforce
his army, or to recal him, but urged Paul to
fulfil his engagements; and called on Cardinal
Caraffa, ometimes with reproaches, sometimes
with threats, to make good there magnificent
promises, from a ralh confidence in which he
had advised his matter to renounce the truce of
Vaucellus, and to join in league with the Pope O.

BUT

Herrera vida de Felipe, 181. O Tbuan. lib. xxviii.
614. Palay. lib. xiii. 181. Burn. ii. app. 317.

BUT while the French affairs in Italy were in BOOK XlI.

this wretched situation, an unexpeted event'"
happened in the Low-Countries, which called Hot5t'e.
the Duke of Guise from a station wherein he in theLow-
could acquire no honour, to the most dignified Ct
and important charge which could be committed
to a subje&t. As soon as the French had dif-
covered their purpose of violating the truce of
Vaucellus, not only by fending an army into
Italy, but by attempting to surprise some of
the frontier towns in Slanders, Philip, though
willing to have avoided a rupture, determined
to prosecute the war with such spirit, as should
make his enemies sensible, that his father had
not erred, when he judged him to be so capable
of government, that he had given up the reins
into his hands. As he knew that Henry had
been at great expence in fitting out the army
under the duke of Guise, and that his treasury
was hardly able to answer the exorbitant and
endless demands of a distant war, he foresaw
that all his operations in the Low-Countries must,
of consequence, prove feeble and be confidered
only as secondary to those in Italy. For that
reason, he prudently resolved to make his prin-
cipal effort in that place where he expected the
French to be weakest, and to bend his chief force
against that quarter where they would feel a
blew moit sensibly. With this view, he afiem-
bled in the Low-Countries an army of about
fifty thousand men, the Flemings serving him
on this occasion with that acive zeal, which ub-
jets are wont to exert in obeying the commands
of a new sovereign. But Philip, cautious and
provident, even at this early period of life, did
not reft all his hopes of success on that formi-
dable force alone.

Hi

BooK Xll. HE had been labouring, for some time, to
X-'1"" engage the English to espouse his quarrel; and
pa,.- though it was manifestly the interest of that
d.o.'l kingdom to maintain a ftri& neutrality, and
t!d inthe the people themselves were sensible of the ad-

vantages which they derived from it; though
he knew how odious his name was to the Eng-
lifh, and how averse they would be to co-ope-
rate with him in any measure, he nevertheless
did not delpair of accomplilhing his point. He
relied on the affetion wherewith the Queen
doated on him, which was so violent, that even
his coldness and neglect had not extinguished
it; he knew her implicit reverence for his
opinion, and her fond desire of gratifying him
in every particular. That he might work on
thee with greater facility, and more certain fuc-
cels, he set out for England. The Queen, who,
during her hulband's absence, had languiihed
in perpetual dejetion, refirmed fresh spirits on
his arrival; and without paying the least atten-
tion either to the interef or to the inclinations
of her people, entered warmly into all his
schemes. In vain did her privy council remon-
ftrate againfi the imprudence as well as danger
of involving the nation into an unneceflary war;
in vain did they put her in mind of the solemn
treaties of peace subsisting between England
and France, which the conduct of that nation
had afforded her no pretext to violate. Mary,
soothed by Philip's caresses, or intimidated by
the threats which his afccndant over her em-
boldened him at Come times to throw out, was
deaf to every thing that could be urged in op-
position to his sentiments, and infifitd with the
greateR vehemence on an immediate declaration
of war against France. The council, though
all Philip's address and Mary's authority were
employed to gain or overawe them, after flrug-

glirng

gling long, yielded at last, not from convic- BooKXII
tion, but merely from deference to the will of ' '
their sovereign. War was declared againfi J5S57'
France, the only one perhaps against that king-
dom into which the Englith ever entered with
relutance. As Mary knew the aversion of the
nation to this measure, he durst not call a par-
liament in order to raise money for carrying on
the war. She fipplied this want, however, by a
firain of prerogative; and levied large fums on
her fubjeets by herown authority. This enabled
her to assemble a sufficient body of troops, and
to fend eight thousand men, under the condudt of
the earl of Pembroke, to join Philip's army ".

PHILIP, who was not ambitious of military OPttion,

glory, gave the command of his army to Ema- army in te
nuel Philibert, duke of Savoy, and fixed 'his to-Coun-
own residence at Cambray, that he might be
at hand to receive the earlieit intelligence of
his motions, and to aid him with his counsels.
The duke opened the campaign with a masterly
stroke of address, which justified Philip's choice,
and discovered such a superiority of genius over
the French generals, as almost ensured success
in his subsequent operations. He appointed
the general rendezvous of his troops at a place
considerably distant from the country which he
defined to be the scene of action; and having
kept the enemy in fufpence for a good time
with regard to his intentions, he at last deceived
them so effectually, by the variety of his marches
and counter-marches, as led them to conclude
that he meant to bend all his force against the
province of Champagne, and would attempt to
penetrate into the kingdom on that fide. In
consequence of this opinion, they drew ail their
strength towards that quarter, and reinforcing

the
U Carte, iii. 337.

BooK XII. the garrisons there, left the towns on other parts
t'- of the frontier deflitute of troops sufficient to de-

'5s7 fend them.

Inrctt St. EMANUEL, as soon as he perceved that this
QOiULm. feint had its full effe&, turned suddenly to the

right, advanced by rapid marches into Picardy,
and fending his cavalry, in which he was ex-
tremely firong, before him, invested St. Quintin.
This was a town deemed in that age of confi-
derable strength, and of great importance, as
there were few fortified cities between it and
Paris. The fortifications, however, had been
much neglected; the garrison, weakened by
draughts sent towards Champagne, did not
amount to a fifth part of the number requisite
for its defence; and the governor, though a
brave officer, was neither of rank, nor authority,
equal to the command in a place of so much
consequence, besieged by such a formidable
army. A few days must have put the Duke of
Savoy in poffeflion of the town, if the admiral
de Coligny, who thought it concerned his
honour to attempt living a place of such im-
portance to his country, and which lay within
hisjurifdidion as governor of Picardy, had not
taken the gallant resolution of throwing himself
into it, with such a body of men as he could
colled of a sudden. This resolution he exe-
cuted with great intrepidity, and, if the nature
of the enterprize be confidered, with no con-
temptible success; for though one half of his
small body of troops was cut off, he, wih 'the
other, broke through the enemy, and entered
the town. The unexpected arrival of an officer
of such high rank and reputation, and who had
exposed himself to such danger in order to join
them, inspired the desponding garrison with cou-
rage. Every thing that the admiral's great kill

and

and experience in the art of war could suggest, BooKXII.
for annoying the enemy, or defending the town, -
was attempted; and the citizens as well as the '557'
garrison, seconding his zeal with equal ardour,
seemed to be determined that they would hold
out to the last, and sacrifice themselves in order to
save their country'.

THE Duke of Savoy, whom the Englifl, TheFre~

under the Earl of Pembroke, joined about this t drelieve
time, pulhed on the siege with the greatef the tow .
vigour. An army so numerous, and so well
supplied with every thing requisite, carried on
its approaches with great advantage against a
garrison which was still so feeble that it durfi
teldom venture to disturb or retard the enemy's
operations by sallies. The admiral, sensible of
the approaching danger, and unable to avert it,
acquainted his uncle the conitable Montmo-
rency, who had the command of the French
army, with his situation, and pointed out to
him a method by which he might throw relief
into the town. The constable, solicitous to save
a town, the loss of which would open a passage
for the enemy into the heart of France, and
eager to extricate his nephew out of that peril-
ous situation, in which zeal for the publick had
engaged him, resolved, though aware of the
danger, to attempt what he desired. With this
view, he marched from La Fere towards St.
Quintin at the head of his army, which was
not by one half so numerous as that of the
enemy; and having given the command of a
body of chosen men to Coligny's brother Dan-
delot, who was colonel general of the French
infantry, he ordered him to force his way into
the town by that avenue which the admiral had
represented as most practicable, while he him-

self
Thuan. lib. xix. 647.

BOOt XI. self with the main army would give the alarm
%-7- to the enemy's camp on the opposite fide, and

endeavour to draw all their attention towards
Auaft o. that quarter. Dandelot executed his orders with

greater intrepidity than conduct. His soldiers
rushed on with such headlong impetuosity, that
though it broke the first body of the enemy
which flood in their way, it threw themselves
into the utmost confusion; and being attacked
by frelh troops which closed in upon them on
every ide, the greater part of them were cut in
pieces, Dandelot, with about five hundred of
the most adventrous and most fortunate, ma-
king good his entrance into the town.

The bttle MEANWHILE the Constable, in executing his
.s 'u. a part of the plan, advanced so near the camp of

the besiegers, as rendered it impoflible to re-
treat with safety, in the face of an enemy so
much superior in number. The Duke of Savoy
instantly perceived Montmorency's error, and
prepared, with the presence of mind and abili-
ties of a great general, to avail himself of it.
He drew up his army in order of battle, with
the greatest expedition, and watching the mo-
ment when the French began to file off towards
La Fere, he detached all his cavalry, under the
command of the count of Egmont, to fall on
their rear, while he himself, at the head of his
infantry, advanced to support him. The French
retired at first in perfect order, and with a good
countenance; but when they saw Egmont draw
near with his formidable body of cavalry, the
shock of which they were conscious that they
could not withstand, the profpedt of imminent
danger added to distrust of their general, whole
imprudence every soldier now perceived, struck
them with general consternation. They began
insensibly to quicken their pace, and those in

the

the rear pressed so violently on such as were BOKXII.
before them, that in a hort time their march 57.
resembled a flight rather than a retreat. Eg- 557
mont, observing their confusion, charged them
with the greatest fury, and in a moment all
their men at arms, the pride and strength of
the French troops in that age, gave way and
fled with precipitation. The infantry, however, Total de-

feat of the

whom the Constable, by his presence and autho- French.
rity, kept to their colours, still continued their
retreat in good order, until the enemy brought
some pieces of cannon to bear upon their center,
which threw them into such confusion, that the
cavalry, renewing their attack, broke in, and
the rout became universal. About four thou-
sand of the French fell in the field, and among
there the Duke of Anguyen, a Prince of the
blood, together with fix hundred gentlemen.
The Constable, as soon as he perceived the for-
tune of the day to be irretrievable, rufled into
the thickest of the enemy, with a resolution not
to survive the calamity, which his ill conduct
had brought upon his country ; but having re-
ceived a dangerous wound, and being wafted
with the loss of blood, he was surrounded by
some Flemish officers, to whom he was known,
who protected him from the violence of the
soldiers, and obliged him to surrender. Besides
Longueville, the Marechal St. Andre, many
officers of diftinAion, three hundred gentlemen
and near four thousand private soldiers were taken
prisoners. All the colours belonging to the in-
fantry, all the ammunition, and all the cannon,
two pieces excepted, fell into the enemy's hands.
The victorious army did not lose above four-
score men .

THIS

· Thuan. 6o5. Harmi Annal. Brabant. ii. 69z. Her-
rera, 291.

BooK Xn. THIS battle, no less fatal to France than the
'^~' ancient victories of Crecy and Agincourt, gained
TIfeStr. by the English on the fame frontier, bore a
fCas of . near resemblance to those disastrous events, in

the suddenness of the rout; in the ralhnefs of
the commander in chief; in the number of per-
sons of note slain or taken; and in the small
lots sustained by the enemy. It filled France
with equal consternation. Many inhabitants of
Paris, with the fame precipitancy and trepida-
tion as if the enemy had been already at their
gates, quitted the city, and retired into the in-
terior provinces. The King, by his presence
and exhortations, endeavoured to console and
to animate such as remained, and applying him-
self with the greatest diligence to repair the
ruinous fortifications of the city, prepared to
defend it against the attack which he initantly
expected. But happily for France, Philip's
caution, together with the intrepid firmness of
the Admiral de Coligny, not only saved the
capital from the danger to which it was exposed,
but gained the nation a short interval, during
which the people recovered from the terror and
dcjection occasioned by a blow no less severe
than unexpeced, and Henry had leisure to take
measures for the publick security with the spirit
which became the overeign of a powerful and
martial people.

Philip - PHILIP, immediately after the battle, visited
rm h'y. the camp at St. Quintin, where he was received

with all the exultation of military triumph;
and such were his transports of joy, on account
of an event which threw so much lustre on the
beginning of his reign, that they oiftened his
revere and haughty temper, into an unusual
flow of courtesy. When the Duke of Savoy
approached, and was kneeling to kifs his hands,

he

he caught him in his arms, and embracing him Boor XII.
with warmth, " It becomes me, said he, ra-'
ther to kifs your hands, which have gained me 557
iuch a glorious and almost bloodless victory."

As soon as the rejoicings and congratulations His delibe

rflO, Con-

on Philip's arrival were over, a council of war ...tro, th
was held, in order to determine how they might Prorecut
improve their viktory to the best advantage.
The Duke of Savoy, seconded by several of the
ablef officers formed under Charles V. insisted
that they should immediately relinquish the
liege of St. Quintin, the reducion of which
was now an object below their attention, and
advance directly towards Paris ; that as there
were neither troops to oppose, nor any town of
strength to retard their march, they might reach
that capital while under the full impreflion of
the astonishment and terror occasioned by the
rout of the army, and take possession of it
without resistance. But Philip, less adventrous
or more prudent than his generals, preferred a
moderate but certain advantage, to an enter-
prize of greater splendour, but of more doubtful
success. He represented to the council the in
finite resources of a kingdom so powerful as
France; the great number as well as martial spirit
of its nobles; their attachment to their fove-
reign; the vast advantageswithwhich they could
carry on war in their own territories; and the
unavoidable deftrudion, which must be the con-
sequence of their penetrating too rashly into the
enemy's country; before they had secured such a
communication with their own, as might render
a retreat safe, if upon any disastrous event that
measure should become necessary. On all
there accounts, he advised the continuance
of the siege, and his generals acquiesced
the more readily in his opinion, as they made

VOL. 111. D d no

BKXII. no doubt of being maRers of the town in

..
a few days, a loss of time of so little confe-

quence in the execution of their plan, that
they might easily repair it by their subsequent
aaivity

dStedrTby THE weakness of the fortifications, and the
Admiral small number of the garrison, which could no
c"11''. longer hope either for reinforcement, or relief,

seemed to authorize this calculation of Philip's
generals. But, in making it, they did not
attend sufficiently to the character of Admiral
de Coligny, who commanded in the town. A
courage undismayed and undifconcerted amidst
the greatest dangers, an invention fruitful in
resources, a genius which routed and seemed to
acquire new force upon every disaster, a talent
of governing the minds of men, together with
a capacity of maintaining his ascendant over
them even under circumstances the most ad-
verse and distressful, were qualities which Co-
ligny possessed in a degree superior to any ge-
neral of that age. These qualities were pecu-
liarly adapted to the fation in which he was
now placed; and as he knew the infinite im-
portance to his country of every hour which he
could gain at this junture, he exerted himself
to the utmost in contriving how to protract the
siege, and to detain the enemy from attempting

which is any enterprize more dangerous to France. Such
^au^t.' were the perseverance and ikill with which he

conducted the defence, and such the fortitude
as well as patience with which he animated the
garrison, that though the Spaniards, the Fle-
mings, and the English, carried on the attack
with all the ardour which national emulation
inspires, he held out the town seventeen days.
Augt 7. He was taken prisoner, at laift on the breach,

overpowered
L Belcar. Commctar. de Rcb. Gallic. 9o1.

overpowered by the superior number of the BooziXII
enemy. S

HENRY availed himself, with the utmost ati- Henry'

vity, of the interval which the Admiral's well fomereCde
timed obtinacy had afforded him. He appoint- fece of hi
ed officers to colle the scattered remains of ~tom.
the Constable's army; he issued orders for levy-
ing soldiers in every part of the kingdom; he
commanded the ban and arriere ban of the
frontier provinces instantly to take the field,
and to join the Duke of Nevers at Laon in Pi-
cardy; he recalled the greater part of the vete-
ran troops which served under the Marechal
Briflac in Piedmont; he sent courier after cou-
rier to the Duke of Guise, requiring him, to-
gether with all his army, to return instantly for
the defence of their country; he dispatched one
envoy to the Grand Signior, to solicit the afflft-
ance of his fleet, and the loan of a fum of
money; he sent another into Scotland, to incite
the Scots to invade the north of England, that,
by drawing Mary's attention to that quarter, he
might prevent her from reinforcing her troops
which served under Philip. These efforts of
the King were warmly seconded by the zeal of
his fubjefts. The city of Paris granted him a
free gift of three hundred thousand livres. The
other great towns imitated the liberality of the
capital, and contributed in proportion. Several
noblemen of diftintion engaged, at their own
expence, to garrison and defend the towns
which lay most exposed to the enemy. Nor
was this general concern for the publick
confined to communities alone, or to those in
the higher sphere of life, but diffuing itself
among persons of every rank, each individual
teemed disposed to a with as much vigour as
if the honour of the King, and the safety of

D d 2 the

Boo XII. the state, had depended solely on his personal

57' effortsM
'557-

TheLI ay PHILIP, who was no firanger either to the
ti pdc- prudent measures taken by the French monarch
ti"e . for the security of his dominions, or to the spirit
cofeqaun- with which his fubjeAs prepared to defend them-

selves, perceived, when it was too late, that he
had loft an opportunity which could never be
recalled, and that it was now vain to think of
penetrating into the heart of France. He aban-
doned, therefore, without much reluctance, a
scheme which was too bold and hazardous to
be perfectly agreeable to his cautious temper;
and employed his army, during the remainder
of the campaign, in the sieges of Ham and
Catelet. Of these, he soon became matier;
and the redution of two such petty towns, to-
gether with the acquisition of St. Quintin, were
all the advantages which he derived from one
of the most decisive victories gained in that
century. Philip himself, however, continued
in high exultation on account of his success;
and as all his paflions were tinged with super-
flition, he, in memory of the battle of St. Quin-
tin, which had been fought on the day confe-
crated to St. Laurence, vowed to build a church,
a monastery, and a palace, sacred to that faint
and martyr. Before the expiration of the year,
he laid the foundation of an edifice, in which
all these were united, at the Escurial in the
neighbourhood of Madrid; and the fame prin-
ciple, which dicated the vow, direced the
building. For the plan of the work was so
formed as to resemble a gridiron, which, accord-
ing to the legendary tale, had been the infiru-
ment of St. Laurence's martyrdom. Notwith-
standing the vast and expensive chemes, in

which
X Mem. de Ribier, ii. 70o. 703.

which his restless ambition involved him, Philip BooXXII.
continued the building with fuchperfeverance ' '
for twenty-two years, and reserved such val 557
fums for this monument of his devotion and va-
nity, that the monarchs of Spain are indebted
to him for a royal residence, which though not
the most elegant, is certainly the most fumptu-
ous and magnificent of any in Europe N.

THE first account of that fatal blow which The French

army recall-

the French had received at St. Q!intin was ed ou of
carried to Rome by the courier whom Henry Italy
had sent to recall the Duke of Guise. As Paul,
even with the assistance of his French auxili-
aries, had hardly been able to check the pro-
grefs of the Spanish arms, he foresaw that, as
soon as he was deprived of their protection, his
territories mulf be over-run in a moment. He
remonstrated therefore with the greatest violence
against the departure of the French army, re-
proaching the Duke of Guise for his ill condut,
which had brought him into such an unhappy
situation; and complaining of the King for
deserting him so ungenerously under such cir-
cumilances. Guise's orders, however, were
peremptory. Paul, inflexible as he was, found
it necessary to accommodate his condut to the
exigency of his affairs, and to employ the medi-
ation of the Venetians, and of Cosmo di Medici,
in order to obtain peace. Philip, who had
been forced unwillingly to a rupture with the
Pope, and who, even while success crowned his
arms, doubted so much the justice of his own
cause, that he had made frequent overtures of
pacification, listened eagerly to the first propo-
fals of this nature from Paul, and discovered
such moderation in his demands, as could

hardly
" Colmenar Annales d' Efpagne, torn. ii. p .136.

Boot XX. hardly have been expefted from a Prince elated
'~^ with victory.
'557.

At-yof THE Duke of Alva on the part of Philip,
t'~ th and the Cardinal Caraffa in the name of his
ro and uncle, met at Cavi, and both being equally

p disposed to peace, they, after a hort conference,

terminated the war by a treaty, on he following
terms: That Paul should renounce his league
with France, and maintain for the future such
a neutrality as became the common father of
Chritendom; That Philip should instantly re-
store all the towns of the ecclesiastical territory
of which he had taken poffeflion; That the
claims of the Caraffas to the dutchy of Paliano,
and other demesnes of the Colonnas, should be
referred to the decision of the republick of
Venice; That the Duke of Alva should repair
in person to Rome, and after aking pardon of
Paul in his own name, and in that of his
nafter, for having invaded the patrimony of
the church, should receive the Pope's abfolu-
tion from that crime. Thus Paul, through
Philip's scrupulous timidity, finihed an unpro-
fperous war without any detriment to the Papal
See. The conqueror appeared humble, and
acknowledged his error; while he who had been
vanquished retained his usual haughtiness, and
was treated with every mark of superiority .
The Duke of Alva, in terms of the treaty, re-
paired to Rome, and, in the posture of a sup-
plicant, kissed the feet, and implored the for-
givenefs, of that very person, whom his arms
had reduced to the last extremity. Such was
the superstitious veneration of the Spaniards for
the papal charader, that Alva, though perhaps

the

° Pallay. lib. xii. 183. F. Pa2l. 380. errera, vol. i.
310.

the proudest man of the age, and accustomed BooKlII.
from his infancy to a familiar intercourse with '- '
Princes, acknowledged that when he approached 557
the Pope, he was so much overawed, that his
voice failed, and his presence of mind forsook
him .

BUT though this war, which at its com- Philipe-

Ror¢ó Pia.

mencement threatened mighty revolutions, was c0te to
brought to an end without occasioning any oa.vio
alteration in those States, which were its imme- Farn'e.
diate object, it produced effecs of considerable
consequence in other parts of Italy. As Philip
was extremely solicitous to terminate his quarrel
with Paul as speedily as possible, he was willing
to make any sacrifice in order to gain those
Princes, who, by joining their troops to the
Papal and French army, might have prolonged
the war. With this view, he entered into a
negociation with Otavio Farnese, Duke of
Parma, and in order to seduce him from his
alliance with France, he restored to him the
city of Placentia with the territory depending
on it, which Charles V. had seized in the year
one thousand five hundred and forty-feven, had
kept from that time in his poffeflion, and had
transmitted together with his other dominions to
Philip.

THIS ftep made such a discovery of Philip's CoCmodi

characer and views to Cosmo di Medici, the mnearues
most fagacidus as well as provident of all the for obtain-
Italian Princes, that he conceived hopes of ac- ing ienna.
complifhing his favourite scheme of adding
Sienna and its territories to his dominions in
Tuscany. As his success in this attempt de-
pended entirely on the delicacy of address with

which

' Pallav. lib. xiii. 185. Summonte Iftoria di Napoli, l
286.

BOOK n. which it mould be conducted, he employed all
'*'y ' the refinements of policy in the negociation
'57- which he set on foot for this purpose. He began

with soliciting Philip, whose treasury he knew to
be entirely drained by the expence of the war,
to repay the great fums which he had advanced
to the Emperor during the siege of Sienna.
When Philip endeavoured to elude a demand
which Cosmo was unable to satisfy, he affeced
to be extremely disquieted, and making no secret
of his disgust, inftru&ed his ambassador at
Rome to open a negociation with the Pope,
which seemed to be the effect of it. The ambaf-
fador executed his commiflion with such dexte-
rity, that Paul, imagining Cosmo to be entirely
alienated from the Spanish interest, proposed to
him an alliance with France, which should be
cemented by the marriage of his eldest son to
one of Henry's daughter's. Cosmo received the
overture with such apparent fatisfadtion, and
with so many profeflions of gratitude for the
high honour of which he had the profpet, that
not only the Pope's ministers, but the French
envoy at Rome, talked confidently, and with
little reserve, of the acceflion of that important
ally, as a matter certain and decided. The
account of this was quickly carried to Philip;
and Cosmo, who foresaw how much it would
alarm him, had dispatched his nephew Ludovico
de Toledo into the Netherlands, that he might
be at hand to observe and take advantage of
his consternation, before the first impreflion
which it made should in any degree abate.
Cosmo was extremely fortunate in the choice
of the instrument whom he employed. Toledo
waited, with patience, until he discovered with
certainty, that Philip had received such intel-
ligence of his uncle's negociations at Rome, as
must have filled his suspicious mind with fear

and

and jealousy; and then craving an audience, Boo KXlI.
he required payment of the money which had'"-'
been borrowed by the Emperor, in the moit 1557'
earnest and peremptory terms. In urging that
point, he artfully threw out several dark hints
and ambiguous declarations, concerning the ex-
tremities to which Cosmo might be driven by
a refusal of this just demand, as well as by
other grievances of which he had good reason
to complain.

PHILIP, astonished at an address in such aTheirrc-

firain, from a Prince so far his inferior as the'"
Duke of Tuscany, and comparing what he now
heard, with the information which he had re-
ceived from Italy, immediately concluded that
Cosmo had ventured to assume this bold and
unusual tone on the profpec of his union with
France. In order to prevent the Pope and
Henry from acquiring an ally, who, by his
abilities as well as the situation of his dominions,
would have added both reputation and firength
to their confederacy, he offered to grant Cosmo
the investiture of Sienna, if he would consent to
accept of it as an equivalent for the fums due
to him, and engage to furnish a body of troops
towards the defence of Philip's territories in
Italy, against any power who hould attack them.
As oon as Cosmo had brought Philip to make
this conceflion, which was the objec of all his
artifices and intrigues, he did not protra& the
negociation by an unnecessary delay, or any
excess of refinement, but closed eagerly with
the proposal, and Philip, in spite of the remon-
ftrances of his ablest counsellors, signed a treaty
with him to that effe&ct

. Thuan. lib. xviii. 624. Herrera, i. a63, 275. Palav.
lib. xiii. t8o.

BoK XI. As no Prince was ever more tenacious of hb

"' rights than Philip, or less willing to relinquish
'557. any territory which he possessed, by what tenure

soever he held it, these unusual conceflions to
the Dukes of Parma and Tuscany, by which he
wantonly gave up countries, in acquiring or de-
fending which his father had employed many
years, and wafted much blood and treaure,
cannot be accounted for from any motive, but
his superstitious desire of extricating himself out
of the war which he had been forced to wage
againfi the Pope. By there treaties, however,
the balance of power among the Italian States
was poized with greater equality, and rendered
less variable than it had been since it received
the first violent shock from the invasion of Charles
VIII. of France. rom this period Italy ceased
to be the great theatre, on which the monarchs
of Spain, France, and Germany, contended for
power or for fame. Their diflenfions and hof-
tilities, though as frequent and violent as ever,
being excited by new objects, lained other re-
gions of Europe with blood, and rendered
them miserable in their turn, by the devafsations
of war.

Sept. 19. THE duke of Guise left Rome on the fame
1^c.i day that his adversary the Duke of Alva made
.eccpio ia his humiliating fubmiflion to the Pope. He
Fr""e was received in France as the guardian angel

of the kingdom. His late ill success in Italy
seemed to be forgotten, while his former ser-
vices, particularly his defence of Metz, were
recounted with exaggerated praise; and he was
welcomed in every city through which he passed,
as the restorer of publick security, who, after
having set bounds by his conduct and valour
to the victorious arms of Charles V. returned
now, at the call of his country, to check the

foimidable

formidable progress of Philip's power. The re- Boo XII
ception which he met with from Henry was no '-
less cordial and honourable. New titles were 557
invented, and new dignities created, in order to
distinguish him. He was appointed lieutenant-
general in chief both within and without the
kingdom, with a jurifdition almost unlimited,
and hardly inferior to that which was possessed
by the King himself. Thus, through the singular
felicity which attended the Princes of Lorrain,
the miscarriage of their own schemes contributed
to aggrandize them. The calamities of his coun-
try, and the ill conduc of his rival the Confta-
ble, exalted the Duke of Guise to a height of
dignity and power, which he could not have ex-
peted to attain by the most fortunate and most
complete success of his own ambitious projets.

THE Duke of Guise, eager to perform fome-Take the

thing suitable to the high expectations of his"h d.
countrymen, and that he might justify the ex-
traordinary confidence which the King had re-
posed in him, ordered all the troops, which
could be got together, to assemble at Com-
peigne. Though the winter was well advanced,
and had set in with extreme rigour, he placed
himself at their head, and took the field. By
Henry's activity and the zeal of his fubjecs, so
many soldiers had been raised in the kingdom,
and such considerable reinforcements had been
drawn from Germany and Swiflerland, as formed
an army refpeóable even in the eyes of a victo-
rious enemy. Philip, alarmed at feeing it put
in motion at such an uncommon season, began
to tremble for his new conquests, particularly
St. Qintin, the fortifications of which were
hitherto but imperfeAly repaired.

BUT

BOOK Xl. BUT the Duke of Guise meditated a more

"

m important er terprize; and after arnufing the

B ia..ta enemy with threatening fucceflively different
CLiL. towns on the frontiers of Slanders, he turned
J.,urai suddenly to the left, and invested Calais with

his whole army. Calais had been taken by the
English under Edward III. and was the fruit
of that monarch's glorious vicory at Crecy.
Being the only place that they retained of their
ancient and extensive territories in France, and
which opened to them at times, an easy and
secure passage into the heart of that kingdom,
their keeping poffeflion of it oothed the pride
of the one nation as much as it mortified the
vanity of the other. Its situation was naturally
so firong, and its fortifications deemed so im-
pregnable, that no monarch of France, how
adventurous soever, had been bold enough to
attack it. Even when thedomeftick ftrengthof
England was broken and exhausted by the
bloody wars between the houses of York and
Lancaster, and its attention entirely diverted
from foreign objecs, Calais had remained un-
dilturbed and unthreatened. Mary and her
council, composed chiefly of ecclefiafticks, un-
acquainted with military affairs, and whose whole
attention was turned towards extirpating heresy
out of the kingdom, had not only neglected to
take any precautions for the safety of this im-
portant place, but seemed to think that the
reputation of its strength alone was sufficient
for its security. Full of this opinion, they ven-
tured, even after the declaration of war, to
continue a practice which the low fate of the
Qeen's finances had introduced in times of
peace. As the country adjacent to Calais was
overflowed during the winter, and the marshes
around it became impassable, except by one
avenue, which the forts of St. Agatha and

Newnham-

Newnham-bridge commanded, it had been the BooK XI.
custom of the English to difmfa the greater part
of the garrison towards the end of autumn, and 55.
to replace it in the spring. In vain did Lord ts dtfcc-
Wentworth, the governor of Calais, remon-'f' a'c.
ftrate against this ill-timed parsimony, and re-
present the possibility of his being attacked fud-
denly, while he had not troops sufficient to
man the works. The privy council treated
these remonstrances with scorn, as if they had
flowed from the timidity or the rapaciousness of
the governor; and some of them, with that
confidence which is the companion of ignorance,
boasted that they would defend Calais with
their white rods against any enemy who hould
approach it during winter . In vain did Philip,
who had passed through Calais as he returned
from England to the Netherlands, warn the
Queen of the danger to which it was exposed
and acquainting her with what was neceflary
for its security, in vain did he offer to reinforce
the garrison during winter with a detachment
of his own troops. Mary's counsellors, though
obsequious to her in all points wherein religion
was concerned, diftruted, as much as the reft
of their countrymen, every proposition that
came from her husband; and fufpecing this to
be an artifice of Philip's, in order to gain the
command of the town, they negleEted his in-
telligence, declined his offer, and left Calais
with less than a fourth of the men requiite for
its defence.

IT was his knowledge of this which en-oGirfepih

couraged the Duke of Guise to venture on anithfigour.
enterprize, that surprised his own countrymen,
no less than his enemies. As he knew that its
success depended on conducting his operations

with
Carte, iii. 345.

BooKxn.with such rapidity as would afford the Englifl

-' ~ no time for throwing relief into the town by
s558. sea, and prevent Philip from giving him any

interruption by land, he pushed the attack with
a degree of vigour little known in carrying on
sieges, during that age. He drove the English
from fort St. Agatha at the first afTault. He
obliged them to abandon the fort of Newnham.
bridge, after defending it three days. He took
the castle which commanded the harbour by
storm; and on the eighth day after he appeared
before Calais, compelled the governor to fur-
render, as his feeble garrison, which did not ex-
ceed five hundred men, was worn out with the

T.ke. the fatigue of sustaining so many attacks, and de-
tow,4 fending such extensive works.

ndlikewire THE Duke of Guise, without allowing the
'e",. Englih time to recover from the contfernation

occasioned by this blow, immediately inveRted
Guines, the garrison of which, though more
numerous, defended itself with less vigour, and
after standing one brilk assault, gave up the
town. The cattle of Hames was abandoned by
the troops posted there, without waiting the
approach of the enemy.

The Cpen- THUS, in a few days, during the depth of
efd ofa winter, and at a time when the fatal battle of
these co- St. Quintin had so depressed the sanguine spirit
esA" of the French, that their utmost aim was to

protect their own country, without dreaming
of making conquests on the enemy, the enter-
prizing valour of one man drove the English
out of Calais, after they had held it two hun-
dred and ten years, and deprived them of every
foot of land in a kingdom, where their domi-
nions had been once so extensive. This exploit,
at the fame time that it gave an high idea of

the

the power and resources of France to all Eu- BooiXiL
rope, set the Duke of Guise, in the opinion of h'i
his countrymen, far above all the generals of 558
the age. They celebrated his conquefis with
immoderate transports of joy while the English
gave vent to all the paflions, which animate a
high spirited people, when any great national
calamity is manifestly owing to the ill conduc
of their rulers. Mary and her ministers, for-
merly odious, were now contemptible in their
eyes. All the terrors of her evere and arbi-
trary adminiRration could not restrain them
from utterring execrations and threats against
those, who having wantonly involved the nation
in a quarrel wherein it was nowise interefled,
had, by their negligence or incapacity, brought
irreparable disgrace on their country, and lo
the most valuable pofeffion belonging to the
Englihi crown.

THE French King imitated the conduc of

its former conqueror, Edward III. with re-
gard to Calais. He commanded all the English
inhabitants to quit the town; and giving their
houfea to his own fubjeEts, whom he allured to
fettle there by granting them various immu-
nities, he left a numerous garrison, under an
experienced governor, for their defence. After
this, his victorious army went into quarters of
refreshment, and the usual inacion of winter
returned.

DURING these various operations, Ferdinand Feb. 4.

assembled the college of Electors at Frankfort, refgg.rioi
in order to lay before them the deed whereby of the m-
Charles V. had resigned the Imperial crown, and Pv.
transferred it to him. This he had hitherto de-
layed on account of ome difficulties which had
occurred concerning the formalities requisite in

supplying

Boox xI. supplying a vacancy occasioned by an event, to

which there was no parallel in the annals of the
1558. Empire. These being at length adjuRed, the

Prince of Orange executed the commiflion with
which he had been entrusted by Charles; the
Eleeors accepted of his resignation; declared
Ferdinand his lawful successor; and put him
in poffelion of all the ensigns of the Imperial
dignity.

The'Pore BUT when the new Emperor ent Gufman,
.ckno- his chancellor, to acquaint the Pope with this
ledge Ser- tranfadion, to testify his reverence towards the
dinand as
Emperor. Holy See, and to signify that, according to

form, he would oon dispatch an ambaflador
extraordinary to treat with his holiness concern-
ing his coronation; Paul, whom neither expe-
rience nor disappointments could teach to bring
down his lofty ideas of the papal prerogative
to such a moderate fandard as suited the genius
of the times, refused to admit the envoy into
his pretence, and declared all the proceedings
at Frankfort irregular and invalid. He con-
tended that the Pope, as the vicegerent of Christ,
was entrusted with the keys both of celestial
and terrefirial government; that from him the
Imperial jurifdition was derived; that though
his predecefors had authorized the Ele&ors to
chufe an Emperor whom the Holy See con-
firmed, this privilege was confined to those cafes
when a vacancy was occasioned by death; that
the instrument of Charles's resignation had been
presented in an improper court, as it belonged
to the Pope alone to reject or to accept of it, and
to nominate a person to fill the Imperial throne;
that, setting aside all these objections, Ferdi-
nand's eletion laboured under two defects
which alone were sufficient to render it void; for
the Protestant Eletors had been admitted to

vote,

vote, though, by their apoftacy from the catho- BooK XII.
lick faith, they had forfeited that and every other -8
privilege of the electoral office; and Ferdinand, '8
by ratifying the concessions of several diets in
favour of hereticks, had rendered himself un-
worthy of the Imperial dignity, which was in-
ftituted for the protecion, not for the deftruc-
tion of the church. But after thundering out
these extravagant maxims, he added, with an
appearance of condescension, that if Ferdinand
would renounce all title to the Imperial crown,
founded on the elecion at Frankfort, make
profelfions of repentance for his past conduct,
and supplicate him, with due humility, to con-
firm Charles's resignation, as well as his afilmp-
tion to the Empire, he might expect every
mark of favour from his paternal clemency and
goodness. Gufman, though he had foreseen
considerable difficulties in his negociation with
the Pope, little expeced that he would have
revived those antiquated and wild pretensions,
which astonished him so much, that he hardly
knew in what tone he ought to reply. He pru-
dently declined entering into any controversy
concerning the nature or extent of the papal
jurifdi&ion, and confining himself to the poli-
tical considerations, which hould determine the
Pope to recognise an Emperor already in pof-
f'llion, he endeavoured to place them in uch a
light, as he imagined could scarcely fail to
frike Paul, if he were not altogether blind to
his own interest. Philip seconded Gufman's
arguments with great earnestness, by an am-
blliador whom he ent to Rome on purpose,
and besought the Pope to desist from olaims so
ulfeafonable, as might not only irritate and
alarm Ferdinand and the Princes of the em-
pire, but furnish the enemies of the Holy See
with a new reason for representing its jurifdition

VOL. III. Ee as

BooKXnI. as incompatible with the rights of Princes, and
-" ffubverfive of all civil authority. But Paul, who
'55S. deemed it a crimeto attend to any consideration

fuggelted by human prudence or policy, when
he thought himself called upon to assert the pre-
rogatives of the Papal See, remained inflexible;
and during his pontificate, Ferdinand was not
acknowledged as Emperor by the court of
Rome5.

Henry e- WHILE Henry was intent upon his prepara-
d&zvours to .
exciteOt tions for'the approaching campaign, he received
&p., accounts of the issue of his negociations in Scot-
land. land. Long experience having at last taught

the Scots the imprudence of involving their
country in every quarrel between France and
England, neither the solicitations of his ambafla-
dor, nor the address and authority of the Qleen-
regent, could prevail on them to take arms
against a kingdom, with which they were at
peace. On this occasion the ardour of a mar-
tial nobility and of a turbulent people was re-
firained by regard for the publick interest and
tranquillity, which, in former deliberations of-
this kind, had been seldom attended to by a
nation always prone to rush into every new war.
But though the Scots adhered with steadiness
to their pacifick fyitem, they were extremely
ready to gratify the French King in another
particular, which he had given in charge to his
ambaflador.

Mirriageof THE young Queen of Scots had been affi-
theDauphin
,th ,he anced to the Dauphin in the year one thousand
Quee of five hundred and forty-eight, and having been

educated since that time in the court of France,

she

'Godleveus de Abdicat. Car. V. ap. Gold. polit. Imp.
39z. Palay. lib. xiii. 189. Ribier, ii. 746. 759.

the had grown up to be the most amiable, and Boo XII.
one of the most accomplithed Princesses of that V'
age. Henry demanded the consent of her ub- '558
jcds to the celebration of the marriage; and a
parliament which was held for that purpose,
appointed eight commiflioners to represent the
whole body of the nation at that solemnity,
with power to sign such deeds as might be re-
quifite before it was concluded. In fettling the
articles of the marriage, the Scots took every
precaution that prudence could dictate, in
order to preserve the liberty and independence
of their country; while the French used every
art to secure to the Dauphin the conduct of
affairs during the Queen's life, and the fuc-
cession of the crown on the event of her demise.
The marriage was celebrated with pomp fuit-Aprl. 14.
able to the dignity of the parties, and the mag-
nificence of a court at that time the most fplen-
did in EuropeT. Thus Henry, in the course
of a few months, had the glory of recovering
an important possession which had anciently be-
longed to the crown of France, and of adding
to it the acquisition of a new kingdom. By
this event, too, the Duke of Guise acquired
new consideration and importance; the marriage
of his niece to the apparent heir of the crown,
raising him so far beyond the condition of other
subjects, as seemed to render the credit which
he had gained by his great aAions no less per-
manent than it was extensive.

WHEN the campaign opened, soon after the The ca-
Dauphin's marriage, the Duke of Guise was d"Pa'
placed at the head of the army, with the fame
unlimited powers as formerly. Henry had re-

E e 2 ceived

T Keith's hiftoryof Scotland, p. 73. Append. 13. Corps.
Diplcm. v. zl.

BOoK xn- ceived such liberal supplies from his fubjeas,
"V' that the troops under his command were both

s558. numerous and well appointed; while Philip,

exhausted by the extraordinary efforts of the
preceding year, had been obliged to dismiss so
many of his forces during the winter, that he
could not bring an army into the field capable of
making head againit the enemy. The Dukeof
Guise did not lore the favourable opportunity
which his superiority afforded him. He in-
vested Thionville in the dutchy of Luxemburg,
one of the itrongeft towns on the frontier of the
Netherlands, and of great importance to France
by its neighbourhood to Metz; and, notwith-
standing the obstinate valour with which it was
defended, he forced it to capitulate after a siege

joae L. of three weeks u.

TheFrench BUT the success of this enterprize, which it
feteddt was expected would lead to other conquests,
Gr.Tclia. was more than counterbalanced by an event that

happened in another part of the Low-Countries.
The Marechal de Termes, governor of Calais,
having penetrated into Slanders without oppo-
fition, invested Dunkirk with an army of four-
teen thousand men, and took it by form on
the fifth day of the siege. Hence he ad-
vanced towards Nieuport, which must have soon
fallen into his hands, if the approach of the
Count of Egmont with a superior army had
not made it prudent to retreat. The French
troops were so much encumbered with the
booty which they had got at Dunkirk, or by
ravaging the optn country, that they moved
slowly; and Egmont, who had left his heavy
baggage and artillery behind him, marched with
fcch rapidity, that he came up with them near
Gravelines, and attacked them with the utmost

impetuosity.
Thuan. lib. xz. 69o.

impetuosity. De Termes, who had the choice Boor XII.
of the ground, having posted his troops to ad- 8
vantage in the angle formed by the mouth of 1558
the river Aa and the sea, received him with
great firmness. Vidory remained for ome time
in suspense, the desperate valour of the French,
who foresaw the unavoidable deftruAtion that
must follow upon a rout in an enemy's country,
counterbalancing the superior number of the
Flemings, when one of those accidents to which
human prudence does not extend, decided the
contest in favour of the latter. A squadron of
English ships of war, which was cruizing on
the coast, being drawn by the noise of the firing
towards the place of the engagement, entered
the river Aa and turned its great guns against
the right wing of the French, with such effec as
immediately broke that body, and spread terror
and confusion through the whole army. The
Flemings, to whom afliftance, o unexpected
and so seasonable, gave fresh pirit, redoubled
their efforts, that they might not lose the ad-
vantage which fortune had presented them, or
give the enemy time to recover from their con-
fternation, and the rout of the French oon be-
came universal. Near two thousand were killed
on the spot; a great number fell by the hands
of the peasants, who in revenge for the cruelty
with which their country had been.plunderea,
pursued the fugitives and massacred them with-
out mercy; the reft were taken prisoners, toge-
ther with De Termes their general, and many
officers of diftinaion .

THIS signal viftory, for which the Count ofThe Duke

Egmont was afterwards so ill requited by Philip, ppofed to
obliged the Duke of Guise to relinquish all other the vi&ori-
schemes, and to haften towards the frontier of °""r'.

Picardy,
Thuan. lib. xx. 694.

Boo XII. Picardy, that he might oppose the progress of

c't" ' the enemy in that province. This disaster re-

fleted new lustre on his reputation, and once
more turned the eyes of his countrymen towards
him, as the only general on whose arms vi&ory
always attended, and in whose condu& as well
as good fortune they could confide in every
danger. Henry reinforced Guise's army withfo
many troops drawn from the adjacent garrisons,
that it soon amounted to forty thousand men.
That of the enemy, after the junction of Egmont
with the Duke of Savoy, was not inferior in
number. They encamped at the distance of a
few leagues from one another; and each mo-
narch having joined his refpe&ive army, it was
expected, after the viciflitudes of good and bad
success during this and the former campaign,
that a decisive battle would at last determine
which of the rivals should take the ascendant
for the future, and give law to Europe. But
though both had it in their power, neither of
them discovered any inclination to bring the de-
termination of such an important point to de-
pend upon the uncertain and fortuitous issue of
a single battle. The fatal engagements at St.
Quintin and Gravelines were too recent to be
so soon forgotten, and the profpea of encoun-
tering the fame troops, commanded by the fame
generals who had twice triumphed over his
arms, inspired Henry with a degree of caution
which was not common to him. Philip, of a
genius averse to bold operations in war, natu-
rally leaned to cautious measures, and would ha-
zard nothing against a general so fortunate and
successful as the Duke of Guise. Both mo-
narchs, as by agreement, flood on the defen-
five, and, fortifying their camps, carefully avoid-
ed every skirmish or rencounter that might bring
on a general engagement.

WHILE

WHILE the armies continued in this inacion, BooKXlI.

peace began to be mentioned in each camp; and -
both Henry and Philip discovered an inclination BotbSh
to liften to any overture that tended to re-efta- narcha be-
blifh it. The kingdoms of France and Spain to des.
had been engaged, during half a century, in
almost continual wars, carried on at great ex-
pence, and producive of no considerable advan-
tage to either. Exhausted by extraordinary
and unceasing efforts, which far exceeded those
to which the nations of Europe had been ac-
customed before the rivalfhip between Charles
V. and Francis I. both nations longed o much for
an interval of repose, in order to recruit their
strength, that their sovereigns drew from them
with difficulty the supplies neceflary for carry-
ing on hostilities. The private inclinations of
both the Kings concurred with those of their
people. Philip was prompted to with for peace
by his fond desire of returning to Spain. Ac-
customed from his infancy to the climate and
manners of that country, he was attached to it
with such extreme predilecion, that he was un-
happy in any other part of his dominions. But
as he could not quit the Low Countries, either
with decency or safety, and venture on a voyage
to Spain, during the continuance of war, the
profpea of a pacification which would put it
in his power to execute this favourite scheme,
was highly acceptable. Henry was no less de-
firous of being delivered from the burden and
avocations of war, that he might have leisure
to turn all his attention, and bend the whole
force of his government, towards suppressing the
opinions of the Reformers, which were spread-
ing with such rapidity in Paris, and other great
towns of France, that they began to grow for-
midable to the established church.

BESIDES

Boo Xll. BESIDES these publick and avowed confidera-

tions, arising from the state of the two hotile

,Anis , kingdoms, or from the wishes of their refpec-
finhecot tive monarchs, there was a secret intrigue car-
of Frbo~
fdiut~ ried on in the court of France, which contri-
i" buted as much as either of the other, to haften

and to facilitate the negociation of a peace.
The Contlable Montmorency, during his cap-
tivity, beheld the rapid success and growing fa-
vour of the Duke of Guise, with envious soli-
ctude. Every advantage gained by his rival
he confidered as a fresh wound to his own repu-
tation, and he knew with what malevolent ad-
dress it would be improved to diminish his
credit with the King, and to augment that of
the Duke of Guise. These arts, he was afraid,
might, by degrees, work on the easy and ductile
mind of Henry, so as to efface all remains of
his ancient affection towards himself. But hecould
not discover any remedy for this, unless he were
allowed to return home, that he might try
whether by his presence he could defeat the
artifices of his enemies, and revive those warm
and tender sentiments which had long attached.
Henry to him, with a confidence so entire, as
resembled rather the cordiality-of private friend-
ship, than the cold and selfish connexion be-
tween a monarch and one of his courtiers.
While Montmorency was forming schemes and
wilhes for his return to France with much
anxiety of mind, but with little hope of success,
an unexpected incident prepared the way for
it. The Cardinal of Lorrain, who had hared
with his brother in the King's favour, and par-
ticipated of the power which that conferred, did
not bear prosperity with the fame discretion as
the Duke of Guise. Intoxicated with their
good fortune, he forgot how much they had
been indebted for their present elevation to their

connexions

connexions with the Dutchess of Valentinois, BooKXII.
and vainly ascribed all to the extraordinary "
merit of their family. This ld him not only
to negle& his benefatrefs, but to thwart her
schemes, and to talk with a farcaftick liberty of
her characer and person. That singular wo-
man, who, if we may believe contemporary
writers, retained the beauty and charms of
youth at the age of threescore, and on whom
it is certain that Henry still doated with all the
fondness of love, felt this injury with sensibility,
and set herself with eagerness to revenge it.
As there was no method of supplanting the
Princes ofLorrain so effectually as by a coalition
of interests with the Conltable, he proposed the
marriage of her grand-daughter with one of his
sons, as the bond of their future union, and
Montmorency readliy gave his consent to the
match. Having thus cemented their alliance,
the dutchess employed all her influence with the
King, in order to confirm his inclinations to-
wards peace, and induce him to take the steps
necessary for attaining it. She insinuated that
any overture of that kind would come with great
propriety from the Constable, and if committed
to the condu& of his prudence, could hardly
fail of success.

HENRY, long accustomed to devolve all as- Hearycom-

fairs of importance on the Constable, and need- goctio to
ing only this encouragement to return to his an- Monto"r
cient habits; wrote to him immediately with hisrc
usual familiarity and affection, empowering him
at the fame time to take the first opportunity of
founding Philip and his ministers with regard to
peace. Montmorency made his application to
Philip by the most proper channel. He opened
himself to the Duke of Savoy, who, notwith-
standing the height of preferment to which he

had

BooK XII. had been raised, and the military glory which
'v'"' he had acquired in the Spanih service, was

' weary of remaining in exile, and languished to

return into his dominions. As there was no
profpet of his recovering possession of them by
force of arms, he confidered a definitive treaty
of peace between France and Spain, as the only
event by which he could hope to obtain reftitu-
tion. Being no stranger to Philip's private
wishes with regard to peace, he easily prevailed
on him not only to discover a disposition on his
part towards accommodation, but to permit
Montmorency to return, on his parole, to France,
that he might confirm his own sovereign in his
pacifick sentiments. Henry received the Con-
stable with the most flattering marks of regard;
absence, instead of having abated or extinguilhed
the Monarch's friendlhip, seemed to have given
it new ardour. Montmorency, from the moment
of his appearance in court, assumed, if poffi
ble, a higher place than ever in his affection, and
a more perfet ascendant over his mind. The
Cardinal of Lorrain and Duke of Guise pru-
dently gave way to a tide of favour too strong'
for them to oppose, and confining themselves
to their proper departments, permitted, without
any firuggle, the Constable and Dutchess of
Valentinois to direct publick affairs at their plea-
sure. They soon prevailed on the King to nomi-
nate plenipotentiaries to treat of peace. Philip
did the fame. The abbey of Cercamp was
fixed on as the place of congress; and all mili-
tary operations were immediately terminated by
a suspension of arms.

Detcho.F WVHILE these preliminary steps were taking
Ca, . towards a treaty which refiored tranquillity to

Europe, Charles V. whose ambition had so long
disturbed it, ended his days in the monastery
of St. Juftus. When Charles entered this re-

treat,

treat, he formed such a plan of life for himself, BooxXII.
as would have suited the condition of a private ' '
gentleman of a moderate fortune. His table '55s
was neat but plain ; his domefticks few; his
intercourse with them familiar; all the cumber-
some and ceremonious forms of attendance on
his person were entirely abolilhed, as deftruAive
of that social ease and tranquillity which he
courted in order to ooth the remainder of his
days. As the mildness of the climate, together
with his deliverance from the burdens and cares
of government, procured him, at first, a confi-
derable remission from the acute pains with
which he had been long tormented, he enjoyed,
perhaps, more complete fatisfa&ion in this
humble solitude, than all his grandeur had ever
yielded him. The ambitious thoughts and pro-
jecs which had so long engrossed and disquieted
him, were quite effaced from his mind: Far
from taking any part in the political tranfations
of the Princes of Europe, he restrained his
curiosity even from any inquiry concerning
them; and he seemed to view the busy scene
which he had abandoned with all the contempt
and indifference arising from his thorough ex-
perience of its vanity, as well as from the plea-
sing refletion of having disentangled himself
from its cares.

OTHER amusements, and other objects, now His milre.

occupied him. Sometimes he cultivated the metrC tu h
plants in his garden with his own hands; some-
times he rode out to the neighbouring wood
on a little horse, the only one that he kept,
attended by a single servant on foot. When
his infirmities confined him to his apartment,
which often happened, and deprived him of
there more acive recreations, he either admitted
a few gentlemen who resided near the monastery

to

BooKXII. to visit him, and entertained them familiarly at

~58 his table; or he employed himself in studying

mechanical principles and in forming curious
works of mechanism, of which he had always
been remarkably fond, and to which his genius
was peculiarly turned. With this view he had
engaged Turriano, one of the most ingenious
artists of that age, to accompany him in his
retreat. He laboured together with him in
framing models of the moit useful machines,
as well as in making experiments with regard
to their respective powers, and it was not seldom
that the ideas of the monarch affited or per-
feeded the inventions of the artist. He relieved
his mind, at intervals, with flighter and more
fantalick works of mechanism, in fashioning
puppets, which, by the ftruture of internal
springs, mimicked the gestures and aions of
men, to the no small aftonifimnent of the igno-
rant monks, who beholding movements, which
they could not comprehend, sometimes dif-
trusted their own senses, and sometimes sus-
peded Charles and Turriano of being in com-
paA with invisible powers. He was particularly
curious with regard to the conftrution of clocks
and watches; and having found, after repeated
trials, that he could not bring any two of them
to go exactly alike, he refleced, it is said, with
a mixture of surprise as well as regret on his
own folly, in having bestowed so much time
and labour on the more vain attempt of bringing
mankind to a precise uniformity of sentiment
concerning the intricate and mysterious doctrines
of religion.

His more BUT in what manner fcever Charles disposed
·ioup o of the reft of his time, he conflantly reserved a

considerable portion of it for religious exercises.
He regularly attended divine ervice in the

chapel

chapel of the monastery, every morning and B00K Xl.
evening; he took great pleasure in reading 155
books of devotion, particularly the works of
St. Augufline and St. Bernard; and converted
mach with his confessor, and the prior of the
monastery, on pious fubjets. Thus did Charles
pass the firt year of his retreat, in a manner
not unbecoming a man perfetly disengaged
from the affairs of the present life, and standing
on the confines of a future world, either in
innocent amusements, which soothed his pains,
and relieved a mind worn out with excessive ap-
plication to business; or in devout occupations,
which he deemed necessary in preparing for
another state.

BUT about fix months before his death, the The cean,

ofhisdelth

gout, after a longer intermission than usual, re-
turned with a proportional increase of violence.
His shattered constitution had not vigour enough
remaining to withstand such a shock. It en-
feebled his mind as much as his body; and from
this period we hardly discern any traces of that
found and masculine understanding, which dif-
tinguifhed Charles among his contemporaries.
An illiberal and timid superstition depressed his
spirit. He had no relish for amusements of any
kind. He endeavoured to conform, in his man-
ner of living, to all the rigour of monaftick au-
flerity. He desired no other society than that
of monks, and was almost continually employed
with them in chanting the hymns of the Missal.
As an expiation for his fins, he gave himself
the discipline in secret with such severity, that
the whip of cords which he employed as the
infirument of his punishment, was found after
his decease tinged with his blood. Nor was he
satisfied with these aCts of mortification, which,
however severe, were not unexampled. The

timorous

Boo XII. timorous and distrustful solicitude which always
*%-~ accompanies superstition, ill continued to dif-
558. quiet him, and depreciating all that he had

done, prompted him to aim at something ex-
traordinary, at some new and singular a of
piety that would display his zeal, and merit the
favour of heaven. The at on which he fixed
was as wild and uncommon, as any that super-
ftition ever suggested to a weak and disordered
fancy. He resolved to celebrate his own obfe-
quies before his death. He ordered his tomb
to be ere&ed in the chapel of the monastery.
His domefticks marched thither in funeral pro-
cession, with black tapers in their hands. He
himself followed in his hroud. He was laid
in his coffin, with much solemnity. The ser-
vice for the dead was chanted, and Charles
joined in the prayers which were offered up for
the reft of his foul, mingling his tears with
those which his attendants shed, as if they had
been celebrating a real funeral. The ceremony
closed with sprinkling holy water on the coffin
in the usual form, and all the afliftants retiring,
the doors of the chapel were shut. Then Charles
rose out of the coffin and withdrew to his a-
partment, full of those awful sentiments, which
such a singular solemnity was calculated to in-
spire. But either the fatiguing length of the
ceremony, or the impreflion which this image of
death left on his mind affected him so much, that
next day he was seized with a fever. His feeble
frame could not long resist its violence, and he
expired on the twenty-firft of September, after a
life of fifty-eight years, fix months, and twenty-
five daysy.

As

Y Strada de Bello Belg. lib. i. p. il. Thuan. 723.

dov. ii. 609, &c. Miniana Contin. Mariana, vol. iv.
a26. Vera y Zuniga vida de Carlos, p. i i.

As Charles was the firif prince of the ageBoox XIL

in rank and dignity, the part which he ated, J
whether we confider the greatness, the variety, Hmsi5,~-
or the success of his undertakings, was the most er-
conspicuous. It is from an attentive obferva-
tion of his condu&, not from the exaggerated
praises of the Spanish historians, or the undif-
tinguilhing censure of the French, that a just
idea of Charles's genius and abilities is to be
collected. He poffefled qualities so peculiar, as
strongly mark his character, and not only di-
ftinguifh him from the Princes who were his
contemporaries, but account for that uperiority
over them which he so long maintained. In
forming his schemes, he was, by nature, as well
as by habit, cautious and considerate. Born with
talents which unfolded themselves slowly, and
were late in attaining maturity, he was accuf-
tomed to ponder every subjeCt that demanded
his consideration with a careful and deliberate
attention. He bent the whole force of his mind
towards it, and dwelling upon it with a serious
application, undiverted by pleasure, and hardly
relaxed by any amusement, he revolved it, in
silence, in his own breast. He then communi-
cated the matter to his ministers, and after hear-
ing their opinions, took his resolution with a de-
cifive firmness, which seldom follows such flow
and seemingly hesitating consultations. Of con-
sequence, Charles's measures, instead of refem-
bling the desultory and irregular rallies of Henry
VIII. or Francis I. had the appearance of a con-
fiftent system, in which all the parts were arrang-
ed, the effects were foreseen, and the accidents
were provided for. His promptitude in execu-
tion was no less remarkable than his patience in
deliberation. He consulted with phlegm, but he
acted with vigour; and did not discover greater
sagacity in his choice of the measures which it

was

BooK XlI. was proper to pursue, than fertility of genius in

v'- ' finding out the means for rendering his pursuit

of them successful. Though he had naturally
so little of the martial turn, that during the
most ardent and bustling period of life he re-
mained in the cabinet inaetive, yet, when he
chore at length to appear at the head of his
armies, his mind was so formed for vigorous ex-
ertions in every direction, that he acquired such
knowledge in the art of war, and such talents
for command, as rendered him equal in repu-
tation and success to the most able generals of
the age. But Charles possessed, in the molf
eminent degree, the science which is of greatest
importance to a monarch, that of knowing men,
and of adapting their talents to the various de-
partments which he allotted to them. From the
death of Chievres to the end of his reign, he
employed no general in the field, no minister in
the cabinet, no ambaflador to a foreign court, no
governor of a province, whose abilities were in-
adequate to the trust which he reposed in them.
Though destitute of that bewitching affability
of manners, which gained Francis the hearts of
all who approached his person, he was no stranger
to the virtues which secure fidelity and attach-
ment. He placed unbounded confidence in his
generals; he rewarded their services with muni-
ficence; he neither envied their fame, nor dif-
covered any jealousy of their power. Almost
all the generals who conducted his armies, may
be placed on a level with those illustrious per-
fonages who have attained the highest eminence
of military glory; and his advantages over his
rivals, are to be ascribed o manifestly to the fu-
perior abilities of the commanders whom he let
in cppofition to them, that this might seem to
detract, in rome degree, from his own merit, if
the talent of discovering and employing such

. infiruments

intfruments were not the most undoubted proof BooK XII.
of a capacity for government. T8

THER E were, nevertheless, defects in his po-

litical character which must considerably abate
the admiration due to his extraordinary talents.
Charles's ambition was insatiable; and though
there seems to be no foundation for an opinion
prevalent in his own age, that he had formed
the chimerical project of elablifhing an univer-
tal monarchy in Europe, it is certain that his
desire of being distinguished as a conqueror, in-
volved him in continual wars, which not only
exhausted and oppressed his fubjets, but left
him little leisure for giving attention to the inte-
rior police and improvement of his kingdoms,
the great obje6ts of every Prince who makes the
happiness of his people the end of his govern-
ment. Charles, at a very early period of life,
having added the Imperial crown to the king-
doms of Spain, and to the hereditary dominions
of the houses of Austria and Burgundy, this
opened to him such a vast field of enterprize, and
engaged him in schemes so complicated as well
as arduous, that feeling his power to be unequal
to the execution of them, he had often recourse
to low artifices unbecoming his superior talents,
and fometimee ventured on such deviations from
integrity, as were dilhonourable in a great
Prince. His insidious and fraudulent policy
appeared more conspicuous, and was rendered
more odious, by a comparison with the open
and undesigning character of his contemporaries
Francis I. and Henry VIII. This difference,
though occasioned chiefly by the diversity of
their tempers, must be ascribed, in some degree,
to such an opposition in the principles of their
political conduct, as affords ome excuse for
this defec in Charles's behaviour, though it

VOL. III. F f cannot

Boa XI. cannot serve as a jufification of it. Francis
'-"- ' and Henry seldom ated but from the impulse
'5ss of their passions, and rushed headlong towards

the obje in view. Charles's meafur, being
the result of cool reflection, were disposed into a
regular system, and carried on upon a concerted
plan. Persons who a in the former manner,
naturally pursue the end inview, without affum-
ing any disguise, or displaying much addref.
Such as hold the latter course, are apt, in form-
ing as well as in executing their designs, to em-
ploy such refinements as always lead to artifice
in conduct, and often degenerate into deceit.

THE circumstances tranfinitted to us, with

refpet to Charles's private deportment and cha-
rater, are fewer and less interesting, than might
hlave been expeAed from the great number of
authors who have undertaken to write an ac-
count of his life. These are not the objects of
this hiltary, which aims more at representing
the great ranfactions of the reign of Charles V.
than at delineating his private virtues or de-
sects.

CorfcreneT THI plenipotentiaries of France, Spain, and
ra." England, continued their conferences at Cer-

camp; and though each of them, with the
usual art of negociators, made at first very high
demands in the name of their refpe&ive courts,
yet as they were all equally desirous of peace,
they would have consented reciprocally to such
abatements and reftritions of their claims, as
must have removed every obstacle to an accom-
modation. The death of Charles V. was a new
motive with Philip to haften the conclusion of
a treaty, as it increased his impatience for re-
turning into Spain, where there was now no per-
son greater or more illustrious than himself. But,

in

in spite of the concurring withes of all the par- BO XII.
ties interefled, an event hppened which occa-
sioned an unavoidable delay in their negocia-
tions. About a month after the opening of the
conferences at Cercamp, Mary of England ended Nov 17.
her hort and inglorious reign, and Elizabeth Mry of
her fiRer was immediately proclaimed Queen by Englad.
the English with universal joy. As the powers
of the English plenipotentiaries expired on the
death of their mifrefs, they could not proceed
until they received a commisli(n and inftrnc-
tions from their new sovereign.

HENRY and Philip beheld Elizabeth's eleva- Henryand

tion to the throne with equal solicitude. As i eth,
during Mary's jealous adniniftration, under ther fuccefr
most difficult circumstances, and in a fitgation
extremely delicate, that Princess had coaduted
herself with prudence and address far exceeding
her years, they had conceived an high idea o
her abilities, and already formed expe&ations of
a reign very different from that of her fiter.
Equally sensible of the importance of gainirg
her favour, both monarchs set themfely.e with
emulation to court it, and employed every art
in order to insinuate themselves into her con-
fidence. Each of them had fomethig merito-
rious, with regard to Elizabeth, to plead in his
own behalf. Henry had offered her a retreat
in his dominions, if the dread of her fiter's
violence Should force her to fly for safety out
of England. Philip, by his powerful intercef-
sion, :had prevented Mary from proceeding to
the mat fatal extremities against her. Each of
them endeavoured now to avail himself of the
circumnftances in his favour. Henry wrote to
Elizabeth, oon after her acceflion, with the
warmest expressions of regard and friendship.
He represented the war which had unhappily

F f 2 been

BooiXn. been kindled between their kingdoms, not as a
'" national quarrel, but as the effec of Mary's

558 blind partiality to her husband and fond com-

pliance with all his wihes. He entreated her
to disengage herself from an alliance which had
proved so unfortunate to England, and to con-
sent to a separate peace with him, without min-
gling her interests with thole of Spain, from
which they ought now to be altogether dif-
joined. Philip, on the other hand, unwilling
to lose his connexion with England, the im-
portance of which, during a rupture with France,
he had so recently experienced, not only vied
with Henry in declarations of esteem for Eliza-
beth, and in professions of his resolution to cul-
tivate the strictest amity with her, but, in order
to confirm and perpetuate their union, he offered
himself to her in marriage, and undertook to
procure a dispensation from the Pope to that
effe&

Ets ELIZABETH weighed the proposals of the two

timson- Monarchs attentively, and with that provident
c·rat br discernment of her true interest which was con-.

fpicuous in all her deliberations. She gave
some encouragement to Henry's overture of a
separate negociation, because it opened a chan-
nel of correspondence with France, which she
might find to be of great advantage, if Philip
Ihould not discover sufficient zeal and solicitude
for securing to her proper terms in the joint
treaty. But (he ventured on this itep with the
'\most cautious reserve, that he might not alarm

Philip's suspicious temper, and lose an ally in at-
tempting to gain an enemy z. Henry himself,
by an unpardonable at of indiscretion, pre-
vented her from carrying her intercourse with
him to such a length as might have offended or

alienated
* Sorbes, i. p. 4.

alienated Philip. At the very time when he BooK XII.
was courting Elizabeth's friendship with the 8''
greatest assiduity, he yielded with an incon- 1558.
fiderate facility to the solicitations of the Princes
of Lorrain, and allowed his daughter-in-law,
the Qeen of Scots, to assume the title and
arms of Qeen of England. This ill-timed
pretension, the source of many calamities to the
unfortunate Queen of Scots, extinguilhed at
once all the confidence that might have grown
between Henry and Elizabeth, and left in its
place diftrufl, resentment, and antipathy. Eli-
zabeth found that he must unite her interests
closely with Philip's, and expea peace only
from negociations carried on in conjunction with
him A.

As she had granted a commifflon, imme-Shempow-

diately after her acceflion, to the fame pleni- bff.drs o
potentiaries whom her sifter had employed, (he tre"t of
now inftru&ed them to a& in every point in pe..
concert with the plenipotentiaries of Spain, and
to take no ftep until they had previously con-
fulted with them . But though he deemed it
prudent to aflume this appearance of confidence
in the Spanish Monarch, (he knew precisely
how far to carry it; and discovered no inclina-
tion to accept of that extraordinary proposal of
marriage which Philip had made to her. The
English had expressed so openly their detestation
of her filler's choice of him, that it would have
been highly imprudent to have exasperated
them by renewing that odious alliance. She
was too well acquainted with Philip's harh im-
perious temper, to think of him for a husband.
Nor could (he admit a dispensation from the

Pope

Strype's Annals of the Reformation, i. t. Carte's

Hil. of Eng. vol. iii. p. 375. * Sorbes' full View, i.
P. 37. 40.

biOK XlI. Pope to be sufficient to authorize her marrying

C""'! ' him, without condemning her father's divorce
1558. from Catherine of Arragon, and acknowledging

of consequence that her mother's marriage was
null, and her own birth illegitimate. But though
the determined not to yield to Philip's addresses,
the situation of her affairs rendered it dangerous
to rejec them; he returned her answer, there-
fore, in terms which were evasive, but so tem-
pered with refpet, that though they gave him
no reason to be secure of success, they did not
altogether extinguish his hopes.

Negoci- BY this artifice, as well as by the prudence
c .u- with which he concealed her sentiments and
Cmbrcfi. intentions concerning religion, for some time

after her accefflon, he so far gained upon Philip,
that he warmly espoused her interest in the
ó55. conferences which were renewed at Cercamp,

and afterwards removed to Chateau-Cambrefis.
A definitive treaty, which was to adjust the
claims and pretensions of so many Princes, re-
quired the examination of such a variety of in-
tricate points, and led to such infinite and
minute details, as drew out the negociations to
a great length. But the conflable Montmo-
rency exerted himself with such indefatigable
zeal and industry, repairing alternately tthe
courts of Paris and Brullels, in order to obviate
or remove every difficulty, that all points in
dispute were adjusted at length in such a man-
ner, as to give entire satisfaction, in every par-
ticular, to Henry and Philip; and the last hand
was ready to be put to the treaty between them.

Drs;hcUlie THE claims of England remained as the only
with regard
to the obstacle to retard it. Elizabeth demanded the

lan^d. refitution of Calais, in the most peremptory

tone, as an essential condition of her conenting

to

to peace Henry refused to give up that in- &o XUII.
portant conquest; and both seemed to have 'v
taken their resolution with unalterable firmner. 5s'
Philip warmly supported Elizabeth's preten-
sions to Calais, not merely from a principle of
equity towards the English nation, that he
might appear to have contributed to their reco-
vering what they had loft by espousing his
cause; nor solely with a view of soothing Eliza-
beth by this manifestation of zeal for her in-
terest but in order to render France less formi-
dable, by securing to her ancient enemy this
easy access into the heart of the kingdom. The
earnestness, however, with which he seconded
the arguments of the English plenipotentiaries,
soon began to relax. During the course of the
negociation, Elizabeth, who now felt herself
firmly feated on the throne, began to take such
open and vigorous measures not only for over-
turning all that her sifter had done in favour
of popery, but for eftabli(hing the protestant
church on a firm foundation, as convinced
Philip that his hopes of an union with her had
been from the beginning vain, and were now
desperate. From that period, his interpositions
in her favour became more cold and formal,
flowing merely from regard to decorum, or
from the consideration of remote political in-
terests. Elizabeth having reason to expect such
an alteration in his conduct, quickly perceived
it. But as nothing would have been of greater
detriment to her people, or more inconfifent
with her schemes of domeftick administration,
than the continuance of war, he saw the
necessity of submitting to such conditions as
the situation of her affairs imposed, and
that (he mut reckon upon being deserted by
an ally who was now united to her by a very
feeble tie, if he did not speedily reduce her

demands

Boot XIT. demands to what was moderate and attainable.

' She accordingly gave new instructions to her
59. ambafiadors; and Philip's plenipotentiaries a&-

ing as mediators between the French and them ,
an expedient was fallen upon, which, in some
degree, justified Elizabeth's departing from the
rigour of her first demand with regard to Calais.
All lesser articles were fettled without much
difcuflion or delay. Philip, that he might not
appear to have abandoned the Englilh, infited
that the treaty between Henry and Elizabeth
should be concluded in form, before that be-
tween the French monarch and him. The one
was signed on the second day of April, the
other on the day following.
Atides of THE treaty of peace between France and

"Pe '" England contained no articles of real import-

Fr~e ud ance, but that which refpeted Calais. It was
E"o"ud iftipulated, that the King of France should retain

pofleflion of that town, with all its dependen-
cies, during eight years; That, at the expiration
of that term, he Ihould restore it to England;
That in cafe of non-performance, he should
forfeit five hundred thousand crowns, for the
payment of which fum, seven or eight wealthy
merchants, who were not his fubjeds, should
grant security; that five persons of diftintion
mhould be given as hostages until that security
were provided; That, although the forfeit of
five hundred thousand crowns should be paid,
the right of England to Calais should still remain
entire, in the fame manner as if the term of
eight years were expired; That the King and
Queen of Scotland should be included in the
treaty; That if they, or the French King, should
violate the peace by any hostile ation, Henry
should be obliged instantly to restore Calais;

That,
'Sorbes, i. 59,

That, on the other hand, if any breach of the BooK XH1
treaty proceeded from Elizabeth, .then Henry 59
and the King and Qeen of Scots were absolved '559
from all the engagements which they had come
under by this treaty.

NOTWITHSTANDING the fludied attention The view

. of both par

with which so many precautions were taken, it i.is with
is evident that Henry did not intend the reftitu- Preea to
tion of Calais, nor is it probable that Elizabeth
expected it. It was hardly possible that Ihe could
maintain, during the course of eight years, such
perfet concord bth with France and Scotland,
as not to afford Henry some pretext for alleg-
ing that he had violated the treaty. But even
if that term hould elapse without any ground
for complaint, Henry might then chufe to pay
the fum Rfipulated, and EliZabeth had no me-
thod of aflerting her right but by force of arms.
However, by throwing the articles in the treaty
with regard to Calais into this form, Elizabeth
satisfied her fubjets of every denomination;
(he gave men of discernment a striking proof
of her address, in palliating what he could not
prevent; and amused the multitude, to whom
the cession of such an important place would
have appeared altogether infamous, with the
profpet of recovering, in a hort time, that fa-
vourite possession.

THE expedient which Montmoreney em- An exped-

ent which

ployed, in order to facilitate the conclusion of promotes
peace between France and Spain, was the nego- peace e..
ciating two treaties of marriage, one between France and
Elizabeth, Henry's eldest daughter, and Philip, Spu"D
who supplanted his son, the unfortunate Don
Carlos, to whom the Princess had been pro-
mifed in the former conferences at Cercamp;
the other between Margaret, Henry's only filter,

and

oes Xnl. and the duke of Savoy. For feeble as the ties
~'-" ' of blood often are among Princes, or how little

Is9s soever they may regard them when pushed on

to a& by motives of ambition, they afiume on
other occasions the appearance of being so far
influenced by there domeftick afferions, as to
employ them tojuflify measures and conceflions
which they find to be neceflary, but know to
be impolitick or dishonourable. Such was the
use Henry made of the two marriages to which
he gave his consent. Having secured an ho-
nourable establishment for his sifter and his
daughter, he, in consideration of there, granted
terms both to Philip and the duke of Savoy,
of which he would not, on any other account,
have ventured to approve.

OThe ",i . THE principal articles in the treaty between
ocificl-

France and Spain were, That a sincere and
perpetual amity should be eftablilhed between
the two crowns and their refpe&ive allies; That
the two monarchs should labour in concert to
procure the convocation of a general council, in
order to check the progress of heresy, and re-
flore unity and concord to the Christian church;
That all conquests made by either party, on this
fide of the Alps, since the commencement of
the war in one thousand five hundred and fifty-
one, should be mutually restored; That the
dutchy of Savoy, the principality of Piedmont,
the country of Breffe, and all the other terri-
tories formerly subjet to the dukes of Savoy,
should be restored to Emanuel Philibert, imme-
diately after the celebration of his marriage
with Margaret of France, the towns of Turin,
Quiers, Pignerol, Chivaz, and Villanova ex-
cepted, of which Henry mhould keep polffion
until his claims on that Prince, in right of his
grandmother, should be heard and decided in

course

course of law; That as long as Henry retained Boo. XII.
theef places in his hands, Philip hould be at
liberty to keep garrisons in the towns of Ver- 'SS9
celli and Asti; That the French King hould
immediately evacuate all the places which he
held in Tuscany and the Siennefe, and renounce
all future pretenions to them; That he hould
restore the marquisate of Monferrat to the duke
of Mantua; That he should receive the Genoese
into favour, and give up to them the towns
which he had conquered in the island of Corsica;
That none of the Princes or states, to whom
these cefflons were made, hould call their sub-
jeAs to account for any part of their conduct
while under the dominion of their enemies, but
(hould bury all pafl transactions in oblivion.
The Pope, the Emperor, the Kings of Den-
mark, Sweden, Poland, Portugal, the King and
Queen of Scots, and almost every Prince and
state of Christendom, were comprehended in
this pacification as the allies either of Henry or
of Philip .

THUS, by this famous treaty, peace was re- which rc-

established in Europe. All the causes of dif- tanblilt
cord which had so long embroiled the powerful i Europe.
monarchs of France and Spain, which had
transmitted hereditary quarrels and wars from
Charles to Philip, and from Francis to Henry,
seemed to be wholly removed, or finally ter-
minated. The French alone complained of the
unequal conditions of a treaty, into which an
ambitious minister, in order to recover his
liberty, and an artful mifrefs, that he might
gratify her resentment, had educed their too
easy monarch. They exclaimed loudly against
the folly of giving up to the enemies of France,
an hundred and eighty-nine fortified places, in

the
D Recueil des Traitez. tom. ii. 287.

BooK XI. the Low-Countries or in Italy, in return for the
~'-" three insignificant towns of St. Quintin, Ham,

559- and Catelet. They confidered it as an indelible

stain upon the glory of the nation, to renounce
in one day territories so extensive, and so ca-
pable of being defended, that the enemy could
not have hoped to wret them out.of their hands
after many years of victory and success.
The pe Bu T Henry, without regarding the sentiment$

nbetwee of his people, or being moved by the remon-

spin m- itrances of his council, ratified the treaty, and
fi'd executed with great fidelity whatever he had

stipulated to perform. The duke of Savoy
repaired with a numerous retinue to Paris, in
order to celebrate his marriage with Henry's
sifter. The duke of Alva was sent to the fame
capital, at the head of a splendid embassy, to
espouse Elizabeth in name of his mailer. They
were received with extraordinary magnificence

Deth of by the French court. Amidit the rejoicings
Jn7,o. and fetivities on that occasion, Henry's days
Aug. ,I. were cut Ihort by a singular and tragical acci-

dent. His son, Francis II. a Prince under age,
of a weak conf.itution, and of a mind flill more
feeble, succeeded him. Soon after, Paul ended
his violent and imperious Pontificate, at en-
mity with all the world, and disgusted even
with his own nephews. They, persecuted by
Philip, and deserted by the ucceeding Pope,
whom they had raised by their influence to the
Papal throne, were condemned to the punish-
ment which their crimes and ambition had me-
rited, and their death was as infamous as their
lives had been criminal. Thus most of the
peronages, who had long sustained the prin-
cipal characters on the great theatre of Europe,
dilappeared about the fame time. A more
known period of history opens at this aera;

other

other aAtors enter upon the stage, with different BOOK Xll-
views as well as different passions; new contests v-
arose, and new schemes of ambition occupied '59'
and disquieted mankind.

UPON reviewing the tranfations of any aftive A genera

period in the history of civilized nations, the rhi'e of
changes which are accomplished appear wonder- period.
fully disproportioned to the efforts which have
been exerted. Conquests are never very exten-
five or rapid, but among nations whose progress
in improvement is extremely unequal. When
Alexander the Great, at the head of a gallant
people, of simple manners, and formed to war
by admirable military institutions, invaded a state
funk in luxury, and enervated by excessive re-
finement; when Genchizcan and Tamerlane,
with their armies of hardy barbarians, poured
in upon nations, enfeebled by the climate in
which they lived, or by the arts and commerce
which they cultivated, thee conquerors, like a
torrent, swept every thing before them, fubdu-
ing kingdoms and provinces in as hort a space
of time as was requisite to march through them.
But when nations are in a state firnilar to each
other, and keep equal pace in their advances to-
wards refinement, they are not exposed to the
calamity of sudden conquests. Their acquifi-
tions of knowledge, their progress in the art of
war, their political sagacity and address, are
nearly equal. The fate of states in this situation,
depends not on a single battle. Their internal
resources are many and various. Nor are they
themselves alone interested in their own safety,
or a&ive in their own defence. Other states in-
terpofe, and balance any temporary advantage
whicheither party may have acquired. After
the fiercest and moit lengthened contest, all the
rival nations are exhausted, none are conquered.

At

Boo XII. At length a peace is conduded, which re-in-

c- Sstates each in poflefion of almost the fame power

and the fame territories.

The ntions SUCH was the state of Europe during the reign
fEmuin of Charles V. No Prince was so much uperor
atet dan to the reft in power, as to render his efforts irrn
th c- fiftible, and his conquests easy. No nation had
,tey. made progref in improvement so far beyond

its neighbours, as to have aquired a very mani-
fest pre-eminence. Each state derived ome ad-
vantage, or was fubje to fnme inconvenience,
from its ituation or its climate; each was dif-
tinguifhed by bomething peculiar in the genius
of its people, or the conifruion of its govern-
ment. But the advantages pofeffed by one
fate, were counterbalanced by circumstances
favourable to others; and this prevented any
from attaining such superiority as might have
been fatal to all. The nations of Europe in
that age, as in the present, were like one great
family; there were some features common to
all, which fixed a resemblance; there was er-
tain peculiarities conspicuous in each, which
marked a diftintion. But there was not among
them that wide diversity of charater and of ge-
nius which, in almost every period of hiftoy,
hath exalted the Europeans above the inhabi-
tants of the other quarters of the globe, and
feerms to have destined the one to rule, and the
other to-obey.

A -.trk- BUT though the near resemblance and equa-
j'h nte lity in improvement among the different nations
of Eropc. of Europe, prevented the Reign of Charles V.
rihgofeh from being diftinguiled by such sudden and
Chtle v. extensive conquests as occur in some other pe-

riods of history, yet, during the course of his
administration, all the considerable states in Eu-

rope

rope suffered a remarkable change in their poll- BOOK XII.
tical situation, and felt the influence of events, '
which have not hitherto spent their force, but
still continue to operate in a greater or in a less
degree. It was during his reign, and in confe-
quence of the perpetual efforts to which his en-
terprizing ambition roused him, that the differ-
ent kingdoms of Europe acquired internal vi-
gour; that they discerned the resources of which
they were poifefled; that they came both to feel
their own trength, and to know how to render
it formidable to others. It was during his reign,
too, that the different kingdoms of Europe, for-
merly single and disjointed, became £o thoroughly
acquainted, and so intimately conaeted with
each other, as to form one great political system,
in which each took a station, wherein it has re-
mained since that time with less variation than
could have been expeted after the events of two
active centuries.

THE pregrefs, however, and acquisitions of The pro

the house of Aufria, were not only greater than 'u,ffte
those of any other power, but more discernible Autrit.
and conspicuous. I have already enumerated
the vast territories which descended to Charles
from his Austrian, Burgundian, and Spanish
ancestors *. To these he himself added the Im-
perial dignity ; and, as if all this had been too
little, the bounds of the habitable globe seemed
to be extended, and a new world was fubjeaed
to his command. Upon his resignation, the
Burgundian provinces, and the Spanith king-
doms with their dependencies, both in the old
and new worlds, devolved to Philip. But Charles
transmitted his dominions to his son, in a con-
dition very different from that in which he had
received them. They were augmented by the
accession of new provinces; they were habituated

to
Vol. ii. p. 2.

BooK Xn. to obey an administration which was no less vi-
'-' gorous than steady; they were accustomed to

expensive and persevering efforts, which though
neceflary in the contests between civilized na-
tions, had been little known in Europe before
the sixteenth century. The provinces of Fries-
land# Utrecht, and Overyffel, whichhe acquired
by purchase from their former proprietors, and
the dutchy of Gueldres, of which he made him-
self master, partly by force of arms, partly
by the arts of negociation, were additions of
great value to his Burgundian dominions. Ser-
dinand and Isabella had tranfinitted to him all
the provinces of Spain, from the bottom of the
Pyrenees to the frontiers of Portugal; but as he
maintained a perpetual peace with that king-
dom, amidst the various efforts of his enterpriz-
ing ambition, he made no acquisition of territory
in that quarter.

Pnicahrl CHARLES hadgained, however, a vaftaccefilon
sp.. of power in this part of his dominions. By his

success in the war with the commons of Castile,
he exalted the regal prerogative upon the ruins
of the privileges which formerly belonged to the
people. Though he allowed the name of the
Cortes to remain, and the formality of holding it
to be continued, he reduced its authority and ju-
rifdiAion to nothing, and modelled it in such a
manner, that it became rather a junto of the ser-
vants of the crown, than an aflembly of the repre-
fentatives of the people. One member of the
conititution being thus lopped off, it was impof-
fible but that the other must feel the itroke, and
susser by it. The suppression of the popular power
rendered the aritocratical less formidable. The
grandees, prompted by the warlike spirit of the
age, or allured btthe honours which they enjoy-

ed

ed in a court, exhausted their fortunes in military BooK XII.
service, or in attending on the person of their "'
Prince. They did not dread, perhaps did not
observe, the dangerous progress of the royal au-
thority, which leaving them the vain diftintion
of being covered in presence of their sovereign,
stripped them, by degrees, of that real power
which they pofleffed while they formed one body,
and a&ed in concert with the people. Charles's
success in aboliihing the privileges of the com-
mons, and in breaking the power of the nobles
of Castile, encouraged Philip to invade the liber-
ties of Arragon, which were still more extensive.
The Castilians, accustomed to fubjedion them-
selves, assisted in imposing the yoke on their
more happy and independent neighbours. The
will of the sovereign became the supreme law
in all the kingdoms of Spain; and princes who
were not checked in forming their plans by the
jealousy of the people, nor controled in exe-
cuting them by the power of the nobles, could
both aim at great objets, and call for the
whole strength of the monarchy in order to
attain them.

As Charles, by extending the regal preroga- Aro ;a

tive, rendered. the monarchs of Spain matiers at 'iPpp
home, he added new dignity of power to their
crown by his foreign acquisitions. He secured
to Spain the quiet poffeflion of the kingdom of
Naples, which Ferdinand had usurped by fraud,
and held with difficulty. He united the dutchy
of Milan, one of the most fertile and populous
Italian provinces, to the Spanish crown; and
left his successors, even without taking their
other territories into the account, the most con-
fiderable Princes in Italy, which had been long
the theatre of contention to the great powers of
Europe, and in which they had truggled with

VOL. III. G g emulation

Booi n. emulation to obtain the superiority. When the
'--~' French, in conformity to the treaty of Chateau-

Cambrefis, withdrew their forces out of Italy,
and finally relinquished all their schemes of
conquest on that fide of the Alps, the Spanifl
dominions then rose in importance, and enabled
their Kings, as long as the monarchy retained
any degree of vigour, to preserve the chief sway
in all the transactions of that country. But
whatever accession either of interior authority or
of foreign dominion Charles gained for the mo-
narchs of Spain in Europe, it was inconsiderable
when compared with his acquisitions in the new
world. He added, there, not provinces, but
empires to his crown. He conquered territories
of such immense extent; he discovered such in-
exhaustible veins of wealth, and opened such
boundless profpeas of every kind, as must have
roused his successor, and have called him forth
to aaion, though his ambition had been miuch
less ardent than Philip's, and must have rendered
him not only enterprizing but formidable.

ProgirTe of WHILE the elder branch of the Austrian fa-
·nh nmily rose to such pre-eminence in Spain, the
of te bose younger, of which Ferdinand was the head, grew

o Au to be considerable in Germany. The ancient

hereditary dominions of the house of Austria in
Germany, united to the kingdoms of Hungary
and Bohemia, which Ferdinand had acquired by
marriage, formed a refpeaable power; and
when the Imperial dignity was added to these,
Ferdinand poTfefsed territories more extensive
than had belonged to any Prince, Charles V.
excepted, who had been at the head of the Em-
pire during several ages. Fortunately for Eu-
rope, the difguff which Philip conceived on ac-
count of Ferdinand's refuting to relinquish the
Imperial crown in his favour, not only pre-
vented for some time the feperate members of

the

the house of Austria from ating in concert, but Boo, XII.
occasioned avifible alienation and rivalfhip. By r
degrees, however, regard to the interest of their
family extinguished this impolitical animosity.
The confidence which was natural returned;
the aggrandizing of the house of Austria be-
came the common objec of all their schemes;
they gave and received assistance alternately to-
wards the execution of them; and each derived
consideration and importance from the other's
success. A family so great and so aspiring, be-
came the general object of jealousy and terror.
All the power, as well as policy, of Europe were
exerted during a century, in order to check and
humble it. Nothing can give a more iriking
idea of the ascendant which it had acquired,
and of the terror which it had inspired, than that
after its vigour was spent with extraordinary
exertions of its strength, after Spain was become
only the shadow of a great name, and its mo-
narchs were funk into debility and dotage, the
house of Austria fRil continued to be formidable.
The nations of Europe had so often felt its fu-
perior power, and had been so constantly em-
ployed in guarding againfi it, that the dread of
it became a kind of political habit, the influence
of which remained when the causes, which had
formed it, ceased to exist.

WHILE the house of Austria went on with Acquiitions

such success in enlarging its dominions, France ofFPr'tnce
made no considerable acquisition of new terri-drig the

reign of

tory. All its schemes of conquest in Italy had Charles v.
proved abortive; it had hitherto obtained no
establishment of consequence in the new world;
and after the continued and vigorous efforts of
four successive reigns, the confines of the king-
dom were much the fame as Louis XI. had left
them. But though France made not such large

G g 2 strides

Booi XI. firides towards dominion as the house of Aufltia,
'-^' it continued to advance by steps which were

more secure, because they were gradual and
less observed.' The conquest of Calais put it out
of the power of the Engliih to invade France
but at their utmoit peril, and delivered the
French from the dread of their ancient enemies,
who, previous to that' event, could at any time
penetrate into the kingdom by that avenue, and
thereby retard or defeat the execution of their
best concerted enterprizes against any foreign
power. The important acquisition of Metz
covered that part of their frontier which for-
merly was most feeble, and lay most exposed to
insult. France, from the time of its obtaining
there additional securities againit external inva-
sion, mut be deemed the most powerful king-
dom in Europe, and is more fortunately situated
than any on the continent either for conquefs or
defence. From the confines of Artois to the
bottom of the Pyrenees, and from the Britilh
channel to the frontiers of Savoy, and the coast
* of the Mediterranean, its territories lay compact

and unmingled with those of any other power.
Several of the considerable provinces, which, by
their having been long subjet to the great
vassals of the crown, who were often at variance
or at war with their master, had contracted a
spirit of independence, were now accustomed to
recognize and to obey one sovereign. As they
became members of the fame monarchy, they
assumed the sentiments of that body into which
they were incorporated, and co-operated with
zeal towards promoting its interest and honour.
The power and influence wrested from the nobles
were seized by the crown. The people were not
admitted to share in these spoils; they gained no
new privilege; they acquired no additional
weight in the legifiature. It was not for the

fake

fake of the people, but in order to extend their BooKXII.
own prerogative, that the monarchs of France t*'
had laboured to humble their great vassals.
Satisfied with havingbrought them under entire
fubjetion to the crown, they discovered no
solicitude to free the people from their ancient
dependance on the nobles of whom they held.

A MONARCH, at the head of a kingdom thus Enble,

united at home and secure from abroad, was en- fume 'r
titled to form great designs, because he felt higher t-
himself in a condition to execute them. The th oeprf
foreign wars which had continued with little in- of urope
terruption from the acceflion of Charles VIII.
had not only cherished and augmented the mar-
tial genius of the nation, but by inuring the
troops during the course of long service to the
fatigues of war, and accustoming them to obe-
dience, had added the force of discipline to their
natural ardour. A gallant and active body of
nobles who confidered themselves as idle and
useless, unless when they were in the field; who
were scarce acquainted with any pastime or exer-
cife but what was military ; and who knew no
road to power, or fame, or wealth, but war,
would not have suffered their overeign to re-
main long in ination. The people, little ac-
quainted with the arts of peace, and always
ready to take arms at the command of their fu-
periors, were accustomed, by the vait expence of
long wars, carried on in distant countries, to
bear impositions, which, how inconsiderable
soever they may seem if estimated by the exor-
bitant rate of modern aions, appear immense
when compared with the fums levied in France,
or in any other country of Europe, previous to
the reign of Louis XI. As all the members of
which the state was composed were thus impa-
tient for ation, and capable of great efforts,

the

Boo. XH. the schemes and operations of France must have
^-"^- been no less formidable to Europe than those of

Spain. The superior advantages of its fitua-
tion, the contiguity and compatnefs of its
territories, together with the peculiar fiate of its
political conflitution at that jun&ure, must have
rendered its enterprises still more alarming and
more decisive. The King possessed such a
degree of power as gave him the entire com-
mand of his fubjecs; the people were strangers
to those occupations and habits of life which
render men averse to war, or unfit for it;
and the nobles, tho' reduced to fubordina-
tion neceflary in a regular government, fill
retained the high undaunted spirit which was
the effect of their ancient independence. The
vigour of the feudal times remained, their
anarchy was at an end; and the Kings of
France could avail themselves of the martial
ardour which that singular institution had kindled
or kept alive, without being exposed to any
of the dangers or inconveniencies which are
inseparable from it when in entire force.

cum- A KINGDOM in such a state is, perhaps,
,ahn pe capable of greater military efforts, than at any

'mmed i other period in its progress. But how formi-

immediate t.of dable soever or fatal to the other nations of
heirpow- Europe the power of such a monarchy might

have been, the civil wars which broke out in
France saved them, at thatjuncure, from feel-
ing its effecs. These wars, of which religion
was the pretext and ambition the cause, where-
in great abilities were displayed by the leadersof
the different factions, and little conduct or firm-
ness were manifested by the crown under a fuc-
cession of weak Princes, kept France occupied and
embroiled for half a century. During there com-

motions

motions the internal strength of the kingdom Boo XII.
was much wafted, and such a spirit of anarchy C
was spread among the nobles, to whom rebellion
was familiar, and the restraint of laws unknown,
that a considerable interval became requisite
not only for recruiting the internal vigour of
the nation, but for re-establishing the authority
of the Prince; so that it was long before France
could turn her whole attention towards foreign
tranfa&ions, or a with her proper force in
foreign wars. It was long before she rose to
that ascendant in Europe which he has main-
tained since the administration of Cardinal Rich-
lieu, and which the situation as well as extent
of the kingdom, the nature of government,
together with the character of her people, en-
title her to maintain.

WVHILE the kingdoms on the continent grew Prref of

into power and consequence, England likewise wihkrepea
made considerable progress towards regular go- to its inte
vernment and interior strength. Henry VIII.
probably without intention, and certainly with-
out any consistent plan, of which his nature
was incapable, pursued the scheme of depref-
sing the nobility, which the policy of his father
Henry VII. had begun. The pride and caprice
of his temper led him to employ chiefly new
men in the administration of affairs, because he
found them most obsequious, or least fcrupu-
lous; and he not only conferred on them such
plenitude of power, but exalted them to such
pre-eminence in dignity, as mortified and de-
graded the antient nobility. By the alienation
or sale of the church lands, which were diffi-
pated with a profusion not inferior to the rapa-
cioufnefs with which they had been seized, as
well as by the privilege granted to the ancient
landholders of felling their estates, or disposing
of them by will, an immense property, formerly

locked

BooKXI. locked up, was broughtintocirculation. This

put the spirit of industry and commerce in
motion, and gave it some considerable degree
of vigour. The road to power and to opulence
became open to persons of every condition.
A sudden and exceflive flow of wealth from the
Weft Indies proved fatal to indufiry in Spain;
a moderate acceflion in England to the furn in
circulation gave life to commerce, awakened
the ingenuity of the nation, and excited it to
useful enterprize. In France, what the nobles
loft, the crown gained. In England, the com-
mons were gainers as well as the King. Power
and influence accompanied of course the pro-
perty which they acquired. They rose to con-
fideration among their fellow fubjedts; they
began to feel their own importance; and ex-
tending their influence in the legislative body
gradually, and often when neither they them-
selves nor others foresaw all the effec of their
claims and pretensions, they at last attained that
high authority, to which the British conflitution
is indebted for the existence, and must owe the
preservation of its liberty. At the fame time-
that the English constitution advanced towards
perfection, everal circumfiances brought on a
change in the ancient system with refpet to
foreign powers, and introduced another more
beneficial to the nation. As oon as Henry
disclaimed the supremacy of the Papal See, and
broke off all connexion with the Papal court,
considerable fums were saved to the nation, of
which it had been annually drained, by remit-
tances to Rome for dispensations and indul-
gences, by the expence of pilgrimages into
foreign countries *, or by payment of annates,

first

The loss which the nation sustained by themoft of. these

rticles is obvious, and mut have been great. Even that
by pilgrimags w not incoafiderable. In the year 1428,

licence

first fruits, and a thousand other taxes which BooiXIIL
that artful and rapacious court levied on the 'y^
credulity of mankind. The exercise of ajurif-
didion different from the civil power, and
claiming not only to be independent but fupe-
rior to it, a wild solecism in government, apt
not only to perplex and disquiet weak minds,
but tending direcly to disturb society, was
finally abolished. Government became more
simple as well as more respeCtable, when no
rank or charafter exempted any person from
being amenable to the fame courts, from being
tried by the fame judges, and from being ac-
quitted or condemned by the fame laws.

BY the loss of Calais the English were ex- Withre-

cluded from the continent. All schemes for a^,airsofth
invading France became of course as chimerical coatinat.
as they had formerly been pernicious. The
views of the Englih were confined, first by
necessity, and afterwards from choice, within
their own island. That rage for conquest which
had poflefled the nation during many centuries,
and wafted its strength in perpetual and fruit-
less wars, ceased at length. Those active spirits
which had known and followed no profession
but war, fought for occupation in the arts of
peace, and their country benefited as much by
the one as it had suffered by the other. The
nation, exhausted by frequent expeditions to
the continent, recruited, and acquired new
strength; and when roued by any extraor-
dinary exigency to take part in foreign opera-
tions, the vigour of its efforts were proportion-

ally

licence was obtained by no fewer than 916 persons to visit
the shrine of St. James of Compoftella in Spain. Rymer,
vol. x.. . In 1434, the number of pilgrims to the
fame place was 2460. Ibid. p. . In 1445, they were
2 oo, vol. xi. p. .

BooKXII. ally great, because they were only occasional and
-" of a ihort continuance.
Vwithre- THE fame principle which had led England

d. to adopt this new system with regard to the

powers on the continent, occasioned a change in
its plan of conduc with refpe& to Scotland,
the only foreign state, with which, on account
of its situation in the fame island, the Englilh
had such a close connexion as demanded their
perpetual attention. Instead of prosecuting the
ancient scheme of conquering that kingdom,
which the nature of the country, defended by
a brave and hardy people, rendered dangerous
if not impracticable; it appeared more eligible
to endeavour at obtaining such influence in
Scotland as might exempt England from any
danger or disquiet from that quarter. The
national poverty of the Scots, together with the
violence and animosity of their factions, rendered
the execution of this plan easy to a people far
superior to them in wealth. Their popular
leaders were gained the 'miniRfers and favour-
ites of the crown were corrupted; and such
absolute direction of their councils acquired, as
rendered the operations of the one kingdom de-
pendent in a great measure on the sovereign of
the other. Such perfect external security added
to the interior advantages which England now
poflefled, must soon have raised it to new con-
lideration and importance; the long reign of
Elizabeth, equally conspicuous for wisdom, for
steadiness, and for vigour, accelerated its pro-
grefs, and carried it with greater rapdity to-
wards that elevated station which it hath since
held among the powers of Europe.

Chantin DURING the period in which the political slate
;ite rof t of the great kingdoms underwent such changes,
Iccond ry revolutions
power in
Europe.

revolutions of considerable importance happened BoocKXit
in that of the secondary or inferior powers.
Those in the papal court are most obvious, and
of most extensive consequence.

IN the Preliminary Book, I have mentioned The mot

cnfiderable

the rife of that spiritual jurifdition which the revolti
Popes claim as Vicars of Jesus Chft, and have of the if-
traced the progress of that authority which they try in th-
poflefs as temporal Princes *. There was no- u..rt
thing previous to the reign of Charles V. thatme
tended to circumscribe or to moderate their
authority, but science and philosophy, which
began to revive and to be cultivated. The
progress of there, however, was ill inconfider-
able; they always operate slowly; and it is
long before their influence reaches the people,
or can produce any sensible effect upon them.
They may perhaps gradually, and in a long
course of years, undermine and shake an eita-
blifhed system of false religion, but there is no
instance of their having overturned one. The
battery is too feeble to demolifl those fabricks
which superstition raises on deep foundations,
and can strengthen with the most consummate
art. -

LUTHER had attacked the Papal supremacy Thegeneral

. . . .. . revolt a-

with other weapons, and with an impetuosity gain the
more formidable. The time and manner of his dohec,"of
attack concurred with a multitude of circum-of Rome,
fiances, which have been explained, in giving d tof
him immediate success. The charm which had the Popes.
bound mankind for so many ages was broken
at once. The human mind, which had con-
tinued long as tame and passive, as if it had
been formed to believe whatever was taught,
and to bear whatever was imposed, routed of

a sudden
Vol. i. p. 149, &c.

BooK XIl. a udden, and became inquisitive, mutinous, and
^'Y disdainful of the yoke to which it had hitherto

submitted. That wonderful ferment and agita-
tion of mind, which, at this diltance of time,
appears unaccountable, or is condemned as ex-
travagant, was so general, that it mufl have
been excited by causes which were natural and
of powerful efficacy. The kingdoms of Den-
mark, Sweden, England and Scotland, and
almost one half of Germany, threw off their
allegiance to the Pope, abolished his jurisdiction
within their territories, and gave the fan&ion
of law to modes of discipline and systems of
doctrine which were not only independent of
his power, but hostile to it. Nor was this pirit
of innovation confined to those countries which
openly revolted from the Pope; it pread
through all Europe, and broke out in every
part of it with various degrees of violence. It
penetrated early into France, and made progress
apace. In that kingdom, the number of con-
verts to the opinions of the Reformers was so
great, their zeal so enterprising, and the abili-
ties of their leaders so distinguished, that they.
soon ventured to contend for superiority with
the eftablihed church, and were Sometimes on
the point of obtaining it. In all the provinces
of Germany which continued to acknowledge
the Papal supremacy, as well as in the Low-
Countries, the Protestant doctrines were secretly
taught, and had gained so many proselytes, that
they were ripe for revolt, and were restrained
merely by the dread of their rulers from imita-
ting the example of their neighbours, and
asserting their independence. Even in Spain
and in Italy, symptoms of the fame disposition
to shake off the yoke appeared. The preten-
lions of the Pope to infallible knowledge and
supreme power was treated by many persons

of

of eminent learning and abilities with such Boo XIL
scorn, or impugned with such vehemence, that z
the most vigilant attention of the civil magi-
firate, the highest strains of pontifical authority,
and all the'rigour of inquifitorialjurifdi&ion, were
requisite to check and extinguish it.

THE defecion of so many opulent and power- This

ful kingdoms from the Papal See, was a fatal theexent
blow to its grandeur and power. It abridged of the
the dominions of the Popes in extent, it dimi- miion,
nifhed their revenues, and left them fewer
rewards to bestow on the ecclesiastics of various
denominations, attached to them by vows of
obedience as well as by ties of interest, and
whom they employed as instruments to establish
or support their usurpations in every part of
Europe. The countries too which now dif-
claimed their authority, were those which for-
merly had been most devoted to it. The em-
pire of superstition differs from every other
species of dominion; its power is often greatest,
and most implicity obeyed, in the provinces
most remote from the feat of government; while
such as are situated nearer to that, are more apt
to discern the artifices by which it is upheld, or
the impostures on which it is founded. The
personal frailties or vices of the Popes, the
errors as well as corruption of their adminiftra-
tion, the ambition, venality, and deceit which
reigned in their court, fell immediately under
the observation of the Italians, and could not
fail of diminishing that refpe&t which begets
fubmiflion. But in Germany, England, and the
more remote countries, these were either altoge-
ther unknown, or being only known by report,
made a flighter impreflion. Their veneration for
the Papal dignity encreafed with their distance
from Rome; and that, added to their gross ig-

norance,

BooXII. norance, rendered them equally credulous and
^"'"' passive. In tracing the progress of the Papal

domination, the boldest and molf successful in-
fiances of encroachment are to be found in
Germany and other countries distant from Italy.
In these its impositions were heaviest, and its
exadions the most rapacious; so that in efii-
mating the dimunition of power which the court
of Rome suffered in consequence of the Refor-
mation, not only the number but the characer
of the people who revolted, not only the great
extent of territory, but the extraordinary obfe-
quioufnefs of the subjects which it loft, mut be
taken into the account.

sad bliged NOR was it only by this defetion of so many
chge tb kingdoms and fates which the Reformation
spirit of occasioned, that it contributed to diminish the
^,hto power of the Roman Pontiffs. It obliged them

to adopt a different system of conduct towards the
nations which still continued to recognise their
jurifdidion, and to govern them by new maxims
and with a milder spirit. The Reformation
taught them, by a fatal example, what they
seem not before to have apprehended, that the
credulity and patience of mankind might be
overburdened and exhausted. They became
afraid of venturing upon any such exertion of
their authority as might alarm or exasperate
their fubjeets, and excite them to a new revolt.
They saw a rival church established in many
countries of Europe, the members of which
were on the watch to observe any errors in their
administration, and eager to expose them. They
were sensible that the opinions adverse to their
power and usurpations were not confined to
their enemies alone, but had spread even among
the people who still adhered to them. Upon
all these accounts, it was no longer poflible to

lead

lead or to govern their flock in the fame man- Boo XlX.
ner as in those dark and quiet ages, when faith ' '
was implicit, when fubmiflion was unreserved,
and all tamely followed and obeyed the voice
of their shepherd. From the ara of the Re-
formation, the Popes have ruled rather by ad-
dress and management than by authority. The
flyle of their decrees is the fame, but the effect
of them is very different. Those Bulls and
Interdi&s which, before the Reformation, made
the greatest Princes tremble, have fmce that
period been disregarded or despised by the most
inconsiderable. Those bold decisions and ats
of jurifdidion which, during many ages, not
only passed uncenfured, but were revered as the
awards of a sacred tribunal, would, since Lu-
ther's appearance, be treated by one part of
Europe as the effe& of folly or arrogance, and
be detested by the other as impious and unjust.
The Popes, in their adminiitration, have been
obliged not only to accommodate themselves
to the notions of their adherents, but to pay
some regard to the prejudices of their enemies.
They seldom venture to claim new powers, or
even to insist obitinately on their ancient prero-
gatives, left they fould irritate the former,
they carefully avoid every measure that may
either excite the indignation or draw on them the
derision of the latter. The policy of the court
of Rome has become as cautious, circumfpet,
and timid, as it was once adventurous and vio-
lent; and though their pretensions to infallibi-
lity, on which all their authority is founded,
does not allow them to renounce any jurifdidtion
which they have at any time claimed or exer-
cifed, they find it expedient to susser many of
their prerogatives to lie dormant, and not to
expose themselves to the rifque of losing that
remainder of power which they still enjoy by ill-

timed

BooXIl. timed attempts towards reviving obsolete pre-

'-- tensions. Before the sixteenth century, the

Popes were the movers and directors in every
considerable enterprize; they were at the head of
every great alliance; and being confidered as
arbiters in the affairs of Christendom, the court
of Rome was the center of political negociation
and intrigue. From that time, the greatest ope-
rations in Europe have been carried on inde-
pendent of them; they have funk almost to a
level with the other petty Princes of Italy; they
continue to claim, though they dare not exercise,
the fame spiritual jurisdiction, but hardly retain
any (hadow of the temporal power which they
anciently possessed.

The Ref- BUT how fatal soever the Reformation may
ioted"to have been to the power of the Popes, it contri-
itTch buted to improve the church of Rome both in
bobh i science and in morals. The desire of equalling
fiC-C" the reformers in those talents which had pro-

cured them respeCt; the necessity of acquiring
the knowledge requisite for defending their own
tenets, or refuting the arguments of their oppo-.
nents, together with the emulation natural be-
tween two rival churches, engaged the Roman
Catholick clergy to apply themselves to the study
of useful science, which they cultivated with
such afliduity and success, that they have gra-
dually become as eminent in literature, as they
were in some periods infamous for ignorance.
The fame principle occasioned a change no less
considerable in the morals of the Romish cler-
gy. Various causes, which have formerly been
enumerated, had concurred in introducing great
irregularity, and even dissolution of manners,
among the popish clergy. Luther and his ad-
herents began their attack on the church
with such vehement invetives against there,

that,

that, in order to remove the scandal, and silence Boo X-
their declamations, greater decency of condunt' '
became necessary. The Reformers themselves
were so eminent not only for the purity but even
austerity of their manners, and had acquired such
reputation among the people on that account,
that the Roman Catholick Clergy must have soon
loft all credit, if they had not endeavoured to
conform in ome measure to their standard.
They knew that all their afions fell under the
revere infpe&ion of the Protestants, whom en-
mity and emulation prompted to observe every
vice, or even impropriety, in their conduct; to
censure them without indulgence, and to expose
them without mercy. This rendered them, of
course, not only cautious to avoid such enormi-
ties as might give offence, but studious to acquire
the virtues that might merit praise. In Spain
and Portugal, where the tyrannical jurifdi&ion
of the Inquisition crushed the Protestant faith as
soon as it appeared, the spirit of Popery conti-
nues invariable; science has made small pro-
grefs, and the character of ecclefiafticks has
undergone little change. But in those countries
where the members of the two churches have
mingled freely with each other, or have car-
ried on any considerable intercourse, either com-
mercial or literary, an extraordinary alteration
in the ideas as well as in the morals of the Popish
ecclefiafticks, is manifest. In France, the man-
ners of the dignitaries and secular clergy have be-
come decent and exemplary in an high degree.
Many of them have been distinguished for all
the accomplishments and virtues which can a-
dorn their profetion; and differ greatly from
their predeceflors before the Reformation, both
in their maxims and in their condut.
VoL. III.

Hh

Nox

BooxXII. NOR has the influence of the Reformation

le been felt only by the inferior members of the

of i te~nd Roman Catholick Church; it has extended to
^t'oe fhethe See of Rome, to the sovereign Pontiffs
Pop themselves. Violations of decorum,. and even
thenjeeL trespasses against morality, which pafied without

censure in those ages, when neither the power
of the Popes, nor the veneration of the people
for their charater, had any bounds; when
there was no hostile eye to observe the errors
in their conduc, and no adversaries zealous to
inveigh against them; would be liable now to
the severest animadversion, and excite general
indignation and horror. Instead of rivalling the
courts of temporal Princes in gaiety, and fur-
palling them in licentiousness, the Popes have
studied to assume manners more severe and
more suitable to their ecclesiastical character.
The chair of St. Peter hath not been polluted,
during two centuries, by any Pontiff that refem-
bled Alexander VI. or several of his prede
ceffors, who were a disgrace to religion and to
human nature. Throughout this long fuccef,
sion of Popes, a wonderful decorum of condut,
compared with that of preceding ages, is ob-
fervable. Many of them have been conspicuous
for the virtues becoming their high fation; and
by their humanity, their love of literature, and
their moderation, have made ome atonement
to mankind for the crimes of their predecessors.
Thus the beneficial influences of the Reforma-
tion have been more extensive than they appear
on a superficial view; and this great division in
the Christian church hath contributed, in some
measure, to increase purity of manners, to dif-
fuse science, and to inspire humanity. History
recites such a number of hocking events, occa-
sioned by religious dissensions, that it mull
afford peculiar fatisfadtion to trace any one fa-
lutary or beneficial effect to that source, from
which so many fatal calamities have flowed.

THE

THE republick of Venice which, at the begin- Boox XII.

ning of the sixteenth century, had appeared so Se of the
formidable, that almost all the potentates of republick of
Europe united in a confederacy for its deftruc- Vnie.
tion, declined gradually from its ancient power
and splendor. The Venetians not only loft a
great part of their territory in the war excited
by the league of Cambray, but the revenues as
well as vigour of the ltate were exhausted by
their extraordinary and long continued efforts
in their own defence; and that commerce by
which they had acquired their wealth and power
began to decay, without any hopes of its revi-
ving. All the fatal consequences to their re-
publick, which the sagacity of theVenetian senate
foresaw on the first discovery of a passage to
the Eaft-Indies by the Cape of Good Hope,
took place. Their endeavours to prevent the
Portuguese from establishing themselves in the
Eaft-Indies, not only by exciting the soldans
of Egypt and the Ottoman monarchs to turn
their arms against such dangerous intruders, but
by affording secret aid to the Infidels in order
to insure their fuccefsZ, proved ineffectual.
The aivity and valour of the Portuguese fur-
mounted every obstacle, and obtained such firm
footing in that fertile country, as secured to
them large possession, together with influence
fill more extensive. Lisbon, instead of Venice,
became the ltaple for the precious commodities
of the East. The Venetians, after having pof-
sessed for many years the monopoly of that
beneficial commerce, had the mortification to
be excluded from almost any share in it. The
discoveries of the Spaniards in the western world,
proved no less fatal to inferior branches of their
commerce. The original defecs which were
formerly pointed out in the constitution of the

H h 2 Venetian
s Freher. Script. Rer. German. vol. ii. 52g.

Bac XII. Venetian republick continued; and the difadvan-

- tages with which it undertook any great eater-

prize, increased rather than diminished. The
sources from which it derived its extraordinary
riches and power being dried up, the interior
vigour of the fate declined, and, of court,. its
external operations became less formidable.
Long before the middle of the sixteenth cen-
tury, Venice ceased to be one of the principal
powers in Europe, and dwindled into a fecoa-
dary and subaltern fate. But as the senate had
the address to conceal its diminution of power,
under the veil of moderation and caution as
it made no rah effort that could discover its
impotence; as the symptoms of political decay
in states are not soon observed, and are feldo
so apparent to their neighbours as to occasion
any sudden alteration in their conduct towrds
them, Venice continued long to be confided,
and refpeted. She was treated not according
to her present condition, but according to the
rank which hfe had formerly held. Charles V.
as well as the monarchs of France his rivals,
courted her aiance with emulation and soli-'
citude in all their enterprizes. Even down to
the dole of the century, Venice remained not
only an object of attention, but a considerable
feat of political negociation and intrigue.

Ot-Tuf- THAT authority which the firif Cosmo di
*.I' Medici, and Lawrence, his grandson, had ac-

quired in the republick of Florence by their
beneficence and abilities, inspired their defcen-
dants with the ambition of usurping the fove-
reignty in their country, and paved their way
A.D. 153o0 towards it. Charles placed Alexander di Me-

dici at the head of the republick, and to the
natural interest and power of the family added
the weight as well as credit of the Imperial

protection.

protetion. Of these, his successor Cosmo, Boo XII
firnamed the Great, availed himself; and efta- - j
blifhing his supreme authority on the ruins of
the ancient republican constitution, he tranf-
mitted that, together with the title of Grand
Duke of Tuscany, to his descendants. Their
dominions were composed of the territories
which had belonged to the three commonwealths
of Florence, Pisa, and Sienna, and formed one
of the most refpetable of the Italian flates.

THE dukes of Savoy, during the former part of te

of the sixteenth century, pffced territories savoy.
which were not considerable either for extent or
value; and the French, having seized the greater
part of them,. obliged the reigning Duke to
retire for safety to the strong fortress of Nice,
where he hut himself up for several years;
while his son, the Prince of Piedmont, endea-
voured to better his fortune, by serving as an
adventurer in the. armies of Spain. The peace
of Cateau Cambrefis restored to him his paternal
dominions. As these are environed on every
hand by powerful neighbours, all whose mo-
tions the dukes of Savoy must observe with
the greatest attention, in order not only to guard
against the danger of being surprised and over-
powered.; but that they may chufe their fide
with discernment in those quarrels wherein it
is impolfible for them to avoid taking part, this
peculiarity in theirfituation Ceems to have had
no inconsiderable influence on their charafter.
By routing them to perpetual attention, by
keeping their ingenuity always on the stretch,
and engaging them in almost continual action,
it hath formed a race of Princes more sagacious
in discovering their true interest, more decisive
in their resolutions, and more dextrous in avail-
ing themselves of every occurrence which pre-

sented

BOOK XI. sented itself, than any perhaps that can be singled

out in the history of mankind. By gradual ac-
quifitions the Dukes of Savoy have added to
their territories as well as to their own import-
ance; and aspiring at length to regal dignity,
which they obtained about half a century ago,
they hold no inconliderable rank among the
monarchs of Europe.

or the THE territories which now form the republick
Prvia. of the United Netherlands, were loft, during the

first part of the sixteenth century, among the
numerous provinces subjed to the house of
Austria; and were then so inconsiderable, that
hardly one opportunity of mentioning them hath
occurred in all the bury period of this history.
But soon after the peace of Cateau Cambrefis,
the violent and bigotted maxims of Philip's go-
vernment, carried into execution with unrelent-
ing rigour by the duke of Alva, exasperated
the free people of the Low Countries to such
a degree, that they threw off the Spanish yoke,
and asserted their ancient liberties and laws.
These they defended with a persevering valour,
which occupied the arms of Spain during half
a century, exhausted the vigour, ruined the re-
putation of that monarchy, and at lat confirain-
ed their ancient matters to recognise and to treat
with them as a free independent state. This
state, founded on liberty, and reared by industry
and oeconomy, had grown into reputation, even
while struggling for its existence. But when
peace and security allowed it to enlarge its views,
and to extend its commerce, it rose to be one of
the most refpetable as well as enterprising
powers in Europe.

THE tranfations of the kingdoms in the

North of Europe have been seldom attended
to in the course of this history.

RUSSIA

RUSSIA remained buried in that barbarism BooKXII.

and obscurity, from which it was called about Ruis.-'
the beginning of the present century, by the
creative genius of Peter the Great, who made
his country known and formidable to the reft of
Europe.

IN Denmark and Sweden, during the reign or Den

of Charles V. great revolutions happened inm ad
their constitutions, civil as well as ecclesiastical.
In the former kingdom, a tyrant being degra-
ded from the throne and expelled the country,
a new Prince was called by the voice of the
people to assume the reins of government. In
the latter, a fierce people, roused to arms by
injuries and oppreflion, shook off the Daniit
yoke, and conferred the regal dignity on its
deliverer, Gustavus Ericson, who had all the
virtues of a hero and of a patriot. Denmark,
exhausted by foreign wars, or weakened by the
diflenfions between the King and the nobles,
became incapable of such efforts as were requi-
site in order to recover the ascendant which it
had long pofleffed in the North of Europe.
Sweden, as soon as it was freed from the domi-
nion of strangers, began to recruit its strength,
and acquired in a short time such interior vigour,
that it became the first kingdom in the North.
Early in the subsequent century, it rose to such
a high rank among the powers of Europe, that
it had the chief merit in forming as well as con-
duaing that powerful league, which proteaed
not only the Protestant religion, but the liber-
ties of Germany, against the bigotry and ambi-
tion of the house of Austria.

INDEX

# INDEX TO THE SECOND AND THIRD VOLUMES.

I N D E X

TO THE

SECOND AND THIRD VOLUMES.
N. B. The Roman numerals diref to the volume, and the figues

to the page.

A.
ABSOLUTION, the form ofthat

ued by father Tetzel in Germa-

ny, II. 89.

dderai, the faction of, assisi the Impe-

rial general Colonoa in the redunion
of Genoa, II. 64.

/drian of Utrecht, made preceptor to

Charles V. under William de Croy,
lord of thievres, IL. 4. Hi, cha.
raCer, i. Sent by Charles with
power to atiume the regency of Caf-
tile on the death of his grandftber,
19. His claim admitted by Cardi-
nal Ximenes, and executed in con-
junaion, i. Authorized by Charles
to hold the cortet of Valencia, which
refuses to ·femblei before him, 70.
Made viceroy of Castile on the de-
parture of Charles for Germany, 73.
His eleion remonstrated againR by
the Cafilians, i. Is chosen Pope,
161. Retrofpea of his condut in
Spain during the abfeoce of Charles,
17. Sends Rouquillo to reduce the
Segovians, who repulse him, 173.
Sends Fonseca to besiege the city,
who is repulsed by the inhabitants of
Medina del Campo, i. Apolo-
gi;.e for Poafeca's condua to the
Vol. III.

people, 75. Recals Fonteca and
dimriftes bis troops, ib. His autho-
rity disclaimed by the Holy Jnnta,
177. Deprived of power by them,
079. His ill reception on his arrival
at Rome, on being chosen to the Pa-
pacy, o25. Restores the territories
acquired by his predecessor, o06.
Labour to unite the contending
powers of Europe, ib. Publiflbes
bull for three years truce among
them, 107. Accedes to the league
againR the French King, i. Hia
death, II . The fentimenta and
behaviour of the people on that oc-
cation, ib. A retrofpe& of his con-
dua towards the Reformers, 25S.
His brief to the diett t uremburgb,
z26. Receives a lift of grievances
from the diet, t18. His conduft to
the Reformers, how esteemed at
Rome, 30.

Africa, the Spanilh troops sent by Car-

dinal Ximenes agaiaft BarbarflLa,
defeated there, II. 40.

J.dirs-Mortes, interview between the

Emperor Charles and Francis, there,
II. 443.
Aix ] CpJ]le, the Emperor Charles

* I i crown-

W

crowned there, II. 85. Ferdinand
his brother crowned King of the Ro-
mans there, 359.

Alarrs., Don Ferdinand, Francis I. of

France, taken pritoner at the battle
of Pia, committed to his cuflody,
II. 48. Conduas Francis to Spain,
iS8. Delivers up Francis in prlu-
ante of the treaty of Madrid, 275.
Is feat tmbaffador to Francis to re-
quire the fulfilmet of his treaty,
29o. Pope Clement VII. taken pri-
sooer by the ImperialiRs, is com-
mitted to his calody, 310.
basj, Johnb Stuart duke of, com-
mands the French army ent by Fran-
cis . to invade Naples, II 43.

Alkrr, of Brandenborgh, grand mister

of the Teutonic Order, becomes a
convert to the dodrines of Luther,
II. 285. Obtain. of Sigifmsod Kiog
fPolaad the investiture of Prussia,
ercced into a dutchy, i. Is put
ander the ban of the empire, 286.
His family fixed in the inheritance of
Pruofi, i. Commands a body of
troops in behalf of Maurice of Sax-
ooy, but endeavours to assert n in-
dependecy, 11. 159. Defeats and
takes the Duke d'Anmale prisoner,
and joins the Emperor at Meta, go0.
Is condemned by the Imperial cham-
ber for his demaods on the bilhops of
*aberg and Wortfobrg, 290o. A
league formed satinft him, *A. Is
defeated by Maurice, a19. Is again
defated by Henry of Brunswick,
93. Is driven out of Germany and
dies in exile, . His territories re-
tored to his collateral heirs, 94.

AI.rrt, Eletor of Mentz, the publica-

tion of indulgences in Germany com-
mitted to him, 11. 89.

Aura-er VI. Pope, remarks on the

pontificate of, II. 13,

Adrx&rr di Medici. See MxnRtc.
dgiers, how it was seized by Barba-

roff, 11. 391. Is seized by the bro-
ther of the fame name, on the death
of the former, 393. Is taken under
she protecion of the Prte, i. Is
governed by Hafcen Aga in the ab-
fence od Brbamofa, 395. Is befieg-
ed by the Emperor Charles V. 398.
Charles forced to re-embark by bad

eather, 403.

AiraJckid brother of Muley Hafcen

King of Tunis, solicits the protecion
of Barbarossa aainft him, 11. 394.
Hs treacherous treatment by Br-
barofa, 35.

Alva, Duke of, adheres to Ferdinand

of Aragon, in his dispute with the
Archduke Philip concerning the re-
gency of CaRile, II. to. Forces the
Dauphin to abandon the siege of Per-
pignan, 11. 8. Presides at the
court-martial which condemns the
Eledtor of Saxony to death, 49.
Detains the Landgrave prisoner by
the Emperor's order, 159. Com-
mands, under the Emperor, the army
dellined againf France, 79. Is ap-
pointed commander in chief in Pied-
mont, 39. Enters the Ecclefiafti-
cal territories, and seizes the Cam-
pagna Romana, 380. Concludes a
truce with the Pope, 381. Nego-
ciates a peace between Philip and the
Pope, with Cardinal Carsffa, 406.
Goes to Rome to atf pardon of the
Pope for his hofilitieF, i6. Is sent to
Pari i the name of Philip to cfpoufe
the Princess Elizabeth, 444.

Aarerarf, a noblemen of Holland, as-

fociated by Charles V. with Cardinal
Ximnes, in the regency of Castile,
II. 38.

AabaptijBt, the origin of that fe& de-

duced, II. 37 Their principal te-
nets, ió. Their fettlemeat at
Mnfter, 376. Charaer of their
principal leader, 377 They seize
the city of Munfler, i. They eta-
blifh a new form of government there,
380. Chnfe Becold King, i. Their
licentious prafices,38. A confede-
racy of the German Prince formed
againi them, 381. Are blockaded
in Munofer by the bilhop, ii. The
city taken and great slaughter made
of them, 384. Their King put to
death, 385. Charater of the feet
since that period, i. See Matibiaf
and Brld.

Asngia, his authority cited in proof

of the extortions of the Flemilh mi-
niflers of Charles V. 11. 49.

Aatalt, Prince of, avows the opinions

of Martio Luther, II. 215.

Amats to the court of Rome, what, II.

t16.

Aras., how Ferdinand became po.

feled of that kingdom, II. . The
cortes of, acknowledges the Arch-
duke Philip's title to the crown, 3.
Antient enmity between this king-
dom and Caflile, 7. Navarre added
to this croun by the arts of Ferdi-
nand, o. Arrival of Charles V.
44. The cortes not allowed to as-
fcmble in his namp, 5o. The refrac-

tory

tory behaviour of the Aragonians,
ib. They refure reltitution of the
kingdom of Navarre, 51. Don John
Lanuxa pp.inted regent, on the de-
prt.ure of Charles for Germany, 73.
Who compores the ditnurbances there,
20s. The moderation of Charles
towards the insurgents on his arrival
in Spain, 204. See Spain.

Ardrei, an interview there between

Francis I. and Henry VIII. of Eng-
land, t1. 83.
j4lsrias, Charles son of Philip and Jo-
anna, acknowledged Prince of, by
the Cortes of Castile, 1I. 15.

Augf/urg, a diet called there by Charles

V. II 166. His public entry into
that city, 167. The confeflion of
faith named from this city, drawn
up by Melan&hon, 354. Reftlute
behaviour of the protellant Princes
at, 35. Its form of government
violently altered, and rendered sub-
mifive to the Emperor, 186. The
diet reaflembled there, 1t9. The
diet takes part with the Emperor
againl the city of Magdeburg, 206.
Is sized by Maurice of Saxony, 147.
Another diet at, opened by Ferdi-
nand, 336. Cardinal Morone attenda
the diet as the Pope's ouncio, 337.
Morone departs on the pope's death,
339. Recef of the d.et on the sub-
jef of religion, 340. Remarks on
thi recess, 343 The diet again as-
fembled there, 111 166. Is intimi-
dated by being surrounded with the
Emperor's Spanilh troops, 167. The
Emperor re-eftablilhes the Romilk
worlhip, in the churches of, i. The
diet, by the Emperor's order, peti-
tions the Pope for the return of the
council to Trent, 173. A system of
theology laid before the diet by the
Emperor, 177. The archbilhop of
Menta, declares, without authority,
the diet's acceptance of it, 179.

Avil/, a convention of the malecon-

tents in Spain held there, 11. 177.
A confederacy termed the holy Junta,
formed there, i. Which dilclaims
the authority of Adrian, i. The
Holy Junta removed to Tordefillas.
178. See 7rvr.

Afrrir, by what megan the house of,

became so formidable in Germany,
11. 33. The extraordinary acqui-
stions of the house of, in the person
of the Emperor Charles V. 111.
447

B.

Barbarofa, Horuc, his rife to the king-

doms of Algiers and Tunis, 11. 39.
Defeats the Spanilh troops sent agalnit
him by Cardinal Ximenes, 40. His
parentage, 391. Commences pirate
with his brother Hayradin, ib. How
he acquired pofeflion of Algiers, 391.
Infests the coasts of Spain, ib. Is
reduced and killed by Comares the
Spanilh governbr of Oran, 393.

BarbaraJt, Hayrsdin, brother to the

former of the fame name, takes pof-
feflion of Algiers on his brother'a
death, 11. 393. Put his dominions
under the protetion of the Grand
Signior, i. Obtains the command
of the Turkilh fleet, ib. His treache.
rout treatment of Alrafchid, brother
to the King of Tunis, 396. Seizes
Tunis, i. Extends his depredations
by fes, i. Prepares to refifR the Em.
peror's armament against him, 398.
Goletta and his fleet taken, 399. 1a
defeated by Charles, 401. Tunis
taken, ii. Makes a descent on Italy,
11. 18. Burns Rheggio, ib. Be-
fleges Nice in conjunaion with the
French, but is forced to retire, 19.
Is dismissed by Francis, 30.

Brbarar faummary view of the revo-

lutions of, II, 389. Its division into
independant kindoms, 390. Rife of
the piratical States, 391. See Bar-
bar ffa.

Barcens, the publick entry of the

Emperor Charles V. into that city
as its count, II. 345. The treaties
of Charles with the Italian States,
publihed there, 338.

Bayard, chevalier, his charaCer, II.

149. His gallant defence of Meai-
eres, beiegeo by the ImperialiRt, i.
Obliges them to raise the siege, a5o.
His noble behaviour at his death,
2ar. His refpeetful funeral, z2a.

Btllay, M. his erroneous account of the

education of Charles V. correted,
II. 3. Nte. His acconnt of the
disastrous retreat of the Emperor
Charles V. from his invasion of Pro-
rence, II. 48.

Bible, a tranfation of, undertaken by

Martin Luther, and its eflecs in open-
ing the eyes of the people, II. a3.

Bicocca, battle of, between Colonna

and Marechal Lautrec, II. 16.

Becald or Beukels, John, a journeyman

taylor, becoms a leader of the Ana-
baptists at Munlter, 11. 375 Suc-

I i eed

ceeds sMtthias ;n the diretion of
their affairs, 379. His enthoisftick
etraagance, i. Is chosen King,
3o. Mrries fourteen wives, 81.
Bebead one of them, 34. 1 put
to a rel death at the taking of
Manfter, 385. See AsbatiJfr.
lliemi, the Archduke Ferdinand

cosen King of, 11. 313. Ferdinand
encreaches om the liberties of the
*-bemim, IlL 66. The Refor-
maotio introdoced by John Huala od
Jerome of Prague, . Raise an ar-
my to ao urpofe, 67 .
Bmai~, admiral of France, appointed

to command the iafion of Milan,
II. 113. His chaaner, ió. En-
ibkle Colon to defend the city of
Mila by his imprudent delay, t4.
larced to haandon the Milanese, t15.
Is wounde ad his army defeated
by the Imperialist at. Stimulates
Fruci to an inviioa of the Milan-
dae, 38. Adrife Francis to beiege
Pavi, *40. Adrifes him to give
battle to Borbon, who adanced to
the relief of Pavri, 4;. I killed
at the battle of Pavit, 47.
bbua, an intervie between the Eam-
peror Carles V. and Pope Clemnat
VII. there, IL 34. Another meet-
a between them there, 364.

J-3l , Robert de I Mirck, lord of,

decdren war aainft the Emperor
Charles, t the instigation of Frnci,,
IL 48. Is ordered by Francis to
iband his troops, i. His terrtories
edIced by the Emperor, 49.

Bmrw, befeged by Henry VIII. of

Egand III. 35 Tken, 44.

B~mrs, Charles Duke of, his charic-

ter, IL 9og. The causes of hi. dif-
coteut with Francis, I. i. His dbch-
ef·die, toa. Rejecs the advances
of Louisa tte King's mother, i. His
eftte sequestered by her intrigues,

11. Negociate secretly with the
Emperor, i. Is included in a treaty
between the Emperor and Henry
VIIL of Egland, i. Is taxed by
the King with betraying him, which
he denies, it1. Escapes to Italy,
£t3. Diress the meifures of the
Imperial nary under Lannoy, 1Z.
Defeats the French on the bask of
the Tefin, 2t. Instigates Charles
to an invaGo of France, 134. Ad-
amcs to the relief of Pavia, 4;.
Defats Francis and takes him pri-
nstec, 47. Hatemn to Madrid tc
cnre his own intc t on the inter.

view between Charles and Praeci,
161. His kind reception by Charles,
167. Obtains a grant of the dutchy
of Milan. and is made general of the
Imperial army, 69. Obliges Sforia
to surrender Milan, 294. Is forced
to oppref· the Milanese to sati fy hi,
troops mutinying for pay, 298. Set
Morone at liberty, and makes him his
confident, 199. Appoints Leyva g-
vernor of Milan, and advances to in.
vade the Pope's territoriets 300. Hli
disappointed troops mutiny, 301. He
determines to plunder Rome, 305.
Arrives at Rome and aflaulth it, 306.
Is killed, 307

Brsenrbasrgb, Eleaor of, avows the
opinions of Lther, II. tas.

_ Albert of. See flbrt.

Brrt,, a league concluded there be.

tween the Emperor and Henry VIll
of England, again France, 11. i2.

Brsfwica, Duke of, avows the opiniorn

of Luther, II. S.

--- Henry Duke of, driven from

his dominioo by the ProtePant
Princes of the league of Smalkalde,
111. 4. Raise men for Francis, but
employs them to recover hi own do-
minions, 6 1 taken prisoner, i.

Bae, firge of, by Ferdinand King of

the Roman, IL 499. Is treacie
roufly (ceied by Sultan Solymaa, i.

C.

Cajetse, Cardinal, the Pope's legate in

Germany, aFpninted to examine the
dotrines of Martin Luther, 11. 98.
Requires Lther peremptorily to re.
traa his error, ii. Requires the
Eletor of Saxony to surrender or
banith Luther, ioo. His conduct jus-
tified, lot.

CAtlis, an icffeaual congrefa there be-

tween the Emperor and Franci, un-
der the mediation of Henry VIII. II.
5o. The caretes manner in which
it was goarded in the reign of Mas
Queen of England, III. 411. Inef-
fetual remonolrances of Philip, and
Lord Wentworth the governor, con-
concerning its defencelefa Rate, 413.
Is invested and taken by the Duke of
Guise, 414. The Engliih inhabitantt
turned out, 415. Stipulatio on cocern-
ing, in the treaty of Chateau Cam-
brefs, 438.

CamdAry, articles of the peace conclud-

ed there between the Emperor
Charles, and Francia of France, II.
338. Remarks on this treaty, 340.

C pt,

Cnmp, peace of, between Henry VIII.

and Francis, 11. 86.
CatsIi5, Cardinal, made legate from

pope Clement Vll. to the second di-
et at Nuremberg, II. 131. Pub-
lilbes articles for reforming the infe-
rior clergy, 131. Advises Chrles to
rigorous meafurea igainft the Pro-
teftant, '356.
CapFirtltis, of the Germanick body,

signed by Charles V. and prescribed
to all hi fcceffor, 11. 65.

Carfa, Cardinal, his precipitate elec-

tion, 111. 3t. Is appointed legate
to Bologna, ii. Reafona of his dif-
guaf with the Emperor, 354. Per-
fuades the Pope to solicit ah al-
liance with France againit the Empe-
ror, 359- His iniduous commifibn
to the court of France, 375. His
public entry into Paris, i. Exhorts
Henry to break his truce with the
Emperor, 376. Abolves Henry fron
his oath, 377. Negociates a peace
between the Pope and Philip, with
the Duke d'Alva, 381. The fate
of him and his brother on the death
of Pope Paul, 444.
Csrhlladim, imbibes the opinions of

Martin Luther, at Wittemburg, II.
o08. His intemperate seal, 13. Aw-
ed by the reproofs of Luther, i.

Carilans, beeged by the count d'En-

guien, and defended by the marquis
de Gualo, 11I. 3o. Guafto defeated
in a pitched battle, 33. The town
taken, 34
Caflalo, Marquis of Piadeno. See Pia-

reew.

Cafiilr, how Irabella became potTrfeed

of that kingdom, II. 1. The Arch-
duke Philip's title acknowledged by
the Cortes of that kingdom, 3. Ifs-
bells dies and leaves her hubland Per-
dinand of Aragon, regent, 6. Ferdi-
and refigna the crown of, 7. Ferdi-
sand acknowledged regent by the
Cortes, i. Enmity between this
kingdom and Aragon, i. The par-
ticular dislike of the Catilians to
Ferdinand, 8. The regency of, joint-
ly velted in Ferdinand, Philip and
Joanna, by the treaty of Salamanca,
1I. Declares against Ferdinand, 3.
The regency of, religned by Philip
to Ferdinand, i. Philip and Joanna
acknowledged King and QOeen by
the Cores, 14. Death of Philip, ;S.
The perplexity of the Castilians on
Joanna's incapacity for government,
16. Ferdinand gains the regency and

the

the good will of the Cftilians by hb
Prudent administration, 1. Oran
and other places in Barbary annexed
to this Kingdom by Ximenes, ii. Xi-
nmnes appointed regent by Ferdi-
nand's will, until the arrival of Char-
les V. t7. Charles aftumes the re-
gal title, 3t. Ximenes procures its
acknowledgement, i. The nobility
deprelfed by Ximenes, 33. The gran-
dees mutiny against Ximeoes, 34.
The mutiny suppressed, i. Ximenea
resumes the grants made by Ferdi-
nand to the nobles 35. The bold re-
ply of Ximenes to the discontented
nobles, 37. Other aociates in the
regency appointed with Ximene at
the intigation of the Flemilh cour-
tiers, 38. Xim-Ces dies, 47. Charles,
acknowledged King by the Cortet,
on his arrival, with a referyation in
favour of his mother Joana. 47.
The Caftilianm receive unfhvourable
impreflons of him, 48. Dilgufted by
his partiality to his Flemilh miniter,
iS. Sauvage made chancellor, 49.
William de Croy, appointed archbi-
shop of Toledo, i. The principal
cities cofederate and complain of
their grievances, 5. 'he Clergy of,
refuse to levy the tenth of benefices
granted by the Pope to Charles V.
68. Interdited, but the interdict ta-
ken off, by Cbarles's application, i.
An ifurreion there, 71. Increase
of difaffeaion, 71. Cardinal Adri-
an appointed regent, on the depar-
ture of Charles for Germany, 73.
The views and pretenGon of the
commonD in their infurredion, y5
The confederacy called the Holy Jun-
ta formed, 176. The proceedings
of which are carried on in the name
ofQueen Joanna, 79. Receives cir-
culatory letters from Charles for the
insurgents to lay down their arms,
with promises of pardon, 18o. The
nobles undertake to fupprets the in-
furgents, 187. Raise an army againt
them under the Conde de Hro, i.
Haro gets pofeffion of Joanna, 188.
Expedients by which they raise mo-
ney for their troops, 89 Unwil-
ling to proceed to extremities with
the Junta, go. The army of the Jun-
ta routed and Padilla executed, 94.
Ditfolution of the Junta, 97.' The
moderation of Charles toward the in-
forgents on his arrival inSpain, 186.
He acquires the lore of the Castilians,
105. See Spai.

Calariie

Cstrri.e of Aragon, is divorced from

Henry VIm. of England, IL 371.
Dies, 449-

C.tberi a Boria, nnn, fies from

her cloifler, and marries Martin Lu-
ther, II. 284

Catrrria Medici. See MnIDts.
Cai, peace coocladed there between

Pope Paul IV. and Philip II. of
Spain, 111 406.

Crcmp, oegocist;ons for peace entered

into there between Philip IL of Spain,
and Henry II. of France, 111 416.
The negociatiots removed to Chateau
Cambrefli 435. See Cbatns Cam-

Ciaraner of men, rules for forming a

prper estimate of them. 111. 68.
Applied to the cafe of Luther, i.
Ckarre- IV Emperor of Gemany, his

bfervations o the manners of the
clergy, in his letter to the Arhbi-
fop of Mentx, II. S15. Nter.

Cirlr, V. Emperor, his decent and

birth, II. I. How he came to in-
berit fch exteniive dominions, .
Acknowledged Prince of Asturias,
by the Cortes of Castile, zI. His
father Philip dies, iA. ealoufy and
hatred of his grandfather Ferdinand,
toward him, so. Left heir to his do-
minion, is. Death of Ferdinand,
i/. His edocatiol committed to Wil-
liam de Coy, lord of Chievres, a3.
Adrian of Utrecht appointed to be
his preceptor, z4- The firtf opening of
his cbaraner. 5. Affrmes the go-
erment of Slanders and attends to
bofinefs, i. Sends Cardinal Adrian
to be regent of Castile, who exe-
cutes it jointly with Ximenes, g9.
Alrumes the regal title, 30. His ti-
tle admited with dfficulty by the
Castilian nobility, 31. Perfoaded to
add associate regent, to Ximenes, 38.
His Flemifi court corrupted by the
avarice of Chievre', 4 Perfoaded
by Ximenes to ifit Spain, but bow
that journey is retarded, 41 The pre-
sent iate of his aflairs 41. Concludes
a peace at Noyea with Fraocis . of
France, and the conditions of the
treaty, . Arrivs in Spain, i.
His ungrateful treatment of Ximnes,
46. His public entry into Valladoid,
47. Is acknowledged King by the
Cortes, ho vote him a free gifr, i.
The Castilians receive nnfavourable
impreflons of him. 48. Difgufis them
by his partiality to his Flemilh mi-
niaera, 49. Sets out for Aragon, 5o.

Sends his brother Ferdinand to viGt
their grandfather Maximilian, i.
Cannot aflemble the Cortes of Ara-
gon in his own name, i. The op-
polition made by that assembly to
his desires, i. Refuses the appli-
cation of Francis I. for retitution of
the kingdom of Navarre, 51. Ne-
glee the remonfirances of the Cafti.
lian, St. Death of the Emperor
Maximilian, i. View of the pre.
sent fate of Europe, 54. How Maxi.
milian was obstructed i securing the
Empire to him, i. Francis 1. als
pires to the Imperial crown, ib.
Circumfances favourable to the pre-
tensions of Charles. i. The Swifa
cantons efponfe his caafe, S8. Appre-
henfions and condut of Pope Leo X.
on the occasion .9 Assembling of
thediet at Frankfort, 61. Frederick
Duke of Slaony refuses the offer of
the Empire and votes for him, 63.
And refuses the presents offered by
his ambatfadors, ,. Concurring cir-
cumftances which favoured his eleti-
on, 64. His elecion, 65. Signs and
confirms the capitulation of the Ger-
manick body, i. The eleion noti-
ied to him 66. Aflumes the title of
Majesty, i. Accepts the imperial dig-
nity ofered by the count Palatine,
ambaflador from the Eleaonr, 67.
The clergy of Castile refuse the tenth
of benefices granted him by the Pope,
68. Procures the interdia the kingdom
is laid under for refnfal, to be taken
off, i. Empowers cardinal Adrian
to hold the Cortes of Valencia, 69. The
nobles refuse to ffemble without his
presence, 70. Autborifes the infur-
gents there to continue in arms, i.
Summons the Cortes of Catile to
meet in Galicia, i. Narrowly es-
capes with his Flemifi minitern
from an infurretion on that account,
7 . Obtains a donative from the
Cortes, 7. Prepares to leave Spain,
and appoints regents, 73. Embarks, ib.
Motives of this journey, 74. Rife of
the rivallhip between him and Pran-
cia I. i. Courts t e fav.ur of Hen-
ry VIII. of England and his minifler
cardinal Wolley, 8t. Visits Henry at
Dover, 81. Promises Wolfey his in-
terest for the papacy, 83. Has a fe-
cond interview with Henry at Grave-
lines, 84. Offers to tubmit his diffe-
rences with Fraocls to Henry's arbi-
tration, ib. His magnificent corong-
tion at Aix-la Chapelle, 85. Calk a

diet

diet at Worms, to check the refor-
mers, 86. Canses which hindered his
efponfing the party of Martin Luther,
134. Grants Luther a safe conduct
to the diet of Worms, 135. An edict
published against him, 136. His em-
barraffment at this time, 40. Con-
eludes an alliance with the Pope, 143.
The conditions of the treaty, 144.
Death of his miniser Chivres, and its
advantages to him, ib. Invasion of
Navarre by Francis, 146. The French
driven out, and their general LEs-
parre taken prisoner, 147. War de-
clared againfl him by Robert de a
Marck, lord of Bouillon, who rava-
ges Luxemburg, 48. Reduces Bou-
illon, and invades France, 49. His
demands at the congref. at Calais,
t5s. Has an interview with cardinal
Wolfey at Bruges, and concludes a
league with Henry VIII. agamin
France, i. Pope Leo declares for
him againR France, 55. The French
driven out of Milan, 163. Visits
England in his palfage to Spain, 65.
Cultivates the good will of cardinal
Wolfey, and creates the Earl of Sur-
rey his high admiral, 166. Grants the
infand of Malta. to the Knights of St.
IJhns expelled from Rhodes by So-
yman the Magnificent, 169. Arrives
in Spain, I70. A retrolpea of his
proceedings in relation to the infur-
reion in Spain, 180. Issues circula-
tory letters for the insurgents to lay
down their arms, with promises of
pardon, i. His prudent moderati-
on toward the insurgents, on his ar-
rival in Spain, 04. Acquires the
love of the Castilians, os5. nters
into a league with Charles Duke of
Bourbon, a2t. Why he did not en-
deavour to get Wolfey elected Pope,
2a6. Invades Guienne and Burgundy
but without success, 219. His troops
in Milan mutiny for want of pay, but
are pacified by Morone, a2o. Un-
dertakes an invalion of Provence, 134.
Orders Pescara to besiege Msrfeilles,
135. Pescara obliged to retire, 236.
Dilcoocerted by the French over-
running the Milanese again, 238.
The revenues of Naples mortgaged
to raise money, ib. His troops de-
feat Francis, and take him prisoner
at the battle of Pavia, 247. His as-
feted moderation at receiving the
news, 249. Avails himself of a trea-
ty concluded between Lannoy and
Pope Clement, but refacs to ratify

it, 54. His army in Pavia mutiny,
and are obliged to be dilbanded,
255. His deliberations on the pro-
per improvements of his difadvan-
tages, 256. His propositions to Franci,
a57. After many delays grants Sfor-
za the investiture of Milan, 260. Mo-
rone's intrigues betrayed to him by
Pescara, 64. Orders Pescara to
continue his negociations with Mo-
rone, ib. His rigorous treatment
of Francis, 265. Visits Francis 267.
His kind reception of the Duke of
Bourbon, ib. Grants Bourbon the
dutchy of Milan, and appoints him
general in chief of the imperial ar-
my there, 68. Fruitless negociati-
ons for the delivery of Francis, 69.
Treaty of Madrid, with Francis, 271.
Delivers up Francis, 74. Marries
Isabella of Portugal, 175. An alliances
formed againl him at Cognac, 88.
Sends ambassadors to Francis to re-
quire the fulfilment of the treaty of
Madrid, 190. Prepares for war againf
Francis, 292. The Pope reduced to
an accommodation with him, 296.
The ehaulted slate of his finaces,
297. His troops under Bourbon dif-
tressed and mutinous for want of pay,
298. Bourbon aftaults Rome, and is
flin, but the city taken, 308. The
Prince of Orange, general on Bour-
bon's death, takes the cafle of St.
Angelo, and the Pope prisoner, 31o.
The Emperor's conduct on that oc-
caion, 3 . His dirTentions with the
Pope, how far favourable to the re-
formation, 33. His inoruaioen to
the Diet at Spires, ib. His manifelto
against the Pope, and letter to the
cardinals, 314. France and England
league against him, 317. Is refused
supplies by the Cortes of Cafile, 321.
Delivers the Pope for a ransom, 323.
His overtures to Henry and Francis,
i6. Their declaration of war
againt him, 325. Is challenged by
Francis to ingle combat, i. An-
drew Doria revolts from Francis to
him, 330. His forcesdefeat the French
in Italy, 333. His motives for de-
firing an accommodation, 337. Con-
cludes a separate treaty with te
Pope, 338. Terms of the peace of
Cambray concluded with Francis, by
the mediation of Margaret of Aultria
and Louise of France, 33. Remarks
on the advantages gained by him in
this treaty, and on his conduc of the
war, 340. Visit Italy, 344. His

policy

pflicy on his public entry into Bar-
celona, 34-; Hts n interview with
the Pope at Bologna, 346. Motives
for his moderation in Italy, i. His
treatice with the State of, 347. 1t
crowned King of Lonbardy and Em-
peror of the Ranm. 349 Sna-
mans diet t Spires to confider the
tSte of -digin, 350. His delibera-
ties with the Pope, refpeaing the
expediency of calling a general conn-
cil, 351. Appoints a dieat a ogf-
burg, 353. Makes a public entry
ito that city, i. Hit endeavour
to check the reformation, 355 Refo-
lute behaviour of the Protestant
Princes toward him, 356. Hi severe
ecree gaioft the Protefant, i.
ropod his brother Ferdinand, to
be eleaed King of the Roman, 357.
Is eppofed by the ProteRtnt 359.
Obtains his elrion, i. Is defiros
of an accommxaion with the Pro-
tt , 361. Concludes a treaty
with them at Nuremburg, 36-1 Ritfes
an army to oppose the Trks, under
Solymas, and obliges him to retire,
363. Hs anotber iterview with
the Pope, and preses him to call a
generl council, 364. Procures
legue of the Italian State to secure
the peace of Italy, i. Arrives at
Barcelonl, i. His endeavour to
prevent the negociations and meeting
etweea the Pope and Francit, 368.
Undertake. to expel Barbaroflf from
Tuois, and reltore Muley Hafcen,
389. Lds in Africa, and heieges
Colett, 398. Takes Goketta, and
seizes Brbaroffs feet, 399. De-
feats Babarofa and tkes Tunisr 401.
Reftres Muley Hafcen, and the
trety between them, 401, 403. The
glory acquired by this enterprize, and
the deliery of the Christian captives,
404. Seizes the dotchy of Milan on
the death of Francis Siora, 416.
Hi policy with regard to it, 417.
Prepares for war with Francis i.
His inveaive gainft Francis at Rome
before the Pope in council, 4S9. Re-
marks on this trnfdaion, 41. In
adet France, 413- Enters Provence
and finds it desolated, 48. Befege.
Marseille and Are, 49. His mi-
ferabe retreat from Provence, 431.
His irafno of Picardy defeated, 433.
h accused of pifoaing the dauphin,
ib. Improbability of its truth, 434
Cnmjeture cocerning the dauphin's
dmth i. Fandera invaded by

Franci, 435. A suspension of rms
in Slander how negociated, 436.
A truce in Piedmont, 437. Motives
to there truces, i. Negociation for
pece with Francis, 440. Conclude.
a truce for ten years at Nice, 441.
Remarks on the war, i. His inter.
view with Francis, 443. Courts the
friendhip of Henry VIII. of England,
449. Indulges the Protestant Princes,
450. Qiets their apprehension of
the Catholick league, 454. His troops
mutiny, 456. Assembles the Cortes
ofCatile, 457. Destroy the ancient
constitution of the Cortes, 458. In-
stance of the haughty spirit of the
Spanith Grandee, 4. Detfres ptr.
miffioo of Francis to pas through
France to the Netherlands 467. His
reception in France, 468. is rigo-
rout treatment of Ghent, 471. Re-
frfes to fulfil his engagement to
Franci, 471. Appoints friredly
conference between a deputation of
Catholick and Proeftant divines be-
fore the diet at Rrtilton, 491. Rt-
fult of this conferenee, 494. Grant
a private exemption from oppreses
to the ProteRtant, 495. Undertaket
to reduce Algiers, 50. Is near b-*
ing cat away by a violent form, 504
Lands near Algiers, i. His soldiers
eapofed to a violent tempef and rain,

o05. His fleet flattered, So6. His
fortitude under these difafert, o58.
Leaves his enterprize and embarks
again, ib. Is diRrefed with another
form at sea, i. Takes advantge
of the French invasion of Spain, to
obtain fubfdies from the Cortes, III.
9. His treaty with Portugal, i.
Conclodes a peace with Henry VIII.
iI. Particulars of the treaty, .
Over-runs Cleve, and his barbarous
treatment of the town of Doren, 15.
His behaviour to the Duke of Cleves,
6. Besieges Landrecy, i6. Is Join-
ed by an Englifi detachment, 17.
1. forced to retir, ii. Court the
favour of the Proteltants, 3. His
negociations with th= Proleftants t
the diet at Spires, %S. Procures
the concurrence of the diet in a war
againi Francis, 7. Negociaten a fe-
parate peace with the King of Den-
mark, aS. Invades Cbampagne, and
befiges St. Diferc, 35. Want of con-
cert between his operations and thoee
of Henry, who now invades France,
ib. Obtains St. Diiere, oy artifice, 37
Hia diftrefes and happy movements

314

38. Concludes a separate peace with
Francis, 40. Hi$ motives to this
peace, 41. His advantages by this
treaty, 43. Obliges himself by a pri-
vate article to exterminate the Pro-
tefant heresy, i. Is cruelly afflit-
ed with the gout, 46. Diet at Worms,
ib. Arrives at Worms, and alters his
conduI towsrds the ProteRtnts, o.
His condun on the death of the Duke
of Orleans, 54. His diimulation to
the Landgrave of Hesse, 70. Con-
cludes a truce with Solymao, 74.
Holds diet at Ratilbon, 7S. Hisde-
claration to the Proterlant deputie,
76. His treaty with the Pope, con-
cluded by the cardinalof Trent, 77.
His circular letter to the ProteRant
members of the Germanick body, 80.
The ProteRftnts levy an rmy *gaiin
him, 83. Is unprepared against them,
88. Puts them under the ban of the
Empire, o. The Protestants declare
war againfl him, 91. Marches to
join the troops ent by the Pope, 94.
Farnese, the Pope's legate, returns in
disgust, 9. His prudent declension
of an ation with the Protestants,
98. Is joined by his Flemilh troops,
99. Proposals of peace made by the
Protelants, o18. Their army dif-
perse, i. His rigorous treatment of
the Protelant Princes, tit. Dilmifl-
en prt of bis army, 114. The Pope re-
cals his troops, i. His refletion on
Fiefco's infurreftion at Genoa, 119.
Is alarmed at the hostile preparations
of FrAnciO, 33. DeathofFranci, 135.
A parallel drawn between him and
Pranci, ib. Consequences of Fran-
cis's aleth to him, 139. Marches a-
gainl the Eleator of Saxony, i. Passes
the Elbe, 141. Defeats the Saxon
army, 145. Takes the Eleaor pri-
soner, i. His harfi reception of
him, 46. Invcftt Wittemberg, 147.
Condemns the Eleor to death, by a
court-martial, 149. The Eleor by
treaty fnrrenders the elecorate, t5t.
The harih terms imposed by him on
the Landgrave of Helfe, 154. His
haughty reception of the Landgrave,
t57. Detains him prisoner, 159.
Seize the warlike stores of the
league, 163. His cruel exadioon, i.
Affemblesa diet at Augburg, 66.
Intimidates the diet by hit Spanih
tloops, 67. Re-eflablilhe the Ro-
milh worhfip in the churches of Augf-
burg, i. Seizes Placentia, yr. Or-
den the diet to petition the Pope for
VoL. III.

the return of the council to Trent.
174. Prolefth againf the councilof
Bologna, 176. Caules system of
faith to be prepared for Germany,
177. Lays it before the diet, 178.
The Iterim opposed, 183. And re-
jeted by the Imperial cilies, a8s.
Reduce the city of Augsburg to sub-
miflion, 186. Repeats the fame vio-
lence at Ulm, i. Caries the Eletor
and Landgrave with him into the Low
Countries, 188. Procures his fou
Philip to be recognized by the States
of theNeherlands, 89. Eftablilbes
the Interim there, tgo. Re-adlemble
the diet at Augsburg, under the in-
fluence of his Spanith troops, 199.
The city of Magdeboarg refuse to
admit the Ittris, and prepares for
refltance, 206. Appoints Maurice
Eleor of Saxony to reduce it, xc7.
Promises to protea the Protestants *t
the council of Trent, 109. Arbitra-
rily releases Maurice and the Elecor
of Brandenburg from their engage-
ments to the Landgrave for the re-
covery of his liberty, so. Endes-
vours to secure the Empire for his fn
Philip, tit. His brother Ferdinand
refuses to resign bi pretentions, t22.
Beieges Parma, but is repulsed, t9.
Proceeds rigoroully gaina the Pro.
tetants, t0o. Endeavours to support
the council of Trent, 2ti. Puts
Magdeburg under the ban of the Em-
pire, la. Absolves the city, z16.
Is involved in diputes between the
council and the Protefiant deputiet,
concerning their ffe condu, 129.-
Begins to fufpeH Maurice of Saxony,
141. Circumfiances which contribut-
ed to deceive him with regard to
Maurice, 141. Maurice takes the
feld gainlR him, 44. Maurice fe-
conded by Henry II. of France, 246.
His diftrefa and consternation, 147. An
ineffeanal negociation with Maurice,
149. Flies from Infpruck, aSi. Re-
lesale the Eletor of Saxony, a53.
Is solicited to fatiafy the demands of
Maurice, 6s. His prerent difficultiea
162, 63. Refuses any diret com-
pliance with the demands of Maurice,
265. Is disposed to yield by the pro-
grefs of Maurice's operations, z66.
Makes a peace with Maurice at Pas-
fan, 68. Refleions on this treaty,
169. Turns his arms against France,
174. Lays fege to Melt, 279. 1s
joined by Albert of Brandenburg, 80.
His army difireffed by the vigilance
Kk of

of the Duke of Guise, 183. Rifet
the fige ad retires in a hattered

adtion i&. Cosmo di Medici as-
ferts his indepedeacy tainft him,
l85. Sin revolts againi him, i.
Is dejcaed at his bad fuccef% 88.
Takes Teruane and demoliflhes it,
a9;. Takes Heldin, i. Proposes
his so Philip as a hu&ad to Mary
Qc en of ~gland, 307. The rti-
cs of the marriage, 3 . Marches
to oppose the French opation, 317.
Is deeated by Hei y, 31S. Invades
Picardy, i. Grants Si , fubdoed
by Como di Medici to his foe Philip,
311. A diet at Atgilurg opened by
Ferd~ad, 336. Leaves the iterior
sdmBiftratiot of Germny to Ferdi-
ad, 339. Appli again to Ferdi-

od to reig his preteao of foc-

efo to Philip, but i reffed, 340.

eceh of the diet of Augfarg on
the fbje of religio, 34t. Atreaty
oclded beteen Pop Paul IV. and
Heny 11. of France aait him, 359
Kcig his hereditry dominions to
hi.s so Philip 360. Hi. Mtie for
retie6 et 361. Had loo meditat-
ed this rfignatioo, 36. The cere-
mony of this deed, 365. His speech
on this ocif, 366. Reius lfo
the domiin of Spain, 3690 Hi
i*tended retire t into Splin retard-
ed, 37t. A trace fr fiveyeac-
celded with Frace, 371. Endex-
vir in vai to fecur the Imperial
croan for Phiip, 384 Re6ign the
Impel crown to Ferdinand, 385.
Set oat for Spaio, i. His arrial
ad reception in Spain, 316. is dil-
treed b by i h'a uneateful neglea
i payig his pe i. Fixe his
retreat in the mnaftery of St. Juftu
in Piench, 387. The fittion d
thit monafery, and his apatm~ nt
der~ e, i. Contrat between the
COndat of Charles ad the Pope,
31S. His mann~ of life in his re-
trat, 47. His death precipitate
by hi m aliEc fercritie, 419 Ce-
kibrat his owe fuen , 430. Diet
st. His charaer, 435. A revien
of the ftte of Europe daring bi
reig, 445. His acqifitio to t t
crown of Splin, 441.

Castlas CmfirG*, the conferences fa

pece between Philip II. of Spain
aad Heary U. of France, remove
thither from Cercamp III. 438. Thb
peace retarded by the demand of Eli
beth of Enaslid for refiittin o

Calais, 439 Particularn of the treaty
figed there etween England and
France, 440. Terms of the pacific.
tion between Philip and Henry, 441.

Crrg.trf nocio from the Pope to the

diet at Nurembhrgh, his ittraioni,
II. 216. Opposes the assembling a
general council, 117.

Chiwru, William de Croy, lord of, ap.

pointed by Maximilian to foperinted
the education of his grandson Charles,
11. 13. Adrian of Utrecht made pre-
ceptor under him 14. His direcion of
the fludies of Charles, S. Hit amrice
corrupts the Ylemih court of Chtrles,
40. Negociates peace with France,
41. Edeavours to prevent an inter-
view between Charles and Ximenes,
43. Attend& Charle. to Spain, 4.
His alcendancy over Charles, 48. His
extortions 49. Hi death, and the
fppofed cafes of it, 44.

Cbrdiaf, primitive, why avefe to he

principle. of tolerationo IlL 334.

Cia t,VII. pope, hit eletion, II. tS.

His chnater, i. Grants Cardil
Wolfey a legmtine comminio in Eng-
land for life, S17. Refuses to ccede
to the league *gainft Francit, 19,.
Labour to accommodate the diffe-
rence between the contending partics,
%10. Hi proceedings with regard to
the Reformer, 131. Conelude. a
treaty of neutral ity it Franc, t43.
Enters into feparte treaty with
Cbarles after the battle of Pari, and
the cofequencea of it, tS4. Join in
an alliance with Francis Sfora, and
the Veoetia, agaieft the Emperor,
l8. Ablhroe Francis from his oath
to observe the treaty of Madrid, a9.
Cardinal Coona· feiz·eRome, and i-
veift him in the castle of St Angelo,

96. Is forced to an aceonmodatinn
with the Imperisliftl, ii. His revenge
agint the Colonna family, 99 In
ides Naples, 300. His teritoriesin-
aded by Bourbon, aod his perpleity
d on the occasion, 30. Concludes

treaty with Lannoy viceroy of Na·les,
i. His cpRtlerntio o Boubo'
moions towards Rome, 304. Rmne
taken, and bimfelf besieged in the
e catle of St. Angelo, 308. Sur-

readers himself prisoner, 310. The
r Florentine revolt against him, 317.

Pays Charle a ransom for his liberty,
with other fipulations, 311. Makes
e his escape from cofinement, 313.

Writes a letter of thanks to Lutrec,
f it. Is jealous of the intentions f

Francir,

rancis, and negociates with Charles, C
329. His motives and teps towards
an accommodation, 337. Concludes
a* eparate treaty with Charles, 338.
His interview with the Emperor at
Bologna, 345. Crowns Charles King
of Lombardy and Emperor of the Ro-
mans, 349. His representation to
the Emperor againat calling a general
council, 352. Has another interview
with Charles at Bologna, and the dif-
fculties railed by him to the calling
a general council, 364, 365. Agrees
to a league of the Italian States for
the peace of Italy, 367. His inter-
view and treaty with Francis, 370.
Marries Catharine di Medici to the
Duke of Orleans, i*. Hi protraion
of the affair of the divorce olicited by
Henry ViL 37 t. Reverses Cranmer's
sentence of divorce, under penalty of
excommunication, 371. Henry re-
nounces his supremacy, i. Hi. death,
373. RefBciions on his Pontifical, i.

Clergj, Romia, remarks on the immo-

ral lives of, and how they contributed
to the progress of the Reformation, II.

i4. The facility with which they
obtained pardons, Iti. Their ufur-
pations in Germar.y, during the dif-
putes concerning oiveftitures, 18.
Their other opportunities of aggran-
dizing themselves there, s 19 Their
personal immunitier, l. Their en-
croachments on the laity, tao. The
dreadful effeca of piritual censures,
tst. Their devices to secure their
uufrpations, ia. The united effect
ofall thefecircumftlacea, t16. Op-
pole the advancement of learning in
Germany, 130.
Cleves, invaded and over-ran by the Em-

peror Charles V. 111. is. Cruel
treatment of Deren, ;i. Humiliat-
ing fubmiflion of the Duke, 6.

CsipPrrdiiag, a leader of the Anabap-

tiRt at Munster, an account of, II.
377. See AabdptiPfs.

Cgiasc, alliance formed there against

Charles V. by the Pope, the Vene-
tians, the Duke of Milan, and Fran-
cia I. II. a8.

Celil i, admiral, governor of Picardy,

defends St. Quintin againf the Spanilh
general Emanuel Phillibert Duke of
Savoy, l 311 96.

3 His brother D'An-

delot defeated in an eodeavour to join
the garrison, 398. Bat D'Andelot
enters the town, ii. His charater,
401. The town taken by assault, and
himself taken prisoner, ib.

Coiegst, Ferdinand King of Hungary and

Bohemia, brother to the Emperor
Charles V. eleaed King of the Ro-
mans by the college of Elector there,
II. 3'3.
- Herman, count de Wied, arch-

bilhop and eleaor of, inclines to the
Reformation, and is opposed by his
canons, who appeal to the Emperor
and Pope, III. 72. Is deprived 'nd
excommunicated, i. Reigna, t1i.
Clamxa, Cardinal Pompe, his charater,

and rivallhip with Pope Clement VII.
II. g95. Seizes Rome, and invet
the Pope in the cale of St. Angelo,
296. Is degraded, and the reft of the
family excommunicated by the Pope,
3eo. s prevailed on by the Pope
when prisoner with the mperialiRt,
to solicit his delivery, 31.

---Proper, the Italian general, his

charater, II. Igg. Appointed to
command the troops in the invasion of
Milan, i. Drives the French out of
Milan, 159. His army how weaken-
ed at the death of Pope Leo X. a6o.
Defeats Marechal de Lautree at Bi-
coeca, a6s. Reduces Genoa. 164.
The bad tate of his troops when the
French invaded Milan 14. Is en-
abled to defend the city by the illcon-
du& of Bonnivet the French com-
mander, 215. Diet, and i facceeded
by Lannoy, 220.

Cch.sill.s, an Aragonian gentleman, em-

ployed by Ferdinand of Aragon, to
obtain Joanna'seonfent to his regency
of Callile, 1I. 9. Thrown into
dungeon by the Archduke Philip, ii.

CnfeTjn of Aglburg, drawn p by

Melanahon, II. 354*

Ctflana, the privileges of that city

taken away by the Emperor Charles
V. for disobedience to the Itarin,
III. 191.

Csrfair., of Barbary, an account of the

rife of, 11. 391. See SAiers,Brrif.

Correi, of Aragon, acknowledges the

Archduke Philip's title to the crown,
11 3. Not allowed to afiemble in
the name of Charles V. 47. Their
oppotiion to his delire, ib. Is pre-
vailed on by the Emperor to recognize
his son Philip as focceffor to that kingo
dom. IlI. 9. See Spain.

Cortes of CaRile, acknow ledges the Arch-

duke Pbilip's title to the crown, 1I.
3. Is prevailed on to acknowledge
Ferdinand regent, according to Ifa-
bella's will, 7. Acknowledge Philip
and Joanna King and Queen of Cal-
Kk a tile

tile, and their loe Charles, Prince of
Aftlrias, . DeclaresCbarles King,
and vote him a free gift, 47, 48.
Smmrned by- Crles to meet at
Comapofte iaalicia 70. Tumul-
rtury proceeding tbereupon, . A
dooasie voted, 7 Loser all its in-
fluce by the diloltien of the Ho!'
Junta, %9. Int bckwardnef to
gr f opplie for tLe Emperors rs
in Italy, y97. Refres hi. prefEng
flictatiom for * fnpply. i. Aflem-
bld at Toledo to grant supplies to the
Emperor, 457. The remoaftiaes
of, 48. The ancient conitwutlo of,
fobvrted by Charle, . See S4i..

C*rres of Valencis, prevailed on by the

Emperr Charle V. to acknowledge
his fa Philip fcceffor to that king-
deo, III. 9. See aoi.

C:rt.~, Cardinal di, goveror of Flo-

rmce for the Pope, epelled by the
Florentine, on the Pope't captivity,
IL 37.

Ci0f di Medici. See Merci.
Cr ,er archbilop of Canterbury, an-

ba the mnrige of Henry VIII. with

Cathrie of Arap, which was re-
fred to Hery by the Pope, I. 371.
His fentere rwrfed by the Pope,
37-

CrZ peace of. between the Emperor

and Fr i, Il. 4o.

Cry, William de, nephew to Chievres,

mde archbiLop of Toledo by Charles
V. 1. 49.

D.

D lrr. lobn, expelled from h;. king-

dom of Navarre by Ferdinand of Ar-
gon, 11. to. Invades Navarre, but is
defeated by Cardinal Ximene, 39.
D'Adlrt, broter to Coligai, is de-

feated by the Duke of Saxuoy, in an
edea vor to foccour St. Qintin, IIL
39S. Bat enter the town with the
fugitives, . The town taken by
alult, 401.

Dauphin of France, eldt of Franci

1. is delivered up. with the Duke of
Orlean to the Emperor Charles V.
in exchange for his father, as hofage
for the perfrmance of the treaty of
Madrid, 74. His death imputed to
poifo 433. The mos probable cause
of it, 434.

- late Duke of Orleans, secnd

foe of Fracis 1. commands an army
and invade Spain, I. 7. Is forced
to abhoe the iege of Perpignn, 8.

Is dilTatisfied at the peace of Crefpy,
45. Makes secret protefnitlo a-
gainft it, i.

D..sbip of France, foe of Henry II. con.

traed to Mary the young Queen of
Scotland, UL 173. Is married to
her, 418.

Deamar, King of, join the Proteftnt
legue at Smalkalde, II. 453.

. f nomary view of the revo

lutiono in, during the ixteenth cno.
tory. HI 473.

Dt Reit, Catdinal, writes a hitfto of

PiNs's confpiricy while youtb,
III. t8. .tr.

Di..o of Poitiers, mifrefs to Henry I.

of France, afift the Guies in per.
funding Henry to an alliance with
Pope Paul IV. gift the Emperor,
Ill. 357. lnduces Henry to break
the treaty of Vaecelle, 378. Mr-
ries her grandaughter to one of oant-
moren's son, 415. oins Mot.
morency *gaint the Gnuies 46.

Drria, Andrew, assist Ltrec in sub

doingGenoa, II. 310. Conquersand
kills Moocada in a sea engagement
before the harbour of Naple, 3g9.
His charaaer, 330. s digufted with
the behaviour of the French, 331. Re.
volts to the Emperor, 331. Opens
to Naples a communicatioo by fe, i.
Refcuec Genoa from the French, 334.
Reftoreo the government of, to the
citizens, 335. The retpea paid to
his memor, 336. Attends the Em-
peror Chtles in his difaftrons expedi.
tion tginf Algier 397. His partial
fondneft for his kinrman Giannetino,
III. 17. Hi. narrow efcpe in La-

gno's infurre~ion, 15. Returns on

Lavagno's death, and the dispersion of
his party, t8i. See Gras and Laveu.

- Ginnetino, his characer, I. s7.

Is murdered by Lavagno's conspirator,
115.

D~r, an iterview there between Henry

VIII. and the Emperor Charles V.
II. 8t.

Dragat a corfir, commands the Tnrkil

fleet which ravage the co·fi of Na-
ples, 1II. a88.

D JPtrt, chancellor of France, his cha-

rater, II. ato Commences a law
suit against Chales Duke of Bourbon,
for his estate, at the instigation of
Louise the King's mother, as .

Dztlfig, the com of, bow rendered

general, 11. 36. Its influence on
manen,~ 37.
Drrem in Clevs taken by the Emperor

Charles

Charles V. the inhabitants put to the
sword, and the town burnt, IIL 15.

E.

Eci.;, an adverrary of Luther's, holds a

publick disputation with him at Leip-
fie, on the validity of the papal autho-
rity, II. 04.

&Ecckrfitii censures of the Romilb

church, the dreadful effects of, II. slt.

-- Reservation, in the receft of

the diet of Auglburg, remarks on,
II. 354.

EdJibArb, plundered and burned by the

earl of Hertford, 111 35.

Edvard VI. of oEgland, his characer,

III. 307.

Ear, count of, commands the cavalry

at the battle of St. Quintin, and puts
Montmorency's troop, to flight, Ill.
399. Engages Marefhal de Termes,
and defeats him by the casual arrival
of an Englilh squadron, 4 .

Egyjt, how and by whom added to the

Ottoman Empire, II. 55.

Ebrtsa&rg, the cattle of, taken by Man-

rice of Saxony, III. s,

1 -

Eigts, a factio n

i eneva so termed,

an account of, I. 43.

Elir.brrb sifter of Mary, her acceflion to

the crown of England, lI. 435. Her
charater, ib. Is addrefled by Philip
of Spain, and Henry of France, for
marriage, . Her prudent conduct
between them, 436. How determined
againlt Hery, 437. Her motires for
rejeting Philip, 438. Retorna Philip
an evaive answer, i. Demands re-
titution of Calais a* the conferences
at Chateau Cambrefis, i. Eablilhes
the Protestant religion in England,
439. Treaty between her and Henry
signed at Chateau Cambrefa, 440.
Em.sul, Phillibert, Duke of Savoy.

See Sv4,.
England, by what means that -kingdom

was freed trom the papal fpremacy,
and received the docrines of the Re-
formation, II. 371.- Mary Queen of,
married to Prince Philip, ofn of the
Emperor Charles V. contrary to the
fenfeof the nation, Il,. 31. The
marriage ratiied by parliament, i.
Is reluctantly engaged by Philip, now
King of Spain, in the war againR
France, 395. Mlry leyies money by
her prerogative to carry on the war,
ib. Calais taken by the Duke of
Guile, 414. Guifnes .and Hames
taken, i. Death of Mary and ac-
ccffiQn of Elizabeth, 435. The Pro-

teltant religion eltablifled by Eliza-
beth. 439. Treaty with France signed
at Chateau Cambrefls 440. Its inte-
rior frength how increased by the
condua of Henry VIII. 46, 457. Its
power no longer fruitleftly wared on
the continent, i. Alteration of its
eondu towrd Scotland, 48.

Epgaien, the Count de, befeges Carig-

nan. ll. 30. Defiret of Francis per-
niflion to engage GuaRo, 31. D-
feats Gafto in a pitched battle, 33.

Erarde la Mark, arobarador ofCharles

V. to the diet of Prankfort, his pri-
vate motives for thwarting the preten-
ionr of Francia I. of France, to the
Imperial crown, II. 64. Signa the
capitulation of the Germanick body,
on behalf of Charles, 65.

Erffma, some account of, 1. 131. Pre-

ceded Luther in bis censures againit
the Romilh church, i; Concrs with
him in bis intentions of reformation,
i. Motives which checked him in
this, 131.

E.fcaril, palace of, built by Philip. Il.

in memory of the battle of St. Qulm-
tin, 111 404.

Earnp, a Ihort view of. thbe ate of, at

the deatb of the Emperor Maximilian,
II. 53.. The contemporary monarchs
of, all illuflriou, at the-time ofCharles
V. 85. The method of carrying on
war in, how improved beyond the
practice ofearlier ages, IL s17. The
sentiments of, on Cnarleas treatment
-of the Pope, 3 5. A raliew of the
state of, during the reign of he Em-
peror Charles V. III. 445. The re-
markable change in, at this period,
446. Hol affecdd bfythe revolt of Lu-
ther againt the church of Rome, 49.

Eatemi, King of Algierz, engages Bar-

baroffa in his service,. and is murdered
by .im, II. 391.

Exrram iratisr ih the Romilhlchurch,

the original intitution of, and dhs
use made of it, II. 1a3.-

F.

Farsef, Alexander, his unanimous elec-

tion to the Papacy, 11. 373. See
p1al ; . : . .-

Cardinal accompaniea the troops

sent. by the Pope to the -Emperor,
· gainio -the army of the Protestant
-klague, 1i 95. Retsrna diflgufd,
i. Leads the troops hbme again
by the Pope's order, s4.- Contri-
butes to the eleaion of :Cardinal di
Monte to the Papacy, g9(.

r errr/s,

Prste, Oaav;o, rsdafon of Pope Psol

IIL ede~ ra to frwprie Parma,
ad entes into treaty with the Em-
teror, IlL s9 confirmed in Par-
nu, by Jis Ill. 1. Procures an
alliace with France, lB. Ii attack-
ed by the Imperiali~. but foccef-
fully pr d by the Fenh, ib.
nPIceti rered to him by Philip II.
of rsmi, 40o.

Peter Lewi., natural oo of

Pope Paul IIL obtain of hi father
the dch o of Parna and Placentia,
nI. 55. H characer, i7o. Isaf-
fanated, y71.
Ser&~ , Kin of Aragon, how he

cuired his kiug , 11.. Invites
hiadgherJoa , d her hafvad,
Philip Archdake of Aria, to Spain,
3. Becoa~ jeaou of Philip, i.
Carrie m his war with Frce vi-
Ipmdy, amithl~ui Philip'&
treaty with Lewi 5. His Qeen
libbh dies, and leaes him reget
of Calile, uder rrtiase . Re-
figa the k of Caile, and is
ck ldgd reget by the Co~r
i. Hia cbataer, 7. His maxims
of Osenment Od'is to the Cdili-
a, t RCqred by Philip to reg~
hi re y, p. Jo 'a letter of
co~ t pucu~ by him, intecepted
by Philp, d berflf c~od, i.
s eferaed by the-Caflilian obility,
i. Daec e t exclude his dagb-
ter fro the ficctoe by iarryiun,
so. Marri Genrae de P Foi, aice
t Lew ill.of Frac, t. A trea-
ty twa him and Philip t Sla-
mac, by which the regey of Car-
tile is jily ved In them, a d
Ea , . Prevails n Henry II.
of E ad to detain Philp far thee
moaurt when drien o0 hat coit,
13. The Cafilin declare i
him, . Refiga the regency of
Catile by ~trty . Iteriew be-
te him and Philip, 14 s b~ t,
at Naples whea Philip died, iS. Re-
t~n aad ains, with the regency of
Cafile, the good will of the natives
by his pdet ahnid aai 19.
Acqir~ by dinuonable me~a the
kigdom f Navarre, o. How he
drayed hia c~ittion, t. E-
deairs- to dimiail his grandfo
Charle' power by a will in fhn of
Ped andu ib. Alter hi will hn a-
yur of Crle, i. Diei. Re-
iLew of hb admiaiftrioa. i. Xi-
r appMtd, by his wiU, rti

of Cat;lle, until the .rr;vl of Cbarles
V. 17.

F, Ji. J, second ta of Philip Archb

duke of Aulria, brn, 11. 5. .eft
regent of Arkgon, by his grandfather
Ferdinand, t. This revoked by I
fub(eqoent will, by which he obtain
only penon~, . Difconteuted
wih b is diapp2intmenr, he is taken
to Madrid under the eye of Cardinal
Xlrenes, 30. Sent by Charles V.
to visit their grandfather Maximilian,
50. I elected King of Hungary tnd
Bohemia. 311. Signs deed called
the RE~r/, 313. The Emperor es-
deavours to get him eleaed King of
the Roms 37. He is opposed by
the Proteftlnt 358. I crowned
King of the Roman., 359. Forms
confedercy agaide the Anabsptifis
at Muofte, 38. Oppofei the reio-
nrSt of Ukric Duke of Wurt·.
berg, 386. Reconixe his title ad '
coecludex s treaty with hi 387. His
kingdo of Hnga7 wrested hiu
him by Jo Zpol &Scpiu, 496.
Bedieges te young King Stephen ad
his mother in Bud, but is defited
b ti Tsko , 499. His men ofim
of bmifioa to the Porte, .
Which are rejected, i. Court the
hfour of the Protelftnts IL 13,
Opens the diet at Worma, 4. Re.
quire* it to submit to the decifina of
the council of Treat, i. Agrees
to y a tribute ta Solyan for Hun-
gry, 74- Ecroachea on the liber-
ties of Boiemi, 64. His rigoro*s
treatment of Prgue, 166. Difarmr
the Bobeniiia, i. Obtains the so-
ereigy of .the city of Conftnce,
t9g. Intvdes Triylvuaia by invi-
ttion of Martinuzi, s31. Oteius
the refigatioa of TraiBllvani from
Qeen IrIsbell, 3O. Ordes Mar-
tinuosi to be aliffinated, 35. E-
tenr into negcFation with Maurice
on behalf of the Emperor, 49. Hi
motives for promtig the Emperor'
*greeing with Maurice, 64. Ifl-
bella and her on Stephen recover
poleioa of Trtofylvaoa, o98. 0-
pen * dicl st Augiurg, nd excites
frpkioMo in the Proteftnts, 336.
The Emperor leaves the internal ad-
mirifration of German atfirt to bifn,
339. I pin applied to by the Em-
peror to ree his petenaons of faK-
ccffon to Philip, bt refuif, 340.
Endevo. therefore to gin te
fticndiip of the diet, 341. -Ai

refuses

refutes the Emperor's solicitation,
384. Charles resigns the Imperial
crown to him, 385. Afembles the
college of Elecors at Frankfort, which
acknowledges him Emperor of Ger-
many, 415. The Pope refuife to ac-
knowledge him, 416.

Figef., the French ambalffdor to Ve-

nice, murdered by the Marquis del
Guafto, Imperial governor of the Mi-
lanefe, . 3.

Ftuldl government, a view of, as it

esiled inSpin II. 75.

Ftefc., Count of Lavagna. See nLavaa.
--- Jerome, engages in his bro-

ther's conspiracy, and fails in securing
Andrew Doria, ig5. His imprudent
vanity on his brother's death, It6.
Shuts himfelfup in fort on his eflte,
S18. Is reduced and put to death,
134-

Flinder. See Nleterlads.
,Flrenret, the inhabitants of, revolt a.

gainRf Pope Clement VII on the newt
of his captivity, and recover their Ii-
berty, II. 317. Are reduced to subjec-
tion to Alexander di Medici, by the
Emperor, 348.. Alexander. di Mdici,
Duke of, afiaffinated by hi kiniman
Lorezo, 445. Cosmo di Medici ad-
vanced to the sovereignty, 446. Cosmo,
supported by the Emperor, defecat
the partisans of Lorenzo, 447. Cos-
mo nsaerts his independency o the
Emperor, III. 285.
roaf'ca, Antonio de, commander in

chief of the forces in Spain,ordered by
Cardinal Adrian to bciege the infar-
gents in 8egovia, II. 173. Is denied
liberty of taking military fores, by
the inhabitants of Medina del Campo,
ib. Attacks and almoR burn* the
whole town, 174. Is repulsed, i.
His hpufe at Valladolid burnt, i:

Fraer, the scquifitions of thua king.

dom, during the reign of the Emperor
Charles V. Ill. 454. The characer
of the people of, 455. The good
consequences of the civil war in that
kingdom to the reft of Enrope, ib.

Francit I. King of France, concludes a

peace with Charles V.. nd the condi-
tions of the treaty, 11. 4. Sends a
fruirleft embalry to Charles for the
reRitution of Navarre to the young
King, 51. Aspires to the Imperial
crown at the death of Maximilian, g4.
Reafont by which he fappotted hit
pretension, ib. Remarks on the
equipages of his ambaladors. to the
Oerman Stes, 57. His preteanion

adopted by the Venetian. 58. Loses
the elecion, 6;. Rife of the rivtlhip
between him and Charles, 74. Courts
the favour of Cardinal Wolfey, 8o.
Promises Wolfe his interest for the
Papacy, 83. Has an interview with
Henry VIII. of England ib. Wrrelea
with Henry and throw* him, 84.
Note. His advantages over Charles,
at the commencement of hoflifities
between them, 140. Concludes n
alliance with the Pope, 14%. Invades
and reduce Navrre, in the name of
Henry D'Albert, son of John, the for-
mer King, 45. The Frenchdriven
out by the imprudence of L'Efparre
their general, who i taken priner
by the Spaniards, 147. RetakeaMo-
son from the Imperialifls, 149. In-
vades the Low Cobntrles, but loses
the opportunities of success by im.
prudence, So. Rejeeathedemandof
Charler at tbe cdngltef t Calalis, 11.
A league concluded between Charles
and Heary VIII. rainRft him, iSt. Hi.
imprudent appointment of the Mare-
chal de Poix to the government of Mi-
lan, 54. De Foix tttck Reggio,
but i repolfed by the governor Guic-
ciardini the hiftoris, 55. The Pope
declares against him, ib. His embr-
raffments on the invfion of Milan,
156. His mother seize te money
appointed for the payment of the Mi-
lanfee troops, i. Milan taken, and the
French driven ot, 10. Leviea bo-
dy of Swifts s61. Who infit on giv.
Jag a precipitate battle to the Imperi-
alifis, which is lofl, 163. War declared
against him by Henry VIII. 64. His
expedients to supply his treasury, t65.
The plan parfued by him to refill the
incursion of the nglil, 167. Picardy
invaded by Hery, /b. The Venetians
league with the emperor agina him,
187. Towrch Pope Adrian accedet,
A. His expeditious movements a-
gainit the Milanese, »o8. Disconcerted
by the Duke of Bourbon's confpiray,
109. Taies him with betraying his
caule, which Bourbon denies, tl.
Bourbon efcspes to Italy, and Frrtcis
returns, 113. Appoints the admiral
Bonnivet to command agaiflt the Mi-
Jnete, i. Picardy invaded by the
Duke of Suffolk, who is driven-batk,
1 8. Repolfe the invafino ofGOuiane
and Burgundy by. Chbiles 29. His
faccerful clole of the campaignib. His
prudent cre todiftppoint the mperi-.
lilts in their iovaio of Povence. 5;.

Aficmble

Ag·ml s a my, wbich atfes the
Imrtilifh t retire from Marfeile,
s3ó. Dermie to inade the Mila-
l6, z37. Appint his mher Looife
reget d~in hisabfe , 38. E-

res Milan, ad takes poffc6on of the
ity, 13. Adifed by Boenivet to be-
Siea Paia,%4 o0 i Hs vilse s *·tt
_ Pvia, t4l. Coclud *· trety
of mtity with Pop Cl~ , 14.
His ipudent inia o Npitpe, 143.
bGfivoaby omit' advice to attack
Borbe ' army, advanced tohe relief
of Pri, 145. L rooted at the bttle
of Pan , 147. Is taken prifoer, i.
I fa to the cale of Piszitcitioe
der the c~tody of Don Ferdinad
Abmare, . Refes tihe propoiti-
am de to him by Charles 57.
hcs rid to Spaino his defre or

rfoel interview ith Charls, t5.
I riery treated in Spaia, 65.
PJIs daged ill, 16. Is ifted by
Charl~ ,6. e6es to resi his
kid 69. Is delivered from his
ip ty by the trety of Madrid 171.
His s~et proelatias ainft the
validity ofithisr , 173. Marri
the QueafPrtl, .

g orn

bi liberty, d the Daphin *nd the
Dueof Oreddelivered o b ge
to Ch for the perform ce of thbe
eaty of Mad~, 5. Writes a kter
of acknowledame to Hen VIII.
ofEnld, o6. Hi reply to the Im-
perial amhfdors, Eate into
a ke with the Pope, the Venetia
nd Sfrsa, i~t Cburle, 8*. Is
alved from his oth to observe the
traty of Madrid, 1. Hi behaviour
ta the Emper' *cod munbd, lat.
Is dispirited by hli farmer ill faccefi,
ss9. Esers ito . traty with Henry
V1I. ors Eldud al the Emperor,
31;. Sceia o his genIl Lao-
rec i Italy. 3. Hi reply t the
Emperora ovrtare, 315. Declaes
wr gairft hbi, and schallnges him
to fn e combt, i. Treat Andre
Dora ill. who relt from him t tohe
Emipeur, 33. H army. under St-
bas driven otof Italy. 333. Hi
tps in Mila nruted, 336. His
endeavour twrd n accommodatio
337. Terms of the peace of Cmbry,
c Ldoded by the mediati of his oo-
der Losife ad M ret of Austria,
339. Remurka the fcrifces made
by h in this treat ad his con-
de ofthe war, 345. Lcu fesfcrt-
y with the Prtat PriLnc 35.

His measures to elude the treaty of
Cambray, 368. His negociations with
the Pope, i&. His iterview and trea-
ty with the Pope, 370. Give* the
Duke of Orlean in marriage to Cz-
tbhaiae di Medici, ib Negocistes a
treaty with Francis Sorra, Duke of
Milan, 406. His envoy Menrille .ee
cuted at Milan for Murder, i. h dif-
appouited ia hi endeavoura to neoci.
ate allismes againl the Emperor, 407.
Invitec Mehla hoo to Paril, 408. Eti-
deces bis zeal for tbhe Rmih religion,
409. Causes of his qarrel with the
Duke of Savoy, 411. Seise, the
Duke' territories, 411. Hi preten-
Son. to the dutchy of Milsa, on the
death of Fraocis Sforz 46. The
Emperor's invetive agaiat him before
the Pope in cooncil, 419. I invded
by Charles, 413. His prudent p of
defence, 46. Joins the rry nder
Mootmorecy, 430. Death of the
Dauphin, 433. Obtains decree of
the parliament of Paris Again the
Emperor, 434. Inades the Low Co
tries, 435 A fufpofion of arms in
Flder, and bo neoeiated,-436.
A trc in Piedmont, 437. Motives
to theft truces i. Coocludes an Il.
lince with Slynman the Magnikent,
438. Negociation for a peace with
the Emperor, 40. Concldes a trace
for ten ye at Nice, 441. Reeaions
on the war, 441. His interview with
Charle, 443. Marries Mary of Guile
to Jmes V. of Scotland, 448. Re
f.le the offer of the deputies of
Gbent, 464. Informs Charles of
the offer mde by them, 465. Grant
the Emperor leave to pal through
France to the Netherland, 468.
His reception of the Emperor, 469.
Is deceived by the Emperor i refpe
to Mila, 470. His ambafdor the
Porte, RincoD, murdered by the Im-
perial govemor of the Milanere, II.
3. Prepare, to resent the ijuF, .
Attack the Emperor with fie armies,
6. Hi.i frl st·rtmpt rendered sbor-
tive, b the imprudence of the Duke
of Orleas 8. Renws his neociati-
om with ultan Solyman, 14. Indes
the Low Countries, 1. Forces the
Emperor to rsife the ege of Landre-
cy, 7. Difmifes Barbroffla 30. Give
the count dBngaien permifion to en-
gage Goa, 3. Relieves Paris, in
Danger of being rurprized by the Em-
peror, 3.-Agree to a feperate peace
with Crles 40. Henry' hbghty

return

return to bis overtures of peace, 44.
Death of the Duke of Orlens, 53.
Peace of Campe, 86. Perceives a ne-
ceffity of checking the Emperor's am-
bitious design, 130. Forms a general
league agait bim, 13. Dies, 131.
His life and charsaer summarily com-
pared with those of Charls, i. Con-
sequences of his death, 139.

Frci, II. his accession to the crown of

France, and charater, 1I. 444.

FreArlftrt, the diet of, effambled for the

choice of an Emperor at the death of
Maximilian, II. 61. Name and views
of the Eleaors, i. The Empire of-
sered to Frederick of ssaony, 6.
Who reject it, with his reason, i.
Chafe Charle V. Emperor, 65. His
confirmation of the Germanick pri-
vileges required and agreed to, i. City
of, embraces the reformed religion, II.
U4. The college of Eleeorr assembled
there by Ferdinand. who is acknow-
ledged Emperorof Germany, III. 41;.

FrderricA Duke of Saxony, t*fembles

with the other Eleonr at the diet of
Fratckfort, to chrfe on Emperor, IL
61. The Empire offered to him, .
Rejeas it, and votre for Charles V. 6a.
Refuaes the presents of' the Spanilh
ambtffedors, 63. This difiaterefed be-
haviour confirmed by the testimony
of hiervans, 64. NIt. Chuafe Martin
Luther philosophical profefor at his
university of Wittemberg, 92. Encou-
rages Luther in his opposition to indul-
gence, 94. Proteas him against Ca-
jean, to . Causes Luther to be feiied
at his return from the diet of Worms,
and conceals him at Wartburg, 137.
Dies, I. 65. Summary of his cha-
racter, 66. Extrat fom his las
will, 69. Vttr. A review of the ex-
traordinary effets of his revolt from
the chuch of Rome on that court, and
on Europe in general, 459.

Frgefa, the French amballador at Ve-

nice, murdered by the Marquis del
Gulfto, the Imperial governor of the
Milanese, llI. 3.

Frmdfprrg, George, a German noble

man, rome account of, he joins the
army of Charles V. II. 98.

G.

General of the Jesuit, an inquiry intr

his office and defpotick authority, II
478.

Getae, an account of its revolt agaia
the Duke of Savoy, 11. 413.

GOrer, reduced by Lautrec, the French

general, 11. 310. The French endea-
vour to prejudice its trade in favour
of Svona, 331. I rescued from the
French by Andrew Doria, 334. The
government of, fettled by the disinter-
eftednef ofDoria, 335. The honour
paid to Doria's memory, 336. I1
visited by the Emperor, 34. A
scheme formed to overturn the con
flitution of, by Fiefco, countof Lavag-
no, 11I. 117. He assembles his ad-
herents, t18. The confpirtors sally
forth from Lsvagno'spalace, 1 4. De-
puties sent to know Lavagno's terms,
t15. Lavagno drowned, s6. The in-
furrecion ruined by the imprudence
of his brother erome Fiefco, i.
The cofpirtorsdifperfe, t17. Jerome
rededed and put to death, 34.

GormaeadI, aflrociation in Valencia,

so termed, on whet occasion formed,
1. zop. Refuse to lay down their
armr, i. Their resentment levelled
at the nobility, who rife an army
agaioft them, 2o1. Defeat the nobles
in several aioon, i. But are routed
and dispersed by them, ton.

Gerag, Itale of, at the death of the

Emperur Maximilian, 1. 54. Charles
V. of Spain, and Francil I. of France,
form pretenfionstothe Imperial crown
i. Their refpeaive reafoun ofered
in favour of their claim s <, l.
Views and intereftr of the other Eu-
ropean States in relation to the com-
petitort, 57. Henry VIII. of England,
advances a claim, 59. But is dcoSu-
raged from prosecuting it, ii. How
the Papacy was likely to be afeed
in the choice of an Emperor, 60. Ad-
vice of Pope Leo X. to the German
Princes, i. Opening of the diet at
Franckfort, 6t. In whom the election
of an Emperor is vefled, id. Views
of the Eletorr, i. The Empire of-
sered to Frederick of Saxony,6.: Who
rejeCts it, and his reafona, i. Charlc
V. chosen. 65. The capitulation of rb
Germanick privileges confirmed by
him, i. Charles sets out for, 73.
Charles crowned at Aix la Chapelle,
8;. Commencement of the Refoima-
tion there, by Martin Luther, 86.
Treatment of the bull of excommuni-
cation published againf Luther, o17.
o The usurpations of the clergy there,

during thedifputes concerning invcfti-
tares, t18. The clergy of, moRly
foreignerS, 1n. The benefices of,
nominated by the Pope, a13. The

expedient

expediet of the Empes for retrain-
lg this power of the Pope ineffetual,
14. The pret progre of Luther'
do~rine in, IL 215. Crievancesof
the peaantr Z76. afwreilan in

i, 78. The moial of their <

gri vsce iF. The infurreaion
qlded, 179. Another infuarreion
ia Thu i iS. How the hole of
Auisbeesme f ffrmidable i, 31.
Procedin relatin to the Reforms-
ti there, 313. Great progreFo of
the Refutio tbere, 337. Ferdi-
mud Kin of Huo ary and Bohemia,
broth to Charles V. cleed King of
the R eto , 359 The Protefat re-

im eblidhed in Sa y, 45. The

Proeta religio eflhifbed in the
Pahtite, 11n. 6. The leage of
5maIalde rcie um ay pilft the
- nE r. 87- Are put der the ba
of the Empire, o. The Protetant
my diferied, to9. The Itri en-
fored by the Empeo, 13. Maurice
of St raise an army, and declare
in eawr of the Protetats, 44.
Murice fared ewe by the Catho-
lick Prince, and why, 145. Treaty of
Pilaaetw the Emperr and Mau-
rice of Soy, 68. Truce betweea
the Emperor end fry of Frace,
371. Charlek r the Imperial
crown to hi brother Fediand, 385.

GCet, an infurecaio there. IL 460.

The pretadlioo of the citizens 461.
Fnomacofederacy Sia the aeen-
doeger of Huary, their goereft
46. Their depmtie to the Emperor,
how treated by hir, i. OS r to fb-
nit to France, 463. Is reduced by
Charles, 471.

GCHlrki r fadion, in Italy, a view of, II.

194.

Cir, Don Pedro de, appinted to the

commnd of the army of the Holy
JutsL 1(7. ReS is hcommif-
. a d Padila replaced, 89.

GaC , ii Africa, taken by the Emperor

Chrl V. IL 399.

CGmug, the Imperial governor of Mi-

1s, procres Cardinal Farnese to be
saffi ated, d takes pofletio of
PLccTiia tr the Emperor, 1I. 7t.
Prepares to seize Parma, i6. Is
repelled by the French, 19.

Gnfrr, feat by Francis I. King of

Fraece, to negociate a peace ith
Carlea V. II 4.

Grae&w , Cardiil, bis artifce to pre-

vail on the count de Sacerre to fur-
reder St Difiere to the Emperor, III.
37. Endeavora to lull the Protellats

into fecority with regard to the Em.
peror'a condua toward them, 6$.
commiEooed by Philip to addref the
aflembly at the Emperor' reSnatin
of bis hereditary dominions, 368.
Groesri, an interview there between

the Emperor Charles V. and Heny
VIII. of England, I. 84.
Gr~per, canen of Cologne, i appointed

a manager f the Protetant and Ca-
tholick cnferences before the diet'at
Rau~io IL 491. Writes a treatise
to cmpofo the difference between
thm, .

i L she sentiments of both

paties oi ti work, 493.

Grrsdu, arhebiop of, president of the

coucil of Castile, his imprudent *d-
vice to Cardinal Adriasreltiog to'the
infrefto in Segovi, II. 1J71 173.

Guas the Marqui del, paited go-

*ernor of Milan, by the Emperor, It.
43s Procure Rnicoo, the French
ambafador to the Porte, to be mur-
dered on hir-jouney thither, 1. 3.
Defeds Cain aginft the Frencl
30. Defeatd by d'Enguien in
pitrchd battl, 33.

GCicci/ri, his account of the publi-

castin of ldulgecs coatradied II.
95. Defeads Reggio agaioft the
Freach, a55. Repulses an attack
upon Parma, by the French, s60.
Hi featimeats of the Pope's treaty
with Lanuy viceroy of Napks, 303.

Gi, Fracis o Lorrain, Duke of, is

made goernor-of Meta by Henry I.
of France, l . 176. Hi charaser,
ik. Prepares to defend it agaift the
Empror, 177. His brother d'Aumale
taken prisoner by the Imperialists,
ao- The Emperor raises the liege,
83. Hishurmne treatmuet of the dif-
trclid and ick Germas left behid,
184. P~ae Henry to a alliance
,ith Pope Pant IV. 36. Marches
with troops into Italy, 389. I unable
to effe& soy tbio, 391. I rcalled
from Italy after the defeat of St.
Q(iotin, 403. Hisreception in Frace,
410. Takes the field againlf Philip,
41. Invelt and takes Calai from
the Eaglih,- 44. Takes als Guises
and Hame% i. Takes Thionville in
Luxembourg, 4o0.

Gaife, Mary of, married to James V. of

Scotland, 1I. 48. Froftrates the in-
tended marriage between her daugh-
ter Mary, and prince Edward of Erg-
lane, 11. 19.

Gar, Cardinal d, why be favoured the

eleaion of Charles V. to the Imperial
crown, 11. 64. Signs the capitulation

of

of the Germanick body on behalf of
Charles. 65.

Catfan chancellor to the Emperor Ser-

dinand, is sent to Pope Paul IV. to
notify the elecion, who refuses to fee
him, III. 416.

H

Hiambirg, city of, embraces the re-

frmed religion, II. 14.

Harn, the conde de, appointed to com-

mand the army of the Castilian no-
bles against the Holy Junta, II. 187.
Attacks Tordeillsu, and gets poflefi-
on of Queen Joanso, ii. Routs the
army of the Junta, and tkes Padilla
prisoner, who is executed, 94

HJafnr Age, deputy governor of Al-

giers, his piracies againfl the Chriflian
flteS, 11. Sol. I bfieged in Algier
by the Emperor Charles V. o54.
Makes a faccefsfl sally, 505. The
Emperor forced by bad weather to
return back agtin, 507.

Hytradis, potter's son of Lebos, com-

mences pirate, II. 39. See Bark,-

Heatshir, ancient, why the principles of

mutual toleration were generally ad-
mitted among them, III. 344.

HrJld, vice chancellor to Charles V.

atteods the Pope's nuncio to Smal-
kaide 11. 45S. Forms a Catbolick
league in oppfition to the Proteflant
one, 453.

Ikrr II. King ofFrance, his motives

for declining an alliance with Pope
Paul 111. agtinR the Emperor, Il1.
173. Procures for Scotland a peace
with England, 17. The young Queen
Mary, contrtated to the Dauphin, and
sent to France for education, i. En-
ters into an alliance with Otavio Far-
nefe Duke of Parma, s8. Proteta
against the council of Trent, t9.
Makes alliance with Maorice Eletor
of Saoy, 37. Seconds the opera-
tions of Maurice, a46. His rmy
marchea and feizee Metz, 49. At-
tempts to furprize Straburgh, 157.
Is flrongly solicited to spare it, ii.
Returns, a58. The Emperor prepares
for Twr against him, 276. Infligates
the Turks to invade Naples, 78.
Terrouane taken and demolilhed by
Charles, 9z5. Hefdin taken, i. Leads
an army into the Low Countriesagainit
Cbhrle, 296. Endeavours to obftrua
the marriage of Mary of England with
Philip of Spain, 35. The progrefi of
ig arms agiinf the Emperor, 316.

Engages Charles, 38. Retires, i,
Comno di Medici, Duke of Florence,
maker war againl him, 31t. Appointa
Peter Strozzi commander of his army
in Italy, 31. Strozzi defeated, 324.
Siena taken, 36. Pope Paul IV.
makes overtures to an alliance with
him again the Emperor, 355 Mont-
morency'a arguments against this aUi-
ance, i. Is persuaded by the CGuies
to accept it, 357. Sends the Cardinal
of Lorrain with power to conclude it,
358. The Pope fgns the treaty, 39.
A truce for 6ve years concuded with
the Emperor, 17j. Is exhorted by
Cardinal Caraffi, to break the truce,
376. Is absolved from his oath, ad
concludes anew treaty with the Pope,
378. &Snd the Duke of GCife into

aly, 38. The Coftable Montmo-
rcncy defeated and taken prisoner at
St. Qinti 3. Henry prepares for
the defence of Pris, 400. St. Quin-
tin taken by afsult, 401. Colles bis
troops and egociates for fance,
403. Hi kind reception of the Duke
of Guise, 411. Calais taken by Guise,
414. Impowers Moutmorency to ne-
gociate a peace with Philip, 415. Ho-
nours him highly on his return to
Prance, 46. Wrlte to'Q4ee Eliza-
beth, with propoal of marriage, 435.
How be failed in his (uit, 436. Hia
daughter married to Philip, and his
filer to the Duke of Svoy, 44z.
Terms of the treaty of Chateau Cam-
brefi, 442. The marriage of his sis-
ter and daughter celebrated with
great pomp, 444. His death, i.

Hemrj VII. of England, detains the arch-

duke Philip and his dutchess, when
diven on his coast, thiee months, at
the insftgation of Perdinad, II. 3.

Blrri Vnl. of England, fends an ambea-

fador toGermany to propose his claims
to the Imperial crown, I1. 59. Is dif-
couragcd from his pretenfooand take
no part with the other competitors i.
His perfonl charater and political in-
fluence in Europe, 78. Entirely guid-
ed by Cardinal Wolfey, 79. Receives
a vit from the Emperor Charlea V.
82. Goes over to France to visit
Francis, 83. Wrefile with Prancis,
and i thrown by him, 84. Net. Has
another interview with Charles atGra-
velines, i. Charles offers to ubmit
his differences with Francis to his ar-
bitration, i. Publilbes a treatise on
the Seven Sacramentt, against Martin
Luther, 13S. ObtainaofthePopethe

title

title of Deftler f tó rat, 139.
Takes prt with Charles agaiof Fran-
cis, 41. Scd Wolfey to negociate
an accommodation between the Em-
per and Franci, ISo. Concludes a
legue with Charles apioft Francis,
I5S. His aowed reafloe for ti
teaty, 15. His private motives, 153.
Declare war aain Francis, 164. 1s

itd by Charles, 65. Makes de-

fcets pmo the cot of France, 166.
Advaees with an army into Picardy,
if. Obliged to retire by the Duke de
Vedome 67. Eter into a treaty
with the Emper and Charle Duke
of B ourbo, . How he raied fp-
plies far his wrn beyond the grant of
his prliament, 8. Sends the Duke
of Sufolk to invde Picardy, who pe-
etrates almo to Pari, but is driven
back, i. E~nga to aift Charles
in aninaeon of Provence, 134
Cause of his net fpporting the Im-
perials, 136. Es of the battle
el Pavia, and cptivity of Prancis on
hi, tS. Particlars of his embassy
te Cbarles, 53. Concludes a defen-
ive lliance with France. 159. Is de-
clared protear of the league of Cog-
uac agpin the Emperor, t88. His
Maove~ for aSing the Pope aginft
the Emperor, 316. Enters into a
league with Francis, ad reouncea
the Englii chim to the crown of
Pran, 317. Declares wru iinft
se Emperor, 315. Conclde a trnce
with the governess of the Low Coun-
trier 330. Projets his divorce fromr
Citharine of Aragon, 34. Motives
wbhich withheld the Pope from grant-
is it, 343. Acquiefcca in the peace
of Cambray, 344. Sends supply
of money to the Proftant league in
Germny, 361. Procreshis marriage
iu be annulled by Cranmer, archbi-
fsip of Ca:tecrbry, 37 . The di-
vorce reversed by the Pope under pe-

ilty of escommuniction, 371. Re-
.monce the Prpal remaccy, b. Re-

tuies to cknowledge any council call-
ed by the Pope, 388. Oppfs James V.
of Scotland arrying Mary of Cufe,
449. His difgfts with Francis and in-
e; course w'ith the Emperor, ib. Con-
cludes a league with Charles, L 5.
Makes war with Scotulnd, . Parti-
calars of his treaty itb Charles, i.
lorvdes Frane and invests Boulogne.
36. Refuses the Emperor's plan of
*?erstir;o, .s. Is deserted bh the Em-

peror, 44 Takea Boulogne i Hi,
haughty propofall to Francis, i.
Peace of Campe. 86. I fcceeded
by his son Edward VL 13. A review
of his policy, 445.
Bretfw, earl of, plunders nd burn
Edinburgh, III. 3. Joins Henry as-
ter his invalions ofFr ce, i.
fr., the Landgrave of, procure* the re
ftoralion of his kinfmas, Ulnc Duke
of Wortemberg, II. 386. His views
compared with those of the Elector of
Sxony, 111. 6. The Emperor's de-
ceitful profefions to him, 70. Qiets
the apprehension of the Protestant
league with regard to the Emperor, 7 .
Is appointed joint commander of the
army of the league with the Eletor
of Saxony, 93. Their charaders com-
pared, i. Urges n attack of the
Emperor, but ;i opposed by the Elec-
tor, 97. His letter to Maurice Duke
of Saxony, 105 The army of the
league disperse, og9. Is reduced to
accept barAC terms from Charles, 55.
His humiliating reception by the Em-
peror, 157. I1 detained in confine-
ment, 159. His offer of fubmifion
flighted by the Emperor, 189. Is
carried by the Emperor with him into
the Netherlands, s8. Renew, his
eedeavour. for liberty, o09. Charles
relecles arbitrarily the Elector of Bran-
denbrg, and Maurice, from their en-
gagements to him, ato. Obtains his
liberty by the treaty of Paffla, 168.
Is *rreRled by the Queen of Hungary,
but freed by the Emperor, 173. The
eects of his confinement on him, 274.
tstrt, his account of Lewis XII.

hcwn to contradic the relation given
by Bellay and other French hittorian
of the education of Charles V. II. 3.
Nile.
"Ih 7Wta. See u7ta.
iJ Lrge, against the Emperor Char-

ife V. formed at Cognac, under the
pioteaion of Henry VIII. of England,
II. 188.

Hsrac, a potter's flo of 1elhos com-

mences pirate, with his brother Hay-
radio, II. 391. See Barr-jsa.
e.gnry, is divided by Solyman the
Magaificent, and its King, Lewis II.
killed, 11. 1. His fuccefes, and the
number of prisoners carried away, ib.
The archduke Ferdinand eleaed King
of, together with Bohemia, 313. John
Zapol Scaepius wrests it from Ferdi-
nand, 496. Stephen succeeds on the

death

death of his father John, 497. Is trea-
cheroufly seized by Solyman, 499. See
Ifabdla, and Martiarazi.

I.
7arme V. of Scotland, levies troops to

rafli Francis in Provence, but his in-
tention frustrated, 1I. 448. His ne-
gociations for marriage with Frsncis's
daughter, i. Marries Mary of Guise,
449. Dies, and leaves Mary his in-
sant daughter to succeed him, 111. ix.
See Marj.

7refits, the order of, by whom founded,

1. 40. Charaaer of that order, i.
Charaaer of Ignatio Loyola their
founder, 474. The order confirmed
by the Pope, 475. An examination
into the constitution of the order, 476.
Office and power of their general,
478. The rapid progreft of the order,
481. Engape in trade, and elablih
an empire in South America, 481.
Bad tendency of the order, 483. Are
refponfable for molt of the pernicious
effecs of Popery, since their inftitu-
tion, 485. Advantages resulting from
their inflitution, ib. Civilize the na-
tives of Paraguay, 486. Their pre-
cautions for the independency of their
empire there, i.

Jdlgearte*, in the Romilh Church, the

docrine of, explained, 11. 88. By
whom rR invented, ib. Martin Lu-
ther preaches againfi them, 93. Writes
againf them to Albert Eleaor of
Mentz, ib. A bull issued in favour
of,' to. The sale of, opposed in
Switzerland by Zuinglius, to5.

lnfamtad, Duke of. his haughty relent-

ment of canual blow on his horse, II.
459. Is proteted by the conflable of
Cafile, 460.
asreamt, a young domeflic of cardinal
di Monte, obtains his Cardinals hrt,
on his eletion to the papacy, III. 196.

Interim, a system of theology o called,

prepared by order of the Emperor
Charles V. for the use of Germany,
IlI. 177. Ii disapproved of, both by
Protenants and Papiats, 79.

Javefritaret usurpations of the Romish

clergy in Germany. during the dif-
putes between the Emperors and
Popes, concerning, II. t8.

7saas , daughter of Ferdinand, and mo-

ther of Csarles V. visits Spain with
her huband Philip Archduke of Auf-
tria, 1I. 3. Is flighted by her husband,
4. Her charater, i. Is abruptly left
in Spain by her husband, i. Sinks in-

to melancholy on the occasion, and is
delivered of her second son Ferdinand,
g. Her letter of content to her f-
ther's regency of Castile intercepted,
and herfelfconfined, 9. Made joint
regent of Caflile with Ferdinand and
Philip by the treaty of Salamanca, I%.
Sets out for Spain with Philip, are
driven on the coast of England and de-
tained three months by Henry VII. 13.
Acknowledged Queen by the Cortes,
14. Her tndernefs to her hulhand in
his sickness, and extraordinary attach-
ment to his body when dead, 15. Is
incapable of government, 16. Her on
Charles afrumes the crown, 3o. The
Cortes acknowledge her son King,
with a reservation in her favour, 47.
Her reception of Padills, the chief of
the Spanish malecontents, 78. The
Holy Junta removed to Tordefillas the
place of her residence, ib. Relaptes
into her furmer melancholy, i. The
proceedings of the Holy unta car-
ried on in her name, 179. I seized by
the Conde de Hero, 188. Dies, after
near fifty years confinement. III. 364.

7b. Zapol Scepius, by the affftance of

Sultan Solyman, eftablilhes himself in
the kingdom of Hungary, 1. 496.
Leaves the kingdom to his son Ste-
phen, 497. See Higary, Ifkda,
and Martl;aari.
alAbtla, daughter of John II. of Catile,
and wife of Ferdinand King of Ara-
gon, her hilory, II. . Her concern
at the archduke Philip's treatment of
her daughter Joanna, 4. Her death
and charaer, 16. Appoints Ferdinand
regent of Calile under reRfricions. i.

- daughter to Sigismund King of

Poland, married to John King of Hun-
gary, II. 497. Her characler, ~A. Is
treacherously carried with her infant
fun into Transylvania by Sultan Soly-
man, 499. The government of this
province and the education of her son
committed to her jointly with Marti-
nuzai. I. 230. Is jealous of Marti-
nuzzi's influence, and courts theTurks,
ib. Is prevailed on to resign Tran-
fylvania to Ferdinand, 232. Retirce
to Silesia, 233. Recovers possession of
Transylvania, 198.

- of Portugal, married to the

Emperor Charles V. II. 27e.

Italj, consequences of the'league be-

tween Pope Leo X. and the Emperor
Charles V. to, 11. 44. The cha-
racters of the Italians, Spaniards, acd
French, contrasted, 153. State of, at

the

the Ppey, 2s5. Views of the It-
ls States with relpea to the Empe-
ror d Franch on the expal6o of
tere m aad

the MPre d e i-

1befe. 33. Teir apprehenn on
the battle of Pava ead captivity of
Franci, 54. The principal State,
oinm the Hol y lage ~ait the
Eperor, l8M. Are dilgufted at the
trdit of Fracis, 194 A riewof
the Gbibine fioa, a9S. Sentiments

the Sbate of, e the peace of Cam-

bray, 34. s si1ted by the Emperor
Charles, 344. Themoti of hi mo-
dertin towards the States of, 346.
A leaue the Stales of, formed
byCherle, 3. Plicetia granted to
Ottio Froe by Philip II. of Spain,
IL 407. The inetitre of Sie giv-
es by Philip to Coaio di Medici, 40
The oofequee of tbefe grats, i.

7JS, Holy, a view of the confederacy

in Spain, fa termed, II. 177. The an-
thority of Adrian difcimed by, ii.

eomoed to Torde6ilhs, where Queen
Joanna rded, 178. Their proceed-

, carried i the name of Jo~ ,
s79. Rece~w letters from Charles
to lay down their arms, with pro-
mises ofpardo, 3. Remonrance
of grievances drawn up by, S(1. The
artio~ar of this remonbtrae, i.
RemArk s the pirit of it, 14. Are
inmidsted from prefTnisg it to
Chrles, ss. Prpofe to deprive
Charle of hih royalty during the life
of Joa, 16.. Take the feld, 187.
Charaer of their army, ii. The
Qea feixed by the Conde de Haro,
lS. How they obtained mone to
frpport their army, 9. Lose time
in eociating with the noble iJ.
Propose to make their pace with
Charles at the epence of the nobles
Ile. Their irresolute cmodu 193.
Their nmy defeated by Haro, and
Padilla take prifer, 194. Padilla
eected, a95. His letter to his wife,
nd the city of Toledo, i. T rin
of the confederacy, 197.

f wau IL Pope, obletion on m e poo-

tiicateof, I. I.L

- 11. Pope, his chi r, In. 96.

Betos his Cardinal' hat infamoay,

. I averse to the calling council
l9t Snmon oe at Treat, 99.
A rt his supreme ath~ity peremp-
torily in the bll for it, ot Re-
pet conirmig Ofvio Prnere in
Fam, t6. equrea OCTio to re

lioquilh his alliance with France,
si. The mannerofhideth, 388.

L

La C , Flemil gentleman, sfoci.

ated by Charles V. with Cardinal
Ximene in the regency of Catile,
II. 3.

LMrr, siege of, by the Emperor

Cbhri V. IIL 16. abandoned by
him, 7.

Linu, mertgage the retenm s of NI.

ple, to (pply the exigences of the
Emperor, II. 9. Francis furrenderx
himself prilooer to him at the battle
of Paia, 147. His caution dilpofal
of him, 41. Delivers him up in
puremce of the treaty of Madrid, and
receives the Duke of Orlean and the
Dauphin, as hostages in exchange,
alS. 1* feat mbsfdor to Francis
to require his falilme t of the treaty
of, ago. Concludes a treaty with the
Pope, 30. Mrche to join the Im-
perilifta at Rome, where the troop.
refuse to obey him, 304.

Lamns don John de, made Viceroy of

Aran, on the departure of Charles
V. for Germany, II. 73. Composes
the difturbiabs there, 01.

L~ws, John Lewis Fieco, count of,

his charat, 1.

. 17. Meditates sub-

verting the government of Genoa,
sl. His preparations, lso. His
artsel method of lemtbling hil adhe-
reatt, tll. Hit exhortation to them,
if. His interview with his wife,
113. Sallies frth, 14. Andrew Do-
ri efcaps, 1S5. Deputies sent to
knowhi term, aI6. Is drowned, i.
His brother's vanity rins their design,
I17. See Susa.

Lamtrec, Odet de Foix, mrechal de,

the French governor of Milan, his
dhaner, II. 4. Alienates theas-
feaioon of the Mianefe from the
French, i. Invests Reggio. but is
repoled by Guicciardiai the historian,
then gvernor, s55. Is excommuni-
cated by the Pope, if. The money for
paying hi troops seied by Louise of
Soy, 1 56. s left by his Swift troops,
58S. h driven out of the Milnefe
territories, 159 A new body *f Swf
nder him inift on givin battle to the
Imperilifti who defeat him, 163.
The Swiss leave him, ib. Retires
into France with the ridue of his
troop 164. Delivers up the Dauphi
and Duke of Orklua in excbang

for

for Francis I. as bhotagel for the per-
formance of the treaty of Madrid,
175. Is appointed generaliflfio of the
league against the Emperor, 319.
His successes in Italy, 310. Motives
which witheld him from subduing the
Milanese, i. Obliges the Prince of
Orange to retire to Naples, 318.
Blockades Naples, i. His army
wafted, and himself killed by the
pefilence, 333.

Learsig, the revival of, favourable to

the reformation of religion, II. 128.

Ltipfic, a public disputation heldthere by

Martin Luther, and Eccius, on the va-
lidity of the Papal authority, II. 1o4.

L X. Pope of Rome, his characer, II.

59. His apprehenions on the eleci-
on of an Emperor of Germany, at the
death of Maximilian if. His council
to the German Princes 6o. Grants
Charles V. a tenth of all ecclefiatical
benefices in Castile, 68. Lays Car-
tile under an interdi4c but takes it off
at the instance of Charles, i. His
conduct on the prorpeC of a war be-
tween Charles and Pranci, 76. Situ-
ation of the Papacy at his acceflion,
iod his views of policy, 87. His in-
attention to Martin Lther's contro-
verfy with the Dominicans, concerning
indulgences, 96. s instigated against
him, and summons him to Rome, 97.
Delires the Eleaor of Saxony not to
protect him, i. Is prevailed on to
permit Luther's doacrines to be exa-
mined in Germany, 98. Cardinal Ca-
jetan appointed to try him, i. Issues
a buh in favour of indulgences, t o. A
suspension of proceedings sgainit Lu-
ther, and why, 103. Publishes a bull
of excommunication againR him, so6.
The political views of his condua be-
tween Charles and Francis, 141.
Concludes a treaty with Prancis, 141.
Concludes a treaty also with Charles,
143. The conditions of the treaty
with Charles, 144 Its consequences
to Italy, 4. Is disappointed in a
scheme toimed by Morone, chancellor
of Milan, for attacking that dutchy,
5$. Ecommunicates Marecha de
Fox for his attack of Reggio, and
declares againt France, i. Takes a
body of Swiss into pay, 157. The
French driven out of the Milanese,
59. Hedies, i. The piritofthe
confederacy broken by his death, i.

L'Zfporre, Poix de, commands the

French troops in Navarre for Henry
D'Albert, 11. it4, Reduces thit

kingdom, il. His imprudent progrefl
in Castile, 147. Is taken prisoner
by the Spaniards, and the French
driven out ot Navarre, i.

Ltroard, faher, form, a scheme to be-

traying Mesa to the Imperialist, III.
331. Intioluces soldiers clad like
friars, 331. Is deteced, i6. s mur-
dered by his monks, 334.

Le.rtfce, Don, his account of the mo-

tives which induced the Emperor
Charles V. to refig his hereditary
dominiont, 111. 363. Not.

Ltwir II. King of Hungary and Bobe-

mia, his characer, II. 31. Is in-
vaded and killed by Solyman the Mag-
nificent, 311.
- XII. King of Frince, receives ho-
mage of the Archduke Philip, for the
earldom of Flanderr, II. 3. Coo-
cludes treaty with him, while at
war with Ferdinand of Aragon, 5.
BeNows his neice, Germaine de Poix,
on Ferdinond, and concludes a peace
with him, 1 . Loses the conidence of
Philip on that occasion, a3. Nte.
Bestows his eldest daughter, already
bethrotbed to Charles V. on ct
of Angoaleme, i.

Lrya, Antonio de, defends Pavia for

the Emperor against Francis, IL 240.
His vigorous defence, 241. Sallies out
at the battle of Pavia, and coitr~butes
to the defeat of Francis %46. Is left
governor of Milan by the Duke of
Bourbon, 300. Defeats the frces
there, 336. Is appointed generaliff-
mo of the Italian league, 36y. Di-
reas the operations of the invrfion of
France, under the Emperor, 413.
Dies, 431.

Literature, its obligations to the order

of efuit, 11. 481.

Lirera di Medici. See Medici.
L iei of Savoy, mother of Francis I. of

France, her character, 11. 156. Her
motives for seizing the money appoint-
ed for payment of marechal Lautrec'
troops, ib. Causes of her averfioa te
the hoafe of EBorbon, lo9. Her ad-
vances towards a marriage with Char-
les Duke of Bourbo, rejeced by im,
tlo. Determines to ruin him, .
InRligates a law-fait againf himn for
his eltates, a 2. Goes to diffoade Fran-
cia from his intended invalion of the
Milanese, who will not wait for her,
138. s appointed regent during his
.brence, i. Her prudent condut on
the defeat of Pavia, and captivity of
her fun Franci, 2sI. Concludes

dcfcniro

ereTt're si:;lr.:t i:h H.y Vill.
19. RlBtise the trr-e rs M»srid
for the recovery cf her so.n' 1I irtr.

'14. Ure- 1'skc.s With M.r ^oet of
Ss, t" * c ~ir'~-.cte the Cre'trrn-
ee bet.weer t Em-.7 or and Frscis
3-9. A:t.clci cf te pscc cf Ca-
e a!, i

L-rer, Cd-*s rsS, rerfste. Hetry

II. cf Fr-cre, tI Icct;' i'e oered
i:::o:ce tih Pr Pa-a IV And ii
se-t to Rrme t nepociase i:. I 3-
Hil irraru'rt tchir'ear t.rr;'-d the
Dccheia of Valerti=%is, 4:5

.Zr-!. IL:; ir. con-inds te cIftie of
P.-pe!:n n Nre:arre, tid is wour4-

i it defce, 11. 45. His ca-

thuSfi.lck trom ot mnj. .. The
fs.rder of the f-,cietr cf jei;itt, I.
Pretvti oa the Pre to c::tb'i' the
crder. 47;. An; exrr':tis :nrto the
coanitlti:a of the order, :I. 0;ce
and powrr of th geceral, 45. The
r;id -retrrf f the oder, 4. 4S5.
Sec r,'i,. I'.

Z.,r.rv, DkZe f. ait, te o

t ii-

cni of Luther, . . 1

L.s:e., !.artir, te hpp confrcacrcec

of the oF:;on-.r p''tsted b hn, 11.
5. H birbh rad cd;ca::c3. 9:. A:-
tick. idltpeoce. S. ChoeC Fphi'-
fophical FrcltTr a! the 'Unieri: of
Wittemberg, . Inc;igI tg.innl the
pFbl:itncof tlrclgecces, i:. Writel
t: Albert E car of .Mc=t:., s:'1
the, 93. Corapofe theses gasizri
Iodulgencct, .. I fprted by the
At:tilit.is;, trd teco:rged by Frc-
dcrtck Elercr c- Sarnr,. 94. I li-
mo:ed to Rcne by Pope Lta. 97. Ob-
taii, of the PoCe leIrt to hitv his
ddtsie: c.:r'o'ed' ia Ge-rtinr, 5.
ApF;ers tcf-:c Cidi::l C;::-, t
Augb=-gc, .3. His resolute rS to
the peremr'tcry order of Caietar, tn
retrs' hb priociples, 99 \\ it'dLdlrS
fr= Acfgr=r. od ipp":li tr te
Pc-c. i:-irf".-mcd, to the Popt, hcen
letter izforred, coecercirg bhin. b.
Appi,.l tot g-erelcnc=cil, 1t:. T'ie
death f Msag:i:ia. h:s of fc- ce to
.-;,. to3. Q=cfliorn the Papal ::'-
ri: i a p cb;c drfpoa:ton, 134. H:;
o:r=izr = condre.ced by the oniverfi:ic
cf Co'cr.e :d Locrir, c;. A b'!l
of aco.-n:.- c:oa pibli'rd :gaini.
hics', te6. Prco:=cc the Ppe L be
An:t;:.rif, d bcr- the bell, 7.-
Refcetic:n en the cd:C cf the
c=;r: cf Rome tor"-d himr, i-S. Re-
c:li.s cai hi cncd;e:, n. C:-:.

1

whkh eonouted to siaeur bit eror
tiol to the chorch of Rr, jI t. gr
ticutsty to the ttt of hini-. 'is
And the oriosi f Ieaer.ing, i. He
it foraorred I . prct at the d~e ..f
Wom., r. f odot geaoe
hin ihthe:. 3. Ws reeptioun there
uk Rs t retmnE his opin,,
i3j. Derarts. i. An ce.: cl Iiined
tg&snrt h", s.. ei stecd trd ~o
crated a Wriburr. 3;. PrOgref of
h.L euri'-ea .k. Ire oniverity of
Pario Faiite decree ozziat in.
3 . Wr. te gair1 by Henry VIII.
es kEylod, '.. Aoswets both, s39.
wVithd'w. frct hi rtreat t chrck
the ir-si,(rsezeal c Cartnos;l.±i,
.13. Uake a rardat;on of he
b io~, .. Hi. do'ri.re aooed by Cc-
,rl of the German Princes, ii5.
Hi, moderate sod rodent cdcc

5. Mar.it ae ohs. Boris, a
r., S4. The groat progpef.os hi&
do~uoea -ame the Germbnick
Sta:t., 313. 34. Ercourage tr
Prt:e -In:t ,irite~ by the Em errr ,
deI:ce s.ajin, Lrm. 3;s. It boijei
t iLck(. ho- Hc-.D Doke ofSixor.1,

,

Hs opoior t

ci Crper's ren.

tpe to o=:,c the Proteslrt, and C-

tr.ar.c of h cazle:, 65. £oirsh
frorr , 1:i1 v.iU, . XAtr. ee
Fr:r~gr,:. A Y~e.or ici e cirsot-

rintr, esr~a, of hi reesot frem the

chumh of Rmc. c that court, and
no LooPe ja etera!. 49.

L~o-e~:aer~ wiiaded by Robtnt c is

March, lard Of Borilton, II 14i.
Inoode. a- 00cr-,&n by the Dur of
Orecars, iii. . Is gaixtr.en

M.

Mo4',-J, cteo of. betneen the E-

reror ( c<ea . sod hs riCror
Franc'.s I. Kilg f France, 11. t
Sct::re-:: of the pub:ick rit rcgsr!
to thi taty, ,-
(.-rJo:.e tie lctit.ras reycin. to odmd
t-e , enforced by Crls '..
i-d er e so~ dcfcce. III. c6.
Mau ice EI:nor of Sxonl appoinred
to rndue t, 07. I Pot onder the
orn cf te Empire, nz. The ttr.
ritoric, o, inraded by George of
Meckbroh~1rC .k, The ibttanta
de'oored in a .1,,

: . 1aUrice f

Saiccr vrrivel and b eieeo the city.
0:3. Surre.der,, :4. The ferte
erano Manice theti borgec. ozg.

It,^f,,J, King of Tunis, Iiu;ory of hit

.ar, 11. 394.
.M trcao an nf(urrei;on 'erc, II. l.

\ hch ic quelled with d.:culty, :03.
The moderation of Charle, toward
the insurgent, on his artsirr il Spain,

.o0.

t',yti, the appclltion of, ailumed by

Charle, V. on hi. eledion to the Im-
erial croown, *D4 tken by *II the
other monarcht of Eurcrc, IL 66.

.:aoitte, council of, n accouct of, II.

463.
f,':d, the inand o, gErntd by the

.mperor Charles V. to the knight: of
S:. Inhn, exrelled from hode. tLy
tFe Turk, 1I. 169.

.'falirir, extirpated by Srltan Selim,

II. cc.

,ont;ltr., t ftaion in GeCcva, so

termed, Come account of, II. 413.

.l'ca , Don John, Ferdinlnd's ambaf-

fador at the Imperial court, rays hit
court to the Archduke Philip on
Queen Ifabelli's death. II. 8. Inter-
cept: Joanna's letter of consent to
Ferdi;nnd's regency of Calilc, 9.
Negociates * treaty between Ferdi-
nand and Philip, tl. Declare, for
Maximilian' regency on Philip's
death, 17. I made Imperial m-
tafTador at Rome, nd concludes an
allioace between Cbarlce V. and Leo
X. 43. The condtions of the treaty,
144. Procures Adrian of Utrecht to
he clcaed Pope, 61f.
f.'frtelit II. Pope, bit chabner, IlL
348. Die., 349.
ifartije,, battle of, between Peter

EtronSi, and the marquni de Marig-
anoo, II. 313.

Afarsrret of Annr;a, nd Dowager of

Savoy, unt to Charles V. undertake
with Louise, mother f Prancis I. of
Frocce, to ccommodate the differ-
cnccl between thoe wo moarchi,
11. 339. Articlc of the pecce of
Cambray, i.

,f!rrLsa:, marqoui of, appointed com-

nioder of the Florentine army, asing
Igaif the French, III. 311. De-
feat, the French aimy under Peter
E:rozzi, 313. Lays siee to Siena,
314. Converts the siege into block-
ade, 31. Siena furrenderr, 316. Re-
ducet Pcrto Ercole, 318. Hi.troops
ordered into Piedmont by the Empe-
ror, ib.

dflarc, Robert de la, lord of Bouillon,

declore war gainll the Emperor
Chsrlce V. II. 243. RrvoSge Lu-
VOL. 111.

mburg v.ilth French troorr, i. Is
cnmmnrd. d to dI'tnd his (roop Ly
IF'r.ci,, 1. lis trritorios iteucd

ty the Em;cror, 4.9

MJrjit. , Lecretcd b the Impcrial;nI,

II. 3S. Itylievcl ty Franic;, 136.
Iter icw ard treist there betrea
the ope ard Franus, 370.

Jfar.:lrcrbt. bislcp of Waradin, i rp.

pinted gEardian soS 'ehen, King of
lungary, 11. 497. His charscr, b.
Sohcitt the affiltance of Sultan Soly.
rnan aFiolf Pcdlnand, 498. Sclymrn
rlioe th kingdiom, 499. 1' *ppoint-
ed to the rovernnment of Tranfylvai
and the educaticn f the ycaug Kirp,
jinily vl'h the Qceen, III. 30. N¢-
grCciste with FPrdinand, 31. Pre-
cilt on the Q(ccn to rcfgn Tracfilvr-
r.i to FcrJinand, 123. I arFpointed
governor of Trinfylinis, and rnade
a Cardini. 133. hI affuiatcd by
Pcrdinand' order, 235.

sJartyr, Pettr, hist uthority cited ia

Froofof the extcrtion cf the Flemit
mininerl of Chrlet V. II. 41.

AYlor o:' Burgundy, contrated to Lewal

XII. of France, but married to the
rmperor Maliim;lin, II. 1.

Alf:rj of Englan!, her cceflion, 1t.

303. Rcctivet proposal from the
Emperor Charle» V. of marryiDg his
ran Philip, i. The English arcrfe
to thil union 3c9. The I oue of corn-
mon :emonlrales gainfl the match,
i. 1'l e articlcs of marriae, 310.
The tiarriage rtifel by pirliament,
tnnd cmpleated, 31t. Re-eflblithc
the R m:fh religion, 313. Perfccute
the R.:ormers, dt. Invites Chaitclto
En lad on bi rcfignation and pafagc
to Spain, which he declines, 38;.
Is ergaged by Philip to affif him n
hi: war igainft France, 394. Leris
money by lrr frercgtive to carry on
the v r, 395. Her neglca in the
security of CAli, 411. Calais in-
veecd and taken by the Duke of
Guite, 414. Diet, 435.

Mar, daughter of Jlme. V. of Scot-

land, (uccced to the crown an ifanr,
11l. i1. It contrfled to the Dauphin
of France 173 It educated t the
crurt of Frarcc, 117. The mrriage
completcd, %18. Afumet the title
and a-m. of Englard on tbe death of
Mary, 437.

Flftiridt Joha, 1 bker, becoret a

leader ofthe Antbattill, at Munfer,
11.37. Siea the city und eflablihe
a new frm of gtcrrrmcnnt therc, ib.

1. I Rerrltfc

Rep!'ses the bifbop of Maler, 379.
I. killed, i. Sec B.U and A, -

MIariac, duke of Sxoou, bis motives

re not ccednlg to the Protefant
leak of rSmlkalde, IlL o. Marches
to the sifoce of Ferdinand in HMn-
gry, it. His diference with his
co the ele~or. i. His cooda at
the diet of Woms, pi. Join the
Empeor agailt the Proteats, S8.
Hb motivet, o. His inlidios coo-
dua towrud the Eleaor, ot. Seies
the ele.-rteof Saxony, lo6. Saony
recovered b the EIedor, ta. His
iefeosd cndeuwt to reduce Wit-
temberg fr the Emperor. 47. Ob-
tas poleion ofthe Elenctte, 15.
l formally iafted st the diet of
Aa oarg, 8o. Beco difLtisGed
with the Emperr, too. HiS mntive
to difctt explained, i. His

dress and cautiom in hi coda,
o03. Eforce the hrrim in hi tet-
ritorie, ii. Mke neverthelefk
profelfho of his ttcbment to the

efohrmtin 10o4. ondertakes to
reduce M debur to submit to the
kteri, i,. Protelt agi the
concil of Trent, toS. Is ccmmif-
f&ed by the Emperer to reduce M -
debs , o7. JoiGeorGic of Mck-
kenrb befere M^dcbu~b, s3.
The city capihtuate, 14. Bi to
lotrlgue wh comut UMaW fes, u5.
Is eleaed BrpF ve of Mlgdeburg
i. Di his troopt, 117. Hi
addref in tamfi the Emperor, *a.
Makes an alie ~ with He IL of
France, to uke war o the 1mp.-
re, 137. Makes rm requtioe
of the La~dg ' liberty, 139. Jo
hi troops, nd pblies ma niito,
145- Tko poleon of Anugag
*d other citier, A47. A a ieFeaal
ergociha with Cbtarc 149. De-
feats a body of the Emperor' troop
»So. T~e the caflle of Ehreburg,
1S. Is rretdd by a mtiny in his
toop. . Ete Iniprck, and
Marowlymile takli Charle, i.
A egocistion between him ad Ser-
dird, tdo. Bdiec Frankfot on
the Maine, 66. Hil im to
as *ccmodtioa, 67. Signs a
trety with the Emperor at Pfas,
.6S. tlefloos c his cond t in tbis

r, t69. rche inHag to
ppofe the Turks, 17t. Is pld at
theed of the lea lAst Albne
f &adeubur 190. Defeatr Al.

bert, but is killed in the battle, tpt.
Hi. chartrer. iA. I succeeded by
his brother Aguftlu,.l 4.
S seximim, Emperor of Germany,
claims the regency of Cflile o his
foa Philip' deuh, . 17. I fp
ported in his claim by Don John

sManel, i. Lofcs it, . Obtains

the goerument of the Low-Countrie
by the death of Philip, 13. Ap-
points William de Croy, lord of
Chievres, to fuperiatend the educa-
tion of his gdoand Chrles, i. Con-
clude peace with Frne aad Ve.
Rice, 43. Dics, St. Stte of Europe t
this period, i. Hie edeavoura to A-
cre the Imperial crown tohis grand.
fonCbhrle, 4. How obbrued, i.

Ackihrgb, George of, inede the

territories of Mldeburg for. the Em-
peror, 111. az. Defets the Mag-
deburghers, who fily ouon him,
s13. I joined by Maurice of 6Sx-
oay. who assume the supreme con.
muad, i.
&ir&s, Jobhl Jame. See JirigMe.
A Alii, Aiexnder, reoted to the do.
minioi of Florence by the Empe-
ror Cbarles IL 348. 1S diated,
lSa, Caudil de, efred Pope,

ad Tafema the titlo f Clement
VIL.n. 1 . See Ckm VIL

MJrci, Cathari- di, i married to the

duke es Orlaea, IL 370. s con-
jared, by the Emperor Charles
V. to he poi~ed the Duphin,

MJ'i, Cosmo de, made duke of Flo.

rece, n. 446. h fppoted by the
Emperor, nd defeat the purt;ns
of La~~ , 447. An his ide-
peadency isOiot the Emperor, Il.
i5. Olfers to reduce Semn ser the
Emperor, 30. Enteri ato war
with France,

Fr t. See

3r ri

&c u.

Hi ddrefa in procering the ieti-
tlre of Siemt from Philip n. of Spain,
409 It isranted to him, i.

Mi6i, Lorieto de, alflhte hir

kilinn Alenoder II. 445. Flie,
i. Attempu to oppose Cosmo but
is defeted, 447.

Me.s del Cmpo, the inhoaitaon of.

refute to et Foofeca take the mili-
tary ares there , for the lege of tlie
infurgeta iSegis, 1 73. The
town aimoe burnt by Sosec, 174.
The inhbitant replfe him, i..
Surrenders after the batle of Villa-

ar,

Jar, and diTolution of the Holy Jun-
ta, 197.

M,/a, bA., imbibes the opinion of

MartinLuther, II. to8. I employ-
ed to draw up a confrfIion of faith
by the Protestant Princes at the diet
of Augsburg, 354. I dejeaed by
the Emperor's decree against the
Protefants, but comforted by Lu-
ther, 356, 357. Ih invited to Paris by
Francis 408. Hit conference with
Eckius, 491. Is prevailed on to fa-
your the lbrri enforced by the
Emperor, IlL 197.
Mtlits, Conde de, made viceroy of

Valencia, OD the departure of Chrles
V. for Germany, I1. 73. Appoint-
ed to command the troops of the
nobles gaint the Germanada, sot.
Defeated by them in fveral aions,
ib. Destroys the affocrition, aos.

Meats, archbishop of, artfully declare?,

before the Emperor, the diet of
Augburg'a acceptance of the Itur-
rim, without being athorized by it,
III. s79.

Mtrwil#, t Milanese gentleman em-

ploed as envoy from Francis I. to

rancis Sforza, duke of Milan, his
fate II.

Mtin, seized by Mntmorency the

French general, I. 49. The duke
of Guise made governor of, 76.
Is befieged.by the Emperor, 179
The Emperor desist, and retires in a
distressed condition, 183. A fcbeme
formed by father Leonard to betray
the city to the Imperialist, 330.
The oofpiracy deteted by the go-
vernor, 33s. Leonard murdered by
his monks, and his afociates exe-
cuted, 334.

Midrt, in France, besieged by the

Imperialits, 11. 149. Gallant de-
fence of, by the chevalier Bayard, i.
The siege raised, i.
ilmr, marechal deFoix appointed to
be the French governor of, IL 154.
His charaaer, . The Milanese
alienated from the French by hit op-
prefion, i. Invaded by the eccle-
fiatical troops under Proper Colon-
na, SSt. The French driven out,
s59. Oppressed by the Imperial
troop, s07. Invaded by the French,
t 3. Who are driven out by Colon-
nasr as. The Imperial troope there
mutiny for pay, but are appeased
by Mrone, o. Abandoned by
the French, iat. Over-run again
b Francis, who seises the city, 39.

The French retire on news of the
battle of Pavia, 148. -The inveti-
ture of, granted to Sforzl, 160.
Taken from him and granted to the
duke of Borbon, 169. Difordert
committed by the Imperial troops,
there, 187. Oppressive meafre of
Bourbon to supply his mutinous troops
18. The French forces there de-
feated by Antonio de Leyva, 336.
Is again granted by the Emperor to
Sforza, 347. Death of Sforsa, 416.
The pretenions of Francis to that
dutcby, ib. Is seized by the Empe-
ror, i. The marquis del Gualto ap-
pointed governor, 431.

Miarn, battle of, between Solyman

the Magnificent, and the Hungarians,
II. 311.

MAst it order, enquiry into the fun-

damental principles of, 11. 476. Pe-
culiar conRitution of the order of Je-
suit, i.

M¢sade, Don Hugo di, the Imperial

ambassador at Rome, his intrigues
with Cardinal Colonn against Pope
Clement II. 195. Reduces the Pope
to an accommodation, a96. Is de-
feated and killed by Andrew Doria
in a naval engagement before the
harbour of Nlples, 319.

AfMslc, is sent by the count d'Enguien

to Francis for permifflon to give bt-
tle to tbe Marquis de Gafto, IlL 3s.
Obtains his suit by his spirited rgu-
ment, 31. Commands in Siens,
when besieged by the Marquii de
MarignAno, 324. His vigorous de-
fence, i. Is reduced by famine, nd
capitulate, 3t6.

Jutr Alcino, numbers of the citizens

of Siena retire thither after the re-
duetion of thaf city by the Floren-
tines, and eftablilh afree government
there, II 317.
FWtcscatli, count of, accused and tor-

tured for poisoning the - Dauphin,
chirges the Emperor with mitigating
it, 11. 433.

M stm;rncd, Mrelchal his charater,

1I. 417. Francis adopts hi plan for
refiting the Emperor, and commits
the eecution to him, i. His pre-
cautions, i. His troops despise his
condut, 430. Observation on his
operations, 431. Is dilgraced, III.
6.' Conduds the army of Henry II.
to join Maurice of Saxony, and seizes
Metz, 49. Dilfuades Henry from
accepting the offered allince with

L I Pope

Pope ltl IV. 355; Commands the
Frcnd army *gsift the Duke of
So , 3~97 Detache D'ndel.t

rdlieve St. Qoitiat, i Eposes

hifnfelf improdeltly to on tdion,
cnd is deles'ed, 399 taken pri-
fener, i. Negociates peace be-
twe Philip ad Henr, 411. Re-
tm to Frnce, d is highly bo-
medby Helry 46. Hisa dity
i si rwding the *goctiom at
CIhtea Cnbrt 43.
Jfyirr, fruitlef confeence held

there for the tdftitutina of the king-
d4e ofNv , IL 5t.
JMwr, Jeom. chaucelr of Mtlu.

hie cha~ r, U. s54. Retirem fm
the Freach eal ion h Mian to
Frack San, i. His triSu
bow readered hbrtive, i. Qieta
the mutiny of the Imperil trop i
Milmu nI. ao h difged with
the e i of Charle, 6o. In-
trica the Empenrr with
Peser, i6. Is betrayed to the
Emertr by P , t164. I uar-
rald t his wit to Pekfa, 65.
h set t liberty by the duke f Bor-
ba, ud betam his eml dn, 9,

JI~. in Prance, taken by dhe Impe-
rlias, U. 49 Retaken by Franci,

I . ~ battle ors bete the E-
pmer Charles V. d the E t of
Sxny, IlL 44
Mmba Haie, king of Tnis, hi in.

humn trtte~t of h fther and
brother, IL 394 I expelled by
Bumbrk. 396. Ea~ the Em-
yp Chartes V. to restore him, 37.
It eftablibed again by the furreader
.f Tunis, 401. His treaty with
Chales 403.
Jarr, Thmu, · dlfipe of Lther,

opp s him with fatical ~ion, II.
-So. Heds the infrre~ii of the
peaht ailThrigia. tSs. Hites-
travpat schemeS i. I defeated
nd pt to death, 13.

~Ikr, the 6r fettlemeat of the

Absalptifts i that city, IL 376.
The city eedbythem, 377. They

tabl~ n a new frm of government
te i. 1s called Mount S, 378.
The bi~op of, repued by them,
379. Is blockaded by the bibop,
3. The city taken 384. See

Jrffr, the pric of compoetia for,
by the R i~ clergy, IL 7.

M fapat , the declared heir to Sulttd

Slymn the IMagniduent, is iveted
with the dminifration of Diarbe-
quir, 111 301. His father rendered
j-alous of his popularity by the arts
of Roxalana, 301. Is frangled by
hi ftber' order, 3oS. His only son
murdered, 306.

N.

NOpi, the reveuest of mortgaged by

Lanoy to supply the Emperor in his
eigencie. IL 39. Invaded by the
French under the Duke of Albany,
143. Inaded by Pope Clement VII
300. Treaty between the Pope and
Lanny viceroy of, 30. The Prince
ofOrnge retretts thither before Lau-
trec 318. Is blockaded by Lautrec,
iS. Se engagement in the har-
bour of, between Andrew Doria and
Moocada, 39. CauSfe which difap-
pointed the French operations againf,
it. Doria revolt, and opens the com-
mnication by feagain, 331. OpprlT-
ed by the Spanish viceroy Don Pedro
de To!edo, becomes difafeeed to the
Emperor Charles V.111. III . br-
raffed by Turki fleet, 88.

1d.jd, count of, iandes Boaile at

tbhe bed of the Imperialitt, IL 49.
hIdea Frace, takes Monfo, and
beseges Mesieret, but it repulsed, i.

Ns rr , the kingdom of. unjOafly c-

quired by Ferdinand of Argon, I.
to. D'Albert'e irai~ n of, defeated
by cardinal Xinene 39. Its cales
dismantled, except Pampeluna, which
Xienet strengthen, if. Invaded
by Franci I. in the name of Henry
D'Albret, 14S. Reduced by L'E-
parre the French geerl, 146. The
Prench driven out by the Spaniards,
and L'Efp rre taken pifoner, 147.

Nttrrlr I, the government of, fir

*afumed by Charles V. II. 30. The
Plemin averse to Chai le' going
to Spain, 43. Invaded by Prancis I.
king of France, x S. A truce con-
cluded with, by Henry VIII. of Eng-
land, 330. Invaded by Francis again,
435. A fofpenloo of armn there,
436. An infurreaion at Ghent, 46o.
See CGAt. h once more invaded by
Pranci, 11I. r. Refind by the
Emperor to his on Philip, 365. A
review of the alterations in, dring
the fiteenth century, 471.
ir, a truce for ten years concluded
there between the Emperor and Fran-
cis IL 441. Besieged b the French
and Turk 1II. 18.

lJ,p,

Jyery treaty of, between Charles V.

and Frascis I. of France, 11. 41.
The terms of, negleced by Charles,

75. Naremsirg, the city of, embraces the
reformed religion, II. 114. Diet of,
particulars f Pope Adrian's brief
to refpeaing the reformers, 126. The
reply to, ii. Prepofes a general coun-
ci, 117. Preset a lift of grievances
to the Pope, 118. The recefr, or
edia, of, ag9. This diet of great
advantage to the reformer, ib. Pro-
ceedings of a econd diet there, 31.
Recef of the diet, 131. An accom-
modation agreed to there, between
the Emperor Charles V. and the Pro-
teftints, 363.

0.

Orar, and other places in Barbary an-

nexed to the crown of Cftlile by
Ximene, II. 1o.

Ora»ge, Phillibert de Chalons, prince

of, general of the Imperial army on
the death of the duke of Bounbon,
takes the catle of Sl. Agelo, ad
Pope Clement VIL pritoenr, II. 31.
Retires to Taplea on the approach of
Lautrec, 318. Takte hi fLucceffbr
the marqi de Saluces, prisoner t
Averfa, 333.

Or.rons, dake of, delivered up to the

Emperor Charles V. with the Dau-
phin, as boh(tges for the performance
of the treaty of Madrid, II. 175.
married to Carharine di Medici, 370.
Becomes Dauphin by the death of his
brother, 434. See Daapkin.

Duke of, brother to the for-

mer, commands the army appointed
by Francis I. for the invalion of Lux-
embourg, 111. 6. Is prompted by en-
vy to abandon his conqaefls, and join
his brother the Dauphin in Roufillon,
8. Dies, 53.

P.

pdriAbc, Donna Maria, wife to Don

John de Padilla, her artful fcbeme to
raise money to supply the army of the
Holy Junta, II. 9go. Her hulband
taken prisoner and execuaed, 95.
His letter to her, i. Raises forces
to revenge his death, 198. I* re-
duced and retires to Portugal, 99.

PFdil, Don John de, bis family and

charater, II. t71. Heads the infur-
retion at Toledo, ii. Routs the
troops under Ronquillo, 74. Calls
* convention of the malcontents at

Avila, 77. Forms the confederacy
called the Holy Junta, i. Di-
claims Adrian's suthority, ib. Cet
pofleflin of Queen Joanna, i. Re-
moves the Holy Junr, to TordefiIs,
the place of her r-fidence, 178. Sent
with troops to Valldolid, and de-
prives Adrian of 1il power of govern-
ment, 179 Is foperfeded in the
command of the army of the Junt,
by Don Pedro de Giron, 187. s ap-
pointed commander at the refignstio
of Giroo, 180. His rmy supplied
with money by an expedient of his
wife, 90o Besiege Torrlob·ton0
t91. TFkes and plunders it, 193.
Coocludes a truce with the noble,
i. Is wounded and taken prisoner,
in an aaion with the conde de Hmr,
194. I put to death, 195. Hit let-
ter to his wife, i. His fetter to the
city of Toledo, 196.
Palatiat, the Reformation eflablilhed

there by the Eletor Frederick, 111.
6. P1ti, count, ambassador from the
diet t Francfort, brings Carles V.
the offer of he Imperial crown,
which he accepts, I. 6Y.
anfpeIoa, catle of, in Nevarre, its
fortiications frengthened by Cardi-
nal Ximene, 11. 39. Taken by L'rf
parres the French general for Henry
D'Albret, 46. Retaken by the'
French, i.

Paprf, how liable to be aFe~ed by the

the difpofel of the Imperial crowo,
11. 59.

PFragry , a fovereigoty eflablilhed

there, by the order of Jesuits, II.
486. The inhabitants of, civilized
by them, iv. Precautions used by
the Jesuits to preserve the indepen-
dency of their empire there, 488.

Paris, a decree publiflbed by the uni-

verfity of, against Martin Luther the
Reformer, II. 138. A decree of the
parliament of, publibhed eatinft the
Emperor Charles V. 434,

P.rma, the dutchy of, confirmed to

OQavio Farnele, by Pope Julius III.
Ill. I16. . attacked by the Impe-
rialia, 'nd fuccefifully proteed by
the French, 1ll.

Pajal, a treaty concluded there be-

tween the Emperor Chsrles V. and
Maurice of Saxony, 111. 368. Re-
fleainos on this pece, and the con-
dou of Maurice, o.

Pvoia, besieged ty Francir I of Frnnce,
II. 240. Vigorously defended by An-

toio

taio ie Lyv, 141. Battle of, be-
tweem PFnocis d the Duke of Boor-
b, 146. The Iperial troops in
that city mutin, 55.
a/n Ill. Pope, leed, 1. 373. His

chraber, ar. Proepe * general
counil o be held t Mintua, 388.

egocates perfmally between the
Emperor ard Frcis, 441. Iflues
bull fr couil at Meltu, 450.
Prornes ad tranfers it to Vicenn,
451. A partial refrmation of abueCs
by, i. S _moa the council of
Tret, III t. Proron it, 13.
SBumo u it aai 47. Grants the
deaties of Paru and Pceat to
bi illeaitinu te ,

S5. Dprive

and cinmmunicate the e'efura
biop of Col e, 7. Preffe the
Emperr to declare aginft the Pro-
teftn, 73. Colden an alliuce
with him Lin the Poteauts. 79.
Idi ly puilb~lta this treat, 8s.
Ht troop join the Emperor, 4
Recalh bem. 4. Re the
coeucil from Treot to Bolo , 6l.
klare the Emperer' request to
Cry the coucil bck to Treat, 69.
Hi releutment aainR the Emperor
for te muder of his f Cardinal
Fwefe, t71. petitioed by the
diet of Anfbr lo r the return of
the coencil to Trent, 73. Elude
the copl~ying wis request, 75.
His fesatme of the rterim pub-
liedbyCharles, t79. Difhifit the
coucil of Bo~o , 1n. Aees
PFar aod Pace to the Holy See,
193. Die 194. Tbemanner fhi
death iqred into, . te.
tfIV. Pope, eeed, II. 340. His
chairer a*d hi&ory, 350 So ld
the der of Thet , i. Is the
priucip eiocca of eftablliang the
iaquStien i the Papl territories,
35s. Lsy] sl~e kia sterity o hi
eleet, 311. His partiality to hi.
nephe . 1. Is alieated from the
Empro by hit nephew, 354.
Makes overtte to a alliance with
Frc 355. Is eraged by the re-
cef of bte diet of ABugAg, 358.
Signs a treaty with Frace, 350. I
indled in the truce for ive years,
eo ded between the Emperor and
Henry, 371. Hi midiou urtices
to dee~t his trc~ 374. Abflve
H r from his oeth. and concludes
* ew treaty with bih, 37. His
Viol proceed lins aioft Philip,
now KLn of Spain, i. The Cam-

pagna Romasa fcized by the Duke
o'Ala, 380. Concludes a truce
with Alva, 38'. ContraRf btwee
his condu& and that of Charles, 388.
Renews his boltilities againIt Philip,
389. Is unprovided for military ope-
rations, 39' I1 reduced to make
peace with Philip, by the recal of
the Dake of Guile after the defeat of
St. Qintin. 406. Receives an am-
baffldor fr m the Emperor Ferdinand
to notify his election but refuses to
fee him or to acknowledge the Em-
peror, 416. Dies. 444.

Paia, French offier, sent ambafe-

dor from Fraocis I. to Sultan Soly-
mn, 111. 4. Hit fcceffal eg-
eiatioon at the Porte, i.

Pterrkt, earl of, sent by Queen Mary

of Egland with a body of men to
join the Spanil army in the Low
Coentries, 11. 395.

Peri s,. the capital of Roofillon, be-

fSged by the Dauphin of France, 11.
7. The ege railed, 8.
Pefcdra, marquis de, takes Milan by

afault, II. i5s. Drives Bonnivet
back to France, tsl. Hisgenerot
care of the chevalier Bayard, t.
Commands in the invalon of Pro-
ance, 135. Befieg es areille, i.
Hi army retires toward Italy, on
the appearnce of the French troop,
136. Refgns Milan to the French,
139. Prevails oa is Spanilh troop
not to murmur at present for their
pay, 4o. Contributes to the defeat
of Francis at the battle of Pavia, 147.
II difgKuled at Francis being taken to
Spain, without his concurrence, a6i.
His resentment inlamed by Morone,
161. Betrays Morone's dcfign to tbe
Emperor, 164. Arrnt Morone, z65.
Dies, t68.
ilip, Archduke of Austria, and fa-
ther of Charles V. visit Spain, with
his wife Joanna, II. . Does ho-
mage by the way to Lewis XII. of
France for the earldom of Slanders,
ia. Hs title to the crown cknow-
ledged by the Cortes, i. Is difgufR-
ed with the formality of the Spanish
court, ii. Ferdinand becmes jea-
lons of his power, i. Sligbts hit
wife, 4 His abrupt departure from
Spain. i Pales tbrough France,
and enters ino a treaty with Lewis,
5. His featimetnu on erdinand's
obtaining the regency of Catile, 8.
Requires Ferdinand to retire to Ara-
gon, and resign his regency of Caf-

tile,

tile, . The regency of Caile vefl-
ed jointly in him, Ferdinand and Jo-
anna, by the treaty of Salamanca, .
Sets out for Spain, and is driven on
the coast of England, where he is
detained three months by Henry VII.
13. Arrives at Corunna, ib. The
Castilian nobility declare openly for
him, if. Ferdinand reftgna the regen-
cy of Castile to him, i. Interview
between them, 14. Acknowledged
King of Cattile by the Corte, i.
Diet, r. Joanna's extraordinary con-
dut in regard to his body, i. See
7»r n.

Pbilip, Prince, son to the Emperor

Charles V. his right of fuccefon re-
cognized by the Cortes of Aragon and
Valencia, III 9. Is acknowledged
by the States of the Netherlands, 89.
His deportment disgusts the Flemings,
ago. His chraer, 114. is mar-
ried to Mary Queen of England, 311.
The Englilb parliament jealous of
him, 314. His father reSign hit he-
reditary dominions to him, 360 Is
called by his father out of England,
365. The ceremony of inveting
him, i. His father's addref to him,
367. Commissions cardinal Granville
to address the assembly in his name,
368. Mary Qeen-dowager of Hun
gary resign her regency, 369. The do-
minions of Spain refgned to him, i.
His unpolitenefe to the French am-
bafiador Coligni, 373. N. The
Pope's violent proceedings againl
him, 378. His fcraples concerning
commencing hostilities again the
Pope, 379' His ungrateful neglect
in paying his father's pension, 386.
The Pope renews hofilities againit
him, 390. Assembles n army in the
Low Countries against France, 393.
Goe over to Engliad to engage that
kingdom in the war, 394. Viits the
camp at St. Qintin, after the vic-
tory, 400. Opposes the fchem of
penetrating to Paris, and orderh the
siege of St. Qgintin to be profecut-
ed, 401. St. Qaintin taken by as-
fault, 401. The small advantages
he reaped by there fuccelre, 404.
Builds the Ecuril in memory of
the battle of St. Qeintiu, i. Con-
cludes a peace with the Pope, 406.
ReRores Placentia to Oavio Far-
nefe, 407. Grants the investiture
of Sienna to Cosmo di Medici, 409.
Enters into negotiations for peace

with hit prisoner Montmorency, 415.
Death of Qeen Mary, 435. Ad-
drefles he,, occeffor Elizabeth for
marriage, 436. Elizabeth's motives
for rejeaing him, 437. Her evasive
answer to him, 438. Supplants his
son Don Carlos, and marries Henry's
daughter Elizabeth, 441. Articles
of the treaty of Chateau Cambrefs,
441.

Pbilliberr, Emmanuel, Duke of Savoy,

Se&e y.

Piiliim, nephew to Andrew Doria,

defeats Moncada, in a sea engagement
before the harbour of Naple, II.
3$9.

PiAJaff, marqnua de, invades Tranlfl-

vanis for Ferdinand, I111. 2. Mifre-
present Cardinal Martinuzi to Ser-
dinand, and obtains commiffin to
sitfffinate him, 134, t13. I forced
to abandon Tranfylvtniz, 19g.

Picnrd., invaded by Henry VIII. II.

166. Henry forced by the Duke do
Vendome to retire, 167. Invaded *-
gain under the Duke of Suffolk, 1t8.
Who penttrate, almost to Pari, but-is
driven back, i, Ineffeual invafon
of, by the Imperialifs, 433.

Picsntrio, the dutchy of, granted, toge-

ther with that of Parma, by Pope Paul
ill. to his natral Ton, Cardinal Par-
nefe, Ill. 4 Farnese, aflainated
there, 171. Is taken ptefflonof by
the Imperial troops, i. Restored to
O&avio Farnese, by Philip II. of
Spain, 407.

Ple, Cardmal, arrives in England with

a legantine commiffon, 111. 313. En-
deavours to mediate a peace between
the Emperor and the King of Prance.
without success, 335. Is recalled
from the court of England, by Pope
Paul IV. 390.

Prrtiar, its effefta on the pmogre of

Ihe Reformation, II. l8.

Pragat, its privileges abridged by Ser-

dinand King of Bohemia, Il. 166.

PratrJrnS , the derivation of the name,

11. 35. Of whom they originally con-
fited. i. A severe decree publibed
against them by the Emperor, 355.
Tney enter into a league, 356. See
.malltade. Renew their league, and
apply to Francis King of France, and
Hcnry VIII. of England, for protecti-
on, 359. Are secretly encouraged by
Si aci., 360. Receive a f(uply of mo.
ney from Henry, 361. Tcrms of the
pacification agreed to between them

and

ad the Emptr at Nurenbrg, 36t.
AJ i the Emperor aait he Trk.'
363. Their eocia with the Pope
reltire toe eenl council, 165. Re-
aew the league of S.~ e for ten
year, 389. The motiae for refufg
to a~ the King of PrFace gainft the
Emper, 4- Reie to acknow ledge
the council fumumoed by the Pope at
Uamtu 451. A eaference between
their pncipl divine nd a depuatit
fCatholick, at Ration, 491. Thia
ceference how rendered fritleia,93.
Obtain a private grant fro Charle in
their fvor, 495 Dive th Dke of
BnIlrfick from his donioi, IlL 4.
All tigrou edit *gauit them i-

dd by a recef ofthe diet ofSpi es,

*t. Tbeir rem _rances to Perdinad
at tbe diet of W m 49. Their in-
aihe dherence to the recef of
Spires 50. Disclaim all ce~io
with the codcil of Tret, Are
ftatberd by the uceo of Frede-
ricik r Paltine, 57. Are alrm-
d at the preedian of the Emperor,
(, 64. The Emperor leagoes with
the Pope ~ins the, 73. Pre-
pare to refil th Emperor, 83. Levy
m army, 4. The opertions of the
army di~aed by the joint coman-
ds 93. Te army dispersed, 109.
The leor of auony reduced, 145.
The lagrve deceived by treaty and
corne E59 The Emperr's cruel
trtmeot of him, l. The bscri,
a fftem of theol recommended by
the Emperor to the diet at Angl, g,
79. Are prmifedproteiio by the
E aperr at the council of Treat, o19.
The Emperor pceed rigproy a
gid them, to. Their deputies ob-
ta* a e-coodu fom the Emperor,
but are refused by the cocil, 119.
Mauicc of Suxoy rife an army in
their cade, 4. See AeA cr. 1rea-
ty of Paefa, a-. The Proteflant
Prine gaiai ute to areagthbe the
Prelafit aerelt, 341- Recrf. of
the diet of Aburg oo the fobjet of
relil, 341. Why originaly averse
to the pinciplet of tolerti, 347.

Jrvw is aid watee by the mrerchal

btaMrency om the apfroach of the
Empeor Charles V. IL 417. i en-
tered by the mperor, 4&8 The dif-
*trosu etreat of the Emperor from,
43t.
~' when conquered by the Teuto-

ick order, IL a85. Is ereed into
a dutthl, and tlly into 4 kingdom

and enjoyed by the hone of Brande
bargh, 86.

R.

Jrtinh a conference between a dep.

ttaion of Proteflat and Catholick di.
vine, before the Emperor and diet
there,11. 491. This conference bow
rendred itlef, 493. A diet open.
ed there by the Emperr, III. 17.
The Catbolic members of afert tl
authority of the council of Treat, 77.
The Protellant present mnemotiil
aginft it, it. The Proteatnt dep.
ties retire, 79.

Rlrfwjrtei, in religion the rife of em

plained, 11. S. The diet at Wornm
called by Charles V. to check the pro-
gre ofi i. Account of Martin
Luther, the Reformer, t9. Begin.
*ing of it i Switserland by Zaingli-
s5 04. State of in Germany, at the
arrivalof Chrle V. 107. Reiedto
on the coadn of the court of Rome
toward Luther, oS. And on Lu.
ther' condn to. Inquiry into the
causer wbich contributed to the pro-
grefs of, t t. Obferratioan on the
pootiScate of Alexander VL and Jn.
liis 1. 113. The immoral lives of
the Romilb clergy, 1 4. The progress
of, faoored by the invention of print-
ing, %8. And the revival of lernmig,
i. The great progiefs of in GeOr
many, t3. Advantages derived to,
from the diet at Norembnrgh, sap.
Its tendency in favour of civil liberty,
Soe. The dissention between the
Emperor and the Pope, favonrable to,
313. The great fpred of, among the
Ger.n Prince, 349. The cofefil.
oa of Augsburg drawn up by Metlnc-
tbon, 3S4- Cacufes hich led to that
of England, 361. The excefle it
gaee rife to, 374. See Prtafftr,
Mmrice, ad SmlAlda. I eftblilh.
ed in Saxony, 46. The great alte-
rtion occasioned by, in the coort of
Rone, 1. 460. Contributed to im-
prove both the morals and learning of
the Romnih churcb, 464.

RtgU, invefled by the French, who are

repolfed by the governor Guicciardini
the hiftBrin, II. 15g.

Rr~ ...rtr of grievances drawn up by

the Holy Junta, the partiulrs of,
II. 181. Remarks on, 184.

R~rf, · deed o called, signed by the

arch duke Ferdinsad on being eleed
King of Bohemia, II. 313.

RbiS,

Rtigi, plundered and burnt by Brub-

ross, Ill. Is.

Rhidt, the ioand of, besieged by Soly-

matheMagnificent, 1. 67. Taken
by him, 68. The iflad of Malta
granted to the knights of, by the Em-
peror Charles, V. 69.

Ricblia, Cardinal, his Remarks on De

Rett' history of Fico's conspiracy,
11. al. Nt. .

Riner, the French ambaflador at the

Porte, the motives of his return to
France, Ill. . Is murdered in hit
journey back to Constantinople, by or-
der of the Imperial governor of the
Milanese, 3.

Rses, refieaion on the condnt of the

court of, refpeaing the proceedings
*gainft Martin Luther, II. to. The
exorbitant wealth of the church of,
previous to the Reformation, t7y.
Venalit of, si. How it drained
other countries of their wealth, st6.
The city feised by Cardinal Colonna,
and Pope Clement VII. besieged in the
caifle of St. Angelo, aS6. The city
taken by the Imperinlilfs, and Bour-
bon killed, 307. It plundered, 309.
The great revolution in the court of,
during the ixteenth century, 11I. 459.
How afeced by the revolt of Luther,
it. The spirit of its government
changed by, 462.

PRfeiis, Cent by Cardinal Adrian with

troops to fpprefs the infarreftion in
Segovis, 11. 173. is routed by the
insurgents, ib.

R~ver, Francelco Maria de, reltored to

his dutchy of Urbino, by Pope Adrian,
11. o06.

r.xalaw , a Ruffian ceptive, becomes the

favourite miltref of Suitan Solyman
the Magificeat, III. A9. Her only
daughter married to Rnftan the Grand
Vizier, i. Procure* berfclf to be
declared a free woman by the Sultan,
300. Is formally married to him,
30o. enders olyman jealos of the
virtues of hist on Mufapha, 302.
Muftapha (trangled, 305
aJftow, Grand Vifier to Solyman the
Magnificent, i married to hi daughter
by Roxalana, 111. 99g. Enters into
Roxalana's scheme to ruin Solyman's
son Muftapha, i. Is sent with an
hrmy to destroy him, 304. Draws
Solyman to the army by falf reports,
ia.

S.
fossleart, treaty of, between Fcrdinan

of Aragon, and his fo-in-ln-w Philip
11. I.
Wiaru, Prince of, heads the difafeSed

Neapolitan, against the oppressions of
the vicero? Don Pedrode Toledo, III
a87. Solicits aid from Henry II. of
Prince, who indigatea the Turks to
invade Naplei, i.

Solacr, marquis de, succeeds Luatrec in

the command of the French army be-
fore Naplea, . 333. Retires to
Averfa, where he is taken prifonerby
the Prince of Orange, i. Betrays his
charge in Piedmont, 4.

Samrcrrr, count de, defends St. DifiGre

against the Emperor Chilt, 11I. 35.
Is deceived into farrender by the
Cardinal Granvelle, 37.

Sasest, a Fleming, made chancellor of

Caltile by Charles, on the death of
Ximenei, 11. 49 His etortions, i.

Saevo , is fortified, and its harbour clear-

ed by the French, to favour its rival.
(iip with Geno, UI. 331.

S ay, a view of the sale of, during the

sixteenth century, 111 469.

- Charlea Duke of, marries Bea-

trix of Portugal, filler to the Emperor
Charles V. II. 41. The cause of
Francis's displeasure againf: him, i.
His territories overrun by the French
troop, 41t. Geseva recover its liber-
ty, 43. His Gtuation by the truce
at Nice, between the Emperor and
Francis, 44. Is beGeged at Nice,
by the French and Turks, 111. 8.

Emmanuel Philliber Duke of,

appointed by Philip of Spain to com-
mand his army in the Low-Cou; tries,
395. Invelts St. Qnintin, 396. De-
teats D'Andelot in an endeavour to
join the garrison, 398. But does not
hinder him from entering the town,
ib. Defeats the Confable Moetmo-
rency, and takes him pitoner, 399.
Is graciously visited in the camp by
Philip, 400. Takes St. Qnintin by
taailt, 401. AfiB Montmorency
in negociating peace between Philip
and Henry, 415. Marries Henry's
filer Elizabeth, 441.

Sodny, Eleaor of, appointed joint com-

mander of the army of the Protetlant
league with the landgrave of Hete,
111. 93. Their characers compared,
ió. Opposes the Landgrave's inten-
tion of giving battle to the Emperor,
97. His Eletorate leised by Maurice,
xo6. The army of the league disperse,
so9l Recovers Saxony, a 1l. It a
mused by Maurice with a negocia-

tion,

tio, II3. stife t aotay to defend
hisef aiIu the Emperor, 140.
i ir te his meal , 141.
C e Pses the IElb. 41. I at-
tcked by te Impetift 144.
tao - iber sd hb y received by
the pes, 46. condened
tbdeathy court martial, 149 His
ref6os - the occaio, i/. Is
inamd by rerd to hi family to fr-
e.br hi aebl~ l. s teffre
te B r 's de of hi
the Jtir 183. The rigr of his

_ertmr. bretac d. 84 Is cIried

sedrS$4 t c~p

by dthe Epmr with him i.to theNe-
hriadau, sMI. b relea_ by the Em-

uoe Maurice tkiL arms a aoft
ZZ- cbmosea toto ctinoe ith the

pmnr, aS4 Obh his liblety

a eer the trety f P~ , a74.

sAG, Due of, eam y to

de einuo IL 4s. Hideath
am doan e to tbe tef i .
Thc Pro ta liSi etblied by
l I Dke el, 46. Hear is fuat

eded y bis fr MLauric, I11. o.

Hi t mins for ant~ to the
la fe sm~ , . Marche to
the *r auce of Perdio i Ha
Cary. a. Jci the Emperor gas
the Prrtie 8ML See ricr.

Sc~ted, f ablia, CORM der in the

afy f dhe PrKuhe keu~ his
igam ~cmmecmt f hbaltitls
1ILL I. isajdicinaly recalled, i.

espeid fom AAflrg the dif.
_pe r f die Ple~ t army, to.

&sdao, J V. of, arried to May

of Gae, dmc 4o~ dof LMogue.
ie, ILU448. Death ofl m and
a~e f his iafhot da Mary,
IlL I. Mary coea ted the
DUn of Fruce, 173. Tbe mar-
rie cleb ed, 419. Mry dJ mes
the title ad arm of Eglad on the
death of Mry of Eknd, 437. ln-
cldled i the treat of Chbeau Cam-
bes, 440. Alteration the coo.
d~ of Ealu d toward. 4 .
&d ia reg refieaom the ori-

i of, IL 374.
S . a l fio there, on accoant
.f their rtprfeitiiv Todcfillu vot-
ig for the domtie to Charle V. II.
s71. He is killed by the poplce,
171 The infirget~ there defeat
ooquilo, feat to fapprefs them by
Cardil Adria, 73. Surrenders
after the battle of Vllhhr, 197.
~ II. Soliu, e tirpue the Mams-

ake, and adds Egypt ad Syria to
his empire, IL S. Conered a for-
midable th Ewopean power, i.
Sfw obtai of Chares V. the invefi-

tre of Mila, II. 6o. orfeits the
dthy, by bi itriguea with Maro,
t65 Joins in a leagwe apinR Chtrle
for the recoery of Milan, ass. I
forced to frrder Milan to the Im-
perialilb, a9. Obtains aain of the
Emperor the iaveitureofMih, 347.
Eate ioto a priate treaty with
Francis 40. Mrille Francit' e,
woy executed fr murder, i. Dies,
416.

Sis, the inhabitant of, implre the

afliace of tbe Emperor Charle V.
to defend them *ainft their noble,
11. as;. The Imperial troops ede-
vour to enflae tem, i. Regain
podeain of their city, t16. Replife
n ttack of the Geenan .

97. I

be6edby the marqui deMariganao,
3x4. The comman der Moluc re.
pelfe the afltult v;gorofy, 3t;.
Nombers of the citien retire, and
eftblidt * free governrment t Monte
Alcino 317. The remining citiscu
opWrefed, i. And fuck to Monte
Akio, iA. s ranted by the Em-
peror tohi oon Philip, 38. The in-
efiture given by Philip to Colmo
di Medici 409.

rwi"fes, battle of, between Ma-

rice of Sxo~y, and Albert of 8ran
denburg. Il.

I a.

Sm, Cardinal of. his scheme for weak-

ening the French army in the Milan-
efe, II. s. s. Leae the Imperial
army to attend the oncla ve on the
death of Leo X. lg.

&s~Ur, the Protestant enter into

league there fortheirmutual pport,
I. 36. The league renewed at a
feond meeting there, 359. The
league of, renewed for ten years 389.
A manifeflo, refufng to acknowledge
a council called by the Pope, 45S.
The king of Denmark joins the'league,
453. The Princes of, protet against
the authoityof the Imperial chamber,
and bte rcef of the diet at Nafrem-
burF, 11. 4 Publilh a manifelo
aginfthbe proceeding of the council
of Treot, 6o. Are alarmed at the
proceedings of tbe Emperor, i&. A
want of unity among the members,
It. The views of the Eledor of
Saxony and the Lndgrave explained,
is. Appear at the diet of Ratilbon by

deputies,.

dcputies, 75. Their deputies protest
apift the council of Trent, 77.
Their deputies aarmed it the Empe-
ror's proceeding and declarations,
leave the diet, 79. The Emperor
leagues with the Pope against them,
,. Prepare to relfi the Emperor, 91.
Are disappointed in their application
to the Venetian and Swift, 84 As
slfo with Henry VIII. aod Francis, 86.
Assemble large army, 87. Are pot
under the ban of the Empire, 90.
Declare war against the Emperor, gt.
Hostilities begun by Schertel, g%.
They recall him, ib.' The Elector of
Saxony and Landgrave of Hefle p-
pointedjoint commanders of their ar-
my,g3. The chraers of the two com-
manderecompared,i. Theiroperti-
ons diftRraed by thi joint command,
S4. Canonade the Emperor's camp,
98. Make overturel of peace to the
Emperor, o07. Their army disperse,
so9. The Eleaor of Saxony reduced,
14g. The Lndgrvedeceived and con-
fined, 9. Their warlike fores rfised
by the Emperor, 163. See Maurice.

&StYoa the Mignificent aend the

Ottoman throne, 1. 85. Invdes
Hungry and tskes Belgrade, 67.
Takes the island of Rhodc, i. De-
feats the Hungarias at Mohacl, 31.
Hi fccefee, and the number of pri-
foenr he carried away, ib. Be-
figes Vienna, 346. Entcrs Hungary
again with a valt army, but is forced
to retire by the Emperor Charles,
364. Takes Barbarola the pirate
under his proteoion, 395. Concludes
an alliance with Francis King of
France, 438. Prepares to invade
Naples, 439. Prote's Stephen King of
Hungary, and defeats Ferdinand, 498.
Seizes Hungary for himself, 499
Over-runs Hungary again, in fulfil-
ment of his treaty with Francis, Il.
I7. Concludes a truce with the Em-
peror, 74. Loses Transylvania, 31.
Ravages the costs of Italy, 164.
Carries a mighty army into Hungary,
it. Re-eftabliiles Ilabella and her
son in Tranfylvaoia, 98. His vio-
lent attachment to hit concubine
Roxalans, 99 Is prevailed on to
declare her a free woman, 30oo For-
mal!y marries her, 301. Is rendered
jealousof the virtues of his foaMula-
pha by the arts of Roxa'anD, 301.
Orders him to be f(rangled, 305. Or-
ders the murder of Monfapba' fon,3o6.
S4iat, the late of, at the death of Ser-

dinand of Aragon, II. a6, 7. Charles
King of, afpirea to the Imperial crown
on the death of Maximilian, 54.
Is eleed Emperor, 6. Refleaion
of the Spaniards on that event, 67.
Charles appoints viceroys, and depart*
for Germany, 73. InfurreaioM there,
l71. A view of the feudal syRem in,
175. An account of the confederacy,
termed the Holy Jnata, 176. Cufea
which prevented an onion of themale
contents in the refpeaive provinces,
103. The.moderation of Charle to-
ward them on his arrival, 0o4. In.
fance of the haughty spirit of the
grandees, 4. Is invaded by the
Dauphin, III. . The dominion of,
resigned by Charles to his son Philip,
369. The arrival of Charles and his
reception there 386. The place of
hit retreat deferibed, 387. The regal
power in, how enlarged by Charles,
448. The foreign acquiitionb added
to, 449. ee Jraen C Gqilq aGicia,
Valnia, Cwrtn, rmaxdo, and I.-
s 7sst'.

Spirer, diet of, its proceedings relative

to the Reformation, 11, 313. Ano-
ther diet called there by the Emperor,
350. Another diet at, III. sg. Re-
cefrof, in favour of the Proteltants, S.

Spiritsal censures of the pomilh church,

the dreadful effecs of, II. itt.

St.Disre, inCbampagne, inveted by the

Emperor, II. 3. Is obtained by the
rtifice of cardinal Granvelle, 37.

St. 7tur, monas ery of, in Plaentas, i

chosen by the Emperor Cbarles V. for
his retreat after his refigation, III
387. His aitnation delcribed, ih
His apartments, 388.

St. ji/ti, invelled by the Spanilh

troops, and defended by admiral Co-
ligni, Ill, 396. D'Andelot defeated
in an endeavour to join the gar-
rifon, i. But enter the town, ib.
Montmorency defeated by the duke
of Savoy, 399. The town taken by
altanit, 401.

St, Sri, Peter, ome account of, II1.

311. Is intrusted with the command
of the French army in Italy, ib. Is
defeated by the marquis de Marigna-
0no 314.

S*aSia, an infurreaion of the peasants

against the nobles there, 11. 178.
They publih A memorial of their
grievances, i. The insurgents dif-
perfed, 179. The Protestant religion
fnppreffed there by the Emperor
Charles V. III. Iz1.

sfll,

~ , dake of, inde Picardy, and

penetr tes a to Pris, but is
drvea back. IL i1.

&rrj, earl of created high admiral to

the Emperor Charla V. 11. 66.
Obiged t. retire ot of Picardy by the
dke de Ventora, 167.
Sea. a fuaary view of the re-

iMn. i. during the fitecth cab-

tr.r II. 473.

siterlmJ, the cateal of. erpeafe the

pretenion o Charles V. t the Im-
Peril rown, II. 51. Commence-
ment of the Referation the by
Zoinglies, 104. lTe regultiob u oser
wbcb they hire ot their troops 157.
Tbe precipi iat bttle, ififted oo by
their troops onder Lutrec, lo. 163.

3vri, bow and by whom addd to the
Ottomna Epire, 11 $S.

T.

ernr., marechl de, gor of Ca-
L , takes Dnkirk by flormn, 1.
410. ngages the coast of Egmort,
and is defeated b the accidental ar-
rial of an ECdt fqugdra oa the
cat, 41s. Is taken rifoer, i*.
ennrw r, utaken ad deolied by the
l~peror Charles V. L 95.

ars , · Daiac fri r, his &fmefl

eoa in the hle of Indulgence in
Grma y, IL 89. His form of ab-
feuio., sd recommeadioo of the
virte of Idoigeer i. Nax. His
debarched coare of life, p. Pub-
lik the~a sains Luther, 94
tedi a4dr, charaaer of, 11. lS.

Co ~r the province of Prufi i.
Thir grand mler Albt mde duke
of Prufia, .

f~tae. the order of, b wbom found-

ed. IIIL 350

9i_& ia Luemboorg. taken by the

duke of Gaif. Ill 40o.
fbari iahrrm io of the pea-

t tere i a lnt the nobility, II.

179. The faatical otioo inlpired
ita them by Thoa ss Muoer, *8.
Their difrdey army defeated, 183.

T.&4 iofereC~ in, at the departure

of Charle V. for Germany, 1. 73.
170. The cathedrl of, tripped of
it ricbes to fopport the army of the
1oly Juts, 9oo. dilla's letterto, at
his eectio~ s96. Nte. Is infigated
to coonrne in an by Padilla's wile
197. Is redced, 99-

fl., Lodoico de, ephew to Cofnu
di Medici feat by his uncle to nego

tiate with Philip I. of Spain for the
invefliture of Siena, 111. 408.

Tilf, Don Pedro de, viceroy of laple,

opprefies the Neapolitaon, Ill. 17.
And occasions the Turks to ravage
the coats of Naples, i.

7Irrati, reflcious on the pgre of

in Germany, 111 343. Why mutu-
ally allowed among the ancient Hea-
tben, 344. How the primitive
Chriitos became avrfe to, 345.

T trr, Plan. a PranciUcn mok, arch-

bishop of Oolosa is made g* ner l of
the Hungarian army againat Solyeam
the Magnificent and defeated by
him, II. 311. 311.

T7#rrfiU , the residence of Qoeen Joan-

na, the confederacy of malecooteat,
called the Holy Junta, removed thi-
ther, II. 178. The Qeen taken
there by the coodde Haru, lS.

T.'r~js, one of the reprefeotative of

Segoa, killed by the populace for vo-
ting the dontie toCharles V. at the
Corte* a~ bled in Galicia, II, 171.
rfalfjl io, i surrendered to Ferdi.
nad King of the Romans by Qleen
Isabella, III. 131.

Tresle, La, dri the Engliob uode;

the duke of Suffolk outof Picardy, 1.
lit.

Tret, the council of, fumoon II.

as Prorogued, 3. Again fammoned,
47. Is opeed, 7. Declares the apo-
cryphal scriptures canoncal, 71. Es-
tabliues the autbority of the church
traditions, i. The council, on r-
mon of o ifehni in the city, is
trnflated to Bologna, s68. Henry II.
of Prance protets agtinft the council
i19. The council breaksupon the ap-
proach of Maurice of Saxouy, a54.
Hiltoricl remarks on this council,
s55. Cbaraternof its hiftorias, i.

cardinal of, feet by the Emperor

Charles V. to conclude an alliance
with the Pope, III. 77. The nature
of this treaty, 79.

T9i, the mean of its coming under the

power of Paruroffe, traced, II. 394
The Emperor and other Chrillian
powers nite to expel rbaroa, and
restore Moley Hafcen, 397. I take
by the Emperor, 401. Mulet Hafcen
t reeeod, and hi treaty with Charles,

401, 403.

Trsfcs, a review ofthe late of, during
the fiteath century, I. 468.

V.
PFlruia, an infDrreaioo in, II. 68. The

people

people there greatly oppressed by the
noble, 69. The nobles refuse to as-
fembne the Cortes except the King is
present, 70. Charles authorises the
people to continue in arms, i. They
expel the nobles, i. Associate under
the GwrroMfdd, nd appoint their
own magistrate, i. Don Diego de
Mendora, Coode de Melito, appointed
regent on the departure of Charles for
Germnany, 73. The Oermnnada refuse
to lay down their arms, too. Defeat
the nobles in everal aaion, so.1
Are at length routed by the conde de
Melito, aoe. The moderation of
Charles towards the infargents on his
arrival, m04.

Fablniimf, dutche of. See Dirz of

Pitirs.

rPoU Jb , the firt public entry ofChar-

let V. into thet city, II. 47. The inhb-
bitsta rife, burn onfeca't house,
an fortify the town, 74. Surren-
dern fter the bittle of Villatar, and
difolution of the Holy juntai, 97.

Yarelrkt, treaty of, between Charles

V. and Henry II. of France, III. 37 .

Vadser, duke of, his plan of operations

in opposing the progrefi of the invfi-
on of Picardy by Henry VII. II. 167.
Obliges him to retire, i.

Serin, the republic of, incline in favour

of the pretenfons of Francis I. of
France, to the Imperial crown, 11. 58.
Their view and apprehenfioos on the
approaching rupture between the Em-
peror Charles V. and Franci, 77.
Leagues with the Emperor agamft
Francia, o17. A final accommodation
between Franci and the Emperor, 347.
Refutes to enter into the league of
the Italian (tte, formed by the Em-
peror, 367. A review of the date of
that republic during the sixteenth
century, 1II. 467.

Ferrina, the confident of the count of

Lavagno, encouragethim inhi rfcheme
of overturning the government of Ge-
nos, II1. 19. Is protected by Franci
on the ruin of that conpiracy, 134.

Ytilville, the French governor of Metz,

detcas father Leonard's conspiracy to
betray the city tothe Imperialitts, III
331. Executes the conspirator, 334.

Fisru, is besieged by Sultan Solyman

the Magnificent, I1 346.

fillfiar, battle of, between Padilla, and

the coode de Haro, II. 94.

ri#eid, marquisde, his spirited reply to

the request of the Emperor to lodge
Bourbon in his palace, II. 168.

Uli, the government of that city vio-

lently altered, and its reformed mi-
niern carried away in chains by the
Emperor CharlesV. Ill. 86.

Ufitid Provinces, of the Netherlands,

a brief view of their revolt againif the
dominion of Spain, 111. 471, 471.

Urbiae, restored by Pope Adrian to Fran-
cefco Maria de Rovere, II. ar5, ao6.

W.

JIallFp, Sir John, joins the Emperor

Charles V. at the siege of Landrecy,
with a body of Englith troops, III. 7.
Far, the method of carrying on in Eu-
rope, how improved at this period from
the practice of earlier ages, II. 117.
General refleiona on the vicitiLude
of, 1I. 4ot.

irartharg, Martin Luther concealed

there by the Elecor ofSaxony, I1. 37.
'atatrt, lord, governor of Calai, re-
monrrates in vain with the Englih
privy council to provide for its fecuri-
y, 111. 413. Is attacked by the Duke
of Gife, and forced tocapitulte, 4t4.

Witt tr. iveefted by the Empeor

Charles V. and defended by Sybill of
Cleves wife to the Elector of Saxony,
III. 47.
tf'fy, cardinal, his rife, characer, and
influence over Henry VIII. of Eng-
hnd, II. 79, 80. Receives a penfon
from Francis 1. of France, St. And
from the Emperor Charles V. i. De-
tached from the French interest by
the latter, 81. Inclines Henry to join
the Emperor aganift Francis, 1s4.
Sent by Henry to Calais to negotiate
an accommodation between the Em-
peror and Franci , o0. HIa an inter-
view with Charles at Bruges, and
concludes a league with him, oo the
part of Henry, against Prance, 15s,
t 5. Meditates revenge against Char-
les on his second dilappointment of
the Papacy, by the leclion of Clement
VII. z17. Obtains of Clement a le-
gantine commiflion in England for
life, ib. Negociates league with
Francis against the Emperor, 310.

Wrsms, a diet called there by Charles V.

to check the progress of the Refor-
mers, 11. 8. Proceeding of, 33.
Martin Luther cited before it, 135.
Refuses to retract his opinions, 36.
An edit publiShed againit him, i.
Diet at, opened, 111 47.

Wrrtrmberg, Ulric duke of, why ex-

pelled his dominions, II. 386. Re-
covers his dominion. by the aliftace

of

Ornrdl tlg f Pce, ad re-
cales the Proau~t idi 357.
l~ r, ir ~Th f~

a, inarure~i-

_ - Iac ai* Q a ry of
rsagld, aMt of the SpFail
rmatc, L 31 . h fabdued d
p-~~d 31

w s, dhilp of Toledo. adbere
te Priu d

of Ara^ in his dilte

wich the arthdude Phir% co rnig
th* rea f Cotile, . so. EBf
ms fPerud'i cbi to the re-
asc Ks Cdiie Phlip'a deatb, 8.
Cmiqur O*, ad ether Flce i
u ry, ser the aow of Cdlib, o.
Appoi ed reat of Casil, by Per-

dd Wrill. tdil the rinl of

Chare V. i Spain, 7. Hi rife d
chan.r i. Admits the claim to
te reipc of cafil Adri, set

irth et s

c i- _ by Chues, ud

aeece i joly with him, .
TIke the iat De Perdimd to
Mdrl d -M~r how eye, 30. Pr-
cm Chales who aiM the regpl
ide, be ukaomdd by the Caf
t~Ba obility 31. Schea to e d
te repl pr n , 3 Drf e
tldw b . 33- Pree the agit fom
the f~il liitaaN, ld edntlae&
srenld a to c the hn, is.

Sapprelia * mutiny headed by te
gadees, 33. Rfoue the grantu of
POrdiad to his oobleN 35. His prm-
dent application of the rewmne, 36.
Hib bold afertio of his authority to
the difcoatented ooble, 37. Other as-
Lciates in the regency appointed at
the iligtion of the Flemik cror-
tiers, j. Raii the foperio ma-
nageaet, i. DefEat Johnb'Albert'
iasoio of Nure, 39. Difina tle
tll the c Blea thre, ecept PIp~e
hIu, which he regt i4. The
troop leat by him agiinf Bubudro
deeted, and his equanmity on that
calo.mi 4o. Alarmed at the cor-
reptio of the Plmih court, he per-
fuda Chula to vit Spfi, 41- Falls
sick oa hi jourey to met Chrles at
bi niJl, 4. W

Hi ltter of cc cl

to Cblrke, 46. Reuos *an iter-
view. i. The inatitude of Chbrle
to him, i. His death, 47. His ch-
r~ba i. Rever~ ce paid to his
memoy by the Spanrd i.

Za~ra bieop of, rifes · regiment of

priet to defend Tordefillas for the
Holy Jut, which i forced by the
coade de H1r, U. U.
Zg&uattack. the tfle of ndalgence

at Zurich in witeMrland, IL o05.
SI N I S.

1

rft Publibed,
[ In Two Volumes, 8vo. Price 13s. ]

THE
H I S T O R Y

OF THE

R E I G N
REIGN

O
PHILIP THE SECOND,

KING OF SPAIN..

B Y

ROBERT WATSON, LL.D.
PROFESSOR OF PHILOSOPHY AND RHETORIC

IN THE UIVEBSITY OF ST. ANPDEW'S.

D U B L IN:
Prnted for W. WHITESTONI, W. SLEATEx, D.

CHAMBEILAINI, J. POTTS, J. HOEY, L. L. FLIW,

J. WILLIAMS, W. COLLES, W. WILSON, j.
PoaTra, W. HALHBZA, and J. EXSaAW,

MDCCLXXVl.

Y4 ~ AA)ied,
[ In Three Volumes, 8vo. Price 9gs. 6d. ]

THE
H I S T O R

y

o F
AMERICA.

B r

WILLIAM ROBERTSON, b.D.

PrncIrAL of the UrIV»5ITY of EDIWUXGOH, and
HISTOXrOGAsIM t htO MAJISTY frS«OTAIAND.

DUBLIN:

Phiaed fr W. WHITRSTOII, W. SLIATII, M. HAY,
D. CAMZBABLADXI , J. POTTS, J. HolE, L. L

FLiw, J. WILLIAMS, W. COLLIS, W.

WELSOW, J. PollTBr W. HALHrAD,
T.T. FAULIM. Id J. EXZIAW.

MDCCUVU.

'S'~
--A
