A D D I T I O N S
ADDITIONS

AND
CORR E CTIONS

T 0
THE FORMER EDITIONS

o F

Dr. ROB E R TS 0 N's
HISTORY oP SCOTLAND.

LONDON:
PRINTED FOR T. CADELL, IN THE STRAND.

MDCCLXXXVI.
[ Price One Shilling. ]

# PREFACE TO THE ELEVENTH EDITION.

P R E F A C E

TO THE

ELEVENTH EDITION.

T is now twenty-eight years since I publilhed the History
of Scotland. During that time I have been favoured by my

friends with several remarks upon it; and various ftridures have
been made by persons, who entertained sentiments different from
mine, with refpeft to the tranfaftions in the reign of Queen
Mary. From whatever quarter information came, in whatever
mode it has been communicated, I have confidered it calmly and
with attention. Wherever I perceived that I had erred, either
in relating events, or in delineating characters, I have, without
hesitation, correted those errors. Wherever I am satisfied that
my original ideas were just and well-founded, I adhere to them;
and refting upon their conformity to evidence already produced,
I enter into no discussion or controversy in order to support them.
Wherever the opportunity of consulting original papers, either

5 in

in print or in manuscript, to which I had not formerly access,
has enabled me to throw new light upon any part of the History,
I have made alterations and additions, which, I flatter myself,
will be found to be of some importance.

COLLEGE oF EDINBVROH,

MARCH 5th, 1787.

ADDITIONS AND CORRECTIONS

T
THE FORMER EDITIONS

OF
Dr. ROB.RTSON'S HISTORY of SCOTLAND.

[Tbfe Ao4dions rtftr to the QUARTO EDITION pristed 1771.]

VOL. I. Page 87, line 5, after the word disregard, add,
A RASH measure of the king of England added greatly to

the violence of this national animosity. The Scots, relying

on the treaty of marriage and union, fitted out several lhips for
France, with which their trade had been interrupted for some time.
These were driven by stress of weather to take refuge in different
ports of England; and Henry, under pretext that they were carry-
ing provisions to a kingdom with which he was at war, ordered
them to be seized and condemned as lawful prizes . The Scots,
aftonilhed at this proceeding of a Prince, whose interest it was ma-
nifeftly, at that junture, to court and to tooth them, set it not

*Keith, 32. 34. Epif. Reg. Scot. ii, App. 311. Hamilton MSS-
vol. 389.

A only

cr.ly as an injury, but as an insult, and expressed all the $efeqt-
rment natur- to an high-fpirited people *.

* I: :.e MS. Collection of Papers belonging to the Duke of Hamil-

ton, S:r Ra! h ?IJllr dr'cribes the spirit of the Scots as extremely out-
ro:e:t's. In 's

;n r:cr from Edinburgh, September i, 1543: " The flay

' - '.e i. ps .is br.::-gt the people of this town, both men and women,
;::- :pe3c.... '.; ::-- rc.h3.:s, into such a rage and fury, that the whole
t;\ .2 c :r.:'.- c: .:- -.:t me, n. ;ear great oaths, that if their Ihips

2-e :

rc- t:., -ite

t;;;y wu.,i !;-:ve their amends of me and mine,

r-- :!.':- ::_ ::'t :;nV 'v-.ou!' here on fire over my head, so that one
.':* :- .... -: . ';-. ai.vr; and r-;.l it hath m.uch ircenfed and pro-
-.-.,:: : :.; . 'c :.e -.; I the Goverror, iaying, that he hath coloured a
' ::e a.:5 '31 - M:.1c-.v onlv to undo ihem. This is the unreasonable-
-:, i: ;'. -- :; v.:.:;;. c '.: here in such a beastly liberty, that they
.-.:.-: rer2-d G rn.or G-vernor; nor yet julice, or any good policy,
c.:-. tk; F:ace among them; affuring'your Highness that, un!efs the
r:- ' de ici;ve:-e, t::re w;il be none abiding here for me without dan-
---.'' %,. ..t In ::.. letter of SeFtember 5, he writes, that the rage

-. - ;: i ccn,:i.'tci& ,o violen:, " that neither I nor any of my

- :. -: o .' cf :v doors; and the Provost of the town, who hath
r.: -.:j : i;a them from assaulting me in my houle, and keepeth
va:c-:. thertfore ni'htlv, hash sent tome sundry times, and prayed me to
;e-: Tmivflf ard my fi1ks within, for it is scant in his power to repress
o.r r..i tne fury of the people. They fay plainly, I shall never pass out
of * .e to'wn a;.ve, except they have their (hips restored. This is the
r.:e and bea.:ineis of this nation, which God keep all honest men
:.:. . "lb. 4-, 1.
VOL. I. PRct 122, licc 4 frc l bottom, after judges, add the

fJllowing Ntle:
H OW\ far this claim of the clergy to exemption from lay-

jurisdiction extended, appears from a remarkable tranfation
in the Parliament held in I546. When that court was proceeding

7 to

to the forfeiture of the murderers of Cardinal Beatoun, and were
about to include a pries, who was one of the aflaflins, in the gene-
ral sentence of condemnation, odious as the crime was to Eccle-
fiaftics, a delegate appeared in their name, and repledgedor claimed
exemption of him from the judgment of Parliament, a/

a iritual

man. This claim was sustained; and his name is not inserted in
the At of Forfeiture. Epift. Reg. Scot. ii. 350. 361.
VoL. T. Page 136, line 24, after explain, add the following

Note:
AS far as I can judge, the husband of the Queen, by the grant

of the Crown Matrimonial, acquired a right to assume the

title of King, to have his name fRamped upon the current coin, and
to sign all public instruments together with the Queen. In confe-
quence of this, the subjects took an oath of fidelity to him.
Keith, Append. 20. His authority became, in some measure,
co-ordinate with that of the Queen; and without his concurrence,
manifested by signing his name, no public deed seems to have been
confidered as valid. By the oath of fidelity of the Scottilh Com-
missioners to the Dauphin, it is evident that, in their opinion, the
rights belonging to the Crown Matrimonial fubfilled only during
the continuance of the marriage. Keith, Append. 20. But the
conspirators against Rizio bound themselves to procure a grant of
the Crown Matrimonial to Darnley during all the days of his life.
Keith, Append. 120. Good. i. 227.

A

x;L. I. Pje 21 , /ii IS, inJftcd! f the paragraph, beginning As

:h; , I;_., :&. an.l c,,a'i! countrymen, insert wbatfollous:
T H E ii;entious lives of the clergy, as has been already ob-

tfered, seem to hive been among the first things that excited

an-v filCric in conce:-ing the truth of the docrines which they
tau':;t, and r-ufld ti'n s

t [rit of inqairy which proved fatal to the

i , !'h : .r-.. tA :his difguit at tle vices of ecclesiastics was soon
-:;.:r...-e : ' :-:e;:' perfo:i, and f.iftinig from them, by no violent
:-.:--:!:, !ft::ed at ;:.f upon the offces which they enjoyed; the
e.:t'. c: f te Reforr.aticn would r.aturally have extended not only
mo ;i:. dotri:.e, 5;t to the form of government in the Popish
churh ; antd te fae spirit which abolished the former, would
hi\ :.:r-t:urned the ,atter. But in the arrangements which took

- ':c di .re: r.; kl;,Joms and states of Europe in consequence

i£ :.'. n.nfc- .:a'C.:. we may observe something similar to what

I:: .- .. upo :t he ft;-i cifabiil'hrenrt of Chriffian:ty in the Roman
Err.rn-e. In \),th periods the form of ecclfiaftical policy was
:-:c=! !eJ, i l o-:c mnealure, upon that of the civil government.
Wi.e:n t'-e Cr';.r;l church was patronized and eftablifled by the
.:'e. the juriidiii cn of the various orders of ecclesiastics, diftin-
E :i:hed by the n.lam c; f Patriarch%, Archbilhops, and Bilhops,
was made to ccrre!',ond with the various divisions of the Empire;
an.J the e:.lellfii; of chief eminence in each of these possessed au-
thority, mcre cr ii-. extensive in proportion to that of the civil
magistrate who prc-fided oxcr the fame diflrid. When the Re-
formation took place, the Epifopal form of government, with its
various ranks and degrees of subordination, appearing to be most
coniiltent with the genius of Monarchy, it was continued, with a

few

few limitations, in several provinces of Germany, in England, and
in the northern kingdoms. But in Switzerland, and some parts
of the Low Countries, where the popular form of government
allowed more full scope to the innovating genius of the Reforma-
tion, all pre-eminence of order in the church was destroyed, and
an equality eftablifled more suitable to the spirit of republican
policy. As the model of episcopal government was copied from
that of the Chriflian church as established in the Roman Empire,
the situation of the primitive church, prior to its establishment by
civil authority, seems to have suggested the idea, and furniihed the
model of the latter system, which has since been denominated
Prf/bytcrian. The firlt Chrilfians, oppressed by continual perfecu-
tions, and obliged to hold their religious assemblies by stealth, and
in corners, were contented with a form of government extremely
simple. The influence of religion concurred with the sense of
danger, in extinguishing among them the spirit of ambition, and
in preferring a parity of rank, the effect of their sufferings, and
the cause of many of their virtues. Calvin, whose decisions were
received among many Protestants of that age with incredible sub-
mission, was the patron and restorer of this fchcme of ecclesiastical
policy. The church of Geneva, formed under his eye and by
his direcion, was deemed the most perfect model of this govern-
ment; and Knox, who, during his residence in that city, had
studied and admired it, warmly recommended it to the imitation
of his countrymen.

VOL. I. PA.gJ 2:2, lit: II, ,fi'r posterity, add the following
r HIS expedient for terminating the difference between Eliza-

beth and Mary was so obvious, that it could not fail of pre-

:-.:-; i:.l;' to the view of the English Ministers. " There hath
bc::; a ma::r i-crc: ti.ought of (fays Cecil, in a letter to Throk-
:.c-:rcn, J-:'.y i1. ,, Iji-, which I dare communicate to you,
;:ih cuh I Le-:.: never to be an author thereof; and that is, if an
sccord might be rnade betwixt our Mistress and the Scottish Queen,
'la: thhi: hould b' Parliament in Scotland, &c. surrender unto the
Q;cc;'' Maieftv alI matter of claim, and unto the heirs of her
'cy ; a:,. in cLnfilieration thereof, the Scottiih Queen's interest
i.-ould be a. cncswvcded in default of heirs of the body of the
Q .en'- Mjiev. WVeel, God fend our Mistress a husband, and
by :-i. a fan, liht we may hope our posterity (hall have a mafcu-

; f licceiTicn. This matter i, too big for weak folks, and too
deep for fimp!e. The Queen's Majesty knoweth of it." Hardw.
S::e Pap. i. i 4. But with regard to every point relating to the
. i:ce:Tlon, Elizabe:h :-.i flo jealous, and so apt to take offence,
::;t h-;r i.ot c-'--tdc:ti.ll MIinifters durst not urge her to advance
on.e fop fart.:r than file herflf chose to go. Cecil, mentioning
i .:.c

m hcrnc ab :-: the icceflfion if the Queen ihould not marry
cr I:v-e i;.e, ad,. with his usual caution: "This song hath
mr.an,' -:, b it, for my part, I have no skill but in plain song."
I'!. i-S.

VOL. 1. Page 224, line 23, after Queen, add the following

Paragraph:
M ARY, in a long conference with Throkmorton, the Englilh

ambassador in France, explained her sentiments concerning

this ungenerous behaviour of his Mistress, in a irain of dignified
expostulation, which conveys an idea of her abilities, address, and
spirit, as advantageous as any tranfadion in her reign. Mary
was, at that time, only in her eighteenth year; and as Throk-
moiton's account of what passed in his interview with her, is ad-
dressed direcly to Elizabeth *, that dexterous Courtier, we may be
well assured, did not embellilh the discourse of the Scottish Queen
with any colouring too favourable.

WHATEVER resentment Mary might feel, it did not retard her
departure from France.

* Cabbala, p. 374. Keith, 170, &c.
VOL. I. Page 225, line 26, after intercept her, add the

following Nrote:
CAMDEN insinuates, rather than affirms, that it was the

obje& of the English fleet to intercept Mary. Tts, however,

seems to be doubtful. Elizabeth positively asserts, that at the re-
quest of the King of Spain she had fitted out a few ships of slender
force, in order to clear the narrow seas of pirates, which infested
them; and [he appeals for the truth of this to Mary's own Mi-
nifters. App. No. VI. p. 13. Cecil, in a letter to Throkmorton,
Aug. 26, i56i, informs him, that " the Queen's ships, which were
upon the seas to cleanse them of pirates, saw her [i. e. Mary], and

saluted

saluted her galleys, and staying her ships, examined them of
pirates, and dififfed them gently. One Scottih lhip they detain
as vehemently fufpeced of piracy." Hard. State Papers, i. 176.
Ciftelnau, who accompanied Mary in this voyage, confirms the
cir:unmftance of her galleys being in fight of the Englilh fleet.
Merm. ap. Jebb. xi. 455.
Vo0.. I. Page 229, line 26, in/lead f tbe paragraph beginningThe

Proteftainr, :S'e. ,:nd ening capital crime, insert atfollows :
T HE leaders of the Protestants, however, by this prudent

compliance with the prejudices of their Sovereign, obtained

from her a proclamation highly favourable to their religion, which
was ifTued fix days after her arrival in Scotland. The Reformed
dc^trine, tliough established over all the kingdom by the Parlia-
ment, \vh:ch met in consequence of the treaty of pacification, had
never received the countenance or fandion of royal authority. In
order to quiet the mirds of those who had embraced that docrine,
and to remove any dread of molestation which they might enter-
ta:i, Mary declared, " that until ihe flhould take final orders
ccncerning reli,icn, with advice of Parliament, any attempt
;,) al: r rfubvcrt th. religion which she found universally prac-
:.:; in the realm, Should be deemed a capital crime." Next
year, a second proclamation to the fame effea was published.-
Keith, lio.

VOL. I. Page 315, line 21, after horror, add the /folk ing

Note:
IN the first accounts of Rizio's murder sent to England, there

seem to have been mingled (as is usual in relating extraordinary

events) some circumstances, which afterwards appeared to be false:
among others, that a Friar, named Black, had been slain at the
fame time with Rizio. Parkhurft Bithop of Norwich, in commu-
nicating this intelligence to his correspondent Bullinger, an eminent
Reformed Divine of Zurich, expresses no condemnation of the
murder of Rizio, and exults over the supposed death of the Friar,
in terms which, in our times, will appear as fbocking as they are
puerile: " Fraterculus quidam, nomine Black, Papiftarum antefig-
nanus, eodem tempore in aula occiditur: Sic niger hic nebulo,
nigra quoque morte peremptus, invitus nigrum subito defcendit in
Orcum." Bum. Hist. of Reform. iii. App. 360.
VOL. I. Page 316, line 24, after power, add the bflloowng

Note:
T HE enterprising spirit of Bothwell was so confpicuow as to

procure him several marks of diftin&ion during his residence

in France. Hardwicke's State Papers, i 143. Throkmorton, the
Englilh ambassador at Paris, and one of the most fagadiow Mi-
nifters employed by Elizabeth, pointa him out as a person who
was to be dreaded and observed. , The Earl of Bothwel, fays he
in a letter, Nov. 28, x160, is departed to return into Scotland,
and hath made boast that he will do great things, and live in

B Scotland

Scotland in despite of all men. He is a glorious, rafli, and
hazardous :;ung man; and therefore it were meet that his adver-
saries ihould both have an eye to him, and also keep him ihort."
Ibid. p. 149.
VOL. I. Page i51, line 19, inflead ofthe paragraph beginning But

tile absolute dominion, Fc. and ending obtained, insert what
B U T the absolute dominion which Bothwell had acquired over

Mary's mind, appeared in the clearest manner, by an ad in

favour of the Protestant religion, to which, at this time, she gave
her alient. Mary's attachment to the Romish faith was uniform
and fuperflitious; the had never laid aside the design, nor loft
the hopes of reforiing it. She had, of late, come under new
engagements to that purpose, and, in consequence of these, had
ventured upon some steps more public and vigorous than any ihe
had formerly taken. But though none of these circumstances were
unknown to Bothwe!l, there were powerful motives which
ro:npted lim, at this juncure, to conciliate the good-will of the
Prcteflants, by exetting himfelfin order to procure for them some
additional security in the exercise of their religion. That which
they enjoyed at present, was very precarious, being founded en-
tirelv on the royal proclamation issued soon after the arrival of the
Queen in Scotland, which, in express terms, was declared to be
only a temporary regulation. From that period, neither the soli-
citations of the General Assemblies of the Church, nor the intrea-
ties of her people, could extort from Mary any concession in favour
of the Protestant religion, on which the professors might reft with
greater confidence. This, however, by the more powerful in-

fluence

fluence of Bothwell, they now obtained. An A& was palsed in
this Parliament, repealing all the laws, canon, civil, and muni-
cipal, adverse to the Reformed religion, and exempting such as
had embraced it from the penalties to which they might have been
fubjeded by there laws, either on account of their past condut or
present profession; declaring, at the fame time, that their persons,
estates, honours, and benefices, were taken under public protetion
against every court, civil or ecclesiastical, that might attempt to
molest them on account of their religious sentiments. Thus the
Proteltants, inead of holding their sacred rights by no better
tenure than a declaration of royal indulgence, which might be
revoked at pleasure, obtained legal' and parliamentary protedtion
in the exercise of their religion. By prevailing on the Queen to
aftent to this law, Bothwell seems to have flattered himflf that he
would acquire such merit both. with the clergy and with the people,.
as might induce them to favour his ambitious schemes, and to
connive at what he had done, or might do, in order to aoecomplilh
them. The Protestants, accordingly, though this at was far
from amounting to a legal eftabliffment of the Reformed faith,
seem to have confidered it as an additional security of such im-
portance, that it was published among the laws enaded in a Par-
liament held towards the close of this year, under very different
leaders *.

I am indebted to the accuracy of Sir David Dalrymple, for point-

ing out (Remarks on the HiRfory of Scotland, ch. 9.) a considerable
error into which I had fallen with respect to this a&, by supposing it to
be so favourable to the doctrine of the Reformation, that the Parliament,
which met Dec. 15, could substitute nothing stronger or more explicit.
in its place, and thought it fufficint to ratify it word for word. This
error I have now corrected; but after confidering the aft with particu-
lar attention, though I am satisfied that it neither eftablilhed the Re-

B a formed

formed religion as the religion of the slate, nor abolished Popery, yet
it granted such new and legal security to the Protestants, as was deemed,
in that age, an acquisition of great value. The framers of the law seem
manifcftly to have viewed it in that light; after reciting " that the
Queen, since her arrival, had attempted nothing contrary to the state
of religion, which the found publicly and universally fianding, on which
account she was moR worthy to be served, honoured, and obeyed, &c."
-the aa goes on, " that as (he intends to-continue the fame goodness
and government in all times coming, the professors of the religion
aforcfaid may and shall have occasion to praiie God for her happy and
gracious government, &c.: and to the effec that the professors of the
religion aforesaid may assure themselves to be in full surety thereof, and
of their lands, lives, &c. and may with the better will jeopard and
hazard their lives and goods in her Highness's service, againt all
enemies to her, and to the commonwell of this realm, &c. therefore
our Sovereign, with the advice of the whole estates in Parliament, &c.":
then follow the tfatutory clauses mentioned in the text. The intention
of passing the a&t is apparent, and it is drawn with great art. This art
is peculiarly manifest in the concluding clause. In her first proclama-
tion the Queen had declared, that it Ihould continue in force only until
The ihould take final order concerning religion with the advice of Parlia-
ment. In this at the intention of taking further order concerning
religion is mentioned, probably with a view to please the Queen; but
it is worded with such fludied dexterity, that the protecion granted by
this law is no longer to be regarded as temporary, or depending upon
the Queen's taking such final order. Parl. K. Ja. VI. c. 31. In the
fame light of an important acquisition of security to the Reformed reli-
gion, this a& is represented by the Privy Council in a proclamation
iflued May 23, 3167. Keith, 571. Mary's principal adherents, in a
paper subscribed by them Sept. 12, 1568, declare, that she, " by the
advice of the three estates, had satisfied the desire of the whole nobility
in an act concerning all the points of religion passed in the Parliament
held April 1567." Goodal, ii. 357. The fame is asserted to be the
intention and effect of this at in another public paper in the year 1570.
Haynes, 621. From confidering all these particulars, one need not
wonder that a law " anent calling (as its title bears), annulling and
abrogating of all laws, ats and constitutions, canone, civile, and muni-

3 cipal,

cipal, with other constitutions, contrare to the religion now profeflit
within the realme," confirmed by the royal afent of the Queen, Ihould
be published among the fiatutes securing the Protestant religion. We
find accordingly, in a very rare edition of the Ads of Parliament,
imprintit at Edinburgh by Robert Lekprevik, printar to the King's
Majeftie, 6 day of April 1568, the as of April x9 inserted among the
acs of the Regent's Parliament in December.
VOL. I. Page 357, line 25, inflead of the paragraph beginning

Bothwell having now got, &c. and ending fufpiciou precipi-
tancy; insert a:followl :
BOTHWELL having now got the Queen's person into his

hands, it would have been unbecoming either a politician or

a man of gallantry to have delayed consummating his schemes
The first ftep towards this was to have his marriage with Lady
Jane Gordon, the Earl of Huntly's siser, dissolved. In order
to accomplish that, in a manner consistent with the ideas of the
Queen on one band, and with the sentiments of his countrymen
on the other, two different processes became necessary: one
founded on the maxims of the canon law, the other accommo-
dated to the tenets of the Reformed Church. Bothwell, ac-
cordingly, commenced a suit, in his own name, in the spiritual
court of the Archbilhop of St. Andrew's, the jurisdiction of which
the Queen had restored by a special commiflion granted for this
purpole, and pleaded that Lady Jane and himself being cousins
within the prohibited degrees, and having married without a papal
dispensation, their union was null from the beginning *. At the

fame

In her own time, it was urged a an aggravation of the Queen's

guilt, that Ihe gave her consent to marry the husband of anotherwo-
man; and the charge has been often repeated since. But, according to

Mary's

fame time he prevailed with Lady Jane to apply to the Proteflant
court of Commiffaries for a divorce, on account of his having
been guilty of adultery. The influence of Bothwell was of equal
weight in both courts. In the course of four days, with the fame
indecent and suspicious precipitancy, the one declared the mar-
riage to be illegal and null, the other pronounced a sentence of
divorce *.

Mary's own ideas, consonant to the principles of her religion, the mar-
riage of Bothwell with Lady Jane Gordon was unlawful and void, and
she confidered them as living together not in the hallowed bonds of ma-
trimony, but in a late of criminal intercourse. Bothwell's addrefics,
which struck her Proteflant subje&s not only as indecent but flagitious,
could not appear in the fame light to her; and this may be pleaded in
extenuation of the crime imputed to her of having liflened to them.
But it will not exempt her from the charge of great imprudence in this
unfortunate flep. Mary was well acquainted with the ideas of her
fubjeas, and knew what they would think of her giving ear for a mo-
ment to the courtship of a man lately married under her own eye, in the
church of her palace. Appendix, No. XXXI. p. 93. Every confi-
deration Ihould have refrained her from forming this union, which to
her people mufl have appeared odious and Ihocking. Remarks on the
Hiflory of Scotland, p. 199, &c.

* Anders. i. 132. Append. No. XXXI. p. 93.
VOL. I. Page 372, line i,1 after occasion, delete the reft of

the paragrapb to the word eluded, line 27, and insert as
fcll·ws:
M A RY, in her present condition, degraded from her throne,

and covered with the infamy attending an accusation of such
atrocious crimes, could be no longer the objeCt of Elizabeth's

jealousy,

jealousy, either as a woman, or as a Queen. Sympathy with a
Sovereign in distress seems, for a moment, to have touched a heart
not very susceptible of tender sentiments; and, while there were
yet warm, Ihe dispatched Throkmorton into Scotland, with power
to negociate both with the Queen and with the confederate. In
his inftrutions there appears a remarkable solicitude for Mary's
liberty, and even for her reputation; and the terms upon which
the proposed to re-etablifh concord between the Queen and her
fubjeas, appear to be so reasonable and well digested, as might
have ensured the safety and happiness of both. Zealous asThrok-
morton was to accomplish this, all his endeavours and address
proved ineffetual. He found not only the confederate nobles,
but the iation in general, so far alienated from the Queen, and so
much offended with the indecent precipitancy of her marriage with
the reputed murderer of her former huiband, as, to be incapable
of listening to any proposition in her favour.

DURING the fate of anarchy, occasioned by the imprisonment

of the Queen, and the dissolution of the eftabli'hed government,
which afforded such ample scope for political speculation, four
different schemes had beep proposed for the settlement of the
nation. One, that Mary should be replaced upon the throne, but
under various and ftrid limitations. The second, that Ihe Ihould
resign the crown to her son, and, retiring out of the kingdom,
should reside, during the remainder of her days, either in England
or in France. The third, that Mary should be brought to public
trial for her crimes, and after convicion, of which no doubt was
entertained, should be kept in perpetual imprisonment. The fourth,
that after trial and condemnation, capital puniihment should be
infliced upon her. Throkmorton, though disposed as well by his
own inclination, as in conformity to the spirit of his inftruaions,

to

to view matters in the light most favourable to Mary, informed his
Court, that the milder schemes, recommended by Maitland alone,
would undoubtedly be reprobated, and one of the more rigorous
carried into execution.

IN justification of this rigour, the confederates maintained

that Mary's affection for Bothwell was still unabated, and
openly avowed by her; that fle rejeced with disdain every
proposal for diflolving their marriage; and declared, that
the would forego every comfort, and endure any extremity,
rather than give her content to that measure. While these were
her sentiments, they contended, that concern for the public
welfare, as well as attention to their own safety, rendered it
necessary to put it out of the Queen's power to restore a daring
man, exasperated by recent injuries, to his former station, which
must needs prove fatal to both. Notwithstanding their solicitude
to conciliate the good-will of Elizabeth, they foresaw clearly what
would be the effec, at this juncure, of Throkmorton's interpo-
fition in behalf of the Queen, and that she, elated with the
prospect of protection, would refuse to liften to the overtures
which they were about to make to her. For this reason, they
peremptorily denied Throkmorton access to their prisoner; and
what propositions he made to them in her behalf they either
refused or eluded *.

Keith, 417. 427.

VOL. L Page 402, iue I, afIer condua,. dkt the re of (t

paragraph to the end, at the word comply, and ifert as

, follows:
,S H Edeclared it to he f! r froam er intentin to iitny rght

of judging betwen Mary agd ier uij*p, or Qs j -nisg

her so far as to require that {he Aould answer to their accuStion.
On the contary, Murray aad i isQcit were fqmioned jo
appeat, in ordr to juftif r. in. tr 'g theirQ crei
so barfily, and to viauioate tiqmfelves frq.ut,, ejes,'r .
which tbe had charged them. *Qn her part, ,liza!h:,;rp ,
whatever flould be the .issue of this ipqui7, to piploy al ] r
power and ipfluence towards replacig Mary.on her tharqo;ne, Xv
·a few .limitations,,by.,no ueanr rerofnabe. . ar, doi.vd br
this seeming attenion . o her d ignit as a en

. oothe.,o ;o c

hand, by a proqiife ;nore flatterin than any w hic.h erhltb i 'o
received from Elizabeth, and urged, on te the r,o tie fbeetng
which were natwral on being conduaed into more itaiter.part
of England, and !}pt th.ere in nmor e ,sonfilient,'-
plie, at length with what Elizeth, required, .^d prom tIto
fend .ommiflioners to the confercpces appointed to bbe,,heiat

. , . . ..- ... . ..'. .1'' i , : ' .'i'-..\lil)

York i.

* Andtrf.lir. pirt i.p.-it, a2,~&tc..Wrsg c. Hiimp46lsa1 .
· tXI rdit..afi Aeitri,9,.go,. : ¥:b:L:, i.. 1] ~(a/lltlqxo I:')

*SC
-. -

d j,

ut, il0. ,'i ' '
-: , Z. cd' . 0. I '-,!.: . z

VOL. L Page 418, ine 5, delete tbe entence beginning Elizabeth

having got, fc. and ending Scottish Queen, line 7, and iWtrt
,U followI :
AS oon as Elizabeth got these into her pofflefion, flie laid them

before her Privy Council, to which she joined, on this

occasion, several noblemen of the greatest eminence in her king-
dom; in order that they might have an opportunity of confider.
ing the mode in which an inquiry of such public importance had
been hitherto conducted, as well as the amount of the evidence
now brought against a person who climed a preferable right of
fucceflion to the English crown. In this refpedable afembly all
the proceedings in the conferences at York and Westminster were
reviewed, and the evidence produced by the Regent of Scotland
againt his Sovereign was examined with attention. In particular,
the letters and other papers said to be written by the Queen of
Scota, were carefully compared " for the manner of writing and
orthography," with a variety of letters which Elizabeth had re-
ceived at different times from the Scottilh Queen; and, as the
result of a most accurate collation, the members of the Privy
Council, and noblemen conjoined with them, declared that no
difference between these could be discovered *. Elizabeth, having
ftabiihed a fad so unfavourable to her rival, began to lay aside
the exprefions of friendship and refpe~ which ihe had hitherto
ufd in all her letters to the Scottih Queen.

Anders. ol. iv. part ii. 170, &c;

VOL II. Page 31, Er 13, ftsr commn caI, ad,
ENCOURAGED by this general difftion to place

dence in her, Eliuzbe relumed a fchame which e

k id

formed during the regency of the Earl of Murray, of feihg
Mary as a prisoner into Scotland. But her entiments and itua-
ton were now very different from what they had bee dug ber
negoation with Murray. Her animofir l th e Q !dn of
Scots wat greatly augmented, by recent experience of iher lab~i
tion as well as power not only to diturb the tranquiy of her
reign, but to wrest from her the. crown; the party in cotland
favourable to Mary was almost entirely broken;: there was no
reason to dread any danger from France, which si contdinedto
court her friendhip She aimed, accordingly, at fometlig tr
different from that which the had in view three y bore.
Then the discovered a laudable solitude not only so the ófe~ ' of
Mary's life, but for securing to her, treatment suited to her ranii
Now she required, as an ~xpref condition, that, immediatel aftr
Mary's arrival in Scotland, file thould be brought to public trial;
and having no doubt that fcntence would be passed accordibg to
her deserts, ihe insisted that, for the good of both kingdos, it
thould be executed without delay *. No tran~ien, peibpt
in Elizabeth's reign merits more severe censure. Eig to cut irt
the days of her rival, the object both of her hatred and d~d, and
no less anxious to avoid the blame to which such i deed of violence
might expose her, The laboured, with timid and ungenerdus rti
fice, to transfer the odium of it from heels to Mary's own fab-

* Murdin, 214.

C 2 jes.

icd2. The Earl of Mar, happily for the honour of his country,
had more virtue than to liften to such an ignominious proposal;
and Elizabeth did not venture to renew it.
VOL. II. Pag;e line 16, after inflame, add the following

Note:
A STRIKING description of that species of eloquence for

which Knox was distinguished, is given by one of his con-

temporaries, Mr. James Melville, Minister of Anftruther. " But
of all the benefites I had that year [1571], was the coming of that
most notible prophet and apostle of our nation, Mr. John Knox,
to St. Andrews, who, by the faaion of the Queen occupying the
castle and town of Edinburgh, was compelled to remove therefra
with a number of the best, and chufed to come to St. Andrews. I
heard him teach there the prophecies of Daniel that summer and
the winter following. I had my pen and little bulk, and took
away sic things as I could comprehend. In the opening of his
text he was moderat the space of half an hour; but when h.
entered to application, he made me so to grue [thrill] and tremble,
that I could not hald the pen to write.-He was very weak. I
saw him every day of his dotrine go bulie [slowly] and fair, with
a furring of marticks about his neck, a staff in the one hand, and
good godlie Richart Ballanden holding him up by the oxter [under
the arm] from the abbey to the pariib kirk; and he the said
Richart and another servant lifted him up to the pulpit, where he
behoved to lean at his first entrie; but e're he was done with his
sermon, he was so active and vigorous, that he was like to ding
tbe pulpit in blade [beat the pulpit to pieces], and fly out of it."
MS. Life of Mr. James Melville, belonging to Mr. Paton of the
Custom-house, Edinburgh, p. 14. 21.

4

# DISSERTATION on King HENRY'S Murder.

DISSERTATION on King HENRY'S Murder.

Page 8, line 2, fter Craigmillar, add,
6. BUT even if all this reasoning fiould be set ds de, and the

authenticity of the Pro4tation should be admitted in its full

extent, it may Rill be a question, what degree of credit should be
given to the afertioa of the two Earls, who were not only present
in the first Parliament, held by Murray as Regent in December
1567, in which the one carried the ceptre, fnd the other the
sword of state, Spotfw. 214. but were both members of the Com-
mittee of Lords of Articles, and in that capaity affted in framing
all the ats by which the Queen was deprived of the Crown, and
her ion feated on the throne; and in particular concurred in the a.
by which it was declared, that whatever hd beflle the Queen,
"was in her awin defult, in sa far s, be divershir previe letters
written haldie with hir awin hand, and fend by hir to James
fometyme Erie of Bothwe!l, cheif executour of the aid horribill
murthour, as weill befoir the committing thairof as thairaftir:
And be hir ungodlie and dilhonourabill proceeding to ane pre-
tendit marriage with him, fuddaindlie and unprovifidie thaireftir,
it is maift certane that fche was previe, airt and pairt, of the adual
devise and deid of the foirnamit munhour of the King her lauch-
full hulband, and thairfoir jltlie defirvis quabtfumever hes bene
done to hir in ony tyme bygaine, or that fl be ufit towards hir,
for the said cause." Anders. ii. 1 .

DISSEITATION, Page 17, line 9, afler also p. 4, add,

N all their negociations with Throkmorton, the Confederates
mention this unalterable attachment of the Queen to Bothwell,

as a sufficient reason for rejeting his proposals of an accommo-
dation with their Sovereign. Keith, 419. 449. This assertion
they renewed in the conferences at York. Anders. iv. part ii.
p. 66. Murray, in his interview with Mary in Lochlevin, charged
her with persising in her inordinate affeaion to Bothwell. Keith,
446. All there, however, may be confidered merely as accufa-
tions brought by the Confederates, in order to vindicate their
rigour towards the Queen. But Throkmorton, who, by his
residence in Edinburgh, and by his intercourse with the Queen's
partizars, as well as with her enemies, had many opportunities of
discovering whether or not Mary had expre(fed herself in such
terms, and who was disposed to view her actions in the most
favourable light, appears, by the paflage which I have quoted from
his letter of the I4th of July, to be persuaded that the Confederates
had not misrepresented her sentiments. He had soon an opportu-
nity of being confirmed with greater certainty in this opinion.
Although the Confederates had refused him access to the captive
Queen, he found means of holding a secret correspondence with
her, and endeavoured to persuade her to give her conlent to have
her marriage with Bothwell dissolved by a sentence of divorce, as
the most probable means of regaining her liberty. She hath sent me
word that she will in no wife consent unto that, but rather die. Ap-
pend. to Vol. I. No. XXI. There is evidence of the continuance of
Mlary's attachment fill more explicit. Lord Herries,in the parliament
held the ijth of December 1567, acknowledged the Queen's inor-
dinate affeaion to that wicked man, and that fle could not be

induced

induced by persuasion to leave him; and that in fequeficring her
within Lochlevin, the Confederates had done the duty of noble-
men. App. to Vol. I. No. XXIIL In the year 1571 a CB-
ference was held by some deputies from a Covention of ~ y,
with the Duke of Chatelherault, Secretary Mitland, Sir James
Balfour, and Kirkaldy; and an account of it written by Mr.
Craig, one of the Minister of Edinburgh, s extant in Caer-
wood MS. HiR. ii. 244 In presence of all these person, moit
of whom were in Edinburgh when the Queen w taken at Car
berry, Maitland, who was now an avowed pardan of Mry,
declares, that on the fame night she was brought to Edinbusgs,
he himself had offered that if ihe would abandon Bothrell, she
should have as thankful obedience as ever ihe had since the came
to Scotland. But no wife would she consent to leave Bothwen
According to Sir James Mclvil, the Queen found means of
writing a letter to Bothwell on the evening of that day when ihe
was condu&ed as a prisoner to Edinburgh, in which fte declared
her afffeion to him in the mot tender expre~io'n, d b- rfo-
lution never to abandon him. This letter, he lays, was ine-
cepted by the Confederates, and determined them to confine Mary
in the castle of Lochlevin. But as neither Buchanan nor Knox,
both abundantly disposed to avail themselves of every fai and
report that could be employed in order to reprefnt Mary's cond
as improper and criminal, mention this letter; and as the Cone-
derates themselves, in their negodaons with Throkmoro, as
well as in their accusations of the Queen before the Englith Cornm
missioners at York and Weftminfer, maintain the s~ue silence
with regard to it, I am fatisfed that Melvi, who wrote hs me-
moirs for the information of his Ton, in his old age, and long
after the events which he records happened; has been mfiaken
with regard to this paricul.

DISSERTATION, Page 19, line 5, after Good. i. 154 delete 4.

After the conferences, Wc. to Good. ii. 256. in line 3, and
in/frt as fillows:
N 0 R did Norfolk declare there to be his sentiments only in

public official letters, he expressed himself in the fame man-

ner to his most confidential friends. In a secret conference with
the Bishop of Ross at York, the Duke informed him, that he had
seen the letters, &c. which the Regent had to produce against the
Queen, whereby there would be such matter proved against her,
as would dishonour her for ever. State Trials, edition of Har-
grave, i. 91. Murdin, 52. The Bilhop of Ross, if he had known
the letters to be a notorious forgery, must have been naturally led,
in consequence of this declaration, to undeceive the Duke, and to
expose the imposture. But, instead of this, the Duke and he and
Lethington, after consulting together, agreed, that the Bilhop
should write to Mary, then at Bolton, and inftrua her to make
such a proposal to Elizabeth as might prevent the public prodution
of the letters and other evidence. State Trials, i. 94. Murdin, 45.
Indeed, the whole of this fccret conference seems to imply, that
Lethington, Ross, and Norfolk, were conscious of some defec in
Mar-'s cause, and therefore exerted all their ingenuity in order to
avoid a public accusation. Murdin, 52, 53. To Banister, whom
the Duke seems to have trusted more entirely than any other of his
servants, he expressed himself in similar terms with refpeC to the
Queen of Scots. State Trials, i. 98. The words of Banifler's
evidence are remarkable " I confess that I, waiting of my Lord
a-d Master. when the Earl of Suffex and Mr. Chancellor of the
Putchy that now is, were in commiflion at York, did hear his

Grace

Orce fiy, that upon eamu o of the mtteof thdmu , it
did appear that the ~ eos Scots am g y and pry to the
der of Lord Darnly, whereby I ily th~ou thdt hi G.
would never join in au e with hr." Muribl, 134., E
beth, in her inftri~om to thelil -of Shl~-wzuyand
1583, aiTerts, that boh the Duke and Earl of Arunddid decre
to herself, that the proof, by the view of her letten, did fall aut
ffficient agaft the Queen of Scots; however, they were ser
drawn to cover her &fau and promnoue iar noc n cy. M,
Advoc. Library. A; iiiL . p.'3r4. from'Coa L&fii g 9. 4
A similar imprion wa made upon other coonmporaie of Mary
by the produion of the letter, which implies. a fll belief o
their being genuine. Cecil, in his comfa dence with Sir Heay
Norris, the Englilh ambasador in France, relates thi tranfa~
in terms which leave no room to doubt with reipe~ to hi own
private opinion. In his letter, Decem. 14th, I568, the very day
on which the letters, &c. were laid before the meeting of Privy
Counsellors and Peers, he infor him," that thR iLg t Wm
driven, for his defence, to difclifc a full fardel of the naughty
matter, tending 1o convince the Queen a deviser of the murher,
and the Earl of Bothwell as her executour; and now the Q(een'
party, so great, refuse to make any answer, and preói that tir
Mifrefs may come in person to answer the matter herlf before
the Queen's Majesty, which is thought not fit to be granted until
the great blot of the marriage with her hulbnd's murtherer, and
the evident charges, by letters of her own, to be deviser of the
murther, be somewhat razed out or recovered; for that a the
mattes are exhibited ag~int her, it is fir unseemly for any Prince,
or for chaste ears, to be annoyed with the filthy noie thereof;
and yet, as being a Commifioner, I mut and will forbear to pro-

D nounce

nounce any thing herein certainly, though as a private perfb I
cannot but with horror and trembling thinl thereof." Cabala,
x j6. 5. From the correspondence of Bowes, the Eigligh Resident
in Scc:land, with Walsingham in the year 1582, publiied to-
wards the close of this Dissertation, it is manifft that both in
England and Scotland, both by Elizabeth and James, both by the
Dukc of Lcnnox and Earl of Gowrie, the letters were deemed to
be genuine. The eagerness, on one fide to obtiin, and on the
other to keep pofeffilon of the caiket and letter, implies that this
was the belief of both. These fentiments'of contemporaries, who
were in a situation to be thoroughly informed, and who had abi-
lities to judge with discernment, will, in the opinion of many of
my readers, far outweigh theories, suppositions, and conjehures,
formed at the distance of two centuries. 6. The letters were sub-
jeded to a solemn and judicial examination with refped to their
authenticity, as far as that could be ascertained by resemblance of
character and fashion of writing: For after the conferences at
York and Westminster were finished, Elizabeth, as I have related,
aflembled her Privy Counsellors, and, joining to them several of
the moR eminent noblemen in her kingdom, laid before them all
the proceedings againit the Scottish Queen, and particularly
ordered, that " the letters and writings exhibited by the Regent,
as the QGeen of Scots' letters and writings, ihould also be flewed,
and conference [i. e. comparison] thereof made in their fight,
v-ith the letters of the said Queen's, being extant, and heretofore
written with her own hand, and sent to the Queen's Majesty;
whereby may be searched and examined what difference is betwixt
them." Good. ii. 252. They assembled accordingly at Hamp-
ton Court, December 14 and i$, 1568; and, "The originals
of the letters supposed to be written with the Queen of Scots' own

hand,

hand, were'then also prefenly produced and peruled; and being
read, were duly conferred and compared,. for the manner of
writing, and fashion of orthography, with sundry other letters
long since heretofore written, and sent by the said Queen of Scots
to the Queen's Majesty. In collation whereof no difference was
found." Good. ii. 256.

DISSIT.ATIOr, Page 2o, i;a 2i, afr Bothwell, add,
8. IN opposition to all these re*a for blieving the letter,

&c. to be authentic, the condud of the Nobles confederated

against Mary, in not producing them direly as evidence against
her, has been represented as an irriagable proof of their bing
forged. According to the account of the Confederates themWc lve
the ciket containing the letters was seized hy them on the twen-
tieth of June one thoufmnd five hundred and futy-feve; but the
firt time that they were judiqitUy fasted as evidence againit th
Queen, was in a meting of e, gnte' Pirvy Council, Decm-
ber fourth, api4.tey afterwaurdsI-rved as ,the foundation of the
ads made against her in the Parliament held on the fifteenth of the
fame. month. If the letters had been genuine, it is contended,
that the obtaining poeffeion of them mut have afforded such mat-
ter of triumph to the Confederates, that they would instantly have
proclaimed it to the whole world; and in their negociations with
the English and French Miniftee, or with such of their fellow-
fubjets as condemned their proceeding, they would have silenced,
at once, every idvoate for thc Q(een, by exhibiting this con-
vincing proof of her guilt. But in this reasoning fuflicient atten-
tion is not paid to the delicate and perilous situation of the Confe-
derates at that juniture. They had taken arms against their

D a Sovereign,

Sovereign, had seized her person at Carberry-hill, and had confined
her a prisoner in Lochlevin. A considerable number, however,
of their fellow-fubjeds, headed by fime of the most powerful
noblemen in the kingdom, was combined againt them. This
combination, they soon perceived, they could not hope to break or
to vanquish without aid either from France or England. In the
former kingdom, Mary's uncles the Duke of Guise and Cardinal of
Lorrain were, at that period, all-powerful, and the King himself
was devotedly attached to her. If the Confederates confined their
views to the dissolution of the marriage of the Queen with Both-
well, and to the exclusion of him for ever from her presence, they
might hope, perhaps, to be countenanced by Charles IX. and his
Ministers, who had sent an envoy into Scotland of purpose to
difuade Mary from that ill-fated match; Append. No. XXL
whereas the loading her publicly with the imputation of being
accessory to the murder of her husband, would be deemed such
an inexpiable crime by the court of France, as must cut off every
hope of countenance or aid from that quarter. From England,
with which the principal Confederates had been long and inti-
mately connected, they had many reasons to exped more effetual
support; but, to their aftonilhment, Elizabeth condemned their
proceedings with asperity, warmly espoused the cause of the
captive Queen, and was extremely solicitous to obtain her re-
lease and restoration. Nor was this one of the artifices which
Elizabeth often employed in her tranfations with Scotland.
Though her most sagacious Ministers confidered it as the wisest
policy to support the confederate Lords rather than the Queen
of Scots, Elizabeth disregarded their counsel *. Her high

notions

*This was the opinion of Throkmorton, as appears from an extrat
of his letter of July a th, publilhed in the Append. No. XXII. The

fame

notions of royal authority, and of the fubmiflion due by subjee,
induced her, on this occasion, to exert brfelf in behalf of Mary,
not only with sincerity but with zeal; the negociated, the solicited,
{he threatened. Finding the Confederates inflexible, /he endea-
voured to procure Mary's release by means of that party in Scotland
which continued faithful to her, and intruCted Throkmorton to
correspond with the leaders of it, and to make overtures to that
effe. Keith, 45i. App. No. XXIII. She even went so far
as to direct her ambafldor at Paris, to concert meafies with the
French King how they, by their joint efforts, might persuade or
compel the Scots to " acknowledge the Queen her good sier to be
their Sovereign Lady and Queen, and renounce their obedience
to her son." Keith. 462, 3, 4. From all these circumstance
the Confederates had every reason to apprehend that Mary would
soon obtain liberty, and by some accommodation be restored to
the whole, or at least to a considerable portion of her authority as
Sovereign. In that event they foreaw, that if they ihould venture
to accuse her publicly of a crime so atrocious as the murder of
her husband, they must not only be excluded for ever from

fame were the fentimcnts of Cecil, in his letter of Aug. 9gth, 567, to
Sir Henry Norris, Elizabeth's ambalfador to France. " You hall
perceive, fays he, by the Queen's letter to you, at this present, how
earnestly the is bent in favour of the Queen of Scots, and truly since
the beginning the hath been greatly offended with the Lords and,
howsoever her Majesty might make her profit by bearing with the Lords
in this action, yet no counsel can Ray her Majety from manifeting her
miliking of them.' Cabala, 140. And in his letter of Sept. 3d,
" The Queen's Majefy, our Sovereign, remaining Btill offnded with
the Lords for the Queen; the example moveth her." Ib. ar. Digges
Comp. Amb. 14.

power

power and favour, but from any hope of personal safety. On
this account ti. . long confined therrfelves to that which was
originallv declared to be the reaion of their taking arms; the
ave,:g'ng the King's death, the dissolving the marriage with
Bothwel!, the inflicing on him condign punishment, or banish-
ing him for ever from the Queen's presence. It appears from
the letters cf Tkrokmorton, published by Bishop Keith, and in
my Appendix, that his sagacity early discovered that this would
be the tenor of their conduct In this letter from Edinburgh,
dated July i4th, he observes, that " they do not forget their
own peril conjoined with the danger of the Prince, but, as far
as I perceive they intend not to touch the Queen either in surety
or in honour; for they speak of her with rcfpea and reverence,
and do affirm, as I do learn, that, the condition aforesaid accom-
plifhed [i e. the separation from Bothwell], they will both put her
to liberty, and restore her to her eflfte." Append. No. XXII.
His letter of August 22d, contains a declaration made to him by
Lethington, in narne and in presence of his aflociates, "that they
never meant harm neither to the Queen's person nor to her
honour-that they have been contented hitherto to be condemned,
as it were, of all Princes, strangers, and namely of the Queen
of England, being charged of grievous and infamous titles, as to
be noted rebels, traitors, seditious, irgrate and cruel, all which
they susser and bear upon their hacks, b-caufe they will not
jLliyv themlelvcs, nor proc.e.. i: any tlHi g th.t may touch their
Sovercign's honcur. But in cal;. :he be with these defamations
continually opprtfed, or *Alih the fore, aid, and practices of
other Princec, ar.d namely of the Qctn of Fngland, put in dan-
ger, or to an extremitv, they ihall be compelled to deal otherwise
with the Queen than they intend, or than they desire; for, added

he,

he, you may be fur we will not loS our lives, have our-hndp
forfeited, and be reputed rebels thsough the world, feeing we
have the means to justify ourselves." Keith, 448. From this
view of the slippery ground on which they stood at that time,
their conduc in not producing the letters for feverl months,
appears not only to have been prudent but essential to their
own safety.

BuT, at a subsequent period, when the Confederates found

it necefiary to have the form of government, which they had
efRabliled, confirmed by authority of Parliament, a diftrent
mode of proceeding became requifitc. All that had hitherto
been done with refpeta to the Queen's difnifion, the feating
the young King upon the throne, and the appointment of a
Regent, was in reality nothing more than the deed of private
men. It required some exhibition of some legal evidence to
procure a conftitutiodal at giving the fanaion of its approba-
tion to such violent measures, and to obtain "a perfec law
and security for all them that either by deed, counsel, or sub-
scription, had entered into that cause since the beginning."
Haynes, 453. This prevailed with the Regent and his secret
council, after long deliberation to agree to produce all the evi-
dence of which they were possessed; and upon that prodution
Parliament passed the ats which were required. Such a change
had happened in the Rate of the kingdom as induced the Con-
federates to venture upon this change in their condu&. In June,
a powerful combination was forming against them under the
leading of the Hamiltons. In December, that combination was
broken; most of the members of it had acknowledged the King
as their lawful Sovereign, and had submitted to the Regent's

2 govern-

government. Huntly, Argyll, Herries, the mos powerful
noblemen of that party, were present in the Parliament, and
concurred in all its ads. Edinburgh, Dunbar, Dunbarton, and
all the chief strong holds in the kingdom, were now in the
hands of the Regent; the arms of France had full occupation
in its civil war with the Hugonots. The ardour of Elizabeth's
zeal in behalf of the captive Queen seems to have abated. A ftep
that would have been followed with ruin to the Confederates in June,
was attended with little danger in December. From this long
deduction it appears, that no proof of the letters being forged
can be drawn from the circumstance of their not having been
produced, immediately after the twentieth of June; but though
no public accusation was brought instantly against the Queen, in
coniequence of seizing the casket, hints were given by the Con-
federates, that they possessed evidence fuficient to convit her.
This is plainly implied in a letter of Throkmorton, July 2ift,
Keith, Pref. p. xii. and more clearly in the pafage which I have
quoted from his letter of AuguR 22. In his letter of July 25,
the papers contained in the casket are Rill more plainly pointed
out. "They [i. e. the Confederates] fay, that they have as
apparent proof against her as may be, as well by the testimony
of her own hand-writing, which they have recovered, as also by
sufficient witnesses." Keith, 426.

DISSERTATION, Page 39, fie so, after already exaaU d,

'add,
pTHESE proofs may be classid under two heads, I. The

erroneous and contradicory accounts which are aid to be

given of the letters, upon he fir.t judicial produltioa of thme.
In the Secret Council held Decem. 4, 1567, they are described
" as her privie letters written and fubfcrivit with her awin
hand." Haynes, 454. Good. ii. 64 In the at of Pilia-
ment, passed on the 15th of the fame month, they are described
as " her privie letters written halelie with hir awin hand."
Good. ib. 67. This diversity of description has been confidered
as a strong presumption of forgery. The manner in which Mr.
Hume accounts for this is natural and plausible, vol v.. . 498.
And several ingenious remarks, tending to confirm his obfer-
vations, are made in a pamphlet lately publilhed, intitled,
Mifellaneous Remarks on the Enquiry into the Evidence agaihj
Mary tueen of Scots. To what they have observed it may be
added, that the original ad of Secret Council does not now
exist; we have only a copy of it found among Cecil's papers,
and the transcriber has been manifetly so ignorant, or so care-
less, that an argument founded entirely upon the supposition of
his accuracy is of little force. Several errors into which he has
fallen, we are enabled to point out, by comparing his copy of
the ad of Secret Council with the ac of Parliament passed in
consequence of it. The former contains a petition to Parlia-
ment; in the latter the real petition is resumed verbatim, and

E converted

converted into a law. In the copy, the Queen'* marriage with
Bothwell is called " a priveit marriage," which it certainly
was not; for it was celebrated, after proclamation of banns, in
St. Giles's church three several day, and with public solemnity;
but in the ad it is denominated " ane pretendit marriage,"
which is the proper description of it according to the ideas of the
party. In the copy, the Queen is said " to be so thrall and bludy
affe&ionat to the privat appetite of that tyrant," which is non-
sense, but in the act it is " blindly affeaionat." In the copy, it
is said, " all nobill and virtuous men abhorring their traine and
company." In the ad, " their tyrannie and companie," which
is evidently the true reading, as the other has either no meaning,
or is a mere tautology. 2. The other proof of the forgery of
the letters, is founded upon the impossibility of reconciling the
account, given of the time when, and the places from which,
the letters are supposed to have been written, with what is cer-
tainly known concerning the Queen's motions. According to
the paper published, Anders. ii. 269. which has been called
Murray's Diary, and which is formed upon the authority of the
letters,

DISSERTATION, Page 35, ine 14, after approbation, Ao,
W ITH refpea to the Sonnets, Sir David Dalrymple has

proved clearly, that they must have been written after the

murder of the King, and prior to Mary's marriage with Both-
well. But as hardly any part of my narrative is founded upon
what is contained in the SonneM and as in this Difertation I have
been constrained to dwell longer upon minute and verbal criti-
cifms, than may be interesting or agreeable to many of my readers,
I Ihall reft satisfied with referring, for information concerning
every particular relative to the Sonnets, to Remars on the Iffory
of Scotland, Chap. XI.

THE END.

A
