T H E

T O
O 1F TI H E

I

G

O F T H I.o
EMPEROR CHARLES

By WILLIAM ROBERTSON, D. D.
PRINCIPALoftheUniverfityofEDINB URGH, andHtsToR1o-

OR A P H tR to His MAJESTY for SCOTLAND.

VO L.
D U B L

III.

I N:
Printed for WM. WATSON, and THOM AS EWINO, Booksellers, il Capel-

itreet, and SAMUEL WATSON, Bookseller, in Dame-fRreet.

M DCC LXIX.
H

I

S

R

Y
R

E

N

V.

# BOOK VII.

THE
H I

S

T

0

R Y
OF THE

I

OF THE
EMPEROR I

BOO

CHAR L ES V.

K

VII.
T H E calamities which the Emperor fuiffered in his BOOK VII.

unfortunate enterprize against Algiers were grcat ; 1541.

Renewal of

and the account of there, which augmented in pro- holililties by
portion as it spread at a greater distance from tle scene of i'tanci, anti

his nimotivC

his disasters, encouraged Francis to begin hostilities, on whicl tor it,
he had Decn for some time resolved. But he did not think it
prudent, to produce as the motives of this resolution, either his
ancient pretensions to the dutchy of Milan, or the Emperor's
difingenuity in violating his repeated promiles with regard to
the restitution of that country. The former might have been a

VOL. III. B good

E

G

N

BOOK. VII. good reason agaifit C concludizng the truce of Nice, but w'as rone

for breaking it ; the latter could not be urgeld without exposing
lhis own credulity as much as the Empetror's Want bs Intcglity.
A violent and unwarrantab'c at.ion b o;ne of thc Imperial
generals furniihed him with a rea(f);l to juflify his taking arms,
which .was of greater sweight than cither of these, and fuclh
as would have rouzed him, if le had been *as desirous of peace,
as lie was eager for war. Francis, by figninlg tlie treaty of
truce at Nice, without consulting Solyinan, gave (is lie fore-
fiw) great offence to that haughty Monarch whi'o con'idered an
alliance with him as an honour of which a Clhriftian prince had
cause to be proud. The Frencl King's friendly :interview
with the Emnperor in Provence, followed by ficll extfiaordinary
appearances of union and confidence as accompanied Charles's
reception in France, induced the Sultan to fiufpdt that the two
rivals had at last forgotten their alncient enmity, in order that
they might form fucli a general confederacy againfl the
Ottoman power, as h.ad been longwifhed for in Cliriftendom
and often attempted in vail. Charles, with his ufiu'i art, en.
deavoured to confirm and strengthen these fifpicions, by
inftruiing his.emiffaries at Conitantinople as well as in those
courts with which Solyman held any intelligence, to reprefelt
the concord between him and Francis to be so entire, that their
fentimenti, views and pursuits, woild be the fame for the fui
ture . It was not without difficulty that Francis efficed these
impreflions; but the address of Rincon, the French ambassador
at the Porte, together with the manifeff advantage of carrying
on hostilities againift the house of Austria in concert with France,

a Mem. de Ribicr. tom. I. p. So2.

'prevailed.
2

prevailcd at length on tile Sultan to enter into a closer con- BOOR VII.
junitioil with Francis than ever. Rincon returned into i541
FFrance, in order to communicate to his maiiffr ;a fcI(.lme of
the Sultan's for gaining the concurrence of tile Venctians in
their operations againfl tlh common enle)y. Sol)'Al.11n hIa1ving
lately concluded a peace with that republic,' to which' the media-
tion of .Fraacis, a.nd tlre good-oflices of Rincon had greatly
contributed,. tlhoughlt it not impollib!e to a!lin:c tlie ' rate' by
fuich advantages, as, togetlher with tile example of' the French
Moarcji, . might oyerbalanie any scruples ariling cithlr frol T,,,e ,,,ter,
decency .or cautin, that, could operate ol the odlier lid. Fran- 'otli"i :"Ithal

fadors his

cis, \Wmly. approvipg of this meaflre, dipatlclcd Rincon back lpricxt for
to Colitanitinlpple, ,,and direftilg him to. go by Veni:e alo6ig :.tlis
.with ,Frcgo(o, a Gelloele exiie vwholn he appointcd'lhis 'amiaflit-
dor t lo tliat republic, empowered. them to negociate the 'matter
with tllhefenate, to whomn Soiyima'n.' had 'ent an envoy for the
fame , tnpurpofeb. Tlie nmarquifs del Guafto,. governor of tlhe Mi-
lanefe, an ollicer of great abilities, but' capable or'attempiting
and execitinlg thie.. molt atrocious adions, got intelligelice of
the motjipps and dce(,ittion of tliefe nmbaiidors. As lie knew
how nmuch !his master vwi'sled to diifcvcr the intentions of the
French,King, and of what consequence it was to retard tle
exccultipn ,ps his measu;res, he employed some soldiers belonging
to the, garrison of Pavia to lie in wait for Rincon and Fi-egfo
nsthey failed down the Po, wlo lmurdered them and most of
their attendants and seized their papers. Upon receiving an
accotunt of this barbarous outrage, committed, (dluing the fib-
filtence of truce, against persons held sacred by thie mons
uncivilized nations, Francis's grief for the unhappy fiate of

b Hlill, dc Venct. de Purata, iv, 125.

B 3 ttwo

BOOK VII. two servants whom he loved and trustcd, his uneasiness at the

C^^54 interruption of his schemes by their death, and every other

panion were swallowed up and lofi in the indignation which
this insult on the honour of his crown excited. He exclaimed
loudly against Guafto, who, having drawn upon himself all the
infamy of affaflination without making any discovery of im-
portance, as the ambassadors had left their instruCtions and
other papers of consequence behind them, now boldly denied
his being accessary in any wife to the crime. He sent an am-
baffador to the Emperor to demand suitable reparation for an
indignity, which no prince, how inconsiderable soever or pu-
fillanimous, could tamely endure: And when Charles, im-
patient at that time to set out on his African expedition, en-
deavoured to put him off with an evasive answer, he appealed
to all the courts in Europe, setting forth the heinousness of the
injury, the spirit of moderation with which he had applied for
redress, and the iniquity of. the Emperor in disregarding this.
just request.

NOTWITHSTANDrNG the confidence with which Guafto

afrerted his own innocence, the accusations of the French gained
greater credit than all his protestations; and lBellay, the French
commander in Piedmont, procured, at length, by his industry
and address, such a minute detail of the tranfaation, with the
testimony of so many of the parties concerned, as amounted
almost to a legal proof of the marquis's guilt. In consequence
of this opinion of the publick, confirmed by such strong evi.
dence, Francis's complaints were universally allowed to be well
founded, ana the ftep hlie took towards renewing hostilities

were
4

were ascribed not merely to ambition or resentment, but to the BOOK VII.
unavoidable neceflity of vindicating the honour of his crown c. <

BUT howjuft soever Francis might esteem his own cause, lie

did not trust so much to tllat, as to neglect the proper pre-
cautions fbr gaining other allies betides the Sultan, by whose
aid he might counterbalance the Emperor's fiuperior power.
But his negociations to this cffect were attended with very little
success. IHelry VIII. more and more bent upon shemes againfl
Scotland, which he knew would at once diflilve his union with
France, was inclinable rather to take part with tle Emperor
than to contribute in any degree towards favouring the op.ra-
tions againfl him. The Pope adhered inviolably to his antient
system. of neutrality. The Venetians, notwithltanding Soly-
man's solicitations, imitated tle Pope's example. The Germans,
satisfied with the religious liberty whiclh they enjoyed found it
more theit interest to gratify than to irritate thle Emperor; so
tlhat the Kings of Denmark and Sweden, who on this occasion
were first drawn in to interest themselves in the quarrels of the
more potent Monarchs of the south, and the duke of Cleves,
who hlad a dispute with the Emperor about the the pofieflion of
Gueldres, were the only confederates Francis secured. But the
dominions of the two former lay at flich a distance, and the
power of the latter was so incolfiderable,. that he gained little
-by their alliance.

:FRANCIS, however, fitpplied all defects by his own aciiVity. Francis' in-
Being afflited at this time with a' distemper, the effet of iis i'tryi" pre-

* paring for'

W ar,
-,* c Bellay, 367, &c. Jovll Hist. lib. 40. 268.

irregular

5

3BOOK \I< . irigcil.p L'cafrrcs, and which preven;ted liis pu:rfi;:g thcm

v~ i:h the si.C

!ce;;ious indulgetce, he r.pp!icd ;

to buif .; with

more thla:'.i s ufiaIl induifry. Tlhe fame cauIl x hieh occafoiiiedC
this cxtr.ordiri;;ry attention to hns afl:irs, rendercd him moro!':
an.d dinflti:;ficd with the miti.fters 'lhom he had hitherto em-
p!oyc(. 'This accidental pcvifhncfs of temper bZi;g fliarpened
by retlicing on the false ftcps into wHlitih 'he had'lately'beci be-
trayed, and the insults to which lie had been exposed, some of
those .in ,whonm le had, hitherto placed the greatest confidence
felt the .effees of this change in his temper, and were deprived
of their- offices. At iat. lie disgraced Montmorency' himself, *wIo
had long direeed affairs as well civil as military \With all the
authority. of a tninifter no. less beloved thah trufltd' by his maf-
ter; and Francis bring fond of shewing that the fall of fitch a
powerful favourite did not assed the rigourI. or prudence *of his
adminittratiop, this was a new motive to redouble his,'diligence
in preparing to open the war by fom fpleendtd .arld, iextraordi-
nary leffort.

i 42. FRANCIS accoirdinly broug',t; into the fi.ld'five, arimies. One

He brings
five armies to ad. in Luxeihbourg iihd r!the.; duka'of 'Orl¢<nsi ccpmpaniqd
into the field. by the duke of Lorraine as his: i!lirudor in tLheart.ofwa.r An-

other commanded by 'the dauphin marched towards: the. son-
tiers of Spain. A thiid l-d by Van Rorncml tihe, marflial,.o f
Gueldres, and composed chiefly of the troops pof,lJecvcs,, hlad
Brabant allotted for the'theatre of its operations. A forth, 'of
which the duke of Venidome was genleral, hovered,,Oln ,tlh. bor-
ders of Slanders. The last, confifti'g of the forces cantoned in
Piedmont, was destined for the admiral Annibautt. The dauphin
and his brother were appointed.to .coiimmand ,where; the, chief
exertion was intended, and'the -greatefti, honour to be. reaped;

. the
6

7

the army of tile former amounted to forty thousand, that of BOOK VIi.
the latter to thirty thouaindcl men. Nothing appears more ,"'

1542,

furprizing than that Francis did not pour with these numerous
and irresistible armies into the Milanese, which had so long been
the objet of his wilhes as well as enterprizes, and that le fliould
chufe rather to turn almost his whole ltrcngth illto another direc-
tion, and towards new conqucfts. But the remembrancc of the
difitlcrs which lie had met with in his former. expeditions iato
Italy, together with tile difficulty of flpporting a war carried on
at fitchi: a dit(ance from his own ldominions, had g!adually abated
his violent inclination to obtain footing in that country,. and made
him willing to try the fortune of his arms iii another quarter.
At the ilam' e time lie expeced to make fllch a powerful imprcf-
sion on the frontier of Spain, where tlierc were few towns of any
ftrcngth, nhd no .nimy affimblcd to qppofl him, as might en-
able him to recovor ¥ponllefion of the .county of Roufillon lately
difrnemberel from the F.rench crown., before Charles could
britng into the field any force able to obftruit his progress. The
necefity of flipporting his alley the duke of Cleves, and the
hope ds drawing a cbnfiderable body of soldiers out of Germany
by his imeans, determined him to ad with vigour in tlle Low-
Coilntries.

TIfE dtuphil and ,duke of Orleans .opened the campaign June.

Iufich about 'the finme.time, the former .lying siege to Petpignan heir opera-
the capital of Roufillon, and the latter entering Luxembourg.
The duke of Orleans puihed his operations with the greatelt
rapidity and fuccers, one town fallingafter anotlher, untill no
place in that large dutchy remained in the Emperor's hands but
Thionville. Nor could hie lhave failcd of over-running the ad-

.jacent

!Boo.< VII. jacent provinces with the fame ease, if he had not voluntarily

'Srz. flopt flort in this career of victory. But a report prevailing

that the Emperor had determined to hazard a battle in order to
save Perpignan, on a sudden the duke, prompted by youthful
ardour, or moved, perhaps, by jealousy of his brother, whom
he both envied and hated, abandoned his own conqiefts, and
hastened towards Roufillon in order to divide with hiim the
glory of the victory.

ON his departure fomebf his troops were disbanded, others

deserted their colours, and the reft, cantoned in the towns which
he had taken, remained inactive. By this condut, which leaves
a dilhonourable imputation either on his underitanding or his
heart, or on both, he not only renounced whatever he could have
hoped from such a promising opening of the campaign, but gave
the enemy an opportunity of recovering, before the end of fum-
mer, all the conquests which he had gained. On the Spanifl
frontier, the emperor was not so inconsiderate as to venture on
a battle the loss of which might have endangered his kingdom.
Perpignan, .thoygh poorly fortified, and briskly attacked, hav-
ing been largely supplied with ammunition and provisions by
the vigilance of Doriad, was defended so long and so vigoroully
by the duke of Alva, the persevering obftancy of wllofe tem-
per fitted him admirably for fucch service, that at last the French,
after a siege of three months, wafted by diseases, repulsed
in several assaults, and despairing of success, relinquilhed the
undert:king, and retired into their own countrye, Thus all
Francis's mighty preparations, either from some defect in his

d SigoniiVitaA. Dorie, p. 1191. e Sandov. Hift.ton. ii. 315.

own
8

own conduCt, or from the superior. power and prudence of his
rival, produced no efedts that bore any proportion to his ex-
pence and efforts, or fucl as gratified, in any dcgrce, his own
hopes, or answered the expectation of Europe. 'The only
solid advantage of the campaign twas the acquisition of a few
towns in Piedmont, which Bellay gained rather by firatagen
and address, than by the force of armsr.

M E A N W H I L E the Emperor and Francis, though both con-

fiderably exhalufed by such great but indecisive cflbrts, discover-
ing no abatement of their mutual animosity, employed all their
attention, tried every expedient, and turned themfelvcs towards
ever quarter, in order to acquire new allies, together with such
a reinforcement offtrcngth as would give them the fupcriorlty
in the ensuing campaign. Charles, taking advantage of the
terror and resentment of the Spaniards, upon the sudden inva-
sion of their country, prevailed on the Cortes of the several
kingdoms. to grant him subsidies with a more liberal hand than
usual. At tle fame time, he borrowed a large fum fiom Jolln
King of Portugal, putting him in poffenilon by way of security
for his being repayed, of the Molucca isles in the East Indics,
with the gainfiul commerce of precious spices, which that fe-
questered corner of tile globe yields. Not satisficd with
this, he negociated a marriage between Plilip his only son,
now in his sixteenth year, and Mary daughter of that Monarch,
with whom her father, the most opulent prince in Europe, gave
a large dower ; and having likewise persuadcd the Cortes of
Aragon and Valencia to recognize Philip as the heir of there

Booi~ VII.

Prepa;ntiolis
for Allother
Callipm£11.

f Sandov. Hilt. ii. 318. Bellay, 387, &c. Fcrrcr. 9. 237.
VOL. III.

9
c

crowins,

crowns, he obtained from them the donative usual on such oc-
cafions '. These extraordinary supplies enabled him to make
such additions to his forces in Spain, that le could detach a great
\bld) intothe Low-Countries, and yet reserve as many as were
fs1 l:iceit for the defence of the kingdom. Having thus provided
for the security of Spain and committed the government of it
to his Ton, he failed for Italy, in his way to Germany. But
how attentive soever to raise the funds for carrying on the war,
or eager to grasp at any new expedient for that purpose, he
was not so inconsiderate as to accept of the overture which Paul,
knowing his neceflities, artfully threw out to him. That am-
bitious Pontiff, no leTs sagacious to discern, than watchful to
seize opportunities of aggrandizing his family, solicited him
to grant Otavio his grandchild, whom the Emperor had ad-
mitted to the honour of being his fon-in-law, the investiture of
the dutchy of Milan, in return for which he promised such a
valt fum of money as would have gone far towards supply-
ing his present exigencies. But Charles, as well from unwil-
lingnefs to alienate a province of so much value, and. from dif-
gust at the Pope, who had hither to refused to join in the war
againit Francis, rejeced the propofil. His difatisfation with
Paul at that juncture was so great, that he even refused to approve
his alienating Parma and Placentia from the patrimony of St.
Peter, and fettling them on his own son and grandson as a
fief to be held of the Holy fee. As no other expedient for
raising money among the Italian states remained, he consented
to withdraw the garrison which he had hitherto kept in the
citadels of Florence and Leghorn, in consideration for which,

t Ferrelas, 9. 238. 241. Jovii Hilt. lib 42. 298. 6.

he
BOOK VII.

1543.

May.
10

EMPEROR CHARLES V.

lie received a large present fiom Coflio de Medici, wlo by this rmcers
iccured his own independance and got poflkllion of two forts, which
were justly called the fetters of Tuscany.

BuT Charles, while le feemeed to have turned his wholc atten-

tion towards raising tlh furms necccalry for defraying the
expence of the year, had not been negligent of objcts nmre
distant, though no less important, and had concluded a league
osTensive and defensive with Henry VIII, from whicl lie de-
rived, in the end, greater advantage than fiom all his other
preparations. Several flight circumtRances, which have already
been mentioned, had begun to alienate the affedions of that
Monarch from Francis his present ally, and new incidents of
great moment had occurred to increase his disgust and ani-
mofity. Henry, dcfirous of cftablilhing an uniformity in reli-
gion in Great Britain, as well as fond of making proselytes to his
own opinions, had formed a cfheme for perflading his nephew
the King of Scotland to renouce the Pope's fiipremacy, and
to adopt the fame system of reformation which he had intro-
duced into England. This meafiure he pursued with his usual
cagernefs and impetuosity, making such advantageous over-
tures to James, whom lie confidered as not over scrupulously
attached to any religious tenants, that he scarce doubted of sic-
cess. His' propositions were accordingly received in such a
manner that he flattered himself with having gained his point.
But the Scottifl ecclesiastics, foreseeing the ruin of the church
to be the consequence of the King's union with England; and

Bol; VII.

1543.

The Empe-
rot's neocia-
lions withl
-lClcny VIIl.

lenry's rup-
ture with
France ant
Scotland.

h Adriani Iftoria. i. 195. Sleid. 312. Jovii Hist. lib. 43. p. 301. Vita di Cos.
Medici di Baldini, p. 34.

C , tlhe

IJ

the partizans of France, no less convinced that it would put an
end to the influence of that crown upon the publick councils of
Scotland, combined together, and by their insinuations defeated
Henry's scheme at the very moment when he expected it to have
taken eflet. 'Too haughty to brook such a disappointment,
which he imputed as much to the arts of the French as to the
levity of the Scottish Monarch, he took arms against Scotland,
threatening to subdue the kingdom, since he could not gain the
friendlhip of its King. At the fame time, his resentment at
Francis quickened his negociations with the Emperor, an alli-
ance with whom he was now as forward to accept as the other
could be to offer it. During this war with Scotland, and before
the conclusion of his negociations with Charles, James V. died,
leaving his crown to Mary his 6nly daughter, an infant a few
days old. Upon this event, Henry altered at once his whole
system with regard to Scotland, and abandoning all thoughts
of conquering it, aimed at what was more advantageous as
well as practicable, an union with that kingdom by a marriage
between Edward his only son and the young Queen. But here,
too, he apprehended a vigorous opposition from the French
faction in Scotland, which began to bestir itself in order to
thwart the meafiure. The neceflity of crushing this party
among the Scots, and of preventing Francis from furnishing
them any effeCtual aid, confirmed Henry's resolution of break-
ing with France, and pufled himon to put a finishing hand to
the treaty of confederacy with the Emperor.

IN this league were contained first of all, articles for securing

Alliancebe their future amity and mutual defence then were enumerated
te1enCharles the demands which they were refpetively to make upon Fran-

I~~~a~~~~~~~~~~nd Henry. ~cis,

cis ;

Boo. VII.

1543*
12

cis; and the plan of their proceedings was fixed, if he Ihould
refuse to grant them satisfaction. They agreed to require, that
Francis fliould not only renounce his alliance with Solyman,
which had been the source of infinite calamities to Christendom,
but also that' he mhould make reparation for tie damages which
that unnatural union had occasioned; t!iht lie flould rcftore
Burgundy to the Emperor; that ie fliculd dcfifi immediately
from hostilities,, and leave Charles at leisure to oppose the
common enemy of the Christian faith; and that he fliould im-
mediately pay tile films due to Henry, or put tome towns in
his hands as security to that eflic. If, within forty days, lie
did not comply with there demands, they then engaged to
invade France each with twenty thousand foot and five thousand
horse, and not to lay down their aims until they had reco-
vered Burgundy, together with the towns on the Somme, for the
Emperor, and Normandy and Guienne, or even the whole realm
of France, for Henry . Their heralds, accordingly, set out
with there haughty requisitions; but not being permitted to en-
ter France could not perform their commission, and the two Mo-
narchs held themselves fully entitled to execute whatever was
flipulated in their treaty.

BOOK VII.

'543.

FRANCIS on his part was not less diligent in preparing for Francis's ne-

the approaching campaign. Having early observed the fymp- gwithSoly
toms of Henry's disgust and alienation, and finding all his ran.
endcavours to sooth and reconcile him ineffechial, lie knew his
temper too well not to expec that open hoafilities would quickly
follow upon this cefration of friendfliip. For this reason he re-
doubled his endeavours to obtain from So,)iman flch aid as
might counterbalance the great acceflon of fLength which the

i Rym xiv. 768. Herb. 238.

Empcror

3

Emperor would receive by his alliance with England. In order
to supply the place of his two ambassadors murdered by Guaflo,
he Tent as his envoy first to Venice, and then to Conftantinoplc,
Paulin, a captain of foot, a man of a daring active spirit, and
on account of these qualities thought worthy of this service, to
which'he was recommended by Bellay, who had trained him to
the arts of negociation, and made trial of his talents and ad-
dress on several occasions. Nor did he belie the opinion con-
ceived of his courage and abilities. Hastening to Constantinople,
without regarding the dangers to which he was exposed, he
urged his master's demands with such boldness, and availed him-
self of every circumstance with such dexterity, that he removed
all the Sultan's own difficulties. He silenced likewise some of the
Baflas, who either swayed by opinion, or having been gained by
the Emperor, whose emiflaries had made their way even into
that court, had declared in the Divan against acting in concert
with Francek. At last he obtained orders for Barbarossa to fail
with a powerful fleet, and to regulate all his operations by the
directions of the French King. Francis was not equally success-
ful in his attempts to gain the princes of the Empire. The extra-
ordinary rigour with which he thought it necessary to punifl
such of. his fubjets as had embraced the protestant opinions, in
order to give tome notable evidence of his own zeal for the
Catholick faith, and to wipe off the imputations to which he
was liable from his confederacy with the Turks, placed an in-
superable barrier between him and such of the Germans as
interest and inclination would have prompted most readily to
join him'. His chief advantage, however, over the Emperor

k Sandov. Hitor. ton. ii. 346. Jovii Hid. lib 41 . 85, &c. 300, &c. Bran-
tome. I Seck. lib. iii. 404.

he
BOOK VII.

3543.
14

he derived on this, as on other occasions, from the contiguity of
lis dominions, as well as from the extent of the royal authority
in France, which exempted him from all the delays and disappoint-
ments unavidable wherever popular allemblies provide for the
expences of government by occasional and frugal ihbfidies. Hence
his domerfick preparations were always carried on with vigour,
and rapidity, while thole of the Emperor, un!els when quickened
by some foreign supply, or some temporary expedient, were to
the last degree low and dilatory.

LONG before any army was in roadincfs to oppose him,

Francis took the field in the Low-Countries, against which
he turned the whole weight of the war. He made himself
master of Landrecy, which lie determined to keep as a key
to the whole province of Hainault; and ordered it to be
fortified with great care. Turning from thence to the right,
he entered the dutchy of Luxembourg, and found it in the
fame defenceless state as in the former year. Meanwhile, the
Emperor, having drawn together an army composed of all
the different nations, subjcd to his government, cntered the
territories of the Duke of Cleves, on whom lie had vowed to
inflict exmplary vengeance. This prince, whose conduct and
situation were fimiliar to that of Robert de la Mark in the firfl
war between Charles and Francis, resembled him, likcwifl in
his fate. Unable with his feeble army, to face the Emperor, who
advanced at tile head of forty-four thousand men, he retired'
at his approach; and the Imperialists being at liberty to at as
they pleased, immediately invelted Duren. That town, though
gallantly defended, was won by aflault, all the inhabitants put
to the fiord, and the place itself reduced to aslies. This dread-

ful

I5
BOOK VII.

'543.

Operations in
the Low
Countricsa

The Emperor
becomes smaf-
ter of the
Dutchy of
Cleves.
August 24.

BOOK VII.

1543.

September 7.
Besieges Landrecy.

ful example of severity firuck the people of the country with
such general terror, that all the other towns, even such as were
capable of resistance, sent their keys to the Emperor; and be-
fore a body of French detached to his afliftance could come
up, the duke himself was obliged to make his fubmiflion to
Charles in the molf abject manner. Being admitted into the
Imperial presence, he kneeled together with eight of the prin-
cipal. fubjeds, and implored mercy. The Emperor allowed
him to remain in that ignominious posture, and eyeing him
with an haughty and implacable look, without deigning to an-
fwer a single word, remitted him to his ministers. The con-
ditions, however, which they prescribed were not so rigorous
as he hadreafon to have expected after such a reception. He
was obliged to renounce his alliance with France and Denmark;
to resign all his pretensions to the dutclly of Gueldres; to enter
into perpetual amity with the Emperor and King of the Ro-
mans. In return for which all his hereditary dominions were
reitored, except two towns which the Emperor kept as pledges
of his fidelity during the continuance of the war, and he was
re-inflated in his privileges as a prince of the Empire. Not
long after Charles, as a proof of the sincerity of his reconcile-
ment, gave him in marriage one of the daughters of his brother
Ferdinand ".

HAVING thus chaflifed the presumption of the Duke of

Cleves, detached one of his allies from Francis, and added to
his dominions in the Low-Countries a considerable province
which lay contiguous to them, Charles advanced towards
Hainault, and laid siege to Landrecy. There, as the first fruits

m Harai. Annal. Brabant, t. i. 628. Recueil des Tratez, t. ii. 226.

of

of his alliance with Henry, he was joined by fix thousand
Englinl under Sir John Wallop. The garriibn, consisting
of veteran troops commanded by de la Lande and Dell', two
officers of reputation, made a vigorous resistance. Francis ap.
proached with all his forces to relieve the place; Charles covered
the siege; both were determined to hazard an engagement; and
all Europe expeCted to fee this contest, which had continued to
long, decided at last by a battle between two great armies led
by them in person. But the ground which separated their two
camps was such, as put the disadvantage manifestly on his fide
who hfould venture to attack, and neither of them chose to run
that rifque: amidst a variety of movements, in order to draw
the enemy into this snare, or 'to avoid it themselves, Francis,
with admirable conduc, and equal good fortune, threw firit a
supply of fresh troops, and then a convoy of provisions into
the town, Co that the Emperor, despairing of ftccefs, with-
drew into winter quarters inorder to preserve his army from
being entirely ruined by the rigour of the season.

MEANWHILE, Solyman fulfilled his engagements to the

French King with great punctuality. He himself marched into
Hungary with a numerous army, and as the princes of the
Empire made no great effort to save a country which Charles,
by employing his whole force against Francis, seemed willing
to sacrifice, there was no appearanceof any body of troops
to oppose his progress. He besieged, one after another,
Quinque Ecclefiae, Alba and Gran, the three most confider.
able towns in the kingdom, of which Ferdinand kept pof-
feflion. The first was taken by storm; the other two furren-

n Bellay, 405, &c.

D

BOOK VII.

November.
Solyman in-
vadce Hun-
gary.

17
VOL. Il.

dered

BOOK VII. dered ; and the whole kingdom, a small corner excepted, was,
!,43- fubjeaedto the Turkish yoke0. About the fame time, Barba-

Barbarofia's rolfa failed with a fleet of a hundred and ten gallies, and coast-
detcent on
Italy. ing along the shore of Calabria, made a dercent at Rheggio

which he plundered and burnt; and advancing from thence to
the mouth of the Tiber he ftopt there to water. The citizens of
Rome ignorant of his destination, and filled with terror, began
to fly with such general precipitation, that the city would have
been left deserted, if they had not resumed courage upon letters;
from Polin the French envoy,. assuring them that no violence-
or injury would be offered by the Turks to any ifate in alliance
with the King his mafterP. From Ostia Barbarossa failed to
Marseilles, and being joined by the French fleet with a body of
land forces on board under the count d'Enguien, a gallant young
prince of the house of Bourbon, they directed their course to-
wards Nice, the sole retreat of the unfortunate duke of Savoy.
August 1o. There to the aitonifhment and scandal of all Chriitendom, the:

Lilies of France and Crescent of Mahomet. appeared in conjunc-
tion against a fortress on which the Cross of Savoy was displayed.
The towns however, was bravely defended againit their com-
bined force by Montfort a Savoyard gentleman, who flood a
general assault, and.repulfed the enemy with great loss, before
he retired into the castle. That fort situated upon a rock, on
which the artillery made no impreflien, and which could not
be undermined, he held out so long, that Doria, had time to
approach with his fleet, and the marquis del Guafto to march.
with a body of troops from Milan. Upon intelligence of this,
September 8. the French and Turks raised the fiegeq; and Francis had .not

o lftuanliff. Hiftor. Hung. I. 15; 167.
p Jovii Hil 1. 43. 304, &c. Pallavic. I(o.
q Guichenon hiftoire de Savoye, t. p. 65 . Bellay, 425, &c.

even
18

19

even the consolation of success, to render the infamy, which BOOK V1I.
lie drew on himself by calling in filch an auxiliary, more to- '5-3
lerable.

FROM the small progress of either party during this cam- Preparations

paign, it was obvious to what a length the war might be drawn fm a gew
,out between two princes, whose power was so equally ballanced,
and who by their own talents or activity, could so vary and
multiply their resources, The trial they had now made of each
others strength might have taught them the imprudence of
perfilting in a war, wherein there was greater appearance of
.their diftrefling their own dominions than of conquering these
of their adversary, and' Ihould have disposcd 'both to with for
peace. If Charles and Francis had been influenced by the confide.
ration of interest or' prudence alone, this, without doubt, must
have been the manner in which they would have reasoned, but
the personal animosity which mingled itself. in all their quarrels,
had grown to be so violent and imnplacable, that for the pleafulrc
of gratifying it, they disregarded every thing else; and were
infinitely more solicitous how to hurt their enemy, than how
to secure what woild be of advantage to themselves. No sooner
then did the season force them to fulpend hostilities, than, without
paying any attention to the Pope's repeated endeavours or
paternal exhortations to re-eftablifi peace, they began to pro-
vide for the operations. of next year with new vigour, and
an ativity inereafing with their hatred. Charles turned his
chief attention towards gaining the princes of the Empire, and
endeavoured to route the formidable but unweildy strength
of the Germanick body against Francis. In order to under- Afra;r of
sand the propriety of the fleps which he took for that purpose, Gctnlan"'

D 2 it

BOOK VII.

1543.

Maurice of
Saxony fuc-.
ceeds his fa-
ther.

The views
and conduct
of this young
Prince.

it is necessary to review the chief tranfations in that country
since the diet of Ratisbon in the year one thousand five hundred
and forty one.

MUCH about the time that aflembly broke up, Maurice fuc-

ceeded his father Henry in the government of that part of
Saxony which belonged to the Albertine branch of the Saxon
family. This young prince, then only in the twentieth year,
had, even at that early period, begun to discover the great to-
lents which qualified him for acing such a distinguished part in
the affairs of Germany. As soon as he entered upon the ad-
ministration, he struck out into such a new and singular path,
as shewed that he aimed, from the beginning, at something
great and uncommon. Though zealously attached to the Pro.
telfnt opinions both from education and principle, he refused
to accede to the league of Smalkalde, being determined, as he
said, to maintain the purity of religion which was the original
object of that confederacy, but not to entangle himself in the
political interest or combinations to which it had given rife. At
the fame time, foreseeing a rupture between Charles and the
confederates of Smalkalde, and perceiving which of them was
most likely to prevail in the contest, instead of that jealousy and
dirtruft which the other Proteflants expressed of all the Empe-
ror's designs, he affected to place in him an unbounded confi.
dence ; and courted his favour with the utmost assiduity. When
the other Protestants, in the year fifteen hundred and forty two,
either declined aflifting Ferdinand in Hungary, or afforded him
reluctant and feeble aid, Maurice marched thither in person,
and rendered himself conspicuous by his zeal and courage. From
the fame motive, he had led to the Emperor's afiftance, dur-

ing
20

ing the former campaign a body of his own troops; and the
gracefulness of his person, his dexterity in all military exercises,
together with his intrepidity which courted and delighted in
dangers, did not distinguish him more in the field, than his great
abilities and insinuating address won upon the Emperor's con-
fidence and favourr. While by this conduct, which appeared
extraordinary to those who held the fame opinions with him
concerning religion, Maurice endeavoured to pay court to the
Emperor, he began to discover some degree of jealousy of his
cousin the Eletor of Saxony. This, which proved: in the fe-
quel so fatal to the EleCtor, had almost occasioned an open
rupture between them and. loon after Maurice's acceflion to the
government, they both. took arms with equal rage, upon ac-
count of a dispute about the riglt of jurifdiaion over a paultry
town situated on the Moldaw. They were prevented, however,
from coming to blows by the mediation of the Landgrave of
Hefle, whose daughter Maurice had married, as well as by the
powerful and authoritative admonitions of Luther '..

MEANWHILE, the Pope though extreamly irritated at tlie

Emperor's conceflions to the Protestants in the diet of Ratisbon,
was so warmly solicited on all hands, by fuch.as were most de-
voutly attached to the fee of Rome, no less than by those whose.
fidelity or designs he fufpeted, to summon a general council,,
that he found it impoflible to avoid any longer calling that.
assembly. The impatience for its meeting, and the expecEa-
tions of great effects from its decisions seemed to grow in pro-
portion to, the difficulty of obtaining it. He still adhered, how-
ever, to his original resolution of holding it in some town of

BOOK VIU.

1543.

The Pope
proposes to
hold a general;
council at
Trent..
r Slid . 317 ck. ISec . iii. 371 386,428. a Sleid. 292. Seek. 1. ii. 403.

Italy,

21

..BooK VIL Italy, where, by the number of ecclefiafticks, retainers to his

1543. court, and depending on his favour, who could repair to it

without difficulty or expence, he might influence and even
direct all his proceedings. This proposition, though often re-
March 3. jeEted by the Germans, he inftruted his nuncio to the diet held

at Spires in the year one thousand five hundred and forty two
to renew once more; and if he found it gave no greater satis-
fation than formerly, he empowered him, as a last concefion,
to propose for the place of meeting, Trent a city in the Tyrol,
subjea to the King of the Romans, and situated on the confines
between Germany and Italy. The Catholick princes in the
diet, after giving it as their opinion that the council might
have been held with greater advantage in Ratiflbon, Cologne,
or some of the geiat cities in the empire, approved of the
place which the Pope had named. The Protestants unanimously
expressed their diflatisfa&ion, declaring that they would pay
no regard to a council held without the precinas of the Empire,
called by 'the.Pope's authority, and in which he aflumed the
right of prefidingt.

MayaZuu t
Summons it
to mect,

THE Pope, without taking any notice of their objections,

publiffed the bull of intimation, named three cardinals to
preside as his legates, and appointed them to repair to Trent
before the first of November, the day he had fixed for opening
the council. But if Paul had desired the meeting of a council
as sincerely as he pretended, he would not have pitched on such
an improper time for calling it. Inifead of that general union
-and tranquillity, without which the deliberations of a council
·could neither be conduted with security,- ror attended with

authority,
22

t ;Slcid. -29i, &ck..1. iii, ;a8s.

authority, such a fierce war was just kindled between the Em-
peror and Francis, as rendered it impoflible for the ecclefiaflicks
from many parts of Europe to resort thither in safety. The legates,
accordingly, remained several months at Trent without any pert
sons appearing, except a. few prelates from the ecclesiastical state;
upon which the Pope, in order to avoid the ridicule and contempt
which this drew upon him from the enemies of the church, recalled.
them and prorogued the council.:

UNHAPPILY for the authority of the Papal fee, at the very

time that the German Protestants took every occasion of pouring
contempt upon it, the Emperor and King of the Romans found
it necessary not only to connive at their conduct, but to. court,
their favour by repeated aas of indulgence. In the fame diet
,of Spires, wherein they had protefed in the most difrefpezdful
terms against assembling a council at Trent, Ferdinand who
depended on their aid for the defence of Hungary, not only
permitted that protestation to be inserted in the records of the
diet, but renewed in their favour all the Emperor's conceflions.
at Ratisbon, adding to them whatever they could demand for
their farther security. Among other particulars, he granted a.
suspension of a decree of the Imperial chamber against the city
of Goflar, one of those which had entered into the league of'
Smalkalde, on account of its having seized the ecclesiastical re-
venues within its domains, and enjoined Henry duke of Brunf-
wick to desist from his attempts to carry that decree into exe-
oution. But Henry, a furious bigot, and no less obitinate than,
rash in all his undertakings, continuing to disquiet the people

Boo K VIL,

ZS43.

Obliged to
prorogue it.

The Emperor
courts the
Protetants.
u F. Paul, p, 97. Sleid. 296.

of

XX

BOOK vn,

1543.

Their vigo-
rous proceed-
ings.

of Goflar by his incursions, the Ele&tor of Saxony and Land-
grave of Hefte, that they might not susser any member of the
Smalkaldick body to be oppressed, assembled their forces, de-
clared war in form against Henry, and in the space of a few
weeks stript him intirely of his dominions, and drove him as
a wretched exile to take refuge in the court of Bavaria. By
this a& of vengeance, no less revere than sudden, they filled
all Germany with dread of their power, and the confederates
of Smalkalde appeared, by this first effort of their arms, to be
as prompt as capable to protect those who had joined their afto-
ciation .

EMBOLDENED by To many conceflions in their favour, as well as

by the progrers which their opinions daily made, the princes of the
league of Smalkalde took a solemn protest against the Imperial
chamber, and declined its jurifdidion for the future, because that
court had not been visited or reformed according to the decree of
Ratisbon, and continued to discover a most indecent partiality in
all its proceedings. Not long after this, they ventured a tfep far;
ther, and protesting against the recess of a diet held at Nuremberg,
which provided for the defence of Hungary, refused to furnish their

April 23. contingent for that purpose, unless the Imperial chamber were re-
1543. formed, and full security granted them in every point with regard

to religion y.
Diet at Spires.

4514.

SucH were the lengths to which the Protestants had pro-
ceeded, and such their confidence in their own power, when

x Sleid. z96. Commnemoratio fuccinCta caufarum Belli, &c. a Smalcaldicia contra
Henr. Brunfw. ab iifdem edita; ap Scatdium. Tom. i. 307.

y Sleid. 304, 307. Seck. 1. iii 404, 416.

the
24

the Emperor returned from the Lowv-Countries, to hold a diet,
which he had summoned. to meet at Spires. The refpeft due
to the Emperor,. as well as the importance of the affairs which
were to be laid before it, rendered. this aficmbly extremely full.
All the Electors, a great. number ,of princes ecclesiastical and fecu-
lar, with the:deputies of most of the cities were present. Charles
soon perceived that this was not a time to offend the jealous spirit
of the Protestants, by aflerting. in any high tone the authority and
dotrines of the church, or by, abridging in the fnmalleft article,
:.theliberty which they now enjoyed; but that, on the contrary,
if he. expected any support from them, or .wished to preserve
Germany from intefline disorders while lie was engaged in a
foreign war, he must sooth them by new conceflions, and a
more ample extension of their religious privileges. He began,
accordingly, with courting the Elector of Saxony and Land-
grave of Hefle, the heads of the Protestant party, and by giving
up some things in their favour, and granting liberal promises
with regard to others,: he secured himself from any danger of
opposition on their part. Hayjpg. ascertained this capital point,
he then ventured to addtefs the diet with greater freedom.
"He began by representing. his, own zeal, and unwearied efforts
with regard to two things. most 'essential to Christendom, the
'procuring of ai general .couhcil, in order to compose the religious
'diflenfions' which had. unhappily .arisen in Germany, and the
providing Come proper means for checking the formidable, pro-
grefs of the Turkish arms. But that his pious endeavours had
'been entirely defeated by the unjutifiable; ambition of the
I French..Kipg, who having wantonly kindled the flame of war
:in'Europe~ which had been so: lately extinguished by the truce
of Nice, rendered it impoflible. for the fathers of the church to
affcmble in council, or to deliberate with security; and obliged

VOL. III. E himn

BooK VlI.

A i43.

The Emperor
follicits its aid
again t
France.

him to employ those forces in his own defence, which with greater
fatisfaftion to himself, as well as more honour to Christendom,
he would have turned against the Infidels. That Francis not
thinking it enough to have called him off from opposing the
Infidels, had, with unexampled impiety, invited them into the
heart of Christendom, and joining his arms to theirs, had openly
attacked the Duke of Savoy a member of the Empire. That Bar-
baroffa's fleet was now in one of the ports of France, waiting only
the return of spring to carry terror and desolation to the coast of
some Christian state. That in such a situation it was folly to think
of distant expeditions againfi the Turk, or of marching to oppose
his armies in Hungary, while such a powerful ally received him
into the centre of Europe, and gave him footing there. That
prudence dictated to oppose, first of all, the nearest and most im-
minent danger, and by humbling the power of France to deprive
Solyman of the advantages, which he derived from the unnatural
confederacy formed between him and a Monarch, who still arro-
gated the name of Molt Christian. That, in truth, a war againRt
the French King and the Sultan ought to be coifidered as the fame
thing; and that every advantage gained over the former, was a
revere and sensible blow to the latter. That, therefore, he now
demanded their aid against Francis, not merely as an enemy of
the Germanick body, or of him who was its head, but as an
avowed ally of the Infidels, and a publick enemy to the Chriltian
name.

In order to give greater weight to this violent invetive of

the Emperor, the King of the Romans stood up, and related
the rapid conquests of the Sultan in Hungary, occasioned, as
he laid, by the fatal neceflity imposed on his brother of employ-

ing
BOOK VII.

1544.

ing his arms against France; and the ambafladors of Savoy gave.
a detail of Barbarofla's operations at Nice, and of the ravages
which he had committed on that coafl. All there, added to the
general indignation which Francis's unprecedented union with the
Turks excited in Europe, made such an impreflion on the diet
as the Emperor wifled, and disposed mos of the members to
grant him such effecual aid as he had demanded. The ambaf-
fadors iFrancis had sent to explain the motives of his conduct,
were not permitted to enter the bounds of the Empire; and tlie
apology which they published for their rnafter, vindicating his
alliance with Solyman, by examples drawn from scripture, and
the practice of Christian princes, was little regarded by men,
irritated already or prejudiced against him to such a degree, as to
be incapable of allowing their proper weight to any arguments in
his behalf

SUCH being the favourable disposition of the Germans,

Charles perceived that nothing could now obftrud his gaining all
that he aimed at, but the fears and jealousies of the Protestants,
which lie determined to quiet by granting every thing, that the
utmost solicitude of there pafions could desire for the security
of their religion. With this view, he consented to a recess,
whereby all the rigorous edits hitherto iffiued against the
Proteflants were ft!fpended; a council either general or national
to be assembled in Germany alas declared necefary in order to
re-eftablifll peace in the church; until one of thee should be
held, (which the Emperor undertook to bring about as soon as
pollible) the free and publick exercise of the Protestant religion
was authorized ; the Imperial cliamber was to give no molefta-

E 2 tion

BOOK VII.

' 44.

His valt con-
ceflions in
*order to gain
the Prote-
Itants.

27

BOoe VTII tion' to the Proteftats; and when the term for which the present

144. judges in that court were elected, should expire, persons duly

qualified were then to be admitted as members, without any
bnd thi te diftin&ion on account of religion. In return for these extra-

ordinary aAs of indulgence, the Protestants concurred, with
the other members of the diet, in declaring war against Francis
in name of the Empire; in voting the Emperor a body of
twenty-four thousand foot and four thousand horse, to be
main:ained at the publick expence for fix months, and to be
emp!oyed agaiaft France; and at the fame time the diet imposed
a poll-tax to be levied throught all Germany on every person
without exception, for the support of the war against the

Turks.

Charles'sne- CHARLES, while he gave the greatest attention to the minute
gocisaions
with Den- and intricate detail of particulars necefary towards conducting
mtrk and
Enr/lad. the deliberations of a numerous and divided assembly to such a

successful period, negociated a separate peace with the King of
Denmark, who, though he had hitherto performed nothing
considerable in consequence of his alliance with Francis, had it
in his power, however, to make a formidable diversion in
favour of that monarch'. At the fame time, he did not ne-
glect proper applications to the King of England, in order to
rouze him to more vigorous efforts against their common enemy.
Little indeed was wanting to accomplish this; for such events
had happened in Scotland as inflamed Henry to the most vio-
lent pitch of resentment againfi Francis. Having concluded
with the parliament of Scotland a treaty of marriage between

a Dumont Corps Diplom. t. iv. p ii .
p. 74.

his

his Ion a:d their young QiZen, by which he reckoned himself Book VII.
secure of effccting the union of the two kingdoms, which had

& ' .0~ 1514.

been long desired, a.:d often attempted without success by his
predeceifors, Mary of Guise the Queen mother, cardinal Bea-
toun, and other partizans of France, found means not only to
break off the match, but to alienate the Scottish nation entirely
from the friendship of England, and to strength its antient at-
tachment to France. Henry, however, did not abandon an object
of so much importance. As the humbling of Francis, besides 'the
pleasure of taking revenge upon an cnemy who had disappointed a
favourite measure, appeared the ipoft effectual method of bringing
the Scots to accept once more of the treaty which they had rejet-
ed, he was so fond of this scheme, that he was ready to second
whatever the Emperor could propose to be attempted against that
monarch. The plan, acqordingly, which they concerted, was
such as, if it had been punctually executed, must have ruined France
in the first place, and would have augmented so prodigiously the
Emperor's power and territories as might in the end have proved
fatal to the liberties of Europe. They agreed to invade France
each with an army of twenty-five thousand men, and, without
losing time in besieging the frontier towns, to advance direcAly to-
wards the interior provinces, and to join their forces near Paris .

MEANWHILE, Francis flood alone in opposition to all the The French

take the field

enemies that Charles was mustering against him. Solyman was in fpediont.
the only ally who had not deserted him; but the afliftance he
received from him had rendered him so odious to all Chriflen-

a Heibert 245. Bellay, 448.

dom,

BOOK VII.

1544

Invest Car;g-
nan.

The Imperia-
lilts march to
relieve it.

THE REIGN OF THE

dom, that he resolved rather to forego all the advantages of
his friendship, than to become, on that account, the object of
general horror and detestation. For this reason, he difmilned
Barbarofla as soon as winter was over, who after ravaging the
coasts of Naples and Tuscany returned to Constantinople. As
Francis could not hope to equal the forces of his rival, he
endeavoured to supply that defect by dispatch, which was more
in his power, and to get the fiart of him in taking the field.
Early in the spring the count d' Enguien invetled Carignan, a
town in Piedmont, which the marquis de Guafto the Inmperial
general having furprized the former year confidered as of so
much importance, that he had fortified it at great expence.
The count pushed the siege with such vigour, that Guafto, fond
of his'own conquest, and; feeing no other way of saving it from
falling'into the hands of the French, resolved to hazard a battle
in order to 'relieve it.' He' began his march from Milan for
this purpose, and as he was at no pains to conceal his intention,
it was soon known in the French camp. Enguien, a gallant and
ehterprizing young man, wiihed paflionately to try the fortune
of a battle his troops desired it with no less ardour; but the
peremptory injunCtion of the King not to venture a general
engagement, flowing from a prudent attention to the present
situation of affairs, as well as from the remembrance of former
disasters, tied up his hands. Unwilling, however, to abandon
Carignani, when it was just ready to yield, and eager to diftin-
guilh his command by rome memorable action, he dispatched
Monluc to court in order to lay before the King the advantages
of fighting the enemy, and the hopes !which lie had of victory.
The King referred the matter to the council; all the minifiers
declared, one after another, againif fighting, and supported

their

their sentiments, by reasons extremely plausible. While they
were delivering tlleir.opipions, Monluc,: who was permitted to be
present, discovered such visible and extravagant symptoms of im-
patience to speak, as well as such diflatisfation with what he
heard, that Francis, diverted with his appearance, called on him
to declare what he could offer in reply to sentiment, wh)ich feepned
to be as just as they were general.', Upon .thlis, IMon!uc, a plain
but spirited soldier, and of known courage, reprcfented the good
condition of the troops, their eagerness to meet the enemy in the
field, their confidence in their officers, togetller ;with the eyerafting
infamy which the declining of a baitle world bring on; the French
arms; and urged his arguments with such lively impetuosity, and
such a flow of military eloquence, as gained over to his opinion, not
only the King, naturally fond of daring actions, but several of the
council. Francis, catching the fame enthusiasm whhic had animated
his troops, suddenly ftarted.up, and having lifted, his hands to
heaven, and implored the divine ,proteCtion and aid hle then ad-
dressed himself to Monluc, "Go, fays he, return. to Piedmionit, and.
fight in the name of God '"

No sooner was it known that the King had given Erguien

leave to fight the Imperialits, than such' was the martial ardour
of the gallant and high spirited gentlemen of that age, that the
court was quite.deferted, every perfon.defirous of reputation,
or capable of service, hurrying to Piedmont in order to fllare,
as volunteers, in the danger and glory of the acion. Eco
raged by the arrival of so many brave officers, Enguien imlie-
diately prepared for battle, nor did Guafto decline the combat,

a Memoirs de Monluc.

31
BOOK VII.

1544.

Battle of Ce-
rirfolc.

- l' llie
'.:

Bo6KS'VIL The number of cavalry was almost equal, but the Imperial infan-

-- -- try exceeded the French by at least ten thousand men. They met
1544.
April 1t. near Ceiifoles, in an open plain, which afforded to neither any ad-

vantage of ground, and both had full time to form their army in
proper order. The shock was such as might have been expected
between veteran troops, violent ard obstinate. The French caval-
ry running to the charge with their usual vivacity bore down every
thing ihat 'opposed them, but on the other hand, the ifeddy and
dificplined valour of the Spanish infantry having forced the body
which they encountered to give way, vitory reriained in furpence,
ready to declare for which ever general 'could make the best use of
that critical moment. Guafto, engaged in that part of his army
which was thrown into disorder, and afraid of falling into the hands
of the French whose vengeance he dreaded on account -of the mur-
der of Rincon and Fregofo, loft his presence of mind, and forgot
to order a large body of reserve to advance; whereas Ehguien,
with admnirable courage and equal conduct, supported, at the
head of his gene d'armes, such of his battalions as began to yield;
and at the fame time he ordered the Swiss in his service, who had
been victorious wherever they fought, to fall upon the Spaniards.
:is rmotion proved decisive. All that'followed was confusion and
slaughter. The marquis de Guaito wounded in the thigh, efca-
ped only by the fwiftefs of his horse. The vicory of the French
was complete, ten 'thousand of the'lmriperialifts being slain," and a
considerable number, with all their tents, baggage and'artillery,
taken. On the part of the conquerors, theirjoy was without allay,
a few only'being killed, and among these no officer of diftinc-
tion .

b Bellay, 429, &c. Memoires de Monluc. Jovii hist. 1. 44. p. 327. 6.

THIS
32

THIS splendid action, besides the reputation with which it BooK VII.

was attended. delivered France from an imminent danger, as 5,
it ruined the army with which Guafto had intended to invade Elfes of it.
the country between the Rhofne and Saone, where there were
neither fortified towns nor regular forces to oppose his progress.
But it was not in Francis's power to pursue the victory with
such vigour as to reap the advantages which it might have
yielded; for though the Milanese remained now almost defenceless;
though the inhabitants, who had long murmured under the
rigour of the Imperial government, were ready to throw off the
yoke; though Enguien, flulhed with success, urged the King
to seize tlis happy opportunity of recovering a country, the
acquisition of which had been long his favourite objecl; yet
as the Emperor and King of England were preparing to break
in upon the opposite frontier of France with such superior force,
it became necessary to sacrifice all thoughts of conquest to the
publick safety, and to recal twelve thousand of Enguien's best
troops to be employed in defence of the kingdom. Enguien's
subsequent operations were, of consequence, so languid and in-
considerable, that the redution of Carignan and some other
towns in Piedmont, was all he gained by his great victory at
Cerifoles'.

THE Emperor, as usual, was late in taking the field, but he Operations in

tie Low-

appeared, towards the beginning of June, at the head of an Countries.
army more numerous, and better appointed than any which he
had hitherto led against France. It amounted almost to fifty
thousand men, and part of it having reduced Luxembourg and
some other towns in the Netherlands, before he himfelfjoined it,

c Bellay, 438, &c.
VO L. II.

F

lihe

BOOK VII.

X544.
June.

The Emperor
inverts St.
Difier.
July 8.

he now marched with the whole towards the frontiers of
Champagne. Charles, according to his agreement with the
King of England, ought to have advanced diredtly towards
Paris; and the dauphin, who commanded the only army to
which Francis trusted for the security of his dominions, was in
no condition to oppose him.. But the success with which the
French had defended Provence in the year one thousand five
hundred and thirty-fix, had taught them the most effectual
method of diftrefling an invading enemy. Champagne, a coun-
try abounding more in vines than corn, was incapable of
maintaining a great army, and before the Emperor's approach,
whatever could be of any use to him had been carried off or
destroyed. This rendered it neceflary for him, to be master of
some places of strength, in order to secure the convoys on which
alone he now perceived that he must depend for subsistence;
and he found the frontier towns To ill provided for defence, that
he hoped it would not be a work either of much time or dif-
ficulty to reduce them. Accordingly Ligny and Commercy,
which he first attacked, surrendered after a short refitance. He
then invrefted St. Difier, which, though it commanded an inm
portant pass on the Marne, was destitute of every thing necef-
fary for sustaining a siege. But the count de Sancerre and. M. de
la Lande, who had acquired such reputation by the defence of
Landrecy, generously threw themfrelves into the town, and un-
dertook to hold it out to the last extremity. The Emperor
soon found how capable they were of making good their pro-
mire, and that he could not expec to take the town without
besieging it in form. This accordingly he undertook; and as
it was his nature never to abandon any enterprize in which he

had

1
34

had once engaged, lie perfited .in it with an inconsiderate obfti-
nacy.

THE Kingof England's preparations for the campaign were com-

pleat long before the Emperor's; but as lie did not clufe, on the
one hand, to encounter alone the whole power of France, and was
unwilling, on the other, that his troops flould remain unaftive, lihe
took that opportunity of chastising the Scots, by fending his fleet,
together with a considerable part of his inifantry, under the earl of
Hertford, to invade their country. Hertford ex. cuted his commis-
sion with vigour, plundered and burn.t Edinburgh andLeithl, laid
wale. the adjacent country, and reimbarked his men with (ilch
dispatch, that they joined their sovereign soon after his landing in
France. When Henry arrived in that kingdom, ie found the Em-
peror engaged in the siege of St. Difier . an ambasffador, h!owever,
whom he Tent to congratulate the Englifli Monarch oni hiis safe ar-
rival on the continent, iolicited him to march in terms of the treaty
diretly to Paris. But Charles had set his ally such ali ill example
of fulfilling the conditions of.their confederacy with exafnefs, that
Henry, observing him employ his time and forces in taking
towns for his own beloof, saw no reason why he should not
attempt the reducion of some places that lay conveniently for
himself. Without paying any regard to the Emperor's remon-
firances, he immediately inveRted Bologne, and commanded the
Duke of Norfolk to press the siege of Montreuil, which had
been begun before his arrival, by a body of Flemings, in conjunc-
tion with some English troops. While Charles and Henry Chewed
such attention each to his own interest, they both ncgleted the
common cause; and, instead of the union and confidence requisite
towards conducting the great plan they had formed, they early dif-

F : covered

BooK VII.

'S44.

HIenry .VIII.
invets Bo-
logne.
July 14.

$5

BOOK VIL covered a mutual jealousy of each other, which, by degrees, begot

54 distrust, and ended in open hatred .

MEANWHILE, Francis had, with unwearied industry, drawn

Gal1lat de-
fence of St. together an army capable, as well from the number as from the

Ds valour of the troops, of making head against the enemy. But

the dauphin, who still a&ed as general, prudently declining a
battle, the loss of which would have endangered the kingdom,
satisfied himself with harraffing the Emperor with his light
troops, cutting off his convoys, and laying wafe the country
around him. Though extremely diftrefed by there operations,
Charles still prefled the siege of St. Difier, which Sancerre de-
fended with astonishing fortitude and conduct. He stood
repeated assaults, repulsing the enemy in them all; and un-
dismayed even by the death of the brave de la Lande, who
was killed by a cannon ball, he continued to thew the.fame bold
countenance and obstinate resolution. At the end of five weeks,
he was frill capable of holding out some time longer, when an
artifice of Granvelle's induced him to surrender. That crafty
politician, having intercepted the key to the cypher which the
Duke of Guise used in communicating intelligence to Sancerre,
-forged a letter in his name authorizing Sancerre to -apitulate,
as the King, though highly satisfied with his behaviour, thought
it imprudent to hazard a battle for his relief. This letter he
conveyed into the town in a manner which could raise no sus-
picion, and the governor fell into the snare. Even then, he
obtained such honourable conditions as his gallant defence
merited, and among others a celfation of hostilities for eight

d Herbert.

days,
36

days, at the expiration of which he bound himself to open .the Boo K VII.
gates, if Francis,.during tlat timie, did,nta;ttaock the Imperial
army, and xttowfihft h troops into .th town' ..,;T;lhus Sancerre, by
detaining the Empeirr fo.long before.an inconfiderable.place, afford,
ed his sovereign full time toafferrible.all.hisforges,.and, what rare-
ly falls to an officer in .such an inyerior.command, acquired the.
glory of havingfaved his country..

As soon as St. Difier surrendered, the Emperor advanced into August i7t

The Emperor
the heart of Champagne, but Sancerre's obstinate resistance had penetrates in-

to the heart

damped his sanguine hopes of penetrating to Paris, and led of France.
him feriouny to reflec on what he might expeft before towns
of greater strength, and defended by more numerous garrisons.
At the fame time, the procuring subsistence for his army was
attended with great difficulty, which increased in 'prqportion as
he withdrew from his own frontier. -He had loft a great number
of his best troops in the siege of St. Differ, and many fell daily
in skirmishes, which it was not in his power to avoid, though
they wafted his army insensibly, without leading to any decisive
a&tion. The season advanced apace, and he had not yet the
command -either of a sufficient extent of territory, or of any
such considerable town as rendered it safe to winter in the ene-
mies country. Great arrears too, were due-to his soldiers, who
were upon the point of mutinying for their pay, while he knew
not from what funds to satisfy them. All these considerations
induced him to liften to the overtures of peace which a Spanish
TDominican, the confeflor of his sifter the Queen of France, had
secretly made to his confeflor a monk of the fame order. In

c Brantome, torn. i. 489.

confequclce

Boom VII. cbnfequence bs this,'. plenipotettiaries were named; on both

£,*,, fides, and began their conferences in Chaufe,; a fmiall village

near -Chalons. At the frasme tiriei Charles; i ither fr6br a desire
of making one great final effort! ggainft France, or merely
to gain a pretext for deserting his ally and concluding a fepa-
rate peiet,- sent' an ambaffadotr: formally to require Henry,
according to the stipulation in thkeir;treaty, to advance towards
Paris. While he expeted a return from him, and waited the
iffiue of the conferences at Chaufle, he continued to march forward,
' though in the uitmoft distress from. scarcity of provisions. But at
i, ·. aft, 1t a fortunate'moti n on hnspart, or through fome'neglect

ort treaiheryton that of:the French,; he furprized first Efpernay .and
then Chateau Thierry, in both which were considerable magazines.
No sooner was it known that these towns, the latter of which is not
fvo days smatch from Paris, were in the hands of the enemy, than
that great capital, defneielefs, and fufeeptible of any violent alarm
in ptoportionr to its greatness, was filled with consternation. The
inhabitants, as if the Emperor had been already at their gates,
fled in the wildest confusion and despair, many fending their wives
and children down the Seine to Rouen, others to Orleans, and the
townsupon the Loire.' ;Francis himself, more.afflided 'with this,
than with any other event during his reign, and sensible as well of
the danger to which the kingdom was exposed, could not re-
frain, in the first emotion of his ,furprize and forr9w, from
crying. out, " How dear, 0 my God, do I- pay for this crown,
which 1 thought thou hadst granted me freely '." Bt recover-
ing in a moment from this sudden folly of peevishness and im-

f Brantome, tom. 6. 381.

patience,
38

patience, he devoutly added, " Thy. will, however, be done. ;"
and prdceeded to iifiie the necessary orders. for opposing the
enemy with his - ufal composure and presence of mind. The
dauphin detached eight thousand men to Paris, which revived
the courage of the affrighted citizens,; he threw a firong garrison
into Meaux, and by a forced march got into Fert0,. between the
Imperialists and the capital..

UPON tlis, the Emperor, wlo began again to feel tihe want of

provisions, perceiving that the dauphin still prudently declined
a battle, and not daring to attack his camp with forces so much
shattered and reduced by liard service, turned suddenly to the
right, and began to fall back towards Soiflbns. Having about
this time received Henry's answer, whereby he refused to abandon
the sieges of Bologne and Montreuil, of both which he expe&ed.
every moment to get poleflion, he thought himself absolved from.
all obligations of adhering to the treaty with him, and at full liber-
ty to consult his own interest in what manner soever he pleased.
He consented, therefore, to renew the conference, which the
fulrprize of Efpernay had broke off To conclude a peace between,
two princes, one of whom greatly desired, and the other greatly
needed it, did not require a long negociation. It was signed at
Crepfy, a small town near Meaux, on the eighteenth of Septem-
ber. The chief articles of it were, That all the conquests which
either party had made since the truce of Nice shall be restored;'
that the Emperor fliall give in marriage to the Duke of Orleans,
either his own eldest daughter, or the second daughter of his-
brother Ferdinand; that if he chose to bestow on him his own daugh-
ter, he (hall fettle on her all the provinces of the Low-Countries,
to be erected into an independent ftatc, which flhall descend to the

male

BooK VIL

Obliged to
retire.

Pence be-
twccn him
and Fiancia
concluded at
Clcfpy.

/
99

BboK VIIi rale:iffue of. the marriago ;, that' if; he.; determined, to give him
<,--^,,~. his- niece, he Ihall,. with her,. grant him the inveftiiure. of. Milan

and its dependencies; that he shall, within four months. declare
which of there two Ptincefes- he had! pitched. upon,, and. fulfill the.
refpeltive conditions' upon the consummation: of the marriage;
which shall take place within a year: from the date of the treaty.;
that as soon as the duke of Orleans is put. in pofleflion either of
the Low-Countries or of Milan, Francis ihall renounce all preten-
sions to the kingdom of Naples, or to the sovereignty of Slanders
and Artois, and Charles shall give up his claim to' the dutchy
of Burgundy and county of Charolois; that Francis shall give
no aid to. the exiled King of Navarre ;. that both Monarchs
shall join in making war upon the Turk, towards which the
King bfall furnish, when required by the Emperor and Empire,
fix hundred men at arms, and ten tlioufand' foot .

Motives of BESIDES the immediate motives to this peace arising from
concluding it. the. distress of his army through want of provisions; from the.

difficulty of retreating outof France;. and the impoflibility, oft
securing, winter quarters there, the Emperor was influenced by,
other considerations, more distant, indeed, but not less weigl!ty.
The Pope. was offended. to a great degree, as well at his con-
ceflions.to the Protestants in the late diet, as at his consenting to
call a.council, and to admit.of public disputations in Germany

g. Recuei do&s Traitiz, t. i, 227z. Beliu do causis Pads Crepiac. in Astis Eruditi
Lips. 1763.

with,
40

EMPEROR CHARLES V.

with a view of determining the dotrines in controversy; and Booc VII.
confidering both thele steps as sacrilegious encroachments on ,544
the jurifdition as well as privileges of the Holy fee, he had ad-
dressed to him a remonstrance rather than a letter on this fiubject,
written with fulch acrimony of language, and in a stile of such
high authority, as discovered more of an intention to draw on a
quarrel than of a desire to reclaimn him. This ill humour was
not a little inflamed by the Emperor's league with Henry, which
being contracted with an heretick, excommunicated by the apo-
ftolic fee, appeared to the Pope a profane alliance, and was not
lets dreaded by him, than that of Francis with Solyman. Paul's
son and grandson, highly incensed at the Emperor for having re-
futed to gratify them with regard to the alienation of Parma and
Placentia, contributed by their tnfufions to four and difguf him
still more. To all which was added the powerful operation of
the flattery and promises which Francis incessantly employed to
gain him. Though fiom his desire of maintainil:g a neutrality,
the Pope had hitherto fupprefled his own resentment, had eluded
the artifices of his own family, and resifted the follicitations of
the French King, it was not safe to rely much on the fteddilcfs of
a man whom his paflions, his friends, and his interest combined
to shake. The union of the Pope with France, Charles well
knew, would instantly expose his dominions in Italy to be at-
tacked. The Venetians, he foresaw, would probably follow the
example of a Pontiff, who was confidered as a model of political
wisdom among the Italians; and thus at a jun&ure when he felt
himself scarce equal to the burden of the present war, he would
be overwhelmed with the weight of a new confederacy againfl
himh. At the fame time, the Turks, almost unresisted, made

h F. Paul, ioo. Pallavic, 163.
VOL. III.

G

filch

such progress in Hungary, reducing town after town, that they
approached near to the confines of the Austrian provincesi. Above
all these, the extraordinary progress of the Protestant doctrines
in Germany, and the dangerous combination into which the Princes
of that profession had entered, called for his immediate attention.
Almost one half of Germany had revolted from the established
church, the fidelity of the reft was much shaken; the nobility
of Austria had demanded of Ferdinand the free exercise of
religion k; the Bohemians, among whom rome feeds of the
docrines of Huss still remained, openly favoured the new opinions;
the archbilhop of Cologne, with a zeal rare among ecclefiafticks,
had begun the reformation of his diocese; nor was it poflible, un-
less rome timely and effectual check were given to the spirit of
innovation, to foresee where it would end. He himself had been
a witness, in the late diet, to the peremptory and decisive tone
which the Protestants had now aflhmed; and had seen how, from
confidence in their number and union, they had forgotten the
humble stile of their first petitions, having grown to such boldners
as openly to despise the Pope, and to shew no great reverence
for the Imperial dignity itself. If, therefore, he wished to main-
tain either the ancient religion, or his own authority, and would
not chufe to dwindle into a mere nominal head of the Empire,
some vigorous effort was requisite, which could not be made
during a war that required the greatest exertion of his strength
againit a foreign and powerful enemy.

SUCH being the Emperor's inducements to peace, he had the
address to frame the treaty of Crefpy so as to promote all the

i fluanhaffli. Hilt. Hung. 17 7.

I Sleid. 285.
BOOK VII.

'544.

ends
42

ends which he had il view. By coming to an agreement with
Francis, he took from the Pope all prospect of advantage in court-
ing the friendlhip of that Monarch in preference to his. By the
proviso with regard to a war with the Turks, he not only deprived
Solyman of a powerful ally, but turned the arms of that ally
against him. By a private article, not inserted in the treaty that
it might not raise any unseasonable alarm, he agreed with Francis
that both should exert all their influence a;:d power in order to
procure a general council, to assert its authority, and to extermi-
nate the Protestant heresy out of their dominions. This cut offall
hope of afliftance which the confederates of Smalkalde might ex-
pe& from the French King i; and left their follicitations, or his
jealousy of an ancient rival, should hereafter tempt Francis to for-
get this engagement, he left him embarrassed with a war against
England, which would put it out of his power to take any part in
the affairs of Germany.

HENRY, pofleffed at all times with an high idea of his own

power and importance, felt, in the most sensible manner, the
neglec with which the Emperor had treated him in concluding
a separate peace. But the situation of his affairs was fich as
somewhat alleviated the mortification which this occasioned.
For though he was obliged to recal the Duke of Norfolk from
the fege of Montreuil, because the Flemish troops received
orders to retire, Bologne had surrendered before the negocia-
tions at Crefpy were brought to an issue. While elated with
vanity on account of this conquest, and inflamed with indigna-
tion againit the Emperor, the ambassadors whom Francis

BOOK VII.

'544.

War con-
tinues be-
tween France
and Englund.

Septem. 14.
I Seck. 1. iii. 496.

G2

43
sent

BOOK VII.

1544.

The dauphin
dissatisfied
with the
peace of
Crefpy.

sent to make overtures of peace found him too arrogant to
grant what was moderate or equitable. His demands were indeed
extravagant, and made in the tone of a conqueror; that Francis
should renounce his alliance with. Scotland, and not only pay
up the arrears of former debts, but reimburse the money which
he had expended in the present war. Francis, though sincerely
desirous of peace, and willing to yield a great deal in order to
obtain it, being now free from the preflure of the Imperial arms,
rejeted these ignominious propositions with disdain; and Henry
departing for England, hostilities continued between the two na-
tions m.

T H E treaty of peace, how acceptable soever to the people of

France, whom it delivered from the dread of an enemy who had
penetrated into the heart of the kingdom, was loudly com-
plained of by the dauphin. He confidered it as a manifest proof
of the King his father's extraordinary partiality towards his
younger brother, now Duke of Orleans, and complained that from
his eagerness to gain an establishment for a favourite son, he had
sacrificed the honour of the kingdom, and renounced the most
ancient and valuable rights of the crown. But as he durst not
venture to offend the king by refusing to ratify. it, though
extremely desirous at the fame time of securing to himself the
privilege of reclaiming what was now alienated so much to his
detriment, he secretly protested, in pretence of some of his adhe-
rents, against the whole tranifation ; and declared whatever he
should be obliged to do in order to confirm. it, null in itself,
and void of all obligation. The Parliament of Thouloufe, pro-

m Mem. de Ribier, t. i. p. 572. Herbert, 244.

bably
44

bably by the infligatiol of his pariizans, did tile fame ,. But
Francis, highly pleased as well with having delivered his fibjcts
from the miseries of al invafio", as with the profp2: of acquir-
ing an independent settlement for Ilis son at no greater price than
the. renouncing conquests to which he had no just claim ; titles
which had hitherto proved the bource of cxpcnce or dilfaftrs
to the nation ; and rights grown to be oblblete and of no value;
ratified the treaty with gpeat joy. Charles, within the time
prescribed by the tieaty, declared his intention of giving Ferdi-
nand's daughter in marriage to the Duke of Orleans, together
with the duchy of Milan as her dowry o. Every circumflance
seemed to promise the continuance of peace. The Emperor,
cruelly afflited with the gout, appeared to be in no condition to
undertake any enteiprize where great aCtivity was requisite, or
much fatigue to be endured. He himlilf felt this, or wiflied at
lcafl that it should be believed; and being lb much difibled by
this excruciating distemper, when a French embaflador followed
him to Brullels in order to be present at his ratification of the treaty
of peace, that it was with the utmofl difficulty he signed his name,
he observcd, that there was no great danger of his violating these
articles, as a hand that could scarce hold a pen, was little able to
brandifl a lance.

T H E violence of his disease confined the Emperor fcveral

months in Brussels, and wasthe apparent caulfe of putting off
the execution of the vast schemes which lie had formed in order
to humble the Protestant party in Germany. But there were
other reasons for this delay. For, how prevalent soever the

n Recueil de Traitez, t. ii. 235, 338.
o Recueil de Traitez, t. ii. 238.

motivet,

BOOK VII.

'5,14.

ror's sdwIIIls
willh rvtjt,)ct
to (J~l*iai,lI'

BOOK VII.

1544

The Pope
summons a
general coun-
cil to meet at
Trent.

motives were which determined him to undertake this enterprize,
the nature of that great body which he was about to attack, as
well as the situation of his own affairs, made it necessary to
deliberate long, to proceed with caution, and not to throw aside
too suddenly the veil under which he had hitherto concealed his
real sentiments and schemes. He was sensible that the Protestants,
conscious of their own strength, but under continual apprehen-
sions of his designs, had all the boldness of a powerful party, and
all the jealousy of a feeble faction ; and were no less quick-fighted
to discern the firit appearance of danger, than ready to take
arms in order to repel it. At the fame time, he continued in-
volved in a Turkish war; and though, in order to deliver him-
self from this incumbrance, he had determined to fend an env.oy
to the Porte with most advantageous and even fubmiflive over-
tures of peace, the resolutions of that haughty court were so tn-
certain, .that before these were known it would have been the
height of imprudence to have kindled the flames of civil war in
his own dominions.

UPON this account, he appeared dissatisfied with a bull issued

by the Pope immediately after the peace of Crefpy, summon-
ing the council to 'aflemble at Trent early next spring, and
exhorting all Christian Princes to embrace the opportunity
that the present happy interval of tranquillity afforded them,
of fupprefling those herefies which threatened to subvert what-
ever was sacred or venerable among Christians. But after such
a flight expression of dislike as was neceflary in order to cover
his designs, he determined to countenance the council, which
might become no inconsiderable instrument towards accomplish-
ing his projects, and therefore not only appointed ambassadors

to
46

to appear there in his name, but ordered tie ecclcfiaflicks in his Boo13 Vil.
dominions to attend at tie time prefixed i,. '5 4.

SUCH were the Emperor's views, when the Imperial dict, aftcr 154; .

Diet ai

several prorogations, was opened at Worms. The Protcfll;lts, \v',,,
who enjoyed the free exercise of their religion by a very pre- MaI:tcl 24.
carious tenure, having no other security for it than tile rccefs
of the last diet, which was to continue in force only until the
meeting of a council, wiflied earneflly to establish that impor-
tant privilege upon some filmer basis, and to hold it by a per-
petual not a temporary title. But, instead of offering them any
additional security, Ferdinand opened tile diet with observing,
that there were two points, chiefly, which required confidera-
tion, the prosecution of the war againfl the Turks, and the slate
of religion ; that the former Was the moll urgent, as Solyman,
after conquering the grenteft part of Hungary, was now ready
to fall upon tile Auitrian provinces that the Emperor, who,
from the beginning of his reign, had neglected no opportunity
of annoying this formidable enemy, and with the hazard of his
own person had resifted his attacks, being animated flill with
the fame ;eal, had now consented to itop flort in the carccr of
his success against France, that, in conjunction with his anticnt
rival, he might turn his arms with greater vigour againfl the
common advcrfary of the Christian faith; that it became all
the members of the Empire to second there pious endeavours of
its head; that, therefore, they ought, without delay, to vote
him such effectual aid as both their duty and their interest called
upon them to furnish ; that the controversies about religion were

r F. Paul, 104.

47

Book VII.

'545.

Fcrdinand
requircs the
Gernians to
ackiowledge
the CouIncil.

so intricate, and of such difficult discussion, as to give no hope of
its being poflible to bring them at present to any final issue; that
by perl'everance and repeated follicitations the Emperor had at
length prevailed on the Pope to call a council, for which they
had so often wished and petitioned; that the time appointed for
its meeting was now come; and both parties ought to wait for
its decrees, and submit to them as the. decisions of the universal
church.

THE popifl members of the diet received this declaration with

great applause, and signified their entire acquiescence in every
particular which it contained. The Protestants expressed great
furprize at propositions, which were so manifestly repugnant to
the recess of the former diet; they insisted that the questions
with regard to religion, as first in dignity and importance, ought
to come first under deliberation; that alarming as the progress
of the Turks was to all Germany, the securing the free exer-
cife of their religion touched them still more nearly, nor could
they prosecute a foreign war with spirit, while follicitous
and concerned about their domestic tranquillity; that if the
latter were once rendered firm and permanent, they would
concur with their countrymen in punting the former, and yield
to none of them in acivity or zeal. But if the danger from
the Turkilh arms was indeed so imminent, as not to admit of
such a delay as would be occasioned by an immediate examina-
tion of the contraverted points in religion, they required that a
diet should be intfantly appointed, to which the final settlement
of their religious disputes should be referred; and that in the
mean time the decree of the former diet concerning religion
should be explained in a point which they deemed essential. 'By

the
48

the recess of Spires it was provided, that they fhlould enjoy unmo-
lefted the public exercise of their religion, until the meeting of a
legal council; but as the Pope had now called a council, to
which Ferdinand had required them to submit, they began to
filfpet that their adversaries might take advantage of an ambi-
guity in the terms of the recess, and pretending that the event
therein mentioned had taken -place, might pronounce them to
be no longer entitled to the fame indulgence. In order to guard
against this interpretation, they renewed their former remon-
ftrances against a council called to meet without the bounds of
the Empire, summoned by the Pope's authority, and in which
he alfumed the right of presiding; and declared that, notwith-
standing the convocation of any fucl illegal aflembly, they still
held the recess of the late diet to be in full force.

BOOK VII.

1545.

AT otherjuntures, when the Emperor thought it of advantage Emperor aP-

to tooth and gain the Protestants, he had devised expedients for rives at
giving them fatisfafion with regard to demands seemingly more
extravagant; but his views at present being very different, Ferdi-
nand by his command adhered inflexibly to his first propositions,
and would make no conceflions which had the most remote ten-
dency to throw discredit on the council, or to weaken its autho-
rity. The Proteftantc, on their part, were no less inflexible; and
after much. time spent in fruitless endeavours to convince each
other, they came to no conclusion. Nor did the presence of
the Emperor, who upon his recovery arrived at Worms, con- May 5.
tribute in any degree to render the Protestants more compliant.
Fully convinced that they were maintaining the cause of God
and of truth, they shewed themselves superior to the allurements
of interest, or the suggestions of fear ; and in proportion as the
Emperor redoubled his solicitations, or discovered his designs,

VOL. III. H their

49

BOOK VII.

1545.

The Pro-
teflants dif-
claim all con-
nedion with
the council of
Trent.

ConduA of
Maurice of
Saxony in
this diet.
August 4.

their boldness seems to have increased. At last they 'openly
declared, that they would not even deign to vindicate their tenets
in presence of a council, assembled not to examine, but to con-
demn them; and that they would pay no regard to an aftembly
held under the influence of a Pope, who had already precluded
himself from all title to act as a judge, by his having stigmatized
their opinions with the name of heresy, and denounced against
them the heaviest censures, which, in the plenitude of his tifurped
power, he could inflict .

WHILE the Protestants, with such union as well as firmness,

rejeted all intercourse with the council, and refused their assent
to the Imperial demands in refpec to the Turkish war, Mau-
rice of Saxony alone shewed an inclination to gratify the Empe-
ror with regard to both. Though he profefed an inviolable
regard for the Protestant religion, he assumed an appearance of
moderation 'peculiar to himself, by which he confirmed the
fovourable sentiments that the Emperor already entertained
of him, and gradually paved the way for executing the ambi-
tious designs which always occupied his acive and enterprizing
mindr. His example, however, had little influence upon such
as agreed with him in their religious opinions, and Charles
perceived that he could not hope either to procure present aid
from the Protestants against the Turks, or to quiet their fears
and jcaloufies on account of their religion. But as his schemes
were not yet ripe for execution, nor his preparations so far
advanced that hle could force their compliance, or puni(h their
obitinacy, he artfully concealed his own intentions; and that he
might augment their security, he appointed a diet to be held at
Ratilbon early next year, in order to adjust what was now left

q Sleid. 343, &c. Seek. iii. 543, c. Thuan. Hiflor. lib. ii. p. 56.
, Seek. iii. 57i.

undeter-
50o

undetermined; and previous to it, he agreed that a certain num-
ber of divines of each party should meet, in order to confer upon
the points in dispute D.

B u T how far soever this appearance of a desire to maintain

the present tranquillity might have imposed upon the Protestants,
the Emperor Was incapable of such uniform and thorough diffi-
mulation, as to hide altogether from their view the dangerous
designs which he was meditating againif them. Herman count de
Wied, Archbishop and Elector of Cologne, a prelate conspicuous
for his virtue and primitive simplicity of manners, though not
more diftinguithed for learning than the other descendants of
noble families, whQ in that age pofeffed most of the great
benefices in Germany, having become a proselyte to the doc-
trines of the Reformers, had begun in the year one thousand five
hundred and forty-three, with the afliftance of Melndlthon and
Bucer, to abolish the ancient fuperitition in his diocese, and to
introduce in its place the rites established among the.Proteftants.
But the canons of his cathedral who were not poireffed with
the fame spirit of innovation, and who foresaw how fatal the
levelling genius of the new feet would prove to their dignity
and wealth,' opposed, from the beginning, this unprecedented
enterprize of their Arclbilhop with all the zeal flowing fiom
reverence for old inititutions, heightened by concern for their
own interest. This opposition, which the Archbilhop con-
fidered only as a new argument to demonitrate the neceflity
of a reformation, neither (hook his resolution nor slackened his
ardour in prosecuting his plan. The canons, perceiving all
their endeavours to check his career to be ineffeAual, solemnly

Sleid. 3 5 1.

H 2 protested

BOOK VII.

1545.

rThe Pro-
tcftants begin
to fufpcd the
Emperor,

pioteefld against his proceedings, and appealed for redress to the
Pope and Emperor, the former as his ecclesiastical, the latter as
his civil superior. This app.:al being laid before the Emperor,
during his residence in Worms, he took the canons of Cologne
under his immediate protection ; enjoined them to proceed with
rigour againit all who revolted from the established church; pro-
hibited the Archbilhop to make any innovation in his diocese i
and summoned him to appear at Bruflels within thirty days, to
answer the accusations which flhould be preferred against him t.

To this clear evidence of his hostile intentions against the Pro-

teftant party, Charles added other proofs still more explicit. In
his hereditary dominions of the Low-Countries, he persecuted all
who were fufpeded of Lutheranifm with unrelenting rigour. As
soon as he arrived at Worms, he silenced the Protestant preachers
in that city. He allowed an Italian monk to inveigh against the
Lutherans from the pulpit of his chapel, and to call upon him, as
he regarded the favour of God, to exterminate that pestilent he-
refy. He dispatched the embafly, which has been already men-
tioned, to Constantinople, with overtures of peace, that he might
be free from any apprehensions of danger or interruption from
that quarter. Nor did any of these steps, or their dangerous ten-
dency, escape the jealous observation of the Proteflants, to fail to
alarm their fears, and to excite their solicitude for the safety of
their fed.

Death of the
Duke of Or-
leans.

MEANWHILE, Charles's good fortune, which predominated

on all occasions over that of his rival Francis, extricated him out
of a difficulty, from which, with all his sagacity and address, he

t Sleid. 310, 340, 35!. Seckend. iii. 443, 553.

would
BJOK V11.

I545.
52

would have found it no easy matter to have disentangled him-
self. Jus about the time when the Duke of Orleans Ihould
have received Ferdinand's daughter in marriage, and together
with her the poeflenion of the Milanelf, he died of a pftlilential
fever. By this event, the Emperor was fieed from the necellity
of giving up ai important province into the hands of an enemy,
or from the indecency of violating a recent ald solemn engage-
ment, which must have occasioned an immediate rupture with
France. He aft'etd, however, to express great sorrow for the
untimely death of a young Piince, who was to have been. so
nearly allied to him; but he carefully avoided entering into any
frelh difcuflions concerning the Milanese, and would not liften
to a proposal which came from Francis of new modelling the
treaty ,f Crefpy, so as to make him fomc reparation for the ad-
vantages which lie had loft by the demise of his son. In the more
astive and vigorous part of Francis's reign, a declaration of war
would have been the certain and instantaneous consequence of
such a flat refusal to comply with a demand seemingly so equi-
table; but the declining itate of his own health,. the exhausted
condition of his kingdoms, together with the burden of the war
against England obliged him, at present, to diflemble his resent-
ment, and to put off thoughts of revenge to some other junc-
ture. In co.Afequence of this event,, the unfortunate Duke of
Savoy loft all hope of obtaining the restitution of his terri-
tories; and the rights or claims rclinquifled by the treaty of
Crefpy, returned in full force to the crown of France, to serve as
pretexts for future warsu.

UPON the first intelligence of the Duke of Orleans's death,
the coifederates of Smalkalde flattered themselves that the

Bclcarii Comment. '69. Paruta, Vcnet. iv. p. 177.

efiential

BOOK VII.

I545.

53

effcntial alterations which it occasioned could scarce fail of pro-
ducing a rupture, which would prove the means of their safety.
But they were not more difappoined with regard to this, than
in their expectations from an event which leemed to be the cer-
tain prelude of a quarrel between the Emperor and the Pope.
Paul, whose passion for aggrandizing his family, increased as he
advanced in years, and as he saw the dignity and power which
they derived immediately from him becoming more precarious,
finding that he could not bring the Emperor to approve of his
ambitious schemes, ventured, though at the rifque of incurring
his displeasure, to grant his son Peter Lewis the investiture of
Parma and Placentia. At a time when a great part of Europe in-
veighed openly againfR the corrupt manners and exorbitant power
of Ecclesiastics, and when a council was summoned to reform the
disorders in the church, this indecent grant of fich a principa-
lity to a son of whose illigitimate birth the Pope ought to have
been ashamed, and whose licentious morals all good men detested,
gave general offence. Some Cardinals in the Imperial interest
remonstrated against 'such an unbecoming alienation of the
patrimony of the church; the Spanish ambassador would not
be present at the solemnity of his enfeoffment; and the Emperor
peremptorily refuse'd, upon pretext that these cities were part of
the Milanese itate, to confirm the deed of invefRiture. But both
the Emperor and Pope being intent upon one common object in
Germany, sacrificed their particular paflions to that public
cause, and suppressed the emotions of jealousy or resentment
which were rising on this occasion, that they might jointly pursue
what each esteemed of greater importance .

Paruta, Hidl. Venet. iv. 178. Pallavic 18o,

ABOUT
BOOK VII.

'545

The Pope
grants the
dutchies of
Parma and

'laccntia to
his son.
54.

ABOUT this time the peace of Germany was disturbed by a

violent but Ihort eruption of Henry Duke of Brunswick. Thlis
Prince, though Itill stript of his dominions, which the Emperor
held in sequestration, until his differences with the confederates
of Smalkalde should be adjufled, poffefled however so much
credit in Germany that he undertook to raise for the French
King a considerable body of troops to be employed in the war
against England. The money stipulated for this purpose was duly
advanced by Francis; the troops were levied; but Henry, initead
of leading them towards France, suddenly entered his own domi-
nions at their head, in hopes of recovering them before any army
could be aifembled to oppose him. The confederates were not
more furprized at this unexpected attack, than the King of France
was aftonifled at a mean thievilh fraud To unbecoming the cha-
ractcr of a Prince. But the Landgrave of Hesse, with incredible
expedition, collected as many men as put a stop to the progress
of Henry's undisciplined forces, and being joined by his fon-in-
law Maurice, and tome troops of the Eletor of Saxony, he
gained filch advantages over Henry, who was rash and bold in
forming his schemes, but feeble and undetermined in executing
them, as obliged him to disband his army, and to surrender
himself together with his eldest son prisoners at discretion. He
was kept in close confinement, until a new reverse of affairs pro-
cured him liberty Y.

As this defeat of Henry's wild enterprize added new repu-

tation to the arms of the Protestants, the reformation of the
Palatinate brought a great acceflion of strength to their party.
Frederick, who succeeded his brother Lewis in that Eledorate,

y Sleid. 352. Seck. iii. 567.

had

BOOK VII.

'545.

FI-In v tit
LBrun i w ick
kindles a war
il Cellaianv .

I546.

The Relbr-
mation of the
Palatinate.
l

.55

had long been fufpeCed of a secret propensity to the doctrines of
the Reformers, which, upon his accession to the principality, he
openly manifested. But as he expeced that something effecual
towards a general and legal efBtblifhment of religion would be the
fruit of so many diets, conferences, and negociations, he did
not, at first, attempt any public innovation in his dominions.
Finding all these issue in nothing, .he thought himself called, at
length, to countenance by his authority the system which he ap-
proved of, and to gratify the wilhes of his fubjets, who by their
intercourse with the Proteflant ltates had universally imbibed
their opinions. As the warmth and impetuosity which accompa-
nied the spirit of Reformation in its first efforts had somewhat
abated, this change was made with great order and regularity;
the ancient rites were abolifled, and new forms introduced with-
out any at of violence, or symptom of discontent. Though
Frederick adopted the religious system of the Protefants, h.
imitated the example of Maurice, and did not accede to the league
of Smalkalde .

A FEW weeks before this revolution in the Palatinate, the

general council was opened with the accustomed folemnities at
Trent. The eyes of the Catholick states were turned with much
expectation towards an assembly, which all had confidered as a
natural and adequate remedy for the disorders of the church
when they first broke out, though many were afraid that it was
now too late to hope for great beiefit from it, when the malady,
by being fiffered to make progress during twenty-eight years,
had become inveterate, and grown to such extreme violence.

Sleid. 356. Seek. 1. iii. 616.

The
BOOK VII.

'545.

Jan. tO.

The ccuncil
afenb!ces at
'T'er.t.

The Pope, by his last bull of convocation, had appointed the
first meeting to be held in March, But his views and those of the
the Emperor were so different, that almost the whole year was
spent in negociations. Charles, who foresaw that the rigorous
decrees of the council againit the Protestants would Coon drive
them, in felf-defence as well as from refentmcnt, to Come def-
perate extreme, laboured to put off its meeting untilhis war-
like preparations were so far advanced, that he might be in a con-
dition to second its decisions by the force of arms. The Pope,
who hbd early Cent to Trent the legates who were to preside in
hip pamne, knowing to what contempt it would expose his autho-
rity,, and what Cufpicions it would beget of his intentions, if the
fathers of the council Ihould remain in a Rtate of inaEivity, when
the church was in such danger as to require their immediate and
.vigcorq interposition, insisted either upon translating the coun-
ct tp :fQo city in Italy, or upon suspending its proceedings at
that junture, or upon authorising it to begin its deliberations im-
mediately. The Emperor reje&ed the two former as equally of-
fenfive to the Germans of every denomination, but finding it
impoflible to,elude the latter, he proposed that the council should
begin with reforming the disorders in the church, before it pro-
ceeded to examine or define articles of faith. This was the very
thing which the court of Rome dreaded most, and which had
prompted it to employ so many artifices in order to prevent the
meetipg,,of such a dangerous judicatory. Paul, though more
compliant than some of his predecessors with regard to calling a
council, was no less jealous than they had been of itsjurifdiAion,
and iaw what matter of triumph filch a method of proceeding
would afford the heretics. He apprehended confcquences not on.
ly humbling but fatal to the papal fee, if the council came to

VOL. III. I confider

BOOK VII.

1546.

57

BOOK VII. confider an inquest into abuses as their only bulfinefs; or if infe-

c^'"^~rJ 'rior prelates were allowed to gratify their own envy and peevish-

ness by prescribing rules to those who were exalted above them
in dignity and power. Without listening, therefore, to this infi-
dious proposal of the Emperor, he initrurted his legates to open the
council.

Jan. 18. THE first session was spent in matters of form. In a fubfe-
Its proceed-
ings. quent one, it was agreed that the framing a confeflion of faith,

containing all the articles which the church required its mem-
bers to believe, ought to be the first and principal business of the
council; but that at the fame time, it should give attention to
what was necessary towards the reformation of manners and
discipline. From this first symptom of the spirit with which
the council was animated, from, the high tone of authority
which the legates who presided in it assumed, and 'frorh the
implicit deference with which most of the members' followed
their directions, the Proteflants conjectured with ease what de-
cifions they might expet. It astonished them, however, to fee
forty prelates, (for no greater number were yet aftembled)yaf-
fume authority as representatives of the universal church, and
proceed to determine the most important points of doctrine in its
name. Sensible of this indecency, as well as of the ridicule with
which it might be attended, the council advanced slowly in its
deliberations, and all its proceedings were for some 'time lan-
guifhing and feeble *. As soon as the confederates of Smalkalde
received information of the opening of the council, they publish-
ed a long manifesto containing a renewal of their protest against
its meeting, together with the reasons which induced them to

F. Paul, 120, &c. Pallavic. p. 18o, &c,

decline

decline its jurifdiEtionsb. The Pope and Emperor, meanwhile,
were To little follicitous to quicken or add vigour to its opera-
tions, as plainly discovered that rome object of greater importance
occupied and intereRed them.

T H E Protestants, as they were not inattentive or unconcerned

fpedators of their; motions, entertained every day more violent
suspicions of their intentions, and received intelligence from
different quarters of the machinations carrying on againl them.
The King of England informed them, that the Emperor hayv
ing long resolved to exterminate their opinions, wouldnot fail to
employ this interval of tranquillity which he now enjoyed, as
the most favourablejuncture for carrying hisdefign into execu-
tion. The merchants of Augsburg, which was at that time a
city of extensive trade, received advice by means of their corre-
fpondents in Italy, among whom were Come whom secretly favoured
the Protestant caufec that a dangerous confederacy against it
was forming between the Pope and Emperor. In confirmation
of this, they heard from the Low-Countries that Charles had
iflued orders, though with every precaution which could keep the
measure concealed, for raising troops both there and in other
parts of his dominions. Such a variety of information, cor-
roborating all that their own jealousy or observation led them
to apprehend, left the Protestants little reason to doubt of the
Emperor's hoktile intentions. Under this imprenion, the depu-
ties of the confederates of Smalkald'e' aflembled at Frankfort,
and by communicating' their intelligence' and sentiments to eacli
other, reciprocally heightened their sense of the impending
danger.. But their union was not fich as their fituatioh required;

b Scckend. iii. 6o2, &c.

I 2

Apprehen-
sions of the
Protcftanta.

Their delibe-
rations.
C Seek. I. iii. 579.

or

59

or the preparations of their enemies rendered neceflary. Their
league had now subsisted ten years. Among so many mem-
bers whose territories were intermingled with each ather, and
who, according to the custom of Germany, had created an
infinite variety of mutual rights and claims by intermarriages,
alliances, and contrats of different kinds, fubjets ofjealoufy and
disorder had unavoidably arisen. Some of the confederates, being
conneted with the Duke of Brunswick, were highly disgusted
with the Landgrave, on account of the rigour with which he
had treated that rash but unfortunate Prince. Others taxed the
Elector of Saxony and Landgrave, the heads of the league, with
having involved the members in unnecessary and' exorbitant
expences by their profuseness or want of oeconomy. The
views, likewise, of these two great Princes, who, by their
superior power and authority, influenced and directed the whole
body, being extremely different, rendered all its motions lal-
guid, at a time when the utmost vigour and dispatch
were requisite. The Landgrave, of a violent and enterprizing
temper, but not forgetful, amidst his zeal for religion, of the
usual maxims of human policy, insisted that the danger which
threatened them, being manifest and unavoidable, they should
have recourse to the most effectual expedient for securing theit
own safety, by courting the prote&tion of the Kings of France
and England, or by joining in alliance with the Protestant can-
tons of Swifterland, from whom they might expetl' siuc1
powerful and present aflifance as their 'situation demanded.
The Eletor, on the other hand, with the most upright inten-
tions of any Prince in that age, and with talents which
might have qualified him abundantly for the administration
of government in any tranquil period, was poflefred with such
superstitious veneration for all the parts of the Lutleran system,

ard
BOOK VII.

iS46.
60

and fuoh bigotted attachment to all its tenets, as made him averse
to an unioni with those who diffeted from him in any article of
faith, and rendered him very incapable of undertakiTng its defence
in times of difficulty and danger. He seemed to think, that the
concerns of religion were to be regulated entirely by principles
and maxims different from thoe which men apply to the common
affairs of life; and being swayed too much by the opinions of
Luther, who was hot bnly a f«ranger to the rules of political con-
duc, but despised them ; he Often discovered an uncomplying
spirit, which proved of the greatest detriment to the cause that he
withed to ,support. ' Infldenced, on this occasion, by the severe
and rigid notions of that Reformer, he refused to enter into any
Confederacy with Francis, be'atire he 'was a persecutor of the
truth; or to solicit the friendship 'of Henry, because le was no
lefsiimpious and profane than the Pope himself; or even to join
in alliance 'with the Swiss, because they differed from him in
several efential articles of faith. This dissension,' about a point
of such consequence, produced its natural effe6ts. ' Each Secrctly
censured and reproached the other. The Landgrave confidered
the Elector as fettered by narrow prejudices, unworthy of a Prince
called to a 'a chief part in a tcene of such importance. The
Elcaor 'fufpeEted him of lobfe principles and- 'ambitious vievs,
which cdrrefponded ill with 'the sacred cause in which they were en-
gaged. But though the Ele6tor's scruples prevented their timely ap-
plication for foreign aid ' and the jealousy or discontent of the other
Princes defeated a proposal for renewing their original confederacy,
tie term during which it was to continue in force being on the
point of expiring; yet the sense of their common danger induced
them to agree with regard to other points, particularly that they

woull I

BOOK VII.

1546.

61

BOOK VII.

1546.

I'heir nego-
ciations with
the Emperor.

would never acknowledge the assembly at Trent as a lawful coun-
cil, nor susser the Archbishop of Cologne to be oppressed on ac-
count of the steps which, he had taken towards the reformation of
his diocese d

THE Landgrave, meanwhile, desirous of penetrating to the

bottom of the Emperor's intentions, wrote to Granvelle, whom
he knew to be thoroughly acquainted with all his master's
schemes, informing him of the several particulars which. raised
the suspicions of the Protestants, and begging an explicit decla-
ration of what they had to fear or to hope. Granvelle, in return,
assured them that the intelligence which they had received of the
Enperor's military .preparations .was exaggerated, and all their
suspicions destitute of foundation; that, though in order to
guard his frontiers againfl any insult of the French or English,
he had commanded a small body of men to be raised in the
Low-Countries, he was as follicitous as ever to maintain tran-
quillity in dermany e,

B u T the Emperor's ations did not correspond with tlhefi

profeflions. For, instead of appointing men of known modera-
tion and a pacific temper to appear in defence of the Catholic
dotrines at the conference which had been agreed on, he made
choice of fierce bigots, attached to their own system with a
blind obstinacy, which rendered all hope of reconcilement def-
perate. Malvenda, a Spanilh divine, who took the conduO of
the debate on the part of the Catholics, managed it with all the
subtle dexterity of a scholastic metaphysician, more fRudious to

d Seck. 1. iii. 566, 570, 613. Skid. 355.

e Sleid. 356.

perplex

perplex his adversaries than to convince them, and more intent on
palliating error tlla on, discovering truth. The Protestants filled
with indignation, as well at his fgphiftry i.:at rome regulations
which the Emperor endeavoured to impose on the disputants,
broke off the conference abruptly, being filly convinced of the
Emperor's having had notliing in view but to amuse them and to
gain time for ripening his own fchemese.

f Sleid. 358. Seek. 1. iii. 620.

I!

THE

63
BOOK VII.

t546.
. ' ( i 4 I

! . ' , .

k . -. /
:, . - I

I

# BOOK VIII.

THE
H I

S T

0

R Y'
OF THE

I G

N

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES V.

VIII.
BooK VIII.

1l46.

Death of
Luther.
Feb. 18.

W H I LE appearances of danger daily encreafed, and the

tempest which had been so long a gathering was ready

to break forth in all its violence against the Protestant church,
Luther was saved, by a seasonable death, from feeling or behold-
ing its deftrutive rage. Having gone, though in a declining
state of health, and during a rigorous season, to his native city of
Eyfleben, in order to compose, by his authority, a dissension
among the counts of Mansfield, he was seized with a violent
inflammation in his stomach, which in a few days put an end
to his life, in the fixty-third year of his age. As he was

raited
R

E
BOOK

raised up by providence to be the. autlor of one/of ;thegreatelt
and most, interesting revolutions.. recorded in ihftory, ;there is
not any person perhaps whose charat'er. Ilas' been drawn with
such opposite colours. In lis ownpae,g, one party; struck with
horror:and inflamqd with rage, ,.when Ithey litw..wvith, what a da-
ring hand he., overtirned every thlilig whichl: they ,:hld to be fa-
cred, or, valued as .eneficial, ,mputeil o him. not only l Bithe de-
feds and vices of a man, butl the qulities of a damon. The other,
warmed with admiration and gratitude, which they thought he
merited as tlhe r.ftor¢r of:light .and tiberty to,th oChrittian, church,
ascribed tol him;,.perfetions abo.ve tlhe cpondition of :humanity,
.pd vie~wed..all :his, agiona with a veneration, bordering on that
which, lhould be paid .only to those who are guided by the imme-
diat;:,iinfplration!.of leaven. It, is, his own condudt, not the
,uwdifsirguithiilg, enfur¢. or: the;i xaggerated praiife of his con-
temporaries,. whih! . ouglht to regulate, the opinion, ot the, prefeht
age':.ionceriihg, him. Zeal for whlat. he regarded as'truth,
undaunted intrepidity. to maintain'.it, abilities both, natural and
acquired to .defend ;it,..nd, unwearied, industry to propagate it,
are : Virtues: q/hich, lhine ,fQo.:,ofpjiC uQoily: in .every part of hi.
bqhaviour, ithat evep his enemios must allow him t9 have!poleffed
them in, an; eminent degree;: :To.thefe may be added with equal
juRtice, fuclh tpuri.y and ,even i suferity. of manners, as became
one Who aTuined the, aharader.!o a reformtri,; such fantity, of
life.asf'ui'ed.the d-o.trinie,!'hi¢hl. l. .deli.vered ; and such perfet
jlifintrjeltednefs as, ffoxds, nq; flig|t i prefumption:of hiis sincerity
Superior to all selfish considerations, a stranger to the elegancies of
life, and despising its pleasures, he left the honours and emolu-
mCents of th;iilurch to his Idifc¢iples, 'lemailii)g;fatisfieda li.mfelf
i-, his original, iftte, of pr'fefor. in ;the university,' aid 'pattor of
VOL. III. K the

Book. VI If.

t546.
Hish Charatdcr.

65

BOOK VIII the town of Wittemberg, with 'the moderate appointments an
1'-6^' nexed to there offices. His extraordinary qualities were allayed

with no inconsiderable mixture of human frailty and human
paflions. These, however, were of such a nature, that they can-
not be imputed to malevolence or corruption of heart, but seem to
have taken their rife from the fame source with many of his Virtues.
His mind forcible and vfment in all its operations,; rouzed by
great objects, or agitated by violent pallions, broke out, on many
occasions, with an impetuosity which astonishes men of feebler
spirits,' or such 'as are placed in a more tranquil situation. By
carrying rome praise-worthy dispositions to excess,' he bordered
sometimes on what was culpable, and was often betrayed into
acions which exposed him to censure. His confidence that his own
opinions were well founded, approached to arrogance; his courage
in aferting them, to rafhnes s; his firmness in adhering to themi to
obstinacy; and his zeal in confuting;his'.adverfaries, to rage and
scurrility. Accuitomed himself to c6nfider every thing as fiubor-
dinate to truth, he expe&ed the fame deference for it from other
men and without making any allowances'for their 'tim'idity; or
prejudices, he poured forth again'it those, who defappointed, hm, in
this particular, a torrent of invective mingled, with contempt,
Regardless of any diftintion of railk or characer when his doctrines
were attacked, he chaflifed all his adversaries, indifcriminattly,
with the fame rough hand!i :neither: the !royal' dignity /of!Henry
VIII. nor the eminent leairing end :abilities bf:.Erafmutus8 screened
them from the fame' gtbfs abtife with which he treated Tetzei:bt
Eccius.

But, these. indecencies of.whichi Ltifihet was guiltyi must not
be imputed wholly to the violence' of his temper. 'They ought

to
66

,c

,

to be charged in part on the manners of the age. Among a
rude people, unacquainted with those maxims, which, by putting
continual restraint on the palions of individuals, have polifled
society and rendered it agreeable, disputes of every kind were
managed with heat, and strong emotions were uttered in their
natural language, without refetye or delicacy. At the fame, time,
the works of learned men were all composed in Latin, and they
were not only authorized, by the example of eminent writers in
that language, to use their antagonists with the most illiberal
scurrility; but, in a dead tongue, indecencies of every kind ap-
pear less (hocking than in a living language, whose idioms and
phirafes seem' gross, becaufe'they' are familiar.

IN passing judgment upon the characers of men, we ought

to try them by the principles and maxims of their own age,
not by those of:'another: For, although virtue and vice, are: at
all times the fame, manners and customs vary continually. Some
parts of Luther's behaviour, which to us appear most culpable,
gave no disgust to his contemporaries. It was even by tome
of those qualities, which we are now apt to blame, that he was
fitted for accomplishing the great work which he undertook.
To rouze mankind, when funk in ignorance or fuperltition, and
to encounter the rage of bigotry, armed with power, required
the utmost vehemence of zeal, and a temper daring to excess.
A gentle call would neither have reached, nor have excited
those to whom it was addressed. , A spirit, more amiable, but
less vigorous than Luther's, would have tirunk back from the
dangers, which he braved and surmounted. Towards the close
of Luther's life, though without any perceptible declension of

K 2 his
: t

BOOK. VIII.

S146.

67

BOOK VIII. his zeal or abilities, the infirmities of his teipper increased upon

1s46. him, so that he grew daily more peevilh, more. irascible, and

more impatient of contradiction.' Having lived to, be. witness of
his own amazing success ; to fee a great part of Europe embrace
his doctrines; and to shake the foundation of the Papal throne,
before which the' mightiest Monarchs had trembled; he dlfcovered,
on tome occafi6nsi symptoms o6f vanity and felf-applaufe.,. He
must have been indeed more than mans if, upon contemplating
all that he actually accomplished, he had never felt any fentinerit
of this kind rising in his breast . :

SOME time before ;his death:;he felt his .ftength declining, his

constitution being worn out by a prodigious multiplicity of business,
added to the labour of discharging .his minifteriali function with
unremitting diligence, to the fatigtle bs tonftant study, besides the
composition of works' ast volhuninoui as. if' he 'had enjoyed unin-

....,;;i·:··j '·. . ·.·· . .,:; .

Ji

* A remarkable inflance of this,ras Well as of a certain'fingulsatty and ele-

vation of sentiment, is found in his Last Will. Though 'the effetis which
he had to bequeath. were.very;iin'confiderable) ihe thought. it. feltary .:o arake
a Tcfeament, 'bpt scorned to frame it with te; usual (legal formalities. o,
tus fum, fays he, in cclo, jn, kerra, ins inferno, & auctQrotatep. al hoc
sufficientem habeo, ut mili soli credatur, cum. Deus nihi, homini licet dam-

iabili, et mfrabliet'mierabili peccatori, ex paterna mifericordia Evan-

gelium filii fili credi'derit, dederitque ut in eo verax & 'idelis' fuerim, ita ut
multi in mundo illud per me'acceperint, &'me pro Dorore veritas'agniovew
rint, fpretd ban'in Papae, Cwefaris, Regum, Principum & facerddoum, irhtno
omnium daenonlim odio. Q32idni, igitur, ad di(pofitioneni hanc, in re cxi-
gua, .fufficiat, si adfit manus meae teflimonium, & dici poflit, hxec fcriplt
D.-Martinus Luther, Notarius Dei, & teflis Evangejii ejus. Seck. I. iii,

i~.'~ 651£~. ~terrupted

terrupted
68

terrupted leiflre and retirement. His natural intrepidity did BOOK V11l.
not forsake him at the approach of death; his lan conver- 1546
fation with his friends was concerning the happininefs reserved
for good men in a future world, of which he spoke with the
fervor and delight natural to one who expeced and wifled to
enter' soon upon, the enjoyment of it'. The account of his death
filled the Rdman Catholic party with exceflive as well as indecent
joy, and damped;:the spirits of;all his followers; neither party
sufficiently confidering that his doctrines were now To firmly
rooted, as to be in a condition to flourifl independent of the
hand which first had planted them. His funeral was celebrated
by orderof the Ele&or of Saxony with extraordinary pomp.
He left several children by his wife Catharine Bore, who fur-
vived him; towards the end of last century, there were
in Saxony rome of his descendents in decent and honourable
stations b.

TH E Emperor, meanwhile, pursued the plan of diflimulation The Emperor

with which he had set out, employing every art to amuse the endevours to
Protestants, and to quiet their fears and jealousies. For this deceive the
purpose he contrived to have an interview with the Landgrave Pot
of Hefle, the most active of all the confederates, and the most March 28.
suspicious of his designs. To him he made such warm profef-
sions of his concern for the happiness of Germany, and of his
aversion to all violent measures; he denied, in fich express
terms, his having entered into any league, or having begun any
military preparations which fliould give cause of alarm to the
Protestants, as seem to have dispelled all the Landgrave's

b Seck. 1. iii. 65 i.

69
11 lcid. 362. Seck. fib. sli. 632, &C.

«

Book V11I.

'546.

Proccedings
of the coun-
cil againfl the
Protellants.
April 8.

doubts and apprehensions, and Cent him away fully satisfied of
his pacific intentions. This artifice was of great advantage,
and effedually answered the purpose for which it was intended.
The' Landgrave upon his leaving Spires, where he had been
admitted to this interview, went to Worms, where the Smal-
kaldic confederates were aflembled, and gave them such a flat-
terring representation of the Emperor's favourable disposition
towards them, that they, too apt, as well from the temper of the
German nation as from the genius of all great aflociations or
bodies of men, to be flow, and dilatory, and undecifive in their
delibrations, thought there was no neceflity of taking any immedi-
ate measures against a danger, which appeared to be distant or
imaginary c.

SucH events, however, soon occurred, as flaggered the credit

which the Protestants had given to the Emperor's declarations.
The council of Trent, though still composed of a small number
of Italian and Spanish prelates, without a single deputy from
many of the kingdoms which it assumed the right of binding
by its decrees, being ashamed of its long inactivity, proceeded
now to fettle articles of the greatest importance. Having begun
with examining the first and chief point in controversy between
the church of Rome and the Reformers, concerning the rule
which ihould be held supreme or decisive in matters of faith,
the council, by its infallible authority, determined, " That the
books to which the designation of Apocryphal hath been given,
are of equal authority with those which were received by the
Jews and primitive Christians into the sacred canon ; that the
traditions handed down from the apostolic age, and preserved

c Sleid. Iill. 367, 373.

in

in the church, arc entitled to as much regard as the dotrines
and precepts which the inspired authors have committed to
writing; that the Latin translation of the Scriptures, made or
revised by St. Jerome, and known by the name of the Mulgate'
translation, Ihould be read in churches, and appealed to in the.
school s

as authentic and canonical." Against all who disclaimed

the truth of these tenets; anathemas were denounced in the
name and by the authority of the Holy Ghost. The decision
of these points, which undermined the main pillar of the Lu-
theran system, was a plain warning to the Protestants what
judgment they might expec when the council should have leisure
to take into consideration the particular and subordinate articles
of their Creed d.

THIs discovery of the council's readiness to condemn their

opinions, was soon followed by a striking instance of the Pope's
resolution to punish such as embraced them. The appeal of the
canons of Cologne against their Archbishop having been carried
to Rome, Paul eagerly seized on that opportunity, both of dif-
playing the extent of his own authority, and of teaching the
German ecclesiastics the danger of revolting from the eflablifled
church. As no person appeared in behalf of the Archbishop,
he was held to be convicted of the crime of heresy, and a Papal
bull was issued, depriving him of his ecclesiastical dignity, infli&t-
ing on him the sentence of excommunication, and absolving his'
fubjets from the oath of allegiance which they had taken to him
as their civil filperior. The countenance which he had given to
the Lutheran. heresy was the only crime imputed to. im, as well
as the only reason afligned to justify the extraordinary riggur of

,I I ~: 4 F. Paul. 141. Pallav. 206.

tlhis

BOOK VIII.

5l46.
April t6

BOOK V!11.

1546.

Challea about
to conmmence
holtilities
against the
i'roteltants.

Negociates
with the
Pope.

THE- REIGN OF THE

this decree. The Protestants could scarce believe that Paul, how
zealous soever to defend the established system, or to humble those
who invaded it, would have ventured to proceed to such extre-
mities againif a Prince and Elector of the Empire, without having
previously secured such powerful protection as would render, his
censure something more than an impotent and despicable rally of
resentment. They were of course deeply alarmed at this sentence
against the Archbishop, confidering it as a sure indication of the
malevolent intentions not only of the Pope, but of the Emperor,
againft'the whole party e,

UPON this fresh revival of their fears, 'with such Violence as

is natural to men rouzed from a false security, and conscious of
their having been deceived, Charles saw that it was now necef-
fary to throw aside the veil, and to declare openly what part he
determined to act. By a long series of artifice and fallacy, he
had gained so much tinme, that his measures, though not altogether
ripe for execution, were greatly matured. The Pope, by his
proceedings against the Elector of Cologne, as 'well as by the
decree of the 'council, had precipitated matters into such a fitua-
tion, as rendered a breach between the Emperor and the Pro-
teftants almost unavoidable. Charles had no choice left him
but either to take part with them in overturning what the
See of Rome had determined, or to support the authority of
the church openly by.force of arms. Nor did the Pope think it
enough to have brought the Emperor under a necelfity of aCting
he prefled him to begin his operations, by prbmifing to second
him with such vigour as could scarce fail of securing his success.
Transported by his zdal again'st heresy, he forgot all the prudent

Sleid. 354. F. Paul, 155. Pallavic. 224.

and

and cautious maxins of tl'e Papal See, *With regard to the danier
of extending the ?nmperial authority beyond. du bouhd,' atd''ln
order 'to cruih the Lutherans, 'he was willing toi'cntribute toiards
railing up a mastet tliat might prove formidlable to' filtrfelf as xiel
a trntlip reft ns thlvtv
,*0 .v t...; . . ,. .

B u , betides'e the 'lertaii expetdtijoh ;d's aiftance 'tfri' the

Pope, Charles was :'ow lecure fromi' ay itigee' of ',nterrupti6n.
to his designs by the 'Tirkifh atris. His negocihti'ns at tile
Porte, which he hadi caried' bh lvith great afiHtity 'since te
peace of Ctefpy, vwere6 bn lthe' 1oint'6f'being tehminated in: 'ch
a manner:as he deired; ':Sdloyman, ipitrly in' oimpliancde'",ih
the Fendi ing, "whb, h' r tavodthe disagree ble obli-
gation of joining the' Etpe'ror aihinft his aticlenti ally, la/bourd
with' great zeal to-bring ibotltt'ah! a'c imrnlbdation betWeen them;
and partly from its beiig,. 'eceflhry:'toQ turnlils' armb towatd.':tlBe
east, where the Persians threatened ro. invade!lhi~s'doriinlbis,
consented without difficulty to a truce for five years. The chief
article of 'it was, that each fiolld :retaih poiFefiodn 6f' what he
now held in Hungary ; sand,

Ferdinand, las n sacrifice to the 'p'ide

of the Sultan, fbblmitted'to pay, inannniudl'tribute'of fifty 'thou'ifld

crowns,; . . ,
' , > 1

BuT it was upon the aid and concurrence of the 'Germans

themselves that the' Emperr relied 'ith th' grehteft. onfideh'c'
The Germdnic body, he Iknew, ias of'filchi iaf;'tregtHt'i a tio
be .inindciblt if it were tunited; and that. it 'was o'll iip]-
ing its own force that· he could hope to subdu'e it'. 'iapily 'fir
him; the union of the ·fveral merberd ii'(hi' great., ,, y .te '
hi!r, the union of the several mernbergn 'i"~his' great' yfyem
was so feeble, tie wh61oe frame was so loofly cond aed, and

e Iftuanliaffii Hifl. IHung. 18o. Mem. de Ribier. tom. i. 582.
VOL. Ill. , its

,BbOK VIII.

1546.

Concludes a
truce wili
Solylnal.

Gains Mau-
rice, and
other Princes
of Gerianyl

73
9

BooK.VII. its different parts tended so violently towards separation from

164.6 each other, that it was almost impossible for it, on any important

emergence, to join in a general or vigorous effort. In the present
junaure, the sources of discord were as many, and as various as
had been known on any occasion. The Roman Catholics, ani-
mated with a zeal in defence of their religion proportional to the
fierceners. with which it had been attacked, were eager to second
any attempt to humble those innovators, who had overturned it
in many provinces, and endangered it in more. John and Albert
of Brandenburg,. as well as several other Princes, incensed at the
,haughtiness and rigour with which the Duke of Brunswick had
,re.n treated by the confederates of Smalkalde, were impatient to
re(cue'him, and to be revenged on them. Charles observed, with
fatisfation, the working of there paflions in their minds, and
counting on them as sure auxiliaries whenever he ihould think it
proper to at, he found it, meanwhile, more necessary to mode-
-atp than to inflame their rage.

Holdsa diet .SUCH was the situation of affairs, such the discernment
at Ratisbon. :,w,;ih which the Emperor. fprefaw and provided for every

l.e.yvet,; w)e the diet of the Empire met at Rati/bon. Mahy of
the Roman Catholic members appeared there in person, but
mod of the confederates of Smalkalde, under pretence of their
being u.nable to bear thie expence occasioned by the late unne-
. efflry, frequency. of, fch afserp1ies, sent only deputies. Their
jealousy, of. the ..lmperor, and apprehensions, that violence,, per-

p,j,,,mjght be eemployed in order to force their approbation of

what he hould propose in the diet, was the true cause of their
absence. The speech with which the Emperor opened the diet
was extremely artful. After profefling, in common form, his

.. '

SI

, m ' ' 'regard
74

regard for the prosperity of the Germanic body, and declariig
that in order to bestow his whole attention upon the re-efRablifh-
ment of its order and tranquillity, he had at present abandoned all
other cares, rejected the mofl prefling follicitations of his other
fubjedts to reside among them, and poftporned affairs. of tlhe greatef
importance; he took notice,: with Iome indigilhtion, that his difin-
terested example had not been imitated many members of chief
consideration having neglected to attend an aflembly to which
he had repaired with such manifest inconvenience to himself. He
*then mentioned their unhappy difenifions about religion ; lamented
the ill success of his pad: endeavours to compote them 1 corn
plained of the abrupt dissolution of the late conference, and craved
their advice with regard to the belt and most effectual method of
retoring union to the churches of Germany, together with that
happy agreement in articles of faith, which their anceltors ihad
found to be of no less advantage to their civil interest, than be-
coming their Christian profeflion.

BY this gracious and popular method of consulting the minem

bers of the diet, rather 'than of obtruding upon them any opi-
nion of his own, besides the appearance of great moderation;
and the merit of paying much refpedt to their judgment, the
Emperor dextroufly avoided discovering his own sentiments,
and reserved to himself, as his only part, :that of carrying into
execution what they flould recommend. Nor was he les 'feciire
of such a decision as he wifled for by. referring it wholly to
themselves. The Roman Catholic members, prompted by'.their
own zeal, or prepared by his intrigues, joined immediately ii
representing that the authority of the council. now':.met /t
Trent ought to be final in all matters of controvcrsy; that all

L ? Ch, iltians

Bdc6k ViI.

iS46.

75

BooK VIII.

1546.

ne
June 9,

Cliriftians !hould submit to its decrees as tie infallible rule of
their faith ;. and therefore they besought him -to exert the power,
with which he was invested by the Almighty, in protecting that
aflembly, and in compelling the Protestants to acquiesce in its
determinations. The Protestants, on the other hand, presented
a memorial, in which, after repeating their objections to the
council of Trent, they proposed, as the only effectual method of
deciding thepoints in dispute, that either a free general council
should be afenibled in Germany, or a national council of the
Empire should be called, or a select number of divines should be
appointed out of. each party to examine and define articles of
faith; they mentioned the!receffes of several diets favourable to
this proposition, and which gave them hope of terminating all
their differences in this amicable manner; they now conjured- the
Eniperotl not to depart' from his forrher plan, and by- offering
violenc& to theiri consciences to bring calamities upon Germany,
the very thought of which must fill every lover of his country with
horror. The Emperor receiving this paper, with a contemptuous
smile paid rin;fartlher.regard, to it. Having already taken his
final ,refolutidn, and perceiving that nothing but force could com-
pel thernto acquiesce, in; it,' he dispatched the Cardinal of Trent
to Rome, inl order ;to conclude an alliance with the Pope, the
termsnj.f which .were. already agreed on; lhe commanded a body
of, troops, Aevied on 'purpose in the' Low-Countries,. to advance
towards, ermany ; he gave commissions to several' officers for
raising men in different pattsof the Empire; he warned John and
Albirt ofBrandendurg, that now was the proper time of exerting
theemfelves,;rin;ioxder :to rescue itheir ally, Henry, of Brunswick,
fron3cptityt .

;l

i ' '
;

:f Si-id.374. Seck.'iii:'58.

ALL

:A 1 L these things could not be tranfaaed; without .the opser-

vation and knowledge of the Protestants. :The secret was now
in many hands ; under whatever veil 'f artifice or secrecy the
Emperor itill asseted to conceal his designs, his officers kept no
such mysterious. reserve, and his.allies and filbjeds :spoke out
his intentions. plainly. Alarmed with: reports of this kind, from
every quarter, as well as with the preparations of war which they
saw begun, the deputies of the confederates demanded audience
of the Emperor,. and in the name of their masters, required to
know wlether. these military preparations .were carried on by his
command, . and foe what end, and against what ehemy. To a
question put in such a tone, and at a time when fadts were become
too notorious' to be denied, it was necessary to give an explicit
answer. He owned the orders which he had issued, and profef-
fing'hispurpboe 'not to molest any on account of religion who
lhotlld ac&as dutiful fubjets, declared :that hie had nothing in
view but to maintain the rights aud prerogatives of the Imperial
dignity, and by punilhing some factious members to preserve
the ancient constitution of the Empire from being impaired or
diflolved by their irregular and licentious conduct. Though the
Emperor did'not name the persons whoml he charged with such
high crimes, and destined to be the objects of his vengeance,
it was obvious that he had the Elector of Saxony, and Land-
grave of Hedie in view. Their deputies cohfidering what he had
said, as a plain declaration of his hofRile intentions, immediately
retired from Ratisbon a

THE Cardinal of Trent found it no difficult matter to treat
with the Pope, who having at length brought the Emperor to

g Sleid. 3 76.

adopt

BOOK V1iI.

1546.

'The i'o-
teltants
alarmed,

The Empe-
tor's treaty
with the
Popc.

77

Book VIII.

1546.

adopt that plan which he had long recommended, afrented with
eagerness to every article that he proposed. The league was signed
a few days after the Cardinal's arrival at Rome. The pernicious
herefies which abounded in Germany, the obstinacy of the Protelf
tants in rejecing the holy council assembled at Trent, and the ne-
ceflity of maintaining found dotrine together with good order in
the church, are mentioned as the motives of this union between
the contracing parties. In order to check the growth of these
evils, and punish such as had impiously contributed to spread
them, the emperor, having long and without success made trial of
gentler remedies, engaged inRantly to take the field with a fuffi-
cient army, that he might compel by force all who disowned the
council, or had apoflatized from the religion of their forefathers to
return into the bosom of the church, and to submit with due obe-
dience to the Holy See. He likewise bound himself not to cotclude
a peace with them during fix months without the Pope's consent,
nor without aflignii g him his share in any conquest which should
be made upon them; and that even after that period he should
not agree to any accommodation which might be detrimental to the
church or to the interest of religion. On his part, the Pope ftipu-
lated to depofite a large umr in the bank of Venice towards defray-
ing the expence of the war; to maintain at his own charge, during
the space of fix months, twelve thousand foot, and five hundred
horse; to grant the Emperor for one year half of the ecclesiastical
revenues throughout Spain; to authorize him by a bull to, alienate
as much of the lands belonging to religious houses in that country,
as would amount to the fum of five hundred thousand crowns;
and to employ not only Spiritual censures but military force against

any
78

any Prince who (hould attempt to interrupt or defeat the executi-
on of this treaty b.

NOTWITHSTANDING the explicit terms in which the extirpation

of heresy was declared to be the objec of the war which was to
follow upon this treaty, Charles till endeavoured to persuade the
Germans that he had no design to abridge their religious liberty, but
that he aimed only at vindicating !iis own authority, and repressing
the insolence of those who had encroached upon it. With this view,
he wrote circular letters, in the fame ftraih with his answer to the
deputies at Ratilbon, to most of the free cities, .and to several of
the Princes who had embraced the ProtefRant doftrines. In there
he complained loudly, but in general terms, of the contempt into
which the Imperial dignity had fallen, and of the presumptuous as
well as disorderly behaviour of some members of the Empire. He
declared that he now took arms, not in a religious but in a civil
quarrel; not to oppress those who continued to behave as quiet and
dutiful subje&s, but to humble the arrogance offuch as had thrown
off all sense of that Subordination in which they were placed under
him as head of the Germanic body. Gross as this deception
was, and manifest as it might have appeared to all who confidered
the Emperor's condut with attention, it became necessary for him
to make trial of its effect; and such was the confidence and dexteri-
ty with which he employed it, that he derived the most solid ad-
vantages from this artifice. If he had avowed at once an intention
of overturning the Protestant clhurch, and of reducing all Germany
under its ancient state of subjection to the Papal See, none of the
cities or Princes who had embraced the new opinions could have

b Sleid. 381. Palliv. 255. Dumont Corps Diplomn. i.

remained

BOOK VIII.

1546.

Endeavours
nil) to Conceal
his intentionv
fiorn tile Plo-
testant s.

79

BOOK vm.

1546.

remained neutral after such a declaration, far lets could they have
ventured to aflilt the Emperor in such an enterprize. Whereas by
concealing, and even disclaiming any intention of that kind, he
not only saved himself from· the danger of being overwhelmned by
a general confederacy of all the Protestant dates, but he ftirnilh-
ed the timid with an ekcufe for continuing inative, and the
designing or interested with a pretext for jiining him without
exposing themselves to the irfamy of abandoiiingtheir 'own' priii-
ciples, or having an active hard in'fuppreffing thern. At thei faete
time the Emperor well knew that if he were enabled, by thei'r'aif-
fiftance, to break the power of the Ele&tor of Saxony and L;ind-
-grave, lie might afterwards p{rescribe what-terms he pleased to the
feeble remains of a party without unidn' or leaders, who'wduld then
regret, too late, their mistaken confidence in him, and'their incon-
fiderate desertion of their afrociates.

The Pope dif- THE Pope, by a sudden and unforeseen display of liis zeal,
concerts his
plan. had 'well nigh disconcerted this plan which the Emperor

had formed with so much care and art. Proud of' having been
the author of such a formidable confederacy againftithe Lutlhean
·heresy, and happy 'in thinking that the glory of extirpating it
was reserved for his Pontificate, he publithed the a:rticles 'of his
league with the Emperor as a proof 6f their piotus intentibn*) s'weli
as of the extraordinary efforts which he hirtelf was about to 'make
for maintainirg the faith in its purity. Ndt satisfied with this,
he soon 'after. ifllied a bull containing'mdIf liberal'promifes of In-
dulgence to all who ihould engage in this holy enterprize,' together
with warm exhortations to such as could not bear a part in it them-
selves, to increase the fervour of their prayers, and the severity
of their mortifications, that they might draw down 'the blefling

of
80

of heaven upon tlhoe who undertook it'. Nor was it zeal alo.se
which pushed the Pope to make declarations so. inconsistent with
the account which the Emperor himself gave of his imtives
for taking arms. He was much scandalized at Charles's dif-
simulation in fucl a cause; at his seeming to be afliamed of
owning his zeal for the church ; and at his endeavours to make
that pals for a political contest, which lhe ought to have gloried
in as a war which had no other objec than the defence of reli-
gion. With as much solicitude, therefore, as the Emperor
laboured to disguise the purpose of the confederacy, did the Pope
endeavour to publifl their real plan, in order that they might come
at once to a rupture with the Protestants, that all hope of recon-
cilement might be cut off, and that Charles might be under fewer
temptations, and have it less in his power than at present, to betray
the interests of the church by any accommodation beneficial to
iimfelfk.

The Emperor, though not a little offended at the Pope's indif-

cretion or malice in making this discovery, continued boldly to
purfie his own plan, and to assert his intentions to be no other than
what he had originally avowed. Several of tile ProtcRant ltates,
whom he had previously gained, thought thenfelves justified in
some measure, by his declarations, for abandoning their alIbciates,
and even for giving afliftance to him.

BUT these artifices did not impose on the greater and founder

part of the Protestant confederates. They clearly perceived it to
be against the reformed religion that the Emperor Jiad taken arms,

i Du Mont Corps Diplon.
k F. Paul, 188. Tllhan. Hlil. i. 6k.
VOL. III. M and

OOK ,VIII

i546.

The prepara-
tions of the
Protcelants foi
their own de-
fence.

BOOK VIII. and that not only the fuppreflion of it, but the extinction of the

54'^^61 German liberties, would be the certain consequence of his ob-
1546.

taining such an entire superiority as would enable him to execute
his schemes in their full extent. They determined, therefore,
to prepare for their own defence, and neither to renounce those
religious truths to the knowledge of which they had attained
by means so wonderful, nor to abandon those civil rights which
had been tranfinitted to them by their apceftors. In order to
give the necessary directions for this purpose, their deputies
met at Ulm, soon after their abrupt departure from Ratisbon.
Their deliberations were now conducted with such vigour and
unanimity, as the imminent danger which threatened them
required. Tie contingent of troops, which each of the con-
federates was to furnish having been fixed by the original treaty
of union, orders were given for bringing them immediately
into the field. Being sensible, at last, that through the narrow
prejudices of some of their members, and the imprudent fecu-
rity of others, they had neglected too long to strengthen them-
selves by foreign alliances, they now applied with great earnestness
to the Venetians and Swiss.

They follicit
the aid of the
Venetians.

To the former, they represented the Emperor's intention of

overturning the present system of Germany, and of raising
himself to absolute power in that country by means of foreign
force furnished by the Pope; they warned them how fatal this
event would prove to the liberties of Italy, and that by susser-
ing Charles to acquire unlimited authority in the one country,
they would soon feel his dominion to be no less despotic in the
other; they besought them, therefore, not to grant a paflage
thro' their territories to those troops, which ought to be treated as
ccmmon enemies, because by subduing Germany they prepared

chains

chains for the reft of Europe. There refletions had not escaped
the sagacity of those wife republicans. They had communi-
cated their sentiments to the Pope, and had endeavoured to divert
him from an alliance which tended to render irresistible the power
of a potentate, whose ambition he already knew to be boundless.
But they had found Paul so eager in the prosecution of his own
plan, that he disregarded all their remonifrances . They would
do nothing more towards preventing the dangers which they
foresaw; and in return to the application from the confederates
of Smalkalde, informed them, that they could not obftrucd the
march of the Pope's troops through an open country, but by levy-
ing an army strong enough to face them in the field, and that
this would draw upon themselves the whole weight of his as well
as of the Emperor's indignation. For the fame reason they de-
clined lending a rum of money, which the Elector of Saxony
and Landgrave proposed to borrow of them, towards carrying on
the war m.

THEIR demands upon the Swiss were not confined to the ob-

ftrudting of the entrance of foreigners into qermany ; they requir-
ed of them, as the nearest neighbours, and closest allies of the Em-
pire, to interpose with their wonted vigour for the preservation of
its liberties, and not to fRand as inactive fpetators, while their
brethren were oppressed and enslaved. But with what zeal soever
the reformed cantons might have been disposed to ad when the
cause of the Reformation was in danger, the Helvetic body was
so divided with regard to religion, as rendered it unsafe for the
Protestants to take any ftep without consulting their afrociates;

I Adriani Ifloria di filoi tempi, lib. v. p. 332.

Sn Sicid. 381. Paruta Ilfor. Vcnct. tom. iv. So. Lambertus IIortcllfius
de bello Germoinicoapud Scardium, vol. ii. p. 547.

M a and

BOOK VIII.

1546.
Of tile Swirs.

BOOK VIII.

t54 6.

Of Francis 1.
arid I Itnry
'llI.

and among them the emiflaries of the Pope and Emperor had such
influence, that a resolution of maintaining an exat neutrality be-
tween the contending parties, was the unnoft which could be pro-
cured .

BBING disappointed in both these applications, they not long

after had recourse to the Kings of France and England the
approach of danger either overcoming the Elector of Saxony's
scruples, or obliging him to yield to the importunities of his
confederates. The situation of the two Monarchs flattered them
with hopes of success. Hostilities betweeen them had continued
for some time after the peace of Crefpy. But becoming weary
at last of a war, attended with no glory or advantage to either,
they had lately terminated all their differences by a peace con-
cluded at Campe near Ardres. Francis having with great dif-
ficulty procured his allies, the Scots, to be included in the treaty,
in return for that conceflion he engaged to pay a great fum,
which Henry demanded as due to him on several accounts, and
lie left Bologne in the hands of the Englilh as a pledge for his
faithful performance of that article. But though the re-efta-
bliffment of peace seemed to leave the two Monarchs at li-
berty to turn their attention towards Germany, so unfortunate
were the Protestants, that they derived no immediate advantage
from this circumstance. Henry appeared unwilling to enter
into any alliance with them, but on such conditions as would
render him not only the head, but the supreme director of their
league; a pre-eminence which, as the bonds of union or interest
between them were but feeble,and as he differed from them Co
v, iidly in his religious sentiments, they had no inclination to

Skid. 392.

admit,
84

admit o, Francis, more powerfully inclined by political confide-
rations to furnilh them with assistance, found his kingdom so
much exhausted by a long war, and was so much afraid of irri-
tating the Pope by entering into close union with excommuni-
cated Heretics, that he durst not undertake the protection of the
Smalkaldic league. By this ill-timed caution, or superstitious
deference to scruples, to which at other times he was not much
addited, he loft the most promising opportunity of mortifying
and diitreffing his rival, which presented itself during his whole
reign.

BU T, notwithstanding their ill success in their negociations

with foreign courts, the confederates found no difficulty at home,
in bringing a sufficient force into the field. Germany abounded
at that time in inhabitants; the feudal institutions subsisted in
full force, and enabled the nobles to call out their numerous
vaflals, and to put them in motion on the Ihorteft warning;
the martial spirit of the Germans, not broken or enervated by
the introdution of commerce and arts, had acquired additional
vigour during the continual wars in which they had been employed,
for half a century, either in the pay of the Emperors, or Kings
of France. Upon every opportunity of entering into service,
they were accustomed to run eagerly to arms; and to every
standard that was erected, voluntiers flocked from all quarters r.
Zeal seconded on this occasion, their native ardour. Men, on
whom the doctrines of the Reformation had made that deep im-
preflion which accompanies truth when firlr dircovered, prepared
to maintain it with proportional vigour; and among a warlike
people, it appeared infamous to remain inacive, when the defcnce

o Rymcr, xv. 93. Hcrl;rt, 258.

BOOK VIII,

1546.

Protenants
take the ticlil
with a great
arily.
P Seck. i. iii. i6t.

of

85

BOOK VIII.

1546.

1*

The inequa-
lity of the
Emperor's
forces to
theirs.

of religion was the motive for taking arms. Accident combined
with all these circumstances in facilitating the levy of soldiers
among the confederates. A considerable number of Germans in
the pay of France, being difmifred by the King on the profpe& of
peace with England, joined in a body the flandard of the Pro-
teftants 9. By such a concurrence of causes, they were enabled to
assemble in a few weeks an army composed of seventy thousand
foot and fifteen thousand horse; provided with a train of an
hundred and twenty cannon, eight hnndred ammunition waggons,
eight thousand beasts of burden, and fix thQufand pioneers r.
Nor was this army, one of the most numerous, and undoubtedly
the best appointed of any which had been levied in Europe during
that century, raised by the united effort of the whole Protestant
body. The Eletor of Saxony, the Landgrave of Hefle, the
Duke of Wurtemberg, the Princes of Anhalt, and the Imperial
cities of Aufbourg, Ulm, and Strafburg, were the only powers
which contributed towards this great armament: The Electors of
Cologne, of Brandenbourg, and the Count Palatine, overawed
by the Emperor's threats, or deceived by his profeflions, remained
neuter. John marquis of Brandenburg Bareith, and Albert of
Brandenburg Afpach, though both early converts to Lutheranifin,
entered openly into the Emperor's service, under pretext of having
obtained his promise for the security of the Protestant religion;
and Maurice of Saxony toon followed their example.

THE immense number of their troops, as well as the amazing
rapidity wherewith they had assembled them, astonished the Em-

q Thuan. 1. i. 68. r Thuan. I. i. 60o. Ludovici ab Avila & ~Zunga
Commentariorum debel. Ge'm. lib. Duo Antw. 1550. 12m0. p. 13, a.

peror,

peror, and filed him with the most disquieting apprehensions.
He was, indeed, in no condition to resist such a mighty force.
Shut up in Ratisbon, a town of no great flrength, whose inhabi-
tants, being mostly Lutherans, would have been more ready to
betray than to aflift him, with only three thousand Spanish foot,
whom he had called from the frontiers of Hungary, and about
five thousand Germans who hadjoined him from different paits
of the Empire, he must have been overwhelmed by the approach
of such a numerous army, which he could not fight, nor even
hope to retreat from in safety. The Pope's troops, though in
full march to his relief, had scarce reached the frontiers of Ger-
many; the forces which he expeced ftom the Low-Countries had
not yet begun to move, and were even far from being complete.
His situation, however, called for more immediate succour, nor
did it seem practicable for him to wait for such distant auxiliaries,
with whom his junction was so precarious.

BuT it happened fortunately for Charles, that the confederates

did not avail themselves of the advantage which lay so full in
their view. In civil wars, the first steps are commonly taken
with much timidity and hesitation. Men are solicitous, at that
time, to put on the semblance of moderation and equity; they
firive to gain partizans by teeming to adhere ftritly to known
forms; nor can they be brought, at once, to violate those efta-
blifhed institutions, which in times of tranquillity they have been
accustomed to reverence; hence their proceedings are often
feeble or dilatory when they ought to be most vigorous ard
decisive. Influenced by there considerations, which, happily for
the peace of society, operate powerfully on the hluman mind, the

Sktidl. 389. Avila, 8, a.

confc-

BOOK VIII.

1546.

They impru.
dently ncgo.
ciate infelad
of acting
1.

87

BOOK VIII.

1546.

July s5.

The Emperor
puts theln
under the ban
of the
Empire.
July 20.

confederates could not think of throwing off that allegiance which
they regularly owned to the head of the Empire, or of turning
their arms against him without one solemn appeal more to his
candour, and to the impartial judgment of their fellow fubjedts.
For this purpose, they addressed a letter to the Emperor, and a
maniftfto to all the inhabitants of Germany. The tenor of both
was the fame. They represented their own conduct with regard to
civil affairs as dutiful and fubmiflive i they mentioned the invio-
lable union in which they had lived witli the Emperor, as well as
the many and recent marks of his good-will and gratitude where-
withal they had been honoured ; they asserted religion to be the role
cause of the violence which the Emperor now meditated against
them; and in proof of this adduced many arguments to convince
those who were so weak as to be deceived by the artifices with
which he endeavoured to rifque every thing in maintenance of
their religious rights, and foretold the dissolution of the
German constitution, if the Emperor should finally prevail a-
gainft them'.

B T Charles, though in such a perilous situation as might

have inspired him with moderate sentiments, appeared as inflexi-
ble and haughty as if his affairs had been in the most prosperous
state. His only reply to the address and manifesto of the Pro-
teftants, was to publish the ban of the Empire against the Elector
of Saxony and Landgrave of Hefle, their leaders, and against all
who ihould dare to alift them. By this sentence, the ultimate
and most rigorous one which the German jurisprudence has pro-

t Sleid, 38 4.

vided
88

vided for the 'punishment of traitors, or enemies to their country, BoOK VIII.
they were declared rebels and outlaws, and deprived of every pri i- C-- .
lege which they enjoyed as members of the Germanic body ; tieir
goods were confiscated; their fubjets absolved from their oath of al-
legiance; and it became not only lawful but meritorious to invade
their territories. The nobles, and free cities, who flamed or per-
feted the constitution of the German government, had not been so
negligent of their own safety and privileges as to trust the Emperor
with this formidable jurifdition. The authority of a diet of the
Empire ought to have been interposed before any of its members
could be put under the ban. But Charles overlooked that formality,
well knowing that, if his arms were crowned with success, there
would remain none who would have either power or courage to call
in question what he had done u. The Emperor, however, did not
found his sentence against the Elecor and Landgrave on their re-
volt from the established church, or their conduct with regard to
religion, he affected to aflign for it reasons purely civil, and tliere too
expressed in fuCch general and ambiguous terms, without fpcci-
fying the nature or circumstances of their guilt, as rendered it
more like an a&t of despotic power than of a legal and limited
jurisdiction. Nor was it altogether from choice, or to conceal
his intentions that Charles had recourse to the ambiguity of
general exprellions, he durst not mention too particularly the
causes of his sentence, as every action which he could have
charged upon the Elecor and Landgrave as a crime, might have
lieen employed with equal justice to condemn such of the Pro-
teftants whom lie fill pretended to co:fider as faithful fiubjeds, and

u Slcid,386. Du Mont Corps Diplo;n. iv. p. Il. 314. Pfcfl:el Iif. Abreg.
tid Droit Pbl. 168. 763. 158.

VoL. I11. N who

89

BOOK VIII. whom it would haue been extremely imprudent to alarm or

dirguft.

1546.

They declare THE confederates, now perceiving all hopes of accommodation
Charlesn to be at an end, had only to chufe whether they would submit with-

out reserve to the Emperor's will, or proceed to open hostilities.
Nor did they want public spirit and resolution to make the proper
choice. A few days after the ban of the Empire was publified,
they according to the custom of that age, sent a herald to the Im-
perial camp with a solemn declaration of war against Charles, to
whom they no longer gave any other title than that of pretended
Emperor, and renounced all allegiance, homage or duty which he
might claim, or they had hitherto yielded to him. But previous to
this formality, part of their troops had begun to ac. Tle com-

Theirs ill mand of a considerable body of men raised by the city of Augf-
operations. burg having been given to Sebastian Schertel, a soldier of fortule,

who by the booty that he got when the Imperialists plundered Rome,
together the merit of long service, had acquired wealth and autho-
rity which placed him on a level with the chief of the German no-
bles; that gallant veteran resolved before he joined the main body
of the confederates, to attempt something suitable to his for-
mer fame and to the expetation of'his countrymen. As the
Popes forces were hastening towards Tyrol, in order to pene-
trate into Germany by the narrow passes through the mountains
which run across that country, he advanced thither with the
utmost rapidity. and seized Ehrenberg and Cuffstein, two strong
castles which commanded the principal defiles. Withqut
stopping a moment, he continued his march towards Infpruck,
by getting pofeffion of which he would have obliged the
Italians to stop short, and with a small body of men could have

resifted
90

refitted all the efforts of the greatefl armies. Caftlealto, the go-
vernor of Trent, knowing what a fatal blow this would be to the
Emperor, all whose designs must have proved abortive if his Italian
auxiliaries had been intercepted, raised a few troops with the ut-
most dispatch and threw himself into the town. Schertel, how-
ever, did not abandon the enterprize, and was preparing to attack
the place, wlen the intelligence of the approach of the Italians,
and an order from the Eletor and Landgrave obliged him to de-
fifl. By his retreat the pafles were left open, and the Italians
entered Germany without any opposition, but from the garrisons
that Schertel had placed in Ehrenberg and Cufffein, which having
no hopes of being relieved, were not long of surrendering x
.

NOR was the recalling of Scllertel the only error of which the

confederates were guilty. As the supreme command of their
army was committed, in the terms of the league of Smalkalde, to
the Eletor of Saxony and Landgrave of Hefle with equal autho-
rity, all the inconveniencies arising from a divided and co-ordi-
nate jurifdition, which is always of fatal consequence in the

x Seckend. lib. ii. 7o. Adriani Ifloria di fuoi tempi, lib. 335.
* Seckendorf the induflrious author of the Commentarius Apologeticus de

Lutheranifmo, whom I have so long and safely followed as my guide in Ger-
man affairs, was descended from Schertel. With the care and follicitude of
a German, who was himself of noble birth, Seckendorf has publiflled a long
digreflion concerning his anceflor, calculated chiefly to shew how Schertel was
ennobled, and his poflerity allied to many of the mod ancient families in the
Empire. Among other curious particulars, he gives us an account of his
wealth, the chief source of which was the plunder he got at Rone. Ilis
landed elate was fold by his grandsons for fix hundred thousand florins. By
this we may form tome idea of the riches amanfed by the Condottieri or com-
manders of mercenary bands in that age. At the taking of Rome Schcrtel
was only a captain. Seckend. lib. ii. 73.

N 2 operations

BooK VIII.

1546.

and ill con-.
dtnt.

91

BOOK VIII.

1546.

The Pope's
troopsjoin the
Emperor.

operations of war, were immediately felt. The Eletfor, though
intrepid in his own person to excess, and most ardently zealous in the
cause, was flow in deliberating, uncertain as well as irresolute in his
determinations, and constantly preferred meaffires which were cau-
tious and safe to such as were bold or decisive. The Landgrave,
of a more active and enterprizing nature, formed all his refoluti-
ons with promptitude, wished to execute them with spirit, and
uniformly preferred such schemes as tended to bring the contest to
a fpecdy ifTie. Thus their maxims, with regard to the conduct of
the war, differed as widely as those by which they were influenced
in preparing for it. Such perpetual contrariety in their sentiments
gave rife, imperceptibly, tojealoufy and the spirit of contention;
These multiplied the dissensions flowing from the incompatibility of
their natural temper, and rendered them more violent. The other
members of the league confidering themselves as independant, and
subjet to the Eledor and Landgrave, only in consequence of the
articles of a voluntary confederacy, did not long retain a proper
veneration for commanders, who proceeded with so little unanimi-
ty; and the numerous army of the Protestants, like a vaif machine
whose parts are ill compaced, and which is deffitute of any power
sufficient to move and regulate the whole, aced with no consisten-
cy, vigour or effet.

THE Emperor, who was afraid that, by remaining at Ratisbon,

he would render it impoflible for the Pope's forces to join him,
having boldly advanced to Landshut on the Ifer, the confede-
rates loft some days in deliberating whether it was proper to
follow him into the territories of the Duke of Bavaria, a neutral
Prince. When at last they surmounted that scruple, and
began to move towards his camp, they suddenly abandoned the

design,
92

design, and haflened to attack Ratitbon, in which town Pmarles
could leave only a small garrison. Meanwhile the Papal troops,
amounting fully to that number which Paul had flipulated to
firnillh, reached Landflut, and were soon followed by fix thou-
sand Spaniards of the veteran bands stationed in Napjls. The
confederates, after Schcrtel's spiritcd but fruitless., expoeition,
seem to have permitted there forces to advance unmolcfted to the
place of rendezvons, without any attempt to attack either them
or the Emperor separately, or to prevent their juncion ,. The
Imperial army amounted now to thirty-fix thousand men, and
was flill more formidable by the, discipline and valour of tile
troops, than by their number. Avila, commendador of Alcan-
tara, who had been present in all the wars carried on by Charlcs,
and had served in the armies which gained the memorable vic-
tory at Pavia, which conquered Tunis, and invaded France,
gives this the preference to any martial force he had ever seen
aflinmbled y. Odavio Farnese, the Popes grandson, aflifted by
the ablest officers formed in the long wars between Charles and
Francis, commanded the Italian auxiliaries. His brother, the
Cardinal Farnese, accompanied him, as Papal legate; and in
order to give the war the appearance of a religious enterprize,
he proposed to march at the head of the army, with a cross car-
ried before him, and to publifl Indulgences wherever he camo
to all who should give them any aflfflance, as had anciently
been the practice in the Cruzades against the Infidels. But this
the Emperor firiCly prohibited, as inconsistent with all the decla-
rations which lie had made to the Germans of his own party 1
and the legate perceiving, to his aftorilhmcnt, that the exercise
of the Proteflant religion, the extirpation of which he con-

x Adtiani Iflolia di fuoi ttnpi, lib. v. 340.

AvIlai, j S.

.PooK VIII.

1546.

4
lidercd

93

PooK VIII. fidered as the role objec of the war, was publickly perk.¢ c.A in

546. the Imperial camp, soon returned to disgust to Italy .

T H E- arrival of there troops enabled the Emperor to si i such

a reinforcenient to the garrison of Ratisbon, that the confeder-
ates relinquithing all hopes of reducing that town, marched to-
wards Ingoldftadt on the Danube, near to which Charles was
now encamped. Meanwhile they exclaimed loudly againfl the
Emperor's notorious violation of the laws and constitution of
the Empire, in having called in foreigners to lay waste Ger-
many, and to oppress its liberties. As in that age, the domi-
nion of the Roman See was Co odious to the Protestants, that
the name of the Pope alone was sufficient to inspire them with
horror at any enterprize which he countenanced, and to raise in
their minds the blacket fulfpicions, it came to be universally
believed among them, that Paul, not satisfied with attacking
them openly by force of arms, had dispersed his eminaries all over
Germany to set on fire their towns and magazines, and to poison
the wells and fountains of water. Nor did this rumour spread
only among the vulgar, being extravagant as well as frightful
enough to make a deep impreflion on their credulity; even the
leaders of the party, blinded by their prejudices, published a
declaration, in which they accused the Pope of having employed
there Antichriftian and diabolical arts against them a. These
sentiments of the confederates were confirmed, in tome mea-
sure, by the behaviour of the Papal troops, who, thinking nothing
too rigorous towards Heretics anathematized by the church,
were guilty of great excesses in the Lutheran territories, and

* F. Paul. 191. a Sleid. 399.

aggravated
94

aggravated the calamities of war, ,by mingling with it all. the
cruelty of bigotted zeal,

THiE first operations. in the field, however, did not correspond

with the violence of thofl paflions which aRilmated individuals,
The Emperor had prudently taken the resolution of avoiding an
action with an enemy so far superior in numberb, especially as he
foresaw that nothing could keep a body composed of so many and
filch diflimilar members, from falling to pieces, but the prelling to
attack it with an inconsiderate precipitancy. The confederates,
though it was no less evident thatuto them every moment's delay
was pernicious, were still prevented by the weakness or division
of their leaders from exerting that vigour,. with which their
situation as well as the ardour of their soldiers ought to have
inspired them. On their arrival at Ingolstadt, they found the
Emperor in a camp not remarkable for strength, and surrounded
only by a flight entrenchment. Before the camp lay a plain of
such extent, as afforded sufficient space for drawing out their
whole army, and bringing it to aa at once. Every confidera-
tion should have determined them to have seized this opportu-
nity of attacking the Emperor; and their valt superiority in num-
bers, the eagerncrs of their troops, together with the liability of
the German infantry in pitched battles, afforded them the molt
probable expectation of viAory. The Landgrave urged this with
great warmth, declaring that if the sole command were vefled
in him, lie would terminate the war on that occasion, and decide
by one general ation the fate of the two parties. But the
Eletor, reflecting on the valour and discipline of the enemies
forces, animated by the pretence of the Emperor, and conducted

BOOK VIII.

1546.

The confede-
rates advaInce
towards the
Imperial
atliy.

Aug. 29.
h Aiila, 7$. a.

by

95

BOOK. VIIr.

1546.

The Emperor
declines a
battle.

by the best officers of the age, would not venture upon an action,
which he thought to be so doubtful, as the attacking such a body
of veterans on ground which they themselves had chosen, and
while covered by fortifications which, tho' imperfect, would afford
them no small advantage in the combat. Notwithstanding his
hesitation and remonitrances, it was agreed, to advance towards
the enemies camp in battle array, in order to make trial whether
by that infiult and by a furious canonade which they began,
they could draw the Imperialists out of their works. But the
Emperor had too much sagacity to fall into this snare. He
adhered to his own system with inflexible conftalcy; and draw-
ing up his soldiers behind their trenches, that they might be ready
to receive the confederates if they should venture upon an assault,
calmly waited their approach, and carefully restrained his own
men from any excursions or skirmishes that might bring on an
engagement. Meanwhile, he rode along the lines, and addref-
sing the troops of the different nations in their own language,
encouraged them by the chearfulnefs of his voice and counte-
nance; he exposed himself in places of greatest danger, and
amidst the warmest fire of the enemies artillery, the most
numerous that had hitherto been brought into the field by
any army. Rouzed by his example, not a man quitted his ranks;
it was thought infamous to discover any symptom of fear when
the Emperor appeared so intrepid ; and the meanest soldier
plainly perceived, that their decliniiig the combat at present was
not the effect of timidity in their general, but the result of a
well sx ighed caution. The confederates, after firing several
hours o:1 the Imperialists, with more noise and terror than exe-
cution, feeing no profpcd of alluring them to fight on equal
terms, retired to their own camp. Tle Emperor employed the

night
96

night with such diligence in strengthening his works, that the con-
federates, returning to the cannonade next day, found that, though
they had now been willing to venture upon such a bold experi-
ment, the opportunity of making an attack with advantage was
loft .

AFTER such a dicfovery of their own feebleness or irresolution,

and of the prudence as well as firmness of the Emperor's con-
duct, the confederates turned their whole attention towards pre-
venting the arrival of a powerful reinforcement of ten thousand
foot, and four thousand horse, which the Count de Buren was
bringing to the Emperor from the Low-Countries. But though
that general had to traverse such an extent of country ; though
his route lay through the territories of several states warmly dif-
posed to favour the confederates; though they were apprized of
his approach, and by their vast superiority in numbers might
easily have detached a force sufficient to operpower him, he
advanced with such rapidity, and by such well concerted move-
ments, while they opposed him with such remissness, and so little
military Ikill, that he conducted this body to.the Imperial camp
without any loss d.

BOOK VIII.

1546.

Tlie Fleniini
troops join
the Enipclor.

Sept. 1o.

AFTER the arrival of the Flemings, in whom he placed great

confidence, the Emperor altered, in rome degree, his plan of ope-
rations, and began to at more upon tie offcnfive, thdugh ihe
still avoided a battle with the utmost industry. He made himself
master of Ncuburg, Dillingen, and Donawert on the Danube;

c Sleid. 395, 397. Avila 27. a. Lamb. IIoricns. ap. Leard. ii.
d Sleid. 403.
VOL. III. 0

of
r'

97

BOOK VIII.

1546.

State of bo.h
armies.

of Nordlingen, and several other towns, situated on the most
considerable itreams that fall into that mighty river. By this he
got the command of a great extent of country, though not with-
out being obliged to engage in several (harp encounters, of which
the success was various, nor without the moit imminent danger
oftener than once of being drawn into a battle. In this manner
the whole autumn was spent; neither party gained any remark-
able superiority over the other, and nothing was yet done towards
bringing the war to a period. The Emperor had often foretold,
with confidence, that discord and the want of money would com-
pel the confederates to disperse that unwieldy body, which they
had neither abilities to guide, nor funds to fupporte; but though
he waited with impatience for the accomplishment of his pre-
diltion, there was no profpet of that event being at hand.
Meanwhile, he himself began to susser from the want of forage
and provisions; even the Catholic provinces being so much
incensed at the introduction of foreigners into the Empire, that
they supplied them with reluctance, while the camp of the con-
federates abounded with a profusion of all necefaries, which the
zeal of their friends in the adjacent countries furnished with the
utmost liberality and good-will. Great numbers of the Italians
and Spaniards, unaccustomed to the climate or food of Ger-
many, were become unfit for service through sicknesss. Con-
fiderable arrears were now due to the troops, who had scarce
received any money fiom the beginning of the campaign; the
Emperor, experiencing on this as well as on former occasions,
that his jurifdidion was more extensive than his revenues, and

c Belli Smr.ikaldici Commentarius Grzco fermone fcriptus a Joach. Came-
rario ap. Freherum, Vol. iii. p. 479.

f Camerar. ap. Frehcr. 483.

that
98

that the former enabled him to assemble a greater number of fol-
diers, than the latter were sufficient to pay. Upon all these ac-
counts, lie found it difficult to keep his army in the field; some
of his ablest generals, and even the Duke of Alva himself, per-
fevering and obitinate as he usually was in the prosecution of
every measure, advising him to disperse his troops into winter-
quarters. But as the arguments urged against any plan which
he had adopted, rarely made much impreflion upon the Empe-
ror, he paid no regard to their opinion, and determined to con-
nue his efforts in order to weary out the confederates; being
well assured that if he could once oblige them to separate, there
was little probability of their uniting again in a bodyg. Still,
however, it remained a doubtful point, whether his steadiness
was most likely to fail, or their zeal to be exhausted. It was fill
uncertain which party, by first dividing its forces, would give the
superiority to the other; when an unexpeced event decided the
contest, and occasioned a total reverse in the affairs of the con-
federates.

MAURICE of Saxony having, by the arts which have already

been described, insinuated himself into the Emperor's confi-
dence, no sooner saw hostilities ready to break out between him
and the confederates of Smalkalde, than vast profpceds of
ambition began to open upon him. That portion of Saxony,
which descended to him from his anceitors, was far from satis-
fying his aspiring mind; and he perceived with pleasure the
approach of civil war, as amidst the revolutions or convulsions
which it occasions, opportunities which at other times are
fought in vai.), of acquiring new power as well as additional
dignity, present themselves to an enterprizing spirit. As he was

g Thuan. 83.

O 2 thoroughly

BOOK VIII.

1546.

The fchiemes
of Maurice of
Saxony.

99

BOOK VIII.

1546.

llis league
with the F'n-
peror.

thoroughly acquainted with the state of the two contending par-
ties, and the qualities of their leaders, he did not hesitate long
in determining on which fide the greatest advantages were to be
expeEted. Having revolved all these things in his own mind, and
having taken his final resolution of joining the Emperor, lie
prudently determined to declare early in his favour; that, by the
merit of this, he might acquire a title to a proportional tecom-
pence. With this view, he had repaired to Ratisbon in the month
of May, under pretext of attending the diet; and after many
conferences with Charles or his ministers, he concluded, though
with the most mysterious secrecy, a treaty in which he engaged
to concur in afifting the Emperor as a faithful fubjeet ; and
Charles, in return, stipulated to bestow on him all the spoils
of the Eledor of Saxony, his dignities as well as territories h.
History scarce records any treaty which can be confidered as a
more manifest violation of the moif powerful principles which
ought to influence human actions. Maurice, a profefled Pro-
teftant, at a time when the belief of religion, as well as zeal for
it interests, took (trong poffefion of every mind, binds himself
to contribute his aliftance towards carrying on a war, which had
manifestly no other object than the extirpation of the Protestant
doctrines. He engages to take arms against his father-in-law,
anid to strip his nearcft relation of his honours and dominions.
He joins a dubious friend againls a known benefactor, to whom
lhis obligations were both great and recent. Nor was the Prince
who ventured upon all this, one of those audacious politicians,
who, provided they can accomplish their ends, and secure their
intercit, disregard avowedly the molt sacred obligations, and
glory in co;temnil'g whatever is honourable or decent. Mau-

tj:larac. Annal., raliant. vol. i. 63q. Stiuvii Corp. 1043. Tluinn. 84.

rice's
100

rice's conduct, if the whole mufi be ascribed to policy, was more
artful and maflerly; he executed his plan in all its parts, and yet
endeavoured to preserve, in ev.ery fhlp which lie took, the appear-
ance of what was fair, and virtuous, and laudable. It is probable,
fiom his ifubfcqlucnt behaviour, that with regard to the ProtefRant
religion at least, his intcntio-s were upright, that lie fondly trufi-
ed to the Emperor's promli;cs for its security, but that, accobrding
to the fate of all who refine too much in policy, and who tread in
dark and crooked paths, in attempting to deceive others, lie him-
self was, in some degree, deceived.

His first care, however .was to keep these engagements with

the Emperor closely concealed: and so perfect a mailer was he
in the art of diflimulation, that the confederates, notwithifanding his
declining all connections with them, and his remarkable alliduity in
paying court to the Emperor, seemed to have entertained no fiufpi
cion of his designs. Even the Elecor of Saxony, when he march-
ed at the beginning of the campaign tojoin his aflbciates, commit-
tcd his dominions to his protection, which Maurice, with an infidi-
ous appearance of fricndfllip, readily undertook i. But scarce had
the Elecor taken the field, when Maurice began to confllt privately
with the King of the Romans how to invade thQfe very territories,
with the defence of which he was entrusted. Soon after, the Em-
peror sent him a copy of the Imperial ban denounced against the
Elecor andi Landgrave. As lie was next heir to the former, and par-
ticularly intcrefted in preventing strangers from getting hisdominions
into their ponielion, Charles required him, not only for hii own fake,
but upon the allegiance and duty which lie owed to the head of the

Struvii Corp. Io46.

Empire,

BOOK VIII.

i 54h.

l-Iis artifices
in oider to
conceal his
initeU1 ions.

10t

BOOK VIII. Empire, initantly to seize and detain in his hands the forfeited

6'-`J estates of the Eledor; warning him, at the fame time, that if

he negle&ed to obey these commands, he flould be held as ac-
ceffary to the crimes of his kinsman, and be liable to the fame
punishment k.

THIS artifice, which it is probable Maurice himfelffuggefted,

was employed by him in order that his condut towards the
Elector might seem a matter of necessity but not of choice, an at
of obedience to his superior, rather than a voluntary invasion of
the rights of his kinsman and ally. But in order to give some
more specious appearance to this thin veil with which he endeavour-
to cover his ambition, he had called together, soon after his return
from Ratisbon, the states of his country; and representing to them
that a civil war between the Emperor and confederates of Smal-
kalde was now become unavoidable, desired their advice with regard
to the part which he should a& in that event. They being prepar-
ed, no doubt, and tutored before-hand, as well as desirous of gra-
tifying their Prince, whom they both esteemed and loved, gave such
counsel as they knew would be most agreeable; advising him to
offer his mediation towards reconciling the contending parties;
but if that were rejeted, and lie could obtain' proper security
for the Protestant religion, they delivered it as their opinion
that he ought in all other points, to yield obedience to the
Emperor. Upon receiving the Imperial rescript, together with
the ban against the Elector and Landgrave,. he summoned
the flates of his country a second time; he laid before them
the orders which he had received, and the punishment
with which he was threatened in cafe of disobedience; he

k Slcid. 391. Thuan. 84.

acquainted
102

acquainted them that the confederates had refilfed to admit of his
mediation, and that the Enmperor had given him the mos: satis-
factory declarations with regard to religion; he mentioned his
own interest in fccuring poflellion of the eledoral dominions, to-
gether with the danger of allowing itrangers to obtain an. efta-
bliliment in Saxony ; and upon the whole, as the point under de-
liberation refpeted his fitbjeds no less than himself, he desired to
know their sentiments how lie fould steer in that difficult and ar-
duous conjuncture. The flates, no lets obsequious and complaisant,
than formerly, relying on the Emperor's promires as a perfect
security for their religion, proposed that, before he had recourse
to mote violent methods, they would write to the Eledor, ex-
horting him, as the best means of appeasing the Emperor, and
of preventing his dominions from being seized by foreign or
hoflile powers, to give his content that Maurice flould take pof-
feflion of them quietly and without opposition. Maurice him-
self seconded their arguments in a letter to the Landgrave, his
father-in-law. Such an extravagant proposition was rejected with
the scorn and indignation which it deserved. The Landgrave, in
return to Maurice, taxed him with his treachery and ingratitude
towards a kinsman to whom he was To deeply indebted; he
treated with contempt his affectation of executing the Imperial
ban, which he could not but know to be altogether void, by the
unconstitutional and arbitrary manner in which it had been ifflied,
he besought him, not to fuifer himself to be so far blinded by am-
bition, as to forget the obligations of honour and friendship, or to
betray the Protestant religion, the extirpation of which out of Ger-
many, even by the acknowledgment of the Pope himself, was the
great objec of the present war 1.

Sleid. 4o5, &c. Thuan. 85. Camerar. 484.

BuT

1o3
BooK VIII.

1546.

BOOK VIII.

1546.

He invades
the territories
of the Elcor
o' Saxony.

BUT Maurice had proceeded too far to be diverted from pur-

suing his plan by reproaches or arguments; Nothing now re-
mained but to execute with vigour, what he had hitherto carried
on by artifice and dissimulation. Nor was his boldness in acion
inferior to his subtlety in contrivance. Having assembled about
twelve thousand men, he suddenly invaded one part of the elec-
toral provinces, while Ferdinand with an army compored of Bohe-
mians and Hungarians over-ran the other. Maurice, in two sharp
encounters, defeated the troops which the EleCtor had left to guard
his country; and improving there advantages to the utmost, made
himself maiter of the whole Electorate, except Wittemberg,
Gotha and Eisenach, which being places of considerable strength,
and defended by fufficicnt garrisons, refused to open their gates.
The news of there rapid conquests toon reached the Imperial and
confederate camps. In the former, their fiitisfadion with an event,
which it was foreseen would be productive of the most important
consequences, was expressed by every poflible demonitration of
joy. The latter was filled with astonishment and terror. The
name of Maurice was mentioned, with execration, as an apostate
from religion, a betrayer of German liberty, and a contemner
of the most sacred and natural ties. Every thing that the rage or
invention of the party could suggest, in order to blacken and render
him odious; invectives, satires and lampoons, the furious decla-
mations of their preachers, together with the rude wit of their
authors, were all employed againif him. XVhile he, trflting to
the arts which he had to long praftifed, as if his actions could have
admitted of any serious justification, publifled a manifesto, con-
taining the fame frivolous reasons for his conduct, which lie had
formerly alledged in the meeting of his states, and in his letter to
the Landgrave m

m Slcid. 4'c;, 410.

TuHll;
I04

T HE Ele6tor, upon the first intelligence of Maurice's motions,

proposed to return home with his troops for the defence of
Saxony. But the deputies of the league, assembled at Ulm,
prevailedon him, at that time, to remain with the army, and
to prefer the success of the common cause before the security of
his own dominions. At length the fifferings and complaints of
his ftbjeab increased so much, that he discovered the utmost
impatience to set out, in order to rescue them from the op.
pression of Maurice, and from the cruelty of the Hungarians,
who having been accustomed to that licentious and mercilels
species of war which was thought lawful against the Turks,
committed, wherever they came, the wildest acts of rapine and
violence. This desire of the Elector's was To natural and so
warmly urged, that the deputies at Ulm, though fully sensible
of the unhappy consequences of dividing their army, durst not
refuse their content, how unwilling soever to grant it. In this
perplexity, they repaired to the camp of the confederates at
Giengen on the Brenz, 'in order to consult their confituents.
Nor were they less at a loss what to determine in this prefling
emergence. But, after having confidered seriously the open
desertion of rome of their allies I the scandalous lukcwarmnefs of
others who had hitherto contributed nothing towards the war;
the intolerable load which had fallen, of consequence, upon tuch
members as were most zealous for the cause, or most faithful to
their engagements; the ill success of all their endeavours to ob-
tain foreign aid; the unusual length of the campaign; the rigour
of the season; together with the great number of foldieis, and even
officers, who had, on that account, quitted the service they c6n-
cluded that nothing could save them, but eitheir the bringing
the contest to the immediate decision of a battle by attacking the

VOL. III. P Imperial

BOOK VIII'

1546.

The cor;fdc-
ratte make
overtures of
acconmmods-
tion to the
Emperor

105

BOOK VIII.

1546.

which he re-
jeets.

The troops of
the confede-
racy separate.

Imperial army, or an accommodation of all their differeuces with
Charles by a treaty. Such was the despondency and dejecion which
now oppressed the party, that of there two they chore what was
most feeble and unmanly, empowering a minister of the Eletor
of Brandenburg to propound overtures of peace in their name to
the Emperor.

No sooner did Charles perceive this haughty confederacy, which

had so lately threatened to drive him out of Germany, condescend-
ing to make the first advances towards an agreement, than conclud-
ing their spirit to be gone, or their union to be broken, he immediate-
ly aflumed the tone of a conqueror; and as if they had been already
at his mercy, would not hear of a.negociation, but upon condition of
the Elector of Saxony's consenting previously to give up himself and
his dominions absolutely to his disposal n. As nothing more intoler-
able or ignominious could have been prescribed, even in the
worst situation of their affairs, it is no wonder.this propofi-
tion was rejeted by a party, humbled and disconcerted rather
than subdued. But though they refused to submit tamely to the
Emperor's will, they wanted spirit to pursue the only plan which
could have preserved their indepnendence and forgetting that
it was the union of their troops in one body, which had hitherto
rendered the confederacy, formidable, and lhad more than once
obliged the Imperialists to think of quitting the field

. they

inconsiderately abandoned that advantage, which,, in spite of
the diversion in Saxony, would still have kept the Emperor
in awe; ard yielding to the Elector's intreaties, consent-
ed to his proposal of dividing the army. Nine thousand

n Hortenfius ap. Scard. ii. 485.

men
1o6

men were left in the duchy of Wurtemberg, in order to protect
that province, as well as the free cities of Upper Germany; a
considerable body marched with the Eledtor towards Snxony ; but
the greater part returned with their refpedive leaders into their
own countries, and were disperscd there o.

THE moment the troops separated, the confederacy ceased to

be the objet of terror; and the members of it, who while
they composed part of a great body had felt but little anxiety
about their own security, began to tremble when they reflected
that they now flood exposed singly to the whole weight of the
Emperor's vengeance; Charles did not allow them leisure to
recover, from their consternation, or to form any new schemes of
union. As soon as the confederates began to retire, he put his
army in motion, and though it was now the depth of winter,
he resolved to keep the field, in order to make the most of that
favourable juncture for which he had waited To long. Some
small towns in .which the enemy.had: left garrisons immediately
opened their gates. Norlingen, Rotenberg and Hall, Imperial
cities, rubmitted soon after. 'Though Charles could not prevent
the Eletor from levying, as he retreated, large contributions
upon the archbishop of Mentz, the abbot of Fulda, and other
ecclesiastics p, this was more than balanced by the submission
of Ulrn, one of the chief cities of Suabia, highly distinguished
by its zeal for the Smalkaldic league. As soon as an example
was set of deserting the common cause, the reft of the members
became instantly impatient to follow it, and seemed afraid left
others, by getting the start of them in returning to their -uty,

O Sleid.4i1.

1300K VIII.

3546.

AhniolR all thel
imeImbers of
the conskde-
tacy itibiit to
the Empcror.

/
P Thuan. 88.

should,

ioyr
P2

BOOK VIII.

1546.

should, on that account, obtain more favourable terms. The
Eletor Palatine, a weak Prince, who, notwithstanding his pro-
feliions of neutrality, had, very preposterously, sent to the con-
federates four hundred horse, a body so inconsiderable as to be
scarce any addition to their strength, but great enough to render
him guilty in the eyes of the Emperor, made his acknowledge-
ments in the most abject manner. The inhabitants of Augsburg,
(haken by To many instances of apoftacy, expelled the -rave
Scheitel out of their city, and accepted such conditions as the
Emperor was pleated to grant them.

THE Duke of Wurtemberg, though among the first who had

offered to submit, was obliged to sue for pardon on his knees,
and even after this mortifying humiliation obtained it with
1547' difficulty q. Memmingen, and other free cities in the circle of

Suabia, being now abandoned by all their former associates, found
it necessary to provide for their own safety by throwing them-
selves on the Emperor's mercy. Strafburg and Frankfort on
the Maine, cities far remote from the feat of danger, discovered
no greater fteddinefs than those which lay more exposed. Thus
a confederacy, lately so powerful as to {hake the Imperial throne,
fell to pieces and was dissolved in the space of a few weeks;
scarce any member of that forrmidable combination now remain-
ing in arms, but the Elector and Landgrave, whom the Empe-
ror, having from the beginning marked out as the vitims of his

The rigorous vengeance, was at no pains to reconcile. Nor did he grant
conditioAs those who submitted to him a generous and unconditional par-
imposed by
the Emperor. don. Conscious of his own superiority, he treated them both

with haughtiness and rigour. All the Princes in person, and

q Mem. de Ribier, ton. i. 589.

the
Io8

the cities, by their deputies, were compelled to implore mercy
in the humble posture of supplicants. As the Emperor labolued
under great difficulties from the want of money, he imposed
heavy fines upon them, which he levied with most rapacious
exadtnefs. The Duke of Wurtemberg paid three hundred
thousand crowns; the city of Augsburg an hundred and fifty
thousand; Ulm an hundred thousand; Frankfort eighty thou-
sand; Memmingen fifty thousand; and the reft in proportion
to their abilities, or their different degrees of guilt. They were
obliged, betides, to renounce the league of Smalkalde; to fur-
nifl afliftance, if required, towards executing the Imperial ban
against the Ele&or and Landgrave; to give up their artillery
and warlike flores to the Emperor; to admit garrisons into their
principal cities and places of ftrengtll; and in this difrnned and
dependent situation, to expect the final award which the Empe-
ror should think proper to pronounce when the war came to an
issue r. But, amidst the great variety of articles diatated by
Charles on this occasion, he, in conformity to his original plan,
took care that nothing relating to religion should be inserted i
and to such a degree were the confederates humbled or over-
awed, that, forgetting the zeal which had so long animated them,
they were follicitous only about their safety, without venturing to
insist on a point, the mention of which they saw him avoiding
with so much industry. The inhabitants of Memmingen alone
made some feeble efforts to procure a promise of protection in
the exercise of their religion, but were checked so severely by
the Emperor's ministers, that .they inflantly fell from their
demand.

BOOK VIII.

1'47.
r Sleid. 41 I, &c. Thuar, lib. iv. p. 125. Mem. de Ribier, torn. i. 6o6.

Tur

o10

Book VIII.

1547.

J.1] . 25.

The Eletor

returns to
Saxony, and
recovers pof-
fIlion of it.

T'HE Eledor of Cologne, whom, notwithitanding the sentence of

excommunication iflied against him by the Pope, Charles had hi-
therto allowed to remain in poffefion of the archiepiscopal fee, being
now required by the Emperor to submit to the cenfuresof the church,
this virtuous and disinterested prelate, unwilling to expose his filb-
jeds, on his account, to the miseries of war, voluntarily resigned
that high dignity. With a moderation becoming his age and cha-
racter, he chose to enjoy truth together with the exercise of his reli-
gion in the retirement of a private life, rather than to diflurb society
by engaging in a doubtful and violent struggle in order to retain
his office .

ME A N w H I L E the Elecor of Saxony reachad the frontiers of

his country. As Maurice could aflemble no force equal to
the army which accompanied him, he, in a short time, not only
recovered poffeflion of his own territories, but over-ran Mifiia,
and stripped his rival of all that belonged to him except Dref-
den and Leipfic, which being towns of rome strength could not
be suddenly reduced. Maurice, obliged to quit the field, and
to ihut himself up in his capital, dispatched courier after cou-
rier to the Emperor, representing his dangerous situation, and
folliciting him with the most earnest importunity to march
immediately to hi,; relief. But Charles, busy at that time in
prescribing terms to such members of the league as were daily
returning to their allegiance, thought it sufficient to detach
Albert Marquis of Brandenburg-Anfpach with three thousand
men to his afliftance. Albert, though an enterprizing and active
officer, allowed himself to be furprized by the Elector, who
killed many of his troops, dispersed the remainder, and took

s Skid.. 4 1 8l a. lib. iv. 148.
II0

him prisoner'. Maurice continued as much exposcd as formerly;
and if his enemy had known how to improve the opportunity which
presented itself, his ruin muff have been immediate and unavoidable.
But the Elector, no less flow and dilatory when invested with the
sole command, than lie had been formerly when joined in autho-
rity with a partner, never gave any proof of military activity
but il this enterprize against Albert. Instead of marching.
directly towards Maurice, whom the defeat of his ally had
greatly alarmed, he inconsiderately listened to overtures of accom-
modation, which his artful antagonist proposed with no other
intention than to amuse him, and to flacken the vigour of his
operations.

Sucli, indeed, was the posture of the Emperor's affairs

that he could not march inflantly to tile relief of his ally.
Soon after tle separation of the confederate army, he, in order
to ease himself of the burden of maintaining a superfluous num-
ber of troops, had dismissed the count of Buren with his Flem-
ings", imagining that the Spaniards and Germans, together
with the papal forces, would be fully sufficient to crush any
degree of vigour that yet remained among the members of the
league. But Paul, growing wife too late, began now to difccrn
the imprudence of that measure, from which the more sagacious
Venetians had endeavoured in vain to dissuade him. The rapid
progress of the Imperial arms, and the ease with which they,
had broken a combination that appeared to firm and powerful,
opened at length his eyes, made him forget at once all the

Avila 99. 6. Mem. dc Ribicr. tom. i. 620.
u Avila 83. 6. Mcm. (Ic Ribier, tom. i. 592.

advantages

BOOK VIII.

1'47.

The Emperor
prevented
from attack-
ing the Elec-
tor and Land-
grave.

I II

Book VIII.

1547.

The Pope
recalls his
troops.

advantages which he had expected from such a compleat triumph
over heresy, and placed, in the strongest light, his own impolitic
condut, in having contributed towards acquiring for Charles such
an immense increase of power, as would enable him, after oppref-
sing the liberties of Germany, to give law with absolute authority
to all the states of Italy. The moment he perceived his error, he
endeavoured to correct it. Without giving the Emperor any
warning of his intention, he ordered Farnese, his grandson, to return
instantly to Italy with all the troops under his command, and at the
fame time recalled the licence which he had granted Charles, of
appropiating, to his own use, a large Ihare of the church-lands in
Spain. He was not destitute of pretences to justify this abrupt
desertion of his ally. The term of fix months, during which the
stipulations in their treaty were to continue in force, was now expi-
red; the league, in opposition to which their alliance had been
framed, seemed to be entirely' diflipated ; Charles, in all his nego-
ciations with the Princes and cities which had submitted to his will,
had neither consulted the Pope, nor had allotted him any part of the
conquests which he had made, nor had communicated to him any
(hare in the vast contributions that he had raised. He had not even
made any provision for the fuppreflion of heresy, or the re-establish-
ment of the catholic religion, which were Paul's chief inducements
to bestow the treasures of the church so liberally in carrying on the
war. These colours, how specious soever, did not conceal from
the Emperor that secret jealousy which was the true motive of
the Pope's conduct. But, as Paul's orders with regard to the
march of his troops were no less peremptory than unexpe&ed,
it was impofible to prevent their retreat. Charles exclaimed
loudly against his treachery, in abandoning him so unfeafon-

ably,
112

ably, while lie was prosecuting a war undertaken in compliance
will his earnest follicitations, and from which, if successful, of
much honour and advantage would redound to the church. To
complaints 'he added threats and expoitulations. But Paul re-
mained inflexible; his troops continued their march towards the
ecclesiastical tate ; and in an elaborate memorial, intended as an
apology for his behaviour, he discovered new and more manifest
symptoms of alienation from the Emperor, together with a deep
rooted terror of his power x. Charles weakened by the withdraw-
ing of so great a body from his army, which was already much
diminished by the number of garrisons that he had been obliged
to throw into tile towns which had capitulated, found it necessary
to recruit his forces by new levies, before he could venture to
march in person towards Saxony.

TH E fame and splendor of his success could not have failed

of attracing such multitudes of soldiers into his service from all
the extensive territories now subjec to his authority, as must
have Toon put him in a condition of taking the field againl; the
Eleator; but the sudden and violent eruption of a conspiracy at
Genoa, as well as the great revolutions which that event, ex-
tremely mysterious in its firfl appearances, seemed to portend,
obliged him to avoid entangling himself in new operations in
Germany, before lie had fully discovered its source and tendency.
The form of government which had been eftablifled in Genoa,
at the time when Andrew Doria restored liberty to his country,
though calculated to obliterate the memory of former diflenfions,

BOOK V1s1.

1547.

A conflpiracy
to overtili,
the govell-
Ilcnt of
Genoa.

x F. Paul. no8. Pallavic. par. ii. p. 5. 'htan. 126.
VoL. I11.

113

"4
BOOK VIII.

1547.

The objeEt of
the confpira-
tors.

and received at first with eager approbation, did not, after a trial
of near twenty years, give universal satisfaction to there turbu-
lent and fatious republicans. As the entire adminifiration of
affairs was 'now lodged in a certain number of noble families,
many, envying them that pre-eminence, wished for the restitution
of a popular government, to which they had been accustomed;
and though all reverenced the disinterested virtue of Doria,
and admired his talents, not a few were jealous of that afcen-
dant which he had acquired in all the councils of the common-
wealth. His age however, his moderation, and love of liberty,
afforded ample security to his countrymen, that he would not
abuse his power, nor stain the close of his days by attempting
to overturn that fabrick, which it had been the labour and
pride of his life to eret. But that authority and influence,
which in his hands were innocent, they easily saw would prove
deftruative, if usurped by any citizen of greater ambition, or
less virtue. A citizen of this dangerous charater had aftually
formed such pretensions, and with some profpeEt of success.
Giannetino Doria, whom his grand uncle Andrew destined to
be the heir of his private fortune, aimed likewise at being his
successor in power. His temper haughty, insolent, and over-
bearing to such a degree as would scarce have been tolerated in
one born to reign, was altogether infdpportable in the citizen
of a free state; and the more sagacious among the Genoese
already feared and hated him as the enemy of those liberties for
which they were indebted to his uncle. While Andrew him-
self, blinded by that violent and undifcerning affection which
persons in advanced age often contract for the younger members
of their family, fct no bounds to the indulgence with which he

treated

treated him; teeming less follicitous to secure and perpetuate the BOOK VIII.
freedom of the commonwealth, than to aggrandize that undeferv- ,547
ing kinsman.

BUT whatever suspicion of Doria's designs, or whatever dif-

fatisfaCion with the system of adminiitration in the common-
wealth, there circumstances might have occasioned, they would
have ended, it is probable, in nothing more than murmurings
and complaints, if John Lewis Fiefco Count of Lavagna, obferv- Fieico Count

of Lavagna

ing this growing disgust, had not been encouraged by it to at- the head of
tempt one of the boldest a&tions recorded in history. That the conpi-

racy,

young nobleman, the richest and most illustrious subjet in the
republick, polfeffed, in an eminent degree, all the qualities which
win upon the human heart, which command refped, or secure at-
tachment. -He was graceful and majestic in his person magni-
ficent to profusion; of a generosity that prevented the wishes of
his friends, and exceeded the expetations of strangers; of an
insinuating address, gentle manners and a flowing affability. But
under the appearance of there virtues, which seemed to form him
for enjoying and adorning civil life, he concealed all the difpo-
fitions which mark men out for taking the lead in the most danger-
ous and dark conspiracies; an insatiable and refllers ambition, a
courage unacquainted with fear, and a mind that disdained Cub.
ordination. Such a temper could ill brook that flation of infe-
riority, wherein he was placed in the republick; and as he envied
the power which the elder Doria had acquired, he was filled with
indignation at the thoughts of its descending, like an hereditary
polfeflion, to Giannetino. These various palions, preying with
violence on his turbulent and aspiring mind, determined him

Qz to

'15

BOOK VIII.

1547.

Intrigues and
preparations
of the con-
fpirators.

to attempt overturning that domination to which he could not
submit.

AT first he thought of an alliance with Francis, and even pro-

posed it to the French ambassador at Rome, as the most effecual
means of accomplishing this; and after expelling Doria together
with the Imperial faction by his afliftance, he resolved to put the
publick once more under the protection of that Monarch, hop-
ing in return for that service to be entrusted with the principal
ihare in the administration of government. But having com-
municated his scheme to a few chosen confidents, from whom
he kept nothing secret, Verrina, the chief of them, a man of
desperate fortune, capable alike of advising and of executing the
most audacious deeds, remonfirated with earnefinefs.againft the
folly of exposing himself to the most imminent danger, while
he allowed another to reap all the fruits of his success; and
exhorted him warmly to aim himself at that pre-eminence in
his country, to which he was destined by his illustrious birth,
was called by the voice of his fellow citizens, and would be
raised by the zeal of his friends. This discourse opened filch
vast prospects to Fiefco, and so suitable to his genius, that
abandoning his own plan, he eagerly adopted that of Verrina.
The other persons present, though sensible of the hazardous
nature of the undertaking did not chufe to condemn what their
patron had so warmly approved. It was instantly resolved, in
this dark cabal, to affaninate the two Dorias as well as the prin-
cipal persons of their party, to overturn the established system of
government, and to place Fiefco on the ducal throne of Genoa.
Time, however, and preparations were requisite to ripen such

a delign

.*

a design for execution; andl while le was employed in carrying on
these, Fiefco made it his clicf care to guard against every thing
that might betray his fecrct, or create suspicion. The dilguife
lie afflumed was of all otlers the inoft impenetrable, He feelmed
to be abandoned:entirely to pleagifur and dillipatiol. A perpetual
gaiety, diversified by the purfiit of all the amusements becoming
his age and rank, engrossed, in appearance, the whole of histime
and thoughts. But amidst this hurry of diflipation, he prose-
cuted his plan with the most cool attention, neither retarding
tile delign by a timid hesitation, nor precipitating the execu-
tion by an excess of impatience. He continued his correfpon.
dence with the French ambaffidor at Rome, though without
communicating to him his real intentions, that by his means he
might fccure the protection of the French arms, if hereafter he
lhould find it neceflary to call them to his nid. He entered
into a close confederacy witl Farnese Duke of Parma, who
being difgufled with the Emperor for refuting to grant himl the
investiture of that dutchy, was eager to promote any meafilre
that tended to diminish his influence in Italy, or to ruin a fami-
ly so implicitely devoted to him as that of Doria. Being sensible
that in a maritime slate, the acquisition of naval power was
what he ouight chiefly to aim at, he purchased four galleys from
the Pope, who' probably was not unacutainted with the design
which lie had formed, and did not disapprove of it. Under co-
lour of fitting out one of there gallies to fail on a cruise against
the Turks, he not only assembled a good number of his own va:s
fals, but engaged in his service many bold adventurers, whom
the truce between the Emperor and Solyman had deprived of
their usual occupation an:d subsistence.

BooK VIII.

5.47.
WVitL

1 17

BOOK VIII.

'547.

WHILE Fiefco was taking these important steps, he preserved

so admirably his usual appearance of being devoted intirely to
pleasure and amusement, and paid court with such artful ad-
dress to the two Dorias, as imposed not only on the generous
and unfufpicious mind of Andrew, but deceived Giannetino,
who conscious of his own criminal intentions, was more apt to
distrust the designs of others. So many instruments being now
prepared, nothing remained but to strike the blow. Various
consultations were held by Fiefco with his confidents, in order
to fettle the manner of doing it with the greatest certainty and
effect. At first, they proposed to murder the Dorias and their
chief adherents, during the celebration of high mars in the prin-
cipal church; but as Andrew was often absent from these reli-
gious folemnities, on account of his great age, that design was
laid aside. It was then concerted that Fiefco Ihould invite the
uncle and nephew, with all their friends whom he had marked
out as viAims, to his house ; where it would be easy to cut them
off at once without danger or resistance; but as Giannetiho was
obliged to leave the town on the day which they had chosen, it
became necessary likewise to alter this plan. They at last deter-
mined to attempt by open force, what they found difficult to effect
by stratagem, and fixed on the night between the second and
third of January, for the execution of their enterprize. The time
was chosen with great propriety; for as the Doge of the former
year was to quit his office, according to custom, on the first of
the month, and his successor could not be elected sooner than the
fourth, the republick remained during that interval in a fort of
anarchy, and Fiefco might with less violence take poffeflion of the
vacant dignity.

'rHF.
118

THE morning of that day Fiefco employed in visiting his

friends, palling some hours among them with a spirit as gay
and unembarraffed as at other times. Towards evening, he
paid court to the Dorias with his ufiual marks of refled, and
surveying their countenance and behaviour with the atten-
tion natural in his situation, was happy to observe the per-
fedt ecurity in which they remained, without the leaf fore-
fight or dread of that fIorm which had been so long a gather-
ing, and was now ready to burst over their heads. From
their palace he hastened to his own, which flood by itself in
the middle of a large court, surrounded by a high wall. The
gates had been set open in the morning, and all persons, with-
out diftindion, were allowed to enter, but strong guards posted
within the court suffered no one to return. Verrina, mean-
while, and a few persons trusted with the secret of the con-
fpiracy, after condudting Fiefco's vaflals, as well as the crews of
his gallies into the palace in small bodies, with as little noise as
poflible, dispersed themselves through the city, and in the name of
their patron, invited to an entertainment the principal citizens
whom they knew to be disgusted with the administration of the
Dorias, and to have both inclination and courage to attempt a
change in the government. Of the vast number of persons who
now filled the palace, a few only knew for what purpfl. they
were assembled, the reit aftonilhed at finding instead of the pre-
parations for a feast, a court crouded with armed men, and apart-
ments filled with the infiruments of war, gazed on each other
with a mixture of impatience, curiosity and terror.

WHILE their minds were in this state of fufpence and agita-
tion, Fiefco appeared. With a look full of alacrity and con-

fidence,

BOOK VIII.

1547.

'rihe cdillpira-
tors :iFreiibil
to execute
their plan.

Ficfco'd ex-
hortations to
theii.

119

BOOK VIII.

, 1547.
'I

fidence, he addressed himself to the petfons of chief diflintion,
telling them, that they were not now called to partake of the pleaflure
of an entertainment, but tojoin in a deed of valour, which would
lead them to liberty and immortal renown. He set before their eyes
the exorbitant as well as intolerable authority of the elder Doria,
which the ambition of Giannetino, and the partiality of the Em-
peror to a family more devoted to him than to their country, was
about to enlarge and to render perpetual. This unrighteous do-
mination, continued he, you have it now in your power to subvert,
and to eftablilli the freedom of your country on a firm ba-
sis. The tyrants must be cut off. 1 have taken the most effectual
measures for this purpose. My associates are numerous. I can de-
pend on allies and prote&ors if necessary. Happily the tyrants are
as secure as I have been provident. Their insolent contempt of
their countrymen, has banished the suspicion and timidity which
usually render the guilty quick-fighted to discern, as well as fagaci-
otis to guard against the vengeance which they deserve. They will
now feel the blow, befi re they fufpe& any hofile hand to be nigh.
Let us then rally forth, that we may deliver our country by one ge-
nerous effort, almost unaccompanied with danger, and certain of
success. These words, uttered withthat irrefitlible fervour which ani-
flates the mind when rouzed by great objets, made the desired
imprefflon on the audience. Fiefco's vassals, ready to execute
whatever their master should command, receivcd 1is discourse
with a murmur of applause. To many whose fortunes were de-
fperate, the licence and confusion of 'nn infurredion afforded an
agreeable profpeL1. Those of higher rank and more virtuous senti-
ments, durst not discover the furprize or horror with which they
were firuck at the propofil of an cnterprize so unexp.ded 'and
atrocious; as each imagined the otlhr to be in the fecrct of the

colnipiracy,
120

conspiracy, and saw himself surrounded by persons who waited
only a signal from their leader to perpetrate the greatest crime.
With one voice then all applauded, or feigned to applaud the
undertaking.

HAvING thus fixed and encouraged his aflociates, before

he gave them his las orders, he hastened for a moment to the
apartment of his wife, a lady of the noble house of Cibo, whom
he loved with tender affection, and whose beauty and virtue ren-
dered her worthy of his love. The noise of the armed men who
crowded the court and palace, having long before this reached
her ears, the concluded Come hazardous enterprize to be in hand,
and {he trembled for her husband. He found her in all the an-
guilh of uncertainty and fear; and as it was now impollible to
keep his design concealed, he informed her of what he had under-
taken. The profpea of a scene To full of horror as well' as dan-
ger, compleated her agony; and foreboding immediately in her
mind the fatal ifflue of it, the endeavoured, by her tears, her
entreaties, and her despair, to divert him from his purpose. Fiefco,
after trying in vain to sooth and to inspire her with hope, broke
from a situation into which an excess of tenderness had unwarily
seduced him, though it could not shake his resolution. " Farewel,
he cried, as he quitted the apartment, you fiall either nevecr fee
me more, or you shall behold to-morrow every thing in Genoa
subjet to your power."

As loon as he rejoined his companions, he allotted each his

proper flation; some were appointed to afl'ult and seize the dif-
ferent gates of the city; some to make themrfelves masters of
the principal streets or places of strength: Fiefco reserved for
himself the attack of the harbour where Doria's gallies were

VOL. III. R laid

BOOK VIII.

'547.

His interview
with his wife.

They attack
the city.

I21

BOOK VIII.

1547.

laid up, as the post of chief importance, and of greatefl danger.
It was now midnight, and the citizens slept in the security of peace,
when this band of conspirators, numerous, desperate, and well
armed, rushed out to execute their plan. They furprized without
refiQance some of the gates. They got poffeflion of others after
a sharp conflict with the soldiers on guard. Verrina, with the
galley which had been fitted out againif the Turks, blocked up
the mouth of the Darfena or little harbour where Doria's fleet lay.
All poflibility of escape being by this precaution cut off, when
Fiefco attempted to enter the gallies from the lhore to which they
were made fast, as they were unrigged and disarmed, having no
crew on board but the slaves chained to the oar, they were in no
condition to make resistance. Every quarter of the city was now
filled with noise and tumult, all the streets resounding with the cry
ds Fiefco and liberty. At that name, so popular and beloved, many
of the lower rank took arms, and joined the conspirators. The
nobles and partizans of the aristocracy, astonished or affrighted,
shut the gates of their houses, and thought of nothing but of fe-
curing them from pillage. At last, the noise excited by this scene
of violence and confusion, reached the palace of Doria; Giannetino
liarted immediately from his bed, and imagining that it was oc-
cafioned by some mutiny among the sailors, rulhed out with a few
attendants, and hurried towards the harbour. The gate of St.
Thomas, through which he had to pass, was already in the poffeflion
of the conspirators, who, the moment he entered, fell upon him
with the utmost fury, and murdered him on the spot. The fame
mufft have been the fate of the elder Doria, if Jerome de Fiefco
had executed his brother's plan, and had proceeded immediately
to attack him in his palace ; but he, from the fordid consideration
of preventing its being plundered amidst the confusion, having

forbid

forbid his followers to advance, Andrew got intelligence of his ne-
phew's death, as well as of his own danger; and mounting on
horseback, saved himself by flight. Meanwhile, a few fenatois had
the courage to alemble in the palace of the republic y. At firfl,
some of the most daring among them attempted to rally the scat-
tered soldiers, and to attack a body of the conspirators; but being
repulsed with loss, all agreed that nothing now remained, but to
treat with the party which seemed to be irresistible. Deputies were
accordingly Cent to learn of Fiefco what were the conceflions with
which he would be satisficd, or rather to submit to whatever terms
he Ihould please to prescribe.

BUT by this time Fiefco, with whom they were empowered

to negociate, was no more. Just as he was going to lcave the har-
bour, where every thing had succeeded to his with, that he might
join his vicorious companions, he heard rome extraordinary
uproar on board the Admiral galley. Alarmed at the noise, and
fearing that the saves might break their chains, and overpower
his associates, he ran thither; but the plank which reached from
the shore to the vessel happening to overturn, he fell into the
Tea, while he hurried forward too precipitately. Being loaded
with heavy armour, he funk to the bottom, and perified in the
very moment when he must have taken full pofnefion of every
thing that his ambitious heart could desire. Verrina was the
first who discovered this fatal accident, and foreseeing, at once,
all its consequences, concealed it with the utmost induflry from
every one but a few leaders of the conspiracy. Nor was it diffi-
cult, amidst the darkness and confusion of the night, to have
kept it secret, until a treaty with the senators fliould have put the

y II palazza della Signoria.

R 2 city

BooK VIII.

1547.

Cause of their
sufficarriage.

123

BooK VIII.

'547.

city in the power of the conspirators. All their hopes of this
were disconcerted by the imprudence of Jerome Fiefco,
who, whlen the deputies of the senate enquired for his brother,
the count of Lavagna, that they might make their proposals to
him, replied with a childish vanity, " I am now the only person
to whom that title belongs, and with me you must treat." Thele
words discovered both to his friends and enemies what had
happened, and made the impreflion which might have been
expe&ted upon both. The deputies, encouraged by this event,
the only one which could occasion such a sudden revolution as
might turn to their advantage, aflumed initantly, with.admirable
presence of mind, a new tone, suitable to the change in their
circumnftances, and made high demands. While they endea-
voured to gain time by protracting the .negociation, the reft of
the senators wers bury in alfembling their partizans, and form-
ing a body capable of defending the palace of the republick..
On the other hand, the cotifpirators dftonilh'ed at the death of
a man whom they adored and trusted, and placing no confi-
dence in Jerome, a giddy youth, felt their .courage die away,
and their arms fall from their hands. That profound :and
amazing secrecy with which the cdnspiracy had been! concerted,
and which had contributed hitherto so much to its success, proved
now the chief cause of its nmifoarriage. The leader was gone,
the greater part of those who acted under him, knew not his
confidents, and were strangers to the object at which he aimed.
There was no person among:them whose authority or abilities
entitled him to assume Fiefco's place, or to finish his plan;
after having loft the spirit which animated it, life and activity
delerted the whole body. Many of the conspirators withdrew
to their houses, hoping that amidit the darkness of the night

they
124

they had pafred unobservcd, and might remain unknown. Others
fought for safety by a timely retreat; and before break of day,
all of them fled with precipitation from a city, which, but a few
hours before, was ready to acknowledge them as malecrs.

NEXT morning every thing was quiet in Genoa; not an enemy

was to be seen; few marks of the violence of the former night
appeared, the conspirators having condulted their enterprize with
more noise than bloodfled, and gained all their advantages by
furprize, rather than by force of arms. Towards evening, An-
drew Doria returned to the city, being met by all the inhabitants,
who received him with acclamations of joy. Though the dif-
grace as well as danger of tile preceding night, were frelh in his
mind, and the mangled body of his kinsman lill before his eyes,
such was his moderation and magnanimity, that the decree issued
by the senate against the conspirators, did not exceed that just
mcafure of severity which was requisite for the fulpport of govern-
ment, and was diltated neither by the violence of resentment,
nor the rancour of revenge z.

A FTER taking the necessary precautions for preventing the
flame, which was now so happily extinguished, from breaking

z Thuan. 93. Sigonii vita Andrec Doria, 1196. La Conjuration du

Comtc de Fiefilue par Cardin. de Retz. Adriani Itforia, lib. vi. 369. Folicta!
Conjuratio Jo. Lud. Ficlci ap. Gr.v,. Thef. Ital. i. 833.

* It is remarkable, that Cardinal dc Rctz composed, at the age of eighteen,

a hiflory of this conspiracy, containing such a discovery of his admiration ot
Ficfco and his enterpiiz.c, that it is not furpriiing that a minifltr, so jealous
and difccrning as Richlieu, flould be led by the perusal of it to predilc the
turbulent and dangerous spirit of that young Ecclefiaftick. Mem. de Rct.,
toni. i. p. 13.

to

BoOK VIII.

'547.

'rnanqiiility rc-ltnablinflcd
in Genoa.

The Empero
alarmed at
this confpi-
racy.

125

BOOK VIII.

'547.

Suspends his
operations in
Germany.

out anew, the firt care of the senate was to fend an ambafrador
to the Emperor, to give him a particular detail of what had hap-
pened, and to beg his afliftance towards the reduction of Mon-
tobbio, a strong fort on the hereditary estate of the Fiefci, in
which Jerome had shut himself up. Charles was no less alarmed
than aftonilhed at an event To firange and unexpected. He could
not believe that Fiefco, how bold or adventurous soever, durst
have attempted such an enterprize, but on foreign suggestion, and
from.the hope of foreign aid. Being informed that the Duke
of Parma was well acquainted with the plan of the conspirators,
he immediately supposed that the Pope could not be ignorant of
a measure, which his son had countenanced. Proceeding from
this to a farther conjecture, which Paul's cautious maxims of
policy in other intfances, rendered extremely probable, he con-
cluded that the French King mufft have known and approved of
the design; and he began to apprehend that this spark might
again kindle the flame of war which had raged To long in Italy.
As he had drained his Italian territories of troops on account of
the German war, he was altogether unprovided for refiiting any
hostile attack in that country ; and on the first appearance of dan-
ger, he muff have detached thither the greatest part of his forces
for its defence. In this situation of affairs, it would have been
altogether imprudent in the Emperor to have advanced in person
against the Elector, until he should learn with some degree of cer-
tainty whether such a scene were not about to open in Italy, as
might put it out of his power to keep the field with an army fuffi-
cient to oppose him.

THE
i26

......!

# BOOK IX.

THE

T O
OF THE

I G

OF THE
EMPEROR

B O C

CHARLES

K IX.
T HE Emperor's dread of the hoffile intentions of the

Pope and French King did not proceed from any imaginary
or ill-grounded fiufpicion. Paul had already given the

firongeft proofs both of his jealousy and enmity. Charles could
not hope, that Francis, after a rivallhip of so long continuance,
would behold the great advantages which he had gained over the
confederate Protestants, without feeling his ancient emulation
revive. He was not deceived in this conjeature. Francis had
observed the rapid progress of his arms with deep concern, and
though prevented hitherto, by circumstances which have been
mentioned, from interposing in order to check them, he was
now convinced that, if he did not make some extraordinary and

timely
H

I

S

E

R

Y
R

N

V.

BOOK IX.

1547.

Francis jea-
lous of the
Emperor's
power and
:uccefs.

128

BOOK IX. timely effort, Charles must acquire such a degree of power as
1%. 7 would enable him to give law to. the reft of Europe. This appre-

1547.

henfion, which did not take its rife from the envy of rivalihip, alone
but was entertained by the wisest politicians of the age, suggested
various expedients which might serve to retard the course of the
Emperor's victories, and to form by degrees such a combination
againift him as might put a flop to his dangerous career.

Negociates WITH this view, Francis infRruCted his emissaries in Germany
with the Pro- to employ all their address in order to revive the courage of the
teftants;

confederates, and to prevent them from submitting to the Lmpe-
ror. He made liberal offers of his assistance, and entering into a
close correspondence with the EleCtor and Landgrave, whom he
knew to be the most zealous as well as the most powerful of the
whole body, he used every argument, and proposed every ad-
vantage which could either confirm their dread of the Emperor's
designs, or determine them not to imitate the inconsiderate cre-
dulity of their aifociates in giving up their religion and liberties
to his disposal. While he took this ftep towards continuing the
civil war which raged in Germany, he endeavoured, likewise,
with Soly- to stir up foreign enemies against the Emperor. He follicited

nian, Solyman to seize this favourable opportunity of invading Hun-

gary, whicd had been drained of all the troops necessary for its
defence, in order to form the army against the confederates of
Smalkalde. He exhorted the Pope to repair, by a vigorous and
seasonable effort, the error of which he had been guilty in con-
tributing to raise the Emperor to such a formidable height of

with the power. Finding Paul, both from the 'confcioufiefs of his own
Popetans mistake, and his dread of its consequences, abundantly disposed

to liften to his exhortations, he availed himself of this favour-

able

able disposition which the Pontiff began to discover, as an argu-
ment to gain the Venetians. He endeavoured to convince them
that nothing could save Italy, and even Europe from oppreflion
and servitude, but their joining the Pope and him in giving the
firR beginning to a general confederacy in order to humble that
ambitious potentate, whom they had all equal reason to dread.

HAVING set on foot there negociations in the southern courts,

he turned his attention next towards those in the north of Europe.
As the King of Denmark had particular reasons to be offended
with the Emperor, Francis imagined that he would not be back-
ward to approve of the league which he had projeced; and left
considerations of caution or prudence Ihould restrain him from
joining in it, he attempted to overcome there, by offering him
the young Queen of Scots in marriage to his son . As the mini-
fRers who governed England in the name of Edward VI, had
openly declared themselves converts to the opinions of the Re-
formers, as loon as it became safe upon Henry's death to lay
aside that disguise which his unforgiving bigotry had forced them
to assume, Francis flattered himself that their zeal would not
allow them to remain inaative fpe4tators of the overthrow and de-
RruEtion of those who professed the fame faith with themselves
and he hoped that notwithstanding the Rruggles of faction inci-
dent to a minority, and the profpedt of an approaching rupture
with the Scots, he might prevail on them likewise to take part in
the common cause b.

BOOK IX.

IS47.

With the
Kings of
Denmark and
England.

WH LE Francis employed such variety of expedients, and
exerted himself with such extraordinary activity, to rouze the

* Mem. de Ribicr, i. 600, 606. b Mem. de Ribier, i. 635.
VOL. III. S different

9

129

BOOK IX.

1547.

The Emperor
greatly alarmed.

different tfates of Europe against his rival, he did not neglect
what depended, on himself alone. He levied troops in all parts
of his dominions ; he collected military stores; he contracted with
the Swiss cantons for a considerable body of men ; he put hit
finances in admirable order; he remitted considerable fums to
the Elector 'and Landgrave; and took all the other steps necessary
towards commencing hostilities, on the Ihorteft warning, and with
proper vigour c.

OPERATIONS so complicated, and which required the putting

so many instruments in motion, did not escape the Emperor's
observation. He was soon informed of Francis's intrigues in the
several courts, as well as of his domestic preparations; and fen-
fible how fatal an interrnption a foreign war would prove to his
designs in Germany, he trembled at the profpe& of that event.
The danger, however, appeared to him as unavoidable as it was
great. He knew the insatiable arid well-directed ambition of Soly-
man, and that he always chore the season for beginning his military
enterprizes with prudence equal to the valour with which he con-
duCted them. The Pope, as he had good reason to believe, wanted
not pretexts to justify a rupture, nor inclination to begin hostilities.
He had already made rome discovery of his sentiments, by express-
ing a joy altogether unbecoming the head of the church, upon re-
ceiving an account of the advantage which the Elector of Saxony
had gained over Albert of Brandenburg; and as he was now Ce-
cure of finding in the French King, an ally of sufficient power to
support him, he was at no pains to conceal the violence and extent
of his enmity d. The Venetians, Charles was well assured, had long
observed the growth of his power with jealousy, which added to

c Mem. de Rib. i. d95. d Mem. de Ribier, tom. i. 637.

the
130

the follicitations and promises of France, might at las quicken
their flow counsels, and overcome their natural caution. The
Danes and Englilh, it was evident, had both peculiar reason to be
disgusted, as well as firong motives to a& against him. But above
all, he dreaded the active emulation of Francis himself, whom he
confidered as the foul and mover of any confederacy that could be
formed against him; and as that Monarch had afforded protection
to Verrina, who failed directly to Marseilles upon the miscarriage
of Fiefco's conspiracy, Charles expeted every moment the com-
mencement of those hostile operations in Italy, of which he con-
ceived the infurretion in Genoa to have been only the prelude.

BUT while he remained in this state of suspense and follicitude,

there was one circumstance which afforded him Come profpet
of escaping the danger. The French King's health began to de-
cline. A disease, the effect of his intemperance and inconsiderate
pursuit of pleasure, preyed gradually on his constitution. The
preparations for war, as well as the negociations in the different
courts, began to languilh, together with the Monarch, who gave
spirit to both. The Genoese, during that interval, reduced
Montobbio, took Jerome Fiefco prisoner, and putting him toge-
gether with his chief adherents to death, extinguished all remains
of the conspiracy. Several of the Imperial cities in Germany,
despairing of timely affitance from France, submitted to the Em-
peror. Even the Landgrave seemed disposed to abandon the
Elector, and to bring matters to a speedy accommodation, on
such terms as he could obtain. In the mean time, Charles waited
with impatience the iflue of a distemper, which was to decide whe-
ther he muff relinquish all other schemes, in order to prepare for
refiting a combination of the greater part of Europe against him,

S or

BOOK IX.

'547.

Entertains
hope from
the declining
slate of Fran-
cis'a health.
March.

13i

BOOK IX.

1547.

Death of.
Francis, and
reflecions on
his chara&er
and rivallhip
with Charles.

or whether he might proceed to invade Saxony, without interrup.
tion or fear of danger.

THe good fortune, so remarkably propitious to his family, that

some historians have called it the Star of the Hotf/e of Antiria, did
not desert him on this occasion. Francis died at Rambouillet, on
the last day of March, in the fifty-third year of his age, and the
thirty-third of his reign. During twenty-eight years of that time,
an avowed rivalfhip subsisted between him and the Emperor, which
involved not only their own dominions, but the greater part of
Europe in wars, prosecuted with more violent animosity, and
drawn out to a greater length than had been known in any for-
mer period. Many circumstances contributed to both. Their
animosity was founded in opposition of interest, heightened by
personal emulation, and exasperated not only by mutual injuries,
but by reciprocal insults. At the fame time, whatever advantage
one seemed to poisess towards gaining the afeendant, was won-
derfully ballanced by 'ome favourable circumstance, peculiarto
the other. The Emperor's dominions were of great extent, the
French King's lay more compact Francis governed his kingdom
with absolute power; that of Charles was limited, but he sup-
plied the want ds authority'by address; the troops of the for-
mer were more impetuous and enterprizing; thofeof the latter
better disciplined, and more patient of fatigue. The talents and
abilities of the two Monarchs, were as different as the advantages
which they poffefled, and contributed no less to prolong the
contest between them. Francis took his resolutions suddenly, pro-
fecuted them at first with warmth, and pushed them into exe-
cution with a most adventrous courage; but being destitute of the
perseverance neceflary to surmount difficulties, he often abandoned

his
I3%

his designs, or relaxed the vigour of pursuit, from impatience,
and sometimes from levity. Charles deliberated long, and deter-
mined with coolness; but, having once fixed his plan, he adhered
to it with inflexible abftinacy, and neither danger nor discourage-
ment could turn him aside from the execution of it. The success
of their enterprizes was as different as their characters, and was
uniformly influenced by them. Francis, by his impetuous activity,
often disconcerted the Emperor's best laid schemes Charles, by
a more calm but steady piofecution of his designs, checked the
rapidity of his rival's career, and baffled or.repulfed his most vi-
gorous efforts. The former, at the opening of a war or of a
campaign, broke in upon his enemy with the violence of a torrent,
and carried all before him -the latter, waiting until he saw thv
force of his rival begin to abate, recovered in the end not only all
that he hlad loft, but made new acquisitions. Few of the French
Monarch's attempts towards conquest, whatever.promifing aspec
they might wear at first, were conducted to an happy iflue, many
of the Emperor's enterprizes, even after they appeared desperate
and impracticable, terminated in the most prosperous manner.
Francis was dazzled with the splendour of an undertaking Charles
was allured by the profpet of its turning to his advantage. The
degree, however, of their comparative merit.and reputation, has
not been fixed either by a firid scrutiny into their abilities for
government, or by an impartial consideration of the greatness and
success of their undertakings; and Francis is one of those Monarchs
who occupies a higher rank in the temple of fame, than either his
talents or performances intitle him to hold. This pre-eminence he
owed to many different circumstances. The superiority which
Charles acquired by the victory of Pavia, and which from that

period

BOCK. IX.

1547.

133

period he preserved through the remainder of his reign, was Co
manifest, that Francis's struggle againt his exorbitant and growing
dominion was viewed by moi: of the other powers, not only with
the partiality which naturally arises for those who gallantly main-
tain an unequal contest, but with the favour due to one who was
resisting a common enemy, and endeavouring to set bounds to a
Monarch equally formidable to them all. The characters of
Princes, too, especially among their contemporaries, depend not
only upon their talents for government, but upon their qualities as
men. Francis, notwithstanding the many errors conspicuous in
his foreign policy and domestic administration, was nevertheless
humane, beneficent, generous. He pofelIsed dignity without
pride affability free from meanness; and courtesy exempt from
deceit. All who had access to him, and no man of merit was
ever denied that privilege, refpeted and loved him. Captivated
with his personal qualities, his fubjets forgot his defects as a
Monarch, and admiring him as the mos accomplilhed and
amiable gentleman in his dominions, they 'never murmured at
acs of mal-administration, which in a Prince of less engaging
dispositions, would have been deemed unpardonable. This admi-
ration, however, must have been temporary only, and would
have died away with the courtiers who bestowed it; the illusion
arising from his private virtues mist have ceased, and posterity
would have judged of his public conduct with its ufial impar-
tiality; but another circumstance prevented this, and his name
hath been transmitted to posterity with increasing reputation.
Science and the arts had, at that time, made little progress in
France. They were just beginning to advance beyond the limits
of Italy, where they had revived, and which had hitherto been

their
BooK IX.

1547.
134

their only feat. Francis took them immediately under his pro-
tetion, and vied with Leo himself, in the zeal and munificence
with which he encouraged them. He invited learned men to
his court, he converted with them familiarly, he employed
them in business, he raised them to offices of dignity, and
honoured them with his confidence. That race of men, not
more prone to complain when denied the refpe to which they
fancy themselves entitled, than apt to be pleased when treated
with the diftindiou which they confider as their due, thought
they could not exceed in gratitude to .flch a benefactor, and
fitained their invention, and employed all their ingenuity in
panegyric. Succeeding authors, warmed with their descriptions
of Francis's bounty, adopted their encomiums, and refined upon
them. The appellation of Father of Letters bestowed upon Fran-
cis, hath rendered his memory sacred among historians, and they
teem to have regarded it as a fort of impiety to uncover his infirmi-
ties, or to point out his defects. Thus Francis, notwithflanding his
inferior abilities, and want of fuceefs, hath more than equalled the
fame of Charles. The virtues which he pofeffed as a man, have
entitled him to greater admiration and praise, than have been be-
ltowed upon the extensive genius, and fortunate arts of a more ca-
pable, but less amiable rival.

BY his death, a considerable change was made in the itate of

Europe. Charles, grown old in the arts of government and
command, had now to contend only with younger Monarchs,
who could not be regarded as an equal match for him, who had
stood the encounter with Henry VIII. and Francis L and come
off with honour in all there different contests. By this event,
he was eared of all his difqiuietude, and was happy to find that he

W.X~~~~ ~~~might.

BOOK IX.

1547.

Ewreas of
FranCis's
death.

135

might begin with safety thoCe operations against the Eleator of Sax-
ony, which he had hitherto been obliged to suspend. He knew the
abilities of Henry II. who hadjuft mounted the throne of France, to
be greatly inferior to those of his father, and foresaw that he would
be so much occupied for Come time in displacing the late King's mi.
nifters, whom he hated, and in gratifying the ambitious demands
of his own favourites, that he had nothing to dread, either from
his personal efforts, or from any confederacy which this.unexperi-
enced Prince could form,

BUT as it was uncertain how long such an interval offecurity

might continue, Charles determined instantly 'to improve it; and
as loon as he heard of Francis's demise, he began his march from
Egra on the borders of Bohemia. But the departure of the Papal
troops,y together with the retreat of the Flemings, had so much
diminiihed his army, that fixtcen thousand men were all he could
afTemble. With this inconsiderable body he set out on an expe-.
dition, the event of which was to decide what degree of autho
rity he lhould possess from that period in Germany: But as this
little army coilfifted chiefly of the veteran Spanish and Italian
bands, he did not, in trusting to them, commit much to the deci-
sion of chance, and even with so small a force he had reason to
entertain the most sanguine hopes of success. The Eledtor, it is
true, had levied ;an army greatly ftperior' in number; but neither
the experience and discipline of his troops, nor the abilities of his
officers, were to be compared with those. of the Emperor. The
Elector, besides, had already been guilty of an error, which de-
prived him of all the 'advantage. he might have derived from
his fiuperiority.in number, and was alone fuflicient to have occafi-
oned his ruin. infead of keeping his forces united,: he detached

one
BaoK IX.

'547.

Charles
iarches
nagainft the
Eletdor of
Saxony.
April 13.

136

one great body towards the frontiers of Bohemia, in order to BOOK IX.
facilitate hisjunstion with the malecontents of that kingdom, and

1547.

cantoned a confidetable part of what remainedin different places
of Saxony, where he expected the Emperor would make the first
impreflion vainly imagining that there open towns, with small gar-
rifons, might be rendered.tenable against an enemy.

THE Emperor entered the southern frontier of Saxony; and Progress of

attacked Altorf upon the ElRer. The folly of the measure which hisarms.
the Eletor had taken was immediately seen, the troops ported
in that town surrendering without resistance; and.thofe in all
the other places between that and the Elbe, either imitated their
example, or fled as the Iniperialifts approached. Charles, that
they might not recover from the panic with which they seemed
to be struck, advanced without losing a moment. The Eledtor,
who had fixed his head-quarters at Meissen, continued in his
wonted Rate of fluctuation and uncertainty. He even became
more undetermined, in proportion as the danger drew near and
called for prompt and decisive refoluiions. Sometimes he
aced, as if he had resolved to defend the banks of the Elbe,
and to hazard a battle with the enemy, as boon as the de-
tachments which he had called in were able to join him. At
other times, he abandoned this.as rash and perilous, seeming
to adopt the more prudent counsels of those who advised him to
endeavour at protra6ting the war, and for that end to retire
under the fortifications of Wittemberg, where the Imperialists
could not attack him without manifest disadvantage, and where
he might wait, in safety, for the succours, which he ex'pected
from Mecklenburgh, Pomerania .and the Protestant cities on the
Baltic. Without fixing upon either of there plans, he broke

VOL. III. T down

137

down the bridge at Meissen, and marched along the east bank
of the Elbe to Muhlberg. There he deliberated anew, and after
much hesitation, adopted one of these middle schemes, which
are always acceptable to feeble minds incapable of deciding. He
left a detachment at Muhlberg to oppose the Imperialists, if they
should attempt to pass at that place, and advancing a few miles
with his main body, encamped there in expectation of the
event, according to which he proposed to regulate his subsequent
motions.

Paffesthe CHARLES, meanwhile, pushing forward inceftantly, arrived
Elbe. the evening of the twenty third of April on the banks of the Elbe

opposite to Muhlberg. The river, at that place, was three
hundred paces in breadth, above four feet in depth, its current
rapid, and the bank poflefled by the Saxons was higher than
that which he occupied. Undismayed, however, by all those
obstacles, he called together his general officers, and with-
out asking their opinions, communicated to. them his intention of
attempting next morning to force his pafage over the river, and to
attack the enemy wherever he could come up with them. They
all expressed their aftonilhment at such a bold resolution, and even
the Duke of Alva, though naturally daring and impetuous, and
Maurice of Saxony, notwithitanding his impatience to crush his
rival the Elecor, remonstrated earnestly against it. But the Empe-
ror, confiding in his own judgment or good fortune, paid no regard
to their arguments, and gave the orders necessary for executing his
design.

EARLY in the morning, a body of Spanifli and Italian foot
marched towards the river, and began an inceflant, fire upon

the
BOOK IX.

1547.
138

EMPEROR CHARLES V.

the enemy. The long heavy mulkets itsed in that age, did exe- BOOK IX.
cution on the opposite bank, and many of the soldiers, hur- 547.
ried on by a martial ardor ih order to get nearer the enemy,
rulhed into the stream, and advancing breast high, fired with a
more certain aim, and with greater effec. Under cover of their
fire, abridge of boats was begun to be laid for the infantry; and
a peasant having undertaken to condut the cavalry through
the river by a ford with which he was well acquainted, they
also were put in motion. The Saxons ported in Muhlberg
endeavoured to obftrut there operations, by a brilk fire from
a battery, which they had erected: but as a thick fog co-
vered all the low grounds upon the river, they could not take
aim with any certainty, and the Imperialists suffered very little;
at the fame time the Saxons being mach galled by the Spa-
niards and Italians, they set on fire Come boats which had
been collected near the village, and prepared to retire. The
Imperialists perceiving this; ten Spanish soldiers instantly stript
themselves, and holding their swords with their teeth, swam accors
the river, put to flight such of the Saxons as ventured to oppose
them, Caved from the flames as many boats as were sufficient to
complete their own bridge, and by this spirited and filccefsful
ation, encouraged their companions no less than they intimidat-
ed the enemy.

BY this time, the cavalry, each trooper having a foot soldier

behind him, began to enter the river, the light horse marching
in the front, followed by the men at arms, whom the Emperor
led in person, mounted on a Spanifl horse, dressed in a sump-
tuous habit, and carrying a javelin in his hand. Such a nu.
merous body struggling through a great river, in which accord-

T z ing

BOOK IX.

1547.

II1 condu&t of
the Eletor.

ing to the directions of their guide they were obliged to make
several turns, sometimes treading on a firm bottom, sometimes
swimming, presented to their corfpanions, whom they left be-
hind, a fpetacle equally magnificent and intereftingd. Their
courage, at last, surmounted every obstacle, no man betraying
any symptom of fear, when the Emperor ihared in the danger
no less than the meanest soldier. The moment that they reached
the opposite fide, Charles, without waiting the arrival of the reft
of the infantry, advanced towards the Saxons with the troops
which had passed along with him, who flushed with their good
fortune, and despising an enemy who had neglected to oppose them,
when it might have been done with such advantage, made no ac-
count of their superior numbers, and marched on as to a cer-
tain victory.

DURING o all there operations, which neceflarily consumed

much time, .the Elector remained inactive in his. camp; and
from an infatuation which appears, to be so amazing, that
the best informed historians impute it to the treacherous arts
of his generals, who deceived him by false intelligence, he
would not believe that the Emperor had palsed the river or
could be so near at hand e. Being convinced, at last, of his
fatal mistake, by the concurring testimony of eye witnefles,
he gave orders for retreating towards Wittemberg. But a
German army encumbered, as usual, with baggage and artil-
lery, could not be put suddenly in motion. They had scarce
begun to march when the light troops of the enemy came in
view, and the Elector saw an engagement to be unavoidable.

d Avila, 115. a.
t Camerar. ap. Freher. ili. 493. Struv. corp.hlilt. Germ. 1047, 1049.

As

V
140

As he was no less bold in action than irresolute in council, ie
made the difpofitibn for battle with the,greateft pretence of
mind, and in the most proper manner, taking advantage of a
great forest to cover his 'wings, so as to prevent his being fir-
rounded by the enemies cavalry which were far more numerous
than his own. The Emperor, likewise, ranged his men in order
as they came up, and riding along the ranks, exhorted them with
few but efficacious words to do their duty. It was with a very
different spirit tlat the two armies advanced to the charge. As
the day, which had hitherto been dark and cloudy, happened to
clear up at that moment, this accidental circumstance made an
impreflion on the different parties corresponding to the tone of
their minds; the Saxons, furprized and disheartened, felt pain at
being exposed fully to the view of the enemy; the Imperialifis,
being now secure that the Protestant. forces could not escape from
them, rejoiced at the return of funfluine, as a certain presage of
vitory. The shock of battle would not have been long or doubt-
ful, if the personal courage which the Eletor displayed, together
with the activity which he exerted from the moment that the ap-
proach of the enemy rendered an engagement certain, and cut off
lall poflibility of hesitation, had not revived in Come degree the
spirit of his troops. They repulsed the Hungarian light horse who
began the attack, and received with firmness the men at arms
who next advanced to the charge; but as there were the flower of
the Imperial army, were commanded by experienced officers, and
fought under the Emperor's eye, the Saxons soon began to give
way, and the light troops iallying at the fame time and falling on
their flanks, the flight became general. A small body of chosen
boldiers, among whom the Eletor had fought in person, fill con-
tinued to defend themnfelves, and endeavoured to save their matter

by

BOOK IX.

'547.

Battie of
Mulhaufen.

The EleCtor
defeated, :inIl
taken pri-
soner

141

BOOK IX.

1547.

His h.irnl
reception by
the Emperor.

by retiring into the forest; but being surrounded on every fide,
the Eleator, wounded in the face, exhausted with fatigue, and
perceiving all resistance to be vain, surrendered himself a pri-
soner. He was conducted immediately towards the Emperor,
whom he found just returned from the pursuit, flanding on the
field of battle in the full exultation of success, and receiving the
congratulations of his officers, upon this compleat victory ob-
tained by his valour and condut. Even in such an unfortunate
and humbling situation, the Elector's behaviour was equally
magnanimous and decent. Sensible of his condition, he ap-
proached his conqueror without any of the sullenness or pride,
which would have been improper in a captive; and conscious of
his own dignity, he descended to no mean fubmiflion, unbecom-
ing the high station which he held among the German Princes.
" The fortune of war, said he, has made me your prisoner,
most gracious Emperor,, and I hope to be treated"-- Here,
Charles harshly interrupted him. " And am I then, at last,
acknowledged to be Emperor; Charles of Ghent was the only
title you lately allowed me. You shall be treated as you de-
serve." At there words, he turned from him abruptly, with an
haughty air. To this cruel repulse, the King of the Romans
added reproaches in his own name, using expreflions still more
ungenerous and insulting. The Elecior made no reply; but,
with an unaltered countenance, which discovered neither astonish-
ment nor dejection, accompanied the Spanifl soldiers appointed to
guard him f.

f Sleld. hifd. 426. Thuan. 136. Hortcnfius de Bello German. ap. Scard.

vol. ii. 498. Defcript. pugnae Mulberg. ibid. p. 509. P. -Ieuter. Rer.
Auflr. lib. xii. c. 13. p. 298.

THIS

THIS decisive vitory cost the Imperialifis only fifty men.

Twelve hundred of the Saxons were killed, chiefly in the pur-'
suit, and a greater number taken prisoners. About four hundred
kept in a body, and escaped to Wittemberg, together with the
eletoral Ptince, who had likewise been wounded in the ation.
After refting two days on the field of battle, partly to refresh
his army, and partly to receive the deputies of the adjacent towns,
which were impatient to secure his protection by submitting to
his will, the Emperor began to move towards Wittemberg, that
lie might terminate the war at once, by the reduction of that city.
The unfortunate Elector was carried along in. a fort of triumph,
and exposed every where, as a captive, to his own fubjeds - a
fpedtacle extremely affli&ing to them who both honoured ind.loved
him; though the insult was .o far from fitbduing his firm spirit,
that it did not. even ruffle the wonted tranquillity and composure
of his mind.

As Wittemberg,. the' residence, in that age, of the eletoral

branch of the Saxon family, was one of the ifrongeft cities in
Germany,. and could not be taken, if properly defended, without
great difficulty, the Emperor marched thither with the utmost
dispatch, hoping that while the conifternation occasioned by his
vitory was frill recent, the inhabitants might imitate the ex-
ample of their countrymen, and submit to his power, as Toon
as he appeared before their walls. But Sybilla of Cleves the
Eletor's wife, a woman no less diftinguilhed by her abilities
than her virtue, instead of abandoning herself to tears and la-
mentation upon her hulband's misfortune, endeavoured, by her
example as well as exhortations, to animate the citizens; and ile

inspirecd

BOOK IX.

1547.

Charles's pro-
grcs altcer his
vitfory.

nlvefts Wit-
te mberg.

143

BooK IX. inspired them with such resolution, that, when summoned to

5+7^ surrender, they returned a vigorous answer, warning the Empe-

ror to behave towards their sovereign with the refped due to his
rank, as they were determined to treat Albert of Brandenburg,
who was till a prisoner, precisely in the fame manner that he
treated him. The spirit of the inhabitants no less than the
strength of the city seemed now to render a siege in form ne-
ceffary. After such a signal victory it would have been dif-
graceful not to have undertaken it, though at the fame time the
Emperor. was destitute of every thing requisite for carrying it
on. But Maurice removed all difficulties, by engaging to fur-
nilh provisions, artillery, ammunition, poineers, and whatever
else should be needed. Trusting to this, Charles gave orders
to open the trenches before the town. It quickly appeared,
that Maurice's eagerness to reduce the capital of those dominions,
which he expe&ted as his reward for taking arms against his
kinsman, and deserting the Protestant cause, had led him to
promise what exceeded his power to perform. A battering train
was, indeed, carried safely down the Elbe from Dresden to
Wittemberg; but as Maurice had not sufficient force to preserve
a secure communication between his territories, and the camp
of the besiegers, Count Mansfeldt, who commanded a body of?
electoral troops, destroyed a convoy of provisions and military
tfores, and dispersed a band of pioneers destined for the ser-
vice of the Imperialists. This put a stop to the prcgrefs of the
siege, and convinced the Emperor that as he could not rely on
Maurice's promises, recourse ought to be had to some more expe-
ditious as well as more certain method of getting poffefion of the
town.

THE
144

THE unfortunate Eletor was in his hands, and he was un-

generous and hard-hearted enough to take advantage of this, in
order to make an experiment whether he might not bring about
his design, by working upon the tenderners of a wife for her
husband, or upon the piety of children towards their parent.
With this view, he summoned Sybilla a second time to open the
gates, letting her know that if {he again rfuifed to comply, the
Eledor should answer with his head for her obstinacy. To con-
vince her that this was not any empty threat, he brought his
prisoner to an immediate trial. The proceedings against him
were as irregular, as the stratagem was barbarous. Instead of
consulting the states of the Empire, or remitting the cause to
any court, which according to the German conflitution might
have legally taken cognizance of the Eleator's crime, he fiub-
je&ed the greatest Prince in the Empire to the jurifdidion of a
court-martial compored of Spanish and Italian officers, and in
which the unrelenting Duke of Alva, a fit infflument for any
a& of violence, presided. This strange tribunal founded its
charge upon the ban of the Empire which had been issued against
the prisoner, a sentence pronounced by the fole..authority of
the Emperor, and destitute of every legal formality which could
render it valid; but presuming him to be thereby manifestly
convi&ted of treafor and rebellion, the court-martial condemned
him to susser death by being beheaded. This decree was inti-
mated to the Ele&tor while amusing himself in playing at Chefs
with Ernest of Brunswick his fellow-prifoner. He paused for
a. moment, though without discovering any symptom either of
furprize or terror; and after taking notice of the irregularity
as well as injustice of the Emperor's proceedings : " It is easy,
continued he, to comprehend his scheme. I must die, because

VOL. III. U Wittemberg

BOOK IX.

S547.

The Emnpe-
ror's ungene-
rous trent-
ment of the
ElcAor.

May to.

The Eledoor's
ltagnaniiltiy.

I45

BOOK IX.

'547.

The difrefs
of his family.

Wittemberg will not surrender; and I flall lay down my life
with pleasure, if, by that sacrifice, I can preserve the dignity of
my house, and transmit to my posterity the inheritance which
belongs to them. Would to God, that this sentence may not
affect my wife and children more than it intimidates me ! and
that they, for the fake of adding a few days to a life already too
long, may not renounce honours and territories which they were
born to poflefs s." He then turned to his antagonist, whom he
challenged to continue the game. He played with his usual at-
tention and ingenuity, and having beat Ernest, exprefled all the
fatisfaftion which is commonly felt on gaining such victories.
After this he withdrew to his own apartment, that he might em-
ploy the reft of his time in such religious exercises as were proper
in his situation h.

IT was not with the fame indifference, or composure, that the

account of the Eletor's danger was received in Wittemberg.
Sybilla, who had supported with such undaunted fortitude her
husband's misfortunes, while she imagined that they could reach
no farther than to diminish his power or territories, felt all her re-
solution fail the moment his life was threatened. Sollicitous to
save that, (he despised every other consideration; and was wil-
ling to make any sacrifice, in order to appease an incensed con-
queror. At the fame time, the Duke of Cleves, the Eletor of
Brandenburg, and Maurice, to none of whom Charles had com-
municated the true motives of his violent proceeding againfl:
the Elecor, interceded warmly with him to spare his life; The
first was prompted to do so merely by companion for his sifter,

h Struvii corpus oo50.

and
.46

9 'I'bull kD. i. 1 42.

and regard for his brother-in-law. The other two dreaded the
universal reproach that they would incur, if, after having boasted
so often of the ample security which the Emperor had promised
them with refpe& to their religion, the first effet of their union
with him should be the public execution of a Prince, who was
justly held in reverence as the most zealous protecor of the Protef-
tant cause. Maurice, in particular, foresaw that he muff become
the object of detestation to the Saxons, and could never hope to
govern them with tranquillity, if he were confidered by them as
acceflary to the death of his nearest kinsman, in order that he might
obtain pofeflion of his dominions.

WHILE they, from such various motives, follicited Charles,

with the most earnest importunity, not to execute the sentence ,
Sybilla, and the reft of the Eletor's family, conjured him by let-
ters as well as messengers to scruple at no concessions that would
extricate him out of the present danger, and deliver them from
their fears and anguish on his account. The Emperor, perceiving
that the expedient which he had tried began to produce the effect
he intended, fell by degrees from his former rigour, and allowed
himself to soften into promises of clemency and forgiveness, if
the Elector would shew himself worthy of his favour by sub-
mitting to reasonable terms. The Eletor, on whom the confide-
ration of what he might susser himself had made no impreflion,
was melted by the tears of a wife whom he loved, and could not
resist the intreaties of his family. In compliance with their
repeated follicitations, he agreed to articles of aacommodation,
which he would otherwise have rejected with disdain. The
chief of them were, that he should resign the Electoral dignity,
as well for himself, as for his posterity, into the Emperor's

U 2 hands,

Book IX.

1547.

His treaty
wvilli Charles,
by \4hich he
surrenders the
Eletoratce
May 19.

147

BOOK IX.

1547.

and remains
a prisoner.

Maurice put
in poffeflion
of the Eltcto-
ral dominionr.

hands, to be disposed of entirely at his pleafute that he should
instantly put the Imperial troops in poffeflion of the cities of
Wittemberg and Gotha; that he flould set Albert of Branden-
burg at liberty without ransom; that he flould submit to the
decrees of the Imperial chamber, and acquiesce in whatever refor-
mation the Emperor should make in the constitution of that
court; that he should renounce all leagues against the Emperor
or King of the Romans, and enter into no alliance for the future,
in which they were not comprehended. In return for there
important concessions, the Emperor not only promired to spare his
life, but to fettle on him and his posterity the city of Gotha and
its territories, together with an annual pension of fifty thousand
florins, payable out of the revenues of the electorate; and like-
wife to grant him a Tum in ready money to be applied towards the
discharge of his debts. Even these articles of grace were clogged
with the mortifying condition of his remaining the Emperor's
prisoner during the reft of his life . To the whole, Charles had
subjoined, that he should submit to the decrees of the Pope and
council with regard to the controverted points in religion, but the
Eleator, though he had been persuaded to sacrifice all the objects
which men commonly hold to be the dearest and most valuable,
was inflexible with regard to this point; and neither threats nor in-
treaties could prevail to make him renounce what he deemed to
be truth, or persuade him to aft in opposition to the dictates of his
conscience.

As soon as the Saxon garrison marched out of Wittemberg,

the Emperor fulfilled his engagements to Maurice; and in re-
ward for his merit in having deserted the Protestant cause, and

i Skid. 427. Thual,. i. 142. Du Mont Corp Diplo.n. iv. p. 11, 332.

having
148

149

having contributed with such fucccfs towards the diflolution of
the Smalkaldic league, he gave him poffeflion of that city, toge-
ther with all the other towns in the electorate. It was not without
reluctance, however, that lie made such a flcrifice; the extraor-
dinary success of his arms had begun to operate, in its ufilal man-
ner, upon his ambitious mind, suggesting new and vast projeAs
for the aggrandizement of his. family, towards the accompliflh
ment of which the retaining of Saxony would have been of the
utmost consequence. But as this scheme was not then ripe for
execution, he durst not yet venture to disclose it nor would it
have been either safe or prudent to have offended Maurice, at that
juncture, by such a manifest violation of all the promires, which
had reduced him to abandon his natural allies.

THE Landgrave, Maurice's father-in-law, was still in arms;

and though now left alone to maintain the Protestant cause, was
neither a feeble nor contemptible enemy. His dominions were
of considerable extent; his fubjets animated with zeal for the
Reformation; and if he could have held the Imperialists at bay
for a short time, he had much to hope from a party whose
strength was still unbroken, whose union as well as vigour might
return, and which had teafon to depend, with certainty, on being
effectually supported by the King of France. The Landgrave
thought not of any thing To bold or adventurous; but being
seized with the fame consternation which had taken poffeflion of
his aflciates, lie was intent, only, how to procure favourable
terms from the Emperor, whom hie viewed as a conqueror, to
whose will there was a ncceflity of submitting. Maurice encou-
raged this tame and pacific fpirir, by magnifying, on the one
hard, the Emperor's power; by boafling, on the other, of

his

BOOK IX.

1547.

Ncg ciationu
with the
Landlgravc.

148

BOOK IX. hands, to be disposed of entirely at his pleasure; that he should
'`V`J instantly put the Imperial troops in poffefnion of the cities of

1547. Wittemberg and Gotha; that he flould set Albert of Branden-

burg at liberty without ransom; that he should submit to the
decrees of the Imperial chamber, and acquiesce in whatever refor-
mation the Emperor flould make in the constitution of that
court; that he should renounce all leagues against the Emperor
or King of the Romans, and enter into no alliance for the future,
in which they were not. comprehended. In return for these
important conceflions, the Emperor not only promised to spare his
life, but to fettle on him and his posterity the city of Gotha and
its territories, together with an annual pension of fifty thousand
flonns, payable out of the revenues of the electorate; and like-
wife to grant him a fum in ready money to be applied towards the

and remains discharge of his debts. Even these articles of grace were clogged
a prisoner. with the mortifying condition of his remaining the Emperor's

prisoner during the reft of his life i. To the whole, Charles had
subjoined, that he should submit to the decrees of the Pope and
council with regard to the controverted points in religion; but the
EleEor, though he had been persuaded to sacrifice all the objects
which men commonly hold to be the dearest and most valuable,
was inflexible with regard to this point; and neither threats nor in-
treaties could prevail to make him renounce what he deemed to
be truth, or perfuadt him to aA in opposition to the dictates of his
conscience.

Maurice put As soon as the Saxon garrison marched out of Wittemberg,
in poflefnlon the Emperor fulfilled his engagements to Maurice; and in re-
of the El¢to-
raldominionr. ward for his merit in having deserted the Protestant cause, and

i Skid. 427. Thuan. i. 142. Du Mont Corp Diplo,n. iv. p. 1I, 33..

having

having contributed with such fulcccfs towards the dissolution of
the Smalkaldic league, he gave him poffeflion of that city, toge-
ther with all the other towns in the eletorate. It was not without
reluctance, however, that he made such a sacrifice; the extraor-
dinary success of his arms had begun to operate, in its usual man-
ner, upon his ambitious mind, suggesting new and vast projects
for the aggrandizement of his family, towards the accomplish-
ment of which the retaining of Saxony would have been of the
utmost consequence. But as this scheme was not then ripe for
execution, he durst not yet venture to disclose it nor would it
have been either safe or prudent to have offended Maurice, at that
juncture, by such a manifest violation of all the promises, which
had reduced him to abandon his natural allies.

THE Landgrave, Maurice's father-in-law, was still in arms;

and though now left alone to maintain the Protestant cause, was
neither a feeble nor contemptible enemy. His dominions were
of considerable extent; his fubjedts animated with zeal for the
Reformation; and if he could have held the Imperialists at bay
for a flort time, lie had much to hope from a party whose
strength was frill unbroken, whose union as well as vigour might
return, and which had teafon to depend, with certainty, on being
effectually supported by the King of France. The Landgrave
thought not of any thing so bold or adventurous; but being
seized with the fame consternation which had taken poffeflion of
his associates, he was intent, only, how to procure favourable
terms from the Emperor, whom lie viewed as a conqueror, to
whose will there was a necefity of submitting. Maurice encou-
raged this tame and pacific spirit, by magnifying, on the one
hand, the Emperor's power; by boaffing, on the other, of

his

BOOK IX.

3547.

Ncgociationis
withi the
Landsgravc.

149

BooK IX.

'547.

The cordi-
tions prefcrib-
ed by the Em-
peror.

his own interest with his victorious ally; and by representing the
advantageous conditions which he could not fail of obtaining by
his interceflion for a friend, whom he was To follicitous to save.
Sometimes, the Landgrave was induced to place such unbounded
confidence in his promires, that he was impatient to bring matters
to a final accommodation. On other occasions, the Emperor's
exorbitant ambition, refrained neither by the scruples of decency,
nor the maxims of justice, together with the recent and (hocking
proof which he had given of this in the cruel and oppreflive
treatment of the Elector of Saxony, came so full into his thoughts,
and made filch a lively impreflion on them, that he broke off
abruptly the negociations which he had begun; seeming to be con-
vinced that it was more prudent to depend for safety on his own
arms, than to confide in Charles's generosity. But this bold refolu-
tion, which despair had suggested to an impatient spirit, fretted by
disappointments, was not of long continuance. Upon a more de-
liberate survey of the enemies power, and his own weakness, his
doubts and fears returned upon him, and together with them the
spirit of negociating, and the desire of accommodation.

MAURICE, and the Elector of Brandenburg, aCted as media-

tors between him and the Emperor; and after all that the former
had vaunted of his influence, the conditions prescribed to the Land-
grave were extremely rigorous. The articles with regard to his
renouncing the league of Smalkalde, acknowledging the Empe-
ror's authority, and submitting to the decrees of the Imperial
chamber, were the fame which had been imposed on the EleCtor
of Saxony. Betides theie, he was required to surrender his
person and territories to the Emperor; to implore for pardon on
his knees; to pay an hundred and fifty thousand crowns towards

defraying
15o

defiaying the expences of the war; to demolish the fortifications
of all the towns in his dominions except one; to oblige the gar-
rifon which lie placed in it to take an oath of fidelity to the Em-
peror; to allow a free palage through his territories to the Impe-
rial troops as often as it Ihall be demanded ;, to deliver up all his
artillery and ammunition to the Emperor ; to set at liberty, with-
out ransom, Henry of Brunswick, together with the other prisoners
he had taken during the war; and neither to take arms himself,
for the future, nor to permit any of his fubjets^,to serve againfl
the Emperor or his allies k.

THE Landgrave ratified there articles, though with the utmofl

reluctance, as they contained no stipulation with regard to the
manner in which he was to be treated, and left him entirely at
the Empetor's mercy. Necellity, however, compelled him to
give his assent. Charles, who had assumed the haughty and im-
perious tone of a conqueror, ever since the reduction of Saxony,
insisted on an unconditional fubmiflion, and would permit nothing
to be added to the terms which he had prescribed, that could
in any degree limit the fulness of his power,, or restrain him
from behaving as he saw meet towards a Prinlce wllonlm h
regarded as absolutely at his disposal. But though he would
hot vouchsafe to negociate with the Landgrave, on such a foot-
ing of equality, as to susser any article to be inserted among
those which he had dicated to him, that could be confidered as
a formal stipulation for the security and freedom of his person )
he, or his ministers in his name, gave the Eletor of Bran-
denburgh and Maurice fuich full satisfaction with regard to this
point, that they aflured the Lanldgrave that Charles wotld behave

4 i'~k Skid. 433. Thuan. . iv. 146.

to

BooK IX.

'547.

To which hs
fubnits.

15i

BOOK IX.

'547.

He repairs to
the Imperial
court.

to him in the fame way that he had done to the Duke of Wurtem-
berg, and would allow him, as soon as he had made his fubmifllon,
to return to his own territories. Upon finding the Landgrave
to be fill poffefred with his former suspicions of the Emperor's
intentions, and unwilling to trust verbal or ambiguous declara-
tions, in a matter of such efiential concern as his own liberty,
they sent him a bond signed by them both, containing the most
solemn obligations, that if any violence whatsoever were offered to
his person, during his interview with the Emperor, they would in-
ftantly surrender themselves to his sons, and remain in their hands
to be treated by them in the fame manner as the Emperor flould
treat him I.

THIS, tcgether with the indispensable obligation of perform-

ing what was contained in the articles of which he had accepted,
removed his doubts and scruples, or made it neceflary to get
over them. He repaired, for that purpose, to the Imperial camp
at Hall .in Saxony, where a circumstance occurred which revived
his suspicions and increased his fears. Just as he was about to
enter the chamber ofprefence, in order to make his public sub-
millon to the Emperor, a copy of the articles which he had ap-
proved of was put into his hands, in order that he might ratify
them anew. Upon perusing them, he perceived that the Imperial
ministers had added two new articles; one importing, that if any
dispute 'hould arise' concerning the meaning of the former con-
ditions, the Emperor should have the right of putting what inter-
pretation upon them he thought most reasonable; the other,
that the Landgrave was bound to rubmit implicitly to the deci-
sions of the council of Trent. This unworthy artifice, calculated

I Du Mont Corps Diplom. iv. p. 1, 336.

to
52z

to furprize him into an approbation of articles, to which lie had BOOK IX.
not the most distant idea of aflenting, by presenting them to him

1547.

at a time when his mind was engrossed and disquieted with the
thoughts of that humbling ceremony which he had to perform, filled
the Landgrave with indignation, and made him fly out into all those
violent expreflious of rage to which his temper was prone. With
some difficulty, the Eletor of Brandenburg and Maurice prevailed
at length on the Emperor's ministers to drop the former article as
unjust, and to explain the latter in such a manner, that he could
agree to it, without openly renouncing the Protestant religion.

THIS obstacle being surmounted, the Landgrave was impatient The manner
to finish a ceremony which, how mortifying soever, had been in which the

Emperor re-

declared necessary towards his obtaining pardon. The Emperor ceived him
was feated on a magnificent throne, with all the ensigns of his
dignity, surrounded by a numerous train of the Princes of the
,Empire, among whom was Henry of Brunswick, lately the
Landgrave's prisoner, and now, by a sudden reverse of fortune,
a fpedator of his humiliation. The Landgrave. was introduced
with great solemnity, and advancing towards the throne, fell
upon his knees. His chancellor, who walked behind hin,
immediately read, by his master's command, a paper which coln-
tained an humble confeflion of the crime whereof lie had been
guilty; an acknowledgment that he had merited on that account
the most severe punishment; an absolute resignation of himself
and his dominions to be disposed of at the Emperor's pleasure;
a submissive petition for pardon, his hopes of which were founded
entirely on the Emperor's clemency and it concluded, with pro-
mises of behaving, for the future, like a fiubjet, whose principles
of loyalty and obedience would be confirmed, and would even
derive new force from the sentiments of gratitude which mufl

VOL. III. X hereafter

4
4

153

hereafter fill and animate his heart. While the chancellor was
reading this abject declaration, the eyes of all the fpedators were
fixed on the unfortunate Landgrave; few could behold a Prince, so
powerful as well as high-fprited, suing for mercy in the posture of
a supplicant, without being touched with commiseration, and per-
ceiving serious reflections arise in their minds upon the instability and
emptiness of human grandeur. The Emperor viewed the whole
tranfation with an haughty unfeeling composure; and preserving a
profound silence himself, made a sign to one of his secretaries to
read his answer; the tenor of which was, That tho' he might have
justly inflicted on him the grievous punishment which his crimes de-
terved, yet, prompted by his own generosity, moved by the follici-
tations of several Princes in behalf of the Landgrave, and influenced
by his penitental acknowledgments, he would not deal with him ac-
cording to the rigour ofjuftice, and would fubje t him to no penalty
which was not specified in the articles that he had already subscribed.
The moment the secretary had finished, Charles turned away ab-,
ruptly without deigning to give the unhappy supplicant any sign of
compaflion or reconcilement. He did not even desire him to rife from
his knees; which the Landgrave having ventured to do unbidden,
advanced towards the Emperor with an intention to kifs his hand,
flattering himself, that his guilt being now fully expiated, he
might presume to take that liberty. But the.Elector of Bran-
denburg perceiving that this familiarity would be offensive to the
Emperor interposed, and desired the Landgrave to go along with
him andMaurice to the Duke of Alva's apartments in the castle.

He was received and entertained by that nobleman with the

refpeft and courtesy due to such a guest. But, after supper,
while he was engaged in play, the Duke took the Elector and
Maurice aside, and communicated to them the Emperor's orders

that

154
BOOK IX.

1547.

that the Landgrave must remain a prisoner in that place under the BOOK IX.
custody of a Spanish guard. As they had not hitherto entertained 5 7.
the most distant suspicion of the Emperor's finceity and recitude Hle is dclain-

cd'a prisoner.

ofintention, their furprize was exceflive, and their indignation not pri
inferior to it, on discovering how greatly they had been deceived
themselves, and ho* infamously abused in having been made the in-
ftruments of deceiving and ruining their friend. They had recourse
to complaints, to arguments and to intreaties, in order to Cave them-
selves from that disgrace, and to extricate him out of the wretched
situation into which he had been betrayed by too great confidence
in them. But the Duke of Alva remained inflexible, and pleaded the
neceflity of executing the Emperor's commands. By this time it
grew late, and the Landgrave, who knew nothing of what had passed,
nor dreaded the snare in which he was entangled, prepared for de-
parting, when the fatal orders were intimated to him. He was
struck dumb at first with astonishment, but after being silent a
few moments, he broke out into all the violent expreflions, which
horror at injustice accompanied with fraud naturally suggests. He
complained, heexpoftulated, he exclaimed; Sometimes inveighing
against the Emperor'sartifices as unworthy of a great and generous
Prince; sometimes censuring the credulity of his friends in trusting
to Charles's insidious promises; sometimes charging them with
meanness in stooping to lend their aflitance towards the execution
of such a, perfidious and dishonourable scheme; and in the end lie
required therm to remember their engagements to his children, and
instantly to fulfil them. They, after giving way for a little to the
torrent of his paflion, solemnly asserted their own innocence and up-
right intention in the whole tranfa&ion, and encouraged him to hope,
that as soon as they saw the Emperor, they would obtain redress
of an injury, which affected their own honour, no less than it did

* X a his

155

BOOK IX.

1547.

The Eleaor
of Branden-
burg and
Maurice folli-
cit in vain for
his liberty.

his liberty. At the fame time, in order to tooth his rage and impa-
tience, Maurice remained with him during this night, in the apart-
ment where he was confined m.

NuxT morning, the Elector and Maurice applied jointly

to the Emperor, representing the infamy to which they would
be exposed throughout Germany, if the Landgrave were de-
tained in custody ; that they would not have advised, nor would
he himself have consented to an interview, if they had fufpeted
that the loss of his liberty was to be the consequence of his
submission; that they were bound to procure his release, hav-
ing plighted their faith to that effect, and engaged their own
persons as sureties for his. Charles listened to their earnest
remonstrances with the utmost coolness. He now flood no
longer in need of their services, and they had the mortification
to find that their former obsequiousness was forgotten, and
little regard paid to their interceflion. He was ignqrant, he
told them, of their particular or private tranfations with the
Landgrave, nor was his conduct to be regulated by there;
though he knew well what he himself had promised, which
was not that the Landgrave (hould be exempt from all restraint,
but that he should not be kept a prisoner during life *. Having
said this with a peremptory and decisive tone, he put an end to

the

m Sleid. 433. Thuan. I. iv 137. Struv. corp. nift. Gernt ii. o152.
? According to several historians of great name, the Emperor, in his treaty

with the Landgrave, tfipulated that he would not detain him in any prison. But
inexecutingthe deed, which was written in the German tongue, theImperial
ministers fraudulently fubltituted the wordowiger instead of eintger, and thus the
treaty in place of a promise that he flould not be detained in any prison, con-
tained only an engagement that he should not be detained in perpetual imprison-

0 ~ ment.

the conference and they feeing no probability, at that time, of
making any imprefion upon the Emperor, who seemed to have
taken his resolution deliberately, and to be obstinately bent on
adhering to it, were obliged to acquaint the unfortunate prisoner
with the ill success of their endeavours in his behalf. This difiap-
pointment threw hlim into a new and more violent transport of
rage, so that to prevent his proceeding to rome desperate extremity,
the Eledor and Maurice promised that they would not quit the
Emperor, until, by the frequency and fervour of their importu-
nity, they had extorted his content to set him free. They ac-
cordingly renewed their follicitations a few days afterwards, but
found Charles more haughty and intractable than before, and were
warned that if they touched again upon a fubjest to disagreeable,
and with regard to which he had determined to hear nothing far-
ther, he would instantly give orders to convey the prisoner into
Spain. Afraid of hurting the Landgrave by an officious or ill-
timed zeal to serve him, they not only desisted, but left the court,
and as they did not chute to meet the first sallies of the Land-
grave's rage upon his learning the cause of their departure, they
informed him of it by a letter, wherein they exhorted him to
fulfil all that he had promired t6 the Emperor, as the most certain
means of procuring a speedy release.

men'. But authors eminent for hiltorical knowledge and critical accuracy have
called in queflion the truth of this common flory. The filcnce of Sleidan
with regard to it, as Well as its not being mentioned in the various memorials
which he has publiflecd concerning the LIandgrave's imprisonment, greatly favour
this opinion. But as several books which contain the information necessary to-
wards difcufling this point, with accuracy, are written in the German language,
which I do not understand, I cannot pretend to inquire into this matter with
the fame accuracy, with which 1 have endeavoured to fettle some other con-
troverted sacs that have occurred in the course of this history. See Struv. Corp.
1052. Mofieim's Ecclcf. Hit. vol. ii. p. 16r, 162. Engl. Edition.

WHATEVER.

BOOK IX.

*S47.
1

157

BOOK IX.

1547.

His impa-
tience under
reflraint.

The rigour of
the Emperor's
exadions in
Germany.

WHATEVER violent emotions their abandoning his cause in this

manner occasioned, his impatience to recover liberty made him
follow their advice. He paid the fum which had been imposed on
him, ordered his fortresses to be razed, and renounced all alli-
ances that could give offence. This prompt compliance with the
will of the conqueror produced no effect. He was still guarded
with the fame vigilant severity and being carried about, together
with the degraded Elector of Saxony, wherever the Emperor went,
their disgrace and his triumph was each day renewed. The for-
titude and equanimity, with which the Elector bore these repeated
insults, were not more remarkable than the Landgrave's fretful-
ness and impatience. His active impetuous mind could ill brook
restraint; and reflection upon the (hameful artifices by which he
had been decoyed into that situation, as well as indignation at
the injustice with which he was still detained in it, drove him
often to the wildelt excesses of passion.

T HE people of the different cities, to whom Charles

thus wantonly exposed there illustrious prisoners as a pub-
lic fpetacle, were sensibly touched with such an insult offered
to the Germanic body, and murmured loudly at this indecent
treatment of two of its greatest Princes. They had soon other
causes of complaint, and such as affected them more nearly.
Charles proceeded to add oppreflion to insult, and arrogating
to himself all the rights of a conqueror, exercised them
with the utmost rigour. He ordered his troops to seize the
artillery and military stores belonging to such as had been mem-
bers of the Smalkaldic league, and having collected upwards of
five hundred pieces of cannon, a great number in that age, he
Cent part of them into the Low-Countries, part into Italy, and

part
X58

part into Spain, in order to spread by this means the fame of his
success, and that they might serve as monuments of his having
fibdued a nation, hitherto deemed invincible. He then levied,
by his sole authority, large fums as well upon those who had served
him with fidelity during the war, as upon fucll as had been in
arms against him , upon tile former, as their contingent towards a
war, which having been undertaken, as he pretended, for the
common benefit, ought to be carried on at the common charge;
upon the latter, as a fine by way of puniflment for their re-
bellion. By there exactions he amassed above one million fix hun-
dred thousand crowns, a fum which appeared prodigious in the
sixteenth century. But Co general was the consternation which
lhad seized the Germans upon his rapid success, and such their
dread of his victorious troops, that all implicitly obeyed his com-
mands though, at the fame time, these extraordinary stretches
of power greatly alarmed a people, jealous of their privileges,
and habituated during several ages to confider the Imperial autho-
rity as neither extensive nor formidable. This discontent and
resentment, how indlifttioufly soever they concealed them, be-
came universal; and the more these passions were reflrained and
kept down for the present, the more likely were they to burst out
Toon with additional violence.

WHILE Charles gave law to the Germans like a conquered peo-

pie, Ferdinand treated his filbjets in Bohemia with till greater
rigour. That kingdom possessed privileges and immunities as ex-
tensive as those of any nation in which the feudal institutions were
established. Tle prerogative of their Kings was extremely li-
mited, and the crown itself elective. Ferdinapd, when placed on
the throne, had confirmed their liberties with every solemnity
prcfcribed by their exceflive follicitude for the security of a con-

flitution

BooK IX.

'547.

1?crl inn rid's
encronci-
mnents on the
Iiberiies oo his
Bohemian
fubjets.

z59

fiitution of government to which they were extremely attached.
He soon began, however, to be weary of a jurisdiction To much
circumscribed, and to despise a sceptre which he could not tranf-
mit to his posterity; and notwithstanding all his former engage-
ments, he attempted to overturn the constitution from its foun-
dations; that instead of an elective kingdom he might render
it hereditary. But the Bohemians seemed resolved not to relin-
quifh, tamely, privileges which they had long enjoyed. At the
fame time, many of them having embraced the doctrines of the
Reformers, the feeds of which John Huss and Jerome of Prague
had planted in their country about the beginning of the preceding
century, the desire of acquiring religious liberty mingled itself
with their zeal for their civil rights; and there two kindred passions
heightening, as usual, each other's force, precipitated them im-
mediately into violent measures. They had not only refuted to
serve their Covereign against the confederates of Smalkalde, but
having entered into a close alliance with the Ele&tor of Saxony,
they bound themselves, by a Colemn afrociation, to defend their
ancient constitution; and to persist, until they should obtain
'such additional grants as they thought necessary towards per-
feating the present model of their government, or rendering it
more permanent. They chore Cafiar Phlug, a nobleman of diT-
tin&ion, to be their general; and levied an army of thirty thou-
Tand men to enforce their petitions. But either from the weakness
ot their leader, or from the difenfions in a great unweildy body,
which, having united hastily, was not thoroughly compated, or
from rome other uiknown cause, the subsequent operations of the
Bohemians bore no proportion to the zeal and ardour with which
they took their fits resolutions. They suffered themselves to
be amused to long with negociations and overtures of different

kinds,
BOOK IX.

1547.
I6o

kinds, that before they could enter Saxony, the battle of Muhl-
herg was fought; the Elector deprived of his dignity and terri-
tories, the Landgrave confined to close custody, and the league
of Smalkalde entirely diflipated. The fame diead of the Empe-
ror's power which had seized the reft of the Germans, reached
them. As soon as their sovereign approached with a body of
Imperial troops, they inifantly dispersed, thinking of nothing but
how to attone for their past guilt, and to acquire some hope of
forgiveness, by a prompt ftlbminion. But Ferdinand, who entered
his dominions full of that implacable resentment which inflames
Monarchs whose authority has been despised, was not to be molli-
sied by the late repentance and involuntary return of rebellious
fubjets to their duty. He even heard, unmoved, the intreaties
and tears .of the citizens of Prague, who appeared before him in
the posture of suppliants, and implored for mercy. The sentence
which he pronounced against them was rigorous to extremity ; he
abolished many of their privileges, he abridged others, and new
modelled the constitution according to his pleasure. He punilhed
many of those who had been moRs active in forming the late affo-
ciation against him with death, and still a greater number with
confiscation of their goods, or perpetual banilhment. He obliged
all his fubjets, of every condition, to give up their arms to be
deposited in forts where he planted garrisons; and after disarm-
ing his people, he loaded them with new and exorbitant taxes.
Thus, by an ill conducted and unsuccessful effort to extend their
privileges, the Bohemians not only enlarged the sphere of the
royal prerogative which they inteneed to have circumscribed, but
they almost annihilated those liberties which they aimed at efta-
blifhing on a broader and more secure foundation n.

Sleid. 408,419, 434. Thun. I. iv. 129, 150. Struv. Corp. ii.
VOL. 1. Y THE

BooK IX.

1547.

i6t

BOOK IX.

1547.

Diet held at
Auglburg.

The IEmperor
exhorts theni
to submit to
the General
Council.

TH E Emperor, having now humbled, and, as he imagined,

subdued the independant and stubborn spirit of the Germans by
the terror of arms and the rigour of punishment, held a diet
at Augsburg, in order to compose finally the controversies with
regard to religion, which had so long disturbed the Empire. He
durst not, however, trust the determination of a matter so inte-
refting to.the free suffrage of the Germans, broken as their minds
now were to fubjedion. He entered the city at the head of
his Spanish troops, and assigned them quarters there. The reft
of his soldiers he cantoned in the adjacent villages; so that the
members of the diet, while they carried on their deliberations,
were surrounded by the fame army which had overcome their
countrymen. Immediately after his public entry, Charles gave
a proof of the violence with which he intended to proceed. He
took possession by force of the cathedral together with one of the
principal churches ; and his priests having, by various ceremonies,
purified them from the pollution with which they supposed the
unhallowed ministrations of the Protestants to have defiled them,
they re-established with great pomp the rites of the Romifl
worship 0.

TH E concourse of members to this diet was extraordinary;

the importance of the affairs concerning which it was to delibe-
rate, and the fear of giving offence to the Emperor by an ab-
fence which lay open to mifconftrudion, brought together almost
all the Princes, nobles, and representatives of cities who had right
to fit in that assembly. The Emperor, in the speech with which
lie opened the meeting, called their attention immediately to
that point, which seemed chiefly to merit it. Having men-

o Sleid. 435, 437.

tioned
I62

tioned the fatal effects of the religious distensions which lad arilen
in Germany, and taken notice of his own unwearied endeavours
to procure a general council, which alone could provide a remedy
adequate to there evils, he exhorted them to recognize its autho-
rity, and to stand to the award of an assembly, to which they
had originally appealed, as having the sole right of judgment in
the cafe.

BUT the council, to which Charles wished them to refer

all their controversies, had, by this time, undergone a violent
change. Tie fear and jealousy, with which the Emperor's first
successes against the confederates of Smalkalde had inspired the
Pope, continued to encreafe. Not satisfied with attempting to
retard the progress of the Imperial arms, by the sudden recal of
his troops, Paul began to confider the Emperor as an enemy,
the weight of whose power he must soon feel, and against
whom he could not be too hasty in taking precautions. He
foresaw that the immediate effect of tle Emperor's acquiring
absolute power in Germany, would be to render him entirely
master of all the decisions of the council, if it flould continue
to meet in Trent. It was dangerous to allow a Monarch, fb
ambitious, to get the command of this formidable engine, which
he might employ at pleasure to limit or overturn the Papal
authority. As the only method of preventing this, he deter..
mined to translate the council to some city more immediately
under his own jurifdidtion, and at a greater distance from the
terror of the Emperor's arms, or the reach of his influence. An
incident fortunately occurred which gave this measure the ap-
pearance of being necessary. One or two of the fathers of the
council, together with tome of their dometfics, happening to

Y 2 die

BOOK. IX.

15.7.

Various lcvo-
lutions in Ihe
council.

163

BOOK IX.

1547.

March i.
Translated
from Trent
to Bologna.

Symptoms of
cdifgul be-
tween the
Pope and
Em ipeivrr.

die suddenly, the physicians, deceived by the symptoms, or
suborned by the Pope's legates, pronounced the distemper to be
infectious and pestilential. Some of the prelates, struck with a
panic, retired; others were impatient to be gone; and after a
short consultation, the council was translated to Bologna, a city
subjec to the Pope. All the bishops in the Imperial interefR,
warmly opposed this resolution, as taken without neceflity, and
founded on false or frivolous pretexts. All the Spanilh prelates,
'and most of the Neapolitan, by the Emperor's express command,
remained at Trent; the reft, to the number of thirty-four, ac-
companying the legates to Bologna. Thus a schism commenced,
in that very aflembly, which had been called to heal the divisions
of Christendom; the fathers of Bologna inveighing against those
who staid at Trent, as contumacious and regardless of the Pope's
authority; while the other accused them of being so far inti-
midated by the fears of imaginary danger, as to remove to a place
where their consultations could prove of no service towards re-
eftablhihing peace and order in Germany P.

THE Emperor, at the fame time, employed all his interest to

procure the return of the council to Trent. But Paul, who
highly applauded his own sagacity in having taken a ftep
which put it out of Charles's power to acquire the direcion of
that assembly, paid no regard to a request, the object of which
was so extremely obvious. The summer was consumed in fruit-
less negociations with refpeat to this point, the importunity of
the one and the obitinacy of the other daily increasing. At last an
event happened which widened the breach irreparably, and ren-
dered the Pope utterly averse from listening to any proposal that

p F. Paul, 248, &c.

came
164

came from the Emperor. Charles, as has been already observed,
had so violently exasperated Peter Lewis Farnese, the Pope's son,
by refusing to grant him the investiture of Parma and Placentia,
that he had watched ever since that time with all the vigilance of
resentment for an opportunity of revengi;g that injury. Fle had
endeavoured to precipitate his father into open hostilities againfl
the Emperor, and had earnestly follicited the King of France to
invade Italy. His hatred and resentment extended to all those
whom he knew that the Emperor favoured; he persecuted Gon-
zaga, governor of Milan, with ill'offices, and had encouraged
Fiefco in his attempt upon the life of Andrew Doria, because both
Gonzaga and Doria pofleffed a great degree of the Emperor's
esteem and confidence. His malevolence and secret intrigues were
not unknown to the Emperor, who could not be more desirous
to take vengeance on him, than Gonzaga and Doria were to be
employed as his instruments in inflicting it. Farnese, by the
profligacy of his life, and by enormities of every kind, equal
to those committed by the worst tyrants who have disgraced
human nature, had rendered himself so odious, that they
thought any violence whatever might be attempted againfl him.
They soon found among his own fubjeCs, persons who were
cager, and even deemed it meritorious to lend their hands in
such a service. As he, animated with the jealousy which
ufially pofleffes petty sovereigns, had employed all the cruelty
and fraud, whereby they endeavour to flipply their defed of
power, in order to humble and extirpate the nobility subjed
to his government, five noblemen of the greatcie diflintion in
Placentia, combined to avenge the injuries, which they them-
selves had suffered, as well as those which lie had offered to
their order. They formed their plan in conjunction with Gon-
zaga ; but it remains uncertain whether he originally fuggefled

the

BOOK IX.

1547.

'The aflflaina.
tion of the
l'ope's foil

165

BOOK IX.

'547.

S-pt. to.

The Imperial
troops take
poflefion of
Placentia.

the fecheme to them, or only approved of what they proposed,
and co-operated in carrying it on. They concerted all the pre-
vious ifeps with such foresight, condufted their intrigues with such
secrecy, and displayed such coniitg.: in the execution of their de-
sign, that it may be ranked among the most audacious deeds
of that nature mentioned in history. One body of the confpi-
rators furprized, at mid-day, the gates of the citadel of Pla-
centia where Farnese resided, overpowered his guards, and mur-
dered him. Another party of them made themselves matters of
the town, and called upon their fellow-citizens to take arms, in
order to reaflume their liberty. The multitude ran towards the
citadel, from which three great guns, a signal concerted with
Gonzaga, had been firedi and before they could guess the
cause or the authors of the tumult, they saw the lifeless body
of the tyrant hanging by the heels from one of the windows
of the citadel. But so universally detestable had he become,
that not one expressed any sentiment of concern at such a fad
reverse of fortune, or of indignation at this ignominious treat-
ment of a sovereign Prince. The exultation at the fuiccefs of
the conspiracy was general, and all applauded the acors in it,
as the deliverers of their country. The body was tumbled into
the ditch that surrounded the citadel, and exposed to the insults
of the rabble; the reft of the citizens returned to their usual oc-
cupations, as if nothing extraordinary had happened.

BEFORE next morning, a body of troops arriving fiom the

frontiers of the Milanese, where they had been posted in expec-
tation of the event, took poffeflion of the city in the Emperor's
name, and reintRated the inhabitants in the ponfeflion of their
ancient privileges. Parma, which the Imperialists attempted

likewise
166

likewise to futprize, was saved by the vigilance and fidelity of the
officers whom Farnese lhad intrufled with the command of the gar-
rifon. The death of a foil whom, notwithfRanding his infamous
vices, Paul loved with an excess of parental tenderness, over-
whelmed him with the deepest affliction; and the loss of a city,
of filch consequence as Placentia, greatly embittered his sorrow.
H-c accused Gonzaga, in open consistory, of having committcd
a cruel murder in order to prepare the way for an unjust ufTur-
pation, and immediately demanded of the Emperor fatisfation
for both i for the former, by the puniflhment of Gonzaga ; for the
latter, by the restitution of Placentia to his grandson Odavio, its
fightful owner. . But Charles, who, rather tlan quit a prize of filch
value, was willing to expose himself to the imputation of being
accefalry to the clime which had giveu an opportunity of seizing
it, and to bear the infamy of defrauding his own fon-in-law of
the .inheritance, which belonged to him,. eluded all his follicita-
tions, and determined to keep poffellion of the city together with
its territories q.

THIS rCfpiitiol, flowing from an ambition fq rapacious, as

to be restrained by, no consideration eitler qs: decency or juflice,
transported thle Pope so far beyond his usual moderation and cau-
tion, that he was eager to take arms against tile Emperor in order
to be avenged on tl)h murderers of his son, and to recover the
inheritance wrelted frol .his family. Conscious, however, of
Ilii own inability to c9nte1nd svith fLuch an enemy, he warinly
Ibllicited the French l ing and the republick of Venice to join
in an offensive league against Charles. But Henry was intent at

BooK IX.

5 47.

The Pope
courts the nl-
liance of the
Pi ench King
anid the Vc-
nectlans.

q F. Paul. 257. Pallavic. 41, 42. 'Thuan. iv. 156. Mcm.dc Ribier. 59, 67.
N.at.lis Comitis Fliltr. lil. iii. p. 64.

that

167

BooK IX.

'547.

The diet of
Auglburg pe-
t:tions for the
return of the
council to
Trent.

that time on other objects. His ancient allies the Scots; having
been defeated by the Englilh in one of the greatest battles ever
fought between these two rival nations, he was about to fend a
numerous body of veteran troops into that country, as well to
preserve it from being conquered, as to gain the acquisition of a
new kingdom to the French monarchy, by marrying his son
the Dauphin to the young Queen of Scotland. An undertaking
accompanied with such manifest advantages, the success of which
appeared to be so certain, was not to be relinquilied for the re-
mote profpec of benefit from an alliance depending upon the pre-
carious life of a Pope of fourscore, who had nothing at heart but
the gratification of his own private resentment. InQead,, therefore,
of rushing headlong into the alliance proposed, Henry amused the
Pope with such general profeflions and promires, as might keep him
from any thoughts of endeavouring to accommodate his diffe-
rences with the Emperor, but at the fame time avoided any such
engagement as might occasion an immediate rupture between
Charles and himself, or precipitate him into a war for which he
was not prepared. The Venetians, though much alarmed at feeing
Placentia in the hands of the Imperialists, imitated the wary con-
du& of the French King, which resembled so nearly the spirit with
which they themselves usually carry on their negociationsr.

BUT, though the Pope found that it was not in his power to

light up immediately the flames of war, he did not forget the
injuries, which he was obliged for the present to endure,
resentment fettled deeper in his mind, and became more ranco-
rous in proportion as he felt the difficulty of gratifying it. It

r Mem. de Ribier. ii. 63, 71, 78, 85, 95. Paruta Iflor. di Venez. 199, 203.
T'huan. iv. 160.

was,
168

was, while these sentiments of enmity were in fill force, and
the desire of vengeance at its height, that the diet of Augsburg,
by tle Emperor's command, petitioned the Pope, in name of the
whole Germanic body, to enjoin the prelates who had retired to
Bologna, to return again to Trent, and to renew their delibera-
tions in that place. Charles had been at great pains in bringing
the members to join in this request. Having ob(erved a confi-
derable variety of sentiments among the Protestants with rcfpec
to the fubmiflion which lie had required to the decrees of the
council, some of them being altogether intratable, while
others were ready to acknowledge its right of jurifdidion
upon certain conditions, lie employed all his address in order
to gain or to divide them. He threatened and over-awed the
Elector Palatine, a weak Prince, and obnoxious to vengeance
on account of the afliftance which he had given to the confe-
derates of Smalkalde. The hope of procuring liberty for the
Landgrave, together with the formal confirmation of his own
electoral dignity, overcame Maurice's scruples, or prevented
him from opposing what lie knew would be agreeable to the
Emperor. The EleAor of Brandenburgh, less influenced by
religious zeal than any Prince of that age, was easily induced
to imitate their example in afenting to all that the Enipcror
required. The deputies of the cities remained frill to be brought
over; they were more tenacious of their principles, and though
every thing that could operate either on their hopes or fears was
tried, the utnoft that they would promise was to acknowledge
the jurifdition of the council, if effeatual provision were made
for securing the divines of all parties free access to that assembly,
with entire liberty of debate; and if all points in controversy
were decided according to scripture and the usage of the primi-

VOL. III. Z tive

BoOK IX.

'547
.

i69

tive church. But when the memorial containing this declaration
was presented to the Emperor, he ventured to put in practice a
very extraordinary artifice. Without reading the paper, or tak-
ing any notice of the conditions on which they had insisted, he
seemed to take it for granted that they had complied with his de-
mand, and gave thanks to the deputies for their full and unreferv-
ed fubmiflion to the decrees of the council. The deputies, though
astonished at what they had heard, did not attempt to set him right,
both parties being better pleased that the matter should remain
under this state of ambiguity, than to push for an explanation,
which must have occasioned a dispute, and would have led, per-
haps, to a rupture '

HAVINc obtained this teeming fubmifnion of the diet to the

authority of the council, Charles employed that as an argument
to enforce their petition for its return to Trent. But the Pope,
from the fatisfadtion of mortifying the Emperor, as well as
from his own aversion to what was demanded, resolved, without
hesitation, that this petition should be rejeted : though in order
to avoid the imputation of being influenced wholly by resent-
nent, he had the address to throw it upon the fathers at Bologna,
to put a direct negative upon the request. He referred to their
consideration the petition of the diet, and they, ready to con-
firm by their assent whatever the legates were pleased to dictate,
declared that the council could not, in confifence with its dig-
nity, return to Trent, unless the prelates who, by remaining
there, had discovered a fchifmatick spirit, would first repair to
Bologna, and join their brethren, and that, even after their
iunAtion, the council could not renew its consultations with any

X F. Paul, 259. Sleid. 440. Thuan. tom. i. 155.

profpet
BOOK IX.

1547-

Oa. z9.

The Pope
eludes the
demand.

Dec. 20.
57O

profpet of benefit to the church, if the Germans did not prove BOOK IX.
their intention of obeying its future decrees to be sincere, by S47.
yielding immediate obedience to those which it had already
past '.

Tans answer was communicated to the Emperor by the The Emperor

protefte

Pope, who at the fame time exhorted him to comply with againf the
demands that appeared to be so reasonable. But Charles was coucl ofg
better acquainted with the duplicity of the Pope's character than
to be deceived by such a gross artifice ; he knew that the prelates
of Bologna durst utter no Sentiment but what Paul infpiyed and,
therefore, overlooking them as mere instruments in the hand of
another, he confidered their reply as a full discovery of the
Pope's intentions. As he could no longer hope to acquire
such an ascendant in the council as to render it subservient to
his own plan, he saw it to be neceflary that Paul should not have
it in his power to turn against him the authority of so venerable
an assembly. In order to prevent this, he sent two Spanifl J$48.
lawyers to Bologna, who, in the presence of the legates, pro- January.
tested, That the translation of the copncil to that place had been
unn.ecefary, and founded. on false or frivolous pretexts;, that
while it continued to meet there, it ought to be deemed an
unlawful and fchifinatical conventicle ;. that all its decisions ought
of course to be held as null and invalid; and that as the Pope,
together with the corrupt ecclefiartics who depended on him, had.
abandoned the care of the church, the Emperor, as its protec.
tor would employ all the power which God had committed to
him in order to preserve it from thee calamities with which it
was threatened. A few days after, the Imperial ambassador at Jan. 23.

SS. Paul, zao. Pallav. ii. 49.

Z z Rome

Al.'

BOOK IX.

1548.

The Emperor
prepares a
fyllem, to
serve as the
rule of faith
in Germany

Rome demanded an audience of the Pope, and in presence of
all the Cardinals as well as foreign ministers, protested against the
proceedings of the prelates at Bologna, in terms equally harsh and
difrefpeatful ".

IT was not long before Charles proceeded to carry these

threats, which greatly alarmed both the Pope and council at
Bologna, into execution. He let the diet know the ill fuccefi
of his endeavours to procure a favourable answer to their peti-
tion, and that the Pope, equally regardless of their entreaties,
and of his services to the chutch, had refused to gratify them by
allowing the council to meet again at Trent; that, though all
hope of holding this afembly in a place, where they might look
for freedom of debate and judgment, was not to be given up,
the profpeEt of it was, at present, distant and uncertain; that, in
the mean time, Germany was torn in pieces by religious diflen-
sions, the purity of the faith corrupted, and the minds of the
people disquieted with a multiplicity of new opinions and con-
troverfies formerly unknown among Christians; that, moved by
the duty which he owed to them as their sovereign, and to the
Church as its protecor, he had employed rome divines, of known
abilities and learning, to prepare a system of doctrine, to which
all fiSould conform until a council, such as they wished for,
could be convocated. This fyltem was compiled by Pflug,
Helding and Agricola, of whom the two former were dignita-
ries in the Romifl church, but remarkable for tlhir pacific and
healing spirit; the last was a protestant divine, fuifpeted, not
without reason, of having been gained by bribes and promises,
to betray or mislead his party on this occasion. The articles

F. Paul, z64. Pallay. 5. Sleid. 446. Goldafti Conftit Imperial. i. 56r.

presented
Itm

prefcnted to the diet of Ratisbon in the year one thousand five
hundred and forty-one, in order to reconcile the contending par-
ties, served as a model for the present work. But as the Emperor's
situation was'much changed since that time, and he found it no
longer necessary to manage the Protestants with the fame delicacy
as at that juncure, the conceflions.in their favour were not now so
numerous, nor did 'they extend to points of so much confequencc,
The treatise contained a compleat system of theology, conformable
in almost every article to the tenets of the Romilh church, though
exprefled, for the most part, in the softest words, or in scriptural
phrases, or in terms of a studied ambiguity. Every dotrine,
Jiowever, peculiar to Popery, was retained; and all the rites,
which the Protestants condemned as inventions of men introduced
into the worship of God, were enjoined. With regard to two points
only, some relaxation of their rigour was granted, and some
latitude in practice admitted. Such ecclesiastics as had married,
and would not put away their wives, were allowed, nevertheless,
to perform all-det functions of their sacred office; and those pro-
vinces, which had been accustomed to partake of the cup, as well
as the bread in the sacrament of the Lord's Supper, were still in-
dulled the privilege of receiving botlh. Even these were declared
to be conceflions for the fake of peace, and granted only for a sea-
son, in compliance with the weakness or prejudices of their country-
men X.

THIS system of doctrine, known afterwards by the name of the
Interin, because it contained temporary regulations which were

x F. Paul, 270. Pallav. ii. 60. Slcid. 453, 457. Struv. Corp. 0xo4.
Goldaft. Contit. Imper. i. 5 8.

173
BOOK IX.

1548.

This, whlich
was called (ie
Interid, lie
lays belorc
the diet.
May S.
to

BOOK IX.

3548..

and extorts
their appro-
bation of it.

New and
fruitless folli-
citations for
the Land-
rave's
liberty.

THE REIGN OF THE

to continue no longer in force than until a free general council
could be held, the Emperor presented to the diet with a pompous
declaration of his sincere intention to re-eftablilh tranquillity and
order in the church, as well as of his hopes that their adopting
there regulations would contribute greatly to bring about that
desirable event. It was read, in pretence, according to form.
As soon as it was finished the archbishop of Mentz, president
of the electoral college, rose up hastily, and having thanked the
Emperor for his unwearied and pious endeavours in order to re.
fore peace to the church, he, in the name of the diet, signified their
approbation of the system of doctrine which he had prepared, to.
gether with their resolution of conforming to it in every particu-
lar. The whole aflembly was amazed at a declaration so unpre-
cedented and unconstitutional, as well as at the Elecor's prefump-
tion in pretending to deliver the sense of the diet, upon a point,
which had not hitherto been the subjed of consultation or debate.
But not one member had the courage to contradit what the
Elector had said; some being overawed by fear, others remaining
silent through complaisance. The Emperor held the archbilhop's
declaration to be a full constitutional ratification of the Interim,
and prepared to enforce the observance of it, as a decree of the
Empire r.

DURING this diet, the wife and children of the Landgrave,

warmly seconded by Maurice of Saxony, endeavoured to in-
tercft the members in behalf of that unhappy Prince, who
fill languished in confinement. -But Charles, who did not
chufe to be brought under the neceflity of rejecting any request
that came from fitch a refpe6table body, in order to prevent their
representations, laid before the diet an account of his tranfac-
tions with the Landgrave, together with the motives which had

y Sleid. 460. F. Paul. 273. Pallav. 63.

at

at firtl induced him to detain that Prince in custody, and which
Tendered it prudent, as he alledged, to keep him still under re.
ftraint. It was no easy matter to give any good reason for an ac-
tion, incapable of being jiftified. But he thought the most frivo-
lous pretexts might be produced in an aflembly 'willing to be de-
ceivedi and afraid of notling so much as to discover that it saw
:his conduct in its true colours. His account of his own condut
was accordingly admitted to be fully fatisfaaory, and after
tome feeble intreaties that lie would extend his clemency to his
unfortunate prisoner, the Landgrave's concerns were no more
mentioned '.

1r order to counterbalance die unfavourable impreflion which

this inflexible rigour might leave in their minds, Charles, as a
proof that his ingratitude was no less permanent and unchangeable
/ than his resentment, inveRted Maurice, in the eletoral dignity,

with all the legal formalities. The ceremony was performed, with
extraordinary pomp, in an open court, so near the apartment in
which thedegraded Elector was kept a prisoner, that he could view
it from his windows. Even this insult did not ruffle his usual tran-
quillity; and turning his eyes that way, he beheld a prosperous ri-
val receiving those ensigns of dignity of which he had been Rripped,
without uttering one sentiment unbecoming the fortitude whicli he
had preserved amidst all his calamities *.

IMMEDIATELY after the dibiolution of the diet, the Emperor

ordered the Interim to be published in the German as well as
Latin language It met with the ufial reception ofconciliating

The Interin
equally dif-
approved of
by Proteflants
and Papists.

z Sleid. 44r. a Thuan. Hilf. lib. v. 176. Str'uv. Corp. 1054.
Invcfitura Mauritii a Mammerano Lucemburgo defcrlpta ap. Scardium ii. 508.

schemes

BooK IX.

1548.

*75

schemes when proposed to men heated with difputatlon;, both
parties declaimed against it with equal violence. The Protestants
condemned it as a f) item containing the grossest errors of Popery,
disguised with so little art, that it could impose only on the most
ignorant, or on those who by wilfully ihutting their eyes
favoured the deception. The Papists inveighed against it, as a
work, in which some doctrines of the church were impiously
given up, others meanly concealed, and all of them delivered
in terms calculated rather to deceive the unwary, than to instruct
the ignorant, or to reclaim those who were enemies to the truth.
While the Lutheran divines fiercely attacked it, on one hand,
the. general of the Dominicans with no less vehemence impugned
it, on the other. But at Rome, as fooi as the contents of the
Interim came to be known, the indignation of the courtiers and
ecclesiastics rose to the greatest height. They exclaimed against
the Emperor's profane encroachment on the sacerdotal function,
in presuming, with the concurrence of an anfembly of laymen,
to define articles of faith, and to regulate modes of worship,
They compared this rash deed to that of Uzzah, who, with an
unhallowed hand, had touched the ark of God; or to the bold at-
tempts of those Emperors, who had rendered their memory dcter-
table, by endeavouring to model the Christian church according
to their pleasure. They even asseted to find out a resemblance
between the Emperor's conduct and that of Henry VIII. and ex-
prefled their fear of his imitating the example of that Monarch, by
usurping the title as well as jurifdidion belonging to the hea'd of
the church. All, therefore, contended, with one voice, that as
the foundations of ecclesiastical authority were now ibaken, and
the whole fabric ready to be overturned by a new enemy some
powerful method of defence must be provided, and a vigorous

resistance
BOOK IX.

I548.
176

refifance must be made, at the beginning, before he grew too
formidable to be opposed.

THE Pope, whoe judgment was improved by longer expe-

rience in great transactions, as well as by a more extensive obler-
vation of human affairs, viewed the matter with more accutedif-
cernment, and derived comfort from the very circumstance
which filled them with apprehension. He was aflonifhed that a
Prince of such superior sagacity as the Emperor should be so in-
toxicated with a tingle vitory, as to imagine that he might give
law tomankind, and decide even in those matters, with regard
to which they are most impatient of dominion. He saw that, by
joining any one of the contending parties in Germany, Charles
might have had it in his power to have opprelfed the other, but
that the presumption of success had now inspired him with the
vain thought of his being able to domineer over both ; he foretold
that a system, which all attacked, and none defended, could not
be of long duration; and that, for this reason, there was no
need of his interposing in order to haften its fall for as soon as
the powerful hand which now upheld it was withdrawn, it
would fink of its own accord, and be forgotten for ever '.

THI Emperor, fond of his own plan, adhered to his refolu-

tion of carrying it into full execution. But though the Eletor
Palatine, the EleEtor of Branden'burg, and Maurice, influenced
by the fame considerations as formerly, seemed ready to yield
implicit obedience to whatever he should enjoin, he met not
every where with a like obsequious fubmiflion. John Marquis
of Brandenburg Anfpach, although he had taken part with

BOOK IX'

1548.

The senti-
mnnts of the
1'opc with
cegard to it.

The Emperor
enforces com-
pliance with
the Interim.

b Sleid. 468. F.Paul, 271, 277. Pallav. ii. 64.
Vol,. Ill.

'77
Aa

great

great zeal in the war againf the condfederates of Smalkalde, re-
fused to renounce doctrines which he held to be sacred, and
reminding the Emperor of the repeated promises which he had
given his Protestant allies of allowing them the free exercise of
their religion, he claimed, in consequence of these, to be ex-
empted from receiving the Interim. Some other Princes, also,
ventured to mention the fame scruples, and to plead the fame
indulgence. But on this, as on other trying occasions, the
firmness of the Eleftor of Saxony wasmoft diftinguifled, and
merited the highest praise. Charles, well knowing the authority
of his example with all the protestant party, laboured, with
the utmost earnestness, to gain his approbation of the Interim,
and by. employing sometimes promises of setting him at liberty,
Cometimes threats of treating him with greater harshness, at-
tempted alternately to work upon his hopes and fears. But he
was, alike, regardless of both. After having declared his fixed
belief in the doctrines of the reformation, " I cannot now, said
he, in my old age, abandon the principals, for which I early
contended; nor, in order to procure freedom during a few de-
clining years, will I betray that good cause, on account of
which I have fuffered.fo much, and am still willing to susser.
Better for me to enjoy, in this solitude, the esteem of virtuous
men, together with the approbation of my own con:science, than
to return into the world, with the imputation and guilt of
apofiacy, to disgrace and embitter the remainder of my days."
By this magnanimous resolution, he set his countrymen a pat-
tern of conduct, so very different from that which the Em-
peror wifled him to have exhibited to them, that it drew upon
him fresh marks of his indignation. The rigour of his con-
finement was increased; the number of his servants abridged;

the
BOOK IX.

(so.
178

the Lutheran clergymen who had hitherto been permitted to at-
tend him, were dismissed; and even the books of devotion,
which had been his chief consolation during a tedious imprilbn-
ment, were taken from himc. The Landgrave of Hess, his
companion in misfortune, did not maintain the fame conflancy.
His patience and fortitude wereboth so much exhausted by the
length of his confinement, that willing to purchase freedom at
any price, he wrote to the Emperor, offering not only to ape
prove of the interim, but to yield an unreserved fubmiflion to
his will in every other particular. But Charles who knew,
that what course soever the Landgrave might hold, neither his
example nor authority would prevail on his children or fubjets
to receive the Interim, paid no regard to his offers. He was
kept confined as ftridly as ever; and while he suffered the
cruel mortification of having his conduct (et in contrast to that
of the Elector, he derived not the smallest benefit from the
mean ftep which exposed him to such deserved censured.

BUT it was in the Imperial cities that Charles met with the

most violent oppositions to the Interim. These finall common-
wealths, the citizens of which were accustomed to liberty and
independence, had embraced the doctrines of the Reformation
when first published with remarkable eagerncfs; the bold spirit
of innovation being peculiarly suited to the genius of free go-
vernment. Among them, the Protestant teachers had made the
greatest number of proselytes. The most eminent divines of
the party were fettled there as pastors. By having the direction
of the schools and other seminaries of learning, they had trained
up disciples as well inftruded in the articles of their faith, as

c Sleid. 46i. di Sleid. 462.

BOOK IX.

1548.

The freecitct
firuggle
againlt rc-
ceiving the
Interiail.

179
Aa 2

. alolus

BOOK IX.

1548.

Compelled
by violence
to fubnmit.
Aug. 3.

zealous to defend them. Such persons were not to be guided
by example, or swayed by authority, but having been taught
to examine and decide in matters of controversy, thought
that they were both qualified and entitled to judge for them-
selves. As Coon as the contents of the Interim were known,
they with one voice, joined in refuting to admit it. Strafburgh,
Constance, Bremen, Magdeburgh, together with many other
towns of less note, presented remonstrances to the Emperor,
setting forth the irregular and unconstitutional manner in which
the Interim had been enacted, and beseeching him not to offer
such violence to their consciences, as to require their assent to
a form of doftrine and worship, which appeared to them
repugnant to the express precepts of the divine law. But
Charles, having prevailed on so many Princes of the Empire
to approve of this new model, was not much moved by the re-
presentations of there cities, which how formidable soever they
might have proved if they could have been formed into one
body, lay so remote from each other, that it was easy to op-
press them separately, before it was pollible for them to unite.

I N order to accomplish this, the Emperor saw it to be requisite

that his measures (hould be vigorous, and executed with such ra-
pidity as to allow no time for concerting any common plan of
opposition. Having laid down this maxim as the rule of his
proceedings, Iis first attempt was upon the city of Augsburg,
which, though overawed by the presence of the Spanifi troops,
he knew to be as much dissatisfied with the Interim as any in
the Empire. He ordered one body of there troops to seize the
gates ; he possed the reft in different quarters of the city; and
assembling all the burgelics in the town, he, by his sole ab-

solute
180

solute authority, publifled a decree abolifling their present BOOK IX.
form of government, dissolving all their corporations and fra- .
ternities, and nominating a small number of peffons, in whom
he vested for the future the right of administration. Each of
the persons, thus chosen, took an oath to observe the Interim.
An act of power, so unprecedented as well as arbitrary, which
excluded the body of the inhabitants from any flare in the
government of their own community, and fubjedted them to
men who had no other merit than their servile devotion to the
Emperor's will, gave general disgust; but as they durst not
venture upon resistance, they were obliged to submit in silence'.
From Augsburg, in which he left a garrison, lie proceeded to
Ulm, and new modelling its government with the fame violent
hand, he seized fluch of their pastors as refufied to subscribe the
Interim, committed them to prison, and at his departure carried
them along with him in chains . By this severity, lie not
only secured the receptibn of the Interim in two of the most
powerful cities, but gave warning to the reft what fich as con-
tinued refractory had to expect. The effed of the example
was as great as he could have withed, and many towns, in
order to save themselves from the like vengeance, found it ne-
ceffary to comply with what he enjoined. This obedience,
extorted by the rigour of authority, produced no (change in
the fcntiments of the Germans, and extended no farther than to
make them conform so far to the letter of the law, as was barely
fifficient to screen them from punifiment. Their preachers ac-
companied those ceremonies, the observation of which the Interim
prescribed, with such an explication of theirtendency, as served

Slcidl. 46. Sleid. 472.

rather

I?1

BOOK IX. rather to confirm than to remove the scruples of their hearers

8 with regard to them. The people, many of whom had grown

up to mature years since the eflabliflhnent of the reformed re-
ligion, and had been accutomed to no other form of publick
worship, beheld the potmpous pageantry of the popish service
with contempt or horror; and in mofd places the Romish eccle-
fitflicks who returned to take poffedion of their churches could
foarce be ptoteted from insult, or their ministration6 from in-
terruption. Thus, notwithstanding the apparent compliance
6f so many cities, the inhabitants being accustomed to freedom,
submitted with reluctance to the power which now opprefled
them. Their understanding as well as inclination revolted
against the do&rines and rites imposed on them; and though,
for the present, they concealed their indignation and resent.
ment, it was evident that these paflions could not always be
kept under restraint, but would break out at last in effets pro-
portional tO their violence .

The Pope CHARLES, meanwhile, highly pleased with having bended
difmifes the the flubborn spirit of the Germans to such general ftibmiflion,
Council as-
fembled at departed for the Low-Countries, fully determined to compel
Bologna. the cities, which till stood out, to receive the Interim. He

carried his two prisoners the Eleator of Saxony and Landgrave
of Hesse along with him, either because he durst not leave them
behind him in Germany, or because he wished to to give his
countrymen the Flemings this illustrious proof of the fuccfS of
his arms, and the extent of his power. Before Charles arrived
Sept. 17. at Brussels he was informed that the Pope's legates at Bologna

g Mem. de Ribier. ii. zl8. Slcid 491.

had
82z

had difmilTed the council by an indefinite prorogation, and that BooK IX.
the prelates assembled there had returned to their refpe-ive coun- 548
tries. Necellity h.d driven tile Pope into this meafiure. By the
feceflion of tliofe who had voted against the translation, together
with the departure of others, who grew weary of continuing in
aplace where they were not suffered to proceed to bufliefs, so
fev and such inconsiderable nembern s remained, that the porm
pous appeilation of a General Counci) could not, with decency
be beltowed any longer upon them. Paul had no choice but to
difflve an assembly which was become the object of contempt,
and exhibited to all Chlriftendom a most glaring proof of the im-
potence of the Romish fee. But unavoidable as the ileafure was,
it lay open to be unfavourably interpreted, and had the ip-
pearance of withdrawing the remedy at tile very time vhenr
those for whose recovery it was provided, .were preyaild
on to aqcnowledge its virtue, and ,to mnre :.trial of its efIe.
Charles did not fail to put this coo0ruti9n on his conduct;
and by an artful comparison of his ,own efobrtp to fuppxres
heresy, with Paul's :scandalous inatteption to a point fg9 ,Iential!
he endeavoured to render the Ppolpff odio0y to ,all zealous Ca-
tholicks. At tle fame tilpe, lie commanded the Prelates of his
faction to remgin at Trent, tllat the Council might /till appear to
have a being, and might be ready, whenever it .was thought
expedient, to ryefume .s deliberations for the .good of the
church h.

THr motive of Charles's journey to the LowCountries, The Emperor
besides gratifying his favourite paniion of travelling fromone foccnive Eis

son Philip in,
part of his dominions to another, was to receive Philip his the Low-

Countries.
h Pallav..p, 1i. 72.

only.

183

BOOK IX.

1548.

Novemb. z5.

Apl 49.
April i.

only son, who was now in the twenty-firft year of his age, and
whom he had called thither, not only that he might be re-
cognized by the States of the Netherlands as heir apparent, but
in order to facilitate the execution of a vast scheme, the ob-
je& of which, and the reception it met with, shall be here-
after explained. Philip, having left the government of Spain
to Maximilian, Ferdinand's eldest Con, to whom the Emperor
had given the Princess Mary his daughter in marriage, em-
barked for Italy attended by a numerous retinue of Spanish
nobles'. The squadron which escorted him, was commanded
by Andrew Doria, who, notwithstanding his advanced age,
insisted on the honour of performing, in person, the fame duty
to the son, which he had often discharged towards the father.
He landed safely at Genoa; from thence he went to Milan,
and proceeding through Germany, arrived at the Imperial court
in Brufels. The States of Brabant in the first place, and those
of the other provinces in their order, acknowledged his
right of fuccefion in common form, and he took the cufto-
mary oath to preserve all their privileges inviolate k. In all the
towns of the Low-Countries through which Philip palred he was
received with extraordinary pomp. Nothing that could express
the refpea of the people, or contribute to his amusement was ne-
gleded ; pageants, tournaments, and publick fpetacles of
every kind were exhibited with that expensive magnificence
which commercial nations display, when on any occasion, they
depart from their usual maxims of frugality. But amidst these
scenes of festivity and pleasure Philip's natural severity of tem-
per was discernible. Youth itself could not render him agreeable,
nor his being a candidate for power form him to courtesy. He

Ochoa, Carolea, 362.

k Hatai. annal. Brabant. 652.

maintained
i8+

maintained a haughty reserve in his behaviour, and discovered such
manifest partiality towards his Spanifl attendants, together with
such an avowed preference to the manners of their country, as
highly disgusted the Flemings, and gave rife to that antipathy,
which afterwards occasioned: a revolution so fatal to him in that
part of his dominions'.

CHARLES was long detained in the Netherlands by a violent at-

tack of the gout, which returned upon him so frequently, and
with such increasing violence,. that it had broken to a great degree
the vigour of his constitution. He, nevertheless, did not intermit
his endeavours, to enforce the Interim. The inhabitants of Straf-
bourg after a long struggle, found it neceflary to give obedience ;
those of Conflance, who had taken arms in their own defence, were
compelled by force not only to conform to the Interim, but to re-
nounce their privileges as a free city, to do homage to Ferdinand
as Archduke of Austria, and as his vafhals to admit an Aultrian go-
vernor and garrison m. Magdeburgh, Bremen, Hamburg, and
Lubeck were the only Imperial cities of note that Rill continued
refracory.

1 Me~n. de R ibier ii. 9g, L'Everqte Mhem. de Card. Orainvellc,. i. za"
m SWid. 474, 491.
VOL. Ir

BOOK IX.

1548.

i85

1 *..
B b

THE

# BOOK X.

THE
OF THE

I

OF T'HE
EMPEROR

CHARLES V.
3 0 O K

X.
'W H I L E Charles laboured, with such unwearied industry,

to overcome the obstinacy of the Protestants, 'te 'effets

of his fteddinefs in the execution of his plan were rendered
less considerable by his rupture with the Pope, which dgily
increased. The firm resolution which the Emperor seemed to
have taken against restoring Placentia, together with his re-
peated encroachments on the ecclesiastical jurifdidion, both by
the regulations contained in the Interim, and by his attempt to
re-assemble a council at Trent, exasperated Paul to the utmost,
who with the weakness incident to old age grew more attached

to
H

S

0

R

Y
R

E

G

N
BOOK X.

1 49.

The Pope's
(chemes a-
gainft the
Emperor.

to his family, and more jealous of his authority, as he advsnced
in' years. Pilthed on by there piflions,,lle made neiv efi)rts to
draw the French King into an alliance against the Emperor'.
But finding that Monarch, notwithflanding his hereditary en-
mity to Charles, and dread of his growing power, as unwilling
as formerly to involve hiinfelf in immediate hostilities, he was
'obliged to contra& his.views, and to think of preventing future
encroachments, since it was not in his power to inflit vengeance
on account of those which were part. For this purpose, he
determined to recall his grant of Parma and Placentia, and after
declaring them to be re-annexed to the Holy fee, to indeminify
OCtavio by a new establishment in the eccletiaftical state. By
this expedient, he hoped to gain two points of no finall con-
sequence; the security of Parma, first of all, as the Emperor
would be cautious of invading the patrimony of the church,
though he might seize without scruple a town belonging to
the house of Farnese; and in the next place, some chance of
recovering Placentia, as his follic'itations to that effetl might
decently be urged with greater importunity, and would infal-
libly be attended with more weight, when he was confidered
not as pleading the cause of his family, but as an advocate
for the interest of the church. But while Paul was priding
himself in this device, as a happy refinement in policy, Oc-
tavio an ambitious and high spirited young man, who could
not bear with patience to be spoiled of one half of his territories
by the rapacioufiiefs of his father-in-law, and to be deprived
of the other by the artifices of his grand father, took meaflires
in order to prevent the execution of a plan fatal to his in-

, Mem. de Ribier. ii. 230.

B b a tercft.

Boolt X
1549

8y7

Boo K X. terest. He set out secretly from Rome, and having first endeavour-

ed to furprize Parma, which attempt was frustrated by the fidelity
1549.

of the governor to whom the Pope had entrusted the defence of the
town, he made overtures to the Emperor of renouncing all connecti
on with the Pope, and depending entirely on him for his future
fortune. This unexpe~ ed defetion of one of the Pope's own fa-
mily to an enemy whom he hated, irritated, almost to madnefa,
a mind peevish with old age and there was no degree of severity
to which Paul might not have proceeded against a grandson whom
he reproached as an unnatural apostate. But happily for OCtavio,
death prevented his carrying into execution the harsh refolu-
tions which he had taken with refpet to him, and put an end
to his pontificate in the sixteenth year of his administration, and the
eighty second of his age*.

As

* Among many inflances of the credulity or weakness of hiflorians in attri-

buting the death of illuflrious personages to extraordinary causes, this is one.
Almost all the hitlorians of the sixteenth century affirm that the death of Paul
III. was occasioned by the violent paflions which the behaviour of his grandson
excited; that being informed while he was airing himself inone of his gardens
near Rome, of O&avio's attempt on Parma, as well as of his negociations with
theEmperor by means of Gonzaga, he fainted away, continued some hours in a
swoon, then fevered, and died within threedays. This is the account given of it by
Thuanus, lib. vi. 21r . Adriani Iftor. dt fuoi tempi, lib. vii. 480. and by Father
Paul, 280. Even cardinal Pallavicini, better informed than any writer with
regard to the events which happened in the papal court, and when not warped
by prejudice or system, more accurate in relating them, agrees with their nar-
rative in its chief circumflances. Pallav. h; ii. 74. Paruta, who wrote his
history by command of the senate of Venice, relates it in the fame manner.
Hiflories Venez. vol iv. 212. But there was no occasion to search for any ex-
traordinary cause to account for the death of an old man of eighty two. There
remains an authentick account of this event, in which we find none of those
marvellous circumstances of which the hiflorians are so fond. The cardinal

of
188

As this event had been long expeced, there was an extrao- BooK X..

dinary concourse of Cardinals at Rome; and the various corn-
petitors having had time to form their parties, and to concert
their measures, their ambition and. intrigues protracted the con-
clave to a great length. Tle Imperial and French facions
strove, with emulation, to promote one of their. own number,
and had, by turns, the prufpea of success. But as Paul during a.
long.Pontificate had raised many to the purple, and those chiefly
persons of eminent abilities as well as zealously devoted to his.
family,. Cardinal Farnese had the command of a powerful and;

of Ferrara, who was entrulted with the affairs of France at the Court of Rome,
and M. D'Urfe, Henry's ambassador in ordinary there, wrote an account to that
Monarch of the affair of Parma, and of the Pope's death. By there it appears,.
that Oaavio's attempt to furprize Paria was made on the twentieth of Oco-
ber; that next day in the evening, and not while he was airing himself in the
gardens of Monte-Cavallo, the Pope received intelligence of what he had done;
that he was seized with such a tranfport.of paflion and cried so bitterly that
his voice was heard in several apartments of the palace ; that next day, how-
ever, he was so well as to give an audience to the Cardinal of Ferrara, and to
go through bufiners of different kinds; that O&avio wrote a letter to the Pope,
not to Cardinal Farnese his brother, intimating his resolution of throwing him.
self into the arms of the Emperor ; that the Pope received this on the twenty.
first without any new symptoms of emotion, and returned an answer to it; that
on the twenty-fecond of O6ober, the day on which the Cardinal of Ferrara's
letter is dated, the Pope was in his usual ltate of health. Mem. de Ribier. ii.
247. By a letter of M. D'Urf6, Nov. 5. it appears that the Pope was in such
good health, that on the third of that month he had celebrated the anniversary
of his coronation with the usual folemnities. Ibidem 251. By another letter
from the fame person, we learn that on the sixth of November a catarrh or
defluxion fell down on the Pope's lungs, with such dangerous symptoms that
his life was immediately despaircd of, Ibid. 252. And by a third letter, we
are informed that he died November the tenth. In none of these letters is his
death imputed to any extraordinary cause. It appears, that more than twenty
days elapsed between Otavio's attempt on Parma and the death of his grand-
father, and that the disease was the natural effec of old age, not one of those
occasioned by violence of paflion.

united

189.

BOOK X.

1550.

February 7th.
The eleftion
of Julius III.

His characer
and conduct.

united squadron, by whose address and firmness he exalted to the
Papal throne the Cardinal di Monte, whom Paul had employed
as his principal legate in the council of Trent, and trufetd with
his most secret intentions. He assumed the name of Julius Ill.
and in order to express his gratitude towards his benefa&or, the
first at of his adminiitration was to put Octavio Farnese in pof-
feflion of Parma. When he was told of the injury which he did
the Holy See by alienating a territory of such value, he briskly
replied, " that he would rather be a poor Pope, with the reputa-
tion of a gentleman, than a rich one, with the infamy of having
forgotten the obligations conferred upon him, and the promises
which he had made b." But all the lustre of this candour or gene-
rofity he quickly effaced by an aftion most shockingly indecent.
According to an ancient and established practice, every Pope upon
his elecion claims the privilege of bestowing, on whom he
pleases, the Cardinal's hat, which falls to be disposed of by his
being invested with the triple crown. Julius, to the aftonilh-
ment of the sacred college, conferred this mark of diftinaion,
together with ample ecclesiastical revenues, and the right of bear-
ing his name and arms, upon one Innocent, a youth of sixteen,
born of obscure parents, and known by the name of the Ape,
from his having been trusted with the care of an animal of that
species, in the Cardinal di Monte's family. Such a prostitution
of the highest dignity in the church would have given offence,
even in those dark periods, when the credulous fuperflition of
the people emboldened ecclefiafics to venture on the most flag-
rant violationsof decorum. But in an enlightened age, when by
the progress of knowledge and philosophy the obligations of
duty and decency were better understood, when a blind venera-

b Mem. de Ribier.

tion

tion for the Pontifical cliaracter was every where abated, and one
half of Chrillehdom in open rebellion againit the Papal See, this
acfio;: was viewed with horror. Rome was immediately filled with
libels and pafqui aides, which imputed the P6pe's extravagant
iegard' for flich an Utnworthy dbjet to the most criminal paflions.
The Proteltants exclaimcd agaift the abrurdity of supposing
that the infallible spirit of divine truth could dwell in a breast so
impure, and calltd more loudly, than ever, and with greater ap-
pearailce of justice, f6r the immediate and thorough Reformation
of a clhirch, the Head of which was a disgrace to the Chriflian
narme".' The reft of the Pope's conduC was of a piece with this
first specimen of his dispositions. Having now reached the fum-
mit of eccl!fiaftical ambition, he seemed eager to indemnify him-
self, by an unreftraiied indulgence of his desires, for the felf-de-
nial or diflimulation which he had' thought it prudent to pradife
while in a fub6rdinate station. He became careless, to so great a
degree, of all serious business, that he could seldom be brought to
attend to it, but in cafes of extreme necellity and giving up him-
self to amusements and diflipation of every kind, he imitated the
luxurious elegadce of Leo, ratherl than the severe virtue of Adrian,
the latter of which it was necelfary to display, in contending with
a fee which derived great credit from the rigid and auflere man-
ners of its teaches '.

THE Pope, how ready' fbever to' fulfil his engagements to

the family of Farnese, 'discovered no inclination to observe the
oath, which each Cardinal had takeli when he entered the con-
clave, 'that if tlie choice should fall' or liii, he would immediately

J 't; ' . ,.' ! , ;t

I
, ! .

c Sklc, 49s F. Paul, 281, rlila~.,I. 76. Thuan, lib, vi. z25;
d F., Paul, ibid.

call

BOOK X.

1550.

Hii views
and proceedl-
ings with re*.
fpcet to the
general council.

191

BooK X. call the council to re-aflfime its deliberations. Julius knew, by ex-

'-v-- 'perience, how difficult it was to confine such a body of men within
:155o.

the narrow limits which it was the interest of the church of Rome
to prescribe; and how easily the zeal of some members, the ralhnefs
of others, or the suggestions of the Princes on whom they depended,
might precipitate a popular and ungovernable assembly into forbid-
<den inquiries, as well as dangerous decisions. He wished, for these
reasons, to have eluded the obligation of his oath, and gave an am-
'biguous answer to the first proposals, which were made to him by
ihe Emperor, with regard to that matter. But.as Charles, either
from his natural obltinacy in adhering to the. memfilires which he
had once adopted, or from .the mere pride of accomplishing what
was held to be almost impoflible, persised in his resolution of forcing
the Protestants to return into the bosom of the church: As he
had persuaded himself that the authoritative decisions of the coun-
cil might be employed with efficacy in combating their prejudices;
and in consequence of that persuasion, follicited earnestly that a
new bull of convocation might be ifiued, the Pope could not, with
decency, Teje& that requet. When.Julius found that he could
not prevent the caHing of a council, he endeavoured to take the
merit of having procured ,the meeting of an aflembly, which was
the obje& of such general desire and expectation. A congrega-
tion of Cardinals, to whom he referred the consideration of what
was necessary for restoring peace to the church, recommended,
by his direction, the speedy convocation of a council, as the 'most
effectual expedient for that purpose; and as the new herefies
raged with. the greatest violence in Gerniany, they proposed
Trent as the place of its meeting, that by a near infpAtion of
the evil, the remedy might be applied with greater discernment
and certainty of success. The Pope wvarmly approved this

! advice,
192

advice, which he Iimfelf had dictated, and lent nuncios to the
Imperial and French courts, in order to make known his inten-
tions

MEANWHILE, the Emperor had summoned a new diet to meet

at Augsburg, in order to enforce the observation of tie Interim,
and to procure a mo:e authentic at of the Empile, ack,;ow-
ledging the jurifdition of the council, as well as an explicit
promise of confornring to its decrees. He appeared there in
person, together with his son the Prince of Spain. Few of the
Eletors were present, but all sent deputies in their name.
Charles, notwithstanding the delpotic authority with which ihe
had given law in the Empire during two years, knew that the
spirit of independance among the Germans was not entirely
filbdued, and for that reason took care to over-awe the diet by
a considerable body of Spanilh troops which cfcorted him thi-
ther. The first point, submitted to the consideration of the diet,
was the neceflity of holding a council. All the Popifl members
agreed, without difficulty, that the meeting of that aflembly
fliould be renewed at Trent, and promised an implicit acquief
cence in its decrees. The Proteltants, intimidated and diliinited,
muff have followed their example, and the resolution of the diet
have proved unanimous, if Maurice of Saxony had not begun
at this tim. to difclolf new intentions, and to ac a part very dif-
ferent from that which he had fb long affimcd.

BY an artful ditlimulation of his own sentiments; by ad-
drcfs in paying court to the Emperor ; and by the ficeming

e F. Paul, zi2 . Pan'av. ii. 77.
VOL. III.

BOOK X.

A diet at
Aubuirg to
enlsolce the
Interill).

J UnC 25.

Aantimee be.
g;1is to Ibrill
deflons
agixinft the
'Empcror.,

193
Cc

zeal with which he forwarded all his ambitious schemes, Maurice
had raised himself to the Electoral dignity; and having added
the. dominions of the elder branch of the Saxon family to his
own, was become the moit powerful Prince in Germany. But
his long and intimate union with the Emperor had afforded
him many opportunities of observing narrowly the dan-
gerous tendency of his schemes. He saw the yoke that
was preparing for his country ; and from the rapid as well as
formidable progress of the Imperial power, was convinced that
but a few fleps more remained to be taken, in order to ren-
der Charles as absolute a Monarch in Germany, as he had
become in Spain. The moie eminent the condition was to
which he himself had been exalted, the more follicitous did he
naturally become to maintain all its rights and privileges, and
the more did he dread the thoughts of descending from the rank
of a Prince almost independent, to that of a vaflal subjed to the
will of a master. At the fame time, he perceived that Charles,
instead of allowing liberty of conscience, the promise of which had
allured several Protestant Princes to affifl him in the war against
the confederates of Smalkalde, was bent on exacting a rigid con-
formity to the doctrines and rites of the Romilh church. As he,
notwithflanding all the compliances which he had made from mo-
tives of intereR, or an excess of co fidence in the Emperor, was
sincerely attached to the Lutheran tenets, he determined net to be
a tame fpedator of the overthrow of a system l:hich he believed to
be founded in truth.

TaHis resolution, flowing from the love of liberty, or zeal for

religion, was strengthened by political and interefled confidera-
tions. In that elevated flation, in which Maurice was now
placed, new and more extensive profpeds opened to his view.

His
BOOK X.

1550.

The political
motives
which influ-
enced him.
194

His rank and power entitled him to be tile head of the Proteflants BooK X.
in the Empire. His predecelror, the degraded Elector, with iJfe- c
rior abilities, .and territories lels coafiderable, had acquired uitch
an ascendant over the councils of the party ; and Maurice neither
wanted discernment to fee tie advantage of this pre-eminence,
nor ambition to aim at attaining it. But he found himself in a
situation which reldered the attempt no leTs diflicult, than the ob-
jea of it was important. On the one hand, the connc&ion xwhich
he had formed with the Emperor was so intimate, tlat lie could
scarce hope to take any ftep which tended to diflllve it, without
alarming his jealousy, and drawing on himself the whole weight
of that power, whichl !ad crufled the greatest confederacy ever
formed in Germany. On the other hand, ite calamities which he
had brought on the Protestant party were To recent and so great,
that it seemed almost impoflile to regain their confidence, or to
rally and re-animate a body of men, after himself had been the'
chief instrument in breaking their union and vigour. These con-
fiderations were sufficient to have discouraged any person of a spirit
less adventurous than Maurice's. But to him the grandeur and '
vastness of the enterprize were allurelnents; and'lie boldly resolved
on mcafrCres, of wlhich 'a genius of an inferior order could have
conceived no idea, or would have trembled at the thoughts of the
danger which attended the execution of them.

Hi-s paflions concurred with his intcreft in confirming this' .'l') pnrinns
resolution; alid the refentnent excited by an injjury, which he which co-

opernted will

sensibly felt, added new force to the motives for opposing the thi:c.
Emperor, which foind policy suggested. Mvlaurice, by his,
authority, had prevailed on the Landgrave of Ileffc id: put his

C c ? pcrlbn

»95

person in the Emperor's power, and had obtained a promise from
the Imperial ministers that he flhould not be detained a prisoner.
This had been violated in the manner already related. The un-
happy Landgrave exclaimed as loudly against his' fon-in-law as
againfl Charles. The Princes of Hesse required him incessantly to
fulfil his engagements to their father, who had loft his liberty by
trusting to him; and all Germany fufpeCed him of having betray-
ed, to an implacable enemy, the friend whom he was most bound
to protet. Roused by there follicitations and reproaches, as well
as prompted by duty and affection to his father-in-law, Maurice
had employed not only entreaties but remonstrances in order to
procure his release All these Charles had disregarded; and
the flame of having been first deceived and then flighted by a
Prince whom he had served with zeal and success, which merited
a very different return, made fich a deep impression on Maurice,
that lie waited with impatience for an opportunity of being re-
venged.

THI utmost caution as well as delicacy were requisite in taking

every ftep towards this end ; as he had to guard, on the
one hand, against giving a premature alarm to the Emperor;
while, on the other, something considerable and explicit was
neceftary to be done, in order to regain the confidence of the Pro.
teftant party. Maurice had accordingly applied all his pow-
ers of address and diflimulation to attain both there points.
As he knew Charles to be inflexible with regard to the sub-
miflion which he required to the Interim, he did not hesitate
one moment whether he should establish that form of dotrine
and worship in his dominions. But being sensible how odious it
was to his fubjetls, inftead'of violently imposing it on them by

the
Book X.

1550.

The caution
and addre(s
with which
he carries on
his fchemnes.
196

the mere terror of authority, as had been done in other parts of
Germany, he endeavoured to render their obedience a voluntary
deed of their own. For this Purpose, he had assembled the clergy
of his country at Leipfick, and had laid the Interim before them,
together with the reafbns which made it necessary to conform to it.
He had gained some of them by promises, others he had wrought
upon by threats, and all were intimidated by the rigour, with
which obedience to the Interim was extorted in the neighbouring
provinces. Even Melandlhon, whose merit of every kind entitled
him to the first place among the Protestant divines, being now de-
prived of the manly counsels of Luther, which were wont to inspire
him with fortitude, and to preserve him fleady amidst the storms
and dangers that threatened the church, was reduced into unwar-
rantable conceflions, by the timidity of his temper, his fond desire
of peace, and his exceflive complaisance towards persons of high
rank. By his arguments and authority, no less than by Maurice's
arts, the assembly was prevailed on to declare, that in points which
were purely indifferent, obedience was due to the commands of a
lawful superior. Founding upon this maxim, no less uncontraverti-
ble in theory, than dangerous when carried into practice, especial-
ly in religious matters, they proceeded to class, among the num-
ber of things indifferent, several doctrines, which Luther had
pointed out as gross and pernicious errors in the Romish creed, as
well as many of those rites which distinguished the Reformed from
the Popish worship, and by consequence, they exhorted their peo-
ple to comply with the Emperor's injuntions concerning these par-
ticulars '.

f Sleid. 481. 485. Jo. Laur, Mofhemii Inltitutionum Hill. Ecclefiafticx, lib. iv.
Helmft. I 75. 4to. p. 748.

BOOK X,

's0.

He lc nsorces
thi Interim
in Saxony.

7

BOOK X. BY this dextrous conduct, the introducion of the Interim exci-
'sc^' ' ted none of those violent convulsions in Saxony, which it occasion-

Makes pro- ed in other provinces. But though the Saxons submitted, the more
feflions of
zeal for the zealous Lutherans exclaimed againit Melandhon and his associates,
Prote ant
religion. as false brethren, who were either so wicked as to apostatize from

the truth altogether, or so artful as to betray it by subtle diitinai-
ons; or so feeble-fpirited as to give it up from pusillanimity and
criminal complaisance to a Prince, capable of facrificirg to his po-
litical interest, that which he himself regarded as most sacred.
Maurice being conscious what a colour of probability his past con-
du&gave to these accusations, as well as afraid of losing entirel'y
the confidence of the Protestants, issued a declaration containing
profeflions of his zealous attachment to the Reformed religion, and
of his resolution to guard againfi all the errors or encroaclments of
of the Papal fee '.

A the fame AVli v.ow; gone-f fao in, order to remove the fears and jealou-
tiheE eror. fief of:the Proteltnts, lh found it necefeary to eftfce the impresL

sion which such a declaration might maKe on the Emperor. For
that purpose, he not only renewed his professions of an inviolable
adherence to his alliance with him, but as the city of Magde-
burg fill persisted in rcjecting the Interim, he undertook to
reduce it to obedience, and inflantly let about levying the troops
to be employed in that service. This damped' all the hopes
whielt the Protestants begun to conceive of Maurice, in confc-
quence of hisdeclaration, and left them more than ever at a loss
to guess at his real intentions. Their frmer fiufpicion and
distrust of him revived, and the divines of Magdeburg filled

g Sleid. 4sS.

Gcr;nany
Ir,.

Germany with writings in which they represented him as the most
formidable enemy of the Protestant religion, who treactleroufly
assumed an appearance of zeal for its interest, that he might more
effetually execute his ifchemes for its deftrution.

THIS charge, fipported by the evidence of recent fhats, as

well as by his present dubious conduc, gained filch un'iversal
credit, that Maurice was obliged to take a vigorous ftep in his
own vindication. As Coon as the re-assembling of the council
atTrent was propored in the diet, his ambafadors protested that
their master would not acknowledge its authority, unless all
the points which had been already decided there were re-
viewed, and confidered as entire; unless the Protestant divines had
a full hearing granted them, and were allowed a decisive voice in
the council; and unless the Pope renounced his pretensions to
preside in the council, engaged to submit to its decrees, and
absolved the bishops from their oath of obedience, that they
might deliver their sentiments with greater freedom. There de-
mands, which were higher than any that the Reformers had ven-
tured to make, even when the zeal of their party was warmest, or
their affairs most prosperous, counterbalanced, in some degree, the
effect of Maurice's preparations against Magdeburg, and kept the
Protestants in suspense with regard to his designs. At the fame
time, he had address enough to represent this part of his conduct
in such a light to the Emperor, that it gave him no offence, and oc-
cafioned no interruption of the ftrid confidence which futfifted
between them. What the pretexts were which he employed in
order to give such a bold declaration an innocent appearance,
the contemporary historians have not explained; that they imposed
upon Charles is, certain, for he still continued to prosecute his plan

as.

BOOK X.

5550

Protofts
against the
mode of pro-
ceeding in
the council.
.*r

i99

BOOK X.

1550.

The diet re-
solve to make
war on the
city of Mag-
deburg j

as well concerning the Interim as the council, with the fame ar.
dour; and to place the fame confidence in Maurice with regard to
the execution of both.

THE Popes resolution concerning the council not being yet

known at Augsburg, the chief business of the diet was to enforce
the observation of the Interim. As the senate of Magdeburg,
notwithstanding various endeavours to frighten or to sooth them
into compliance, not only persevered obstinately in their opposition
to the Interim, but began to strengthen the fortifications of their
city, and to levy troops in their own defence, Charles required of
the diet that they would afift him in quelling this audacious re-
bellion against a decree of the Empire. Had the members of the
diet been left to at agreeably to their own inclination, this
demand would have been rejected without hesitation. All the
Germans who favoured, in any degree, the new opinions in
religion, and many who were influenced by no other confidera-
tion than jealousy of the Emperor's growing power, regarded
this effort of the citizens of Magdeburg, as a noble fland for the
liberties of their country. Even such as had not resolution
to exert the fame spirit, admired the gallantry of their enterprize,
and wifled it success. But the presence of the Spanilh troops,
together with the dread of the Emperor's difplcafire, over-awed
those who were present in the diet to such a degree, that with-
out venturing to utter their own tentiments, they. tamely rati-
sied, by their votes, whatever the Emperor was pleased to pre-
scribe. The rigorous decrees, whicll Charles had iflied by his
own authority against the NMagdcburgers, were cor.fiilcdl ; a
resolution was taken to rails troops in order to besiege the city
in form; and persons were named to fix the contingent in men

or
2o00

or money to be fulrnifled by ehch state. At. the fame time,, the
diet ietit'ioed tiiat Maurice might be entruRted, w\it. ;he qom-
mathd of that iarmy, to vhich Charles gave his c9nfent with
great. alacrity, and with high encomitms, upon. the wisdom of
the choice which they had made .h As Maurice conducted al! his
schemes with profound ahd impenetrable secrecy, it is probable
that heo took no ftep avowedly in 'order. to obtain this charge. The
recommeiidati6n 'bs his 'co6ntrymen !.was' either pUrely accidental,
or fl6wed from the opinion generally entertained of his great
abilities i and neither the diet had any foresight, nor the Empe-
ror any: dread of the confeqUlences which followed upon this
nomihation. Maurice aceepted; without hefitatiop the trufl corn
rhitted to him, instantly discerning the important advantages
whlich he might derive from it.

: IEANWHILE, Julius, in preparing the. bull for the convoca-
tion of thj council, observed all those tedious .forms whlic the
court of: Rome can employ, with so much dexterity, to retard
any disagreeable measure. At last it was. publiflied, and the
council summoned to meet at Trent on 'thq firfl day of the enfu-
ing month of May. As he knew that many of the Germans
rejeted 'br 'ditiuted the: aUtltoritty and jurifdidion which the
Papal fee claims With refpeft to general councils, he took care,
in the'preamible 'of the bull, to 'afert, in the strongest terms,
his o'in igihit, not only to call and preside in that aflembly, but
to direct its proceedings; nor would hee soften these exprefiois,
in any degree, notwithstanding the repeated solicitations ore the
Emperor, who foresaw what offence they would give, and what
conttru&ion might be put on them. They were censured, ac-

h Sleld. S03, 512.
VOL. III D d cordingly,

Boor X.

IS.o.

Atpopisu
Maurice
general.

The council
summoned to
re-affenible at
Trent.
December.

. aQ?

o200
BOOK X.

1550.

The diet re-
solve to make
war on the
-ity of Mag-
deburg i

as well concerning the Interim as the council, with the fame ar-
dour; and to place the fame confidence in Maurice with regard to
the execution of both.

THE Popes resolution concerning the council not being yet

known at Augsburg, the chief business of the diet was to enforce
the observation of the Interim. As the senate of Magdeburg,
notwithtianding various endeavours to frighten or to sooth them
into compliance, not only persevered obstinately in their opposition
to the Interim, but began to strengthen the fortifications of their
city, and to levy troops in their own defence, Charles required of
the diet that they would aflift him in quelling this audacious re-
bellion against a decree of the Empire. Had the members of the
diet been left to as agreeably to their own inclination, this
demand would have been rejeted without hesitation. All the
Germans who favoured, in any degree, the new opinions in
religion, and many who were influenced by no other confidera-
tion than jealousy of the Emperor's growing power, regarded
this effort of the citizens of Magdeburg, as a noble fIand for the
liberties of their country. Even such as had not resolution
to exert the fame spirit, admired the gallantry of their enterprize,
and wished it success. But the presence of the Spanilh troops,
together with the dread of the Emperor's difplcal'u!e, over-awed
those who were present in the diet to fucl a degree, that with-
out venturing to utter their own sentiments, they. tamely rati-
sied, by their votes, whatever the Emperor was pleated to pre-
scribe. The rigorous decrees, whiich Charles had ifliled by his
own authority against the Magdcburgers, were corlfimiicd; a
resolution was taken to rails troops in order to befiegc the city
in form; and persons were named to fix the contingent in men

or

or money to be furnished by ehch state. At. the fiame time,, the
diet petit'iohed that Maurice might be entruited, with. the com-
maiid of tlat army, to lihich Charles gave, hii cqnfcnt with
great. alabrity, and with high encomiiqms, upon the. widom of
the choice which they had made ". As Maurice condutcd all his
schemes with profound and imfpenetrable secrecy, it is probable
tlht'the took no flep avowedly in 'order to obtain this charge. The
rec6mmeiidatin 'of his 'countrymen ! was either purely 9accidental,
dr flowed from the opinion generally entertained of his great
abilities; and neither the diet had any foresight, nor the Empe-
ror any: dread of the coilfeqtences which followed upon this
nominiation. Maurice accepted, wvithout hesitation the truRl com.
ri'tted t6 him, instantly discerning the important advantages
which hie might derive from it.

MEANWHILE, Julius, in preparing the. bull for the convoca-

tibn of .the council, observed all those tedious ,formis w ili' tle
: . '

. 4,; L .: '. . r * . '

. L i '; '

[

, ' |'

. . . . ' *

I ,

;

court of Rome can employ, with to much dexterity, to retard
any disagreeable measure. At )afl it was. publified, and the
council summoned to meet at Trent on the first day of the enfu-
ing month of May. As he knew that many of the Germans
rejec.ed or di(iited the.: autliority and jurifdicion which the
Papal fee claims with respect to general councils, he took care,
in the preamble of the bull, to aflert, in the strongest terms,
his own right, n6t only to call and preside in that assembly, but
to dire&t its proceedings; nor wduld he' 'soften th&ef expreniods,
in any degree, notwithstanding the repeated folicitationis of the
Emperor, who foresaw what offence they would give, and what
conftruaion might be put on them. They were censured, ac-

h Sleid. 503, 512.

D cd

Booi< X.

Appoint M4aturice
general.

The council
fuimmoned to
re-afiemble at
Trent.
December.

. 2Y1
VOL. IlI.

cor~dingly,

BOOK X.

' SSI.

Feb. 13.

Another fruit-
less attempt
to procure
the Land-
grave liberty.

accordingly with great severity by several members of the diet,
but whatever disgust or suspicion they excited, such absolute
direction of all their deliberations had the Emperor acquired,
that he procured a recess in which the authority of the council
was recognized, and. delared to be the proper remedy for the
evils which at that time affli6ted the church; all the Princes and
tfates of the Empire, such as had made innovations in religion,
as well as those who adhered to the fy(tem of their forefathers,
were required to fend their representatives to the council; the
Emperor engaged to grant a safe conduct to such as demanded it,
and to secure them an impartial hearing in the council he pro-
mifed to fix his residence in some city of the Empire, in the
neig':bourllood of Trent, that he might protect the members of the
council by his presence, and take care that, by conducting their
deliberations agreeably to scripture and the dotrine of the fa-
thers, they might bring them to a desirable iflue. In this recess,
the observation of the Interim was more ftritily enjoined than ever,
and the Emperor threatened all who had hitherto neglected or re-
refused to conform to it, with the severest effets of his vengeance,
if they perfited in their disobedience '.

DURING the meeting of this diet, a new attempt was made in

order to procure liberty to the Landgrave. That Prince, no-wise
reconciled by time to his situation, grew every day more impa-
tient of restraint. Having often applied to Maurice and the Elec-
tor of Brandenburg, who tcok every occasion of soliciting the
Emperor in his behalf, though without any effet, he now com-
manded his sons to summon them, with legal formality, to per-
form what was contained in the bond they had granted him,

Sleid. 5t. Thuan. lib vi. 233 GoldaRi Conftit. Imperiales, vol. ii. 340.

by
202

by surrendering themselves to be treated with the fame rigour Boo K X.
as the Emperor had used him. This furnifled them with a 55,
firelh pretext for renewing their application to the Emperor, toge-
ther with an additional argument to enforce it. Charles firmly
resolved not to grant their request; though at the fame time being
extremely desirous to get rid of their incessant importunity, he
endeavoured to prevail on the Landgrave to give up the obliga-
tion which he had received from the two Electors. But that Prince
refused to part with a security which he deemed efential to his
safety, the Emperor boldly cut the knbt which he could not
untie; and by a public deed annulled the bond which Maurice
and the Elector of Brandenburg had granted, absolving them
from all their engagements to the Landgrave: No pretension
to a power so pernicious to society as that of abrogating at plea-
filre the most sacred laws of honour, and molt formal obligations
of public faith, had hitherto been formed by any but the Roman
Pontiffs, who, in consequence of 'their claim of infallibility,
arrogate the right of dispensing 'with precepts and duties of
every kind. All Germany was filled'with; aftoniflment, when
Charles aflumed the fame prerogative. The slate of subjec-
tion, to which the Empire was reduced, appeared to be
more rigorous as well as intolerable than that of the moil
wretched and enslaved nations, if the Emperor by an arbitrary
decree might cancel those solemn contracts, which are the foun-
dation of that mutual confidence whereby men are held together
in social union. The Landgrave himself now gave up all hopes
of recovering his liberty by the Emperor's content, and endea-
voured to procure it by his own address. But the plan which lie
had formed to deceive his guards being discovered, filch of his
attendants as he had gained to favour his cfcape were put to

Dd z death.

203

BOOK X.

155..

Charles's
plan for pro-
curing the
Imperial
crown for his
son Philip.

THE REIGN OF THE

death, and he was confined in the citadel of Mechlin more
closely than everk.

ANOTHER tranfaaion was carried on during this diet, with

refpet to an an affair more nearly interefitilg to the Emperor, and
which occasioned likewise a general alarm among the Princes
of the Empire. Charles, though formed with talents which
fitted him for conceiving and conducting great designs, wya
not capable, as has been often observed, of bearing extraordi-
nary success. Its operation on his mind was so violent and in-
tocicating, that it elevated him beyond what was moderate or at-
tainable, and turned his whole attention to the pursuit of vadf but
chimerical objeals. Such had been the effe, of his victory oyer
thi. confederates of Smalkalde. He did not long ret satisfied
with the substantial and certain advantages which were the refut
of that event, but gefpifing these, as poor or inconsiderable fruits
of. such great success, le had aimed at bringing all Germany to an
uniformity in religionp and. at rendering the Imperial poyver de-
fpotic. These were objects extremely splendid, it ,must le ,acknow-
ledged, and alluring to an ambitious mi d; the pursuit 9o them,
however, was attended with manifest danger, andthe attainment
of them very precarious. But the ftep:3 which he had already
taken towards them beirg 'accoonpanied with such filccefs, his
imagination, warmed with contemplating this vast design, over-
looked or despised all difficulties. As he conceived the execution
of his plan to be certain, he legan 9o be felicitous howv he might
render the pofleflion of stich an important acquisition perpetual
in his family, by transmitting the German Empire, as well as
the kingdoms of Spain, and his dominions in Italy and the

k Skid. 504. Thuan. 1. vi 234, 235.

Low-

Low-Countries, to his son. Having long revolved this flattering
idea in his mind, without communicating it, even to those mini-
fters whom lie most trusted, he had called Philip out of Spain,
in hopes that his presence would facilitate thle carrying forward
the scheme.

GREAT obstacles, holvever, and ficlh as would have deterred

any ambition less accustomed to overcome difficulties, were to be
surmounted. He had in the year one thousand five hundred
and thirty imprudently afifted in procuring his brother Ferdi-
nand the dignity of Kingof the Romans, and there was no pro-
batility that this Prince, who Vas still in the prime of life, and
had a son grown up to the years of manhood, would rclinquifi,
in favour of tis nephew, the near profpec of the Imperial throne,
which Charles's infirmities and declining fate of health opened
to him. tlhis did not deter the Emperor from venturing to
make the proposition; and when Ferdinand, notwithstanding
his profound reverence for his brother, and obsequious fubmif-
sion to his will in other instances, rejeted it in a peremptory
tone, he was not discouraged by one repulse. He renewed his
application to him by his fiter, Mary Queen of Hungary, to
whom Ferdinand flood indebted for the crowns both of Hungary
and Bolemia, and who, by her great abilities, tempered with
extreme gentlenels of difpofitioln had acquired an extraordinary
influence over both the brothers. She entered warmly into a
measure, which tended so manifestly to aggrandize the house of
Aultria; and flattering herself that fie could tempt Ferdinand'
to renounce the reversionary pofTeflion of the Imperial dignity
for an immediate eftablilhmlent, file aflired him that the Empe-
ror, by way of compensation for his giving up his chance of
filcceflion, would inilantly beflow upon him territories of very

considerable

BOOK X.

'55'.

',rue obflaclea
that flood iii
its way.

205

BOOK X.- considerable value, and pointed out in particular those of the

i1·. Duke of Wurtemberg, which might be confiscated upon different

pretexts. But Ferdinand was more ambitious than to be persuaded,
by her address or intreaties, to approve of a plan, which would
have degraded him from the highest rank among the Monarchs
of Europe to that of a subordinate and dependent Prince. He

was at the fame time more attached to his children than to fruf-
trate, by a rash conceflion, all the high hopes in profpe& of which
they had been educated.

Hisendea- NOTWITHSTANDING the immoveable firmness which Ferdi-
yours to suP- nand discovered, the Emperor did not abandon his scheme. He
mount there.

flattered himself that he might attain the object in view by
another channel, and that it was not impoflible to prevail on
the Electors to cancel their former choice of Ferdinand, or at
least to elec Philip a second King of the Romans, fubftitut-
ing him as next in fuccefion to his uncle. With this view he
took Philip along with him to the diet, that the Germans m:ght
have an opportunity to observe and become acquainted X ith
the Prince, in behalf of whom he courted their interest; and
he himself employed all the arts of address or i fiiuation to
gain the Electors, and to prepare them for lending a favour-
able ear to the proposal. But no sooner did lie venture upon
mentioning it to them, than they, at once, saw and trembled at
the consequences with which it would be attended. They had
'long felt all the inconveniencies of having placed at the head of
the Empire a Prince whose power and dominions were so extensive;
if they (hould now repeat that folly, and continue the Imperial
crown, like an hereditary dignity, in the fame family, they fore-
saw that they would give the son an opportunity of carrying on

that
206

that fyflem of oppreflion, which the father had begun; and would
put it in his power to overturn whatever was left yet entire in the
antient and venerable fabric of the German conflitution.

THE character of the Prince, in whose favour this extraordi-

nary proposition was made, rendered it still less agreeable.
Philip, though pollefed with an insatiable desire of power,
was a stranger to all the arts of conciliating good-will.
Haughty, reserved and severe, he, instead of gaining new
friends, difgutled the ancient and most devoted partizans of the
Austrian interest. He scorned to take the trouble of acquiring
the language of the country, to the government of which lie a-
spired; nor would he condescend to pay the Germans the compli-
ment of accommodating himself, during his residence among them,
to their manners and customs. He allowed the Eledors and most
illuflrious Princes in Germany to remain in his pretence un-
covered, affecting a flately and ditfant demeanour, which the
greatest of the German Emperors, and even Charles himself, a-
midit the pride of power and victory had never aflumed 1. On the
other hand, Ferdinand, from the time of his arrival in Germany,
had itudied to render himself acceptable to the people, by a con-
formity to their manners, which seemed to flow from choice;
and his Ton Maximilian, who was born in Germany, possessed in
an eminent degree, such amiable qualities, as rendered him the
darling of his countrymen, and induced them to look forward
to his election as a mofi desirable event. Their efleem and assec-
tion for him fortified the resolution which found policy had fug-
gested; and determined the Germans to prefer the popular vir-

BOK X.

1551.

Philip's cha-
rafter difa-
greeable to
the Gcrmans.

1 Frediman Androx Zulich Difertatio politico-I-Iiftorica de Ngevis politicis
CazoliV. Lipr. 17o6. 4t0. P. 21.

tues

207

BOOK X.

Charles o-
bliged to re-
linquilh this
fchemne.

The Pope and
Emperor
form a design
to recover
Parma and
Placentia.

'1rEt R EI G([ OF THE

tues of Pferdlniand 'id is foii, io the stubborn aUtiferity of Philip,
which interest could not soften, nor ambit'ion teach hi'i to dif-
guise. All the Electors, tie ecclefiadical as well as secular, con-
curred in exprelling such strong disapprobation of the measure,
that Charles, notwithfianding the reluctance with which he g.ve up
any point, was obliged to drop the fclieme as impratic'able. By
his unseasonable perseverance in pufliing it, he not only filled the
Germans with newjealoufy of his ambitious designs, bit laid the
foundation of rivalfhip and discord in the Austrian family, and
forced his brother Ferdinand, in felf-def'ence, to court the Eletors,
particularly Maurice of Saxony, and to form such coninetioos With
them, as cut off all profped of rerewing the propo(al wVith si'c-
cess. Philip, Cowered by his disappointment, ias sent back to
Spain, to be called thence when any new scheme of aimbitidn should
render his presence neceflary m.

HAVING relinquihed this plan of doneftic ambition which

iad long occupied d n engrossed him, Charles imagined that
lie would now ieave leisure to turn all his aittention towards his
grand icheme o'f eftabliihing uniformity 6f reiigion in the
Empire, by forcing all the contending parties to acquiefe in
the decisions of the council of Trent. But such was the eX-
tent of his dominions, the variety of connections in which this
entangled him, and the multiplicity of events to which there
gave rife, as seldom allowed him to apply his whole force to any
one object. The machine which he had to condu& was so
great and complicated, that an unforeseen irregularity or obftruc-
tion in one of the inferior wheels, often disconcerted the motion bs

m Sleid. 505. Thuan. 18o, 138. Memoir. de Ribice, ii. 219, z81, 314.
Adriani Iftor. lib. viii. 507, 520.

the

the whole, and disappointed him of the most considerable effedts BOOK X.
which he expected. Such unlooked-for occurrence happened t5,.
at this juneture, and created new obstacles to the execution of
his schemes with regard to religion. Julius IlI. though he had
confirmed Octavio Farnese in the poffefion of the dutchy of Parma,
during fie first effusions of his joy and gratitude on his promo-
tion to the Papal throne, soon began to repent of'lhis own gene-
rofity, and to be apprehensive of consequences whiich either he
did not foresee, or had disregarded while the sense of his obliga-
tions to the family of Farnese was recent. Tie Emperor still
retained Placentia in his hands, and had not relinqiiifhed his pre-
tensions to Parma as a fief. of the Empire. Gonzaga, the gover-
nor of Milan, having, by the part which he took in the' murder
of the late Duke Peter Ludovico, offered an insult to the family
of Farnese, which he knew could never be forgiven, had for that
reason vowed its deftrution; and employed all the' influence,
which his great abilities ap well as long services gave Ilim with
the Emperor, in perfuadipg him to seize Parma by force of arms.
Charles, in compliance with his solicitations, and that he,might
gratify his own desire of annexing Parma to the Milanese,
listened to the proposal; and Gonzaga, ready to talre .encourage-
nment from the flightef appearance of approbatior, began to
afgemble troops, and to make other preparations for the execution
of his scheme.

OCTAVIO, who saw the impending danger,' found itneceflary otlavro PAi-

for his own safety to increase the garrison of his capital, and `fe ccutst'
to levy soldiers for defending the reft of the country. OBut as the of Franc.
expence of such aan effort far exceeded his scanty revenues, he
represented his situation tto the;Pope, and implored that protec-
tion and afnifance which was due to him as a vassal of the

VOL. IIJ. r e

BOOK X.

155 .

His league
with
Henry II. .

church. The Imperial minister, however, had already preoccu-
pied the Pope's car; and by discoursing continually concerning
the danger of giving offence to the Emperor, as well as the impru-
dence of supporting Otavio in an usurpation so detrimental to the
Holy See, had totally alienated him from the family of Farnese.
Otavio's remonstrance and petition met, of consequence, with a
cold reception.; and he, despairing of any alifLtance from Julius,
began.to look round for protection from some other quarter. Hen-
ry .II. of France was the only Prince powerful enough to afford
him this protection, and fortunately he was now in a situation
which allowed him to undertake it. He had brought his tranfatti-
ons with the two Britilh kingdoms, which had hitherto diverted his
attention from the affairs of the continent, to such an ifiue as he
desired. This he had effected partly by the vigour of his arms,
partly by his dexterity in taking advantage of the political
factions which raged in both kingdoms, and rendered the counsels
of the Scots violent and precipitate, and the operations of the
English feeble and unsteady. He had procured from the English
favourable conditions of peace for his allies the Scots; he had pre-
vailed on the nobles of Scotland not only to ndfiance their youing
Qyeen to his son the Dauphin, but even to fend hier. into France
that she might be educated under his eye; and had recovered
Boulogne together with its dependencies which had been conquered
by Henry VIII.

HAVING gained, points of fo.much consequence to his crown,

and disengaged himself with fiuch honour from the burden of
supporting the Scots, and maintaining a war against England,
Henry .was now at full leisure to pursue the meafulres which his
hereditary jealousy of the Emperor's power naturally suggested.
He listened, accordingly, to the sirs 'overtures, which' Odtavio

Farnese
210

Farnese made him; and embracing eagerly an opportunity of reco-
vering footing in Italy, he instantly concluded a treaty, in which
he promised to espouse his cause, and to furnish him all the aflif-
tance which he desired. This tranfadion could not be long kept
secret from the Pope, who foreseeing the calamities which must fol-
low if war were rekindled so near the ecclesiastical state, immedi-
ately issued monitory letters, requiring Odtavio to relinquilh his
new alliance. Upon his refusal to comply with the requisition, he
soon after pronounced his fief to be forfeited, and declared war
against him as a disobedient and rebellious vassal. But as he could
not hope, with his own forces alone, to subdue O&tavio while sup-
ported by such a powerful ally as the King of France, he'had re-
course to the Emperor, who'being extremely solicitous to prevent
the eftablilhment of the French in Parma, ordered Gonzaga to fe-
cond Julius with all his troops. Thus the French took the field
as the Allies of Otavio; the Imperialirts as the protectors of the
Holy See; and hostilities commenced between them, while
Charles and Henry themselves till affected to give out that they
would adhere inviolably to the peace of Crefpy. The war of Par-
ma was not diftinguiflhed by any memorable event. Many small
rencounters happened with alternate success; the French ravaged
part of the ecclefialtical territories; the Imperialists laid wale
the Parmesan; and tne latter, after having begun to besiege
Parma in form, were obliged to abandon the enterprize with dif-
grace" (

BUT the motions and alarm which this war, or the prepara-

tions for it, occasioned in Italy, prevented modt of the Italian
prelates from repairing to Trent on the first of May, the day

BOOK X.

15if.

Occasions the
renewal of
holtilitics be-
tween Charles
and Henry.

Retards the
necting of
the council.
\ n Adriani Iltor. lib. lviii. ,i, i , , ;4. Sleid. 513. Paruta, p. 220. Lettere

del Caro fcritte al nome del Card. Farnese toni. ii, p. I , &c.

E e 2 appointed

211

appointed for re-affcmbling the council; and though the Papal
legates and nuncios resorted thither, they were obliged. to adjourn
to the first of Sepember, hoping such a number might then
assemble, that they might with decency begin their deliberations.
At that time, about sixty prelates, moitly from the ecclefiatical
Rfate or from Spain, together with a few Germans, convened .
The session was opened with the accustomed formalities, and the
fathers were about to proceed to business, when the abbot of
Bellozane appeared, and presenting a letter of credence as arnbaf-
fador from the French King, demanded audience. Haying
obtained it, he protested in Henry's name against an assembly
called at such an improper juncture, when a war, wantonly
kindled by the Pope, made it impofible for the deputies from
the Gallican church to resort to Trent in safety, or to deliberate
concerning articles of faith and discipline with the requisite tran-
quillity bhe declared that his matter did not acknowledge this
to be a general or Qecumenic council, but must confider apd
would treat it a a particular and partial Convention P. The legate
asseted to despise this prqteft; and the prelates proceeded, not-
withstanding, to examine and decide the great points ip contro-
verfy concerning the sacrament of the Lord's Supper, penance,
and extreme unction. The measure of the French Monarch,
however, gave a deep wound to the credit of the council, at the
very commencement of its deliberations. The Germans could
not pay much regard to an assembly, whose authority the second
Prince in Christendom had formally disclaimed, or feel any great
reverence for the decisions of a few men, who arrogated to them-
selves all the rights belonging to the representatives of the church
universal, a title to which they had filch poor pretensions.

f

p Sleid. 5,8. Thuan. 28z. F. Paul. 301.
BOOK X.

'SSI.
1551.

Henry pro-
tefs againlt
the council.
I

212

o F. Faul. z68.

THE Emperor, nevertheless, was draining his authority to

the utmost, in order to eftablilh the reputation and jurifdidtion
of the council.. He had prevailed on the three ecclefiatical Elec-
tors, the prelates ofgreateft power and dignity in the church next
to the Pope, to repair thither in person. He had obliged several
German billops of inferior rank to go to Trent themselves, or to
fend their proxies. He granted an Imperial fife conduc to the
ambafladors, nominated by the Ele&or of Brandenburg, the duke
of Wurtemberg, and other Protestant states, to attend the coun-
cil; and exhorted them to fend their divines thither, in order to
propound, explain and defend their doctrine. At the fame time,
his zeal anticipated the decrees of the council; and as if'the Pro-
teftant doctrines had already been condemned, he took large fleps
towards exterminating them. With this intention, he called together
the ministers of Auglburg; and after interrogating them concerning
several controverted points, enjoined them to teach nothing with
refped to there, contrary to the tenets of the Romish church. Up-
on their declining to comply with a requisition so contrary to the
dictates of their consciences, he commanded them to leave the town
in three days, without revealing to any person the cause of their
banishment; he prohibited them to preach for the future in any
of the countries subjea to the Imperial jurifdidCtion; and obliged
thlm to take an oath that they would punctually obey these
injunctions. They were not the only victims to his zeal. The
Protestant clergy, in most of the cities in the circle of Swabia,.
were ejected with the fame violence; and in many places, such
magistrates as had distinguished themselves by their attachment
to the new opinions, were difminifed with the utmost abrupt irregu-
larity, and their offices filled, in consequence of the Emperor's
arbitrary appointment, with the molt bigotted of their adverfa-

L r.s

BOOK X.

'551.

Violence of
the Ernperor'»
proceedings
agninst the
Proteflants.

213

ries. The Reformed worship was almost entirely suppressed
throughout that extensive province. The ancient and fundamental
privileges of the free cities were violated. The people were com-
pelled to attend the ministration of priefis, whom they regarded
with horror as idolaters; and to submit to the jurifdiaion of magi-
ftrates, whom they detested as usurpers ".

His endea- THE Emperor, after this discovery, which was more explicit
vour to sup- than any that he had hitherto made, of his intention to subvert the
port the
council. German constitution, as well as to extirpate the Protestant religi-
November. on, let out for Infpruck in the Tyrol. He fixed his residence in

that city, as by its situation in the neighbourhood of Trent, and on
the confines of Italy, it appeared a commodious fiation, whence he
might infpedt the operations of the council, and observe the progress
of the war in the Parmesan, without losing fight of the occurrences
that might happen in Germany '.

The siege of
Magdeburg.

DURING these transactions, the siege of Magdeburg was car-

ried on with various success. At the time when Charles pro-
fcribed the citizens of Magdeburg, and put them under the ban
of the Empire, he had exhorted and even enjoined all the neigh-
bouring states to take arms against them, as rebels and common
enemies. Encouraged by his exhortations as well as promises,
George of Mecklenburg, a younger brother of the reigning Duke,
an acive and ambitious Prince, colleced a considerable number of
those soldiers of fortune who had accompanied Henry of Brunf-
wick in all his wild enterprizes; and though a zealous Lutheran
himself, invaded the territories of the Magdeburgers, hoping

q Sleid. 516, 528. Thuan. 276.

r Sleid. 329.

that,
BOOK X.

1551.
Z 4

that, by the merit of this service, he might procure rome part of
their domains to be allotted to him as an eftablilhmcnt. The ci-
tizens, unaccustomed as yet to endure patiently the calamities of
war, could not be retrained from sallying out in order to favc
their lands from being laid waste. They attacked the duke of
Mecklenburg with more courage than conduct, and were repulsed
wit'i great slaughter. But as they were animated with that uncon-
querable spirit, wlhich flows from zeal for religion co-operating
with the love of civil liberty, far fiom being diflheartened by
their misfortune, they prepared to defend themselves with vigour.
Many of the veteran soldiers who had served in the long wars be-
tween the Emperor and King of France, crowding to their flandards
under able and experienced officers, they acquired military skill
by degrees, and added all the advantages of that to the efforts of
undaunted courage. The duke of Mecklenburg, notwithstanding
the severe blow which he had given the Magdeburgers, not daring
to invest a town strongly fortified, and defended by such a garri-
son, continued to ravage the open country.

As 'the hopes of booty drew many adventurers to his camp,

Maurice of Saxony began to be jealous of the power which he pof.
feled by being at the head of such a numerous body, and marching
towards Magdeburg with his own troops, aflumed the fipreme
command of the whole army, an honour to which hiss higll rank
amd great abilities, as well as the nomination of the diet, gave
him an indisputable title. With this united force he invested
the town, and began tile siege in form; claiming great merit
with the Emperor on that account, as, from his zeal to execute
the Imperial decree, he was exposing himself once more to
the cenfurcs and maledicions:of the party vith which he agreed

in.

BOOK X,

Maurice takes
the conuiinnd
of the army
which carricd
on the fiegc.

215

BOOK X.

The city fur-
renders to
Maurice.

in religious sentiments. But the approaches to the town went on
slowly; the garrison interrupted the besiegers by frequent fal-
lies, in one of which the duke of Mecklenburg was taken pri-
toner, levelled part of their works, and cut off the soldiers in
their advanced posts. While the citizens of Magdeburg, ani-
mated by the discourses of their pastors, and the soldiers encou-
raged by the example of their officers, endured all the hardships
of a siege without murmuring, and defended themselves with
the fame ardour which they had at first discovered; the troops of
the besiegers acted with extreme remissness, repining at every
thing they suffered in a service which they disliked. They broke
out, more than once, into open mutiny, demanding the arrears
of their pay, which, as the Germans contributed with great
reluctance towards defraying the expences of this war, amounted
to a considerable fum'. Maurice, too, had particular motives,
though such as he durst not avow at that junture, which induced
him not to push the siege with vigour, and made him chute ra-
ther to continue at the head of an army exposed to all the impu-
tations which his dilatory proceedings drew upon him, than to
precipitate a conquest which might have brought him rome accef-
sion of reputation, but would have rendered it necessary to dilband
his forces.

AT last, the inhabitants of the town beginning to susser dif-

trefs from want of provisions, and Maurice, finding it impoflible
to protract matters any longer without filling the Emperor with
such suspicions as might have disconcerted all his measures, he
concluded a treaty of capitulation with the city upon the follow-

a Thuan 277. Sleid. 514.

ing
z16

ing conditions ; that the Magdeburgers should humbly implore BooK X.
pardon of the Emperor; that they flould not for the future , 5.
take arms, or enter into any alliance againfl the house of Aultria Novcllb. 3
that they flould submit to tile authority of the Imperial chamber;
that they liould conform to the decree of the diet at Augsburg
with relpedt to religion ; that the new fortifications added to the
town llould be demolilhed; that they flould pay a fine of fifty
thous.nd crowns, deliver up twelve pieces of ordnance to the Em-
peror, and set the Duke of Mecklenburg together with their other
prisoners at liberty without ransom. Next day their garrison
marched out, and Maurice took poffefion of the town with
great military pomp.

BEFORE the terms of capitulation were fettled, Maurice had Mu"'rie'.

vitw. at this

held many conferences with Albert count Mansfeldt, who had junAure.
the chief command in Magdeburg, and with count Heideck, an
officer who had served \ith great reputation in tie army of the
league of Smalkalde, whom the' Emperor had proscribed on
account of his zeal for that cause, and whom Maurice had, not-
withitanding, secretly engaged in his service, and admitted into
the most intimate confidence. To them lie communicated a fclhcme,
which he had long revolved in his mind, for procuring liberty
to his father-in-law the Landgrave, for vindicating the privileges
of the Germanic body, and letting bounds to the dangcrous en-
croachments of the Imperial power. Having conlllted with them
about the mealures which might be neceflary for securing the
success of fuclh an arduous enterprize, he gave Mansfeldt secret
assurances that the fortifications of Magdeburg lhould not be dc-
itroyed, and that the inhabitants fiould neither be dillurbed in
the exercise of their religion, nor be deprived of any of their
antient immunities. In order to engage Maurice mlore thoroighlly

VOL. III. F f rom

2'7

BooK X.

1551.

The advan-
tages he de-
rived from his
negociations
with the Mag-
deburgers.

from considerations of interest to fulfil there engagements, the
senate of Magdeburg eleced him their Butgrave, a dignity which
had formerly belonged to the electoral house of Saxony, and which
entitled him to a very ample jurifddlCion not only in the city but in
its dependencies '.

THUS the citizens of Magdeburg, after enduring a siege of

twelve months, and struggling for their liberties religious and
civil with an invincible fortitude worthy of the cause in which
it was exerted, had at last the good fortune to conclude a treaty
which left them in a better condition than the reft of their
countrymen, whom their timidity or want of publick spirit
had betrayed into such mean submissions to the Emperor. But
while a great part of Germany applauded the gallant condut of
the Magdeburgers, and rejoiced in their having escaped the
deftrution with which they had been threatened, all admired
Maurice's address in the condua of his negociation with themr
as well as the dexterity with which he converted every event to
his own advantage. They saw, with amazement, that after hav-
ing afflited the Magdeburgers during many months with all
the calamities of war, he was at last, by their voluntary elec-
tion, vested with supreme authority in that city which he had
so lately besieged ; that after having been so long the objet
of their invectives and satire as an apostate, and an enemy to
the religion which heprofefled ; they seemed now to place un-
bounded confidence in his zeal and good will ". At the fame
time, the publick articles in the treaty of capitulation were so

t Sleid. 5$8. Thuan. a76. Obfidionis Magdeburgici defcriptio per Sebaft,
Beffelmeierum. ap. Scard. ii. 5 8.

a Arnoldi vita Maurit, apud Menken, ii. 1227.

perse 6ly

perfetly conformable to those which the Emperor had granted to
the other Prote(tant cities, and Maurice took such care to mag-
nify his merit in having reduced a place which had defended it-
self with so much obstinacy, that Charles, far from furpeking any
thing fraudulent or collusive in the terms of accommodation,
ratified them without hesitation, and absolved the Magdeburgers
from the sentence of ban whicl had been denounced against
them.

TH . only point that now remained to embarrass Maurice

was how to keep together the veteran troops which had served
under him, as well as those which had been employed in the
defence of the town. For this, too, he found an expedient
with singular art and felicity. His schemes against the Emperor
were not yet so fully ripened, that he durfl venture to dif-
close them, and proceed openly to carry them into execution.
The winter was approaching, which made it impoflible to
take the field immediately. He was afraid that it would give
a premature alarm to the Emperor, if he fIould retain such a
considerable body in his pay until the season of adion returned
in the spring. As loon then as Magdeburg opened its gates,
he Tent home his Saxon subjes, whom he could command to
take arms and re-assemble o;l the shortet warning, to their
own habitations; and at the fame time, paying part of the
arrears due to the mercenary troops, who had followed his ftan-
dard, as well as to the soldiers who had served in the garrison, he
absolved them from their refpedive oaths of fidelity, and dif-
banded them. But the moment he gave them their discharge,
George Duke of Mecklenburg, wvho was now set at liberty,
offered to take them into his service, and to become furcty for

F f 2 the

BOOK X.

[ss'.

His expedient
foi keeping
an army on
foot.

219

BOOK X.

1551.

Hisaddrefs in
concealing his
intentions
from the Em-
peror.

the payment of what was still owing to them. As such adventurers
were accustomed often to change masters, they inifantly accept-
ed the offer. Thus, there troops were kept united, and ready to
march wherever Maurice should call them, while the Emperor,
deceived by this artifice, and imagining that the Duke of Meck-
lenburg had hired them .with an intention to aftert, by force of
arms, his claim to a part of his brother's territories, suffered it to
pass without observation, as if it had been a matter of no confe-
quence .

HAVING ventured to take these steps which were of so much

consequence towards the execution of his schemes, Maurice,
that he might divert the Emperor from observing their tendency
too narrowly, ad prevent the suspicions which that must have
excited, saw the necellity of employing rome new artifice in
order to engage his attention, and to confirm him in his present
security. As he knew that the chief object of the Emperor's
solicitude at this juncture, was how he might prevail with the
Protestant States of Germany to recognize the authority of the
council of Trent, and to fend thither ambafadors in their own
name, as well as deputies from their refpedive churches, he
took hold of this predominating paflion in order to amuse and
to deceive him. He affected a wonderful zeal to gratify Charles
in what he desired with regard to this matter; lie nominated
ambassadors, whom he impowered to attend the council; he
made choice of Melanahon and some of the most eminent
among his brethren to prepare a confeflion of faith, and to lay

x Thuan. 278. Struv. corp hit. Germ. zo64. Arnoldi vita Mauritii apud
Menken, ii. 1227.

it
I

220

it before that aflembly. After his example, and probably in
consequence of his solicitations, the Duke of Wurtemberg,
the city of Strafburg, and other Protestant States appointed
ambafladors and divines to attend the council. They all ap-
plied to the Emperor for his fafe-conduct, which they obtained
in the most ample form. This was deemed flfficient for the
security of the ambassadors, and they proceeded accordingly on
their journey; but a separate fafe-conduct from the council it-
self, was demanded for the Protestant divines. The fate of
John Huss and Jerome of Prague, whom the council of Con-
stance, in the preceding century, had condemned to the flames
without regarding the Imperial lafe-conduCt which had been
granted them, rendered this precaution prudent and necefrary.
But as the Pope was no lets unwilling that the Protestants
should be admitted to an hearing ilr the council, than the Em-
peror had been eager in bringing them to demand it, the legate
by promises and threats prevailed on the fathers of the council
to decline ifiuing a fafe-conduct iln the fame form with that
which the council of Basil had granted to the followers of Fuss.
The protestants, on their part insisted upon the council's copying
the precise words of that instrument. The Imperial ambassadors
interposed in order to obtain what would f tisfy them. Alterations
in the form of the writ were proposed; expedients were
suggested; protests and counter protests were taken ; the legate
together with his associates laboured to gain their point by artifice
and chicane; the Protcftants adhered to theirs with firmness and
obtinacy. An account of every thing that passcd in Trent was
trai:i.itted to the Emperor at Infpluck, who, attempting from
an excess of zeal, or of confidence in his own address, to recon-
cile the contending parties, was involved in a labyrinth of in-

extricable:

POOKR X.
..SS'

221

BOOK X.

1551;

The affairs of
Hungary.

extricable negociations. By means of this, howev.er, Maurice
gained all that he had in view; the Emperor's time was wholly
cngroffed, and his attention diverted; while he had leisure to
mature his fchemea, to carry on his intrigues, and to finith his pre-
parations before he threw pss the malk, and struck the blow which
he had so long meditated '.

BUT previous to the history of Maurice's operations, some

account must be given of a new revolution in Hungary, which
contributed not a little towards their producing such extraordi-
nary effets. When Solyman, in the year I541, by a stratagem,
which suited the base and insidious policy of a petty usurper,
rather than the magnanimity of a mighty conqueror, deprived
the young King of Hungary of the dominions which his
father had left him, he had granted that unfortunate Prince the
country of Transylvania, a province of his paternal kingdom.
The government of this, together with the care of educating
the young King, for he still allowed him to retain that title,
though he had rendered it only an empty name, he committed
to the Q.(een and Martinuzzi bishop of Waradin, whom the late
King had appointed his son's guardians and regents of his domi-
nions, at a time when those offices were of greater importance.
This co-ordinate jurifdicfion occasioned the fame distentions in a
frnall principality as it would have excited in a great kingdom;
an ambitious young Queen, conscious of her capacity for go-
vernilg, and an high spirited prelate, contending who (hould
engross the greatest (hare in the administration. Each had their
partizans among the nobles, but as Martinuzzi, by his great

Sleid. 526, 5s9. F. Paul. 323, 338. Thuan. 286.

talents,

talents, began to acquire the ascendant, Isabella turned his own
arts against him, and courted the protecion of the Turks.

&OOK X.

155s.

THr neighbouring baflias, jealous of the bilhop's power as well

as abilities, readily promised her the aid which the demanded, and
would (bon have obliged Martinuzzi to have given up to her the
sole diredion of aftlirs, if his ambition, fertile in expedients, had
not suggested to hiln a new meafire, and one that tended not only
to preserve but to oilarge his authority. Having concluded an
agreement with the queen, by the mediation of some of the nobles'
who were tollicitous to save their country from the calamities of a
civil war, he secretly dispatched one of his confidents to Vienna, and
entered into a negociation with Ferdinand. As it was no difficult
matter to persuade Ferdinand that the fame man whose enmity and
intrigues had driven him out of a great part of his Hungarian do-
minions, might, upon a reconciliation, become equally inltrumen-
tal in recovering them, he listened eagerly to the first overtures of
an union with that prelate. Martinuzzi allured him by such pro-
fpets of advantage, and engaged, with so much confidence, that
lie would prevail on the most powerful of the Hungarian nobles to
take arms in his favour, that Ferdinand, notwithstanding his
truce with Solyman, agreed to invade Transylvania. The com-
mand of the troops deflined for that service, consisting of ve-
teran Spanihl and German soldiers, was given to Cattaldo Mar-
quis de Piadena, an officer formed by the famous Marquis de
Pescara,. whom he strongly resembled both in his enterprizing
genius for civil bufiners, and in his great knowledge in the art
of war. This army, more formidable by the discipline of the
soldiers, and the abilities of the general, than by its numbers,

was

Mattinuzzi
favours Ser-
dinand's prc-
tensions in
that kingdom.

2z3

was powerfully seconded by Martinuzzi and his faction among the
Hungarians. As the Turkish BaIhas, the Sultan himself being at
the head of his army on the frontiers of Persia, could not afford the
Queen such immediate or effectual afliftance as the exigency of her
affairs required, the quickly loft all hopes of being able to retain
any longer the authority which Ihe possessed as regent, and even be-
gan to despair of her son's safety.

MARTINUZZI did not susser this favourable opportunity of ac-

complilhing his own designs to pass unimproved, and ventured,
while she was in this state of dejetion, to lay before her a proposal,
which at any other time, the would have rejected with disdain. He
represented how impoflible it was for her to resist Ferdinand's vidto-
rious arms; that even if the Turks mhould enable her to make head
againit them, (he would be far from changing her condition to the
better, and could not confider them as deliverers but as masters
to whose commands ihe must submit; he conjured her, therefore,
as she regarded her own dignity, the safety of her Ton, or the fe-
curity of Christendom, rather to give up Transylvania to Ferdi-
nand, and to make over to him her son's title to the crown of Hun-
gary, than to allow both to be usurped by the inveterate enemy
of the Christian faith. At the fame time, he promised her, in
Ferdinand's name, a compensation for herself, as well as for her
son, suitable to their rank, and proportional to the value of what
they were to sacrifice. Isabella, deserted by Come of her adherents,
distrusting others, destitute of friends, and surrounded by Caftal-
do's and Martinuzzi's troops, subscribed, though with a
relutant hand, there hard conditions. Upon this, the furren-

dered
BoOK X.

1551.

The success
of his mea-
fures.
224

dered such places of strength as were Rill in her pofln:iion, fle
gave up all the ensigns of royalty, particularly a crown of gold,
which, as the Hungarians believed, had descended from heaven,
and conferred on him who wore it an undoubted right to the
throne. As flle could not bear to remain a private perfbn,
in a country where the had once enjoyed sovereign power, the
instantly let out with her son for Silcfia, in order to take poflif-
sion of the principalities of Oppelen and Ratibor, the investiture
of which Ferdinand had engaged to grant her son, and likewifc
to bellow one of his daughters upon him in marriage.

UPON the rcfignation of the young King, Martinuzzi, and

after his example the reft of the Transylvanian grandees, Iwvore
allegiance to Ferdinand ; who, in order to testify his grateful sense
of the zeal as well as success with which that prelate had served
him, affeeted to diftinguilh him by every poflible mark of favour
and confidence. He appointed him governor of Transylvania,
with almost unlimited authority; lie ordered Caftaldo to pay the
greatest deference to his opinion and commands; he encrcafed
his revenues, which were already very great, by new appoint-
ments ; he nominated him archbifhopof Gran, and prevailed on
the Pope to raise him to the dignity of Cardinal. All this
ostentation of good-will, however, was void of sincerity, and
calculated to conceal sentiments the molt perfectly its reverse.
Ferdinand dreaded Martinuzzi's abilities; diftrufled his fidelity ;
and foresaw, that as his extensive authority enabled him to
check any attempt towards circumscribing or abolishing the
'extensive privileges which the Hungarian nobles posseTsed, he
would stand forth, on every occasion, the guardian of the liber-

VOL. III. G g tics

BOOK X.

$--S-.

Appointed
governor of
that part of
Huntgary
which was
friijed to
Ferdinand.

225

BooK X.

1551.

Ferdinand
begins to
Form designs
againit hini.

ties of his country, rather than ad the part of a viceroy devoted
to the will of the sovereign.

FOR this reason, lie secretly gave it in charge to Caftaldo, to

watch his motions, to guard against his designs, and to thwart
his meafuies. But Martinuzzi, either because he did not per-
ceive that Caftaldo was placed as a spy on his actions, or because
he despised Ferdinand's infiduous arts, afiumed the direction of
the war against the Turks with his usual tone of authority, and
condutedt it with great magnanimity, and no lets success. He
recovered some. places of which the Infidels had taken pofleflion;
he rendered their attempts to reduce others abortive; and eftab-
lifhed Ferdinand's authority not only in Transylvania, but in the
Bannat of Temefwar, and several of the countries adjacent. In
carrying on there operations, he often differed in sentiments from
Cafftaldo and his officers, and treated the Turkifl prisoners with
a degree of humanity, and even of generosity, which Clftaldo
loudly condemned. This was represented at Vienna as an art-
ful method of courting the friendship of the infidels, that, by
securing their protection, he might flhake off all dependence upon
the Sovereign whom he now acknowledged. Though Marti-
nuzzi, injuftification of his own conduCd, contended that it was
impolitic to exasperate, by unnecefTary severities, an enemy
prone to revenge, Caftaldo's accusation gained credit with Ferdi-
nand, prepofleffed already against Martinuzzi, and jealous of
every thing that could endanger his authority in Hungary, in
proportion as he knew it to be precarious and ill established.
These suspicions, Caftaldo confirmed and strengthened, by the
intelligence which he transmitted continually to his confidents
at Vienna. By misrepresenting what was innocent, and put-
ting the worst conftruition on what seemed dubious in Marti-

nuzzi's
n26

EMPEROR CHARLES V.

nuzzi's condui t; by imputing to him deligns which he never
formed, and charging him with actions of which lie was not
guilty; he at last convinced Ferdinand, that, in order to prcferve
his Hungarian crown, lie mulf cut off that ambitious prelate.
But Ferdinand, foreseeing that it would be dangerous to pro-
ceed in the regular courle of law against a subject of such exorbi-
tant power, as enabled him to set his fovercign at defiance, dcter-
mined to employ violence in order to obtain that fatisfadion, which
the laws were too feeble to afford him.

HE iflued his orders accordingly to Caflaldo, who willingly

undertook that infamous service. Having communlicated tile
design to some Italian and Spanish officers wholm lie could trufl,
and concerted with them the plan of executing it; they entered
Martinuzzi's apartment, eaily one morning, under pretelce ('o
presenting to him tome difpatchcs which were to be Tent of'
immediately to Vienna ; and while lie perullfd a paper itl
attention, one of their number firuck him with his poinard in
the throat. The blew was not mortal; Martinuzzi flarted up
with the intrepidity natural to him, and grappling the afllfin,
threw him to the ground ;but the other conspirators rufliiig in,
an old man, unarmed, and alone, could not long flufsain ficth ll i
unequal conflict, but flnk under tile wounds which lie received
from so many hands. Their dread of the foreign troops restrained
the Transylvanians from rising in arms, in order to take ven-
geance on the murderers of a prelate who hlid long' been the ob-
jec of their love as well as veneration. They' spoke of the
deed, however, with horror and execration ; and exclaimed againif
Ferdinand, whom neither gratitude for recent and important
services, nor reverence for a charalter confidcrcd as sacrcd and
inviolable among Chriflians, could reflrain fiom flieddingl tile

G g z blood

He is na Thc
rsirted by hirs
coll urraiid.

Dec. t S.

' he enRa of
tl:at violent
anction.

227

BOOK X.

ISS'-
1551.

BOOK X.

1531.

Maurice
courts the
prorelion of
the tr'ench
King.

blood of a man, whose only crime was attachment to his native
country. The nobles, detesting the jealous as well as cruel po-
licy of a court, which, upon uncertain and improbable surmises,
had given up a person no less conspicuous for his merit than
his rank, to be butchered by aflaflins, either retired to their
own estates, or if they continued with the Austrian army, grew
cold to the service. The Turks, encouraged by the death of
an enemy whose abilities they knew and dreaded, prepared
to renew hostilities early in the spring; and instead of the fe-
curity which Ferdinand had expeced from the removal of Mar-
tinuzzi, it was evident that his territories in Hungary were about
to be attaked with greater vigour, and defended with less zeal than
ever a.

MIEANWHILE, Maurice having almost finished his intrigues

and preparations, was on the point of declaring his intentions
openly, and of taking the field againfl the Emperor. His first
care, after he came to this resolution, was to disclaim that nar-
row and bigotted maxim of the confederates of Smalkalde,
which had led them to shun all connection with foreigners.
He had observed how fatal this had been to their cause; and in-
ftrtuted by their error, he was as eager to court the proteAion of
I-enry II. as they had been follicitous to prevent the interposition
of Francis I. Happily for him, he found Henry in a difpofi-
tion to liften to the first overture on his part, and in a situation
which enabled him to bring the whole force of the French monar-
chy into action. Henry had long observed the progress of the

a Sleid. 3;. 'rhnan. lib. ix. 309, &c. Ifltanlihffi Hist. Regn. Hungarici

lib. xvi. 189, &c. Mene. de Ribier, ii. 671. Natalis Colnitis Hilloria lib. iv.
84, &c.

Emperor's

Emperor's arms with jealousy, and wifled to difitnguifll him- BOOK X.
self by trying his itrength againit the fame encmry, whom it
had been the glory of his father's reign to oppose. He had
laid hold on the first opportunity in his power of thwarting the
Emperor's designs, by taking the Duke of Parma under his pro-
tection; and hoffilities were already begun, not only in that dut-
chy but in Piedmont. Having terminated the war with England
by a peace, no less advantageous to himself than honourable for his
allies the Scots, the restless and enterprizing courage of his nobles
was impatient to display itself on some theatre of action more
conspicuous than the petty operations in Parma or Piedmont as-
forded them.

JOHN DE FIESSE, binlop of Eayonne, whom Henry had sent His treaty

with him.

into Germany, under pretence of hiring troops to be employed
in Italy, was empowered to conclude a treaty in form with
Maurice and his aflociates. As it would have been very inde-
cent in a King of France to have undertaken the defence of
the Protestant church, the interests of religion, how much
soever they might be affeced by the treaty, were not once
mentioned in any of the articles. Religious concerns they
pretended to commit entirely to the disposition of divine pro-
vidence; the only motives afligned for (heir present confcde-
racy against Charles were to procure the Land(grave liberty, and
to prevent the subversion of the ancient conflitution and laws of
the German Empire. In order to accomplifl there ends, it was
agreed, that all the contrating parties should, at the fame time,
declare war against the Emperor; that neither peace nor truce
flould be made but by common content, nor without including
each of the confederates; that in order to guard againli the

'ineon

229

BOOK X. inconveniencies of anarchy, or of pretensions to joint commands

'S, ^r Maurice fliould be acknowledged as head of the German confe-

derates, with absolute authority in all military aflairs that
Maurice and his associates should bring into the field seven thou-
sand horse, with a proportional number of infantry; that
towards the fubfiftance of this army, during the three firit months
of the war, Henry flould contribute two hundred and forty
thousand crowns, and afterwards sixty thousand crowns a month,
as long as they continued in arms; that Henry should attack the
Emperor on the fide of Lorrain with a powerful army'; that if
it were found requisite to elect a new emperor, such a person
flould be nominated as lhall be agreeable to the King of France b
This treaty was concluded on the fifth of October, some time
before Magdeburg surrendered, and the preparatory negocia-
tions. were conducted with such profound secrecy, that of all the
Princes who afterwards acceded to it, Maurice communicated
what he was carrying on to two only, John Albert, the reigning
duke of Mecklenburg, and William of Hesse, the Landgrave's
eldest son. Thie league itself was no less anxiously concealed,
and with such fortunate care, that no rumour concerning it
reached the ears of the Emperor or his ministers, nor do they
seem to have conceived the mcft distant fuipicion of fuich a
tranfafion.

Sollic;ts tie AT the falme time Maurice, with a solicitude which was
Rid of Eld-
ward VI. of careful to draw rome acceflion of strength from every quar-
England. ter, applied to Edward VI. of England, and requested a

subsidy of four hundred thousand crowns for the flpport of

b Recucil des Traitez, tom. ii. 258. Thuan. lib. viii. 279.

a con-
. 30o

a confederacy formed in defence of. the Protefant' religion.
But the factions which prevailed in the Englilh court during
the minority of that Prince, and which deprived both the coun-
cils and arms of the nation of their wonted vigour, left the
Englifhi ministers neither time nor inclination to attend to foreign
affairs, and prevented Maurice's obtaining that aid, whlich
their zeal for the Reformation would have prompted them
to grant him '.

MAURICE, however, having secured tie protetion of ficlh a

powerfil Monarch as Henry II. proceeded witlh great confidence,
but with equal caution, to execute his plan. As lie judged it
neceflary to make one effort more, in order to obtain the Empe-
ror's content that the Landgrave fiould be set at liberty, le rent
a solemn embafly, in his own name, and in that of the Elector
of Brandenburg, to Infpruck. After refiuming, at great lengtli,
all the fads and arguments upon which they founded their
claim, and representing, in the fIrongeft terms, the peculiar
engagements which bound them to be to nafiduous in their so-
licitations, they renewed the request in behalf of the unfortu-
nate prisoner, which thlcy had so often preferred in vain. The
Ele&or Palatine, the Duke of Wurtemberg, the Dukes of Meck-
lenburg, the Duke of Deuxponts, the Marquis of Brandenburg
Bareith, and the Marquis of Baden, by their ambafladors, con-
curred with them in their fitit. Letters were likewise delivered
to the fame effect from the King of Denmark, the Duke of
Bavaria, and the Dukes of Lunenburg. Even the King of
the Romans, moved with companion towards the Landgrave in

c Burnet's Hilt. of the Reform. vol. ii, Append. 37.

his.

BOOK X.

S'S'.

Demands
once more
that the
Landgrave
liould be set
at liberty.
December

23t

BooK X. his wretched situation, or influenced, perhaps, by a secret jea

' lousy of his brother's power and designs, which since his attempt

to alter the order of fucceflion in the Empire, he had come to
view with other eyes, and dreaded to a great degree, joined in
this application.

BUT Charles, constant to his own system, with regard to the

Landgrave, eluded a demand urged by such powerful intercef-
fors; and having declared that he would communicate his refo
lution concerning the matter to Maurice as soon as he arrived at
tnfpruck, where he was every day expected, he did not deign to
descend into any more particular explication of his intentions'.
This application, though of no benefit to the Landgrave, was of
great advantage to Maurice. It served to justify his subsequent
proceedings, and to demonstrate the neceflity of employing arms
in order to extort that equitable conceflion, which his mediation
or intreaty could not obtain. It was of use, too, to confirm the
Emperor in his security, as both the solemnity of the application,
and the solicitude with which so many Princes were drawn in to
enforce it, led him to conclude, that Maurice placed all his hopes
of restoring the Landgrave to liberty, in gaining his consent
to difniis him.

1552. MAURICE employed artifices fRill more refined to conceal his

tintues ton machinations, to amuse the Emperor and to gain time. He
amuse the affected to be more solicitous than ever to find out some expe-
Emperor.

dient for removing the difficulties with regard to the fafe-con-
duat for the Protoftant divines appointed to attend the council,

.d. 53. .
d Sleid. 531. Thaun, lib. viii. 28o.

so
232

to that they might repair thither with fifety. His nmbafadort
at Trent had frequent conferences concerning this matter, with
the Imperial ambasSadors in that city, and laid open their lienti-
ments to them with the appearance of the most unreserved confi-
dence. He was willing, at last, to have it believed, that lie thought
all differences with refpef to this preliminary article were on
the point of being adjusted ; and in order to give credit to this
opinion, he commanded Melandthon together with his brethren to
set out on their journey to Trent. At the fame time, he held a
close correspondence with the Imperial court at Infpruck, and re-
newed on every occasion his profeflions of fidelity and attachment
to the Emperor. He talked continually of his intention of goilg
to Infpruck in person ; le ordered a house to be hired for him in
that city, and to be fitted up with the grcateft dispatch for his re-
ception '.

BuT, profoundly fiilled as Maurice was in the arts of deceit,

and impenetrable as he thought the veil to be under which lie
concealed his designs, there were several things in his conduct
which alarmed the Eniperor amidst his security, and tempted him
frequently to fufped that he was meditating something extraor-
dinary. As there fiffpicions took their rife from circumstances
inconsiderable in themselves, or of an ambiguous as well as un-
certain nature, they were more than counterbalanced by Maurice's
nddrefs and the Emperor would not, lightly, give up his con.
fidence in a man, whom he had once trusted and loaded with
favours. One particular alone seemed to be of such consequence,
that he thought it neceflary to demand an explanation with
regard to it. The troops which George of Meckleiiburg had'

c Arnoldi vita Maurit. ap. Menken, ii. 12 9,
VoL.. Ill. H h taken

BolOK X.

SSZ,

The Empe-
ror conceives
loibe fillpici-
on coiccrn-
ing his intcn-
tions.

taken into pay after the capitulation of Magdeburg, having
fixed their quarters in Thuringia, lived at discretion on the lands
of the rich ecclesiastics in their neighbourhood. Their licence
and rapaciousness were intolerable. Such as felt or dreaded their
exations, complained loudly to the Emperor, and represented
them as a body of men kept in readiness for some desperate enter-
prize. But Maurice, partly by extenuating the enormities of which
they had been guilty, partly by representing the impofibility of
disbanding there troops, or of keeping them to regular difciplinec
unless the arrears still due to them by the Emperor were paid,
either removed the apprehensions which this had occasioned, or
as Charles was not in a condition to satisfy the demands of
there soldiers, obliged him to be silent with regard to the mat-
ter '.

THE time of ation was now approaching. Maurice had

privately dispatched Albert of Brandenburg to Paris, in order to
confirm his league with Henry, and to haften the march of the
French army. He had taken measures to bring his own fubjeas
together on the first summons; he had provided for the security of
Saxony while he should be absent with. the army; and he held the
troops in Thuringia, on which lie chiefly depended, ready .to ad-
vance on a moment's warning. All these complicated operations
were carried on without being discovered by the court at Infpruck,
and the Emperor remained there in perfect tranquillity, busied en-
tirely in counteracing the intrigues of the Pope's legate at Trent,
and in fettling the conditions on which the Protestant divines should
be admitted into the council, as if there had not been any tranfadi-
on of greater moment in agitation.

f Sikid. 549. 'rluln. 339.
BOOK X.

'5S2Z
A 5;2.

Maurice pre-
pares for
action.
234

.' 33
* At S
"..;1

THIS credulous security in a Prince) whore sagacity in oblfrving

the conduct of all around him, commonly led him to an excels of
difrruft, may seem unaccountable, and has been imputed to infa-
tuation. But betides the exquisite address with which Maurice
concealed his intentions, tw;o circuiiilances contributed to the de-
lusion. The gout returned upon Charles Toon after his arrival at
Infpruck, with an encreafe of violence ; a:d his conlftitution being
broken by such frequent attacks, lie was Ieldom able to exert his
natural vigour of mind, or to confider affairs with his usual vigi-
lance and penetration; and Granvelle, bishop of Arras, his prime
minister, though one of the most subtle ftatefmcn of that, or per-
haps of any age, was on this occasion the dupe of his own craft.
He entertained such an high opinion of his own abilities, and held
the political talents of the Germans in fltch contempt, that he de-
spifed all the intimations given him concerning Maurice's secret
machinations, or the dangerous designs which lie was carrying
on. When the Duke of Alva, whose dark suspicious mind har-
boured many doubts concerning the Eleator's sincerity, proposed
calling him immediately to court to answer for his conduct, he re-
plied with great scorn, that there apprehensions were groundless,
and that a drunken German head was too gross to form any scheme
which he could not easily penetrate and baffle. Nor did le as-
fume this peremptory tone merely from confidence in his own
discernment; he had bribed two of Maurice's miniflers, and
received from them frequent and minute information concern-
ing all their master's motions. But through this very channel,
by which he expeted to gain access to all Maurice's counsels,
and even to his thoughts, fuich intelligence was conveyed to him
as compleated his deception. Maurice fortunately discovercd

H Iih the

BtooK X.

Circuiailancot
which con-
trihulcd to
dercnive the
Eiiqszcior,

and his
libiavlt2r.

the correspondence of the two traitors with Granvelle, and inftend
of punifling them for their crime, he dexterously availed himself
of their fraud, and turned his own arts against the bishop. He
asse&ted to treat these ministers with greater confidence than ever
he admitted them to his consultations, and seemed to lay open his.
heart to them; and taking care all the while to let them be ac-
quainted witlh nothing but what it was his interest should be known,
they tranfiitted to Infpruck such accounts as pollefeed Granvelle
with a fim belief of his sincerity and good intentionsg. The Em-
peror'himfelf, in the fulness of security, was so little moved by a
memorial, in name of the ecclesiastical Elecors, admonifling him
to be on his guard against Maurice, that he made light of this in-
telligence; and his answer to them abounds with declarations of
his entire and confident reliance on the fidelity as well as attach-

ment of that Prince h.

Maurice takes A'r last Maurice's preparations were compleated, and he had
the/{eld
:ig.illl the the atipfa¢tion to find that his intrigues and designs were fill

iipcor. unknown. But, though now ready to take the field, he did not

lay aside the arts which lie had hitherto employed; and by one
piece of craft more, he deceived his enemies a few days longer.
1-le gave out, that he was about to begin that journey to Infpruck
of which he had so often talked, a;.d he took one of the miniters
whiom Granvelle had bribed to attend him thither. After tra-
velling post a few flages, he pretended to be indifpolid by the
fatigue of the journey, and dispatching the fufpedcd minifler to
make his apology to the Emperor for this delay, and to afflire
him that he would be at Infpruck within a few days; as fooon
as this spy on his actions was gone, he mounted on horseback,
,Mirch 18. rode full lpced towards Thuringia, joined his army which

g M\Ieh ii, !Veiioirs fol. edit. p. z.

h Slcid. 53S.

amountcd

BOOK X.
%.-V--

isz.
236

amounted to twenty thousand foot and five thousand horCe, and
put it immediately in motion *..

AT the fame time he published a manifeflo concerning his

reasons for taking arms. These were three in number ; That
he might secure the Proteflant religion, which was threatened
with immediate dcftrudtion ; That he might maintain the con-
ftitution and laws of the Empire, and save Germinny from be-
ing fubjeaed to the domination of an absolute monarch; That
he might deliver the Landgrave of Hesse from the miseries of a
long and unjust imprisonment. By the first, he rouzed all tile
favourers of the Reformation, a party formidable by their zeal as
well as numbers, and rendered desperate by opprefion. By the
second, he intcrefted all the friends of liberty, Catholicks as well
as Protestants, and made it their interest to unite with him in al-
serting the rights and privileges common to both. The third,
bGides the glory which ih acquired by his zeal to fulfil his en-
gagements to the unhappy prisoner, was become a cause of ge-
neral .corcern, not only from the compallion which the Land-
grave's sufferings excited, but from indignation at the injustice and
rigour.of the Emperor's proceedings againfl him. Together with
Maurice's manifelfo, another appeared n the name of Albert Mar-
quis of Brandenburgh Culmbach, who had joiped him with a
body of adventurers whom he hal drawn .together, The fiame
grievances which Maurice 'had pointed, out are mentioned in it,
but with an excess of virulence and animosity, fiuitable to the
charaater of the prince in whose name it was publilhed.

BOOK X.

' SS2.

Publishes a
manifeflo jus-
tifying his
conduq

* Melv. Mrem. . 13. These circuiflanccs coinccrniilg the Saxon milniiers

whom Granvclle had bribed, arc not mentioned by the German hiflori:ais;
but as ~ir James MIlvil received his information from thle Eleetor Pal.titic,
and as they arc perlfcly agreeable to the rct of Maurice's condu , tthey nlay
be conlidercd as authentick.

237

BOOK X.

1552.

He is power-
fully support-
cd by the
French King.

Maulice's o-
perations in
the field.

THE King of France addcd to these a manifesto in his own

name, in lwhich, after taking notice of the ancient alliance between
the French and German nations, both descended from the fame
ancestors; and after mentioning the application, which, in con-
sequence of this, some of the mofi illufirious among the German
Princes had made to him for his protecion ; le declared that lie
now took arms to re-eftablifl the ancient conititution of the Em-
pire, to deliver tome of its princes from captivity, and to secure
the privileges and independence of all the members of the Germanic
body. In this manifesto, Henry afflimed the extraordinary title of
Proteflor of the Liberties of Germauy, and of its captive Princes;
and there was engraved on it a cap, the ancient symbol of freedom,
placed between two daggers, in order to intimate to the Germans,
that this blefling was to be acquired and secured by force of
arms

MAURICE had now a very different part to act, but his

flexible genius was capable of accommodating itself to every
situation. The moment lie took arms, he was as bold and
enterprizing in the field, as he had been cautious and crafty in
the cabinet. He advanced by rapid marches towards the
Upper Germany. All the towns in his way opened their gates
to him. He reinstated the magistrates whom the Emperor had
deposed, and gave poflefion of the churches to the Proteitant
ministers whom he had ejeted. He direted his march to
Augsburg, and as the Imperial garrison which was too incon-
fiderable to think of defending it, retired immediately, he took

:Sleid. 549. Thuan. lib. x. 339. Mem.de Ribier. ii. 371.

porfirion
2538

poffelion of that great city, and made the fame changes there as
in the towns through which he had paied.

No words can express the Emperor's aftonifliment and con-

flernation at events so unexpeted. He saw a great number of
the German princes in arms against him, and the reft either
ready to join them, or wiflling success to their enterprize..
He beleld a. powerful Monarch united with them in close
league, seconding their operations in person at the head.
of a formidable army, while he, through negligence and cre-
dulity, which exposed him no leTs to scorn than to danger, had:
neither made nor was in condition to make any effetual provi-
lion either for crushing his rebellious filbjetas or resitting the
invasion of the foreign enemy. Part of his Spanish troops had'
been ordered into Hungary against the Turks; the reft had'
marched, back to Italy upon occasion of the war in the dutchy
of Parma. The bands of veteran Germans had been difinifled be--
cause he was not able to pay them; or had entered into Maurice's
service after the liege of Mlgdeburg; and he remained at Ins-
pruek with a body of soldiers scarce strong enough to guard his
own person. His treasury was as much exhausted, as his army
was reduced. He had received no remittances for rome time from
the new world, He had forfeited all credit with the merchants of
Genoa and Venice, who refused to lend'him money, tlho tempted'
by the offer of' exorbitant interest: Thus Charles, though un-
doubtedly the most considerable potentate in Christendom, and
capable of exerting the greatest strength, as his power, though
violently attacked, was still unimpaired, found himself in a
situation which rendered him unable to make such a sudden

k Slcid, 555 Tuilan. 342.

and.

BOOK X.

April 1.

The Empe-
ror's altonilffi
ment and.
distress.

23~

BOOK X.

1552.

Endeavours to
gain time by
a negociatlon.

Progress ot
the French
army.

and vigorous effort as the juncture required, and was necessary to
have saved him from the present danger.

IN this situation, he placed all his hopes on negociating; the only
resource of those who are conscious of their own weakness. But
thinking it inconfiltent with his dignity to make the first advances
to fubje&ts who were in arms against him; he avoided that inde-
corum by employing the mediation of his brother Ferdinand.
Maurice confiding in his own talents to conduct any negociation in
filch a manner as to derive advantage from it, and hoping that by
the appearance of facility in hearkening to the first overture of ac-
commodation, he might amuse the Emperor and tempt him to
flacken the activity with which he was now preparing to defend
himself, readily agreed to an interview with Ferdinand in the town
of Lintz in Auitria: and having left his army to proceed on its
march under the command of the Duke of Mecklenburg, lie re-
paired thither.

THE Kingof France punctually fulfilled his engagement to his

allies. He took the field early with a numerous and well
appointed army, and marching diretly into Lorrain, Toul and
Verdun opened their gates at his approach. His forces appeared
next before Metz, and that city by a fraudulent stratagem of
the Conitable Montmorency, who having obtained permiflion to
pass through it with a small guard, introduced as many troops
as were sufficient to overpower the garrison, was likewise seized
without bloodfled. Henry made his entry into all there towns
with great pomp; hle obliged the inhabitants to swear allegiance
to him and annexed these important conquests to the French
Monarchy. He left a firong garrison in Metz. From thence
lhe advanced towards Alsace in order to attempt new conquests,

to
240

to which the success that had hitherto attended his arms invited
him '.

THE conference at Lintz did not produce any accommodation.

Maurice, when he consented to it, seems to have had nothing
in view but to amuse the Emperor; for lie made fich demands
both in behalf of his confederates, and their ally the French King,
as he knew would not be accepted by a Prince, too haughty to sub-
mit, at once, to conditions dictated by an enemy. But how firmly
soever Maurice adhered during the negociation to the interests of
his afociites, or how fteaddily soever he kept in view the objets
which had induced him to take arms, he often profened a firong
inclination to terminate the differences with the Emperor in an
amicable manner. Encouraged by this appearance of a pacifick
disposition, Ferdinand proposed a second interview at Palfau on
the twenty-fixth of May, and that a truce should commence on that
day, and continue till the tenth of June, in order to give them
leisure for adjusting all the points in dispute.

UpONr this, Maurice rejoined his army on the ninth of May,

which had now advanced to Gundelfingen. He put his troops
in motion next morning; and as sixteen days yet remained for
action before the commencement of the truce, he resolved, during
that period, to venture upon an enterprize, the success of which
would be so decisive, as would render the negociations at Paffau
extremely short, and entitle him to treat upon his own terms.
He foresaw that the profpe& of a ceflation of arms, which was
to take place so soon, together with the opinion of his earnest-

I Thuan. 349.
VOL. ll. I i left

BOOK X.

I552.

The negocia.
tions between
the Emperor
and Maurice
of no elfct.

Maurice ad-
vances to-
wards Ins-
pruck.

241

BOOK X.

A552.

Takes the
castle of
Ehienibergh.

ness to re-eRfablill peace, with which he had artfully amused Ser-
dinand, could not fail of inspiring the Emperor with such faire
hopes, that he would naturally become remiss, and relapse into
for: degree of that security, which had already been so fatal to
him. Relying on this conjeture, he marched diretly towards
Infpruck, and advanced with the most rapid motion that could be
given to so great a body of troops. On the eighteenth he arrived
at Fieffen, a post of great consequence, at the entrance into the.
Tyrolefe. There he found a body of eight hundred men, whom
the Emperor had afTembled, strongly entrenched, in order to
oppose his progress. He attacked them inflantly with such
violence and impetuosity, that they abandoned their lines pre-
cipitantly, and falling back on a second body ported near Ruten,
communicated to those troops, the pannick terror with which they
themselves had been seized, so that they likewise took to flight,
after a feeble refifance.

ELATED with this success, which exceeded his most finguine

hopes, Maurice palsed on to Ehrenbergh, a cattle situated on an
high and Reep precipice, which commanded the only 'paTs thiough
the Mountains As this fort had been fulrecndercd t6 :the Pro-
telants, at the beginning of the Smalkaldic war, because the
garrison was then too weak to defend it, the Emperor, sensible
of its ilnportnce, had taken care, at this juncture, to throw into
it a body of troops sufficient to maintain it against the greatest
army. But a flepherd, in pursuing a goat which had firayed
from his flock, having discovered an unknown path by which
it was poflible to ascend to the top of the rock, came with this
seasonable piece of intelligence to Maurice. A finall band of
chosen foklicrs under the command of George of Mccklenbufrgh

was
24z

was inflantly ordered to follow this guide. They set out in the
evening, and clambering up the rugged track with infinite
fatigue as well as danger, they rcached the uirnmit unperceived;
and at an hour which had been concerted, when Maurice began the
aflault on the one fide of the castle, they appeared on the other,
ready to scale the walls, which were feeble in that place, because
it had been hitherto deemed inacceflible. The garrifbn, struck
with terror at the fight of an enemy on a quarter where they
had thought themselves perfecly secure, immediately threw
down their arms. Maurice, almost without bloodfled, and
which was of greater consequence to him, without lots of time,
took poffeflion of a place, the redu&cion of which might have re-
tarded him long, and have required the utmost efforts of his va-
lour and skill .

MAURICE was now only two days march from Infpruck, and

without losing a moment he ordered his infantry to advance
thither, having left his cavalry, which was unserviceable in that
mountainous country, at Fieflen, to guard the mouth of the
pass. He proposed to advance with fiuch rapidity as to anticipate
any accounts of the loss of Ehrenbergh, and to furprize the Em-
peror, together with his attendants in an open town incapable
of defence. But just as his troops began to move, a battalion of
mercenaries mutinied, declaring that they would not flir until
they had received the gratuity, which, according to the cuftomn
of that age, they claimed as the recompence due to them for
having taken a place by aflault. It was with great difficulty as well
as danger, and not without some considerable lots of time, that

m Arnoldi vita Maurit. 123,

I i 2 Maurice

BooK X.

A 55a.

A mutiny of
Mis troops ie-
tnids hia
Aiiarch.

243

BOOK X.

The Emperor
flie I, con-
fusion troon
Infpruck.

Maurice en-
ters that
town.

Maurice quieted this insurreCtion, and prevailed on the soldiers to
follow him to a place where he promised them fuoh rich booty as
would be an ample reward for all their services.

To the delay, occasioned by this unforeseen accident, the

Emperor owed his safety. He was informed of the approaching
danger late in the evening, and knowing that nothing could save
him but a speedy flight, he instantly left Infpruck, without regard-
ing the darkness of the night, or the violence of the rain which
happened to fall at that time; and notwithstanding his being so
mnuch debilitated by the gout that he could bear no motion but
that of a litter, he travelled by the light of torches, taking his
way over the Alps by roads almost impallible. His courtiers and
attendants followed him with equal precipitation, some of them on
such horses as they could hastily procure, many of them on foot,
and all in the utmoftconfufion. In this miserable plight, very un-
like the pomp with which Charles had appeared during the five
preceding years as the conqueror of Germany, he arrived
at length with his deje&ed train at Villach in Carinthia, and
scarce thought himself secure even in that remote. inacceflible
corner.

MAURICE entered Infpruck a few hours after the Emperor

mid his attendants had left it;. and enraged that the prey should
escape out of his hands when he was just ready to seize
it, he pursued them Come miles; but finding, it impollible to
overtake persons, to whom their fear gave speed, he returned to
the town, and abandoned all the Emperor's baggage and that of
his ministers to be plundered by the soldiers; while he preserved
untouched every thing belonging to the King of the Romans,
either because he had formed Come friendly connection with

that
244

that Prince, or because he wished to have it believed that such a'
connection subsisted between them. As there now remained only
three days to the commencement of the truce, (with such nicety.
had Maurice calculated his operations) he set out for Paflau, that
he might meet Ferdinand on the day appointed.

Boor. X.

a Sp.

BEFORE Charles left Infpruck, he withdrew the guards placed

on the degraded Eleator of Saxony, whom, during five years, he
had carried about with him as a prisoner; and let him entirely at
liberty, either with an intention to embarrass Maurice by letting.
oose a rival, who might dispute his title to his dominions and dig-
nity, or from a sense of the indecency of detaining him a prisoner;,
while he limfelf run the rifque of being deprived of his own liberty.
But that Prince, feeing no way of escaping but that which the Em.
peror took, and abhorring tie thoughts of falling into the hands of
a kinsman, whom hejuftly confidered as the author of all his mis-
fortunes, chore rather to accompany Charles in his flight, and to
expet the final decision of his fate from the treaty which was now.
approaching;.

THIS was not the only effect which Maurice's operations pro-

duced. It was no fboner known at Trent that lie had taken
arms, than a general, consternation seized the fathers of the
council. The German prelates immediately returned home;
that they might provide for the safety of their territories.. The
reft were extremely impatient to be gone; and the legate, who.
had hitherto disappointed all the endeavours of the Imperial
ambassadors to procure for the Protestant divines an audience in
the council; laid hold with joy on such a plausible pretext for dis.

miflin,,

The Emperor
sets the Elec
tor of Saxony
at liberty.

The council
of Trent
breaks up in'
great conter -
nation.

q45

Book X.

1552.

The effe& of
its decrees.

mifing an aflembly, which he had found it so difficult to govern.,
In a congregation held on the twenty-eighth of April, a decree wais
issued proroguing the council during two years, and appointing it
to meet at the expiration of that.time, if peace were tlhen re:efta-
blifhed in Europe n

. This, prorogation, however, continued no less

than ten years; and its proceedings when re-assembled in the year
one thousand five hundred and fixty-two, fall not within the period
prescribed to this history.

T.HP convocation of this assembly had been pafionately desired

by all the. fates and Princes in Christendom, who,. from the
wisdom and piety of prelates representing the whole body of the
faithful, expected some charitable and efficacious endeavours
towards composing the distensions which unhappily had arisen
in the church. But the several Popes by wlhoe authority it was
called, had other objects in view; and exerting all their power
or policy to attain these; acquired by the abilities as well as
address of their .legates, by the ignorance of many of the pre-
lates, and by the servility of the indigent Italian bishops, such
influence in the council, that they dictated all its decrees, and
framed them not with an intention to restore unity and concord
to the church, but to eftablifl their own dominion, or tq con-
firm these tenets, upon which they imagined that dominion to
be founded. Dotrines, which had hitherto been admitted upon
the credit of tradition alone, and received with some latitude of
interpretation, were defined with a scrupulous nicety, and con-
firmed by the fantion. of authority. Rites which had formerly
been observed only in deference to custom supposed to be ancient,
were eftablithed by the decrees of the church, and declared to

n F. Paul, 3S3.

be
246

be eflential parts of its worflip. The breach, inifead of being
closed, was widened, and made irreperable. In place of any at-
tempt to reconcile the cointending parties,: a line was drawn with
fich studied acctitsat, as ascertained and marked out the diftinti-
on between them. 'This Rlill serves to keep them at a distance;
and must, without some signal interposition of divine Providence;
render the separation perpetual. : ,

knowldge of te proceedings of tis ebly is derie

OUR knowledge of tlhe proceedings of this' assembly is derived

from three diffirent authors. Father Paul of Venice wrote his
history of the Council of Trent, while the memory of what had
passed there was recent, and some wvho had been members of it
were Rill alive. He has exposed the, intrigues, and ,artifi!¢,s by
which it was conduced, with a freedom and fevprity which have
given a deep wound to the credit and reputation of tlle colucil.
He has decfribcd its deliberations, and explained its decrees,
with such perlpicuity and depth of thought, with fiuch various
erudition and such force of reason; a5 have Ijuftly entitled, his
work to be placed among the most admired historical compofi-
tions. :About half a century thereafter, the Jesuit Pallavicini
publillied his'hiiflory of the coitncil in oppolition to that of
Father Paul, 'and by employing all thie force of an acute 'and te-
fining genius to invalidate the credit, or to confute the realonings
of his antagonist, hle lhbours to prove, by artful apologies for the
proceedings of the bciincil,.'antid fillttile interpretations of its de-
crees, ithat' it deiiberited' wti h'inlpartiality, and decided with
judgment as well as 'cahdbur. :Vhargis9, a Spanilli dotor of laws,.
sent the blfhop of Arras a ire'gilar account of the tranfaftions
there, explaining all the arts which the Legate employed to in-
fltence, 'or vcr-a\vc tlie co;itiLil. ' is letters have been publihi-

.. ' s :**:
' I . * * ;" '** ** *' ! . ^ * ed ,

BooKrX.

1S52.

Charniter of
the huistoriang
of this coun
cil.

Bo o K X.

1552.

The French
endeavour to
furprize
Strafburgh.
i

ed, in which he inveighs against the Papal court with that asperity
of censure, which was natural to a man whose situation enabled
him to observe its arts thoroughly, and who was obliged to exert
all his attention and talents in order to disappoint them. But
whichsoever of there authors an intelligent person takes for his
guide, in forming a judgment concerning the spirit of the council,
he must discover so much ambition as well as artifice among some
of the members, so much ignorance and corruption among others i
he must observe such a large infusion of human policy and paflions,
but such a scanty portion of that simplicity of heart,' fanaity of
manners, and love of truth, which alone qualify men to determine
wihat doctrines are worthy of God, and what worship is acceptable
to him; that;he will find it no easy matter to believe, that any ex-
traordinary influence of the Holy Ghost hovered over this assembly,
and dictated its decrees.

WHILE Maurice was employed in negociating with the King
of the Romans at Lintz, or in making war on the Emperor in
the Tyrol, the French King had advanced into Alsace as far as
Strafburgh ; and having demanded leave of the Senate to march
through the city, he hoped that by repeating the fame fraud
which he had praftifed at Metz, he might render himself master
of the place, and by that means secure a pafage over the Rhine
into the heart of Germany. But the Strafburghers, infiruded
and put on their guard by the credulity and misfortune of their
neighbours, (hut their gates; and having aflembled a garrison
of five thousand soldiers, repaired their fortifications, razed the
houses in their suburbs, and determined to defend themselves to
the utmost. At the fame time they sent a deputation of their
nmoft refpedable citizens to the King, in order to divert him
from making any hostile attempt upon them. The Eledors of

Treves
24%

Treves and Cologn, thc Duke of Cleves, and other Princes in the
neighbourhood, interposed in their behalf; beseeching -lenry that
lie would not forget so soon the title whlich he had geicroufly
afrumed ; and inflead of being tie Deliverer of Germany, become
its Oppressor. The Swils cantons seconded them with zcal, Ibli-
citing Henry to lpare a city which had long been conneled with
their community in friendflip and alliance.

POW\ERFUL as this united interceflion was, it would nct liave

prevailed on Henry to forego a prize of so much value, if lie had
been in a condition to have seizcd it. But, in that age, the
method of fubfifling numerous armies at a diRance fiom the
frontiers of their own country, was imperfetly underflood, and
neither the revenues of Princes, nor their experience in thc art
of war, were equal to the great and complicatcd eflbrts which
such an undertaking required. The French, though not far
removed from their own country, began already to fufTcr for
wantof provisions, and had no fificient magazines collected to
support them during a siege, which must neceflarily have been
of great length ". At the fame time, the Qleen of Hungary,
governess of the Low-Countries, had aflemblel a consid rable
body of troops, which, under the ccmmand of Martin de Roffem,
laid waae Champagne, and threatened tile adjacent provinces of
France. These concurrilg circumifances obliged the King,
though with reluctance, to abandon the enterprize. But being
willing to acquire some merit with his allies, by this retreat
which he could not avoid, he pretended to the Swiss that he had
taken the resolution merely in compliance with their requeflt
and then, after giving orders that all the horses. in his army

o Thuan. 35t, 352.
VOL. III.

) Slcid. 557. Brantcme, tom. vii. 39.

BooK X.

But vitihout
LUcceisu.

249
Kk

fltould

BOOK X.

1552.

The opera-
tions otAlbert
of Branden-
burg.

should be led to drink in the Rhine, as a proof of his having
pushed his conquests To far, he marched back towards Cham-
pagne.

WHILE the French King and the main army of the confe-

derates were thus employed; Albert of Brandenburgh was
entrusted with the command of a separate body of eight .thou-
sand men, consisting chiefly of mercenaries who had retorted to
his ltandard, rather from the hope of plunder, than the expec-
tation of regular pay. That Prince, feeing himfelfat the head
of such a number of desperate adventurers ready to follow
whereverhe fliould lead them, soon began to disdain a slate of
subordination, and to form such valt schemes of aggrandizing
himself, as seldom occur, even to ambitious minds, unless when
civil war or violent factions rouze them to bold exertions, by al-
luring them with immediate hopes of success. Full of there afpir-
ing thoughts, Albert made war in a manner very different from
the other confederates. He endeavoured to spread the terror of
his arms by the rapidity of his motions, as well as the extent and
rigour of his devaluations ; he exaced contributions wherever he
came, in order to amars fich a fiTn'of money, as would put it in his
power to keep his army togethe':; he laboured to get poffeflion
of Nuremberg, Ulme, or some other of the free cities in up-
per Germany, in lwhich, as a capital, he might fix the feat of
his power. But, finding these cities on their guard, and in a con-
dition to refit his attacks, he turned all his rage againit the
popish ecclefiafticks, whose territories he plundered with fiuch
wanton and merciless barbarity, as gave them a very unfavour-
able imprelfion of the spirit of that reformation in religion,
with zeal for which he pretended to be animated. The bishops

of
a50

of Bambergh and Wurtzbuigli, by their situation, lay particu-
larly exposed to his ravages l he obliged the former to transfer
to him, in property almost one half of his extensive diocfe;
and compelled the latter to advance an immense ibim in order
to save his country from ruin and desolation. During all thele
wild sallies, Albert paid no regard either to Mauricc's orders,
whose commands as Generalillimo of the league lie lhal en-
gaged to obey, or to the remonftrainces of the other con lede-
rates; and manifestly discovered that he attended only to his own
private emolument, without any solicitude about the common
cause, or the general objeas which had induced them to take
arms *.

MgANWHltLE, Maurice having ordered his army to march back

into Bavaria, and having publiflcd a proclamation enjoining the
Lutheran clergy and instruCtors of youth, to resume the exer-
cife of their functions in all tile cities, schools, and univeifities,
from which they had been ejeced, met Ferdinand at Palhau on
the twenty-fixth of May. As matters of the greatest con-
sequence to the future peace and independance of the Empire
were to be fettled in this congress, the eyes of all Germany
were fixed upon it. Besides Ferdinand and the Impe ial
ambassadors, the Duke of Bavaria, the bilhops of Saltzburgh,
and Aichftadt, the miniifers of all the Electors, together w.tll
deputies from most of the considerable Princes and free cities
resorted to Palasu. Maurice, in name of his afTociates, and the
King of theRomans as the Emperor's representative opened the
negociation. The princes who were present, together with the
deputies of such as were absent, adted as intercellors or media-
tors. between them.

IJooFe X.

a 5 5 .

The negoci.
sliotis ol
pecetc at Pal-
sial.
q Sleid. 561. Thuan. 357.

Kkz

.St

BOOK X.

1552.

The terms
which Mau-
rice proposed.

Powerfully
supported by
the Princes
of theEmpire.

MAURICE, in a long discourse, explained the motives of his

own condut. After having enumerated all the unconstitutional
and oppreflive ads of the Emperor's administration, he, agree-
ably to .the manifesto which he had published when he took
arms against him, limited his demands to the three articles.
That the Landgrave of Hesse should be immediately set at
liberty; That the grievances in the civil government of the
Empire should be redrefled; and that the Protestants should be
allowed the publick exercise of their religion without molefta-
tion. Ferdinand and the Imperial ambafTadors discovering their
unwillingness to gratify him with regard to all these points, the
mediators wrote a joint letter to the Emperor, beseeching him
to deliver Germany from the calamities of a civil war, by giving
such fatisfafion to Maurice and his party as might induce them
to lay down their arms; and at the fame time they prevailed
xupon Maurice to grant a prolongation of the truce for a short time,
during which they undertook to procure the Emperor's.final alp
i\er to his demands..

THIS requefl was presented to the Emperor in the name of

all the Princes of the Empire, Popish as well as Protestant, in
the name of fucli as had lent an helping hand to forward iris
ambitious schemes, as well.as of those who had viewed the pro-
grefs of his power with jealousy and dread. The uncommon and
cordial unanimity with which they concurred at this juncture
in enforcing Maurice's demands, and in recommending peace,
flowed from different causes. Such as were most attached to.
the Roman catlolick church could not help obterving tlat
the Protestant 'confederates were at the head of a numerous.
army, while the Emperor was but just beginning to provide fbr

his
25z

his own defence. They foresaw that great efforts would be re- B
quired of them, and would be neceflary on their part, in order
to cope with enemies, who had been allowed to get the start so far
and to attain such formidable power. Experience had taught
them that the fruit of all there efforts would be reaped by the
Emperor alone, and the more compleat any victory proved which
they should gain, the faster would they bind their own fetters,
and render them the more intolerable. These considerations made
them cautious how they contributed a second time, by their in-
discreet zeal, to put the Emperor in poffeniion of power which
would be fatal to the liberties of their country. Notwitlllanding
the implacable fierceness of the spirit of bigotry in that age, they
chore rather that the Protestants flould acquire that security for
their religion which they demanded, than by aflifling Charles to
oppress them, to give such additional force to the Imperial pre-
rogative, as would overturn the constitution of the Empire. To
all there considerations, the dread of feeing Germany laid waffe
by a civil war added new force. Many states of the Empire al-
ready felt the deftru&ive rage of Albert's arms, others dreaded
it, and all wiflied for an accommodation between the Emperor
and Maurice, which they. hoped would save them from that cruel
scourge.

SUCH were the reasons that induced f6 many Princes, not-

withstanding the variety of their political interests, and the op-
position in their religious sentiments, to unite in recommending 1
to the Emperor an accommodation with Maurice, not only as a
salutary, but as a neceifary measure. The motives which prompt-
ed Charles to desire it were not fewer or of less weight. Hle
was perfectly sensible of the advantage which the confedcrates

had,

a53

0 K X.
155~--

I

[he motives
vhicii influ-
miced the
'iipcror at
his juncturc.

'BOOK X.

.1552b

had acquired through his own negligence ; and he now felt the
insufficiency of his resources to oppose them. His Spanish fubjeats,
digiufted at his long absence, and weary of endless wars, which
were of no benefit to their country, refused to furnish him any
considerable supply either of men or money; and although he might
have hoped by his address or importunity to draw fiom them at
last more effe&ual aid; that, he knew, was too distant to be of
any service in the present exigency of his affairs. His treasury mwas
drained; his veteran forces were dispersed, or disbanded, and he
could not depend much either on the fidelity or courage of the new
levied soldiers whom he was collecting. There was no hope of
repeating with success the fame artifices which had weakened and
ruined the Smalkaldic league. As the end at which he aimed was
now known, he could no longer employ the specious pretets, which
had formerly concealed his ambitious designs. Every 'Prince in
Germany was alarmed and on his guard ; and it was vain to think
of blinding them a'fecond'time'to such a degree, as to make one
part of them Iihftrurmeits to enslave the other. The fpilit of a con-
federacy whereof Maurice was the head, experience had taught
'him, to be very diffetent from 'that of the league of Smalkalde'
aiid from xhlat he had already felt, he had no reason to flatter
himself that its counsels would be as irresolute, or its efforts as
timid and feeble. If he should resolve on continuing the war,
he might lay his account that the most considerable Ptates in
Germany would 'take part in it against him; and a dubious
neutrality was the utmolt he could expe& from the reft. While
tlie confederates found full employment for his arms in one
quarter, the King of France would seize the favourable oppor.
tunity, an'd pulh on 'his operations in another, with almoftc

certain
254

certain success. That Monarch had already made conquests in the
Empire, which he was no less eager to recover, than impatient to
be revenged on him for aiding his malecontent filbjeas. Though
Henry had now retired from the banks of the Rhine, lie had only
varied the scene of hostilities, having invaded the Low-Countries
with all his forces. The Turks, roured by the solicitations of
the French King, as well as flimulated by resentment against
Ferdinand for having violated the truce in Hungary, had prepared,
a powerful fleet to ravage the coafs of Naples and Sicily,.
which lie had left almost defenceless, by calling thence the greatest
part of the regular troops to join the army which he was now as-
fembling.

FERDINAND, who went in person to Villach, in order to lay

before the Emperor the result of the conferences at Pafsau, had
likewise reasons peculiar to himself for desiring an accommoda-
tion. These prompted himr to second, with the greatest earnest-
ness, the arguments which the Princes assembled there had em-
ployed in recommending it. He had observed, not without secret
satisfaCtion, the fatal blow which had been given to the despotic
power, which his brother had ufuirped in the Empire. He was
extremely solicitous to prevent Charles from recovering what lie
had loft, as he foresaw that lie would immediately resume with
frefli eagerness, and a'better chance of success, his favourite scheme
of transmitting that power to his son by excluding him fiom the
right of fuccellion to the Imperial throne. On this account, he
was willing to contribute towards circumscribing the Imperial
authority, in order to render his own poffeflion of it certain.
Betides, Solyman, exasperated at the loss of Transylvania, and:
fill more at the fraudulent arts by which it had been seized,

had

BOOK X.

I55a.

Ferdinand
zealous to
promote an
nccoiiimoda-
tion.

25

BOOK X.

Circum(ftAn-
ces which re-
tard it.

had ordered into the field an army of an hundred thou and men,
which having defeated a great body of Ferdinand's troops, and
taken several places of importance, threatened not only to com-
pleat the conquest of the province, but to drive him out of that
part of Hungary which was fiill subjet to his jurifdition. He
was unable to refill such a mighty enemy; his brother, while
engaged in a domestic war,- could afford him no aid; and he
could not even hope to draw from Germany the contingent either
of troops or money usually furnifled to repel the invasions of
lthe Infidels. Maurice having observed Ferdinand's perplexity,
with regard to this last point, had offered, if peace were re efta-
bliflhed on a secure foundation, that he would march in person
with his troops into Hungary to his afliftance. Such was the
effect of this well-timed proposal, that Ferdinand, destitute of
every other profpet of relief, became the most zealous advocate
the confederates could have chosen to urge their claims, and there
was scarce any'thing that they could have demanded which lie
would not have chosen to grant, rather than have retarded a paci-
fication, to which he trusted as the only means of saving his Hun-
garian crown.

WHEN To many causes conspired in rendering an accommo-

dation eligible, it might have been expeced that it would have
immediately taken place. But the inflexibility of the Emperor's
temper, together with his unwillingness to relinquish, at once,
objects which lie had long pursued with such earnestness and
-afliduity, counterbalanced, 'for some time, the force of all the mo-
tives which difpolcd him to peace, and not only put that event at
a distance, but seemed to render it uncertain. When Maurice's
demands, together with the letter of the mediators at Paflau,
.were presented to him, he peremptorily refuscd to redress the

grievances

grievances which were pointed out, nor would he agree to any
stipulation for the immediate security of the Protestant religion,
but proposed referring both these to the determination of a future
diet. On his part, he required that instant reparation should
be made to all who, during the present war, had suffered either
by the licentiousness of the confederate troops, or the exaAions
of their leaders.

MAURICE, who was well acquainted with the Emperor's arts,

immediately concluded that he had nothing in view in there
overtures but to amuse and deceive; and therefore, without
listening to Ferdinand's intreaties, he left Paffau abruptly, and
joining his troops which were encamped at Mergentheim, a city
in Franconia, belonging to the knights of the Tuetonic order, he
put them in motion, and renewed hostilities. As three thousand
men in the Emperor's pay had thrown themselves into Frankfort
on the Maine, and might from thence infest the neigbouring
country of Hesse, he marched towards that city, and laid siege
to it in form. The brilknefs of this enterprize, and the vigour
with which Maurice carried on his approachesagainft the town
gave such analarm to the Emperor, as disposed him to lend a
more favourable ear to Ferdinand's arguments in behalf of an
accommodation. Firm and haughty as his nature was, he found
it necessary to bend, and signified his willingness to make con-
ceflions on his part, if Maurice, in return, would abate rome-
what of the rigour of his demands. Ferdinand as soon as he
perceived that he began to yield, did not desist from his impor-
tunities, until he prevailed on him to declare what was the utmost
that he would grant for the security of the confederates. Having
gained this difficult point, he instantly dispatched a mefiniger

Vo L. III. L 1 to

BOOK X.

a551.

Mautce's vi-
gorous opera-
tions facilate
it.
July 7.

257

BOOK X.

1552.

Maurice de.
firous of an
accommoda-
tios.

to Maurice's camp, and imparting to him the Emperor's final
resolution, conjured him not to frustrate his endeavours for the
re-eftablifhmentofpeace; or, by an unseasonable obstinacy on
his fide, to disappoint the withes of all Germany for that falu-
lary event.

MAURICE., notwithstanding theprofperous situation of his as-

fairs was strongly inclined to liften to his advice. The' Emperor,
though over-reached and surprised, had now began to assemble
troops, and how flow soever his motions might be, while the first
effe&s of his conlternation remained, he was sensible that Charles
must at last at with vigour proportional to the extent of his power
and territories, and lead into Germany an army formidable by its
ilumbers, and still more by the terror of his name, as well as the
remembrance of his past vitories. He could scarce hope that a
confederacy composed of so many members would continue to
operate with sufficient union and perseverance to resist the con-
fiftent and well direted efforts of an army, at the absolute dif-
pofal of a leader accustomed to command and conquer. He
felt already, although he had not hitherto experienced the Ihock
of any adverse event, that he was the head of a disjointed body.
He saw, from the example of Albert of Brandenburgh, how
difficult it would be, with all his address and credit, to prevent
any particular member from detaching himself from the whole,
and how impoflible to recal him to his proper rank and sub-
ordination. This filled him with apprehehenfions for the com-
mon cause. Another consideration gave him no less dif-
quiet with regard to his own particular interests. By setting at
liberty the degraded Elector, and by repealing the act depriving
him of his hereditary honours and dominions, the Emperor had

it
;.ss

i in his power to wound him in the most feniible part. The
efforts of a Prince beloved by his ancient subje&s, and
revered by all the Proteltant party, in order to recover what
had been unjuRly taken from him, could scarce have failed of
exciting commotions in Saxony, which would endanger all that
he had acquired at the expence of so much diflimulation and
artifice. It was no less in the Emperor's power to render vain
all the solicitations of the confederates in belalf of the Land-
grave. He had only to add one a& of violence more to the
injustice and rigour with which he had already treated him;
and he had accordingly threatened the sons of that unfortu-
nate Prince, that if they perfifled in their present enterprize, in-
stead of feeing their father restored to liberty, they Ihould hear
of his having suffered the punishment which his rebellion had
merited a.

HAVING deliberated upon all there points with his afociates,

Maurice thought it more prudent to accept of the conditions offer-
ed, though less advantageous than those which he had proposed,
than again to commit all to the doubtful issue of war b. He re-
paired forthwith to Paffau, and signed the treaty of peace; of
which the chief articles were, That before the twelfth day of
August, the confederates shall lay down their arms, and disband
their forces; That on or before that day the Landgrave shall be
set at liberty, and conveyed in safety to his cattle of Rheinfels;,
That a diet shall be held within fix months in order to deliberate
concerning the most proper and effectual method of preventing
for the future all disputes and dissentions about religion; That,

a Sleid. 571.
b Sleid, HiRt. 563, &c. Thuan. lib . '
359, &c.

L 1 z in

The peace of
Religion con-
cluded at
'aflau.

Aug. z.
BoOKr X.

I5S2. 'S51·

259

26o
BOOK X.

1552

Rlefletions
upon this
peace and
upon the con-
dut of Mau-
rice.

THE REIGN OF THE

in the mean time neither the Emperor nor any other Prince,
shall, upon any pretext whatever, offer any injury or violence to
such as adhered to the 'confefion of Augsburg, but allow them
to enjoy the free and undiflurbed exercise of their religion;
That the Protestants in return, (hall not molest the Catholicks
either in the exercise of their ecclesiastical jurifdition), or in
performing their religious ceremonies ; That the Imperial
chamber shall administer justice impartially to persons of both
parties, and Protestants be admitted indiscriminately with the
Catholicks to fit as judges in that court; That if the next diet
(hould not be able to terminate the disputes with regard to reli-
gion, the stipulations in the present treaty in behalf of the Pro-
teftants, i(all continue for ever in full force and vigour; That
none of the confederates shall be liable to any action on account
of what had happened during the course of the war; That the
consideration of those encroachments which had been made, as
Maurice pretended, upon the conflitution and liberties of the
Empire (hall be remitted to the approaching diet; That Albert
of Brandenburgh shall be comprehended in the treaty, provided
he hall accede to it, and disband his forces before the twelfth
of Augut '.

SUCH was the memorable treaty of Paffau, that overturned the

vast fabric, in erecting which Charles had employed so many
years, and had exerted the utmost efforts of his power' and
policy; which annulled all his regulations with regard to reli-
gion; defeated all his hopes of rendering the Imperial autliority
abbolute and hereditary in his family; and eftablithed the Pro-

i Recuei .es Tiaitez, ii. z61.

teftant

teftant church, which had hitherto subsistcd precariously in
Germany, through connivance, or by expedients, upon a firm
and secure basis. Maurice reaped all the glory of having concert-
ed and compleated this unexpeted revolution. It is a singular
circumstance, that the Reformation should be indebted for its
security and full eflablifhment in Germany, to the fame hand
which had formerly brought it to the brink of defiruction, and
that both events fliould have been accompliflhed by the fame arts
of diflimulation. The ends, however, which Maurice hadin view,
at there differentjunctures, seem to have been more attended to
than the means by which he attained them; and he was now
as universally extolled for his zeal and publick spirit, as he had
lately been condemned for his indifference and interested policy.
It is no less worthy of observation, that the French King, a
monarch zealous for the Catholick faith, should, at the very time
when he was persecuting his own Protestant fubjeas with all
the fierceness of bigotry, employ his power in order to protect
and maintain the Reformation in the Empire; and that the
league for this purpose, which proved so fatal to the Romilli
church, Should be negociated and signed by a Roman catholick
bishop. So wonderfully doth the wisdom of God filperintend
and regulate the caprice of human paflions, and render thern sub-
servient towards the accomplishment of his own purposes.

LITTLE attention was paid to the intcrefis of the French

King during the negociations at Pafrau. Maurice and his aso.-
ciates, having gained what they had in view, discovered no great
solicitude about an ally, whom, perhaps, they reckoned to be
overpaid, by his acquisitions in Lorrain, for the afliftance which
he had given them. A short clause which they procured to be

inserted.

BOOK X.

152.

Little atten-
tion paid to
the French
King in thiA
treaty.

BOoK X. Itferted in the treaty, importing that the King of France might

S77 conimmunicate to these confederates his particular pretensions or

causes of hostility, which they would lay before the Emperor, was
the only sigh that they gave of their remembring how much they
had been indebted to him for their success. Henry experienced
the fame treatment, which every Prince who lends his aid to the
authors of a civil war may expet. As soon as the rage of faction
began to subside, and any profpe& of accommodation to open,
his services were forgotten, and his associates made a merit with
their sovereign, of the ingratitude with which they abandoned
their protector. But how much soever Henry might be en-
raged at the perfidy of his allies, or at the impatience with which
they hastened to make their peace with the Emperor at his ex-
pence, he was perfectly sensible that it was more his interest to
keep well with the Germanick body, than to resent the indigni-
ties offered him by any particular members of it. For that reason
he dismissed the hostages which he had received from Maurice
and his associates, and affected to talk in the fame strain, as for-
merly, concerning his zeal for maintaining the ancient conftitu-
tion.and liberties of the Empire.

THE

# BOOK XI.

T (
OF T HE

IF T

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES V.

B 0O

K
A S 'oon as the treaty of Paflau was signed, Maurice, in

consequence of his engagements with Ferdinand, marched

into Hungary at the head of twenty thousand men. But the
valt superiority of the Turkilh armies, the frequent mutinies, both
of the Spanish and German soldiers, occasioned by their want of
pay, together with the diflentions between Maurice and Caftaldo,
who was piqued at being obliged to resign the chief command
to him, prevented his performing any thing in that country
worthy of his former fame, or of great benefit to the King of
the Romans a.

a Ituanhafli Hit. Hungar. az8. Thuan. lib. z. 371.

BOOK X.

15iS2.

Aug. 3.
Maurice
marches into
Hungary
against the
' urkl.

WHEN
H

R

3

S
E

R

Y
G

N
X.

BOOK XI.

The Land-
grave of Hesse
recovers his
liberty.

WHEN Maurice set out for Hungary, the Prince of Hesse

parted from him with the forces under his command, and
marched back into his own country, that he might be ready to
receive his father upon his return, and give up to him the reins
of government which he had held during his absence. But
fortune was not yet weary of persecuting the Landgrave. A
battalion of mercenary troops, which had been in the pay of
FHefle, being feddced by Reifenberg their colonel, a soldier of
fortune, and ready to engage in any enterprize, secretly withdrew
from the young Prince as he was marching homewards, and
joined Albert of Brandenburgh, who still continued in arms
against the emperor, refuting to be included in the treaty of
Paffau. Unhappily for the Landgrave, an account of this
reached the Netherlands, just as he was difmified from the
citadel of Mechlin ,where he had been confined, but before he
had got beyond the frontiers of that country. The Queen of
Hungary, who governed there in her brother's name, incensed
at fuchan open violation of the treaty to which he owed his
·liberty, commanded him to be arrested, and committed him
again to the custody of the fame Spanitb captain who had
guarded him for five years with such severe vigilance. Philip
beheld all the horrors of his imprisonment renewed, and
his spirits subsiding in the fame proportion as they had risen
during the short interval in which he had enjoyed liberty, he
funk into despair, and believed himself to be doomed to per-
petual captivity. But the matter being explained to the Em-
peror's full fatisfaftion, that the revolt of Reifenberg's mer-
cenaries could be imputed neither to the Landgrave nor to his
son, he gave orders for his release ; and Philip at last obtained

the
264

the liberty for which he had To long languifledb. But though
he recovered his freedom, and was reinstated in his dominions,
his fiifferings seem to have broken the vigour, and to have cx-
tinguifhed the activity of his mind: From being the boldest
as well as molt enterprizing Prince in the Empire, le became the
molt timid and cautious, and pawed the remainder of his days in
a pacific indolence.

THE degraded Eleator of Saxony, likewise, procured his liberty

in consequence of the treaty of Pallau. The Emperor having
been obliged to relinquifl all his schemes for extirpating the
Protestant religion, had no longer any motive for detaining him
a prisoner; and being extremely solicitous, at that juncutre, to
recover the confidence and good will of the Germans, whose alif-
tance was etfential to the success of the enterprize which lie medi-
tated against the King of France, lie, among other expedients
for that purpose, thought of releasing from imprisonment a
Prince whose merit entitled him no less to esteem, than his sus-
ferings rendered him the object of cmpaflion. John Frederick
took poffefion accordingly of that part of his territories which
had been reserved for him, when Maurice wvas invcftcd with the
Electoral dignity. As he continued to display in this situation,
the fame virtuous magnanimity, for which lie had been con!lii-
cuous in a more prosperous and splendid slate, and which lie had
retained amidst all his sufferings, he lived several years in that
high reputation to which he had so just a title.

T I. loss of Metz, Toul and Verdun, had made a deep impref-
sion on the Emperor. Accuflomed to terminate all his operations

$ Sleid. 573. Belcarii Comment 83t.
V\'i. II. M mn aaainft

BOOK XL

1553.

Likewise the
Eleftor of
Saxony.

The Emperor
resolves to
mnake war
upon France.
4

BOOK XT.

3552.

His prepara-
tions for this
purpose.

against France with advantage to himself, he thought that it
nearly concerned his honour not to allow Henry the superiority
in this war, or to susser his own administration to be stained with
the infamy of having permitted territories of such consequence to
be dismembered from the Empire. This was no less a point of
interest than of honour. As the frontier of Champagne was
more naked, and lay more exposed than that of any province in
France, he had frequently, d iing his wars with that kingdom,
made inroads upon it with great success and effect; but if Henry
were allowed to retain his late conquests, France would gain
such a formidable barrier on that fide, as to be altogether secure,
where formerly she had been weakest. On the other hand,
the Emperor had now loft as much, in point of security, as
France had acquired, and being itripped of the defence which
thole cities afforded it, lay open to be invaded on a quarter,
where all the towns having been hitherto confidered as interior,
and remote from any enemy, were but slightly fortified. These
considerations determined Charles to attempt recovering the
three towns of which Henry had made himself master and the
preparations which he had made againit Maurice and his affo-
ciates enabled him to carry his resolution into immediate exe-
cution.

As loon, tlen, as the peace was concluded at Palfau, he left

his inglorious retreat at Villach, and advanced to Augsburg at the
head of a considerable body of Germans which he had levied to-
gether with all the troops which he had drawn out of Italy and
Spain. To there he added several battalions, which having been
in the pay of the confederates, entered into his service when dif-
miffed by them; and he prevailed likewise on some of the Princes
of the Empire to join him with their vassals. In order to conceal

the
266

the destination of this formidable army, and to guard against alarm-
ing the French so as to put them on preparing for their defence, he
gave out that he was to march forthwith into Hungary, in order to
second Maurice in his operations against the Infidels. When he
began to advance towards the Rhine, and could no longer employ
that pretext, he tried a new artifice, and spread a report that he
was marching in order to chastise Albert of Brandenburg, whose
cruel exactions in that part of the Empire called loudly for his in-
terpofition to check them.

BUT the French having grown acquainted, at last, with arts

by which they had been so often deceived, viewed all Charles's
motions with distrust. Henry immediately guessed the true object
of his vast preparations, and resolved to defend the important
conquests which lie had gained with vigour equal to that with
which they were about to be attacked. As he foresaw that the
whole weight of the war would be turned againlft Metz, the fate
of which would decide that of Toul and Verdun, he nominated
Francis of Lorrain Duke of Guise to take the command in that
city during the siege, the iffile of which would equally affect the
honour and interest of his country. His choice could not have
fallen upon any person more worthy of that trust. The Duke
of Guise possesed, in a high degree, all the qualities of courage,
sagacity, and presence of mind, which render men eminent in
military command. He was largely endowed with that magna-
nimity of foul which delights in bold enterprizes, and aspires to
fame by splendid and extraordinary actions. He repaired witl
joy to the dangerous station afigned him, as to a theatre on
which he might display his great qualities under the immeditate
eye of his countrymen all ready to applaud him. The martial

M m a genius

BooK XI.

The precau-
tions ofthe
French for
the defence of
Mctz.

The Duke of
Gnife ap-
pointed go-
vernor of the
town.

267

BOOK XI.

1552.

Prepares for
a vigorous
defence.

genius of the French nobility in that age, which confidered it
as the greatest reproach to remain inactive, when there was any
opportunity of signalizing their courage, prompted great num-
bers to follow a leader who was the darling as well as the pattern
of all that courted military fame. Several Princes of the blood,
many noblemen of the highest rank, and all the young officers
who could obtain the King's permiflion, entered Metz as volun-
tiers. By their presence they added spirit to the garrison,
and enabled the Duke of Guise to employ on every emergency
persons eager to distinguish themselves, and fit to conduct any
service.

BUT with whatever alacrity the Duke of Guise undertook the

defence of Metz, he found every thing, upon his arrival there,
in such a situation, as might have induced any person of less
intrepid courage to despair of defending it with success. The
city was of great extent, with large suburbs ; the walls were in
many places feeble and without ramparts; the ditch narrow;
and the old towers, which projeaed inflead of baiflons, were at
too great distance from each other to defend the space between
them. For all there defects he endeavoured to provide the best
remedy, which the time would permit. He ordered the suburbs,
without sparing the monasteries or churches, not even that of
St. Arnulph, in which several Kings of France had been buried,
to be levelled with the ground ; but in order to guard against
the imputation of impiety, to which fiuch a violation of so many
sacred edifices, as well as of the ashes of the dead might ex-
pose him, he executed this with much religious ceremony.
Having ordered all the holy vestments and utensils, together with
the bones of the Kings, and other persons deposited in there

churches
268

churches to be removed, they were carried in solemn proceflion to
a church within the walls, he himself walking before them unco-
vered, with a torch in his hand. He then pulled down such hou-
fes as stood near the walls, cleared and enlarged the ditch, repair-
ed the ruinous fortifications, and ereced new ones. As it was
necessary that all there works Ihould be finilhed with the utmost
expedition, he laboured at them with his own hands: the officers
and voluntiers imitated his example, and the soldiers submitted
with chearfulnefs to the most severe fatigues, when they saw that
their superiors did.not decline to bear a part in these together with
them. At the fame time he compelled all useless persons to leave
the place; he filled the magazines with provisions and military
stores; burnt the mills; and destroyed the corn and forage for
several miles round the town. Such were his popular talents, as
well as his arts of acquiring an ascendant over the minds of men,
that the citizens seconded him with no less ardour than the soldiers ,
and every other palffon being swallowed up in the zeal to repulse tlie
enemy, with which he inspired them, they beheld the ruin of
their estates, together with the havock which he made among.
their publick and private buildings, without any emotion of re-
fentment c

MEANTIME the Emperor, having collected all his forces,

continued his march towards Metz. As he passed through the
cities on the Rhine, he saw the dismal effects of that licentious
and wasteful war which Albert had carried on in there parts.
Upon his approach, that Prince, though at the head of twenty
thousand men, withdrew into Lorrain as if he had intended to

c Thuan. xi. 387.

join

BOOK XL

Iss2.

Charles ad-
vancec to-
warda Metz.

269

BOOK XI.

5 52.

join the French King, whose arms he had quartered with his
own in all his itandards and ensigns. Albert was not in a
condition to cope with the Imperial troops d, which amounted at
least to sixty thousand men, forming one of the most nume-
rous and best appointed armies that had been brought into the
field during that age in any of the wars among the Christian
Princes.
fnvelts the THE chief command under the Emperor, was committed to

tow. the Duke of Alva, affllted by the Marquis de Marignano, to-

gether with the most experienced of the Italian and Spanish ge-
nerals. As it was towards the end of Otober, these intelligent
officers represented the great danger of beginning, at fuich an
advanced season, a ficge which could not fail to prove very
tedious. But Charles adhered to his own opinion with his
usual obstinacy, and being confident that he had made such
preparations, and taken such precautions, as would ensure
o. 19. success, he ordered the city to be invested. As soon as the

Duke of Alva appeared, a large body of the French rallied out and
attacked his van guard with great vigour, put it in confusion,
and killed or took prisoners a considerable number of men. By
this early specimen which they gave of the conduct of their
officers, as well as the valour of their troops, they shewed the
Imperialists what an enemy they had to encounter, and how dear
every advantage muff colt them. The place, however, was corn
pleatly invetfed, the trenches were opened and the other works
begun.

Both parties
endeavour to
gain Albert of
Brandenburg.

THE attention both of the besiegers and besieged was turned
for some time towards Albert of Brandenburgh, and they strove

d Natal. Comitis, Hilt. 127.

with
170

with emulation which (hould gain that Prince, who fRill hovered
in the neighbourhood flutuating in all the uncertainty of irre-
solution, natural to a man, who being swayed by no principle,
was allured different ways by contrary views of interest. The
French tempted him with offers extremely beneficial , the Im-
perialifts scrupled at no promise which they thought would make
an impreflion upon him. After much hesitation he was gained
by the Emperor, from whom he expected to receive advan-
tages, which were both more immediate and more permanent.
As the French King, who began to fu(pe& his intentions, had
appointed a body of troops under the Duke of Aumale, bro-
ther to the Duke of Guise, to watch his motions, Albert fell
upon them unexpetedly with such vigour that he routed them
entirely, killed many of the officers, wounded Aumale himself,
and took him prisoner. Immediately after this victory, lie
marched in triumph to Metz, and joined his army to that of the
Emperor. Charles, in reward for this service, and the great ac-
ceflion of strength which he brought him, granted Albert a par-
don in form of past offences, and confirmed him in the poffeflion
of the territories which he had violently usurped during the ware.

THE Duke of Guise, though deeply affected with his bro-

ther's misfortune, did not remit, in any degree, the vigour with
which he defended the town. He harrafted the besiegers by
frequent sallies, in which his officers were so eager to distinguish
themselves, that his authority being scarce sufficient to restrain the
impetuosity of their courage, he was obliged at different times to
lhut the gates, and to conceal the keys, in order to prevent the
Princes of the blood, and noblemen of the first rank, from ex-

BoOK XL.

1552.

Nov. 4.

The gallant
behaviour of
the Duke of
Guile and his
garrison.
e Sleid. 575. Thuan. lib. xi, 389. 392.

posing

27w

BOOK XI.

1552.

Nov. z6.

The diltrefs
of the Impe-
rial army.

posing themselves to danger in every Tally., He repaired in the
night what the enemy's artillery had beat down during the day,
or erected behind the ruined works new fortifications of almost
equal strength. The Imperialists, on their parts, pushed on the
attack with great spirit, and carried forward, at once, approaches
against different parts of the town. But the art of attacking for-
tified places was not then arrived at that degree of perfetion to
which it was carried towards the close of the sixteenth century,
during the long war in the Netherlands. ,The besiegers, after
the unwearied labour of many weeks, found that they had made
but little progress; and although their batteries had made
breaches in different places, they saw, to their astonishment, works
suddenly appear, in demolishing which their fatigues and dan-
gers would be renewed. The Emperor, enraged at the obfli-
nate resistance which his army met with, left Thionville, where
he had been confined by a violent fit of the gout, and though still
so infirm that he was obliged to be carried in a litter, he repaired
to the camp; that by his presence he might animate the soldiers,
and urge on the attack with greater spirit. Upon his arrival
new batteries were ereced, and new efforts made with redoubled
ardour.

BUT, by this time, the winter had set in with great rigour;

the camp was alternately deluged with rain or covered with
snow ; at the fame time provisions were become extremely
scarce, as a body of French cavalry which hovered in the neigh-
bourhood, often interrupted the convoys, or rendered their
arrival difficult and uncertain. Diseases began to spread among
the soldiers, especially among the Italians and Spaniards, unac-
cuflomed to such inclement weather; great numbers were dif-

abled

abled from serving, and many died. At length,' fuclh breaches I
were made as seemed practicable, and the Emperor resolved to
hazard a general assault, in spite of the remonfirances of his
generals concerning the imprudence of attacking a numerous
garrison, conduR5ed and animated by the mofl gallant of the
Frehch: nobility, with an army weakened by difeafes,.'and dif-
heartened with ill success. The Duke of Guise, fufCpecing his
intentions from the extraordinary hurry which lie observed in
the enemy's camp, ordered all his troops to their refp. aive polls.
They appeared immediately on the walls, and behind the breaches,
with such' a determined countenance, so eager for the' combat,
and so well prepared to give the assailants a warm reception, that
the Imperialifis, instead of advancing to. the cliarge when the
wordof cormmand was given; stood motionless, in a timid dejedced
silence. 'The Einperor perceiving tlat he coild not trust troops.
whose spirits were so inmuch broken, r:etired. abruptly. to his quar-
ters, complaining that he was now deserted by his soldiers, who
defedred no longer the name of men '.

-. , .i j .
DeEXP LY.,as this behaviour of his troops . nortified and aflceted 1

C

him, Charles would not hear of abandoning the siege, tlouglle h
saw the neceflity of changing the method of attack. He fiufpended
the fury, of, his batteries, .ald .proposed to proceed. by the more
secure' but:tedi6us. method .ds tapping. Butas.it filil continuled
to rain or io fniw alnmbft inceflantly, filch as' were employed
in this service endured incredible hardlhips i and the duke of
Guise, whose indultry was not inferior to his valour, difcbverinlg
all their'mines, counter-worked tlehe, and prevented',thcir .es
fed. At last, Charles finding 'it impofible to'contend any longed

a Thuan. 397.
VOL. III. N n with

1,

~0O0K Xj4,.

3 5 52..

'hle Einperor
Iianger the
icthod of
ttack.

I) 1
'! , . 1i .

273

j
14

BOOK XL

ISSa.

Dec. 26.
Obliged to
raise the siege.

Ruin of the
Imperial
army, and
humanity of
the French.

with the rigour of the season, and with enemies whom he could
neither overpower by force, nor subdue by art, while at the fame
time a contagious distemper raged among his troops, and cut off
daily great numbers of his officers as well as soldiers, yielded to
the solicitations of his generals, who conjured him to save the
remains of his army by a timely retreat ; " Fortune," fays he,

I now perceive, resembles other females, and chufes to confer

"her favours on young men, while she forsakes those who are ad-
"vanced in years."

UPON this, he gave orders immediately to raise the siege, and

submitted to the disgrace of abandoning the enterprize, after
having continued fifty-fix days before the town, during which
time he had loft upwards of thirty thousand men, who died.of
diseases, or were killed by the enemy. The duke of Guise, as
soon as he perceived the intention of the Imperialists, took me+-
fures to prevent their retiring unmolested, and sent out feve-
ral bodies both of cavalry and infantry to infest their rear, to,
pick up.ftragglers, and to seize every opportunity of attacking
them with advantage. Such was the coirfufion with which
they made their retreat; that the French might have Annoyed
them in the most cruel manner. But when they sallied out, a
fpetacle presented itself to their view, which extinguished at
once all hostile rage, and melted 'theinmihto tenderness and comrn
paflion. The Imperial camp was !filled with the tick and
wounded, with the dead and the dying. In all the different
roads by which the army retired numbers were found, who have
ing made an effort beyond their firength to escape,, were left,
when they. could go no fartler, to perifl without afliftance. This
they received from their enemies, and were indebted to them for

all

it
274

all the kind offices which their friends had not the power to per-
form. The duke of Guite immediately ordered proper refresh-
ments for such as were dying of hunger; he appointed surgeons to
attend the sick and wounded; and those who would have suffered
by being carried so far, he admitted into the hospitals which he
had fitted up in the city for his own soldiers. As loon as they
recovered he sent them home, under an escort of foldiera, and
with money to bear their charges. By there aas of humanity,
which were uncommon in that age, when war was carried on with
greater rancour and ferocity than at present, the duke of Guise
completed the fame which he had acquired by his gallant and fitc-
cefsful defence of Metz, and engaged those whom he had van
quifhed to vie with his own countrymen in extolling his name b.

To these calamities in Germany, were added such unfortu-

nate events in Italy, as rendered this the most disastrous year in
the Emperor's life. During his residence at Villach, Charles
had applied to Cosmo de Medici for the loan of two hundred
thousand crowns. But his credit at that time was so low, that in
order to obtain this inconsiderable rum, he was obliged to put
him in pofeflion of the principality of Piombino, and by giving
up that he loft the footing which he had hitherto maintained in
Tuscany, and enabled Cosmo to afliume, for the future, the tone
and deportment of a Prince altogether independant. Much
about the time that his indigence constrained him to part with

BOOK XI,

3552.

Bad situation
of the E11l-
peror's affairs
In Italy.

b Sleid. 575. Thuan. lib. xi. 319, &c. Pete Daniel, Hilt. de France, tom.

iii, 392. Perc Daniel's account of this siege is taken from the journal of the Sieur
de Salignac, who was present. Natal. Comit. Hist. 129.

N n this

275

BOOK XI. this valuable territory, he loft Siena, which was of frill greater

1Srz. consequence, through the ill conduct of Don Diego de Mendoza .

The revolt SIENA, like most of the great cities in Italy, had long enjoyed
of Siena.

iena. a republican government, under the protetion of the Empire;

but being torn in pieces by the dissensions between the nobles
and the people, which divided all the Italian commonwealths,
the faction of the people, which gained the ascendant, besought
the Emperor to become the guardian of the administration which
they had eftablilhed, and admitted into their city a small body
of Spanilh soldiers, whom he had sent to countenance the exe-
cution of the laws, and to preserve tranquillity among them,
The direction of there troops was given to Mendoza, at that time
ambassador for the Emperor at Rome, who persuaded the credu-
lous multitude, that it was necessary for their security against any
future attempt of the nobles, to allow him to build a citadel in
Siena; and as he flattered himself that by means of this fortress he
might render the Emperor mailer of the city, he pushed on the
works with all poflible dispatch. But he threw off the mask
too soon. Before the fortifications were compleated, he began
to indulge his natural haughtiness and severity of temper, and
to treat the citizens with great insolence. At the fame time
the soldiers in garrison being paid as irregularly as the Empe-
ror's troops usually were, lived almost at discretion upon the
inhabitants, and were guilty of many acts of licence and oppref-
sion.

The Sienere THEsr injuries awakened the Sienefe to a sense of their dan-
court the as-
flitance of ger. As they saw the necefity of exerting themselves, while the
France.

c Thuan, lib. xi, 376.

unfinished

unfinished' fortifications of the citadel left them any hopes of BOOK XL
fitccefs, they applied to the French ambaflador at Rome, who C552
readily promired them his master's protecion and afiftance. At
the fame time, forgetting their domestic animofities when such a
mortal blow was aimed at the liberty and existence of the repub-
lick, they Tent agents to the exiled nobles, and invited them to
concur with them in saving their country from the Servitude
with which it was threatened. As there was not a moment to
lose, measures were concerted speedily, but with great pnrdence;
and were executed \ith equal vigour. The citizens rose suddenly iil
arms; the exiles flocked into the town from different parts with all
their partizans, and what troops they could draw together ; and
several bodies of mercenaries in the pay of France appeared to ftp-
port themr. The Spaniards, though furprized, and much inferior
in number, defended themselves with great courage; but feeing no
prospect of relief, and having no hopes of maintaining their flation
long in a half-finifhed fortress, they soon gave it up. The Sienefe,
with the utmost alacrity, levelled it with the ground, that no monu-
ment might remain of that odious ftrudure, which had been
raised in order to enllave them. At the fame time renouncing all
connection with the Emperor, they Tent ambassadors to thank the
King of France as the reflorer of their liberty, and to intreat that
he would secure to them. the perpetual enjoyment of that blefling
by continuing his protecion to their republick '.

To there misfortunes, one still more fatal had almost fuc- Dcfcent of
ceeded. The revere adminiflration of Don Pedro de Toledo, thilurngkdo li

of Naples.

d Peccd Memoriede Siena, vol. ii. p. 230, 261. Thuan. 375, 377, &c. Pa-
ruta. Hilt. Vcnet. z67. Mceu. de Ribier, 424, &c.

viceroy

277

BOOK XI.

wE_2

viceroy of Naples, having filled that kingdom with murmuring
and disaffection, the Prince of Salerno, the head of the malecon-
tents, had fled to the court of France, where all who bore ill-will
to the Emperor or his ministers, were sure of finding proteation
and aflitance. That nobleman, in the usual lile of exiles, b aft-
ing much of his partizans, and of his great influence with them,
prevailed on Henry to think of invading Naples, from expeCta-
tion of being joined by all those with whom the Prince of Sa-
lerno held correspondence, or who were diliatisfied with Tole-
do's government. But though the firfi hint of this enterprize
was suggested by the Prince of Salerno, Henry did not chufe
that its success should entirely depend upon his being able to fulfil
the promises which he had made. He applied for aid to Soly-
man, whom he courted, after his father's example, as his most
vigorous auxiliary against the Emperor, and solicited him to
second his operations by fending a powerful fleet into the Me-
diterranean. It was not difficult to obtain what he requested of
the Sultan, who, at this time, was highly incensed against the
house of Austria, on account of their proceedings in Hungary.
He ordered an hundred and fifty ffiips to be equipped, that they
might fail-towards the coast of Naples, at whatever time Henry
should name, and might co-operate with the French troops in their
attempts upon that kingdom. The command of this fleet \vasgiven
to the corsair Dragut, an officer trained up under Barbarofla, and
scarce inferior to his matler in courage, in talents, or in good for-
tune. He appeared on the coast of Calabria at the time which had
been agreed on, landed at several places, plundered and burnt feve-
ral villages; and at last casting anchor in the bay of Naples, filled
that city with consternation. But as the French fleet, detained by
some accident, which the contemporary historians have not ek-
plained, did not join the Turks according to concert, they, after

waiting
a78

z79

waiting twenty days, without hearing any tidings of it, set fail
for Constantinople, and thus delivered the viceroy of Naples from
the terror of an invasion, which he was in no condition to have re-.
ifted '.

As. the French had never given so revere a check to the Emperor

in any former campaign, they expressed immoderate joy at the
success of their arms, Charles himself, accustomed to a long fe-
ries of prosperity, felt the blow most sensibly, and retired from
Metz into the Low-Countries, much dejected withthle cuell reverre
of fortune which affected him' in his declining age, when the vio-
lence of the gout had increased to such a pitch, as entirely broke
the vigour of his constitution, and rendered him peevifl, difficult
of access, and often inca'pable of applying to business; But when.
ever he enjoyed any interval of cafe,, all his thoughts were bent on
reverige and he deliberated,' with the utmost solicitude, concern-
ing the most proper means of annoying France; and of effacing the
stain which had obscured the reputation and glory of l.is arms.
All the fehlmee rn ontcerning;Germany, which had engrossed him so
long,: beingdifconcerted by: the peace of Paffau, the affairs of the
Empire became only secondary objects of attention, and enmity to
France was the predominant paflon which chiefly occupied his
mind.

THE turbulent ambition of Albert of Brandenburgll ex-

cited violont commotions, which disturbed the Empire during
this year. That Prince's troops having shared in the calamities
of the siege of Metz,, were greatly reduced in number. , But the
Einperor, prompted by gratitude for his diftinguilhed services

BOOK XL.

I 52.

The Eperor
sensibly as-
seCed with
the fiate of
his affairs.

The violent
proceedings
of Albert of
Branden-
burgh.
e Thuan. 375, 380. Me. de Ribier, ii. 403, Gianene.

011

Boo

55

He is t
demnel
the In
Chaint

1K XI. on that'occafion, or perhaps with a secret view of fomenting di-
S3i visions among the Princes of the'Empire, having paid up all the

money due to him, he was enabled with that fium to hire so many
of the soldiers difmifled. from the Imperial army, that he was
soon at the head of a body of men as numerous as ever. The
bishop of Bamberg and Wurtzburg having solicited the Imperial
chamber to annul, by its authority,' the'iniquitous, conditions
which Albert had compelled.them to sign, that court unani-
moufly found all their engagements with him to be void in
their own nature, becatfe they.liad been ,extoyted by-force; en-
joined Albert to renounce;all cjairm; to ;dhe .performance 9f them;
and exhorted all the' Princes of the Empire,, if hle ihould persist,
in such an'unjuft demand, to take arms against him as a disturber.
of the public tranquillity;: Toi this decision; Albert opposed .the
confirmation of his tranfa6ti6ns withi the 'two' preldtes, 'which the
Emperor had granted him'as the reward of his having joined the
Imperial army at Metz; and in order to intimidate his antagohists'
and to c.onvince them of his resolution not to relinquish his pre-
tensions, he put his troops in. motion, 'that he might fecpre the ter-
ritory in'queftion. ' 'Varioius endeavdurs .wre employ¢ed, and many
expedients ptopofedy in order to prevent the kinldling. a new warin
Germany. But the iame warmth of temper which rendered Albert
turbulent and enterprizing, inspiring him with the most sanguine
hopes of success, even in his wildest undertakings, he disdainfully
rejeCed all 'reafnable 6verties ot
s ccommi6dati6n. ' '

.;cutes 1s ~e omsrl~datibn'

. ,e . ,,

con- UPON this,' the 'Imperial'chamber issued its decree ngainft
pial him; and required tlhe Eltecor of Saxony, together with several
ber. other Princes mentioned by name, to take arms in order.to

carry
280

carry 'it into execution. Maurice and tllofe afoniated with him
were not unwilling to undertake this service. They were ex-
tremely follicitous to maintain publick order by supporting the
authority of the Imperial chamber, and fw ..the. .ecllit.y of
giving'a timely check ,to the usurpations of nan ambitious Prince
who had no principle of aftion but regard to his own intcrers,.
and' no m6tive to diret him but the impulse of ungovernable
paflions. They: had good reason, to fufpea that the Emperor
encouraged Albert in his extravagant and irregular. procecdings,
and secretly. afforded him aflifance, that by raising him up to
rival Maurice in power, he might, in any future broil :make use
of his afliftance to counterbalance and' controul the autliority
which tle other had acquired in the Empire .

' . >. "

THuzs considerations uinited the mol' pbvetfutl Princes in

Germany' in a 'league against Albert, of' whichi''Miurlce wa
declared generaliflimo. This formidable confederacy, h6wever,
wrought no' change in Albert's sentiments; but as he knew that
he 'coild 'nt' ''erift' many Princes, ifl he should allow tlhem
time to aftimble' theif forces, he endeavoured, by lhis'advity,
to deprie 'them of all the advantage which they might derive
from their united power and numbers; and for that reason
marched directly against Maurice, the enemy illom lie dreaded
most.' It wash ippy for the allies that the conduct of their affairs
was committed to a Pr;nce of such abilities. He by his autho-
rity and example had inspired them with vigour, and having
carried on their preparations with a degree of rapidity, of
which confederate b6dies are seldom' capable, he was in condi-

f Sleid. 585. Mem. de Ribier. ii. 442. Arnoldi. vita Maurit. ap Mcnkcn
ii. ir22.

VOL. III. 0 o tioa

300 K. XV.

I 53.

April 2.

A confede-
racy formed
against him,
of which
Maurice was
head.

BOOK XI. tion to face Albert before he could make any considerable

553. progress.

THEIR armies, which were nearly equal in number, each

He attacks consisting of twenty four thousand men, met at Sieverhaufen in
Albeit. the dutchy of Lunenburg; and the violent animosity against

each other, which possessed the two leaders, did not susser them
to continue long inactive. The troops inflamed with the fame
July 9. hostile rage marched fiercely to the combat; they fought with

the greatest obftinancy; and as both generals were capable of
availing themselves of every favourable occurrence, the battle
remained long doubtful, each gaining ground upon the other

And defeats alternately. At last victory declared for Maurice, who was
his army. superior in cavalry, and Albert's army fled in confusion, leaving

four thousand dead in the field, and their camp, baggage and
artillery,, in the hands of the conquerors. The ,allies bought
their victory dear, their best troops suffered greatly, two sons
' of the Duke of Brunswick, a Duke of Lunenburgh, and many

other perfons.of diftintion were among the number of the
But is killed slain . But all there were soon forgotten, for Maurice himself,

the battle as he led up to a second charge a body of horse which had been

broken, received a wound with a pistol bullet in the belly,
of which he died two days after the buttle, in the thirty second
year. of his age, and in the sixth after his attaining the electoral
dignity.

E Hiftoria pugnos infelicis inter Maurit. & Albert. Thom. Wintzcro auc-

tore apud Scard. ii. 559. Sleid. 5.3. Rufcelli epifires aux Princes '54. Ar-
noldi vita Maurit. 1245.

OP

OF all the personages who have appearcd in the hiflory of

this active age, when great occurrences, and sudden' revolutions,
called forth extraordinary talents to view, and afforded them
fill opportunity to display theinfelves, Maurice may justly be
confidered as the most remarkable. If his exorbitant ambi-
tion, his profound dillimnulation, and his unwarrantable ufurpa-
tion of his kinsman's honours and dominions exclude him from
being praised as a virtuous man; his prudence in concerting
his measures, his vigour in executing them, and the uniform
success with which they were attended, entitle him to the appel-
lation of a great Prince. At an age, when impetuosity of
spirit commonly predominates over political wisdom, when the
highest effort even of a genius of the first order is to fix on a bold
scheme, and to execute it with promptitude and courage, he
formed and conducted an intricate plan of policy, which de-
ceived the most artful Monarch in Europe. At the very junc-
ture when the Emperor had attained almost unlimited defpo-
tifm, Maurice, with power seemingly inadequate to such an
undertaking, compelled him to relinquish all his usurpations,
and established not only the religious but civil liberties of Germany
on such foundations as have hitherto remained unshaken. Al-
though at one period of his life, his conduct excited the jealousy
of the Protestants, and at another drew on him the resentment
of the Roman Catholicks, such was his masterly address, that
he was the only Prince of the age, who in any degree possessed
the confidence of both, and whom both lamented as the most
able as well as faithful guardian of the constitution and laws
of his country.

0 o 2

Bloot< XI.

A S5 3..1
Hi ci.tr6Ii.

283

Trlt
t't

BOOK XI.

1553.

Albert cou-
tinues the

war.

Sept. 12.

He is driven
out of Ger-
many.

January 12.
1557.

Maurice's
brother Au-
guftus fuc-
ceceds him in
the eletoral
dignity.

T H

r conflernation which Maurice's death occasioned among

his troops, prevented them from making the proper improve-
ment of the vicory which they had gained. Albert, whole
adivecourage, and profuse liberality rendered him the darling
of such military adventurers as were little follicitous about the.
justice of his cause, soon re-assembled his broken forces, and;
made fresh levies with such success, that he was quickly at the
head of fifteen thousand men, and renewed his depredations
with additional fury. But Henry of Brunswick having taken.
the command of the allied troops, defeated him in a fecondx
battle scarce less bloody than the former. Even then. his cou-
rage did not, finkk nor were his resources exhausted. He made,
several efforts, and some of them very vigorous,. to retriever
hisaffairs : but beirng laid under the ban of the Empire by thec
Imperial: chamber; ,.bing driven by degrees; out of all his' here-"
ditary, territories, as well as tliof which he had usurped;.
being forsaken by many of his officers, and overpowered by
the number of: his enqmias) he fled for refuge into France.
After~ having, been fob a, confiderabla time,, the terror and.
fGotrg§ of Ger tny,; hb lingered, out. A few, yearp in an indi-
gent and. dependaht;. Rate! of exlet; the miseries of whiich his,
reilQfs and arrognt fpii . endured with the mot, indignant. intm
patience. Uppn, his 4datb...itliouti iffio) :his territories,, which:
hd' .been fejiged. b. fthe' Psites .who too l arnms, aga.in4 lhii,
xsrel refrored'bys a deQrdef q^s, th Etpperorpb toahis collateral
hq4rs, of.the holufeaE.firndtaburghll1. .

: , i

* : *

; . ,

.

MAURICE, having left only one daughter, who. .tAb, after.,
wards married to William Prince of Orange, by whom the had

h Sleid 592. 594. 599, Struv. Corp. hilt. Germ. 1o75.

a son
284

a son who bore his grandfather's name, and inherited tile great
talents for which he was conspicuous, a violent dispute arose
concerning the succession to his honours and territories. John
Frederick, the degraded Elecor, claimed the electoral dignity,
and that part of his patrimonial estate, of which he lad
been violently fRripped after the Smalkaldic war. Augustus,
Maurice's only brother, pleaded his right not only to the here-
ditary pofflclions of their family, but to the elecoral dignity
and to the territories which Maurice had acquired. As Augustus
was a Prince of considerable abilities, as well as of great candour
andgentlenefs of manners, the States of Saxony, forgetting tlie
merits and sufferings of their former master, declared warmly
in his favour. His pretensions were powerfully supported by
the King of Denmark Whose daughter lie had mnarried, and
zealously efpotufed by the King of the Romans oit of regard' to
Maurice's memory. The degraded Eletor, though secretly
favoured by his ancient eneniy the Emperor, wds at! last obliged'
to relinqlilfh his clain^s upbn obtaining a small additibn to the
teitdritores wich had been allbtt'ed' t6 l ini/ together with' a' fti
pulation, securing to ihis family the' eventual fu:cenion, upon a'
failure of madl heirs. ih the Albertine line. That; uiffortntnate
but magnanimous Prince died next year, soon after ratifying
this treaty, of agreement, and the electoral dignity is flill' pof;
feffled by the descendants of Augustus i.

DURING there tranifactions in Germany, war was carried on

in' the LowiC6sit'ri'e with considerable vigour. Tile Emperor,
impiatierit to efface' tlie fain whicli his ignominious repulse at
Ietz' left upno Iliik riHlltaity' reptitation, had' an army' early in

i Sleid. 5 ; , ;luan. 409. . SiCu . Corp. ls. Germ.

tlhe

BooK XI.

1553.

IHofilities in.
tlhe' LodW
Couhhtsics.

285

BocK XI.

5ss3.

June 21.

The progress
of the Impe-
rialifts dif-
quiets the
French King.

tle field, and laid filge to Terouanne. Though the town was-
of such importance that Francis used to call it one of the two
pillows on which a King of France might ileep with fccurity,
the fortificatio::s were in disrepair: Henry, trusting to what had
happened at Metz, thought nothing more was necefiary to ren-
der nil the efforts of the enemy abortive, than to reinforce the
garrison with a considerable number of the young nobility. But
d'Effe, a veteran officer who commanded them, being killed, and
the Imperialists pufluing the siege with great vigour and perse-
verance, the place was taken by assault. That it might not
fall again into the hands of the French, Charles ordered not
only the fortifications but the town to be rared, and the inha-
bitants to be dispersed in the adjacent cities. Elated with this
success, the Imperialists immediately inveRted Hefrdin, which,
though defended with great bravery, was likewise taken by
assault, and fuch'of the garrison as escaped the sword were made
prisoners. The Emperor entrusted the conduct of this siege to
Emanuel Philibert of Savoy Prince of Piedmont, who, on that
occasion, gave the first display of his great talents for military
command, which loon entitled him to be ranked among the
first generals of that age, and facilitated his re-efiablilhment in
his hereditary dominions, the greater part of which having
been over-run by Francis in his expeditions into Italy, were fill
occupied by Henry k

THE loss of there towns, together with so many persons of

diftinftion, either killed or taken by the enemy, was no inconfi-
derable calamity to France, and Henry felt it very sensibly; but he

Thuan. 411. Haraei Annales Brabent, 669.

wap
286

was still more mortified at the Emperor's having aflumed his BooK XI.
wonted superiority in the field To fo'mn after the blow at Metz, 551
which the French had represented as fatal to his power. He
was ashamed, too, of his own remillefs and exceflive fccurity
at the opening of the campaign; and in order to repair that
error, lie assembled a numerous army, and led it into the Low-
Countries.

ROUzzD at the approach of fuich a formidable enemy,

Charles left Bruflels, where he had been (hut up so closely dur-
ing seven months, that it came to be believed in many parts of
Europe that he was dead ; and though lie was so much debili-
tated by the gout that he could scarce bear the motion of a
litter, he hastened to join his army. The eyes of all Europe
were turned with expectation towards there mighty and exaf-
perated rivals, between whom a decisive battle was now thought
unavoidable. But Charles having prudently declined to hazard a
general engagement, and the violence of the autumnal reins
rendering it impossible for the French to undertake any siege,
they retired without having performed any thing suitable to
the great preparations which they had made I.

THE Imperial arms did not make the fame progress in The Imperia-
Italy. The narrowness of the Emperor's finances seldom al- lifts unruc-

cefsfulin Itw-

lowed him to at with vigour in two different places at the fame ly.
time; and having exerted himself to the utmost in order to make,
a great effort in the Low-Countries, his operations on the other
fide of the Alps were proportionably feeble. The viceroy of

X Haraus 672. Ihuan. 414.

Naples,.

287

Boot XI. Nap'es, in conjl.inion with Cofmio di Medici, who was greatly

~, - alarmed at the introduction of French troops into Siena,'

endeavoured to become master of that city. But instead of re-
ducing the Sienefe, the Imperialists were obliged to retire ab-
rup:ly, in order to defend their own country, :upon the appear-
ance of the Turkish fleet, which threatened tfie coast of Naples;
and the French not only established themselves more firmly in
Tuscany, but, by the afiftance of the Turks, conquered a great
part of the island of Corsica, subjed, at that time to the
Genoese m.

And in Hun- THE affairs of the house of Austria declined no lefs.in Hun-
gary. gary during the course of this year. As the troops which Ser-

dinand kept in Transylvania received their pay very irregularly,
they lived almost at discretion upon the inhabitants; and their
insolence and rapaciousness greatly disgusted all ranks of. men,
and alienated them from their new sovereign, who,. instead of
proteting, plundered his fubjeas. Their indignation at this,
added to their desire of revenging Martinuzzi's death, wrought
so much upon a turbulent nobility, impatient of injury, and
upon a fierce people, prone to change, that they were ripe for a
revolt. At that very juncture, their late Qjeen Isabella, toge-
ther with her son, appeared in Transylvania. Her ambitious
mind could not bear the solitude and inactivity of a private life
and repenting quickly of the ceflion which she had made of the
crown in the year one thousand five hundred anl fifty-one, she
left the place of her retreat, hoping that the dissatisfaction of
the Hungarians with the Austrian government, would prompt,
them to recognize once more her son's right to the crown. Some

m Thuan. 417.

noblemen
2S8

noblemen of great eminence declared immediately in his favour.
the Bashaw of Belgrade, by Solyman's order, espoused his
cause in opposition to Ferdinand; the Spanish and German fol-
diers, instead of advancing against the enemy, mutinied for want
of pay, declaring that they would march back to Vienna; so that
Caftaldo, their General, was obliged to abandon Transylvania
to Isabella and the Turks, and to place himfelfat the head of the
mutineers, that by his authority he might restrain them from
plundering the Austrian territories, through which they paifed n.

FERDtNAND'S attention was turned so. entirely towards the

affairs of Germany, and his treasures so much exhaustRd by his
late efforts in Hungary, that he made no attempt to recover
this valuable province, although a favourable opportunity for
that purpose prefehted itself, as Solyman was then engaged in a
war with Persia;. and involved besides in domeftick calamities
which engrossed and diRfurbed his mind. Solyman, though
diftinguihed, by many accomplilhments, from the other Otto-
man Princes, had all the pallions peculiar to that violent and
haughty race. He was jealous of his authority, sudden and fu-
rious in his anger, and filfceptible of all that rage of love, which
reigns in the Eaf, and often produces the wildest and mot:
tragical cffc:ts. His favourite mistress was a Circaflian slave
of exquisite beauty, who bore him a Ton called Muitapha, whom,
both :9n account of his birth-right and merit, he.deftined to be
the heir of his crown'. Roxalana, a Ruflian captive, loon sup-
planted the Circaflian, and gained the Sultan's heart. Having
the address to retain the conquest which flie had made, lie
kept !piffeflion of; ,his love! without any rival, for many years,

n Tlunn. 430.
VOL. III. P p during

BOOK X.

1553.

Ferdinand
obliged to
abandon
Tranlylvania.

Solyman's donteftick
distresses,

The tragical
history of his
fonMufliapla.

289

EooKc XI. during which she brought him several Cons and one daughter.

-*

l } All the happiness however, which lthe derived from the! un-
"'553.

hounded sway that she had acquired over a monarch whom one
half of the world revered or dreaded, was embittered by perpetual
reflections on; Mfltapha's accellion to the throne, and the cer-
tain death bf:her.!fons, who she foresaw would le.imiluiediitely
facrificedi according to the barbarousjealoufy of Turkih policy,
to the safety of the new Emperor. By dwelling continually on
this melancholy idea, (he came gradually to view Muftapha as
the enemy of her' children, and to hate him with more than
a ftcp-mother's ill-wil! This prompted her to wish his. deftruc-
tion, in"'order to secure for one of her own sons the throne
which was deitined for him. Nor did file want either ambition
to attempt such a high enterprize, or the arts requisite for car-
iying it into execution. Having prevailed on the Sultan to give
her only 'daughter in marriage to Ruftan the Grand Vifier, she
disclosed her scheme to that crafty minister, who perceiving that
it was his own interest to co-operate with her, readily promised,
his afliftance towards aggrandizing that branch of the royal
line, to which he was now so nearly allied.

As soon as Roxalana had concerted her measures with this.

able confident, Ihe began to affect a wonderful zeal for the.
Mahometan religion, to which Solyman was superstitiously
attached, and proposed to found and endow a royal mfaque, a.
work of great expence, but deemed by the Turks' meritorious.
in the highest degree. The Mufti whom ihe consulted approved ;
much of her pious intention; but having been gained and.
inftruced by Ruftan, told her that (he being a slave could de-.
rive no benefit herself from that holy deed, for all the merit of

1 it-
290

it. would accrue .to Solyman tie mailer whose property Ille was.
Upon this flle fee, d ito ,be overwhelmed withi sorrow, 'anid tg
fink into the deepest melancholy, as if he hadl been difgufbcd
with life and all its enjoyments. Solyman, who was absent with
the army, being informed of. this dejecion of mind, and of the
cause from which it proceeded, discovered all the follicitude
of a lover to remove it, and by a writing under his hand de-
clared her a free woman. Roxalana hlaving gained this point,
proceeded to build tile Mosque, and re-aflumed her ufuial chear-
fulness and gaiety of spirit. But when Solyman, on his return
to Conitantinople, sent an eunuch, according to the custom of
the seraglio, to bring her to partake of his bed, fle, seemingly
with deep regret, but in the most peremptory manner, declined
to follow the eunuch, declaring that what had been an honour to
her while allave, became a crime as Ihe was now 'a free woani,
and that (he would not involve either tlie Sultan or herself in thl
guilt that must be contracted by filch an open violation of the law
of their prophet. Solyman, whose paflion tlis difficulty, as well
as the asseted delicacy which .gave rife to it, heightened and in-
flamed, had recourse immediately to the Mufti for his dirction.
He replied, agreeably to the Koran, that Roxalana's scruples were
well founded, but added, artfully, in words which Ruftan had
taught him to use, that it was in the Sultan's power to remove
there difficulties by efpouflig: lHer *as his lawful wife. The
amorous monarch closed eagerly with the proposal, and folemuly
married her according to the form of the Mahometan ritual;
though by doing so he difiegirded a maxim of policy which
the prid- of the Ottoman blood had taught all the ftiltans fiace
Bajazet I. to confider as inviolable. From 'his time, none of
the Turkish monarchs had married, because ;when he was vai-

P p '2 quillhed

291
B3ooK XI.

I·-A553 . *i
.; .

BnrK XL quiibed and taken prisoner by Tamerlane, his wife had been

C"5'5 abused with barbarous insolence by the Tartars. That no funi-
'553-

lar calamity might subjec the Ottoman family to the like dif-
grace, the sultans admitted none to their bed but slaves whose
dishonour could not bring any such stain upon their house.

BCT the more urcommon the ftep was, the more it convinced

Ro.alana of the unbounded influence which she had acquired
over the Sultan's heart; and emboldened her to prosecute, with
greater hope of fi.iefs, the scheme that she had formed in ord.r
to ddtrcy Muftapha. This young prince havirg been entrnfted
by his father, according to the praetice of the sultans in that age,
with the government of several different provinces, was at that
tim- inveft-d with the administration in Diarbequir, the' ahierit
hifopotamia, which Solymraa had wrested from the Pcifia.s,
and added to his empire. Ia all there different commands,
Muftapha had conductd himself with such cautious prudence as
could give no offence to his father, though, at the fame time, he
governed with so much moderation as well as justice, 'ard dil-
played such valour and generofiry as rendered him equally the
favonrite of the people and the darling of the soldier'.

THB-E S£was no room to lay any fc.ly or vice to his charge,

that could- impir the high opi..ion which his father entertai:;cd
of hi'. Roxlana's malevolence was more refirnd; Ih. turned
his virt:.es against him, ard made ufo of thleie as engi -es for
h:s dGe.mAca ito. She often mentioned, ii SjA man's prctn-.ce,

.tic fpip.e d cualities of his so n; fh- ctebrated his courage,

. s libteali:y, his papular arts, with maiicio's and e.era.esl
przi c. As io -n as she prectived tha- the S.i';an htiard ihlii

- :_01|1.!3? :C.
292

encomiums, which'were often repeated, with uneasiness; that BOOK XI.
'fiufpicion of his son began to mingle itflf with his former r3
esteem of him; anA that by degrees he came to view him with
jealousy and fear, she introduced as by accident, some discourse
'concerning the rebellion of his father Selirm against Bajazet his
'grandfather; lie took notice of the bravery of the veteran
troops Under Muftapha's command, and of the neighbourhood
of Diarbequir to the territories of the Persian Sophi, Solyman's
mortal'enterhy. By these arts, whatever remained 'of paternal
tertdernefs was e-trirelyj' ettiiguifhed, tand such pailions were
:kindled in his brcat as gave 'all Roxalaia's inmlignant luggef-
tions'the colour nrt only of probability but of truth. A deep-
rooted hatred succeeded, now, to 'his lirrpiciors and. fear of
Muifl'aha. -Ia 'hppoi:lted spics to obrrtve' -and report ill lhi,
wdrds and aftlohs; h 'watched aid

a flod .o'i hii gilard'agaiec
liirm as hlis mio-t dangerois cdne-my.

H -.v N'G thus alienated the Sul.an's heart from -Mi.l'aphl,

Roxalana ventired dn arioiher flep, andrattreaftdS'ulyman to
allow her own so:s thei liberty of apprruing at court, hoping
that By gainring access ro thcir fatler, tyr. minrht, by their g,)'x)
qualities and dutiful dpoi-tm.i't, i fi'",l:.? thc;inlves i.'o
that p'ace in 1 )ias iWaffsis h !i Mfp'lpha had fo:'mtr'y
'held ; arid, 'tiolgHl' t¥>laIt Yle d,'rr-nt-d was con:trsr to
th' practice of thie Otwrrmn 'f'r.ii' i ft .e:;, the uxrius
rni'.,rch gra.ted ltVir rtrlte-f . T *a-i t!e- s-.tab .in:rigilts
R.i^. , ad..d an-artifice' ffil r;ore li:b! , v:.!!>' cw.i-; ea.ed th.
Suliaa;i's d.lulion aid heigl:t' lrd L-is j.alo!:.' ;,'fd t;.r. -i.
'wrote to the B.,ih'a\s i'f"t(- p.t-:e-s adjiac-':; it

.;; t 'b

t

'. :-,

' inftiif ing ttil-; to

" l
': litn'-'i14,: ' r i-:'-it;ge3.::. I: ..:..': ..

r , --- L''

293

BooK Xf. ;proceedirgs in his, government, and to each ,ps, them I ;ga¥ .

--. ;prrivae hlint, flwing, in! appearance from Ilis .eal for. their
*intereR,; that: nothing -would be more acceptable to the Sultan
than to receive favourable accounts of a son whom he diftined
to fuitain the glory. bs theq Qttoman name. The. ; (haws,
ignorant of his fraudulent 'intention, and eager ,to pay!: :ourt to
their sovereign at such an easy price, .filled :their leqters with
·itudied but fatal panegyricks of Muftaphl, representing him as
a Prince worthy to succeed such .an illuftrioul father, anld; s en-
dowed with talents which :might .enable him to emulate,:-per-
haps to equal his fame. These .letters were induariqonfy flewp
to Solyman, at the seasons when it was known that they would
make the. deepest impreflion. Every expreflion in recommendation
,of his fon-wounded him to the heart; he fifpeted his principal
.officers of being ready to favour the mofi desperate attempts of
;a Prince whom they were so fond to praise; and fancying that
he saw. them already allaulting his throne with rebellious arms,
*he determined, while it was yet in his power, to anticipate the
blow, and to secure his own safety by his son's death,

F OR this purpose, though. under pretence of renewipg the

war against Persia, lie ordered Ruftan to march towards Diar-
bequir at the head of a numerous army, and to rid him of a
Ton whose life he deemed inconsistent witl hjls own safety.
But that crafty minister did not choose to be loaded with tle
odium.of having executed this cruel. order. Asfoon as he arrived
in Syria he wrote to Solyman, that. the danger was so immi-
nent as called for his immediate presence; that the camp was
full of Muftapha's emissaries. that many of the soldiers were cor-
rupted that the affttions of all, leaned towards him i tlat he had

discovered
294

discovered: a negociation 'which' ihad been carried on with- the PooK: Xli
piphi of! Persia in ;order to marry NMuRthpha with one .6f;his $

'553.

daughters; that he already felt' both his talents and his autho&
'ity to be inadequate to the exigencies of flich an arduous con-
junture, that. the Sultan, alone had. sagacity to discern . what
tefolution should be' taken in tliofe circumstances, n'ad. plwter.. to
carry that resolution. into execution. : .

THIS charge of courting the friendffip of the Sophi, Roxa-

lana and Ruftan hadt: eferved as the last and -mol envenomed of
all their calumnies. It. opsrated with the violence whi'ch they,
expetled from Solyman's inveterate abhorrence of the Persians,
and threw himself into the wildest. transports of rage. He set out
inflantly for Syria, and.haftencd thither with all the precipita-
tion and impatience of fear and revenge. As Toon as he joined
his army near Aleppo, and had concerted measures with Ruftan,,
lie Tent a Chiaus or messenger of the court to his son, requiring
him to repair immediately to his pretence. Muftapha,. though
no stranger to his ftep mother's. machinations, or to Ruftan's,
malice, or to his father's violent tenmper,: yet relying on his own.
innocence, and hoping toQ.difcredit' the jaccufations of- his ene-
mies by the promptitude .f; iis obedience, followed.the mefen-
ger without delay to Aleppo. The moment lie arrived in the
camp, he.was introduced into the Sultan's tent.. As. he entered
it, he observed.. nothing.. that could give, him any alarm; no
additional crowd. of attendants, .no body; of armed guards,.but.
the fame order and silence which always reign in the Sultaf's
apartments. In a few 'minutes, however,. feeral-, mutes ap-
peared, at the fight of iwl)om:,Muf;gphl knowing what was hiia
doom, cried withl a loud voice, " Lo, nmy death 1" and attempt-.

ed,

295

BooK XL ed to fly. The mutes ruffed forward to seize him, he refifed
^"^v" and ftrgled, demanding with the umoft earnests to fee the

Sultan; and despair, together with the hope of finding protec-
tion from the soldiers, if he could escape out of the tent, anni-
mated him with such extraordinary frength, that, for some
time he baffled all the efforts of the executioners. Solyman
was within hearing of his son's cries, as well as of the noise
which the dtruggle occasioned. Impatient of this delay of his
revenge, and ftmck with terror at the thoughts of Muftapha's
escaping, he drew aside the curtain which divided the tent, and
thrusting his head, darted a fierce look towards the.mutes,
and with wild and threatening gestures seemed to chide them for
foth and timidity. At fight of his father's furious and unre-
lenting countenance, Muftapha's strength failed, and. his
courage forsook him; the mutes fa~ened the bow-string about
his neck, and in a moment put an end to his life.

THe dead body was exposed before the Sultan's tent. The

soldiers gathered round it, and contemplating that mournful
object with astonishment, and sorrow, and indignation, were
ready, if a leader had not ben waating, to have broke -out into
theaildeftxeeffes of rage. After giving vent tothe firit expref-
fionsof their grief, they retired each man to his tent, and fhuttiing
themflves rp,- bewailed in secret the cruel. fate of their favourite;
nor wa there one of them -who taRstd food or even watet during
the reniide- of: hat day. Next morning the fame solitude
and filece reigned in the camp; and, Solyman, being afraid that
fame dreadful fterm would follow this sudden calm, in order
to appease the enraged soldies, -deprived Ruflan of the :eas,
ordered him to leave the camp, -and rai~dAhmet a-gallant

officer,
296

officer much beloved in the army, to the dignity of Vifier. BooK XI.
This change however, was made in concert with Ruflan him- 53
self; that crafty minister flggefting it as the only expedient
which could save himself or his mailer. But within a few
months, when the resentment of the soldiers began to subside,
and the name of Muftapha to be forgotten, Achmet was
strangled by the Sultan's command, and Ruftan reinflated in
the office of Vifier. Together with his former power, he re-
assumed the plan for exterminating the race of Muftapha which
he had concerted with Roxalana; and as they were afraid that
an only son whom Muftapha had left might grow up to avenge
his death, they redoubled their activity, and by employing the
fame arts againRt him which they had praftifed againit his fa-
ther, they inspired Solyman with the fame fears, and prevailed
on him to ifile orders for putting to death that young innocent
Prince. These orders were executed, with barbarous zeal, by
a eunuch, who was dispatched to Bursa, the place where the
Prince resided; and no rival was left to dispute the Otto;nan
throne with the Cons of Roxalana o.

SUCH a tragical scene, productive of Co deep diflrefs, fel- Charles pT-
dom occurs but in the hiftery of the great monarchies jecsa'mar-

riage bctween

of the Earl, where the force of the climate works up and I;i son and
sublimes all the pailions of the human mind into the greatest Mary o°fEg-
fury, and the absolute power of sovereigns enables them to at
witi.'uncohntrouled violence; but while it pafred in the court
of Solyman and engaged his whole attention, Charles was
ptitruing with the utmost ardour a new scheme for aggrain-

o Augerii Giflenii Buibequii Legationis Turcica Epiflola iv. Franc.

x165.p.37. Thuan. ib.2. p.432. M em. de Ribier ii.457. Mauroceni
hiltor. Veneta, lib. vii. p. 60.

VOL. 111. Qq dizing

297

BooK XI.

1553.

To which
Philip gives
his content.

dizing his family. About this time, Edward the sixth of Eng-
land, after a short reign, in which he displayed such virtues
as filled his fubjeds with sanguine hopes of being happy un-
der his government, and made them bear with patience all,
that they suffered from the weakness, the difentions and the
ambition of the ministers who aflilmed the administration during
his minority, was seized with a lingering diflemper which
threatened his life. The Emperor no sooner received an account
of this, than his ambition, always attentive to seize every op-
portunity of acquiring an increase of power or of territories to
his son, he suggested the thought of adding England to his
other kingdoms by the marriage of Philip with the Princess
Mary, the heir of Edward's crown. Being apprehensive, how-
ever, that his son, who was then in Spain, might decline a-
match with a Princess in her thirty-eighth year, and eleven
years older than himself q Charles determined, notwithftand-.
ing his own age and infirmities, to make offer of himself as a.
husband to his cousin.

BuT though Mary was so far advanced in years, and defli-

tute of every charm either of person or of manners that could'
win affection or command esteem, Philip, without hesitation,
gave his content to the match proposed by his father, and was
willing, according to the.ufual maxim of Princes, to sacrifice his
inclination to his ambition.. In order to insure success, the Em-
peror, even before Edward's death, began to take such steps as
might facilitate it. Upon Edward's demise, Mary mounted, the
throne of England', the pretensions of the lady Jane Gray

q Palav. hilt. Concil. .Trid. v. ii. c. 13. p. X5.

proving

proving as unfortunate, as they were ill founded r. Charles lent
immediately a pompous embafny to London to congratulate
Mary on her accession to the thirorie, and to propose the alliance
with his son. The Queen dazzled with the profpeA of marry-
ing the heir of the greatest Monarch in Europe ; fond of uniting
more closely with her mother's famuily to which ile had been
always warmly attached; and eager to secure the powerful
aid which (he knew would be necessary towards carrying on her
favourite scheme of re-eftablifling the Romifl Religion in Eng-
land, listened in the molf favourable manner to the proposal.
Among her fubjeds, it met with a very different reception.
Philip, it was well known, contended for all the tenets of the
church of Rome with a sanguinary zeal which exceeded the
Ineafureeven of Spanish bigotry; this alarmed all the numerous
partizans of the Reformation. The Castilian haughtiness and
reserve were far from being acceptable to the English, who hav-
ing several times seen their throne occupied by those who were
born fubjesds, had become accustomed to an unceremonious and
familiar intercourse with their sovereigns. They could not
think, without the utmost uneasiness, of admitting a foreign
Prince to that influence in their councils, which the husband
of their Queen would naturally possess. They dreaded, both
from Philip's overbearing temper, and from the maxims of the
Spanish monarchy which he had imbibed, that he would infuse
ideas into the Queen's mind, dangerous to the liberties of the
nation, and would introduce foreign troops and money into the
kingdom to afif: her in any attempt against them.

BOOK XI.

1553.

Tile Celti-
ments of
Mary and of
the lnglilli
with regard
to it.
r Carte's his. of England, iii. 287.

Qq 2.

299
FULL

BOOK XI.

1553.

The house of
Commons le-
monfrate a-
gainft it.

The marriage
treaty con-
cluded.

1554.
January 12.

FULL of these apprehensions, the house of Commons, though

in that age extremely obsequious to the will of their Monarchs,
presented a warm address againit the Spanifl match ; many
pamphlets were published representing the dangerous confe-
quences of the alliance with Spain, and describing Philip's bi-
gotry and arrogance in the moif odious colours. But Mary,
inflexible in all her resolutions, paid no regard to the remon-
ftrances of her Commons, or to the sentiments of the people.
The Emperor, having secured, by various arts, the mrinifters
Whom she truited most, they approved warmly of the match,
and large furrs were remitted by him in order to gain the reft
of the council. Cardinal Pole, whom the Pope, immediately,
upon Mary's acceflion, had dispatched as' his legate into Eng-
land, in order to reconcile his native country to the fee of Rome,
was detained 'by the Emperor's comnmand at 'Dillinghen, ih
Geimany, left by his pretence lie should thwart Philip's preten-
sions, and e'mploy his inteteft in favour of his tkinfmian Courtnay
Earl of Dev,6nhire, 'Whohm the English a'tdehtly wiihed 'theit
foveieign to chufe for a hubarid ,.

MEANWkhiLt, the 'fitgociation was carried forward with the

gredteft rapidity, 'the Eiiliror 'agreeing, without hehftationt to
every article in savoir do' tfgigland which MIary's minilters: either
reprefeieted as necefltry 'tb boolie the' pople ahd reconcile them.
to the 'match, or 'that' Wds sugges'ted by their own fears and
jealotir of a 'foreigh hnafter. he chief articles were, that
Philip during Hii hiarri'age With 'th 'Qeieen 'ihiould bear
the title of King of England, but the entire adminiftra-

* Cart. iii. 288.

tion
o300

tion of affairs, as well as the role disposal of all revenues, offices,
and benefices should remain with the Queen; that the heirs,
of the marriage Ihould, together with tile crown of England,
inherit tle dutchy of Burgundy and the Low-Countries ; that
if Prince Charles, Philip's only ton by a former marriage,
should die without iufie, his children by the Queenl whether
male or female should fuiceed to tie crown of Spain and all the
Emperor's hereditary dominions that before the confumma-
tion of the mnarriage, Philip should fivear solemnly that he
would retain no domeflick who was not a fubje1' of the QL.ecn,
and would bring no foreigners into the kingdom that might
give umbrage to the English: that he would make no altera-
tion in the confitrution 'or laws of England that he would not
carry the Queen or any of the children born of this marriage
6btt of the kingdom ; 'tht if the Qgeeh should die before him
without itile, he Yhoulld immediately leave tile crown to the
lawful heir, without claiming any right of administration
whateveir; .that England Thiuld not, :in consequence of this
mnatriage, be engaged in 'any war subsisting between Prance and
Spain; and t'hat the alliance 'between France and England
should remain in full force t.

BUT this treaty, though both the Emperor and Mary's mi-

niRters employed their utmoRl address in framinig it so as to please
the English, was far froim quieting their fears and jealousies.
Tliey saw that words and promires were a feeble security against
tile encroachments of an ambitious Prince, who, as foou as le
got poilellion of the power and advantqges wliidl tle .Qeen's

BOOK XI.

1554.

DiCcontent
and appre-
henfions of
the Englili.
't Pymceils Nda, vol. XY0 3'l7. j93. MM e 'Ribler, Ii. 49Cls

hussland.

30I

BOOK XI.

155.4.

Wyat's infur-
ietlion.

-husband must neccffarily enjoy, could easily. evade any of
,the articles that either limited his authority or obftrutded his
schemes. They were convinced that the more favourable the
conditions of the present treaty were to England, the more
Philip would be tempted to violate them; and they dreaded
that England, like Naples, Milan, and the other countries
.annexed to the Spanih crown, would soon feel the intolerable
weight of its opprellive domination, and be constrained, as these
.had been, to waffe its wealth and vigour in wars wherein it
had jo .interest, and from which it could derive no advantage.
These Sentiments prevailed To generally that every part of the
kingdom was filled with discontent at the match, and with {n-
dignation againift the advisers of it. Sir Thomas Wyat, a gen.
tieman of Come note, and of good intentions towards the pub-
lick, took advantage of this, and routed the inhabitants of
Kent to arms in order to. save their country from a foreign yoke.
Such numbers retorted in a short time to his itandard.; he
marched to London with such rapidity; and the Queen was so
utterly unprovided fqr defence, that the: aspeC of affairs was
extremely threatening, and if any nobleman of distinction had
joined the malecontents, or had Wyat poflfeed talents equal, in
any degree, to the boldness of his enterprize, the infurreion
must have proved fatal to Mary's power. Rut all his measures
were concerted with f6 little prudence, and executed with filch
irrefdlution, that many of his followers firfook himn; the reft
were dispersed by an handful of men; and he himself was taken
prisoner without having made any effort worthy of the cause
that he had undertaken, orfuitable to the ardour with which he
engaged in it. He suffered the puniflment due to his rashness
and rebellion. The .Qeen's authority was confirmed and in-

created
.3o2

303

creased by her success in defeating this inconsiderate attempt
to abridge it. The lady Jane Gray, whose title the ambition of
her relations had set up in opposition tb the Queen's, was, not-
withstanding her youth and innocence, brought to the scaffold:
The lady Elizabeth, the Queen's sifter, was observed with the
most jealous attention. The treaty of marriage was ratified by
the parliament.

PHILIP landed in England, with a magnificent retinue, cele:

brated his nuptials with girat solemnity; and though he could
not lay aside his !atural feve ad ride, or aflume gracious
and popular manners,, le endeavoured to conciliate the favour
of the Englith nobility by hls extraordinary librait. In
cafe that should fail of acquiring him such influence in the
government of the 'kingdom, as he aimed at obtaining, the
Emperor kept.a body of twelve tlioiifand men on the coast of
Slanders, in readiniefs. to embark. for England,, and to support
him in all his.entcrprizes.

EMBO LDENED by all there favourable circumstances,

Mary pursued the scheme of extirpating the Protestant re-
ligion out of her dominions, with, the most precipitant zeal.
The laws of Edward the sixth in favour of the Reforma-
tion were repealed; the Protestant clergy ejeced; all the
forms and rites of the Popish worthip were re-established;
the nation was solemnly absolved from the guilt which' it
liad contracted during the period of its apoftacy, and was
publickly reconciled to the church of Rome, by cardinal
Pole, who, immediately. after the Queen's marriage was.
permitted to continue his journey to England, and to ex-

1$t~~~ ercife

DooK XI.

1554.

The marriage
celebrated.

M ary's mea-
fures to over-
turn the Pro-
teRant reli-
gion in Eng-
rand.

BOOK XI. ercife his legantine functions with the mofi ample power. Not

A554. satisfied with having overturned the Protestant church, and

having established her own system on its ruins, Mary insisted
that all' her fubjeas ihould conform to the fame mode of worship
which fle preferred; (hould profess their faith in the fame creed
which she had approved; and abjure every practice or opinion
that was deemed repugnant to either of them. Powers altoge-
ther unknown in the English constitution were vested in certain
persons appointed .to take cognizance of heresy, and they pro-
ceeded to exercise them with more than inquisitorial severity.
The profpea of danger, however, did not intimidate the.
teachers of tle Protestant doctrines,' wvho believed that they
were contending for truths of the utmost confequenice' to the
happiness of mankind. They boldly avowed their sentiments,
and were condemned to that cruel death wliicl the church of
Rome reserves for its enemies.. This ihocking. punishment was
inflited with that barbarity which the rancour of false zeal alone
can infplre. The Engliih, who are inferior in humanity to no
people in Europe, and remarkable for the mildness of their
publick executions, beheld, with astonishment and horror, per-
f6ns wlo had filled the most respectable ftitions in their churth,
and who were venerable' on account of. their age, their piety aidl
their literature, condemined; tbo endure :torments- to 'wlhih even'
the most: atrocious criminalsL were not subjected.

Theobltacles TNIS extreme rigour did not accompliih. the end at wliicli
which flie had
t:ohshuehntd Mary aimed. The patienceand' fortitude witi wtiiclh thfe mar-

tyrs for the Reformation submitted to their fuitering,, the
heroick. contempt of death expressed by persons of every rank,

, 'an4
.304

and age, and sex, confirmed many more in the Protcll.lt faithl, IBoo;I XI.
than the threats of their enlragd persecutors could frc;ligltll into .--
apmoftacy. The bufin-fs of fiich as were entrultcd with trying of
hirceicks grew upon th.rn, a;!d aplp.'ared to be as cndlels as it
was odious. The Quccnll's al)!fli mLi,ifters became sensible how
impolitick as well as dang.crolis it \vas to irritate the people by
the frlc(ltllq t fpedacle of public excicuiions, which they detetced
buth as llunjuft and crudl. lE'\-tn l'lilip w\as lb thoroughly con-
\inced of her having ruli to an cxt(;ci of rigour, that on this
occasion lie affurned a part to which lhe was little accustomed,
becoming an advocate for moderation and lenity x

BUT, notwithlifanding this attempt to ingratiate himself with TheEnglihh

the Englilll, they discovercd a constant jealousy and difirufl of *lealoIs of
all his intentions ; and wlhen ome members who had been
gained by tle court ventured to move in the house of Commons
tlhat the nation ought to alfift the Emperor the Queen's father-
in law, in his war againf: France, tlhe proposal was rejected
with general difaTtisfattion. A motion which was made, that
the parliament should give its conlent that Philip might be pub-
lickly crowned as the QLcen's hulfband, met with fulch a cold
reception, that it was instantly withdrawn. v.

MEANWHILE, the King of France had observed the progress Tl'llcl rcncfl
of the Enmperor's ncgociation in England witl much uneasiness. King alai',e
the great acceflion of territories as well as reputation which Iis lbetwecCI Pli-

lip and Mlary.

x Godwin's Annals of Q.Mar) ap. Kcnnctt. v. ii. p. 3g9. Iurnct's hit.
of Refor. ii. 298. 305.

y Carte's hist. of England, iii. 314.
VOL. 11. R r enemy

305

B)OK. X!. enemy would acquire by tile marie.ge of his son with the

5-5 Queen of such a powerful kingdom was obvious and formi-
1554.

dable. He easily foirctilw that the Englifll, notwithliftaditng all
their fears and preccations, would be soon drawn in to take part
i: the quarrels on the conti:ent, a'.d be compelled to ad in sub-
ferviency to the Emperor's ambitious fclemes. For this reafoil,
Henry had given it in charge to his ambaf.ldor at the court
of London, to employ all his addrels in order to defeat or re-
tard the treaty of marriage; and as there was not, at that time,
any Prince of the blood in France, whom he could propose to
the Queen as a husband, he inftruded him to co-operate with
such of the Englifl as wilhed their sovereign to marry one of
her own fubjecs. But the Qlccen's ardour and precipitation,
in closing with the firfl overtures in favour of Philip, having
rendered all his endeavours ineffctual, Henry was so far from
thinking it prudent to give any aid to the English malecontents,
though earnestly follicited by Wyat and their other leaders,
who tempted him to take them under his protection, by offers
of great advantage to France, that he commanded his ambafa-
dor to congratulate the Queen in the warmest terms upon the
fuppreflion of the infurredion.

His prepara-
tions for a vi-
gorous cam-
paign.

BUT, notwithstanding there external profeflions,. he dreaded

so much the consequence of this alliance, which more than
compensated for all that the Emperor had loft in Germany, that
he determined to carry on his military operations both in the Low-
Countries, and in Italy, with extraordinary vigour, in order that
lie might compel Charles to accept of an equitable peace, before
his daughter-in-law could filrmount the aversion of her fibjedts
to a war on the continent, and prevail on them to anifit the

Emperor
o06

Emperor either with money or troops. For this purpolf, he
exerted himself to the utmost in order to have a numerous
army early afiembled on tile frontiers of the Netherlands, and
while one part of it laid waste the open country of Artois, tile
main body, under the Conflable Montmorency, advanced towards
the provinces of Liege and Hainaut by the forest of Ardennes.

E'lE L campaign was opened with the siege of Mariemburgh,

a town which the Queen of Hungary, the governess of the
Low-Countries, hlad fortified at great expence but, being
destitute of a fuflicient garrison, it surrendered in fix days.
I-enry, elated with this success, put himself at the hlead of his
army, and inverting Bouvines, took it by allnult, after a Ihort
refiftancc. With equal facility he b:came mater, of Dinant and
tlen turning to the left bent his march towards the province of
Artois. The vast fuims whicll the Emperor had remitted into
England had b exlhaufted his treafilry, as to render his prepara-
tions at thisjuni'ure, flower and more dilatory tlan usual. He had
no body of troops to make llead against the French at their first
entrance into his territories; and though lie drew together all
the forces in the country, in the utinolft hurry, and gave the
command of them Emanuel Phlilibert of Savoy, they were in
no condition to face an enemy so far superior in number. Thc
Prince of Savoy, however, by his Ptlivity and good conduCd,
made up for his want of troops. By watching all the motions of
the French at a diflanlcc, and by cllufing his own pofls witli such
fl(ill as put it out of thlir power either to form any siege of
consequence or to attack, him,,lie obliged them to fall back for
want of subsistence towards their own frontiers, after having burnt
all the open towns, and lhainlg plundered the country through

R r .2 lwhlich

']'le progrels
of his ariils.

June 28.

The Emperor
little able to
obiltu0t it.
Booit X1

tt;54.

.3 7

BOok Xu .

'554.

The French
inveR RKnti.

An ation be-
tweenthe two
armies.
Aug. 13.

whichl they marched wi:h a cruelty and licence more bccom-
i;;g a body of light troops tha:l a royal army led by a great
moinarch.

BUT Henry, that he might not dilinils his army without at-

tempti:g some conqueftl adequate to the vast preparations, as
well as sanguine hopes with v/liich h hadi opened the campaign,
ilvecfed Renti, a place deemed in that age of great imporlance,
as, by its situation on the confines of Artois and the Boutlonnais,
it covered the former province, and protected the patties which
made incursions into the latter. The town, which was llrongly
fortified and provided with a numerous garrison, made a gal-
lant defence; but being warmly prefled by a powVrfiul army,
it must soon have yielded. The Emperor, who at that titie
enjoyed a short interval of ease from the gout, was so follicitdtus
to save it, that, although he could bear no other motion but
that of a litter, he instantly put himself at the head of his
army, Which having received fevcral reinforceeicrts was now
strong enough to approach the enemy. The French were eager
to decide by a battle, what should be the fate of Renti, and ex-
peted it from the Emperor's arrival in his camp; but Charles
avoided it with great industry, and as he had nothing in view
but to save the town, he hoped to acconrplifl that without ex-
posing himself to the consequences of fich a dangerous and
doubtful event.

NOTWITHSTANDING all his precautions, a dispute, about a

post which both armies endeavoured to seize, brought on an
engagement which proved almost general. The Duke of Guise,
who commanded the wing of the French which flood the

brunt

brunt of tile conmbat, displaycd valour and conduld worthy of BoOKl XI.
the dcFce;dcr of 'Metz; the Imperialists after an obstinate s-
llruggle were npulfcd, the French remained malters of the
post in dilpute, and if the Conflable, either from Ihis natural
c;uition and slowness, or fiomr unwilliilgnefs to support a rival
wlhdni ie hated, had not delayed bringing up thbe main body to
fccolid the imnprefnion which Guise had made, the rolt of thl
enemy must have been complete. Thb Emperor, notwvitliftlnd-
ing the loss which lie .had ffiltained, continued in the fiae camp,
and the Fr'ncli, bbeing straitened for pro0viflons, and finding it
impolllble to ctry on the fiegd in thle face of an lioftile army,
quitted their intrenchments. They retired openly, courrihg tlh
enemy to approach, rather than fhiunning an engagemclit.

BuT Charles, having gained his, end; fiirlftcd tlherni to marcl The Ilperia
off unmoliefed. As fboi as hii troops entered their own lils invade

Picardy.

country, Henry threw garrisons into the frontier towins, and
difinffed the reft of the army. This encouraged the Imperia-
lifts to push forward witli a confidcrable body ds troops into
Picardy, and by laying waste the country with fire and sword,
they endeavoured to revenge thenfdlves for the ravages which
the French had committed in Hainault and Artoisz. But as they
were not able: to reduce any place of importance, they gained
nothing more tihan the enemy had done by this cruel. and inglo-
rious method of carrying on the war.. ,

MEAN.WHILE, the arms of France were still more unsuccess- Assails of

fil in Italy. Tlhe footing, which tlie French had acquired in Siena Itly.
occasioned much uneasiness to Cofmio di Medici the mofl saga-

' Thuan. 460, &c. Harci Ann. Brab. 674.

cious.

309

BOOK XI. cious and lenterprizing of all the Italian Princes. I-e dreaded

' the neighbourhood of a powerfil people, to whom all who
1554.

favoured the ancient republican government in Florence would
have recourle, as to their natural protedors against that abfo-
lute authority which the Emperor had enabled him to ufilrp;
he knew how odious lie was to the French, on account of his

CofinodiMc- attachment to the Imperial party; and lie foresaw that if they
dlici's schemes
with regard to were permitted to gather strength in Siena, Tuscany would soon
Sielna feel the effets of their resentment. For there reasons, he with-

ed with the utmost follicitude for the .expulsion of the French
out of the Sienefe, before they had time to establish them-
fclves throughly in the .country, or to receive fucll reinforce-
ments .from France as would render it dangerous to attack
them. As this, however, was properly the Empcror's bufiners
wlio was called ;by:his interest as well as honour to. dillodge there
formidable intruders into the heart of his dominions, Cofino
laboured to throw the whole burden of the enterprize on him;
and on that account had given no afliftance, during the former
campaign, but by advanci'ig some. finall fums. of money towards
tle payment of the Imperial troops. .

Henegociates BUT as the defenec of the Netherlands cngroffd all the Em-
with the Em- peror's attention, and his reniittances,* into ' England';: had
peror.

drained his:,treafitry, it was obvious lthat his operations in Italy
would be extremely feeble ; :and Colmo p!ainly percciving that: if
he himself did not take part openly in the war, and adt wvith
vigour, the French would scarce meet with ainy annnbyantce. As
his lituation rendered this' refoluitiohn 1 iicfliry t' arid unavoidable,
his' next' cate -was to e;xecute'li: !ueH a'- ianner, that:'le miight
derive from it lomc other advantage, belide tiat of driving the

French
310

French out of his neighbourhood. With this view, he dispatched an
cnvoy to Charles, and oflercd to decilre war againfl France, and
to reduce Siena at his own clharges, on conditio! that lie fliould
be repaid whatever lie Ihould expend in tile enterprize, and bc
permitted to retain all his conquests until his demands were
filly fitisfied. Charles to whom, at this junture, the war
againfl Siena was an intolerable burden, and who had neither
expedient nor rcfource that could enable him to carry it on with
proper vigour, closed gladly with this overture; and Cosmo,
well acquainted with the low slate of the Imperial finances,
flattered himself that the Emperor finding it impoflible to re-
imburfe him, would fufier him to keep quiet poflielion of what-
ever places he flould conquer...

FULL of these hopes, he made great preparations for war, and

as the French King had turned the firength of his arms againfl
tlie Netherlands, he did not dirfp.ir of afcmbling filch a body
of men as would prove more than a filfficient match for any force
which he could bring into the field in Italy. He endeavoured to
obtain afliftance from the Pope, or at leafl to secure his remain-
ing neutral, by giving one of his daughters to that Pontiffs
nephew. He attempted to detach the Duke of Oifini, whose
family had been long attached to the French party, from his
ancient confederates, by bestowing on him another of his daugh-
ters; and what was of greater consequence than cither of there,
he engaged John James Medecino, Marquis of Marignano, to
take the command of his army b. This officer, from a very low

a Adriani Ifloria de fuoi tempi, vol. i. 662.
b Adriani Ifloria, vol. i. p. 663.

condition

BOOK XI.

'554.

Enters into
war with
Francc.

Giv's lihe
comiimand of
his army to
Medeccino.

3Ir

. I 1
.*» )

Ii~~c3 XI.

'utcer Stnozzi
ciitiutlediiwith
the command
of the French
arnhy in Italy.

codtlition in life, had raised himself, tlrough all thle ralks cf
f'irvcc, to high command, and had difplayd talntls and ac-
quired reputation in war, which entitled him to be placcd on a
level with the greatef generals of that martial age. Having
attained a flation of eminence so difproportionatc to his birth,
he laboured with a fond follicitude to conceal his original obfct-
rity, by giving out that he was defiended of the family of Me-
dici, to which honour the cafial refemblaicc of his name wa;
his only pretension. Cofino, happy that he could gratify him
at such an easy rate, flattered his vanity in this point, acknov/-
ledged him as a relation, and permitted him to afflme the arms
of his family: Medecino, eager to serve the head of that family
of which lie now confidered himself as a branch, applied with
wonderful zeal and afliduity to raise troops ; and as during his
long service, he had acquired great credit with the leaSders es
those mercenary bands which formeSt the strength of Italian
armics, lie engaged the moit eminent of thlcn to follow. Cofino's
standard.

To oppose this able general, and the formidable army wlhicl

he had assembled, the King' of Frahce made choice of Peter
Strozzi, a Florentine nobleman, who had 'resided long in France,
as an exile, and who had risen by his nierit to high. reputation and
command in the army. H-e was the son of Philip Strozzi, who,
in the year one thousand five hundred and tlirty-feven had conl-
curred with ftlch lirdour in the 'atttmpt to expel the family of
Medici out of Florence, and to rc-cftablifll the ancient republi-
can form of government; and who had petifhed in the under
taking. The son inherited the implacable aversion to the Me-.
dici, as well as the falme enthufiafticl; zeal lor the liberty of. Flo-
rence which had animathd his failthr, wholi death he was impa.

tient

tient to revenge. Henry flattered himself that his army would
make rapid progress under a general whose zeal to promote his
interest was roured and seconded by ftlch powerful pafnions; efpe-
cially as he had allotted him, for tle scene of aftion, his native
country, in which lie had many powerful partizans ready to
facilitate all his operations.

BuT how specious soever tle motives might .appear which

induced Henry to make this choice, it proved fatal to the intereils
of France in Italy. Cosmo, as soon as he heard that the mortal
enemy of his family was appointed to take the command in
Tuscany, concluded that the King of France aimed at Ibme-
thing more than the proteCtion of the Sienefe, and saw .tlle
neceflity of making extraordinary efforts, not merely to reduce
Siena, but to 'fve himself from destruCtion.. At the fame
time, the Cardinal of Ferrara, who had the entire direcion of
the French affairs in Italy, confidered Strozzi as a formidable
rival in power, and in order to prevent him from acquiring any
increase of authority from success, he was extremely remiss in
fitpplying him either with money to ,py his troops, or with
provisions to support them. Strozzi himself, blinded by his
resentment against the Medici, pushed on his operations with the
impctuofity of revenge, rather than with the caution and pru-
dence becoming a great general.

AT' first, however, he attacked several towns in the territories

of Florence with fuclh vigour as obliged Medecino, in order to
check his progress, to withdraw the greater part of his army
from Siena, which he had inverted before Strozzi's ariival in Italy.

c Pecci Memorie di Siena, vol. iv. p. 103, &c.
VOL. III. S f As

BOOK XI.

1554.

The inipru-
dIeIIcc of thia
choice.

Tile hatle of
Marciano.

3t3

BOOK XI.

1554. -

Aug. 3.

In which the
French are
defeated.

As Cosmo sustained the whole burden of military operations,.
the expance of which mufll oon have exhausted his revenues; as.
neither the viceroy of Naples nor governor of Milan were in con-
dition to afford him any effeatual aid; and as the troops which '
Medecino had left in the camp before Siena could. attempt nothing
against it during his absence; it was Strozzi's business to have
protraced the war, and to have transferred the feat of it into the
territories of Florence; but the hope of ruining his enemy.by
one decisive blow, precipitated him into a general engagement
not far from Marciano. The armies were nearly equal in num-
ber; but a body of Italian cavalry in which Strozzi placed great
confidence, having fled either through the treachery or cowar-
dice of the officers who commanded it, without making any
refitance, the infantry remaihed' exposed to the attacks of all
Medecino's troops. Encouraged; however, by Strozzi's pre--
fence and example, who after receiving a dangerous wound
in endeavouring to rally the cavalry, placed himself at the.
head of the infantry, and manifeted an admirable pretence
of mind, as well as extraordinary valour, they stood their ground
with great firmness, and-repulfed such of the enemy as ventured
to approach them. But there gallant troops being surrounded at
last on every fide, and torn in pieces by a battery of cannon
which Medecino brought to bear upon them, the Florentine
cavalry broke in on their flanks, and a general rout ensued.
Strozzi, faint with the loss of blood, and' deeply affected
with the fatal consequences of his own rashness, found the
utmost difficulty in making his escape with a handful of men d..

d Pecci Memorie della Siena, vol. iv. p. 157

MED.ECINO:

.. f
314

MRDECINO returned immediately to the Siege of Siena with

his vicorious troops, and as Strozzi could not, after the utmost
efforts of activity, colle& as many men as to form the appear-
ance of a regular army, he had leisure to carry on his approaches
against the town without moleflation. But the Sienefe, inflead
of finking into difpair upon this cruel disappointment of their
only hope of obtaining relief, prepared to defend themselves to
the utmost extremity, with that undaunted fortitude, which the
love of liberty alone can inspire. This generous resolution
was warmly seconded by Monluc, who commanded the French
garrison in the town. The active and enterprizing courage
which he had displayed on many occasions had procured him
this command.; and as he had ambition which aspired at the
highest military dignities, without any pretensions to attain them
but what he could derive from merit, he determined to diftin-
gtiifh his defence of Siena by extraordinary efforts of valour
and perseverance. For this purpose, he, with unwearied industry,
repaired and strengthened the fortifications ; he trained the citi-
zens to the use of arms, and accustomed them to go through the
fatigues and dangers of service in common with the soldiers;
and as the enemy were extremely ftrid in guarding all the
avenues to the city, lie hulbanded the provifi)ns in the maga-
zines witll the most parsimonious oeconomy, and preyailcd on
the soldiers as well as the citizens to reftria themselves to a very
moderate daily allowance for their filbfiftence. Medecino,
though his army was not numerous enough to form the town
by open force, ventured twice to afiault it by furprize, but lie
was received each time with so much spirit, and repulsed withi
fiuch lots, as discouraged him from repeating the attempt, and
left him no hopes of reducing the town but by famine.

BOOK XL.

1554.

Medicino be-
sieges Siena.

which is gale
laitly de-
fended by
the citizens
and Monluc.

315
Ss

Wl1 ,1

ECOK XI. WITi this view, lie fortified his own camp with great care;

*554. Occupied all the polts of firength round, the place, and having

^ecdlicino entirely cut off ths besieged from any communication: with the
converts the
figeintoa adjacent country, lie waited patiently until neceflity should corn-
blockade. p-l them to opn their gates. But the entlhufialic zeal of the

citizens for liberty, made them derpifc the inconveiiencics
occasioned by a scarcity of provisions, and even supported theml
long under all the mileries of famine ; Monluc by his example
and exhortations taught his soldiers to vie with them in patience
and-abftinence; and it was not until they had withflood a siege
of ten months, until they had eaten up all the horses, dogs, and
other animals in the place, and were reduced almost to their, last
15$5 morsel of bread, that they propored a capitulation. Even then they

demanded honourable terms; and as Cofimo, .though no. stranger
to the extremity of their condition, was afraid that despair
miight prompt them to venture upon some wild enterprize, he
immediately granted them conditions more favourable than they
could have expefted.

Aprl 22. .THE capitulation was made in the Emperor's name,. who en-.
The town gaged to take the republick of Siena under. the prote&cion of
obliged by
famine to the Empire.; he pronifed to maintain tlhe ancient liberties of
capitulate. the city, to allow the maglratcs the full exercise of their.

former asthority, to secure the citigens in the undisturbed
poffeflion of their privileges and property.; he granted an. ample
and unlimited pardon to all who had born arms againfl him;
he reserved to himself the right of placing a garrison in the
town, but engaged not to rebuild the citadel without the con.
sept of the citizens. Monluc and his.French garrison were allowed.
to march out with all the honours of war.

ME D C NO
316

NtEDECrNO obfcrved the articles of capitulation, so far as de-

pended on hliii with grcat exaca:efs. No violence, or infiilt
whatsoever was offered to the inhabitants, and tha French garri-
sorn was: received with all the refpedi due to their 'piiit and
bravery. Bat many of the citizens filrpeting from the extra-
ordinary facility with wlicl they had obtained such favourable
conditions, that the Em'peror, as, well as Colilo,: would take tllh
firfi opportunity of violating them, and difdaini:lg to p'ofl'e i
precarious liberty, which. depended' on the will of another,'
abandoned tie place of their nativity, and accompanied the
Frenchl to Monte-Alcino, Porto Ercole, and other finall toins iii
the territory of the republic. They ecfabtfled ni Monto-Acino
the fame rmodel of government to' which they had been accu-,
tomed at Siena, and!' app6inting magistrates with the 'fine
titles and jurifdidtion,' solaced themselves with this image of
their ancient liberty.

' , : i ,

THE fgare of the Sinede conccrniig the faite otr ttheir' coun

try were not imaginary, or their fiifpicion of the' Emperor and.
Cosmo ill-founded' ; for no sooner had the Imperial troops taken
poflelion of the town, than Cfino, without regarding the ar-
ticles of capitulation, not- only displaced 'the magirlrates who
were in. office, and nominated new ones 'devoted 'to his.intercet,
but commanded all the citizens to deliver up their arms to per-
sons whom he appointed' to receive them. They submitted to
the former from neceflity, though withl all the reluctance and
regret which men accuiftomed to- liberty- Peel. in qbeytin the
firfl commands of a master. They did not yield the fame
tame obedience to. the latter; and, many persons of. diftinCion,
rather than degrade themselves, by flirriiedering their arms,

1 ' ''; 'from.

BooKe XI'

1 555:

Many ot the
Seinefc rctilc.
to MIontz-
Alcino,

and efiablilhl
n tice governl-
ncni there.

Hardnflps to
which the ci-
tizens of Sie-
na were sub-
jeced.

3r7

BOOK XI.

1555.

Cosmo at-
tacks those
who had re-
.tihed.
June 13.

from the rank of freemen to the condition of slaves, fled to
their countrymen at Mont6-Alcino, and chose to endure all
the hardships, and encounter all the dangers which they had
reason to expect in that new station, where they had fixed the
feat of their republick.

.COSMO, ?not reckoning himself .secure .while such numbers of

implacable and desperate enemies were 'fettled in his neighbour-
hood, and retained any degree of power, follicitcd Medecino to
attack them in their different places of retreat, before they had
time to recruit their strength and spirits, after the many calami-
ties which they had suffered. He prevailed on him, though his
army was much weakened by hard duty during the siege of
Siena, to invest Porto Ercole; and the.fortifications being both
flight and incomplete, the besieged were soon compelled to open
their gates. An unexpected order which Medecino received
from the Emperor to detach the greater part of his troops into
Piedmont, prevented farther operations, and permitted the
Sienefe exiles to reside for rome time undisturbed in .Monte-
Alcino. But their unhappy countrymen who remained at
Siena, were not yet at the end of their sufferings.; for the Em-
peror instead of adhering to the articles of capitulation, granted
his son Philip the investiture of that city and all its dependen-
cies; and Francis de Toledo, in the name of their new master,
proceeded to fettle the civil and military government, treated
them'likea conquered people, and fubjedcd theem to the Spa-
nilh yoke, Without paying any regard vwhatever to their privi-
leges or eftablilhed forms of policy .,

c Sleid. 617. Thuan. lib. xv. 526 537. Joan. Camerarii adnot. rer. pre-

cipuarum ab anno 550o ad 1561 ap Freherum, vol. iii. p. 564. Pec(i Mem-
morie-dell a Siena, iv. 164, &c.

TaH
318

THE Imperial army in Piedmont had been so feeble, for

some time, and its commanders so inaAive that the Emperor,
in order to give vigor to his' operations in that quarter, found
it necefary not only to call off Medecino's troops from Tuf-
cany while in the career of conquefl,. but to.employ in Pied-
mont a general of such reputation and abilites, as might
counterbalance the great military talents of the Marechal
Briffac, who was at the head of the. French forces in that
country.

HE pitched on the Duke of Alva for that purpose'; but

it was as much the effect of a court intrigue, as of his opinion
of. the Duke's merit, which led him to this choice. Alva
had long attended Philip with the utmost afliduity, and had
endeavoured to work himself into his confidence by all the in-
finuating arts of which *his haughty and inflexible nature was,
capable. As he nearly resembled that Prince. in many features
of his character, he began to gain much of his good-will. Ruy
Gomez de Silva,. Plilip's favourite, who dreaded the progress.
which this formidable rival made in his maiter's affetions, had
the address to prevail with the Emperor to name Alva to this
command. The Duke, though sensible that he owed this diflinc-
tion to the malicious arts of an enemy, who had no other aim
than to remove him at a diflance from court, was of such punc-
tilious honour, that he would not decline a command tlha ap-
peared dangerous and difficult, but, at the fame time, so
haughty that he would not accept of it but on his own terms,
infiting on being appointed the Emperor's Vicar General in
Italy, with the Iupreme military command in all the Imperial
and Spanifl territories in that country. Charles granted all his

demands ;.

BOOK XI,

Operations in
Piedmont.

Charles ap,
points the
Duke of Alva,
gcneralifliio
there.

5i9

820
.BOOK XI.

1555.

His opera-
tions there
inconfider-
able.

A conspiracy
to betray
Metz to the
Imperialills.

detands; and he :todk !pofnflion of. his new dignity with almost
unlimited authority.

His first operations, however, were neither proportioned to

his former reputation and the extensive powers with which he
was invefred, nor did they come up to the Emperor's expecta-
tions. Briftac liad under his command an army which, though
inferior in number to the Imperialists, was compoted of chosen
troops, which having grown old in service in that country,
where every town was fortified. and every castle capable of
being defended, were perfectly acquainted with the manner of
carrying on war there. By their valour, and his own good con-
duct, Briflac not only defeated all the attempts of the Imperia-
lits, but added new conquests to the territories of' which :he was
formerly master. Alva, after having boasted with 'his usual
arrogance, that he would drive the French out of Piedmont in
a few weeks, was obliged to retire into winter quarters, with the
ignominy of being unable to preserve entire that part of the
country of which the Emperor had hitherto 'kept poffefionf.

As the operations of this campaign in Piedmont were indeci-

five, those in the Netherlands were inconsiderable, neither the
Emperor nor King of France being able to bring into the field
an army itrong enough to undertake any enterptize of moment.
But what Charles wanted in force, he endeavoured to supply by
a bold firatag:m, the success of what would have been equal to
that of the most vigorous campaign. During the siege of Metz,
Leonard Father Guardian of a convent of Franciscans in that
city had, by his attachment to the French interest, insinuated

f Thuan. lib. xv. 529. Guichenon Hill. de Savoye, tom. i. 670.

himself

himself far into the esteem and favour of the Duke of Guise. Be-
ing a man of an ative and intriguing spirit, he had been extremely
1useful both in animating the inhabitants to fitftain with patience
all the hardlhips of the siege, and in procuring intelligence of
the enemies designs and motions. The merit of there impor-
tant services, together with the warm recommendations of the
Duke of Guise, secured him fiuch high confidence with Viellcville,
who was appointed governor of Metz, when Guise left the town,
that he was permitted to converse 6r correspond with whatever
persons he chole, and nothing that he did created any suspicion.
This monk, from the levity natural to bold and projecting ad-
venturers; or from resentment against the French, who had not
bestowed on him such rewards as lie tlhoughtdue to his own
merit; or tempted, by the unlimited confidence which was
placed in him, to imagine hliat he mright carry on and accomplifl
any scheme wvith perfed security formed a design of betray-
ing Ietz to the Imperialifs.

H.E communicated his intention to the Queen-ddwager of

HFItigary, who ,governed the Low-Countries ihi. name of her
brother. 'She hpprovidgg without any scruple, an ad of trea-
chery, from whlich the 'Emperor might derive fitch signal ad-
vantage, aflifted the Father Guardian in concerting the moit pro-
per plan for enfitring its filcces. They agreed that the Father
'Gliardian flhbuld enddavotluto :gainlthle mnnks of his convent to
coiecur in -promo'tin'g'the 'defigil; that he fliould introduce into
the convent a certain iitimber of cliolLn loldiers, disguised in the
hhabitbf friars ; ;that'lwhen every thing 'was; ripe for execUtion,
'the bgvehrilor '6f I'hidiville ' hotild march towards Merz in the
niglit 'With a :Coifiderable body of troops, and 'attempt to
Vol. 1I. T t sc:ale

BOOK XI.

'555.

The plan of
it.

321

^

BOOK XI.

1555.

.Its progress.
Ia discovered

scale the ramparts ; that while tlhe grlifo:l was employed in
refifling the allailants, the monks flould set fire to the town in
different places; that the soldiers who lay concealed should rally
out of the convent, and attack, those who defended the ramparts
in the rear. Amidst the universal terror and conffion, which
events To unexpected would occasion, it was. not doubted but
that the Imperialists might become masters of the town. As a
recompence for this service the Father Guardian. stipulated that
he should be appointed bishop of Metz, and ample rewards were
promised to fuclh of his. monks as should be moit active in co-
operating with him.

THE Father Guardian accomplished what he had undertaken

to perform with great secrecy and dispatch. By his authority
and arguments. as well as by the profpeC of wealth or ho-
nours which he set before his monks,. lie prevailed on all of
them to enter into the conspiracy. He introduced into the con-
vent, as many soldiers as were thought sufficient, without being
fufpefted. The governor of Thionville,. apprised. in due time
of the design, had aflembled a proper number of troops for exe-
cuting it; and the moment approached, which probably would
have wrested from Henry. the most important of all his con-
quells.

BuT happily for France, on the very day that was fixed for

itriking the blow, Vielleville, an able and vigilant officer, re-
ceived information fiom a spy whom he entertained at Thion-
ville, that certain Franciscan friars resorted frequently thither, and
were admitted to many private conferences with the governor, who
was carrying on preparations for some military enterprize with

great

great dispatch, but with a molt myflerious secrecy. This was
sufficient to awaken Vielleville's suspicions. Without cummu-
nicating these to any person, lie instantly visited the convent of
Francitcans; deteced the soldiers who were concealed there;
and forced them to discover as much as they knew concerning
the nature of the enterprize. The Father Guardian, who had
gone to Thionv:.lle tlat he might put the last hand to his ma-
chinations, was seized at tile gate as he returned; and he, in
order to save himself from the rack, revealed all the circum-
stances of the conspiracy.

VIELLEVII.E not satisfied with having seized tile traitors,

and having frultrated their fchems, was follicitous to take ad-
vantage of the discoveries which he had made, To as to be
revenged on the Imperialilts. For this purpose he marched out
with the bell troops in his garrison, and placing there in ambull
near the road, by which the Father Guardian hlad informed him
that the governor of Thionville would approach Metz, he fell
upon the Imperialists with great fury, as they advanced in per-
fed security, without fufpeding any danger to be near. Con-
founded at this sudden attack, by an enemy whom they expea-
ed to firprize, they made little resistance; and a great part of
the troops employed in this service, among which were many
persons of diftindion, was killed or taken prisoners. Before
next morning, Vielleville returned to Metz in triunph.

No resolution was taken for some time concerning thl fate of

the Fatler Guardian and his monks, the farmers and conductors
of this dangerous conspiracy. Regard for the honour of a body
so numerous and refpedable as the Franciscans, and unwilling-

T t 2 nclf
»

BOOK XI.

1555.

A body of
Imperialists
detc-ted.

The conslira-
tors punilied.

323

BOOK XI. nIf; to afiftrd a fubjeCd of triumph to the enemies of the Romifli

'"555"" church by their disgrace, seem to have occasioned this delay.

But at length, the necefity of infliLing exemplary punishment
upon them, in order to deter others from venturing to commit
the fame crime, became so evident, that orders were issued to
proceed to their trial. Their guilt was made apparent by the
clearcft evidence; and sentence of death was plfaed upon the
Father Guardian together with twenty monks. On the even-
ing previous to the day fixed for their execution, the jailor
took them out of the dungeons in which they had hitherto been
confined separately, and shut them all up in one great room,
,that they might confess their fins one to another, and join to.
gether in preparing for a future slate. But as soon as they were
left alone, instead of employing themselves in the religious ex-
ercifes suitable to their condition, they began to reproach the
Father Guardian, and four of the senior monks, who had been
most active in reducing them, for their inordinate ambition,
which had brought fuclh misery on them, and such disgrace
upon their order. From reproaches they proceeded to curses and
execrations, and at lass, in a frenzy of rage and despair, they fell
upon them with such violence, that they murdered the Father
Guardian on the spot, and so disabled the other four, that it
became necefCary to carry them next morning in a cart, together
with the dead body of the Father Guardian to the place of exe-
cution. Six of the youngest were pardoned, the reft suffered
the punishment which their crime merited g.

g Thuan. lib. xv. p. 522. Belcar. Com. Rer. Gal. 866. Memoirs du
Marech. Vielleville, par M. Charloix, tom. iii. p. 2 49, &c. p. 347. Par. 1757.

Tuou H
3'4

THOUGH both parties, exhausted by the length of the iwar,

carried it on ill this languifling manner, neither of them flhewed
any difpofitioni to liften to overtures of peace. Cardinal Pole
indeed laboured with all the zeal becoming his piety and l!uma-
nity, to re-eftablifl concord among the Princes of Christendom.
He had not'only perfuadced his miflrefs, the Qeen of England,
to enter warmly into his sentiments and to offer ler mediation
to the contending powers, but had prevailed both on the Em-
peror and King of France to fend their plenipotentiaries to a
village between Gravelines and Ardres. He limfelf, together
with Gardiner bifflop of Winchester repaired thither in order to
preside as mediators in the conferences, which were to be held
for adjusting all thle points in difference. But though both the
monarchs committed this negotiation to tliofe ninifleys, in whom
they placed she greatest confidence, it was soon evident that they
came together with lo filinere desire of accommodation. Each
propof£d qrticles so extravagant that they could have no hopes
of their being accepted. Pole, after exerting, in vain, all his
zeal, address and invention, in order to prfiuade them to re-
linguifli such extravagant demands, and to consent to the filb-
ftitution of more equal conditions became sensible of the folly
of wafting time, in attenpting to reconcile those, whom their
obstinacy rendered irreconcilable, broke off the conferrence, and
returned into England h.

BOOK XL

A frutlefsne.
gociation in
order to ella-
blllfl peace.

May 21.

DuRINo these tranfacions in other parts of Europe, Germany Aflairs of

enjoyed filch profound tranquillity, as afforded the diet full lei- GCe"'any.
sure to deliberate, and to eftablifil proper regulations concerning a

h Thrlan. lib. xv. p. 523. Mem. de Ribier, tom. ii. p. 613.

point

325

EOOK XI.

'555.

Diet held at
Augiburg,
and. Ferdi-
nand's fpeeeh
in it.

point of the greatest consequence to the internal peace of the
Empire. By the treaty of Paf'au in one thousand five hundred
and fifty-two, it had been referred to the next diet of the Em-
pire to confirm and perfet the plan of religious pacification,
which was there agreed upon. The terror and confusion with
which the violent commotions excited by Albert of Branden-
burg had filled the Empire, as well as the constant attention
which Ferdinand was obliged to give to the affairs of Hungary,
had hitherto prevented the holding a diet, though it had been
summoned, Coon after the conclusion of the treaty, to meet at
Augsburg.

BUT as a diet was now necessary on many accounts, Ferdi-

nand about the beginning of this year Ilad repaired to Augtburg.
Though few of the Princes were present either in person or by
their deputies, he opened the assembly by a speech, in which he
proposed the termination of the dissentions, to which the new
tenets and controversies with regard to religion had given rife, not
only as the first and great business of the diet, but as the point whicli
both the Emperor and he had most at heart. He represented the
innumerable obstacles which the Emperor had to surmount be-
fore he could procure the convocation of a general council, as well
as the fatal accidents which had for rome time retarded, and had
at last suspended the consultations of that assembly. He observed
that experience had already taught them how vain it was to
exped any -remedy for evils, which demanded immediate re-
dress, from a general council, the assembling of which would
either be prevented, or its deliberations be 'interrupted by the
dissentions and hostilities of the Princes of Christendom; That
a national council in Germany, which, as some imagined, might

be
326

be called with greater ease, and deliberate with more pevfe&C BOOK 2X.
security, was an afrembly of an unprecedented nature, the juri'-
diction of which was uncertain in its extent, and the form of its
proceedings undefined. That in his opinion there remained but.
one method for composing their unhappy differences, which
though it had been often tried without filccefs, might yet prove
effectual if it were attempted with a better and more pacific
spirit than had appeared on former occasions, and that .Was to
chufe a few men of learning, abilitcs and moderation, who by
difcufling the disputed articles in an amicable conference, might
explain them in fu.ch.a manner as to bring;the contending parties
either to unite in feentiment, or to differ with charity.

THIS speech being printed in common form, and.difperfed Suspicions
over the Empire, revived the fears and jealoifies of the Prote- and fears of

1 :. the Protel:-

ftants; Ferdinand, they observed with lmuch furprize, had not tents.
once mentioned, in hisaddrefs to the diet, the treaty of Paffau,
the stipulations in which they confidered as the great security of
their religious liberty.. The fUifpicions to which this gave
rife were confirmed by the accounts which they daily received of
the extreme rigor with which Ferdinand treated their Protestant
brethren in his hereditary dominions, and as it was natural to
confider his actions as the surest indication of his intentions,
this diminilhed their confidence in those pompous profetlions of
moderation or of zeal for the re-eftablilhment of concord, to
which his pracice was so utterly repugnant.

THE arrival of the Cardinal Morone, whom the Pope had The .i-

appointed to attend the diet as his nuncio, compleated their con- crcafed by
viction, and left them no room to doubt that rome dangerous a nunciofrom
machination was forming against the peace or safety of the Pro- the Pope to

the diet,
teftant

,32

:BOOK .X'. teflant church. Julius elated with the unexpected return bs

!55. 'the Englili nation from apoftacy, began to fldtter himfeif that

the spirit of mutiny and revolt having now spent its fdrce the
happy period was come when the church might resume its ah-
cient duthority, and be obeyed by the people with the fame
tame fubmiflion as formerly. Full of tlefe hopes, 'he had sent
M6r6ne to Augtburg 'with inifrudtiohs to enmplby his elo-
quence in order to excite the Germans to imitate the laudable
exariple of'the English, and 'his political address in order to
prevent any decree of the'diet to the' detriment of 'the catholick
faith. As Morone inherited from lis father, tle chancellor of
Milan, uncommon talents for negoci:atioh and ihirigue, he could
scarce have failed of embarrafling the meafires of the Prote-
ftants in tle diet or of defeating'whatever thdy aimed at obtain.
ing in it For 'their farther security.

The death of BUr an niinforefeeh ev'ent deliereld tliem 'from 'all ilie datiger
Julius 111. wivhic thley had' readfon to appreheind from 'Mor6ioe's 'prefeine.

Jilius, 'by abandonin'g limfelf to pleaflures a aiid ahfeti'eits
ino less iunbecomiingilis 'age tlil irs 'chta'te, 'haviig -con
trafted 'fitcl hlbis 'f dilipittilon, 'tlht 'a y eriils o'tupation,
'efipecially ;'f atteded 'with difficltty, ::e&'iilte 'ain it''iletale
burden to him,; hid long resiftcd :the' ollicitatibns of :his hephe\v
"'to liholda 'onfiflf6y,' bccaufc he expected thein 'a violent' bpp'oi-
tion to lis fcheiims'il' tiv6'ir of that'yojng dtlin. ' lt'jlihen all
the pretexts which 'he 5d'Jild'inve'nt 'fr' ltdtinglir^ii:ctueqft '

e're

exhausted, and at the fame time his indolent avcrfion to business
continued to igrow upon him, he feigned indifpofitioln thther
than yitkl to his nephew's importunity; dnd' that lhe tniglt :give
the deceit, a greater cblotir of probability, he riot bnly confined

'liimfelf
3S2t

himself to his apartment, but changed his uffial diet and man-
ner of life. By persisting too long in ating this ridiculous part,
he contracted a real disease, of which he died in a few days,
leaving his infamous minion the Cardinal de Monte to bear his
name, and to disgrace the dignity which lie had conferred upon
him , As soon as Morone heard of his death, le set out abruptly
from Augsburg, where lie had resided only a few days, that he
might be present at the election of a new Pontiff

ONE cause of their suspicions and fears being thus removed, the

Protestants soon became sensible that their conjeitures concerning
Ferdinand's intentions, how plausible soever, were ill-founded,
and that he had no thoughts of violating the articles favourable
to them in the treaty of Paflau. Charles, from the time that
Maurice had defeated all his schemes in the Empire, and over-
turned the great system of religious and civil defpotifin, which
he had almost eftablifled there, gave little attention to the in-
ternal government of Germany, and permitted his brother to
pursue whatever measures he judged most salutary and expedient.
Ferdinand, less ambitious and enterprizing than the Emperor,
instead of refumning a plan, which he, with power and resource4
so far superior, had failed of accomplifling, endeavoured to
attach the Princes of the Empire to his family by an adminiftra-
tion uniformly moderate and equitable. To this lie gave, at pre,
sent, particular attention, because his situation at this juncture
rendered it necefary to court their favour and support with more
than ufllal afliduity.

i Onuphr. Panvinius de vitis Pontificum, p. 320. 'Thuan. lib. xv. 517.

BOOK XI.

March 23.

The nuncio
sets out for
Rome.

Ferdinand's
reasons for
wlfluing to
ratiefy the
Proteftalu..

3z9
U u

CHARLS
VOLet. Ill.

"BOOK XI. CHARLES had again resumed his favourite projet of acquir-

ing the Imperial crown for his son Philip, which the ill reception

Charles had it had met with when first proposed had obliged him to inter-
resumed his
plan of alter- mit, but had not persuaded him to relinquish. This led him
Ing thei ue- Warmly to renew his requests to his brother that he would ac-
cenion to the
Empire. cept of some compensation for his prior right of fucceflion, and

sacrifice that to the grandeur of the house of Austria. Ferdinand
who was as little disposed, as formerly, to give such an extraor-
dinary proof of felf-denial, being sensible that, in order to de-
feat this scheme, not only the most inflexible firmness on his
part, but a vigorous declaration from the Princes of the Empire
in behalf of his title, were requisite; was willing to purchase their
favour by gratifying them in every point that they deemed interest-
ing or eifential.

The Turks ON the other hand, the Turks, after having wrested from him
were ready to
invade Hun- great part of his Hungarian territories, were ready to attack the
gary. provinces still subje&t to his authority with a formidable army,

against which he could bring no equal force into the field, unless
the diet mhould grant him immediate and extraordinary aid. For
this he could not hope if the internal peace of the Empire were
not established on a foundation solid in itself, and which Ihould
appear, even to the Protestants, so secure and so permanent, as
might not only allow them to engage in a distant war with safety,
but encourage them to aft with vigour.

He is alarmed A STEP taken by the Protestants themselves, a short time after
taktole RtePe the opening of the diet, rendered him still more cautious of giving
Protestants. them any new cause of offence. As loon as the publication of Ser-

dinand's speech created the fears and suspicions which have been

mentioned,
330

mentioned, the EleCtors of Saxony and Brandenburgh, together
with the Landgrave of Hesse, met at Naumburgh, and renewing.
the ancient treaty of confraternity which had long united their
families, they added to it a new article, by which the contracting
parties bound themselves to adhere to the confeflion of Augsburg,
and to maintain the doctrine which it contained in their refpedive
dominions k.

FERDINAND, influenced by all there considerations, employ-

ed his utmost address in conducting the deliberations of the diet
fb as not to excite the jealousy of a party on whose friendship
he depended, and whose enmity, as they had not only taken the
alarm, but had begun to prepare for their defence, he had so
much reason to dread. The members of the diet readily agreed
to Ferdinand's proposal of taking the state of religion into confi-
deration, previous to any other business. But, as loon as they
entered upon it, both parties discovered all the zeal and animosity
which a subje&t so interesting naturally engenders, and which the
rancour of controversy, together with the violence of civil war,
had inflamed to the highest pitch.

THE Protestants contended that the security which they

claimed in consequence of the treaty of Paffau should extend,
without limitation, to all who had hitherto embraced the doc-
trine of Luther, or who flould hereafter embrace it. The
Catholics, having first of all afterted the Pope's right as the
fulpreme and final judge 'with refpet to all articles of faith, in-
sifted that the toleration granted, by the treaty of Paflau, to

BOOK XI.

Ferdinand
zealous to
pronote an
acconmmodtl
tion.

The preten-
sions of the
Catholicks
and Prote-
fiants.
Chytraci Saxonia, 480.

U u 2

331
such

332
BOOK XI.

'555.

Sept. 25.
'The peace of
religion efta-
blifed.

filch as had adopted the new opinions; which, on account
of the present situation of the Empire, and for the fake of
peace, they were willing to confirm; should not be extended
either to those cities which had conformed to the Interim, or to
such ecclefialtics a (flould for the future apostatize from the
church of Rome. It was no easy matter to reconcile such oppo-
site pretensions, which were supported, on each fide, by the
most elaborate arguments, and the greatest acrimony of expref
sion, that the abilities or zeal of theologians long exercised in
difputatioh could suggest. Ferdinand, however, by his address
and perseverance; by softening some things on each fide; by
putting a favourable meaning upon others; by representing in-
ceflantly the hecefity as well as the advantages of concord; and
by threatning, on some occasions, when all other considerations
were disregarded, to diflolve the diet, brought them at length to a
conclusion in which they all agreed.

CONFORM ABLY to this a recess was framed, approved of,

and publiflled with the usual formalities. The following are
the chief articles which it contained, That such Princes and
cities as have declared their approbation of the Confeflion of
Augsburg, shall be permitted to profess the doctrine and ex-
ercife the worship which it authorises without interruption or
moleflation from the Emperor, the King of the Romans, or
any power or person whatsoever; That the Protestants on theit
part, (hall give no disquiet to the Princes and States who ad.
here to the tenets and rites of the Church of Rome; That, for
the future, no attempt Ihall be made towards terminating re
ligious differences, but by the gentle and pacifick methods of
perfiafion and conference; That the-Popifh ecclesiastics flall

claim

claim no spiritual jurifdi6ion in such tRates as receive the Con-
feflion of Augsburg; That such as had fcized the benefices or
revenues of the church, previous to the treaty of Paffau, shall
retain poffefion of them, and be liable to no prosecution in the
Imperial chamber on that account; That the fifpreme civil
power in every state ihall have right to eflablih what form of
dotrine and worship it shall deem proper, and if any of,,its
fubjets refute to conform to there, shall permit them to renove
with all their effeats wherever they please; That if any prelate
or ecclefiaitic hiall hereafter abandon the Romifhl religion, he
llall instantly relinquish his diocese or benefice, and it Ihall be
lawful for those in whom the right of nomination is vetted, to
proceed immediately to an election, as if tlhe oftice were vacant
by death or translation, and to appoint a filcceflor of undoubted
attachment to the ancient system .

SUCH are the capital articles in this famous Recess, which is

the basis of religious peace in Germany, and the bond of union
among its various Rtates, the sentiments of which are To extremely
different with re(ped to points the most interefling and impor-
tant. In our age and nation, to which the Idea of Toleration is
familiar, and its beneficial effects well. known, it may seem
strange that a method of terminating their diflentions, To suit-
able to the mild and charitable spirit of the Chriflian religion,
did not sooner occur to the contending parties. But an expe-
dient, which, how salutary soever it might be, was repugnant
to the sentiments and practice of 'Chrifians during many ages,
did not ilie obvious to discovery. Among the ancient heathens,
all whose deities were local and tutelary, diversity of sentiment

Sleid. 62o. F. Paul, 368. Pallav. P. 1 . 16i.

concerning

BOOK XI.

1555.

Rceflesionson
the progress
of the prin-
ciples of tole-
ration.

33S

concerning the object or rites of religious worflip seems to have
been no source of animosity, because the acknowledging vene-
ration to be due to any one God, did not imply denial of the
existence or the power of any other God; nor were the modes
and rites of worship established in one country incompatible with
those which other nations approved of and observed. Thus the
errors in their system of theology were of such a nature as to be
productive of concord, and notwithstanding the amazing number
of their deities, as well as the infinite variety of their ceremonies,
a sociable and tolerating spirit subsisted almost universally in
the pagan world.

B u T when the Christian revelation declared one Supreme

Being to be the sole object of religious veneration, prescribed the
form of worship most acceptable to him, whoever admitted the
truth it held, of consequence saw every other mode of religion to be
absurd and impious. Hence the zeal of the first converts to the
Christian faith in propagating its doctrines, and the ardour with
which they laboured to overturn every other form of worship.
They employed, however, for this purpose no methods but such
as suited the nature of religion. By the force of powerful argu-
ments, they convinced the understandings of men; by the
charms of superior virtue, they allured and captivated their
hearts. At length the civil power declared in favour of Chris-
tianity, and though numbers, imitating the example of their
superiors, crouded into the: church, many still adhered to their
ancient fuperititions. Enraged at their obstinacy, the ministers
of religion, whose zeal was flill unabated, though their fandity
and virtue were much diminiihed, forgot so far the nature of
their own miflion, and of the arguments which they ought to

have
BOOK XI.

1555.
334

have employed, that they armed the Imperial power against these BOOK XI.
unhappy men, and as they could not persuade, they tried to com- ,15i
pel them to believe.

AT the fame time, controversies concerning articles of faith

multiplied, from various causes, among Christians themselves,
and the fame unhallowed weapons which had first been used
againit the enemies of their religion, were turned against each
other. Every zealous disputant endeavoured to interest the
civil magistrate in his cause, and each in his turn employed the
secular arm to crush or to exterminate his opponents. Not long
after, the bishops of Rome put in their claim to infallibility in
explaining articles of faith, and deciding points in contro-
verfy, and bold as the pretension was, they, by their artifices
and perseverance, imposed on the credulity of mankind, and
brought them to recognize it. To doubt or to deny any doc-
trine to which there unerring inftmriors had given the fantion
of their approbation, was held to be not only a resisting of truth,
but an aft of rebellion against their sacred authority; and the fe-
cular power, of which by various arts they had acquired the abfo-
lute direction, was initantly employed to avenge both.

THUS Europe had been accustomed, during many centuries,

to fee speculative opinions propagated or defended by force; the
charity and mutual forbearance which Christianity recommends
with so much warmth were forgotten, the sacred rights of con-
science and of private judgment were. unheard of, and not only
the idea of toleration, but even the word itself, in the sense now
affixed to it, was unknown. A right to extirpate error by force was
universally allowed to be the prerogative of those who pofelfed

the

335

the knowledge of truth, and as each party of Cllhiftians believed
that they had got pofeflion of this invaluable attainment, they all
claimed and exercised, as far as they were able, the rights which
it was supposed to convey. The Roman catholicks, as their system
refted on the decisions of an infallible judge, never doubted that
truth was on their fide, and openly called on the civil power to
repel the impious and heretical innovators who had risen up
against it. The Protestants, no less confident that their doctrine
was well founded, required, with equal ardour, the Princes of
their party to check such as presumed to impugn or to oppose
it. Luther, Calvin, Cranmer, Knox, the founders of the re-
formed church in their refpedive countries, inflicted, as far as
they had power and opportunity, the fame punishments which
were denounced against their own disciples by the church of
Rome, on fich as called in question any article in their creeds.
To their followers, and perhaps to their opponents, it would have
appeared a symptom of diffidence in the goodness of their cause,
or an acknowledgment that it was not well founded, if they had
not employed in its defence all those means which it was supposed
truth had a right to employ.

IT was towards the close of the seventeenth century, before

Toleration, under its present form, was admitted first into the
republick of the United Provinces, and from thence introduced
into England. Long experience of the calamities of mutual per-
fecution, the influence of free government, the light and humanity
acquired by the progress of science, together with the prudence
and authority of the civil magifirate, were all requisite in order
to eftabliih a regulation, so repugnant to the ideas which all the
different feets had adopted from mistaken conceptions concern-

ing
Boo K Xl.

1555.
336

ing the nature of religion and the rights of truth, or which all of
them had derived from the erroneous maxims eftablilhed by the
church of Rome.

THE recess of Augsburg, it is evident, was founded on no

such liberal and enlarged sentiments concerning freedom of
religious inquiry or the nature of toleration. It was nothing
more than a scheme of pacification, which political conlidera-
tions alone had suggested to the contending parties, and regard
for their mutual tranquillity and safety had rendered necefiary. Of
this there can be no stronger proof than an article in the recess it
self, by which the benefits of the pacification are declared to extend
only to the Catholicks on the one fide, and to fuclh as adhered
to the Confeflion of Auglburg on the other. Tle followers of
Zuinglius and Calvin remained, in conlequence of that exclusion,
without any protection from the rigour of the laws denounced
againll hereticks. Nor did they obtain any legal security, until
the treaty of Westphalia, near a century after this period, pro-
vided that they flould be admitted to enjoy, in as ample manner
as the Lutherans, all the advantages and protection which the recess
of Augsburg affords.

BUT if the followers of Luther were highly pleated with the

security which they acquired by this recess, such as adhered to
the ancient system had no less rcafon to be satisfied with that
article in it, which preserved entire to the Roman catholick
church the benefices of such ecclefiafticks as flould hereafter
renounce its dotrines. This article, known in Germany by
the name of. the Ecclesiastical Reservation, was manifeflly so
conformable to the idea and to the rights of an established

VO L. IIl. X x church
,

BOOK XI.

Advantages
of the religi-
ous peace to
tile I.uthe.
rans.

Anti to the
Catholicks.

.t37

church; and it appeared Co equitable to prevent revenues, which
had been originally appropriated for the maintenance of persons
attached to a certain system, fiom being alienated to any other
purpose, that the Protestants, though they foresaw its confe-
quences, were obliged to relinquish their opposition to it. As
the Roman catholick Princes of the Empire have taken care to
fee this article exatly observed in every cafe where there was an
opportunity of putting it in execution, it has proved tile great
barrier of the Romish church in Germany againit the Reformation;
and as from this period the fame temptation of interest did not
allure ecclefiafticks to rclinquifh the eftablilhed system, there have
been few of that order, who have loved truth with fiuch difintcreft-
ed and ardent affecion, as to abandon for its fake the rich benefices
which they had in pofleflion.

Marccllus II. DURING the fitting of the diet, Marcellus Cervino Cardinal
ptil lope, of Santa Croce, was eledted Pope in room of Julius. He, in

imitation of Adrian, did not change his name on being exalted
llischaraaer. to the Papal Chair. As he equalled that Pontiff in purity of inten-

tion, and excelled him much in the arts of government, and fiill
more in knowledge of the slate and genius of the papal court
as le had capacity to discern what reformation it needed, as well
as what it could bear, fiuch regulations were expeted from his
virtue and wisdom, as would have removed many of its grossest
and most flagrant corruptions, and have contributed towards re-
conciling to the church, fuich as from indignation at these enor-
mities had abandoned its communion. But this excellent
Pontiff was only shewn to the church and immediately snatched
lis death. away. The confinement in the conclave had impaired his

health, and the fatigue of tedious ceremonies upon his accefflon,

together
BOOK XI.

'55s.
338

together with too intense and anxious application of mind to BooK XI.
the schemes of improvement which he meditated, exhausted so t55
entirely the vigour of his feeble constitution, that he sickened
on tle twelfth, and died on the twentieth day after his elec-
tion m

Ar.l tlhc refinements in artifice and intrigue, peculiar to ' The lclaon

of IPal IV.

conlclaves, were difllayed in tlhat which was held for clectingl
a filccelror to Marcelllus; tlie Cardinals of the Impel ial and
French f'aticons labouring, with equal ardour, to gaill the Ineccf-
fary number of fiffrages for one of their own party. But, after
a firuggle of no long duration, though conducted with all the
warmth and cagernefs natural to men contending for so grent
an objeCt, they united in choofing John Peter Caraffa tlhe eldest Mav 3.
member of tlhe lfcred college and the son of Count Montorio, a
nobleman of an illuflrious family in tlhe kingdom of Naples.
The address and influence of Cardinal Farnese who favoured
his pretensions, Caraffa's own merit, and perhaps his great age,
which soothed all the diiappointcd candidates with the near pro-
speCt of a new vacancy, concurred in bringing about this fpecdy
union of fuffiages. In order to testify his rerpeft for tle me-
mory of Paul III. by whom lie liad been created Cardinal, and
his gratitude to the family of Farnese, he affimced the name of
Paul IV.

TtlE choice of a prelate of fuclh a singular characer, and His rire an.

who lad long lheld a course extremely diflirent from that chara.ci.
which usually led to the dignity now conferred upon him, filled

* Thuan, 520. F. Paul, 365. Onuph. Panvin. 321, &c.

Xx2

the

339

the Italians, who had nearest access to observe his manners and
deportment, with astonishment, and kept them in fiufpenfe and
solicitude with regard to his future conduct. Paul, though born
in a rank of life which, without any other merit, might have
secured to him the highelt ecclesiastical preferments, had from
his early years applied to fludy with all the afliduity of a ,man,
who had nothing but his personal accomplishments to render
him conspicuous. By means of this lie not only acquired
profound skill in fcholaftick theology, but added to that a con-
fiderable knowledge of the learned languages and of polite lite-
rature, the study of which had been lately revived in Italy, and
was pursued at this time with great ardour. His mind, how-
ever, naturally gloomy and revere, was more formed to imbibe
the four spirit of the former, than to receive any degree of ele-
gance or liberality of sentiment from' the latter; so that lie
acquired rather the qualities and pallions of a recluse ecclefiaftick,
than the talents necessary for the conduc of great affairs. Ac-
cordingly, when he entered into orders, although several rich
benefices were bestowed on him, and lie was early employed as
nuncio in different courts, he soon became disgusted with that
course of life, and languished to be in a situation more suitcd to
his taste and temper. With this view he resigned at once all his
ecclesiastical preferments, and having instituted an order of re-
gular priests, whom he denominated Theatines, from the name
of the archbifhoprick which he had held, he associated himself
as a member of their fraternity, conformed to all the rigorous
rules to which lie had fubjeded them, and preferred the solitude
of a monaftick life, with the honour of being the founder of a
new order, to all the vast objecs which the court of Rome pre-
sented to his ambition.

IN
BOOK XI.

'555.
34"

IN this retreat he remained for many years, until Paul III in-

duced by the fame of his san&ity and knowledge, called him to
Rome, in order to confiult with him concerning the meafiures
which might be most proper and effectual forthe fupprefling of
heresy, and re-eftablifling the ancient authority of the church,
Having thus allured him from his solitude, the Pope, partly by his
intreaties, and partly by his authority, prevailed on him to accept
of a Cardinal's hat, to re-affume the benefices which he had re-
signed, and to return again into the ufilal path of ecclesiastical
ambition which he seemed to have relinquished. But, during two
fiuccefive Pontificates, under the firftlof which the court of Rome
was the most artfill and interefled, and under the second the most
dissolute of any in Europe, Caraffa retained his monaftick auflle-
lity. He was an avowed and bitter enemy not only of all in-
novation in opinion, but of every irregularity in practice; lhe
was the chief instrument in establishing the formidable and
odious tribunal of the Inquisition in the papal territories; lie
appeared a violent advocate on all occasions for the jurifdidion
and discipline of the church, and a severe cenfilrer of every
meafitre whichl eemed to flow from motives of policy or interest,
rather than from zeal for the honour of the ecclefiatical order,
and the dignity of the Holy See. Under a prelate of filch a
character, the Roman courtiers expected a severe and violent
Pontificate, during which the principles of found policy would
be sacrificed to the narrow prejudices of priestly zeal; while the
people of Rome were apprehensive of feeing the fordid and for-
bidding rigour of monafRick manners fiibRituted in place of the
gaiety or magnificence to which they had long been accuf-
tomed in the papal court. These apprehensions Paul was
extremely solicitous to remove. At his first entrance on the

administration

BOOK XI.

555.

The firl steps
of his admini-
ftration.

341

BOOK XI.

155s.

The excess of
his attach-
ment to his
nephews.

Their ambi-
tious projecls.

adminitiration he laid aside that austerity which had hitherto
distinguished his person and family, and when the master of his
houfhold inquired in what manner he would chufe to live, lie
haughtily replied, " As becomes a great Prince." He ordered
the ceremony of his coronation to be conduCed with more than
usual magnificence; and endeavoured to render himself popular
by several ars of liberality and indulgence towards the inhabi-
tants of Romie" n.

His natural severity of temper, however, would have soon

returned upon him, and would have juRified the conjectures of
the courtiers, and the fears of the people, if he had not, imme-
diately after his election, called to Rome two of his nephews,
the sons of his brother the Count of Montorio. The eldet lie
promoted to be governor of Rome, the youngest, who had
hitherto served as a foldker of fortune in the armies of Spain or
France, and whose difpofitiol as well as manners were fRill more
foreign from the clerical character than his profellion, he created
a Cardinal, and appointed him legate of Bologna, the second office
in power and dignity which a Pope can bestow. Thefc marks of
favour, no less fidden than extravagant, lie accompanied with
the .most unbounded confidence and attachment, and forgetting
all his former revere maxims, he seemed to have no other objec
than the aggrandizing of his nephews. Their ambition, unfor-
tunately for Paul, was too aspiring to be satisficd with any
moderate acquisition. -They had seen the family of Medici
raised by the interest of the Popes of that house to supreme
power in Tuscany; Paul 1I. had by his abilities and address
secured the dutchies of Parma and Placentia to the family of

Platina, p. 327. Caflaldo Vita di 'aolo IV. Rom. 1615. p. 70.

Farnese.
342

Farnese. They aimed at fime establishment for themselves, no
lefl confidcrable and independaant; and as thqy could not expedt
that tle Pope would carry his :indulgence towards 'them so fat
as to secularize any part of the patrimony of the church, they
hlad no profpet of attaining what they wilhed, but by difmem-
bering the Imperial dominions in Italy, in hopes of seizing
Come portion of them. This alone would 'have been to them
a ifitficient reason for sowing the feeds of discord between their
uncle and the Emperor.

u T Cardinal CaraTl had, besides, private reasons which

filled him with hatred and enmity to the Emperor. While lie
served in the Spanifli troops lie had not received such marks of
honour and dillindlion as lie thought due to his birth and merit.
Disgusted with this ill-utage, lie llad abruptly quitted the Imperial
service, and entering into that of France,; he had not only met
with filch a reception as soothed Iris vanity, and 'attdched him to
the French interest, but by contraciing an intimate friendship
with Strozzi, who commanded the French army in Tuscany,
lie had imbibed a mortal antipathy to the Emperor as the great
enemy to the liberty and independence of the Italian states.
Nor was the Pope himielf indisposed to redcive imnpreflons
unfavourable to ;the Emperor. The opposition given:- t9 :1hi
election' by the Cardipqls of, tle Ilmperial , faction left in his
mind deep .resentMent, which was heightened 'by the remem-
brance of ancient injurics from Charles or his miniftera. i :

OP this his nephews took advantage,

ous devices, in order to exasperate him
of, .ecqnci!iatiol.. They aggravated every

adr eployed v

and! employed vpai*-
beyond a poflibility
circumftanlce whicl
; : ,i" 1, '" dould

BOOK XL

RcaCons of
their dliguft
with the Emn
peror,

.i 1

They endea.
vour to nlie-
natc the Pope
froml the Em-
peror.

343

could be deemed any indication of the Emperor's diflatis-
fation with his promotion; they read to him an intercepted
letter in which Charles taxed the Cardinals of his party with
negligence or incapacity in not having defeated' Paul's
election: They pretended, at one time, to have discovered
a conspiracy formed by the Imperial' minister and Cosmo de
Medici against thePope's life; they alarmed him, at another,
with accounts of a plot for afaffinating themselves. By there
artifices, they kept his mind, which was naturally violent, and
become suspicious from old age, in such perpetual agitation, as
precipitated him into measures, which otherwise he would have
been the first person to condemn °. He seized rome of the Car-
dinals who were most attached to the Emperor, and confined
them in the castle of St. Angelo; he persecuted the Colonnas
and other Roman barons, the ancient retainers to the Imperial
fation, with the utmost severity; and discovering on all occa-
sions his distrust, fear, or hatred of the Emperor, he began at
Jaft to court the friendship of the French King, and seemed wil-
ling to throw himself absolutely upon him for flipport and pro-
tertion.

THIS was the very point to which his nephews wished to

bring him as most favourable to their ambitious schemes; and
as the accomplishment of there depended on their uncle's life,
whose advanced age did not admit of losing a moment un-
necessarily in negociations, inflead of treating at second hand
with the French ambassador at Rome, they prevailed on the
Pope to dispatch a person of confidence directly to the court of

o Ripamontii Hist. Patrite, lib. iii. 1146. Ap. Grev. Thef. vol
ii Mem. de Ribier. ii. 615. Adriani Iflor. i 906.

France,
BOOK XI.

"55.
I5SS.

Induce hini
to court the
King of
France.
344

France with such overtures on his part, as they hoped would
not be rejected. He proposed an alliance offensive and de-
fenfive between Henry and the Pope; that they should attack
the dutchy of Tuscany and the kingdom of Naples with their
united forces; and if their arms flould prove filccefsfil, that
the ancient republican form of government (hould be re-eltablilhed
in the former, and the investiture of the latter should be granted
to one of the French King's Tons, after reserving a certain terri-
tory which should be annexed to the patrimony of the church,
together with an independant and princely establishment for each
of the Pope's neplews.

THE King, allured by these specious projects, gave a most

favourable audience to the envoy. But when the matter was
proposed in council, the conlsable Montmorcncy, whose natu-
ral caution and aversion to daring enterprizes increased with
age and experience, remonstrated with great vehemence against
the alliance. He put Henry in mind how fatal every expe-
dition into Italy had been to France during three fucceflive
reigns, and if filch an enterprize had proved too great for the
nation even when its strength and finances were entire, there
was no reason to hope for success, if it Ihould be attempted
now when both were exhausted by extraordinary efforts during
wars, which had lasted, with little interruption, almost half a.
century. He represented the manifest imprudence of entering
into engagements with a Pope of fourscore, as-any system which
refted on no better foundation that his life must be extremely
precarious, and upon the event of his death, which could
not be distant, the face of things together with the inclination
of the Italian States muf instantly change, and the whole weight
of the war be left upon the King alone. To these confidera-
tions he added the near profped which they now had of a final

VOL. II. Y y accommo-

BOOK XL

Conlable
Montiiioren-
cy opposes
the alliance
with the
Pope.

.
345

BOOK XI.

9555.

The Duke of
Guise favours
it.

Cardinal of
Lorrain sent
to negociate
with the
Pope.

accommodation with the Emperor, who having taken the re-
solution of retiring from the world, wished to transmit his
kingdoms in peace to his son; and he concluded with repre-
senting the absolute certainty of drawing the arms of England
upon France, if it fliould appear that the re-establishment of
tranquillity in Europe was prevented by the ambition of its
Monarch.

THESE arguments, weighty in themselves, and urged by a

minister of great authority, would probably have determined
the King to decline any connection with the Pope. But the
Duke of Guise and his brother the Cardinal of Lorrain, who
delighted no less in bold and dangerous undertakings than
Montmorency shunned them, declared warmly for an alliance
with the Pope. The cardinal expected to be entrusted with
the conduc of the negociations in the court of Rome to which
this alliance would give rife; the duke laid his account with
obtaining the command of the army which would be appointed
to invade Naples; and confidering themselves as already in
these stations vast projects opened to their aspiring and un-
bounded ambition. Their credit, together with the influence
of the King's mistress, the famous Diana of Poitiers, who was,
at that time, entirely devoted to the interest of the family of
Guise, more than counterbalanced all Montmorency's prudent
remonstrances, and prevailed on an inconsiderate Prince to liften
to the overtures of the Pope's envoy.

THE cardinal of Lorrain, as he had expected, was immedi-

ately sent to Rome with full powers to conclude the treaty, and
to concert measures for carrying it into execution. Meanwhile,
the Pope, either from reflecing on the danger and uncertain ifflue

of
.9

346

of all military operations, or through tile address of tle Imperial
ambaflador who had been at great'pains to sooth him, had not
only begun to lose much of the ardour with which he had set
on foot tie negociation with France, but even discovered great
unwillingnes. to continue it. In order to rouse him from this
fit of despondency, and to rekindle his former rage, his ne-
phews had recourse to tile arts which they had already pramtifed
with so much fiuccefs. They alarmed him with new reprefen-
tations of the Emperor's hostile intentions, with frefli accounts
which they hlad received of threats uttered against him by the
Imperial ministers, and with new discoveries which they pretended
to have made of conspiracics formed, and jull ready to take efled
against his life.

BUT these artifices, having been formerly tried, would not

have operated a second time with the fame force, nor have made
the imprefion which they willed, if Paul had not been cx-
cited by an offence of that kind which lie was least able to bear.
He received advice of the recess of the diet of Augsburg, and
of the toleration which was thereby granted to the Protefants,
and this threw him at once into Ifchl transports of paflion
against the Emperor and King of tlie Romans, as carried ,him
headlong into all the violent meafilres of his nephews. Full of
high ideas with refpet to the. papal prerogative, and animated
with the fiercest zeal against heresy, he confidered the liberty of
deciding concerning religious matters, whichl had been afumeed by
an assembly compored partly of laymen, as a prcftlumptuous and
unpardonable encroachment on that jurifdicion which belonged
to him alone; and regarded the indulgence which had been
given to the Protestants as an impious at of that power which
the diet had usurped. He complained loudly of both to the
Imperial ambafnador. He insisted that the recess of the diet

Y y z flould

BOOK XI.

.1555.

1'nul enraged
at the pro-
ceedings of
the diet of
Augsburg.

iS
347

should immediately be declared illegal and void. He threatened
the Emperor and King of the Romans, in cafe they should either
refuse or delay to gratify him in this particular, with the severest
effecs of his vengeance. He talked in a tone of authority and
command which might have suited a pontiff of the twelth cen-
tury, when a papal decree was sufficient to have shaken or to have
overturned the throne of the greatest Monarch, but which was al-
together improper in that age, especially when addressed to
the minister of a Prince who had so often made Pontiffs more
formidable feel the weight of his power. The ambassador,
however, heard all his extravagant propositions and mena-
ces, with much patience, and endeavoured to tooth him
by putting him in mind of the extreme distress to which the
Emperor was reduced at Infpruck, of the engagements which
he had come under to the Protestants in order to extricate him-
self, of the teceflity of fulfilling there, and of accommo-
dating his conduct to the situation of his affairs. But weighty
as there considerations were, they made no impreflion on
the mind of the haughty and bigotted pontiff, who in-
ftantly replied, that he would absolve him by his apoftolick
authority from the obligation of there engagements, and
even command him not to perform them; that in carrying on
the cause of God and of the church, no regard ought to be
had to the maxims of worldly prudence and policy, and that
the ill success of the Emperor's schemes in Germany might
justly be deemed a mark of the divine difpleafilre against him,
on account of his having paid little attention to the former, while
he regulated his conduc entirely by the latter. Having said
this, he turned from the ambassador abruptly without waiting for
a reply.

His
BOOK XI.

155.
348

His nephews took care to applaud and cherish these senti-

ments, and easily wrought up his arrogant mind, fraught
with all the monkith ideas concerning the extent of the
papal supremacy, to such a pitch of resentment against the
house of Austria, and to such an high opinion of his own power,
that lie talked continually of his being the successor of those
who had deposed Kings and Emperors; that he was exalted
as head over them all, and would trample such as opposed him
under his feet. In this disposition, die cardinal of Lorrain
fouid the Pope, and easily persuaded him to sign a treaty,
which had for its obje&, the ruin of a Prince against whom he
was so highly exasperated. The stipulations in the treaty were
much the fame as had been proposed by the Pope's envoy at
Paris; and it was agreed to keep the whole tranfadion secret
until their united forces Ihould be ready to take the field P.

DURING the negotiation of this treaty at Rome and Paris,

an event happened which seemed to render the fears which had
given rife to it vain, and the operations which were to follow
upon it unnecessary. This was the Emperor's resignation of his
hereditary dominions to his Ton Philip; together with his refo-
lution to witldraw entirely from any concern in business or the
affairs of this world, in order that he might spend tile remainder
of his days in retirement and solitude. Though it requires
neither deep reflection nor extraordinary discernment to discover
that tlhe state of royalty is notexempt from cares and disappoint-
mnent; though most of those who are exalted to a throne find
solicitude, and satiety, and disgust to be their perpetual atten-

BooKt XL

And exafpe-
rated by his
nephews.

Decem. 15.
Concludes a
treaty with
Fiance.

The Emperor
resolves to re-
sign his heri-
ditary domi-
nions.

P Pallav. lib. 13. p. 163. F. Paul 365. Thuan. lib. xv. 525. lib. xvi.
54o. Mem. de Ribier. ii. 6og, &c.

dants

349

dants in that envied pre-eminence; yet, to descend voluntarily
from the supreme to a subordinate station, and to relinquish the
poffeflion of power in order to attain the enjoyment of happi-
ness, seems to be an effort too great for the human mind. Se-
veral instances, indeed, occur in history of Monarchs who have
quitted a throne, and have ended their days in retirement. But
they were either weak Princes who took this resolution rashly,
and repented of it as soon as it was taken; or unfortunate Princes
from whose hands rome strong rival had wrested their sceptre,
and compelled them to descend with reluctance into a private
station. Dioclefian is perhaps the only Prince capable of holding
the reins of government, who ever resigned them from de-
liberate choice, and who continued during many years to enjoy
the tranquillity of retirement without fetching one penitent
sigh, or casting back one look of desire, towards the power or
dignity which he had abandoned.

No wonder, then, that Charles's resignation should fill all Eu-

rope with aftoniflment, and give rife, both among his contempo-
raries, and among the historians of that period, to various conjec-
tures concerning the motives, which determined a Prince whole
ruling paflion had been uniformly the love of power, at the age
of fifty-fix, when objeCts of ambition operate with full force on
the mind, and are pursued with the greatest ardour, to take a
resolution so singular and unexpected. But while many authors
have imputed it to motives so frivolous and fantastical, as can
hardly be supposed to influence any reasonable mind; while
others have imagined it to be the result of rome profound
scheme of policy; historians more intelligent, and better in-
formed, neither ascribe it to caprice, nor search for mysterious
secrets of Rtate, where simple and obvious causes will fully ac-

count
BOOK XI.

1 5SS

The motives
of this refig-
nation. 350

count for the Emperor's condut. Charles had been attacked BOOK XI.
early in life with the gout, and notwithflanding all the precau-
tions of the most skilful physicians in his time, the violence
of the distemper encreafed as he advanced in age, and the fits be-
came every year more frequent, as well as more intolerable. Not
only was the vigour of his constitution broken, but the facul-
ties of his mind were impaired by the excruciating torments
which he endured. During the continuance of the fits, lie was
altogether incapable of applying to business, and even when
they began to abate, as it was only at intervals that hle could
attend to what was serious, le gave up the greatest part of his
time to trifling and even childish occupations, which served to
relieve or to amuse his mind, enfeebled and worn out with ex-
cess of pain. Under there circumfiances, the conduct of fucl
affairs as occurred, of course, in governing so many kingdoms
was a burden more. than filflicient; but to pufl forward and
complea: the vast schemes, which the ambition of his more
aftive years had formed, or to keep in view and carry on
the fame great system of policy, extending to every nation in
Europe, and conneced with the operations of every different
court, were tasks, which far exceeded his strength, and op-
preflcdl and overwhelmed his mind. As he had been long ac-
customed to view the business of every department, whether
civil or military, or ecclefiallical, with his own eyes, and to
decide concerning it according to his own ideas i it gave him the
utmost pain, when lie felt his infirmities encreafe so salt upon
him, that lie was obliged to commit the conduit of all affairs
to his ministers. He imputed every misfortune which besel
him, and every miscarriage that happened, even when the
former was unavoidable, and the latter accidental, to his ina-
bility to take the infpe.Lion of business on himself. He complained

of

35t

of his hard fortune, in being opposed, in his declining years,
to a rival, who was in the full vigour of life, and that while
Henry could take and execute all his resolutions in person, he
should now be reduced, both in council and in aftion, to rely on
the abilities of other men. Having thus grown old before his
time, he wifely judged it more decent to conceal his infirmities
in some solitude, than to expose them any longer to the publick
eye; and prudently determined not to forfeit the fame, or lose
the acquisitions of his better years, by itruggling, with a vain
obstinacy, to retain the reins of government, when he was no
longer able to hold them with steadiness, or to guide them
with address *.

* Dom Levefque in his memoirs of cardinal .Granvelle gives a reason for the

Emperor's resignation, which, as I recollec, is not mentioned by any other his-
torian. He fays, that the Emperor having ceded the government of the king-
dom of Naples and the dutchy of Milan to his son, upon his marriage with the
Queen of England Philip, notwithRianding the advice and intreaties of his fa-
ther, removed all the ministers and officers in those countries, and appointed crea-
tures of his own, to fill the places which they held. That he aspired openly, and
with little delicacy, to obtain a share in the adminiitration of affairs, in the Low.
Countries. That he endeavoured to thwart the Empetor's nieafures, and to
limit his authority, behaving towards him fonetimes with inattention, and
sometimes with haughtiness. That Charles finding that he must either yield to
his Ton, or openly contena with him, in order to avoid these, which were both
disagreeable and mortifying to a father, he took the resolution of resigning his
crowhs, and of retiring frim the World, vol. i. p. 24, &c. Dom Levefque
derived his information concerning these curious fiats, which he relates very
briefly, from'the original papers of 'cardinal Granvelle. But as that vast collec-
tion of papers, one of the molt valuable historical monuments of the sixteenth
century, and which could not fail of throwing much light on the tranfadions of
Charles V, though preserved and arranged by M. L'Abb6 Boizot of Befancon, is
not publilhed, I cannot determine What degree of credit Ihould be given to this
account of Charles's refignatlon. I have therefore taken no notice of it in relat-
ing this event.

BUT
BOOK XI.

'1555.
. Et~_

I ss ;
352

BUT though Charles had revolved this scheme in his mind

for several years, and had communicated it to his filters the
dowager Queens of France and Hungary, who not only ap-
proved of his intention, but offered to accompany him to what-
ever place of retreat he fliould choose; several things had hi-
therto prevented his carrying it into execution. He could not
think of loading his Tont with the goveniment of To many king-
doms, until he ihould attain such maturity of age, and of abi-
lities, as would enable him to filluain that weighty burden but
as Philip had now reached his twenty-eighth year, and had been
early accustomed to bufiners, for which lie discovered both in-
clination and capacity, it can hardly be imputed to the partiality
of paternal affction, that his scruples, with regard to this
point, were entirely removed; and that lie thought he might,
without further hesitation or delay, place him on the tlrone
which lie was about to abandon. His mother's situation had
been another obflrudion in his way. For although she had con-
tinued almost fifty years in confinement, and under the fame
disorder of mind which concern for her hulfband's death had
brought upon her, yet the government of Spain, was still vested
in her jointly with the Emperor; her name was inserted to-
gether with his, in all the publick writs ifuled in that kingdom ;
and such was the fond attachment of the Spaniards to her, that
they would probably have scrupled to recognize Philip as their
sovereign, unless fie liad consented to aftume him as her partner
on the throne. Her utter incapacity for business rendered it impof-
fible to obtain this. Bt't her death, which happened this year
removed this difficulty; and as Charles, upon that event, be.
came sole Monarch of Spain, it left the filcceflion open to his
son. The war with France had likewise been a reason for re-
taining the administration of affairs in his own hand, as lie was

V oL. III, Z z extremely

BOOK XI.

Circunmlan-
ces which had
retarded it.

353

BOOK XIr

15S5.

The forma-
lities with
which he ex-
ecuted it.

extremely solicitous to havei terminated. it, that he might have
given up his kingdoms to iis son. at peact wit;h all the world..
But as Henry 'had difcoveredl no disposition to close with any.
of his overtures, apd' had even rejeted proposals of peace, wlich
were equal and moderate, in: a tone, that teemed to indicate a.
fixed, purpose of continuing hostilities, he saw that it was vain to
wit longer in expe.tation of an event, which, how desirable
soever, was. altogether uncertain.

As this,, then,. appeaed to be the proper juncture for exe-

cuting the fclbemq which he, lad long meditated, Charles
re.>!ye.4 to,.refign: his kipgdolns to his son,. with a folemplity,
suitable, tQ the impnortance of the tranfadion, and to perform this
la

. aft of foereignty, w.ithl filch formal pomp, as might leave

a laftjpg, impreflion, on tlhe minds not only of his filbjets but of
lis fuccefflo.r, With this view he called Philip out of England,
where the peev.if temper of his Queen, whic! increased with:
her despair of having issue, rendered him extremely unhappy,
and. the jealousy of the English left him no hopes of obtaining
thedireiorn'of their.affairs. Having assembled the States of the.
Low-Countries at Bruiels, on tlhe twenty-fifth of October,.
he feated himself, for the. last time, in thle chair of slate, on
one fide of which was placd, his son, apld on the other his
filter. the Queen of H.ungary regent of, the, Netherlands, with a
splendid retinue of the, grapdees of Spain 'ald princes of the.
Empire ftndingbeii hid hi. The president of the council of.
Slanders, by hls corpmand, exp!ained in a fev words his in-
tention in callipg this extra.rdipnry meeting of the Stats.. He
then read, the, inftrglment of refignationl by which Ch;arles flrren-
dered to, his fop Philip all his territories, jurifditiop, and al-
tlority. in the Low.-Cqontries, abfolvjng his futbjefts there from

their
354

35.5

their oath of allegianc to him, which l? required them to tranf- BooK.,I.
ser to Philip his lawful heir, and to serve him with the fame loy- '
alty ahd zeal that they had tmanifelted, during so 'long i coqurfe of
years, in flpport of his government.

CIIARIIS tlien rose fiomI his feat, and leaning oI the nioulder

of the Prince of Orange, because he was unable to stand without
support, lie addrefred himself to the audience, and from a paper
which lie held in his hand, in order to alift his memory, lie re-
counted, with dignity, but without ostentation, all the great
things which lhe had undertaken and performed since the coin-
meneement oF his uldhniniftration. He observed, that from thc
feventecelth ybea of his age, lie hid dedicated all his dioulghts
nnd attention to publick objeds, reserving 'no portion of his
·time for the indulgence of his cafe, and very little for the enjoy-
nent of private. pleafilre; tiat either in a pacifick or hlofile
manner, lie had visited Geraniay nine tiites, Spain fix times,
France 'four times, Italy seven timesi the' L6wv-Countries ten
times, England twice, Africa as often, and had made eleven
'voyages by sea; that wlile his health permitted him to dif-
charge his duty, and thd vigour of his constitution was equal,
in any degree, to the arduous office of governing such extensive
dominions, he had never shunned labour, hor repined tinder
fatigue; that now wlhen lils health was broken, and his vigour
exhautted by the rage of an inculable distemper, his growing
infirmities admonished liim to retite, lnor was he Co foind of
reigning, as to rdtain the sceptre in an impotent hand, which
Was no longer able to proteA his filbje6ts, or to rlender them
happy; that instead of a sovereign worn out with direafes, and
scarce half alive, he gave them one in the prime of life, acctif-
tomed already to govern; and who added! to the vigour'of youtl
all the attention and sagacity of maturer years; that, if during the

Z z 2 course

course of a long administration, he had committed any material
error in government, or if under the pressure and amidst the at-
tention which he had been obliged to give to so many and great
affairs, he had either neglected or injured any of his fubjees, he
now implored their forgiveness; that, for his part, he should ever
retain a grateful sense of their fidelity and attachment, and would
carry the remembrance of it along with him to the place of his
retreat, as his sweetest consolation, as well as the best reward for
all his services, and in his last prayers to Almighty God would
pour forth his ardent wilhes for their welfare.

THEN turning towards Philip, who fell on his knees and

kifled his father's hand, " If, fays he, I had left you by my
death this rich inheritance, to which I have made fulch large
additions, some regard would have been justly due to my me-
mory on that account; but now when I voluntarily resign to you
what I might have itill retained, I may well expet the warmest
expressions of thanks on your part. With there, however, I
dispense, and shall confider your concern for the welfare of your
fubjets, and your love of them, as the best and most acceptable
testimony of your gratitude to me. It is in your power, by a wife
and virtuous administration, to justify the extraordinary proof
which I give this day of my paternal affecion, and to demon-
ftrate that you are worthy of the confidence which I repose in you;
Preserve an inviolable regard for religion; maintain the Catho-
lick faith in its purity; let. the laws of your country be sacred
in your eyes; encroach not on the rights and privileges of your
people; and. if the time shall ever come, when you shall wish to
enjoy the tranquillity of private life, may you have a son endowed
with such qualities, that you can resign your sceptre to him, with
as much fatisfadion, as I give up mine to you."

As
BOOK XI.

s555.

_ }

'SS5·
356

357

As soon as Charles had finished this long address to his

filbjedts and to their new sovereign, he funk into the
chair, exhausted and ready to faint with the fatigue of fucll
an extraordinary effort. During his discourse, the whole au-
dience melted into tears, rome from admiration of his mag-
nanimity, others softened by the expreflions of tenderness towards
his son, and of love to his people;. and all were affeded
with the deepest sorrow at losing a sovereign, who had diflin-
guiflled the Netherlands, his native country, with particular
marks of his regard and attachment..

PHILIP then arose from his knees, and after returning tlianks

to his father, with a low and fubmillive voice, for the royal gift
which his unexampled bounty had bestowed upon him, lie ad-
drefled the assembly of the flates, and regretting his inability to
speak the Flemish. language with filch facility as to express what
lie felt on this interesting occasion, as well as what he owed to his
good fubjeAs in the Netherlands, he begged that they would al-
low Granvellc bilhop of Arras, to deliver what he had given him
in charge to fpeakl in his name. Granvelle in a long discourse,
expatiated on the zeal with which Philip was animated for
the good of his fubjets, on his resolution to devote all his time
and talents to the promoting of their happincfs, and on his inten-
tion to imitate his father's example in diftinguihing the Nether-
lands with peculiar marks of his regard. Ma's, a lawyer of
great eloquence, replied in the name of the States, with large pro-
fefions of their fidelity and affedtion to their new foveicign.

T HEN Mary, Queen-dowager of Hungary, resigned the

regency, with which Ihe had been entruflcd by her brother
during the space of twenty-five years. Next day Philip, in
presence of the States, took the usual oaths to maintain the

rights

BOOK XI.

5ss$.

BOOK X[. riglht and privileges of his fubjec'6s and all the members, iin

i5565 their own amne, and in that of their conftituelnts, swore atle-
January 6. giance to lim q.

A rEW weeks thereafter, Charles, in an assembly no Icfl

splendid, and with a ceremonial equaUy pompous, resigned to
his son the crowns of Spain, with all the territories depending
on them, both in the old and in the new world. Of all theiic
vast poffenifons, he reserved nothing for limfelf but an annual
pension of an hundred thousand crowns, to defray the charges
of his family, and to afford him a finall flm for aCs of benefi-
cence and charity r.

As

q Godleveus Relatio Abdicationis Car. V. ap Goldnif. Polit. Ilrper. p. 377.
:Strada de Bello Belgico, lib. i. p. 5.

r The Emperor's resignation is an event not only of such importance, but of

such a nature, that the precise date of it one would expert, Ihould have been afcer-
tained by hiltorians with the greatest accuracy. There is, however, an amazing
and unaccountable diversity among them with regard to this point. All agree
that the deed iby which Charles transferred to his son his dominions in the Nether-
lands, bears date at Brufuels the 25th of October. Sandoval fixes on the 28th
of October as the day on which the ceremony of resignation happened, and he
was present at the transaction, vol. ii. p. 592. Godleveus who published a treatise
de Abdicatione Caroli V. fixes the publick ceremony as well as the date of the in.
firumentof resignation on the zsth. Pete Barr6, I know not oar what authority,
fixes it on the 24th of Novemlber. Hifl. DIAlem. viii. 976. Herrera agees with
Godjeveus in sentiment, tom. i. 155, as likewife.does Pallaviciai,.whofe authority
with refpef to dates, and every thing where a minute accuracy is requisite, is of
great weight. Hilt. lib. xvi. p. 168. Iillorians differ no less with regard to the day
on which Charles resigned the crown of Spain to his son. According to M. de
Thou, it was a month after his having resigned his dominions in the Netherlands,
i. e. about the 2Sth of November, Thuan. lib. 16. p. 571. According to Bandoval
it was on the 16th January r556, Sand. ii. 603. Antonio di Vela agrees with
him, Epitome del Vida del Car. V. p. o. According to Pallavicini it w*s
on the 17th. Pal. lib. xvi, p. 168. and with him Herrera agrees, Vida del D.
Felipe, tom. i. p. 233. But Ferreras fixes it on the first day of January, Hilt.

Gencr.

As he had fixed on a place of retreat in Spain, hoping that the

dryness of the air and warmth of the climate in that country might
mitigate the violence of his disease, which htd been much en-
creased by the moisture of the air and the rigour of the winters
in the Netherlands, he was extremely impatient to enmbarl for that
kingdom, and to disengage hilmfelf entirely from business, which
he found to be impollible wlile lie remained in Brulels. But his
physicians remonstrated so firongly againit his venturing. to tean
at that cold and boifierous season of tle year, that he consented,
though with relutance, to put off his voyage for Ibme months.

BY yielding to their intreaties, he had the fatisfadion, before

lie left the Low-Countries, of taking a considerable flep towards
a peace with France, which lie ardently, wilhed for, not only on
his Ton's account, but tlhat he might have the merit, when
quitting: the world, of re-eftablilhing that tranquillity in Europe,
which lie had baniflied out of it almost from the time that he as-
fumed the administration of affairs. Some time previous to his
resignation, commifioners had been appointed by him and by
the French King; in order to treat of an exchange of prisoners.
In their conferences at the abbey of Vailcclles, near Camnbray,
an expedient was accidentally proposed for terminating hostilities;

BOOK XI.

Rceolves to
fix his refi-
dence in
Spain.

Obliged to
remain Ibr
Tomac tllnic in
the Ncther-
lands.

Promotes the
negotiation
for peace.

Oencr. ton. ix. p. 371. M. de Beaucaire fippolcs the rcfignation of the crown of
Spain to have been executed a few days Iltir the resignation of the Netherlands,
Coin. de Reb. Gall. p. 879. It is remarkable that In the treaty ofTruce, at Vaucelles,
though Charles hnd made over nll his dominiont to his son foini weeks previous
to Ihe, concluflin of itt all the fiipulations are in the Emperor's nanie, nnd'
Philip is only designed King' of England and Naples. It is certain Philip was
not proclaimed King of Canlile, &c. at Valladolid fooncr than the 24th of
March. Sandov. ii. p. 6o6, and previous to that ceremony, hie did not chufe, it'
would feccr', to affilne the title of King of any of his Spanilh kingdoms, or to
perform any a' of royal jutifdiaion. In a deed anflxed to the treaty of truce,
dated April 19th, he.aflllies the title of King of Caltile; &c; in the ufital Rile
of the Spanish monarchs in that age. Corps Diplm. tom. iv. Append. pi 85.

bctwixt

359

BOOK XI.

15s6.

A truce COR-
cluded.
Sth Feb.

betwixt the contending monarcls, by a long truce, during the
fubfiftance of which, and without dificufling their reflpc)ive
claims, each should retain what was in his pof'efion. Charles,
sensible how much his kingdoms were exhaulfted by the ex-
pensive and almost continual wars in which his ambition had
engaged him, and eager to gain for Ils son a lhort interval of
peace, that he might eitablifl himself firmly on his throne, de-
clared warmly for closing with the overture, though manifeflly
diflonourable as well as disadvantageous; and fich was the
refpeft due to his widorom and experience, that Philip, notwith-
standing his unwillingness to purchase peace by fitch conceflions,
did not prefiume to urge his opinion in opposition to that of his
father.

HENRY could not have hesitated one moment about giving his

content to a truce on filch conditions, as would leave him in quiet
poffeflion of the greater part of the Duke of Savoy's dominions,
together with the important conquests which he had made on the
German frontier. But it was no eaf) matter to reconcile such a
ftep with the engagements that le had come under to the Pope, in
his late treaty with him. The Constable Montmorency, however,
represented in such a itriking light, the imprudence of facri-
sicing the tnre interests of his kingdom to there rash obligations,
and took such advantage of the absence of the Cardinal of Lor-
rain, who had seduced the King into his alliance with the
Caraffas, that Henry, naturally fluctuating and unsteady, and
apt to be influenced by the advice lall given him, authorized his
ambassadors to sign a treaty of truce with the Emperor for five
years, on the terms which had been proposed. But that he might
not seem to have altogether forgotten his ally the Pope, who he
foresaw would be highly exasperated, lie, in order to tooth him,
took care that he Ihould be exprefly included in the truce',

Mem. de Ribier. ii. 6a6. Corps Diplom. torn. iv. App. 81.

THE
.36o

THE Count of Lalain repaired to Blois, and the Admiral

Coligny to Brussels, the former to be present when the King of
France, and the latter when the Emperor and his Ton, ratified
the treaty and bound themselves by oath to obfilrve it t. \When
an account of the conferences at Vaucelles, and of the conditions
of truce which had been proposed there, were first carried to
Rome, it gave the Pope no manner of disquiet. He trufled so
much to the honour of the French monarch, that lie would not
allow himself to think that Henry could forget so soon, or violate
so Ihamefully, all the stipulations in his league with him. He
had fucil an high opinion of the Emperor's willom, that lie made
no doubt of his refilring his consent to a truce on tfich unequal
terms; and on both these accounts lie confidently pronounced
that this, like many preceding negociations, would terminate in
nothing. But later and more certain intelligence soon con-
vilced hlim that in political affairs no reasoning is more filla-
cious, thllan, becaute an event is improbable, to conclude that it
will not happen. The sudden and unexpected conclusion of the
truce filled Paul with astonishment and terror. The Cardinal
of Lorrain durst not encounter that storm of indignation, to
which he knew he flould be exposed from the haughty Pontiff,
who had so good reason to be incensed; but departing abnlptly
from Rome, lie left to the Cardinal Tournon the difficult tafl of
attempting to sooth Paul and his nephews. They were filly

t One of Admiral Coligny's attendants, who wrote to the court of France

an accouat of what happened while he resided at Brussels, takes notice, as an
instance of Philip's imipoliteners, that he received the French amibalfador in an
apartment hung with tapestry, which represented the battle of Pavia, the
manner in which Francis I. was taken prisoner, his voyage to Spain, with all
the circumltances of his captivity and imprisonment at Madrid. Mem. de
Ribier, ii. 634.

V OL. III. A a a sensible

BooK XI.

5S;6.

Ratified by
both mnon-
nichs.
'1 lie Pope's
nllonlilhent
and distress.

361

BOOK XI. sensible of the perilous situation in which they now flood. By

556. their engagements with France, which were no longer secret,

they had highly irritated Philip. They dreaded the violence of
his implacable temper. The Duke of Alva, a minister, fitted
as well by his abilities as by the severity of his nature, for exe-
cuting all Philip's rigorous schemes, had advanced from Milan
to Naples, and began to assemble troops on the frontiers of the
Ecclesiastical State. While they, if deserted by France, muf:
not only relinquish all the hopes of dominion and fove-
reignty to which their ambition aspired, but remain exposed to
the resentment of the Spanilh monarch, without one ally to pro-
tea them against an enemy with whom they were so little able to
contend.

He attempts UNDER these circumstances, Paul had recourse to the arts of
the war. negociation and intrigue, of which the Papal court knows well

how to avail itself in order to ward off any calamity threatened
by an enemy filperior in power. He taffected to approve highly
of the truce, as an happy expedient for putting a stop to the
effusion of Christian blood. He exprefed his warmeit wishes
that it might prove the forerunner of a definitive peace. He
exhorted the rival Princes to embrace this favourable opportu-
nity of setting on foot a negociation for that purpose, and offer-
ed, as their common father, to be mediator between them.
Under this pretext, he appointed Cardinal Rebiba his nuncio to
the court of-Bruftels, and',his nephew Cardinal Caraffa to that
of Paris. The publick inftrufions given to both were the
fame; that they 'hould use their utmost endeavours to prevail
with the two monarchs to accept of the Pope's mediation, that
by .means .of it, peace might be re-established, and measures

.might
362

might be taken for assembling a general council. But under
this specious appearance of zeal for attaining objets so defir-
able in themselves, and so becoming his sacred character to pur-
sue, Paul concealed very different intentions. Caraffa, besides
his publick inftru&tions, received a private commillion to follicit
the French King to renounce the treaty of truce, and to renew
his engagements with the Holy See, and he was impowered to
spare neither entreaties, nor promises, nor bribes, in order to gain
that point. This, both the uncle and the nephew confidered
as the real end of the embassy ; while the other served to amuse
the vulgar, or to deceive the Emperor and his son. The Car-
dinal, accordingly, set out initantly for Paris, and travelled witlh
the greatest expedition, while Rebiba was detained some weeks
at Rome; and when it became necefary for him to begin his
journey, he received fccret orders to protract it as much as poF-
fible, that the ifiue of Caraflt's negociation might be known
before he flould reach Brussels, and according to that, proper
diretions might be given to him with regard to the tone which
he flhould aflume, in treating with the Emperor and his sot ".

CARAPPA made his entry into Paris with extraordinary

pomp; and having presented a consecrated sword to Henry, as
the protector, on whose aid the Pope relied in the present exi-
gency, he besought him not to disregard the entreaties of a
parent in distress, but to employ that weapon which he gave
him in his defence. This he represented not only as a dxtty of
filial piety, but as an adt of justice. As the Pope, from confi-
dence in the assistance and support which his late treaty with

BOOK XI.

1556.

I th May.

His negocia-
tions for that
purpofc.
U Pallav. lib. xiii. p. 169. Burnet Hist. of Reform. ii. App. 309.

A aa 2 France

363

BooK XI. France entitled him to expet, had taker such steps as had irri-

6.Qr tated the King of Spain, he conjured Henry not to filffer Paul

and his family to be crushed under the weight of that resent-
ment which they had drawn on themselves merely by their
attachment to France. Together with this argument addressed
to his generosity, he employed another which he hoped would
work on his ambition. He affirmed that now was the time,
when, with the moss certain profpet of success, he might attack
Philip's dominions in Italy; that the flower of the veteran
*¢. ..;. Spanish bands had perished in the wars of Hungary, Germany,

and the Low-countries; that the Emperor had left his son an
c:-,-:::.,, exhausted treasury, and kingdoms drained of men; that he had

no longer to contend with the abilities, the experience, and
good fortune of Charles, but with a monarch scarce feated on
his throne, unpratifed in command, odious to many of the
Italian States, and dreaded by all; that the Pope, who had al-
ready levied soldiers, would bring a considerable army into the
field, which when joined by a sufficient number of French troops,
might, by one brisk and fidden effort, drive the Spaniards out
of Naples, and add to the crown of France a kingdom, the
conquest of which had been the great object of all his predecessors
during half a century, and the chief motive of all their expedi-
tions into Italy.

Their effea. EVERY word Caraffa (poke made a deep impreflion on
July 31. Henry; conscious, on the one hand, that the Pope had just cause

to reproach him with not having consulted the laws either of
generosity or of decency, when he renounced his league with
him, and had agreed to the truce of Vaucelles; and eager, on the
other hand, not only to distinguish his. reign by a conquest,

which
364

which three former monarchs had attempted without fitccefs,
but likewise to acquire an establishment of fulclh ignity and
value for one of his sons. Reverence, however, for the oath,
by which lie had so lately confirmed the truce of Vaucelles;
tile extreme old age of the Pope, whose death might occasion an
intire revolution in the political system of Italy ; together with the
representations of Montmorency, who repeated all the arguments
that he had used againit the firfl league with Paul, and pointed
out the great and iinmediate advantages which France derived
from tle truce ; kept Henry for roine time in fiupence, and might
pollibly have outweighed all Caraffa's arguments. But the Car-
dinal was not fiuch a novice in tle arts of intrigue and negocia-
tion, as not to have expedients ready for removing or fur-
mounting all there obstacles. To obviate the King's scruple with
regard to his oath, he produced powers from the Pope to absolve
him from the obligation of it. By way of security against any
danger which he might apprehend from the Pope's death, he
engaged that his uncle would make filch a nomination of Car-
dinals, as flould give Henry the absolute command of the next
election, and enable him to place in the Papal chair a person
entirely devoted to his interest.

IN order to counterbalance tile eff'ec of tie Conitable's opi-

nion and influence, he employed not only tile active talents of
tile Duke of Guise, and the eloquence of his brother the Cardinal
of Lorrain, but the address of the Queen, aided by the more power-
ful arts of Diana of Poitiers, who, unfortunately for France,
co-operated with Catherine in this point, though lhe took plea-
hire, on almost every other occasion, to thwart and mortify her.
JJ hcy, by their united follicitations, easily swayed the King, who

leaned

BOOK XI.

«ss6X

';63

BOOK XI.

1556.

July 3 1

The Pope's
violent pro-
ceedings
against Philip.

leaned of his own accord to that fide, towards which they
wished him to incline. All Montmorency's prudent remonftran-
ces were disregardcd; the nuncio absolved Henry from his
oath; and he signed a new league with the Pope, which re-
kindled the flames of war both in Italy and in the Lov-
Countries.

As soon as Paul was informed by his nephew that there was

a fair prospect of his succeeding in this negotiation, he dif-
patched a meflenger after the nuncio Rebiba, with orders to
return to Rome, without proceeding to Brussels. As it was
now no longer necefary to preserve that tone of moderation,
which suited the character of a mediator, and which he had
affected to assume, or to put any farther restraint upon his re-
fentment against Philip, he boldly threw off the mafl, and took
such violent steps as rendered a rupture unavoidable. He
seized and imprisoned the Spanish envoy at his court. He
excommunicated the Colonna's; and having deprived Mark
Antonio, the head of that family, of the dukedom of Paliana,
he granted that dignity, together with the territory annexed to
it, to his nephew the Count of Montorio. He ordered a legal
information to be presented in the consistory of Cardinals against
Philip, setting forth that he, notwithttanding the fidelity and
allegiance due by him to the Holy See, of which he held tle
crown of Naples, had not only afforded a retreat in his domi-
nions to the Colonna's whom the Pope had excommunicated and
declared rebels, but had furnished them with arms, and was ready,
in conjunction with them, to invade the Ecclesiastical State in an
hostile manner; that such conduct in a vassal was to be deemed
treason against his liege lord, the punishment of which was the

forfeiture
,66

forfeiture of his fief. Upon this the consistorial advocate re-
quested the Pope to take cognizance of tlhe cause, and to appoint
a day for hearing of it, when hie would make good every article
of the charge, and expet from his justice that sentence which
the heinolufiefs of Philip's crimes ipierited. Paul, whose pride
was highly flattered with the idea of trying and pafling judg-
ment on so great a King, assented to his request; and as if it had
been no less easy to execute than to pronounce sentence, declared
that lie would consult with the Cardinals concerning the forma-
lities requisite in conducting the trial".

BuT while Paul allowed his pride and rerentment to drive him

on with fiuch headlong impetuosity, Philip discovered an amaz-
ing moderation on his part. He had been taught by the Spanish
ecclefiafticks who had the clarge of his education, a profound
veneration for the Holy See. This sentiment, whlicl hlad been
early inftifed, grew up with him as he advanced in years, and
took full pofellion of his mind, which was naturally thoughtful,
serious, and prone to fitpertlition. When he foresaw a rupture
with the Pope approaching, he hlad fitcl violent scruples with
refpea to the lawfulness of taking arms againfl the Vicegerent
of Chrifl, and the common father of all Christians, that lie
consulted some Spanilh divines upon that point. Though
they, with the usual dexterity of cafifilts in accommodating
their responses to the circumstances of those who apply to
them for direction, afllred him that, after employing pray-
ers and remonstrances in order to bring the Pope to reason, he
had full right, both by the laws of nature and of Chriftiani-
ty, not only to defend himself when attacked, but to begin

, Pallav. lib. xiii. 7 1.

Ihoftilities,

I300rB XI.

July Z1*

pcrtuitious
(c1wpkC5.

367

BOOK XI.

1556.

The Duke of
Alva takes
the field
against the
Pope.
Sept 5.

hostilities, if that were judged the most proper expedient, for
preventing the effects of Paul's violence and injustice: Yet
Philip still deliberated and delayed, confidering it as a most cruel
misfortune, that his administration should open with an attack
on a person, whose sacred function and character he so highly
refpeded Y.

AT last the duke of Alva, who, in compliance with his maf.

ter's scruples, had continued to negociate long after he should
have begun to as, finding Paul inexorable, and that every over-
ture of peace, and every appearance of hesitation on his part
encreafed the Pontiff's natural arrogance, took the field and
entered the ecclesiastical territories. His army did not exceed
twelve thousand men, but it was composed of veteran soldiers,
and commanded chiefly by those Roman barons, whom Paul's
violence had driven into exile. The valour of the troops, and
the animosity of their leaders who fought in their own quarrel,
and to recover their own estates, supplied the want of num-
bers. As none of the French forces were yet arrived, Alva
soon became mafier of the Campagna Romana; tome cities
being surrendered through the cowardice of tie garrisons, which
consisted of raw soldiers, ill disciplined, and worse command-
ed; the gates of others being opened by the inhabitants, wilo
were eager to receive back their ancient masters. Alva, that he
might not be taxed with impiety in seizing the patrimony of
the church, took pofeffion of the towns which capitulated, in
the name of the college of cardinals, to which or to the Pope
that should be chosen to succeed Paul, lie declared that he. would
immediately restore them.

y Ferrer. Hifi. de Efpagne ix. 373. Herrera, i. 308.

THE
368

s

THE rapid progress of the Spaniards, whose light troops made

inroads to the gates of Rome, filled that city with conftema-
tion; and Paul, though inflexible and undaunted himself was
obliged to give way so far to the fears and solicitations of the
Cardinals, as to fend deputies to Alva in order to propose a
ceflation of arms. The Pope yielded the more readily, as 4he
was ienfible of a double advantage which might be derived
from obtaining that point. It would deliver the inhabitants
of Rome from their present terror, and would afford time
for the arrival of the succours which lie expeded from
France. Nor was Alva unwilling to close with the overture,
both as he knew how desirous his master was to terminate a
war, which he had undertaken with relucance, and as his army
was so much weakened by garrisoning the great number of
towns which he had reduced, that it was scarce in a condition to
keep the field without frenl recruits. A truce was accordingly
concluded firIt for ten, and afterwards for forty days, during
which, various schemes of peace were proposed, and perpetual
negociations were carried on, but with no sincerity on the part
of the Pope. The return of his nephew the Cardinal to Rome,
the receipt of a considerable fum remitted by the King of France,
the arrival of one body of French troops, together with the ex-
pedtation of others which had begun their march, rendered him
more arrogant than ever, and banifled all thoughts from his
mind, but those of war and revenge *.

a Pallav. lib. xiii. 177. Thuan. lib. xvii. 588. Mein. dc Ribier, ii. 664.
VOL. III.

Bb b

THE
-1 '

BOOK XI.

556.

A truce be-
tween the
Pope and
Philip.
Nov. ig.

369

# BOOK XII.

THE

T

OF THE

OF THE
EMPEROR

BOO
BOOK XII.

1556.

Charles's new
attempt to
alter 'the fuc-
ceflion of the
Empire.

CHARLES

K

V.

XII.
W HILE these operations or intrigues kept the Pope and

Philip busy and attentive, the Emperor disentangled

himself finally from all the affairs of this world, and set out for
the place of his retreat. He had hitherto retained the Imperial
dignity rot from any unwillingness to relinquish it, for after
having resigned the real and extensive authority that he enjoyed
in his hereditary dominions, to part with the limited and often
ideal jurifdidion, which belongs to an elecive crown, was no
great sacrifice. His sole motive for delay was to gain a few
months for making one trial more, in order to accomplish his
favourite scheme in behalf of his son. At the very time Charles
seemed to be the most sensible of the vanity of worldly grandeur,

and
H

I

S

0

R

Y
R

E

I G

N

*

and when he appeared to be quitting it not only with indiffer-
ence, but with contempt, the vast schemes of ambition, which
had so long occupied and engrossed his mind, still kept poffeflion
of it. He could not think of leaving his son, among the Princes
of Europe, in a rank inferior to that which he himself had
held. As he had, Come years before, made a fruitless attempt
to secure the Imperial crown to Philip, that by uniting it to the
kingdoms of Spain, and the dominions of the house of Burgundy,
he might put it in his power to prosecute, with a better profpecb
of success, those great plans, which his own infirmities had obliged
him to abandon, he was still unwilling to relinquish this flattering
project as chimerical or unattainable.

NOTWITHSTANDING the repulse which he had formerly

miet with from his brother Ferdinand, he renewed his follicita-
tions with fresh importunity, and during the summer, had tried
every art, and employed every argument, which ie thought
could induce him to quit the Imperial throne to Philip, and to
accept of the investiture of rome province, either in Italy, or
in the Low-Countries, as an equivalent .. But Ferdinand, who
was To firm and inflexible with regard to this point, that he
had paid no regard to the solicitations of the Emperor, even
when they were enforced with all the weight of authority,
which accompanies supreme power, received the overture,
that now came from him in the situation to which he
had descended, with greater indifference, and would not
deign to liften to it. Charles, aflhamed of his own credulity

A Ainbaf3des des Noailles, toni. v. 350.

B b b 2

BOOK XII.

1556.

Which proves
unsuccessful.

371
ill

BooK XII. in having imagined that he might accomplish that now, which

he had attempted formerly without success, defited finally from
his scheme. He then resigned the government of the Em-
pire, and having transferred all his claims of obedience and
allegiance from the Germanick body, to his brother the King
August 27. of the Romans, he executed a deed to that effea, with all the

formalities, requisite in such an important tranfation. The
instrument of resignation he committed to William Prince of
Orange, and impowered him to lay it before the college of
electors b

NOTHING now remained to detain Charles from that retreat

for which he languilhed. Every thing having been prepared rome
time for his voyage, lie set out for Zuitburg in Zealand, where
the fleet had orders to rendezvous. In his way thither he passed
through Ghent, and after stopping there a few days, to indulge
that tender and plearant melancholy, which arises in the mind of
every man in the decline of life, on visiting the place of his
nativity, and viewing the scenes and objects familiar to him in
his early youth, he pursued his journey, accompanied by his
Ion Philip, his daughter the archducllefs, his sifters the dow-
ager Quleens of France and Hungary, Maximilian his fon-in-
law, and a numerous retinue of the Flemish noblility. Before
he went on board, he difinifed them, with marks of his atten-
tion or regard, and taking leave of Philip with all the tenderness
of a father who embraced his son for the last time, he set fail
on the seventeenth of September under convoy of a large fleet

Charles sets
out for Spain.

b Goldaft. Conflit. Imper. pars i. 576.

of
3 2

of Spanilh, Flemiih and English flips. He declined a pressing
invitation, from the Queen of England, to land in some part
of her dominions, in order to refresh himself, and that Ihe
might have the comfort of feeing him once more. It cannot
surely, said he, be agreeable to a queen to receive a visit from
a father-in-law, who is now nothing more than a private
gentleman.

His voyage was prosperous and agreeable, and he arrived at

Laredo in Biscay on the eleventh day after he left Zealand. As
soon as he landed, he fell prostrate on the ground; and confider-
ing himself now as dead to the world, he kifded the earth, and
said, " Naked came I out of my mother's womb, and naked I
now return to thee, thou common mother of mankind." From
Laredo he pursued his journey to Burgos, carried by his atten-
dants sometimes in a chair, and sometimes in a horfe-litter, sus-
fering exquisite pain at every flep, and advancing with the
greatest difficulty. Some of the Spanifl nobility repaired to
Burgos in order to pay court to him, but they were so few
in number, and their attendance was so negligent, that Charles
observed it, and felt, for the first time, that he was no longer a
Monarch. Accustomed from his early youth to the dutiful and
officious respect with which those who possess fovercign
power are attended, lie had received it with the credulity com-
mon to Princes, and was weak enough to be mortified, when
he now discovered, that he had been indebted to his fortune,
for much of that obsequious regard, which lie lad fondly
thought was paid to his personal qualities. But though lie
might have soon learned to forget the levity of his flub-

jeds,

BOOK XII.

1556.

His arrival
and reception
there.

373

BOOK XII.

!556,

The place of
his retreat.

jeds, pr to have despised their neglect, he was more deeply
affliced with his son's ingratitude, who, forgetting already how
mulch he owed to his father's bounty, obliged him to remain
Tome weeks at Burgos, before he paid him the firit moiety of
that fnall pension, which was all that he had reserved of so
many kingdoms. As without this rum, Charles could not dif-
miss his domeflicks with flch rewards as their services merited,
or his generosity had deflined for them, he could not help ex-
prefing both furprize and diffatisfaation b. At last the money
was paid, and Charles having dismissed a great number of his
domefticks, whose attendance he thought would be superfluous
or cumbersome in his retirement, he proceeded to Valladolid.
There he took a last and tender leave of his two fiters, whom
he would not permit to accompany him to his solitude, though
they entreated it with tears, not only that they might have the
consolation of contributing by their attendance and care to miti-
gate or to sooth his sufferings, but that they might reap in-
ftrudion and benefit by joining witl him in those pious ex-
ercifes, to which he hadconfecrated the remainder of his days.

FROM Valladolid he continued his journey to Plazencia in

Eflremadura. He had paIfed through that city a great many
years before, and having been ltruck at that time with the de-
lightful situation of the monastery of St. Juftus belonging to
the order of St. Jerome, not many miles distant from that place,
he had then observed to. Come of his attendants, that this was a
spot to which Dioclefian might have retired with pleasure.. The
impression had remained so strong on his mind, that he pitched
on it as the place of his retreat. It was feated in a vale of

b Strada de Bello Belg. li). i. 9.

fro
374

no great extent, watered by a small brook, and surrounded
by rising grounds,. covered with lofty trees; both from the
nature of the foil, and temperature of the climate, it was
esteemed the most healthful and delicious situation in Spain.
Some months before his resignation le had sent an architec thi-
ther, to add a new apartment to the mohaftery, for his accommo-
dation; but he gave ftric orders that the stile of the building
Ihould be such as suited his present station, rather than his for-
mer dignity. It confilfed only of fix rooms, four of them in
the form of Friars cells, with naked walls; and the other two,
each twenty feet square, were hung with brown cloth, and fur,
nifhed in the most simple mariner. They Were allI level with the
ground ;' with a door on one fide into a garden; of which Charles
himself had given the.'plan; and had filled' it with various plants,
which he proposed to cultivate with his own hands. On the
other fide it communicated wi th techapel of the monastery4
in which he was to perform his devotions. Into this humble
retreat, scarce sufficient for the comf6rtabl daccOmmodation. of a
private gentleman, did Charles' enter, with 'twelvd domefticks
only. He buried there, in solitude and silence, his grandeur,
his ambition, together with all those vdft projesLts,: icl, during
half a century, had alarmed and agitated Edrope,ifilling: eeY y
kingdom in it, by turns, with tile ferrb'1 of his' arfs,'ail thu
dread of being fibjeded to his power. ..

.i .

.THE contrast between Charlee's conduit, .and that. of the

Pope at this juncture, was o. obvious,; tha t t rftruck even rthe
most careless observers; nor' was the con)parifon which they
made much to Paul's advantage. The former, a conqucror,

BOOK XII.

i$S6.

F 1557.
February 24.

i !. !' .

'

Contrall be.
tween the
behaviour of
Clihrics aiind
dlie 1'ope.
c Sandov. ii. 607. & Zunliga. 10. Tlhuan. lib. xvli. 6og.

: 1 1, -( - ' ·
X l' ( id

3* 75

COOK XII.

.15 7.

The duke of
Guise leads
the French
army into
Italy.

born.to reign, long acciftomed to the splendor which accompa-
nies supreme power, and to those busy and interesting scenes in
which: an active ambition had engaged him, quitted the world,
at an early period of life, that he might close the evening of his
days in tranquillity, and secure some interval for fober thought,
and serious recolletion. The latter, a priest, who had pafled the
early part of his life in the shade of the schools, and ill the study
of: the speculative sciences, who was seemingly so detached from
the world, that he had Lhut himself up for many years in the soli-
tude of a cloister, and who was not raised to the Papal throne
until he had reached the extremity of old age, discovered at
once all the impetuosity of youthful ambition, and engaged in
vast schemes, in order to accomplish which, he. scrupled not to
scatter the feeds of discord and to kindle the flames of war in
every corner of Europe. But Paul, regardless of the opinion and
censures of mankind, held on his own course with his wonted
arrogance ,and violence. These, although they feented already
to have exceeded all bounds, rose to still a greater height, upon
the arrival of the duke of Guise in Italy.

THAT which the two Princes of Lorrain foresaw and desired,

had happened. The duke of Guise was entrusted with the com-
mand of the army appointed to march to the Pope's afiftance.
It confited of twenty thousand men, of the best troops in the ser-
vice of France. So high was the Duke's reputation, and such
the general expe&tation of beholding rome extraordinary exertion
of his courage and abilities in a war, into which he had precipi-
tated his country, chiefly with the design of gaining a field
where he might display his own talents, that many of the
French nobility, who had no command in the troops em-
ployed, accompanied him as volunteers. This army passed the

Alps
,76

Alps in a rigorous season, and advanced towards Rome, without BooK XII.
any opposition from the Spaniards, who, as they were not strong
enough to aft in different parts, had colleced all their forces in one
body on the frontiers of Naples, for the defence of that kingdom.

EMnoLDENED by the approach of the French, the Pope let The Pope re-

loose all the fury of his resentment against Philip, which, not- news lgilt
withitanding the natural violence of his temper, prudential con- Philip.
fiderations had hitherto obliged him to keep under tome rc-
ftraint. He named commifioners, whom he empowered to pass
judgment in the suit, which the consistorial advocate had cor
menccd against Philip, in order to prove that lie had forfeited
the crown of Naples, by taking arms against the Holy See, of February 12.
which hle was a vasal. He recalled all.the nuncios resident in
the courts of Charles V. of Philip, or of any of their allies. This
was levelled chiefly against Cardinal Pole, the Papal legate in the April 9.
court of England, whose great merit, in having contributed so
successfully to reconcile that kingdom to the church of Rome,
together with the expectation of farther services that lie might
perform, was not fifficicnt to screen him from the resentment
which he had incurred by his zealous endeavours to re-cflablifl
peace between the house of Aufiria and France. He commanded
an hddition to be made to the anathemas annually denounced
against the enemies of the church on Maundy-Thurfday,
whereby he inflicted the censure of excommunication on the
authors of the late invasion of the ecclesiastical territories, what-
ever their rank or dignity might be; and, in confcquence of this,
the ufial prayers for the Emperor were omitted next day in the
Pope's chapel d.

d Pal. lib. xiii. 180. Menm. de Ribier, ii. 678.

377
V o I- III.

C c c

Bu L'

BOOK XII.

1557.

His military
preparations
Iladequate.

BuT while the Pope indulged himself in these wild and

childish sallies of rage he either neglected, or it exceeded his
power, to take such measures as would have rendered his resent-
ment really formidable, and fatal to his enemies. For, when
the duke of Guise entered Rome, where lie was received with a
triumphal pomp, which would have been more suitable if he had
been returning from having terminated the war with glory, than
when he was going to begin it with a doubtful chance of success,
he found none of the preparations for war in such forwardness
as Caraffa had promised, or he had expected. The Papal troops
were far inferior in number to the quota stipulated; no maga-
zines sufficient for their fubfitance were formed; nor was money
for paying them provided. The Venetians, agreeably to that
cautious maxim which the misfortunes of their slate had first
led them to adopts and which was now become a fundamental
principle in their policy, declared their resolution to preserve an
exa& neutrality, without taking any part in the quarrels of
Princes so far their superiors in power. The other Italian tfates
were either openly united in league with Philip, or secretly wished
filccefs to his arms agaInst a Pontiff, whose inconsiderate ambition
had rendered Italy once more the feat of war.
Duke of THE Duke of Guise perceived that the whole weight of the

Guifs war would devolve on him; and became sensible, though too
operations.

late, how imprudent it is to rely, in the execution of great enter-
prizes, on the aid of feeble allies. Pulhed on, however, by the
Pope's impatience for action, as well as by his own desire of per-
forming something of what he had so confidently undertaken,
April 13. he marched towards Naples, and began his operations. But the

fiuccefs of these fell far Ihort of his former reputation, of what
the world expected, and of what he himself had promised. He

opened

I1
378

opened the campaign with the siege of Civitella, a town of rome BOOK XII.
importance on the Neapolitan frontier. But the obstinacy with %rJ
which the Spanilh governor defended it, baffled all the impetuous
efforts of the French valour, and obliged Guile, after a siege of
three weeks, to retire from the town with disgrace. He endea-
voured to wipe off that stain, by advancing boldly towards the
duke of Alva's camp, and offering him battle. But that prudent
commander, sensible of all the advantages of landing on the de-
fenfive before an invading enemy, declined an engagement, and
kept within his entrenchments; and adhering to his plan with
the Rfeadinefs of a Castilian, eluded with great address all Guise's
firatagems, to draw him into actione. Meanwhile, sickness
wafted the French army; violent diflenfions had arisen between
Guire and tie commander of the Pope's forces the Spaniards
renewed their incursions into the ecclesiastical state; the Pope,
when lhe found, instead of the conquests and triumphs whiclh ie
had fondly expeftcd, that lie could not secure his own territories
from deprdation, murmured, complained, and began to talk of
peace. The duke of Guise, mortified to the last degree with ha-
ving acted such an inglorious part, not only follicited his court ei-
ther to reinforce his army, or to recal him, but urged Paul to fillfil
his engagements; and called on Cardinal Caraffa, sometimes with
reproaches, and Cometimes with threats, to make good these mag-
nificent promises, from a rafhl confidence in which lie had advised
his master to renounce the trice of Vaucelles, and to join in league
with the Popes.

BvT whlile the French affairs in Italy were in this wretched Hofilities in
situation, an unexpeaed event happened in tile Low-Coun- theuntr

' Herrera vida de Felipe, 181.
f Thuan. lib. xxviii. 14. Palav. lib. xiii. 181. Burn. ii. app. 317.

C c c . tries,

379

BOOK XII.

'557.

Philip endea-
vours to en-
gage England
in the war.

tries, which called the duke of Guise from a station wherein he
could acquire no honour, to the most dignified and important charge
which could be committed to a subject. As soon as the French had
discovered their purpose of violating the truce of Vaucelles, not
only by fending an army into Italy, but by attempting to fir-
prize some of the Frontier towns in Slanders, Philip, though wil-
ling to have avoided a rupture, determined to prosecute the war
with such spirit, as should make his enemies sensible, that his
father had not erred, when he judged him to be so capable of
government, that he had given up the reins into his hands. As
he knew that Henry had been at great expence in fitting out the
army under the duke of Guise, and that his treafiury was hardly
able to answer the exorbitant and endless demands of a distant
war, lie foresaw that all his operations in the Low-Countries
must, of consequence, be feeble, and be confidered only as fecon-
dary to those in Italy. For that reason, he prudently resolved
to make his principal effort in that place where he expected the
French to be weakest, and to bend his chief force against that
quarter where they would feel a blow most sensibly. With this
view, hc aifembled in the Low-Countries an army of about fifty
thousand men, the Flemings serving him on this occasion with
that acive zeal, which ftlbjeds are wont to exert in obe)ing the
commands of a new sovereign. But Philip, cautious and provi-
dent, even at that early period of life, did not reft all his hopes of
fiuccefs on that formidable force alone.

HE had been labouring for fonme time to engage the English to

espouse his quarrel; and though it was manifestly the interest of
that kingdom to maintain a strict neutrality, and the people them-
selves were sensible of the advantages which they derived from it;
though lie knew how odious his name was to the Englifl, and

hIow
38o

how averse they would be to co-operate with him in any meafilre,
he nevertheless did not derpair of accomplifiling his point. He re-
lied on the affection wherewith the Queen doated on him, which
was Co violent, that even his coldnes and neglect had not extin-
guifhed it; lie knew her implicit reverence for his opinion, and
her fond desire of gratifying him in every particular., Thathe
might work on there with greater facility, and more certain fuc-
cess, he set out for England. The Queen who, during her
husband's absence, had languished in perpetual dejection, re-
filmed frelh spirits on his arrival; and without paying the least
attention either to the interest or to tile inclinations of her pcople,
entered warmly into all his schemes. In vain did her privy-council
remonstrate againit the imprudence as well as danger of invol-
ving the nation in an unnecessary war; in vain did they put
her in mind of the solemn treaties of peace subsisting between
England and France, which the conduc of that nation had afforded
her no pretext to violate. Mary, footled by Philip's carefles,
or intimidated by the threats which his ascendant over her em-
boldened him at tome times to throw out, was deaf to every
thing that could be urged in opposition to his sentiments, and
insisted with the greatest vehemence on an immediate declara-
tion of war against France. The council, though all Philip's
address and Mary's authority were employed to gain or over-
awe them, struggled long, and yielded at last, not from convic-
tion, but merely from deferdnce to the will of their fovercign.
War was declared against France, the only one perhaps against
that kingdom into whlich the Englifl ever entered with reluc-
tance. As Mary knew the aversion of the nation to this mea-
flre, fie durst not call a parliament in order to raise money for
carrying on the war. She llpplicd this want, however, by a

ftraini

BOOK XII.

1557.
June o0.

BOOK XII.

1557.

Operations of
Philip's army
in the Low-
Countlies.

frain of prerogative; and levied large fums on her fubjees by
her own authority. This enabled her to assemble a filfficient
body of troops, and to fend eight thousand men under the con-
du&f of the earl of Pembroke to join Philip's army 5.

PHILIP, who was not ambitious of military glory, gave the

command of his army to Emanuel Philibert duke of Savoy,
and fixed his own residence at Cambray, that he might be at
hand to receive the earieft intelligence of his motions, and to
aid him with his counsels. The duke opened the campaign with
a masterly froke of address, which justified Philip's choice, and
discovered such a superiority of genius over the French generals,
as almost ensured success in his subsequent operations. He ap-
pointed the general rendezvous of his troops at a place confidera-
bly distant from the country which he destined to be the scene
of ation; and having kept the enemy in fi(fpence for a good
time with regard to his intentions, he at last deceived them so
effectually by the variety of his marches and counter-marches,
that they concluded that he meant to bend all his force against the
province of Champagne, and would attempt to penetrate into the
kingdom on that fide. In consequence of this opinion, they
drew all their strength towards that quarter, and reinforcing the
garrisons there, left the towns on other parts of the frontier
destitute of troops sufficient to defend them.
Invefs St. EMANUEL, as soon as he perceived that this feint had its full

untin. effect, turned suddenly to the right, advanced by rapid marches

into Picardy, and fending his cavalry, in which he was ex-
tremely strong, before him, invested St. Quintin. This was a

s Carte iii. 337.

town
.

town deemed in that age of considerable strength, and of great
importance, as there were few fortified cities between it and
Paris. The fortifications, however, had been much neglected;
the garrison, weakened by draughts lent towards Champagne,
did not amount to a fifth part of the. number requisite for its
defence; and the governor, though a brave officer, was nei-
ther of rank, nor authority, equal to the command in a place
of so much consequence, besieged by such a formidable army.
A few days must have put the Duke of Savoy in pofliefon of
the town, if the admiral de Coligny, who thought it concerned
his honour to attempt Caving a place of such importanpe to his
country, and which lay within his jurifdition as governor of Pi-
cardy, had not taken the gallant resolution of throwing himself
into it, with fiuch a body of men as he could collect of a slidden.
This resolution he executed with great intrepidity, and confider-
ing the nature of the enterprize, with no contemptible success;
for though one half of his small body was cut off, he, with the
other, broke through the enemy, and entered the town. The
unexpected arrival of an officer of such high rank and reputa-
tion, and who had exposed himself to fich danger in order to
join them, inspired the desponding garrison with courage. Every
thing that the admiral's great (kill and experience in the art of
war could filggeft, for annoying the enemy, or defending the
town, was attempted; and the citizens as well as the garrison
seconding his zeal with equal ardour, seemed to be determined
that they would hold out to the lUst, and sacrifice themselves in
order to save their country h.

h Thuan. lib. xix. 647.

BOOK XII

1557.

383

BOoK XII. THE Duke of Savoy, whom the English under the Earl of

-ev Pembroke, joined about this time, pushed on the siege with

The French the greatest vigour. An army so numerous, and so well
endeavour to
relieve the flipplied with every thing requisite, carried on its approaches
town. with great advantage against a garrison which was still so feeble

that it durst seldom venture to disturb or retard the enemy's
operations by sallies. The admiral, sensible of the approaching
danger 'and unable to avert it, acquainted his uncle the contfable
Montmorency, who had the command of the French army,
with his situation, and pointed out to him a method by which
he might throw relief into the town. The constable, follicitou;
to save a town, the loss of which would open a passage for the
enemy into the heart of France; and eager to extricate his ne-
phew out of that perilous situation, in which zeal for the pub-
lick had iengaged him; resolved, though aware of. the danger,
to attempt what he desired. With this view he marched from
La Fere towards St. Qlintin at the head of his army, which
was not by one half so numerous as that of the enemy, and
having given the command of a body of chosen men to Co-
ligny's brother Dandelot who was colonel general of the French
infantry, he ordered him to force his way into the town by that
avenue which the admiral had represented as most practicable,
while he himself with the main army would give the alarm to
the enemy's camp on the opposite fide, and endeavour to draw
August lo. all their attention towards that quarter. Dandelot executed his

orders with greater intrepidity than condut. His soldiers
rushed on with such headlong impetuosity, that though it broke
the first body of the enemy which stood in their way, it threw
themselves into the utmost confusion; and being attacked by
fresh troops which closed in upon them on every fide, the

greater
384

;'.

greater part of them were cut in pieces, Dandelot, with about five
hundred of the most adventrous, and most fortunate, making
good his entrance into the town.

MEANWHILE the Constable, in executing his part of the

plan, advanced so near the camp .of the besiegers, as rendered
it impoflible to retreat with safety in the face of an enemy so
much tliperior in number. The Duke of Savoy instantly per-
ceived Montmorency's error, and prepared, with the pretence
of mind and abilities of a great general, to avail himself of it.
He drew up his army in order of battle, with the greatefl ex-
pedition, and watching the moment when the French began to
file off towards La Fere, he detached all his cavalry under the
command of the count of Egmont to fall on their rear, while
lie, at the head of his infantry, advanced to support him. The
French retired at firit in perfect order, and with a good counte-
nanece but when they faw'Egmont draw near with his formi-
dable body of cavalry, the shock of which they were conscious
that they could not withstand, the profpe& of imminent danger,
added to distrust of their general, whose imprudence every soldier
now perceived, struck them with general conftcrnation. They
began insensibly to quicken their pace, and tlhoc in the ,ear began
to press To violently on such as were before them, that in a fliort
time their march resembled a flight rather than a retreat. Egmont,
observing their confusion, charged them with the greatest firy,
and in a moment all their Genfdarmeric, the pride and flrength
of the French armies in that age, gave way and fled with pre-
cipitation. The infantry, howevcr, whom the conRlable, by his
presence and authority, kept to their colours, still continued
their retreat, until the enemy brought Tome pieces of cannon
: VOL. III. D d d to

BOOK XII.

i57.

The battle of
St. Quintin.

Total dcfieat
of the French.

385

BoOK XII.

'557.

The first es-
sets of it.

to bear upon their centre, which threw them into such disorder,
that the cavalry renewing their attack, broke in, and the rout
became universal. About four thousand of the French fell in the
field, and among those the Duke of Anguyen a Prince of the blood,
together with fix hundred gentlemen. The Conflable, as roon
as he perceived the fortune of the day to be irretrievable, rulled
into the thickest of the enemy, with a resolution not to survive
the calamity, which his ill-conduCt had brought upon his country;
but having received a dangerous wound, and being wafted with
the lots of blood, he was surrounded by some Flemilh officers,
to whom lie was known, who proteted him from the violence
of the soldiers, and obliged him to surrender. Besides the con-
Itable, the Dukes of Montpenfier and Longueville, the Marechal
St. Andre, many officers of diitindion, three hundred gentlemen,
and near four thousand private soldiers were taken prisoners.
All the colours belonging to the infantry, all the ammunition,
and all the cannon, two pieces excepted, fell into the enemy's
hands. The victorious army did not lose above fourscore
men .

THIS battle, no less fatal to France than the ancient viltories

of Crecy and Agincourt, gained by the Englifl on..the fame
frontier, bore a more near resemblance to there, in the fud-
dennefs of the rout; in the raflinefs of the comman-
der in chief; in the number of persons of note slain or
taken; and in the small loss sustained by the enemy. It filled
France with equal coniternation. Many inhabitants of Paris
with the fame precipitancy and trepidation, as if the enemy

Thuan. 65o. Hara:i Annal. Brabant. ii. 692. Herrera, 291.

had
386

had been already at their gates, quitted the city, and retired
into the interior provinces. The King, by his presence and ex-
hortations, endeavoured to console and to animate filch as
remained, and applying himself with the greatest diligence to
repair the ruinous fortifications of the city, prepared to defend
it against the attack which le inltantly expected. But happily
for France, Philip's caution, together with the intrepid firmness
of the Admiral de Coligny not only saved the capital from the
(anger to which it was exposed, but gained the nation a short
interval, during which the people recovered from the terror and
dejection occasioned by a blow no leTs revere than unexpected,
and Henry had leisure to take measures for the publick security
with the spirit which became the Sovereign of a powerful and
martial people.

PHILIP, immediately after the battle, visited the camp at

St. Quintin, where he was received with all the exultation of
military triumph; and fucl were his transports of joy on ac-
count of an event, which threw so much lustre on the beginning
of his reign, that they softened his severe and haughty temper,
into an unusual flow of courtesy. When the Duke of Savoy
approached, and was kneeling to kifs his hands, he caught him in
his arms, and embracing him with warmth, " It becomes me,
fays he, rather to kits your hands, which have gained me filch a
glorious and almost bloodless viAory."

As soon as the rejoicings and congratulations on Philip's

arrival were over, a council of war was held in order to deter-
mine how.they might improve their victory to the belt advan-
tage. The Duke of Savoy, seconded by several of the ablcit

I) d d 2 officers

BOOK XII,

'557.

Philip repairs
to his army.

His delibera-
tionsconcern-
ing the prose-
cution of the
war.
W

387

officers formed under Charles V. insisted that they should imme-
diately relinquish the siege of St. Quintin, the reduction of
which was now an object below their attention, and advance
directly towards Paris; that as there were neither troops to
oppose, nor any town of strength to retard their march, they
might reach that capital while under the full impression of the
aftonilhment and terror occasioned by the rout of the army,
and take poflefnion of it without resistance. But Philip, less
adventrous or more prudent than his generals, preferred a mo-
derate but certain advantage, to an enterprize of greater fplen-
dour, but of more doubtful success. He represented to the council
the infinite resources of. a kingdom so powerful as France; the
great number as well as martial spirit of its nobles; their attach-
ment to their sovereign; the vast advantages with which they
could carry on war in their own territories ; and the unavoidable
deftrudion, which must be the consequence of their penetrat-
ing too rashly into the enemy's country, before they had secured
such a communication with their own, as might render a retreat
safe, if upon any disastrous event that should become neceflary.
On all these accounts, he advised the continuance of the siege,
and his generals acquiesced the more readily in his opinion, as
they made no doubt of being maflers of the town in a few
days, a loss of time of so little conlequence in the execution of
their plan, that they might e.lily repair it by their fulbfequent
activity '.

THE weakness of the fortifications, and the small number of
the garrison, which could no longer hope either for reinforce-

'Belcar. Commentar. di Reb. Gallic. go1.

ment,
BOOK XII.

'557.

St. Quintin
defended by
Admiral
C(o!igny.
388

ment, or relief, seemed to authorize this calculation of Philip's BOOK XII.
generals. But, in making it, they did not attend fiufficiently to 1S7.
the character of Admiral de Coligny, who commanded in the
town. A courage undifiayed and undifconcerted amidst the
greatest dangers, an invention fruitful in resources, a genius which
rouzed and seemed to acquire new force upon every disaster, a
talent of governing the minds of men, together with a capacity of
maintaining his ascendant over them even under circumstances
the most adverse and distressful, were qualities which Coligny
pofleffed in a degree superior to any general of that age. These
qualities were peculiarly adapted to the station in which he was
now placed., and as he knew the infinite importance to his coun-
try of every hour which lie could gain at thisjuncture, he exert-
ed himself to the utmost in contriving how to protraa the siege,
and to detain the enemy from attempting any enterprize more
dangerous to France. Such were the perseverance and skill with which is
which he conducted the defence, and such the fortitude and takelbytaf
patience with which he animated the garrison, that though the
Spaniards, the Flemings, and the Englilh, carried on the attack
with all the ardour which national emulation inspires, lie held
out the town seventeen days. He was taken prisoner, at last, Auguf 27.
on the breach, overpowered by the fiuperior number of the
enemy.

HENRY availed himself, with the utmost activity, of the in- Henry's ilca-

terval which the admiral's well-timed obstinacy had afforded filres for tlle
him. He appointed officers to collet the fcattcrcd remains of kingdon.
tle constable's army ; e ifited orders for levying soldiers in
every part of the kingdom ; lie commanded the ban and arriere
ban of the frontier provinces inflantly to take the field, and to

join

389

BOOK XII.

15S;.

The vidory
of St. Quintin
produfaive of
few beneficial
consequences.

join the Duke of Nevers at Laon in Picardy; he recalled the
greater part of the veteran troops which served under the
Marechal Briffac in Piedmont; he rent courier after courier
to the Duke of Guise, requiring him, together with all his
army, to return instantly for the defence of their country; lie
dispatched one envoy to the Grand Signior, to follicit the aflif-
tance of his fleet, and the loan of a rum of money; he rent
another into Scotland, to incite the Scots to invade the north of
England, that by drawing Mary's attention to that quarter,
he might prevent her from reinforcing her troops which served
under Philip. There efforts of the King were warmly seconded
by the zeal of his subje&s. The city of Paris granted him a free
gift of three hundred thousand livres. The other great towns
imitated the liberality of the capital, and contributed in propor-
tion. Several noblemen of diftindion engaged to garrison and to
defend at their own expence the towns which lay most exposed
to be attacked by the enemy. Nor was this general concern for
the publick confined to communities alone, or to those in the
higher sphere in life, but diffiufing itself among persons of every
rank, each individual seemed disposed to ac with as much vigour
as if the honour of the King, and the safety of the state had de-
pended on his personal efforts um.

PHILIP, who was no firanger either to the prudent meafilres

taken by the French monarch for the security of his dominions,
or to the spirit with which his fibjets prepared to defend them-
selves, perceived, when it was too late, that he had loft an
opportunity which could never be recalled, and that it was now
vain to think of penetrating into the heart of France. He

Mem. de Ribicr. ii. 701. 703.

abandoned,
390

abandoned, therefore, without much reludance, a fchcme which
was too bold and hazardous to be perfetly agreeable to his
cautious temper; and employed his army, during the remain-
der of the campaign, in tile sieges of Ham and Catelet. Of
these, he Toon became marter; and the reducion of these two
petty towns, together with the acquisition of St. Quintin, were all
the advantages which he derived from one of the most decisive
vitories gained in that century. Philip, himself, however, con-
tinued in high exultation, on account of his success; and as all
his pallions were tinged with filperfitiion, he, in memory of the
battle of St. Quintin, which had been fought on the day con-
fecrated to St. Laurence, vowed to build a church, a monastery,
and a palace sacred to that faint and martyr. Before the expira-
tion of the year, he laid the foundation of an edifice, in which
all these were united, at the Escurial in the neighbourhood of
Madrid; and the fame principle, which dictated the vow, direc-
ted the building. For the plan of the work was To formed as
to resemble a gridiron, which, according to the legendary tale,
had been the instrument of St. Laurence's martyrdom. Notwitllh
flanding the vast and expensive fchcmes, in which his restless am-
bition involved him, Philip continued the building with filch
perseverance for twenty-two years, and reserved fichl vast fitns
for this monument of his piety and vanity, that the monarchs
of Spain are indebted to him for a royal residence, which though
not the most elegant, is certainly the most filmptuous and mag-
nificent of any in Europe *.

THE first account of that fatal blow which the French had

received at St. QCintin was carried to Rome by the courier,
whom Henry had sent to recall the Duke of Guise. As Paul,

BOOK XII.

15S7.

The French
noiiy recalled
out of 1taly.
Colmcnar Annales d'Efpagne, tom. ii. p. 136.

even

39t

even with the afliftance of his French auxiliaries, had scarce been
able to check the progress of the Spanish arms, he foresaw that
as loon as he was deprived of their protection, his territories must
be over-run in a moment. He remonstrated therefore with the
greatest violence against the departure of the French army, re-
proaching the Duke of Guise for his ill conduet, which had
brought him into fuich an unhappy situation; and complaining
of the King for deserting him so ungenerously under such
circumstances. Guise's orders, however, were peremptory.
Paul, inflexible as he was, found it necessary to accommodate
his conduc to the exigency of his affairs, and to employ the
mediation of the Venetians, and of Cosmo di Medici in order
to obtain a peace. Philip, who had been forced unwillingly
to a rupture with the Pope, and who, even while fuccels
crowned his arms, doubted Co much the justice of his own cause,
that he had made frequent overtures of pacification, lifened
eagerly to the first proposals of this nature from Paul, and dif-
covered such moderation in his demands, as could scarce have
been expected from a Prince elated with victory.

THE Duke of Alva on the part of Philip, and the Cardinal

Caraffa in the name of his uncle, met at Cavi, and both being
equally disposed to peace, they, after a short conference, termi-
nated the war by a treaty on the following terms: That Paul
should renounce his league with France, and maintain for the
future such a neutrality as became the common father of
Christendom; That Philip should instantly restore all the towns
of the ecclesiastical territory of which he had taken poffeflion;
That the claims of the Caraffa's to the dutchy of Paliano, and
other demesnes of the Colonna's should be referred to the

decision
BOOK XII.

1557.

A treaty of
peace be-
tween the
Pope and
Philip. 392

decilion of the republick of Venice; That the Duke of Alva
llould repair in person to Rome, and after asking pardon of Paul
in his own name, and in that of his master, for having invadecl
the patrimony of the church, fiould receive the Pope's abfolu-
tion from that crime. Thus Paul, through Philip's scrupulous
timidity, finished an unprofperous war without any detriment to
the Papal See. The conqueror appeared humble, and acknow-
ledged his error; while he who had been vanquished retained
his ufiial haughtiness, and was treated with every mark of fu-
periority ". The Duke of Alva, in terms of the treaty, repaired
to Rome, and in the posture of a supplicant, kilred the feet, and
implored the forgiveness of that very person, whom his arms
had reduced to the last extremity. Such was the superstitious
veneration of the Spaniards for the papal charader, that Alva,
though perhaps the proudest man of the age, and accustomed
from his infancy to a familiar intercourse with Princes, acknow-
ledged that when he approached the Pope, he was ro much
overawed, that his voice failed, and his pretence of mind for-
sook him 9.

BUT though this war, which at its commencement threatened

mighty revolutions, was brought to an end without occasioning
any alteration in those States, which were its immediate objet,
it produced effe&ts of considerable consequence in other parts of
Italy. As Philip was extremely follicitous to terminate his quarrel
with Paul as speedily as poflible, he was willing to make any
sacrifice in' order to gain those Princes, whlo, by joining their

X Pallav. lib, xiii. 183. F. Paul. 380. Herrera, vol. i. 310.

Pallav. lib. xiii. 185. Summonte lftoria di Napoli, iv, 286.
VOL. III. Ee e troops

BOOK XII.

1557.
1 S7-

I'ilip reflore
I'laccntia to
Oetavio Far-
ncie.

393

even with the afliftance of his French auxiliaries, had scarce been
able to check the progress of the Spanish arms, he foresaw that
as loon as he was deprived of their protection, his territories must
be over-run in a moment. He remonstrated therefore with the
greatest violence against the departure of the French army, re-
proaching the Duke of Guise for his ill condu&t, which had
brought him into such an unhappy situation; and complaining
of the King for deserting him so ungenerously under such
circumstances. Guise's orders, however, were peremptory.
Paul, inflexible as he was, found it necessary to accommodate
his condut to the exigency of his affairs, and to employ the
mediation of the Venetians, and of Cosmo di Medici in order
to obtain a peace. Philip, who had been forced unwillingly
to a rupture with the Pope, and who, even while fuccesl
crowned his arms, doubted so much the justice of his own cause,
that he had made frequent overtures of pacification, lillened
eagerly to the first proposals of this nature from Paul, and dif-
covered such moderation in his demands, as could scarce have
been expeced from a Prince elated with victory.

THE Duke of Alva on the part of Philip, and the Cardinal

Caraffa in the name of his uncle, met at Cavi, and both being
equally disposed to peace, they, after a short conference, termi-
nated the war by a treaty on the following terms: That Paul
ihould renounce his league with France, and maintain for the
future such a neutrality as became the common father of
Christendom; That Philip should iniRantly restore all the towns
of the ecclesiastical territory of which he had taken poffeflion;
That the claims of the Caraffa's to the dutchy of Paliano, and
other demesnes of the Colonna's ihould be referred to the

decision
BOOK XII.

1557.

A treaty of
peace be-
tween the
Pope and
Philip. 392

deciion of the republick of Venice; Tlat the Duke of Alva
Ihould repair in person to Rome, and after afling pardon of Paul
in his own name, and in that of his master, for having invaded
the patrimony of the church, fiould receive the Pope's abfolu-
tion from that crime. Thus Paul, through Philip's scrupulous
timidity, finified an unprofperous war without any detriment to
the Papal See. The conqueror appeared humble, and acknowt
ledged his error; while he who had been vanquished retained
his ufilal haughtiness, and was treated with every mark of fu-
periority n. The Duke of Alva, in terms of the treaty, repaired
to Rome, and in the posture of a supplicant, kissed the feet, and
implored the forgiveness of that very person, whom his arms
had reduced to the last extremity. Such was the fiuperftitious
veneration of the Spaniards for the papal character, that Alva,
though perhaps the proudest man of the age, and accustomed
from Iis infancy to a familiar intercourse with Princes, acknow-
ledged that when he approached the Pope, he was so much
overawed, that his voice failed, and his pretence of mind for-
sook him 9.

BUT though this war, which at its commencement threatened

mighty revolutions, was brought to an end without occasioning
any alteration in those States, which were its immediate objet,
it produced effe&s of considerable consequence in other parts of
Italy. As Philip was extremely follicitous to terminate his quarrel
with Paul as speedily as poflible, he was willing to make any
sacrifice in' order to gain those Princes, whlo, by joining their

, Pallav. lib, xiii. 183. F. Paul. 380. Herrera, vol. i. 310.

Pallav. lib. xiii. x8. Summonte lftotia di Napoli, iv. 286.
Vow. III. Ee e troops

BOOK XII.

'S57.

I'hilip reforce
P'lacentia to
Ofavio Far-
Incfe.

393

394
BOOK XII.

15S57.

Cosmo di Me-
dici's mea-
fures for ob-
taining Siena.

troops to the Papal and French army, might have prolonged the
war. With this view, he entered into a negociation with
Odavio Farnese, Duke of Parma, and in order to reduce him
from his alliance with France, he restored to him the city of Pla-
centia with the territory depending on it, which Charles V. having
seized in the year one thousand five hundred and forty-feven, had
kept from that time in his poffeflion, and had transmitted together
with his other dominions to Philip.

THIS ftep made such a discovery of Philip's character and

views to Cosmo di Medici, the most sagacious and provident of
all the Italian Princes, that he conceived hopes of accomplishing
his favourite scheme of adding Siena and its territories to his
dominions in Tuscany. As his success in this attempt depended
entirely on the delicacy of address with which it was conduced,
he employed all the refinements of policy in the negociation
which he set on foot for this purpose. He began with solicit-
ing Philip, whose treasury he knew to be entirely drained by
the expence-of the war, to repay the great fums which he had
advanced to the Emperor during the siege of Siena. When
Philip endeavoured to elude a demand which he was unable to
satisfy, he affected to be extremely disquieted, and making
no secret of his disgust, inftruded his ambassador at Rome to
open a negociation with the Pope, which seemed to be the effect
of it. The ambafTador executed his commission with such dex-
terity, that Paul, imagining Cosmo to be entirely alienated from
the Spanish interest, proposed to him an alliance with France,
which Ihould be cemented by the marriage of his eldest son to
one of Henry's daughters. Cosmo received the overture with
fuCch apparent fatisfation, and with so many profeflions of gra-

titude

titude for the high honour of which he had the profpe&, that BOOK XII.
not only the Pope's ministers, but the French envoy at Rome 57 .
talked confidently, and with little reserve, of the acceflion of that
important ally, as a matter certain and decided. The account of
this was quickly carried to Philip; -and Cosmo, who foresaw
how much it would alarm him, had dispatched his nephew Lu-
dovico de Toledo into the Netherlands, that he might be at hand
to observe and tale advantage of his conftemation, before the
first impreflion which it made should in any degree abate.
Cofino was extremely fortunate in the choice of the inftru-
ment whom he employed. Toledo waited, with patience, until
he discovered with certainty, that Philip had received fulch intel-
ligence of his uncle's negociations at Rome, as must have filled
his suspicious mind with fear and jealousy ; and then craving an
audience, he required payment of the money which had been
borrowed by the Emperor, in the most earnest and peremptory
terms. In urging that point, he artfuilly threw out several dark
hints and ambiguous declarations, concerning the extremities,
to which Cosmo might be driven by a refifal of this just de-
mand, as well as by other grievances of which he had good reason
to complain.

PHILIP, astonished at an address in such a strain, from a Prince Their fircccfe.

so far his inferior as the Duke of Tuscany, and comparing what
he now heard, with the information which he had received from
Italy, immediately concluded that Cofino had ventured to aflimne
this bold and unusual tone on the profpeA of his union with
France. In order to prevent the Pope and Henry from acquiring
an ally, who by his abilities and the situation of his dominions
would have added both reputation and strength to their confe-
deracy, lie offered to grant Cofino the investiture of Siena, if

E e z he

395

he would consent to accept of this, as an equivalent for the
fums due to him, and engage to furnish a body of troops to-
wards the defence of Philip's territories in Italy, against any
power who should attack them. As soon as Cosmo had brought
Philip to this, which was the objec of all his artifices and in-
trigues, he did not protract the negociation by any unneceflary
delay, or any excers of refinement, but closed eagerly with the
proposal, and Philip, in spite of the remonstrances of his ablel
counsellors, signed a treaty with him to that effect P.

As no P ince was ever more tenacious of his rights than Philip,

or less willing to relinquish any territory which he pofeffed, by
what tenure soever he held it, these unusual concellions to the
Dukes of Parma and Tuscany, by which he wantonly gave up
countries, in acquiring or defending which, his father had em-
ployed many years, and wafted much blood and treafire, cannot
be accounted for from any motive, but his fuperifitious desire
of extricating himself out of the war which lie had been forced
to wage against the Pope. By there treaties, however, the
balance of power among the Italian States was poized with
greater equality, and rendered less variable than it had been
since it received the first violent shock from the invasion of
Charles VIII. of France. From this period Italy ceased to be
the great theatre, on which the monarchs of Spain, France, and
Germany, contended for power or for fame. Their dissentions
and hostilities were nevertheless as frequent and as violent as
ever; but being excited by new objecs, they slained other regions
of Europe with blood, and rendered them, in their turn, miserable
by the devastations of war.

P Thuan. lib. xviii. 624. Herrera, i. 263. 275. Palav. lib. xiii, 18o.

THR
BOOK XII.

1557.
396

397

THE Duke of Guise left Rome on the fame dlay that his

adversary the Duke of Alva made his ignominious fubmiillions
to the Pope. He was received in France as the guardian angel
of the kingdom. His late ill filccefs in Italy seemed to be for-
gotten, while his former services, particularly his defence of
Metz, were recounted with. exaggerated praise; and lie was
welcomed in every city through which he passed, as the re-
ftorer of publick security, who after having set bounds by his
conduct and valour to the vicorious arms of Charles V. returned
now, at the call of his country, to check tile formidable progress
of Philip's power. The reception which he met with from Henry
was no less cordial and honourable. New titles were invented,
and new dignities created in order to diltinguin him. He was
appointed lieutenant-:general in chief both within and without
the kingdom, with a jurifdiftion almost unlimited, and hardly
inferior to that which was possessed by the King himself. Thus,
through the singular felicity which attended the Princes of
Lorrain, the miscarriage of their own fchemcs contributed to
aggrandize them. The calamities of his country, and the ill
conduc& of his rival the Conflable, exalted the Duke of Guise to
a height of dignity and power, which lie could not have ex-
pected to attain by the most fortunate and most compleat fiuccefs
of his own ambitious projects.

THE Duke of Guise, eager to perform something suitable to

the high expectations of his countrymnen, and that lie might
justify the extraordinary confidence which the King had reposed
in him, ordered all the troops, which could be got together, to
alsemble at Campcigne. Though the winter was well hd-
vanced, and had set in with extreme rigour, he placed himself

it
x

Boor,' XII

1557.

Sept 29.
'l'he Duke of
G Life's recccp
tiJn in France.

Tak(t t'l
conllll:aIl of
the army.

BOOK XII.

1557.

He invests
Calais.

1558.
January i fl.

at their head, and took the field. By Henry's activity and the
zeal of his fubjeds, so many soldiers had been raised in the king-
dom, and such considerable reinforcements had been drawn from
Germany and Swifserland, as formed an army refpedable even
in the eyes of a victorious enemy. Philip, alarmed at feeing it
put in motion at such an uncommon season, began to tremble
for his new conquests, particularly St. Quintin, the fortifications
of which were hitherto but imperfecly repaired.

BUT the Duke of Guise meditated a more important enter-

prize; and after amusing the enemy with threatening fucceflively
different towns on the frontiers of Slanders, he turned suddenly
to the left and invested Calais with his whole army. Calais had
been taken by the English under Edward III. and was the fruit of
that monarch's glorious victory at Cressy. Being the only place
that they retained of their ancient and extensive territories in
France, and which opened to them, at all times, an easy and secure
pafiage into the heart of that kingdom, their keeping poffeflion
of it toothed the pride of the one nation as much as it morti-
sied the vanity of the other. Its situation was naturally so
firong, and its fortifications deemed so impregnable, that no
monarch of France, how adventrous soever, had been bold enough
to attack it. Even when the domeftick strength of England was
broken and exhausted by the bloody wars between the houses of
York and Lancaster, and its attention entirely diverted from
foreign objects, Calais had remained undisturbed and un-
threatened. Mary and her council, composed chiefly of Eccle-
fiafticks, unacquainted with military affairs, and whose whole
attention was turned towards extirpating heresy out of the
kingdom, had not only neglected to take any precautions for

the
398

the safety of this important place, but seemed to think that the
reputation of its strength alone was filfficient for its security.
Full of this opinion, they ventured, even after tle declaration
of war, to continue a practice which the low state of the
Queen's finances had introduced in times of peace. As the
country adjacent to Calais was overflowed during the winter, and
the marlhes around it became impaflable, except by one avenue,
which the forts of St. Agatha and Newnhambridge command-
ed, it had been the custom of the Englilh to dismiss the greater
part of the garrison towards the end of autumn, and to replace it
in the spring. In vain did Lord Wentworth, the governor of
Calais, remonstrate against this ill-timed parsimony, and represent
the poflibility of his being attacked ffiddenly, while lie had not
troops sufficient to man the works. The privy council treated
these remonstrances with scorn, as if they had flowed from the
timidity or the rapacioufiefs of the governor; and rome of them;
with that confidence which is the companion of ignorance,
boasted that they would defend Calais with their white rods
against any enemy who should approach it during winter q. In
vain did Philip, who had passed through Calais. as he returned
from England to the Netherlands, warn tle Queen of the dan-
ger to which it was exposed; and acqciainting her with what
was necessary for its security, offer to reinforce the garrison
during winter with a detachment of his own troops. Mary's
counsellors, though obsequious to her in all points wherein
religion was concerned, distrusted, as much as the reft of their
countrymen, every proposition that came from her husband;
and fiifpeding this to be an artifice of Philip's in order to gain

q Carte, iii. 345.

the

BOOK XII.

3558.

Its defencelcfs
slate.

399

BOOK XII.

1558.

the command of the town, they ncglected this intelligence, de-
clined his offer, and left Calais with less than a fourth of the
men requisite for its defence.

Guise puthes IT was his knowledge of this which encouraged the Duke
the siege with
vigour. of Guise to venture on an enterprize, that furprized his own

countrymen, no less than his enemies. As he knew that its fuc-
cess depended on conducting his operations with fuci rapidity as
would afford the English no time for throwing relief into the
town by sea, and prevent Philip from giving him any interrup-
tion by land, he pushed the attack with a degree of vigour little
known in carrying on sieges during that age. He drove the
English from Fort St. Agatha at the first assault; obliged them
to abandon the fort of Newnhambridge, after defending it
three days; took the cafile which commanded the harbour by
torm; and on the eighth day after he appeared before Calais
compelled the governor, whose feeble garrison, which did not
exceed five hundred men, was worn out with the fatigue of
Takes the sustaining so many attacks, and defending such extensive works,

town. to sign a capitulation.

and likewise
Guifnes and
Hames.

THE Duke of Guise, without allowing the Englifll time to

recover from the consternation occasioned by this blow, imme-
diately invested Guifnes, the garrison of which, though more
numerous, defended itself with less vigour, and after flanding
one briik assault, surrendered the town. The castle of Hames
was abandoned by the troops posted there, without waiting the
approach of the enemy.

THus
400

THus, in a few days; during the depth of winter; and at

a time when the fatal battle of St. Quintin had so deprefled the
sanguine tiirit of the French, that their utmost aim was to pro-
tedt their own country, without dreaming of making conquests
on the enemy; the enterprizing valour of one man drove the
English out of Calais, after they had held it two hundred and
ten years, and deprived them of every foot of land in a king-
dom, where their dominions had been once so extensive. This
exploit, at the fame time that it gave an high idea of the power
and resources of France to all Europe, set the Duke of Guise,
in the opinion of his countrymen, far above all the generals of
the age. They celebrated his conquests with immoderate tranf-
ports of joy; while the Englifl gave vent to all the paflions,
which animate a high-fpirited people, when any great national,
calamity is manifestly owing to the ill condut of their rulers.
Mary and her Ministers, formerly odious, were now contemp-
tible in their eyes. All the terrors of her revere and arbitrary
adminiftmtion could not refirain them from uttering execrations
and threats against those, who having wantonly involved the
nation in a quarrel wherein it was in no wife interested, had by
their negligence or incapacity brought irreparable disgrace on
their country, and loft tle most valuable polTenfion belonging to
the Englifl crown.

BooKC XII,

i1558.

The Iplen-
dor and
elcttt of these
conquets.

TnI. French King imitated the condut of its former con-

qeror, Edward III. with regard to Calais. He commanded
all the English inhabitants to quit the town, and giving their
houses to his own fiubjeds, who he allured to fettle there by
granting them various immunities, he left a numerous garrison,
under an experienced governor, for their defence. After this, his

VOL. III. F f f vitoricus.

9

401

BooK XII.

1558.

Feb. 24.
Charles's re-
fignation of
the Imperial
crown.

The Pope
refutes to ac-
knowledge
Ferdinand as
Emperor.

viAorious army went into quart rs of refrelhment, and the
usual inaCtion of winter returned.

MEANWHILE Ferdinand alfembled the college of Eledors at

Frankfort, in order to lay before them the deed whereby
Charles V. had resigned the Imperial crown, and transferred it
to him. This he had hitherto delayed, on account of some diffi-
culties which had occurred concerning the formalities requisite
in supplying a vacancy occasioned by an event, to which there
was no parallel in the annals of the Empire. These being at
length adjusted, the Prince of Orange executed the commission
with which he had been entrusted by Charles; the Elecors ac-
cepted of his resignation; declared Ferdinand his lawful fuccefor;
and put him in possession of all the ensigns of the Imperial
dignity.

BuT when the new Emperor sent Gufmnan his chancellor, to

acquaint the Pope with this tranfadion, to testify his reverence
towards the Holy See, and to signify that, according to form,
he would soon dispatch an ambafiador extraordinary to treat
with his holiness concerning his coronation; Paul, whom neither
experience nor disappointments could teach to bring down his
lofty ideas of the papal prerogative to fitch a moderate standard
as suited the genius of the times, refused to adrAit the envoy
into his presence, and declared all the proceedings at Frank-
fort irregular and invalid. He contended that the Pope, as the
vicegerent of Christ, was entrusted with the keys both of ccle-
flial and terrestrial government; that from him the Imperial jurif-
dition was derived; that though his predecessors had autho-
rized the Eletors to chufe an Emperor whom the Holy See

confirmed,

confirmed, this privilege was confined to those cafes when a
vacancy was occasioned by death ; that the instrument of
Charles's resignation had been presented in an improper court,
as it belonged to the Pope alone to rejed or to accept of it, and
to nominate a person to supply his place , that, setting aside all
there objetions, Ferdinand's election laboured under two defe&ts
whicl alone were sufficient to render it void, for the Protestant
Ele&ors had been admitted to vote, tho', by their apoftacy from
the catholick faith, they had forfeited that and every other privi-
lege of the electoral office; that Ferdinand, by ratifying the con-
ceflions of several Diets in favour of hereticks, had rendered
himself unworthy of the Imperial dignity, which was instituted
for the protection, not for the destruCtion of the church. But after
thundering out there extravagant maxims, he added with an ap-
pearance of condescension, that if Ferdinand would renounce all
title to the Imperial crown, founded on the election at Frank-
fort, make profellions of repentance for his past conduct, and
supplicate him, with due humility, to confirm Charles's refig-
nation, as well as his aflimption to the Empire, lie might exped
every mark of favour from his paternal clemency and goodness.
Gufman, though he had laid his account with considerable
difficulties in his negociation with the Pope, little expected that
he would have revived there antiquated and wild pretensions,
which alloniihed him so much that lie icarce knew in what tone
lie ought to reply. He prudently declined entering into any
controversy concerning the nature or extent of the papal jurif-
didion, and confining himself to the political considerations,
which flould determine the Pope to recognize an Emperor
already in poffeflion, lie endeavoured to place these in fuchl a
light, as he imagined could scarce fail to firike Paul, if he were

F f f 2 not

s3ooK XII.

1 3

403

BOOK XII.

1558.

Henry endea-
voured to ex-
cite the Scots
against Eng-
land.

THE REIGN OF THE

not altogether blind to his own interest. Philip seconded Gus-
man's arguments with great carneflnefs, by an ambaflador wVIom
lie sent to Rome of purpose, and befouglt the Pope to desist
from claims so unseasonable, as might not only irritate and alarm
Ferdinand and the Princes of the Empire, but furnifi the ene-
mies of the Holy See with a new reason for representing its ju-
rifdiation as incompatible with the rights of Princes, and sub-
verfive of all civil authority. But Paul, who deemed it a crime
to attend to any consideration suggested by human prudence or
policy, when he thought himself called to afert the preroga-
tives of the Papal See, remained inflexible; and during his pon.
tificate, Ferdinand was not acknowledged as Emperor by tile
court of Rome r,

WHILE Henry was preparing for the approaching campaign,

he received accounts of the ilufie of his negociations in Scotland.
Long experience having at last taught tile Scots the imprudence
of involving their country in every quarrel between France and
England, neither the solicitations of his ambaflador, nor the
address and authority of the Queen-regent, could prevail on
them to take arms against a kingdom, with which they were at
peace. On this occasion the ardor of a martial nobility and
of a turbulent people was restrained by regard for the publick
interest and tranquillity, which in former deliberations of this
kind, had been seldom attended to by a nation always prone to rush
into every new war. But though the Scots adhered with fteadi-
ness to their pacific system, they were extremely ready to gratify

r Godleveus de Abdicat. Car. V, ap, Gold. polit. Imp. 392. Palay. lib. xiii. 18g.
Ribicr. ii. 746. ;, 9.

the

tie French King in another particular, which he had given in
charge to his ambassador.

TiEe young Queen of Scots had been affianced to the Dauphin

in the year one thousand five hundred and forty-eight, and
having been educated since that time in the court of France,
flTe had grown up to be the most amiable, and one of the moil
accomplilhed Princefles of that age. Henry demanded the con-
sent of her fiubjeds to the celebration of the marriage, and a
parliament which was held for that purpose, appointed eight
commifioners to represent the whole body of the nation at that
solemnity, with power to sign fuich deeds as might be requisite
before it was concluded. hi fettling the articles of the marriage,
the Scots took all the precautions, that prudence could dilate,
in order to preserve the liberty and independence of their coun-
try; while the French lufcd every art to secure to the Dauphin
the conduct of affairs during the Queen's life, and the fucceflion
of the crown on the event of her demise. The marriage was
celebrated with pomp fiuitable to the dignity of the parties, and
the magnificence of a court at that time the most splendid in
Europe . Thus Henry, in the course of a few months, had
the glory of recovering an important poffenion which lhad anci-
ently belonged to the crown of Fran:c, and of adding to it the
acquisition of a new kingdom. By this event, too, the Duke of
Guise acquired new consideration and importance; the marriage
of his niece t- the apparent heir of the crown, raising him so far
beyond the condition of other fubjers, as seemed to render the
credit which he had gained by his great actions, no less permanent
than it was extcnfive.

BOOK XII.

1558.

MIrtlaeg of
the Dauphin
with tie
Q,1een of
Scoas.

Aptil t4.
A Keith's history of Scotland, p. 73. Append. 13. Corps Diplom. v. 21.

4o0
Wit n

BOOK XII.

1558.

lhe caim-
paign opened.

Julie 2.

The French
army defeated
at Gravelines.

WHeN the campaign opened, soon after the Dauphin's mnar-

riage, the Duke of Guise was placed at the head of the army
with the fame unlimited powers as formerly. Henry had re-
ceived filch liberal supplies from his fiubjeds, that tle troops under
his command were both numerous and well appointed; while
Philip, exhaulted by the extraordinary efforts of the preceding
year, had been obliged to diflnis so many of his forces during
the winter, that lie could not bring an army into the field capable
of making head against him. The duke of Guise did not lose
the favourable opportunity which his superiority afforded him.
He invested Thionville in the dutchy of Luxemburg, one of the
flrongeft towns on the frontier of the Netherlands, and of great
importance to France by its neighbourhood to Metz; and, not-
withflanding the obstinate valour with which it was defended, he
forced it to capitulate after a siege of three weeks t

BuT the success of this enterprise, which it was expected

would lead to other conqueits, was more than counterbalanced
by an event that happened in another part of the Low-Coun-
tries. The Marechal de Termes, governor of Calais, having
penetrated into Slanders without opposition, invested Dinkirk
with an army of fourteen thousand men, and took it by storm
on the fifth day of the siege. From. that he advanced towards
Nieuport, which must have Toon fallen into his hands; if the'
approach of the Count of Egmont with a supe'rior army had
not made it prudent to retreat. The French troops were To
much encumbered with the booty which they had got at Dunkirk,
or by ravaging the open country, that they moved slowly;

t I'huan. lib. xx. 690

and
4o06

and Egmont, who had left his heavy baggage and artillery
behind him, marched with fitch rapidity, that lie came up with
them near Gravelines, and attacked them with the utmost im-
petuofity. De Termes, who had the choice of the ground,
having ported his troops to advantage in the angle formed by
the mouth of the river Aa and the sea, received him with great
firmness. Victory remained for some time in suspense, the
desperate valour of the French, who foresaw the unavoidable
deftrution that rust follow upon a rout in an enemy's coun-
try, counterbalancing the superior number of the Flemings,
when one of those accidents to which human prudence does not
extend, decided the contest in favour of the latter. A fiitadron
of English ships of war, which was cruizing on the coast,
being drawn by the noise of the firing towards the place of
the engagement, entered the river Aa and turned its great guns
against the right wing of the French with filch cflect as immedi.
ately broke that body, and spread terror and confifion through
their whole army. The Flemings, to whom afliftance, so unex-
pecded and to seasonable, gave fresh spirit, redoubling their es-
forts, that they might not lose the advantage which fortune had
presented them, or give the enemy time to recover from their
consternation, the rout of the French soon became universal.
Near two thouland were killed on the spot; a greater number
fell by the hands of the peasants, who in revenge for the cruelty
with which their country had been plundered, pursued the figi-
tives and massacred them without mercy; the reft were taken
prisoners, together with De Termes their general, and many offi-
cers of diflinafion u.

Bobs XII.

1558.
u Thuan. lib, xx. 694,

407

BOOK XII. THIS signal vicory, for which the Count of Egmont was

s'"ir afterwards so ill requited by Philip, obliged the Duke of Guise
The Suke of to relinquish all other ichemes, and to haften towards the fron-
Guifeoppofed
to the viftori- tier of Picardy, that he might oppose the progress of the enemy
ous army. there. This disaster refleted new lustre on his reputation, and

once more turned the eyes of his countrymen towards him, as
the only general on whose arms victory always attended, and in
whose conduc as well as good fortune they could confide in every
danger. Henry reinforced Guise's army with so many troops
drawn from the adjacent garrisons that it soon amounted to
forty thousand men. That of the enemy, after the jundion of
Egmont with the Duke of Savoy, was not inferior in number.
They encamped at the distance of a few leagues from one ano-
ther; and each monarch having joined his refpedive army,
it was expected that, after the viciflitudes of good and bad success
during this and the former campaign, a decisive battle would at
last determine which of the rivals should take the ascendant for
the future, and give law to Europe. But though both had it in
their power, neither of them discovered any inclination to bring
the decision of a point of such importance to depend upon the
uncertain and fortuitous issue of a single battle. The fatal en-
gagements at St. Quintin and Gravelines were too recent to
be so soon forgotten, and the profped of encountering the fame
troops, commanded by the fame generals who had twice tri-
umphed over his arms, inspired Henry with a degree of caution
which was not common to him. Philip, of a genius averse to
bold operations in war, naturally leaned to cautious mea-
fures, and would hazard nothing against a general To fortu-
nate and successful as the Duke of Guise. Both monarchs,

as
408

as if by agreement, stood on the defensive, and fortifying their
camps carefully, avoided every ikirmifh or rencounter that might
bring on a general engagement.

WHILE the armies continued in this inaction, peace began to

be mentioned in each camp, and both Henry and Philip disco-
vered an inclination to liften to any overture that tended to
re-establish it. The Kingdoms of France and Spain had been
engaged during half a century in almost continual wars, carried
on at great expence and producive of no considerable advantage
to either. Exhausted by extraordinary and unceasing efforts,
which far exceeded those to which the nations of Europe had been
accustomed before the rivallhip between Charles V. and Francis I.
both nations longed so much for an interval of repose, in order
to recruit their strength, that their sovereigns drew from them
with difficulty the supplies necessary for carrying on hostilities.
The private inclinations of both the Kings concurred with those
of their people. Philip was prompted to with for peace by his
fond desire of returning to Spain. Accustomed from his infancy
to the climate and manners of that country, he was attached to it
with such extreme prediletion, that he was unhappy in any
other part.of his dominions. But as he could not either with
decency or safety quit the Low-Countries, and venture on a
voyage to Spain, during the continuance of war, the profped
of a pacification which would put it in his power to execute this
favourite scheme, was highly acceptable. Henry was no lets
desirous of being delivered from the burden, and avocations of
var, that he might have leisure to turn all his attention, and
bend the whole force of his government towards suppressing the

VOL. II. G g g opinions

BOOK XII.

1558.

Both mon-
archs begin to
desire peace.

409

BOOK XII.

i558.

An intrigue in
the court of
France facilir
tates it,

opinions of the Reformers, which were spreading with such rapi-
dity int Paris and other great towns of France, that they began to
grow formidable to the established church.

BESIDES there publick and avowed considerations. arising

frnm the slate of tle two hostile kingdoms, or from the wiflies
of their refpestive monarchs, there was a secret intrigue carried
on in the court of France, which contributed as much aseither
of the other, to halten and to facilitate the negociation of a peace.
The Conflable Montmorency, during his captivity, beheld the
rapid success and growing favour of the Duke of Guise, with the
envious solicitude of a rival. Every advantage gained by him he
confidered as a fresh wound to his own reputation, and he knew
with what malevolent address it would be improved to diminish
his credit with the King, and to augment that of the Duke of
Guise. There arts, he was afraid, might, by degrees, work on
the easy and duaile mind of Henry, so as to efface all remains
of his ancient affection towards him. But he could not disco-
ver any remedy for this unleCs he were allowed to return home,
that he might try whether by his presence he could defeat the
artifices of his enemies, and revive thole warm and tender fen-
timents which had long attached Henry to him, with a confi-
dence so entire, as resembled rather the cordiality of private
friendship, than the cold and selfish connection between a mo-
narch and one of his courtiers. While Montmorency was form-
ing schemes and' wishes for his return to France with much
anxiety of mind, but with little hope of ficcefs, an unexpected
incident prepared the way for it. The Cardinal of Ilorrain, who
had shared With his brother in the King's favour, and partici-
pated of the power which that conferred, did not bear profpe-

rity
410

rity with the fame discretion as the Duke of Guile. Intoxicated
with their good fortune, he forgot how much they had been
indebted for their present elevation to their'connection? with the
Duchess of Valentinois, and vainly ascribed all to the extraor-
dinary merit of their family. This led him not only to neglec
his benefatrefs, but to thwart her schemes, and to talk with a
farcafick liberty of her characer and person. That singular
woman, who, if we may believe contemporary writers, retain-
ed the beauty and charms of youth at the age of threescore, and
on whom it is certain that Henry still doated with all the fond-
nets of love, felt this injury with sensibility, and set herself with
eagerness to revenge it. As there was no method of fupplantinlg
the Princes of Lorrain so effetually as by a coalition of interests
with the Constable, she proposed the marriage of her grand-
daughter with one of his sons, as the bond of their future
union, and Montmorency readily gave his content to the match.
Having thus cemented their alliance, the duclhes employed all
her influence with the King in order to confirm his inclinations
towards peace, and to induce him to take the steps necessary for
attaining it. She insinuated that any overture of that kind
would come with great propriety from the Constable, and if
committed to the conduct of his prudence, could hardly fail of
success.

HENRY, long accustomed to devolve all affairs of importance

on the Constable, and needing only this encouragement to return
to his ancient habits, wrote to him immediately with his usual
familiarity and affection, impowering him at the fame time to take
the first opportunity of founding Philip and his ministers withl re-
gard to peace. Montmorency made his application to Philip by the

G g g 2 most

BOOK XII.

1558.

Henry corm-
mits the ne-
gociaion to
ronilio-
rCIncy.

41i

BOOK XIL most proper channel. He opened himself to the Duke of Savoy,

5 who, notwithstanding the height of preferment to which he had

been raited, and the military glory which he had acquired in the
Spanifn service, was weary of remaining in exile, and languiflecd

, to. return into his dominions. As there was no profpea of
' his recovering pofieflion of there by force of arms,, he confi-

dered a definitive treaty of peace between France and Spain, as
the only event by which he could hope to obtain reflitution.
Being no firanger to Philip's private wishes with regard to
peace, he easily prevailed on him not only to discover a dirpo-
fition on his part towards an accommodation, but to permit Mont-
morency to return, ,on his parole, to France, that lie might con-
firm his. own sovereign in his pacifick sentiments. Henry
received the Conflable with the/moft fattering marks of re-
gard; absence, instead of having abated or extinguished his
friendship, seemed to have given it new ardour; and he aflmed,
from the moment of his appearance in court, a higher place,. if
poflible, in his affetion, and a more perfect ascendant over his
mind, than ever. The Cardinal of Lorrain and Duke of Guise
prudently gave way to a tide of favour too firong for them to
oppose, and confining themselves to their proper departments,
permitted, without any ftrugg!e, the Constable and Duchess of
Valentinois to dire& publick affairs at their pleasure. They toon
prevailed on the King to nominate plenipotentiaries to treat of
peace. Philip did the fame.. The abbey of Cercamp was fixed
on as the place of congrefi; and all military operations were im-
mediately terminated by a suspension of arms..
Death of WHI LE there preliminary fleps were taking towards a

treaty which restored tranquillity to Europe, Charles V. whose

ambition
412

ambitioin had so long disturbed it, ended his days in the monattery BOOK XII.
of St. Jultus. When Charles entered this retreat, he formed such a 558
plan of life for himself, as would have iuited the condition of a
private gentleman of a moderate fortune. His table was neat but
plain; his domefticks few; his intercourse with them fanmi- '

..

liar; all the cumberrome and ceremonious forms of attendance
on his person were entirely abolilled, as deftruaive of that social .
cafe and tranquillity which he courted in order to sooth tile re-
mainder of his days. As the mildness of the climate, together with
his deliverance from the burdens and cares of government pro-
cured him at first, a considerable. remillion from the acute pains
with which he had been long tormented,. he, enjoyed,. perhaps,
more complete fatisfation in this humble solitude, than all his
grandeur had ever yielded him. The ambitious thoughts and
projects which had so long engrossed and disquieted him, were
quite effaced from his mind: Far from taking any part in the
political tranfafions of the Princes of Europe, he restrained. his
curiosity even from any inquiry concerning them ; and he seemed
to view the bury scene which he had abandoned with all the con-
tempt and indifference arising from his thorough experience of its
vanity, as well as from the pleasing reflecion. of having difen-
tangled himself from its cares.

OTIIER amusements, and other. objets now occupied him. l-a ins:-
Sometimes he cultivated the plants in his garden with his own lnts in his

Ittctat.

hands; rometimes lie rode out to tile neighbouring wood on a
little horse, the only one that lie kept, attended by a tingle servant
on foot. When his infirmities confined him to his apartment,
which often happened, and deprived him of there more active
recreations, he either admitted a few gentlemen who resided

1Inea

413

BOOK XII. ,near the monastery oto visit him, and entertained them familiarly

58 at his :table; or he employed himself in Rludyiing the principles

.and in forming curious. works of mechanism, of which he had
.always been remarkably fond, and to which his genius was pecu-
liarly turned. With this view he had engaged Turriano, one
of the mnol- ingenious artifis of that age, to accompany him in
'his retreat. ' He laboured together with him in framing models of
the-mofl ufefiil machines, as well as in making experiments with
regard to their refpeaive powers, and it was not seldom that the
ideis of the monarch aflifted or perfected the inventions of the
artist. He relieved his mind, at intervals, with-flighter and
more fantafRick works of mechanism, in fashioning puppets,
·which by the ftrudure of internal springs, mimicked the
gestures and acions of men, to the no small altonifhment
.of the ignorant monks, who beholding movements, which
they could not comprehend, sometimes distrusted their own
senses, and sometimes fufpeded Charles and Turriano of being
in compact with invisible powers. He was particularly
curious with regard to the conftnlRion of clocks 'and wa:ches,
and having found, after repeated trials, that he could not
bring any two of them to go exactly alike, he reflet.ed, it is
said, with a mixture of furprize and regret on his own folly, in
having bestowed so much time and labour on the more vain
attempt of bringing mankind to a precise uniformity of senti-
ment concerning the intricate and inyterious doctrines of
religion.

'His more fe-
rious occupa-
tions

BUT in what manner soever Charles disposed of the reft

of:his time, he conitantly reserved a considerable portion
of it for religious exercises. He regularly attended divine

service
414

service in the clapel of the monastery, every morningaitdi even- BooK XIt,
ing; he took great pleaffure in reading boksiof devbti'on, par- ,
ticularly the works of St. Augufline and; St. Bernard; and con-
verted muchi with his. confefflrs and. the prior of the monastery
on pious fubjefta. Thus: did.. Charles, pats the sirs: year of' his
retreat,, in,a manner not!unbecoming a man perfetly disengaged'
from the affairs of the present life, and landing on the confines
of a future world either in innocent amusements, which soothed'
his pains, and relieved; a mind worn out with excessive appli-
cation.to Business; or in devout occupations, which ihe deemed'
necessary in preparing. for another state.

B'U about fix months before his death, the gout, after. a. Thecauft of

longer intermifion than. usual,, returned with a proportional
increase of violence. His lhattered. Conitittion had scarce
vigour enough remaining to withstand fuich a shock. It en-
feebled jiis mind as.much as his body, and from that period: we
scarce discern any traces of that found and. mnfculine tmder-
standing, which distinguished Charles among his contempora-
ries. An illiberal and. timid fuperifition deprefld his spirit. He
had no relifl for amusements of any kind; He. endeavouredr to
conform, in his manner of. living, to all the rigour of monaftick
aulterity. He desired no other society than that of monks, and!
was almost continually employed with them in chanting the hymns:
in the MisTal. As an expiation for his fins, he gave himself the
discipline in secret with ftch severity, that the whip of cords which
lie employed as the infirument of his punifiment, was found after
his decease tinged with his blood. Nor was lie satisfied with
these a&s of mortification, which, however revere, were not un-
exampled. The timorous and diflruifful folicitudc which a!ivays

accompanies

BOOK XII.

1558.

accompanies superstition still continued to disquiet him, and de-
preciating all that he had done, prompted him to aim at some-
thing extraordinary, at tome new and singular a& of piety that
would display his zeal, and merit the favour of heaven. The ad
-on which ie fixed was as wild and uncommon, as any that
fuperititon ever suggested to a weak and disordered fancy. He
resolved to celebrate his own obsequies before his death. He
ordered his tomb to be ereated in the chapel of the monastery.
His domefticks marched thither in funeral procession, with
black tapers in their hands. He himself followed in his flroud.
He was laid in his coffin, with much solemnity. The service for
the dead was chanted, and Charles joined in the prayers which
were offered up for the reft of his foul, mingling his tears with
those which his attendants shed, as if they had been celebrating
a real funeral. The ceremony closed with sprinkling holy
water on the coffin in the usual form, and all the aliftants re-
tiring, the doors of the chapel were (hut. Then Charles rose
out of the coffin and withdrew to his apartment, full of there
awful sentiments, which such a singular solemnity was calculated
to inspire. But either the fatiguing length of the ceremony,
or the impression which this image of death left on his mind
affected him so much, that next day he was seized with a fever.
His feeble frame could not long resist its violence, and he ex-
pired on the twenty-firlt of September, after a life of fifty-eight
years, fix montls, and twenty-five days. x

x Strada de Bello Belg. lib. i. p. iI. Thuan. 723. Sandov. ii. 609, &c.
Miniana Contin. Mariana, vol. iv. 216. Veray Zuniga vida de Carloi, p. ii.

As
416

As Charles was the first prince of the age in rank and dig- BooK XII.

nity, the part which he aaed, whether we confider the great-
ners, the variety, or the success of his undertakings, was the His chlatlr.
most conspicuous. It is from an attentive observation of his
conduct, not from the exaggerated praises of the Spanish hifto-
rians, or the undiftinguifhing censure of the French, that ajuft
idea of Charles's genius and abilities is to be colleced. He
poif'eied qualities To peculiar, as strongly rhark his character, and
not only distinguish him from the Princes who were his contem-
poraries, but account for that superiority over them which he so
long maintained. In forming his schemes, he was, by nature,
as well as by habit, cautious and considerate. Born with talents,
which unfolded themselves slowly, and were late in attaining
maturity, he was accustomed to ponder every subjec that de-
manded his consideration with a careful and deliberate attention.
He bent the whole force of his mind towards it, and dwelling
upon it with a serious application, undiverted by pleafilre, and
hardly relaxed by any amusement, he revolved it, in silence, in
his own breast. He then communicated the matter to his mi-
nifters, and after hearing their opinions, took his resolution with
a decisive firmness, which seldom follows such flow consultations.
In consequence of this, Charles's measures, instead of refem-
bling the desultory and irregular rallies of Henry VIII. or
Francis I. had the appearance of a consistent system, in which
all the parts were arranged, the eftects were foreseen, and the ac-
cidents were provided for. His promptitude in execution was no
less remarkable than his patience in deliberation. He consulted
with phlegm, but he acted with vigour ' and did not discover
greater sagacity in his choice of the measures which it was
proper to pursue,. than fertility of genius in finding out the

VOL. III. H h h means

417

BOOK XII.

1558.

means for rendering his purfiuit of them fuccefsfill. T6ho6ug
he had naturally so little of the martial turn, that during the
most ardent and bufling period of life, he remained in the
cabinet inactive, yet when he chore at length to appear at the
head of his armies, his mind was so formed for vigorous
exertions in every diretion, that he acquired fiuch knowledge
in the art of war, and such talents for command, as rendered
him equal in reputation and success to the most able generals of
the age. But Charles poffefled, in the most eminent degree, the
fcienice which is of the greatest inportance to a monarch, that
of knowing men, and of adapting their talents to the various
departments which he allotted to them. From the death of
Chievres to the end of his reign, he employed no general in the
field, no minister in the cabinet, no ambaflador to a foreign
court, no governor of a.province, whose abilities were inade-
quate to the truf which he reposed in them. Though defitttc
of that bewitching affability of manners, which gained Francis
the hearts of all who approached his person, he was no stranger
to the virtues which. secure fidelity and attachment. He placed
unbounded confidence in his generals; he rewarded their ser-
vices with munificence; he neither envied their fame, nor dif-
covered any jealousy of their power. Almost all the generals
who conducted his armies may be, placed on a level with those
illustrious personages, who have attained the highest eminence
of military glory; and his advantages over his rivals are to be
ascribed so manifeRfly to the £uperior abilities of the commanders
whom he set in opposition to them, that' this might seem to de-
tra4t, in:fome fome.degree, from his own merit,' if the.tdlent of
discovering and employing such intruments were 'noti the' most
undoubted proof of a capacity for government,
4I8

THEnR was, neverttlelefs, defecs in his political clharater BOOK XII.

which must considerably abate the admiration due to his -'"5
extraordinary talents. Charles's ambition was insatiable; and
though there seems to be no foundation for ah opinion prevalent
in his own age, that he had formed the chimerical project of
eflablifhing an universal monarchy in Europe, it is certain that
his desire of being distinguished as a conqueror involved him
in continual wars, which exhausted and oppressed his subjeCts,
and left him little leisure for giving attention to the interior
police and improvement of his kingdoms, the great objets
of every Prince who makes the happiness of his people the
end of his government. Charles, at a very early period of life,
having added the Imperial crown to the kingdoms of Spain, and
to the hereditary dominions of the houses of Austria and Bur-
gundy, this opened to him such a vast field of enterprize, and
engaged him in schemes so complicated as well as arduous, that
feeling his power to be unequal to the execution of there, he had
often recourse to low artifices unbecoming his superior talents,
and sometimes ventured on such deviations from integrity as
were dishonourable in a great Prince. His insidious and frau-
dulent policy appeared more conspicuous, and was rendered more
odious, by a comparison with the open and undesigning clharac-
ter of his contemporaries Francis I. and Henry VIII. This dif-
ference, though occasioned chiefly by the diversity of their tem--
pers, must be ascribed, in Come degree to such an opposition in the
principles of their political conduct as affords Come excuse for.
this defect in Charles's behaviour, though it cannot serve as a
juRification of it. Francis and Henry seldom aced but from
the impulse of their paflions, and rushed headlong towards the
objet in view. Charles's meafiircs being the result of cool re-

H h h z fledion,

419

BOOK XII.

1558.

fleeion, were disposed into a regular system, and carried. on
upon a concerted plan. Perfons'who. a. in the former manner
naturally pursue the end in view without assuming any disguise,,
or displaying much address.. Such as hold. the latter course are.
apt, in forming as well as in executing their designs, to employ
such refinements,, as always lead to artifice in conduct, and often.
degenerate into deceit.

The circumstances transmitted to us, with respect to Cha-les's.

private deportment and charader, are fewer and. less interelting,
than might have been expected, from. the great. number, of aur
thors who have undertaken to write an. account of his life. There.
are not the object of this history, which aims at representing the.
tranfadions of the reign of Charles V. not at.delineating his prit-
vate virtues or defects..

Conference in
order to peace.

M E A N W H I L E the plenipotentiaries of France, Spain and:

England continued their conferences at Cercamp; and though
each of them, with the usual art of negociators, made at firlf
very high demands in the name of their refpedive courts, yet as
they were all.equally desirous of peace, they would have conrented
reciprocally to such abatements and reRtricdions of their. claims:
as must have removed every obstacle to an accommodation.
The death of Charles V. was a new motive with Philip to haften.
the eonclufion of a treaty, as it increased his impatience for
returning into Spain, where there was now no person greater
or more illustrious than liimfelf. But in spite of the concur-
ring wishes of all the parties interested, an event happened
which occasioned an unavoidable delay in their negociations.
About a month after the opening of the conferences at Cer-

camp,

420
I

camp, Mary of England ended her ihort and inglorious reign,
and Elizabeth her sifter was immediately proclaimed Queen by
the English with universal joy. As the powers of the English
plenipotentiaries expired on the death of their mistress, they
could not proceed until they received a commiflion and initruc-
tions from their new sovereign..

HENRY and Philip beheld Elizabeth's elevation to the throne

with equal follicitude. As during Mary's jealous adminiftra,
tion, under the most difficult circumstances, and in a situation
extremely delicate, the had.conducted herself with prudence and
address far exceeding her years, they had conceived an high
idea of her abilities, and already formed expectations of a reign
very different from. that of her siser.. Equally sensible of the
importance of gaining her favour, both monarchs set. themselves
with emulation to. court it, and employed every art. in order to
insinuate themselves into her confidence. Each of them. had
something meritorious, with regard to Elizabeth, to plead in his
own behalf. Henry had offered her a retreat in his dominions,
if the dread. of her fitter's violence should. force her to fly, for
safety out of England.. Philip had, by his. powerful interceflion,
prevented Mary from proceeding to the moit fatal extremities
against her. Each of them endeavoured now,. to avail himself
of the circumstances in his favour. Henry wrote to Elizabeth
soon after her acceflion with the warmest expreflions of regard
and friendship. He represented the war which had unhappily
been kindled between their kingdoms, not as a national quarrel,
but as the effect of Mary's blind partiality to her husband and
fond compliance with all his withes. He entreated her to difen-
gage herself from an alliance which had proved to unfortunate to

England,

BOOK XII

Nov 17.
Death of Ma-
ry of England.

Henry and
Philip court
Elizabeth her
fucccffor.

42X

BQOK XIL

1558.

Elizabeth's
deliberations
concerning
her conduCt.

TH E REIG:N OF T H:

England; and to content to a separate peace with' him; without
mingling. her interests with those of Spaini froh: which they
ought now. to be altogether. disjoined.; Philip). on-the other
hand, unwilling to lose his connection with England, the im-
portance of which during a rupture with France he had so
recently experienced, not only vied with Henry in declarations of
esteem for Elizabeth, and in profellions of his resolution to cul-
tivate-the tii&tetR;amity with her; but in order to confirm and
perpetuate their union, he offered hinmfelf to her in marriage,
and undertook-.to procure a difpenfatiori from' the Pope to that
efFect. .

ELIZABETH weighed the proporals of. the two Monarchs

*attentively) and with that provident discernment of her true
interest which was confplcubus in all her deliberations. She
gave :some encouragement to' Henry's overtut're 'of a separate
negociation, because it opened a channel of c6rrefpobdence
wiih .France, which ihe might find to be of great advantage, if
Philip should not discover fuflicient'zeal and follicitude for fecur-
ing to her proper: terms in the joint treaiy. But the ventured
on this with.the 'utmbft reserve ahd caution, that Ihe might not
alarm Philip's suspicious tenmper,' and lose an ally in' attempting
to gain an enemy y. Henry himself, by an unpardonable 'ad of
indiscretion, prevented her from carrying her intercoutfe 'with him
to such a length as might have offended 'or alienated: Phililip. At
the very'time he was courting Elizabeth's ftiendfhp with the'
greatest assiduity, he yielded with an inconsiderate facility to the
follicitations of the Princes of Lorrain, and allowed his daugh-

yFoibes i. p. 4

ter-
l

tertin-law :thelQueen :ofScots ;to 'aflirte the title and arms of
Queen of England. This ill-timed pretension, the source of
many calamities to the unfortunate Queen of Scots, extin-
guilhed at once all: the confidence that might have grown be-
tween Henry and;Elizabeth, and left in its place diftrift, re-
fentment and antipathy. rElizabeth found that me:',muft unite
her interests closely with Philip's, and expect peace only from
negociations carried on in conjunction with him ,.

As the. had :granted a cofminiflion, immediately after her

acceflion, 'to the fame plenipotentiaries 'whom" her. fitter had
employed, The now instructed them to at in every point in
concert with the plenipotentiaries of Spain, and to take no ftep
until they had previously confillted with them a. 'But though
the deemed it prudent to afume! this appearance of cbnfidence
in the Spanih "Monarch, she knew precisely how far !to carry it;
and discovered no inclination to accept of that extraordinary
proposal of marriage which Philip had made to her. The En-
glilh had 'exprefed so: openly their; detestation of -her fifteri
chokie of him, that it -would have beeh highly imprudent :to
have exasperated them by renewing that odious alliance. She
was too well acquainted with Philip's harth imperious.temper,
to think of him for a hufland. Nor could the admit a.difpen.
fation from the Pope to be sufficient to authorize her marrying
fim witholit condemnting her father's' divorce from Catherine of
Aragon, and acknowledging of consequence that her mother's

BOOK XII.

i 55S8.

She empow.
era her anlbaf-
fadors to tceat
of peace.

"

. ' '

1 . ~s .'.,~ · ·

V'Strype'a Annals of theReformnition, i. r. Carte's Hist. of, Eng. Tol. iiE.
P, 3S'" * Foibes full view, i. 37. 40.

marriage

423

BOOK XII.

1558.

Negociations
at Chateau-
Cambrefis.

1559.

Fcbtuary 6.

Difficulties
with regard to
the claims of
England.

marriage was null and her own birth illegitimate. But though {he
determined not to yield to Philip's addresses, the situation of her
affairs rendered it dangerous to reje&t them; Ihe returned her an-
fwer, therefore, in terms which were evasive, but so tempered with
refpe&t, that though they gave him no reason' to be secure of fuc-
cess, they did not altogether extinguish his hopes.

BY this artifice, as well as by the prudence with which Ihe

concealed her sentiments and intentions concerning religion,
for some time after her acceflion, Ihe To far gained upon Philip,
that he. warmly espoused her interest in the conferences which
were renewed at Cercamp, and afterwards removed to Chateau-
Cambrefis. A definitive treaty, which was to adjust the claims
and pretensions of so many Princes, required the examination
of such a variety of intricate points, and led to fich infinite and
minute detail# as drew out the negociations to a great length.
But the constable Montmorency exerted himself with fuch.iinde-
fatigable zeal and industry, repairing alternately to the courts of
Paris and BruIfels, in order to obviate or remove every difficulty,
that all points in dispute were adjuRed at length in such a.man-
ner, as to give entire fatisfation in every particular to Henry and
Philip; and the laft-hand was ready to be put to the treaty be-
tween them.

THE claims of Englapd remained as the only pobfacle to

retard it. Elizabeth demanded the restitution of Calais, in the
most peremptory tone, as an essential condition of her consent-
ing to peace; Henry refused to give up that important con-
queRft and both seemed to have taken their resolution with

unalterable
424

unalterable firmness. Philip warmly supported Elizabeth's pre- BOOK XIl.
tensions to Calais, not merely from a principle of equity towards 5
the Englilh nation, that le might appear to have contributed
to their recovering what they had loft by erpoufing his cause;
nor solely with a view of soothing Elizabeth by this manifefta-
tion of zeal for her interest; but in order to render France lets
formidable, by securing to her antient enemy this eafy'accefs into
the heart of the kingdom. The earnestness, however, with which
he seconded the arguments of the Englifl, plenipotentiaries, loon
began to relax During the course of the negociation, Eliza-
beth, who now felt herself firmly feated on her throne, began to
take such open and vigorous measures not only for overturning
all'that her filler had done in favour of popery, but for edla-
blifhing the protestant church on a firm foundation, as con-
vinced Philip that his hopes of an union with her had been
from the beginning vain, and were now desperate. Fromil tat
period, his interpositions in her favour became more cold' and
formal, flowing merely from regard to decorum, or from tle cbil-
fideration of remote political interests. Elizabeth, having rea-
son to expect such an alteration in his conduct, quickly per-
ceived it. But as nothing would have been of greater detri-
ment to her people, or more inconsistent with heri schemes of
domeftick administration, than the continuance of a war with
France, Ihe saw the neceflity of fib'mittiing tb filch conditions as
the situation of her affairs imlpofed, and that The must lay her ac-
count with being deserted by an ally who was now united to her
by a very feeble tie, if the did not speedily reduce her demands
to what was moderate and attainable. She. accordingly gave
new inftrutions to her ambafladors; and Philip's plenipoten-

VoL. III. .1 i i tiaries

425

BOOK XII.

'559-

Articles of
peace be-
tween France
and England.

tiaries acting as mediators between tle French and them h, an ex-
pedient was fallen on, which justified, in some degree, Elizabeth's
departing from the rigour of her first demand with regard to Ca-
lais. All leser articles were fettled without much difcuflion or
delay. Philip, that he might not appear to have abandoned the
English, insisted that the treaty between Henry and Elizabeth
ihould be concluded in form, b-fore that between the French
monarch and him. The one was signed on the second day of
April, the other on the day following.

THE treaty of peace between France and England contained

no articles of real importance, but that which refpeded Calais.
It was flipulated that the'King of France ihould retain pofeffion
of that town, with all its dependencies, during eight years; that,
at the expiration of that term, he should reflore it to England;
that in cafe of non-performance, he should forfeit five hundred
thousand crowns, for the payment of which fim, seven or eight
wealthy merchants, who were not his fubjecds, should grant fecu-
rity; that five persons of diftindtion should be given as hostages
till that security were provided; that, although the forfeit of five
hundred thoufaid crowns should be paid, the right of England to
Calais fliould fRill remain entire, in the fame manner as if the
term of eight years were expired ; that the King and Queen of
Scotland should be included in the treaty that if they, or the
French King, 'fould violate the peace by any hoflite action, Hen-
ry should be obliged inflantly to restore Calais; that on the other
hand, if any breach of the treaty proceeded from E'izabeth, then
Henry and the King and Queen of Scots were absolved from all
the engagements which they had come under by this treaty,

b Fo:bct, i. 59.

NOTWI T-
426

NOTWITHSTANDING the fludied attention with which so BOOK XII.

many precautious were taken, it is evident that Henry did not
intend the reflitution of Calais, nor is it probable that Elizabeth The views of

boili patties

expected it. It was hardly poflible that fie could maintain, during with rritpcit
the course of eight years, such perfect concord both with France to lhe'e.
and Scotland, as not to afford Henry fonle pretext for allcdging
that ile had violated the treaty. But even if that term fllould
elapse without any ground for complaint, Henry might then
chufe to pay the ftim flipulated, and Elizabeth had no method of
aflerting her right but by force of arms. However, by throwing
the articles in the treaty with regard to Calais into this form,
Elizabeth satisfied her fubjeds of every denomination; fle gave
men of discernment a striking proof of her address, in palliating
what she could not prevent; and amused the multitude, to whom
the final surrender of a place of such importance would have ap-
peared altogether infamous, with the profped of recovering in 4
short time that favourite poffefion.

THI expedient which Montmorency employed, in order to An expedient
facilitate the conclusion of peace between France and Spain, which pro-

mobtes peace

was the negociating two treaties of marriage, one between Eli- between
zabeth, Henry's eldest daughter, and Philip, who fipplanted n:nce and
his son, the unfortunate Don Carlos, to whom that Princess had
been promised in the former conferences at Cercamp; the other
between Margaret, Henry's only sifter, and the duke of Savoy.
For feeble as the ties of blood often are among Princes, or
how little soever they may regard them when pufled on to ad
by motives of ambition, they aflinue on other occasions the ap-
pearance of being To far influenced by there domeftick aflcdions,
as to employ them to juflify m:afures and conceflions which
they find to be necessary, but know to be impolitic or diflo-

I i i 2 nourab!e.

427

BOOK XII.

1559.

The terms of
pacification.

nourable. Such was the use Henry made of the two marriages
to; which he gave his content. Having secured an honourable
establishment for his sifter and his daughter, he, in consideration
of there, granted terms both to Philip and the duke of Savoy,
of which he would not, on any other account, have ventured to
approve.

THE principal articles in the treaty between France and Spain

were, That a sincere and perpetual amity should be eftablifled
between the two crowns and their refpedive allies; that the two
monarchs should labour in concert to procure the convocation of a
general council, in order to check the progress of heresy, and re-
flore unity and concord to the Chriflian church that all conquests
made by either party, on this fide of the Alps, since the commence-
ment of the war in one thousand five hundred and fifty-one,
mhould be mutually restored; that the dutchy of Savoy, the prin-
cipality of Piedmont, the country of Brefe, and all the other ter-
ritories formerly subjea. to the dukes of Savoy, flould be reflored
to Emanuel Philibert, immediately after the celebration of his
marriage with Margaret of France, the towns of Turin, Quiers,
Pignerol, Chivaz and Villanova excepted, of which Henry
Ihould keep poifeffion until his claims on that Prince, in right
of his grandmother, should be heard and decided in course of
law; that as long as Henry retained there places in his hands,
Philip should be at liberty to keep garrisons in the towns of Ver-
celli and Asti; that the French King should immediately evacu-
ate all the places which he held in Tuscany and the Sienefe, and
renounce all future pretensions to them i that he should restore
the marquisate of Montserrat to the duke of Mantua; that he
should receive the Genoese into favour, and give up to them

the
428

the towns which he had conquered in the island of Corsica; that BooK XII.
none of the Princes or Rates, to whom there ceflions were made,
should call their fubjeCs to account for any part of their conduc
while under the dominion of their enemies, but should bury all
past tranfa&ions in oblivion. The Pope, the Emperor, the.
Kings of Denmark, Sweden, Poland, Portugal, the King and
Queen of Scots, and almost every Prince and state in Christen-
dom, were comprehended in this pacification as the allies either
of Henry or of Philip c.

THUS, by this famous treaty, peace was re-eftablilhed in Which re-

efinbliflies

Europe. All the causes of discord which had so long embroiled tranquillily in
the powerful monarchs of France and Spain, which had tranf- Europe.
mitted hereditary quarrels and wars from Charles to Philip,
and from Francis to Henry, seemed to be wholly removed, or
finally terminated: The French alone complained of the une-
qual conditions of a treaty into which an ambitious minister,
in order to recover his liberty, and an artful mistress, that Ihe
might gratify her resentment, had seduced their too easy monarch.
They exclaimed loudly against the folly of giving up to the
enemies of France, an. hundred and eighty-nine fortified places,
in the Low-Countries or in Italy, in return for the three infig-
nificant towns of St. Quintin, Ham and Catelet. They con-
fidered it as an indelible Rain upon the glory of the nation, to
renounce in one day territories To extensive, and so capable
of being defended, that the enemy could not have hoped to
wrefl them out of their hands, after many years of victory and
success,

c Recutil des Traitez, t. ii. 287,

BUT

429

BooK XII. BUT Henry, without regarding the sentiments of his people,

or being moved by the remonstrances of his council, ratified the

lThepetac be- treaty, and executed with great fidelity wlatever he had ftipu-
twetn France
andi Spain ra- lated to perform. The duke of Savoy repaired with 'a numerous

tiied, retinue to Paris, in order to celebrate his marriage with Henry's

filter. The duke of Alva was Tent to the fame capital, at the
head of a splendid embassy, to espouse Elizabeth in the nameof his
mnafer. They were received with extraordinary magnificence

Dleath of by the French court. Amidif the rejoicings and festivities on
Hlenry,
July 10. that occasion, Henry's days were cut flSort by a singular and tra-

gical accident. His Con, Francis II. a Prince under age, of a
feeble constitution, and of a mind still weaker, succeeded him.
August 18. Soon after, Paul ended liis violent and imperious Pontificate, at

enmity with all the world, and disgusted even with his own
nephews. They, persecuted by Philip, and deserted by the fuc-
ceeding Pope, whom they had raised by their influence to the
Papal Throne, were condemned to the punilhment which their
crimes and ambition had merited, and their death was as infa-
mous as their lives had been criminal. Thus all the personages,
who had long fuflained the principal characers on the great
theatre of Europe, disappeared about the fam'e time. A more
known period of history opens at this aera; other actors appear
on the stage, with different views and dissent paflions; new
contests arose, and new schemes of ambition occupied and dif-
quieted mankind.

A general UPON reviewing the transactions of any active period, in the
review of the history of civilized nations, the changes which are accomplished
whole period.

appear wonderfully disproportioned to the efforts which have
been exerted. Conquests are never very extensive or rapid, but
among nations, where progress in improvement is extremely un-

equal.
43°

431

equal. When Alexander the Great, at the head of a gallant
people, of simple manners, and formed to war by admirable mi-
litary institutions, invaded a slate funk in luxury, and enervated
by excessive refinement; when Genchizcan and' Tamerlane, with
their armies of hardy barbarians, poured in upon nations, en-
feebled by the climate in which they lived, or.by the arts and
commerce which they cultivated, they, like a torrent, swept
every thing before them, filbduing kingdoms and provinces
in as short a space of time as was requisite to march through
them. But when nations are in a similar state, and keep pace
with each other in their advances towards refinement, they are
not exposed to the calamity of sudden conquest. Their acqui-
fitions of knowledge, their progress in the art of war, their po.
litical sagacity and address, are hearly equal. The fate of flatcs
in this situation, depends not on a tingle battle. Their internal
refourccs are many and various. Nor are they themselves alone
interested in their own safety, or active in their own defence.
Other fates interpose, and balance any temporary advantage which
either party may have acquired. After the fiercest and most
lengthened contest, all the rival nations are exhausted, none are
conquered. At length a peace is concluded, wlhicl re-inflates each
in po'eflion of almost the fame power and the fame territories.

SUCH was tlhe late of Europe during the reign of Charles V.

No Prince was so much superior to the reft in power, as to render
his efforts irrefiflible, and his conquests easy. No nation had
made progress in improvement so far beyond its neighbours as
to have acquired a very manifest pre-eminence. Each slate de-
rived Come advantage, or was fubje& to rome inconvenience, from
its situation or its climate; each was diflinguiflled by something
peculiar in the genius of its people, or the conflitution of its go-

vernment.

BOOK XII

as59.

The nations
of Europe in
a fiil.ir fAte
duritg the fix-
teenth cen-
tury.

BOOK XIJ..

1559.

A remarkable
change in the
state of Eu-
rope, during
the reign ot
Charles V.

vernment. But the advantages possesed by one, were counter-
ballanced by circumflances favourable to others; and this pre-
vented any from attaining such superiority as might have been
fatal to all. The nations of Europe in that age, as in the pre-
sent, were like one great family; there were:rome features com-
mon to all, which fixed a resemblance; there were certain pecu-
liarities conspicuous in each, which marked a diftindion. But
there was not among them that wide diversity of characer and
of genius which, in almost every period of history, hath exalted
the Europeans above the inhabitants of the other quarters of
the globe, and feemns to have destined the one to rule, and the
other to obey.

BUT though the near resemblance and equality in improve.

ment among the different nations of Europe, prevented the
reign of Charles V. from being distinguished by' fich sudden,
and extensive conquests as occur in rome other periods of history,
yet, during the course of his adminiitration, all the considerable
states in Europe suffered a remarkable change in their political
situation, and felt the influence of events, which have not hi-
therto spent their force, but frill continue to operate in a greater
or in a leTs degree. It was during his reign, and in consequence
of the perpetual efforts to which his enterprizing ambition rouzed
them, that the different kingdoms of Europe acquired internal
vigour, that they discerned the resources of which they were
possessed, that they came both to feel their own strength, and' to
know how to render it formidable to others. It' was during his
reign, too, that the different kingdoms of Europe, formerly
single and disjoined, became so thorouighly acquainted'and so
intimately'connected with each other as to form one great poli-

tical
432

tical system, in which each took a fation, wherein it has remained BOOK XII.
since that time with less variation than could have beei expected
after the events of two active centuries.

THB progrets, however, and acquisitions of the house of The progrtef

of the house

Austria, were not only greater than those of any otiher power, of Auftia.
but more discernible and conspicuous. I have already enume-
rated the vast territories which descended to Charles from his
Austrian, Burgundian, and SpaniSh anceRors*. To there lie
himself added the Imperial dignity; and, as if all this had
been too little, the bounds of the universe were extended,
and a new world fubjeted to his command. Upon his refig-
nation, the Burgundian provinces, and the Spaniih kingdois
with their dependencies, both in the old and new worlds, de-
volved to Philip. But Charles tranfinitted his dominions to
his son, in a condition very different from that in which he had
received them. They were augmented by the accefiori of new
provinces; they were habituated to obey an admininsration
which was no lets vigorous than iteady ; they were acictftomed
to expensive and persevering efforts, which, though necenfary in
the contests between civilized nations, had been little known in
Europe before the sixteenth century. The provinces of Friehand,
Utrecht and Overyffel, which he acquired by purclafe from their
former proprietors, and the dutchy of Gelders, of which he made
himself malter, partly by force of arms, and partly by the arts of
negociation, were additions of great value to his Burgundian
dominions. Ferdinand and Isabella had transmitted to him all
the provinces of Spain, from the bottom of the Pyrenees to the
frontiers of Portugal; but as he maintained a perpetual peace

* Vol i. p. a.
VOL. III.

433 '
K k k

with

BOOK XII. with that kingdom, amidst the various efforts of his enterprizing

ambition, he made no acquisition of territory in that quarter.

Paricularly CHARLES had gained, however, a vast accefion of power
in Spain.

in this part of his dominions. By his success in the war with
the commons of Castile, lie exalted the regal prerogative on
the ruins of the privileges of the people. Though he
allowed the name of the Cortes to remain, and the formality
of holding it to be continued, he reduced its authority and
jurifdiaion to nothing, and modelled it in such a manner, that
it became rather a junto of the servants of the crown, than
an afrembly of the representatives of the people. One Mem-
ber of the constitution being thus lopped off, it was impoflible
but that the other must feel the firoke, and susser by it. The
suppression of the popular power rendered the ariftocratical
lets formidable. The grandees, prompted by the warlike spirit
of the age, or allured by the honours which they enjoyed in
a court, exhausted their fortunes in military service, or in at-
tending on the person of their Prince. They did not dread,
perhaps did not observe, the dangerous progress of the royal
authority, which leaving them the vain diftindion of being co-
vered in pretence of their Sovereign, stripped them by degrees
of that real power which they poflef'ed while they formed one
body, and acted in concert with the people. Charles's success in
abolishing the privileges of the commons, and in breaking the
power of the nobles of Castile, encouraged Philip to invade the
liberties of Aragon, which were fill more extensive. The
Castilians, accustomed to subjection themselves, assisted in impo-
sing the yoke on their more happy and independant neighbours.
The will of the sovereign became the supreme law in all the
kingdoms of Spain; and Princes who were not checked in form-

ing
434

435

ing their plans by thejealoufy of the people, nor controlled in ex-
ecuting them by the power of the nobles, could both aim at great
objects and call foleh the whole strength of the monarchy in order
to attain them.

As Charles, by extending the regal prerogative, rendered the

monarchs of Spain masters at home, he added new dignity and
power to their crown by his foreign acquisitions. He secured to
Spain the quiet poTnefion of the kingdom of Nnples, which
Ferdinand had usurped by fraud, and held with difficulty. He
united the dutchy of Milan, one of the most fertile and populous
provinces in Italy, to the Spanish crown; and left his fucceflors,
even without taking their other territories into the account, the
most considerable Princes in that country, which had been long
the theatre of contention to the great powers of Europe, and in
which they had struggled with emulation to obtain the superiority.
When the French, in consequence of the treaty of Cateau Cam-
brefis, withdrew their Forces out of Italy, and finally relinquish-
ed all their schemes of conquest on that fide of the Alps, the
Spanilh dominions there rose in importance, and enabled their
Kings, as long as the monarchy retained any degree of vigour,
to preserve the chief sway in all the tranfations of that coun-
try. lut whatever accelion either of interior authority or
of foreign dominion Charles gained for the monarchs of Spain
in Europe, it was. inconsiderable when compared with his
acquisitions in the new world. He added, there, not provinces,
but empires to his crown. He conquered territories of such
immense extent; he discovered such inexhatiftible veins of
wealth, and opened such boundless profpets of every kind, as
must have rouzed and called forth to action his fucccfor, though

K k k 2 his

BOOK XIl.

Al(s in other
parts of Eu-
tope.

43_

BOOK XII.

Progress of
the German
branch of the
houuf of
Autria.

his ambition had been much less ardent than Philip's, and must
have rendered him. not only enterprizing but formidable.

WHILE the elder branch of the Austrian family rose to such

pre-eminence in Spain, the younger, of which Ferdinand was
the head, grew to be considerable in Germany. The ancient
boreditazrydominions of the.houfe of Austria in Germany, united
to the kingdoms of Hungary and Bohemia which Ferdinand had
acquired by marriage, formed: a rerpectable power; and when
the Imperial dignity, was added to there, Ferdinand poffefled
territories more extensive than had belonged to any Prince,
Charles V. excepted, who had been at the head of the Empire
during several ages. Fortunately for Europe, the disgust which
Philip conceived on. account of Ferdinand's refuting to relin-
quilh. the Imperial crown, in his favour, not only prevented for
some time the separate members of the house of Austria from
a4ting in concert, but occasioned a visible alienation and'rival-
lhip. By degrees, howeverr regard to. the interest of their fa-
mily, extinguished this impolitic animosity. The 'confidence
which was. natural returned:; the aggrandizing of the house of
Austria became the common object of all: their schemes;' they
gave and, received; afiftance alternately: towards. the execution of
them; and each, derived, conlideration and importance from the
other's fu:cef A family oi. great and:fo afpiting became the
genera objoe ofjealoufy and terror. Alli the powerc as well ist
policy. of Europe were exerted during a centuryi in order to
check and. hu ble it, Nothing can give a more firiking idea
of the ascendant which it, had, acquired; and' of the terror
which. it had isfpire4d than. tiat after its, vigour was spent
with. extraordinary. exertions of its strength, 'after Spain

was

437

was become only the shadow of a great name, and its monarchs
were funk into debility and dotage, the house of Austria still
continued to be formidable. The nations of Europe had To often
felt its superior power, and had been so constantly employed in
guarding against it, that the dread of it became a kind of
political habit,. tie influence of which remained when the caufcs,
which had. formed it) ceased to exilt

WHILE. the house of Austria went on with such fuccefe in

enlarging its dominions France made no considerable acquii-
tion of new territory.. All its schemes. of conquest in Italy had
proved abortive ; it had hitherto obtained; no efRablilhment of
consequence in the new world; and after the continued and
.vigorous efforts, of four flicceflive reigns,, the confines of the
kingdom were much the fame as Louis XL had left them. But
though France.made not such large strides towards dominion as
the house of Autria,. it' continued to advance by. Reps. which
were more secure, because they were gradual and, lets observed.
The. conquest of Calais put it out of the power of the En;.
glifh to invade France but at their utmost peril, and delivered
the French from the dread of their ancient enemies, who,
previous to that eventi could at. any time penetrate into
the, kingdom by, that avenue, andi therebyj retard or defeat
the execution of their best. concerted enterprizes against any
foreign powetr. The important; acquifition:of Metz covered that
.part of their frontier which. formerly, wasi most feeble,. and
lay most exposed, to insult. France, from the time of its obh
taining.thefe additional securities against external invasion, mult
be deetnedthe most powerfil. kingdom. in Europe, and is more
fortunately situated than any on the continent either for conquest
or; defence. From the confines of Artois to the bottom of the

Pyrenees,

BOO:K XlI.

Acquifitione
of the King.
of Fiance
during the
reign of
Charles V.

BOOK XIl.

Enables them
to alTume an
higher flation
among the
powers of
Europe.

Pyrenes, and from tle British channel to the frontiers of
Savoy and the coast of the Mediterranean, its territories lay
compact and unmingled with those of any other power. Several
of the considerable provinces, which, by their having been long
subjet to the great valrals of the crown, who were often at
variance or at war with their matier, had contracted a spirit
of independence, were now accustomed to recognize and to obey
one sovereign. As they became members of the fame mo-
narchy, they afrumed the sentiments of that body into which they
were incorporated, and co-operated with zeal towards promot-
ing its iitereft and honour. The power and influence wrested
from the nobles were seized by the crown. The people were
·not admitted to share in there spoils; they gained no new pri-
·vilege; they acquired no additionl weight in the legislature.
-It was not for the fake of the people, but in order to extend
*their own prerogative, that the monarchs of France had laboured
to humble their great vaflals. Satisfied with having brought
them under entire fubjetion to the crown, they discovered no
follicitude to free.the people from their ancient dependance on
.the nobles of whom they held.

A MONARCH, at.the head of a kingdom thus united at home

and secure from abroad, was entitled to f6rm great.defigns,.be-
cause he felt himself in a condition to execute them. The
foreign wars which had continued with little interruption from
the acceflion of Charles VIII. had not only cherilhed and aug-
mented the martial genius of the nation, but by inuring the troops
during the course of long service to the fatigues of war, and accuf-
toming them to obedience, had added the force of discipline to
their natural ardour. A "gallant and atlive body of nobles who

·confidered

confidered themselves as idle and useless, unlefb when they were in
the field i who were scarce acquainted with any pastime or cx-
ercife but what was military; and who knew no road to power,
or fame, or wealth, but war, would not have £uffered tieir fove-
reign to remain long in inaction. The people, little acquainted'
with the arts of peace, and always.ready to take arms at the
command of their Superiors, were accuffomed by tie vast
expence of'long wars, carried on in distant countries, to bear
impositions; which, how inconsiderable soever they may seem if
effimated by the exorbitant rate of moden. exations, appear
immense when compared. with the fums levied in France, or in
any other country of Europe, previous to the reign of Louis XI.
As all the members of which the Rate was compored were thus
impatient for a&tion, and capable of great efforts, the (chemes
and operations of'France must have been no lets formidable to
Europe than those of Spain. The superior advantages of its
situation, the contiguity and compadnefs of its territories toge.
ther with the peculiar state of its political conftltution at that
juncture mutt have rendered' its enterprizes ftlll more alarming
and more decisive. The Kiingpofhefl'd ruch a degree of power as
gave him the entire command of his fubjeds; the people were
stranges to those occupations and habits of life which render-
men averse to war, or unfit for. it; and the nobles, though*
reduced to the subordination necessary in a regular government,
fill retained' the high undaunted .tpiiit which was the effec' of
their ancient independehce. The vigour of the Feudal times re-
mained, their anarchy was at an end ; and the Kings of France
could avail themselves of the martial ardour which that singular
institution had kindled or kept alive, without. being exposed to,
any of the dangers or inconveniencieawhich are inseparable from
it when in. entire force.

A KINGDOM-

BOOK: XII.

_ _~c

439

BooK XII.

Circumftan-
ces which
prevented the
immediate
effecs1 of their
power.

Progress of
England with
refpet to its
interior fiate.

THE REIGN OF THE

A KINGDOM in such a slate is, perhaps, capable of greater

military efforts than at any other period in its progree But
how formidable soever or fatal to the other nations of Europe
the power of such a monarchy might have been, the civil
wars which broke out in France saved them at that juncture
from feeling its effe&s. There wars, of which religion was
the pretext and ambition the cause; wherein great abilities were
displayed by the leaders of the different factions, and little con-
duet or firmness were manifested by the crown, under a succession
of weak Princes, kept France occupied and embroiled for half
a century. During there commotions the internal strength of
the kingdom was much wafted, and such a spirit of anarchy
was spread among the nobles to whom rebellion was familiar,
and the restraint of laws unknown, that a considerable interval
became requisite not only for recruiting the internal vigour of
the nation, but for re-eftablilhing the authority of the Prince;
so that it was long before France could turn her whole attention
towards foreign tranfations, or a& with her proper force in
foreign wars. It was long before she rose to that ascendant in
lurope which (he has maintained since the administration of
Cardinal Richlieu, and which the situation as well as extent of
the kingdom, the nature of her government, and the character
of her people, entitle her to maintain.

WHtLE the kingdoms oa the continent grew into power and

con'equepce, Englamn likewice ,made considerable progress to'
wards regular government and interior strength. Henry VIII.
probably without intention, and certainly without any confident
pln, of which. his na~ue wa&. incapable4 pursued the scheme

of

ofdeprefling the nobility, which the policy of his father Henry VII. BOOK XII.
had begun. The pride and caprice of his'temper led him to em- J
ploy chiefly new men in the administration of affairs, because he
found them most obsequious, or least scrupulous; and he not only
conferred on these such plenitude of power, but exalted them to
such pre-eminence in dignity, as mortified and degraded the
ancient nobility. By the alienation or fale'of the church lands,
which were diflipated with a profusion not inferior to the'rapa-
cioufnefs with which they had been seized, as well as by the pri-
vilege granted to the ancient landholders of felling their estates,
or disposing of them by will, an immense property, formerly
locked up, being brought into circulation, put the spirit of in-
duftry and commerce in motion, and gave it Come conliderable
degree of vigour. The road to power and to opulence became
open to persons of every condition. A sudden and exceflive
flow of wealth from the Weft Indies proved fatal to industry in
Spain; a moderate acceflion in England to the .fum in circula-
tion gave life to commerce, awakened the ingenuity of the
nation, and excited it to useful enterprize. ' In France, what the
nobles loft the crown gained. In England, 'the commons were
gainers as well as the King. Power'and iifluence accompanied
of course the property which they acquired. They rose to con-
fideration among their fellow fubjeds; they began to feel
their own importance; and extending their' influence in' the
lgiflative body gradually, and often when neither they them-
selves nor others foresaw all the effete of their claims and pre-
tensions they at last attained that high authority, to which the
British constitution is indebted for the existence, and muf. owe
the preservation of its liberty. At the fame time that the Eng-
lilh constitution advanced towards perfection, several' circum-

VOL. I. L I 1 t;lances

441

BOOK XII.

With refpet
to the affairs
of the cooti-
nent.

stances brought on a change in the ancient system with respect
to foreign powers, and introduced another more beneficial to
the nation. By disclaiming the supremacy and jurifdiAion of the
Papal See, considerable fiums were saved to.the nation, of which
it had been annually drained, by remittances to Rome for dif-
penfations and indulgences, or in order to defray the expence of
pilgrimages into foreign countries °, or by payment of annates,
firfl fruits, and a thousand other taxes which that artful and
rapacious court levied on the credulity of mankind. The idea of
a jurifdidion different from the civil power, and claiming not
only to be independent but superior to it, a wild folecifnm in
government, apt not only to perplex and disquiet weak minds,
but tending directly to disturb society, was finally abolished. Go-
vernment became more simple as well as more refpeftable, when
no rank or: character exempted any person from being amenable
to the fame courts, from being tried by the fame judges, and from
being acquitted or condemned by the fame laws..

By the loss of Calais the English were excluded from

the continent. All schemes for invading France became of
course as chimerical as they had formerly been pernicious,
The views of the Englifn were confined, first by neceflity, and
afterwards from choice, within their own island. That rage
for conquest which had possesed. the nation during many cen-
turies, and. wafted its strength ih perpetual and fruitless wars,

*. The loft which the natien fusained by most of these articles is obvious,.

and muR have been great. Even that by pilgrimages was not inconsiderable.
In the year 1428, licence was obtained by no fewer than 916 persons to visit the
4hrine of St. James of Compoftella in Spain. Rymer, vol. x. p. . In 1434,
the number of pilgrims to the fame place was 246o. Ibid. p. . In 1445,
they were .loo. vol. xL p.

at-

at length ceased. Those active spirits which had known and
followed no profefllon but war, fought for occupation in the
arts of peace, and their country benefited as much by the one
as it had suffered by the other. The nation, exhausted by fre-
quent expeditions to the continent, recruited, and acquired new
strength; and when rouzed by any extraordinary exigency to
take part in foreign operations, the vigour of its efforts were
proportionally great, because they were only occasional and of a
Ihort continuance.

THE fame principle which had led England to adopt this

new system with regard to the powers on the continent occa-
sioned a change in its plan of conduct with refpet to Scotland, the
only foreign state, with which, on account of its situation in the
fame island, the English had such a close connecion as demand-
ed their perpetual attention. Instead of prosecuting the ancient
scheme of conquering that kingdom, which the nature of the
country, defended by a brave and hardy people, rendered dan-
gerous if not impracicable; it appeared more eligible to endea-
vour at obtaining such influence in Scotland as might exempt
England from any danger or disquiet from that quarter. The
national poverty of the Scots, together with the violence and
aninofity of their factions rendered the execution of this
plan easy to a people far superior to them in wealth. Their
popular leaders were gained; the ministers and favourites of
the crown were corrupted; and such absolute direction of
their councils acquired, as 'endered the operations of the one
kingdom dependent in a great measure on the sovereign
of the other. Such perfect external security added to the
interior advantages which England now possessed, must soon

L I 1 2 have

BOOK XII.

With rclpca
to Scotxlnxlt.

443
A

BOOK XII.

Changesin the
political slate
of the fecon-
dary powers
in Europe.

have raised it to new consideration and importance; the long
reign of Elizabeth, equally conspicuous for wisdom, for fteadi-
ness, and for vigour, accelerated its progrers, and carried it with
greater rapidity towards that elevated station which it hath since
held among the powers of Europe.

DURING the period in which the political itate of the great

kin'gdoms underwent such changes, revolutions of considerable
importance happened in that of the secondary or inferior powers.
Those in the Papal court are modt obvious, and of most extensive
*consequence.

The most IN the Preliminary Book I have mentioned the rife of that
evouidon rblof piritual jurifdiftion which the Popes claim as Vicars of Jtfus
the sixteenth Christ, and have traced the progress of that authority which
century in the
court of they posiess as temporal Princes *. There was nothing previous
Rome. to the reign of Charles V. that tended to circumscribe or to mo-

derate their authority, but science and philosophy, which began
to revive and to be cultivated. The progress of there, however,
was still inconsiderable; they always operate slowly; and it is
long before their influence reaches the people, or can produce
any sensible effect upon them. They may perhaps gradually,
and in a long course of years, undermine and shake an efta-
blifhed system of false religion, but there is no inRtance of their
having overturned one. The battery is too feeble to demolish
those fabricks which superstition raises on deep foundations, and
can strengthen with the most consummate art.

* Vol I. p. 24.

LUTHER
444

LUTHER had attacked the Papal supremacy with other wen- BOOK XIi.

pons, and with an impetuosity more formidable. The time '*Ihe gencrl
and manner of his attack concurred with a multitude of circum- levolt against

the dolltines
fiances, which have been explained, in giving him immediate of the church

of Ro1me, and

success. The charm which had bound mankind for so many the power of
ages was broken at once. The human mind, which had' con- he PoPC5.
tinued long as tame and paflive, as if it had been formed to
believe whatever was taught, and to bear whatever was imposed,
rouzed of a sudden and became inquisitive, mutinous, and dif-
dainful of the yoke to which it had hitherto filbmitted. That
wonderful ferment and agitation of mind, which, at this distance
of time, appears unaccountable or is condemned as extravagant,
was so general, that it mufl have been excited by causes which
were natural and of powerful efficacy. The Kingdoms of
Denmark, Sweden, England and Scotland, and almost one half
of Germany threw off their allegiance to the Pope, abolifled
hisjurifdition within their territories, and gave the fandion of
law to modes of discipline and fyflems of doctrine which
were not only independent of his power, but hostile to it. Nor
was this spirit of innovation confined to those countries which
openly revolted from the Pope; it spread through all Europe,
and broke out in every part of it with various degrees of vio-
lence. It penetrated early into France and made progress apace.
The number of converts to the opinions of the Reformers was so
great, their zeal To enterprizing and the abilities of their leaders
so diftinguilhed, that they soon ventured to contend for fiuperiority
with the established church, and were sometimes on the point
of obtaining it. In all the provinces of Germany which con-
tinued to acknowledge the Papal supremacy, as well as in tlie
Low Countries, the Protestant doctrines were secretly taught,

and
/

445

BooK XII.

This abridged
the extent of
the Pope's
dominions,

and had gained so many proselytes, that they were ripe for revolt,
and were restrained meerly by the dread of their rulers from
imitating the example of their neighbours, and aferting their
independence. Even in Spain and in Italy, symptoms of the
fame disposition to shake off the yoke appeared. The pretensions
of the Pope to infalliable knowledge and supreme power were
treated by many persons of eminent learning and abilities with
such scorn, or impugned with such vehemence, that the modt
vigilant attention of the civil magistrate, the highest trains of
pontifical authority, and all the rigour of the inquisitorial jurif-
dition were requisite to check and extinguish it.

THe defection of so many opulent and powerful king-

doms from the Papal See, was a fatal blow to its grandeur and
power. It abridged the Dominions of the Popes in extent, it
diminished their revenues, and'left them fewer rewards to be-
flow on the ecclefiafticks of various denominations, attached to
them by vows of obedience as well as by ties of interest, and
whom they employed as instruments to eflablifh or support their
usurpations in every part of Europe. The countries too which
now disclaimed their authority, were those which formerly had
been most devoted to it. The empire of fuperftion diffirs
from every other species of dominion; its power is often greatest,
and most implicitly obeyed in the provinces molt remote from the
feat of government; while such as are situated nearer to that
are more apt to discern the artifices by which it is upheld, or
the impostures on which it is founded. The personal frailties
or vices of the Popes, the errors as well as corruption of their
administration, the ambition, venality and deceit which reigned
in their court, fell immediately under the observation of the Ita-

lians,
44(

lians, and could not fail of diminishing that refpete which be-
gets fubmiflion. But in Germany, England, and the more
remote countries, there were either altogether unknown, or
being only known by report, made a flighter impreflion. Their
veneration for the Papal dignity increased with their distance
from Rome; and that, added to their gross ignorance, rendered'
them equally credulous and pallive. In tracing the progress of
the Papal domination, the boldest and most successful instances
of encroachment are to be found in Germany and other coun-
tries diffant from Italy. In there its impositions were heaviest,
and its exactions the most rapacious; so tliat in estimating the
diminution of power which the court of Rome suffered in
consequence of the Reformation, not only the number but the
charater of the people who revolted, not only the great extent
of territory, but the extraordinary obfequioufiefs of the fubjets.
which it loft, must be taken into the account.

NOR was it only by this defe6tion of so many kingdoms and

states which it occasioned, that the Reformation contributed to
diminish the power of the Roman Pontiffs. It obliged them to
adopt a different system of conduct towards the nations which
continued to recognize their jurifdition, and to govern them by
new maxims and with a milder spirit. The Reformation taught
them, by a fatal example, what they seem not before to have ap-
prehended, that the credulity and patience of mankind might be
overburdened and exhausted. They became afraid of venturing
on any fiuch exertion of their authority as might alarm or exaf-
perate their fubjcts, and excite them to a new revolt. They saw
a rival church established in many countries of Europe, the mem-
bers of which were on tie watch to observe any errors in their

administration,

BOOK XII.

and obliged
themn to
change the
spirit of their
govegnaecnt.

448

.300oK XII. administration, and eager to expose them. They were sensible
^--Y "' that the opinions adverse to their power and usurpations were

not confined to their enemies alone, but had spread even
among the people who still adhered to them. Upon all these
accounts, it was no longer poflible to lead and to govern their
flock in the fame manner as in those dark and quiet ages, when
faith was implicit, when fubmiflion was unreserved, and all
tamely followed and obeyed the voice of their ihepherd. From
the ara of the Reformation, the Popes have ruled rather by ad-
dress and management than by authority. The tile of their de-
crees is the fame, but the effect of them is very different. Those
Bulls and Interdicts which, before the Reformation, made the
greatest Princes tremble, have since that period been disregarded
or despised by the most inconsiderable. Those bold decisions and
aCts of jurifdition which, during many ages, not only passed
uncenfured, but were revered as the awards of a sacred tri-
bunal, would, since Luther's appearance, be treated by one part
of Europe as the effect of folly or arrogance, and be detested
by the other as impious and unjust. The Popes, in their admi-
niftration, have been obliged not only to accommodate' them-
selves to the notions of their adherents, but to pay some regard
to the prejudices of their enemies. They seldom venture to
claim new powers, or even to insist obstinately on their ancient
prerogatives, left they should irritate the former; they carefully
avoid every measure that may either excite the indignation or
draw on them the derision of the latter. The policy of the
court of Rome has become as cautious, circumspect, and timid,
as it was once adventurous and violent; and though their pre-
tensions to infallibility, on which all their authority is founded,
does not allow them to renounce any jurifdition which they

have

have at any time claimed or exercised, they find it expedient to
susser many of their prerogatives to lie dormant, and not to ex-
pose themselves by ill-timed attempts towards reviving there, to
the rifque of losing that remainder of power which they fill
enjoy. Before the sixteenth century, the Popes were the mo-
vers and directors in every considerable enterprize; they were
at the head of every great alliance; and being confidered as
arbiters of the affairs of Chriflendom, the court of Rome was
the centre of political negociation and intrigue. From that
time, the greatest operations in Europe have been carried on in-
dependent of them; they have funk almohf to a level with the
other petty Princes of Italy ; they continue to claim, though they
dare not exercise, the fame spiritual jurifdidion, but scarce retain
any flhadow of the temporal power which they anciently pots
fefied.

BUT how fatal soever the Reformation may have been to the

power of the Popes, it contributed to improve the church of
Rome both in science and in morals. The desire of equalling
the reformers in those talents whirh had procured them ref)peft
the ncceflity of acquiring the knowledge requisite for defending
their own tenets, or refuting the arguments of their opponents
together with the emulation natural between two rival churches,
engaged the Roman Catholic cl rgy to apply themselves to the
fludy of ufefill science, which they cultivated with fiuch afliduity
and fiucceCs, that they have gradually become as eminent in litera-
ture, as they were in rome periods infamous for ignorance. The
fame principle occasioned a change no less considerable in the
manners of the clergy of the Romnill church. Various caufcs
which have formerly been enumerated, had concurred in introdu-

VOL. II. M m m cing

BooK X1!.

The Refor-
iation cotlri-
buted to imi-
psove the
church bothh
in Icience iand
inoialy.

449

450
BOOK XII.

LsJ

cing great irregularity, and even dissolution of manners among
the Popish clergy. Luther and his adherents began their attack
on the church with such vehement invetives againfi there, that,
in order to remove the scandal, and silence their declamations,
greater decency of conduc became necessary. The Reformers
themselves were so eminent not only for the purity but even aufte-
rity of their manners, and had acquired such reputation among
the people on that account, that the Roman Catholick Clergy must
have soon loft all credit, if they had not endeavoured to conform
in some measure to their standard. They knew that all their
actions fell under the severe infpetion of the Protestants, whom
enmity and emulation prompted to observe every vice, or even
impropriety in their conduct; to censure them without indul-
gence, and to expose them without mercy. This rendered
them, of course, not only cautious to avoid such enormities as
might give offence, but ltudious to acquire the virtues that might
merit praise. In Spain and Portugal, where the tyrannical ju-
rifdiftion of the Inquisition crulhed the Protestant faith as: oon.
as it appeared, the spirit of Popery continues invariable; science
has made small progress, and the character of ecclesiastics has
undergone little change. But in those countries where the mem-
bers of the two churches have mingled freely with each other, or
have carried on any considerable intercourse, either commercial
or literary, an extraordinary alteration in the ideas as well as in
the morals of the Popish ecclesiastics, is rranifeft. In France, the
manners of the Dignitaries and secular clergy have become de-
cent and exemplary in an high degree. Many of them have
been distinguished for all the accomplishments and virtues which
can adorn their profeflion; and differ greatly from their pre-

deceflbrs

deceffors before tile Reformation, both in their maxims and in BOOK XII.
their conduct.

NoR has the influence of the Reformation been felt only by The efftdc of

it extend to

the inferior members of the Roman Catholick Church; it has the clatacr
extended to the See of Rome, to the sovereign Pontiffs tlem- of the Popes

Iheml'Avce.

selves. Violations of decorum, and even trefpafles against mo-
rality, which pa(led without censure in tlofe ages, when neither
the power of tle Popes, nor the veneration of the people for
their character, had any bounds; when there was no hostile eye
to observe the errors in their conduct, and no adversaries zealous
to inveigh against them; would be liable now to the severest
animadversion, and excite general indignation or horror. In-
stead of rivalling the courts of temporal Princes in gaiety, and
surpassing them in licentiousness, the Popes have studied to as-
fume manners more severe and more fulitable to their ecclefiafti-
cal character. The chair of St. Peter hath not been polluted,
during two centuries, by any Pontiff that resembled Alexander VI,
or several of his predecessors, who were a disgrace to religion
and to' human nature. Throughout this long fuccflion of
Popes, a wonderful decorum of conduct, compared with that of
preceding ages, is observable. Many of them have been conrpi-
cuous for the virtues becoming their high ftationi and by their
humanity, their love of literature, and their moderation, have made
some attonement to manlind for the crimes of their predeceflors.
Thus the beneficial influences of the Reformation have been
more extensive than they appear on a filperficial view; and this
great division in.the Chriflian church hath contributed, in some
measure, to cncreafe purity of manners, to dilTuife fcicncc, and
to inspire humanity. IIifory recites fimch a number of flocking

M m m 2 evnts,

45I

BOOK XII.

State of C.e
lrpubick of
Venice.

events, occasioned by religious disTentions, that it lmuf afford
particular fatisfafion to trace any one salutary or beneficial es-
fed to that source, from which so many fatal calamities have
flowed.

THE republick of Venice which, at the beginning of the fix-

teenth century, had appeared so formidable, that almofR all the po-
tentates of Europe united in a confederacy for its deRfruCtion, de-
clined gradually from its ancient power and splendour. The Vene-
tians not only loft a great part of their territory in the war excited
by the league of Cambray, but the' revenues as well as vigour of
the state were exhausted by their extraordinary and long continued
cfforts in their own defence; and that commerce by which they
had acquired their wealth and power began to decay, without any
hopes of its reviving. All the fatal consequences to their re-
publick, which the sagacity of the Venetian senate foresaw on
the first discovery of a passage to the Eaft-Indies by the Cape of
Good Hope, took place. Their endeavours to prevent the Por-
tuguefe from establishing themselves in the Eaft-Indies, not only
by exciting the Soldans of Egypt and the Ottomon monarchs to
turn their arms against such dangerous intruders, but by afford-
ing secret aid to the Infidels in order to insure their success z, prov-
ed ineffectual. The activity and valour of the Portuguese furs
iiounted every obstacle, and obtained such firm footing in that
fertile country, as secured to them large pofiefions, together with
influence fill more extensive. Lisbon, inRead of Venice, became
the staple for the precious commodities of the East. The Vene-
tians, after having possessed for many years the monopoly of
that beneficial commerce, had the mortification to be excluded

z Frcher. Script. Rr. German. voL ii. 529.

from

fiom almost any (hare in it. Tile discoveries of tle Spaniards
in the western world, proved no less fatal to inferior branches
of their commerce. The original defects which were formerly
pointed out in the constitution of the Venetian republick conti-
nued, and the disadvantages with which it undertook any great
enterprize, increased rather than diminiflled. The sources from
which it derived its extraordinary riches and power being dried
tp, the interior vigour of the state declined, and of course, ren-
dered its external operations less formidable. Long before the
middle of the sixteenth century, Venice ceased to be one of the
principal powers in Europe, and became a secondary and fubal-
tern slate. But as the senate had the address to conceal its di-
minution of power, under the veil of moderation and caution;
as it made no rafl effort that could discover its impotence; as
the symptoms of political decay in tfates.are not loon observed,
and are seldom To apparent to their neighbours as to occasion
any sudden alteration in their condut towards them, Venice coIn
tinued long to be confidered and refpeated. She was treated
not according to her present condition, but according to the
rank which the had formerly held. Charles, as well as the mo-
narchs of France his rivals, courted her afliftance with emulation
and follicitude in all their enterprizes. Even down to the close of
the century, Venice remained not only an objec of attention, but
a considerable feat of political negociation and intrigue.

THAT authority which the first Cosmo de Medici, and Law-

rence,.his grandson, had acquired in the republick of Florence
by their beneficence and abilities, inspired their descendants with
the ambition of usurping the sovereignty in their country, and
paved their way towards it. Charles placed Alexander de Me-
dici at the head of the republick, and to the natural interest and

;:~~~~.... ~: ~power

BOOK XII.

Or 'Tucaay.
A. D. 1530.

453

454

BOOK XII.

Of the dukes
of Savoy.

power of tl:e family added the weight and credit of the Impe-
rial protection. Of these, his successor Cofno, firnamed the
Great availed himself; and establishing his supreme authority
on the ruins of the ancient republican constitution, he tranf-
mitted that, together with the title of Grand Duke of Tuscany,
to his descendants. Their dominions were composed of the terri-
tories which had belonged to the three commonwealths of Flo-
rence, Pisa, and Siena, and formed one of tle molf refpeCable of
the Italian flates.

THE dukes of Savoy, during the former part of the sixteenth

century, pofeffed territories which were not considerable either
for extent or value; and the French, having seized the greater
part of them, obliged the reigning duke to retire for safety
to the firong fortress of Nice, where he shut himself up for several
years; while his Ton, the Prince of Piedmont, endeavoured to
better his fortune, by serving as an adventurer in the armies of
Spain. The Peace of Cateau Cambrefis restored to him his pa-
ternal dominions. As there are environed on every hand by
powerful neighbours, all whose motions the dukes of Savoy rmuft
observe with the greatest attention, in order not only to guard
againit the danger of being furprized and overpowered, but that
they may chufe their fide with difcernme.;t in those quarrels
wherein it is impossible for them to avoid taking part, this pe-
culiari'y in their situation seems to have had no inconsiderable
Influence on their claradler. By rouzing them to perpetual at-
tention, by keeping their ingenuity always on the stretch, and
engaging them in almost continual action, it hath formed a race,
of Princes more Sagacious in discovering their true inteiet,, more
decisive. in their resolutions, and more dextrous in availing tlem-
felves.of ever) occurrence which presented itself, than any per-

haps

haps that can be singled out in the hiltory of mankind. By
gradual acquisitions the Dukes of Savoy have added to their
territories as well as to their own importance; and aspiring at
length to regal dignity, which they obtained about half a century
ago, they hold no inconsiderable rank among the monarchs of
Europe.

THE territories which now form the republick of the united

Netherlands, were loft during the firlf part of the sixteenth cen-
tury, among the numerous provinces subject to the house of
Austria; and were then so inconsiderable, that hardly one oppor-
tunity of mentioning them hath occurred in all the busy period
of this history. But soon after the Peace of Cateau Cambrefis,
the violent and bigotted maxims of Philip's government, car-
ried into execution with unrelenting rigour by tile Duke of Alva,
exasperated the free-people of the Low-Countries to such a de-
gree, that they threw off the Spanish yoke, and afierted their
ancient liberties and laws. These they defended with a perse-
vering valour, which occupied the arms of Spain during half a
century, exhausted the vigour, ruined the reputation of that
monarchy, and at last constrained their ancient masters to recog-
nize and to treat with them as a free independent Rate. This
state founded on liberty, and reared by industry and oeconomy,
had grown into reputation, even while Rtruggling for its existence.
But when peace and security allowed it to enlarge its views, and
to extend its commerce, it rose to be one of the most refpestable
as well as enterprizing powers in Europe.

THE tranfadions of the kingdoms in the North of Europe,
have been seldom attended to in the course of this hitfory.

RussIA.

BOOK XII.

Ofthe United
Provinces.

455

BOOK XII. RusS;A remained buried in that barbarism and obscurity, from

which it was called about the beginning of the present century,
Of Rufiia. by the creative genius of Peter the Great who made his country

known and formidable to the reft of Europe.

Of Denmalk
and Sweden.

IN Denmark and Sweden, during the reign of Charles V. great

revolutions happened in their conflitutions, civil as well as eccle-
fiaftical. In the former kingdom, a tyrant being degraded from
the throne and expelled the Couptry, a new Prince was called
by the voice of the People to assume the reigns of government.
In the latter, a fierce people rouzed to arms by injuries and op-
preflion,. shook off the Danish yoke, and conferred the regal dig-
nity on its deliverer GufRavus EricCon, who had all the virtues
of a hero and of a patriot. Denmark, exhausted by foreign
wars, or weakened by the dissentions between the king and
the nobles, became incapable of such efforts as were requisite in
order to recover the ascendant which it had long possessed in the
North of Europe. Sweden, as Coon as it was freed from the
dominion of strangers, began to recruit its strength, and acquired
in a short time such interior vigour, that it became the first
kingdom in the North. Early in the subsequent century, it rose
to such a high rank among the powers of Europe, that it had
the chief merit both in forming and conducting that powerful
league, which protected not only the Protestant religion, but the
liberties of Germany against the bigotry and ambition of the
house of Austria. .

INDEX
456

# INDEX TO THE THIRD VOLUME.

D

TO THE
THIRD

A

LBERT, of Brandenburgh, grand
mafier of the Teutonic order, com-
mands a body of troops in behalf of
Maurice of Saxony, but endeavours
to aTLert an independency, 250.

Defeats and takes theDuke d'Aumale prisoner,
and joins the Emperorat Metz, 271. Iscon-
demned by the Imperial chamber for his de-
mands on the bishops of Bamberg and
Wortfburgh, 280. A league formed against
him, 281. Is defeated by Maurice, 282.
Is again defeated by Henry of Brunswick,
284. Is driven out of Germany and dies in
exile, ib. His territories restored to his
collateral heirs, ib.
Alva, Duke of, forces the Dauphin to abandon

siege of Perpignan, 8. Presides at the
court-martial which condemns the Eleetor
of Saxony to death, 145. Detains the
Landgrave prisoner by the Emperor's order,
155. Commands under the Emperor, the
army deltined against France, 270. Is ap-
pointed commander in chief in Piedmont,
319. Enters the Ecclefiaflical territories
and seizes the Campagna Romana, 368.
Concludes a truce with the Pope, 369.
Negociates a peace between Philip and the
Pope, with Cardinal Caraffa, 392. Goes to
VOL. III.

VO L UM

E.

Rome to alk pardon of the Pope for his hof-
tilitics, 393. Is sent to Paris in the name of
Philip to espouse the Princefi Elizabeth, 430.
Augjburg, the diet again assembled there,

162. Is intimidated by being surrounded
with the Emperor's Spanifn troops, ib. The
Emperor re-eflablifhes the Romlbh worilip,
in the churches of, ib. The diet, by the
Emperor's order, petitions the Pope for the
return of the council to Trent, 169. A
fyflem of theology laid before the diet by the
Emperor, 174. Tie archbishop of Mentz,
declares, without authority, the diet's ac-
ceptance of it, 174.
en/lria, the extraordinary acquisitions of the

house of, in the person of the Emperor
Charles V. 433. 436.
Barbarossa, makes a descent on Italy, 18.

Burns Rheggio, ib. Beficges Nice in con-
juncaion with the French, but is forced to
retire, ib. Isdifinffed by Francis, 30.
Bohemia, Ferdinand encroaches on the liberties

of the Bohemians, 160. The Reforma-
tion introduced by John Huss and Jerome
of Prague, ib. Raise an army to no pur-
pose, ib. Is closely confined in the citadel
of Mechlin, 204.

N n n Blologne,
I

N

E

X

Boulogne, besieged by Henry VIII. of England,

35. Taken, 43.
Brunswick, Henry Duke of, driven from his

dominions by the Protestant Princes of the
league of Smalkalde, 24. Raises men
for Francis, but employs them to recover
his own dominions, 5 5. Is taken prisoner, ib.

C
Calait, the careless manner in which it was guard-

ed in the reign of Mary Queen of England,
398. Ineffeaual remonflrances of Phi-
lip, and Lord Wentworth the governor,
concerning its defenceless slate, 399. Is in-
veRled and taken by the Duke of Guise, 400.
The English inhabitants turned out, 401.
Stipulations concerning, in the treaty of
Chateau Cambrefis, 426.
Campe, peace of, between Henry VIII. and

Francis, 84.
Caraffa, Cardinal, his precipitate eleion,

342. Is appointed legate to Bologna, ib.
Reasons of his disgust with the Emperor,
343. Persuades the Pope to solicit an alli-
ance with France against the Emperor, 344.
346, 348. His insidious commaifion to the
court of France, 363. His publick entry
into Paris, ib. Exhorts Henry to break his
truce with the Emperor, 364. Absolves
Henry from his oath, 366. Negociates a
peace between the Pope and Philip, with
the Duke d'Alva, 392. The fate of him
and his brother on the death of Pope Paul,
430.
Carignan, besieged by the count d'Enguien,

and defended by the marquis de Guafto,
30. Guallo defeated in a pitched battle, 32.
The town taken, 33.
C.vi, Peace concluded there between Pope

Paul IV. and Philip II. of Spain, 392.
Ccrcamp, negociations for peace entered into

there between Philip II. of Spain. and Henry
I!. of France, 412. 42o. The negoci-
ations removed to Chateau Cambrefis, 424.
See Chateau Cambrefis.
Cbarofiers of men, rules for forming a proper

effimate of them, 67. Applied to the
cafe of Luther, ib.
Charles V. Emperor, takes advantage of the

French invasion of Spain to obtain fubfilics
from the Cortes, 9. His treaty with Portugal,
ib. Concludes a league with Henry VIII. 1 i.
Particulars of the treaty, 12. Ovcr-rurs

Cleves,and his barbarous treatmentof the town
of Duren, i 5. His behaviour to the Duke of
Cleves, 16. Besieges Landrecy, ib. Is
joined by an English detachment, 17. Is
forced to retire, ib. Courts the favour of
the Proteflants, 23. His negociations with
the Proteflants, at the diet of Spires, 25.
Procures the concurrence of the diet in a
war against Francis, 28. Negociates a fe-
parate peace with the King of Denmark, ib.
Invades Champagne, and invefis St. Difiere,
34. Want of concert between his opera-
tionsand those of Henry, who now invades
France, 36. Obtains St. Difiere by artifice,
ib. His diltreffes and happy movements,
38. Concludes a separate peace with Fran-
cis, 39. His motives to this peace, 40. His
advantages by this treaty, 42. Obliges him-
self by a private article to exterminate the
Proteflant heresy, 43. Is cruelly afflited with
thegout,45. Diet at Worms, 47. Arrives at
Worms and alters his conduct towards the
Proteflants, 49. His condu& on the
death of the Duke of Orleans, 53. His
diflimulation to the Landgrave of Hesse, 69.
Concludes a truce with Solyman, 73. Holds
a diet at.Ratifbon, 74. His declaration to
the Proteflant deputies, 77. His treaty with
the Pope, concluded by the cardinal of
Trent, ib. His circular letter to the Pro-
teflant members of the Germanick body, 79.
The Proteflants levy an army against him,
86. Is unprepared against them, 87. Puts
them under the ban of the Empire, 88. The
Protestants declare war againfl him, 90.
Marches to join the troops sent by the Pope,
92. Farnese the Pope's legate returns in
difgufl, 94. His prudent declension of an
ation with the Proteflants, 96. Is joined
by his Flemish troops, 97. Proposals of
peace made by the Proteflants, 1o6. Their
army disperse, ib. His rigorous treatment
of the Proteflant Princes, o18. Dismisses
part of his army, i i i. The Pope recals his
troops, 12. His reflecion on Fiefco's in-
furrcation at Ge.oa, 126. Is alarmed at
the hoflile preparations of Francis, 130.
Death of Francis, 132. A parallel drawn
between him and Francis, ib. Consequences
of Francis's death to him, 135. Marches
against the EleCtor of Saxony, 136. Passes
the Elbe, 138. Defeats the Saxony army,

114.

141. Takes the EleEtor prisoner, 142. His
harsh reception of him, ib. Invefis Wittem-
berg, 143. Condemns the Elector to death,
by a court martial, 145. The Ele6or by
treaty surrenders the eleaorate, 148. The
harsh terms imposed by him on the Land-
grave of Hefle, 50. His haughty reception
of the Landgrave, 153. Detains him pri-
soner, 154. Seizes the warlike flores of the
league, 58. His cruel exacions, 159.
Assembles a diet at Augsburg, 162. Inti-
midates the diet by his Spanish troops, ib.
Re-eflablifhes the Romish worship in the
churches of Augfburgh, ib. Seies Placen-
tia, 166. Orders the diet to petition the Pope
for the return of the council td Trent, 169.
Protests againit the council of Bologna, 17 1.
Causes a fyflem of faith to be prepared for
Germany, 172. Lays it before the diet, 174.
The Interim opposed, 178. And rejected
by the Imperial cities, 179. Reduces the
city of Augsburg to lIbmillion, 181. Re-
peats the fame violence at Ulm, ib. Carries
the Eletor and Landgrave with him into
the Low-Countries, 183. Procures his son
Philip to be recognized 'by the States of the
Netherlands, 184. Eflablifhes the Interim
there, 185. Re-assembles the diet at Augf-
burg, under the influence of his Spanish
troops, 193. The city of Magdeburg re-
fuses to admit the Interim and prepares for
refifance, 2oo. Appoints Maurice Elector
of Saxony to reduce it, ib. Promises to
protect the Proteflants at the council of
Trent, 202. Arbitrarily releases Maurice
and the Eleaor of Brandenburg, from their
engagements to the Landgrave for the re-
covery of his liberty, 203. Endeavours to
secure the Empire for his son Philip, 205.
His brother Ferdinand refuses to resign his
pretensions, ib. Besieges Parma, but is re-
pulsed, 211. Proceeds rigorously againit the
Proteflants, 213. Endeavours to support the
council of Trent, 214. Puts Magdeburg
under the ban of the Empire, ib. Abfolvcs
the city, 219. Is involved in disputes be-
tween the council and the Protestant depu-
ties, concerning their safe conduct, 221.
Begins to fufpec Maurice of Saxony, 233.
Circumstances which contributed to deceive
him with regard to Maurice, 235. Mau-
rice takes the field against him, 237. Mau-

rice seconded by Henry II. of France, 238.
His difrefs and confiernation, 239. An in-
effeclual negociation with Maulice, 240.
Flies from Infpruck, 244. Releafcs the E-
leQor of Saxony, 245 Is solicited to fa-
tisfy the demands of Maurice, 252. His
present difficulties, 253. Rcfufes any direct
compliance with the demands of Maurice,
256. Is disposed to yield by the progress of
Mauricc's operations, 257. Makes a peace
with Maurice at Pafilau, 259. Rcnflcions
on this treaty, 260. Turns his arms againtf
France, 266. Lays siege to Metz, 270.
Isjoined by Albert of Brandenburgh, 271.
His army distressed by the vigilance of the
Duke of Guise, 272. Raises the siege and
retires in a shattered condition, 274. Cofnmo
di Medici afterts his independency against
him, 275. Siena revoltsagainlt him, 276.
Is dejected at his bad success, 279. Takes
Terrouane and demolilhes it, 286. Takes
Hefdin, ib. Proposes his son Philip as a
husband to Mary Ql.cen of England, 299.
The articlesof themarriage,300. Marches
to oppose the French operations, 308. Is
defeated by Henry, 309. Invades Picardy,
i. Grants Siena, fiubdued by Cosmo di
Medici to his Ton Philip, 318. A diet at
Augfburgopened by Ferdinand, 326. Leaves
the interior adiiniflration of Germany to
Ferdinand, 329. Applies again to Ferdi-
nand to resign his pretensions of fucceflion
to Philip, but is refused, 330. Rccefs of
the diet of Augsburg on the subjec of reli-
gion, 332. A treaty concluded between
Pope Paul IV. and Henry II. of Francc
against him, 349. Resigns his hereditary
dominions to his son Philip, ib. His mo-
tives for retirement, 350. Had long mcdi-
tated this resignation, 353. The ceremony
of this deed, 354. His Ipcch on lthe occa-
·sion, 355. Rcfigns also the dominions of
Spain, 358. His intended retirement into
Spain retarded, 359. A truce for five years
concluded with France, 360. Endcavours
in vain to fccure the Imperial crown for
Philip, 370. Resigns the Imperial crown
to Ferdinand, 372. Sets out for Spain, ib.
His arrival and reception in Spain, 373. Is
difirefced by his fol's ungrateful neglec in
paying his pension, 374. ;ixes his retreat
in the monafiery of St. Juftus in Plaz.encia,

N n n 2 ib. The

ib. The situation of this monastery, and
his apartments, described, 375. Contrast
between the condu& of Charles and the
Pope, ib. His manner of life in his retreat,
413. His death precipitated by his monas-
tick severities, 415. Celebrates lhis own
funeral, 416. Dies, ib. His charater, 417.
A review of the (late of Europe during his
reign, 431. His requisitions to the crown
of Spain, 435.
Cbateau Capmbrfis, the conferences for peace

between Philip II. of Spain, and Henry II.
of France, removed thither from Cercamp,
424. The peace retarded by the demand
'of Elizabeth of England for restitution of
Calais, ib. Particulars of the treaty signed
there between England and France, 426.
Terms of the pacification between Philip and
Henry, 428.

Cbris/ians, primitive, ve,
why avrfe to the prin-

ciples of Toleration, 334.
Cleves, invaded and over-run by the Emperor

Charles V. 15. Cruel treatment of Duren,
ib. Humiliating fubmiflion of the Duke, 16.
Coligni, admiral, governor of Picardy, defends

St. Quintin against the Spanish general
Emanuel Phillibert Duke of Savoy, 383.
His Brother D'Andelot defeated in an en-
deavour to join the garrison, 384. But
D'Andelot enters the town, 385. His cha-
racter, 319. The town taken by alfault,
and himself taken prisoner, ib.
Cclogne, Herman, count de Wied, archbishop

and elestor of, inclines to the Reformation,
and is opposed by his canons, who appeal to
the Fmpcror and Pope, 51. Is deprived aqd
excommunicated, 71. Resigns, 1 o.
Con/lance, the privileges of that city taken away

by the Emperor Charles V. for disobedience
to the Interim, 185.
Cartes, is prevailed on by the Emperor to re-

cognize his son Philip as successor to that
kingdom, 9. See Spain.
Cortes of Valencia, prevailed on by the Em-

peror Charles V. to acknowledge his son
Philip successor to that kingdom, 9. See
Spain.
Crefty, peace of, between the Emperor and

Prancis, 39.

D
D'Andelot, brother to Coligni, is defeated by

the Duke of Caxony in an enldeavour to fuc-

cour St. Quintin, 384. But enters the town
with the fugitivess 385. The town taken
by assAult, 389.
Daupbin, late Duke of Orleans, second son of

Francis I. commands an army and invades
Spain, 7. Is forced to abandon the siege of
Perpignan, 8. Is dissatisfied at the peace of
Crefpy, 44. Makes a secret proteltation
againit it, ib.

of France, son of Henry II. con-

traCed to Mary the young Qleen'of Scot-
land, 168. Is married to her, 405.
Denmark, a summary view of the revolutions

in, during the sixteenth century,/456.
De Retz, Cardinal, writes a history of Fiefco's

conspiracy while a youth, 125. Note.
Diana of Poitiers, mistress to Henry II. of

France, aflilrs the Guises in persuading Henry
toan alliance with Pope Paul IV. against the
Emperor, 346. Induces Henry to break the
treaty of Vaucelles, 365. Marries her gran-
daughter to one of Montmorency's sons, 41 1.
Joins Montmorency against the Guises, ib.
Doria, Andrew, his partial fondness for his kiof-

man Giantetino, 1 14. His narrow escape in
Lavagno's infurreaion, 122. Returns on
Lavagno's death, and the dispersion of his
party, 125. Sec Genoa, and Lavagno.

- Giannetino, his character, 114. Is
murdered by Lavagno's conspirators, 122;
Dragut a corsair, commands the Turki(li fleet

which ravages the coasts of Naples, 278.
Duren in Cleves, taken by the Enmperor. Charles

V. the inhabitants put to the sword, and the
town burnt, 15.

E
Edinbnfgb, plundered and burnt by the earl of

Hertford, 35.

Edward VI. of England, his character, 298.
Egmont, count of, commands the cavalry at

the battle of St. Quintin, and puts Montmo-
rency's troops to flight, 385.. Engages Mare-
flal de Termes, and defeats him by the
casual arrival of an Englifl squadron, 407.
EhLrinburgb, the castle of, taken by Maurice

of Saxony, 242.
Elizabetb sifter of Mary, her acceflion to the

crown of England, 421. Her charatler,
ib. Is addrelTcd by Philip of Spain, and
Henry of France, for marriage, ib. Her
prudent condua between them, 422. Howy
determined againit Henry, 423. Her mo-

tives

tives for rejecting Philip, ib. Returns Philip
an evasive anfxwer, 424. Demands reflitu-
tion of Calais at the conferences at Chateau
Cambrefis, ib. Establishes the Protcftant
religion in England;425. Trcaty between
her and Henry signed at Chateau Cambrcfis,
426.
England, Mary Queen of, married to Prince

Philip, son of the Emperor Charles V. con-
trary to the Ienfe of the nation, 300. Tlie
marriage ratified by parliament, 303. Is
ielu6tantly engaged by Philip, now King of
Spain, in the war againfi France, 381. Ma-
ry levies money by her prerogative to carry
on the war, 382. Calais taken by the Duke
of Guise, 400. Guifnes and Hames taken,
ib. Death of Mary and acceflion of Eliza-
beth, 421. The Proteltant religion eflab-
lifhed by Elizabeth, 425. Treaty with
France signed' at Chateau Cambrefis, 426.
Its interior fircngth how incrcal'd by the
conduct of Henry VIII. 440. Its power no
longer frultlefsly wafled, on the continent,
442. Alteration of its'condua tbwards Scot-
land, 443.
Eniiienrt the count de, besieges Carignan, 30.

Desires of Francis, permiflon to engage
Guaflo, 31. Defeats Guafo in a pitched
battle, 32.
Efiurial, palace ofi built by Philip II. in me-

.mory of the battle of St. Qiintin, 391.
Europe, a review of the fiate of, during the

reign'of the Emperor Charles V. 431. The
rematkable change in, at this period, 432.
H-ow nafE'cCLe by the revolt of Luther againfl
the church of Rome, 445.

F
Fainfefi, Cardinal, accompanies the troops fcnt

by thc Pope to the Emperor, against tih
army of the Proteltant league, 93. Re-
turns difgttlcd, 94. Leads the troops home
again by the Pope's order, 112. Contributes
to the clecion of Cardinal di Monte to tile
Papacy, 190.
-- .- Ocqavio, grandson of Pope Paul III.

endeavotus to furprize Parma, and enters
into treaty with the Empeiror, 188. Is con-
firmed in Parma, by Julius III. 209. Pro-
cures an alliance with France, 211. Is at-
tacked by the Imperialists, but fuccefsftilly

proleted by thle French, i'. Placentia re-
flored to him by Philip II. of Spain, 394.
-- Peter Leewis, natural son of Pope Paul

111. obtains of his father the dutchies of Par-
ma and Placentia, 54. Hlis character, 165.
Is allalfinated, 166.
Fti;'inaill, fecold Ion of Philip Archduke of

Aufli iia, courts the favour of the Protcflants,
23. Opens thie det at \Worms, 47. Requives
it to fubmiit to the de ifions of the council of
''rent, 48. Agrees to pay a tribute to Solvmatn
for H-ungary, 73. Encroaches on the lil;ertits
of Bohemia, 159. I-His rigorous treatment of
Prague, 161. Disarms the Bohemians, ib.
Obtains the sovereignty of tile city of Con-
fiance, 185. Invades Transylvania hy in-
vitation of Martinuzzi, 223. Obtains tlhe
resignation of Transylvania from Qen
Ilabella, 225. Orders Mnrtinuzzi to be
affaflinated, 227. Enters into negociation
with Maurice on behalf of the Emperor,
251. His motives for promoting the Em-
peror's agreeing with Maurice, 255. Ifa-
bella and her Ion Stephen, recover pofelnion
of Transylvania, 289. Opens a diet at
Auglbftrg, and excites filfpicions in the
Proteflants, 326. 'lihe Emperor leaves the
internal administration of German affairs to
him, 329. Is again applied t6 by the Em-
peror to resign his pretensions of fucceflion
to Philip, but refuces, 330. 'Endeavours
therefore to gain the friendlhip of the diet,
331. Again refties the Emperor's folicita-
tions, 371. Charles resigns the Imperial
crown to him, 372. Aflembles the college of
Eleelors of Frankfort, which acknowledges
him Emperor, f Gernany, 402. 'Ilhe lope
refuies to acknowledge him, ib.
FItrso, Jerome, engages in his brother's con-

fpiracy, and fails in securing Andrew D)ori:a,
12?.. Ilis imprudent vanity on his bro-
ther's death, 124. Shuts himtln f up in a
fort on his eflate, 126. Is educed and put
to death, 131.

Flanlerti. Sec Netherlandr.
Florence, Cosmo asserts his independency on ilhe

Emperor, 275.
France, the acquisitions of that kingdom, dui.

ring the reign of the Emperor Charles V.
437. The charaCter of the people of,
438. The good conf(qulncis of the civil

W . 1r

wars in that kingdom to the refi of Europe,
440.
Francis I. his ambarfador to the Porte, Rincon,

murdered by the Imperial governor of the
Milanese, 3. Prepares to resent the injury,
4. Attacks the Emperor with five armies,
6. His firfi attempts rendered abortive, by
the imprudence of the Duke of Orleans, 8.
Renews his negociations with Sultan Solyman,
14. Invades the Low Countries, 15. For-
ces the Emperor to raise the siege of Landre-
cy, 7. Dismisses Barbarossa, 30. Gives
the count d'Enguien permiflion to engage
Guaflo, 31. Relieves Paris, in danger of
being furprized by the Emperor, 39. A-
grees to a separate peace with Francis, ib.
Henry's haughty return to his overtures of
peace, 44. Death of the Duke Orleans, 53.
Peace of Campe, 84. Perceives a necessity
of checking the Emperor's ambitious designs,
128. Forms a general league againit him,
ib. Dies, 132. His life and charater fum-
marily compared with those of Charles, ib.
Consequences of his death, 135.
Francis II. his accession to the crown of France,

and characer, 430.
Frankfort, the college of Eleetors assembled

there by Ferdinand, who is acknowledged
Emperor of Germany, 402.
Fregofo, the French ambassador to Venice,

murdered by the Marquis del Guafto, the
Imperial governor of the Milanese, 3.

G
Genoa, a scheme formed to overturn the confli-

tution of, by Fiefco, count of Lavagno, 116.
He assembles his adherents, 119. The con-
fpirators rally forth from Lavagno's palace,
122. Deputies sent to know Lavagno's
Terms, 123. Lavagno drowned, ib. The
infurrecion ruined by the imprudence
of his brother Jerome Fiefco, 124. The
conspirators disperse, ib. Jerome reduced
and put todeath, 131.
rmany, the Proteitant religion eltablifhed in
Gethe Palatinate, 56. The league of Smalkalde

raise an armyagainft the Emperor, 86. Are
put under the ban of the Empire, 88. The
Proteflant army dispersed, o16. The In-
terim enforced by the Emperor, 180. Mau-
rice of Saxony raises an army, and declares
in favour of the Protcflants, 237. Maurice

favoured even by the Catholick Princes, and
why, 252. Treaty of Paffau, between the
Emperor and Maurice of Saxony, 259.
Truce between the Emperor and Henry ot
France, 360. Charles resigns the Imperial
crown to his brother Ferdinand, 372.
Golelta Gonzaga, the Imperial governor of Mi-

lan, procures Cardinal Farnese to be af'afli-
nated, and takes poffeflion of Placentia for
the Emperor, 166. Prepares to seize Parma,
209. Is repulsed by the French, 211.
Granvelle, Cardinal, his artifice to prevail on

the count de Sancerre to surrender St. Difiere
to the Emperor, 36. Endeavours to lull the
Protestants into security with regard to the
Emperor's condu& toward them, 62. Is
commifllioned by Philip to address the aflem-
bly at the Emperor's resignation of his here-
ditarydominions, 357.
Guaflo,.procures Rincon the French ambassador

to the Porte, to be murdered on his journey
thither 3. Defends Carignan against the
French, 30. Defeated by d'Enguien in a
pitched battle, 32.
Guifc, Francis of Lorrain, Duke of, is made

governor of Metz by Henry II. of France,
267. His characer, ib. Prepares to de-
fend it against the Emperor, 268. His bro-
ther d' Aumale taken prisoner by the Imperi-
alifis, 271. The Emperor raises the siege,
274. His humane treatment of the diltreffed
and sick Germans left behind, ib. Persuades
Henry to an alliance with Pope Paul IV. 346.
Marches with troops into Italy, 376. Is un-
able to affeCt any thing 377. Is recalled
from Italy after the defeat of St. Quin-
tin, 393. lis reception in France, 397.
Takes the field against Philip, 398. Invefis
and takes Calais from the English, 400.
Takes also Guifnes and Hames, ib. Takes
'Ihionville in Luxembourgh, 406.
Guise, Mary of, fruitrates the intended marri-

age between her daughter Mary, and prince
Edward of England, 29.
Gunfman chancellor to the Emperor Ferdinand,

is sent to Pope Paul IV. to notify the elecaion,
who refuses to fee him, 402.

H
IHeatbens, ancient, why the principles of mu-

tual toleration were generally admitted
among them, 334.

HIenry

Henry II. King of France, his motives for declin-

ing an allance with Pope Paul III. againlt
the Emperor, 168. Procures for Scotland a
peace with England, 210. The young
Queen Mary, contrated to the Dauphin,
and sent to France for education, ib. Enters
into an alliance with OCtavio Farnese Duke
of Parma, 211. Protests againtf the coun-
cil of Trent, 212. Makes alliance with
Maurice Elector of Saxony, 229.' Seconds
the operations of Maurice, 238. His army
marches and seizes Metz, 240. Attempts
to furprize Strafburgh, 248. Is firongly so-
licitcd to spare it, 249. Returns, 250. The
Emperor prepares for war againft:him, 267.
Infligates the Turks to invade Naples, 278.
Terrouane taken and demolifllcdby Charles,
286. Hefden taken, ib. Leads an army into
the Low-Countries agairlt Charles, 287.
Endeavours to obftru& the marriage of Mary
of England with Philip of Spain, 306. The
progress of his arms against the Emperor,
307. Engages Charles, 309. Retires, ib.
Cosmo di Medici, Duke ot I lorence, makes
war against him, 31 1. Appoints Peter Stroz-
zicommander of his army in Italy, 312.
Strozzi defeated, 314. Siena taken, 316.
Pope Paul IV. makes overtures to an alli-
ance with him against the Emperor, 345.
Montmorcncy's arguments againfi this al-
liance, ib. Is persuaded by the Guises to ac-
cept it, 346. Sends the Cardinal of Lor-
raill vith powers to conclude it, ib. The
Pope signs the treaty, 348. A truce tor five
years concluded with the Emperor, 360. Is
cxhortcd by Caidinal Carafl'., to break the
truce, 363. Is absolved from his'oatli, and
concludes a new treaty with the Pope, 366.
Sends the l)uke of Gaife into Italy, 378.
'fle Ccnflablu Morntmorercy dcfcated a!d
taken prisoner at St. Quintin, 385. I-enry
prepares for the defence of Paris, 387. St.
Quiinill taken by affull, 389. Collclts his
troops and negociates for affillance, ib. Hlis
kind rtccition of the Duke of Guise, 397.
Calais taken by Guile, 400. Impowers

lMontmlorntcy to ncg;ciatc a peace with

Philip, 41 L. H11onours himl highly en his re-
turn to France, 412. Writes to Quten
Elizabeth, with proposals of marriage, 421,
How he failed in i.s fiuit, 422. Ilis daugh-
ttr married to Philip, and his sifter tc the

Duke of Savoy, 427. Terms of the treaty
of Chateau Cambrefis, 428. The mar-
riage of his friter and daughter celebrat-
ed with great pomp, 430. His death, ib.
Itenry, the VIII. of Engllnd concludes a league

with Charles, i . Makes war with Scotland,
12. Particulars of his treaty ¥with Charles, ib.
Invades France and inivefs lBoulogne, 35. Re-
fifes the l;mperor's plan of operations, 39. Is
deferled by tile lmpcrol, 43. ''lakes Boulog-
ne, ib. Iis haughty propolFls to Francis, 44.
Peace ot Camnpe, 84. Is fucceeled by his son
Edw-:d VI. 129.A review of his policy, 441.
Hertford, earl of, plunders and buI ns Edinburgh,

35. Joins Henry after, in his invasions of
france, ib.
Hefe, Landgraveof, his views compared with

those of the EleQor of Saxony, 62.T he Elmpe-
ror's deceitful profeflions to him, 69. Qjiets the
apprehensions of the Proteflant league with
regard to the Emperor, 70. Is appointed
joint commander of the army of the league
with the Elecor of Saxony, 91. Their
characters compared, 92. Urges an attack
of the Emperor, but is opposed by the Elec-
tor, 95. His letter to Maurice Duke of Sax-
ony, 103. 'he army of the league disperse,
106. Is reduced to accept hlarlh terms from
Charles, 15o. Iis humiliating reception by
the Emperor, 153. Is detained in confine-
ment, 155. His oflers of fubmiflion flight-
ed by the Emperor, 1 79. Is carried by the Em-
peror with him into the Netherlands, 183.
Renews his endeavours for liberty, 203. Char-
les relcafes arbitrarily the Eletor of Brandcn-
burgh, and Maurlice, from their engage-
ments to him, 203. Obtains his liberty by
the tre.ty of Pal:lti, 259. Is arrefled by ilhc
(~een of Hungary, but freed by the Emperor,
264.' le cfln'es of hisconfinement o ilim, 265.

I
JainmI, tlh Vth of Scotland dies, and leaves Mamy

his infant daughter to fucccecd him, 2.
See Mary.
Inlocent, a young domeflick of Cardinal di

Monte, obtains his Cardinal's hat, on his
clesion to the Papacy, 190.
fItrrilm, a fyfleml of theology so called, pre-

pared by order of the Empetor Charles V.
for the tife of Germnany 172. Is difap-
proved of, both by Protfltants and Papiits,
176.

"JOanna)

foanna, daughter of Ferdinand and mother of

Charles V. dies after near fifty years confine-
ment, 353.
Ifabella,daughter of Sigismund king of Poland,the

government of the province of Transylvania
and the education of her son committed to
her jointly with Martinuzzi, 222.1s jealous
of Martinuzzi's influence, and courts the
'Turks, 223. Is prevailed on to resign Tran-
fylvania to Ferdinand, 224. Retires to Sile-
fia, 22z. Recovers poffeflion of Tranfyl-
vania, 289.
Italy, Placentia granted to O&avio Farnese by

Philip II. of Spain, 394. The investiture
of Siena given byPhilip to Cosmo di Medici,
396. The consequence of these grants, ib.
julius Il. Pope his characer, I9o. Bellows

his Cardinal's hat infamously, ib. Is averse
to the calling a council, 192. Summons
one at Trent, 193. Asserts his supreme
authority peremptorily in the bull for it, 201.
Repents confirming O)tavio Farnese in Par-
ma, 209. Requires OQavio to relinquiih
his alliance with France, 21. The manner
of hisdeath, 328.

L
Landrecy, siege of, by the Emperor Charles V.

16. Isabandonedbyhim, 17.
Lavagna, John Lewis Fiefco, count of, his,

characer, a21. i Meditates subverting
the government of Genoa, 216. His pre-
parations, 1 7. His artful method of assem-
bling his adherents, 119. His exhortation
to them, 120. His interview with his wife
121. Sallies forth, 122. Andrew Doria
escapes, 123. Deputies sent to knvow his
terms, ib. Is dtowned, ib. His brodher's
vanity ruins their design; 124. See Fiefio.
Leward, father, forms a scheme of betraying

Metz to the Imperialifls, 321. Intro-
duces soldiers clad like friars, 322. Is de-
teteld, 323. Is murdered by his monks, 324.
Levef U., Don, his account of the motives which

induced the Emperor Charles V. to resign
hi hizreditary dominions, 352. Note.
Lorrai;, Cardinal of, perfiades Henry II. of

France, to accept the offered alliance with
Pope Paul IV. and is sent to Rpme to ne-
gociatc it, 346. His imprudent beha-
viour toward the duchess of Valentinois, 41 1.
Luther, Martin, dies, 64. Summary of his

charaser, 65. ExtraCt from his last will,

68. Note. See Proteftantr. A view of the
extraordinary effeEs of his revolt from the
church of Rome, on that court and on Europe
in general, 445.
Luxemburg, invaded and over-run by the Duke

of Orleans, 7.Is again invaded by Francis. 5.

M
Magdeburg, the city of, refuses to admit the

Interim enforced by Charles V. and prepares
for defence, 200. Maurice Eleaor of
Saxony appointed to reduce it, 201. Is
put under the ban of Empire, 214. The
territories of, invaded by George of Meck-
lenburg, ib. The inhabitants defeated in a
Tally, 215. Maurice of Saxony arrives and
besieges the city, ai6. Surrenders, ib. The
senate eleas Maurice their burgrave, 218.
Marcellus II. Pope, his chara&er, 338. Dies,

339. Marciano, battle of, between Peter Strozzi,

and the Marquis de Marignano, 314.
Marignano, marquis of, appointed commander

of. the Florentine army, ating against the
French, 311. Defeates the French army
under Peter Strozzi, 314. Lays siege to Siena,
315. Converts the siege into a blockade,
316. Siena surrenders,. ib. Reduces Porto
Ercole, 318. His troops ordered into Pied-
mont by the Emperor, ib.
Martinuzzi, bishop of Waradin, is appoint-

ed to .the government of Transylvania and the
education of the young King, jointly with
the Queen, 222. Negociates with Ferdi-
nand, 223. Prevails on the Queen to resign
Transylvania to Ferdinand, 224. Is appoint-
ed governor of Transylvania, and made a
Cardinal, 225. Is aflitrinated by Ferdinand's
order, 227.
Mary of England, her acceflion, 298. Re-

ceives proposals from the Emperor CharlesV.
of marrying his son Philip, 299. The
Englifl averse to this union, ib. The house
of commons remonfirates against the match,
300. The articles of marriage, ib. The
marriage ratified by parliament, aud com-
pleated, 303. Re.eflablifhes the Romitl
religion, ib. lcerfecutes the Reformers, 304.
Invites Charles to England on his resignation
and paflage to Spain, which he declines, 373.
Is engaged by Philip to aflift him in his war
against France, 38y. Levies money by her

l'rcro-

E.

Prerga.tive to carry on the war, 382. Her
negk&linthe security of Calais, 398. Calais
invellcd and taken by the Duke of Guiit,
400. Dies, 42t.
Miy., daughter of James V. of Sotland, fuc-

ceeds to the crown, an iLfanI, 12. Is
contracted to the Dauphin oa l.cance, 168.
Is educated at the court f France, 210 o, 405.
The mariage. compleated, i;.. Afflimes the
titles and, arms. of Englauion the death of
Mary, 423.
IMtautice, duke of Saxony, his motives fop not

acceding tp the rotetant league, of Sunal-
IaltRAu 20. Marclhs t ti he: aOiftance of
Fedinand in Bluory, /. His difircnce
withll his uncle the: eliuQr, ib. 1Us coniEt
at the diet of Worms, 50. Joins the Em-
peror against the Protestants, 86. Ilia mo-
tives, 0oo. His infliomu conhd~ toward
the Elecor, ilot. Seizes the elecaorateof
Saxony, 4 Saxonyaxon recoveted by the
elftaor, 1 to. His ineafFecual endeavours to
redtce Wittemberg foe the Emperor. 144.
Obtains poleflion. of the eleEtorate, 148.
Is formally invelted at the diet of Augsburg,
75. Becomes dissatisfied with the Empe-
ror, 194. His motives to dicontent ex-
plained, 19I. His address ant caution in
his conducO, 196. Enforces the Interim in
his territories 197. Makes, noverthelefs,
profleons of his attachment to the Refor.
mation, 198. Undertakes to reduce Mag-
deburg to submit to the Interi/, ib. Proteits
againt; the council of Trent, 199. Is com-
mirfsoned by the Emperor to reduce Magde-
burg, 201. Joins Gtorge of Mecklenburg
before Magdeburg, 215. The city capitu-
lates, 216. Begins to intrigue with count
Mansfeldt, 217. Is ele&ced Burgrave of
Magdeburg, 218. Dismisses his troops, 21:9.
His, address in amusing the Emperor, z20.
Makes an alliance with Henry II. of France,
to make war on the Emperor, 229. Makes
a formal requiftion of the Landgrave'* li
berty, 231. Joins his trops, and publifies
a manifesto, 237. Takes pofleifonofAugf-
burg and other cities, 238. An inaffeiual
negociation with Charles, 240. Defeates a
body of the Emperor's troops, 242. Takes
the castle of Ehrenburg, ib. Is retarded by
a mutiny in his troops, 243. Enters In-
fpruck, and narrowly miffes taking Charles,

VOL. III.

244. A negociation between hinm ard
Feidinnnd, 251. Bcfieges Frankfort (on the
Maine, 257. Itis inducements to an accoim-
modation, 258. S;gns a ticaty with the
Emperor at Paflua, 259. ReflcQions cn
his condua in this war, 260. Marches into
Hungary to oppose the Turks, 262. Is
phced at the head of the klague againfl Al-
bert of Brandenburg, 281. I)efcats Albert,
but is killed in the battle, 282. His charac-
ter,. a23. h fuiccecded by his brother Au-
guflis, 284.
Mfetklrdurgb, George of, invades the territo-

ries of Magdeburg for the Emperor, 214.
Dcfeats the Magdeburghers who filly out
on him, 215. Is joinel by Maurice of
Saxony, who afTumes the supreme command,
ib.

Medicria,. John James; fee Mamri.wifo..
Mtdici, Cosmo de, duke o£ Florence, as-

firts his independency againfb the Emperor,
275. Offirs to reduce Siena for the Em-
peror, 311.. Enters into. a war with France,
ib& See Ma'rignatno. His address in pro-
curing the invefiture of Siena from. Phi-
lip II. of Spain, 394. It is granted to him,
396.
Melannbon, is prevailed on to favour the Inte-

rim enforced by the Emperor, 197.
Msvnt, archbishop of, artfully'declares, before

the Emperor, the diet of Augltharg's accep-
tance of the Interim, without- being autho-
rized by it, 174. .
Metz,. seizd by Montmonency the French gc-

neral, 240. The duke of Guifei made
governor. of 267. Is besieged by the Em-
peror, 270. The Emperor deftfid, and re-
tires in a diflreffed condition, 274. A
scheme formed by father Leonard to betray
the city to the Impelialifts, 321. The con-
fpiracy deteied by thb goverhor, 323.
Leonard murdered. by his monks, and his
aflhciate executed,. 324.
MoanlW,. is lent by the count d'Enguien to

Francis for permiflion to give battle to the
marquis de Guaflo, 30. Obtains his fitit
by his spirited arguments, 31. Commands
in Siena, when beficged by the marquis de
M.rignanO, 315. His vigorous defence,
ib. Is reduced by famine, and capitulates,
316.
Monte Alcino, numbers of the citizens of Siena

0 o o Wicie.

retire thither after the reducion of that city
by the Florentines, and establish a free go-
vernment there, 317.
Montmorency, is dilgraced, 6. Conduts the

army of Henry II. to join Maurice of
Saxony, and seizes Metz, 240. Dif-
filades Henry from accepting the offered al-
liance with Pope Paul IV. 345. Commands
the French army against the duke of Savoy,
384. Ietaches D'Andelot to relieve St.
Quintin, ib. Exposes himself imprudently to
an action, and is defeated, 385. Is taken
prisoner, 386. Negociates a peace between
Philip and Henry, 41 i. Returns to France,
and is highly. honoured by Henry, 412. His
afniduity in forwarding the negociations, 424.
His expedient for promoting the treaty of
Chateau Cambrefis, 427.
Mulbaufen, battle of, between the Emperor

Charles V. and the Eletor of Saxony, 141.

M2ufJapba, the declared heir to Sultan Solyman

-the Magnificent, is invefled with the admi-
nifiration of Diarbequir, 292. His father
rendered jealous of his popularity, by the
arts of Roxalana, 293. Is firangled by his
father's order, 296. His only son murdered,
297.

N
Naplet, oppressed by the Spanish viceroy Don

Pedro de Toledo, becomes difaffeaed to the
Emperor Charles V. 277. Is harraffed by

t a Turkish fleet, 278.
Netberlands, isonce more invaded by Francis,

15.: R.fighed bythe Emperor to hi'; son
Philip, 3514. A review of the alterations in,
during the sixteenth century, 455.

Nice, besieged by the French and Turks, 18.
Oe'leant, -duke of, brother to the former, com-

marids the Irmy appointedby Francis I. for
the invafionof Luxembourg, 7. Is prompt-
ed by envy to abandon his conquests, and
join'his brother the Dauphin in Roussillon, 8.
Dies, 53.

P
Pulatinate, the Reformation eltablilhed there

by the Elector Fredetick,. 56.
Parma, the dutchy of, confirmed to Octavio

Farnese, by Pope Julius III. 209. is attacked
by the Imperialists and successfully proteced
by the French, 211.
Pa/au, a treaty concluded there between the

Emperor Charles V. and Maurice of Saxony,
259. Refle&ions on this peace and the con-
dut of Maurice, 260.
Paul III. Pope, summons the council of Trent, 22.

Prorogues it, 23. Summons it again, 46.
Grants the dutchies of Parma and Placentia
to his illegitimate son, 54. Deprives and
excommunicates the elecoral bishop of
Cologne, 71. Presses the Emperor to de-
clare against the Protestants, 72. Concludes
an alliance with him against the Protestants,
78. Indiscreetly publishes this treaty, 80.
His troops join the Emperor, 93. Recals
them, 1 12. Removes the council from Trent
to Bologna, 164. Refuses the Emperor's
request to carry the council back to Trent,
ib. His resentment against the Emperor for
the murder of his son Cardinal Farnese, 167.
Is petitioned by the diet of Auglburg for
the return of the council to Trent,. 169.
Eludes the complying withthis request, 170.
His sentiments of the Interim published by
Charles, 177. Dismisses the council of
Bologna, 182. Annexes Parma and Placen-
tia, to the Holy See, 187. Dies, 188. The
manner of his death inquired into, ib.
Paul IV. Pope, elected, 339. His chara&er

and history, 340. Founds the order of
Theatines, ib. Is the principal occasion
of eltablifhing the inquisition in the Papal
territories, 341. Lays aside his aulterity on
his eleation, 342. His partiality to his ne-
phews, ib. Is alienated from the Emperor
by his nephews, 344. Makes. overtures to
an alliance with France, 345. Is enraged
by the, recess of the diet of Augsburg, 347.
Signs a treaty with France, 348. Is in-
cluded in the truce for five years, concluded
between the Emperor and Henry, 360. His
insidious artifices to defeat this truce, 362.
Absolves Henry from his oath, and con-
cludes a new treaty with him, 366. His
violent proceedings against , Philip, now
K ing of Spain, 376. The Campagna Ro-
rharia seized by the Duke d' Alva, 368.
Concludes a truce with Alva, 369. Con-
traft between his condua and that of Charles,

375.

375. Renews his hostilities against Philip,
377. Is unprovided for military operations,
378. Is reduced to make peace with Philip,
by the recal of the Duke of Guise after the
defeat of St. Qgintin, 392. Receives an
ambaflador from the Emperor Ferdinand to
notify his ele&ion,. but refilfes to fee him or
to acknowledge the Emperor, 402. Dies,
430.
PaUlit, a French officer, sent ambassador from

Francis I. to Sultan Solyman, 14. His
successful negociations at the Porte, ib
Pembroke, earl of, sent by Queen Mary of En-

gland with a body of men to join the Spanish
army in the Low Countries, 382.
Perpignan, the capital of Rouflillon, besieged

by the Dauphin of France, 7. The siege
raised, 8.
Pbilip, Pirnce, son to the Emperor Charles V.

his right of fuccellion recognized by the
Cortes of Arragon and Valencia, 9. Is ac-
knov lcdpct by the flates of the Netherlands,
184. His deportment difgufls the Flemings,
185. His charaOer, 207. Is married to
Mary Qcuen of England, 300, 303. The
Englifli parliament jealous (f 1hin;, 305. His
father rcfigns his hereditary dominions to
him, 349. Is called by his fatherout of Eng-
land, 354. The ceremony of invefling him,
ib. IHis father's addrcfstohinm,356. Com-
miflions Cardinal Granvelle to address thc as-
ftmbly in lis name, 357. Mary Q.ueen-dow-
ager of Hungary resigns her regency, ib. The
dominions of Spain resigned to him, 358.
His unpolitcnefs to the French amb?,.laador
Coligni, 361. Note. ThIe Pope's violent
proceedings againit him, 366. His scruples
concerning commencing hollilities against the
Pope, 367. His ungrateful neglec in paying
his father's pension, 374. Ihe Pope renews
hofililtics againfl him, 377. Aflemblcs an ar-
my in the Low Countries against France, 380.
Goes over to England to engage that kingdom
in war,381. Visits the camp at St. Quintin,
after theviaory, 387. Oppofcs the scheme of
penetrating to Paris, and orders the siege of
St. Qu:ntin to be prosecuted, 388. St.
Qminiin taken by assault, 389. The small
advantages he reaped by these successes, 390.
Builds the Escurial in memory of the battle
of St. Qjintin,391. Concludes a peace with
tlie Pope, 392. Restores Placentia to Ota-

vio Farnese, 394. Grants the invelliture of
Siena to Cosmo di Medici, 396. Enters into
negociations for peace with his prisoner
Montmorency, 411. Death of Qgeen Mary,
421. Addreftes her fiucceflor Elizabeth for
marriage, ib. Elizabeth's motives for rejet-
ing him, 423. Her evasive answer tohiim,
424. Supplants his son Don Carlos and
marries Henry's daughter Elizabeth, 427.
Articles of the treaty of Chateau Cambrefis,
428. Pbillibert, Emmanuel, Duke of Savoy. See

Savoy.
Piadena, Marquis de, invades Transylvania for

Ferdinand, 223. Mifreprcfents Cardinal
Martinuzzi to Ferdinand, and obtains a
commiflion to afrallinate him, 227. Is forced
to abandon Transylvania, 289.
Placentia, the dutchy of, granted together with

that of Parma by Pope Paul III. to his natu-
ral son, Cardinal Farnese, 54. Farnese as-
faflinated there, 166. Is taken poffeflion of
by the Imperial troops. lb, Reflored to
OAavio Farnese, by Philip II. of Spain,
394.
Pok, Cardinal, arrives in England with a lc-

gantine commillion, 304. Endeavours to
mediate a peace between, the Emperor and
the King of France, without fucccfs, 325.
Is recalled from the court of England, by
Pope Paul IV. 3 7 7.
Prague, its privileges abridged by Ferdinand

Kingof Bohemia, 161.
Protefantt. Drive the Duke of Brunfwiok from

his dominions, 24. All rigorous edOrss againl
them fifpended by a recess of the diet of
Spires, 27. Their renonfiranc'e to Ferdi-
dinand at the diet of Worms, 48; Their in-
flexible adherence to the recess of Spires, 49.
Disclaim all conneion with the council of
Trent, 50. Are fcrengtheled by the accef-
sion of Frederick EleEor Palatine, 56. Are
alarmed at the proceedings of the Emperor,
59 77. Tlic Emperor leagues with the Pope
againfl them, 78. Prepare to resist the Empc-
ror, 82. Levy an army, 86. The operationsof
the army difnraacd by the joint commanders,
92. The army difperled, ro6. The Elc&or of
Saxony reduced, 142. The landgrave dc-
ceived by treaty aid confined, 154. The
Emperor's cruel treatment of them, 158.
The interim, a fyflem of theology recoin-
0 o o 2 mlnded
/

T H I

tuended by the Emperor to tlie diet at Augf-
burg, 174. Are proniifd protcaion by the
Emperor, atthe council of Trent, 202: The
Fmperor proceeds rigorously against them,
21 .- Their deputies. obtain a fafe-conduct
friii the Emperor, but are refused by the
council, 221. Maurice of Faxony raiser Pn
army in their cause, 237. See Maurice.
''reaty of Paffau, a9. The Proteltant
Princes again unite to ftrergthen' the Pro-
teltant interest, 33r. Recess of the diet of
Auiglburg on the fubje& of religion, 332.
\hy originally averse to the principles of
toleration, 336.

R
Ratifdon, a diet opened there by the Emperco,

74. The Catholick members of, assert the
authority of the council of Trenl, 75. The
Proleftants present a memorial against it, 76.
The Protellant deputies retire, 77.
Reformaliia, ,the great alteration occasioned by,

in the court of Rome, 445. Contributed to
improve both the morals and learning of the
R6milh church, 449.
Rbeggio, plundered and burnt by Barbarossa,

18.
RicBlitu, Cardinal, his remarks on De Retz's

hiflory of Fiifco's confpil acy 1t25. Note,
Rincaon, the French ambaflfajpr at the Porte,

the motives of his return. to France, 2. Is
murdered in his journey back to Conflntino-
pie, by order of the Imperial governor of
the Milanese, 3.
Roci, the great revolution in the court of,'du-

ring the 'fixrenth, century, 444. How as-
f'eatedy the ravolt qs Luther, 4'45. /The
spirit of its government qhangkd by, 447.
Roxalana, a Rufi"n captive becomes the fa-

vourite miflrefs of Sultan Solyrn.n the Mag-
rificent, 289. Her only daughtcr married to
Rultan the Grand Vizier, 29o. Prccures
herself to ,l? declared: a free v-omrn by the
Sultaqn plp .. Is formally married to him, ib.
Rer!def4t pIymin jcaltqs of the virtues of
. iig fop04 utlqpa, .29,3.,. 1ltflapha llraogled,
296.
Rq/tan, Grand Vizier to Solyman the Magni-

ficejlt,,i married to.his daughter by Roxa-
.ana, 29q. .;nrtears into. Roxlana's scheme
to ruin S91) rnin's son Mu(lapha, il. Is sent

with an army to dellroy him, 294. Draws
Solyman to the army by false reports, a95.

S
Salerno, Prince of, heads the difaffeced Nea-

politans, againfi the oppreflions of the vice-
roy Don Pedro de Toledo, 278. Solicits aid
from Henry II. of France, who infligatcs the
Turks to invade Naples, ib.
Sancerre, count de, defends St. Difiere against

the Emperor Charles, 34. Is deceived into
a surrender by the Cardinal Granvelle, 36.
Savoy, Charles Duke of, is besieged at Nice,

by the French and Turks, 18.
--r--Emmanuel Phillibert Duke of, appoint-

ed by Philip of Spain to command his army
in the Low Countries, 382. Invefls St.
Quintin, ib. Defeats D'Andelot in an en-
deavour to join the garrison, 384. But does
not hinder him from entering the town, 385.
Defeats the Conlable Montmorency, and
takes him prisoner, ib. Is graciously visited
in the camp by Philip, 387.Takes St. Quin-
tin by aflault, 389. Aflifis Montmorency in
negociating peace between Philip and Henry,
412.. Marries 1Henry's filler Elizabeth,
427. 430.
Saxony, Eletor of, appointed joint commander

of the army of the Protestant league, with
the Landgrave of Hefle, 91 Their chara.-
ers compared, 92. Opposes the Landgrave's
intention of giving battle to the Emperor,
95.. His Elecorate feiztd by Maurice, 104.
The army of the league disperse, o16. Re-
covers Saxony, i to. Is amuted by Maurice
with a negociation, i t. Railes an army
to defend himself againfl the Emperor, 136.
Is irrefolule in his meafules, 137. . Charles
palles the Elbe, 138. Is attacked by the
Imperialills, 141. Is taken. prisoner and
harlhly received by the EImper.r, 142. Is
condemned to death by a court martial, 145.
His resolution on the occasion, 146. Is in-
duced by regard to his family to fuircnder his
eletorate, 148. Refuses the Emperor's
cdfire of his approving the Interim, 178. Tl'h
rigour of his confinement increased, ib. Is
carried by the Emperor with him into the
Netherlands, 183. Is rcleafed by.the Em-
peror on Maurice taking arms against him,
but ,chufes to continue with the Empclor,

245.

245. Obtains his liberty after the treaty of
PagIau, 265.
---Henry Duke of, is succeeded by his son
Maurice, 20. His motives for not acceding
to the league of Smalkalde, ib. Marches
to the afilltance of Ferdinand in Hungary, ib.
Joimn the Emperor against the Proteltants,
86..1oo. See Maurice.
Scbertel, Sebastian, a commander in the army

of the Protellant league, his vigotous comi
mencement of hostilities, go. Is injudici-
oufly recalled, 91. Is expelled from Augf-
burg on the dispersion of the Proteflant army,
108.
Scotland, death of James, and aceefion of his

infant daughter Mary, 2. Maty contra&Et
ed to the Dauphin of Francet 168. The
mwrriage celebrateA 465. Maty afltmes
the title and arms of England on the death
of Mary of England, 423. Included in the
treaty of Chateau Cambrefis, 426. Alterati.
on in the condut of Elngland toward, 443.
Sicna, the inhabitants of, implore the af11itnc

of the Emperor Charles V. to defend them
against their nobles, a16. The Imperial
troops endeavour to edflave them, ib. Re.
gain polefison of their city, 27q. Repulse
an attack of the Germans, 288. Is befieg.
ed by the mnrquls de Marignano, 315. the
commander Monluc repulres the afaults vi-
goroufly, ib. The town reduced by famine,
316. Numbers of the citizens retire, and
eftablith a free government at Monte Alcino,
317. The remaining citizens opprefed, ib.
And flockto Monte Alcino, 318. Is granted
by the Emperor to his son Philip, ib. The
investiture given by Philip to Cofito di Me.
dici, 396.
Sievtrbaufn, battle ofy between Maurice of

Saxony, and Albert of Brandcnburgh, 282.
Simalkalde, the Princes of, protefi againll the

authority of the Imperial chamber, and the
recess of the diet at Nuremburgh, 24. Pub-
lith a mahifefto igainftR the pr6cetdings of
the council of Trent, 58. Are alarmed at
the. proceedingb of the Emperor, ). . A
want of unity among the members, 60. The
views of the Eletor of Saxony, atid the
lndgra9e, explained, ib. Appear at the'
diet of Ratilbod by deputies, 74. T'heit'
deputies proteit againt theicOundil of trent,'

16. Their deputies ahtmcd at the Empc.
roms proceedings and declafationsb leate bhe
diet, 77. The Emperor leagues with the
Pope against them, 78. Prepate to refllt
the Entret6r, 82. Ar dItppohnted in their
application to the Vinetihas andSwifs, 83.
As also with Hensy VnI. and Francis, 84.
Altemble a latge tarmy, Bt. Are put under
the ban of the Empire, 88. Declare war
againit tht EmnVeot, go. Holtfllties begun
bySchertd, ib..' They recal hin,, T. he
Eletor of Saxony and Landgrave of Hefl
appointed joint commanders of their army,
ib. The charaaers of the two commaniders
compared, 92. Their opertiions difrated
by this joint cdmmntdl, lb. Cannonade the
Emperor's camp, 96. Make Overtures of
peace to the Emtpetor, tb6. Their army
disperse, ib. The Elector of Saxony re-
duced, 142. The Lanmgrave deceived and
confined, t54. Their warlike slobs seized
by the Emperor, i 58. See Mlltilte.
Solymah the Magnificent, over-runs Hungary

again, in fulfilment of his treaty with Francis,
17. Concludes a truce witthe Emperor, 73.
Lores Tranfylvanla, 225. Ravages tlie
coalts of Italy, 255, 278. Carries a mighty
army into Hungary, ,256. Rc-eftabllhes
Isabella and her son in 'rranfylvania, 289.
His violent attachment to his concubine
Roxalana, ib. Is prevailed on to declare her
a free woman, 291. Formally marries her,
ib. Is rendered jealous of the virtues of his
son Muflapha, by the arts of Roxalana, 23.
Orders him to be firangled, 296. Orders
the murder of Muflaphu's Ton, 297.
Spain, is invaded by the Danphih, 7. The do-

minions of, resigned by Charles to his son
Philip, 358. The arrival of Charles, and
his reception therce 373. The place of his
retreat delcribed, 74. The regal power in,
how enlarged by Charles, 434. The so-
reign acquiitlons added to, 435. Sec Aragon,
Cajlile, Oalida, aleenia , Gt (rmanada,
and t-loy yunta.
Spiret, alolherdiet at, 25. Recers of, in favour

of the Proteflants, 27.
St. D/ifer, in Champagne, invcfted by thle Em-

peror, 34. Is obtained by tlh artifice of
cardinal Granrvelle, 36.

St.
UJ M E.

St. 7ulus, monastery of, in Placenzia, is chosen

by the Emperor Charles V. for his retreat
after his resignation, 374. His situation de-
fcribed, 375. His apartments, ib.
St. suintin, inveRled by the Spanish troops, and

defended by admiral Coligni, 383. D'An-
delot defeated in an endeavour to join the
garrison, 384. But enters the town, 385,
Montmorency defeated by the duke of Savoy.
ib. The town taken by assault, 389.
Strozzi, Peter, some account of, 312. Is in-

trulted with the command ot the French ar-
my in Italy, 313. Is defeated by the mar-
quis de Marignano, 314.
Suabia. The Proteflant religion suppresscd there

by the Emperor Charles V. 213.
Sweden, a summary view of the revolutions in,

during the sixteenth century, 456.

T
Termes, marefchal de, governor of Calais,

takes Dunkirk by form, 406. Engages the
count of Egmont, and is defeated by the ac-
cidental arrival of an English squadron on the
coafl, 407. Is taken prisoner, ib.
Terrouane, taken and demolished by the Empe-

ror Charles V. 286.
Tbeatiner, the order of, by whom founded,

340. Tbionville, in Luxembourg, taken by the duke

of Guise, 406.
Toledo, Ludovico de, nephew to Cosmo di Mc-

dici sent by his uncle to negociate with Philip
11. cf Spain for the invefliture of Siena, 395.
Toldo, Don Pedro de, viceroy of Naples, op-

presses the Ncopolitans, 278. And occafi-
ons the Turks to ravage the coalls of Na-
ples, ib.
loleratisn, refleAions on the progrcfs of, in

Germany, 333. Why mutually allowed a-
mong the ancient Heathens, 334. How the
primitive Christians became averre to, ib.
'ranfylvania, is surrendered to Ferdinand King

of the Romans, byQueen Isabella, 22S.
Trent, the council of, summoned, 22. Pro-

rogued, 23. Again summoned, 46. Is open-
ed, 56. Declares the apocryphal scriptures
canonical, 70. Eflablifhes the authority of
the church traditions, 71. The council, on
rumours of an infecion in the city, is tranf-
lated to Bologna, 164. Henry II. of France

T H E, &c.

protefis against the council, 212. The coun-
cil breaks up onj the approach of Maurice of
Saxony, 245. Hiflorical remarks on this
council, 246. Charaters of its hiflorians,
247.

Trent, cardinal of, sent by the Emperor Charles

.V. to conclude an alliance with the Pope,
76. The nature of this treaty, 78.
TufJany, a review of the liate of, during the

sixteenth century, 453.

V
Vaucelles, treaty of, between Charles V. and

Henry II. of France, 359.
Venice, a review of the state of that republic

during the sixteenth century, 452.
Verrina, the confident of the count of Lavag-

no, encourages him in his scheme of over-
turning the government of Genoa, 116. Is
protected by Francis on the ruin of that con.
fpiracy, 131.
Fielleville, the French governor of Metz, de-

tecs father Leonard's conspiracy to betray
the city to the Imperialists, 322. Executes
the conspirators, 324.
Ulm, the government of that city violently al-

tered, and its reformed ministers carried away
in chains, by the Emperor Charles V. 181.
United Provinces, of the Netherlands, a brief

view of their revolt against the dominion of
Spain, 455.

W
Wallop, Sir John, joins the Emperor Charles

V. at the ficge of Landrecy, with a body of
Englifll troops, 17.
War, general refleeions on the viciflitudes of,

430. Wenttwortb, lord, governor of Calais, remon.

ftrates in vain with the English privy council
to provide for its security, 399. Is attacked
by the duke of Guise, and foiced to capitu-
late, 400.
Wittcmberg, invelted by the Emperor Charles

V. and defended by Sybilla of Cleves, wile
to the Eletor of Saxony, 143.

W'orms, dietat, opened, 47.
kVyat, Sir Thomas, raises an infurreEtion in

Kent againfl Queen Mary of England, on
account of the Spanish match, 302. Is sub-
dued and punished, ib.
F I N I S.
