----

&--
I ,ubb'ihed by-ai- Inrv. ks~r Giasanw. 1001,

THE
HISTORY

OF
SCOTLAND,

DOURING THE REIGNS OF
QUEEN MARY, AND KING JAMES VI.

TILL
His ACCESSION TO THE CROWN OF ENGLAND.

WITH
A REVIEW of the SCOTTISH HISTORY

previous to that Period;
And an APPENDIX containing ORIGINAL PAPERS.

BY WILLIAM ROBERTSON, D.D.
lATE PRINCIPAL OF THE UNIVERSITY O EDINBURGH, AND H1i.

TORIOGRAPLHE TO HIS MAJESTY FOR SCO ILAND.

IN THREE VOLUMES.

V O I. III.

G L A S G 0 W,

ptinte t Clbapmnn ani fl ng,
FOR J. I'MRAY, BOOKSELLER.

80o0.

# A CRITICAL DISSERTATION CONCERNING The MURDER of King HENRY, and the genuineness of the Queen's Letters to Bothwell.

A
CRITICAL DISSERTATION

CONCERNING
The MOUDER of King HENRT, and the genuineness

of the Queen's Letters to Bothwell.

IT is not my intention Tn engage in all the controver-
fies to which the murder of king Henry, or the letters
from Mary to Bothwell, have given rife; far less to ap-
pear as an adversary to any particular author, who had
treated of them. To repeat, and to expose all the ill-
founded assertions with regard to these points, which
have flowed from inattention, from prejudice, from par-
tiality, from malevolence, and from dishonesty, would
be no less irksome to myself, than unacceptable to most
of my readers. All I propose, is to assist others in form-
ing some judgment concerning the faas in dispute, by
fating the proofs produced on each fide, with as much
brevity as the cafe will admit, and with the fame atten-
tion and impartiality which I have endeavoured to exer-
cife in examining other controverted points i the Scot-
tilh history.

In order to account for the king's murder, two dif-

ferent fyflems have been formed. The one fppofes
Bothwell both to have contrived and executed this
crime. The other imputes it to the earls of Murray,
and Morton, and their party.

The decision of many controverted facts in history, is

a matter rather of curiosity than of ulf. They stand
detached; and whatever we determine with regard to
them, the fabric of the Itory remains untouched. But
the said under diljlute in this place is a fuRdamental
and essential one, and according to the opinion which
an :hilturnl a,.hi s itll igard to it, hie nlul vary and

dispose thewhole of his subsequent narration. An hi-
ftorical system may be tried in two different ways, whe-
ther it be consistent with probability, and whether it be
fupportedby proper evidence.

Those who charge the king's murder upon Bothwell,

argue in the following manner; and though their rea-
fonings have been mentioned already in different places
of the narrative, it is necessary to repeat them here.
Mary's love for Darnly, fay they, was a sudden and
youthful passion. The beauty of his person was his
chief merit. His capricious temper soon raised in the
queen a difgufi, which broke out on different occasions.
His engaging in the conspiracy against Rizio, converted
this disgust into an indignation, which he was at no
pains to conceal. This breach was, perhaps, in its own
nature, irreparable; the king certainly wanted that art
and condescension which alone could have repaired it.
It widened every day, and a deep and fettled hatred es-
faced all remains of affection. Bothwell observed this,
and was prompted by ambition, and perhaps by love,
to found on it a scheme, which proved fatal both to the
queen and to himself. He had served Mary at different
times with fidelity and success. He insinuated himself
into her favour, by address and by flattery. By degrees
he gained her heart. In order to gratify his love, or at
least his ambition, it was necessary to get rid of the king.
Mary had rejected the propolal made to her for obtain-
ing a divorce. The king was equally bated by the par-
tifans of the house of Hamilton, a considerable party in
the kingdom; by Murray, one of the most powerful
and popular persons in his country; by Morton and his
aflbciates, whom he had deceived, and whom Bothwell
had bound to his interest by a recent favour. Among
the people Darnly was fallen under extreme contempt,
He expcdted for all there reasons, that the murder of
the king would pass without any inquiry, and to Mary's
love, and to his own address and good fortune, he
trufled for the accomplishment of the reft of his wishes.
What Bothwell expected .really came to pass. Mary,
if not privy herself to the design, connived at an action
which rid her of a man whom the had such good rea-

son to detest. A few months after he was married to
the person who was both fulpected and accused of coIm-
mitting the murder.

Those who charge the guilt upon Murray and his

party, reason in this manner: Murray, they fay, was a
man of boundless ambition. Notwithflanding the il-
legitimacy of his birth, he had early formed a dfign of
utulrping the crown. On the queen's return into Scot-
land, he insinuated himfelfinto her favour, and engro -
fed the whole power into his own hands. lie set him-
self against every proposal of marriage which was
made to her, lcit his own chance of succeeding to the
crown should be deflroyed. He hated Darnly, and xw as
no less hated by him. In order to be revenged on himr
he entered into a fidden friendship with Bothwell, his
ancient and mortal enemy. He encouraged him to
perpetrate the crime, by giving him hopes of marrying
the queen. All this was done with a dfigln to throw
upon the queen herself tl:e imputation of being accctlary
to the murder, and under that pretext, to dllrov r.oth-
w(ll, to depose and imprison her, and to fcize the fcep-
tre which he had w'reilcd out of her hands.

The former of thec fyfitems has an air of probability,

is consistent with itself, and solves apu aranccs. In tlic
latter, some airtions are faife, lbme links are wantinl
in the chain, and eflets appear, of which no luirEcient
cause is produced. Murrav, on the queen's return into
Scotland, served her with great fidelity, and by his pru.
dent adminifllation rendered her so popular, and o
powerful, as enabled her with ease to quash a formida-
ble inlurrection railed by himself in the e .r I565.
What motive cotld induce Murray to mnluricr a prire
without capacity, without followers, without influence
over the nobles, whom the queen, y her ncgle', had
ieduced to the lowelt state of contempt, and whlo, after
a long difgrac, had regained (according to the moil fa-
vourable luppofition) the precariouJs pofTicfion or hlti
favour only a few days Letore his death? It is di;ult
to conceive what Murray had to fear from the king'a
li;e. It is nro as' matter to gucls what he could gain
Vol. 111. 3

by his death. If we suppose that the queen had no pre-
vious attachment to Bothwell, nothing can appear more
chimerical than a scheme to persuade her to marry a
man, whose wife was fill alive, and who was not only
fufpeted, but accused, of murdering her former hus-
band. But that such a scheme should really succeed is
fill more extraordinary.-If Murray had intigated
Bothwell to commit the crime, or had himself been ac-
ceffary to the commission of it, what hopes were there
that Bothwell would silently bear from a fellow-cri.
minal all the persecutions which he suffered, without
ever retorting upon him the accusation, or revealing
the whole scene of iniquity ? An ancient and deadly
feud had subsisted between Murray and Bothwell; the
queen with difficulty had brought them to some terms
of agreement. But isit probable that Murray would
choose an enemy, to whom he had been so lately recon-
ciled, for his confident in the commission of such an at-
trocious crime? Or, on the other han'l, would it ever
enter into the imagination of a wife man, first to raise
his rival to filpreme power,-in hopes that afterwards he
should find ome opportunity of depriving him of that
pox-er? The nioft adventurous politician never hazard-
ed such a dangerous experiment. The most credulous
folly never trusted such an uncertain chance.

But, however strong these general reasonings may

he, we must decide according to the particular evidence
pi'oduced. This we now proceed to examine.

That Bcthwell was guilty of the king's murder, ap-

pears, . From the concurring testimony of all the con-
tempol r hiftorinns. 2. From the confession of those
pcrfons who suffered for assisting at the commission of
the crime, and wiho entered into a minute detail of all
its circumstances. Anders, ii. x65. 3. From the ac-
knowledgment of Mary's own conmiffioncrs, who al-
low BcRhwell to have been one of those who were
guilty ufrhis crime. Good. ii. Z. 4. From the ex-
Fr'.s ctflinc;n of Lrel, , ifhop tf Ross, to the fame es-
fcd with the ormcr. I)cf. of Qc Mary's Hon. And.
i. 75. Id. iii .

p .

3 . Morton, at his death, declared
r,,:; Bo:hwcll had fulii:cd himn, at diffcrent times,

to concur in the conspiracy formed againlf the life of
the king; and that he was informed by Archibald
Douglas, one of the conspirators, that Bothwell was
present at the murder. Crawf. Mem. App. 4. The
letter from Douglas to the queen, published in the Ap-
pendix No. XIV. confirms Morton's testimony. 6.
Lord Herries promiles, in his own name, and in the
name of the nobles who adhered to the queen, that they
would concur in punishing Bothwell as the murderer of
the king. Append. No. XXIV.

The most direc charge ever brought again ft Murray

is in there words of bishop Lefly: " Is it unknown,;'
addressing himself to the earl of Murray, " what the

lord Herries said to your face openly, even at your
own table, a few days after the murder was com-
" mitted? Did he not charge you with the foreknow-

ledge of the fame murder? Did he not, nlla circui
tione ufjs, flatly and plainly burden you, that riding

, in Fife, and coming with one of your most assured
c and trusty servants the fame day whereon you de-
' parted from Edinburgh, said to him, among other
' talk, This night ere morning lord Darnly ihall loli
c his life?" Defence of QMary, Anders ii. 75. But
the assertion of a man so heated with faction as Lefty,
unless it were supported by proper evidence, is of little
weight. The servant to whom Murray is said to have
spoken these words, is not named; nor the manner in
which this secret conversation was brought to light
mentioned. Lord Herries was one of the most zea-
lous advocates for Mary, and it is remarkable, that in
all his negotiations at the court of England, he never
once repeated this accusation of Murray. In antwcting
the challenge given him by lord Lindsay, Herries had
a fair opportunity of mentioning Murray's knowledge
of the murder; but, though he openly accuses of thllat
crime some of those who adhered to him, he indultri-
oufly avoids any insinuation againt Murray hinfelf.
Keith, Pref. xii. Mary herself, in conversation with
fir Francis Knolles, accused Morton and Maitland of
being privy to the murder, but does not mention Mur-

B

ray. And. iv. 55. When the bihop of Ross and lord
Herries themselves appeared before the-Englifh council,
January Ix, ir6o, they declared themselves ready, in
oliedience to the queen's command, to accuse Murray
and his aflciates of being acceffar to the murder, but
"they being also required, whether they, or any of
" them, as of thcmselves, would accuse the said earl
" in special, or any of his adherents, or thought them
" ,uilt thereof;" they answered, " That they took

God to witness that none of them did ever know
' any thing of the conspiracy of that murder, or were

in council and foreknowledge thereof; neither who

' were devisers, inventors, and executors of the fame,
"till it was publicly discovered long thereafter by
" fame of the afaffins, who suffered death on that ac-
" count." Good. ii. 308. These words are taken out
of a register kept by Ross and Herries themselves, and
seem to be a direc confutation of the bishop's asser-
tio:l.

The earls of Huntly and Argvll, in their Prot/fl.t;on

io::cin, te llMurder of' te Ktrg of Scot,, after mentioning
the conference at Craigmillar, concerning a divorce,
add, " So after these premises, the murder of the king

following, we judge in our consciences, and hold for

" certain and truth, that the earl of Murray and fecre-
" trv Lcthington were authors, inventors, counsellors,
" and causers of the fame murder, in what manner,
· or by whatsoever persons the fame was executed."
Anders. iv. 88. But, I. This is nothing, more than
the private opinion or personal affirmation of these two
noblemen. a. The conclusion which they make has no
connection with the premises on which they found it:
Bccaufe Murray proposed to obtain for the queen a di-
vorce from her hudband with her own consent, it does
not follow that therefore he committed the murder with-
out her knowledge. 3 Huntly and Argyll were at that
time the leaders of that party opposite to Murray, and
animated with all the rage of faction. 4. Both of them

r ere Murray's personal enemies. Huntly, on account
of the treatment which his family and clan had receiv-
ed from that nobleman. Argyll was desirous of being

divorced from his wife, with whom he lived on no good
terms, Knox, 328. and by whom he had no children.
Crawf. Peer. 19. She was Murray's siser, and by his
interest he had obftrudced that design. Keith, 551.
These circumstances would go far towards invalidating
a positive testimony; they more than counterbalance
an indeterminate suspicion. 5. It is altogether uncer-
tain whether Huntly and Argyll ever subscribed this
proteflation. A copy of such aprotefiation as the queen
thought would be of advantage to her cause, was tranf-
mitted to them by her. Anders. iv. b. ii. 86. The
protestation itself, published by Anderson, is taken from
an unfubfcribed copy with blanks for the date and place
of subscribing. On the back of this copy, there is past-
ed, indeed a paper, which Cecil has marked " Answer
" of the earl of Murray to a writing of the earls of
"Huntly and Argyll." Anders. 94, 195. But it can
scarce be esteemed a reply to the above-mentioned pro-
teftation. Murray's answer bears date at London, Ja-
nuary 9, I568. The queen's letter, in which fie in-
closed the copy of the protefation, bears date at Bow-
ton, Jan. , i368. Now it is scarce o be supposcd that
the copy could be ent into Scotland, be subscribed by
the two earls, and be seen and answered by Murray
within so hort a time. Murray's reply teems intended
only to prevent the impression which the vague and un-
certain accusations of his enemies might make in his ab-
fence. Cecil had got the original of the queen's letter
intohiscuftody. Anderfliv. i8. Tisnaturallyleads
us to conjecture that the letter itself, together with the
inclosed protestation, were intercepted before they came
to the hands of Huntly and Argyll. Nor is this mere
conjecure alone. The letter to Huntly, in which the
protestation was inclosed, is to be found; Cott. Lib-
Cal. c. . fol. 280. and is an original subscribed by Ma-
ry, though not written with her own hand, because she
seldom chose to write in the Englilh language. The
proteflation is in the fame volume, fol. 28z. and is ma-
nifeftly written by the fame person who wrote the queen's
letter. This is a clear proof that both were intercepted.
So that much has been founded on a paper not fubl'crib-

## Answers to the Objections and Alledgance of the Queen, ... the Earl of Murray Lord Regent, the Earl of Morton, ..., Glencairn, Hume, Ruthven, &c. to have been moved to armour, for that they adhorred and ...

ed by the two earls, and probably never seen by them.
Besides, this method which the queen took of fending
a copy to the two earls, of what was proper for them
to declare with regard to a conference held in their own
pretence, appears omewhat suspicious. It would have
been more natural, and not so liable to any mifinterpre-
tation, to have desired them to write the most exad ac-
count, which they could recollel, of what had passed
in the conversation at Craigmillar.

The queen's commissioners at the conferences in Eng-

land accused Murray and his associates of having mur-
dered the king. Good. ii. 28. But these accusations
are nothing more than loose and general affirmations,
wirhout descending to such particular circumfiances as
either ascertain their truth, or discover their fallehood.
lIie fame accusation is repeated by the nobles aftembled
at Diuubarton, Sept. x568. Good. ii. 359. And the
flme observation may'be made concerning it.

All the queen's advocates have endeavoured to ac-

er 'lut for Mlurray's murdering of the king, by supposing
thi-t it was done on purpose that he might have the pre-
tence of disturbing the queen's administration, and there-
Ib rendering ineffectual her general revocation of crown
lands, which would have deprived hini and his afiociates
of the best part of their eflates. Lefly Def. of Mary's
Hlon. p. 73. But whoever confiders the limited powers
of a Scottihf monarch, will fee that iuch a revocation
c'uld no; he very formidable to the nobles. Every kilg
,f Scotland began his reign with filch a revocationi and
.s often as it a as renewed, the power of the nobles ren-
.crt-d it ineffetual. The best vindication of Mun-ay
and his party trom this accusation, is that which they
prci,:edtt to the queen of England, and which hath
i:cer hitherto bten publithed.
An crr t the Obljeionf and AUledgan;e of the een, alledg-

' iLe Earl of Mlurray Lord Regent, te ual of Morton,

_,iar, Glkcairn, RIume Ruthven, C'c. to bave been mooed
t. rmour,fcr that they abhorred and migbt nt abide lcr ge-
s atisnz of tib Alienation made of ejr Pts ; ty.

It is answered, that is alledged but all appearance,

and it appears God has bereft the alledgance of all wit
and good remembrance, for thir realbns following:

Imprimis, as to my lord regent, he never had occasion

to grudge thereat, in refpedt the queen made him privy
to the fame, and took relblution with him for the exe-
cution thereof, letting his lordship know fle would a-
furedly in the famine except all things (he had given to
him, and ratify them in the next parliament as the did
indeed; and for that cause wished my lord to leave be-
hind him mailer John Wood, to attend upon the fame,
to whom he declared, that als well in that as in all o-
ther her grants it hould be provided, yea of free will
did promise and of'er before ever he demanded, as it
came to pass without any lett or impediment; for all
was ratified by her command, and hand write, at the
parliament, but [i. e. without] any difficulty.

Item as to my lord of Morton, he could not grudge

thereat quha never had of her property worth twenty
dollars that ever I knew of.

Item the fame, I may fay of my lord Glencairn.
Item the fame, I may fay of my lord Hume.
Item the fame, I may fay of my lord Ruthven.
Item the fame, I may lay of my lord Lindsay.
Only my lord of Marr, had ane little thing of the

property quilk alfua was gladly and liberally confirmed
to him, in the faidfparliament preceding a year; was
never ane had any cause of mikcontent of that revoca-
tion, far less to have put their lives and heritage to to
open and manifest ane danger as they did for sic ane
frivole cause.

Gyf ever any did make evil countenance, and how

any milcontentment of the said revocation, it was my
lord of Argyll in fpeciall, quha lpak largely in the time of
parliament thairanents to the queen herself, and did
complain of the manifest corruption of ane at of par-
liament past upon her majesty's return, and fa did let
any revocation at that time; but the armour for revenge
of the king's deid was not till twa months after, at
qnhat time there was no occalion given thereof, nor
icver a man had mind thereof.

Having thus examined the evidence which has been

produced against the earls of Murray and Bothwell; we
shall next proceed to inquire whether the queen herself
was accefHry to the murder of her hulband.

No sooner was the violent death of Darnly known,

than strong suspicions arose, among some of her subjes,
that Mary had given her consent to the commission of
that crime. And. ii. 156. Wre are informed, by her
own amhaffador in France, the archbhihop of Glasgow,
that the sentiments of foreigners, on this head, were no
less unfavourable to her. Keith, Pref. ix. Many of her
nobles loudly accused her of that crime, and a great
part of the nation, by supporting them,, seem to have
allowed the accusation to be well founded.

Some crimes, however, are of such a nature, that

they scarce admit of a positive or diret proof. Deeds
of darkness can seldom be brought perfecly to light.
Where persons are accused not of being principail, but
only of being acceari, to a crime; not of having per-
petrated it themselves, but only of giving content to the
commission of it by others, the proof becomes still more
difficult: and unless when some accomplice betrays the
secret, a proof by circumflances, or presumptive evi-
dcnce, is all that can be attained. Even in judicial trials,
such evidence is sometimes held to be sufficient for con-
demning criminals. The degree of conviAtion which
such evidence carries along with it,-is often not inferior
to that which arises from positive testimony; and a con-
curring series of circumstances latisfies the understand-
ing no ess than the express declaration of witnesses.

Evidence of both thele kinds has been produced againIt

Mary. We hall first confider that which is founded
upon circumstances alone.

Some of these suspicious circumstances preceded the

king's death; others were fubfcquent to it. With re-
gard to the former, we may observe that the queen's
violent love of Darnly was soon converted into an aver-
sion to him no less violent; and that his own ill con-
duct and excesses of every kind, were such, that if they
did not justify, at least they account for this sudden
change of her disposition towards him. The rife and

progress of this domestic rupture, I have traced with
great care in the hifory, and to the proofs of it which
may be found in papers publilhed by other authors, I
have added those contained in App. No. XVI. and XVII.
Du Croc, the French amballador, who was an eye-wit-
ness of what he describes, not only represents her dif-
gust to Darnly to be extreme, but declares that there
could be no hopes of a recmncilement between them,
" The queen is in the hands of physicians, and I do at-
sure you is not at all well; and I do believe the princi-
pal part of her dilafe to consist in deep grief and for-
row; nor does it seem poffille to make her forget the
fame. Still he repeats these words, I could vuifi to be
drad. You know very well that the injury he has re-
ceived is exceeding great, and her majesty will never
forget it.-To speak my mind freely to you, I do not
expect, upon several accounts, any good understanding
between them, [i. e. the king and queen], unless God es-
fectually put to his hand.-His bad deportment is incur-
able; nor can there ever be any good expeóced from
him, for several reasons, which I might tell you was I
present with you. I cannot pretend to foretell how all
may turn, but I will sav, that matters cannot subsist
long as they are, without being accompanied with fun-
dry bad consequences." Keith, Pref. vii. Had Henry
died a natural death at this junceure, it must have been
confidered as a very fortunate event to the queen, and as
a seasonable deliverance from a husband who had become
altogether odious to her. Now as Henry was murdered
a few weeks afterwards, and as nothing had happened
to render the queen's aversion to him less violent, the
opinion of those who confidered Mary as the author of
an event which was manifestly so agreeable to her, will
appear perhaps to some of our readers to be neither un-
natural nor over-refined. If we add to this, what has
been observed in the history, that in proportion to the
increase of Mary's hatred of her hulband, Bothwell
made progress in her favour, and that he became the
object not only of her confidence, but of her attach-
ment, that opinion acquires new strength. It is easy to
observe many advantages which might redound to Ma-

ry as well as to Bothwell from the king's death but ex-
cepting them no person, and no party in the kingdom,
could derive the least benefit from that event. Both-
well, accordingly, murdered the king, and it was, in
that age, thought no violent imputation on Mary's cha-
radter, to suppose that she had consented to the deed.

The steps which the queen took after her hulband's

death add fength to that supposition. . Melvil, who
was in Edinburgh at the time of the king's death, asserts,
that " every body fufpeAed the earl of Bothwell; and
those who durst speak freely to others, said plainly that
it was he," p. iSS. . Mary having issued a procla-
mation, on the izth of February, offering a reward to
any person who hould discover those who had murder-
ed her hulband; And. i. 36; a paper in answer to this
was affixed to the gates of the tolbooth, February 6,
in which Bothwell was named as the chief person guilty
of that crime, and the queen herself was accused of hav-
ing given her content to it. And. ii. 156. 3. Soon after,
February 20, the earl of Lennox, the king's father,
wrote to Mary, conjuring her, by every motive, to
prosecute the murderers with the utmost rigour. He
plainly declared his own suspicions of Bothwell, and
pointed out a method of proceeding against him, and
for discovering the other authors of the crime, no less
obvious than equitable. He advised her to seize, and
to commit to sure custody, Bothwell himself, and those
who were already named as his accomplices; to call an
assembly of the nobles; to issue a proclamation, inviting
Bothwell's accusers to appear; and if, on that encou-
ragement, no person appeared to accuse them, to hold
them as innocent, and to dismiss them without further
trial. And. i. 40. 4. Archbishop Beatoun, her am-
baffador in France, in a letter to Mary, March 9th, em-
ploys arguments of the utmost weight to persuade her to
prosecute the murderers with the greatest severity. " I
can conclude naething (fays he) by quhat zour majesty
writes to me zourfelf, that fen it has plefit God to con-
serve zow to take a rigorous vengeance thereof, that
rather than it be not actually taine, it appears to me
better in this warld that ze had loft life and all. I ak

your majeftie pardon, that I write fae far, for I can heir
naething to zour prejudife, but I man [must] conitraind-
ly writ the famin, that all maycome to zour knawledge;
for the better remede may be put thereto. Heir it is
needful that ze forth shaw now rather than ever of be-
fore, the greite vertue, magnanimitie, and constance
that God has grantit zow, be quhais grace, I hope ze
fall overcome this most heavy envie and difplefir of the
committing thereof, and conserve that reputation in all
godliness, ze have conquift of lang, quhich can appear
na wayis mair clearlie, than that zou dofich [filch] jus-
tice that the bail [whole] world may declare zour inno-
cence, and give tefimnony forever of their treaoln that
has committed (but [without] fear of God or man) so
cruel and ungodly a murther, quhairof there is fa micAt,
[much] ill spoken, that I am conftraini't to al zou
mercy, that neither can I or will I make the rehearlal
thereof, which is ow.r [too] odious. But alas! madame,
all over Europe this day, there is na purpose in head fa
frequent as of zour majeftie, and of the present slate of
zour realm, quhilk is in the most part interpretit linift-
erly.' Keith, Pref. ix. 5. Elizabeth, as appears from
Append. Vol. I. No. XIX. urged the fame thing in
strong terms. 6. The circumflances of the cafe itlelf,
no leis than these solicitations and remonstrances, called
for the utmost vigour in her proceedings. Her husband
had been murdered in a cruel manner, almost in her
own presence. Her fubjeds were filled with the utmolt
horror at that crime. Bothwell, one of her principal
favourites, had been publicly accufd as the author of it.
Refledlions, extremely dishonourable to herself, had
been thrown out. If indignation and the love ofjuftice,
did not prompt her to pursue the murderers with ar-
dour, decency, at least, and concern for vindicating her
own character, hould have induced her to avoid any
appearance of remifnefs or want of zeal.

But initead of this, Mary continued to discover, in all

her aions, the utmolt partiality towards Bothwcll.
On the ISth of February, five days after the murder,
the bestowed on him the reversion of the superiority of
the town of Leith. which, in the year i565, Ihe had

## Copy from the original in the charter - house of the city of Edinburgh of an Assianation to the reversion of the superiority of Leith by queen Mary, to the earl of Bothwell.

mortgaged to the citizens of Edinburgh. This grant
·vas of much importance, as it gave him not only the
command of the principal port in the kingdom, but a
great acendant over the citizens of Edinburgh, who
were extremely desirous of keeping poffnffion of it

* Copy from te original in the cbarter-bofe f tLe city of Edin.

hurgb of an Affenation to t1 rrion of ite fuperioritr of
Leith by green A/ary, to the earl o Bahwe-zl.

Maria Dei gratia Regina Scotorum, omnibus prohis

hominibus fuis ad quos prxlentes literie pervenerint fa-
lutem. Sciatis, quod nos ad memoriam reducentts
multiplex bonum verum et fidele fervitium, non tantum
quondam noftrae chariffime matri Maria Regina regni
nofiri pro telr.pore in noflra minoritate taum et im-
penfum, verurn ctiam nobifinct ipfis, tan intra partes
Galliae quam intra hoc nofirum rgnum, ad extentio-
nem noftri honoris et auotnritatis in punitione furum,
malifaaorum, et tranfgrefiorum intra idem, per no-
itrum confilum coniaguincum ct confiliarium Jacobun
comitem Bothuile, dominuml Halis. Creighton et Lid-
difdale, magnum adinirallum regni noltri, commiffio-
nem et oncrationem ad Ilun crftictunl habentem, per
quas ipfe fimm corpus et vitam in magno periculo po-
fit ; ac etiam, in performatione et extentione noflri
dicti fcrvitii, fuam hcreditatem, supra fummam viginti
millium mcrcarum hujus noflri regi, alienavit ac lefit.
Et nos cegitantes qutd, ex nofira principali honore et
devoria dllum nostrum confifum confangulneum & con-
filiarium eunm quodam accidente et gratitudine recom-
penfare et gratificare incumbit que nos commode fibi
con,-edere poterimus, unde ipfe magis habilis omnibus
fiuturus temporibus efle poterit, et ad hujulinodi per-
forandum in omnibus caufis feu eventibus; In recom-
penfationem quorum prenmifforum, ac pro diverfis aliis
nolil is ratlonabilibus caufis et confiderationibus nos mo-
ventibus, Fecimus, &c. dicum Jacobum comiten Bo-
thuile, &c. ac suos Laeree s n afculos (uofcunque nofirog
leeitimos, &c. aflignatos in ct ad literas reverfionis lac-
tas, &c per Symtinem Plefiion de codel.n militem, prt.c

a. Bothwell being extremely desirous to obtain the corn-
rnand of the castle of Edinburgh, the queen, in order to
prevail on the earl of Mar to surrender the government
of it, offered to commit the young prince to his cuftodv.
Mar consented; and he inflantly appointed Bothwell
governorof the castle. And. i. Pref. 64. Keith, 3 ).
3. The inquiry into the murder, previous to Bothwell's
trial, seems to have been conducted with the urmolt re-
miffnefs. Buchanan exclaims loudly against this. And.
ii. 24. Nor was it without reaibn that he did lo, as is
evident from a circumitance in the affidavit of Thomas
Nelson, one of the king's servants, who was in the houle
when his master was murdered, and was dug up alive
out of the rubbish. Being examined on the Monday as-
ter the king's death, " This deponar 'chew the Bonkle
had the key of the cellare, and the Queenis fervandis
the keys of her llalmir. Q khlk the laird ofTullibardin
hearing, said, Hald thair, here is ane ground. Efter
quhilk words pokin, thai left of, and proceedit na ar-
ther in the inquifirion." And. iv . p. .67. Had there
been any intention to search into the bottom of the mat-
ter a cirlcumfPliace of so much importance merited the

pofitum, balivos, consules, et communitatem huius no-
firi burgi de Edinburgh, pro feipfis ac uis fuccefioribus,
&c. ohis, noftrifque heredibus, fuccenflribus, et aflinna-
tis pro redemptione, &c. uperioritatis totils villa de
Leith, &c. impignorata per nos ditis praerfito, &c.
filb reverfione alienate continentis fummanm decem mil-
lium mercarum nionetae praefcriptxa numerandlum et
calculandum in parochiali ecclesia de Edinburgh, filper
prt-nmnitlon qtadraginta dicrum, ut moris eft, velti
in didlis rc\erfionis iteris, &. de data vo Octob. 1 6i.
&c. (The rcit is torm, and contains a claulc of at)folut,:
warrandice.) 1 cujus K RE T srTI I ) NI u prrefen-
tibus magnum figillum noflrurr. apponi fecimus Apui
Edinhlrgh derinio quinto die menfia Februarii, anno
Domini millcfimo quingentefimo fexagefilo fcxto, t'
legni nofiri vicelimo quinto.

T.' ce great el nt:'e.
Vol. III. C

most careful enquiry. 4. Notwithflanding Lennox's
repeated solicitations, notwithfianding the reasonable-
ness of his demands, and the neceflity of complying
with them, in order to encourage any accuser to appear
against Bothwe!l, fle not only refused to commit him
to cifody, or even to remove him from her presence
and couni!s; And. i. 42, 48. but by the grants which
we have meutioned, and by other circumitaices, difeo-
vered an increase of attachment to him. 5. She could
not avoid bringing Bothwell to a public trial; but she
permitted him to fit as a member in that niceting of
the privy-council which directed his own trial; and the
trial itself was carried on wi:h filch unnecessary preci-
pitancy, and with fb many other fufpic:ous circumftan-
ces, as render his acquittal rather an argument of his
guilt than a proof of his innocence These circumftan-
rcs have all been mentioned at length in Book IV. and
therefore arc not repeated in this place. 6. Two days
after the tria!, Mary gave a public proof of her regard
for Bothw-ell, by appointing him to carry the sceptre be-
fore her at tie rr.teting of parliament. Keith, 378.
7. In that parliament Ihe granted him a ratification of
all the vast pcffcfilons and honours which she had con-
ferred uon him, in which was contained an ample e-
numeration of all the services he had performed. And.
i. t7. S. Though Melvil, who foresaw that her at-
tachment to Bothwell would at length induce her to
marry him, warned her of the infamy and danger which
would attend that aion, she not only disregarded this
salutary admonition, but discovered what had passed
between them to Bothwell, which exposed Melvil to
her indignation. Melv. Ij6. 9. Bothwell ized Mary
as he returned from Stirling, April 24. If he had done
this without her knowledge and consent, such an insult
could not have failed to have filled her with the nmot
violent indignation. But according to the account of
an old MS. "The friendly love was so highly contradl-
e.l between this great princess and her enormous sub-
jc-, that there was no end thereof, for kit was conflant-
Iv eteemed by all men, that either of them loved other
earnally), so that he suffered paticr.tly to be led where

the lover !ift, and all the way neither made obflacle, im-
pediment, cmoml:-, or refrlfance, as in rf.uh accidents
uli to be, or that fne might have done by her princely
authority, being accompanied with the noble earl of
Huntly, and fecrctary Maitland of Lethington." Keith,
381 Melvil, who was present confirms this account,
and tells us that the officer hy whom he was fcized, in-
formed him that nothing was done without the queen's
content Mclv. s58. io. On the Iith of May, a few
days before her marriage, Mary declared thatr h: .;:s
then at fll liberty, and that though B'!lthwe!l h i of-
fended her by sizing her pcrfon, fie was so miuch li.s-
sied with his dutiful behaviour lince that time, and bi
indebted to him for past services, th-.t he not on!)' fr-
gave that offen', hot icfolvc pro imete him to high-
er honours A,.!. 8 .

II . eli-ft r- th, crriti:nd

rate nobles had driven li,;tlh'ell fromi tih' qucen's pre-
fence, and though fle av.- that he was confi,--r? as the
murderer of her former hii:fbaid fr gireat i.rt of
her luic"}s, her aet.lon did not in the Ic al aii.,T and
fie continued to expres thie imo)f uniiateral,!c attach:!Iln:
to him " i can prceive (l1ys Sir N. Thrknlorton)
that the rigour with which the queen is kept, r ,:ee;i-
cth by order fiom the men, bhcaulf tiht tli qu:c:l
will n,t by any means be induced to lernd her a:tl,ri:
to prosecute the murderer; nor will not confi nr lV any
persuasion to abandon the lord Bolhiwell so r h ier u)Tld,
but avoweth conitantlv that ihe -wil iive and dic itli
him; and faith, that if it were put to her choice to relin-
quifh her crown and kingdom or the lord Bolthw l , he
would leave her kingdom and dignity to go a f:nple d1am-
fel with him, and that file will never (onfent'thlit he fLall
fare worse, or have more harm than herself." Avppend.
to Vol.I. No. XXI1. From this long enumeration of cir.
cumftances, we may without violence, draw the follow-
ing conclusion: Hlad Mary really been acceflTiv to the
murder of her husband; had Botliwell pe-rpetra'ed thel
crime with her consent, or at her command; and had
she intended to stifle the evidence againfi him, and to
prevent the discovery of his guilt, lhe could scarcely

Cz

have taken any other steps than those she took, nor could
her conduf have been more repugnant to all the max-
ims of prudence and of decency.

The positive evidence produced against Mary may
be classed under two heads.

I. The depositions of ome persons who were em-

ployed in committing the murder, particularly of Ni-
cholas Hubert, who in the writings of that age, is called
Frencb Paris. This person, who was Bothwell's servant,
and much trusted by him, was twice examined, and
the original of one of his depositions, and a copy of the
other, are still extant. It is pretended that both there
are notorious forgeries. But they are remarkable for a
simplicity and naivite which it is almost impossible to
imitate; they abound with a number of minute facts
and particularities, which the most dexterous forger
could not have easily assembled and connected together
with any appearance of probability; and they are filled
with circumstances, which can fcarrely be fuppoled to
have entered the imagination of any man but one of
Paris's profession and character. But, at the fame time,
it must be acknowledged, that his depositions contain
some improbable circumfiances. He seems to have been
a foolish talkative fellow; the fear of death, the violence
of torture, and the desire of pleasing those in whose
power he was, tempted him, perhaps, to feign ome
circurftances, and to exaggerate others. To ay that
some circumfiances in an affidavit are improbable or
false, is very different from faying that the whole is
forged. I fufpet the former to be the cafe here; hut I
fee no appearance of the a:ter. Be that as it will, fime
of the molt material fact in Paris's affidavits reft upon
lis single teftimonv; and for that reason, I have not in the
hifiory, nor shall I in this place, lay any firers upon them.

2. The letters said to be written by Mary to Both-

well These have been frequently publiihed. The ac-
cident by which the queen's nemirs got them into their
pofcffion, is related in Book V Whren the authenticity
of any ancient paper is dubious or contefled, it may le
ascertained either by external or internal evidence. Both
there have been produced in the prefcnt calc.

I. External proofs of the genuineness of Mary's let-

ters. . Murray, aid the nobles who adhered to him,
affirm upon their word and honour, that the letters
were written with the queen's own hand, with which
they were well acquainted. Good. ii. 64, 9, a. The
letters were pblicly produced in the parliament of Scot-
land, December I567; and were 'o far cnli sered as
genuine, that they arc mentioned in the a aainit Ma-
ry, as one chief argument of her guilt. Good. ii. 66,
6;. 3. They were flewn privately to the duke of Nor-
folk, the earl of Suffex, and fir Ralph Sadler, Elizabeth's
commifioners at York. In the account which they
gave of this matter to their miflrefs, they seem to con-
fider the letters as genuine, and expreis no filpicion of
any forgery; they particularly observe, that the mat-
ter contained in them is ltich, that it could hardly be
invented and devised hb, any other than herilf; for that
they discourse of some things, which were unknown to
any other than to herself and Bothwell; and as it is
hard to counterfeit ib many, so the matter of them, and
the manner how there men came y them, is such, as
it feemeth that God, in whose light murder and blood-
lhed of the innocent is abomliable, would not p;-mit
the fame to be hid or concealed." Good. ii. 14 . They
seem to have made such an imprclfi.n on the duke of
Norfolk, that in a fubfiquent letter to Pembroke, Lei-
cefter, and Cecil, he has thcfe words: " If the matter
shall be thought as detestable and marlifelt to yo., as
for ought we can perceive it felneth here to us."
Good ii. 154. For, after the conferences at York and
Weltniinfter were finished, E!izabeth rclelvl-d to call to-
gether the earls who were then at court, and to lay be-
fore them the whole proceedings againt the Scoltifil
queen, particularly that " the letters nd vritings exlli-
hited by the recent, as the queen of Scots' letters and
writings, hould alto be shewed, and conference i. e.
comparilbn] thereof made in their ight. with the letters
of the laid queen's, being extant, and hretofore ws.it-
ten with her own hand, and sent to the queen's m ijefty;
whereby may be earciled and examined what difference

is betwixt them." Good. ii. 25z. They afembled ac
cordingly, at Hampton Court, December 14 and ij,
Ij68, and, " The originals of the letters supposed to
he written with the queen of Scots' own hand, were
then also presently produced and perused; and, being
read, were duly conferred and compared, for the man-
ner of writing, and falion of orthography, with sundry
other letters long since heretofore written, and sent by
the said queen of Scots to the queen's majesty. In col-
lation whereof no difference w-as found." Good. ii.
26. 7. Mar having written an apologetical letter for
ler conducA to the countess of Lennox, July So, x570',

Mary's lettter has never been published, and ought

to have a place here. where evidence on all fides is fair-
Iv produced. " Madam, ifthe wrang and false reportis
of rbllis, enemies weill knawin for traitouris to zow,
and a'ace to muche trusted of me Iby your advice, had
rot so far flurrtd you agalis mv innocency, (and I must
fa aainis all kyndnefs, that zou have not onelie as it
were condempn;t mre wrangfullie, but so hated me, as
some wordis and opene deideis hes teflifrit to all the
.n-rlde, a manyfeft mifliking in you aganis zour awn
blude), I wold not have omittit thus lang my dewtie in
i rrting to zou excusing me of those untrue reportirs
lmade of me. But hoping with Godis grace and tyme
to have my innocencv knawin to zow, as I trust it is dl-
read- to the maift pairt of all indiffternt perfonis, I
thocit it hefl not to trouble zou for a tyme till that fi:ch
a matter is moved that tuichis us baythl, quhilk is the
transporting zoure littil ion and mv onclie child in this
countrey. To the quhilk alhbit I be never ob willing.
I wald he glaid to have zour advvyf therein, as in all o-
ther rhingis tuiching him. I have born him, and God
.1:awis with quhat danger to him and me boith; and
01 7o he i, iefcendit. So I mneane not to forzet my
rewtie to zn, in fcliewin herein any uirkvndnefs to
-r.w, how unkinrlle that ever ze have dlt with 1me,
o will love zow as my awnt, a:d rctl'neS zowx as my
;.":oder in law. And ;-i ye i-cs to naw farther of iy
:'v:;d in that anrd all u:l:c: thiitnwi betwixt us, n:v a.i:-

she tranrmitted it to her hufoand then in Scotland; and
he returned to the countess the following answer:
" Seeing you have remittit to me, to answer the queen
the king's mother's letters sent to you, what can I fay
but that I do not marvell to fee hir writ the best she can
for hirfelf, to feame to purge her of that, quhairof many
befvde me are certainly perfuadit of the contrary, and I
not only affurit by my awin knawledge, but by her hand
writ, the confessions of men gone to the death, and uther
infallibil experience. It wull be lang tyme that is hable
to put a mattir so notorious in oblivioun, to male black
quhyte, or innocency to appear quhair the contrary is
fa weill knawin. The maift indifferent, I trust, doubtis
not of the equite of zour and my cause, and of the just
occasion of our myfliking. Hir right dewtie to zow
and me, being the parties interest, were hir trew consef-
fiun and unflyned repentance of that lamentable fadc,
odious for hir to be reportit, and sorrowful for us to
think of. God is just, and will not in the end he abuf-
ed; but as lie has mianifelted the trewth, so will he pu-
neife the iniquity." Lenox's Orie. Regyf. of Letters. In
their public papers, the queen's enemies may be fufpedt-
ed of advancing what would be molt subservient to their
cause, nor wliai was agreeable to truth, or what flowed
from their own inward convition. But in a private let-
ter to his own wife, Lennox had no occasion to difeinehle;
and it is plain, that he not only thought the queen guilty,
but believed the authenticity of her letters to Bothwell.

11. Vith regard to the iternal proofs of the genuine-

ncls of the queen's letters to Bothwell, we may ob-
trrve, . That whenever a paper is forged with a par-

baufador the bifilop of Ross fall be ready to confer with
011. And so after my hairtlie corpmendationis, remit-
ting me to ivy faidle ambaiTador, and zour hettcr confi-
deration, I crilunit zoo to the prote6lion of Almighty
4,od, quhom pay to preserve zou and my brotlier
Charles, and Iu js zoO to knaw my pairt better nor ze
do. From C(hai:t'ort h this x of July 157o.
T'o Isn Ladie I. nTox Yr5our natural gude Nice
.:v nuodc; i;n .wv aad loving dochter"',

tic'lar intention, the eagerness of the forger to efta.
blihi the point in view, his solicitude to cut off all the
doubts and cavils, and to avoid any appearance of un-
certainty, always prompt him to use expressions the
most explicit and full to his purpose. The passages
foisted into ancient authors by heretics in different a-
ges; the legendary miracles of the Romish faints; the
fuppcffititous deeds in their own favour produced by
monasteries; the false charters of homage mentioned,
Vol. I. p. o. are so many proofs of this assertion. No
maxim seems to be more certain than this, that a for-
ger is often apt to prove too much, but seldom falls
into the error of proving too little The point which
the queen's enemies had to establish was, " that as the
earl of Bothwell was chief executor of the horrible and
unworthy murder perpetrated, &c. so was she of the
foreknowledge, council, devise, persuader, and com-
mander of the said murder to be done." Good. ii. 207.
But of this there are only imperfe hints, ofcure in-
timations, and dark expressions in the letters, which,
however convincing evidence they might furnish if
found in real letters, bear no resemblance to that glare
and luperfiuity of evidence which forgeries commonly
contain. All the advocates for Mary's innocence in
her own age, contend that there is nothing in the let-
ters which can serve as a proof of her guilt. Lefly,
Blackwood, Turner, &c. abound with pafages to this
purpose; nor are the sentiments of those in the present
age different. " Yet still it might have been expected
(fays her latest defender) that bfme one or other of the
points or articles of the accusation should be made out
clearly by the proof. But nothing of that is to be seen
in the present cafe. There is nothing in the letters that
could plainly shew the writer to have been in the fore-
knowledge, council, or device of any murder, far lets
to have persuaded or commanded it; and as little is
there about maintaining or justifying any murderers."
Good. i. 76. How ill-advied were Mary's adverlaries
to contract so much guilt, and to pradtife so many ar-
tifices, in order to forge letters, which are so ill contriv-
ed for eitablifhing the conclusion they had in view!

HIad they been so base as to have recourse to forgery,
is it not natural to think that they would have produc-
ed something more explicit and decisive; As it is al-
most impossible to invent a long narration confifing of
many circumstances and to connect it in such a man-
ner with real fa5ts, that no mark of fraud hall appear.
For this reason, kilful forgers avoid any long detail
of circunflances, especially of foreign and superfluous
ones, well knowing that the more these are multiplied,
the more are the chances of detection increased. Now
Mary's letters, especially the first, are filled with a mul-
tiplicity of circumflances, extremely natural in a real
correspondence, but altogether foreign to the purpose
of the queen's enemies, and which it would have been
perfed folly to have inserted, if they had been altoge-
ther imaginary, and without foundation. 3. The
truth and reality of several circumstances in the letters,
and theei, too, of no very public nature, are confirmed
by undoubted collateral evidence. Lett. I. Good. ii.
i. The queen is aid to have met one of Lennox's
gentlemen, and io have had some converlation with
him. Thomas Crawford, who was the person, ap-
peared before Elizabeth's commissioners, and confirm-
ed, upon oath, the truth of this circunftance. He like-
wife declared, that during the queen's flay at Glafgnw,
the king repeated to him, every night, whatever had
palsed through the day, between her majesty and hinm;
and that the account given of thefi conversations in the
firit letter, is nearly the fame with what the ing com-
municated to him. Good. ii. 245. According to the
lame letter there was much discourse between the king
and queen concerning Mynto, Hiegait, and Walcar.
Good. ii. 8, o, xa. What this might be, was altoge-
ther unknown, until a letter of Mary's, preserved in the
Scottish college at Paris, and published, Keith, Pref.
vii. dilcovcred it to be an affair of bo much importance
as merited all the attention he paid to it at that time.
It appears by a letter from the French ambassador, that
Mary waas ubjet to a violent pain in her fide. Keith,
ibid. This circumstance is mentioned, I.ett. . p. 30.
in a manner so natural as can scarcely belong to any but

a enuine production. 4. If we hall flill think it pro-
bable to suppose that so many real circumflances were
artfully introduced into the letters by the forgers, in or-
der to give an air of authenticity to their producion;
it will farce be possible to hold the fame opinion
concerning the following particular. Before the queen
began her first letter to Bothwell, he, as ultal among
those who write long letters concerning a variety of sub-
jeat, made nte, or mrandvs of the particulars he
iShed to remember; but as he fat up writing a great
part of the night, and after her attendants were asleep,
her paper failed her, and she continued her letter upoll
the lame heet on which The had formerly made her
memorandums. This he herfclf takes notice of, and
makes an apology for it; " It is late; I desire never
to cease from writing unto you, et nrow, after the kil-
sing of your hands, I will end niv letter. Excuse my
evil writing, and read it twice over. Excuse that thing
that is fcriblit, for I had na paper zeflcrday, quhen I
wraite tha' of the memorial." Good. ii. 28. These
memorandums still appear in the middle of the letter;
and what we have said seems naturally to account for
the manner how they might find their way into a real
letter. It is scarce to be fuppoftd, however, that any for-
ger wouldthink ofplacingmemorand(ums in the middleof
a letter where at first fight, they make so absurd and o
unnatural an appearance. But if any hall still carry
their refinement so far as to suppose that the forgers
were so artful as to throw in this circumstance, in order
to preserve the appearance of genuineness, they mut
at least allow that the queen's enemies, who employed
these forgers, could not be ignorant of the design and
meaning of these hort notes and memorandums; but
we find them mistaking them so far as to imagine that
they were the credit of the bearer, i. e. points concerning
which the queen had given him verbal inftruftions.
Good. ii. ijz. This they cannot possibly be; for the
queen herself writes with so much exadtnefs concerning
the different points in the memorandums, that there
was no need of giving any credit or inftruclions to the
bearer concerning them. The memorandums are in-

deed the tontentl of the letter. . Mary mentioning her
conversation with the king, about the affair of Mvnto,
Hiegait &c. fays, " The morne, (i.e. to-morrow) i will
fpeik to him upon that point; and then adds, " As to
the reft of Wille Hiegait's, he confeffit it; but it was
the morne (i. e. the morning) after my coming or he
did it." Good. ii. 9. This addition, which could not
have been made till after the conversation happened,
iecms either to have been inserted by the queen into the
'ody of the letter; or, perhaps, she having written it on
the margin, it was taken thence into the text. If we
suppose the letter to be a real one, and written at dif-
ferent times, as it plainly bears, this circumstance ap-
apears to be very natural; but no reason could have in-
duced a forger to have ventured upon filch an anachro-
nifmn, for which there was no necefity. An addition
pctrfily similar to this made to a genuine paper, may
be found. Good. ii. 282.

But, on the other hand, Mary herself, and the ad-
rocates for her innocence, have contended, that there
letters were forged by her enemies, on purpose to blast
her reputation, and justify their own rebellion. It is
not nceffrary to take notice of the arguments which
inre produced, in her own age, in support of this opi-
lion; the olfcrvations which we have already made,
(ontain a full reply to them. An author, who has in-
cuired into the affairs of that period with great indu-
fily, and lwho has acquired much knowledge of them,
lha published (as he affirms) a demonstration of the for-
gcry of Mary's letters. This demonltration he founds
upon evidence both internal and external. With re-
gard to the former he observes, that the French copy
of' the queen's letters is plainly a tranflarion of Buchan-
ai's Latin copy; and by consequence, the aflertion of
lie queen's enemies, which Latin copy is only a tranf-
altion of the Scottish copy; that fie wrote them ori-
gi:-ally in French is altogether groundless, and the
wihole letters are gross forgeries. He accounts for this
Pfrange succession of tranfiations, by uppofing that
when the forgery was proiecited, no peribn could be
F;und capable of writing originally in the Fiench lan-

guage letters which would pass for the queen's; for
that reason they were first composed in Scottish; but
unluckily the French interpreter, it would seem, did
not underitand that language; and therefore Buchanan
translated them into Latin; and from this Latin they
were rendered into French. Good. i. 79. 8o.

It is scarce necessary to observe, that no proof what-

ever is produced of any of these fulppofitions. The
manners of the Scots in that age, when almost every
man of rank spent a part of his youth in France, and
the intercourse between the two nations was great, ren-
der it altogether improbable that so many complicated
operations fbould be necessary in order to procure a few
letters to be written in the French language.

But without infiiting farther on this, we may observe

that all this author's premises may be granted, and et
his conclusion will not follow, unless he likewise prove
that the French letters, as we now have them, are a
true copy of those which were produced by Murray an.l
his party in the Scottish parliament, and at York and
Weftminfier. But this he has not attempted; and if
we attend to the history of the letters, such an attempt,
it is obvious must have been unfilccefsful. The letters
were first published at the end of Buchanan's Detr7io,.
The first edition of this treatise was in Latin, in which
language three of the queen's letters were filbjoined to
it; this Latin edition was printed A. D. I57?. Soon
after, a Scottish translation of it was published, and at
the end of it were printed, likewise in Scottish, the
three letters which had formerly appeared in Latin, and
five other letters in Scottish, which were not in the
Latin edition. Next appeared a French translation of
the Detection, and of seven of the letters; this bears to
have been printed at Edinburgh by Thomas Waltem,
1572. The name of the place, as well as the printer, is
allowedby all parties to be a manifest inpolture. Our
author, from obierving the day of the month, from
which the printing is said to have been finished, has als
ferted that this edition was printed at London; but rn
frefs can be laid upon a date found in a book, where
every other circumfiance w; h regard to the printing Js

allowed to be false. Blackwood, who (next to Lefly)
was the best informed of all Mary's advocates in that
age, affirms, that the French edition of the l)etection
was published in France: " 1 [Buchanan a depuis
adjouftl a cefte declamation un petit libelle du pre-
tendu mariage du due de Norfolk, et de a facon de
son proces, et la tout envoyc aux frercsa la RoJelle,
lefquels voyants qu'il pouvoit rl-vir a la cause, 'ont
traduit en Frangois, et iceluy fut imprime a Edi!ihotnlg,
c'eft a dire a la Rochelle, par Thomas Waltem, noin
apofie et fait a plaifir. Martyre de Marie. Jebb, ii.
z56." The author of the I,,IcAcc e , M2argoes farther,
and names the French translator of the Detectiln,
" Et icelui premierement compos' (conime il Itkmle
par George Buchanan Ecofliys, et deplis traduit en
langue Francoise par un Hugonot, Poiteven (advocat
dc vocation) Camuz, foi difant gentilhoine, t tin de
phns remarquez fedittuz tde France. Jebb, i. 425, 443."
The concurring teftili of two contemporary au-
tlors, whose residence in France afforded thenm fufici-
ent means of inforlimation, mnilt outweigh a flight con-
jecdure. This French translator does not pretend to
publish the original Frnlch letters as written hy the
queen herself; he exprelly declares that lie tr-nnfl.i:
them from the Latin. Good. i. Io .. aliAl on author
a-tended to all these circuniilancci, he mii:!it have fiv-
ed himself the labour o so any criiiilis to prove
that the present French cpy ot the Ictters is a t-ranll-
tion irbm the Latin. 'he F;rcl:rh editor liirl.ii' :1w-
knowledges it, and, so far as 1 know, no perlol ever
denied it.

cWe may observe, that the French translator was o

ignoraut, as to affirm tha.it ^ ;iy Ihad written ttf. Irt-
tcrs, partly in Frenrlh, partly i Sctlifh. (ood. i.
Io3. llad this traifflatioti hien ipuhliffcd at I.onlmn
by Cecil, or had it heel mai:e by his dirc'ti, I rnrIs
an error would not have Ieen adm:ittd intoit. 'rii
e'ror, lowevcr, was owin) to an odd circulliftil. e.
In the Scottish tranflati,)i ot the )cicqion, th re was
pri fixed to each letter two or three icilntinces of the ori-

Vul. 111. D

ginal French, which breaking off with an &c. the Scot-
tih translation of the whole followed. This method of
printing translations was not uncommon in that age.
The French editor obfcrving this, foolishly concluded
that the letters had been written partly in French, part-
ly in Scottilh.

If we carefully confider those few French sentences of

each letter, which fill remain, and apply to them that
species of criticitm, by hich our author has examined
the whole, a clear proof will arise, that there was a
French copy not translatcd from the Latin, but which
was itftlf the original from which both the Latin and
Scottifn have been translatcd. I'his minute criticism
mull nereffarily be dilrarccabe to many readers; hut
luckily a few lentences olv are to be examined, which
will render it extremcnlv fhurt.

In the firit letter, the French sentence prefixed to it

ends with theie words, v/i/oisl hn. It is plain thisex-
preffon, reu c .- fp.: .. orp fsnr csur, is by no means
a translation ot p!ne p-st i.,,, e'ri. atslue corpfnlt/;e corde.
The whole fnence as a firii: and elegance in the
Frenrh, lich nei:;ir the Latin nor Scottish have re-
taniied. yjt.li e, ala d.ec is not a tranflatiol of toto pran-
ai, i:-,por; ti-. Scottish tranllation, ghbile dtnner-lic, cx-
p" il3s te Ic'll of the Frrncl more properly; for an-
tltr:i qubli: flltiict ;*.::i/ as \well as durin. 3e ,'a pal
tzn, ,-ar.t I rT r is not jufill rltdered neque crI.nllerrnz r-
r,:c,.rn- . ., ys, a ;i.: the paic ied in the FrenLh copy
i oel peculiar to that language, and gives a more pro-
tbablc acioulii of her bch:t.iour than the other. JuYeu,,t

ren s. 'i! ni'v f:ifci: icn, it: lit a translation of t quijudica-

ri,, r5 n : i *,fu. The F'rnc h lentence orefixed to
Irtt. ends with jfrnn./,. ]t is evident that both the
Latin and Scotti;h tral;ilations have omitted altogether
tl .-ls .rds, el :t.s i, ..,i t,:,predre. The French
lmc':lcc prefixed to Ictl. i

cr with prefeiier. ?'ase

*..- TY. .. i :.li /1-1, is piltlin! n tranfation ofdiuti i-
iz. Mnat a

j'm; th!e l'u!c of i:r Frinch is better expref-

fcd by te Sttllh 1 /i i, . ,:/, :

ter iairur. Again,

Y.u r .jir v-e 'Jire 1~; i- \V.eV d;i.'rent front id exif,.
'... njra nr?. .. s.i .c '; r.,.;.:Jn IL.tters never ap-

peared in Latin; nor is there any proof of their being
ever translated into that language. Four ofthem, how-
ever are published in French. This entirely overturns
our author's hypothesis concerning the necessity of a
translation into Latin.

In the Scottilh edition of the Detection the whole/on,

net is printed in French as well as in Scottish. It is not
pofible to believe that this Scottiih copy could be the
original from which the French was translated. The
French consists of verses which have both measure and
rhyme, and which, in many places, are far from being
inelegant. The Scottish co;fifts of an equal number of
lines, but without mealiore or rhyme. Now no man
could ever think of a thing lo abf;rd and impracticable,
as to require one to translate a certain given number of
lines In prose, into an equal number of veresf where
both mealure and rhyme were to be ofervcd. The
Scottish, on the contrary, appears nianifeltly to be
a translation of the French; the phraes, the idioms,
and many of the words are French, and not Scottish.
Besides, the Scottish translator has, in several intances,
mistaken the lfnfe of the French, and in many more
exprefles the sense imperfectly. llad the sonnet been
forged, this could not have happened. The direclors
of the fraud would have undertood their own work. I
shall satisfy myself with one example, in which there is
a proof of both my afiertions, Stanza viii. 9.

Pour luyj'attenlz toute bonne fortune,
Pourluy je veux garder lante et vie,
Pour luy tout vertu de fuivre j'ay envic.
For him I attend all good fortune,
For him I will conserve helthe and lyse,
For him I desire to ensue courage.

Alttndin the first line is not a Scottish, but a French

phrase; the two other lines do not exprcfs the fenle of
the French, and the last is absolute noniinfe.

The eighth letter was never translated into French.

It contains much refined mvfticifnm about ,i;i.i, a folly
of that age, of which Mary was very fond, as appears
from several other circumflaiuces, particularly from a

letter concerning ;mprfaJ by Drummond of Hawthorn-
den. If Mary's adversaries forged her letters, they were
certainly employed ven- idly a-hen they produced this.

From these observations it seems to be evident that

there was a French copy of Mary's letters, of which
the Latin and Scottilh were only translations. Nothing
now remains of this copy but thole few sentences,
which are prefixed to the Scottish translation. The
French editor laid hold of those sentences, and tack-
ed his own translation to them, which, so far as it
is his work, is a servile and a very wretched tranf-
lation of Buchanan's Latin; whereas in those introduc-
tory sentences, we have discovered strong marks of their
being originals, and certain proofs that they are not
translated from the Latin.

It is ~pparent, too, from comparing the Latin and

Scottish translations with these sentences, that the Scot-
tifh translator has more perfectly attained the sense and
spirit of the French than the Latin. And as it appears,
that the letters were very early translated into Scottish,
Good. ii. 76; it is probable that Buchanan made his
translation, not from the French, but from the Scottinl
copy. \'ere it necessary, several critical proofs of this
might be produced. One that has been already men-
tioned feems'decifive. )iiujiu itic orato fum bears not
the lc-af resemblance to jay, -.eille plus trd !a baut; but
if, inflead of 1 -.jlat: Li. e. watched] its'er there up, we
suppose ltat Buchanan read I 1'aiti', &c. this miflake,
into whlih he might so eafilv have fallen, accounts for
the error in his translation.

These criticisms, however minute, appear to be well

founded. But whatever opinion may be formed con-
cerning them, the other arguments, with regard to the
internal edence, remain in full force.

The external proofs of the forgery of the queen's let-

ters, which our author has produced, is extremely Ipe-
cious, but are not more solid than that which we have
already examined. According to Murray's Diary, Mary
set tct from Edinburgh to Glasgow, January 21, 1567;
she a-rivcd there on the 2;d; left that place on the with;
she, together with the king, reathed Linlithgow on the

2Sth, flaid in that town only one night, and returned
to Edinburgh before the end of the nonth. But, ac-
cording to our author, the queen did not leave Edin-
burgh until Friday January 24th; as he flaid a night
at Callendar, ie could not reach Glasgow sooner than
the evening of Saturday the z2ttli, and he returned to
Linlithgow on Tuesday the 28lh By conlequence, the
firfi letter, which fuppofcs the que-en to have been at
least four days in C'lafgow, as el 11 a tilt lecond letter,
which bears date at CGlafgow, Saiutij ornin, whereas
lhe did not arrive there until the evening, mull he for-
geries. That the q!lLtn did not ft out from Edinburgh
sooner than the 4th of Ja1nuary, is evident (as he con-
tends) fionm the public records, which contain a P,.et-
of a roifrnmaticn oj . l;-ret Iby James Bov-d to Margart
Chalmers, granted by the (lueen, on the a24th of Jaini-
arv at Edinhblrgh; and likew-il' a lIttcr of the quceen's
lated at Edinburch ln the fame day, .ipl),intinig Jaiaes
inglis taylor to the prince ler il l. iThat lle kiing and
queen had returned to Lilitluhl \v on the 28th, appears
from a deed, in which they appoint Aew l'erricr
keeper of their paiacr therc, dated at Litlitligow, Janit-
arv 28th, Good. i. t18.

'This has been repretlnted to he not only a cont-iln-

ing, but a legal proof of the forgery of tle letters lid
to be written by Mary; but how far it falis hort o this
will appear fronm tle following conlfiderations:

I. It is evidcnt, fioin a dclarai'n or confifiuun

made by tile bif''hcp of KR'c, tlhat before te conlcentes
at York, ullicli erate openld in the begiiinig of O()q.
l ;68, Mary had, hb a tilice of Mailaull's got i:to
her hands a copy ol those Ilett s licl her l)jefts :a:c l-
rcl her of laving writteu to 3ohIwell. sI rowln's trial of
the duke of Norfol, .: , . It is liihly prolbl)ale
that the bishop of olIf il;:i lt 11i th Ilttcfis before lhe
wirote the defence of qullc i Mary's ', nour in tih year

;-o. 'I'hev were putll ih, d to ;il the . irld, t(uoetlh<r
' ih sBuchanan's Detu.ciii, A. 19. ; . Now, it the-?
i:ad o'on:ained a e-ol lo ;*, a , t; l,.tn timen: i

i .

obvious to discover, as the supposing the queen to have
passed several days at Glasgow, while he was really at
Edinburgh; had they contained a letter dated at Glal-
gow, Saturday morning, though she did not arrive
there till the evening; is it possible that (he herself, who
knew her own motions, or the able and zealous advo-
cates who appeared for her in that age, should not have
published and exposed this contradiction, and, by so
doing, have blaled at once the credit o fluch an impol-
ture? In disquisitions which are naturally abftrne and
intricate, the ingenuitv of the latest author may discover
many things which have escapcd the attention, or bas-
fled the sagacity of those who have formerly conlidered
the fame subjec. But when a matter of fat lay so ob-
vious to view, this circumltance of its being unobserved
by the queenr herself, or by any of her adherents, is a!-
niofi a demonfiration that there is nmce miflake or falla-
cy in our'author's arguments. So far are any, either of
our historians, or o Mary's defenders, fiorn calling
in cueflion the common account concerning the time of
the quern's setting out to Glasgow, and her returning
from it, that there is not lthe least appearance of any
diffcrene anlcng them with regard to this point. But
farther,

a. Those papers in the public records, on which our

author rts the proof of his albeorion concerning the
queen's motions, are nor thl originals tlublcribed by the
queen, but copies only, or translations of copies of thole
originals. It is not ncitcdrihr, no,' \ o;!ld it be very ealy
to rindr this inclligihic to perliloi. uaiilquaintcd with
the sorns of la'w in Sotland; hut t vry Scotilinan con-
erfanr in Lrufnecf will undcrfta.t n.e whir I iy that
the precept of cunfirmaiioi of thr !;!.-rcnt to oyd is
cnl a Latin copy or notc o a pr.cept, - whic-l was leal.
ed with tl:e priv-ftal, on a al ranir. i tle lignet of-
fire, pr cccding on a gi::'.ire v;hic boure dlate at E-
dinbrgh the 24!h of January; and that the deed in
favour cr James Ing'.is i the ropy of a i rter, lealed with
the privy litAl, procecii:g on a fignli;lre which bore
dare at I-;:,bt;il;h Ja;iuarv z.!th. l-rom ail his e
:..i,' arc 'a :

v.: c
.!:e tcgre ci r;:.it!:, t}:ha: a p-ul

founded on papers which are so many removes distant
from the originals, cannot but be very lame and uncer-
tain.

3. At that time all public papers were iued in the

name both of the king and queen; by law, the king's
fiibfcription was no less requilite to any paper than the
queen's; and therefore unltfs the original lignatures be
produced, in order to afcertaii the particular day when
each of them signed, or to prove that it was signed only
by one of them, the legal proof ariling from these pa-
pers would be, that both the king and queen igned
them at Edinburgh on the 24th of January.

4. The dates of the warrants or precepts iffi ed by the

sovereign, in that age, seem to have been in a great mea-
slre abitrar, and affixed at the pleasure of the writer;
and of coneqience, thtcl dIates were feldoin accurate,
are often false, and can never be relied upon. This a-
bnlle became so frequent, and was found to be lb perni-
cious, that an an of parliament A. D. 1 92, declared
the fixing a false date to a signature to be high treason.

5. There still remain, in the public records, a great

number of papers, which prove the neceflity of this
law, as well as the fallacy of oui author's arguments.
And though it he no al'y malter, at the distance of two
elnt!uies, to prove any particular late to be false, yet
ilrprifing inltances of this kind hflall be produced. No-
thing is more certain from hliflrv, ,than tihat the king was
at Glalgow,Jan. 4, I r6-: and vtr tle record of lignatllres
from 1s56 to r x2, tol. rt,, contains the copy o0 a fig-
nature to Archibal I lidmo iflon, f. id to have been lib-
feribed hy sr .,eri..,r, i. e the king and queen, at E-
dinhurgh, Jantlan 24, 167 ; so that if we were to
tiult ii plicitly upon the dates in the records of that
ze, or to hold our author's argument to be good, it
w'ulhl prove that not only he queen, hut the king too,
'v s at Edilburg ( on lthe 24th of'Jai.iiarv.

It appears from an oriial lerttr of the bifflop of

lRofs, that on the a rih of Otohber 1566, Mary lay at
tile point of death; Keith, App. i34; tdl yet a deed is
r b found in rh public records, which bears that it

vas signed by the queen that day. Privy feal, lib. 35
fol. 89. Oucrterlonv.

Bothwell sized the queen as he returned from Stir-

ling, April 24rh, 1567, and (according to her own ac
count) condu.ed her to Dunbar with all diligence
And. i. 95. But our author, relying on the dates ol
some papers which he found in the records, supposes
that Bothwell allowed her to flop at Edinburgh, and to
rranlact bufincfs there. Nothing in be more impro
hah!e than this supposition. We may therefore ran
the date of the deed to IMrib6t, Privy feal, lib. 36. fol
4. and which is mentioned y our author, vol. i. I24
amrong the inltances of the false dates of papers which
were issued in the ordinary course of hufinefs in that age.
Our author has mil:akie the date of the other paper to
Sorbes, ibid. it is signed April 14th, not April 4th.

f' there he anv point agreed upon in Mary's hiftorv,

it is that fl,e remained at Dunhar from the time that
Bothwell carried h thither, till he returned to Edin-
burgh along with him in the beginning of May. Our
author himself allows t.t she resided twelve days there,
vol. i. 367. Now though there are deeds in the records
which hear that hey were signed by the queen at Dun-
bar during that time, et there are others which bear
that they were firgnd at Edinburgh; e. g. there is one
at Edinburgh, April :27h, Privy feal, lib. 36. fol. 9i.
'Thre are others aid to e signed at Drnbar on that
day. Lib. I3. C'hart. No. 524, 520. lb, lib. 7.
No. 154, I57. There are lome signed at Dunbar, Ap-
ril 2th. Others at Edinhurgh, April 3oth, lih:b.
Chart. No 492. Others at Dunbar, May ift Id. ihi.'
No. 58. 'I hefe different charters suppose the quec:l
to have made so many unknown, improbable, and in-
confdtent journeys, that they afford the c carelt demntiu
fration that the dates in dille records ought not to h1
drptnded on.

This becomes more evident from the ate ofr l

charter fairl tn he fgned April z7tl, whilch happentd
:hat year to be a Sunday, which was not, at that tin,;,
a day of business in 5culanl, as apptars froim l '.
i-c. .- off. :rn,, thern l.t-jt hi' t!: lo:ds of .C('c;,

From this hort review of our author's proof of the

forgery of the letters to Bothwell, it is evident that his
arguments are far from amounting to demonstration.

Another argument againil the genuineness of these

letters is founded on the style and composition, which
are said to be altogether unworthy of the queen, and
unlike her real productions. It is plain, both from the
great accuracy of compolition in molt of Mary's letters,
and even from her foliritude to write them in a fair
hand, that The valued herself on those accomplishments,
and was delirous of being esteemed an elegant writer.
But when she wrote at any time in a hurry, then many
marks of inaccuracy appear. A remarkable instance
of this may be found in a paper published, Good. ii.
3oI. Mary's letters to Bothwell were written in the
utinoft hurry; and yet under all the disadvantages of a
translation, they are not dftitute either of spirit or of
energy. The manner in which she exprcffes her love
to Bothwell has been pronounced indecent and .ven
flocking. But Mary's temper led her to warm ex-
pressions of her regard; those refinements of delicacy
Pchich now appear in all the commerce between the
sexes, were in that age, but little known, even among
persons of the highest rank. Among the earl ofHarde-
wicke's papers, there is a fcries of letters, from Mary to
the duke of Norfalk, copied from the liarleian library,
p. 37. b. 9. fol. 88. in which Mary declares her love to
that nobleman in language which would now be reck-
oned extremely indelicate; Hard. State Papers, i. 189,
&c.

Some of Mary's letters to Bnthwell were written be-
fore the murder of her husband; iome of them after
that event, and before her marriage to Bothwell.
Those which are prior to the death of her husband a-
bound with the fondest expreflions of her love to Both-
well, and excite bomething more than a suspicion that
their familiarity had been extremely criminal. We find
in them, too, some dark cxpreffions which her enemies
employed to prove that he was no stranger to the
schemes which were formed against her husband's life
Of this kind are the following paflahgs; "Alace! I

nevir diffavit ony body; Bot I remit me altogidder to
zour will. Send me advertisement quhat I fall do, and
quhatfaever thing come thereof I fall obey sow. Ad.
vise to with zourfclf, gifze can find out any mair secret
inventioun by medicine, for he fuld tak medicine and
the bath at Craigmillar." Good. ii. 2z. " See not hir
quhais fenzeit teiris fuld not be fa meikle praisit and e.
itemit, as the trew and faithful travellis quhilk I fuftene
for to merit her place. For obtaining of the quhilk,
aganis my natural, I betrayis thame that may impefehe
me. God forgive me", &c. Ibid. . "1I have walk-
it later thairup, than I wad have done, gif it had not
been to draw Something out of him, quhilk this
berer will fchaw zow, quhilk is the fairest commodity
that can be offerit to excuse zour affairs." Ibid. iz.
From the letters posterior to the death of her husband,
it is evident that the scheme, of Bothwell's seizing
Mary by force, and carrying her along with him, was
contrived in concert with herself, and with her appro-
bation

* That letters of so much importance as those of Ma-

ry to Bothwell should have been entirely loft, appears
to many altogether unaccountable. After being pro-
duced in England before Elizabeth's commissioners,
they were delivered back by them to the earl of Mur-
ray. Good. ii. 2.5. He teems to have kept them in
his pofftflion during life. After his death, they fell in-
to the hands of Lennox his successor, who reflored
them to the earl of Mortcn. Good. ii. 91. Though
it be not neeeffarilv conicled with any of the quefti-
ons which gave occasion to this Dissertation, it may
perhaps satisfy the curiosity of tome of my readers to in-
torm them, that, after a very diligent search, which
has lately been made, no copy of Mary's letters to
Bothweli can be found,in any of the public libraries in
Great Britain. The only certain intelligenceconcern-
ing them since the time of their being delivered to
Morton, was communicated by the accurate Dr. Birch.

Extracd of the letters of Robert Bowes, efq. ambaf-
fador from queen Elizabeth to the king of Scotland

Having thus ated the proof on both fides; having
examined at so great a length the different systems

written to fir Francis Walsingham, freretary of Rate,
from the original register book of Mr. Bowes's letters
from irth of August x582, to 28th of September X 83,
in the possession of Chrilopher Hunter, M. D. of Dur-
ham.

I8, 8th November, from Edinburgh.

Albeit I have been home in hand, that the coffer

wherein were the originals of letters between the Scot-
tilh queen and the earl of Bothwell, had been delivered
to lundry hands, and thereby was at present wanting,
ane unknown where it relied, vet I have learned cer-
tainlv by the prior of Plufcardyne's means, that both
the coffer and also the writings are come, and now re-
main with the earl of Gowrie, who, 1 perceive, will be
hardly intreated to make delivery to her najcfty ac-
cording to her majcfty's dcfire.

This time past I have expended in searching where

tile coffer and writings were, wherein, without the help
of the prior I hould have found reat difficulty; now
I will essay Gowrie, and o my' fuccels you fnall be
fiortly advertised.

lth of November, 1S82, from Edinburgh.

Becatuf I had both learned, that the casket and let-

ters mentioned in ins lalt, before theicl were come to
tie poflfilon of the earl ol Gowr;e, and all fiound that
no mean might prevail to win the fame out us his
hands without his own cl'it and privity; in which
behalf I had employed fit intrinncnts, that ncvertlie-
rl s profited nothing; therefore I attempted to enfly hinm-
I;lf, letting him know that the laid calcet and

l ltcrs

lilmuld have been brought to her majreiv by the offer
and good means of cood friends, proniliilg to have de-
livered them to lhcr ila rlt before they came into his
hands and custody, and knowing that he did becr the
like affection, aid w.d ready to pieafure her nlajeily
in all things, and (:hict1i' i, this that had been thus far
tI-idered to hter mai.li ', ani winch thereby hould be
ii ii ac.eptedi, :nd,.i ... ricly l,aiks an: gr:.lut ;y be

with regard to the faas in controversy; it may be ex.
peCted that I should now pronounce sentence. In my

requited to his comfort and contentment; I moved
him that they might be a present to be sent to her ma-
jefly from him, and that I might cause the faine to be
conveyed to her majesty, adding hereunto such words
and arguments as might both flir up a hope of liberality,
and also befl effe& the purpose. At the first he was
loth to agree that they were in his possession ; but I let
him plainly know that I was certainly informed that
they were delivered to him by Sanders Jardin; where.
upon he pressed to know who did so inform on me, in-
quiring whether the funs of the earl of Morton had
done it or no. I did not otherwise in plain terms deny
or answer thereunto, but that he might think that he
had told me, as the prior is ready to avouch, and well
pleased that. I fna'l give him to be the author thereof;
after he had said (ihmigh) all these letters were in hi3
keeping (which he would neither grant nor deny) ye:
he might not deliver them to any person without the
consent and privities, as well of the king, that had in-
terest therein, as also of the reft of the noblemen enter-
prifers of the aion aganilnf the king's mother, and
that would have them kept as an evidence to warran,
and make good that action. And albeit I replied, lltat
their action in that part touching the assignation of lhle
crown to the king by his mother, had received filch c-
labhlinnlcent, confirmation, and strength, by as of par.
liament and other public authority and instruments i
neither hould that cafe be suffered to come in deb '
or question, nor fuclh icrolls and papers ought to e
hewed for the ltrengtliening thereof, so as there mighit
wvell be left and be rendered to the hands of her ma-
jest, to whom they were deflined before they fell il
his keeping; vet he would not be removed or atisfied;
concluding, after muT'h reasonings, that the earl of Mor-
ton, nor any other that had the charge and keepin:
thereof, durst at an\ tine make delivery; and becarme
it was the first time that I had inrevd him therein, ai,!
that he wuuld gladly brth an!vfwr her majefly a g;c,

oillioon, there are only two conclulions, which can be
drawn from the fads which have been enumerated.

expeetation in him, and allb perform his duty due to
his sovereign and associates in the aion afore'aid;
therefore he wouldt seek out the said casket and letters,
at his return to his house, which he thought should be
within a short time, and upon finding of the fame, and
better advice and cnfidcration had of the cauic, he
would give further antiwer. This rfolution I have re-
ceived as to the ting; and for the present I could not
better, leaving him to give her majesty fch testimony
cf his good will towards her, by his frdiik dealing here-
ii!, as the may have caule to confirm her higilicnl.
gnod opinion conceived already of him, and be there-
by drawn to greater goodness towards him. I shall
fiill labour him both by mvfelf and also by all other
means; but I greatly distrust the desired fircefs herein.

24th of November 82, from Edinburgh.

For the recovery of the letters in the ofitr, come

to the hands of the carl of Gowrie, I have lately moved
him earnestly therein, letting him know the purpole of
the Scottish queen, oth giving out that the letters are
couirtcrrfeired b her rebels, and also seeking thereon to
ha\e them dlivered to her or defaced, and that the
nieaius which he will make in this behalf shall be so
,great an.i efiTc-tual, as these writings cannot be safely
kept in that realm without dangerous offence of hirm
that hath the cuflody thereof, neither shall lie tha; is
once kn;owsn to have them be lhflncred to hold them in
his hands. Herewith I have at large opened the perils
hlikly to fall to that aion. And the parties therein,
anld particularly to himrflf that is now openllv known
to have the poTft-fl:on of thefc writings, ad I have let-
tin him fee what ulrety it fall bring to the said caule,
and all the partics thereiln, and to himllclf, that there
xritings may be with f'crecy and good order commit-
ted to the kee ping of her majt lly, that will have them
ready whenlbever any use shall b fr them, and by her
lighltef-es countenance dcfi.nd them and the parties
Vol 111. 1

One, that Bothwell, prompted by his ambition or

love, encouraged by the queen s known aversion to her

from fuclh wrongful objeAions as hall be laid against
them, offering at length to him, that if he be not fully
satisfied herein, or doubt that the reft of the associates
shall not like of the delivery of them to her majesty in
this good marner, and for the interest rehearsed, that I
shall readily, upon meeting and conference with them,
procure tlheiralTfnt in this part (a matter more easy to
offer than to perform); and lastly, moving him that
(for the secrecy and benefit of the caule, and that her
majesty's good opinion towards himtelf may be firmly
fettlcd and confirmrd by his acceptable forwardness
herein) he would, ithout needlels scruple, frankly
commit these ritings to her majesty's good cuflodv
for the good uses received. After long debate he re-
flved, anid aid, that he woild unfeig-nedly shew and
do to her nmarliv all the pleasure that he might with.
out cfiernce to thi- ki:g his lovereign, and prejudice to
the abciarts in the alin, and therefore he would firt
mia'ke farcl and view. the said letters, and herein take
advice what he mig,!t do, and how far he might satis-
fy and rontent her iiiajefly; promiling thereon to give
nmore rfolute afwcer; and he concluded flatly, that as-
ter he had found and fen the writin;. that he miight
not n.ake drliverv of them without the privity of thc
kii.g. Albeit I flood long ith him agaiflt his refilu-
tion in this point, to acquaint the king with thid
m.rtter before tle letters were in the handtl of her na-
ipfiv, letting him ece that his doings there hould admit
grear '-anger to the cause; yet I could not remove himl
rrom it. It may be that e mntacieth to put over the
mattcrfrom hinililfto the king, upon fight whereof I
fhail travel effectuallv to obtain the king's consent;
that the letters m e mit d to her majefil's keep-
i;lg thinking it miore ciJ t prevaillher-in with the king,
in the pre;itit I(.'e aI a ffRidlh that he beareth to her
h;lfinefs, tanl to in anv thing at the hands of the a-
f;ciates in he a tqion, uM !i re.,j: sone principal of ther

:i, co,, i d :Iaii a tht divutiu of ib.'e king's nio-

hmilband, and presuming on her attachment to himself,
itruck the blow without having concerted with her the
manner or circumnfances of perpetrating that crime.
That Mary, inltead of teflifying much indignation at
the deed, or discovering any relentment agailft Both-
well, who was accused of having committed it, conti-
nued to oad him with marks of her regard, conduced
his trial in such a manner as rendered it impossible to
discover his gilt, and oon after, in opponition to all
the maxims of decency or of prudence, voluntarily a-
greed to a marriage with him, which every confidera-
tion Ihould have induced her to detest. By this ver-

ther; in this I shall still call on Gowrie, to search out
the coffer, according to his promilfe; and as I shall find
him minded to do therein, so Ihall 1 do my heft and
whole endeavour to cffc- the luccels to her mnajefvt's
befl contentment.

ad December, 15 7, from Edinburglh.

Because I fau good opportunity oficred to renew

the matter to the earl of (;o'rie for recovery of the let-
ters in the coffer in his ands, therefore I put him in
mind thereof; whereupon he told me, that the duke of
I.rnno < had ought earnefily to have had thole letters,
and that the king did know where they were,
as they could not be delivered to her majefly without
tli king's privity and conJent, and he pretended to be
flill willing to pleasure her majefly in the fame, so far
as he may with his duty to the king aln to th: reft of
the associates in that afion; but I greatly dillult to
effed this to her majesty's plealure, wherein nevcrtlie-
lcfs I shall do ny utmost endeavours.

Whether James VI. who put the earl of Gowrie to

death, A. D. 1584, and sizcd all his efl'Cts, took care
to deft-ov his mother's lctters, for whote honour lie
was at that time extremely zealous; whether tllev have
perished by some unknown accident; or whether they
may not still remain unohfe\rved among the archives of
some of our great famlilis, it is ip'lible to dcter-
rllile.

E

did, Mary is not pronounced guilty of having contriv-
ed the murder of her hulband, or even of having prc-
viouflygiven her content to his death; hut he is nt
acquitted of having discovered her approbation of the
deed, by her behaviour towards him who was the a-
thor of it.

The other conclusion is that which Murray and h)i

adherents laboured to eiablift, That James, foiu.c
tymme earl of Bothwile, was the chiefe executor of the
horribill and unworthy murder, perpetrat in the perl'n
of umquhile king Henry of gude memory, fader to
our foveraine lord, and the queenis lauchfull buflband;
fa was he of the foreknowledge, counfall, dcile, per-
fwuader and command of the said murder to be done."
Good. ii. 207.

Which of there conclusions is mo-st agreeable to the

evidence that has been produced, 1 leave my readers to
determine.

# APPENDIX.

APPEN DI X.

No. I. (page z26.)
A MEMORAL o certain point, meet for reJ7orinO ti

realm oj SCOTLAND to the a,cient,. uveale.
(5th August rt.9, Cotton. Lib. Cal. b. x. fol. 7.

From a copy in secretary Cecil's hand.)
TMPRIMIS, it is to he noted, that the best wordly fe-

licity that Scotland can have, is either to continue in

a perpetual peace with the kingdom of England, or to
be made one monarchy with England, as they both
make but one island, divided fiom the reft o the
world.

If the first is fought, that is, to be in perpetual peace

with England, then must it necessarily be provided that
Scotland e not so fubje to the appointments of France
as is presently, which, being an ancient enemy to Eng-
land, feeketh always to make Scotland an instrument,
to exercise, thereby, their malice upon England, and to
make a footflool tereof to look over England as they
may.

Therefore, when Scotland shall come into the hands

of a mere Scottish man in lond, then may there he
hope of filch accord; but as long as it is at the com-
mandment of the Frerch, there is no hope to have ac-
cord long betwixt these two realms.

Therefore lecing it is at the French king's command-

ment bv reason of his wife, it is to be confidered tor
the weale of Scotland, that until he ihave children, and
during her abhence ot of the realm, the next. heirs to
the crown, being the ouse of the Hlamiltons, fIhold
have regard hereto, nd to fee that neither the crown
ie imposed nor wailed; and, on the ottler fide, the no-
i'ilitv and commrnonalty ought to force that the laws al

E£3

the old customs of the realm be not altered, neither that
the country be not impoverished by taxes, emprefl, or
new impoits, after the manner of France; for proviion
wherein, both by the law of God and man, the French
king and his wife may be moved to reform their mifgo.
vernance of the land.

And for this purpose it were good that the nobility

and commons, joined with the next heir of the crown,
to seek due reformation of such great abuses as tend to
the ruin of their country, which must be done before the
French grow too strong and inlblent.

Firfi, That it may be provided, by consent of the

three estates of the land, that the land may be free from
ail idolatry like as England is; forjullification whereof,
if any free general council may be had where the pope
of Rome have not the feat of judgment, they may ofler
to shew their caule to be most agreeable to Chrilt's reli-
gion.

Next, '.g rovide that Scotland might be governed,

in all rules ft offices, by rth ancient blood of the realm,
without either captaiin, lieutenants, or oIldiers, as all
other princes govern their countries, and lfpecially that
the forts might be in tl:e hands of mtre Stottifh men.

Thirdly, That :h.v mihit never be occasioncd to cn-

ter into ars agair!t England, except England should
g've the irft caulc to Scotiand.

Fourthly, That no nobleman of Scotlant should re-

ccive ptiiicn of France, tcxept it were w-hilit he did
serve in Francec for otunrwile thereby the French would
fliortly corrupt n;any to betray their own country.

Filthlv, 1 hat no office, abbey, living, or conmmudity,

be givell to any but mere Scottith men, by the alient of
the three estates of the realnm.

Sixthiv, That thclc be a council in Scotland appoint-

ed in the queen' alltnce to govern the whole realm,
and i thole caks not to be directed by the lIrench.

Seventhl , '1 hat t be by the laid thri. eitates appoint-

ed how the queen's revenue of the re.Jii thall be expend-
cd, how Inuh the quet:i shall ave for lher portionl anl
eitate curium her ablreLec, how much f.all ie lilitcd to

the governance and defence of the realm, how much
yearly appointed to be kept in treasure.

In thefe,-and such like points, if the French king and

the queen be found unwilling, and will withfiand these
provisions for the weale of the land, then hath the three
estates of the realm authority, forthwith, to intimate to
the said king and queen their humble requests; and if
the fame be not effectually granted, then humbly they
may commit the governance thereof to the next heir of
the crown, binding the fame also to observe the laws
and ancient rights of the realm.

Finally, If the queen lhall be unwilling to this, as it

is likely Ihe will, in refpedt of the greedy and tyrannous
affeAion of France, then it is apparent that Almighty
God is pleased to transfer from her the rule of the king-
dom for the weale of it, and this time mult be iufed with
great circumlfpecion, to avoid the deceits and tromnpe-
ries of the French.

And then may the realmSScotland confider, being

once made free, what means may I; dviied by God's
goodness, to accord the two realms, to endure or time
to come at the pleasure of Almighty God, in whole
bands the hearts of all princes be.

No. II. (p. .)

A letter of Mlaillil/ f Lcthinglot', tl t direttnd:
To my loving friend James. Be this delivered at

London.
(2otb Jan. 1559-6o. C.os. Lib. Cal . ix. oFrm

the oiinizl in hi, o'r hand.)
I Understand y the lalt letter I received from yow,

that discoursing with zour countrymen upon the mat-

ter of Scotland, and commoditevs may enlw to that
realm hereafter, giff ze presently aflili ws with zir
forces, ze find a nombre of the contrary advile, doult-
ii,g that we fall not at length be found trulyv friends,
nnr mean to contyllcw in confLant ametye, albeit we
promifc, but only for avoyding the present danger make
You to serve our turne, and after being ldliv cdi, becum
enemies as of before. For prose quia.Lreof, they alled-e
lt.ihgs that have pall betwixt we heretofore, ad a few

presumptiones tending to the fam end, all grounded up-
on miflruft; quhilks, at the irft ficht, have some hewe
of appearance, gif men wev not the circumstances ot
the matter; but gifthey will confer the tyme past with
the present, confider the nature of this caus, and estate
of our countrve, I doubt not hut judgment fall be able
to banish mistrust. And firfl, I wad wish ze should ex-
amvne the causes off the old inmitve betwixt the realms
of England and Scotland, and quhat moved our ancef-
tors to enter into ligue with the Frenche; quhilks by
our floreys and regfltres off antiqiiteys appear to he
these. The princes of England, some tymc, alledging
a certain kvnde of foveraintye over this realm, some
tvn:e upon hye courage, or incited by incursions offour
bordourares, and fcmblable occasions, mony tymes en.
terprifed the conquefl of ws, and fa far furth preift it by
force offarmes, that we were dryven to great extremi-
teys, by loss of our p-inces, our noblemen, and a good
part of cur cuntrey, fa that experience taught ws that
our owne fIrength vas fcarfe fuifficient to withstand the
force of England. The Frenche zour auncient enemies,
confidering well how nature had fa placed sws in a ifiand
wirh zow, that na nation was able fa to annoye Eng-
land as we, being enemyes, foucht to joine ws to tieym
in ligue, tending by that meane to detourne zour ar-
n.,es from the invasion of France, and occupy zow in
the defence of zour country at liame, ofle'ring for that
efrct to heftowe some chargers upon ws, and for com-
pafling off theyr purpos, choylid a tvme to propone the
matter, quhen the frelche memory of injuris lately re-
ceaved at zour hands, was fa deeply prented on our
hearts, that all our myndes were occupied how to be re-
venged, and arme ourselves with the powar of a forayne
prince againit zour enterprises thereafter.

This was the beginning off our confederacy with

France. At quhilk time, our cronicles maks mention,
that some off the wvfeft foresaw the perril, and small
frure should rednund to us thereof at length: zit had as-
feclion fa blinded judgment, that the advile ofthe maift
F-rt o'rc.2ame the belt. The maifi part of all quarrell;
t:rvt ixt .s lnce that tvme, at least qlien the provoc2.

tion came on our fide, hes ever fallen out by tleyr pro-
curement rather than any one caus off our selves: and
quhenlaever we brack the peace, it come partly by their
intyfements, partly to eschew the conquest intended by
that realm. But now hes God's providence fa altered
the cafe, zea changed it to the plat contrary, that now
lues the Frenfclie taken zour place, and we, off very
jugement, becum defyrous to have zou in theyr rowme.
Our eyes are opened, we espy how uncareful they have
been of our welle at all times, how they made ws ever
to serve thevr turne, drew us in maift dangerous weva
for theyr commoditc, and nevertheless wad not ftyck,
oft tyvnes, againf the natour of the ligue, to ontrak
peace, leaving w.s in weyr. We fae that their support,
of late zeres, wes not grantit for any affection they bare
to ws for pytie they had off our estate, for recompense
of the lyke friendship Icawin to theym in tyme off thevr
affi tiones, but for ambition, and infaciable cupiditie to
reygne, and to mak Scotland an accessary to the crown
of France. This was na friendly office, but mercenary,
craving hvre sarre exceeding the proportion of thevr
dcferving; a hale realm for the defence of a part. VWe
fee thevm manifrflly attempt the thing we fufpedted off
2zo; (we feared ze ment the conquest of Scotland, ant
they are planely failed to that work; we hated zow for
doubt we had ze ment evill towards ws, and fall we
love thym, quhilks bearing the name off frends, go a-
bout to bring ws in mait vile servitude? Gif by zour
friendly support at this tyme, ze fall declare that not
only seek ze not the ruyne of our country, but will pre-
serve the libertie thereof from conquest by ftrangeares,
lall not the occasion off all inimite with zow, and ligue
with theym, be taken away? The causes being removed,
how fall the effedtes remane The fear of conquest made
us to hate zou and love theym, the cais changed, quhen
we fee theym planely attempt conquet, and zou fIhaw
us friendship fall we not hate theym, and favour zow ?
Gif we have fchawne fa great conflance, continuing za
mony zeares in amity with theym, off quhome we had
a small commodite, quhat fall move us to breake with
!ow, that off all nations may do ws greatelt plealbur?

But ze will fay, this matter may be reconcyled and

then frends as off before. I think weill peace is the
end of all weyr; but offthis ze may be assured, we will
never a far trust that reconciliation, that we will be
content to forgo the ametye of England, nor do any
thing may bring ws in suspicion with zow. Gif we
wold, at any tyme to please theym, break with zow,
fiould we not, befydes the loie of efimation and difcrc-
diting off ourselfes, perpetually expone our common
weill to a maift manifefi danger, and becum a prey to
thevr tyranny? Quhais aid could we implore, being def-
titute of zour friendship, gif they off new wald attempt
thevr formar enterprise? Quhat nation myght help ws
giff they wald, or wald giff they might? And it is like
eneuch, thay will not flick hereafter to tak theyr tyme
off ws, quhen difplefour and grudge hes taken depe rute
on baith fydes, feeing ambition has fa impyrit ower
thevr reason, that before we hed ever done any thing
mvght offend theym, but by the contrary pleased them
by right and wrang, they did not stick to attempte the
subversion of our hale slate. I wald ze ihould not e-
fleeme ws fa barayne ofjudgement, that we cannot fore-
fee our awne perril; or fa foolifche, that we will not
fludy by all gode means to entertayne that thing may
be our fafetye; quhilk consistes in all the relaying of
zour friendships, I pray zow confider in like cafe, when
in the days of zour princes off maift noble memory
king Henry the VIII. and king Edward the VI. meanes
were opened offamvtye betwixt baith realms; was not
at all tymes the difference of religion the onley flay
they were not embraced? Did not the craft of our cler-
gv and power of their adherents subvert the devises of
the better fort? But now has God off his mercy remov-
ed that block furth off the way; now is not theyr prac-
tice lyke to tak place any mare, when we are comine
to a conformity of doctrine, and profes the fame reli-
gion with zow, quhilk I take to be the ftrayteft knot off
amitye can be devised. Giffit may be alledged that
some of our countrymen at ony tyme violated theyr
fromis? Giffze liss to wav the circumfiances, ze lall
and the promis is rther brought on by neceffitie, aftcr

a great overthraw off our men, then comme off free
will, and tending' ever to our great incommodite and
decay off our haill state, at leift fa taken. But in this
cafe, fall the preservation off our libertie be inleparably
joined with the keping offpromeffe, and the violation
off our fayth cast ws in maifl miserable servitude. So
that giff neyther the fear off God, reverence of man,
religion, othe, promise, nor wardly honcltye, was fuffi-
cient to bynd ws, yet fall the zeale of our native coun-
trey, the maintenance off our own estate, the faicty of
our wyffes and childrene from slavery, compell ws to
kepe promise. I am assured, it is trewlv and fincerelv
ment on our part to continew in perpetual ametve with
zow; it fall be uttered by our proceeding. Giif ze be
as defyrous of it as we ar, assurances may be devvlcd,
quharby all partyes will be out of doubte. There be
gode means to do it, fit instruments for the purpos,
tvme serves weill, the inhabitants of hayih reahls wilh
it, God hes wrought in the people's hartes on both par-
ties a certaine fill agreement upon it. Never did, at
any) tre, so mony things concurre at ones to kt it
up; the disposition of a few, quhais harts are in Codis
hands, may mak up the hale. I hope e q iiiil hes be-
gun his work, and mainteyned it quhile nowi by the
expecdation of min, ihll perfyte it..

I pray zow, let not zour men dry ve time in confulta-

tion, quhcther ze fall lilpport xws or no, lcying the mait-
erlipcaketh for itflf, that Ye mon take upon uw thle
defence of our caus, gils ze have any reli)cdt for zoir
awne weill. Their preparatives in France, anti kl'ving
of men in Germany, (quheyrofil am lately advcrtii'c-l ,
ar not altogilder ordevned for wvs; ze ar the mark:
I they shote at; they feke our realme, bur for ant entrcy
to zours. Giff they houl directly 1I'llaw holtilitie to
zow, they knaw zo wald mak redy for theyme, therle-
tore they do, by indireit mneanes, to blini' zoXw, the
thing they dare not as zit planely attempte. T'he
frme to invade us to th' end that havilg anlmblrd
thetre hayle forces a nere zour bordours, they may
unlk it to attack zow; It is ane of their aid fetches,
Ilmaking a fllew to one place, to light on ane other.

Remember how covertly zour places about Boulougne
were affaizeit, and carried away, ze being in peace as
now. How the enterprise of Calais was fynely diffem-
bled, I think ze have not fa sone forgotten. Beware of
the third, prevent theyr policy by prudence Giff ze
fe not the lyke disposition presently in thevm, ze fe na-
thing. It is a grosse ignorance to mifknaw, what all
nations planely fpeks off. Tak hede ze zay not here-
after, "Had I wifi;" aie uncomnely sentence to pro-
cede offa wyfe man's mouth. That is onwares chanc-
ed on to zow, quhiik zow commonly wiffed, that this
countrey myght be divorced from the Frenfche, and is
fa comme to pass as was maift expedient for zow. For
riffbv your intyfement we had taken the matter in
i:and, ze myght have fufptced we would have been
untrufty friends, and na langer continued fledfalle,
then perril had appeared. But now, quhen off our self,
we have conceyved the hatred, provoked by private
injuries, and that theyr evil dealing with ws hes deferv-
ed our inimitye, let no man dobte but they 1all yulde
vss ennemyes in ernest, that fa ungently hes demcyned
our countrey, and at quilais hands we can look for na-
thing but all extremitye, giffever they may get the up-
per hand. Let not this occasion, fa happely offered,
escape zow: giffze do, neglecting the present opportu-
nitie, and hoping to have ever gode luk comme fleaping
upon zow, it is to be feared zour enemye waxe so great,
and fa firang, that afterwards quhen ze wald, ze f.lI
not be able to put him down; and then, to zour smart,
after the tyme ze will acknowledge zour error. Ze
have felt, by experience, quhat harme conieth of over-
fight, and rrulting to zour enemyes promeie. We of-
ser zow the ocalion quheyrhy your tormer loflls may
be repayred, qlhilk giff ze let over flyde, fifiering i
to be overrun, quha then, I pray zow, fall flay the
Frenfche, that tlley fall not invade zow in zowr oll
boundes, sick it i their lust to reygne, that they can
neither be content with theyr fortune prelent, nor rlft
ald be satisfied whe7- they have gode luck, but will !lill
follow on, having in thyr awne brayne ronceaved the
imag;e of fa great a ccnquefi, quhat think ye fall be the

end? Ts ther any of fa froall judgement, that lie doth
inot folfee already, that theyr hail force fall then be
bent againfl zow ?

It fall not be amis, to confider in qnliat cafe the

Frenfchebe presently. Theyr estate is not always l.
calm at hame as every man thinketh. Ant trcwlv it
wes not theyr great redines for w eyr made theym to
tal; this mater on hand, at this tvnei, ut rather a vavne
tril in their awne policy, hinking to have found na
reliftance, their opinion hes deceaved theyin, and that
makes them now amafed. The estates ofFthe empire
(as I heare) has suited reflitution offth' imperial towns
l Mtz, Toull, and Verdun, quhilk may grow to lome
Ibfynes; and all thing is not a calme uwthinl theyra\w:ie
cuntrey, the less fit they be prcfently for weyr, the
mare opportune elteme ye the time for zow. GCiff the
l;ke occasion were offered to the Frenfchie aganlit zow,
ucev, how gladly would they embrace it? Are zc nt
es, hamed of zour sleuth, to spare theym llat hes al-
rerady rompjflcd zour deflrutiioin, giff tli)m were
allc? Confider with zour self quhilks is to ie clioy'lcd ?
To wevr againfl them out with zour rcalme or with-
in? iffquhill ze fleape, we fall be over'lrowne, then
l1ll they not favle to fute zow in zour awne counrre,
anl uft wsas a fote stole to overloke zow. But fmle
rilt sav, perhaps, theyv mian it not. It is folls tn think
tl:t-v wad not gifftltey were alble, quhcn bc!or hand
the! flick not to giflzoiur arrnrs, and ufurpe the ilyle of
27.or crown. Then quat difftrence thtre is to camp
Mwi:liin zowr awne houndsor without, itis manifest. GCif
twea armyics should. camp with in zowr country, but a
iiouneth, alliet ye receaved na other harine, zit hould
zoer loffe be greater, nor all the charge ze wiii nede to
bcflow onouriupport will draw to, befydes tlihedihonour.

I.et not men, that eyther lack gode advilc, or ar not

for particular rfpeclts wcill affcted to the caus, move
vow to fubflriadl zour helping hand, hy alleging tlings
n.t ,i;arent, for that they be pC fib'!l. It is not, I
grant, unpoffible that we may rcceave conditions of
;:,e; lint I lIe little likelvhole that our ennemycs

Vul. 111. F

uill offer ws fik as will rcmove all miftrufl, and giff wue
xwald have accepted others, the matter had bene lan:
or now compounded. Let zow not be moved for th.it
they terme ws rebelles, and diffmcs our jufi qucrril
with the name of conspiracy against our foverayne. It
is hir hyenes right we manctayne. It is the lilerty of
hir realm we fludy to peferve with the hazard of our
Ivvrs We are not (God knaw:.th' conime to thi;
poynt for wantones as men impatient of r'.wll, or \wii
ling to fciakc offthe zokc o Cgovernnient, bu t ar ira n:
to it by ncceffitie, to avovde tle tyranny of firangrarls,
feakiirg to defraud ws of lawful government. GCiil rc
would siSer fIrangearcs to plant themrflfli-s peac;:i '
in all the firenthes of our rcallne, fortify the ftyL.ol.,
and maifi important places, as ane entre to a plai i C.n-
que!, now in the minoritic of our foverane, beyinig frlt
of the ralme, should we not be thought oncareft:l si
tht cor:mon weill, hetrayarcs o our native countrlv,

ilnd tvill fubjets to hir majtftii; QEuat otiler oinil'.
.ol!d fche have ({f s ? Might she inot jifily 'ir.l c:i;:

call ws to acomn:p, as negligent minilticr. (;;iT' i!.I-
geares should he tlhus fuiErcd to broke the (liefe .li',,
btare the hail r-e!l, a!ter and pervert our lawcs and ii
berty at theyr plcaf.ur; myght not the ljeople rel,, r
cur noblemen un orthy the place of couilalours? \\
mean na wyfe to fubtrak our oedie:ice frn our io\ cr-
ane, to defraud hir hyenes off her dew re\v-lence, r1 n
and ,-evenl:s off lir crown. VVe fke natiiig but tl.l:
Scc land may remane, as of before, a fre realuic, rv'::
hy l:ir h ecs and hr niniiters borne imen of the la::;
-r.d tiit tl.e f:cce.T:on ot the crow-n nay rinane i.h
the ian. ul biode.

I u ;it not ze fould not fa lyttl eie,.e the f ienlcll:i;

of Scc'tand, that zcr jged it not wourthy to L chnr 3 bra..
It fail be ina irall rorrmodite f:r zow to he dlivered !t
the anovy:!ce of so neir a nyglhtlour, ci;hais ininmiv:E
may r.or. tr6uble zow, then of any other nation all,,.
twii as pt:iant, not lveng dry marche \x itl zow. 1B,
ifv. tl.at fe fall not nede to fearc the invalo!n off:,
,ri;nee lac. itig the commodite to invade zw by Ia:;
en cr t.nt'i Coni:dcr uhat ;ipci fluous cl:arlec ze '

'T7

fiowe on the fortification and keeping of Barwick; quhilk
c may reduce ta a mean fownic, having ws to frends.
Tile realme of Ireland being of nature a gode anil fertill
colintrey,.by reason off the continewall unquietnes and
lak of policy, ze knaw to be rather a burthen unto zov
then great advantage; and giffit were peaceable may be
very commodious. For pacification quhayroff, it is not
unknowne to zow quhat service we are abill to do. Re-
fil; not theyr commoditeys, besides molly ma quhlen
they are offrid. Qhilks albeit 1 fiudy to amplify and
dilate, yet is na other countrey able to osier zou the lykc,
and are the rather to be embraced, for that zour aun-
ccilors, by all means, maift ernefily fitted our amity, and
vrt it was not theyr hap to come by it. The matter hes
;lrinaift carried me beyond the bondes of a lattre, quhar-
for I will leave to trouble zou after I have given you
this note. I wald wil; that ze, and they that ar learned,
sliuld rede the twa former orations of Demoftllenes, cal-
led Olyntli yace, and confidere quhat counfall that wy)L
oratour gave to the Athenians, his countrymen, in a lyke
cae; quhilk lies so great affinite with this cause of ours,
that every word thereof myght be applied to our pur-
pos. There may ze learne of him quhat advise is to be
lollowed, when zour nyghtbours hous is on fyre. Thus
I id zou heartily fareweill. From Saint Andrews, the
acth of January I5 9.

No. 11. (p. 176.)
.art of a letter from T/o. Rundolph to Sir William Cecil,

from t camp befre Litll, 291b of APril, 156o.

(An original in the Paper-office )

T WILL only, for this time, discharge mryfelf of my pro-

mise to the earl of Huntly, who Io defyreth to be re-

commended to yu, as one who, with all his heart, fa-
voureth this cause, to the uttermost of his power. Half
the words that come out of his mouth were able to per-
fuade an unexperienced man to speak farther in his be-
half, than I dare be hold to write. 1 leave it to your
honour to judge of him, as of a man not unknown to
you, and will myself always nmcalure my thoughts, as
he shall dtcerve to be spoken of. With nuchl difficulty
anld great petfuafion, lih hath subscribed with the reft oi

the lords to join with them in this ation; whatfonme-
ver he can invent to the furtherance of this caufc, he
hath promised to do with solemn protestation and ma-
ny words; he trufteth to adjoin many to this aule; and
faith surely that no man hall lie where lie taketh part.
He hatl, this day subscribed a bond between England
and this nation; he faith, that there was never thing
that liked him better.

No. IV. (p. 86.)
Randodlp to Cecil, oth Aug.' 560. From Edin3urg.h

(An original in the Paper-office.)

OINCE the 29th of July, at what time I wrote laP, to
t' vour honour, I have heard of nothing worth the re-
porting. At this present it may pleale you to know,
that the most part of the nobles are here arrived, as your
honour shall receive their names in writing. The earl
of Huntlv excufeth himself by an infirmity in his leg.
His lieutenant for this time is the lord of Lidington,
thofen speaker of the parliament, or harangue maker,
as here men term it. The first day of their fitting in
parliament will be on Thursday next. Hitherto as ma-
ny as have been present of the lords have communed
and devised of certain heads then to be propounded, as,
who flall be ent into France, who into England. It is
much easier to find them than the other. It feemeth
almost to be resolved upon that for England the mafler
of Maxwell, and laird of Lidington. For France Pi;-
tarow and the justice clerk. Allo they have confinetd
whom they think meeteft to name for the XXIV. of;l::
which the XII. counfcllors mull be chosen. They in.
tend very shortly to fend away Dingwal the herald into
France, with the names of thoe they hall chue, and
also to require the king and qeen's consent unto tli.
parliament. They have dcvifid how to have the con-
traca ith England confirmed by authority of parlia-
ment; how also to have the articles of the agreenent
between them and'their king and queen ratified. Thtle
things yet have only been had in cormmunication. lor
the confirmation of the contrati with England I h.e
no doubt; for that I hear nmany nmn very much like t!1'

fame, as the earl of Athol, the earl of Sutherland, the .
Glarnis, who dined yesterday with l.James. The lord
James requested me this prclent day to bring the con-
tracd unto him. I intend, alib, this day, to feak unto
the 1. Gray, i our 1. Gray's name, for that he promilied
in Iny hearing to fbicribe, and then presently would
Ihave done it, if the contract could have been had. For
the more assurance against all inconvenients, I would,
betides that, that I trul t it hall be ratified in parliament,
thl; every nobleman in Scotland had put his hand and
Ict hiis feal, which may always remain as a notable mo-
iini;:t, tho' tle at of parliament he hereafter difan-
nullcd. If it might, therefore, fLand with your advice,
that the lords might be written unto, nonw that they are
here prrfent, to that effect, or that I might receive from
your honr. rome earnelt charge to travel herein, I doubt
nt but it would l:rve to good purpole. If it miight
be allb known with what fubilantial and erffeioC s words
or charge you deliec to have it confirmed, I think no
gecat difficulty would be male. The earl nlarlhal has
len een n moved to fubfcrihe, he ufeth mo delays than
mlen judged he wnmld. His fin told me yeitcrday, that
lie would Ipeak with me at leilure, so did allb brum-
i;ii'ick; I knov. not to whlat purpose: I have catiled 1.
j.iiies to lie te ea'neih-r with the 1. marhal, for his
a'i hority's tlke, when of late it was in conlultationl by
\ilat nmeans it might be wrought, that the amity be-
t hccn tlhefe two re.:lins might be perpetual; and anmong
Iliverlie men's pinipn, oe fai.l tlhat he knew of no o-
ti(r, but by making them botih one, and that in hope
nr' :hat io things were djne, tan would otherwii have
(.lwr !cen granted; the earl of Argyli advised hiin car-
nc':ly to tick unito that, tla: h had p.otimfil, that it
fio'ld pafi his po.ver and all the crarty knaves of' his
',)uiitli (1 am bhld to ule unto y'our it. his own \o0!cl ;,
t break ib golly a prpof.. T'ih:s talk liked well ti:h
.'iilters, howfoinrver it pleased hlin to whlom it wvs
lpoken unto. 'Tie barons, wlio in time pail ha\, been
rn the parliament, ha:d yflerdav a ronventiol aiong
!imni;lves i tie church, in very honel and uiet .,r;

1 ,5

they thought it good to require to be restored unto their
ancient liberty, to have voice in parliament. They pre-
sented that day a bill unto the lords to that effedt, a co.
py whereof shall be sent as soon as it can be had. It
was aufwered unto gently, and taken in good part. It
was referred unto the lords of the articles, when they
are chosen to rebflve thereupon.- itre jydl. ,a
15,g paragrapb concern'7n the jrlificalli, o0J DI)nar, t¥.
-- his present morning, viz. the 9th, I ullderltio(!,
that the lords intended to be at the parliaient, which
caused me somewhat to flay my letter, to fee what
could hear or learn worth the reporting unto your hl-
nour. The lords at ten of the clock, afin:hlcd thenl-
selves at the palace, where the duke lieth; from w hellce
th -y departed towards the tolbooth, as they were in
ci nity. Each one being let in his l'at, in lich order as
your li. shall receive them in this scroll. The crown,
the mace, the ford, we-e laid in the queen's feat. Si-
ierce being colr.rmr.:led, te 1. or Lidingtoo brean hl'
oration. He xcufcd his infufficitncv to occupy tiat
place. He made a brief difeourfc of things pafl, and of
, hat necefftv men were forced unto for the defcnc of
tlheir country, what remedy and support it pli-aftd Gud
to fend them in the time of their nceflitv, how much
he were bound heartily to acknowledge it, and to rc-
quitr it. He took away the periuafioii that was in rna-
ny m:en's mind that lay back, that nifdeemed other
things to be meant than was attempted. He advised
ail tilates to lay all particulars apart, and to bend them-
selves wholly to the true service of God and of their
country. He willed themn to remember in what slate it
had btcn of long tin,e for lack of government, and ex-
srcilc us justice. In the end, he exhorted them to mutu-
al aitv and heartv f-iendfllp, and to live with one an-
other as members' a!l of one bod.--He prayed Cod
long to maiutain this neace and amitv with all prince,
efpecia!v btwsixt the realms of England and Scotland,
in the fear of God, and so endt d. - he cler.c of regiftc:
inmediately itood up, and alked them to what matter
tLev would proceed? It was thought necessary that thr
ar.iles cfth; pe,cc hould be confirned v.:h t:l: cIrL

mon consent, fr that it was thought nccelfary to fend
thlem away with speed into France, and to receive the
ratifications of them as oon as might be. The articles
being read, were immediately agreed unto: A day was
appointed to have certain of the nobles subscribe unto
them, and to put their feals, to be sent away by a herald,
m ho ha!l alib ring the ratification again with him. Tile
harons, of whom have above written, required an an-
fwer to their requefl; somewhat was said unto the contra-
rv. The barons alledged for them cuflom and authority.
It was in the end resolved, that there Ihould ;c cholrl
fix to join with the lords of the articles, a.id that if they,
after good advifernent, hould find it right and neceniL-
rv for the commonwealth, it should be ratitied at this
pa:!iament for a perpetual law. The lords proceeded
imlrnediately hereupon, to the chufing of the lords ot
the articles. The order is, that the lords ipiritual chute
the temporal, and the temporal the spiritual, and the
lh';r(fiEs their own. T'here were chol).n as in this o-
ther paper I have writtin. This being done, the lords
iYeparted and accompanied the duke, all as far as the
Bow, (which is the gate going out of the high Itleet),
aml many down into the palace where he lietl. 'lTc
touwn all in armour, the trumpets founding, and other
iilufic such as they have. Thus much 1 report unto
your hoioi:r of that I did both hear and fee. Other
1iolrnniti s have not been uscd, aving in 'times long
paif the lords have had parliament robes, which are now
with thenm wholly out of ule.

Tlhe name; of as many earls and lords spiritual an4
temporals as are 2fliinbled at this parlia.nent.

Tlhe duke of Chatelherault.

Earls Caithncfs. Livingflon.

Arran. Rothes. Innermeth.
Arvyll. Monteith. Boyd.
Athole. I.Lords. Ogilvy.
Cravwford. F Flkine. Fleing.
Caflils. Rutllven. Glamis.
Marfnall. I.indicy. Gray.
Morton. Somerville. Ochiltree.
Ilrncairn. Cathcart. Gordon.
;;:: .or nd. H ums

Lords Spiritual.
St. Andrews. Dunkell. Athens. The iifhop of the

Isles. Abbots and Priors I know not how many

The Lords of the Articles.
Spiritual. Temporal. Barons ele&ed to be of

the Articles.

Athens. The Duke. Maxwell.
Isles. Argill Tillilardin.
Lord James. Marshall. Cuniinghamhead.
Arhroath. Athole. Iochenvar.
Newbottle. Morton. Pitarow.
Lindoris. Glencairn. Lunvy.
Cowpar. Ruthven. Ten pvofls of tlhe rhif
Kinross. Elrfkine. towns, which also arc
Kilwinning. Bo!d. of te articies.

Lindsay.

So that with the Subprior of St. Andrews, the
n hole is thirty-fix.

It were too long for me to rehearse particularly t!,e

dilpofition, and chiefly the aflfccios of thclIc tcn, tI ..;
are at this time chorcn lords of the articles. May it 1,-
tisfy our hoir. for this tine to know that. hv the coim-
mon opinion of men, there was not a l'.l:'.ntiallr or
more fiifficient nunier of all fir:s of nient chiolL i1
Scotland thdf mnany years, nor of whomn men 1.. !
greater hone of ood tu en'ue. This rrlent moirl-
ill, viz. tIc ot!h, the 1. o Iidington I;:de me priv)
unto our Irn;er; he itendcth, as much as ni.iav c,
to followv. yvur advice. Some hard ;:i s thir ar.
lie himlelf is determined not to o io !'ra.e. li:
z!li-,-th many rasons, hut fapakcth !e:ai of that, tl.,
mcvc h him molt, whii h is the c. x:iplt of th;. I.ii,
that xent on a miu-cr e 'atful mniefrlic Iai hr fhlali
r?-, and flood on ther terms with their ri;, ,- thiu I1
doth, and yet your honour knlo'. ;:;. \: the

; i-

vwoild judgeth.
l'titi.n os'tie i.--.r Barsi o :1: P -',
r,:,Tm ,.) ','/.?;t. I ./, .

(Inclolcd in ia1r.1d:!t.,'.'s ;.; it . . ;:,

Y lord., unto 'r": r kl..ci.i.; , :.:;,. '

. , icau

si ws~t', "' r

i i :'. .. ..

:. ; : .- i :

!;- . of
- .

realm, your brethren in Chrifi, That whereas the cauf-
es of true religion, and common well of this realm, are,
in this present parliament, to be treated, ordered, and
established, to the glory of God, and maintenance of
the commonwealth; and we being the greatest num-
ber in proportion, where the said causes concern, and
has been, and yet are ready to bear the greatest part of
the charges thereuntill, as well in peace as in war, both
with our bodies and with our goods; and feeing there
is no place where we may do better service now than
in general councils and parliaments, in giving our belt
advice and reason, vote and councell for the furthe-
rance thereof, for the maintenance of virtue and
punishment of vice, as use and custom had been of
old by ancient as of parliament observed in this
realm; and whereby we undeftand that we ought to
he heard to reason and vote in all causes concerning
the commnonuwealtlh, as well in councils as in parlia-
ments; otherwise we think that whatfomever ordi-
nances and flatutes be made concerning us and our e-
state, we not being required and fuffcred to reason and
vote at the making thereof, that the fame should not
oblige us to fland thereto. Therefore it will please
your lordships to take consideration thereof, and of the
charge born, and to be born by us, since we are willing
to serve truly to the common well of this realm, after
our estate, that ye will, in this present parliament, and
all coulcls, whiere the common well of this realm is to
he treated, take our advice, counfell, and vote, so that,
without the fame, your lordships would susser nothing
to e passed and concluded in parliament or councils
aforesaid; and that all ats of parliament made, in
times past, concerning us for our place and felate, and
in cur favour, he at this present parliament confirmed,
approved,and ratified; and act of parliament made there-
upon. And your lordships anftwer humbly becteches.

Oj the firces of1 this petiion, 1/'e j6lo/ving account ii gi-en by

K.:nio1h; Lett. to Cecil, 19 Aug. I56o. The matters
cnncluded and pas by common content en Saturday
lilt, in such folenim fort as the first day that they as-
filnblcd, are thlief; Firlt, that the barons according to

an old a ofp arliament, made in the time of Jame f.
in the year of God 1427, hall have free voie in parlia-
ment, this at passcd without any contrad,icion.

Nio. V. (p 94.)
A I.lr cf T7Lnrs Randsl,, ie En lrf- rel 'nt, to 1te riglt

u 9riffipf'Jr Iit',liam Cei!, int. prti. fatl j.:rtly t Ite

(9 Aug. 1561. Cott. Lib. B IC. so. 2.)

HAVE received your honour's letters of the firfl of
this month, written at ()fyes in I:llax; and all a

letter unto the i'rd James, from his kinfin.n St. Comer
out of France, in this they aeree both that the qucen ;f
Scotland is noth.ng changcd of her purpose in home
coming. I aflbur your honour that will be a stout a-
venture for a fitk crafed wvoinan, that may e doubild
as well what mav happen :lnto her upon the leas, as al-
so how heartily flie may be r':eived whlen he corrc:h
to land of a great number who are utterly pcr!ialred.
that she intendeth their utter riin, come when she wil
the preparel.ce is very small whLcnfoever that she .arlive,
scarcely any man can he persuaded that he has ay
such thought in her head. I have shown your honour's
lette s unto the lord James, lord Morton, lord Liding-
ton; they wish, as your honour doth, that fihe might be
Itayed vet for a space, and it it were not for their obe-
dience fake, some of them care not tho' thev never saw
her face. They travel what they can to prevent the
wicked devices of thele milchievous purpol'es of her
minilters, but I fear that that wili always be found that
filij hujus fcculi, they do what they can to flalld with
the religion, and to maintain amnty with their neigh-
bours; they have also need to look unto thmfelves, four
their hazard is great, and that they fee there is no re-
imedy nor safety for themfclhes, but to repose therm-
selves upon the queen's majesty, our sovereign's favour
and support. Friends abroad they have none, nor ma-
ny in whom they may trust at home. There are in
mind hortlv to try what they may be assured at of tlc
queen's majesty, and what they may auredly perform
of that they intend to offer for their parties. 'Ihis the

queen of Scotland above all other things dtoulteth;
this he fckti hy all meancs to prevent; a hath cauf-
ri S;. Come, in hr lname, ealiffly to write to charge
hiun hat no ifuch things he a;tempted before her coni-
inr homie; for tl:lit it is said, that they too already ar-
rivedl here out of Engltad for the pl:lui, o, what ft.nm)-
I mn: In-itev.r the noblemen cdo nake, that the) are
Frk-ved with thti:- queen's refusal, that cometh far fri-n
thi.ir hearts. ' hey intend to expoltuiate with me here-
uoU. I have nmy answer ready enough for them. If
flit thrluf all Eilifhnien out of tiijs colitry, I duub:
lint but there will be fomn of her own tat wiill bear l:s
olne kiidnefs. Of me flt.- hall be quit, so iton as it
i!.aficth the queren's n.aielty my mistress no lonter to
uc miny lervic: in t lii. ['e. JBy such tlk, as I have of
li.t had with e lit i(d ames a nd lord of Lidingtlltr I
pIrceive that they are of mind that ineliativ i t'
tie nrxt cornvrnrion I fl::!l rcpaiilr towards yu with
It tir d!ctc:i.inations, and rcf,!uiiois, in all plurpole,
\i rhriii your hnour's advice is carneflly rquirtirl,

huid lihrtly lIiokcdl i-. V\'hatflnt vr - 1 desire i ,l't!f,

I k:iin' rny ill ouirlr to he fiihjct un:o tne qur-n ry
;;ivere;.i 's pzl..(ue, i ut to content lmvIl; e, would ('-i
1 xtrr f haip;v a ti> i-rv her n:ajefiy in as I. main
ilate as ever toor . nizletrnn did, to lie quit ,t tihs
) .; n,: tht I di in my hn.art wax veary of icr ma-
j, ';"s I:.-vice, hit btclu'! my time and yea.s rctul:-e

1 p,
; a.cce ol more repo'c a;.d quietnic .. tha I siid i in

i' ir lt. tr 1 ('Idl:t ail) mII inluffi..iener when other

ti!'u:..c i iis ,:5 iiry ar:flt, or ou.h; shall be req iircl
1,1 imsI o ti:r ;d'vai:ccilln ot her naj;lty's ecrvice, tl it

'':ir miv wSll is nor a,c to rco:ials, or my creiit
1. L. ie, t tu wsork to that ethcl, as perehance hall i
'..,- fr ait ;iy hinds. As your holnour ath le)en
I ::l.: in ot n:' euintinluane in this ronom, so I trult th;t
I fi.ill sii:d t;at oltil:al favour at yor hands, tlht si

''.1 ' a. t l il fiai li with lle the lltce's majefty'b p!ca-
.J'r, I t;iay gi cz tl.ij pIai unto fum:ne 'r worthier than
! ri!crlt, a::d in the ; :n lcafon, have my ourfe di-
..-'il by CU' good advice ow I r:i. by cmy on:rl-

vance do some such service, as may be agreeable to her
majefly's will and pleasure.

These few words, I am bold to write unto your ho-

nour of myself For the reft, where that is wisted that
the lords will outly continue yet for one month, I as-
sure your honour that there is vet notb;hn omitted nt
their old and accultomed manner of doing, and feeing
that they have brought that unto this point, and hou!d
now prevail, they were unworthy of their lives.

I find not that they are purposed so to leave the mat-

ter, I doubt more her money than I do her fair words;
and vet can I not conceive what great things can be
wrought with forty thousand crowns, and treasure of her
own here I know there is no sure or ready means to get
it. The lord ofLidington leaveth nothing at this time
unwritten, that he thinketh may be able to satisfy vour
defrre, in knowledge of the prelent tfate of things here,
Whatfomever cometh of this, he findeth it ever bes,
that she come not; but if she do come, to let her know,
at the first, what she liall find, which is due obedieiK,
and willing fervire, if he embrace Christ, and desire to
live in peace with her neighbours. By such letters as
you have last received, your honour fomnewhat iuntdr-
standeth of Mr. Knox himself, and also of others, u hli:
is determined, he himfelfto abide the utrermoft, and -
ther never to leave him until God hath taken his lifr,
and thus together with what comfort fomever it wil
please you to give him by your letters, that the queen's
majefly doth nc. utterly condemn him, or at the Icall
in that point, that he is so fore charged with by li>
own queen, that her majefly will not allow her doing.
I doubt not but it will be a great comfort unto him,
and will content many others; his daily prayer is flr
the maintenance of unity with England, and that God
wvill never fuffri- men to be so ungrate, as by any pr-
fiafion to run headlong unto the deftrltion of th rn,
that have fared their lives, and reflored theircountryo
to liberty. I leave farther, at this time, to troulbi
your honour, desiring God to fend ijich an amity 1tr
:?: t:hee te two r-ean:s that God ni:a be glorified :o

them of this world.-At Edinburgh te 9th of August,
1561.

No. VI. (p. 2o0.)

A letter of _uen E.!;'obelh to uren Mary *.

(16 of Aug. I561,, Paper-office, from a copy.)

To the right excellent, right high and mighty princefe,

our right dear well-beloved fiter ad cousin the
queen of Scotland.
IGHT excellent, right high, and mighty princeflTe,
our right dear and right well-heloved sifter and

cousin, we greet you well. The lord of St. Cri;
brought to us your letters, dated the th of this present
at Abbevile, whereby ye signify, that although by the
ianfwer brought to you by Monsieur Doyzcll, ye might
have had occasion to have entered into onme doubt of
olr amity, yet after certain purpolks pafled betwixt you
and our ambalTador, you would afure us of your good
meaning to live with us in amity, and for your purpose
thlirein ye require us to give credit to the laid St.
Colme. We have thereinto thought good to answer
as olloweth: The fame St. Coflme, harh made like de.
claration unto us on your part, for your exculc in not
ratifying the treaty, as yourfllt made toolr ambassador,
and we have briefly anl;vered to every the famic points
as he can hew you: and if he Ihall not lb do, yet least
in the mean season you might be induced to think that
your reasons has satisfied us, formrally we afiure you,
that to our requests your answer cannot be reputed for
a latisfadlion. For we require no benefit of you, but
that you will perform your promise whereunto you
are bound by your feal and your hand, for the refulal
v hereof we fee no reason alledged can lferve. Neither
covt we any thing, but that which isin your own pow-
er as queen of Scotland, that which yourself in words

* This is the complete paper of which that indunfri-

otls and impartial collErtor, bihlop Keith, has publified
a tragment, from what he calls his fllattered 1MS. 154,
note (a) iSi.
Vol. 111. G

and speech doth confess, that which your late hs.
band's our good brother's arnhaffadors and you conclu-.
ed, that which your ov n nobility and people were made
privy unto, that which indeed made peace and quiet-
ness betwixt us, yea that without which no perfec a.
mitv can continue betwixt us, as if it be indiflrcntiy
weighed, we doubt not but ye will perceive, alluw,
and accomplish. Neverthelefr perceiving by the repor-
of the bringer, that you mean furthwith upon your coin.
ing home, to follow herein the advice of your coul:i:l
in Scotland, we are content to suspend our conceipt ci
all unkindncfs, and do assure you that we be fully re-
solved upon this being performed, to unite a filre ban,]
of amity, and to live in neighhourhood with you as
quietly, friendly, yea as affilredly in the knot of friend-
ship, as we be in the knot of nature and blood. And
herein we be so earnestly determined, that the worlil
should fee if the contrary should follow, (which God
forbid) the very occalion to be in you and not in us;
as the story witneffcth the like of the king your father,
our uncle, with whom our father fought to have knit
a perpetual bond by inviting to come in this realm te
York, of which matter we know there remain with u,
and we think with ou, ilndrv witnesses of our father'b
earnest good meaning, and of the error whereunto i-
vers evil councillors induced your father; or finally
where it fecmeth that report had been made unto you:,
that we had sent our admiral to the seas with our navy
to impeche vour pafuage. both your servants do well un-
derftand how salic that is, kuowing for a truth that we
have not any more than two or three small barks upon
the Ieas, to apprehend certain pirates, being thereto en-
treated, and almofi compelled, by the earnellt complaint
of the ambafiador of our good brother the king ,>
Spain, made of certain SCcttifhmen haunting our i:rl
as pirates, under pretence of letters of inarque, of whi
matter alb we earnelly require you, at your conling :u
your realm, to have une goud conlidcrat;ion, and tl:'
rather for refpec :h.,t ought to be b- twixt vour rtar;;!
and the countries of us, o Fr'i Ti-, ot Spai:, and of i1:c
i.onue of Burg.;i.I . .r.d .:; ri . . ' ::, - ,!

high and mighty princess, we recommend us to you
with most earneflrequefl, not 1t negler thre our frirnd-

we mean and intend to accomplifn. Given under our
signet, Heyningham the i6th of Augult, in the third
year of our reign.

No. VII. (p. 228.)
A etter of Randolph to the ,iil , hianurasle Sir Wfil'dam Cecil,

knight, principai fretary ts the queen's ntyrfv.

(rith of May, 1563. Paper-office, from the original.)
jS late, until the arrival of mnonlieur Le Cror, I had
' nothing worth the writing unto vnour honour.-

Before his coming we had so little to think upon that
we did nothing but pass our tine in banqueting, mask-
I mg, and running at the ring, anjt iich like. IHe brought
with him such a number of letters, and such abundance
of news, that for the space of three day;, we gave our-
selves to nothing else but to reading of writings, and
hearing of tales, many so truly reported, that they
might be compared to any that ever Lciane, did write
deviris narrationibus. Among all his tidings, for the
most allfured, I lind this unto your honour as an un-
doubted truth, whir h is, that the cardinal of Lorraine,
at his being with the emptror, moved a marriage be-
tween his youngell son, the duke of Atlruche, and this
queen; wherein he hath so far travelled, that it hath al-
ready come unto this poiut, that if he find it good,
the said duke will out of hand fend hither his anil)aia-
dor, and farther proce d to the confumation lherof,
with as convenient speed as .nay be; and to the intent
her mind may be the better known, Le Croc is sent uln-
to her with this meflage from the cardinal, who hath
promised unto the emperor, to have word again before
the end of May; and for this cause Le Croc is ready
for his departure, and his letters writing both dav and
night. This queen being before advertired of his to-
wardnefs, by many means hath ioiught far off, to know
my lord of Murray's mind herein, l,ut would never so
plainly deal with him, that he could arn what her

G 2

meaning is, or how she is bent. She ufeth no man'
council, but only this man's that last arrived, and affur
ediy until the 1. of Lidington's return, she will do whai
the can to kep that secret; and because resolution in
his abfcnce cannot b taken, the will, for this time, rt.
turn Le Croc with request, to have longer time to de
vize; and after, with the moit speed she can, she fully
purpofeth to advertize him, I mean, her uncle the car.
dinal, of her mind. Of this matter the 1. of Liidingtor
is made privy. I know not whether by some intclli
gence that he had before his departure, or si e his ar
rival in France, divers letters have passed between her
grace and him, whereof as much as it imported not
greatly the knowledge of, was communicated to some,
as much as was written in lypher is kept unto thern
felvcs. Whether also the I. of Lidington hath had
conference with the Spanish ambassador in England t
this mattcr, or ay like, I leave it unto your honour's
good means to get true knowledge thereof. Guteffi- cr
lurmizes in so grave matters, I would be loath to write
for verities. This allo your honour may take for truth,
that the emperor hath offered with his son, for this
queen's dower, the county of Tyroll, which is laid to
be worth o,cco franks 1by ear. Of this matter all;r
the ri.ingrave wrote a lctter unto this queen, out of
France not long since. This is all that presently I can
write unto your honour hereof; as I can come by far-
ther knowledtge, vour honour shall be informed.

I hve received your hrnour's writings by the Scot-

ti'h man that last came into these parts; he brought al-
so Ictte-s unto this queen from the 1. of Lidington; their
date .-s old, and contained only the news of France.
I perceive div-rs ways, that Newhaven is forre cloid,
but am not so ignorant of their nature, but that I know
they a ill fay as Inuch as they dare do, I will not fay a
the proverb doth, canis t midus fortius latrat.' F1rom
hence I do affrlre them, whit means fomever they ma!i,
or how piifil fomceer thtir mone be, they are like to
receive but iniall comfort for all their long allie. We
fland daily in doubt what triendfhip we hall need our-
felt, except we put better order unto our nniru'ed papiliLs

than yet we do, or know how to bring to pass that we
i may be void of their comber.

To morrow, the Isth of this inflant, the queen de-

parteth of this town, towards Edenburgh. If my hap
be good, you hall thoroughly hear some merry tidings
of the Bp. of St. Andrews; upon VWednefdav next lie
hall be arraigned, and five other priests, for their mal-
sing at Eafler las. Thuis mot humbly I take my leave;
at St. Andrews the Isth of May, 1563.

| A ~ No. VIII. (p. 2..)
ZLetr of Randolph to the riht honsurale Sir Tiil;izam Cecil,
k night, prncipTl /fc-.r'carv t/o t, I

' .-t'j c/?yt.
(loth of April sx561. Paper-office, from the origi-

nal in his own hand.)

.4AY it please your honour, the th of this instant,

Rowlet. this queen's secretary, arrived here; he

reporteth very honefllv of his good usage; he brought
with him many letters unto the queen that came out of
France, full of lamentation and lorrow. She received
from the queen mother tvo letters, the one contained
only the rehearsal of her griefs, the other signify the
slate of France as then it was, as in what fort thiins
were accorded, and what farther was intended so'- the
appeasing of the discords there, not mifirusling but that
it realon could not be hau at the queen of England's
handc, but that -he realm of France ihould find her rea-
dy and willing to support and defend the right thereof,
as by friendship and old alliance between the two realns
she is bound.

How well there words do agree with her doings yonr

honour can well confider, and by her writings in this
fort unto this queen (which I aliure your honour is true),
you nay affuredlv know that notl;ing [hall be left un-
done of her part, that may move debate or controver-
fle between this queen and our sovereign.

It was much mused by the queen herself, how this

new kindness came aout, that at this time he r(ceived
two long letters written all with her own hand, a)ying,
all the time since her return fie never received half

j.3

many lines as were in one of the hItters, which I can
mvfelf tltify by the queen's own faying, and other good
assurance, where hitherto I have not been deceived.
can also tarther affitre your honour, that this queen hath
saved that she knoueth now, that the friendflip of the
queen's majesty my Ibvcreign may stand her more ii
stead, than that of her good mother in France, and as
she is desirous of them both, so will file not loie the one
for the other. I may albo farther assure your honour,
that whatfomever the occasion is, this queen hath foirc
wihat in her heart that will burit out in time, which will
manifcfl that Ibme unkirdnefs hath passed between
them, that will not be easy forgotten. In talk fometimet
wihh myself, he faith that the queen mother might have
used the matter otherwise than he hath done, and doth
much doubt what shall be the success of her great delire
to govern alone, in all things to have her will. Seeing
then that presently they stand in such terms one with
the other, I thought it better to confirm her in that
mind (this queen I mean), than to speak any word that
might cause her to conceive better of the other. And
yet I am assured he shall receive as friendly letters, and
as many good words from this queen, as the other did
write unto her. Whether the queen mother will speak
any thing unto the 1. of Lidington of that purpose fie
did write unto tiis queen of, I know not; but if he do,
I think it hard if your honour can get no favour therc-
of, at his return, or I prchance by some means here.
It may perchance 'e written only by tlha queen, to try
what anf--er this queen will give, or underfland what
mind fnc beareth unto this queen's majelty our sovereign.
This queen knoweth now that the earl Bothwell is sent
for to London She causcd a gentleman of hers to en-
quire the cause; I answered that I knew none other,
but that his takers were in controversy who took him,
and tlat it hould be judged there. I know tlat fCie
thinketh much thait ih is not ltint into Scotland. It is
vet grc..:y doubted that if he were here, lie would be
reserved fcr an evil infitrumcnt. If the lord of Liding-
ton have not been plain with your honollr Iherein, he is
in the wrcng to thuole wLo re his ricuids hliee, but mull

of all to himself. There come a vulture in tis realm,
if ever that man come again into credit.

if t iNo. IX. (p. 24.)

The oration made y 14tritam Araitan ol' l.etliuJfo" younger
.secretary for the time, in the par!ianmnt holJen by or /o-

eregn tev king's mvother, queen of tlis ralll fr tle liire,
the ti=e of ,the fciaition of umnguie Miltthew erarl of Ln-
nox.

lords, and others here convened, Albeit, be that

- it has plealed her majcfly nioft gr-aioiflv to utter
to you, by her own mnouth, ye may have fiiiicn:lv con-
ccived the cause cf :his your prefelnt aflembly, yet hav-
ing her majelly's co;:iiailrlimet to supply my lord
chancellor's place, bhing presently as ve fee deceased, I
a:n willed to exprefa the ianic somewhat more at large.

Notour it i it

is, h in her linels's minority, a pro-

t res oi forfaulture was decreed againit my lord of Len-
nox, for terlailn (ofi.iccs alledged commnitted bsy him;
fp.cified in the dome and ccnlement of parliament giv-
en thereupon; by reaibn hcrcof lie has this long time
b:eii exiled, and al lent iorlth of his native country; how
grievous the fame has been unto him, it has well appear-
ed hy divers his iilites, f:ndry waiys brought unto ler
niijcfy's knowledge, nut only coialning inot htlimble
a;jd due fulmiiflion, but alw ivs b.aling wiinfs oif his
good devotion to her nmjeily, hias nirur;.l princess, and
earnet affcdiun he had to her hilghnisl riolt hlumble'!
fIrvice, if it hou',d pl, a!l h :ir m jt sty (,f her clernciny
ti, inake him able to enjoy the benefit of a i'ubjec; in.ny
rcfrlpAs might have iio d her hiih!in-'s favourably to
iclinine to his reqleft, a the anciniicv o his housc, and
ti.e lirname he lbears, the lioInour lie has to appertain tu
1.r najcily by alfinity, by r t:lobn ol' my lady Margaret,
her highlinci's auilt, :;Itid ix crs otr lti gt-o;d coiilid'ra.
tlnls, as allo the .,ii',.IItils rei-, elt i>! It'.; ,'I()il iillIr the
q:l'cen's maijefty oil Ewl ; d.!, s Il.i;' c-.: .'ll i colin ,ln.i-
tl a ,

was not o! !'.il mo:l.etr iIlides t.t oi her u\ n

r.-tural, her nmajli; ils a crti i nt ;l: n to pity tIe
'it;cy of noble biiou.i, ,i il. a.s

, c l.:.il. i. her ,'. r-
1" :; lasa c-t - ....... ... - i lli.; .

of the uphold, maintenance, and advancement of the
ancient blood, than to have matter miniftcred of the de.
cay or overthrow of any good race. Upon this occa.
sion, her majefly the more tenderly looked upon his re-
quefi, and her good sier the queen of England's favour.
able letter, written for ccommendation of his cause, in
consideration whereof rat only has she granted unto
him her letter of reflitution, by way of grace, but also
licensed him to pursue, by way of reduclion, the reme-
dies provided by the law for such as think themselves
grieved by any judgement, unorde-lv led, and to have
the proccs rverfed; for examination whereof, it has
pleased her najcfty presently to aflemble you the three
estates of this her realme, by whole advice, deliberation
and decision at her marfliy's mind, to proceed forward
upon his cemplints, as the merits of the cause, laws of
:'e realnie, and praeticer ,bfrved in uch cafes, will bear
cur. The fum of all yc.ur proceedings at this time, e.
ing by that we have heard, thus as it were poilted out,

ir.ight here end, if tc natter we have in lland gave
me not occasion to fay a fw more ords, not far difir-
e t from the fame fuhjecRt, x! crein I would extend the
circumstances mote largtly. If I feared lult to offend
i.er highnels, whose presence and modcfi nature abllors
long ipcaking and adulation, and so will compel me o
pFeak such things, as may lti.:n to tend to any good and
rertetl point; and left it ficuld he compted to me, as
that I were oblivious, if 1 fTould onit to put you in re-
n embrance, in what part c nmay accept this, and t-
like demonfirations of hr gentiii nature; whose gracl-
cus behaviour towaids al! l.cr fuhjefts, in general liay
frrve for a good proof ^f that felicity, we may look tar
under her happy govrrnnlent so long as it shall pleai'c
God to grant her unto us, for a good harmonly to he
had in the common weill, thc offices between the prince
and the fubjtets must le rcriproque; as by her majelty's
prudence we enjoy this preniit peace with all foreigil
nations, and quietness among ourselves, in such fort,
that I think juitly it may be affirined Scotland, i no
man's age, that presently lix ', v as in- greter tranqril-
lit); so is it the duty cf 11 us chr loving luljtLrts to ;:-

knowledge the fame as a nont hig h lrnefit, p-ocecdliog
from the good government of her niai-elf, dclal ing our-
flves thankful for the faie, and rendering to her ma-
jelly lulch due obedience, as a lust prince may look tor
at the hands of faithsid and oedient filbjects. I mean
no forced nor unwilling obedience, which I know her
nature does detell, but such as proceeds from the con-
templation of her mnodcn kind of regiment, will for love
and duty fake produce rile fiuits thereof. A good proof
have we all in general had of her majefly's benignity
tliefe three years, that Ihe has lived in the government
over you, and many of you have largely tafted of her
large liberality and frank dealing; on the other part her
highness has had large appearance tf yo, dutiful obedi-
e nce, so it becomes you to continle, as we have begun,
in consideration of the very notaler eanmples.of her cle-
innciv above others her good cqiua'itis, and to ah'lor and
dcteft all false bruites and rnumnurs, \ hich are tile most
prftilcnt evils that can be in any conmon weill, and rhe
luuwers and inventors thereof. Then ma r we hie well as-
fured to have of her an mft gracious rinceflc, andl nle
niofi faithful and loving fuIjea.s, and so both tie head
and the members, being encouraged to maintain the har-
nmony and accord of the politic bodies, whereof I made
nmention before, as tle glory thercof (lall partly apper-
tain to her mnajety, ih fiall no finall praise and iiufpcalk-
able comrnoditv redound there through to you all uni-
vrrlally her fubjecis.

No. X. (p. 49.)

Tfb peril and Itroules il, tn..y

m .y i riyte,

r t.and i, tlie o

coum Jbilow, lo ite qren'J ruel.i aJ Eol.nd, and flale cf
tis rJeairn upon tI marriage o6 the guren of Scoli o the lo d
Dariey.
UIRST, the minlds of fitch as be affected to the queen
F of Scotts, either for herself or for the opinion of her
pretence to this crown, or for the desire to have change
of the forme of religion i this realn, or for the dilion-
trntation they have of the queen's majelty, or her fuc-
ceflion, or of the succession ot any other beside tle queen
of Scots, shall be, by this marriage, crcclcd, comlTortkd,

and induced to devise and labour how to bring their de.
fires to pass; and to make some estimate what persons
those are, to the intent the quantity of the danger may
be weighed; the fame may be compasscd in those forts
either within the realme or without.

The firfi are such as are fpeciallv devoted to the queen

of Scotts, or to the lord Darley, by bond of blood and
alliance; as first, all the house of Lorrain and Guile for
her part, and the earl of Lennox and his wife, all such
in Scotlana as be of their blood, and ave received dif-
pleasures by the duke of Chatelherault and the Hamil.
tons. The second are all manner of persons, both in
this realme and other countries that are devoted to the
authority of Rome, and mislike of the religion now re-
ceived; and in these two forts are the fibflance of then
comprehended, that shall take comfort ii this marriage.

Next therefore to be confidered what perils and trou-
bles these kind of men shall intend to this realme.

First, the general scope and mark of all their desires

is, and always shall be, to bring the queen of Scotts to
have the royal crown of this realne; and therefore,
though the devisers may vary amongst themselves for
the compassing hereof, according to the accidents of the
times, and according to the impediments which they
shall find by means of the queen's majefly's altions and
governments, yet all their purpofs, drifts, devises, and
practices, (hall wholly and only tend to make the queen
of Scotts queen of this realme, and to deprive our fove-
reign lady thereof; and in their proceedings, there are
two manners to be confidcred, whereof the one is far
worse than the other; the one is intended by them, that
either from malicious blindnels in religion, or for natu-
ral affection to the queen of Scotts, or the lord Darley,
do prfuade themfclves that the laid queen of Scotts hath
prelelltlv more right to the crown than our fnoereign la-
dy the queen, which fort be all their kindred on both
fides, and all such as are devoted to popery, either in
England, Scotland, Ireland, or lfewhcre; the other is
meant by them, which, with less malice are persuaded
that the queen of Scotts hath only right to be the ncxt

heir to fccecd the queen's majesty and her iue, of
which fort few are without the realre, but here within
and yet of them, riot i many as are of the contrary,
and from thelr two forts shall the peril, devires, and
prairfes proceed. From the firfi, which imagine the
queeli of Scotts to have perpetually right are to be look-
ed for these perils. Iirlf, is it to be doubted the devil
will infecs some of them to imagine the hurt of the life
oif ur dear sovereign lady, by Inch means as the devil
hilla figgefl to them, although it is to be asSuredly hop-
td, that A.mighty God will, as he hath hitherto, graci-
oufly protect and pi-efilrve her from such dangers? Se-
o -ndly, there :rill he attempted, i persuasions, by bruits,
bvy ilrumnurs, and fil.h like, to alienate the minds of good
slubjcts from the queen's majefly, and to conciliate them
to the queen of Scotts, and on thii behalf the frontiers
andl the north will be mu.lli lolicited and labored.

hiirdlyl, there will be attempted causes of some tunmults
I and rebellions, ctp..cialy in the north towards Scotland,
Ih as thereupon m- i;;low f ome open enterprfe let by
violence. Follthlv, there will e, by the said queen's
rCunc-il and fri;CiLs, a new league made with France, or
Spainl, hat shall be ofr-nlive to this reaime, and a further-
a.c to their title. And as it is allb very likely, that
t!!c will et a foot as rnany practices as they can, both
upon the frontiers and in Ireland, to occasion the queen's
rnajefly to incrcale and continue her charge thereby,
to retain her from being mighty r potet, and for the
attempting of all tlihle things, many devil.s will be ima-
ginrld rom time to time, and no negligence will therein
appear.

Erom the fecon!;- fort, which mean no other favour
tn the queen of Sotts, hut that she should succeed in
title to the queen's nmaj-fly, is nt much to be feared,
but that they flhlil coltent thcnmlelvcs to fee not onfv
tile quetren' lair ft not: to marry, and so to impeach it,
Ltt to hope, that the queen of Scotts shall have iflue,
stiiich they will think to be more plealable to all meni,
beiaife thereyv the crowns of England ant Scotland
fiali be united in one, and thcreby the occaficn of i'jr

shall ease; with which persuasion many people "ly
be ftduced, and abused to incline themselves to the part
of the queen of Scotts.

The remedies againfl these perils.

A Duplicate.

Afn'zmmary of t cnf/fi.r/:Jtn 'J adv;e gioven AI trte Ior-, ed

ether, of tr pri-y iouril. coil/eed out of tbeulndry anjj;:.
ral fee:bel f the fad ri-llcrs.
(4th of June, I165. Cot. Lib. Cal. b ro. fol 290.)

Lord Keeper, M-. Comptroller,
Lord Treasurer, Mr. Vice Chamberlain,
(Derby, lIr. Secretary,
Earls of Bedford, Cave,

Lcicefier, Peter.
Lord Admiral, Mason.
Lord Chamberlain.

Queflions propounded were there two.
i. F'IRST what pcris rlight enifue to the queen's ma-

jefi., or this realin, o the marriage betwixt the
queen of Scotts, and the lord Darnlcy.

2. W\\at were neet to be done, to avoid or renitdy
the fame.

To the t;.-fl.

The perils being fdry, and very many, were re-
duced by feme counsellors into only one.

i. First, That by this marriage, the queen of Scoti

(being net married), a great number in this realm nt
of the worst fubjrfls rr,iglt le alicnated in their minds
from their natural duties to her majcfly, to depend up-
en the fucefs of this marriage of Scotland, as a nmen
to efil.iflih rhe fuceffion of both the crow-ns in the if-
sue of the fame marriage, and so favour all devises arP
pratices that fould tend to the advancement of the
' queen of Scotts.

2. Secondly, That confidering the chief foundatirn cr

thtm, which fuirthered the marriage of lord Darnlry
was laid upon the trufl of f-h as were papists, as tl.e
ennl mrrans left to rellore the religion of Rume, it wia

plainly to be seen, that both in this realm and Scotland,
the papists would moit favour, maintain, and fortify
this marriage of the lord Darnley, and would, for fur-
tierance of faction in relic-ion, devil'e all mnans and
pliadices that could be within this realin to liflurb the
liate of the queen's majelty, and the peace- of the
r ahn, and conicquently to atchieve their purpvfis by
force rather than fall. By some other, thelb perils hlav-
ing indeed many branches, were reduced, though fu;ne-
.t hat otherwise, into two forts, and thele were in na-
:*lre such as they could not be easily fevered the one
trorn the other, but were knit and linked together, r!a-
irally for maintaining the one with the other. Ihe
f;:ft of there fort of perils was, that, by this mirriage
with the lord Darnley, there was a plain intcnmion to
further the pretended title o the rcen of Scots, not
only to succeed the queen's nmajeify as in her befl ami-
ty ihe had professed, hut that to occupy the queen's
iftate, was when he was in power, he did manifestly
declare.

'The second was, that hereby the Romish religion

flwull be ercetcl, and increaled daily i this realm,
rA d these two were thus knit together, that the frthe-
r.ilne and naintenance of the title fiaid, in furthering
c? :he religion o Rome within this realn; and in
like manner the furthe-anlce es the lame religion flood
:y the title, .cr cierwii the title had no founda-
;:ion

Proofs of the first.) And to prove that the intens
inti to advance the title to difturh the queen's ma-
;eftv, muff needs ensue, was confidered that always the
:itcntion and will of any person is molt malifelt, when
: !eir power is greatelt, and contrary wh n power
5 inmail, then the intention and will ns every perlon it
covered and less seen. So as when the queen ofScolls
lo,) r was greateit, by her marriage with the dauplin
oi France, being afterward French king, it manifestly
appeared of what mind fle and all her friends werc.
,.;iig then manifestly all the means that could be devil-
ed to impeach and dilpolisi the queen's majelly, filr
VoL. ill. !I

by writing and publishing herself in all countries queer
of England; by granting charters, patents, and comn
missions, with that style, and with the arms of England
both the French and Scotts, which charters remain ftil
undefaced; anl to prosecute it with effet, it is known
what preparations of war were made, and sent into
Scotland; and what other forces were affcmbled in
foreign countries, yea, in what manner a hameful
peace was made by he French with king Philip to em-
ploy all the forces of France to purfile all the matters by
force which by God's providence, and the quetn's na
jeftv contrary power, were repelled; and af:erwards,
by her husband's death, her fortune and power becng
changed, the intention began to !.ide itself, and althlo
by the Scottish queen's commiffaries an accord was
made at Edenlrough, to reform all those titles and
claims, and pretcrnt s, vet to this day, by delays anJl
cavillations. the ratification of that treaty hath been
deferred. And lo now, as soon as she hall feel her
power, he will set the lame again abroad, and by con-
fdering of fucl errors as were committed in the firll,
her friends and allies will amend the fame, and pro-
ceed fihbfantialiv to her purpose. By lome it v-n
thought plainly, that the peril was greater of this mar-
riage with the lord Iarnic-, being a fubjeEt of :.:
realm, than with the mightiest prince abroad; for bli
this, he being of this realm, and having for the c:;llti
of religion, and other retlpcis, made a party lhere,
lhould enrreafe bv force with diminution of the powrc;
of the realm; in that u hatfoever power he could Inak
by the faciion of the papist, and other difeontcntdl
persons here, should be as it were deduced out oftlhe
power of this realm; and by the marriage of a ftran-
ger, she could ot be ared of anv part here; so as
this marriage he should have a portion in her can
power to lirve her turn, and a fnall portion of adv-rlia-
ries at home in our own bowels, always seem more da;-
gerou. than treble the like abroad, whereof the exam-r
ples are in our own stories nmany, that foreign pow -i'
never prevai!cd in this r!n., hot with tle help i.r
lornmc ! liln. it va a; o icicinCIbILertd that ft.ii

how before this attempt of marriage, it is found, and
manifestly seen, that in every corner of the realm, the
fadion that molt favoureth the Scottish title, is grown
flout and bold, yea seen manifelly in this court, both
in hall and chamber, it could not he but (except good
heed were ipeedily given to it) by this marriage, and by
the practice of the fautors thereof, the ilier fadtion
would shortly encreafe, and grow lb great a! dange-
rous, as the redress thereof would he alrnoft desperate.
And to this purpose it was remembered, how or late in
perusing of the fuibfance of the juflice of the p-ace, in
all the countries of the realm, fantily a tli:,d was
found fully assured to be trufled in the matter of cli-
gion, upon which only firing the queen of Scots title
doth hang, and borre doubt might be, that the friends
of the earl of Lennox, and his had more knowledge
hereof than was thought, and thereby made avant now
in Scotland, and their party was so great in England as
the queen's majesty durfl not attcmt to contrary his
marriage. And in this bort, was the lum of the perils
declared, being notwithlsanding more largely and plain-
ly set out, and made lb apparent by manv ure argu-
ments, as no one of the council could deny them to be
Lut many and very dangerous.

Second Question.

The queflion of this confulation was what were

meet to be done to avoid tlhefe perils, or else t divert
the force thereof from hurting the realm? wherein
there were a great number of particular devi!s pro-
pounded; and yet the more part of them was reduced
b Ibome into three Ieads.

i. The first thought neceflary by all persons, as the

only thing of the most moment and efficacy, to reme-
dy all thle perils, and many others, and such as with-
out it no other remedy could be found sufficient, and
that was to obtain that the queen's majesty would mar-
ry, and make therein no long delay.

2. The econd was to advance, eftablilh, and fortify
i;.dctd the proftflion of religion both in Scotland and

1H

in England, and to diminish, weaken, and feeble t!:t
cortr i-v.

3. Tile third was, to proceed on sundry tlilgs, either

to diFappcnt and break this intended mairiage, or, at
the : a:, thereby to procure the fame not to be lo hurt-
ful t, this rea'rl a otherwise it will he.

T:: first cf th-fe 'lr-ce hath n partirular rights in it,

but a earnett and unfeigred dfirr and suite, with all
,l r.mi,!. I.3, \

bhy prayer to Almigty God, and adice

aid cc.ncil * .:- oueen's majcft, that she would dr-
fee r more .ti. froin marriage, whereby the good
ful'jrc-s of te :ca!ni n ight stay their hear:s, to dpend
unon her .airfi-, and ' -- ilTue of h-r body, without

hich nofu.-rev ca h 'icvitcd to ascertain any perlbn

of con:inuance ct their amilites or poflerities, to eni..y
th. -s hich othe; ile fnould come to them.

Second, concerning tle matters of religion, wherein

bo:h --ih and policy were joined together, had tlhlc
par, i:'zrs.

Firit, whereas of late the adversaries of religion, in

the realm, have tken occasion t, comfort and incrca;c
their fasaion, both in England, Scotland, and abroad,
m ith a rumour and expetation that the religion hall
be shortly chang-:l in this realm, by means that the
bim.ops. by the queen's majeity commandment, ha\e
of late dealt ftreightly with lbme persons of good reli-
gion, becaufc th( v had forborn to we-.r crtain apparel,
and such like things ; being more of form and acri-
dci.t,, than ofanv fuhitance, for that it is well known
that her majefly had no mtaning to comfort the a.cr-
saries, but (:n!v to meintain an uniformity as well in
tl:ing- external as in the substance, nor et hath any
intention to make any change of the religion as it is c-
stablished hy laws. It was thought by all men very
ntcetiarv for :i c iupprefiig of the pride and arrogancy
of the adverlarncs, indircAly hereby to notify, by her
special lctte:-s to the two arcihbiihops, that her former
commandrm,-nt was ori- to retain an uniformity, and
not to give -ny occasion to any person to misiiidge of
her majelty, in the change of any part of religion, but
that she did not dttermine firmly to maintain the form

i APPENDIX. 37

of her religion, as it was established, and to punish
such as did therein violate her laws. And in these
points, some also wilhed that it might plafe her arch-
bishops, that if they should fee that the adversaries con-
tinued in taking occasion to fortify their faclion, that
in that cafe they should us a moderation therein, until
the next parliament, at which time, some good, uni-
form, and decent order might be devised, and eflablifli-
ed, for such ceremonies, so as both uniformity and gra-
vitv might be retained amongst the clergy.

The second means was, tha the quondam bifliops,
and others, which had refused to acknowledge the
queen's majefiy's power over them, according to the
law, and were of late difperfei in the plague time to
sundry places abroad, where i. is known they cease not
to advance their faction, might be returned to the
Tower, or some other prison, where they might not
have such liberty to seduce and inveigle the queen's ma-
jeftv's fubieCis, as they daily do.

The third means was, that where the bishops do

complain that they dare not execute the ecclefiaflical
laws, to the furtherance of religion, for fear of the pre-
munire wherewith the judges and lawyers of the realm,
heing not belt assiSted in religion, do threaten thelm,
.-d in many cafes lett not to pinch and deface them,
t;at upon flnch caf-s opened, some convenient authori-
ty might be given them, from the queen's majeity, to
continue during her pleasure.

The fourth was, that there were daily lewd, injudici-
ous and unlawful books in English brought from beyond
fras, and are beldly received, read, and kept, and clpe-
cially in the north, seducing of great numbers of good
ihjects, the like boldness whereof was never filiffred in
.ny other princess's time, that fomne fireight order
might he given to avoid the fame, and that it might be
confidered bv the judges, hat manner of crime the
fame is, to maintain such books, made direi.lly against
her majeftv's authority, and maintaining a sovereign
owver, contrary to the laws of the realm.
'I'he fifth was, that wlhere a great number of mo)lks,

J 3

fryars, and finch lewd persons are fled out of Scotland,
and do fcrve in England, especially in the North, as cu-
rates of churches, and all such of them as are not found
honefi and conformable, may be banished 'out of the
realm, for that it appeareth they do sow sedition in the
realm, in many places, and now will iniral their do.
ings.

The sixth, u here sundry having ecclefiaflical livings

are on the otler fide the sea, and from thence main.
tain f(titi n il the rcaln; that livings may be better
be.owued, to the commodity of the ralm, upon good
fuhjec;.

i.e fcventh is, that the judges of the realm, havin;

no small auth(iriit in this realm, in governance of ail
property of the ealn, might be sworn to the qluecn's
mnrcfi,, according to the laws of the realm, and lo
thrrb. they Oitid folr confcicnce fake nainltain the
qutcen'o mairfl' s authority.

The p ard. ::'rs f the third intention to break and
avrid this nmariale, or to divert the perils.

I-rft to break i is marriage, confildei ing nothing cn

likely do it, .:; iore c, or fear of fotce, : is thought y
frim that tlielc means following mIiilght occaiion thl
Lreach of the marria-e.

r. That the ea I1 o; Bcdford repair to his charge.
2. That tli works ai Berwick e more advanced.
3. Tlihaz t!cr arrit be tther Incra''d,
4. 'That a1l I:c *.vaden; pu: ti:cir ironiers in order
witlh speed, to bc reat at an hcur' s wa nipg.

;. 'lthat f:ie nobi pii in;l, as t;ic delke of Nuoir;' ,

or the earl of Saloi, or lucli ot.C!', be lent nto York.
thire, to be lieuc;lient ge-hra] in .c No.rth.

6. That pleprlztions ti ade ui a power, to bc i:

readiness to l-er\c: .ithlr .,t LBcrax k, r to inv.;d. :S3t'
land.

8. That prtfent!v L'dv Lcnnox e co;nin:mted to fc:,:

place, .-bere she ma be kept !rom n; ing or re'ci;;.:.
of imtLlliiencc.

9. Thlat the earl of I.er.non as d h: fen may be ft.

for, and required o be lket homnle by tc i!rcn o:' .rci'
accordi:' t the U eaty; and ii Uc2. vh i. nut c.i:::

then to denounce to the queen of Scots the breach of
the treaty, and thereupon to enter with holtility; by
which proceeding, hope is conceived (so the ifame be
done in deeds and not in hews) that the marriage will
be avoided, or at the leait that it may be qualified from
many perils; and wltatfoever is to be done herein, is to
e executed with speed, wlhilt fh has a party in Scot-
land that favouretl not the marriage, ad before any
league made by the queen of Scots with rance or
Spain.

Some other allows well of all there proceedings, sav-

ing of proceeding to oflility, but all to agree in the
reil, ald alib to these particlarities followin-g.

i .I hat the carl's lands, upon his rcftil l, or his

son's rcfuting, hfiuldl he lizcd, and bellowed in git or
cultody, as ha!l pleal: her najiclty, upon good fubji cts.

1 . That all manifest fa\ourers of tie rcal, in tle

North, or -iiewliere, lie inquired for, and that hllic be,
li l;undry nicaris, well hIoked to.

12. iliat enquiry bi made il the North, who have

t.i nlrwardflip of the queen's niaefty's lands there,
andi tlat no person eltr ving nillrult he fulinc- I to
I!.vc g cvcrnall o rule of any of her fubjsts or la;ls
il the Niortli, Init only to retain their sCcs, and mioe
trijlty pcri.,n .ave- ruile of the fame people's lands.

] z. That all Ilrqurlut paiiagcs into this realrl, to and

tron Scotlad, be reftraiied to all cot il i men, I1\ n;.
lilch as have ffce conduct, cr be efpeiallv rconii!,cntl-
cd foiro Air:. IRaindlu!hl, an tfiav'l crs ( o tiis r alil.

That omie inteiligiince be ued! ith si I'.h i Scitlaid,

as iavour ot tle ilrriage, and th.y .coltlortc( tI ro i
tliie to timne.

1. hl' at the queen's majifly's houfhold, clairllher,

anld pinc;onr';. , li,-tlr i, . 1 1:1110, to avoid bread .id(1
LUIII).'t; lit,:tJi ukidi ; , i.: rv a iiil thie tate ol the

T hiat the yrimi r ,i .I e arl of Len-'nox, Mr.

..!.'(S, bC w!i

'ti.. iti Ot e Xi c

' l iie.e lie ni.,y

.. :(,Ittr'oineii.g.

[,. Tlt ( 1c.lerii:; i: :'.; on and title of the
i n 'A Scuts ,
l: ;,0 1i' l":; i:,u received great

favour, and continued, by the queen's majefly'8
favour herein, to the queen of Scots and her mini-
fters, and the lady Catherine, whom the said queen
of Scots accompted as a competitor unto her in pre-
tence of title,, it may please the queen's maiefty, by
some exterior a, to hew some remission of her di.-
pleasure to the lady, and to the earl of Hartford, that
the queen of Scots thereby may find some change, and
her friends put in doubt of further proceedings therein.

IX. That whosoever hall be lieutenant in the North,
fir Ralph Sadler mav accompany him.

19. That with speed the realm of Ireland may be
'comniitted to a new governor.

20. Finally, that there advices being confidered by

her majeity, it may please her to choose which of them
The liktlh, and to put them in execution in deeds, and
not pass them over in confultationsand speeches.

For it is to be assured, that her adversaries will use all

means to put their intention in execution. Some hy
pratice, ome by force, when time shall serve, and no
time can erve so well the queen's majefly to intlerrult
the perils, as now at the first, before the queen of Sco
purpoles be fully fettled.

No. XI. (p. 259.)
.Rand/l Ito t e e,l of aLei:cllr, jrom Edinburgh tie

31/7 of 7u/v.

(Cott. Lib. Cal. h. ix. fol. 2I6. An original.)
.AY it please your lordship, I have received your
lordship's letter by my servant, sufficient teftimo.

nv of your lor'ifnip's favour towards me, whereot I
think mvfelf always so assured, that what other miPiap
soever befal me, have enough to comfort nmyelf with:
though I have not at this time received neither a cord-
ing to the need I fland, nor the necessity of the fervi:e
that I employed in, I will rather pass it, as I may wirh
patience, than trouble your lordship to be further futer
fur me, when there is tb little hope that any good i!l
be done for me. I doubt not but your lornrdip hatil
heard by luch information as I have given from lin n',,
\ hat the present slate of this country is, how this quc:-..

is now become a mnrried wife, and her hub.and, the
litf-laine !day of his iarriarge, made a king. In their
desires, hitherto, they have found Ib much in their con-
tcntment, that if the rit succeed and prl-oler accord-
inglv, they may think thenmfflves much happier, than
there is appearance that they shall be; Ib many dilion-
tented minds, Ib much nlifiking of the filbjedts to have
thtfe matters tliis ordered, and in this bort to be
brought to paRs, I never heard of any marriage; o lit-
tle hope, so little comfort as men do talk, was never
Iccn, at any time, when men fhnuld nmol have shewed
themlelves to rejoice, if that consideration of her own
honour and well of .er country had been had as ap-
pertained i to weighty a cafe. This is now their fear,
the overthrow of religion, te breach of amitie with tile
que(n's majesty, and the deflructicon of as many of the
nlobility as the hath a mif.ikilg of, or that she liketh to
pitch a quarrel unto. To 'ee all thelt iconvenineies
approachinlig, there are a good number that may soon-
er laiment with thenilclves, and complain to their
ncighbours, than be able to find reinedie to help them,
lome attempt with all the force they have, bt are too
weak to do any good, what is required otherways, or
uwhat means there is made your lordship knoweth;
uhlat will be anufwred, or what will be done, therein,
we are in great doubt, and though your intent be ne-
ver so good unto us, yet do we-lb much fear your de-
lay, that our ruin Ihall prevent your support when coun-
cil is once taken. Nothing b needful, as speedy exe-
cution. Upon tle queen's mnajefly we wholly depend;
in her majesty's hand it flandeth to lave our lives, or
to susser us to perifl; greater honour her najefty can-
not have, than in that which lieth in her majefly's
power to do for us; the fums are not great; the num-
btrs of men are not many that we desire; many will
daylay be found, though this will be obme charge;
men grow daylay, though, at this time, I think her mna-
jetfy hall lole but few; her friends here being once
taken away, where will her majtfiy find the like; I
Ipcak leafl of that which I think is moll earnestly in-
tended by this queen, and her hulband, when by himl

it was lately said, that he cared more for the papifis in
England, than he did for the proteflants in Scotl:nd;
if therefore, his hopes be so great in the papifls of Eng.
land, what may your lordship believe that he thinketh
of the protestants there; for his birth, for his nurr;tour,
for the honour he hath to be of kine to the queen my
mistress, if in preferring those that are the queen's ma-
jeflies worfi fubjecs to those that are her bell, he dccla-
reth what mind he beareth to the queen's majefly's
self, any man may fay it is slenderly rewarded, and his
duty evil forgotten; he would now seem to he indiffe-
rent to both the religions, he to use her mass, and he
to come sometimes to the preaching; they were nar-
ried with all the folemnities of the popish time, saving
that he heard not the mass; his speech and talk argtl-
eth his mind, and yet would he fain seem to the world
that he were of some religion; his words to all men,
against whom he conceiveth any difpleaf-re how unjust
soever it be, so proud and fpitfull, that rather he fecm-
eth a monarch of the world, than he that, not long
since, we have seen and known the lord Darnley; he
looketh now for reverence of many that have little wi!l
to give it him; and some there are that do give it, that
Lhink him little worth of it. All honour that may be
attributed unto any man by a wife, he hath it wholly
and fully; all praises that may be spoken of him, he
lacketh not from herself; all dignities that he can en-
due him with, which are already given and granted;
no man pleafeth her that contenteth not him; and
what may I lay more, she hath given over to him ler
whole will, to be ruled and guided as himself best lik-
eth; she can as much prevail with him, in any thing
that is against his will, as your lordship may with nlc
to persuade that I hould hang myself; this last dig-
nity out of hand to have been proclaimed king, she
would have it deferred until it were agreed by parlia-
ment, or he had been himself 21 years of age, that
things done in his name might ha'e the better autl.i;rt
tv. He would, in no cafe, have it deferred one day,
and either then or never: whereupon this doubt is rilen
amongfl our men of law whether ihe being clad will;

hu/band, and her husband not twenty-one years, any
thing without parliament can be of strength, that is
ionle between them; upon Satin-day at afternoon, there
matters were long in debating. And before they were
well resolved uipon, at nine hours at night, by three
heralds, at found of the trumpet he was proclaimed
king. This was the night before the marriage; this
day, Monday at twelve of the clock, the lords, all that
were in the toun, were present at the proclaiming of
hin again, where no man said so much as Amen, thv-
ing his father that cried out aloud, God save his
qleen. The manner of the marriage was in this fort,
upon Sunday in the morning between five and fix, tle
ma, conveyed by divers of her nobles to the chapell;
tIe had upon her back the great mourning gown of
black, with the great wide mourning hood, not unlike
unto that which the wore the doulfull (lay of the buri-
al of her hulband: she was led unto the chapell, b the
(arl of Lennox and Athol, and there was fte left nltil
lher hitfband camc, who was allo conveyed by the fame
in!s, the minister prirfis, two, do there receive them,
h!i bands are askcd( the third time, and an inftrlinient
: 1kcn bv a notour that no man laid agati!t them, or
I -al.dgedi any caule wlhy te nmarriage mighlt not oro-
tet1l. The words were spoken, the rings which were
ithre, the middle a rich dianmond, were put upion her
fig:er, thev kneel together, andl llan, Dravers said over
them, fie tanriethl out the mals, and lie taketh a kits,
laml Ileavet her tlher, and went to her chanilmer, whi-
Il'cr v ithin a space she tollo\ eth ; andlt being .reijilred,
}a .(or(ing to te iblcmiity, to calt off her ares and to
!'..v asid.e tlofe firrnwful ganrents, aid ive hirf-clf

ni
a more phalhit life, after Ibitme pretty refifllll, rere

1 ';lieve tor manner lake than gri.s (if heart, she susser-
el ti:ein that florol ly, every niin ti.at could approach,
It lake out a pin, a d Io l)eing committed to her ladies,
tlhan-cth llergarnilen , but wento be, to

e fignie to

tc :. rld, tat it v a, not lufi that moved them o mar-
;i), lit oiXr tie ncefit oi hler countrsy not. ift od
'i, lonc to leave it dltlitiute r;s an hl ir. Slp i otms
:'"i, or fuc as ar. given of al tiliine to iii.i :i

worst, w-ould that it should be believed, that they knew
each other before thrv came tnere; I would not your
lordship fiould so believe it, the likelihoods are so :l.:
to the contrary, that if it were pflihle to fe filtct .;
a& done, I would not believe it. Alter the narl'i:.
followeth commonly gl(at celer and dancing: to thir
dinner they were conveyed hb the whole nobilitv: the
trumpets founl ; a largess cried: mony thrown al.ol,t
the houfl in great ahundance, to such at were happy to
get any part; they dine both at one tahle, she upon tI},
uprperhand, therc serve her thcle earls Atholc, fel;',
Morton, carver, Craufoord, cup-hearer; thele fer-rv
him in like offices, earls Eglington, Ccels, and G(;i-
cairn; after dinner they danced a w-hile, and then ;.
tired themselves till the hour of supper; and as tliy
dined so do they sup, some dancing there was, and lo
they go to bed; of all this I have written to your lo:'i.
ihip I am not oulanus teftib to this, hut of the veri!:
your lordihip hall not tired to doubt, howl.evcr I carn,
bv it; I was sent for to have ILern at the folpper, ).;
like a currish or uncourtly carle I rtlufed to be theic;
and vet that which your lordship may think ig::
move me much, to have had the light of nmy mi:I:i',
ofw-hom there eighteen days by itll account 1 got ic:
a ght, 1 an. my lord taken hv ail that fcrt as a ery
evil prfon. which in nmv heart 1 do well allow, and lilt
of myself the better, for yet can 1 not find either hol;cf
or good that liketh thiir doings. I leave a this tl!i.e
further to trluble your lordship, craving pardrn ;;
my lng silence, 1 liave more ado than 1 am able to
(liicharge, walk now more abroad by night than by
day, and the day too little to discharge myself of til:l
which I conceive, or receive in the night. As ye;
lordship, I am lure, is partaker of fich ltt rs as I xvrnit
to Mr. Secretary, so that I trust that he fhali be to tl:;i
to save me of a little labour, to rite the fame again,
molt humbly I take mv leave at Ediiburgh, the lali d'q
0iJuly, 1565.

No. XII. (p. 262.)
Letter of tei earl of Bedford to the onouralle Sir William Cecil

nt,. her Majefy' pfincipalfecretary, and one of her igb-
ness's rpivy council.
(2d of Sept. 565. Paper-office, from the original.)
A SER my hearty commendations, this day at noon

captain Brickwell came hither, who brought with

him the queen's majefy's letters, containing her full
relblution and pleasure for all things he had in charge to
give information of, saving that for the aid of the lords
of the congregation there is nothing determined, or at
the least expressed in the fame letters, and for that pur-
pose received I, this morning, a letter fubtiribed by
the duke, the earl of Murray, Glencarne, and others,
craving to be holpen with 3oo harquebufyers out of
this garrison, for their better defence. And albeit, I
know right well the goodness of their cause, and the
queen's majesty our fbvereign's good will, and care
towards theme; and do altb underhand that it were
very requilite to have them holpen, for that now there
cause is tobe in this manner decided, and that it now
fnndeth upon their utter overthrow and undoing, lince
the queen's party is at the least 5000, and they not
much above ooo; betides, that the queen ath har-
quehufvers, and they have none, and do yet want the
power that the earl of Arguyle should bring to them,
who is not yet joined with theirs; I have thereupon
tlouigplt good to pray you to be a means to learn her
mnaefiv's pleasure in this behalf, what, and how, I
Tf1!l anfiver them, or otherwile deal in this matter, now
at this their extreme neceflitv. For, on the one fide,
lyrth thereupon their utter ruing and overthrow, and
the miserable fillverlion of religion there; and, on the
Dther fide, to adventure so great and weighty a matter
ii this is (albeit it be but of a few soldiers, for a frmall
:ine), without good warraunte, and thereby t bring,
eiadlventure, upon our lcads borre wiliiitl warrs, and
, the mean time to leave the place ufurniflied, (hav-
: in the wlole: but 8co), it hl:out an y granlt ;f new
iiy for the latne; ai.d by tlait crn-a;: alu, to lc.ave
V. 1J1. 1
[

the marches here the more fubjecl to invasion, while n
the mean season new helps are priparing; to this knl
not 1 what to fay or how tn do. And so much more I
marvel thereof, as that having so many times writtt
touching this matter no r folnite det rminatilon comttli.
And so bet-ween the wvriin. i an]d ok ing for anfrrr,
the occasion cannot pfalf, but 1:ullt !ccds procted a:d
have success. God turr. it to is lory, bl:t filrely jl
ruen's rcafon hath great catlte to Icar it. Soiul a li,!i;
it is now come into, as this little fpply would 0
nitlth good to advance God's honour, to conltintr l:I:
n a;tfly's :rtat ad arefuil mmcry of ti:-m, an , i
lr,-trvne a great mnav n blenni and entltIcn. i!
be not n. he!pen, it is giu:e for ever. Your gp:.l
,il! and atcion that way I do nothing millrufl, a.
herein shall take luih pgod iad ice as by any mcan I
can. I received si( m thlfe lords two papers inclo;.'!,
tLr chfrcd fl.iereo fhal! apear unto you. For thO.:
matters th.: cptain Brickwell rutight, I fiall anfr.r
you Ly' mv .e.xt. ad Lchrewitlh eInd you two letitrs
from Mr. Randolph, lo'h received this day. By liim
you r.al! ihear that the prc.tftant., are retired from E-
denbloroull-l, flrtlher 4cT. So 1 lCh e )cur rtfoluti,n
for t,ir aid shall come in tie, if it r(.:,ic with pcec,
for that tev will not now l:i prlcni!. n; (7 th m; :.i; l
f) w-ith my hlarty thanks itt.imnit 'ou to God. I c.i
Bcr: ick, te d f Sor!t:. 156.

No. XIII. (p. . )

TI, c..-.n i. ;/' ta11 /j BI..'id.

('-:l.Sp:. -,6. IPapcrr-(.f'e.)
TpriN thIr a. !-crtiicn. e:.s late!l rc-i i. c, from '.:,

xi ith u.;l od:) r thin. s '

c.il.c -io -oni t:" i

d

Scrr,.c and Tl.cnmas Rl-a;,!pl, and ..on th- I-
niiatcr well cn;iide-id, we have thus dct' rmiint.. \it

i'l, witih all the li'.;i lhat vw can, fi:d to you 3oc:.

to tL thus lift d. If vu f t?.i! certainlv ndeifiand ti.i!
the carl oi .'!u;:ray !ath iuch w.:it of mnse, as Ti.:
iiiprefl.rg to in o icc,!. midit fard l:;i t ii ft
for tl:e help t d' i:.d hi'',v ou

y fru ! ji p;'fcnly !.

him fi.tret! to t :dr..fnd. that nt, il, asoft c. '.,
't l.im ha c inii(.i, :.:d - ' -a ill yat you '.

have, in the mors secret fort that you can, when the said
fum Ihall come to you, or if you can by any good
means, advance him some part thereof beforehand.

The other 2oocI. you hall cause to he kept whole,

unspent, if it be not that you hall lee necessary cause to
ilnpreft forne part thereof to the now numbers of the
600 footmen and o ihorfemen; or to the catling out
of wages of lich workmen, as by sickness, or other-
wife, ought to be discharged. And where we perceive,
hyv our utindy letters, the earnest request of the said
earl of Murray and his afrociates, that they might have,
at leall, 3oo of our soldiers, to aid them. Aind that
you also write, that though we would not command
you to give them aid, vet if we would hut wink at your
oilig herein, and seem to b!a.ne you tor attempting

! liich things, as you with the iltlp of others should bring

alio':t, you doubt not but things would do well; you
ihall underfiand for a truth, that we have no intention,
for many rtfpl.ds, to maintain any other princes fublt
jecis, to take arms against their foverign ; neither
would e willingly do any thing to give occasion to
make wars betwixt us and that prince, which has cauf.
ell us to forbear, hitherto, to give you any power, to
let them be aided ith any men. But now, coniider-
iiag we take it, that they are purfled, notiithflanding;
their humble fbiniffion, and (ofer to be or(!d-led andl
trrl1 by law and juflice, hich being refu!l to thenm,
thiey are retired to Dlmnn;'fc, a place near o'lr weft
marches, as it feemeth there to deecnd termlelv,', and
adliing thereunto the good intention that pl)r.:itly the
French king pretendtih, by lfending one (f hiis to join
with some one of os, and jointly to treat with that
queen, and to induce her to forbear this manner of vio-
lent and rigorous proceeding againfit ler fbjes, for
which purpose the French ambaif.;l,'r here with us
has lately written to that queen, whereof anlver is
daily looked for; to the intent in the mean time the
said lords hould not be oppressed and ruined for lack
of rome help to defend them, we are content and do
authorize, if you fiall fee it necessary for their defence,

I z

to let them (as of your own adventure,andwithout noti
fying that you have any direclion therein from us)to have
the numberof 3co soldiers, to be taken either in whole
bands, ortobe drawn out of all your bands, as you hall fee
cause. And to cover the matter the better, you hall
fend thee numbers to Carlisle, as to be laid there in
garrison, to defend that march, now in this time that
such powers are on the other part drawing to thole
frontiers, and so from thence as you shall fee cufe to
direda of, the fame numbers, or any of them, may mol
covertly repair to the said lords, when you shall expref.
fly advertize, that you fend them that aid only for
their defence, and not therewith to make war against
the queen, or to do any thing that may offend her per-
son, wherein you hall so precisely deal with them,
that they may perceive your care to be such as if it
hould otherwise appear, your danger should be so
great, as all the friends you have could not be able to
save you towards us. And so we assure you our con-
science moveth us to charge you, so to proceed with
them; for otherwise than to preserve them from ruin,
we do not yield to give them aid of money or men:
and yet we would not that either of there were known
to be our a&t, but rather to be covered with your own
desire and attempt.

No. XIV. (p. 70.)
SRaldclp to Cecil,from f.dinlb,-e, 7b Fe. 1565-6.

(An original.)
\MY humble duty confidered; what to .write of the

Y present fate of the country I am so uncertain, y

reason of the aily alterations of mens minds, tha it
maketh me much flower than otlerwile I would. With-
in these few days there was onme good hope that tiii
queen would have flheed some favour towards the
lords, and that Robert Melvin should have returned
unto them with comfort, upon fe.me conditions. Since
that time, there are come out of France Clernau by land,
and Thorneton by ea; the one from the cardinal, the
other from the bishop f Glasgow. Since whose ar-
rival neither can there be good word gotten, nor a-
pearance of any good intended them, except that tlcy

be able to perfwade the queen's majefly our sovereign
to make her heir apparent to the croun of England.
I write of this nothing less than know, that she hath
spoken. And by all means that she tlinker:l the best
doth travaile to bring it to pals. There is a band late-
ly devised, in which the late pope, the emperor, the
king of Spain, the duke of Savoy, with divers princes
of Italy, and the queen mother, fulpeced to be of the
fame confederacy to maintain papistry through!ut
Chrifliandon; this band was ilnt out of France by
Thorneton, and is fiblcibiud by this queen, the copy
thereof remaining with her, and the principal to e re-
tuned very fhortlie, as I hear, by Mr. Stephen Wilson,
a fit miniltler for fuich a devilish dvire; if the coppie
hereof may be gotten, that thall be sent as I cojiveliciit-
Ih may. Monficur Rambo'let came to this toun upon

inday, lie ipoke that night to the queen an..l her

hiliband, but not lon!;; the next day h held lc:ng con-
fcirenoes with them both, but nothliig canlme to tle
knowledge of any whereof they i;.tre.lte. I ca naot
speak with a that ha;! anv lio;)e tha.t therie will bli
:/ goo(l duone for the lrds ',' lim, tiutll it is i-;.t

i.e
t Le hatil varv godl wi!', to do lo tu thi unt:rl;nit ,r

his power. He is lodi d nca; t the c t)rt, a ;.l la-
ctil upon tlie quezen' chlarges. t[pon S1 l)-, t e o;'-
(ir is given, whereat mc.&o rear !o [nit l'.v to !he l)-
I'llt that day at ile l a. T

lTpo. Can lli:,' i lai tla-'

carred their cai!iles w til the q .'., h.:r T .' L :l.!,
the earl of Lentox, and t-rl !i , A.e' , ill.-;--. ,i,.;,
lorsli have been called togcihl:: id r '..; iicl t: h- ?,
tl'Ic nals that day. , so;ne Ir.tc pro ;l'-'d, -s C',,.-' ,
l nii omnerie, S'tot, C.Lhlt,. ()h!,-; h lvz ',':.1,
as Filciing, Levington, iL l;ly, llintl ai! Bi th.;
zaid ofthein all, tjlhcl i.. I I u:

n i-lt , but w-or!k th' l t

of; it was moved in cun l t in,.t als shs -, ;

l c-

b':ai in St. Giles cliun- h, \ h. I h i evec w ;

' .:. !r t

'

tellipt mns n:inI.lq, than iiit(! .r ind-.lel : .lie v';- s o;
lite :;ln;:l d azl1 t.' l ! 1)I)''t ',.:di l

ti ) 1 r' -;..l :

w lh l .i .as the trl.'t:tl i'i -:u;, tl

:'' t, .-

ijc'iv'b :ubjels, oft wt.uf - ..i
, ., 1i. thi: '; i,. L Ijt

T '%

that the bruit is greater than the truth, but in these
matters, htr majesty is too wife not i time to be ware,
and provide for the worst; forne in that country are
thougl:t to be privie unto the bands and confederacie of
which I have written, wlhere of I am sure there is feme
things, tho' perchance of all I have not heard the truth,
in this court divers quzrles, contenticns, and debates,
nothing so much fo:ght as to maintain mischief and
disorder. David yet rtaineth fill his place, not ith-
out heart grief to manv, that fee their sovereign gui,'rd
chiefly by l' ich a felow ; the queen hath utterly refuftd
to do any .kond to mIy crd of Argyll, and it is said that
shall be ith first voyage that she xkiil make after he is
delivered of being uith child; the bruit is comrnn
that ie is, ut hardly hclirved of' mny, and ot this,
I can at;r- you, that hecre iave of la:e appeared foiue
tokens o the cont! arv.

No. XV. (p. 2 7.)

Part es a letterfrisr tet earl f BdJjrr,! d aln. r. . ;...

ds.'bt to the Id,r fr the cour-rl rs Enl,:n'd Jrorm Brg,,ii,
21b1 cf .zarkih 1566. Al d,'i.ial in i/e cttto., Ltrty,
C/l:. u.'i Io. .so. 72. (z7th March, 1566.)

lMav it please your IHonlrs,

TTEARIXG, of so n':vn;e matters as we do, and fndl-

- inge fich v-arrti in ti-e rorts, we have mr\ i:

Za'o to eccr-:rre tic vriie: c .icil r.keth us the fl,,cr
:rd coather to Fpt ,zv h;r. in wrvting, to tle entente
we \vwo!! re: t. ;a vo::'kloii's, and hv vyi the qu:tci's
rr:ajtie, our overeigne, should not be airetifed blut ot
the v rie trcthe as we can pofbllr. To this end e
thcti.he t octd to fi:d up captain Carewe, who was in
Edir.l,c:;:;e a : t.r t'r.: of the lafi attrmptate, wVio
fpFt'e there with divcri, and after that with the queen's
seif aid her hutband conforme to that, v.hich we have
iearr, d by others, ald know b)- this reporte, we fei.d
tte fa.:: , confrmed by the parries self, that were there
prefnii and ffiflers unto thel that were executors or
the are.

Tiis we f:-nde for certain, that the queen's husband

hb ing entered into a vehement suspicion of David, that
, hmf rome thynge was cortmitted, hich was moll

aga)ynfte the queen's honour, and not to be borne of
his perte, fyrite communicated his nlynde to George
Duglas, who fynding his sorrows so great, fought all
the means he coulde to put Ibme remedie to his griefs;
and communicating the fame unto my lord Ruthen by
the king's commandment, no other waye coulde be
found then that David itould be taken out of the waye.
Wherein he was so earnest and daylye pressed the fame,
that no refte coulde he had untyll it was put in execu-
tion. To this that was ound good, that the lord Mor-
ton, and lord Lindfave should be made privie to th' in-
tente that theie might have their friends at handc, vs
ncade, required; which caused them to affemnble Ifonay-
nv, as thcie thought ufLicicnt againfi the tyme, that
this determination of thc;rs thould he put in executinne
whi.ch was determined the ixth of this infltate 3 laies
al'.re the parliament should ligyne, at which tyinc the
lfavdr lords were affi-cd that the erles Argyle, Morraye,
krthes and thclir complyces olloide Iave been forfeited,
!'the king could nt Ihe pcrfiladed through this means
tii be iliCir fricidis; u}:o for the del'yre ih had that tis
ir.;tot hould take eftfer th' one va)ye, was content to
y'ldv , witli.nt ;:i. dificultie to t'Jther, with this con-
di;nr:, that tl.cie hould give their conl'nts, that he
l:iiht have the crowne matrirnonial. lIe was tb im-
iZ::c:,: to ]e tlieil thil-s he saw, and were daylye
lr,: l ht to his eares, that he ay!ye preicd the laid
lord klilen, that there nil!t be no longer delay; and
to the intent that mylit rnanilcite unto the world,
that he approved the adte was contten to be at the do.
igf of that in;iclf.

Upon Saturday at night neile unto vi of the clock
the king conveyeth hnitlf, the lord Ruthcn, George
Duglaii, anti two otlhrs, throwe his oni chanber by
the prir' slayers up to the qeen's chamber going to
v. hich tiere is a cabinet about x foot square; in the
Lnie a little !<,i. repofnsi hed and a table, at the which
ither were fitting at sipper the queene, the lady Argile,
aiid David with his capp upon his head. Into the ca-
binet there cometh ir the king and lord Ruthen, vwho
wilied David to come forth, iLying, that as o

place for him. The queen said, that it was her will.
Her howfoand anfwerede, that yt was againfle her ho-
nour. The lord Ruthen said, that he hould lerne bet-
ter his deutie, and offering to have taken him by the
arm, David took the queen by the blychtes of her
gown and put himself behind the queen who wolde
gladlee have saved him: But the king having looted
his hand, and holding her in his arms, David was
thrust out of the cabinet throw the bed chamber into
the chamber of presence, whar where the lord Morton
the lord Lindfy, who intending that night to have re-
f-rved hym, and the next day to hang him, so imane
being about him, that bore him evil will, one t-ft
him into the boddie with a dagger, and after hlvn, a
great many others, so that he had in his lodie above
wounds. It is told for certain that the king's own dag.
er was left flicking in him. Whetlther he itulck him (Ir
not we cannot be here certavn. He was not fl3avc in
the queen's presence, as was said, but going down the
Itavers out of the chamber of prcli.ne.

There remavned a long tyme with the queen her

how foand and the lord Ruthen. She made, as we hlre,
great intererifion, that he shold have no harm. Slir
blamed greatlee her howfband that was the aclr (i li,
frul a deed It is said, that he did asigwtr, that l)a\;d
had more co-npanie of her boddic than he for the Ipa;o
of two months; and therefore tor her honour anld :is
own contentment he gave is c (nfent that l:e hould Ie
taken away. (" It is nlot" (-the fh) " the woman's
"p-rt to seek the husband," and therefore in that the
fault w-as hs own lie fait t t hen lie can.e, tlle
either wold not or made l.erlft1 ick. " Well," lay:l
flie, " ou have taken your last of me and )your tar.-
"well.'' Then were pity, faith the lord Ruthen, lie
is venr n:ajefty's hiifband and inufi ield uiie to e.lt
.thcer. '" \hv nmav I not," ifax i e tic, " rlive Lhin .as
c, weli as our ife did her l.llali' ()0:hi h:xc
drlte thr like. Th Iclrd R-i:( .-Iid '.,t fl'i was law-
tiull di:',r. frum her hs.n.5id, and fur i.

iS .h i;;il

as the king -oitl, d hliihuit grcisc Lciyd,:s this n.:l
nwOa m5-:., ,;i:,.: -.'.e ;s * t1; il;bili:.-, Piamoc tu h .

and deftrutiion to herself and country. "Well," faith
Ihe, " That shall be dear blude to some of you, yf his
" be pylt." God forbid, fayth the lord Ruthen: for
the more your grace Lhowe yourself offended, the world
will judge the worse.

Her husband this tyme fpeaketh litle, herself conti-

nually weepeth. The lord Ruthen being ill at alfe and
weak calleth for a drink, and fayth, "This I mull do
" with your majesties pardon," and perfuadeth her in
tlhe heft fort he could, that he would pacify herself.
Nothing that could be said, could please her.

In this mean time, there rose a nombre in the court;
to pacify which there went down the lord Ruthen,
who went ftravt to the erles untly, Bothwell, and A-
thol, to quiet them, and to aure them from the king
that nothing was intend against them. These notwith-
flanding taking fear, when theie heard that my lord
Murray wold be there the next day, and Argile meet
them, Huntly and Bothwell both get out of a window
and so depart. Atholl had leave of the king with
Flyfh and Glandores (who was lately called Deyflcy the
pcrlon of Owne), to go where they wol, and bring
concorde out of the court by the lord of Lidington.
Theic went that night to such places where they thought
themlelves in molt luftie.

Before the king least talk with the queen, in the her-
in of the lord ](uthen he was content that he ihould
lic with her that night. We know not how he *
liinl'lf, but came not at her, and excultl hymfclf to
hii friends, that he was so fleepie, that he could not
uake in due season

''here were in th;s companie two that came in with
the king; the one Andrewe Car of Fawdenfide, whorh
the quern fayeth would have flroken ler with a daggar,
and one Patrick Balantine, brother to the justice clerk,
wllo ailo her grace fayth, offered a dggtr against her
irlly ith the cock dowu. We have been earnestly in
banid with the lord Kuthen to know the varitie; but he
afTu-cth us of the contrarie. There were in the queen's
dlamber the lord Robert, Arthur Arfkin, one or two o-
tlhrs. They at the firfi ofH.ring to make a defence,

the lord Ruthven drawd his dagger and 4 mo weapons,
then that were not drawn nor seen in her presence, as
we are by this lord assured.

[The letter afterwards gives an account of the figeht

to Dunbar cafUe, whither resorted the lords Huntly and
Bothwell: That the earl of Morton and lord Ruthven
find themselves left by the king for all his fair promises,
bonds, and subscriptions. That he had protested before
the council, that he was never conenting to the deaih
of David, and that it is fore'againft his will: " That of

the great substance David had there is much spoken,
" ome fay in gold to the value of Ix"£. His apparel

was very good, as it is said, 28 pair of velvet hose.
" His chnmber well furnifled, armour, dagger, po-

letts, harquebules, 22 swords. Of all this nothing
fpovld or lacked saving 2 or three daggers. He had

" the custody of all the queen's letters, which all were
" delivered unlooked upon. We hear ofa juill, that
"he had hanging about his neck of some price, that
" cannot be heard of. He had upon his back, when he

was flayne, a night gown of Damask furred, with a
fattin doublet, a hole of ruffet velvet."

No. XVI. (p. 284.)

Part of a letter from Randolfh to (Cecil. 'Yan. I6, 1565-6.
- T Cannot tell what ifliking of late there

- hath been between her grace and her hus-

band, he preffeth earnestly for the matrimonial crown,
which he is loth hastily to grant; but willing to keep
somewhat in store, until fne know how well he is wo th
to enjoy fich a sovereignty: and therefore it is thought
that the parliament for a time shall be deferred, bet
hereof I can write no ertainty.

From ir. Rand4pL'i letter to feiretary Cecil.

(4th April, 1566. Paper-office, from the original.)
THE justice clerk in hard terms, more for his bro-

ther's cause than any defct, and as far as 1 c:n

hear the king of all other in worst, for neither ha''i
the queen good opinion of him for attempting of ay
thing that was against her will, nor the people that Ihe
hath denied so manifest a matter, being proved to I'e
done by his commandment, and now himself to be the

arclifer and pursuer of them that did as he willed them.
T!his Scot, that was executed, and Murray that was
vcfterday arraigned, were both accused by him. It is
written to me, for certain, by one, that upon MoIn-
lsv last ljoke with the queen, that ihe is determin-
d that the house of Lennox hall be as poor in
S,,tland as ever it was. I he earl continueth sick,
firc troubled in mind; he ftaith in the abby, Iis
ftn hath been once witll im, and he once with the
qutcn, lince fie came to ith caille. The queen hath
ntw seen all the covenants and hands that palltlih e-
\ttrcn the king and the lords, and now findeth that his
!:claration, before her and o!rncil, of his innocencv of
).c death of David was talfe; and rievouflv offended
tiat, by their means, he fhuuld fek to come to tile
crown matrimonial.

Part of a ltter f om RPani.ltod 1 Crecilrom Lervic),

2 5f Alut,i)' 1566.
-- r'i FRF. is continually very nch fpeerh of the

- discord between the queen and her husband,

fr far tlat, that is commonly laii and believed of hlim-
sris, that Mr. Janmes Thornton is gone to Rome to sue
n io a (li\ orce l)ctween them. It is very certain that Ma-
Iv\Afir hlad nt spoken with hlim within thel. three
!.rs. He is neither acconpanied nor looked upon of
a;ii noblelman: attended upon by certain of his own
c;rvants, and fix or seven of the guard; at liberty to do,
and go where and what he will, they have no hope yet
among themfielves of quietnels.

- David's brother named Joseph, who came this
uay with Male afier, unknown to any man here is
bcu.olie fleretary in his brother's place.

No. XVII. (p. 288.)

'T, a, / o/ bjedoad ti Ccn, 3/

, i/i,/f, 1566.
rrllE iqueen and her lilfband agree after the old man-

n r, or lather worse. She eateth hut very fldom

ti!h himl, lieth not, nor keepeth company withl him,
i. ,;)th ill any fuchas love him. He is si, tar out of her
, '!,, .s at l;er going out of the cattle of Edinburgh,
In, rn:Noc lbroad, ie knew nothing thereof. It can-
; icr mo' dl!y, nor with the honour of a queen, be re-

ported what she said of him. One Hickmari, an Eng-
lith merchant there, having a water spaniel which was
very good, gave him to Mr. James Melvill, who after.
wards, for the pleasure, which he saw the king have in
such kind of dogs, gave him tothe king. The queen there-
upon fell marvellously out with Melvill, and called him
difembler and flatterer, and said he could not trust one,
who would give any thing to such one as he loved not.

Tbe earl f Bedford to Cecil, Au. 8.
T'HE disagreement between the queen and her hus-

band continucth, or rather increafeth. Robert

Melvill drawing homewards within twelve miles of E-
dinburgh, could not tell where to find the queen; filh
which time she is come to Edinburgh, and had not
twelve horses attending on her. There was not then,
nor tha! I can hear of since, any lord baron, or other
nobleman in her company. The king her husband is
gone to Dumfermling, and paffeth his time as well as
he may; having at his farewell, such countenance as
would make a husband heavy at the heart.

Sir olbn Sorier to Cecil 8 Seps. from Beroict.

I HE queen hath her husband in frall eflimation. and
1 the earl of Lennox came not in the queen's fi^!x
since the death of Davy,

Sir John FotJrrto Cec:l, rItb De.

THE earl of Bothwell is appointed to receive the am-
- bafadors, and all things for the christening are at
his lordship's appcintment, and the fame is fiarcdlv
well liked of the nobility, as is said. The king ald
queen is presently at Craig-miller, but in little greater
familiaritv than he was all the while past.

Ad.ertlfeo.ents oct of Scot:landfronl t, earl of Besod.
(August c566. Paper office, from the original )
THAT the king and queen agreed well together two

days, after her roming from - , and after my

lord Murray's coming to Edinburgh, some new difrord
has happened. The queen hath declared to my lord
of Murray that the king bears him evil will, and hs
said to her, that he is determined to kill hin, fi.tli;:'
fault that he dotl bear him so much company: and :
like mnner hath w,!!d nm lord of' AlMrra t f;i;:l

the king, vhich he did a few nights since in the queen's
presence, and in the hearing of divers. The king con-
frffed, that reports were made to him, that my lord of
Murray was not his friend, which made hin peak that
thing he repented; and the queen affirmed, that he
king had spoken such words unto her, and confel'cd be-
fore the whole house, that she could not he content that
rither lie or any other should lie unfriend to my lord
oi 1Murray. I)My lord of Murray e:quired the lame
llouitly, and used his fpeecl very nmodclly, in the mean
time the king departed very grievcd; he cannot hear
that the queen fhoulld use familiarity cither with man
or wuonail, and cipecially the ladies of A -guile, Murray,
and MaTre, who keep rnofl company with her. My
lord o Murray and oolhnwell have hcenl at evil worls
for the 1. of Led(ltgroul, lbefore the qur!een, for he aind
fir James Bali'ourc li ad new conic from Ltdington
with hisanfw-r uplnl .ltl lhea'i of a.rtic;es as H',thwell
anl he should agrer ulpon, wi h n ihl reported to the
siid earl in the q Iee.el's prclll r, Imade answer, that
te he parted \h1 Ih

u i lanlls as was desired, lie

should part witih hIis life. SMv I id of Mlurrayv aid
flitly to him, that tiety as hoineft Inmi as he should
l!'e their i-esc ere he rtalt Iedinrton. The queen
i..lke n thi, i'1 ir hiad both; i in Ihcl tetclres thery
'J:ted, and iit!- . ti at I liea of II:I not rmet. 'file
i::i-n after her huntilg ame to .dihnmurgh, and car-
rcih the prilce thncer to Sir!ing with her. Thislaft
Saturday was cxeci!cd a ervant of rile lord Rliuthven's,

iho colifffcd lli-.t le was ill tile albilct, ilbt nlot of
cuilCLil of tlh. Ia:. The queen Lathl alib opened to
Ir,: lord of.M'::i-a! , that nvoumy was lent from the pope,
how much it kwa., and Ly v wiuit, and tor wlhat pur-
Ji'u, it was lbrou!ilt.

:o. XVII]. (p. 299

Pr, a ll;,ri, ,

L,zl.' o j. F. b 20, Itó9r, A

c ' i,,,nteli1, /

, ^ C:.,I. It .LnotiuJ n atifzwer to a omL-n.

i'eitler of i z1.'^, utsv;/,e nir' sr/r. melt q thebibsp o/ RE/.,
AI-TFK thlis ii e. Mi\ar's laiuding in Scotland) how

patictl)' idi 1 bcar 'with Ially vain delays in not
V .i. 1I1 K

ratifying the treaty accorded by your own commission-
ers, whereby I received no small unkindness, besides
the manifold causes of suspicion that I might not here-
after trust to any writings. Then followed a hard
manner of dealing with me, to entice my subject and
near kinfrman, the lord Darnly, under colour of private
suits for land, to come into the realm, to proceed in
treaty of marriage with him without my knowledge,
yea to conclude the fame without my assent or likilg.
And how many unkind parts accompanied that fad,
by receiving of my fubjets that were basle runnegates
and offenders at home, and enhancing them to places
of credit againfi my will, with many such like, I will
leave for that the remembrance of the fame cannot but
be noyfome to you. And yet all there did I as it were
lupprefs and overcome with my natural inclination of
love towards you; and did afterwards gladly, aa
you know, chriflen your son, the child of my said kinf-
man, that had before so unloyally offended me, both in
marriage of you, and in other undutiful usages towards
me his Ibvereign. How friendly also dealt I by meffla-
ges to reconcile him, being your hlufoand, to you, wh:en
others nourilhed discord betwixt you, w.o as it lecmcd
had more power to work their purposes, being evil to
you both, than I had to do you good, in refpeEt of thl
evil I had received. Well I will overpa s your hard ac-
cidents that followed for lack of following my council,
And then in your molt extremity, when you was.a pri-
soner indeed, and in danger of your life from your no-
torious evil willers, how tar from my mind was the re-
membrance of any unkindnels you had ihewed me.
Nay how void was I of refpedt to the designs which
the world had seen attempted by you to my crown,
and the security that might have ensucd to my fate by
your death, when I finding your calamity to be grear,
that you were at the pit's brink to have roiferably loft
your life, did not only intreat for your life, hut i
threatened tome as were irritated against you, that 1
only may fay it, even I was the principal cause to fivt
your life.

No. XIX. (p.314.)

lZtter of - EliZi=obtto of Scitlj. TIhu mared on the

lack witb Cecil'J band-Copia Literarum Regiae Ma-
jeftatis ad Reginam Scotorum. VIII° Aprilis.

[Paper-office.]
MADAME, vous ayant trop molefte par M. de Crocq,

je n'eufe eu i eu de consideration de vous fafcher

de cede lettre, si les lins de charitc vers les ruincz, et
les prieres des miferahles ne m'y contraignaflent. Je
entens que un edit a ete divnlgui: de par vous, madame
que ung chafcun, que veult jultifier que ons ele les
mcurtriers de votre feut mari, et mon fu cousin, vien-
nent a le faire le x me de cc mois. Ia quelle chose,
comme c'eft plus lionorable et neceflaire, qui en tel
cas I pourra iaire, ne y eftant cach qque miltire
ou finefe, ainfi Ic pere et amis du mort ge,'ilthomme
m'ont humblement requis, queje vo'us pr.ail de pro-
longue le jour, pourc' qu'ilz cognoifiit que les ini-
qnies fe font combines par force de fair. ccque par
droit ils ne pourront pas faire; partant, jr ne puis mais
finon pour 'amour de vous meme, a qui il toiche le
plus, et pour la consolation des onnocenis. de vous ex-
iorter le leur conceder eete requelte, laquelIc, ii elle les
feroit nie, vous tourneroit grandrneint en l(upcol, de
plus que j'efpere ie penlez, et que ne vo:ldricz voln-
tiers ouyr. Pour l'amour de Dieu, madame, u!s--7 de
telle lincerite & prudence el ce cas qui vos touche de
si pres, que tout le monde aye raison, dr vous livrer
comme innocente d'ung erime si enormnc, chore que si
ne fdes, feriez dignement elbloyi; hors de railcz de
princesses, & non lans cause faite opprobre dc v!ugaire,
et plutot qve cela vous aviene, je vous fonliaiterois
une lepulture honorable, qu'unc vie mnacrile; vous
voiez madame, que je vous traite comme ma fille, et
vous promets, que si j'en eufit. ne I!y fouhaitrrois
mieuz, que je vous dellre, commne )I Seigneur Dieu me
porte telmoignage, a qui je prie de bon cceur de vous
infpircr a faire cc qui vous tera plus a honieur, ct a vos
amis plus de conbolation, avec mes tres cordiallcs re-
commendations comme a icelle a qui fe fouhaite le plus

Ki

de bien, qui vous pourra en ce monde avenir. De
W'eft. ce 8 jour de Janvier en haste.

1No. XX. (p. z50.)

Account of tbhel fotne
e / divorre between the earl of Botb-.ell

and liid, Jea, (;ordgn tir

. iie. From a m.anfuript beong.

in£ to Mr. IDavsid Falcs.'r, urrscate. . 45.

T PON the z9 cf Apryle 1 .67, before the richt hon.
U Mr Rober Maitland dean of Aberdene, Mr. Ed-
ward Heinrvfon, docor in the las, tv.o of the Senators
of the rcl ge of justice, Mrr. Clement Little, and Mr.
Alexander Syme, advocattis, cnrrmiiers of Edin;
compeered Mr. Iic.r- Kinronif, procurator for Jean
Go:rdicurn- coii.tes of Bothi-ell, continue he her for
purcw-;:.g etane proces fdil-orccment intendit by her
tontra James erie Bnotlhell her h.!:ftoand for adltry,
commiited be him with Bessie Crawiu;de the purfueris
fervanr f- tl'c time; and frklyke, for he said erle,
comT;ptacd Mr. Edmond Ilay, v ho ef;cr he had pur.
sued ai: cra'.d the purtuer's procurator's oath de ca.
lumnia, if hc had just caus to p'f£icw tle said adion,
and oLtiintd it, dcrved the !ibell, and the aid Mr.
Hlrncr took tIc mjrnc, the last day of Apryle, to prove
the ame p-o prirna. T'he qlilk day, having produ-
ced ronie wt-;rliTs, he took the next 'av. being thle r
of May, to d fartl:cr d.lir nre. Uponl the quhilk
of Mlay he produced Iome noc itnefi;s, and renounc-
ed farther probatiouine. After quhilk, he desired a
term to be affiglid to pr!nolnce ntence. To whom
the said cono.iiT;icrtrs .aiigrcd Satterday next, the 3 of
May, to prf.ioul.e fntence therein, ficundum allega-
ta et proha2a, quilk accordingly was given that day in
favo r of the pur-ewar.

At tile fame ti;irc thrre was another proces intendit

be the erl of Bolthiwell contra his lady, for to have their
n:mariatc declared nil, as being contraced againfi tlle
canons waithout a dilpcniation, and he and his lady be-
ing witl,in degrees defendand, viz. ferdis a kin, and
that -yfc for cprding of this proces, there was a com-
mifliounc grantit to the Archbishop of St. Androis to
e-nosee and 'detcrnine it, and Rot hlifflop of Dunkeld,
X iliam bifluop of Duinblane, Mr. Audro Craufurd

chlaon in Glasgow, and parson of Egel]fame, Mr.
Alexander Creightoun, and Mr. George Cookc chan-
cellor of Dunkeld, and to Mr. Johne Manderfloune
chanon in Dunhar and prebendar of Beltoune, or any
aneofthem. Thiscommiffioneis datit 27 Aprile I.6i;,
was presented to two of the saids commillioners, viz.
Mr. And, Craufurd and Mr. Johne Manderftoune on
Satterday 3 May, by Mr. Thomas Hepburne parson of
Auldhamftocks, procurator for the erl of Bothwell, who
accepted the delegatioune, and gave out their citation
by precept, diredled, Decann Chrifiianitatis de liadin-
tone, nec non vicario feu curato eccle. parochie tie
Crcichtoune, feu cuicunq; alteri capellano delite requi-
fitis, ser summoning at the said erie's inllanc, both of
the lady personally if he could be had, or orterwavs at
tile parofche kerk of Creichtoune the time of fcr:'i , or
at icr dwelling place belore vitntifs, prilnm, icidulo,
tertio et peremijtorie, unico tamnen contextul p)rotulice
cdi&o. And likewavfe to be wincffes in the aid niat-
ter, Alex. bishop of Galloway, who did marry the aid
erle and his lady, in l.ialrudlioule kirk, in :Feb. j65,
fir John Bannatyne of Achnoule, jultice :ltrk!, Mr.
Robert Creichtoun of Elliok the qetin's advc, atc, Mr.
David Chalmers provotl of Creichtoun and cianccllor
ofRols, Michael -- abbot of Mellofs, and to coin-
pear before the aid judges or any one of them in St.
Ceils kirk in Ed' on Monday the , tl of vMa,, be them-
selves, or their procm-;ors. Upon the aidl day,
Mr. John Manderftouln, one o thlcjudgs diltgate only
being prelent, conipearcd the fanme prcculr''rtr fr
both the parties that were in the former proces, Mr.
Edmund Hay ( articulatlic ) and !on'e
of the uvitn-ftis summoned pro(!uced, a:d reccived for
proving ot the tilme. The said procurator ren-unced
tarder probatioune, and tic judgc a.r nin o,
the 6th of May, ad pub!icanduin pondlcttj, nt mpil ic.
prlitior.es ipforum tcftiun. IThe quliilk day, pol plu-
blicatas depositiones praedicts, Mr. lien. Kli:rofie,

Two words in the parentliefs illegible.

K 3

procurator for the lady inflanter objecit objedlionesuri
generaliter, contra produLta, iiilpcr renunciavit ulteri.
ori defenfioni; pinde conclufa de confenfu procurato.
rum hinc inde caufa, judex prediCtus fiatuit craftinum
diem pro termina; ad pronunciandum fuam fntentiain
detnitivam, ex cddutis coram eo, in prefenti caufa c
pro cecTu Ccnform hereunto, on WVednefday the ;th
of May, the said judge gave out his sentence in favour
of the-erli, dc-laring the marriage to be, and to have
been null from the beginning, in rfpeet of their contin-
gence in blood, which hi:tlerd their lawful marriage
without a difpcnfalion obtain-d o f bcfoir.

No. XXI. (p. 326.)

A leter frcrm Es-.gida,..s, .sins
I. er irder f ing Henry

Drn,.y.

(Farl of Morton's Archives. Bundle B. No. 25.)
H AVIG the commmodity of this hearer Mr. Clark, I

thlo't goor to write a fewr words tuto you. 1 hav

rec rfone w-rits from you ; alnd ime 1 have fcen latcl
sent to o:hrrs fioio vyu. as nr mcl to lthe earl of Bed-
ford of tlie 16t: of lIa. I have participat the conr:rs
thereof to fLcl as t' iih!t meet, this mtkle I can r:ile
you; tl:e irntlli-erc. ri ten hither by the French was l".-
trri, for th.rc was ilnr i..e. papist nor proteflant lwhic
did r;:t r c::. tr::.' ;.: ihe :.hould be done, by the queen
ily
l ,\ :;2.'.:'1 ..:! !.:, .a':.al't such as liad colinl;t-
ted ti.a: a! e:!un-',' i mrrder in your country; hut to
fay t-u:. !at: .a. d In, did not ri!e from itch
as were- *!:il t,, , ..: i', }i;i froln such as shu!.l
give lii.- r ci ::;.: ,- t!: -i, :nto. And further, I a:
sue o)

', 1 i.cvtr k:: -' i :r a.tter of nate propozeii!

whic; lit d

J L :! ..

: .-- .r,'- of all i;'rts of natiolis as

tls'- h-.l: sea, 1 .; !i J Li \' ou, no malr prcii;otd
the !:;, r v-i'h ..:.

, : ion thIn the Spanilh :!nl

b...LJ r. A.!..::c i .:: r!.:! ino man dare openly e

o; a .:i::-r r::. :

l.: .. :,'; rl that whiI cevcr is lil-

t;. cf : *, :-.:::.;r . .;. . .:.... v.;ith alvc utrc, is unsi':'-
tls: to ! e. 1 1';:'! 1:c; .. . to :ii vou, u hlicli be itur
Ie;c, a .- s'' f.-m -:; .' . r! i': g here. You are ac-
( ;ai!: i ii

:,l :h~m a= .... ::s eI eeds I mull collirs,
t .at il.;'r '. Lu.:t .c..:;l s of ben fit, hut',

and surety; it hehoveth your whole nobility, and name-
lv such as before and after the murder were deemed to
alldw of Bodwell, to prosecute with sword and justice
the punifhrnent of those ahominable as, though we
lend you but a cold aid, and albeit you, and divers others,
both honourable and honest, be well known to me, and
sundry others, here, to be jutifiable in all their actions
and doings; yet think not the contrary but your whole
nation is blenifhed and infamit by there doings which
lately passed among you. What we chall do I know not,
neither do I write unto you assuredly, for we be fuljec
unto many mutations, and yet I think we shall either aid
you, or continue in the defence and safeguard of your
prince, so as it appear to us that you nmean his safeguard
indeed, and not to run the fortune of France, which
wiil e your own deflrnutiqln if you be unalvifed. I
know not one, no not one of any uiiality or slate in this
country, which does allow of the queen your lIvercign,
but would gladly the world were rid of her, so as the
lane were done without farther slander, that is to fy
by ordinary juilice. This I fend the 23d of May.

No. XXII. (p. 4, vol. 2.)
Parl ti a ltlotr r./m Sir aViO'lJs 7bro',ortl to Ce^ti, 'Isb

of 7rly iS67.-f'm Br,-ricik.
(An original. Paper-office.)
---C IR, )your letter of the 6th of July, I received the

c lth at Berwick. I am sorry to fee rilat the

queen's majefiy's disposition altereth not towards the
lords, for when all is done, it is they which mull Ia';id
her more in Itead, than the queen ,her cousin, and will
be better inltrurmints, to work lome bcnefite andl quict-
ness to her majcfl iy 2m her realmn, than the tquen of
Scotlaind which is void of good fame.
A let/er Jro,?sn Sir A'Sit,/..s 'Tr.otcvs to C,il, Jron Fal-

ca, I i,. L/ 7u!v i :;7. (Paper oice.)
Cla, as you igil;t pe:-civc liy myr lettr (f tle I th

Jtuly, i ldgt at Fa! aill tat lii;igit, accorrmpal'Ycd1

with the lord I luine, te In rd of Le(dii.gton, and jamlici
MLclvin, where I was e! lceatcd very well, acorliii, to
the Itate ol tiha place, Vwhichi is fitter to lodge priluner.
than folks at hlibc!t, as it i very little, iu it is vry

firong. By the conference I have had with the lord of
Ledington I find the lords his associates and he hath
left nothing unthought of, which may be either to thir
danger, or work them furetv, wherein they do not for-
get what good and harme France may do them, and
likewise they confider the fame of England; but as farr
as I can perceive, to be plain with yow, they find more
perril to grow unto them through the queen's majefly's
dealings than either they do by the French, or by any
contrary faction among themselves, for they assure them.
selves the queen will leave them in the bryers if they run
hrr fortoun, and though they do acknowledge great be-
nefit as well to them, as to the realm of England by her
majeftv's doings at Leith, whereof they fay mutually her
majesty and both the realms have received great fruit:
yet upon other accidents which have chanced since, they
have observed such things in her majefly's doings as
have ended to the danger of such as The hath dealt with-
al, to the overthrow of your own designments, and little
to the surety o any party: and upon there confidera-
tions and diicoumfes at length, methinketh find a dipo-
fition in them, that either they mind to make their bar-
gain with France, or else to deal neither with France nor
yow, but to do what they hall think meet for their slate
and surety, and to use their remedy as occasions fliall
move them; meaning neither to irritate France nor Eng-
lrad, until such time as they have made their bargain
assuredly with one of vow; for they think it convenient
to proceed with yow both for a while pari paffu, for that
was my lord of Ledington's terms. I do perceave they
take the matter very unkindly, that no better anfwer.is
made to the letter, which the lords did fend to her ma-
jetfh, and likewise that they hear nothing from yow to
their satisfaction, I have anfwcred as well as I can, and
have alledged their own proceedings so obscurely with
tlie queen, and their uncertainty hath occasioned this
that is yet happened, and therefore her majesty hath fnt
me to the end I may inform her throughly of the slate
of the matters, and upon the declaration of their minds
and intents to such purposes as hall be by me propoGfd
on her majesty's behalf unto them, they shall be realon-

ably and refolutelv answered. At these things the lord
of Ledington smiled and shook his head, and said it were
better for us yow would let us alone, than neither to do
us nor yourselves good, as I fear me in the end that will
prove; Sr if there be any truth in Ledington, le Crocq
is gone to procure Ramboilet his coming hither or a
man of like quality, and to deliver them of their queen
for ever, who (hall lead her life in France, in an abbey
reclufed, the prince at the French devotion, the realm
governed by a counsel of their election of the Scottilh
nation, the forts committed to the custody of fiuch as
(hall be chosen amongst themselves, as yet I find no great
likelihood that 1 hall have accels to the queen, it is ob-
jered they may not so displease the Frenchi king, nlefs
they were sure to find the queen of England a good
friend; and when they once b y

my aces to the queen

have offended the French, then they fay vow will make
your prcat thereof to their undoing; and as to the
queen s liberty, which was the first head that I propo-
red, theysfaid that thereby they did perceive tlhat the
queen wants their undoing, for as for the reft of the
matters it was hur folly to talk of them, the liherty go-
ing before; but said they, if you will do us no good, do
us no harm, and we will provide for our fclvcs. In the
end thev f.:id we houlld rehife our own commodity, be-
fore tlnv cronluded with any other, which I slotid hear
or at rmy coriing to Edin, byv my next I hope to fend
you the band concluded by liamiltons, Argyll, Huntly,
and that fa3tion, not lb much to the prejudice of the
lords of Edilr, as that which was sent into France; thus
having no more leifire, but compelled to leap on horle-
back with the lords to go to Edinr, I humbly take my
leave of from Faftcaftle the z2th of July 567.
Io Sir Nicolas TLro morion being in Scotland. By te ueen,

the I4th July I567.
TRUSTY and well beloved we greet you well, though

we think that the causes will often change upon va-

riety of accidents, yet we think for sundry respects, not
amil', that as you ihall deal with the lords having charge
of the young prince for the committing of him into our

realm, fo-fhall yow also do well in treaty with the queen
to offer her that where her realm appeareth to be fuhjer
to sundry troubles from time to time, and thereby (as it ii
manifeti) her son cannot be free, if she hall be content
ed that her son may enjoy surety and quietness, within
this our realm, being so near as he knows it is; we
shall not fail to yield her as good surety therein forhn
child, as can be devised for any that might be our child
born of our own body, and shall be glad to hew to he
therein the trew effect of nature; and herein The may
be by yow remembered how much good may ensue to
her son to be nourished and acquainted with our coun
try, and therefore all things confidered, this occasion
for her child, were rather to be fought by her and the
friends of him, than offered by us; and to this end, we
mean that yow hall so deal with her, both to flay her
indeed from inclining to the French pratice, which is
to us notorious, to convey her and the prince into
France, and alfc to avoid any just offence, that fhr
might hereafter conceive, if he hould hear that we
Ifould deal with the lords for the prince.
Sir Nriola Tbrol.aoricn to queen Eliaaetlb, I4t July 56,

jrol Edinburgb.

(An original. Paper-office.)
TT may please your majesty to be advertised, I did

fignifie unto Mr. Secretary by my letters of the Ith

and zath of July, the day of mine entry into Scotland,
the causes of my flay, my lodging at Faftcaftle, a place
of the lord Hume's, where I was met by the said lord
and by the lord Lidington, and what had passed in con-
fcrence betwixt us, whileft I was at the said Faftcafile.
Since which time, accompanyed with the lords afore-
said, and with 4co horses by their appointment for my
better conduR, I came to Edinr the lath of this present.
The 3th being Sunday appointed for a folemne conr
runion in this town, and also a folemne fast being pu-
blifhcd, I could not have conference with the lords
which he assembled within this town as I desired, that is
to fay, the earls of Athole, and Morton, the lord Hume,
the lord of Lidington, fir James Balfour captain of the

castle, Mr. James M'Gill, and the president of the fcf-
lion.

Nevertheless I made means by the lord of Lidington
that they would ufe.no protrade of time in mine au-
dience, so did I likewise to the earl of Morton, whom
I met by chance; I was answered by them both, that
albeit the day were dellined to sacred exercises, such as
were there of the council would consult upon any moy-
en touching my access unto them and my conference
with them, and said also, that in the afternoon either
they would come to me, or I should hear from them.
About 4 of the clock in the afternoon, the said 13th
day. the lord of Lidington came to my lodgings, and
declared unto me on the behalf of the lords and others,
that they required me to have patience, though they
had defferred my conference with them, which was
grounded principally upon the abrence of the earles of
Mar and Glencainn, the lords Semple, Crighton, and
others of the council, faying also that they did confider
the matters which was on your behalf to treat
with them of, were of great importance, as they could
not satisfy nor conveniently treat with me, nor give
me answer without the advice of the lords, and others
their afrociates; the lord of Lidington also said unto
me, that where he perccived, by his private conference
with me in my journey hitherwards that I prelTcd
greatly to have fpeedv accrfes to the queen their Ibve-
reign, he perceived, by the lords and others which were
here, that in that matter there was great difficulty or
many rel'pecs, but specially bccaufe they had rctul'd
to the French anlbaflhdor the like access, which being
granted unto me, might greatly offend the French, a
matter which thev deired and intended to eschew; for
they did not find by your majeflv's dealings with them
hitherto, that it behoved them to irritate the French
king and to lose his favour and good intelligence with
him: I answered, that as to their refusal made unto the
French animafador, monaceur de Ville Rove was dil-
pa!ched forth of France before theli accidents here hap-
pcned, and his ipecial errand was to impeach the
tectn's marriage with the earl of Bothel (tor so indeed.

since my coming hither I learned his commission tended
to that end, and to make offer to the queen of another
marriage), and as to monsieur de Crocq, he could have
no order forth of France concerning these matters, firce
they happened; and therefore they might verywell hold
them fufpeded to have conference with the queen, leall
they might treate of matters in his time without in.
flrucdions, and so rather do harm than good; but your
majefly being advertized of all things which had chanc.
ed, had sent me hither to treat with them, for the well
of the realm, for the conversation of their honours and
credit, and for their surety; and I might boldly fay unto
him, that your majesty had better deserved than the
French had. He laid, for his own part, he was much
bound unto your majefiy, and had always found great
favour and courtesy in England; but to be plain, with
you, fir, saved he, there is not many of this affenihlv
that have found so great obligation at the queen yotr
sovereign's hands, as at the French king's, for the earles
of Morton and Glencairn be the only peri;ns vhi h
took benefit by the queen's majefiy's aid at Leith, the
reft of the noblemen were not in the aion; and ve
think, said he, the queen's majefiv your bovereign, y
the opinion of her ov.n council, and all the world, tok
as great benefit by that charge as the realm of Scct.
land, or any particuiar person; and not to talk with Ma
as an ambfiiador, but with fir Nicolas Throckmirt ul
my lord Morton, and such as were in -pain for the
death of Davie, found hut cold favour ot the quccn's
majesty's hands, when they were banished forth oi
their own country; but I would all our whole company
were as well willing to accomplish the queen otir o-
vereign intents anddefires as I am; for mine own part,
I am but one, and that of the meanest fort, and the be
- many noblemen and such as have great interest in t!:c

matter, mary yow shall be assured will employ mni\ ir
to employ my credit, and ll that 1 may do, to fatistc
the queen your mifires, as much as lyeth in me, and
for your own part you have a great many frilends i
this assembly, with many other good words. But r
conclusion I mull take this for an aiver to ifay u::

the other lords were come, and thereupon I thought
meet to advertize your majesty what hath passed, and
how far forth I have proceeded; your expectation be-
ing reat to hear from hence.

And now to advertize our majefly of the fate of all

things, as I have learned since my coming hither, it

av please your majesty to nderitand as followeth,
The queen of Scotland remaineth in good health in
the cafle of Lochleven, guarded by the lord Linlay
and Lochleven the owner of the oue ; for the lord
Kuthven is employed in another conimiflion, becaujf
he -rgan to how great favour to the queen, and to
give her intelligence. She is waited on with $ or 6
ladvs, 4 or 5 gentlewomen, and chamberers, whereof
one is a French woman. 'he earle of lichan, the
earle of Murray's brother, hath alib liberty to come to
ierat his plealure; the lords aforelhid, which have her
in guard, doe keep er r very firaitlv, and as far as I can
perceive, their rigour proceedetll hy their order from
there men, becatife that the quer will not by any
means be induced to lend her authority to prolecute the
Imurder, nor will not collent by any periwalion to a-
Lallton the lord Botlh-ll for hter 1luind, but avo.vetl
tniallantlv that she xwill live anlt die wxi-itl hinm; a.ll
!aith that if it were put to her choice to relin(qu;fh her
,toxin and kingdonm, or the lord Botlell, she would
l'ave her kingdom and dignitt, to go as a lip;!e dam-
cd1l with him, and that Ihe will never conlent that lhe
fail fare worse or have more arml than herlelf.
And as far as I can perceive, the principal culfe of
er detention is, for that thefl lords do fee the queen
cing otfo feorvent afiefrion towards ti.c earle o-
iell as she is, and being put at, as they ioultld ih coin-.
).llt(l to be in continuail arms, and to have occasion of
inany battles, he bing with mIanifeft evidence notori-
r,ily deteded to he the principal nmiturdtrer, and the
urds nimaning prolecution of.jufice againilt him accord-
Ig to his merits.
I'he lords mean alib a divorce betwixt the queen and
..ln, as a marriage nut to be 'uflired for many respeCts,
Vo!. 11. L

which separation cannot take place if the queen be at
liberty, and have power in her hands.

They do not allobforget their own perill, conjoined

with the danger of the prince, but as far as I can per-
ceave, they intend not either to touch the queen in
surety or in honour, for they do speak of her with re-
sped and reverence, and do affirm, as I do learn, that
the conditions aforesaid accomplished, they will both
put her to liberty, and reflore her to her eflate.

These lords have for the guard of their town 450

harq-bufhers which be in every good order, for the en-
tertainment of which companys, until all matters be
compounded, they did sue unto your majesty, to aid
them with such fum of money as hath been mentioned
to Mr. Secretary by the lord of Lydington's writing,
amounting as I perceive to ten or twelve thousand
crowns of the

They were lately advertized that the French king

dnth mind to fend hither monsieur de la Chapell des
Urfine,.a knight of the French order, and always well
afecllionate to the hufc of Guyse, and howsoever la
Forest, Villaroy, and du Crocq have used language in
the qeen's favour and to these lords disadvantage there,
to our majesty; la Crocq doth carry with him such
matter as shall be little to the queen's advantage, so as
it is ti:oulgt the French king, upon his coming to h,s
prefnce, will rather fatisfie the lords, than pleasure
the qen; for they have their party so well made, as
tle French w ill rather make their profit by them, than
any other way.

Hlerewith I fend your majefy the lal bond agreed

-n, anl fincd by the l!ami!lons, the earl of Arg)>1,
liuntly, and .;i.ndry others at Dumbarton.

;c-.'erticlt'fS, lince my coming to this town, the lIa-

mil.tons have fnt unto me a gentleman of thtir fur-
r.ar! r 3iann!d Robert llamilton, with a letter from te
hifi.op oi'S:. AnIdrews and the abbot of Arbroath, le
cln- xh';crcot i lcrl v':r majcfty and mine aul\wer u'i-
to ihei-:. rc. rr.;:g tc ';c bearer the declaration of b1:,;
Thirns, as thinic diJ iv him unto me.
The earl of Ar il, ath in like manner, feit i..

other unto me with a letter and credit, have tfed him
asI did the others, the copy of both which letters I
fend to your majesty also. The lord Harrys ht al.b
sent unto me but not written, and I have returnd unto
him in like fort.

Against the 2oth day ofthis month there is a generall

alsembli of all the churches, fliires, aud boroughs totiins
ofthis realm, namely offuch as be contented to repair
to these lords to this town, where it is rthourt the
whole slate of this matter ,will be handled, and 1 cear
me much to the queen's difadvlantage and d:nger; un-
less the lord of Lietington and onie otlhe,." wiih be heft
afl'cfld unto her do provide some remedy; for I per-
ceave the great number, and in manner a'l, but chulliv
the common people, which hare aliifled in thr-l dings,
do greatly diflonour the queen, and mind ltrioiilv ci-
tiher her deprivation, or hcr dcflruLion, I ulcd th: best
means I can (confidering the furie of the worl'. here) to
prorogue this alfemrbly, for that appearrth to me to he
the best remedy: I may not lieak of dilibluition of it,
for that may not be aiden, and I fIould thelri-b bring
mrfelf into great hatred and peril. The chitleli of the
lords whiicl be here preint at this time dare not how
so much lenity to the queer as 1 think they cou!ll te con-
tented, for fear of tile rage of the people. 'Ihe wo
men be mcefl furious and impucd nt aaiiift the queen,
and yet the men be mad (ni, r;j; lb as a frranger over
bufie may Ibon be made .b 1-.r:fi.' a:rnonig th.iL.

There was a great bruit that the la:iikolns with

their adherents would put their force into tie (kids a-
gaillt the 24th of this month, but do hot find ti,at in-
tent so true, as the commlon bruit gneth.

The earl of Argyll is in the HilghLandsI where there

is trouble among his own countrymen.

The earl of I. ennox is by thele Irrds much desired

here, and I do believe our majelly may io uJk ,i:ll; ald
diret him, as he hall be able to promote y'our purpole'
with these men.
Tlhe earl of Argyll, the Hamiltons and he be incom-

L

patible. - I do find amongfl the Hamiltons, Argy)i
and the company two strange and fimdry hlmours.

Hami!tons do make sho- of the liberty of the queen,

and profreute that with great earneitnels, bccaule it!.
would have thcle lords detirov her, rather than fl
ihoald be recovered from them hv violence; anutlh,
time they seem to deftre her iibrrty and Bothwell's dc-
firuion, becaufr they would cmipals a marriage be.
tv.ixt the queen and tire lord of Arhr-tlh.

The earl of LArgall doth as Lcti hir l:herty, and Bin:.

xvt!i's d'.flru&i;ion, becau l;he would mrarry the queen u
his brother.

And yet neither of them, nt.tih;'ni";ng their e',pel

eoncu'rcnce, (as appcercth hv their hond), doth (!i!i-o
vcr their minr.s to each other, nor mind one end; Kiox
is not here, but in the weft parts, he and the reft of tl.e
ninifers will be here at the great arcmbly, whos aufi
rity againf the queen fear as much as ay man's.

1By sone conference which I had ith some of h!i

eoutncil, me tllinkelh that thev have intelligence thai
there is a difpofitiun in the qeen of Scotland to leavi
this realm, and to retire herlf into either England or
into France, but most willingly into England, for fli

- nd miliikeiings as she knoweth hath been, and is

meant unto her in France, leaving the regiment eithe
to a number of perins dleagued, and authorized y
htr, or to ome one or more.

And it please vour majefly, I think it not amisS te

put viw in rnemb.rance, that in cafe the said queen
conic i:-o Engl!ai d by your allowance, without tli
French king's ccii;ent, she ilhall loole her dowery in
France, and havelitte or nothing from hence to enter
tain her; and in catfe he do go into France with te
king's coilte-nrient, she may be an inftlrument (if he
can recover favour, as time will help to cancell her dif
grace) ci-l.er hy m:atJii;, vu ith foile hiulfand of good
iquait, or by foine other devi l, to vork new unquiet.
nef, to her V .on contry, and so conlfquently to ou!
maicfty's.

Ther-;fore it mav plcafe vour majeftL to confider of
this matter, and to let me kuow- your plcafure with coli

venient speed, how T f(all awer the fame, if it be pro-
pounded unto me, either by the quern or by the council,
as a piece of the end and coinpofiion For I am fre,
of late, he hath seemed very deCfrous it hve the i;attcr
brought to pass that he might go into ErLlal!, ret i-l-
ing her efate and jurifdicqliol in hrfcl, though she do
not exercise it; and likcwAife I inderlland thai fime of
this council which be least affi cced to hcr farctv do think
there is no other way to save her. Thus A!l:;ghty God
plerreve your mrajelty in health, honour, and all felicity;
at Edin, the I4th July 1567.
Sir Niholas TbrokmLrtion o nueen tFli;cteR, the I ib of July

1 67,f'om Edinlb,,,gL.

(An original. Paper-office.)

r may pleas your majefiv, vow mi-ht perceive by
my letters of the 6th, ow far [ iad proceeded

with these lords, and what was their anfrer: since
which time I have spoken particularly with the arle
Morton, tie lord of Lidington, and fir James Halfour
captain of this cafile, at whole hands I canilot percrave
that as yet acccfs to the queen to I.ochleven will be
granted me, flaying theimtlves still yv tihe ablen1ce of tie
lords and others their aflbciates, which (;ley fay) they
look for within two days; and for that 1 find, by like-
lihood and apparent presumptions, that iiinl access to
i!e queen will hardly he granted, I have thought good
not to defer this difpi.tlch until 1 have a reblute afwer
in that matter.

May it therefore please your mnjellv, to underfland
Rohert Melvin returned from the queen in Lochlevin,
:,; this town the 6th of July, and brouglht a letter fron
!!er .x-ritten of her own hand to thcle lor-ds, which doth
,ontain, as I underlland, mat;nr as folioweth :-A re-
tueii unto them to have confidcration of her health, andi
i; they will not put her to liberty, to change the place
ofreflraiiit to the castle of Stirling, to the end he might
have the cmfort and company of her son, and if they
ill not change her from Lochlevin, he required to
halr fIome other gentlewoman about her, naming none,

L t

To have her apothecary, to have some modest mini.

fler. To have an embroiderer to draw forth furl
wo.-k as she would be occupied about, and to have a
varlet of the chamber.- Touching the government ns
the realm fne maketh two offers, which are but general.
Iv touched in her le:ter, the pa-ticiuiaritys be not iperifi.
ed, bt referred to Robert Mclvin's credit; the one is
to commit it only and wholv to the earle of Murra,
the ether is to the lords whose names ensue, aflifted . with
such others as thev fnall call unto them, that is to Iv,
the duke of Chattelherault, the earls of Morton, Mur.
ray, Marr, and Glencain.

She hath written unto them that I might have arcefs

unto her.-She requireth further, that if they will nnt
tr-at her and rga.rl her as their que-n, et to til lher
as the king teir;- i vercign's daugh.ter, (whom malny of
tlh-m k:n; ), and as their prince's methcr.--Sle \rili
bv no mians !c ld tu ab.t!don Boiltweli for her huntial,
nor reliriir.hri him; which matter v.ill do h(r nriitt
harm of ai:, an-d ha:dcneth tl.- l lords to great lcveiity
agair.fi her.

She xieldeth in words to the prcfccution of the mnr-
del.

I have the means to et e know that your nma-'.f!
hath fcnr me :hi:-er fir, r r relief.

I have also pr iuIdcld her to conform hirlcl' to r:-

nrunce Botl v.'l for her hIufiand, ar.d to he eonttei;.i
to fiT: -r a dioirrec to pis LbetAixt ticli: she hath I;;.!
nir wcrr tal -t ::- will i no wife coii'net unto that, b'.t
ratIher d;e: gr, i'! lerf,]f lupl! thi realbs, aid,:d
heritel to re ic en wetkt gone with Iil I. hy renoll;-
ing Br.hwi, ti

si ..:!:' ackno vi :t- li

. itlf to te x;e't

e(-hild i a bar,!, anli tr hve foi-. t,-d l:r c.hinu.',
which fl(he wial di: ('o to die fr it: 1 I:ax piiided '
0to :ive .,r u\:n litc alid lier child, to choose e the alt
hard c'>di:;on.

;'. li..-ex arti;t ! ' re in i; tc twn he 6th, ti :1'

rcih ' .l v-l. "

i .'' l '.^r !;.c ',',: conferi ncl , :,:

;,'bh 1*r. C', . ', i-'-', :.: . tlx r' . :]iii I'i thiis toe!,.

1 kave.l! j a\ <C v,'r h llrm tc l':-:.cll antd perlwi\o r
-: , 1 tind thcl.i b':h x er y at.fir, C in [his t niiet~- ee, v..:

they Ihall do hereafter I know not, they are furnilhed
with many arguments, some forth of the scripture,
some forth of histories, fonie grounded (as they fay) up-
on the laws of this realm, some upon praeCices used in
this realm, and some upon the conditions and oath
made by their prince at her coronation.

The bishop of Galloway, uncle to the earl of Iuntley,

hath sent hither to these lords, that his nrphew the earle
and some others of that fide may, at Linlithgow or at
Stirling. have some communication with some appoint-
ed on this fide, afluring them that there is a good difpo-
fition inl the lords of the other party to concurre with
thcfe, assuring further that they will not dissent for
triffles or unnecessary things, and (as I am given to un-
dctrfland) they can be pleaiidl the queen's reltraint he
continued until the murder be purlued in all persons,
whlcercby tlie liparation of the queen and Bothell is em-
plycd, the prefcrvation of the prince, the security fr all
men, and a good order taken for the governance of the
ria!is in tranquiliity.

Caltain Clerk, which hath lo long served in en-

nia.k and served at NCewhaven, dd: the 6th of this
ri.:ith (accompanied with one ofslis filiers, or ratlher
tle i l]!ier as the greater fame tirth) kill one .

'ilii a

l 11ama1, an(d f(ch a one as had great etimai; n with
tihlr l rds both for his ikill, ihis liairdyefs, hon cJy, and
willini;nel in tis action; whereupon Clerk hth re-
tired Iiimfelf; their quarrel was about the faip whitli
took Blacketer, which fiuip was appointed lby tlltefe hIord
t: go to the north of Scotland: to impeach the p o1f:': it
the earle Bothwell, in calf hle went either to the ifls, or
to ;aiy other place; by the death of this man this enter-
{'r/.- A3 da(lI'd.

'I'lh hilol)p cf Galloway is come to I.inlithgow, and

do!ll (elire to li:eak with the Lorl of Tidington.

''- ahlbt of Kilwinning hath sent for fir James Bal-

f.u;-, captain of the call e, t have conference with :iln.

As 1 wrote unto your ntajefty in my last thc ii-inil-

ti'sl.i nw lid ito nalertt to dif.evr thlfe lorc 0' and t.l-in
a!::: :I, hut would concur in ail things (yea in a,,I ex-
trUl:.ity aait t queen) to as that they might L as-

fured the prince of Scotland were crouned king, and
should die without issue, that the earle of Lennox's son
living hould not inherit the croun of this realm, as next
heir to his nephew.

And although the lords and councelors speak revec

rently, mildly, and charitably of their queen, so as I
cannot gather by their speech any intention to cruelty or
violence, yet I do find by intelligence, that the queen is
in very great peril of her life, by reason that the pop!e
agembled at this convention do mind vehemently tht
dcftruclion of her.

It is a public speech amongfl all the people, and a-

mongit all eflates (saving of the ounfellors) that their
queen hath no more liberty nor privilege to commit
rnmrder nor adultery, than any other private person, ei-
ther by God's laws, nor by the laws of the realm.

The earl of Bothell, anA ail his adherents and ali-

ates, be put to the horn by the ordinary jultice of this
town, named the lords of the fflion; and commar!-
mient given to all sheriffs, and all other officers, to ap-
prehend him, and all other his followers and receiptors.
-The earl of Bothwell's porter, and one of his otl:tr
fen-itors of his chamber, being apprehended, aave c'n-
fefied such sundry circumflances, as it appearthll cti-
den:li, that he the said earl was one of the principal
excclt-rs of the murder, in his own person acconpaly-
ed w;!h Iundry others, of which number I cannot yt
certaily learn the names but of three of them, that is tn
sav two of the Ormiftons of Tivotdall, and one Hai-
born of Bolton; the lords would he glad that none of
the rr:urderers should have any favour or receipt in E::-
land, and hereof their desire is, that the offit e-s up ',
the border may be warned; Bothell doth fill remain i'
the north parts, but the lord Seaton and Fleming, hlirh
have been there, have utterly abandoned him, and! en
repair hitherwards.-The intelligence doth grow dl,.v
betwixt these lords, and those which held of; alnd nlt,
withfianding there lords have sent an hundred and fi'tv
harqtibufhers to Stirling. to keep the town and plag
from furprize; and so have they done in like manner ti
it. JohnIton, which be the two pafiages frcm thec o:',

and weft to this town, I do underfiand the captain of
Duihar is much busied in fortifying that place, I do
niervii the carriages be not impeached otherwile han
they e.

Of late this queen hath written a letter to the captain

of the said castle, which hath been surprised, and tlhre-
byv matter is discovered which maketh little to the
queen's advantage.

Thus, having none other matter worthy your ma-

jefly's knowledge I beseech God to prosper your majesty
with long life, perfect health, and prolpcrous felicity.
At Edinburgh the 18th of July 1I67.
Letr f Sir Ni;chlasJ T/r olmo, ton to e ri h L ,,,,ctle the

earl of Leicerjr, ,It. of e Ora:d,, a'Zd 1n ,

'
:. l s

L Ler

m.;e/iy's moi h/onorae /r,'i c'r,,. t'.
[z4th of July Is67. Paper-office, from the original.]
BY my former dispatches lent to her majn-fl, and Mr-

Secretary, since the nath of Jul, your l(ird!hip

rniilit have perceived the slate of this counltrly, ad to
'wlat end these matters be like t come: ib as nut to
trouble your lordflhip with many words; this qleel is
like very hortly to be deprived of her royal efl.ite, her
fun to be crowned king, and flie deta;led in p: iin
within this realm, and the fame to be governced, in the
young king's name, by a council, confifling of certain
of the nobility, and other wife men of this ralm; so as
it is easy to be seen that the power and ability to do any
thing to the commodity of the queen's majesty, and the
realm of England, will chiefly, and in manner wholly,
relt in the hands of there lords, and others their abflci-
ares, assembled at Edinburgh. Now if thre quern's ma-
jelly will flill persist in her former opinion towards the
q111ien of Scotland (unto whom flhe hall b able to do no
goodl), then I do plainly fee that thlee lords and all their
accomplices will becolme as good French, as the French
king can wish, to all intents and purposes. And as for
the lHamiltons, the earls of Argiiile, Huntlye, and that
faction, they be already so far inclianted that way, as
there needeth little device to draw them to the French
devotion. Then this is the slate of things so come to

pas in this country, that France has Scotland now as
-much conjoined unto them, to all purposes, as ever it
was and what an instrument, the young prince will
prove, to unquiet England, I report me to your lord-
lhips wisdoms, and therefore confidering the weight of
the matter, and all the circumitances, 1 trust your lord-
hips will well bethink you in time, (for 'tis high time,)
how to advise her majefly, to leave nothing undone that
may bring the prince of Scotland to be in her poflieffln,
or at the leafl, to be at her devotion. And amongl o-
ther things, that I can imagine, for the firit degree no-
thing is more meet to bring this to effcct, than to allure
this company here assembled, to bear her majefly this
favour. Some talk hath passed between the lord of
Liddington and me, in certain conferences, about this
matter. By him I find, that when her majesty hall have
won these men to her devotion, the principal point that
will make them co;eformable to deliver their prince into
England, will ret upon the queen, and the realms ena-
bling him to the fucccfilon of the crown of England, lor
fault ot issue of the qeen's majesty's body, ome otlii-r
things will also be required, as the charge of the faii
prince and his train to be at the charge of Engaidt. I
do well perceive that these men will never be brought to
deliver their prince into England, without the founler
condition, for the furcelion ot England; for (faith Lid.
dington) that taking place, the prince shall be as dear to
the people of England as to the people of Scotland; and
the one will be as careful of his preservation as the -
ther. Otherwise, he faith, all things confidered, it will
be reported that the Scottiihmen have put their prince
to be kept in safety, as those which commit the fbeer to
be kept by the wolves. So as for conclulion, your lord-
ships may perceive here will be the scope of this matter.
As unto the delivering of him upon hostages, he fayt tl,
let no man think, that the condition of the fitccefion
not being accomplished, the nobility and the gentry will
never content to leave themselves deflitute of their Icre-
reign, upon any hostages, neither upon any promiit,
nor likelihood of good to issue in time to come. It were
not good for yourielves (faith he) that the matter we-:

so handled; for then you should adventure all your goods
in one hip, which might have a dangerous effcdt, con-
fdering the unwillingness of the queen your sovereign to
content to etablilhing any successor to the crown And
then, how unmete were it, that her majesty having in
her poffeflTon already all such persons as do pretend to it,
or be inheritable to the crown, to have our prince also
in her custody. For so there might follow, without
good capitulations, a strange and dangerous issue, tho'
the queen your miflrefs do think that such imaginations
could not proceed but from busy heads, as you have ut-
tered unto us on her behalf. What is come to pass
fiice my last diipatch, and how far forth things ar pro-
ceeded, I refer your lordlhip to be informed by my let-
ters ent unto her majesty, at this tirbe. And o I pray
Alhighry God, prererve your lordship in much honour
and felicity. At Edinburgh this 4th of July 1567.

It may please your good lordship to make my lord
Stuard partner of this letter.

The quwen to Sir Nicotli Throkmorton.

By the queen.
(6th August 1567.)
TRUSTY and right well beloved, we greet you well,

ffor as much as we do confider that you have now

a long time remained in those parts without expedition
in the charge committed unto you, we think it not meet,
secing there hath not followed the good acceptation and
fruit of our well meaning towards that ltate, which g,,od
real;.n would have required, that you liould continue
there any longer, our plealure, therefore, is, that you
shall, immedi.tely upon the receipt hereof, fend your
servant Middlemore unto the lords and estates of that
realin, that are affemled together., illing him to de-
cla e unto them, that it cannot hut fecri very firange
into us, that you having been sint fiom us, of such good
intent, to deal with them, in matters tending so much
to their ow.n quiet, and to the benefit of the whole c-
Iaite of their country, they have so far forgotten tlein-
fivcs, and so fligitly regarded uI and our good me;in-
ain6 not only in delaying to hear you, and dcferlilig

your access to the queen their sovereign, but also, which
is ftrangcft of all, in not vouchlafing to make any an-
fwer unto us. And altho' these dealings be such, in-
deed, as aere not to he looked for at their hanrls, vet
do we find their usage and proceeding towards their 'o.
vcraign and queen, to overpass all the reft in so strange
a degree, as we for our part, and we fiippole the whole
world betides, cannot ut think them to have therein
gone so far beyond the duty of fubjecis, as must needs
remain to their perpetual tauche tfrr ever. And therl-c
fore ve hail fay, that we have tho't good, without co.-
fuming any longer time in vain, to revoke you to our
prefrnce, requiring them to grant you licence and pal-
pert so to do, which when yu hall have obtained, e
w ii: hilat you make your repair hither, unto us, with as
convenitnit speed as you may. Givuen, &c.

Indorfed 6th August 1567.

Trrdmorn o tLe rigLt oourbz!e Sir IVilliam Cecil ,i,!l,

one .f, her majri 7', priky CtIrnJil and prinsi:lalfccretir , ^ :vt

r:th Aug. 1567. Paper office. From the original.
tr h T I have learned, since the arrival of my or(l

' Murray, and Mons. de Linnerol, you hall undcr-

fland by my letter to her majelty, at this time. ' lie
French do, in their negotiations, as they do in their
drink, put ater to their wine. As I am able to fee in-
to tl.cir doings, they take it not greatly to the heart how
the queen sleep, whether she live or die, whether he be
at liberty or in prizon. The mark they shoot at, is, to
renew their old league; and can be as well contented to
take it f this little king (howsoever his title be), and tle
lamec bv the order of thele lords, as otherwise. Lynle-
rc,! caimr lht vcflerday, and methinketh he will not tar.
ry l:;g; onu may guls how the French will lfeel to
difipiak tci lords, when they changed the comig ov
la Chapclle tles Ourfinls for this man, because they
doubted that de la Chapcle fhculd not be grateful to
them, being a papifl. ir, to lpeak more plainly to you,
;han I i:: do other-vife, me thinketh the earl of Mlur

ray uill run the course that those men do, and be par-
taker of their fortune. I hear no man speak more bit-
terly againit the tragedy, and the players therein, than
he, so little like he hath to horrible fins. I hear an ink-
ling that Ledington is to go into France, which I do as
much mislike, as any thing, for our purpose. I can al-
sure you the whole protestants of France will live and
die in these men's quarrels; and, where there is bruit a-
mnongft you, that aiA should be lent to the adverse party,
and that Martigues should come hither with lome force;
Mionl Boudelot hath affurtd me of his honour, that in-
ftRad of Martigues coining against them, he will come
with as good a force to filccour them: and if that be
lne; ulder meaner condct, Robert Stuart shall come
with as many to fortify them. But the conitable hath
ajl'ired thele lords, that the king meaneth no way to of-
ii',l them. Sir, I pray find my revocation convenient,
al.d lfpecd vou to fuither it, for I am here now to no
p,:rp(n'e, urlefs it be to kindle there lords more agaiilft
t-. Thus 1 do humbly take my leave of you, fro; E-
diiiburgh the izth of Auguit 1567.

Yours to ue and command.

The queen to Niccll 'rrolinorlon.
'rRtsrTY and we!l beloved, we greet you we!l. W'e

have, within thele two days, received three fundlry

letters of yours, of the zoth, 2zd, and 2, of this month,
Ilaving not before thole received any fven days blfore;
an.ll do find, by ilhief your letters, that you have very di-
ligentl and largely alvertiled us rcf all the hasty and pe-
r-inptorv proceedings tlhere; which as we nothing like,
i1 we truift in time to fee them wax colder, and to i'e-
i e ome reformation. For we cannot perceive, that
t;'rv wirli whom the) have dealt can an'swer the doubts
ri;' d , v the tiamiltons, who hoolbevr they may be
.!r: i-! for their private rcfpef yet those things which
ti.-v move, will be allowed by all realbnalule persons.
]'ir ir thry may trot, heiint nohlemen of' the realm, he
fli;lired to l;ear the rlqueen their lovereign declare her

indr cl (c:i.crnirLS the repolrts hiich are nmade by her,
V\'l 1 1. M

by such as keep her in captivity, how should they be-
lieve the reports, or obey them, which do report it? and
therefore our meaning is, you hfall let the Hamiltons
plainly underfand, that we do well allow of their pro-
ceedings, (as far forth as the fame doth concern the
queen their sovereign for her relief,) and in fitch things
as shall aprear rfor.able for us therein to do, for tl.e
queen our fifler, we ill be ready to perform the lame.
And where it is so rnquired, that upon your conlig
thence, the lord Scroop fould deal with the lord Her-
ris to impart their meanings to us, and curs to them, e
are well pleated therewith, and we require you to atrtr-
tize the lord Scroope hereof by your letters, and to will
him to shew himself favourable to them in ti ir ail:s,
that may appear plainly to tend to the relief of the queen,
and maintenance of her authority. And as we hvc
willed our secretary to write unto you, that upon o r
message done to the earl of Murray, you might reluin,
so our meani:g is vcu shall. And if thfe our lttcrs
ihall meet you on the way, yet we will have you al- cr-
tife both the lord Scroope and the Ilaniions ol ur
meaning.

Ijdorfed 9 Aug. 567.

No. XXIII. (p. , vol. 2.)
Sir .Vitbodl Tbrociortion to bte arkb;f-op c Sj. AtiretriJ ard

Il a6t of Arrolce.
(i3th Aug. 1567. Paper ofice, from a copy which Sir

Nicholas fnt to the queen.)

A rTER my good commendations to vour good !,ril-

/ships this hall be to advertize you, rljat the qle, -n'

maiefl my sovereign, aving fcnt me hithr her amn)l:
fador to the queen her lifter your fovercign, to coninjl-
nicate unto her such matter as he thought meet, cfi
dering the good amity ndi ntelligence betwixt thin,
-ho being detained in captivity (as your lordships k.n. )
contrary to the duty of all good fbjecis, for the e;:-
largement of whose per!nii, and the rtelitution of lier t
her dignity, her majetfi gave me in charge to treat with
thcfe lords affcrr.bicd at Edenburgh, offiril:g them all
reasonable condi:ions and i. as miighL be, for tir.

safeguard of the young prince, the punifliment of the
late horrible murder, the dilfolution of the marriage be-
twixt he queen and the earl of Bodwell, and latly for
their own sureties. In the negotiation of which matters
I have (as your lordships well know) spent a long time
to no purpose, not being able to prevail in any thing
with those lords, to the queen my sovereign's fatisfac-
tion. Of which strange proceedings towards her maje-
fly, and undutiful behaviour towards their sovereign, I
have advertised the queen's majeft), she (not being mind-
ed to bear this indignity) hath given me in charge to de-
clare her further pleasure unto them, in such fort as
they may well perceive her majesty doth disallow of
their proceedings, and thereupon hath revoked me.
And further hath given me in charge to communicate
the fame unto your lordships, requiring you to let me
know, before my departure hence (which hall be, God
willing, as oon as I have received answer from you)
what you and your confederates will assuredly do, to set
the queen your sovereign at liberty, and to restore her
to her former dignity by force or otherwise; feeing these
lords have refused all other mediation, to the end the
queen's majesty my sovereign may concur with your
lordships in this honourable enterprizc.

And in cafe, through the dispersion of your alfociates,

your lordlhips can neither communicate this matter a-
mongft you, nor receive relolution of them all by that'
tine, it may please you to fend me the opinions of so
many of you as may confer together, within two or
three days, so as I may have your answer here in this
town by Monday or Tuelday next at the farthest, being
the i9th of this Augufl; for I intend (God willing) to
depart towards England, upon Wednesday following.
Thus I molt humbly take my leave of your lordships at
Edenburgh, the x3th of Aug. I567.

Indorfed the 3th Aug. r567.

Sir lNi bolas Tbrockmorton to ihe lord Haerryt.
(.4th Aug. 1S67, Paper-office, from a copy which fir

Nicholas sent to fccretary Cecil.)
YOUR good lordship's letter of the t3th of August I

Iave received the 9Ith of the fame. For answer

whereunto it may like your lordfllip to underftnd,
that I will fignifie unto you plainly, how farforth I am
already thoroughly inflruded of the queen's majesty
my fovereign'spleafure concerning the detention of the
queen your sovereign, and concerning her relief.

To the first her majesty hath given in charge, to fe

all kinds of persuasion in her name, to move thele lords
2afembled at Edenburgh to desist from this violent and
undutiful behaviour, which they used toward their so-
vereign. And in this part, besides the hew of many
reasons, and sundry persuasions of amicable treaty with
them, her majesty hath willed me to use some plain and
severe speech unto them, tending so far forth, as if they
would not be better advised, and reform there their out-
rageous proceedings exercised against their sovereign,
that then they might be assured her majesty neither
would nor could indure such an indignity to be done to
the queen, her good cousin and neighbour.

And notwithflanding there my proceedings with

them, they have made proof to be little moved thereby;
for as yet neither ill they content to the enlargement,
neither susser me to speak with her. So as it lemeth
to me, it is fuperfiuous to treat any more with them as-
ter this manner. Wlhereupon I have advertised the
queen's majefly my sovereign, exptcillg daily her mna-
jefly's further order; and as I shall be advertised there-
of, so will not fail to fignifiy the fame to your good
lordship; and in the mean time will advertiie her ma-
jefty also, what your lordship hath written unto me.
Thus with my due commendations to vour good lord-
ship, I commit the fame to almighty Cod, reiling al-
ways todo you the pleasure and service that I can law-
fully. At Edenburgh.

Indorfed 24th uguft, 1567

No XXIV. (p 15, vol. .)
.account f lordJ HIrriJ's hei banvir in te paorliament held

Dreoerber I, I 6-. (Paper office.)
THE lord Herr-v made a notable harangue in the

name of the duke antd himself, their friends and

adherents (the duke hiifrclf, the earl of Cafilles, and the
abbot of Kiiwinning being also present) to pcrfuade the

union of the whole realm in one mind. 'Wherein he
didliot spare to set forth solemnly the great praise that
part of this nobility did deserve, which in the begin-
ining took meanes for punilhment of the earl of Both:
well, as also feeing the queen's inordinat affction to
that wicked man, and that he could not be induced by
their perluafion to leave him, that in fequeftring her
person within Lochlevin, they did the duty of noble-
men. That their honourable doings, which had not
I lared to hazard their lives and lands, to avenge their
native country from the ilanderous reports that were
Ipoken of it among other nations, had well deserved
that all their brethren houldjoin with them in so good
a caife. That he and they, in whole names he did
fpleak., would willingly, and without any corn;ulfion,
enter themneives in the fame yoke, and put their lives
andl laids in the like hazard, for maintenance of our
cause. And if the queen herself were in Scotland, ac-
coinpanied with 20o,00 men, they will he of the lame
mind, and fight in our quarrel. I-le hoped the remain-
der noblemen of their party, Hluntly, Arguile, and o-
thers. which had not as yet acknowledged the king,
would come to the fame conlormitv, whereunto he
would also earnestly move them. And if they wil! re-
main oblinate, and rfule to qualify rhemlelvts, then
will the duke, he and their friends, joil with us to cr-
rea them, that otherwil will not reform themllves.
So plausible an oration, and more avantageous for our
plrtv, none of ourselves .'ould have made. lie did nut
torget to term my lord regt, by the name of reclent,
(:he-r was no nmcLilonl at all of t)h earl olMirray) anil
rt ca!l him gra.': at every w,.rd, when his fpceclic-
we.re directed to himr, accomnp.aying all his words with
law courtelics atcr t.is manner.

No. XXV. (. 3 r. vol. 2. )
.-,, n . ali v, >

to ,e', l z, . ich.

iCort. Lib Cil. i. A copy, and probably a trai.fitin.]
A 1.u i,-'u.s the neceflity of my cause (which mak-

::1 ll t: .; i .?ortune to you) do rilake ya to

M 3

judge that I am out of the way; yet such as have not
my passion, nor the refpeis -x hereof you are persuadcd,
w-il think that I do as mv cause doth recuire. Madam,
1 have not acufed you, either in words nor in tholight,
to Have used ourself evil towards me. And I believe,
that yon have no want of gccd understanding( to keep
you from perf\wafion agF:lint vour natural good int lina-
tion. But in the n:ezn I cn't- chiit (having my fenlCs)
but perceive very evil furtherance in many matre,
since my ccmirg hith r. I thc' hr .t lat had uffci-
ently dclfi c:,. d rinro you tl:c dionminolitics, which
this drekv brirgcth u nto me. And especially that tcy
think iu thic rext rrenth f A:gufl, to hold a parlia-
ment agairft n and all my servants. And in tle
mean time, I am flay.d here, and vet will you, that
I fhouId ut nlyfelf further into your country (withotl
feeing you., and remove rre further from mine; and
there do me (his ifl:onour t the request of my r-l !s,
as to fend corrm:fiFoners to hear them againfi me, as
ou wc!d do to a mere fuibjec, and not hear me y
ir-outh- Now, rmad..m, I have promirfd you to conl
to ou, ad having there made my moan and complainr
of thet rteels, and t:ev cciing thither, not as pl;!
f.c-s, but as fuhbjccs, to ai.ifwe'. I would have b ciibt
you to hear my ufiifiration rs that whicll thev i'"!e
falfiy fct furth againit n., and if I could not purge imy-
self tihereof, vou mic-ht te: discharge your hands of
my causes, and let me go for such as I am. But to d'o
as you ay, if I were culplble I would be better advise(!;
but heitn not so, I cn't accept tlits cdiionour at their
hands, that being in pc..tfliiin they will cme and ac-
cufe me before yvur crl.n'iff:oner , lhereof I can't
!ike: And fee:rg you think it to he agaillt your ho-
nour and coni;rnage to do otherwift, I hefeech yrl
thaty cu will net e mine enemy, untill you may ;
how I can difehiart- mvlfli every way, and to fuffcr i;.
to -o into rar::ce, where I have a dow:ry to mainti:
r.c; or at least to go ir'to Sotlant, with affi:rance ta
if there ccme anyv iral.t'ers thither, I ill ind myl-ll
2rr their retiun; i:chut ny prejudice to vcu, or if i
;iL \vot n-;; to de tLus, I prot'lt that I i!l not il;'!:e

it to fallhood, if I receive firanllers in my country,
without making yu any other dilHharge for it. 1Do
with my body as you will, the honour or blame shall
lie vours. For I had rather die here, and tha: my
faithful servants may be succoured (tho' vou! wotuld not
so) by strangers, than to susser them to bh utterly un-
done, upon hope to receive, in time to come, particular
commodity. There he many things to move me to
fear that I fliall have to do, in this country, with others
than with you. But forafilmich as nothing hath fo!l.w-
ed upon my last moan, I hold my peace happen what

abide

may hap. I have as lees to te my fortune, as
to Crek it, and not find it. Further, it pleased vou to
give license to my liibjects to go and come. This has
hen retufed by my lord Scroop and Mr. Knol!s (as
tlcy fay) by your commandment, because I would not
depart hlnce to voilr charge, unill [ had anlfwer of this
lrtter, tho' I fhe;wrtd them that yon required my anli\t r,
iupon the two points, conia!.d in yonl I-trer.

i'hr one is to let you brielI, unltlrlland, I amr colle

tI you to make my moan to you, the which being heard,
I wmuld declare unto you min- inlocecn'v, and then re-
qilire your aid; and for lac'l: tlhrcof, I can't but mike
my moan and complaint to God, that I am not heard in
ni just quarrel, and to alipeal to other princes to have
retlpet thereunto, as my cafe rcquireth ; and to you,
mnadanm, firil of all, uwhe;l you fiall have examinedvl ,mr
cinficience before him, and lave him for Uitiecf.-
A'd the other, which is to come further into o'ir
country, and not to come to your prcienice, [ will
rllclrn that as no favour, Ibut will take it for te
contrary, obeying it a a thing forced. In mean time,
I cii:ec(h 'ci:, to return to me nm lord IIerrics to, : I
.ran't he witli;tiit him, having none of my cnlil here,

ndl al!o to uflfcl me, if it plicale )yo, withour furthler
.!ay, to depart I.ence whitlcribiever it he out o this
country. I am sure ou will nt deny men this fiinple
rrqucfl fir your honour's fake, si *:i^ i doth not ph-ale
you to ule vyour natural goodlrnl toais ar ic ,!ih,;--
ue, an;d si.ing that of mine own acco-, I ..;, ,..

thither, let me depart again with yours. And ifGodper-
mit my causes to succeed well,I (hall be bound to you for
it; and happeningotherwife, yet I can't blame you. As
for my lord Fleeming, feeingthat upon my credit youhave
suffered him to go home to his house, I warrant you he
1hall pass no further, hut hall return ahlen it hall please
you. In that you trust me, I will not (to die for it) de-
ceive you. But fro' Dumbarton I anfwernot, when
my 1. Fleeming hall be in the Tower. For they which
are within it will not forbear to rceive succour, if I
don't afiure them of yours; no, tho' you would charge
me wizhail, for I have left them in charge, to have more
rofpecl to my servants and to my state, than to my life.
Good fifler, be of another mind, win the heart, and all
(hail he vours, and at your comnandment. I tlioou t
to satisfy you wholly, if 1 might have seen you. Alas!
do not as the serpent, that floppe:h his hearing, for I
am no enchanter, hut your filler, and natural cuulin.
if Cafar had not clifdai ed to hear or read the com-
plaint of an advertiser, lie had not lb died; why fholl
princes ear- he topped, secing that they are painted a
;ing' meaning thiat they hould !icar all and b' well a!-
Wiled, hbefrre they anvwer. I am not of il.e nature of
the bahi'ifi, and less of the cil-nclion, to turn yo:: '
n.v hi;:rnei. and tho' I Ihoui ber b dangerous and cur(i'd
as men lav, you are fufficicnt'v arm'd with conflancy
anhd th juiice, which I require ol Gud, who give you
:race to lif it well .ith long a.nd happy life. From
Cariile, tlhe Sth of July, 63.

AN. XXV. (p. 32. vo:. .)
P.,t -'a ::r/rrm Sir Franci, Knoilyi, r C,' , 8i l Aug.?

r 68, frm B o,.

(An original. Palr'office.)

_ D T 1
'lt r fi.!i:h!r queen doth eem, citwardly, not,

c;\,5 tr. ;..: n the form, but ailo the chief ar-

Ir!re of:lc --',:. i . ' the gospel, namely jiufifralin
!.v a-,t 'v :

.. i !':e :areclh the fatlis of pil)ilry re

. , , , :-
; r- .t '. or *:}lro Pe, itli contenrted cars,

and with gentle and weak replys, and she doth not seem
to like the worse of religion throw me.
]Part of a letter from Sir Francis Knollys to Cecil, z Sept.

I168,from Blton,.
| -T came to this queen's ears of late that he was

bruited to be lately turned to the religion of the

gofpell, to the great disliking of the papists hereabouts,
which thing he herself confefTed unto me, and yeller-
day, openly in the great chamber, when the acmbly
was full, and ome papifis present, he took occasion to
speak of religion, and then openly he profefced herself
to be of the papist religion, and took upon her to pa-
tronize the fame, more earnestly than she had done a
great while afore, altho' her defences and arguments
were to weak, that the effent of her speech was only to
shew her zeal; and afterwards to me alone, when I
mifliked to fee her become so confidently backward in
religion, Why, said he, would you have me to lo1e
France and Spain, and all my friends in other places,
by seeming to change my religion, and yet I am not
aflured the queen my good filler will e my asured
friend, to the fatisfacion of my honour and expectation.

No. XXVII. (p. 3 Z. vol. 2.)
A letter from my i,rd 1ferries to my lrd S ooip and Sir rS

.Kollys, September 3d. I568.

[Cott. Lil. Cal. C. An original in his own hand.]
MY lords, pleafit your honourable lordthips, I am in-

formed by James Borthlwick, lately come from

the queen's majeflv, your fovcrane, that is fhawin to
her highness, I huld have ridden in Cr.fuirdmure,
fen my last coming into this realm, upon the earl of
Murray's dependants And that I uild have cauit, or
lern of counfall to Scottifmen to have ridden in nlg-
land, to flay or fpulzie her majesty's filbjects.

My lords, I thought it right needful ecaufe your
lordships is, by your foveranc, commanded to attend
upon the queen's majesty my nifrrefs, so having daily
access in thir matters, to declare upon the truth; humbly
desiring that your lordships will, for God's cause crti.'
ficate the queen your foverane the fame.
As God lives, I have neither contented, nor any wife

had knowledge of any Scottifr.an's riding in England,
to do the subjects thereof hurt in bodies or goods, frne
the siege of Leith; and as I understand it ihall he fund
true, that giff onv fci open hurt be done, it is by the
queen my sovereign's difobients, and that I have not
ridden nor hurt no Scottifman, nor commanded no hurt
to be done to them, fen my coming from. the queen's
majesty of England, it is will kend, for that never ane
will complain of me.

I have done more good to Crawfurdmure nor ever

the earl of Murray has done, and will be loather to do
them any harm than he will. Except the queen's ma-
jefly your sovereign, command sic false reports to be
tryit, quhereof this altogidder an inventit leafing, her
grace fall be trublit, and tyne the hearts of true men
here, quhom of sic report fall be made, that haith
would fervehir, and may, betterthan they unworthyliars.

My lords, I underfand the queen's majesty your so-

vereign is no' contented of this bruite, that there should
ony Frenchman come in this realm, with the duke of
Chattelherault. Truth it is, am no manner of way
the counfall of their cuming, nor has no sic certainty
thereof, asI hear by Borthwick's report from the queen's
majefly your sovereign. And giff I might as well fay
it, as it is true indeed, her grace's self is all the wyitr,
and the counfal that will never let her take order with
my maiftrefs cause. For that our sovereign havand her
majesty's promise, be writing, of luff, friendship, and
affitance giff need had so requirit, enterit that realm,
upon the 6th day of May, fen that time the queen's
majesty has commanded me divers times to declare he
would accept her cause, and do for her, and to put her
in peaceable poffeflion of this realme, and when I re-
quired of her majesty, in my miltrefs name, that her
highness would either do for her (as her special trft
was fie wold) according to her former promises, or o-
therwife give her counfall, would not content (as I hew
her grace I faund diverse repugnant) than that he
would permit her to pass in France, or to ome other
prince to seek support, or failing hereof (quhilk was a-
gains all reason) that she would permit her to return in

her awin country, in sic fempil manner as Ihe came out
ps it, and said to her majesty ane of thir, for her ho.
nour would not be refufit, eeaf.d that fhi was come il
her realm upon her writings and promises of friendlhip.
And ficklike, I aid to her highness, giff my maiftrei's
had the like promise of her nobility and eflates, as fie
had of herlelf, f hould have rcprovit them highly, gif
ther had not condeflendir to one of thir three, and so I
lv; and so I write, that in the warld it lfould be maift
reprehendable, giff this prornife takcth not other good
cflc, nor vet it does. Notwitiflanding I get gud an-
fwir of thir'promfes of fricni!fhip made to my fovcreign,
and to put her grace in this her awn countri peaceably,
we have fund the contrary working by Mr. Midllle-
more, direAit from her highncfs to flay the army that
r ailt down our houses. And alfua, in the proceeding of
rl;is late pretendit parliament, promised twenty daxs be-
I:lre the timne to inmyelf to have canlle it been difchargit.
And vet contrary to this pronmife, have made their prc-
ttndit manner of forfatilture of; t men ot guid reputa.
lon, bishops, abbottis, and harroni, obedient fubjets
to our sovereign, only for her cause.

They have alib difponit, fen our sovereign's cause wua
tiken upon hand be the queen's majelly of that realm,
an hundred thonfand pound Scots worth of her ain

true usj:iets

geir, under the color of the law, groundit

upoin their falle treasonable ftowin, authority.

The murders, the oppressions, the burnings, the ra-
vihinlg of women, the deftritc'tion of policy, both ec-
clirialtical and temporal, in this mean time, as in my
formner writings I said it was lamentable to ony Chriilian
nmaln to hear of, except God giff grace, the pro'cillon of
the evanigile of Jelus Chrit proferifl be vour prince,
c inlall and realme, be mair mndir, nor the auld ia-
n.itv tlat has ttand betwixt tlie ralins, inanl of my
,iiitrnymen will doubt in this article, and their pro-
c ediings pulttis myftlf in Sanil 'nlollinas belief.

Now, my lords, gif the queen's majeft) of thlat realm,
rlpon quhais promise and honour mv Inailrefs came
ilre, as I have said, will leave all the French wUritlisrs
;ad I:reich phraies of writil;', qn'hilks amonlis thei

is over meikle on baith fides unfit, and plainly, accord.
ing to the auld true custom of Ingland and Scotland,
quherein be a word promift truth was ohfelv'd,proniil,
in the name of the eternal God, and upon the high ho.
nour of that nobill and princely blude of the kings of
Ingland, quhereof fie is defcendit, and presently wean
the diadem, that she will put my maiftrefs in her awin
country, and cause her as queen thereof in her authority
and strength to be obeyit, and to do the fame will ap.
point an certain-day within two months at the fartlisl,
as we understand this to be our weill, fua will we, or
the maift part of us all, follow upon it leaving the
Frenchmen and their evil French phrases togidder. And
therefore, and for the true perpetual friendhip of that
realm, will condition, and for our part, with the grate
of Almighty God, keep sic heads and conditions o a-
-reement, as noble and wife men can condcicend upon,
for the weill of this haill island. As I have been part
lings declaring to the queen your sovereign, quhi;; I
f.ew to your lordships felfis both in re!igion, in the pul.
ifliment of he earle Bothwile, for he queen's lalt inln
band's slaughter, and for a mutual baud of amity per-
petually to remain amangis us.

Doubt!efs, my lords, without that, we may find i:

time and friendly working, as may gs us occalion .ha1l
to forgette Middlemore and his l.:te prctendit pi.
ment, we will turn the Icaf, leaving our lbvereign agai;,i
our will to reft where the is, under the promise of fiicnd
ship. As I have baith aid, and will ever affirm, ma&'e
by your fovercign, quhi:k was onlv cause of her grace's
coming in that realrne, and seek the help and moyen ol
French or Sanifr, till expuIfe this trealbonable and fai
pretendit autlhority, quhilk means to rign above us.

My lords, 1 derir-e vour lordships onrider, that it

he. that maift desires the amity betwixt ngland an:
Scotland to continue, and of a poor manl belt cabttl ha,,
t :at writ this.

IM hrether the laird of Sk'rlin, fchaws me, that in

vour' crdfnips romnln'ning with him, it appearit to ln!,
Vur mind was we shulid lufiirr the earl of Murray to
ou;k, a .:.i.'' : \stre a! g.ils foll to us and com.lila

thereof to the queen's niaeily, and her highness wald
fee it reformit. My lords, her ajefty will be over
meikle troublit to reform the wranges we have fuffaint
already. For I am sure, gif reason and juflice mn: have
place, our maiflrels, and we her fubjets, have rect ived
express wrang. for above two hundred thousand pounds
flrlig, in the time of this unhappy government, fceing
tit rformation of fa great caules, comes, now a days,
so flowlie and tli ungodly law of oblivion in ic matters
so melkle praiis'd 1 think, nowrher for the queen's ho.
hinor, nor cur weill, your lordships would lua mean, nor
that it is good to us to follow it. And that ye will
give your foverrign sic advertileinent thereof, as your
good wisdoms shall find in this cau!k mcct. It will be
true and'frindful sorking for us, indeed, and nuwther
French phrases, nor boalling, and friding little other
efeca, that will cause us to hold away the ilenchnmen.
This is plainly written, and I desire v ur lortdhip's plain
answer, for in truth and plainnci langelt continues gud
friendship, quhilk in this matter I pray God may lang
continue, and have your Ilo-dfhips in.his keeping. Off
Dumfries, the third day of September 1568.

Your lordships at my power

to command leifuly HERRIS.
^ueen MIl ry to ~ I/izagetb.

[l568. Cott. Lib. Cal. I. An original.]

AlAAME, nia bonne foeur. J'av refceu dte vos lettres,

M d'une niefine dete; 'unc, ou vous faites mention
de 'excufede Mlonf. de Mnrra pour tenir son ptctendu
parlement, qui me fenible bien froid, pour olrenir plus
de tollerance que je m'rltois perluadee n' avoir par vof-
tre promefc, quant a n'oiler donner cormiffion de vcnir
fans un parlncicnt pour Icur pen de onibre de .nblcfle
alors, je vous refpons, q'ils n'oit que troii ou quaitre
d'avdantage, qui ullent auffi bien dit lelr (opinion hrs
de parlement, qui n'a ile tli taut pour ctt e fft,
mais pour faire c ql'exprecfitltt nous avions rqulis
elreempefchlles;qui tfi la forlaitur ie nies lubjcts pour
n'avoir eses fid-lics cc quc je mi'affulois, jufluls a lir,
Vol. III. \;

avoir en en promnefe de vous, par la lettre ecrite a mi
lord Scrup e Mailtre Knoleis vous inquire a ire contre
eclx, voire, a les enfayre refentir, toutcfoisjc vois quc
je I'ay mil pris, j'en uis plus marrie, pour ce tque ur
votre etre e qu'i me mc ntrerent, et leur parole, jc 'ay
si divuiguemcit affuray que pour vengeance que j'eu de-
firafIe, si non mcttre diilirence entre ieur faux deport-
mens, et ls miens fincrres. Dans voftre lete auffi da.
tee du so0: d'Aouil, vous mettie cs mots, " I think
" your adverse party, upon my lundry former advri:cs,
" -ill hold no parliament at all, and it they do, it flall
U b1 only in torm of a:i aflfemblv, to accord whom ; o
" tnd into this rcaln, and in what fort; for otherwilr,
" if therv hall protoet in manner of a parliament, wilh
" any aa ofjudgmcnt against any perion, a!l r nt,
"in any wife, allow tiher'cf; and if they lthAtt e to
" verccn, then you mny think the famr t e of ; n-
" ther moment, tllan the former profedurcs; aJ i/
" such their rash manner of procecdings, they i.l'
" most prejudice themselves; and be atlured to tiid inm
' ready to condemn them, in their doings." Surquoy,
j'ay conrremande mrs ferviteurs, les Iaifint retircr, ibut-
tr-lt Ilion voitre comiandement d'rtre faufmcnt noN-
mres traitres, par ceulx,qui Ic font de vra, et encore d'etre
provcques parefcarmnns dies,et par prines demes genset
lettres,et au contraire vlus etes informee que mes fubjesls
ont evahis les vofires, Mardame, qui a fait ce rapport n'dt
pas homne dc bien, car bird de Sesford et son sis font
etont eftes mes rchelles depuis Ic commencement; enqriir-
es vous.-'ils n'efloicnt a Donfris aveques etlx,j'avois cfi'i
refpondre de fa frotiere. c-e qui me fut retuse, ce qui
tr'en devroit asses defcharger, neanmoins, plur vous
faire preuve de ma fidelite, et de leur falfite, s'i! nus
me fayte donner le nom d(s coulpables, c i me for:ifirr,
je commanderav nmes fuljrcis les pourfuivre, ou si vou
voules quece foit ies vollres, les miens leur taderont:je
vous prir m'rn mander voilre volonte, au relie mes flb-
jeis fiddles leront relxfp fables a tout ec que lenr fcra
mis fu les contre vous, ni les vofires, ni Ics rebelles, dcf
puis que me coufcilla;es its faire retirer. Quant aux
xrancois, j'cfctvis que l'cn m'en fit nul lepourluite, ar

i'crperois tnt en vous, que je n'en aurois beroign,-je
ne feu si le diA aura en mes lettrcs, mais e vous jure
devant Dieu que je ne fcay chore du inonde de leur ve-
nae, que Ce que m'en aves manlray, ni n'en i oui de
France mot de monde, et ne le puiF croire pour cell oc-
rafion, et i ils si font, c'eft fans, mon fceu ni confcnte-
incnt, Pourquov je vous fupplie ne me condarner lans
m'ouire, carje fuis prest de tenir tout ce que j'ay offert a
Mfller Knolkis, et vous afure que voflre aitc, qu'il
vous plcft m'offrir, sera ref(ue avant totes les chores lu
monde, quant France fervit la pour prerer leur retour a
rclle condition, que prenies mes affaires en mcein, cn loe-
or, et bonne ami, corme ma France, dll rl vous; mais
uIne diofe feule me rende conflue, j'ay taut d'enemis
qu'ont votre oreille, la quelle ne pouvant avoir par pa-
rollc, toutes roes aions vous font defguifees, et falle-
ment raporttes, par quoi il ni'it impolibtl de ni'affur.
cr de vous, pour les manteries qu'on vous a fait, pour
d(itmnire voftre bonne volonte de mno; par quoy ie de-
firerois hicn avoir ce bien vous faire entendre ma sincere
ct bonue affction, laquelle je ne puis si bicn dfcrire,
que mes eicrmis a tort ne la decclrre. Ma bonne foeur,
gagnes moy; nvoyes mov querir, n'rntrcs en jalousie
pour faulx raports de celle qie ne desire que votre bonne
grace; je me remettray fur Mester Knolleis a qui je me
fuis librenent defcouverte, et apres vous avoir baifec ets
mains,je prierai Dieu vous donncr et fante, longue et
heureuife vie. De Boton, ou je vous pronmets je n'efpe-
rc pertir, qu'aveques vofire bonne grace, quoyque 1cs
menteurs ntcntent. Ce z6 d'Aouft.

No. XXVIII. (p. 33, vol. 2.)
3vtv. E:izabetL to t earl of MAurry.

(Paper-ofice, from a copy rorretted by secretary Cecil.)
' IGHr truny and right rell beloved cousin, we greet

you well, where we hear fay, that certain reports

are made in sundry parts of Scotland, that whatloever
h.ould fall out now upon the hearing of the queen of
Smtton cause, in any proof to convince or to acquit the
said queen concerning the horrible murder of her late
hufbandour cousin, \we have determined to rtftore her

N

to her kingdom and government, we do so much difike
hereof, as we cannot indure the fame to receive any
credit; and therefore we have thought good to affire
you, that the fame is untrulv devised by the authors to
our difonour. For as we have leen always certifle
from olr said fifler, both by her letters and nmelages,
that he is by no means guilty or paricipant of that mur-
der, which we with to be true, so fiire if. he ahould be
found jufly to be guilty thereof as hath been reported of
her, whereof we would be very sorry, then, indeed, it
hould behove us to confider otherwise of her cause than
to satisfy her desire in reflitution of her to the govern-
ment of that kingdom. And so we would have you and
all others think, that hould be disposed to conceive ho-
nourablv of us and our ahtions.

Indorfed 20. Sept. 568.

No. XXIX. (p. 38. vol. .)
S;r Fianu Knrl.Lv to :cil, tbi 9tb of ober 1568,son

(An original Paper Office.)
--.M Y lord's grace of Norfolk fending for me to

v Bolton, to attend upon him here Thursday

last, I made m; rp.ir hither accordingly, meaning to
flay here until Monday next; as touching the matters of
the commiflon, that his grace and the refl have from
her highness, his grace hath imparted unto me of all
things thereunto appertaining, and what hath hitherto
passed, and allho' the matters be too weighty for my
weak capacity, to prcfune to utter any opinion of mine
own thereof, yet I fee that my lord Herries, for his
parte laboureth a reconci!ia:ion, to be had without the
extremity of odious accullations; my lord of Ledington
also faith to me, tl:at hC clilid wI\flh these matters to e
ended in duke manner, so that it might be done uwih
safety; of the reft you can conceive, by the advertilf
mentsand writings. sent up by our conminioners.
A leiter frr the bsjlp of Roji to te quien c S.ot, f ,oai 1Urt,

Cioblr 15,8.

(Cot. Lib. Calig. C. i. A copy.)
p.LFIS your maji.fy 1 ctnferr-ed at length w-ith A. ane

great part of a night, whoaflured me that he 1ha

reasoned with B this Saturday C. on the field, who de-
terminate to him that it was the I). determinate purpose
not tocnd your cause at this time, but to hold the fame
in furpence, and did what was in her power, to make
the E. purlie the extremity to tile effedA F. and his ad-
herents miylht litler all they could to your dishonour, to
the effec to cauf' yo come in disdain with the hail sub-
jeas of tlhis realm, that ye may be the mair unable to
attempt any thing t lier disadvantage. And to this es-
fit is all Il-r intention, aid when they have produced
all they can against you, D. will not appoint te matter
inflantly, but tranrport you up in the country, and re-
tain you there till he think time to hew you favour,
wlich is not likely to he hafiily, because of your uncles
in Fr'ance, (': thle fear he has of vourfelf to el her un-
fiitnd. Au': t'erefore their cotu(l is, that ye write an
writing to the 1) mt-aning tat ye are informnit that your
fuhjeas which has offenlit you. 'I'is is in eflc: that
your majeflv hearing the etate of your afflirs as they
proceed in York, V;as inforinrd lthat her majtcly was in-
frnned of von, that on could l not gtIdely remIit your
fjl-jets in iu-h fort as they night credit you hereafter,
which was a g' rat catlc, ot the flav of this controvcrf to
be ended. Amn' tlerrlore p;e fHiading her D. effedltally
not to trnll anv who had nade any luch narration. But
like as ye had rc'derrd you in her hands, as most ten.
der to you of an; living, si prayit her take na opinion
ofyou, hui tliat ye wauld tile fihr rounhll in all your
affairs, anl v.ald prefer her friei'fhiiip to all others, as
well unc!ts as thers, and aflure her to keep that things
ye wald ! lr:i'c to v r t!hie-ifts bv hler advice. And if
D. difcrt( lts S\ n,, vc \' rld le gla;l to fitisfv her iu that
peint he rtl ;t inr: v iil:i;: I cr i lali il fccr-tt and quett
manner, s\ here her .;. ica!e(, until tle time her .
were fullv .itiificd, anl ao.ll' ic':fon

of difrclcdit r mov-

ed frcri i cr. So that in tie ini'ni tiline Vour reain were
l;olden in exuit tnel, anil \ ur true llipcs reflort(l and
rraintair( i tihcir c ctl!'te: nd ic other things
tending it ii.!: ff-R. Ad afiin1.s that tile believe that
thisn.av Le cecafi(ci, to carne l:cr cIidit you that e ot-

143

ser so far; and it may come that within two or three
months he may become better minded t your grace,
for now he is not well-minded, and will not ftew you
any pleasure for the caul'es aforesaid.

.V. B. The title of this paper is in Cecil's hand; the
following key is added in another Lhad.

A. The laird of Lethingto .
B. The (dke ds Niorfolk.
C. Was the day he rode to Cawbod
D. The queen of England.
E. The queen of Seots commifioners.
F. The earl of Murray.

No. XXX. (p. 46. vol. 2)
DeJi;:ration cfcrctartv C('il's conc;n . S ot:a.,J Dec. t1.

1$68.

[Piper Office.]
THE befl way fr England, but nt the eafief, that

the queen of Scou; ilight remfin d-:-;vJd of her
crown, and the slate continue as it is.

The second way for England profitable, and not so

hard.-Tlhat the queen of Scotts might e induced, by
fame perfwafions, to agree that her son might continue
king, becarfe he is crowned, and herself to remain als

'.ieen; and that the government of the realm might ,
committed to such persons as the queen of Enlan!
ihouid name, so as fur the nomination of them it Inight
be ordered, that a convenient number of person; oi
Scotland fnould be firit aiimed to tle qiueen of En:il.!:
indlhff-rently for the ql c- of Scnts, an.l for her i, rh.:t
i. to fLv, the One his hy the queen of Scots, and ;Ii. o-
ther 1 .v the earl f Lenoxt and lady Lennox, parents r
tlte child; and our of thtrfi,; the qen's majcit oi

'njlalmd -tn make choice- fr all the offi.ers ct- the rca;,
tilat are, by the laws ot Sc.:lnd, difpoiic ,b ti:. bi,-;
or qceen ot the land.

1 at until his mar hei ('dne by the queen's mait fli

tie govcerr.mcl.t remain ii; ri, irds oflhe carle of \ld:-
ray asi i , pl-.ovidi.ng he fia..i not di'ci: far' oiitL.
ot f' -per:als Tm ct nt,.z'. an i..;.ger bu;t 'c t!,eic

'c ;

k
cr :be 'rtn i!c:.

That a parliiment e fumnmoned in Scotland by fcve-

ral conmmandmnirts, both of the queen of Scots and of
the young king.

-That hoitages be delivered untolEngland on the

voung king's behalf, to the number of t-elve persons
of the earle of Murrav's part as the queen of Scots hall
name; and like ife on the queen's behalf to thr like
number as the ear'e ol Murray shall name; the fame not
to he any that have by inheritance or office cause to be
itl this parliamcii;, to remain from the ibgining of the
furnnionsofthatparlianent, until tl]re monlths astir that
parliament; which hoflagcs hall be pledges, that the
friends of cilher part fliall .Kpt the pa. i all cafe-s, till
by this parliamnit it he c" nclui.eJ, that the ordin.ince
which the qtn of l' :Iani. fl ill dievife ir.r the govern-
ncnt of the ri n in,' nit to tie i. ( .i' l cowun ns
&-o:land, nor .onitrry to the laws of S.o:land Ior any
1l aus inheritan'e, as the fame was befo-ce the parlia-
nment at Edinr tle Deccol' 1567; ihalll be ellaliflcci to
he kept ;.nd :o)'ed, under pin (it Ililgh treafot for the
breakers ther-eof.

-''hat v the lme pariame nent also be eflab!ifhed

all executioln. anid judgnlilrrts given against any perflon
for the death of th late kitig.

-- That by tile foine parliament, a remifion be

made univerfaily froni the qcen of Scnts to any her
contrarvs, and ailo firoi everv one !iibj.:'t to a):ther,
laving tat reltitutio l)e rmad.ll of laniii andi hlioi!;, and
all other hings hlcritahl, that have l)trn b)y eitiler ide
taikn Ifrnm thmnl x hich \(r;: tile iownr's thereof at the
Continiling ol tile :ircnl lli S,.ots t l.o lilvin.

Th;at by the lanle parliairent it be (leclared who fi:.ll

be si:c e.lbrs to the crown next ater tle (1. of Scot n and
her nT e: or clit, t iha Iuch rghlit of id. of Chit -lli--
raulil !!;., at li,c tl ' lagi i tile q. of S: .ls ltit the
lord Da:iey, rra y itu cili.rved alni not ltc udi.'d.

That ltr q.s .S'oi s rn;ly have ore li the q;ili.

Cn.jei'ly o i:i l.lr.l, t wi'vc nl iths ater the ll ;):

. -

L ri ;':t, api! ;i.it i}l- m
111-.l ot t p it ou't of l1 .g S'.i

,i:hout p<';i Il.l L., .,1 the quctl'. la.;ii y.

'J i.t tl v l:. :

e i.l .c
' ;,,;. : c i .. ;:'o 'A*

up in England, till he be years of age.

It is to be confidered, that in this cause the comnpoi-

tion bteteen the queen and hr fiulijes may be ade
with certain articles, outwardly to he fen to the world
for her honour, as though all the parts ihould come of
her, and yet fr the surety ofcontrarns, that certain be-
twixt her and the queen's majefly art. to be concluded.

No. XXXI. (p. 48, vol. 2.)
Tire ueen to Sir Frrnciri Knollcyl, 22 Jan. i5689.

(Paper office.)
VT£ greet you well, we mean not, at this point, hy

any writing, to renew that which it hath plca-id

Cod to make grievous to us and foilTyffi to yow; b:ut
forbearing the fame as unmeee at this point, having rr-
aflion to command yew in our fcrvice, and yow allc.
\i hilt yo.u are to serve us. We require yew to eoirfi-
dtr of tl;is that fol'.oweth with like ctindideration and di-
liger.ce as hilltrto you hae accufltuiate in our fcrvicr;
at thle time of our las lectters written to ' ow the folu-
tetnth ot il.;s n,orth for removing of the qiurcn of' Snt',
v - hd tunde!t arding out of Seot!anid f certain x rit-
ings f rnt by ier Irom. thence into Scotlani!, an;crpgf t.e
v ich one is f,u)'d to contain great nd manifeil un-
tiuths tuching :s and others lloi, as fLali and may
1lainly appear t:ito you by the eopy of the tlnme, hih
likcwile we fend vrw. anzi Jbcaule at tre fame time \ie
, ere advertised, thit it i nmld hIe folvly proclaimnred in
Scotland, t}hough then it x.cs !t.<, we t):ocilt f-ood sift
to remove the quter!, t efoir c ro o!ld (diilol the fame,
ernd then exrcct l:ee iffuc thereof; and now, this da-,
by letters si l or ci uill of Hunt! n -e are afrnrtain-
cd, that finet that limie tie famne mrratters cc.intian in
the writings, are 1 ublifhed i diverts- rprts of Scetlsitn,
· }hereupo<n we hate thought it v-ry n.ct, ser the if-
charge of our honour, a.d to c'i; ud the fallfl:rod
cc:taintd i that writing, neit (.nl to lisv te le rr--
]i- oVtd by open prct-lan;at:i r L} i _;r ii ltlticrs, tl'e c(-
p} Lci ltf mt e rco L:erewitl itnl da ox, I.ut allo iln c n-
e ni nt Iore to cl.arge that (ti(tn thereu tli, so as fl.
Iray be nved to declare the authorb thertof, and r-

fladers of her, to write in such flanerous fort such un-
truths of us; and in the mean fealbn, we have here stay-
cd her commissioners, knowing no other whom we
more probably prefrime to be parties hereunto, than
they, until the queen (hall name some other, and acquit
them; who being generally harged, wi!ttout xpreffing
to them any particularity, do ufr all manner of fpecchcs
to discharge themselves: wherefore our pleafulre is, that
ve hall, after ye have well pierifed the copy of this writ-
ing ent to vow, speedily declare unto her, that we have
good underflanding given us of diverse letters and writ-
ings sent by her into Scotland, signed by her own hand,
amongst which one such writing is sent with her com-
mandment expreflv as now it is already published, as
we are much troubled in mind that a princess as he is
laving a caufc in our hands o implicated with diffcul-
tys and calamitys, hould either conceave in her own
mind, or allow of them that should devise filch false,
untrue, and improhable matters against us, and our ho-
nor, and specially to have the aventure to have the fame
being known si untrue to be published; and you hall
alo fay, bccaufe we will not think so ill of lier, as that
it hould proceed of her self, but rather he hath been
counselled thereunto, or by abuse made to think fi)me
part thereof to be true, we require her, even as he may
look for ony favour at our hands, that he w ill disburden
l;erfelf as mnuch as truly Ihc may herein, and name them
which have been the authors and perfwaders thereof,
and so she hall make as gr-at amends to us as the cafe
may require; after you have thus far proceeded, and
lome answer of her, whet hr she thall deny the writing
absolutely, or name any that have been the advisers
thereof, you (hall fay unto her that we have flayed her
commiflioners here, liitil we may have fonte answer
hereof, because we cannot but impute to them some part
of this evil dealing, until by her anfwcr the authors may
be known; and as loon as you can have direc answers
from her, we pray you to return us the fame; for as
the cafe ftandcth, we cannot but be much disquieted
with it, having our honour so deeply touched contrary
to any intention in us, and for any thing we know in

our judgment the earl of Murray, and others named
the fame writing void of thought for the matters, to
them therein imputed; you ma impart to the qneen f
Scots either the contents of the flandercus letter, or fnew
her the copy to read it, and you may alSo impart this
matter to the lord Scroop, to join with you there as you
Ihall think meet.
Sir Francis Knollys to queen Elizalfi.r, froa If$dcerb, tie

2St6 anuar I568.

[An original. Paper ffice.]

T WILL suppress my oun grief,. and pass them o-

- ver with filenca, for the prefcnt !eamring of vour

mr.ajefl-and for this queen's answer to the coppie o1
her supposed letter sent unto Scotland, I must add thii
unto my brother's letter, rent unto Mr. Secretary yd-
ternight late; in proce's of time he did not deny but
th-t the firfi lines ccntained in tie said toppie was a-
greeahle to a tter, that she had sent unto Scotland,
which touched my lord of Murray's pronife to deliver
her for into your majefly's hands, and to t-oid that the
fame should rnut be done without her consent, made Lcr,
fne faith, to write in that behalf; she faith also that the
wrote that they fi;ould aule a proclamation to be made
to flir her people to defend my lord of Murray's intnt
and ptirpofe, for delivering of her said Ton, and impunge
his rebellious government, as he termed it, but she ut-
terly denyeth to have written any of the other slander-
ous part of the said letter touching your majefl; Ihe
said also, that she suspected that a Frenchman, now in
Scotlard, might be the author of some Scotch letters de-
vise in her name, but he would not allow me to 5;Tite
this for any part of her anru er.

No. XXXII. (p. 54, vol. 2.)
Sir .niclola T'irirmiro n to rte rigllt Snourablte le lord if

Liddington.

[2cth July 1569. From the original.]
VOtR letter of the third of July, I have received the

i r-th of the fame. For answ-er wliereunto you lbin
underfland, that friends here to my lord regent and )o0

do wilh such a con-crrence in all doings, as in matter
and cirrumilaiice, there arise no dissension, or at the
Ilaft, no more nor other thani the difference of countries
doth eccffarily require. We here do thin!; convenient
that as few dlays be used as may be, for the confuin-
inarion of the matter in hand, which principally to ad-
vanee, your allowance, prolecution, and fpecdy promo-
;on in Scotland, is molt requilite, for you are ib wife,
anid well acquainted with the slate of the world, and
with all our lutmilrrs, as you know that foinl do all.uw
and diailion tor reaioll, fonmc for respect of multitude,
I:bi for refpedt of persons, anti o the c.tiue is to for-
ward as men do like to let it forward. You are not to
fIrk that some will life cautions, some nutirality, fonie
dcliavs, and ioine w\ill pl.tiUilv irniptige it. An:l yt all
and every of theie lbrts will alter titcir doigsi, wheit
tsey ffhafi fee the regent and his favourers accord with
ith bcr-i and greatel lpart there, anld agree with the wis.
tfi and firongel part here. Tho' the nmatter has taken
its beginnling hre upon deep and weighty conGidera-
tions, for the weil o both the priiincs aln! their realms,
as well presently, as i time to cornl, yet it is thought
moP, expedient, th th te regent and ralm ut iScotland,
by you, ftould ppore th mina'ter to tile lucen our so-
Ivre.gn, if you like to ule convernic'n, ,;uud ordr, or
be difpofsd to leave but a ear, adril no wolund of the
lurts pail. I would be gl.d dh.it thi.s n;y letter should
coie to your hands Iei';re thc rcoIen; iOI, whereat it
f liens your queen's rell >iation anil Itarri..' to the duke
of Nrfnik hould b propotieldcd, tit hi: to wvynne in
thl. both aliowaucc or rci'c:ln. II) wuicih prilcced-
ici, hceaulfe you rav me to write frankly, I fay and
rralon tats, me t'.;llcith you use a preponfrrous order,
to neniland the conne iFl Ilit per fonis, in lfui ma1tters,
ai ihjeir niintis to a glool 1 i, l ith rathcr bee felt or
preparcd, and rlcref'orc there miult needs follow either
a uuivert, re!!;Ll, or iCr;o js ii)nl ainongfl vou,
wheTchr a iblonlerilnr i:;t i;ligr. e i,,: lt needs come to
qleen Elizaheth of the i::n;'ic mari-i:tge from then.:e,
whch oI,:ght t have 1)cct: i'- cI -:lv .ld ad.f'dily pro-
Ix,~audcd unto her li;tslha.c; erucb y you kfe then t:.e.

meaning is, by this dealing, her majesty hall be made
inexorable, and so bring the matter to such passe, as tlii
which should have wrought surety, quietness, and a flay
to both queens and their realms, 1hall augment your ca-
lamity, and throw us your best friends into divorfe with
you, and into unhappy divisions amongfl ourfrles; for
you may net corjecture that the mattr is now in dli-
beratirn, but expectet l good occaficn for executing;
sure I am you do not judge so flendet y of the managing
tlis matter, as to think we have not cast the worst, or
to enter therein so far u ithout l:e afifiance of the nol.i
li:y, the ablcft, the wifcfl, and the mightiest of this reanm,
except queen Elizabeth: from whom it hath been con-
cealed until you, as the fittest minister, might propnurd
it to her, on the belalf of the regent and the noli'ity
of Scotland. How ar mailer Woddes dtfamaticl.s do
carry them of queen Elizabeth's affeclions, and nia!!tr
icretarS's, to afifl the regent, and to l:pp-efs the ctn
of Scots, I know not, nor is it not mrttriz; but I !o
afiuredly think, that her majcfly will prefer her iurtv,
tle tranquility of her reign, and the conftrvatioln es her
people, before any device, hich may proceed from vain
difiourfe, or irrpcrfsdtioiis of passions, and inconfideralt
affecaions. And as for Mr. Secretary, you are not to
learn, that as he liketh not to go too salt afore, so he ce-
veteth not to tarry too far behind, and lpecially whtn
the reliques be us no great value or power. If 1 ccu!i
as well assure you of his magr.animity and conilaucv, s
of his'prefent conformity, 1 would fay conidnti, y-oi
mnav rpofe as well of hirn in this matter, as of the rl::ke
of Norfolk, the earls of Arundel, Pembroke, I.eictfier,
Bedord, Shrevxbury, and the reft of the nobility; all
which do embrace and protefle the accomplithmrint of
this cafe. I have, acco ding to l.ur advice, witn
presently to my lord regent, with the fame zeal and cre
of his wkell doing that I owe to him, whom I love and
honour. Mblr. Secretary hath afiured unto him the ru..n
of Scotland's favour an! g d opiniln, wlhcrewith ht
feemeth to be "well falisfy'd. If yiur credit he, as I
trust, haflen our tomin h!ilher, orl it is vt-ry necktii
r\ a

that ou clre here rrenctly. _liizabc th e:S
.

,rrite to my lord regent in such fort, as he may perceive
MIr. Wood's discourses of- her majelty's affection to be
vain, and Mr. Secretary otherwise bent than he conjcc-
tureth of him, the effet of which her majesty's letter
vou hall understand, by my lord Leicefler s letter unto
vbu at this dispatch. At the court, zo July r169.

No. XXXIII. (p. 55, vol. 2.)
art o a ltter fiom the earl of lfurray to R. B. (probably

lard Burbigh.)

(1569. Iarl. Lib. 37. B. 9. so. 43-)
-' ECAusE I fee that great advantage is taken on

frmall occaliots, and that the men:ion of the

marriage betwixt the queen my sovereign's mother, and
the d1. of Norfolk hath this while pait been very frequent
in both the realms, and then I myl':lt to be spoken of as
a motioner, which I perceive is at the last come to her
inajefty's cars; I wiii, for satisfaction of her highness,
and the discharge of my duty towards her majelty, ma-
nifrft unto you my interell, and medling in that matter,
from the very begining, knowing whlatfoever is preju-
diial to her highness, ca;not but bIe hurrful to the king
my lfoereign, this his realm, and me. What conferences
was betwixt the duke of Norfolk, and any of them that
wrre sith me within the realm of England, I am not
able to declare; but am no wile forgetful of any thing
that p;afif(d bet ixt himn and me, either at that time, or
filcc. And to the end her inaefly may underfiand
:ow I have been dealt with, in tis matter, I am com-
pelled to touch ibme circunltances, before there was any
mention of her marriage. In York, at the meeting of
l1 llhe cominiffioners I found very-and neutral dealing
with the duke, and other her highness's commifioners
;1 the heginning of tlhe caule, as in the making of the
others to proceed sincerely, and so furch. Durin.g which
timne I entered into general fi)eecl, flicking at.our just
i cfcnce in the matters tiat were objected against us, 1)v
:hc fait queen's commiflinncirs, looking certainly for noi
',):1 r thing, but fumllma'rv cogntlion ill the cauti of clin-
.r:.vcrt, with a final dcliaraiticn to have fbllowed Up.
\ :1. I1I. I)

on a certain day the lord Lithington secretary rode \ilit
the dnke to Howard, what purpoe they had I cannot
fay, but that night Lithingron returning, and entering in
conference with me upon ;he slate of our ation, 1 was3
advised by him to pals to the duke, and require familiar
conference, by the which I might have rome feeling to
what ifue our matters would tend. According to which
advice, having gotten time and place convenient in tle
gallery of the house where the duke was lodged, after
renewing of our first acquaintance made at Berwick, the
time bhfore the aflize of Leith, and some fpeceches passed
betwixt us; he began to iay to me, how he in Eneland
had favour and credit, and I in Scotland had will land
frrindfliip o' many, it was to be thought there could
none more fit infilrurents, to travel for the continuarle
of the amity betwixt the realms than we two. And o
that discourse upon the prelent itate of both, and ilow I
was entered in that action tending f far to the que;r's
difronou-, I was willed by him to -onl ider how miattr,
stood in this, what hoonou: 1 iad r.c ivlc of he quicdi,
and what inconvenicrnies her ldefamiaiuii in the nattr
laid to her charge ni!ght brced to her pollerity. Ilir
refpe& was not little to ihe cro; n of England, there
was but one heir. The l-Hmil'ons my unfriend(s adl
the next refpec, and tilat 1 fh"uld C-ileni the iflu ot( iier
body uou!. be t . more aifctaionate to me and i!ii,',
than an:y other that cu.!k: it::ain to that crown. A!; 1o
it fhcu'l he n.ectft, thlit fl!:c itf-tr.el h r difie.:r .

.r

made I.ochl\eviti, a.d -e d) i.ilr.ct the itt ;r- ,t
her hatd 3 write, that 1f.. f:l;!d : ut i- i.:.,llc u i;:i

::..

land. MJv reply) to tha.w, h tc wa.rr hIal ":'
fed in pa.ia-n:. nd [lie kttrqr; -r. of i.anv, fio t;.
the abfl aci.tt '." tile f.e couiil nt t; u (ioC ii !-r v;
any purl.nic, .:. ',t - l L'..i we, i;: t1:'. O g, bil ,,
th;e ignomn!lh' u:. Ls. A F;:iL: : t;i C, n t b :
for ,'s that wa, ., ieir: (i, '

i;, l

i.e q;i ..'s

i, ....y

of rfnglan. ', n, it mad . ' to t;i, I.at:cr a- ;:c
oui lit t be, i. . c t .- .. ,,! r,'. ,

l e

'.t. ) I': .'.'-

la for tha.t ic .!. .in,! 'o- f! c--. ti u;.i (.:
-catul. ''I hc tuk ' -.;''.. cr '. :;, . . i .:
tn hat:d'. m .:tt; t.. : .> c

: . ; . .... .; ..
.

on the occasion of certain articles, that were required to
he c solved on, hefore we entered on the declaration of
th, very ground of our adtion, we came up to the court;
where some new commilfioners were adjcined to the
former, and the hearing of the matter ordaiied to be in
the parliament hnufe atWeflminifer in presence of wlich
coniniifioners of the said queen, and--throug! the-
rel-uking of the qiteen of England's own ron.miflioners,
we Lttered te whole of the ation, and produced such
evidences, letters, and prohations, as we had, whi;:h
migplt move the queens majeftv to think well of our
caule. Whereupon expecting her highness declaiation,
and secing no great likelihood of the famr e to he lifdden-
ly given, but daily motions then made to come to an
accrd with the aid queen, our matters in hand in Scot-
land, in the mean season, standing in hazard and da;n-
ger, we were put to the uttermost point offour wit, to
imagine whereunto the matte s would tend, tho' albeit
we had left nothing undone for juflification of cur cau-
fes, yet appeared no end, but continual motions nmae to
come to fonie accord with the queen, andi reflore her to
wthe or half reign. I had no other answer to give
them, but that I should neither do igainft confcicnce or
honour in that matter. Notwithflanding feeing this my
plain answer wrouglh no eci(, nor dil'patch to us, and
that I was initoriLtnd that the duke began to dislike of
ie, and to fpcak ot Ime, as that I had reported ot the
said queen ir;everentlv, calling her - and murderer,
I was advised to pal' t1 hinl, and give hint good words
and to purge myllt of the things objctled to me, that
I hould not one n the fldden entlry of' his evil grace, nor
hav i

hii to (ini ellelr--o ntmfldering his greatnls.

It tiling thl ewitlhal whilipered, and hewed to me, that
it' I departed, he ftandiqng dilcontnted and not fatisfird,
1 inigilt peradventure lind fucli trouble in my way, as
my throat might be cut before I cane to Berrick Ail(
threfoe since it might well enough appear to her mar-
riage, I fliou!(l not lput him in utter dfpair, that my

* Probably u.l.Dter.

() 2

good will could not be had therein. So few days befir,
my departing I came to the park in lHaptoni cu::
where the duke and I met together, and there I decl;arr
unto him that it was come to my ears, how fomne n(lf
report hoild be made of me to iim, as that I flIolt
fpe.k irreverently and rafhiy of the said queen my ove
reign's n.cther, such words as before expcffecd hat i
might -t-thereby rmy afflecion to be so alienate fron
her, as tiLat I cr. ld not love her, nor be content of lit
pre:cmr. cnt, ho-; eit he might pertadc himfllf of th
contrary, for as she once was the person in the work
that I loved hefl, having that honour to be so near untc
her, and haing received such advancement and honou
by her, I was not so ungrate or so unnat ural ever to wifn
her body harm, or to speak of her as was untruly re;pot
ed of me (howfcever the truth was in the self,) and as
to the preservation of her son, now my sovereign, had
moved me to enter into this cause, and that her owni
pressing was the occasion of that was uttered to her-
whenso'ever God should move her heart to repent of he;
byparft behaviour and life, and after her known repent.
ance, that she hould he separate from that ungodly and
unlaxful marriage that fne was entered in, and then as.
ter were joined with fun h a godly and honourable a per-
fonage, as were afflctioned to the true religion, and
whom we might trufl, could find in my heart to lo;e
her, and to (hew her as great pleasure, favour, and gord
will, as ever I did in mv life; and in cafe he hould be
that personage, there was none whom I could better like
of, the queen-in--of England being made privy
to the matter, and she allowing thereof, which being
done, I fiould lalu;r in all things that I could, to her
honour and picafilrr, that were not prejudicial to d:e
king my fovcrcign's ctiate, and prayed him not to think
otiherwife of me, for my afficion wvas rather buricd
and hidden --i:hin me, awaiting until God should dired
her to know I.erfelf, than utterly alienated and abftradl
ed from her; i hich lie fe-med to accept in very good
part, fa)ing, earl of Murray thou thinks of me thi:

t Probablyfid¢. ft Probably donvour.

thing, whereunto I will make none in England or Scot-
land privy, and tl.ou haft Norfolk's life in thy hands.
So departing, I came to my lodging, and by the way,
and all night, waa in continual thought and agitation
of mind, hoi to behave mvflf in that weighty Imatter,
fil-1, imacining hereunto this hould tend, if it were
attemptea without the queen's majefly of England's
knowledge and good will, this realm, and I ml-lt in
partiular having received such favour and comfort at
her highness's hands, and this whole ile fch peace and
quietiiefs, fnce God possessed her majesty with the
cnrwxn. And on the other part, eeing the duke had
dilflofed him to me, protelling, none other were or
should be privy to our Ipeech, I tho't I could not find in
min heart to utter any thing that might endanger him;
xioved to the uttermo , with thlfr cogitations, and all
d, fire of sleep then removed, I prayed God to fend me
sone good relief and outgatr, to my difL;iarge, and fa-
tisfaftion of my troublled mind, which I loundl indeed;
for upon the morn, or wuitin a day or two thereafter, I
ent;cred into conversation ith my lrd (of Leicefler, in
lis chamber at the court, where he began to find firange
with me, that in the matter I made lo difficult to him,
ilanding to precisely on conference, and how when 1 had
in nv comnitiication with the duke, come so far
: d ihere he made ibe filf-curlte with me, about that
,xhich was talke bctwixt us, I perceiving that the duke
iad--t thle nmatter to my lord ofLeicefcir, and thinking
rie thereby discharged at the duke's handls, therefore f
;rpeated the fame communication in every point to my
c;rd of Leiceier, who desired me to nsew the fame to
the queen's majefy, hich refued to do, willing him
if he tho't it might import her highness any thing, that
je as one-- by her majefly, artd for many benefits re-
< ivrd at her highness's hands is ol;iged to wish her well,
kci:ld make declaration of the lIBne to her majesty, as I
irderftand by ome speech of her highness to me, he did.
'i is my declaration to the duke was the only cause,

t Probably JdfJird.

3

that staid the violence and trouble prepared for me un-
executed, as I have divert ways underflood. The fain:
declaration I was obliged to renew since in writings
of-- sent to my servant John Wood. The fum where-
of, I trust, he hewed the duke, and something also I
wrote to himself, for it was tho't this hould redtec
some time, that the duke should not suddenly declare
him our enemy, for his greanefs was oft laid before
me, and what fi-itndfhip he had of the chief of the no-
bility in England, so that it might appear to the queen'
majesty of England-fo cold towards us, and doing no-
thing publickly that might seem favourable for us, we
had some cause to ffurpethat her higlinels should not be
contrarious to the marriage when it should he propoedt
to her. The-iharp mefage sent by her rnajeity withl the
lord Boyd, who had the l:ke conmiion from the
duke tending so far to the said queen's preferment, :s
were proposing one manner ot conditions fromn blol,
gave us to thlink tat her highness had been forelrt-n ll
the dke's design, and that fne might be induced to a!-
low thcreo'i. Bu; lIx- LtCit it as dc.'i.d in England,
that the lord of lctll.i;gIor; fliotl ..e a-s from me, ait!
break the matter to h1rr highness, as her majcfiy in a c:-
ter declared that fh. looknd for his conling, yet that de-
vise proceeded never ot ine, nor tl.e noblemen at tl;
convention culd no i' accord to lis lfnding, nor al-
low of the matter mnctioi;l:d, but :-lt)ogttlcr nmflikctd it,
as bringing with t! e fane great io.;: o;rnicilcics t1 ti,

surety and q osic: o .cli

of his a hlc il.-; for culr pr{,1- lI

ing have dctia.'ad our mifilkiig ard iitil nno a ,, n I -
purpose froin tile beginning, and if -c iad plcaltdl i..
was icadv or it i-jl:i'cry. And in likcwile it w:- '.
vise.. to give cori;.i:t, tla. tile -- betwevrn the L..'
qit.cen anti Bot.}.c'l, fnuuid be ffcrd to procir'!d
tIli realn, as it \.-;s dtcircd l y tl:e laid lord l i!yd!, i:
reiuon e could !C rt under.:nil. hat was lhc (ll;c .i'.i
ni. tis's p as, :c, and ali..'crie in tl at el hali.--Ai,,
'-.;.rei'.; ye ntin n, tl't her li' !L xsas nit made pr:',
C,! .i . . nd: i tl.eti-. :, lhtc i' .t
il.-s tilt *:1 Ir'. l;.L

* P tr ia,:- ..: .

first motion being declared, as I have written, to my
lord of Leicefler, and by him imparted to her majesty,
so far as I could perceive by some speech ns her high-
ness's to me, before my departing. Thus I have plain-
ly declared how I have been dealt withal for this mar-
riage, and howjuft necessity moved me not to require
direcly that which the duke appeared so --unto. And
for my threatenings, to afnent to the fame, I have ex-
prefled the manner; the persons that.laid the matter be-
fore me, were of my own company. But the duke
finlce hath fpokcn, that it was his writing which savtd
my life at that time. In conclusion I pray you persuade
her majesty, that she let no speeches nor any other thing
passed and ojeCted to my prejudice, move her maie!ly
to alter her favour- towards me, or any ways to doubt
of mv assured conflancy towards her highneis; si r in
any tiling which may tend to her honour and lilrctv, I
will, while 1 live, beitow myself, and all that will do for
me, not-ithfainding my hazard r danger, as proof
Ihould declare, lwhen her majefiy finds time to employ
me.

No, I. (p. 63. vol. .)
William Maitland, ,f Ledinglon,to my lorrf Leice,'cr, Mr,.h

3oth 1 7o, frorw Litton.

(An origi;:.l )
'T"' great defolatiol tilrea n.c- to tliii wlhol rcalm,

!-.e t le dixllioTs tlhicoleo'i i .. IL.-':, sac: ors, (loth

prt-f me to Iralne inyletterl, to your i(rdflli, il, It:.r
fort; then were blehovftull for irec, i 1 lial ) otilier i1-
siu'ct, hut only to iiialirain imy priv.ate rt ';I; thelrc.
t(lri I am driven to i'urni ih tlicn iill. Iartrc, whicli I
linew not to he p!::lltle, x licrc-lpon b' i.;u-.n ling
niy mneanilng, some there r, lv take or, iiin ,f if.' c-,
llinking that I ratlie;' litter ill own j)..!.lls, il;,1i ?1 i
ahout to inforni your lhrtlh;i,) ti'ry i' ( ii t llue; !'t 1
trUit my plain dealing chalil t. rlcord o te;lit ii, r;iy i,
il;y ineiin:g, to mliake the inicc finliill, I v. '! !. b -
l(ic your ldfhip's eye;, the pla:t o Lhii c'u;!' ; l it

first is divided into two feions, the one pretending t!
king's reign, the other alledging the queen to h ve 'trn
cruelly dealt withall, and unjufily deprived of her slate;
the former is compored of a good number of nobility,
gentlemen, and principal hut roughs of the realme, lwho
shall have, as Mr. Randolph beareth us in hand, the
queen's maieflv your fovercig!'s alowance and protr.
tion; the otler hath in it fonie most principal of the nobili-
ty, and therewithall, good numbers of the inferior fort,
throughout the whole realn, which also look afli:tl:v
that all kings do allow their quarrcl and will aidl ih:.
accordingly. What confequcnce this division will iirws
aftr it, I leave it to your lordflip's consideration, th'-re
is fallen nut anether division, acci:'enta!ly, by my l rd
regent's death, which is like to change the slate of t;!
other two falio'n:, to increarf the one, and diminih ti:
other, w:il; is greunlie upon the regiment of the ralm.
Sone number of noblemen alpiie to tile gove rni' n:,
pretending right thereto bv realon of he queen's dc.::.-
sion of the eroun, and her commiion granted at tl;rt
time for the rgiinr:nt d(uring the king's minority; ail
r,tlhrr facin doth a ogtther repine against that division,
tl:i.'irg it . titlerl fit nor toltrable, that three or feur
of the mcantft fort an.ong he earls, hall presume to
cilr;tnge to themselves a rle over the whole realme,
tlt nt. of tie blood, the first in rank, the greatcilt !-
wa i r ;h for tlie anitien;tr of their houfts, degree, na.i
si; :c,, being ncirlecL d; tdlii order they think pr;),,-
fle-r::s, t!:at the mc;.ncr lbrt shall be placed in pbli1
f.in.clion to conmand, and tile greater fiall conti:me .i
private ilen to obey; behlirs that, they think if ti:
crminiffEn had hi tl.e beginning ir-en valewable (wlnch
tl.c moil part wiil not grant) yet call it not be extein'-:;
to tl: prrlent, for that the conditions thereunto anineN-
td are ceased, and so the effrlc of the whole void ; t:
latttr part of this division hath manv pretcnccF, for 1ir
i':e-s the queen's faSction, which is wholly on that fi,'i
a reati nimmhcr of these that have heretofore profc.f
tl;i ki 5:s nie,'icnc do favour the fame, and will ;-i"
\ iell t, tile gV( Iov:li tii of the other, whose prcfi rn; "
or rc!pccis they dislike, when the queel' - i ftio.

be increased, with a part of ti king's, and these not of
Ilalt substance, and ow may judge what is like to en-
file; another incident is like to move men to enter in
further dilfourfcs, it is given out here in Scotland that
the queen's majcfty is setting forth some forces toxy ards
the border, which hall enter this realm, to countenance
these, that aspire to the regiment, and suppress the con-
trary faction, and bruits are ]fprcad, that the fame hall
be here out of hand; these that think themselves of e-
qual force with their contrary faction at home, are ra-
ther an overmatch to them, vet not able to encounter
with the forces of another prince, rather than yield to
their ins, riors, will, I fear, take advice of necessity, and
evil counsellors, and reck also the maintenance of sone
forrign prince, whereby her majesty (altho' no further
inconvenient were to be feared) must be driven to excef-
five charges, and it woul! appear there were a confpiira-
cy of all the elements at one time to set us together by
the ears, for now when the rumour of your forces com-
ing towards the border is spread abroad, even at the
fame time is arrived at Dumbarton, a galzeon with a
messenger lI-nt exprefly from the king of France, to that
part of tile nobility that favours the queen, to learn the
slate of the country, and what ful)lport they lack or de-
lire, either for furtherance of her affairs, or for their
own safety; affurelly this meflage will be well received
and fufferedl accordingly, this is the present late of
Scotland. Now if your lordship would also know my
opinion, how to choice the bell, as the cafe standeth;
I will in that also fatisfie your lordship, I am required
from them to deal plainly, and your lordlhip halljudge
whether I do so or not; for I think it piain dealing
when I simply utter my judgment, and go not about to
disguise my intents. I trust the queen's majesty hath a
desire to retain at her devotion the realme of Scotland,
which Ihe hath gone about to purchase, with bestowing
great charges, and forthe loss of some of her people: this
desire is honourable for her highness, profitable for both
Ithe countrys, and of none to be dilallowed; fpecial!v if
it be (as I take it) to have the amity of the whole realm,
for it is not a portion of Scotland can serve her turn, nor

w ill it prove commodious for her to suit the friendship oi
a' fadion of Scotland, for in so doing, in gaining the
best, fe may lose the more, and the fame would brir;g
all her acions with us in suspicion, if he should go about
to nourifl faations amongst us, hich meaning I am
sure never entered into her maiefl)y's heart; then if it be
the fricndhip of the whole he doth demand, let her
not, for pleasure of one part, go about to overthrow the
remnant, which will not be so faifible, as ome may
give her to underfiand; hut rather, by way of tre at,
let her go about to pacify the whole slate, bring l.e
parties to an accord, reduce us all by good means to an
uniformity, so shall he give us all occasion to think vcli
of her doings, that the tendeth out wealth, and pro-
vokes us universally to wish unto her majefiy a mr,R
prosperous continuance; by the contrary, if, for the
pleasure of a few, The will end forces to suppress those
-whem they mislike, and so confeqtently offend many;
men be not so faint hearted, but they h..ve courage to
provide for their own fafrty, and not only will embrace
the means partly offered, but will also procure further,
at the hand of other princes. This for mine ow n part,
I do abhor, and protest I desire never to fee forces of
strangers to set foot within this land, yet I know not to
what point necefity may drive men into, as if men in
the middle of the tea were in a ship, which filddenly
hould be set on fire, the fear of burning would nmak
them leap into the sea, and soon after the fear of the wa-
ter would drive them to cleive again to the fired hip. so
for avoiding present evil, men will many times he in-
forced to have recourse to another no less dangero'.
Trufl me forces will not bring forth any good fruit to
her majrfly's behove, it mufl be ome way of treat) fla'i
serve the turn, wherein by mv former letters your or!-
ship doth know already what is my judgment; yci; i:l
how plainly I do write, without consideration in i.!
part my letters may be taken, -yet my liope is that Ildh
as will favourably interpret them, hall think that I
mean aswel to her majtfly, and that realine, as tllJr
that will utter other langu-ge. I wish the continuance
of the amily betixt the two countrys, without uli

respect, and will not conceal from her majefiy any thinr,
to my knowledge, tending to the prejudice thereof; it I
Ihall percave her majfty taking frank dealings in evil
part, 1 fliall from thenceforth forbear; in the mean lea-
son I will not cease to trowble your lordflip, as I thlall
have occafon to write, and so I take my leave of your
lordlhip.

No. II. (p 69, vol. 2.)
Ltlier of qeen Elizabel to l earl of Su.fks, uly Id,, I570.

[Calderw. MS. History, vol. . p. 189 ]

IGHT truftl and well beloved cousin wve great vou

.well, this day we have received your letters of 2g

the last month, with all other letters, fcnt fronl Scotland,
and mentioned in your letters, wlhereunto aniwcr is de-
sird to be given before the tenth of thli month; which
is a very short time, the weightine's of te matter;, Lan
tile ii!tances of tlil places conlfleiredl; nevcrthlcll} we
ii:c, as the fhortnels cou!d fr it, rclblveil t give
thi; aniwer ;fllowing, whih we vwi that y::, -

,' war-

rant hereof fhali caul to w given in our lnam:c o the
cari of Lennox and the reit ot the noblemen cnvee-ncd
with lhimr Where it is by them, in thrir letters, a3:t
a ritilers alledged, tlhat for lack of our rroli ;e alit\.lr,
cioiceriling te etlal)li(hing of the r;,lilnent ,f tihe
ralin, under their 'ouling king, great iCi'ovce ';-ies
h.ive ihai)pnc.l, anil tlterefore they h.i.ve d:'itrred tnow
at lhrir last c(:vention to d tc.riine of the linlle,
. lIr !hll have the place of govcrlourLt, iuntil he z ft of
:'i. :iiouri, before which tie'- tlhev i-cq:ire to have our

.,xi, in what per!bn or peri;mi the govei irnerit of
,.' r.calmni shall be efilahhlfl.d, we accept vry thank-
:;:i; lile gooduill and reputation they have of' us, in
:'ilJ.ng tb frankly to require andl foilow our avife in
a :latter that toucheth the slate of their ki:;, their-

,- a

s, and realm lb near, -welrein as we perciive, thlt

!) our iormer forlearin; to interineddic therein, trey
i}:L. taken Ibmc dilio:irlnt, a3 thinigh that we wvii.ld
hr,' .ave regard o their t:ie: a lircty, l on tha J-

,r- par.t they of their ' inln, ought to tIli.k, tlat
i i.i;;t ib by the wl:il :,- vo-id evil interpreted il us
ia:;point them a form o' government, or a gvcrn-

our by name, for that howsoever we hould mean well
if we should do so, et it co.!dl not be without fonc
in the heads of the estate, nobilit?, and commUn:it) of
that realm, that the government thereof should be by
mre specially named and ordained; so as finding diffi.
culty on both parts, and yet mifliking most that they
shou!d take any di!comfort by our forbearing to how
our miud therein, we have thought this ibrt for to pro-
cced, confidering with ourselves how now that rea!
hd been a gond face of time ruled in the name of their
king, and by reafcin of his base age governed hereto'ore
by a very careful and honourable perfin, the earl of

,iurray, until that by a nmichievols perfo n n evil ex-
anii-le' he was murdered, whcrely great disorder i,d
ccn lfion crnecfcrity had, and will r:ore follow, if' (.
termination 'ie i.ot Iade f ime other special pe-r;,
or pei sons, to take tih charge of governor, or fiptrilr
rulr fcial! for adniniflration of law and jultire, weC
cannot but very well allow the dcfire of there Inlor, .:
hav fe ome fpcciall governor to be clhoen; and thcn.
fore being well assured that their own underflanding ;
all otl;ers is 1-cft to confider the start of that realm, a:.i
to 'iicrn the abilities and qualities of every per. n
i::et mlnd capable for such a charge. we fhall.better f.-
tI:fic ourfe'es, whom they by heir conmion confrct
fi:.i f: f cliufe and appoint to that purpose, then :
a:!v to l-e hy us aforehand uncertainly named, and !:t
bhecauie ti:c. shall percrave tlat we have care o;'t'r
peribn of their king, who bv nrulcfs of blood, and in
refpe't of his so young years, ought to be very tender
an dear to us, we shall not hide our opinion from tha;,
b.:; if the shall all accord to name hia grandfather, o.:
tounfi, t:e eari of Lennox to be governor alone, or
jointly ith ohers, (whlom wae hear to be in the Ie:cen
tinir 1)b trir common consent appointed lieutcinait-^g'
neral), realon moveth us to think that none can e cl '-
fen in that whole realm that shall more desire the p''e
fervrtit'n c the king, and be more meet to have thle
gos.t ;Ir!tnIt for his afetv, being next to him in blood
cf an lnoleiuin of :.at reain, or clfewhere, and y:

hereby we do not mean to prefcrive to them this choice,
except they lhall of themselves fully and freely allow
thereof; furthermore we would have them well aflured,
that whatsoever reports or devises, are, or shall be
spread or invented, that we have already yielded our
mind to alter the fate of the king or government of
that realm, the lame are without just eaufe or ground
by us given, for as we have already advertized them,
tiat although we have yielded to hear, which in ho-
nour we could not refuse, what the queen of Scots on
her part hall fay and offer, not only for her own affur-
ance, but for the wealth of that realm, yet not knowing
what the fame will be, that hall be offered, we mean
;int to break the order of law and jufiice, by advancing
icr cause, or prejudging her contrary, before we hall
dlilibrately and assuredly fee, upon the hearing of the
i lole, sone place necetrary, and just cause to do; and
terore finding that realm ruled by a king, md the
fine affirmed by laws of that realm, and therefore in-
v.fltcd by coronation and other folemnities used and
rtquifite, and generally so received be the whole eftares,
we mean not by y ielding to hear the complaints or in-
formations of the queen againll tier son, to do any at
whereby to make conclufin of governments, but as
we have found it, so to susser the fame to continue, yea
not to fuflr it to be altered by any means that we may
imlpefhe, as to our honour it doth belong, as by your
late actions hath manifestly appeared, until by ibme
juliice and clear cause we shall be direcly induced o-
thcrwife to declare our opinion; and this we would
have them to know to be our determination and courit
that we mean to hold, whereon we trust they for their
king may fee how plainly and honourably we mean to
proceed, and how little caule they have to doubt of us,
whatsoever to the contrary they have or hall hear;
anil. on the other part, we pray them of their wisdoms
to think how unhonourable, and contrary to all u-
man order it were for us, when the queen of Scotland
d! th so many ways require to hear her cause, and dlth
i'' r to be or!ered be us in the fame, as well for rat-

',L. i1.
i

ters betwixt ourselves and her, as betwixt herself and
her son and his party of that realm, against which offers
no reason could move us to refuse to give ear, that we
ihould aforehand rpenly and direcdly, before the causes
be heard and confi'crcd, as it were, give a judgment
or sentence either for ourlelvs or fo.r th m whom he
maketh to be her contraries. Finalv ye flall ad(lmonifh
them that they do not, by ni!onrciing our good
meaning towards tl.cr, or by indirlec afiertioils of their
adverfarv, grounded on untruths, hinder or weaken
their own cause, in such fort, that our good meaning
towards them fOall not take such efiec towards then,
as thev shall eflr'e, or tlernfelves have need of. All this
our answer ye hall cauie he given them, and let them
know, that for the fhortrefs of time, this being tlh end
of the lecond of this month, we neither could make
an? longer declaration of our mind, nor vet write any
several letters, as if time might have lerved we would
have done. 2d JulVy 15o.

No. I11. (p. 69, vol. 2.)
Tile o'ljf o/' Ri oso relrr Lidinton frsm Cbatlij.orlS.

(rjth June, I5;c.)
I nAVE received your letters dated the 26th of May

here at Chattilfworth the o1 ot January, hut on t:c

receipt therref I had written to yo(i at lergth, like as
the queer did with my lord Levingfton, by the which
you will be resolved of many points contained il our
said tt:r. I write to you that 1 have received your
Irt!er and credit from Thomas Cowy at London, ad
fct ttt. Leiceft r io know the ueen (cf Englard'; iiii
w-hrther you fhouldl cnn:e here or not. lie lent ,e
wv:-lo that the will nowise have you come as one of the
ccmrm;iff:oners, becauie she is vet eftended with you;
and therefore it appears good that ye come not hither,
but r main where ye are, to use your wificom and di-
ligerce. as may best advance the queen's affairs, for I
ptrcei cvour weill and fafrtv depends thereon, in re-
fiedt of the great fl)d and nnimity born against you
bv v':. Scots people, and the rtat heirship taken or
V\-;!tr th-r's landis; both Iwere lure demonihratiols
-:t ;.i.:' :,.-i..c. Yet I ay cre.ouragd by you:' :.

and deliberate mind. Assure yourself no diligence hall
be omitted to procure supports forth off all parts where
it mav be had. We will not refuse the aid neither of
Papill, Jew, nor Gentil, after mv advice; and to this
end, during this treaty, let all things be well prepared.
And leeing my lord Seaton is dfiroui to go into 1'lan-
ders, the queen thinks it very nccary that he lo do,
for the duke D'Alva has gotten exprels command of
the king of Spain to give fiLpport, and I am sure that
there he shall have aid both of Slanders and the pope,
for it abides only on the coming of fiome men of coun-
tenance, to procure and receive the fame. He rmifl
needs tarry there, on the preparations thereof, during
the treaty, which will he a great filrtherance to the
fame here. The queen has already wxritten to the duke
D'Alva for this effeift, advertizing of his conming; there
is certain lums of money coming for support of the
Englishmen, as 1 wrote to you before fron the pope.
Whereupon I wo'id he had a general commission to
deal for them, and receive fucll fums as shall he given.
The means hall be found to cause you to anfuerit of
the fums you writ for, to be difpoifit upon the furnish-
ing of the caflle of Edcnburgh, so being some honest
and true man were font to Slanders to receive it, as aid
is, which I would you prepared and sent. Orders shall
he taken for the metals as you writ of. We have pro-
ponit your avyce in entering to treat with the queen of
England, for retiring of her forces puntyoally for lack
of aid. Your answers to the Englishmen are tho't very
good, but above all keep you weill out of their hands,
in that cafe, eflote prudnteis ficut serpentes. You
may take experience with the hard dealing with me
how ye would be used if ye were here, and yet I am
not forth of danger, being in medio nationis pravae;
always no fear, with God's grace, shall make me rink
from her majesty's service Since thequecn of England
has refused that you come here, it appears to me quod
nondum eft fedata malitia amorreorum, &c. and there-
fore if Athol or Cathenes might by any means be pro-
cured to come, they were the most fit for the purpoe-,

P X

Rothev were also meet, if he and I were not both of
one firname; so the treaty would get the less credit
either in Scotland or here. Therefore avys, and fend
the best may serve the turn, and fail not Robert Mel-
vil come with them, whoever comes, for so is the
queen's pleasure; in my last packet, with James Fogo,
to you, in the beginning of May, I sent a letter of the
queen's own hand writing to him, which r trufl ye re-
ceived. I am sorry ye come not for the great relief I
hoped to have had by your presence, for you could well
have handled the queen of England, after her humoulr,
as you were wont to do. The reft I refer to your good
ivifdom, praying God to fend you health. From Chat-
tiworth the Isth of January.

No. IV. (p. 84,vol. 2.)
Tbe declaration f ohbn Cair to te Icrds of Granre nnJ Le.

ibiro, =o.ungarc upon the 8b day of 0a. 7 .

'THEREAS you desire to know the queen's majeflv's
W pleasure; what she will do for appearing of thef
controversies. and therewith has offered yourselves to e
at her commandment, touching the common tranquilli-
tv of the whole isle, and the amity of both realms; her
pleasure is in this behalf, that ye hould leave offlthe
maintenance of this civil discord, and give your ohedi
ence to the king, whom he will maintain to the utn:olt
of her power.

And in this doing, she will deal with the regent and

the king's party, to receive you into favour, upon rca-
fonab!e conditions for security of ifr and livings.

Also she fays that the queen of Scotts, for that he has

practised with the pope and otlier princes, and alio
with her own fubjets in England great and d11n
gerous treasons .aainft the fRate of her own cnu:l-
try, and also to the destruction of lier own person, th.t
the ihal! never bear authority, nor have liberty wlhik flie
lives.

If e refuse these gentle offers, now offered unto you,

she will presently aid the king's party, with men, amn
munition, and all r eccffrrv things, to be had aain y.

Whereupon her majefly requirts your anfwcr wit!
specd, w:ithour anv dlay.

No. V. (Book VI. p. 92, vol. 2.)

Arrtilestftl by K- to the eneral ajfrnb!y, Ai
L t 5tb, 15 72.

(Cald '. w. MS. Ilift. vol. , 356.)
FIRST, desiring a new at to be made ratifying all

things concerning the king and his obedience that

were ena&ed of before without any change, and that the
ministers who have contraveened the former acs be cor-
rected as accordeth.

That fute be made to the regent's grace and nobility

maintaining the king's cause, that whatsoever proceed-
eth in this treaty of peace they be mindful the kirk be
not prejudg'd thereby ill any fort, and they specially of
the minilecrs, that have been robbed of their poffeflions
within the kirk during the time of the troubles, or other-
wife dung and injured, may be restored.

To fute at tie rgcnt, that no gift of any bifloprick

or other benefice br given to any perlon, contrarv to the
tenor of the a'ts nladl ill the tinm of the firil regent of
good memory, and they that are given contrar the aid
aLs, or to any unqIalified person, may be revoked and
made null hb an adc of seeret council, aind that all bishop-
ricks so vacanld i::y he prrented, and qualified perlons
nomninat threulno, witnin a year after the vaking there-
,f, according to the order taken in Leith be the com-
lnilfioners of th nubility and of the kirk in the nmonth
of January last, ad ill fpc:ial to complain upon the giv-
ing of bifhoprick of R!sb to the lord Mcthven.

That no penttions of ben:fiK'es, great or finall, be gi-

ven lie flnpil donation of any lord regent, without con-
1nt of the poffiltr of the said benefices having title
thereto, and the adinillion of the fuperintenldent or com-
mnifloners of the province where this benefice lyeth, or
of tlhe binfllps lawfully clecled according to the said or-
der taken a Leith; and delire an ac of council to be
made thereupon, until the next parliament, wherein the
liliine may be )pecially ina cd, with ililibition to the
lords of tl'iii, to gie any letters or decreets, upon such
lia;ilc gifis of htiirfices or penlions not being given in
nm..iie' abo .c reiiarld, and that the kirk presently as.

P 3

fen.bled declare all such gifts null so far as lyctli in ti.: r
powvcr.

That the firif form of precfntatir bI, >enefices, xl:i. i:

were in the irft and ft.ond rc-geIl' s iniie, he not I 1:aI-
ged as now it is cnini in!y; but that h;is laufe bIe (on
tained in the prefenitarion, that if t:e peribn prcltitc,
make not refidan'e, or he slanderous or found unworthy
either in life or dc-rrir.e he the judgment ro the kirk 'o
whi lch aiwife'i.e e

hall e fitb ) ol me.-t to he tran!irr:-

ed to another room at the fight of the kirk, the f.i;l
prefentaticn and all that flail fall there,'],on fl.ali e
null and of no force nor effect; and tilis to ;lave pliac
alib in the nomination of the hifhops.

That an ai .e made' in this aforTml.l that ll thin:

done n prejudice cf the kirk's assumption of the ti.i;!l,
eiheri- by apifts r.r others, by giving cf ifws, life.r. ',
or tal:;, or ny othel-rife difponing the said aTi:',.i
thirrs, he drreartd null with a o!emn protellation t;..
whole kirk difafenteth thereto.

That an at he made decerning and ordaiinir ail i-

fbops, admitted to the order of the kirk now rceive ,
to give account of tir -lwole rents, and int:omi! f.s
thcrewith once in the year, as te kirk stall a, i;:',
for l:ch caulcs as the kil'k mav efily confidc ;he!i ;:;c
to he noft expedient and inetenir

Ar,ent the n:rifdiction of the kirk, that the' fame l e

determined in this afferm!v. hcaufc this arliclc 1)! :'
long been potponcd to make ute to the r.ent a1:,.
council for remedy aainfP mie'incrs and excolir....-
cate persons.

LaJt, That orders hI taken aent the procurer o ':

kirk, who procure gainft minicr and ini!ifiy, aI.d
for fitting ojuftice cf the kirk's aions in the fcfii.,.

No. VI (p. 9, vol. 2.)
Delariih. f .niry -'Iirrevr, Es,. uto'.I tb p-arar cv/...i

th, 2,d /t. It37.

E it known to all men, bh thef prc.fr r' 1. 'a: I ltr.
ry Ki!igrewe Es. anrrl';Eiador for the (jii-el' 1!.:-

jiely of Er. gand, Iorlrn'lch is, at tl:e carnefi ioti:'
a d foEcitatioa bcIrg :adc tr m': , oi.r Lihli' '

half, there is accord and pacification of the public trou-
bles and civil war within this realm of Scotland acrecdt
and concluded, and the fame favourablv extendted to-
ward3 George earl of Hluntly, lord Gordon andl Raid!e-
nuich, and the lord John Hiamniltoei, son to the dike's
grace of Chaileliarault, and conmmicndatour of the ablbv
of Ahirbrothock, for the surety of their lives, liings, ho;.
nours, and goods of thenl, their kinsfolks, h-i. nd, fcr-
vants, and partakers, now properly clepcnditog on then;
in treating of the which lid placifr.ation, tle mlurders
of the late earl of Murray uncle, and the arl cfLi vrnax
ranilfatlher, late rcent to the king's ia.r l1 otSr (oc-
Is111 is realmi and lieges, as a!so a article touching the
li':rharge for the irucis or moveale g oods, i.. h the
f::il rerl;mis hiave taken fra pcribns prlotcfiing the kin's
oi.lcdince, before the dcl:!n;;gs done or oininittc d l)y
tiicm, lince the j. th day of Junij i567, and lelie the
li:!t d!ay of July lait afil'd, hy rca'bn of the commnon
cauri or any thing depending thcretlujou,, Icii: i!!(!;:: t
1.' the king's commiiraies niatteris of liic!i . !,t :.i 1 i
ilnliptrance, as the kin,'s present regent could iit ',.-
venicntlv, of liinitelf, remit or difcha-rg the laiii. ' t
i! r-j or the ni c(ii:t of the precltlt parirf. ' i ,..::. i
or ithe will of tie kii;g, and conlmmon quilrtnl, oi't i.:
r.'a:: al li;-.es, it is acforded, that thlic n.. ,

to , .

miioli of the ilid nmurdcrcrs, and oftie diltil '.-.. . il :
fid fruetis, moveabie goods, and o tile datm. .,, i
moved by the per!ons desiring te lad ' ,tni!i. a.':
di'';:arc to the (ueen's rnajicy I1v fcvtr,-.;, ,, i,,
the priili nearect both in lb)oil .'!l hal ..:.

l ;., tl:

!i. of Scots. Ari whatlibevcr Itr Ilaj'ey li : .: Ivi.
2'i ronnel tou:clin the 1hid !: ''!!: n i d;:i ic..tc-<
te l.i id lrd srcgeCi, for the \i ii o t k:: a.nd I:ii-
verial quietil'es of tIe rali(: of iSco:!anid, lil1 pel ito m,
! r.r ., anl t! i:.i !the lan:c. Ant l il lilt if, I

.iailt

-.:rs I untvl; ald ITnlc!.ct'ot' of Airlirotlcck, Ib.ng
i:l'.' d to 1: '.c Icl!Vt-'i'd i'!t'dics and ihollnge. iccr oldcr-
, ';n or li': tco,'ii:l:. o te fIil accorad and pacifica-
ti;,, haLth rtqcir;d n:ciln pi..ec :hereoc, itl her ria!Li'y's
nlane, by :i'tt of lp coiniTis'. ,, t'c pronile c:,r l: in,
i!.; !li> ; y (l!a:; ;'.'. . :,< !:itis . cbi;.r\e anc!, i.... 'lie

said pacification, and all articles and conditions thereof,
for their parts, and that it would please her majelty to
interpose herself, as surety and cautioner for them to
that cffet, to the king's majefly of Scotland their fobc-
reign and his said regent, which I have done and pro-
mile to do, by virtue of her majefly's commifflon, as by
the honourable and plain dealing of the said earl and
lord, their intention to peace well appears, the fame be-
ing most agreeable to the mind of the queen's majelft
my sovereign, which so longi by her miniflers hath tra-
velled for the said pacification, and in the end, at her
motion and solicitation, the fame is accorded, know;,i
her majeftv's desire, that the fame may continue unvio-
late, and that the noblemen and others now returning
to the king's obedience shall have ffficient furel\t 'cr
their lives, livings, honours, and goods. Therefore in
her majeftv's name, and by virtue of mv coinmninfioi, I
promise to the aforesaid earl Huntly and commrnendtor r
of Abirbrothock, that by her maiefty's good meanE, tilC
said remiifT.in and dif-harge shall be purchased and ob-
t:,ined to them, their kinsfolks, friends, firvants, and
p:.r::'-rs, now properly depending upon them (the pr-
si- is tf cit;c in the first abiinence always excepted', as
a!so that the said pacification shall be truly ofe:rv-d to
them, nd that her majefiy shall interpose hcrlclfas ccn-
frvatrix thereof, and endcavour herself to caul't ti.,
f. me to be trulv and sincerely kept in all points and :r-
ticles ilierof arordingly. In witness whereof, I have to
this prc-ntn; f;bilcibed wiIh my hand, and f-aledl !i
fJime v s mine own feal the I jth day of Feb. AIl
Uom.:;i 7. Anid this to be performed by nm, Ic-
twixr the r tic hlrefj, andl the parliament which f.al' I:c
ap riirted tor tlrir rittutin, or at the f rthlct i,;;ore
t!.e c!;d of the laid parliament. Sic fubfcribitur.
'T,'r L j:' C,.,o:v' nl r 'rr:-rniro :tLe queen of S.Oc/.tl1J

(:176. Cot. 1.:!. Ca!ig. B. 4.)

'Hr qir-cr, of S-o:.;ad. idoivaegr of France, l:i.l ;,r

- Ticr dorvy, trh.e:i:--

o;!icr pofcfie-ions, the (I:l;k-:

es ']urcere, . Lii.

: ..- .
cn.: i. .rc.l.ct l l;tl giv. ;:e

her by the king and efiates of parliament; which duke-
dom she possessed peacefully till r67, and then, upon
the pacifidation between the king and Mons. his brother,
to augment whose appenage this dutchy was given, to
which the queen of Scotland yielded upon account of
princes who were her near relations, provided the equi-
valent which was promised her hould be faithfully per-
formed. So that year, after a great many solicitations,
in lieu of that dutchy, she had granted her the county
of Vermandaife, with the lands and bailiwicks of Seuley
'.Id Vetry: tho' 'tis known that county and the other
lands were not of equal value with Turene, but was pro-
mifed to have an addittion of lands in the neighbour-
hood to an equal value. Upon this letters patent were
granted, which were confirmed in the courts of parlia-
ment, chamber of accounts, court of aids, chamber of
the treafitry, and others neceffarv; upon which flhe en-
tered into pol(Lffion of that county, &c. Afterwards,
I)b a valuation of the commiffioncrs of the chamber of
accounts, it-was found that the evcnue of that county,
&c did not amount to those of Turene by 3000 livrts.
But, instead of making up this deficiency according to
julfice, obme of the privy council, viz. M. de Chever-
ncy, the presidents of Bellievre, Nicocholay, and St.
lionet, in the name of the king, notwithflanding of her
aforesaid loftes, did fell and alienate the lands ot tenlis,
and the dutch s of Eflaimpes, to nadame de Montlen-
sier, from whom the king received money; of wich
sale the counsfllors afoire'aid obligtd themlelves to be
guarantees, which hath hindered the aforesaid qucen to
have justice done her. So that nmadam de Montplcnfier
l:a!h been put in pofltefion of thcfe lands of Senlis, con-
trary to all the declarations, protellazions, and afiiran-
cCs of the king of I'rance to queen 1Mary's anlhafadors.
So shat tile queenl f Scoti::.i! is (;ilirf'lflt'.d oif he r do1--
r, ,,lt-lary to all equity, without any regard to her
q;ality.

No. VII. (p. c, vol. 2.)

A letter from ths lrd if ,'.:L. 'in to te t egrt '-o'f :-1n.
(:d March 1577. E. ol' Mortiin's Archives, Bund. B.

No. i9.)

IT will pleare your grace, I received your grace's let.

ter, and has confidered the famne. The parlon ot

Camfe was here at me before the receit thereof, di-
recid fra my lord of Mar, and the mafler, anent m.y
last written, which as the answer of the writing that
the maler sent to me, which I fend to your grace, de-
firing me to come to Sterling to coifr'. with them.
had given my answer before the receipt of your grace's
letter, that I behuiffit to be besyd San Androis, at ane
friend's tryst, which I might not omit: I underfand by
my said cousin, that the king's rnajicfy is to write to
divers of the nobility to come there, aent your lord.
ship's trial, and that he had written before his dll.pr-
ture to my lord Monthrois. I underfiand like-ilc lhe
will write to your grace to come there for the lamte cf-
feel, which I tho't good to make your grace forelien of
the fame, praying your grace, for the love of God Al-
mighty, to look upon the best, and not to eep in lccul-
ritv, but to turn you with unfeigned heart to God, andi
to conrder with vourfelf that when the king's majclly
wa.s very young, God made him the iilrunlnlt to di-
veil his mother from her authority, who was natural
princ-cs, for offending of his Divine Majtcly, and that
there ran no vice in her, but that the fame is as lal-cgly
in vou. except that your grace condescended not to the
deftruclion of your wife. For, as to harlotry and an;-
bition, 1 think your grace has as ar offecnded God, and
far more in avaricioufilefs, which vices God never left
unplagued, except speedy repentance, which I pray
God grant to your grace, for otherwise your grace can
never have the love of God nor man. I pray your grace
flatter not yourself; for if your grace believes that ye
have the good will of them that are the king's good
willers ye deceive yourself; for surely I fee perfccly
that your own particulars are not contented, lat be the
reft, and that most principally for your hard dealing.
I pray your grace, beir with me that I am thus haillic,
for certainly it proceeds from no grudge, but front the
very affe'ion of my heart towards your grace, which
has continued since we were acquainted. And now I
fee, becaufc the matter flands in your grace's handling

w ith the king's majesty, for certainly, if your grace fall
forth with him now, 1 fee not how ye shall meet hereaf-
tcr; pray 1 your grace to call to God, and look on the
belt, and cait from your grace both your vices, to wit,
amhition and avaritionfnefs. I am riding tis day to
Sanc Androis, and trull to return on Wednefdav at the
farthelt. If your grace will command me in any offices
that are honell, that 1 may do your grace picalutrc in at
Sterling, advertise of your grace's mind, and fiall do to
my power and knowledge, and tis with my hartlie,
&c. &c.

To our tIrly coroftn Lke ord .,chlevlT.
(From the original. E. of Mnrton's Archicves,

Bund. B. No. 3r.)

TR ts ry cousin, after our mos hearty commcn(lt ir'ns,

we r-eived your letter of the :d of Ilarch, and as

we take your plainness therein in good part, as proceed-
iig from a fiiend and kinlinall, il w\ hole good afl cctii,
toward s - we never doubted, so ye may not think it
lirange tli.t we puree olurtiltfb ifa of your ac'lfation,
as in coilt; ience we find not ourltlf to have onildetd in.
As tcltltini our offence to God, w\e iterli not to cxcule
it, !iir to iibmit us to his mierry; for a;:'' iion lirely

,:c :tilk none can jltil accule us; for ill our private
cliate wc could, and can live as c contrnted as anv
nl our degrcee in Scotland, lwithout fiurlti r lil

, in. The

lbe.lilg to the charge of the gover cll nt If the reall,
irrlcd, mon lead us, or an other that shall occupy thit
1phcc, not simply to refipect ourself, lut his mI.lctt's
rn:,llc, wicich we supply, and tllercin not tilan :lldii: g
tiit I iiolds of neaure as, as,we trust, it shall nt lic fiiud
we i!ve done, it ought not to Ic attrilulted to an' anl-
iiin i i;.. For as lon:i as cv(r lli;j m.ijefl (hil t!lilk
hil-flt ready antd alle for hijs own gove-nmlenit nne
shall nl!) e williu .ly a ree and advance iti- Ihme nr I,
ill:e I think never to let my face aainit lhi, whoi:
rnlolr. rihitv, and prefervatiol hai betln ib (!: i u lto
i, n I will never believe to finid thtcr'iic ;:t his
h ilit thin !avon., :t!thoil all thie uiicritjit' I1 have in
'1 cai 'th s;c-c a'buut hir, to i. er Ji2dle iii to t coltra.

ry. As we write unto you, our friendly dealing and
confidence in the house of Mar is not thankfully acquit;
as we trust yourself confiders; but because the ambaffa.
dors of England, my lord of Angus, the chancellor,
treasurer, and some noblemen rides weft this day to fee
the king, we pray you heartily address yourself to be
there as soon as ye can, and as ye fiall find the likelihoud
of all things, let us be advertized thereof, with your own
advice, by Alex. Hay, whom we have thought good to
fend weft, feeing my lord of Angus from Sterling rides
to Douglas. And so we commit you in the protetion
of God. At Holyrood-houfe, the 4th of March ISj;.

For the avaritioufnefs laid to our charge, indet,. it

lies not in us so liberally to deal the king's geare, as ;o
fatisfv all cravers, nor never shall any lbvereign and na-
tive born prince, let be any officer, eschew the dicfd(in
of such, as thinks them judges to their ouwn reward; in
many causes I doubt not to find the affiltance of nm
friends, but xwhere my acions shall appear unhoiuflt, I
will not crave their aftance, but let me bear m onl
burthen.

No. VIII. (p. 121. vol. .)
Ltlfr of I'WalnfwJam's to Randolph, F,. 3 158-t.

(Cott. Lib. Calig. C. 6.)

S I R,
T HA7E received from my lord lieutenant the rcpc of

your letter of the z5th of the last dirceed unto i.

lordship, containing a report of your negociation wit!
the king and his council, in your second audience, i}rre-
with having made her m-jelly acquainted, she fcclilttl
somewhat to nriia, that you fiould I'o long d.-.'r .'.1
jsr t er emret of Empedocles. But I matle anl\'t: i:
your behalf, that I thoujglt you were dirlctted ly i!'.
zdvice ofthe said Empedocles/,it'ds, in the folicitli;g t
that cause, who knew what time was fittefi for v,;i 0
take to deal therein, with molt effcct, and bflt i .l',
x-::h which ai;\ser, her majeflt did in the end re.t ,i..
v.il satisfied, toucling that point.

Your putting of us in hope that d'.Au'ibn mifgilt '3-
si'- e v on at her r-aefivt's devotion, wvas at fir1t i:i;'

prrtrd to have been ironie spoke by you. But since it
fremneth vou infilt upon it, I could wish you were other-
wife perlraded of the man, or at leait kept that opinion
to vourfelf, for confidering the end andt purpolf of his
ccming into Scotland, as may he many ways iffiicientiv
proved, was only to advance the queen's liberty, and
rrrel;ticn into that government, to overthrow religion,
and to procure a foreign match with \ illt-narius, where-
in the i;iclofid ci pv, which you may u!e to good pur-
pc.lt thile, shall partly give you orme light; tliere is no
n an hlre can c pcrfaded that lie will change his pur-
poe, or lo linall advantage, as he is likely to find by it,
and therefore y u fllall do well to forhear to harp any
more upon that string, as I have already written to you.
The prince ot Orange fending, I fear will not be in
time tl at it may do any good, for hefides that these
ptople art in tlcnilelves flo in their relblutions, their
own airs arc, at prclent, so great, their slate so con-
fufdcl, aril the prince's authority so fo.all, that he can-
nr.t so loon t:, e order in it; and yet for mine own part,
I lia;c not n negligent or carelets in the m:itter, hav-
iig mi.rce than three weeks palt, lent one about it, from
al:mrr. nevcrthclefs I do yet hear nothing. The letters,
vol d(-ire flinuldl be Iwritcn thither bi\ the French mi-
ii;lrs, l have given order to Mr. Killil.grew to procure,

1li ", I doult :ot, will carefully perform it, lo that,

hope, fail have them to lind vou by the next. And
, 1 coii:iiiit you to God. At XWVhitehall the 3d of le-
bruarv 8c.

Your very loving cousin and servant,

FRA. ALSINGHAIM.

T7i. /'/ler is an orrilzal, and in some parl.s of it vrole in cypbers

a,;d c-pli,,ied by .,,,o!hr IanM. By' E-rdcles is uderj?nod
I[li, io. By illenariui tie kib g of Scotl, irAu'igney is
aticcj .Las. 0 I 0

jd Feb. I58,.

Sr-/ry n'ri .:t,.'r/. u.'.r good aiigen ,giren, and in timr to

6 ,.frr i f. ,,j'red beit i ,r.r. OthoSlp meet to ib in ontvnient
V l. I.
ll

fort used, and laid again/ D'Atbig'i, to prv-e Litm aufrg
the king, te nobility, and that late.

(Cott. Lib. Calig. C. 6. An original.)

hIRST, it hath been informed, by credible means,
F that D'Aubigney was privy and acquainted with
la Nave the king's mother's secretary, coming into
Scotland, anti of his errand there, tending cLiefly to
persuade the king, to think and esteem it an evil preCi-
dent for princes, that subjects might have power to de-
prive their lawful sovereigns as they did his mother,
who was not minded, by any mean, to defeat him, ci-
ther of the present government of that realm, or yet oi
the pffefTion of the crown and inheritance therect,
but rather to alTure the fame to him; and that for the
accomp;ifhr,ent of that aflurance, the king should hlve
been advi!ed and drawn to have governed, for some
short time, as prince, calling D'Autbigny to rle as go-
vernor of the prince, by commiflion from the qii-,i
his mother, until the king's enemies wre fupprt-iffcl
after which time D'Aubigny hould have powetr gil-:
to establish and resign that kingdom to the king, y lii
mother's voluntarv consent, whereby all fhl, a, la,
before been in aion againtl the qtci or her a!tho
rity, might be brought to fland in the king's nl:r.
And for that the king might live in more lurcr.
D'Atulignv filonld be declared both lfcond peribon ;
fuccefion of that crown, and aifo lieutenant general of
Scotland, and that D'Aubigny before his departnur ou;
of France, received commitlion from the king's mo:hr
to the effects rememrltred, or near the fame. That i:,
this behalf lie had conferrcc with the ifbops oi (,ll-
gow, and Ross, anrd witi, irJames BRford, with vlti
persons, and with the duke us G(uif, e l:ad an. t.i
frcauent inltlligence, and by fir Janics Baford i, v;.
adviscd to conter with t;,e lord John Hlamihon lbio-'
his repair into Scotland, .r-he-l-unrn he ag'-ced, ail
aitervards he feilt one John lal;i!:on to ihe llaii .,.
John to excufc him in tl.i part, allcdging, ihat : e i-
forbear to come to lii:n, l.cfI tl:r-civ he ll ltai n;: r" '
Itindcr greater si.; t :. !C *c::L'. .;i i.y !I11 i: '.:t:t *-:.

That before his coming into that realm, the nobility
and country were well quieted and united in gcod con-
Iord, with great love betwixt the king and nobility,
and amongli the tnobleffic, bt hath both drawn the
king againfl flndry of the chiifeft of his nobility, that
have been molt rea, nd have expended their hlond
andpofleffions to prelirvr religinn,and de(lfe tle king's
perfn, hisgovernnment and eflate, and allo blah given
occasion of great iufpicions and of'lnlce to he engentder-
ed betwixt the king and his nlhbilit, and e!fpeially
witl situ: as have betn in aion aT:.iift the king's
mother, and her authority, U! ho by fiorce a(nd means of
flie laid coromriffion and pradice, flhoul have been
brought into mlt dangerous condlitirin; and who alib
may find therlfelves in no finall perill whil-e le pofTi ils
t,' king's ear, abufeth his prfen rc, a:id holletli such
es the principal keys and ports of this realm, as lie prc-
leltly enjoyeth.

That he hath drawn the king not onl t f t,!-m:t the

great benefits done to him and his realm,., :. t' Rli.- rl 'S
inajciy of Elgland, but ;itll to requite tie !sI I' with
filndry signs of great unihalil: a l:iu fs, and v '.:.ding
therewith tie honour of her mni.ie!y, andi ther hi' atl
adventured to fliake the happy amity long lime con-
tinued betwixt tholt princes.

And whereas there griefa were to be repaired y

gentle letters and good offers. to have ;?alsrd a hli.n
r'rie hbetwixt thein : In which reip)c.c the king and
co.nai,. lI'ving r( ilvt(d to wxrite to her majefi, t(lr her
l.i!rkis bertic:' tatiactin in the late negtec.:ion of
Mr Alexander lIlue of Northherwick, had giveu or-
t-r to the king's secretary to frame that let:cr: He
rr.in:!inh to breiak th- ion:d of amity in flltler, willed
th iccrctar to l;c flie thl.:t ntlliing should be inltrted
in tlha !crter, rwherel;v the king !:r.'::ld crave any hing
at hr !iands,l iekin'i, their; hI lI c!t fITall lovi;ng olur-
trfi(s betwixt them. a:, 1;y t;e dc,-it rtion of the said Ie-
cre:ary may be better learned, and thereupon rii,.c
*i i.ac under the hope and encouragement of D'Au-

Qz

bignv's protection, Alexander King presumed with
that holdnelf to make his levwd hr.-.ngue, ard nby L.is
means hath hitherto escaped chaliement and correc.
tion, due for his off:ice.

That fir James Baford, condemned of the flaugi;tei

of the king's father, hath been called into the i-ralnl b,
Lennox. w;h'out the privity of the king. And whr-c-
as the said fir James found in a green velvet dh-f, iate
the earl c(f Bh.-ll's, and saw and had in his iiau.'
the prin pal 'ba.d of the conspirators in that murdli,
and can bct delare and witnfs who were authors all
exccutois of the fame; he is drawn by Lennox to f-
prels the truth, and to accule fu h as lie himrelf kliio--
eth to e innoceint; and as by order of lav, will be
so found, if they may have luc trial, which, contiary
to all juilice, is by Lennox means denied.

Tis iir be clbrgs agail l'Aiubliny, menti;,ned i tLe rfore.
i.,g !-:.'r by l'.l:,,J, ; but by IBaJhrd Itiy mea,,Jir J'...

No. IX. (o.

( 33. vol. 2.)
The crpv of tIe ing of France hi dirca,:onJ fnt to Scot!,ri

tlitL S'nrur : la ilofte ienton. -raat.ljed out of jt
Frenc.

(Calderw. MS. Hiltory, vol. 3, p. zo2.)
FIR'ST, on their most ch-iftian majefly's part, le shall

make the imoil hono rab:e filitation and ilitl':

to the most fIrene king ot Scotland, their gud brou!lr
and little son, that in him is passable.

To give him their letters that are closed, ii. h and

such like as they have written to hinm with their han;d.,
and to show expressly th. perfet friendlliii and ingu-
lar affecion, that their majesty's bear to hiin, ad to
bring back the answer.

To take heed to the things which touch near the mnol

serene king, to the effcxt that his perli n may he in a
danger, but that it may be molt surely prciervc(l.

And that he be not hindered in the honest libertv

that ie ought to have, 2.ai! tlhat no grcater, or straiter
guards be a-,ut l:i;n than nr had hefore.

And fuLi like, t- at he be no: impeached in the au-

thority, that God hath given to him of king and prince
Iovereign above his fuhjes, to the effeif h may as
freelv ordain and colimmand in his affairs, and in tle
aTrars of his country, with his ordinary council as he
was ul to do of l e'ore.

T'f:a: ):L- ncbiiitvy, I.arons, and commonality of his

coirntr :-.v have their free liLerty to relort to his ie-
rel:c n'itltv withoit fulpicion of greater guards or
v;ore armed men aout his prfon than the use was,
that thev be not afraid and hindered to resort; and
further thatthe fignielr tie la Mnltc Fenelon fall libe-
rsi.ly and freely fpcak to the said lirene king and coun-
cil, rquiri!g the re-establishing of that that Inay or hath
heer, c;ange( or altered.

Ani tlat he may know if the principalls ns the nobi-

li;v, iitd other rren of -oedl behaviour of the towns and
ril;ionlality of the country convetns, and are content
with ;:h form of overnnient prefilntl with the siid
firei,e king, to the ind that if there he any nmilionltent
:r trv ar..aile to agree thein together, and that he
rc:re ir:ot withtout thr certainty oi the famine.

Anl if he ma udcrtand that there be any who

have nr; librd them bo rev, !ct tly towards the laid fe-
r r.e i!n their lbvtrei n lord, a thc d:ty of their ohe-
(ii nce required, that Ie nmay pr.y on thlis hbhalf of his
liictllv nli;ft chrifiian il1e laid ilrene king his good bro-
lt,tr, i:iving him coiitcill wholly to forget the fame,
anld txIing th-m to do thrir lduty towards his ma-
i!!., n tilrc conilng, in all r.-l'ei'cCs with the obedience
and :rie uhjeetioll thic ouglt him.

Ad if the said Itignicr de la Motte perceives the

fail li-relne king to he in any manner confilained of his
fer.O't, authority, liberty, and disposition of his affirs,
tIan e used to lbe, and nor ( rveitient for his royal lig-
.il", rr as the lovereigry of a prince does require, that
he i.1 i: ov(n lawrt.l ari: honeRf to place him in the
lar:l. e, ;,d that he impov as much as the credit of his
r.uo; chiriftian nlaj1!, mnay do toward the nobility, and
lu:i'it;rc; of tliat c-'nl;.;, and as much as may his nalle,
it ii tl.e nan.e cfhis crown towards the Scottish nation,

Q3

the which he loves and confides in as much as they
were proper Frenchmen.

And that he witness to the said fcrene king, and ihs

estates, of his content, and to all the nobility and p:-!n-
cipall personages of the contry, that his molt chrlltian
majefie will continue on his part in the moll ancient
alliance and confederacy, which he hath had with the
said serene king his good brother, praying his nohility
and contry, with his principall lubljeas, to prefcrvc in
the famine, in all good understanding and friedilfhip
with him; the which, on his part, he hall do, obiurv-
ing the famine molt inviolable.

Further his mofi christian majefy understanding that

the fcrene king his good brother was contented with
the duke of Lenox, and his fervife, the said figni.tir e
la Motte, had charge to pray his serene majesty thlu he
might rnmaine beside him to his contentment, brliv.-
ing that he ihould more willingly intertain the p.i, s
of love and confederacie, ibetwixt their majefsvs and
their contrys, becauf lie e as a good fiibjeft to tlkin
both; and if he might not remain, without liinm altc-
ration of the tranquility of his estate, that he night re-
tire him to his own house in the said country, in illrc-.ls,
or if he pleated to return to France that he might tirc-
l-- and it it pleases his serene majesty, to cauli cealc:
and flay the impeachments, that are made of new up-
on the frontiers, to thie ffcCt that the natural French-
men may enter as freely into the country, as :hey crc
wont to do of before.

And that there may be no purpose of difaiTlmation,

nor no fptech hut honourable o the iemit chrifli;n g

king,

in that contry, but uch like as is lptnkii moll hiuloilr-
ahly: of the fercce king ot Scotland in France.

He had another head to propone, whizh hie c:ncral-

ed till a little before his departure, to wit, !iiat lic
queen, the king's mother, was contint :o rci-v. her
son in as i -:io of tilC iingdim.

No.X. (p. 47, vOl. 2.)
Lord Hunflon to Sir Francisr l. ',Zhin, the 1 4tl of Augufi

ijS4, fbte i>.*i i-.

(Calderw. MS. Hiltory, vol. 3. p. 374.)

SIR,
ACCORnING to my formrr letters, touching my

meetingil with the earl ofArran upon Aeidnicfdavy last,

there came hither to me froil: :le earle, the juflice clerk,
and fir Xilliam Stuart, captain of Dutmbarton, both of
the king's privic council, to treat with me about the
order of our meeting, referring wholly to ime to appoint
the hour, anld the nutmlber we shou!d meet withal, f as
we concluded the place to be Fouldcn, the ihour to be
ten o'cl ck, anil thie nulmbier with outrf'lves to be i. of
a fide; :ndl the rclt of olr trrops to tanl! each o them
a mile flrin the town; the one on th one li:., the o-
ther on lihe other li;e, so a; our troops were two miles
aiunikir; I wis not many !:rofnimen, hut I fiul!it-l it
with ftielel, \ hlere I ad re; lhot on lhiorf, b, t tihey
were v\-ry inar jso horie w-: !I ajpointed: Arcording to
whicih appolitilrent, we rn.t vctrlrday, andc after tomei
conigra:iatinlls, tlie erle f ll i thi- like protefiations of
his gonol will a,d readiness t f t h e onuein's maiefly,
before a;nv prince in the world, -xt his l;verci:n, as he
hal dne hert o;rire by his Ic::rs, antl rather more;
xiitll url earnelt vows, ?s unle!i lie be wnrC than a
dc.il, ih:r majetlv rmayv ldifpf of him at h -r p!ti:;'c;
th;:i, itn ended, I ciicrcdl with i toiiO"u the a'.ule
1 had o ,'tal itli him, a.id ;o 1l ar as ! rould, n'rL mi-
til:ng ,t ;rtcC:!Cald, that I lh,! to ch:n ;:ec tle 'ing ; n !ill,
xi'li a;v n:I.kiml , l r;;!:i;., rt, :,'aid !u: na'.;':, acco'di:in
tn I:' i', i ts, ii'l ''; ;', ut '::

' :Ie i 'c a lfk c-r-

e'! ).'; : ', '

. i.;lii p reii- !.' tI;...I ' . S et;

liere.x': ; lit ! ' ivi'ii: !i ' }':ii, 1: a;'i i iied thitu
liti I;,.\ more ci,;;!nlta:,- -, litt n, t:::. . it 't.

' 'hit I d.-alt Iit i; i I tc ',

i:.j lr . ii

i :.i of her m a-

jin'P- s .;;i sito, leorI th.iclr it 1
t ,' is a; l;as

te.i i tti. ft on. t(oot for he

t ic , t

'

..: oi 1r

i -;:' !iy

!; ,: ea-;tsaite, uG, tl,rcrii' !.:: !'.iit'rv dif'i ..:l ,
"!.t: :;:.itri,'es have Leen o,::,cd ti Iis llaij!Et hli,
ui:I.;t i_.o., and: by w l.at miil.s tll, cari. has .;uuit

to divert them, and for what causes; the one, for that
be marriage with Spain or France, he rnmu alfn alter his
religion, which as he is furc the king will never doe, so
he will never susser him to hearken unto it, so long as lhe
has any credit with him; he denys ou! lint the king has
been dealt withal be praclices to deal against her inajt!
tv, which he has so far denied and refused to enter
into, as they have left dealing t herein, but whatfoie;tr
the king or he knoweth therein, there shall he nothing
hidden from her majefiv, as her mraeftiy hall know ve-r
fhortlv; furciv it seems by his fptecltes, that if the kiln
would have yielded thereunto there had been nr, lilln!l
company of French in Scotland err now to difqItit h r
majefi.--- This being ended, I dealt with hinm carn li-
ly for the flay of this parliament, ul hich now apprach-
eth; or at the least tlat there may be notlil.,g tlole
therein, to the prejudice of these noblemen and olthl!
now in England, for the forfaulting of their lix ih:is and
gocds; hereupon lie m.l a le discourse to me, fili
of the ear! cf Angus dali::g ahrut the earl of Morton,
then ot his going out, sl

.t ithlain'iig of fiuntlie :n-

cious offers the king lihaU i.:ide hhin, lthi: of thle io.;i f
Ruthyen, how that preflcl!)y asher they l],d t;ec il's
majefiy in their hands, thev imi.pri:b:t.:td hlinitli, dI.t
with the king fr F tttiug -nTthe c;uke r.iu r the r :!lc,
the king refused fe tn do, the) tol' i llaii.lv t!,at it
he wouldl not hc should 1 a. c ihe earl ot Arran's li;di in
dish; t.e king ased what .ffence tic c:rl h.ad n:ade : and
they anifLert d it nmt:ft be fti, and fi.ould hi ti; li, lr!;. ::;,
for the afeguard of Arran's life, the kin;g was cni:-it !
lend away tlie duke, and et Arran aftrwal<is ilildir
times in danger of his l;.r; I al.i'li:cd unto hlli :.
king's letter to the quetn's n'a.c , anI hIis .s n
council, that they had done lic:tiiiing : titr lis .i-s .'c,
and with his good liking and contentment, '1Ao a.I-
k :'red me he durst do no otherwise, -ror could n,t
ai;y thling but that wlhich pceafe- tl.ne, with l.i' a
nunmber of o; her their dealings xitl; the king x hi:li ie
was in ti;ir i}, al:' as ale o long to be w:'itteu, anil too
bad ilfthey were true: I laid the kirg mnichlt have let t'
quecen's majeftv's abafador have kwn his n.ind lc-

cretly, and her majesty would have relieved him; he an-
Iwered, that the king was not ignorant that the appre-
htnfions in that maimer, proceeded fron Mr Bow's
pracice, and thereby durfi not impart so mnuch to him,
and yet theking was content and diid give rmiflion to
as many as would acknowledge their salts, and ak re-
miion, and fich as would not, he thought fit to ban-
iih, to try their further loyalty, in which time they con-
fpircdl the king's second apprehension, and the killing of
tl.e carle, and others, and !cditeld thie ministers to their
fa&ion, and yet not ifaisfied wvith there conli)iracies and
treafri;n.ale dealings (as he terms them) arc entered into
a third, being in England undtr her majeity's protection
to lililnoun her ninjefly as far as in them lyeth, or at'
lead to calife the king cccav fmne unkindness in her
majevty, for harbouring of thei ; I wrote to yow what
tlie conliracy was, the taking of the Iing, the killing
of the earle of Anan, and fmte others, the taking of the
caftie of Edinr. and br-inging home the eales, to take the
charge of the kiig; all which (fays lie) is by D:-ritmond
confel-d, and by the prov,t o G!liculdden ino great-
lvy enied, and the conflable ofthe cale thereupon fled;
the arl .r.ui,ht Drumicnd with himl as f.,l as Lang-
ton, whlre he lay, to have (. m!'fled the con lpiraiy be-
fore rme, hut having at his lig:ting received a blro on
his leg with a horse, lb as lie could l)riiig himn t further,
I replied i;iat I thouglr verily thiey won! not work any
such prasices in ref:: ,e'( utli q:ueeCI s IIiaicfty, a.i ing
within her raline, anl if there be any fulch pactices,
they have proceededd fror olhers, and tlihe not privie
unto them; and that if it be nout apparently proved a-
garinl them, that it will 1) thoight ;o Ile lbmc practice
to aggravate the fault, and to make them the inore o-
dious to tie king. lHe an fwered lme, that it should be
proved so sufficiently, that they ho.:ldl not be able with
truth to denyl it, for their own hanls is to be nhowed to
part of it, and ther"fore concluded, ;t.ti: if her n .i-:ty
ihrrild for prei' the king for them at tii ie, thirat. ,uld
rather hin-ier this matter of tlil ainit ;., nor i'u, iidt it,
and that lince they seek chiefly his life, le t

ctlh! not, in
any reason, seek to do themn any good; and beside he

afiired me, that if he would, he dare not, this last mat-
ter being fallen out as it is; and fureiv if this matter had
not fallen out, I would not have donbted the refloring
of the earl of Mar very (hortly, if her majefiv would
have employed me therein, hut for the earl of Angus, I
perceive the king is persuaded that lhc.h he, and the reft
of the Douglasses, have conceivcd so mortall an hatred
againrf him and the earl of Arran, about the death of
tl:e earle of Morton, as if they were at home, to-mor-
row next, they would not leave to pracliie and conspire
the death of them both, znd therefore a hard matter to
doanything forhim : fnalv, herl cnnc led and rcquired ne
to assure her majcftv fron; the king, that there ihall no-
thing be hid from her, nor any thi;le left undone that
may fatisfie her ma;efly with reason, and that the king
- hall never do any thing, nor consent to hare anything
done in her prejudice, so long as he had anv credit
with him, or authority under lin. Having thus far
proceeded, he desired to few me his commiflio, whlich
is under the great sea, to inimfc!f or.iv, which is as )a'ge
as may be, and vet fundric of the irivie council t-en
with him, but not one in comriifon, norprefent, nor
near us all this time, having spent anlol five hours in
there matters; 'he prefnted to me the master of GrLy,
nwho delivered to me a letter from the king in his col.l-
mrendation, whom Iperceive the king means to fend to
her majesty, and therefore rc(,uir;es a safe condue for
his paflhge, which I pray vow cl lilre, and to fend it as
soon as you may. I Ict hinit inc.!rflaltl of tihe !,rd
Seaton's negeciation with thc rS rcnh king. I-e fwUur
to me, that Seaton was Illit a knave, and that it was
partlv aainft his will, that he should be sent thither.
But his commifion and inflruiiiln being of no great
importance, he yielded the fooncr; and if Seaton has
gone beyond his inltrulionls, hich Arran drew him-
self, he v iii make Seaton smart for it. Touching \Wl-
liam Newgate, and Mark Golgan, he protelred he ne-
ver heard of anv such; he ays there was a little l:cor
foul, with a blck beard, come thither a begging, wo
said he was an enemy to Definond, to whicrl he gave 2
rrcun, but ncver heard of him finec, and for any Sto:i

man going into Ireland, hie ays there is no uch matter;
if there be, there may be so:ne few raikals that he*knows
not of; and toucthing the coming of any Jefitits into
Scotland, he fays it is hut the flal(lerous devise of the
king's enemvs, and llch as would have the world be-
lieve the king .ere ready to revolt in religion, who the
world shall well Iee will continue as confant therein, as
what prince soever profclcd it most; and the earl him-
felfdos protest to ec, that to his knowledge, lie never
saw a Jesuit in his liWe, and did afrure me if there were
any in Scotland, they should not do so much harm in
Scotland, as their niinillrs would do, if they preach
such dotrines as they did in Scotland; and toal1;iing one
Ballnden, of whom I wrote to vi,.o, I heard fromn Mr
Colvill, the earle avows contlantly that he knows nrt,
nor bath not heard of any fich man, but he wou!d in-
quire at thejufiice ccrl, ' a;nd !s.ouli inform me what lie
could learn of that; thi:s I live made you as fh.)rt a
dilourfe as can of io inmary mattcrs, Ji long diltlurf!fd
upon, but thefci .e tile principal points of all oir talk,
so neui as c-a :'ein !),i: it, ad for this tiime curon-
mit ou to th:- A.lnighty. At Bcrwick the 4th ors Au-
gus; 1584.

ihe king i: very dfeliols to have

n:y ion Roherr Caryo a coir to himll,
I pray you klnow ler majclty's plcalftrc.
/drrias . an/vr'cr to t11e rics', or anri.l/s pro.'ncJ to tr lorJ

HfNcs, lt 1;wr in i, .lir fijrr:.
A s to te firait and fi'vcr 'ierfculinin of all flch, as

have )been io:ed to ];ivr vtlen -ell a' eTtc-i t tlil

Queen's r.iajcllv, it cannt ap:-.ar tlhey were Ci'lcr fln
hart calii: p ;tei.hedl, or ha.'.ii) 'alt with, fil:!c ^is Ina-
jril' oft latei. ls j'iIn i;, earicfui and d.iigict to choice
,-it good inil.,icniits to i

! 1) c. ix-t her nim.cly and

iiim,as his na; fPv h:is drOln- ii' t!'-ieIln of youlr lor 'lfp!»
and nie; celil.- ti. in ail !.:' - i:t;lons, their'goI -
will and affi'citin lirn to -. a.i. Xt a,, at no time,
!iii to their ch a:-e, t ca:rla! actions of t'eaoln m.iiy
way tried now b t ' !helc tllrec ctaliE, ald I.rtc l!tan

ca
ii uelt to tLie: w!, .il.

As fcr his majesty inhibiting, by public proclamation,

such as were banished, not to repair in England; the
bruits and wbifperings that came to his majefly's ears, of
their conspiracies and treasons, hich since fyn they ac-
complilhed, so far as in them lay, moved his majefy to
inhibit them to repair to anv place, bo near his najefty's
realm, left they shou!d have attempted there things
which hortly they did attempt, being farther off, and
more difiant both by fen and land.

As for reception of Jesuits, and others, her majeflv's

fugitives, and r.o delivering them according to s
promise, as your lordfbip propones, his majeflt would be
moll glad that so it might fall out by your lordfliip's tra-
viles, that no fugitive of either realme should be receiv-
ed of either, and when so hall be, it shall not fall on his
majcfly's part, albeit in very detd this time bygone llis
majefly has been constrained to receipt her majefli's
mean rebells and fugitives, contrar his good natural!,
finceher majefly hath receipt, in efFcot, rle whole and
greatest rebels and trai:ors iis majesty in his own blood
ever had, as fr the agreemcent with his ma;efly's mo-
ther anent their afociation, his majeflv has commated
me, in presence of our lordship's servant, to assure hler
majesty and your iordfilip, in his najefly's name, that
it is alirgether false, and an untruth, nor any such like
matter d nc vet.

His majefly has also commanded me to assure your

lordship, that it is allo false and untrue, that his najef-
ty has, by any means direct or indireeRt, lent any in;d
sage to te pope, or received any from him; or tat
his majesty has dealt ith Spain or any foreigners, to
harm her rr:acftv or her realm, which his majesty could
}:ave no honour to do, this good intelligence taking
place, as I hope in Cod it shall.

As concerning the ccniicmptuous usage of her rra;cf-

ty's miniflers, lent unto his najefly, his majesty ulcd
none of them so ; and it his mnjcafy had, sufficient caule
was given by them, as some ol their own writs on ct
teflify- as I more particularly he-ed your lorldi.i;J a
Foulden at our late ni.cting.

No. XI. (p. Ijz, vol. 2.)
Th SlttlyfI qtea/ offers Upo :e e c? f jhr liertf pripound-

ed bv Icr fecre!arv Na's7. Nove-mber 1584.

(Cor. Lib. Calig. C. 8. A copy.)
THE queen ny m:itrefs being once well aflured of your

majesty's amjty,

1. Will declare openly that she will (as it is fineerely

her meaning) straitly to join unto our majefly, and to
the fame to ield and bear the chief honour and relpdct,
before all other kings and princes in Ch!iflendom.

2. She will swear, and protest olernnly, a finrere
Forgetfulncfs of all wrongs u hich she may pretend to
have been done unto her in this realm, and will never,
In any fort or manner whatsoever, flcw offtenct for the
fiaine

3. She will avow and acknowledge, as well as in her

own particular name, as also for her heirs and others
dcti:endiiig of her for ever, your majrfly, forjuft, true,
ald lawful queen of England.

4. And consequently, will renounce, as well for her-

self, as for her said heirs, all rights -and pretences which
lhe may claim to the crown of England, during your
majesty's life, and other prejudice.

5. She will revoke all ats and he-s, by her hereto-
fore made, of pretence to this said crown to the preju-
dice of your majeflt, as may he the taking of the arms
and file of queen of England, by tie commandment of
king Francis her late lord and h. fband.

6. She will renounce the pope's bull for so much as
may be expounded to turn in her favour, or for her
beboof, touching the deprivation of her majesty, and
will declare that she will never help and serve hcrelf
witl it.

7. She will not profecttc, during your majesty's life,

by open force or otherways, any publick declaration of
l:r right in the succession of this rcairt, so as secret as-
s:rance be given unto her, or at the eIaft publick pro-
mise, that no deciding thereof hall he made in the pre-
;'dice of her, or of the king her son, during your ma-
ellty's life, not after your decease, until such time as

vol. nI. '
R

they have been heard thereupon, in public, free, and
general alTembly of the parliament of the said realm.

8. She will not pradlife, direftly or indirectly, with

any of your majefly's fubjeci, neither within nor out of
your realm, any thing tending to war, civil or foreign,
againR your majesty and your estate, being under pre-
text of religion, or for civil and politick government.

9. She will not maintain or iupport any of your fuh-

jedis declared rebels, and convidced of treason againil
you.

ie She will enter into the afbociation, which war

shewed her at Wingfield for the firety of your majcfi 's
life, so as there be nmended or right explicated folne
claufce, which I will show to your majesty, when 1
flihll have the copy thereof, as I have before time re-
quired.

x1. She will not treat with foreign kings or princes,

for any war or trouhle against this state, and wiil rc-
bounce, from this time, all enterprises made or to be
made in her favour for that rfprdt.

12. Furthermore, this realm being aflailed by any civii

or .oreign wxar, he will take part with your majcflv, and
will affif you in your delerce wvith all her force; and
r,cans, d Ie:ding of herfclf and with all her hfiens o'
Chrii.cldorn..

I3. .And to that eftIT, for the mutual defence rni

mainteran:z of your mr iij:ft , auid the two reahlrs of tl;si
Lle, il. vwil ener with your Maefly i a league clrecn-
pve, as hall be more particularly advired, and will pr-
fwade, as much as i her, tilc king her lon to do tlir
like.

The leagues with all prts abroad remaining firr!,

and cfpcc;0!'y th. i, :ih-c ; :-%o-

h I lwcr-n , i-,i ,'

: red.

Sco:'nd, in that 'w.k t:
il! no; V' ^a'nithis prelnt.

14. She x ili entrr .i a '-agu ui. :, i, av';g i' ,, 1

assurance, or ferrtt, !r- rioll and a, knun l.-l rr :; (li
her right in t: l:cti:. of i icro n, alld 1lili,
that happni .g any lrrra h btrtwix !Franec u.il ! 3
realm (which i. prccih G(od nr to happcl'.', li.:
just value of h;:r c.o'.:-y liall be placzid for her in 1'
of the ;-tvc;iu; c lhc .rc\ ii.

i5. For assurance of her promises and covenants, he

doth offer to abide herself in this realm for a certain
time (better hoflage can she not give thlan her own per.
ioun, which so as he be kept in the liberty here before
propounded, is not in cafe to escape fccretly out of this
country, in the sickly slate he is il, and with the good
order which your majelly can take therein.

i6. And in cafe your majefiy do agree to her full and

mhole deliverance, to retire herfti'f at her will out of
this realm, the said queen of Scots l.e will give uffi-
cient holtage for fch time as will be advilid.

17. If she abide in this realm, she will promise not to

depart out of it, without your liccn e, so as it be pro-
milcd unto her that her state, in fiuch liberty as fha be
acounted unto her, flall Inlt be in any lIrt aeredi, untill
after her tryall to have attempted againfl your lie, or
other trouble of your estate.

18. If he go into Scotlaud, she wiil promise to alter

nothing there in the religion which is now used there,
Ihe being fuflfred to have free exercili of hers, for her
antl hCr ho uhold, as it s,..s at her return out of France;
a;nl further to pull out every root of new divilion be-
twei-n the lubjes, that none of the fiibjccds of Scotland
fr.all he rlited for his cn):lr.:. 'ne, nor conii-rained to go
t, the service of the coit:: J.., ciigiun.

r9. She will grat.r a gi 'al ab,,ilition of all offences

d!ute aaitltl her in Siotltal:, and titings shall remain
there as they are at this preliit, for the refpiec, Living
ihat m which hath been done against h honour, which
fh. int.'l.tit to lave revoked a ,

a ll illeed.

2o. !hie wiil travel to li:tle a lure and general reccon-

Ci!iatiln between the ni'):i;i:- of thl country, ,i:d to
t..fi: ti be apptointed .:,o.it th ki;;i, he'r son, aind in l is
.ua;til, fucl as fliail he lit lor the enter: .;.lient of the
peace ai(dl (uiet ot the country, and rhe amity of the
rli11Tl.

:t. She uill do her best to content your maj.fly, in

favour of the Scots lords aniileil and refuged hitlhr,
iloni their due i'ubmiffion to [heir prilices, and our ma-
jl;)y's pronlile to aiiilt the laid qleen and king of Scot-

1 1

land agalnft them, if they happen to fall into their for.
mer a;:ks.

32. iic \, ill proceed to the marri.ge of the kini; Ihrr
son, with the advice and good council of your majefiy.

2 :. As she w;ll pass nothing without the king her l;'i,

so doth fee dcfire that he intervene conjuintly wi hi lr
in this treaty, for the greater and periedrr affuran e
thereof, for otherwi1e any thing can hardly be ellablilh-
ed to be found and continue.

24. The said Scotch queen trufleth, that the French

king, her good brother, according to the good affir-clin

lwhich he hath always sh.:\cd her, and hath been al'fn-fi
teflified unto me by Mc:nfr dr Manniffiere for this said
treaty, will very wil!inlv intervene, and will aflifl her
for the surety o her prcmiles.

25 And so will the princes of the house of Lorrain,

following the will of the said king, will bind theinllves
thereunto

26 For other kings and princes of Chriflendoln, fil:

wi!! asia to obtain the like of them, if for greater lrI;nI-
nity and approbation of the treaty it be found to be ue-
ctr-v.

-:7. She doth desire a speedy answer, and final conclu-

sion of the prrmilfs, to the end to meet in time with all
in-onvenlencies.

28. Ar.d in the mean time, the more to firengtlen

the iaid rcatv. as made by her of a pure and frank o ,il,
the d.:irel ilthat dencr.Plr.tion be made of ome rclcafc-
min-t f her captivity.
Obijdoni agairf th: S:ttiO/ q , under ferretary I4afi,gb' ei

La d, -\oerlert I584.
THE queen o Scots is ambitious, and flandeth ii! as

feared to her majcfly, and therefore it caiinnt be
but that her liberty should bring peril unto her majflty.

That her enlargement wili give conmfort to papifls,

an.i oth.-r ill afiecetd fubjecls, and greatly advance the
o}::iion. !Ld of her titic as successor.

T'ha a long as she ihall b continued in her majefly's

pcefic :., the may serve as it were a gage of her mnaje-
fly's surety, for that her friends, for fear of the dangcr

fIe may be thrown into, in cafe any thing hould be
done in her favour, dare not attempt any thing in of-
fence of her najefty.
November ilaul ours' wcerefJt to e !.:,itn ivl tLe quren
1584. J of Scols eilltr t, 1e e d rrired or rof.

(Cot. Lib. Cal. 8.)
THE course to be taken with the said queen may be

ronfidered of in three degrees; eitler,

1. To continue her under cufltody in that slate she

now i.

2. To restrain her of the present liberty she now hath.
3. (r to set her at li!berty upon caution.
r. Touching the first, to continue her under ruftody

in that fla.e Pfe ncw is; it is to be confiderel, that the
p;.inces that favour that queen, upon the comFIainit he
maketh of hard ulage, are greatly ieced with coonniii -
ration towards her, and promiie t do their endeavour
folr her liberty, for which purpolc licr minilicrs filicit
them daily.

And to move them the more to pity her cafe, he ac-

quainted them with her osiers nmade to her m.:,cflv,
xihich alprarcl ' to be n l irci)fsil)le than realioable
for her niaj si', si) as ti, rt.lual ad rejectiig givtl her
friends aiii ;avC;-lrs cafile to t(ink er 1 harrdly dealt
v'ithal, and therel;ire may', with tile better groun' and
reason, attempt lJmev.hlat for the 'etting her at li!<.rty.

It is allb likel tat the fai:l qu en, upon this rrtulil,

findeth lier caliL i ellprate, U ill continue her pratice un-
der and, botha at 'ine and abroad, not only for her dte-
livery, but to attain to the present pofilc:ioni of this
rrown upen her pretended title, as he hath hitherto
dione, a appeareth, and is mr(t nianifeit by leltcr ad
pits itel-cepted, and chicily by that late alteration of
Scotland whichi hath procedd altos tiher by her direc-
tion, whereby a gap is laid open tIr the malice oi all
her majefly's enemics, so as it appeareth that this man-
ner of keeping her, with fich number of perfotis ab he
inw hath, and with liberty to write and receive letters
ibeing duly confidered) is offensive to the princes the
laid ueen's friends; rather chargeable than profitable

R 3

to her majeftv; and subjec' to all such practices as ma?
peril her majtfty's person or state. without any provilioi
for hr majelty's iafety, and therefore no way to bi
liked of.

z. Touching the second, to restrain her in a mort
firaighter degree of the liberty she hath hitherto enjoyed

It may at first fight be thought a remedy very apt tc

flop the course of the dangerous praftices softered here.
tofore by her: For, true it is, that thir remedy miglt
prove very profitable, if the realm of Scotland flond in
that fort devoted to her majefly, as few years palt it did;
and if the king of that realm were not likely, as vc!l
for the release of his mother, as for the advancemenlt .t
both their pretended titles, to attempt somewhat agailt
this realm and her majesty, wherein he hlould nithcr
lack foreign afflflance, nor a party here within this
realm: but the king and that realm Itanding affedted as
thev do, t:s refiraint, infcadl of remedying, is likely to
breed tlrfe inconveniencies following:

Fir'i, It will inct-eal- the offence both in him, and il

the rl! of the princes her friends that mifliked o her
.eltrint.

Secondly, It will give them just cause to take fomc
wav of rerires.

Lafily, It is to be doubted, that it may prooke firln

defpvrate iii-difpoled perfun, all hope of her liberty re-
m(ived, to attempt fome;v hat againit her majesty's oun
perfen, (a matter above all clithes to hle weitihcd,) ulich
ir:ccnven:ecncy bcing dukv cniseircd, it will appear ila-
nitrflh-, tha; the rel.rant.!i in a Itiairhtcr d -gre, is hikc-

to prove a remedy uljct to v.cr iL ard events.
The latter degree, :.hr:i:cr it x'iclr t to iCt the aid

queen at liberty, n;itni!r:il !oimine (C!, or doubt, toujl-
ing the rrmnner of the liberty, in ul at i,rt the lanil is
to h- perforried, lwhether to be colitnued here within
the realm, or to he reflored into her own country.

But firit, this ;-rop(s:iiictl, bctole tle particularnti be
weighed, is to be toi Cidered in gcncrality.

For it is very harti fiir a weli-affctdred l: jectl, and II-

dereth her majeiy's lurety, and weiileth either thle na-
Iwre of the cuttt queen Litig inclined to anibtion

and revenge, or her former actions, what practices she
hath set on foot most dangerous for her majefry and this
realm, to allow of her liberty, being not made acquaint-
ed with fitch 'causes, as time hath wrought, to make it
less perilous than it bath been, nor with ilhch cautions as
may, in some fort, be devised to prevent both her ambi-
tion and malice; and therefore, to make this apparent.

It'is to he confidered, that the danger that was in thle
mother, is now grown to be in the son. He pretendeth
the fame title she doth: Such as do affcet her, both at
home and abroad, do asse&t him (and he is the more
dangerous for that he is unmarried, which may greatly
advance his 'ortune, and that he is a nan, wherebv he
may enter into action in his own periln); where fie is
restrained, he is at liberty; his own realm is now alto-
gether at his devotion, and the party aiTedcd to this
crown abased; lo as the matter duly conlidered, neither
her liberty nor refiraint doth greatly alter the cafe for
perils towards her majcfty, uilels by 1uch ipromilcs as
may be made by way of treaty with her, lthe danger
likely to grow from the king chr sibl to be provid:id ior.

But in this beehalf it may be ojtci.t, that lb lon as

the mother remains in her nmaielty's hands, the king w 1ll
atte mpt notiing for fear of his motlierl's peril.

To this objection it may he answered, i, hat they

hope that her majefly, being a prince ofju ifice, and in-
clined to mercy, will not punish the mother ifor the fitn 's
offence, unless fie flall be found, by good p:'tuio culpa-
ble. Secondarily, That men will not be oel'r-halty,
confidering in what predicamncit the king flaindltci touch-
iug his expeqation of this crown, to advile anvy tling
that in time future may be dangerous to the giver of
fucb council as may rach;i to his mo;ther's peril.

And laftiv, the taking away of his Irmther, Ie beilng

firong in the field throgli both frei.In alliiiainc, a.nd
a party here within the realm, will appear Iu weak a re-
medy, (which mav rather exJicrate borh him, and hr
party, to proceed with moule cot:rage and hiat to re-
venge, if an filch hard cmeailrir e

il be itirerc unto

her), as they will suppose for the reCalbn above Ipe iitd,
that no l'uch extremity will be u.i-i.

I: may aso be objeaed, that the setting of her at li-

berty wi!l grratlv enrcour2ge the papists both at home
and abroad; but herein, if the provision be duly corfi-
dered, that rma; he made by parliament both here an
there, th(y ihall rather find cause of difconfort than o-
therwife.

There t-.on othts htins refnlved, and the perils that

vas ir the mother ap;jlaring mofi manifefllv to be fecil
ii, tle fn arconapani.-d with more danger, with due ron-
f!..r -aimn had! a!so of fcl remedies as may be provi!el
fr ' ri-cvcrniitg of the dangers, that her liberty may
mr. nitcr jr.ft cufc to doubt of; there will he good caulie
Cr h;'e rin'-nd, that the lime will rather breed bnclfit
tlan perils.

Now- it rtfcth, in wh:at fort the said !;herty hall ie

prr:-rmeti: ii it fn211 be thought meet she hall be co.n-
tn:-cd -ithin thie realm with foame limitation, efr.ecially
i:n tl:;a pace s -hre fre new refideth, the country round
about h.-i-,i so ifzfled in religion as it is, it is greatly
to be til:. -ti-d that \ii:l verv much increase the corrtp-
tionl, -rd iallin; av.ay in that htlhalf. Besides, she should
have c n; -.i"-t :, , u ith much more ease and speed, to
t:lrt.'-:n !lra a'c.rs v.-itilin this realm, than by being in
her c x i COLr.C'.r .

Ic 2nrt.-.d ir;h- v.: itl:out limitation either in Sotlarnl

cr :.: c:- t! . n all l:cr rraiefly lose the g,ges of her
l.:'t:-- t!.nl r- :.s! f.-. It at hand to give advice in fi:r-
t!ltnra:r'c (f fluh pra& ices, as have been laid for to fnlr
triLub!e in th:s realm, v. herein she hath been a prini:l
pal-! -.

For the firfl, it is ..nfercd efore, that the refrn c oi

an- perils ti-at -av 1 er:a! i;lto her, will in no tIor r -
tria n her on. F.ir ti.c other, ii it he cenfidered wiiat
hsnn lier ad ice -ill x\ ork unto ILrfrlf, i refpec' ot n'
i-~l:ion of tic t - , . nd e provion th:.t may h!
mride in } arl ai.nt I: ;, it is to hc tho !:t, thr.t
will tht;n be v.ell ad .'d, b -fore e atrtnmt any li:ch
m-tter, iwhich I:..- c.. nmay do without cpriil. IBei's
fitch princt;, s ha;v itrpoled their faith and prr'i
for l;r, cannot with hnc!cur assist l ir, whercen Il c
Irenc king -i.;! not be found very forw.rd x\\h:. !r

nmof friendly fort, hath lately rejeaed all such requelfs,
propounded either by her or her on's minilters, that
might any way offend her majesty. And lb to conclude,
lecing the cause of her grief hall be taken away; the
French king gratified, who is a mediator for her, and
will mislike, that b any Spauiih pracice, he llotuld be
drawn to violate her faith, that the reft of the princes
hall have o just caulf of olcnce, but rather to tl,;nk
honourably of her majefly, confidering the Scu:tifh
queen's carriage towards her, which hath deserved no
way any fulch favour; the noblemen of Scotland hall be
rflored, who will be a good flay of fuchl counfclls as
may tend to the troubling of this realm, cpecially hav-
ing so good a ground of warrant as t.I parliament to
lanld unto; the charges and perills which her praices
might have bred to this realm hall be avoided; and last-
ly, the hope of the papills fiall be taken away, by iuch
good prov;ions, as in both the realms may be made,
whereby the perills that might fall into her majelty's
own perlbn (a matter of all others to be weighed), shall
be avoided, when by the change that may grow by any
such wicked and ungodly practice, they hall fee their
cafe no way relieved in point of religion.
Reason to indace ber nmajrjfy to proceed n tie treaty under

rcre/ary ,trlin,,ihar

' hanJ.

(Cott. Lib. Cal. C 8.)
THAT such plots as have of late years been devised

(tending to the raiGlng of trouble within this realm)

have grown from the Scots queen's miniitcrs, and fa-
vourers, not without her allowance and seeking: Or,

lThat the means ulcd by the said miniflers, to induce

princes to give car to the laid plots, is principally ground-
ed upon some commniltration had of their relbant.

That the stay, why the said plots have not been put

in execution, hath proceeded, for that the iaid princes
have, for the most part, been entertained with home and
domestic troubles.

That it is greatly to be doubted, that now their realms

begin to be quiet, that somewhat will be attempted in
her favours by the said princes.

That it is also to be doubted, that somewhat may bh

attempted by some of her fautors in an extraordinary
fort, to the perill of her majeflv.

That for the preservation thereof, it shall be conveni-

ent for her majeftl to procceed to the finishing of the
treaty, not long fithence begun between her and the faiil
queen.

No. XII. (p. ;58, vol. 2.)

Letter of . Mary to . E/i-aketl.
(Cott. Lib. Coll. B. VIII. Fol. 147. An original.)

Madame mabonne Seur,

n 'Aiturar.t que vous avez en communication d'llne
-- lettre de Gray que voftre homme Semer me livra
hier foubz le nom de mon filz y recognoiflant quasi de
mot a la mot less mefmes raisons que le dit Gray n'c!-
crivit en chifre eftant dernierement prrs de vous dclf-
montrant la fuffifance & bonne intention du prrfonageje
vons prieray fulement fuiivan: ce que si devant je vous
ay tant inftantemrnt inrportune que vous me permet:icz
defclaircir librement & ouvcr:ement ce point de 'affoci-
a-!or; d'entre mo- & ion fiz & nme deflier les mains
pour proceder avec ui comme je jugeray eftre ris
pour on bien & le mien. Et 'ente-prendz quoi que
l'on vcus die & puiif- en rpporter d aie faire ntir e
petit blruilkin qui rerluade

r r auciins dc vos minifircs

a enterpris cettc icepar;tior. cttr minr. et mon cnr:.:, &
pour y commencer je v.us fuppic m'odlroyer qii jc
puiffe parler a ce iufice cit-rk qui vous a rie nouvllc-
m ent cnvoye pour mander par luy a mon filz imo i:-
tention ur cela, ce qui je me promis que ne ma refiulircz
qua e ne feroit que pour dcmonrtrcr n cffeA la lb, :c
intennion que vos m'avrz al'hree aoir a l'acccr( &
entretien de naturel devoir e;i:t la mere & l'cnfant (1qi
dit en bonnes termes efire empcihte iour vous me ten..t
captive en on d.rfert ce que vous ne pourrez mieux 'rl-
mrntir & faire paroitre xofitr bon defir a notre unr.,l
que me donnan Its m.yens d'v proc-dicr, & non n'il
rctcnir & tcrrpelchcr commc auctune dtc -'o miniftrs pie-
tenc'ent a fn dr laiffoer toujours lieiu a Ieur mau.;li & si-
niitres practiqucs entre nous. La lette porti (qllrte 'l

fociation n'est ps pasee, auffi ne luy ai je jamais dit,
bieque non filz avoit accepte; & que nous en avions
ronvenu enliemble, comme I'ate ligne de fa main, & ces
lettres tant a moy, que en France en font soy, ayant
donne ce meme temoigoage de fa loucle ropre a plu-
fieurs ambaffadeurs & pe; innes de credit, s'excufant de
ne 'ofer faire publier par craint e vous l'culemert, de-
mandant forces pour vous refitler d'avant te ce declarer
fiouvertement efant journellementperluade aucentraire
par vos miniftres qui luy prometoyent avecque une tn-
treire a Yorck le faire declarer votre ileretier. Au fur-
plus Madame, quand mon enlant feroit si malheureux
que de s'opiniaftrer en cette extreme impiete & ingrati-
tude vers moy, je ne puis penltr que vous non plus
qu'aucun aultre prince de la Chretiente le voiiliiicz ea
cela aplaudir ou meiltenir pour luy favre acqiuerir ma
makdicftion ails que plutos introvindrex pour luy faire
rccongnoitre la riifu trop juste & evilanlt devant Dieu
& Its hommes. Ilelas & encores ne luy vouloier 'cen
ofter, mays donner avec droit ce qu'il tient par uSli:'a-
tion. Je me fluis du tout cominnife a vous, & idele-
ment faites si il vous pleft que jc ne en luye pis q(l'au-
pravant, & quc le faulfcte dcs uns ne prevac delalit
la vcrit vers vous, pour bien rcevant inal, & la plus
grande afiliclii que me 1'aurroit arriver a aavtsir la
perte de non fils. Je vo's fupplir de In meanier en c..s
qu'il perfifle en cetre ni'efconnoiffance tie fun devoir,
que de le luy o de moy ii vous plailn advouer pour ir-
gitime roy oi royne d'Ecofle, & si vous avts arca:li)
de ourfuiv-c avec moy a part la traitc commncle cn-
trc nous de quoy je vouc requiers fa;is plus tteni'rc cc
relponle de ce mal gouvernc ent.lt vous rn rejucrrant
avrc auant d'affaelion queje jclins inon co ir lopprc!l'
d'enniitv. IPour Dieu fouvcncz vois de la )proiircli
uee m'avez faites de me prodie-- en votre protctiti imc
raportant de tout a vous, & fur c prian. Di-u qiu'i
vous viueille prelirver de touts vrs encrncm s ct diiiiu-
klz amys, oinrie je le desire de e conliti;r & d me
vrnger de ccu z qui pourchafi'nt ull ttl mn;llliur ctic
la ncre & l'enlantle cefferay devous trouiistc, :ials 1,) i
a m'eniiuicr (q je jne eregoivc quclque coilulli.,n cid

vous & de Dieu encore uin coup je le fupplie de vous
garder de tout peril. Futhbcr x Mars.

Votre fidelemeilt vouce fciur,

& obcilfant coufine,

MARIE ¢,:

A la reyne d'Angleterre

madame ma bonne fceur &
coufine.

No. XIII. (p. i.9, vol. 2.)

A Tr/7fanent y P .iMary.

(Cot. Lib. Vcfpaf. L. 6. p. 41.)
N. B. T ie following paper was traniferibed by the

revd. i'.r. Crawford, late regius profeflor of church
hiflorv in the university of Edinburgh. Part of
this paper, according to him, is written by Naic'
Mary's secretary, the reit with the queen's oin
hand. What is marked is in the queen's hand.
CONssiDFRANr par ma condition prefente l'elat de

vie hurraine, si incertain, que perfonne ne s'en pu-

eft, ou doibt afteurer,finnon fous la grandeet infinie ni-
f:ricorde de Dieu. Et me voulant prevaloir d'icelle
centre tous les dangers et accidens, qui me pourroieut
ii(pinement furveniren cette captivite, mefmes a cause
des grandcs et longnes maladies, ou j'ay etc detenu.
jufques a prfent j'ay advifó tandis que j'ay la commo-
dit. ou raison en jugene nt, de pourvoir apres ma mort
la falu de mon ame, enterrenient de mon corps et dil
poiricn de mon bien, eflat, & affaires, par ce prrill
Tron testament et ordonnance de mon dernier voluntc,
qui s'Ltnfult.

Au nom du Pere, du Filz, et du bencite St. Esprit.

Premierement, me recongnoiffant indigne pecherlie
avec plus d'offnces envers mon Dieu, quc de fati.fac-
tion par toutes les adverfits que j'ay fouffert; dolt je
ia loue fa bontc. Et m'appuyant iur la croix de nion
S.uve::r et Redempteur Jesus Christ. Je recomcmnde
mon amc a la henoifte et individue Trinitc et aux pricres
de la glorieufe Vierge Marie, et de tous les anges fainfts
& fainclcs de paradis, efperant par leur merites t in-
terctffion, etre avdec a obtenir de eftre faicte parl..i-
Fante avcc eulx de felicite eternelle. Et lpur ni'y a-

miner de cueur plus net et entier delpoouillant des a pre-
sent tout reffentiement des injures, calomnies, rebellions,
et aultres offenses, qui me pourroient avoir efl fes
durant ma vie, par mes fubjets rebellcs et aultres enne-
mis; J'en retriet la vengeance a Dieu, & Ic lupplie leur
pardonner,de mefme affetion, que je luy requiers pardons
a mes faultes, et a tons ceuls et celles que je puis avoir
offenif de faits ou de parolles. J veulx et ordonne, &c.

P'our ne contrevenir a la glorie, honneur, et conver-

fation de 1'Eglfe catholique, apoflolique et Romaine, en
la quelle je veulx vivre et mourir, si le prince d'Elcoffil
mon filz y pueft etre reduict contre la niauvaife nourri-
ture, qi'il a prie a mon tres grand reret en l'herelie
de Calvin entre mes rebclles, je le laifc feinl et unique
heritier lie mon rovauec d'Efeoffe, de r ict que ie pre-
tende jule-ment en a a couronne d'Anglcterre t pays
quii en dependent, et generallenent de tons et clrac:in
rles meuhics et immcullles qui refteront apres na morr,
ct txcution de ce prtfent tetiament.

Si non, et q;e mron dit filz continue a vivre en a dire

herlie Je cede, traiilporte, et faitc don " de touts et
" clacuns roes droiLcas, queje pretende et puis preten-
" Ire a la couronne (d'Angleterrc, et aultres roirls,
" f-iincur-is, ou ro)vaulmres en dependantz, u rov ca-
' tl':lique, ou aultre de ficrs q'il luy plaira, avciques

advis, concentemnelt de a1 aintert: tant pour lc vovr
aujouriluy le feul letlrs appiui de la religion catholi-

" q:, que pour reconnoifiancec'e gratuites faveurs que

moy, ct les miens recommandiez par mo), ont avons
receu de lu! en ma plus grande cccff:t ; ct refguardt
"au[i an droit que luy ricline, pt pretendre a ces
" 'irz royau!mnis et pays.c le Ilfpplie qu',n rconipcnce

';i preign alliance, de ia marihn de Lorralne, et li il
c p it de ccile de GuiTle, pour inemoire de l1 race
t de laquelie je uis Ibrtie au cotcle Mere, n'a ayant de
' rc!lv de mclon pert, que men ful enfaind, ICqu(l c-

slant Caihoiiq'ae j'ay tousjnurs vouc pour une dcs fcs
filles, si il lu-, plaibit (I l'accepter, ou failiant une

"c ti ts nie:-,ccs marice commie a tille.

"Je lav. .c- ironi hz a a protUrteCon du roy, de prince,
\c'. iI.l

" et dues de Lorrayne et de Guise, et du Mayne, a:
" quelz je recommende et son estate en Efcoffe, et Im1I
" tdr.i en Arnletcrr, i il et catholique, et qucll ic
" parlie de efle royne." Je faitz don au compte ('c
Lenox" de comie de Lennox tenu par feu son pere, t
commande non filtz,cornmemon heretier et fuccl ur,
d obevr en ceft en droit a mon volontc.

Je veulx et ordonne toutes irs lommes et deinlcrs

qui fe troveront par mos deues, ien mis caufc e u dr.c
eflre faits " a Lohliven" etre promptement 1atc ut
acquittis, et tout tort et griefs repares per led;ts cxccu.
teurs defquelz j'en charge la conscience. Oultre, &c.
( :clltoi two vt rree paraerapbJi cnterninr particular a .;,
and rl.rt i ad i-,ij Faif a manior de Sheffeld en A:c.
terre le jo:r de - Mil cinq cens foixant & dix clit.

" Si mon filz meurt, au comte de Lenox, au C!:l.l'
Hamilton lcque! fe montrera le plus fidelle vers 111o,

"i tC plus conflant en religion, au jugement de
"Dues de Iorraine et de Guyfe, ou je le rapport fur

ce de ceulx a quej auray donnay le charge de trayter

"avefque eux de par moy et celilx, a condition d ce
" marrie- ou allier en la dite mavlbn ou par leur advi,."

_fdlconv near fro pavfe oJ prtirular lgadies.

" Et e remets ma tante de Lenox au droidl qutile

" peut pretendre a la conte d'Angous avant l'a(c',
"fait par mon commandement entre ma dite taite de
* Leox et le comte de Morton, vru quil a eflc fait

p par le feu roy mon Mary et mov, lur la pronlfi de

" la fidelle afiance, si luv et mov encourions ldanlicr
" t befoing d'ayde ce qu'il rompit, s'cntendant f tc-
' menrau les nos ennemis rebelles, qu"attemtprClt
" contre fa vie, et pour cell effcet pris les armes, et o.!
" portC les bannieres defploiees, contre nous, je revoqie

auffi toute autre don que je luy ay fait de contc (le

" Morton fur promeffes de fes bon services a advrlr,
" ct entends que la dite Conte loit reunie a la couroiii;.
"si ell fe trouve y partenir, comme fes trahifons t;nt

en la mort de mon feu Mary, que en mon hanffle-

"_nient, et pourfuit de la mien ne l'ont merite. lt d-
" fends a mon filz de ce jamavs fervire de luy pour de
K iuy pour la hayne qu'il aye a fes parcnts, la lquilec

u crais ne s'eftende jufques a luy, le connoilfant du
"touit aff:.tionnc aux ennemis de mon druite en ce
" roaumte, du.quel il et penconnaire.

" Je recommeilde mon nepvu Francois Stuart a
" non filz, et luy commande dtenir pres de luy et
"s'enlervit, etje luy laiil I bien du conte de Boduel
" foil oe, en relfpecl qu'il eft de mong ilg, mon fil-

l" cul, et ma eitt laiffe en lutelle par Ion pere.
" Je declare que mon frere baitard Robert Abl de
" St Croix n'a en que par circonvention Orkenay, et
" qle le ne fut janays mon intention, comme il aprct
" par la revocation que j'av fate dcpuys, et etr aurli
" faite d'avant la afage te xxv. ans, ce quej'amois de-
" liberer si il ne m'euffent prenner par prison de Ie de
" defayre aulx eflats je vculx done quc Orkenay foit
' reune a la couronne comme une de plus neceffaires
" pour mon filz, & fans mayfonl ne potrra etre bien tenue.

Le illes de Morra ne parvien: acccffi heriter, ains

revient la contc a la Couronne, fii ly pirlc liy don-

"ner fa ou fille en marrialge, et il noine
" I'en fienne ligne."

No. XIV. (p. 67, vol. 2.)

A lelter from 1Mr Ar:i6a1dl Douglas o the queen of Scolf.
pLEASE your majefly, 1 received your letter of the

late of the 2th of Nov. and in like manner has

seen ine part of the contents of one other of the fame
late, directld to Monfr. de Movifir, ambaflador for
his niajefly the mos Chrillian king, both hich are a-
greeable to your princely dignity, as by the one your
hnghnefs delires to know the true cause of ny haniflh-
ineut, and offers unto nme all favour if I should be inno-
cent of the heinous facis committed in the person of your
hulband of good memory, so by the other the said am-
baflador is willed to declare unto me, if your Iulband's
murder could be laid jultly against me, that you could
not follicit in my raise, neither yet for any person that
was participant of that execrable fa&, but would seek
the revenge thereof, when you should have any means
to do it; your majcftl's offer, if I be innocent of that
crime, is mos favourable, and your desire to know the

S

truth of the fame is molt equitable; and therefore that
I should with all my simplicity, sincerity and truth an-
fwer thereunto is most reasonable, to the end that your
princely dignity may be my help, if my innocence shall
sufficiently appear, and procure my condemnation, if I
be culpable in any matter, except in the knowledge of
the evil disposed minds of the most part of your nobility
against your said husband, and not revealing of it;
which I am assured was sufficiently known to himlelf,
and to all that had judgment never so little in tlat
realm; which also I was conltrained to understand. as
he, that was specially employed betwixt the earl lor-
ton, and a good number of your nobility, that they
might with all iinmilitv intercede at your majefly's hand
for his relief, in fi!ch matters as are more specially con-
tained in the declaration following, which I am con-
strained for my own juflification, by this letter to ca!l to
your majeny's remembrance. Notwithfianding tha! I
am assured, to my grief, the reading thereof will not
frnally offend your princely mind. It may plta!e your
majeftv to remember, that in the year of God i566, the
said of earl of Morton, with divers other nobility and
gent. were declared rebels to your majeflv, and banifr.-
ed yonr realm for iniolent murder committed in our
majesty's own chamber, which they alledged was done
bv command of your hband, who notwithflanding
affirmed that he was compelled by them to subscribe thie
warrant given for that effict, Iowfocever the truth of
that matter remains amongfr them, it appertains nnt to
me at this time to be curious; true it is that I was one
of that nilmTbe-, that heavily cffi-ndlcd against your rn-
jefl, a.d paid i:.o Frztree the time of oul lanii-
ment, at th- (rffire of the reft, to humbly pray yoilr
hrot.hr the r oft Chriflian king to intercede that our t-
fences iri ht be par'cned, and your nmaj;fly's cler.ren-
cy extended towards us, albeit d(iv:rs i)f no finall tjil'-
taticn, ;n that ra!m, was of the opinion, tliat tllh !t.id
fa r:c(.rited t -i' ir tc !e requisite tor, nor yet ;pa: 'i-
ed. A'wa-s fucil -aa the care;ul mind of his ii.itl'¥
tow:rds rit- (1i!etn-fs oc' llat realm, that the dealing i1
that cause was commlitted to Monfr- de Movilir, :.i;

was dircsSted at that time to go into Scotland, to congra-
tulate the happy birth of your fol, whom Almighty
God of his goodness may long prelerve in happy estate
and perpetual felicity; the careful travail of the laid de
Movifir was so effedtual, and your majesty's mind so
inclined to mercy, that within hort pace thereafter I
was permitted to repair in Scotland, to deal with earls
Murray, Athol, Bodvel, Arguile, and secretary Le-
dlngton, in the name and behalf of the laid earl Mor-
ton, lords Revel, Lindlfay, and remanent complefis,
that they might make offer in the names of the id earl,
ot any matter that might fatisfie your majelty's wrath,
alil procure your clemency to be extended in their fa-
vours; at my coming to them, after I had opened the
effclt of my mluelage, they declared that the marriage
hetwi't you and your hillband had been the occaflon al-
ready of great evil in that realn, and if your hiufhand
Ihui be iuffered to follow the appetite and tmind of
Inch as was about him, that kind of dealing might pro-
duce with nime worse effe.ts; for helping ifl ucll incoln-
venience that might f.dl out y .that kind us deallnm,
thev had thlioilgh convenient to j.iin theml ilves in league
an(! band wvlh Ibnme othr noblemen, rclolved to ohey
youlr imajelty as their na: ral ibvereign, and have no-
tliing to to witl vmr hnibani l's command whatsoever,
it llhe laid earl would for liminlIt enter into that hand and
conilederacy with them, they could biecontent to bunm-
bly request and travail by al means with your majelty
for his pardon, but l:tbre they could any farther pr-
ceed, they dclircd to know the laid earl's mind heleiil;
when I had anivcred, that he nor his friends, at my de-
parture, could not know that any luchl like matter
wunlili be proponit, and tlerc'imc was not ilftbucied
'.!iat to answer therein, they desired that I hould return
fitiicirntly inlflritled in this matter to Sterling, ibefore
tli, baptifin of youLr Ion, whoin God might preli-ve;
tllis mnefl.ie was taithfully delivered to nc at N;wcal-
ti i Engl.and, where the laid earl then riiaiied, in
prelence of his friends and company, whei they all
uoiiJelended to have no tarther dealing with you hul-

S

hand, ard io enter into the said band. With thi; ('rli.
her-tion I returned to Serlinv, where at the requtl It
the rnoft Chrif:an king and te qr-en's majrety of E:g-
land by their ambaff.dors preient. your majflt', -'a-
ious pardon was grantcd unto th.n all, under, . ; --
tion always that they fhouid remain baifinjd for, :-,
the realm, the space of two years, and fartlhe (:. i,
5-our m i(ft¥''s p!tafure, which limitatikn was aftrer ; i
tigated at the hunin le reqleft of your own no'ilii;, :
that immediatels after the said earl of Morton reni:',

.

into Sro, land to Q!l.ittintgahre, where the earl if' ;.l-
yell and fccretarv Ltdingtonl come to him; what fpcc h
pafil d there aniongft them, as God shall he my j: .-, I
klitc- otiing at that time, hut a thrir departure I u a.
r, quefied b tc said earl Morto to accompany te cal
Mcdvell and secretary to Edtr!rhi g-h, ad to rtilrn 'i.h
fich an 'x er a ' - I(heil obtain of -our najtclv, w1 ii
bei-g iv\'rn unto me b the ad !irfons, as (od f il
c mn jde, vas no other than there wuols, " St.a
"to the tarl Mlcrton that the (c!ren t ili htilr no I'cr h
"of that matter appoiltcd itnro lin:;" when I crrat
that the answer might he n ade n ore icnliible, fecr -arv
l.ed.;nton fald, that the ear;l would fuiiI tl:ty u;!-
f!.nd it, .lheit tfiw or none at that .t;r. uder!;u:rl

h;: p.:T-d amongst them. It is known to all inr;, as

vci!l be railiinc letters paficd betwi.xt the f-r.d earl a!1
!.cdintcn when they become in divers f. ic~:r s. a; :.,;
anel b:!k t furth it by !ic mi;iit;-rs wh'-rin thr :'i-
rtnn t.at the earl of hMorton h; (-o: .ifei-l o lthen, i -
fore !'.s death, that the carl B.od-cl cam.e to Qui:tti:i-
gaime to prepon he calling away off the king yuo'r iul-
1iand, t the Y.hich proposition the said earl of ,Mor':ii
afrrms hha- he could giveno answer unto such tine I!':
rnmght kno-. . ma;efiv's mind 'hrr., whirc he :'-
v-cr rr-ived . - "t.e aionil.bl- nmrder, it is nov.'-
for. b' the drTofitons of rnr:y etr!.ns t:ha ertL .... -
cuted zn the death for the c irnmtinp thertof, tihat i.c
f=me was executed them, a a adt the ecimrmanld of fi.-n
of :hr noi:v,. as had futbfcrivit band cr tiat ei'i;':
hb t!:;s r:.p!eaf:t dec:aratici, the n:.lt part t .-- t
;nc' .- :o )our:self ad the re;a.iindcr may L. .t. t.

torture, and that are extant in the cuflody of the ordi-
nary judges in Scotland, my innocency, so far as may
concern any fa, does appear sufficiently to your ma-
idtly. And as fr my dealing aforesaid, I can be no o-
ithlrwif' charged therein, hut as what would accufi the
v-Itil that prclcrves the w i:r 'rom harm, for the intuin-
perancy of luch as immoderately use the fame. A for
the fpeial caife of my hanifhinent, I think the fame
has proceeded upon ane npii;on conceived, that I was a-
bnl to acufe the earl of Morton of so much matter as
tierv alledge himself to have coneffed before he died,
aiul would not be induced, for loss of reputation, to per-
form any part thereof. If this be the occafien of my
trobhle, as I filppofl it is, what punilhment I should de-
fiLve, I remit me to your majrfly's better judlgment,

lwho well knows how careul ever ilk gentleman fiouldl
hi of li.; famiie, reputation and honour, and how far ever
il!k tnn houlld abhor the name of a pultroun, and how
unldlecent it wou!d lhave been t me( to accuse the earl of
M.lr'.rto, bring so near of his kin. notwithftandlnig all
the inijurie 1 was -onflrained to receive at his hand all
the tiln( (o l.i; (i orllln'nii t, and fr no other caul., hut
so, fllewin of par '

i'ular frien(ihip to particular friends

ii the ti:le -r'the ]lal cruel troubleC in Scotland. Sorry
I bc now to accuse h)im in any matter being dead, and
more sorry !at being on l' If, e itch kind of dealing ob-
tain(dl tl,at nar;; of n:rate. Always for my own part
I l:ave been bl.:i!h d m;' native country hose three
ycars and fir moilt!hs, iiving in anxiety of mind, my
hll gults in Scotland, whiichli wre not finall, interitit,
and ldepolit upon, alId iha ctilially since the timle I
uas re!ievcd out o my !alt troubles at the ellire of
?ihos:,l. de Movifir, tattinded rt kinow your maj sy's
p!(3afirc, and tn wait pon what service it fliould |pl-alc
w;i:r ir.a-rfl t

:i.r o cnoinand. TUpon the th of April

r:,ft. our g-.;,:)1 f-nd frcl-erar WVitfinghame has de-
, .-''d I('ti ore, ti." !.- hiihnei. !ho't it expedient that
I bri'u!l rtir mVlri- tvwhere i peaicfd, I declared unto

I
'n 1 .i1d i !; .Jl :s !;c:-bhv I might perform that

,
1:, td. '..h i: ':n a fh.culd receive it from your ma-

jelty. Neither knew I where it would please your
highness to dire& me, until such time as I should have
received further information from you. Upon this oc-
cation, and partly by permiflion, I have taken the hard-
refs to write this present letter, whereby your majetv
may underhtand any part of mv troubles pail, and trait
present. As to my intention future, I will never deny
that I am fully resolved to spend the reft of my days in
your majesty's service, and the king your son's, whereto-
ever I shall be directed by your majefyv, and for the bet-
ter performing thereof, if so hall be her majesty's plea-
sure, to recommend the tryall of my innocency, and ex-
amination of the verity of the preceding narration, to
the king your son, with request that I may be pardoned
for such offences as concerned your majefly's frvic e and
var common to all men the time of his Its aige and Irr-
denit to all, except to me, I should be tl;c iearer thr.c-
of myself, and he directed in whatfuever service it shou!d
please your majefy for to command. Moll hulnhle
beseech your majefiy to confider hereof, and to he I;
gracious as to give crder, that I may ave means ti
fcrve your majesty according to the fincirity of myi nt rl-
ing, and so expecting your inajefty's an'er, aftl kilii:lg
your hand with all humiiitv 1 talke leave from Londoil.

No. XV. (p. 173, vol. .)
A letterfrom Sir Am;,r Pijal-t.

t DID forbear according to your direcdion significd in

our letters of he fourth of this pr'ecnt, to procced

to the execution of the contents of Ilr \Vaaile's I!rers
unto you, for the d:;perfing of this lady's nnec(cIr.'y
fer-ants, and for the scaling of her money, u hercin 1
was bold to write :nto vcu my fimpie opiiioni, (alhhuuyl
in vain as it nowi falleth out), b my tt ers of tli: ;ti
of this iinflant, which I do'iLt not are withl you before
this time; but upon the receipt of your lkttcrs of !he
5th, which came not unto my hands until the 8th in ti,
evening, b rcalrin, as did appear by indorlenmr:,
that they lad been rmif!taken, and were sint back t;
W'Vindfor, after they we"e enttred iro the way toss at '
me, I confidcrd, that bcin:r acconipanic d oniy - i::
0ox: :ir\-:nit, it n;:'t !'.' 'i.ug!.t tint thelty s,idU i)

intreated to fay as I would command them, and there-
fore I thought good, for my better difrharge in these
money matters, to crave the assistance of Mr. Richard
Baggot, who repairing unto me the next morning, we
had access to this queen, whom we found in her bed,
troubled after the old manner with a defluxion, which
was fallen down into the file of her neck, and had be-
reft her of the use of one of her hands, unto whdm I de-
clared, that upon occasion of her former praftifes,
doubting left she would persist therein by corrupting
underhand some bad members of this slate, I was ex-
prcfly commanded to take her money into my hands,
and to reit answerable for it,when it shall be required; ad-
viling hertodeliver the said money I:tonmcwith quietness.
After many denials, many exclamations, and many bit-
ter words against you, (I fay nothing of her railing a-
gainft mviylf), with a flat affilmation that her majesty
might have her body, but her heart he holid never
have, refufingto dliver the key of the cabinet, I called
my servants, and sint for barrs to break open the door,
whereupon she yielded, and causing the door to be o-
pened, I found there in the coffers, mentioned in Mr.
Waade's remembranrc, five rolls of canvas, containing
five thousand French crowns, andl two leather bags,
whereof the one had, i gold, one hundred and four
pounds two flillirn's, and the other had three pounds
in silver, which bag of ilver was left with hier, affirm-
ing that he had no more money in this Ihoufe, and that
flie was indebted to her servants for their wages. Mr.
~Waade's note maketh mention of three rolls left in
Curlr'st chamnher, wherein, no doubt, Ite was mrifreck-
oned, which is evident as well b the teflimonics and
oaths of divers persons, as a!so by pr-ralle conjec-tres;
so as in truth we found only two rolis5, c'.ery of whilt
containeih one thousand crowns, which v. as this (q'icn's
guifte to Curie's wife at her marriage. There is found
in N'w's chamber, in a cahinet, a chain worth by
efirmati(ii, one huncded pounds, and in money, in one
bag nine hundred pounds, in a fetund bag two hulidred

t Curie can tell you the truth of this matter.

fourscore and fix pounds eighteen shillings. All the
foresaid parcels of money are bestowed in bags and
fealed by Mr. Richard li.agot, saving five hundred
pounds of Naw's money, wwhich I reserve in my hand,
for the ue of this houfhold, and may be repaved at
London, where her majcfty hall appoint, out of the
money, received lately y oneo of my servants, out of
the Exchequer. I feared left the people might have
dispersed this money in all this time, or have hidd. the
fame in some secret corners; for doubt whereof 1 had
caused all this queen's family, from the highest to the
lowest. to be guarded In the several places where I
found them, so as fs I had not found the monev with
quietness, I had been forced to have search first ail-their
lodgings, and then their own perrons. I thank God
with all my heart, as for a singular blessing, that that
falleth out so well, faring left 3 c(ntrary lucccfs might
have moved some hard conceits in her majclfy.

Touching the dilpcrfing of this queen's servants, I

trust I have done so much, as may fiffijce to satisfy her
majeflt for the time, wherein I could not take any ab-
solute course, until I heard again from you, partly be-
cause her majesty, by Mr. Waade's letter, doth refer to
your consideration to return such as thall be discharged
to their fcveral dwellings and countries, wherein, as it
feemeth, you have forgotten to deliver our opinion;
partly, for that as yet, I have received no answer from
you, of your resolution, upon the view of the"Scottilh
family sent unto you, what persons you will appoint
to be difmift; only this I have done, I have beflowed all
such as are mentioned in this bill inclosed in three or
four several rooms as the fame may suffice to contain
them, and that their meat and drink hall be brought
unto them by my servants. It may please you, to ad-
vertife me by your next letters, in what fort, and for
what course, I shall make their passports, as also, if they
shall fay that they are unpaid of their wages, what shall
I do therein. Yet is said that they have been accustom-
ed to be paid of their wages at Christmas, for the whole
year. Her majesty's charge will be formewhat diminish-
ed by the departure of this people, and my charge by

this occasion will be the more eas,.t But the pcrfons,
all fa.e Baftian, are such filly and simple Ibuls, as there
was no great cause to fear their pr.aticcs, and upon
this ground, I was of opinion, in my former letters,
that all this difmiifed train should have followed their
mistress until the next remove, and there to have been dlil-
charged upon tl:he 'udden, r-doubt that aid remloe might
be dlaved, vflhe did fear, or c.pec any hard mcafoure.

Others shall excilit their foohlfh pity as they may;

but for ny part, I renounce my part of the joys of
heaven, yf in any thing that I have said, written, or
done, I have had any other recpe than the furtherance
of her majcfty's service; and so I shall most earnestly
pray you to affirm for me, as likewise for the not las-
ing of the money by Mr. Manners, the other comnilf-
fiiners, and mvfelf. f trust Mr. Waade hah anlivcr-
ed, in all humblle duties, for the whole company, that
no one of us did f mnuch as think that our commniflion
reachiig only to the papers, we might be hold o touch
the money, so as there was no Ipeech of that all to my
klnnwledi, and as you know I was no commiflioner in
this search, but had my hands full at Tyxall, difcrect
servants are not haflily to deal in great matters, with-
ont wurrant, and elpeciall where the cauii is iuch as
the dlcav of it carried no danger.

Your advtrtilrnment of that happy remove hatil been

greatly conmfiotale unto me. I will not fay, in re-
fpecl of inm cf, iecautei my private interelt hatl no
mealure of comparil n w.ith her majesty's lallty, and
with the quiet of this realm. God grant a happy and
fp)ecdy yfue to thele good and godly councels; anl so I
commit you to his merciful proteclion. Froin Chart-
l'y the ctb of Septemler I586.

No. XVI. (p. 183, vol. 2.)
Ietter fom i/e k'rs of Sc.t i AiJr. ArcLihald Douglas Ahs

amrb,ador in F,5sl,,,d, OiCober, Ij86.

F SFV. R\: Up ou, tell:s na langer in the earnest dcaling
for mny m.olcr, for e have done it too long; and

+ This laldy l;ath ood ft're of luioney t p:clilIt in

tie l'ac . i
_ bali,.:dur' il;a. l.

think not that any your travellis can do goode if hir
life be taken, for then adieu with my dealing with
theime that are the special infiruments thairof; and
theirfore, gif ye look for the continuance of my favour
towartis you, fpair na pains nor plainnes in this cace,
but redde my letter wrettin to William Keith, and con-
form yourfcif quhollie to the contentis thairof, and in
this requeifi let me reap the fruidcs of your great cre-
dit there, ather now or never. Fairwell. Otober,
i586.
Letter tojir William Kcitl, abaajadr in E/il,:nd, probaby

frcnmj crcary lMaaitland. A-2v. 27, 1568.
BY your letters sent by this bearer (albeit concerning

no pleasant subjec), his maji.yt conceives wcil

of your earneftnref and fidelity in your negotia-
tions, as alib of Mr. Archibald's aivitl and l ii-
gence, whom you so greatly praifc and recommend.
wish the issue correspond to his Inajid!'s opinion, your
care and travell, and his great diligence as ou wri;:.
His majesty takes this ricr(;us proceedi(:g ag ailLt :isi
mother deeply in heart, as a mna:tr grativy c.;nclu:ll:!
him both in honour and otherwise. His highinci;, -
tions and behaviour utter plainly not only low far a-
ture prevails, but also how lie apprchends ur' the Icquld
of that process, and of what moment li eiteeins it.
There is an embnhaf ihortlv to be dircctcd, uwhri;r
wil! be employed an earl and two counfeilors, on wh.cl
aniwer xvill depend the co'itinuiance o dif.ultion ot 'i:e
amity and good intelligence betwueen tlie princes of t!is
ife. n the mean salon, if farther extreity be ulc,
and his majesty's suit and requft dildais:d, Ihis hlii'-
ness will think himft'f dishonoured and cuttninled lar
b1fides lis expedtation and defrrts. Ye may pertteis
his nmaieft's difpofitiun by his c'ttcr to yo.i, which yo !
shall impart to bir rch!iiald, and blth deal accord-
ing thereto. I need not rccomnl:cnd to vour ( are, Cu:!-
cerning your mafler's service both in wxeil mnd ini i '-
nour. As y-'u and your colleague hall l;bi.ave vo:nr!
in this behlai, so for mv own part, will I intel-r:t;; ' -
affetion to our n:afirr. I a l .r of that I hear .'
V .r''', :.:. '
. ;.; rcli' t;l:lt I.u v, r,: of ':. -

Archibald, whose friends here make great account of
his professed devotion to the queen, belides the duty he
owes to the king's majelty her son. Farther I am con-
firained to remit to next occasion, having fearce time to
scribble these few lines (which of themselves may bear
witness of my haste.) Wishing you a profierous ilIue
of your negociation, I commit ou, &c.

The people, and all elfates here are so far movid by.

the rigorous proceedings against te queen, that his
majesty, and all that have credit are importuned, and
may go abroad for excianmations ainf them, and im-
precations against the q!ittn of England.

No. XV!. (p 1i86, vol. 2.)

To iLe kirg's m.ejrj7l, fi*,I, 2ir. Altrhia!/ Do'slar.
pLEASE your majeltV, I received your letter of the

date of the 28th of Septcnibh.r, the tlh of October,

which was the fame day that I trccled \cl ln. Murray
towards your higlinel;; by fucI leters a hic crarricd,
and others of several dates, y.,ir mnajtflt y ay perceive
that I had omitted niothing o tar as my tr;' tl rr.iglit
reach unto, anent the prl orming of the two chief poilnt
contained in the said letter belbr tle rec-it thereof,
which by thererefc lls I must repeat for anfwcring of
the saids. As to the firit, so far as may concern the in-
terceding for the queen your majcfty's notlier her lfe,
I have divers times, adl in every adiendce, travelled
with this queen in that matter, specially o know what
licr full determination nft be in that po;nt, alnd couid
lnever bring her to :'y urther anl\vf , but that this
proceeding agailnft her by order of J iice wis no Il'i
;,gainft her mind, tha aainft their ill tl:at loved hcr
btIt; as towards her life ihe could give no anl\cer iicre-
lnlto, until fuchl time as the law hatll declared whetler
flie was innocent or gui.y. Ilcrewithal it was lier
pleasure thus far to il!i-l m, that it w aas a nililber
(,i the aflbciates that e.-.neitly pr es ld hr ltat rh;l law
mrniht proceed against !her, giving ralons that iU) long
a. ih was suffered t, deal in matters, lb ngl would
1,cver this realm be ill qiiet, nither her lii', nitilier
tlis slate i assurance, and in !he end thiey uled this pro-
Vul. III. T '

leftation, that if she wouid not in this matter follow
their advice, that they should remain .ii:; all the blame
whatsoever (hould fil out; whereupon (he had granted
them liberty to proceed, left such as had made the re-
qufi might hereafter have charged herfell with incon-
vcnience if anv hound happen.

And by mvicif I know this her speech to be true, bc-

canfe both pzapift and proteltant has behaved them, as
it hath been her pieafshre to d-clare, but upon divers re-
fpecis, the one to avoid filfpicion that otherwise was
conceived aai'flt themn, the other upon real and care
th:;r tley will be known to have or prefervatinn of
their fovericn's li!e and state in this perilous tn:e,
upon crtefi!dration wherhbf, I have been conJraii -
ed to ertr i tr; I me dealing with both, here-.; h
I rr.adie h.r n ,c:' ac(;qa;r.ted; the proteflai:;q,
-11d 1;;ch a in ·'.er nr:ts xv ill he known to bear no
fnm;': sac .'- ir:i' : - majesty's service, hath prayed
tla' they rr.? ! c <r-:"';-d fi-om an- dealning in he con-
trary o. ;:. \ rch . ti!',r oath they have avowed,
and by thc. e

fr-ch to helir Ibvert i:-n reqciitel for, anl

that befn-- mv co!'ring in hi3 coi;::t-; if they ihould
now et. crhrwife d&( it would produce Io bet:cr cflTe& hilt
to mrakr them fubir:! to the accuf. ion of their lobe-
reig-, . t en it fid pi!rafc her to do it, es their incrn-
fanlv, in gi-in ccu: cll hrcrl, t v mih!it incur
thr danger of il cr .;-r.!1or. and e r ns q.tnlt v.or-
thy of punifrm.eut. Su.h oft th pal.!s l, as I did deal
with, iwent intmedi3rr!i , and told her im.jcfiv what I
h.d IFpke.l o temi, . lin n't it he ui :derfood le niat-
tr of befcrr. sent :..r i:;e ad drc!arld to me :.. wivn
lpe ch that I d utt rrid to theimr, stilling r;,cir i he
w-ril of n., n.i2rr's ;rrvice ;o ab.:i i tom d'ia' in
with fuel, 25 were not \et 1L!:icit-Uv mnoved to ;l; ,k
of my malcr a ihei did. I craved leave of her i;;tLy
t1.'t i mrig' : '!!firn rtm of our mna3f',s te i:t-
viour tawar'1. i,-' r:.d i:te itarc of this re ll vi vh.'-r '.;l-
to wit3 I.oic d:: i:v she ave hi! C '-. " '. '
Izae eparture r: in t:rt, which i: .sw I; tc

l:', i' t

tilis irfia.t, n.:t.l the ii.- 2:.cr tl. t th l ori t i;!.;
c 'a;.i!j *ry i.<i '.'L. . ; ..;.v--a r; i. r, nuieftl ro:

northward to Fothringham, it was her pleasure to pro-
mise to have urtiltrfpeecli in this matter at thereturning
ofthe aid lords, and to give full anlwer accordiug to your
inajctly's contentment to the remainder matters, that
1 had proponit in name of your anl jrl. As t the
ad part concerning the aflociation, and dlefire that the
promile made to the master of Gr)ay conrcining your
majelty's title may be fulfi!le!; it appears by the said
letter, that the very point whereupon the qu!rlion that
may bring your majelly's title in tdl'lit,i;i; n,,t been
rightly at the writing of the said letter confilered,
which 1 take to ha'-e procteded fr lark of rea.li:g of
the ajt of parliament, wherein is tulfilled all tlle pro-
nife made by the qulcen to the Ilil mantr, an' n-
thing may nov: al

a ny

doe i

a ri

do iio agahl r

vour

fail titlc, except that a in pln.ni si rh iil' c ron r:cte'd
by thtie lords of tis paIrli;Li:lit th.t art rfo veCtllcnt
at this time aanit the queen your mnicliy's inother,
tliat your majfity is, or may e proved liiereater aili'nt-
ing to her proceedings, and Ifone that love our na-
jelly's service were o that opinion that too calnieft re-
quelft might move a ground, whrl!etlTpo luifiicions
might grow in men so ill affre'td in that nmatter, which
I tho't might be helped by obtaining of a dcc!ar;ition
in parliament of your ina;efly's inlnocence at this time,
and by reason that geod natur:e anl public honilt-
would conflnin you to iterccde for tie queel n our
nmother, which would carry witli itfelI witilout; any
further, some lijliicion that mright move ill a-icsd
men to doubt. il mv fonier letters I hunibly caved
of vour majetly that iorne lrarned rrmn in tie lw.vs,
might be moved to adrile with the words of the ailuci-
ation, and the mitigation contained inl the ac' of par-
liament, and ithal to aivile v hat fulpicions ercit's
your ma.vefy's requelt night wo;k in these choleric
men at this tir.e, and Ihos tleir incds might Ib: belt
moved to receive reareil; anti upon al theie coiifid.rla-
tions they might have ermncdl the v.orls o a deetlara-
tor of your nsairnflv iinll . ic to le l ti:'inetl in tils
parliament, azd ! :iiir'g :1: t:le vtiv wundr's ot a
prottiiaLion for the anme clii.cl tiat nilgit belt si vc

for your maieft's service, and for my better inform.7-
lion. Alheit this was my timple opinion, I shall he con-
tented to follow any dirccion it hall piealc your ma-
jef- to give:. I hav-: already opened the fubflance hert-
ofto the queen o thb' realm, who fccis not to he of-
fended herewith, and h.-tl gra!t--d liberty to deal therc-
in with such of tlle parliancrlt as may remain in any
doubt of mind. This being the fm of my proceed-
ings in t;:is matter, beftdes the remainder, contained in
otier letters of several dates, I am constrained to lay
the whole oen before your majcfty, and to humbly
pray that fuU informnation may be sent unto me vhat
fi:rtlcr to do herein, in this middle time, while I fnall
recetie rmort ample dire&ion I hall proceed and be do-
ing according to such direction as I have already re-
ccivecd. And so, most gracious Lovereign, wilhing unto
your maaiefl all happy success in your affairs, I hum-
bly take mr leave from London, 16th of O0t. this 1586.

A i :.:<rilsir if'i ujJy y tL- ta. ,rr fj Gry.
TT will pleaie Your majefl, I have tho't meeter to set

down all thinlgs a they occur, and all advertii'emrt.ts
as they come to my eas;, then jointly in a letter.

1 came to Vare the a4th of Dee. and sent to WV'-

Kl:h and Mr. A'-rcl hald Douglas to adcrtiii the
queen of it, lk a thev did at their aidienrc. She pTr-
miled tile queen your- majlly's n:other's li c fliduld li.
spared till we wre heard. 'Tie 27th they came to
Vare to me, the which day Sir Robt. came to Var,
where they ewed us how far they had already gone
in their negociation, but for that the discourse of it is
ftnt down in our general letter, I remit me to it, only
this far I will t-ltiy unto your mnajiety that W'. Keilth
hath uscd liimlclf rigilt iloneftly and wifely till our
coming, relpecilge .i11 ciruniftances, and chiefly his
colleague his dealing, which indeed is ot better than
your majefl knows already.

The z9th of Dec'. we tame to London, where we

were no ways friiendly r-ceived, nor after the honcit
fort it has pieated yur majesty use her ambalfadors,
never man sent to welcome or convey us. The tl:ai
day we undcrftood of Mr. de Bellievre his leave takilg,

and For that the custom permitted not we sent cur ex-
cufes by Mr. George Young.

The ift day of Jane. W-. Keith and his colleague ac-

cording to the custom sent to crave our audience. We
received the answer coltaincd ill the general letter, and
couldnot haveanfr-rti till rie 6th davy,lit was done that
day your majeily h 1i- i in rlte geniceral, yet we was not out
of fperance at that tinc, allcit we receivcd iard answers.

The gth day we lic-k with the carl of I.ciccftr,

whlere our confercil'e wag, a i rft down ill the gcne-
ral. I remarked this, that he that day falid plainlv the
detaining of tle qti:.cn of 5.'.tl.iani piilrer was for that
she pretended a fin ..llion to this cro-ln. Jltdlge then
by this, w:at is tlio't o your niajelty, as e ihail hear a
little after.

The 9th day we jieak with t!', Ficnl h ambhaf'ldo-,

whom we found ver plailn in n.ll; ;g to s a wie dif-
conrfe of all hlis p;'r t :'linti, a:i1d Mr. de 13 ilr,.v:- x1
thatilked him in vour -1i,:' !, narm, ;i:rid C, Ied i h
thliigs as we had to trc.t \ ,ilt tlis q!ceen, tv: tihe lilt
point, as more lar 'v 1'; I!own l 1 our ct-',r-;l.

It is (lio't lierr, .:; d 1t'i;ic fiili ot vyir i.r Ilv .

eilviled me, tha ! :!:tv :-c i nr c'i.itiin was nst i-
sth1ualal, nld ta: !,. ' .i(liil, t x a 1tot i'C;v to t, a . ill-
iced I think is t ue, f';r si; c i !iicv:L hi;i pI ti

; , ti her

isi . talk of this Chaft'iriit i his li r;ins taikcin with hlis
W' le papers and p.r'l:ti, w\lii.l i Iwas Iilig In
'lane, for that :It'hv -l'..;.e limn with a coni)li-3, y of
.;:e againt th n;-,n i ., i ,cr lift. i a -'d li;
S Irvant lias cnrfif.ci ! tl.c; i.r lterr, Ilt '.!

' t..) I (i..*'i trilt
I .now :ot, buit !ti I tt' p;roof I f)!, a( io;l! !,i .it

m

.'nef nman, for in.lhc- i) t. ap'.r;. ard! (i . t

' :;'

i' th! ) v.ho hath 1.-.-n vetr i -llant :; ti is r,. e:.r. I
t.'w him tlIat ith q;ielen and earll i.lt ti.':r i,'i !.'-
'i:ed to fpi ak with tmi i ,eiva:-, ;),! it: t.d li .i :.i-

t ; he ave i reely tlat lie tiio't it lt.ectitf, .
! :.; the ralbin ws !r rlt, ;iliniit a- i.;. to hili, that r
:iat h.t beern i:'itdled l,e iostte of ler nmaj.elt s
"-Cend3 in tranee ti mave ,cne rci! of.iic ih; hr i. rvi'e,
:'.t he f-.j! t' n:' '\it!l:c, 'h:t i;' ir-l'cit Jeiii'

in this hoifld bea sufficient teimineny tat all was iyes,
and that this knave Nauc who now had etrayed her,
had in that done evil offices; he desired me, secing he
saw only with other folks eyes, that I should no ways
impute to her, for the like she had done to himself ly
Xau:c his persuasion. I anflsered he should be mv wit-
ncfs in that.

The 9th day we sent to cnurt to crave audience, which

we got the tcth day; at the 'irft, he laid a thing long
looked for fhouid be e welcome when it comes, 1 would
now fee your ma'ter's iof.-r:s. I aniv erxe, no man makes
offers but for foci:e caule; we would, and like your nlt
jells, first to know the cau!e to he extant for which we
offer, ad li!:ew-ie that it he extant till your majtily has
he-.rd tis. I tl:ink it ht extant y t, but 1 will not pro-
nii!. for zn hour, hut you think to hilt in that fort. I
a:niered w.e mind not to fnift, but to offer from our f-
vere;gn ali thin^-t that with reason may be; and in pr-
cila, we cfred as is set dI: n.i in our general, a!l was re-
fulcd and tho't nothii.g She called on the three ;hat
were in the house, the erl oi eicetier, my lord ad.inr I1,
and chambetlain, and veri-: deipitefully repeated all cour
orTrs i rcltencc o t.ern all. I opened the lait part,
and' :ail, Miadam, for v. hat rpecS is it that men i.-al
agniznlt your pei soen r efate for her cause ? Sh anlr-
ed, Ltcaufe they think file shall succeed to me, and for
th.l fe is a papilt: appearingly laid I both the cles
ma,- be rer.ovtd, she lsid she would be glad to undtir-
stand it. It; rr.dam, tai' I, all that she has of right of
icctffion were i t king our sovereign's person, were
not all hcpe ot papists retnosedt She afl'wered, I hl!r
so. Then, mnarial:l I thilink the uc-en his mother i:.i:!
wi!!ingly drcmit all herrights in his e rron. She aur,\s :-
ed, she hath no right, for .e is declared unhabil. T i.-
I !aid1, if fte have no ri;hr, appearinglyv he lhope c.el; s
ai'-ceav. -so that i nc.t to be feared that any man ::-
tempt far her. 'i:he ueen atrfwered, but tis' I:niil
zlln. not our de.larati; n: tlie let it tall, tih' 1, in t;h
kinl'.s perin by her anignation. The e-ar! ot Leice".
ani:?. red, f.e is a riliT.r, ai.d l;,iw can filc deImitk
an;w;red t'- dcen -.s'Tiu i. t i.- ;, b :hr- d;vi . o; .-

the friends he has in Europe, and in cafe, as God forbid,
that any attempt cuttis the queen here away, who ihall
party with her to prove the demission or assignation to
be ineffetual, her ion being oppolite party and having
all the princes hlr friends for him, having bonded for
the efficacy of it with his majesty of before. The queen
made as she could not comprehend mny mraning, and fir
Robt opened the matter again, she yet made as tho' he
understood not. So the earl of Leicelter arlfered that
our meaning was, that the king lhouldJbe put in his mo-
ther's place. 1, it o, the queen arfcred, then I put
myfelt in a woric cafe than of before; by Godl's palion,
that were to cut my own throat, and for a dutclly or
an eallt ln to vourfell vou or l;.ch as you wuould caule
some of our dclperate iinave kill me. No, by Cod,
he shall never lie in that place. I answered, he craves
nothing of you:' majtl), but only o; Ihis niother. The
earl of I.eicelirr aiul.'-crd that were to m;,kc him party
to the queen mlly rinifrei;s. 1 said, he will be far nmre
psrt., if lie be in her piace thro' her death. She would
tlay no longer, but haid he flould not have a worl in
h;s mother's place. And said, tell your king what good
I have done ibr him in holding the cr(,'n on his head
since lie was born, and that 1 :iI!t! to keep the league
that now flands between us, and if he break it shall be a
double fault, and with this ninild to have bidden us
a farewell; but we achevit (i. e. fiT;ificd arguing upon
this point.) Andl I lfake cavinig of lkr that her life
miay be lpared for 15 days; the rcftul.d. Sir Robt. cra-
ved for only eight da;\. ihc laid not for an hour; and lb
gcid her way. Yoia- inat;liy ltes we l.:\ d(ivered all
at had for r firrs, but aii is lor l noling, vtr file and her
co ncc has laid a dct cminiation ithai tiv inind to fil-
Irw forth, and i Ice it comecs rather t lier councel tlian
hcrfelf, n h like

I ike th. o rof; for , ithlout doubt, lir,

it hall cuL off ail t'riici.hip ye had }.ere. Altho' it were
that once theiy h.idl i::nc.. Ieil to your ilia llv, yet re-
merniheri:;: teti lelvye, tl..t they have itine'led with
youir i;uti.cr's hi.iui, i(..d laitli t.ey cannot hope great
:tood or yclitlcit, a tl:i t

r tr;il; I aiu lorry tor; ! . -
ther our ,;,ajetly . ,aJ p' i ive b)y ili Ini ddtCirlt ot

that I proponit, if they had meaned well to your maje-
sty, they had used it otherwise than they have done, tor
reason has hound them. But I dare not write all. I
mind something to speak in this matter, hecaufe we look
fhurlv our letters fiall be truffit by the way.

For that I fee private credit nor no means can alter

their dereination, altho' the queen again and the earl
of Lrireftfr has desired to speak with me in particular:
I mind not to speak, nor nhali not; but'affuredly hall
let all men fee that I in particular was no ways tyed to
England, but for the refpe6t of your majesty's lervice.
So albeit, at this time, I rould not effecduate that I ie-
fired, yet my upright dealing in it hall be manifefled to
the xorld. We are, God willing, then to crave an.i-
ence, where we mind to use sharply our innrucim.l,
which hitherto we have used very calmly, fur we can,
for your honour's cause, fay no less for your majclt.,
thaln the French ambassador has said for his mailer.

So I pray your majcift crnfider my upright drali'g

in your frvice, nd not the effrct, for had it been do-
able i. e. ptoiible to be done) by any I might have lihre
had credit. but bring I came only lor that cause I will
not mv credit fhaU serve hcre to anv frtlicr prpoi.
I pray God -elkrvc your mainyr arni fir.n( yu a tn al.1
fincerc frirr.dfhip. From Lond('n his i2th Cf I;n. 1 :'.'

I cLnlerfland the queen is to Iclnd one o hr oll ;u

ynt:r majesty.
7T tbh rlrt b on. r-v lord ,i.e-bancell'r ',ri

fr
r -et.- , i. b
h .:-

iv. from t mnafler of (;, .s.
y lotid, I fci,' vycu these lines with tl!hiq in'Iofrc ;t)

his rrmajtf, . hcertbv -our !o-dfllip shall untdrfla.d
iowe r-i3tters goes here And li:-fre ail things I p.'v

',or Icrc'fiip move his majefly to refpc' nov diligel:c,
nind ot the crtic' in this neg;oiati,,n, tor I lvrar if it

l'a3l itecn for the cro-n of Entgla(i to nmvfilf could '.,
:o more, ani It'not uoluricnds have advnntage of Int,
for the werld ihall fee that I loved Jln.'lan' fr his i,.-
iefll's ervice onlv. I look ortlv t ind voir lorcPi!p
iritnd as : mnade romrife, and li) (; d 1 fiCal 1,e to yv
if I cn. \~.- Keith and 1 dcvylet. i1 matters had l:,'e
wt-II, to -avs run a ccuric that o-.u l!rdfonlp n:igt.t .;' ^

here been in credit and others difapp6ilned, hut now 1
will do for you as for niyfeif; which is to rare for no
credit here, for in confcieiee they mean not honestly to
the king our sovereign, and if they may, he will go the
get his mother is gone, or shortly to go, therefore, rmy
lord, without all kind of scruple 1 pray you to advise
him the belt is not this way. They fay here, that it has
been said by pne who heard it from you, that ye dfirced
not the king and Enland to agree, because it would
rack the nobleren, and gave an example of it by king
James the fourt, 1 anlicered in your name that I was
assured you never had floken it. Mr. Archibald is the
speaker of it, who I aure lordship has been a poilon in
this matter, for they lean very mickle to his opinion. lie
cares not, he fays, for at length the king \ ill be fain to
deal this way, either by fair means or necc-lity, lb that
when he deals this course he is sure to be welcomen; to
let down all tbat is pai of the like purpofrs, it would
consume more paper than I have here, so I defer it to
meeting. There is a new conspiracy alledgel against
the queen to have been intended, for the French arbat-
fador resident three of his men taken, hut I think in the
end it shall prove nothing. Mr. Stafford, who is am-
bafladorl for this queen in France, is touched with it,
his brother is taken here, always i has done this harm
in our negntiaitki, that all this council would not move
this quten to, meddll with the queen of Scotland's blood,
till this invention was found forth. I remit all other
things to the inclolcd. We minded to have scut to his
majelty a dilfou-i;' , which we have rlt down of all our
proceedings fincc our hither coming, but we arc lurely
adve tizcd that the bearer is to be trnll(d by the way
for our pacquets, so that we defer it till our own coin-
ing; this 1 have put in a privy part betide the acquet.
We Thall think take leave on Fryday the ijth day,
where we mind exactly to follJw the rigour of our in-
flruions, for it cannot stand with the king's honour
that we fay lels than the French ambassador, which was,
le roy mon mailtre ne peult moins faire que fe refentir.
So that about tle 24th I think we nhall, God willing, be
at home, except forne shy come which we look not for.

The queen and the earl of Leicester has e fired to speak
with me. I refused save in presence of my colleagues,
by reason I fee a determination which particular credit
cannot help, and I crave no credit iut for that cause.
It will please your lordIhip retire the inclosed from his
majefly and keep it. So after my service commended
to vourfelfand bedfellow, I commit you to God. From
London the i2th of Jan. 15f6.

To the kinrg' m ajejy fromfir RoLcrtl A-Il.;.

T may please your majeflv, since the direction of our
former letter, we had audience, and her majefly ap-

peared to take our overtures in good part in prefcrre of
her council; albeit no osiers could take place with them,
having taken resolution to proceed with e xtremity, not
the Ics it pleat d her majefiy to defit us to fay for two
days on taking our leave, until flTe had uadvxild upon
our propcitions; since which time, her majefly is ie-
come more hard by some letters (as we are inforn!c:)
has come from Scotland, making some hope to believe
that your majefly takes not this matter to heart, as we
know the contrary in eftfca, and had of before removed
the like opin;on out of her majefly's mind, which by si-
nifltr information was credited, thir reports has hinder-
ed our comrrifion, and abused this queen, fearing in
like manntr we shall be flayed until aiver come from
Scotland by such person as they have intelligence f.
And a:beit that it wvill be well enc:'gh knc wn to all men
Low heavily your majesty takes tlis prccceding to heart,
the truth is, that thet have b this occalion ft perli:ad-
ed the queen, that it is like to hind-r our negotiation.
As ailb Alchinder (i.e. Alexander) riewxard is to be di-
recled in their party, by our knlr. ld'c, who has a-
s-arntvt r.ore of his credit, than i elitve he may per-
form, and we w-eat him t defft irom this dealing. lay-
ing it does harm, and he is not miert i.r that purpose,
remitt.ing to vcl!r r.ajefly's gco(d c:i'xrction to ake cr-
der hcrcin a e i- hal! be arfv-era'!e tor -, ur majef;y not
to omit anv ;-i'h:t '-e 3ave in l::rT^. zs the titihl is,
the rr-flrr of (rha.- nhs b khr. .ri ..'leei very up'.:-,ht-
lv and difcettly im tl s c}arge, and evi: tavuec with he
divers in these parts who were of before his friends.

We have been hehalding to the menitrals who has born
us best company, but hae not been troubled with otheli;
Wvlzcrne Kethe hath left nothing undone that he hath
in charge. As for matter Archibald he has promised at
all times to do his dewovr, wherein he shall find true re-
port made to your majelty, craving pardon of your ma-
jefty that I have been lb tedious, after I have killtd your
majesty's hand 1 humbly take my leave. Praying God
to grant your najefty mnany good days and happy, in
whose protcrtion I commit your majesty at London, the
26th of Ja . .86.

Sir,albeit Mafler George hasnot been in commission he

is nor inferior i his service to any of us, as well by his
good advice and diligent care lie takes for the advance-
menct of your fcrvice, wherein we have not been a little
furthered.
To ite iiT'^s y.rr;i, from te marler f Gay and r .RCert
PLEASE it onr majesty in the last audience we had,

since our aft advertisement by VrTm. Murray, we find

her majefiy at the reliming our offers something mkti-
gated, and inclined to confider more deeply of them,
before we got our leave, at our ralolin_, certain of the
council, namely, my lord of Lricclcr, fir Christopher
Haton. my lord Hliunf(lon, and my lord iawart being
prelent in the chamber, gave little flow of any great
contentment to heare her from her former relblution,
now callin in perplexitie what she flould do, always we
left her in that state, and lince e have daily prelled
tonference with the whole council, which to this hour
we have not yet oh:ained. This day we have font down
to crave our leave. The greatest hinder which our ne-
gotiation has found hitherto is a perfuaGon they have
here that eitchr yl.ur majesty deals flperGicial y in this
matter, or that with time ye may be moved to digelt
it, which wlihln with great difficulty e had expungit,
we filln anew that certain letiers written to them of late
frorm Scotl,:'id has fteuid Ibn!e place of credit with them
in our con.:re. So that rclblvilg now to clear them
of tha: doubt hy a lfecial mcfige, they have made
choice of fir Alexander Stcwart to try your !igtuicl'>'

meaning in it, and to persuade your majesty to like of
their proceedings, where from no terror we can fay out
unto him is able to divert him, he has given out that he
has credit with your majesty, and that he doubts not to
help this matter at your higbnefs's hand. If he come
there that errand, we think your majesty will not over-
fee the disgrace that his attempts hall give us here, if
he be not tane order with before that he be further
heard, and if fu be that any other be directed (as our intel.
ligence gives us there shall) our humble suit is to your ma-
jefly, that it may please your highness to hear of us what
we find here, and at what point we leave this matter
with her majesty, before that they find accidence, te
causes whereof remitting to our private letters. W'e
commit your majesty for the present to God's eternal
protecltou. From Iondon this zlft of Jan. 156.

No. XVIII. (p. 19i, vol. .)

Co/T of a letter from te earls of Siurlq.r: y and Kent, Z'r.

toucbiwg lreir pro.eedings -tlrtb reard to the death of the Scet-
ti/b Queel to her rnmj'f couscil.
IT may please our hont' good lordships to be advcr-

tifed, that on Saturday the 4th of this present, I Ro-

bert Beale came to the house of me the earl of Kent in
the county of - to u hem our lordhiip's letter and
meflage was delivered, and her majeflv's commiflion
shewn; whereupon I the earl forthu itlh knt precepl for
the flaying of such hues and crie as had troublled the
country, requiring the officers to make fla of all liu.i
persons, as should bring any such war.illts without
names, as before had been done, and to bring them to
the next juflice of peace, to the intent that, upon th, ir
examination, the occasion and caures of such flilio.;
bruites might be bolted out and known. It was allo rc-
solved that I the said earl of Kent should on the Mrin-
day following, come to Lyilord to Mr. Elmes, to he the
nearer and readier to confer with my lord of Shrewfibiirv.
Sunday at night, I Robert Beale calme to Fotherinll:v,
where after the communicating the commiflion, &c. ul-
to us fir Amice Pawlet and fir Druc Drury, by reaion
that fir A. Pax let was but late recovered, and not ablc
o repair to the earl of Shie fbury, being thce at Ort01t1i

fix miles off; it was thought good that we fir Drue Dru-
rv and Robert Beale lotid go unto him, which we did
on - morning; and together with the delivery of her
majefly's commiflion, and our lordihip's letterrimpart-
ed unto him what both the earl of Kent and we tough
meet to be done in the cause, praving is lordfilp hi-
ther the day following, to confer with me the siid earl,
concerning the fame; which his lordflip promilcd. And
for te better colouring of the matter, I the lid earl o
'hrewfbury lent to Mr. Beale, a jullice of peace c.f tile
county of I-untingdon next adjoining, to u\i.on .'nm-
municated that warrant, hich ri Jrt Beale h!iad un'ler
your lot:dihip's hands, for the itia)ing ot the uts and
cries, requiring him to give notice the e- f'to the own
of Peterborough, and efpecialih unto thc julic. of peace
ot Huntingdonlhire, and to caule the pit!'lt s nl bring-
trs of filch warrants to be flayed, and brought to the
next justice of peace; and to bring us word to l:otl:cr-
ingay cafile on Wednesday morning ihal he had dne,
and what he hould in the mean tili,. underiland of the
authors of such bruites. Wlhich like order, i alfl lir
Amias Pawlet had taken o Monday morning in this
town, and other places adjoinig. 'IThe lame night, the
Iherii of the county of Norti:anipron upon the receit of
your lordship's letter came to Arundel, and lettirs were
lent to me the earl of Kent of tile carl of Shre Ibury's
intention and metting liere on 'luellay hv noon; and
nther lerters ere alto lent with their lordihip's alent
to fir Edward Montagu, fir Richard Knightly, Mr. T'ho.
.trudenell, &c. to be here on Wednesday by eight of the
clock in the morning, at which time it was thought
nmect that the execution houald be. So upon Tucfday,
we the earls canme hither, where the ftierifi met us; and
opon conference between us It was rieolved, that the
tare for the fending for the liurgeons, and oher neceffa-
rv provition should be comrnitt-d unto hil againit tlhe
tNie. And \v.e f)orhwi'th repaired unto her, and first in
the presence of herft'lf and her folks, to the inlent that
they might lke and report hereafter that ihe was not o-
.herwilcpruoceedcd with than according to law, and the
Vol. lII. U

form of the flatute made in the z7th year of her maje-
sty's reign, it was thought convenient that her majeft's
commission fnould be read unto her, and afterwards he
was by sundry Ipeeches willed to prepare herself againlt
the next morning. She was alfi put in remembrance of
her fault, the honourable manner of proceeding with her,
and the necessity that was imposed upon her majelty to
proceed to execution, tor that otherwise it was found
that they could not both iland together; and however,
fithence the lord Buckhurft's his being here new confpi-
racys were attempted, and so would be fill; wherefore
since she had now a good while since warning, by ti
said lord and Robert Beale, to think upon and prepare
herself to die, we doubted not but that she was, before
this, fettled, and therefore would accept this mefl'ae in
pood part. And to the efiect that no christian du.y
might he aid to be omitted, that might be for her com-
fort, and tend to the salvation both of her body and Illl
in the world to come, we offered unto her that it it
would please her to confer with the bishop and dean of
Peterboretgh, ftie night; which dean we had, for tl':a
purpose, appointed to be k',hged within one mile of tila:
place. Hereto ihe replid, crossing hrfclf in the aii.c
of the Father, the Sen, and the Holv Ghost, aying tiat
Ihe was readv to die in the catholic Romnan faith, w-I:ili
her anceflors had professed, fron which she would nt
be removed. And albeit we uled many perlilafion to
the contrarv, yet we prevailed nothing; and thereforc,
when hec dema.nded the admittance ot her priest, we :t-
terlv denird that unto her. Hercupon, she demandied
to underfiand what answer we had touching her fornlc:
pctition to her maiefty, concerninVj her papers of ac-
counts, and the beft-cwing o' her body. To the firfIt v
had none other anfiwer to mrake hut that we thought :
they were not lent before, the fame might be ii ,il'.
\.i'alde's cuftod', who was iow in Flrance, and fI,,l
her papers could not any wife i plea!ire her majdily, .-
doubted not but that the fame w e(uld be delivered ui.:'
such as he fihou!d appoint. Ior, for our ownt parts, 0:
unloul:tc.v rt:.l.;:ti that her mInj'ilv would not n.:;'
any prc..l; of l. r i.:.i'., a tid t.cUiorc .in our opini';..-

fhc might set down what fle would have lone, and the
fame hould be imparted unto her majesty, of whom
both he and others might expe6c all courtesy. Touch-
ing her body, we knew not her majefiy's pleasure, and
therefore could neither fay that her petition flould he
denyed or granted. For the pratice of Babington,
she utterly denied it, and would have iferred it, that
her death was for her religion; whereunto it was cft-
soons by us replied, that for many yesrs he was not
touched for religion, nor hould have been now, but
that this proceeding against her was for treason, in that
she was culpable of that horrible conti'iracy for deflrov-
ing her maieRy's person ; which she again denied, ad-
ding further, that albeit she for herelf forgave them
that were the procurers of her death, yet she doubted
not but that God would take vengeance thereof. And
being charged with the depositions of Naue and Curie
to prove it againf her, he replied, that he accused none,
but that hereafter when ihe flall be dead, and they re-
main alive, it ltall be seen how indifferently he had
been dealt with, and what meafilre had been used unto
her; andaced whether it had been heard before this,
that servants had been practised to accuse their miRrelf,
and hereupon allb required what was beco,ne of them,
and where they remained.

Upon our departure from her, for that it seemed by

the comimilion, that the charge o her was in the d-
position of us the earls, we required S. Amias Paulet
and S. Driue Druric, to receive, for that night, the
charge, which they had betore, and to caiul the whoie
number of soldiers to watch tlhat nighi, and that her
folks hould be put np, and take order that oi.lv four of
them hould tb at the execrion, remaining aloof of
and guarded with certain perlbls lb da they tlould not
cone near unto her, which were MIelvil ler steward,
the phyician, lurgeon, and apothecary.

Wednefilay morning, after tliat ''e the earls were

repaired unto the cattle, and the fherifl'had prepared all
things in the hall for the execution, he was command-
ed to go into her chamber, and to brinu her down to
the place where wvere present, we which iave signed

this letter, Mr. Henry Talbot,Efq; fir Edward Mon-
tague, knt his son and heir apparent, and William
Montague his brother, fir Ri hard Knichtly, knt. Mr.
Thomas Brudenel, M. Buill, Mr. Robert and John
Wingefield, Mr. Forreft, and Rayner, Benjamin Pig-
got, Mr. Dean of Peterborough, and others.

At the ftairfold, fne paufd to speak to Melvil in our

hearing, which was to this effec9, " Melvil, as thou
haft been an honelt servant to me, so I pray thee con-
tinue to my son, and commend me to him. have
not inpugn'd his religion, nor the religion of others,
but wish him well. And as I forgive all that have of-
fended me in Scotland, so I would that ve should alio;
and beseech God- that he would fend him his holy fpi-
rit, and illuminate him." Meivil's answer was, tl,;a
he would so do, and at that instant he would befech
God to aflifl him with his spirit. Then she demanded
to speak with her priest, which was denied unto her,
the rather for that he came with a superstitious pair
of beads and a crucifix. She then desired to have her
women to help her, and upon her earnef request, and
faying that when other gentlewomen were cxecuted
she had read in chronicles, that they had women al-
lowed unto them, it was permitted that file should have
twe r.arr.ed bh: erfeif, which were Mrs. Curie allll
Kennedy. Aircr she came to the scaffold, first, in pi.-
fence of thicnm all, her majeftv's commission was openly
read; ad ai'tcrvards Mr. Dean of Peterborough, ac-
cording to a di.cction which he had received, the nigllt
before, from us the earls, wou'd have made a godl;
admcnition to her, to repent and dye well in the tfer
of God and charity to the world. But at the firfl entry,
fi.e uterly refused it, saving that he was catholique,
and that it were a follv to move her, being so relblute-
hI minded, and that our prayers would little avail her.
WVhereupon, to the in;ent it might appear that we, and
the whole affcnlby, had a christian desire to have her
die well, a godly praver, conceived by Mr. Dean, w.s
read and pronounced by us all, " That it would plcalc
Aimighty God to fend her his Holy Spirit and grace,
and allo if it were his will, to pardon all her offenccs,

and of his mercy to receive her into his heavenly ani
everlafling kingdom, and finally to bless her maj-Py,
and confound all her enemies;" whereof Mr. Dean,
minding to repair up shortly, can shew your lorclfhips
a copy.

T'his done, The pronounced a prayer upon her knees

to this cfTcl, to beseech God to fend her his I!oly
Spirit, and that he trusted to receive her salvation in
his blood, and of his grace to he received into his king-
dtnm, belought God to forgive her enemies, a she ifr-
gave them; and to turn his wrath from this land, to
bitis the queen's macrltie, t.at file nihit fcrve hinl.
J.ikcwife to be merciful to her Ibn, to have compafiion
oi his church, and altho' ihe was not worthy to he
hcard, yet file had a confidence in his mercy, and praJ.
ed all the faints to pray unto her Saviour to receive he:."
After this (turning towards her ftrvants) he desired
them to pray for her, that her Saviour would receive
her. Then upon petition made hy the executioners, she
pardoned them, and said, flie was glad that the end of
all her sorrows were so near. Then he disliked the
whinning and weepinF of her women, aig,tat they
r:illl(r ought to thank Cod for lhr relolu:ion, and ki;-
flni: them, wuilled them to depart Irom tlhe fffoll and
farewell. And lb rfolutely kneeled down anld having
a kerchefT banded about her eyes, laid down her neck,
whereupon the executionecr proceeded. licr fervaits
werec incontinenthv removed, and order taken thaL
n0ne fould apl'-oach unto her corps, hut that it fIoul
ec embalnmed by the urgeon appointed. And further,
her crofie, appare!, and othe- things are retained here,
are not viclded unto the executioner for inconveniencies
tllat miniht follow,but h is remitted to be rewarded by
iilch as lent him hith(r.

This hath been the manner f our dealing; in this

fcrvi.e, whereof we !:ave c :ll lt ^good to adverteii
your lordIhips, as parti ulariv as we couili!, sorI i-c tinic,
and further have tlhought good to lgn nto niy nt our
lorlfhips betide.s, that for the avoiding of ail fiiiftlr and
ianlctro,-s re; crts that m;ay he rail.ti to tl:e contrar',

u j

we have calfed a note thereof to be conceiv'd to te
fame effe&t in writing, which we the said lords have
subscribed. with the hands of such other there the
knights and gentlemen ahove named that were prefcnt
at the action. And b beferching Almighty God loni
to bss her maicfty wil; a molt proiperous reign, anl!
to cor found ail liis ani her enn;ies, we take our leaves.
From Fo:heringay-caftie, the 8th of Feb. 1586, in halt.
iNs. B. This, as well as several other papers, in thi;

appendix, is taken from a collection made by Mr.
Crawfurd of Drumfoy. hiftoriographcr to quce"
Anne, now in the library of the faculty of Advo-
cates Mr. Cra-furd's tranicriber has omitted to
mention the book i the Cott. Lib. where it is to
be found.

No. XIX. (p. 19:, vol. 2.)

T7e elij7icr. araia

oij fr . lavijcr, in Lt cf of te aIt So&t-

tilo Yuern, mrC t coin:.-ri IrnL,-s dire ither, 1. Bjore her tri.;
at Fotherier,.;, 2. D-)rg tslat Is~% ,. A'j.crr te far..
I. p EFORE her ril, lie neither is, nor can be cliarir'

_ to have had ai. hand at all in the cause of thi

fail q;een, or donei any thing whatsoever concerniii:
the lame, dire'tlr or iitlirerliv.

2. During that frclTon, he rem.ained at court, where

the only i:i'ti .tl he ih.d therein, was as her m.jliiiy'
ccretarv, to r eive tht !ters from the commiflieuncs,
impart theni to her highleii,and return then her aniwers.

A;. Ater rth return tl.cnce, o the laid commiuioners,
i: is wcl known to a!l her o;icil,

r. That ie rever was at any '.lil'eration or mcet:i.;

w-hatfoevcr, in parlianclit, or coui. i, ccl:uncrnin lti.e
ca':fe ci :he rCaid jqu.ci, t:'f rhc Icniiizg r. vn ur her ,.:-
jr.,t s arr.r.t *i.o

tir ccminnioilersi, by the iore.s .il
c.h.r; ' t ir cc;..:!.

_. Thor he . as n pr'a t-i ia finiig :hie icteitnce pa:

,.' I hat he nevr r:i:- -d eitl:, : 'c procianiti i: :-

'!iftin the li.'-. '.. war: ia: .r d:cdlatl, ncr '
o:r.cr itkitr, or [h:r.g x :lui:otvtr -llcrninii the l.in'.

'1 Lat 'eu o; '>t. d.ig v,' iLlh can i pcci.y ,nd ti' '

impnted to him, is the carrying up the said warrant un-
to her nlajelty -to e signed. She fending a great coun-
iellor unto him, with her pleasure to that end, and car-
rying it to the great real of England, by her own\ special
diretion and commandment.

For the better clearing of which truth, it is evident,
i. That the letter, being penned by the lord trealfurrr,

was delivered b him unto Mr. Davilon, with her ma:c-
fly's own privitv, to be ready for to ign, vwheicn lil
fhouldl ie pleased to call tor it.

2. 'That being in his handls, he retained it at tle !east

five or fix weeks unprefented, nor once ofiring to carry
it up, till she lent a great connlellor unto him for the
lime, and was sharply reproved therefor by a great peer
ill lier najefty's own preltince.

. 'lhat having figtned it, file gave him an exl,refs

commnandment to carry it to the tal, and being ! aled to
fend it inmmediatelv away nnto the commifi,-lrs, ac-
c(rd i: to the direction. Iterieltapplintiig the 1.,! oft
'otheringay for the piace of execrtntion, niniking .e
court-yard, in divers rpecls, and in co!cnluil aillb-
lutely sorbad hin to trouble lihr any further, or let er
hear any more hereof, till it Was dulne. She, uri her
part, having, (as he said) performed all that, in law or
realon, cotldl he requiretl of her.

4. Which directions n twithll.anding, he kcl't tl;

xarrant aled all that night, and tile gtratcft pait o-f
the next day in his hands, bronuht it l;ack with hiim nt
tle court, acqtuainted liher majclty will:!, aild ( in ing
her maj 'li retl)led to proceed therein, - .-i;, t)
}c' orI'n:ti- direC'ti,o;s, an;d vet dt-irc'ms lo caryv ti: mi;t-
ter tl, as lhe miiht throw the burden foin jit-rl', he
abfllntilv retolved to quit lis hainds ther-tof.

;. .kid hereupOtl w'tnt overC unn tit lord's tr as rer's

chamber, together with Mr. vice-cal;.ibrlai: i l-t ii,
anmi i his prelCnce reflored ti.- l:-oie hilo the h}ld:, iot
the laiid lord treaifrer, ofw-h)o'i Ile had !',elore rec, ived
i:, w\o ioni lheneel'orth klzIt :, till ilimlcit ann tie reit
ot thi council lint it ?'w-a.

\'l:ich, in fubitanicc and truth, is all the pa;r .:rd i-

terefl the said Davison had in this cause, whatsoever is,
or may be pretended to the contrary.

Touching the fending down thereof unto the com-

mruToners, that it was the general at of her maieftv 's
council (as is befcre mentioned) and not any private act
of his, may appear by.

T. Thrir own conteffion. . Their own letters fTnt

down therewith to the comrnmifloncrs. 3. The trftli -
P:ts of the lords and others to whlom they were dircdc('.
As slfo, 4 of Mr. Beale, by whom they were Ient. 5.
The tenor of her majeftv's first commifiion for their cal-
ling to the flar chamber for the fame, and private ap-
pe2arnce and fuhmi!Tion afterward inflead thereof, be-
fre the lord chancellor Bromley. 6. The con!( sion
of Mr. Attorney-general in open court cnnfirmed. 7.
Bv the fentcnce itt''f upon record. 8. Betides a coll-
non a of council, containing an answer to he vel bai-
iv delivered to the Scottish arnbaflador then remaining
here, avowing and juflifying the Tame.

Now where sone suppose him to have given some ex-

traordinary furtherance thercunto, the contrary may e-
v.dentv appear by,

i. Iiis former absolute refnfal to sign the band of as-

fi.iaioin, being earnefliy prefied thereunto by her ma-
jcily's t if.

. iiis exrufing Of himrlf from being used as a com-

minffi.r.c, in the examination of Babington and his coin-
ritcce:, .dnt avoiding the fame by a journey to the Bath.

.. His being a mean to flay the commissioners from

Ft cnou,'ipe the sentence at Fotheringay, and deferring
)t till thly should return to her maielty's prelence.

4. His keeping the warrant in his hands fix weeks
:npr.eknted, without once offering to carry it up, till
i.cr lrae:r'v f-nt epreflv for the fame to sign.

. His deterring to fend it away after it was fealed

unzo the commifiionter-, as he was specially commanl-
ed, slaving it ail that night, and the greatest part oi tic
r.ext day in his hands.

6. Aid finally, his restoring thereof into the hands

of the lord :relurclr, of whom he had before receivcd
i;c f:me.

Which are clear and evident proofs, that the fid Da-

vilnl did nothing in this caue whatsoever, contrar to
the duty of the place he then held in her mjefty's
service. Cal. C. 9.

This tleems to be an original. On the back is this title,
The inlocency of MIr Davison in the cufe of the late

Scottift queen.

No. XX. (p. 474. line 38, vol. 2.)
Lettr, fi-om 0 , to il Pnj/iy ki.ef Jam.s.

TOST worthy prince, the depending dangers upon
M your affc(ionates have been such as hath iorecd
silence in him, w)ho is faithiully devoted to your pIr'on,
and in due time of trial will undcrpn all hazalrds us hr-
tune, for the maintenance.of the just legal rigii:s, that,
by the laws divine, of nature, and of natiol', is invct-
ed in your royal person. Fall not then, molt nobil and
renowned prince. from him whose providence ihath in
many dangers preserved you, no doubt, to be an inftliu-
nir:nt of his glory, and the good of his people. Some
fccrets, I find, have been revealed to your prejudice,
which must proceed from some ambitious violent Ipirit-
ed perion near your majelty in cuu:)cil and favour; no
man in particular will I accufc, but I am Iu:: it hath no
foundation from any, with whon, for our l :-v:ce, I
have llhld corrn 'pondcnce, othcr iwif, I had, lon flinllc,
been dilabled fiiom pe-rf'rmance ol thlulf duties, that the
thoughts of my har deart cndcavouretil; icig only known
to this worthy nobleman, bearer hereof, one noted in
all parts of Chriltendom for his fidelity to your person
and slate, and to Air. David F:owlis your moll loyal r-
vant, my first and faithfill rorrrljonnlcnt; a;il nnro
James Hudibne, whom I have found in all thingq ti:at
concern you, molt flcret and assured. It nav, there-
tore, pl':afe your niajeikt, at the humble motion of ,
which jargon I desire to be the indorfement of your
commands unto me, that, by rome tokeu of your fa-
vour, he may underfand in what terms you regard his
fidelity, fereccy, and service. My paflionate afftceion
to your person (not as you are a king, but as vyou are a
good king, and have jult title, after my sovereign, to
be a great king) doth traniport me to prellumption. Con-

demn not, most noble prince, the motives of care and
love, altho' mixed with defects in judgment.

I. I therefore, firt beseech your majefly, that for

the gord of those, whom God, by divine Providence,
hath dftined to your charge, that you will be pleased
to have an extraordinary care of all pradicers or prac-
tices, againflt our person; for it is not to be doubted,
hu.t that in both kingdoms, either out of ambition, sac-
tion, or fear, there are many that desire to have their
fovercign in minority, whereby the fovercignty and
slate might be lfwayed by partiality of subalternate per-
tons, rather than by true rule of pnwer and juflicc.
Preserve our person, and fear not the praCtices of
nan upon the point of your right. which wil! be pre-
Icrved and maintained againit all aftaults of competition
whatever. Thus I leave the p-otection of yonr person
and royal posterity, to the Almighty God of Heaven,
who bless and preserve you and all yours, in all regal
happiness to his lory.

a. Next to the preservation of your perron, is the

converfaticn and ferret keeping of your counlells,
wh:ich, as I have said, are often betrayed and diic\ er--
ed, either out of pretended zeal in religion, turbulent
faction, or base conception, the which your majefly is
to regard with all circumfpeCion, as matters ioft dan-
gercus to our person and slate, and the only me:ans to
ruin and deftrov all thole that tand faithfullv devoted
to your majetly's service. Some particulars, and per-
sons of this nature, I make no doubt have been dilco-
vered by the endeavours of this nobleman, the bearer
hereof of whom your majesty may be further intonrned.

3. The 3d point considerable is that your mnajeftv, by

all means poffibie, secure vourfelf of the good allc(tion
of the French king and flates, by the negociatiun ot
some faithlul secret confidlent; the :rench naturally dil
tafting the union of the HB-itih islands under oner mo-
narch. In Germany, I (oubt not, but you have many
a!iics and friends, but lI realon of thtir remote ttate,
tlhev do not so much importe this afair, which must bc
guided by a quick and sudden motion.

4. When God, by ]hofc Providence, the period 'F

all persons and times is determined, flall call to his
kingdom of glory her majefly, (although I do affi.redly
hope that there will not be any question in competition,
yet for that I hold it not fitting to give any minute en-
trance into a cause of to high a natnre), I do humbly
beseech your majesty to design a secret, faithful, and ex-
perienced confident servant of yours, being of an ap-
proved fidelity and judgment, continma'Iv to be h:ere
resident, whose negociation, it were convenicnt our
majelty should fortifie, with fich secret trult ard poxw-
ers, as there may not need 14 days respite, to post 'or
authority, in a caule, that cannot endure c hours re-
fpitc, without varieties of danger. In the which it is
to be cnfidered, that all fulh as pretend lealt good o
your eltab!lfhment, will not in public oppugn outr title,
hut ot of their cunning ambition will ifck to rin
time, by alledlring their pretcnce of (commonl god to
the tl.:te, in popi'odiling of potod conditions tor d'i .:r-
thl;ning the commoln vveale, of ivers hard law., letay
iinpofitions, corniptions, oppreflions, &c. wlich i a
main point to lead the popular, who are Inmcil h iluft-
ed with many particular-s of this nature. it were there-
fore convenient, that theft metives, out of your nmaici
ty's providcnce, lthould e prevtnted, by your tire otilr
in tiu-fe points followinig, viz.

I. That yoir maijfly would be pleased to ab,'lith pur-

veyors and purveyance, being a matter infiiil-ly l iln-
five to the common people, and the whole k;i:gduli,
and not profitable to the prince

2. 'hat your majefly would be pleased to ti. l.v ihe

cierrt of wards, being the ruin of all the ,bic au:l au-
cicnt fa;ilies of this realln, b' Ihal matcik,, nd evil
ediuation of their clhiiric , b) s\ hicli no revlnuc of the
c:(\owin w.ill bc dc i a c d.

3. The abrogating the multlpliiit of penal laws, ge-

n:l.ill' repin:'d ',gai.ft by the ibjec, in reg.rd .,f their
I.!:;crrtaIty, beiig manyv timnes altered i:roi their true
marliny, by variet v of in' rpi'etati ns.

4. l'Tat ycur m:ijelly will be pkialid to ad!rit free

oltlort of the nati'xc tormnoditvis of this kj!:.!omn,
ro;' Ii e, rcflrai:id by fubalt.crnatc perlo:: for ,l i ate

y88 APP NDIX.
profit, being most prejudicial to the commerce of all
merchants, and a plain decfrudtion to the true induflry
and manfacaure of all kingdoms, and againit the profit
of the crown.

These, being by your majesty's confidents in the

point of time propounded, will aiTiredly confirm unto
vour matcflie the hearts and affections of the whole
kingdom, and absolutely prevent all insinuations and
devices of digned patriots, that, out of pretext of
common good, would seek to patronize themlrlves in
popular opinion and power, and therebv to derogate
iron vyour rajefil's bounty and free favour, by prince-
lv n;erit of our moderation, judgment and juttice.

Your rma.;cly's favour, thus granted to the lbjed,
.: no v.ay impeach the profits of the crown but ad-
vance them. The difpri-ortionable gain of Ibme
chequtr cfiicers, with the bale and mercenary profits f
the idle and unnecefIary clerks and attendants, will only
fuffcr some detriment; but infinite will be the good unto
ti.e kingdom, which will confirm unto your ilajefly the
universal love and aff£cion of the people, and establish
your renown in the highest efleem to all posterity.

TI'e Lord prefervc our majeflie, and make you tri-
umphant over all your enemies.

'l- care over his person, whose letters pass in this

p?' :rt, and will die befor: he leave to be ours, hall
be i. l;s :han of mine own life, nd in like etcem wiil
I hl-:! a! your aithfl coofidents, notwitlifinding I
wili !'t'd rryfclf reserved from being known unto any
of them , in my particular devoted affToions unto your
niaieflv, cn\- this extranrdinary w-orthy man, whoie
.fiociaic i am in his n,i,!ortune, doth know my heart,
and we will bottl pr:y for you, and if we live you fihall
find us tgether.

1 bc!eecli your majesty, burn this letter, and the o-

rlhers; or aliho' it be in an unuiiial hand, yet it maybe
iTcovcred. Your mijcefiy's motl devoted, and

.humble iervant, b.
3'Js\ 1i^
