OBERTSON.,O~

· `iz

C~4r, r
/0-

->hrbia Scotornuman egina et Fnuranzs 79otarl a

T 11E

I'blNBlURH

PRINTED FOR G 110DIE, A.GLTHRIE J. AVDi. F4IFBA 9\'S

A\D J. R BTRTSON.

MDL e \ HISTORY OF

S C OT L A ND

DUrRING THE REIGNS OF

UveEN 1\fARY, and of IC NG JAM~ES VII.

TILL

His ACCESSIONu to thle Croli n of Evot wo. 3

WITH A

10'IEW Of the ScourI~su HzsToRY previous o that P riali,

And an APPENDIx containing OazOnhAL PAPERS.

Bu WILLIAM ROBERTSONr, D. D.

PRIINCIPAL OF THIE UNIVERSITY OF EDI\B I, IND III TO I AP I TO

HISMA~lr. T1 TO SCO.LA D.

TO WHIlCH IS 4 DD D,

AcGlCI e Date of the C ntrol a lyr (1 t~ ( 411Lar, n t 'n ary

ic. mer E intion of tl I H o L.

VOLUMEIE

# THE AUTHOR'S PREFACE.

L

THE AUTHO R's

PREFAC E.

SDELIVER this book to the world with all-the diflk
dence and anxiety natural to an Author on pubhfhl-
ing his firfl performance. The time I have employ.
ed, anld the pains I have taken, in order to render it
morthy of the public approbation, it is, perhaps, pru-
dent to conceal, till it be know n whether that appro-
bation thlall e, r be bellowed upon it.

But as I har e departed, in many infitnce , fr m

formner Hill rialns, as I hav e placed fac'ts in a differ-
ent libht, and have drawcn characders nith new co-
lours, I ou ht to account for this condua to my
readers; and to produce the ex idence, on w hich, at
the difiance of tw~o centuries, I prefumne to contradic't
the tellimony of cotempor, ry, or of less remote His-
torians.

TH1E tranfations in AbIry's re'gn gave rife to twoa

p r les, n hich nr ere animat d ab Init each other n ith
the fierceit poli ' . hatred, emibittered by reli i us
zeal. Ea h of thle e p · d Iced Hidtorialns of c nlider-
a' le merit, whlo ad pted adl their Cen iment , and
d f ndf d all their ad~i ns. Truth, ho sever, was not
the i le obj ~t of th f~e At hors. Bli al d by preju-
d' , and heated by the part which they th mitlve
L dl ed in thle fcen th.ey defrc be, they wrote co

apology for a fadion rather than the hiffory of their
country. Succeeding Hifforians have followed thes~e
guides almost implicitly, and have repeated their er-
rors and misrepresentations. But as the fame paflions
w~hich inflamed parties in that age have des~cended
to their pofferity; as almost every event in Mary's
reign has become the objea of doubt or of d~ispute;
the eager spirit of controverly soon discovered that
without some evidence more authentic and more im-
partial than that of Hifforians, none of the points in
queition could be decided with certainty. Records
have therefore been searched, original pgpers have
been produced, and public archives, as well as the
repositories of private men, have been ransacked by
the zeal and curiosity of writers of different parties.
The attention of Cecil to colleA whatever related to
that period, in which he aded to conspicuous a part,
hath provided such an immense flore of originlal pa-
pers for illuffratin g this part of the Engliih and Scottish
hiitory, as are almost fu~fficient to s~atisfy the utmost
avidity of an Antiqjuarian. Sir Robert Cotton (wvhofe
library is now the property of the public) made great
and valuable additions to Cecil's collea~ion; and from
this magazine, Digg~es, the compilers of the Cabbala,
Anderson, IKeith, Haynes, Forbes, have drawn most
of the papers which they have printed. No Hiffory
of Scotland, that merits any degree of attention, has
appeared since thes~e colltc~tionis were publiihed. By
cons~ulting them, I have been enabled, in many in-
fl-ances, to corred~ the inaccuracies of former Hiflori-
ans, to avoid their millakes, and to detect their mil~-
representations.

B3uT many important papers have escaped the no-

tice of thos~e industrious Collec~ors, and after all they

have produced to lighlt, much flill remained in dark-
ness, unoblerved or unpubliihed. It w~as any duty to
search for these, and I found this unpleasant talk at-
tended with considerable utility.

THE library of the honourable Faculty of Aldvocates

at Edinburgh, contains not only a large colledtion of
original papers relating to the affairs of Scotland, but
copies of others no less curious, u hich have been pre-
served by Sir Robert Cotton, or are extant in the pu-
blic oflices in England. Of all thele, the Curators of
that library were pleased to allow me the peruGL.

THOUGH the Britinh Muficum be not yet open to

the public, Dr. Birch, whole obliging dilpolition is
w~ell known, procured me access to that N~oble Col-
leAion, which is worthy the magnificence ofa3 great
and polished nation.

Tu er vast and curious colleaion of papers relating

to the reign of Elizabeth which w as made by Dr. For-
bes, and of which he published only two volumes,
haviing been purchased, lince his death, by the Lord
Vis~count Royflon, his Lordship was so good as to al-
low me the use of fourteen volumes in qluarto, con-
taining; that part gs them which is conneaed witly
my f~ubjeQ.

SIa Alexander Dick communicated to me a very

\ aluable colledtion of original papers in two large vo-
lumes. They relate chiefly to the reign of fames.
M\any of them are marked with Archbilbop Spotl
nood's hand; and it appears from s~everal passages in
his hillory that he had peruled them wiith great at-
tenti n.

MR. Calderwood, an eminent Presbyterian Clergy.

man of the last century, compiled an hiffory ofScot-
land from the beginning of the reign of James V. to
the dea'th of James VTl. in fix large volumes; where-
in he has inserted many papers of consequence which
arte no where else to be found. A copy of this hiffory,
which still remains in manus~cript, in the poffefflon of
the Church of Scotland, was put into my hands by
my worthy friend, the Reverend Mr. George Withart,
p~rinlcipal Clerk of the Church,

Sm; David Dalrymple not only communicatedl to

mue the papers which he has colleaed relating to Gow-
rie's coufpiracy; but by explaining to me his f~eati-
ments with regard to that problematical paffagre in
tke Scottihfl hillory, has enabled me to place that tranf-
adion in a light w-hich dif~pells rnuch of the do~rknefs
and confusion in w~hich it has been hitherto involved,

MR~ Goodall, though he knew my sentiments w~ith

reganrd to the conduat and charad'er of Queen Mary
to be extremely different from his own, communi-
catped to me a volume of manuscripts in his poifffi~on,
which contains a great number of valuable papers
copied fiom the originals in the Cottonian Library
and. Paper Ollice, by the late RevL'rend Mr Craw-
fu~d, Regius ProfeffTor of Church HFiflory in thle uni-
rerfity of Ediinburgh. I' likewif received- from him--
thev evisina~l Riegiffer of letters k~ept by the Regent
Lenul~ox dlur'pg his admlimitration.

I .IAVE COnifutcd al dlefe papers as far as I thought

f -y cou;ld be of any use tomn ardJ illuffratin~g that pe-
r' Y .C of w: ich I write the hiffory. WCith w-hat faccefs
J Le· e empl,,yedl th!em to confirm wthat waLs aiready

known, to alcertamn what was dubious, or to deter-
mine what was controverted, the public muflt judge.

I IMICif eRflly have drawn from the different repo.

fitories to which I had access, as many papers as would
have rendered my Appendix equal in size to the most
bulky colleaslon of my predecessors. But I have f~a-
tisfied myself w ith publithling a few of the moit curt-
ous among them, to which I found it necessary to ap-
peal as vouchers for my ow n veracity. None of ther'e
as far as I can recolled, exer appeared in any f(,lmer
colledtion.

I HAVE added to the Appendix a Critical D~erta-

tron concerning the murdepr of K~in~g Hienry, at d t/ e
nluiPnenes of t/e (Ju en's letters to Bothweell. The fat~
and observations w hich relate to Madry's letters, I on e
to my friend M~r. John1 Davidson, one of the Clerks to
the Signet, who hath examined this point n' h I i
usual acuteness and induitry.

# BOOK FIRST.

THE

HISTORY

OF

S C OT LA ND.

BOOK FIRST.

CONTENTS.

Tar aragan of the Scots The peculaar abrarny of their Initory Fou r smak-

al nroas A review of the national Lhrytr fomn the death of Alexander III.
to the accellion of Mary. General causes whach limited the power of a feu-
dalmonarch Pecular force of the Scotldufhai~cracy. Itscpuaus. Egorts
to extend the myal authorsty. J mes . James I. Jarnes III James IV.
James V. H~is death Extraodmaryinfh uence of the Scottish Kngs inpar-
liament. Extreme mfignafacancy of public Batutes. State of Eurpeat the
beganning of the z6th century Franess L Charles V. Their charaders.
Henry l lII. has plan of condult in the a~airs of Scotland.

as. Bri age of the Scottih hillory ar darrk ad fabulous. Boos T.

Na ions, as well as men, arrive at maturity by degrees and the
events, which happened during their infancy or early yourth, can- of nauous
not be recolleeed, and deserve not to be remembered. The gro~efs "~~yur
ignorance which anciently covered all the North of Europe, the
continual migrations of its inhabitants, and the frequent and de.
itrudive revolutions which there occaiioned, render it impollible
to give any autheatic account of the origin of the di~erent king-
doms now eftablithed there. Every thing beyond that thort pe.
riod to which well attefid aunals reach, is obrcure i an immenfee
space is left for invention to occupy ) each nation, with a vanity
inseparable from human nature, hath fdlled that void with events
calculated to display its own antiquity and lufkre. An Hillory,
which ought to record truth and to teach wisdom, often sets out
with retailing 68~ions and abfurditie.

Tax Scots carry their pretensions to antiquity as high as any Origin of

of their neighbours. Relying upon uncertain legends, and the the aC
traditions of their hards, itill more uncertain, they reckon up a
series of kings several ages before the birth of Christ; and gite a

Boox I. particular detail of the occurrences which happened in their reigns.

But with regard to the Scots, as well as the other northern na-
tions, we receive the earliest accounts on which we can dependJ,

A. D. 81. not from their own, but from the Roman authors. When the

Romans under Agricola, firit carried their arms into the northern
parts of Britain, they found it poifeffed by the Caledonians, a fierce
and warlike people; and having~ repulled, rather than conquered
them, they ereaed a firong wall between the firths of Forth and
Clyde, and there fixed the boundaries of their empire. Adrian,
on account of the difficulty of defending such a difiant frontier,
contraded the limits of the Roman province in Britain, by build-

St. D. xxx, ing a ifecond wall, which ran between Newcalile and Carlisle. The

ambition of succeeding Emperors endeavoured to recover what
Adrian had abandoned; and the country between the two walls
was alternately under the dominion of the Romans, and the Ca-
ledonians. About the beginning of the fifth century, the inroads
of thre Goths and other Barbarians obliged the Romans, in order
to defend the centre of their empire, to recal those legions which
guarded the frontier provinces 3 and at that time they quitted all
their conquests in Britain.

A. D. 421 Their long residence in the island had polished, in some deg~reei

the rude inhabitants, and the Britons were indebted to their in-
tercourfe with the Romans, for the art of writing, and the use of
numbers, without which it is impossible long to preserve the me-
mory of past events.

North Britain was, by their retreat, left under the dominion

of the Scots and Pias. The former, who are not mentioned by
any Roman author, before the end of the fourth century, were
probably a colony of the Celtae or Glauls; their affinity to whom.
appears from their language, their manners, and religious rites *
circumitances more decisive, with regard to the origin of na-
tions, than either fabulous traditions, or the tales of ill-inform-
ed, and credulous Annalifts. The Scots, if we may believe the
common accounts, f~ettled at Brit in Ireland; and, extending·
themselves by degrees, landed at last on the coasts opposite to
that island, and fixed their habitations there. Fierce and bloody
wars were, during several ages, carried on between them and the

a. D. 835. Pias. At length, Kienneth II. the fixty-ninth king of the Scots

(according to their own fabulous authors) obtained a complete
viaory over the Pias, and united under one monarchy, the whole
country, from the wall of Adrian, to the northern ocean. And
his kingdom became known by its present name, which it derivert

fromn a people at Birit lettled there as firangers, and remained long BooK I.
o~bscure and inconsiderable. L

From this period, the hiffory of Scotland would merit some at- miftory of"

tention, were it accompanied with any certainty. But as our re- a e
2note antiquities are involved in the fame darkness with thos~e of ccure.
other nations, a calamity peculiar to ourselves has thrown almost
an equal obscurity over our more recent tranfaeions. This was
occasioned by the malicious policy of Edward I. of England.
Towards the end of the thirteenth century, this monarch called
in question the independency of Scotland 3 pretending that that
kingdom was held as a fief of the crown of England, and fubjea-
ad to all the conditions of a feudal tenure. In order to eftablilh
his claim, he seized the public archives, he ranfagcked churches
and monasteries, and getting poffetlion, by force or fraud, of ma-
ny hifforical monuments, that tended to prove the antiquity or
freedom of the kingdom, he carried s~ome of them into England,
and commanded the reft to be burned*. An universal oblivion
of past tranfaaions might have been the effeA of this fatal event,
but some imperfe& Chronicles had escaped the rage of Edward;
foreign writers had recorded some important faas relating to
Scotland j and the traditions concerning recent occurrences were
freth and worthy of credit. These broken fragments, John de
Fordun, who lived in the fourteenth century, colleaed with a
pious induffry, and from them picked out materials, which he
formed into a regular hiflory. His work was received by his
countrymen with applaure; and, as no recours~e could be had to
more ancient records, it supplied the place of the authentic an-
nals of the kingdom. It was copied in many monasteries, and
the thread of the narrative was, by different monks, continued
through the subsequent reigns. In the beginning of the sixteenth
century, John Major and Heator Boethius published their hifto-
ries of Scotland, the former a f~uccinA and dry writer, the latter
a copious and florid one, and both equally credulous. Not many
years after, Buchanan undertook the fame work; and if his ac-
curacy and impartiality had been, in any degree, equal to the
elegance of his taste, and to the purity and vigour of his ityle,
his hiflory might be placed on a level'with the most admired
compositions of the ancients. But, instead of rejeaing the im-
probable tales of Chronicle writers, he was at the utmost pains to
adorn them; and hath clothed with all the beauties and graces

*Innes, Elfay 552-

BOOK I. Of £8aion, thofb legends, which formerly had only its wildndis and

extravagance.

Four The hiflory of Scotland may properly be divided into four pe-
rernarklble
;eras in the riods. The first reaches from the origin of the monarchy, to the
scots hiffo- reign of Kenneth II. The second, from Kenneth's conquest of

the Piats, to the death of Alexander III. The third extends to
the death of James V. The last, from thence to the accellion of
James VI. to the crown of England.

The first period is the region of pure fable and conjeAure, and

ought to be totally negleaed, or be abandoned to the induffry
and credulity of antiquaries. Truth begins to dawn in the fe-
cond period, with a light, feeble at firit, but gradually increaf-
ing; and the events which then happened, may be slightly touch.
ed, but merit no particular or laborious inquiry. In the third
period, the hillory of Scotland, chiefly by means of records pre-
served in England, becomes more authentic : not only are events
related, but their cadies and effeas explained; the charaders of
the a80ors are displayed; the manners of the age described j the
revolutions in the conflitution pointed out: and here every Scots.
man thlould begin, not only to read, but to fludy the history of
his country. During the fourth period, the affairs of Scotland.
were so, mingled with those of other nations, its Situation in the
political slate of Europe was so important, its influence on the
operations of the neighbouring kingdoms was to visible, that its
history becomes an objea of attention to Foreigners, and with,
out some knowledge of the various and extraordinary revolutions
which happened there, they cannot form a just notion either of
the most illuffrious events, or of the chara~ter of the most diftin.
guiihed personages in the sixteenth century.

A rev-iew of The following hiffory is confined to the last of these periods.
the third

wr. To give a view of the political slate of the kingdom, during that

which immediately preceded it, is the design of this preliminary
Book. The imperfed knowledge which firangers have of the
affairs of Scotland, and the prejudices Scotfmnen themselves have
imbibed with regard to the various revolutions in the govern-
ment of their country, rendered such an introduaion equally ne-
cellary to both.

The period, from the death of Alexander III. to the death of

James V. contains upwards of two centuries and an half, from:
the year r286, to the year J542*

Rife: of the It opens with the famous controverly concerning the indepen-

c nrlerj dency~ of Sceolnd,l bfore then u.nion, ofn the two kngdoms this

was a quellion of much importance. If the one Crown had been BOOK I.
considered not as imperial and independent, but as feudatory to teLv
the other, a treaty of union could not have been concluded on pendiencyof
equal terms, and ev·ery advantage which the dependent kingdom scotland.
procured, must have been esteemed the concefilonn of a Sovereign
to his vassal. Accordingly, about the beginning of the present
century, and while a treaty of union between the two kingdoms
was on foot, this controvertyr was agitated with all the heat, which
national animofities naturally inspire. WCThat was then a fubjeA
of s~erious concern, the union of the two kingdoms hath rendered
a matter of mere curiosity. But though the objeas, which at
that time warmed and interefied both nations exist no longer, a
quefion which appeared so momentous to our anceffors, cannot
be altogether indifferent or uninftruAive to us.

Some of the northern counties of England were early in the

hands of the Scottith Kings, who, as far back as the feudal cuf'
toms can be traced, held these poffemons of the Kings of Eng-
Jand, and did homage to them on that account. This homage,
due only for the territories which they held in England, was in
no wife derogatory from the royal dignity. Nothing is more
suitable to feudal ideas, than that the fame person should be both a
Lord and a Vassal, independent in one capacity, and dependent
in another *. The Crown of England was without doubt impe-
rial and independent, though the Princes who wore it were, for
many ages, the vassals of the Kings of France 3 and, in conf~e-
quence of their poirletions in that kingdom, bound to perform all
the services, which a feudal Sovereign has a title to exas. The
fame, was the condition of the Monarchs of Scotland, free and in-
dependent as Kings, but, as poffeffing English territories, vassals
to the King of England. The English Monarchs, content with
their legal and uncontroverted rights, were neither capable, nor
hlad any thoughts of ufurping more. England, when conquered
by the Saxons, being divided by them into many iimall kingdoms,

* A very singular proof of this occurs in the French hillory. Arpin f~old the

vicompte of the city of Bourges to Philip I. who did homage to the Count of
Sancerre for a part of these lands, which h-ld of that NoTbleman, A. D. 1100o. I
believe that no example, of a King's doing homage to one of his owvn fulbje61s,
is to be met with in the hillories either of England or Scotland. Philip le Bel
abolifhecd this prattice in France, A. D. 1302. Henaut. AbregP Chronol. Some-
wnhat similar to this, is a charter of the Abbo3t of Mlelrofs, A. D. 1535, confli-
tuting James V. the Bailiff or Stewfard of that abbey, velling in? him all the
powers whnich pertained to that offce, and requiring him to be answ~erable to the
Abbot for his exercise of the fame. A~rchiv. publ. Edin.

Boaxi I. was in no condition to extend its dominion over Scotland, united

Sat that time under one Monarch. And though there petty princi,

palities were gradually formed into one kingdom, the reigning
Princes exposed to continual invasions of the Danes, and ofteq
fabje~ted to the yoke of there formidable pirates, seldom turned
their arms towards Scotland, and were utterly incapable of efla-
blilhing new rights in that country. The first Kings of the Nor-
man race, busied with introducing their own laws and manners
into the kingdom which they had conquered, or with maintain.
ing themselves on the throne which some of them poffeired by a
very dubious title, were as little anxious to acquire new authori.
ty, or to form new pretentions in Scotland. An unexpedled ca.
lamity that befel one of the Scottish Kings first encouraged the
English to think of bringing his kingdom under dependence.
William * King of Scotland being taken prisoner at Alnwick, Hen.
ryr II. as the price of his liberty, not only extorted from him an
exorbitant rans~om, and a promis~e to surrender the places of great-
eft firength in his dominions, but compelled him to do homage
for his whole kingdom. Richard I. a generous Prince, solemnly
renounced this claim of homage, and ablolved Wjiilliam from the
hard conditions which Henry had imposed. Upon the death of
Alexander III. near a century after, Edward I. availing himself
of the situation of affairs in Scotland, acquired an influence iq
that kindom, which no English Monarch before him ever poi~el-
fed, and imitating the interefled policy of Henry, rather than
the magnanimity of Richard, revived the claim of lovereignty to
which the former had pretended.

Pretensions Mlargaret of N~orway, grand-daughter of Alexander, and heir
ofBnxceand to his Crown, did not long s~urvive him. The right of fuc-

flexa- cetiion belonged to the descendents of David Earl of Hunting-

ton, third son of David I. Among these, Robert Bruce, and
John Baliol, two illuffrious competitors for the Crown, appeared.
Bruce was the son of Isabel Earl David's second daughter a Ba-
lio1, the grandson of Margaret the eldeit daughter. According
to the rules of fuccei~on which are now eflbitihed, the right of
Baliol was preferable, and notwfithflanding Bruce's plea of being
xcarer in blood to Earl Dav~id, Baliol's claim, as the reprefenta-
tlve of his mother and grandmother would be deemed incanteft-
ible. But, in that age, the order of succession was not afcer-
tained with the fame precision. The quefflon appeared to be no
less intricate, than it was important. And though the prejudi-
cLs of the people, and perhaps the laws of the k~ingdom, favour-

* Sirnamed the Lion.

ed B~ruce, each of the rivals were fupporlted by a powerful sac- BDOOK
tion. Arms alone, it was feared, must terminate a dispute too
weighty for the laws to decide. But, in order to avoid the mi-
series of a civil war, Edward was chosen Umpire, and both par-
ties agreed to acquiesce in his decree. This had well nigh prov-
ed fatal to the Independence of Scotland; and the nation, by its
eagernes~s to guard against a civil war, was not only exposed to
that calamity, but almost fubje~ted to a foreign yokie. Edward
Avas artful, brave, enterprising, and commanded a powerful and
inartial people, at peace with the whole world. The anarchy
wthich prevailed in Scotlanid, and the ambition of competitors
ready to sacrifice their country in order to obtain even a depen-
dent Crown, invited him first to seize, and then to fubjeBt the
kingdom. The authority of an umpire, which had been unwa-
rily beffowed upon him, and from which the Scots dreaded no
dangerous cons~equences, enabled hirn to execute his schemes
with the greater facility. Under pretext of examining the que-
flion with the utmost s~olemnity, he summoned all thte Scottish Ba-
rons to Norham, and having gained some, and intimidated others,
he prevailed on all who were prese~nt, not excepting B3ruce and
Ealiol, the competitors, to acknowledge Sco~tland a fief of the
English Crown, and to fw'ear fealty to him as their Sovere ~n or
Liege Lord. This flep led to another still more important. As
it was vain to pronounce a sentence which he had not power to
~execute, Edward demanded poffeffion of the kingdom, that he
might be able to deliver it to him whose right should be found
preferable. And such was the pufilllanimity of the nobles, and
the impatient ambition of the competitors, that both assented to
this firange demand, and Gilbert de Umfraville, Earl of Angus,
w~as the only man, who refused to su~rrender the castles in his
custody to the enemy of his country. Edward finding Baliol
`the most oblequious and the least formidable of the two competi-
tors, soon after gave judgment in his favour. B~alio1 once more
profefled himself the vassal1 of England, and farbmitted to every
condition, which the Sovereign whom he had now acknowledged
was pleased to preferibe.

Edward, having thus placed a creature of his own upon the.

throne of Scotland, and compelled the nobles to renounce the an-
clent liberties and independence of their country, had reason to
conclude that: his dominion, was now fully established. But he
began too soon to assume the matter; his new vassals, fierce and
independent, bore with impatience a yoke, to which they were

B~oor L not accufomed. Provoked by his haughtiners, even the panive

spirit of Balio1 began to mutiny. But Edward, who had no long-
er use for such a pageant King, forced him to resign the Crowfn,
and openly attempted to seize it is fallen to himself, by the re-
bellion of his vassal. At that critical period, arose Sir Williant
Wallace, a hlero, to whom the fond admiration of his country·
men hath alcribed many fabulous aAs of prowess, though his real
valour, as well as integrity and wisdom, is such as needs not the
heightenings of fiation. He, almost single, ventured to take arms
in defence of the kingdom, and his boldne~s revived the lpirit of his
countrymen. At last, Robert Bruce, the grandson of himwhollood
in competition with Baliol, appeared to aflert his own rights, and
to vindicate the honour of his country. The nobles, ashamed
of their former bafenel~si and enraged at the many indignities of-
fe ed to the nation, crowded to his flandard. In order to crulh
h m at once, the English 11Ionarch entered Scotland, at the head
of a mighty army. Alany battles were fought, and the Scots,
th~ough often vanquilhed, were not fabdued. The ardent zeal
with which the nobles contended for the independency of the
kingdom, the prudent valour of Bruce, and above all a national
enth7uiiafm inspired by such a cause, balfled the repeated efforts
of Edwrard, and counterbalanced all the advantages which he
derived from the number, and wealth of his fubjeas. And
tho0ugrh the war continued with little intermillion upwards of
frentlly years, B3ruce and his pofferity kept pofletion of the throne
of Scotland, and ruled with an authority not inferior to that of
its former Illonarchs.

But while the sword, the ultimate judge of all disputes be-

tw-een contending nations, was employed to terminate this con·
troverly~, neither Edw-ard nor the Scots s~eemed to distrust the
juffice of their cause; and both appealed to hiffory and records,
and from thlere produced, in their own favour, fach evidence, as
thley pretended to be unanfiverable. The letters and memorials
addrexred by each1 party to the Pope, who was then reverenced as
the common father, and often appealed to as the common judge
of all Chriflian Princes, are still extant. The fabulous tales of
the early British hillory; the partial testimony of ignorant Chro-
niclers; fuppoafititious treatics and charters; are the proofs, on
which Edw:ard founded his title to the sovereignty of Scotland;
and the homnage done by the Scottish llonarchs for their lands in
Englrland, is prepofferoufly supposed to imply the fabje8ion of their

wihole kingdom*. 111 founded, however, as their right was, the Booze L
English did not fail to revive it, in all the subsequent quarrels
between the tw~o kingdoms - while the Scots disclaimed it with
the utmost indig~nation. To this we must impute the fierce and
implacable hatred to each other, which long inflamed both. Their
national antipathies were excited, not only by the ufuial circum-
flances of frequent hostilities, and reciprocal injuries; but the
English considered the Scots as vafials who had presumed to re-
bel, and the Scots, in their turn, regarded the Eng~lish, as usurp-
crs who aimed at enslaving their country.

At the time when Robert Bruce began his reign in Scotland 1306.

the fame form of goverment was establish~ed in all the indm kingdom fh
of Europe. And the f~urpriiing similarity, in their conflitution w~hen Bruce
and law·s, demonfirates that the nations which overturned the Ro- twi~g~bea his
man empire, and created there kingdoms, though divided into
different tribes, and diitinguifhed by different names, were orig;i-
nally the fame people. When we take a view of the feudal system
of laws and policy, that stupendous and singular fabric ereaed
by them; the first objea that firikes us is the King. And
when we are told that he is the sole proprietor of all the lands
within his dominions, that all his f~ubjeas derive their poffeflions
fr-om him, and in return consecrate their lives to his service;
when we hear that all marks of diftin~ion, and titles of dignity,
flow from him as the only fountain of honour ; when we behold the
most potent Peers, on their bended knees, and with folded hands,
swearing fealty at his feet, and acknowledging him to be their
Sovereign, and their Liege Lord; we are apt to pronounce him
a powerful, nay an absolute Monarch. No conclusion, however,
would be more rash, or worse founded. The genius of the feudal
government was purely ariffocratical. With all the ensigns of
royalty, and with many appearances of despotic power, a feudal
King was the most limited of all Princes.

Before they sallied out of their own habitations to con- originpfthe

quer the world, many of the northern nations seem not to have Feudal Go-
been fubjeat to the goverment of kingst;i and even where mo- axdn se

it.

narchical government was established, the prince poireifed but tacratical
little authority. A general rather than a king, his military com- eus
mand was extensive, his civil jurifdiaion almost nothing J. The
army which he led was not composed of soldiers, who could be
compelled to serve, but of such as voluntarily followed his itand-

* Anderfon's Hiitiorical Ess~ay concerning the Independency, &rc.
t Clef.1ib. vi. c. 23. t Tacit. de Mor. Gerox. c.7.In.

Bool; I aid s. These conquered not fo~r their leader, but for themrn

selves; and being free in their own country, renounced not
their liberty when they acquired new settlements. They didi
not exterminate the ancient inhabitants of the countries which
they s~ubdued, b;t s~eizing the gleater 'part of their lands, they
took their persons under proteAion. And the difficulty of main-
taining a new conqlueft, as well as the danger of being attacked
by new invaders, rendering it necessary to be always in a poflure
of defence, the form of government which they eliablifhed, was
altogether milicary, and nearly relembled that to which they had
been accuffomed in their native country. T'heir general fliill
continuingto be thlehead of the colony, part of the conquered lands
were allotted to hitn j the remainder, under the name of benefiar
or f~efls, was divided amongit his principal officers. As the com-
mon safety required that there officers thoulld, upon all occaf20as, be
ready to appear in arms, for the common defence, and thould con-
tinue obedient to their general, they bound themselves to take the
hield, when called, and to serv1e him with a number of men, in
proportion to the extent of their territory. There great officers,
again, parcelled out their lands among their followers, and annex-
ed the fame condition to the grant. A feudal kingdom was pro-
perly the encampment of a great army; military ideas predominat.
ed, military subordination was established, and the po~efilon of land
was the pay which soldiers received for their personal service. In
consequence of these notionls, the poffefflon of land was granted
during pleasure only, and kings were ele~ive. In other words,
an offcer disagreeable to his general was deprived of his pay, and
the person who was most capable of conduaing~ an army, was
chosen to command it. Such were the first rudiments, or infancy
of feudal goverment.

But long before the beginning of the fourteenth century, the

feudal fyfiem had undergone many changes, of which the follow-
ing were the most considerable. Kingrs formerly ele~tive, were
then hereditary ; and fiefs granted at first during pleasure. de-
fcended from father to son, and were become perpetual. These
changes, not lelrs advantageous to the nobles, than to the prince,

Generalcau- made no alteration in the ariflocratical [~pirit of the feudal confli-
feswhichli- tution. The king, who at a difiance, s~eemed to be invefied with
mited. the
powerotthe majesty and power, appears, on a nearer tiew, to posses~s none of
feudal mo- these advantages, which beffow on monarchs their grandeur and

* Caf.1b. vi c. 33

enthority. His revenues were scanty; he had not a flanding army, EooK I,
jlnd hie enjoyed no proper jurifdietion. -

At a time when pomp and s~plendor were unknown, even in The~ir reve-

the palaces of kings; when the officers of the crown received nues were

fmnall.

little salary besides the fees and perquisites of their offce; when
embaflaes to foreign courts were rate; when armies were corn-
pos~ed of soldiers who served without pay; it was not neceffarythat
a king should posses~s a great revenue; nor did the condition of
Europe, in those ages, allow its princes to be opulent. Commerce
made little progress in the kingdoms, where the feudal govern-
ment was eila~blifhted. Inflitutions, which had no other obje~t
but to ins~pire a martial spirit, to train men up to be soldiers, and to
make arms the only honourable profetiron, naturally difcouragedthe
commercial arts. The revenues, arising from the taxes imposed on
the different branches of commerce, were by cons~equence inconfi-
derable, and the prince's treas~ury received little supply from a
source, which, among a trading people, flows with such abun-
dance, and is almoit inexhauffible. A fixed tax was not levied
even on land; such a burthen would have appeared intolerable
to men who r~eceived their estates, as the reward of their valour,
and who considered their service in the field, as a full retribution
for what they poifeffed. The king's demefnes, or the portion of
land which he still retained in his own hands unalienated, fur-
nilhed fubliftence to his court, and defrayed the ordinary ex-
pence of government*. The only slated taxes which the feu-
dal law obliged vassals to pay to the king, or to those of whom
they held their lands, were three; one when his eldest son was
made a knight; another when his eldest daughter was married;
and a third in order to ransom him if he thould happen to be
taken priifoner. Bes ides these, the kings received the feudal casual-
ties of the ward, marriage, &c. of his own vassals. And, on
some extraordinary occasions, his f~ubjeas granted him an aid,
wehich they diftingulihed by the name of a benevolence, in order
to declare that he received it not in consequence of any right,
but as a voluntary gift, flowing from their g~ood-will-t. All these
added together, produced a revenue, s~canty and precarious, which
far from enabling the king to attempt any thing that could excite
the jealousy or fear of the nobles, kept him in continual indi-
gence, anxiety, and dependence.

* Craig de Feud. lib. r. Dieg. 14. Du Cange Gloss. voc. Dominicum.
t Du Cange voc. Auxilium.

BBot I- Nor could the king supply the defea of his revenues, by the

V terror of his arms. Mercenary troops and nanding armnies were

-Aanding ar. unknown as long as the feudal goverment fablifted in vigour.
anes. Europe was peopled with soldiers. The vaflals of the king, and

the fub-traffls of the barons were all obligtd to carry arms. And
while the poverty of princes prevented them from fortifying their
fr~ontier towns, wnhile a campaign continued but a few weeks, and
while a fierte and impetuous courage was Impatient to bring every
quarrel to the decillon of a battle, an army, without pay, and with
little dircipline, was f~ufficient for all the purposes both of the few
curity end of the glory of a hiation. Such an army, howher,
far from being an engine at the king's dilpofal, was often no less
formidable to him, than to his enemies. The more warlike anyt
people were, the more independent they became; and the famb
persons being both s~oldiers and fubjeas, civil privileges and immul
nities were the consequence of their viaories, and the reward of
their martial exploits. Conquerors, whom mercenary armies, un-
der our present forms of goverment, often render the tyrrants q;S
their own people, as well as the f~courges of mankind, were commonly,
under the feudal conflitution, the most indulgent of all princes
to their fubjeas, because they flood most in need of their allt-
ance. A prince, whom even war and viaories did not render the
master of his own army, poffeffed no shadow of military power du.
ring times of peace. His disbanded soldiers mingled with his
other fubjeas; not a single man received pay from him; ma.
ny ages elapted before a guard was appointed to defend his pers
son; and destitute of that great infirument of dominion a flands
ing army, the authority of the king continued always feeble, and
was often contemptible.

Their jurif. Nor were there the only circumitances which contributed to.
diaionwas wards deprefling the regal power. By the feudal fyLtem, thekingg
limited. S-judicial authority was extremely circumscribed. At firit, princes

seem to have been the s~upreme judges of their people, and in per-
son, heard and determined all controversies among them. phe
multiplicity of causes soon made it necelfary to appoint judges,
who, in the king's name, decided matters that belonged to the
royal juridiiiion. But the Barbarians, who over-ran Europ~e, hav-
ing destroyed most of the great cities, and the countries which
they seized being cantoned out among powerfulbarons, who were
blindly followed by numerous vaf~als, whom in return, they were
bound to protea from every inijury; the adminiffration ofjuffice
was greatly interrupted, and the execution of any legal featence

became almost impraaicab~le. Theft, rapine, murder, and difor. BOOK I.
der of all kinds prevailed in every kingdom of Europe, to a de- - -
gree almost incredible, and fearce compatible with the fubliftence
of civil faciety. Every offender sheltered himself under the pro-
te~ion of some powerful chieftain, who screened him from the
pursuits of justice. To apprehend, and to punish a criminal, of-
ten required the union and effort of half a kingdom". In order
to remedy ther~e evils, many persons of diftinaion were intruffed
with the admmiilration of juffice within their own territories.
But what we may presume was, at first, only a temporary grant,
or a personal privilege, the incroaching spirit of the nobles soon
converted into a right, and rendered hereditary. The lands of
some were ereated into Baronies, those of others into Regalities.
The jurifdiaion of the former was extensive, that of the latter, as
the name implies, royal and almaft unbounded. All causes, whe-
ther civil or criminal, were tried by judges, whom the 10rd of the
regality appointed*, and if the king's court called any person with-
in his territory before them, the lord of regality might put a stop
to their proceedings, and by the privilege of repledging, remove
the cause to his own court, and even puniih his vassal, if he sub-
mitted to a foreign jurifdiaion f. Thus almost every queffion in
which any person, who resided on the lands of the nobles, was in-
terefied, being determined by judges appointed by the nobles
themselves, their valials were fearce sensible of being, in any de-
gree, f~ubjea to the crown. A feudal kingdom was s~plit into ma..

* A remarkable inflance of this occurs in the following hiflory, so late as the

year 156x. Mary, having appointed a court of juitice to be held on the borders,
the inhabitants of no less than eleven counties were summoned to guard the per-
son, who was to aa? as judge, and to enable him to enforce his decif ions. The
wordsof a proclamation, which afford such a conveining proof of the feeblenes~s of
the feudal government, deserve our notice.--'' And because it is necessary for the
execution of her Highners' commandments, and service, that her juffice be well
accompanied, and her authority fufficiently fortified, by the concurrence of a
good power of her faithful fub~jeas--Therefore commands and charges all and
sundry Earls, Lords, Barons, Freeholders, Landed-men, and other Gentlemen,
dwelling within the said counties, that they, and every one of them, with their
kin, friends, servants, and houfh~old-men, well bodin in the feir of war in the
moRt fubflantious manner, (i. e. completely armed and provided,) andwith twen-
ty days vianuals, to meet and to pals toward him to the borough of Jedburgh,
and there to remain during the said fipace of twenty days, and to receive such
direaion and commands, as shall be given by him to them in our Sovereign La-
dy's name for quietness of the country; and to put the fame in execution, under
the pain of lofinlg their life, lands, and goods." Keith's Hlift. of Scotland, 198.

( Craig, lib. iii. Dieg. 7.

BOOK I. 117 81311 principalities, almoff independent, and held together by

a feeble, and commonly an imperceptible bond of union. And
the king was not only firipped of the authority annexed to the
person of a supreme judge, but his revenue fuffered no small di.
munition, by thle loss of thole pecuniary emoluments, which were,
in that age, due to the person who adminiffered justice.

In thle fame proportion that the king funk in power, the nobles

role towards independence. Not satisfied with having obtained 2
hereditary right to their fiefs, which they formerly held during plea-
sure, their ambition aimed at something bolder, and by introducing
entais, endeavoured, as far as human ingersuity and invention can
reach that end, to render their poffefilonss unalienable and ever·
Jafting. As they had full power to add to the inheritance transmit·
ted to them from their anceffors, but none to diminish it; time
alone, by means of marriages,1egacies, and other accidents, brought
continual accellions of wealth, and of dignity; a great family, like
a river, became considerable from the length of its course, and as
it rolled on, new honours and new property flowyed fuccefi~vely
into it. Wihatever influence is derived from titles of honour, the
feudal nobles, likewise, poffeffed in an ample manner. These
marks of dillinAlon are, in their pwn nature, either official or per-
fanal, and being annexed to a particular charge, or beflowed by
the admiration of mankind upon illuffrious charl~ers, ought to be
appropriated to thele. But the son, however unworthy, could not
bear to be firipped of that appellation,' by which his father had
been diftingrulfhed. Hiis prelamption chsimed, what his virtue did
not merit; titles of honour became hereditary, and added new
luffre to nobles already in pcffefiion of too much power. Some-
thing more audacious and reore extravagant flillremained. Thefu-
prene direaion of all affairs,b oth cil iland military, being~committed
to the great officers of the crown, the fame and safety of princes,
as well as of their people, depended upon the fidelity and abilities
of there officers. But fach was the prepofferous ambition of the
nobles, and to fuccefsful even their wildest attempts to aggrandize
themf lves, that in all the kingdoms wshere the feudal inflitutions
prevailed, most of these offces w~ere annexed to great families,.
anld held, like fiefs, by hereditary right. A person, whole undu-
tiful behaviour rendered hlim odious to his Prince, or w-hole
incapacity exposed him to the contempt of the people, often held
a place of power and trust, of the greatest importance to both.
In1 Scotland the offices of Lord Jul~:ce General, Great Cham·
fSerlain, High Stewrard, High Conitable, LadrlPadhal, and High

Admiral, were all hereditary j and in many counties, the office of Boos I.
Sheriff was heldi in the fame manner.

Nobles, whol~e property was so exten~sive, and whole power so

great, could not fail of being turbulent and formidable. Nor did
they want infirurnents for ex~ecuting their holdeft defigrns. That
portion of their lands, which they parcelled out among their fol-
lowers, s~upplied them wvith a numerous band of faithful and de-
termined vassals; wh~ile that, which they retained in their own
hands, enabled them to live with a princely ifplendor. The great
hall of an ambitious Baron was often more crowded than phe court-
of his Sovereign. The firong~ cattles, in which th~ey reflded, as-
forded a fTecure retreat to the discontented and seditious. A great
part of their revenue was spent upon multitudes of indigent, but
bold retainers. And if at any time they left their retreat, to ap-
pear in the court of their So iereig~n, they were accompanied, even
in times of peace, with a vast train of armed followers. The usual
retinue of William the sixth Earl of Douglas consisted of two thou-
sand horse. Those of the other nobles were magnificient and formi-
dable in proportion. lInpatient of s~ubordination, and forgetting
their proper rank, these potent and haughty Barons were the ri-
vals, rather than the fubje61s of their Prince. They often de-
I'piled his orders, insulted his person, and wreited from him his
crown. And the hiffory of Europe, during several ages, con-
tains little else, but the account of the war and revolutions, ac-
caiioned by their exorbitant ambition.

But, if the authority of the Barons far exceeded its proper Theirpower

bounds in the other nations of Europe, we may affrm that the g~reater mn

Scotland

balance which ought to be preserved between a King and his than in aur
nobles was entirely 1011 in Scotland. The Scottish nobles enjoy- Other king-

dom.

ed, in common with those of othler nations, all the means for ex-
tending thleir authority which arise from the ariffocratical g~enius
of thle feudal government. Besides these, they poffeffed advan-
tages peculiar to thems~elves; the accidental sources of their
power were considerable; and singular circumstances concurred
with the [~pirit of the conititution to agrgrandize them. T'o enu- The parti-
merate the most remarkable of there, will serve both to explain ~f~c <ulls
the political state of the kingdom, and to illuffrate many import-
ant occurrences, in the period now under our review.

I. The nature of their country was one cause of the power The, natmle

and independence of the Scottith nobles. Level and oaen coun- of the couur

try,

tries are formed for servitude. The authority of the supreme
magiffrate reaches with ease to the moit distant corners, and

BOOK L. when nature has ereaed no barrier, and affords no retreat, the

guilty or obnoxious are soon deteaed, and punished. Mountains,
and sens, and rivers, set bounds to despotic power, and amidit
there, is the natural feat of freedom and independence. In such
places, did the Scottish nobles usually fix their residence. By re·
tiring to his own caffle, a mutinous Baron could defy the power
of his Sovereign; it being impraaicable to lead an army through
a barren country, to places, almost inaccellible to a single man.
The fame causes, which checked the progress of the Roman arms,
and rendered all the efforts of Edward I. abortive, often prote8.
ed the Scottish nobles from the vengeance of their Prince; and
they owed their personal independence, to those very mountains
and marfhes,.which saved their country from being conquered.

Th~e [mall II. The want of great cities in Scotland contributed not a
gubrea f~lt citiers. little to increase the power of the nobles, and to weaken that of

the Prince. Wherever numbers of men assemble together, or-
der must be established, and a regular form of government in~iti
tuted, the authority of the magiffrate muff be recognized, and
his deciilons meet with prompt and full obedience. Laws and
subordination take rife in cities j and where there are few cities
as in Poland, or none as in Tartary, there are few or no traces of
any fort of police. Eut under the feudal governments, com·
merce, the chief means of assembling mankind, was negle61ed;
the nobles, in order to firengthen tlgeir influence over their vas-
fals, resided among them, and seldom appeared at court, where
they found a superior, or dwelt in c' ·s, where they met with
equals. In Scotland, the rich cour* . the south lying open
to the Englithl, no town Etuated' * e could rife to be great or
populous amidst continual inroad .Ild alarms; the residence of
our monarchs was not fixed to ruy particular place; many parts
of the country were barren and uncultivated; and in consequence
of these peculiar circumstances, added to the general causes flow-
ing from the nature of the feudal inflitutions, the towns in Scot-
land were extremely few, and very inconsiderable. The vass~als
of every Baron occupied a diftina portion of the kingdom, and
unmingled with others, formed a separate and almost independent
society. Initead of giving aid towards reducing to obedience
their seditious Chieftain, or any whom he took under his protec-
tion, they were all in arms for his defence, and obitruaed the
operations of justice to the utmost. The prince was obliged to
connive at Criminals, whom he could not reach; the nobles, con-

fOcious of this advantage, were not afraid to offend 3 and the dif- BOOK I.
ficulty of punilhing almost insured them of impunity.

III. T'he divililon of the country into clans had no small effe8 The infitu-

in rendering the nobles considerable. Th ainwihoe-tionofclans.
ran Europe, were originally divided into many fmnall tribes; and
when they came to parcel out the lands which they had conquer-
ed, it was natural for every Chieftain to beffow a portion, in the
firit place, upon those of his own tribe or family. There all held
their lands of him; and as the fagfety of each individual depend-
ed on the general union, these Cmall societies clung together, -and
were dillinguilhed by some common appellation, either patrony-
mical, at local, long before the introducaion of firnames, or en-
signs ar-morial. But when there became common, the defcen-
dents and relations of every Chieftain assumed the fame name and
arms with him; other vassals were proud to imitate their example,
and by degrees they wrere communicated to all those who held of
the fame fiperior. Thus clanfhips were formed; and in a gene-
ration or two, that consanguinity which was, at firit, in a great
measure, imaginary, w-as believed to be real. An artificial union
was converted into a natural one; men willingly followed a lead-
er, whom they regarded both as the superior of their lands,
and the chief of their blood, and served him not only with the
Eidelity of valfals, but with the affecaion of friends. In the other
feudal kingdoms, we may observe such unions as we have de-
ifcribed, imperfealy foqrmed; but in Scotland, whether they were
the produdion of chance or the effeRt of policy, or introduced
by the Irish colony abor aentioned, and firengthened by care-
fully preserving their genealogies both genuine and fabulous,
clanfhips were universal. Such a confederacy might be over-
come, it could not be broken; and no change of manners, or of
government, has been able, in some parts of the kingdom, to dif~-
solve associations which are founded upon prejudices so natural to
the human mind. How formidable were nobles at the head of
followers, who, counting that cause just and honourable which
their Chief approved, were ever ready to take the field at his
command, and to sacrifice their lives in defence of his person, or
of his fame ? Against such men, a king contended with great
disadvantage, and that cold service, which money purchases, or
authority extorts, was not an equal match for their ardor and
zeal.

IV. The smallness of their number may be mentioned among The fmnall

the causes of the grandeur of the Scottish nobles. Our annals nuraber of

.. the nobles.

BOOK L. reach not back to the fir~t diviflon of property in th~e L'nrdo tt

C-~' but to far as we can trace the matter, the original po~emons of

the nobles seem to have been eutenfive. T'he ancient Thanes
were the equals and the rivals of their prince. 1\lany of the Eallh
and Barons, who succeeded them, were masters of terri ories no
less ample. France and England, countries wide and fertile, as.
forded s~ettlements to a num-rous and powerful nobility. Scot-
land, a kingdom neither estenfive nor rich, could not contain
many such overgrown promlietors. Eut the power of an arillo-
cracy always dimninimes, in proportion to the increase of its num-
bers; feeble if divided among a multitude; irrefillible if center-
ed in a few. When nobles are numerous, their operations near-
ly resemb-le thos~e of the people, they are rouled by what they
feel only, not by what thej apprehend; and submit to many ar.
bitrary and opprefirve a~ts, before they take arms against their
Sovereign. A small body, on the contrary, is more sensible,
and more impatient; quick in dilcerning, and prompt in repel-
ling danger j all its motions are as sudden, as those of the other
are flow. Hence proceeded the extreme jealousy, with which
the Scottish nobles oblerved their monarchs, and the fierceness
with which they opposed their encroachments. Even the virtue
of a Prince did not render them less vigilant, or les~s eager to de-
fend their rights; and Robert Bruce, notwfithftanding the fplen-
dor of his viffories, and the glory of his name, was upon the
point of experiencing the vigour of their resistance, no less than
his unpopular descendent James III. Besides this, the near alli-
ance of the great families, by frequent intermarriages, was the
natural consequence of their small number. And as confangui-
nity was, in those ages, a powerful bond of union, all the kind-
red of a nobleman interested th7emselves in his quarrel, as a com-
man cause, and every contest the king had, though with a sing-le
baron, s~oon drew upon him the alms of a whole confederacy.

Their V. Those natural connexions both with their equals, and with
leagus nd their inferiors, thle Scottith nobles firengthened by a device, which
tions. if not peculiar to themselves, was at least more fiequent: among

them, than in any other nation. Even in timles of profound
peace, they formed associations, which when n ade with their
equals, were called leagues of mutual' d fence; and when with
their inferiors, bonds of manrent. By the former, the contra8-
ing parties bound thlemfelves mutually to assist each other, in all
causes, and against all persons. By the latter, prote~tion was
flipulated on the one hand, and fidelity and personal service

promiled on thle other *X. Self-prefervation, it is probable, forced Boox I.
men at Birit into there confederacies, -and while disorder and ra-
pine were universal, while government was unsettled, and the
authority of laws little known or regarded, near neighbours
found it necessary to unite in this manner for their s~ecurity, and
the weak were obliged to court the patronage~ of the firong. By
degrees, there associations became so many alliances offenfive and
defensive against the throne; and as their obligation was held to
be more sacred than any tie whatever, they gave much umbrage
to our Kings, and contributed not a little to the power and inde-
pendence of the nobility. In the reign of James II. William the
eighth Earl of Douglas entered into a league of this kind with
thle Earls of Crawfurd, Ross, Mvulray, Ormond, the Lords Ha-
milton, Balveny, &c. and to, formidable was this combination to
the King, that he flabbed Douglas with his own hand in order to
dissolve it.

V1. The freqttent wars be'tween England and Scotlan~d proved The fre-

another cause of augmenting the power of the nobles. Nature g~~,t war's
has placed no barrier between the two kingdoms 3 a river, almost land.
every where fordable, divides them towards ·the ·east; on the
weft they are separated by an imaginary line. The small reve-
nues of our Kings prevented them from fortifying, or placing
garrisons in the towns on the frontier; nor would the jealousy of
their fubjeats have permitted such a method of defence. The
Barons, whos~e eflates lay near the borders, considered themselves
as bound in honour and interest to repel the enemy. The war-
denJh :~ of the diff~erent marches, ofmees of great trust and digni-
ty, were always beffowed on them. This gained them the lead-
ing of the warlike counties in the south; and their vassals, living
in a slate of perpetual hoffility, or enjoying at best an infrecure
peace, became more inured to war than even the reft of their
countrymen, and more willing to accompany their Chieftain in
his moRt hardy and dangerous enterprises. It was the valour, no
less than the number of their followers, that rendered the D~ou-
glasses great. The nobles in the northern and midland counties
were often dutiful and oblequious to the crown, but our monarchs
alwfays found it impra~icable to subdue the mutinous and ungo-
vernable spirit of the borderers. In all our domestic quarrels,
those, who could draw to their fide the inhabitants of the south-
ern counties, were sure of viaory ; and conscious of this advant-
ag-e, the Lords who pofifeled authority th~ere, were apt to forget

* AB. 30. Farl. 1424. ASt. 43. Parl. 1355-~

BOOK T. the Quty which they owed their Sovereign, and to aspire beyond

Sthe rank of fubjeAs.

The fre. VII. The calamities which b~efel our Kings contributed mnore
qutentmmo- than any other cause to diminifhl the royal authority. Never welr
happenoedin any race of monarchs to unfortunate as the Scottish. Of fix sac.
scotland. cellive Princes, from Robert III. to James VI. no one died a

natural death; and the minorities, during that time, were long-
er, and more frequent, than ever happened in any other king-
dom. From Robert Bruce to James VI. we reckon ten princesj
and seven of there were called to the throne, while they were
minors, and almost infants. Even the most regular and best efta-
blithed governments feel s~ensibly the pernicious effeas of a mino·
rity, and either become languid and inaaive, or are thrown into
violent and unnatural convulflons. Bunt, under the imperfe8 and
ill adjuffed f~yfem of government in Scotland, ther~e effeas were
still more fatal; and the fierce and mutinous sp~irit of the nobles,
unrestrained by the authority of a King, scorned all fubjeaion to
the delegated jurifialton of a regent, or to the feeble commatnds
of a minor. T'he royal authority was circumscribed within nar-
rower limits than ever; the prerogatives of the crown, naturally'
inconsiderable, were reduced almost to nothing; and the arifto.
cratical powcer gradually role upon the ruins of thle monarchical.
Left the personal power of a regent thould enable him to aB with
too much vigour, thie authority, aninexed to that office, was
sometimes rendered inconsiderable, by being divided j or if a
single regent was chaf n, the greater nobles, and the heads of
the more illuffrious families, were seldom raised to that dignity.
It was often conferred upon men, who piotTefed hrttle influence,
and ex-cited no jealoury-. They, confcio is of their own weak-
ness, were obliged to ovellooki some inlegularitics, and to per-
mit others; and in order to support their authority, which was
deltitute of real firengrth, they endeavoured to gain the mait
powerful and aaive Barons, by granting them poffetions and im-
muniies, which rais~ed them to still greater power. When the
King himfl~f came to aiffme the reins of government, he found
his revenues wasted or alienated, the crown lands seized or given
away, and the nobles 10 accustomed to independence, that after
the struggles of a whole reign, he was feldomn able to reduce

Revicw of them to the fame flrate, in wfhich thley had been at the beginning

ab
I:);o f his minority, or to wrest from them what they had usurped
',i·s during that time. If' we take a view of what happened to each
' sch of our Kwngs, who was to unfortunate as to be placed in this situ-

ation, the truth and importance of this observation will fully BOOKr I.
appear.

The minority of David II. the son of Robert Bruce, was dif- D ~d H,

turbed by the pretenflons of Edward Bario1, who, relying on the
aid of England, and on the s~upport of some diffaffeaed nobles
among the Scots, invaded the kingdom. The success wyhich at
Birit attended his arms, obliged the young Kiing to retire to
EFrance 3 and Balio1 took poileffidn of the throne. A small body
of the nobles, however, continuing faithful to their exiled Prince,
drove Baliol out of Scotland; and after an absence of nine years,
David returned from France, and took the government of the
kingdom into his own hands. But nobles, who were thus waft-.
ing their blood and treasure in defence of the crown, had a right
to the undiflurbed poffeflion of their ancient privileges, and even
some title to arrogate new ones. It seems to have been a maxim,
in that age, that every leader might claim as his own, the terri-
tory which his sword had won from the enemy. Great acquifi-
tions were gained by the nobles in that way ; and to there the
gratitude and liberality of David added, by diffributing, among
such as adhered to him, the vast pofifetions which fell to the
crown by the forfeiture of his enemies. The family of Douglas,
which began to rife above the other nobles, in the reign of his
father, augmented both its power and its property, during his
minority.

James I. was seized by the Engliih, during the continuance of I405·

a truce, and ungenerously detained a prisoner, almost nineteen meL
years. During that period, the kingdom was governed, Birit by
hlis uncle Robert Duke of Albany, and then, by Murdo his son.
Both these noblemen as~pired to the crown, and their unnatural
ambition, if we may believe mos1 of our hifterians, not only cut
thlort the days of Prince David, the King's elder brother, but
prolonged the captivity of James. They flattered thems~elves,
that they might itep with less opposition into a throne, when al-
most vacant s and dreading the King's return, as the extinaion
of their authority, and the end of their hopes, they carried on the
negociations for obtaining his liberty, with extreme remiffners.
At the fame time, they negleaed nothing that could either sooth
or bribe the nobles to approve their scheme. They slackened
the reins of government; they allowed the prerogative to be en-
croached upon; they fuffered the most irregular aAs of power,
and even wanton initances of oppression, to pass with impunity ;
th:ey dealt out the patrimony of the crown among those whole

BOOK I. enmity they dreaded, or whole favour they hlad gained; and te.

Sduced thle royal authority, to a slate of imbecillity, from whlich.

thcceeding monarchs laboured in vain to rais~e it.

:4 y7. During the minority of James II. the adminiffration of affairs,
Jamas II. and the custody of the King's person were committed to Sir lVil-

liam Crighton, and Sir Alexander Livingiton. Jealouly and dif-
cord were the effeAs of their conjuna authority, and each of
thlem, in order to fireng~then himself, beffowed new powers and
privileges upon the great men, whos~e aid he courted. While
the young Earl of D~ouglas, encouraged by their divilions, erea.
ed a fort of independent principality within the kingdom; and
forbidding his vassals to acknowledge any authority but his own,
hie created Knights, appointed a prily council, named officers
civil and military, affirmedd every enlign of royalty, but the title
of King, and appeared in public with a magrnificence more than
royal.

r460. Eight persons were chosen to govern the kingodom, duiing the

James III. minority of James III. Lord Boyd, howvever, by kcizing the

person of the young King, and by the ascendant which he ac.
quired over him, soon engroffecd the whole authority. He foun-
ed the ambitious profplea of raising his family to th~e fame pitch
of power and grandeur with those of the prime nobility; and he
effea~ed it. W'hile intent on this, h~e relaxed the vigour of go.
rernment, and the nobles became accuffomed, once more, to
anarchy and independence. TI~ e power, whichl Boyd had been
at to much pains to acquire, was of no long continu-nce, and thle
fall of hris family, accolding to the fate of favourites, was sudden
and defiruaive; but upon its ruins, the family of Hamilton rose,
whichl soon attained th~e highest rank in the kingdom.

James v-. As the minority of James V. was longer, it was likewise more

turbulent than thos~e of the preceding Kings. And thle contend-
ing nobles, encouraged or prote~ed either by the King of France,
or of England, formed themselves into more regular fa~ions, and
disregarded more than ever the reflraints of order and authority.
'The F~rench had thle advantage of feeing one, devoted to their
i Itcreft, raised to be reg nt. This was the Dukre of Albany, a
Iative of France, alnd grandson of James II. But Alexander
.,ord Hom7e, the most eminent of all the Scottish peers, who far-
rived thle fatal battle of Flowfden, thwaaited aill his measures, du-
ring the first years of his administration; and the intrigues of the
Queen D~owager, fiffer of H-enry VIII. rendered the latter part
of it no less feeble. T houlgh fupprorted by IFrenchl auxiliaries, the

nobles derp~If~ 3 is authority, and regardlels either of his thireats, Boop ra
or his entreaties, peremptorily refulfed, two several timps, to en- c`
ter England, to the bordiers of whaich Eingrdo~ he had led them.
Provok~ed by there repeated inflances of contempt, the regent a-
bandoned his troublesome ftationl, and retiring to France, prefer-
red the tranquillity of a private life, to an ofmce destitute of real
authority. Upo-n his retr~eat, Douglas Earl of Angus became
master of the King's person, and governed the kingdom in his
name. Many efforts were: made to deprive him of his usurp-
ed authority. But the numerous vass~als and friends of his fami-
ly adhered to him, because he divided with them the power and
emoluments of his ofEce; the people reverenced and loved the
name of Douglas; without the title of regent, he exercised a
fuller and more absolute authority thlan any who had enljoyed that
dig~nity; and th~e ancient, but dangerous pre-eminence of the
Douglafirs, feemtedi to be retrored.

To thes~e, and to many other caules, omitted or unobserved by

us, did the Scottith noliity owe that exorbitant and uncommon
power, of which inflances occur, to frequently, in our hiitory.
Niothing, however, demonfirates to fully the extent of their
Spower, as the length of its duration. Many years after the de-

clenflon of the feudal fyfiem in the other kingdoms of Europe,
and when the arms or policy of princes had, every where, thla-
kien, or laid it in ruins, the foundations of that ancient fabric re-
mained firm and untouched in Scotland.

The powers, which the feudal inflitutions veiled in the nobles, The pow~er

soon becamne intolerable to all the Princes of Europe, who longed It~lheb~c~~
to po~fffs fomethingj more than a nominlal and precarious authori- became in-
ty. Their impatience to obtain this, precipitated Henry III. of t~~L- e t
England, Edward II. and some other weak Princes, into rathh
and premature attempts ag~ainfl the privileges of the Barons, in
which they were disappointed, or peritted. Princes, of great-
er abilities, were content to mitigate evils which they could not
cure; they fought occupation for the turbulent spirit of their
nobles, in frequent wars; and allowed their fierce courage to
evaporate in foreign expeditions, which, if they brought no other
advantage, secured at leaRt domeffic tranquillity. But, time and
accidents ripened the ftudal governments for defiruition. To- Thle
wards the end of the fifteenth century, and beginning of the an:irtt
sixteenth, all thle Princes of Europe attacked, as if by concert, nobics sic-
thle power of their nobles. Men of genius th~en undertook w-;th Frjne a
Acucers, wnhat th;eir unfnilllul predlecelt`ors had attempted in vain, inEn6!·lad

BOOK i. Lewis XI. of France, the mos1 profound and the mos1 adventrog

genius of that age, began, and in a sing~le reign, almost com.
pleted the scheme of their deftruAlon. The sure, but concealed
policy of H~enry VII. of England produced the fame effea. The
means, indeed, employed by there monarchs were very different,
T'he blow which Lewis firuck, was sudden and fatal. The arti.
fices of H-enry resembled those flow poisons, which waste the
conflitution, but become not mortal till some difiant period. Nor
did they produce consequences less opposite. Lewis boldly add.
ed to the crown whatever he wrefied from the nobles. Henry
undermined his Barons by encouraging them to fell their lands,
which enriched the commons, and gave them a weight in the

Bat leiiflature unknown to their predecessors. But while these great
the nobles revolutions were carrying on in two kingdoms, with which Scot-
contmnue to
gather land was intimately conneaed, no alteration happened there; the
iten ihn King neither extended his own prerogative, nor enabled the com-

mons to encroach upon the aristocracy; the nobles not only re-
tained their ancient privileges and poffetions, but daily made
new acquisitions.

Our Kings This was not owing to the inattention of our Princes, or to
ede~avour- their want of ambition. They were abundantly sensible of the
theroyalau. exorbitant power of the nobles, and exutremely solicitous to hum-
thor'ity ble them. They did not however poffer~s means, fufficient for ac·

complifhing that end. The resources of our monarchs were few,

General and the progress which they made inconsiderable. But as the
fan s number of their followers, and the extent of their jurifdialon,
end. were the two chief circumitances which rendered the nobles for·

midable; in order to counterbalance the one, and to restrain the
other, all our Kings had recourse to the fame expedients.

E~ncourage I. Among nobles of a Sierce courage, and of unpolilhed man-

ena1 ners, surrounded witih vassals bold and licentious, whom they were

nobles. bound by interest and honour to protea, the caules of discord

were many and unavoidable. And as the contending parties could
seldom agree in acknowledging the authority of any common fupe-
rior or judge, and their impatient spirit would s~eldom wait the
flow decisions of juffice, their quarrels were dfually terminated
by thle tward. The offended Baron assembled his vassals, and waft-·
ed the lands, or thed the blood of his enemy. To forgive an in-
jury was mean, to forbear revenge infamous or cowardly*. Hence

*The spirit of revenge was encouraged not only by the manners, but w~hat is

more remarkable, by the lawfs of those ages. If anly person thought the profecu-
tion of an injury offered to his family, too troublesome, or too dangerous, the

quzarrels were tranfmlitted from father to son, and under the name BOOK T.
of deadly feua'r, subsisted for many generations, with unmitigated I-V"
rancour. It was thle interest of the crown to foment rather than
to extinguish there, and by scattering or cherithiing the feeds of
discord among the nobles, that union which would have rendered
the ariffocracy invincible, and which must at once have annihi-
lated the prerogative, was effeaually prevented. To the fame
caus~e, our Kings were indebted for the success, with which they
sometimes attackied the most powerful chieftains. T'hey employed
private revenge to aid the impotence of public laws, and arming
against the person who had incurred their dis~pleasure, those rival
families, which wished his fall, they rewarded their service, by
iharing among them thle spoils of the vanquished. But this ex-
pedient, though it served to humble individuals, did not weakren
the body of the nobles. Thole, who were now the infiruments
of their Prince's vengeance, became, in a thort time, the objeAs
of his fear. Having acquired power and wealth by serving the
crown, they, in their turn, fCet up for independence; and though
there might be a fluaustion of power, and of property, though
old families fell, and new ones role upon their ruins, the rights of
the ariflocracy remained intire, and its vigour unbroken.

II. As the adminifiration of justice is one of the moRl power- Extend thie

ful ties betwyeen a King and his fubjeAs, all our monarchs were at jd0m i~ai
the utmofr pains to circums~cribe the jurifdiaion of the Barons, and King's
to extend that of the crown. The externlal forms of fubordina- courtS.
tion, natural to the feudal system, favoured this attempt. An ap-
peal lay from the judges and courts of the Barons, to those of the
King. The right, however, of judging in the first initance, be-
10nged to the nobles, and they easily found means to defeat the
effea of appeals, as well as of many other feudal regulations. The
royal jurifdiaion was almost confined within the narrow limits of

Salique laws permitted him publicly to desist from demanding vengeance; but
the fame laws, in ordler to punish7 his cowardice, and want of affeaion to his fa-
mily, deprivedhim of the right of fuccellion. Henaut. AbregZ Chronol. p. 8x.
Among the Anglo-Saxons, w-e find a singular inflitution diflinguifhed by the
name of soDALITIvU; a voluntary affociationl, the objea whereof was the per-
fonal security of thof'e who joined in it, and which the feebleness of government
at that time rendered necessary. Among other regulations, which are contain-
ed in one of those still extant, the following def~enres notice. " If any associate
shall either eat or drink with a person who has killed any member of the sons.
JLrrzUx, unless in the presence of the King, the Bishop, or the- Count, and un-
less he canl prove th~at he did not know the person, let him pay a great fine.''
Hlicks Dissert, Epiftolar, aput, Thefaur. Ling. Septentr. vol. i. p. 2x.

BOOK T. the K;ing's demefhes, beyond which, his judges claimed indeed

Mv much authority, but poffeffed next to none. Our Kings were sea.

fible of there limitations, and bore them with impatience. But
it was impossible to overturn, in a moment, what was to deeply
rooted; or to firip the nobles, at once, of privileges wh~ich they
had held to long, and which were wrought almost into the frame
of the feudal conflitution. To accomplish this, however, was an
obojea of uniform and anxious attention to all our princes. JamesLI
led the way, here, as well as in other inflances, towards a more
regular and perfe&t police. He made choice, among the estates
of parliament, of a certain number of persons, whom he diin·
guiilhed by the name of Lords of Sefzon, and appointed them to
hold courts for determining civil causes, three times in the year
and forty days at a time, in whatever place he pleased to name.
Their jurifdiaion extended to all matters, which formerly came
under the cognizance of the King's council, and being a commit.
tee of parliament, their decisions were final. James. II. obtain·
ed a law, annexing all regalities, which thould be forfeited, to the
crown, and declaring the right of jurifdi8ion, to be unalienabke
for the future. James III. imposed severe penalties upon those
judges appointed by the Barons, whole decisions should be found
on a review to be unjust; and by many other regulations, endea·
voured to extend the authority of his own court *. James IV.
on pretence of remedying the inconveniences arising from the fbort
terms of the court of Sellion, appointed other judges called Lord
of Daily Council. The Seflon was an ambulatory court, and met
seldom; the Daily Council was fixed, and fat constantly at Eldin-
burgh; and though not composed of members of parliament, the
fame powers, which the Lords of Sefflon enjoyed, were vefied in
it. At last James V. ereaed a new court, which still fubills,
and which he named the College ofuJu./ice, the judges or S'enators
of which were called Lords of Council and S'eflon. T'his court,
not only exercised the fame jurifdlialon which formerly belonged
to the Sefiion and Daily Council, but new rights were added.
Privileges of great importance were granted to its members, its
forms were prescribed, its terms fixed, and reguflaity, powler and
iplendor conferred upon it. The persons conflituted judges in all
there different courts, had, in many refpecs, the advantage of those
who presided in the courts of the Barons; they were more emi-
nent for their ikill in law, their rules of proceeding were more uni·

* A&L. 26. P.

46 9 AS.94.P. 493- ARt. 99.P ?147.

form, and their decisions more consistent. Such judicatories be- o"I
came the objeAs of confidence, and of veneration. Men willing-
ly submitted their property to their determination, and their en-
croachments on the jurifdiaions of the nobles were popular, and
for that reason fuccefsful. By devices of a similar nature, the
juridii~ion of the nobles in criminal caules was restrained, and the
aulthority of the court of Jul/iciary extended. The crown, in this
particular, gaining insensibly upon the nobles, recovered more
ample authority; and the King, whole jurifdiaion once resembled
that of a Baron, rather than that of a Sovereign *, came more and
more to be considered as the head of the community, and the fu-
preme dispens~er of juffice to his people. These acquisitions of our
Kings, however, though comparatively great, were in reality in-
considerable ; and notwithstanding all their: efforts, the separate ju-
t~ildiaions of the nobles remained, many of them, in great vigour I

* The moit perfeat idea of the feudal fyftemn of government may be attained

by attending to the slate of Germany, and to the hiffory of France. In the for-
mer, the feudal inflitutions flill sublist with great vigour; and though altogether
abolished in the latter, the public records have been so carefully preserved, that
the French lawyers and antiquaries have been enabled, with more certainty and
precision, than those of any other country in Europe, to trace its rife, its progress,
and revolution~s. In Germany, every principality may be considered as a fief, and
all its great Princes as vassals, holdinlg of the emperor. They poffers all the feudal
pr-ivileges; their fiefs are perpetual; their jurifdiaion, within their own terri-
tories, s~eparate and extensive; and the great offi~ces of the empire are all heredi-
tary, and annexed to particular families. At the fame time the Emperor retains
many of the prerogatives of the feudal monarchs. Like them?, his claims and
pr'etentions are innumerable, and his power small; his jurifdiaion within his
own demefnes or hereditary countries, is complete; beyond the bounds of there
it is almost nothing. And so permanent are feudal principles, that although the
feudal system be overturned in almost every particular slate in Germany, and al-
tho~ugh its Princes have all become absolute, the original feudal confi-tuttion of
the empire still remains, and ideas peculiar to that form of government, direat
all its operations and determine the rights of all its Princes. Our observations,
with regard to the limited jurifdliaion of the Iing under the feudal governments,
are greatly illuffrated by what happened in France. The feeblenes~s and dot-ge
of the descendents of Charlemaigne encouraged the Peers to usurp an independ-
ect jurif~diaion. Nothing remained in the hands of the crown; all was seized
by them. H hen H-ugh Capet ascended the throne, A. D. 987, he kept poffeiocn
of his private patrimony the Comtt of Paris, and all the jurifdiaion, which the
Kiings his successors exercised for some time, was within its territories. There
were only four towns in France, where he could eflablifh GRAuNs BAILLIIS, Or
royal judges; all the other lands, towns, and baillages belonged to the nobles.
The methods to which the French monarchs had recourse for extending their ju-
rifdition were exacaly fimnilar to those employed by our Princes. Henaut's A-
breg , p. 617. &c. De L'Efprit des Loix, Liv. 30. ch. 20, &rc.

D ij

Boar T. and their final abolition was reserved to a dillant and more happy

Speriod.

Each of our But besides there methods of defending their prerogative, and
~in 4spur humbling thle ariflocracy, which may be considered as common to
olan of all our Princes, we thall find, by taking a review of their reigns,

s.bl~~ that almoRt every one of our Kings, from Robert Bruce to James

V. had formed fame particular fyfiem for deprefling the authority
of the nobles, which was the obujea' both of their jealousy and
terror. The condua of our monarchs, if we reft satisfied with
the accounts of their historians, must be considered as flowing en-
tirely from the rdientment against particular noblemen; and all
their attempts to humble them, must be viewed as the sallies of
private pat~ion, not as the consequences of any general plan of
policy. But, though' some of their ac~ions may be imputed to those
patlions, though the different genius of the men, the temper of
the times, and the slate of the nation necefiarily occalloned great
variety in their fchernes, yet, without being chlrgreable with ex.
cellive refinement, w\e may afmrm that their end was uniformly

Thisproved th'e fame. And thle projeA of reducing the power of the ariffo.
byareview cracy, sometimes av~owed, and pursued with vigour; sometimes
of the e-
vents m concealed, or s~eemingly fulpended; was never altogether aban·
th-irreigns. doned.
Robert No Prince was ever more indebted to his nobles than Robert
BrUce. Bruce. Their valour conquered the k~ingdom, and placed him

on the throne. His gratitude and generosity bellowed on them
the landls of the vanquished. Property has seldom undergone
greater or more sudden revolutrions, th~an those to which it was
fubljea, at that time. in Scotland. Ed vard I. having forfeited
the eltates of most of the ancient Scottith nobhes, granted them to
his English fubjeAs. There were e.xpelled by thle Scots, and their
lands seized by new mallers. Amidit such rapid changes, con-
fusion was unavoidable; and many poffeffed their lands by titles
extremely lame. During one of those truces between the tw~o na·
tions, occasioned rather by their beings weary of war, than desirous
of peace, Robert formed a scheme for checking the growing power
and wealth of the nobles. He fulmmoned them to appear, and to
tLhew by what rig~hts they held their lands. They assembled ac·
cordingly, and the queflion being put, they started up, at once,
and drew their swords, " By there, said they, we acquired our
lands, and with there: we will defend them." The King inti-
midated by their boldndfs, prudently dropt the projeA. But to
deeply did the nobles relent this attack up~on their order, that

anotwithilanding Robert's popular and sp~lendid virtues, it occasion. BOOK T.
ed a dangerous confp~iraicy against his life.

David his son, at Birit an exile in France, afterwards a prisoner David II.

in England, and involved in a continual war with Edward III.
had not leis~ure to attend to the internal police of his kingdom, or
to think of retrenching the privileges of the nobility.

Our hifforians have been more carefull to relate the military, RobertlL.

than the civil tranfaaions of the reign of Robert II. Skirmithes
and inroads of little consequence, they describe minutely, but
with regard to every thing that happened, during several years of
tranquillity, they are altogether silent.

The feeble adminiffration of Robert III. muff likewise be pas- Robert III.

fed over slightly. A Prince, of a mean genius, and of a frail and
sickly conititution, was no fit person to enter the lifts with aatie
and martial nobles, or to attempt wresting from them any of their
rights.

The civil tranfac~ions in Scotland are better known since the James I.

beginning of James I's reign, and a complete series of our laws
supplies the defeats of our hiflorians. The English made some a-
mends for their injustice in detaining that Prince a prisoner, by
their generous care of his education. During his long residence
in England, he had an opportunity of observing the feudal lyfem
in a more advanced itate, and refined from many of the imperfec-
tions which still adhered to it, in his own kingdom. He s~aw
there nobles great, but not independent; a King powerful, though
far from absolute; he saw a regular adminiffration of government;
wife laws enaated; and a nation flourithing and happy, because
all rankis of men were accuffomed to obey them. Full of these
ideas, he returned into his native country, which presented to him
a very different scene. The royal authority, never great, was now
contemptible, by being so long delegated to regents. The ancient
patrimony, and revenues of the crown, were almaft totally alien-
ated. During his long absence, the name of a King was little
known, and less regarded. The licence of many years had render-
ed the nobles independent. Univers~al anarchy prevailed. The
weak were exposed to the rapine and opprefiron of the firong. In
every corner some barbarous chieftain ruled at pleasure, and nei-
ther feared the King, nor pitied the people*.

* A cotem~porary r·ank~ih writer deferibes t~hese calamities very feelingly-,

in his rude Latin. In ditbus illis, non erat lex in Scotia, fed qu~ilibet potenti-

XOOK I. JTmeS was too wife a Prince to employ open force to corree

such inveterate evils. Neither the men, nor the times would have
borne it. HL applied the gentler, and less offenfive remedy of laws
and statutes. In a parliament held immediately after his return, he
gained the confidence of his people, by many wife laws, tending
visibly to re-eflablifh order, tranquillity, and juffice in the king.
dom. But, at the fame time that he endeavoured to secure these
blessings to his fubjeAs, he discovered his intention to recover those
poikcflions, of which thle crown had been unjustly bereaved; and
for that purpole obtained an aB by which he n as empowered to
summon thole, who had obtained crown lands during the three
las1 reigns, to produce the rights by which they held them *. As
this statute threatened the property of the nobles, another w-hich
passed in a subsequent parliament, aimed a dreadful blow at their
power. By it, the leagues and combinations, which we have al-
ready deferibed, and which rendered the nobles to formidableto
the crown were declared unlawful-F . Encouraged by this faccels
in the beginning of his enterprize, James's nex~t flep was ftillbold·
er and more decisive. During the fitting of parliament, he seized,
at once, his coufmn M'urdo Duke of Albany, and his sons; the
Ladls of Douglds, Len~nox, Angus, Mlarch, and above twenty
other Peers and Barons of prime rank. To all of the~n, however,
he was immediately reconciled, except to Albany, and his sons,
and Lennox. There were tiedl by their Peers, and condemned;
for what crime is now unktnown. Thleir execution flruck the no-
bles with terror, and their forfeiture added vast poffelons to the
crown. He seized, likewise, the earldoms of Buchan and Strath-
ern, upon different pretexvts; and that of M~ar fell to hlim by in-
heritance. The patience and inaaivity of the nobles, whike the
King· was proceeding 10 rapidly towards aggrandizing the crown,
are amnazing. The only obfiruaion he met with was from a flight
infurreaion headed by the Duke of Albany's youngest son, and that
wras easily fu~pprelfed. The splendor and prelelnce of a King, to
w~hich the nobles had been long unaccuff omed, inspired reverence:
James was a Prince of' great abilities, and conduaed his operations
with much prudence. He was in friendship with England, and
rclely allied with~ the French King : He was adored by the people,

oriumjuniorem oppreflt; et totum regnum fki't unum la racin:um; homicidia,
depra-dationes, incendia, et cat~era maleficia rem Inferuln i ii u'it1l; et jultitia
: legata exvtra terminos regni exulavit. Clarsular. M\orav. aptLd Innes Eifjy

* A8. 9. P. 1424 - "Il AG 3 P. I4'4

u-ho enjoyed unusual fecuiity and happiness under his adminifkr~t- O ]
tion: And all his acqlafitions, however fatal to the body of the
nobles, had been gained by attacks upon individuals; were ob-
tained by deciflons of law-; and being founded on circumflances
peculiar to the persons who f~uffered, might excite murmurs and
apprehenflons, but afforded no colourable pretext for a general re-
Lellion. It was not so with the next attempt whijch the King made.
Encouraged by the facility with which he. had hitherto advanced,
he ventured upon a measure that irritated the whole nobles, and
which the event thews either to have been entered into with too
much precipitancy, or to have been carried on with too much vio-
lence. The father of George Dunbar Earl of M\/arch had taken
arms against Robert III. the King's father; but that crime had
been pardoned, and his lands reffored by Robert Dukie of Albany.
James, on pr-etext that the regent had exceeded his power, and
that it was not competent to any but the K~ing~ himself to pardon
treason, or to alienate lands annexed, to the crown, obtained a f~en-
tence declarinlg the pardon to be void, and depriving Dunbar of
the earldom. Many of the nobles held lands by no other right than
what they derived from grants of the tvvo Dukes of Albany. Such
a decision, though they had reas~on to exped it in consequence of
the statute which the K~ing had obtained, occaiioned a general a-
larm. Though Dunbar was, at present, the only fufferer, the pre-
cedent might be extended, and their titles to poffe~lions, which
they considered as the rewards of their valour, might be futbjea-
ed to the review of courts of law, whole forms of proceeding, and
jurifdiation, were in a martial age little known, and extremely odi-
ous. Terror and discontent s~pread fast upon this discovery of the
King's intentions; the common danger called on the whole order
to unite, and to make one bold fland, before they were firipped
piecemeal, and reduced to a state of poverty and insignificance.
TIhe prevalence of these f~entinxents among the nobles encouraged
a few desperate men, the friends or followers of those who had
been the chief fufferers under the King's adminiffration, to form
a conspiracy against his life. The first uncertain intelligence of
this was brought him, while he lay in his camp before Roxburgh
cattle. He durst not confide in nobles, to whom he had given so
many causes of disgust, but instantly dismissed them and their vassals,
and retiring to a monastery near Perth, was soon after murdered
there, in the most cruel manner. All our hiftorirtns mention, with
affonifhment, this circumstance of the King's dilbanding his army,
at a time, when it was so necessary for his preservation. A King,

BOOK L. fay they, surrounded with his Barons, is iecure from secret trea.

son, and may defy open rebellion. But those very nobles were
thre persons whom he chiefly dreadedj and it is evident, from
this review of his adminiffration, that he had greater reason to
apprehend danger, than to exped defence, from their hands. It
was the misfortune of James, that his maxims and manners were
too refined for the age in which he lived. Happy! had he reign.
ed in a kingdom more civilized; his love of peace, of juffice, and
of elegance, would have rendered his schemes fuccef~sfulj and in.
flead of his perishing because he had attempted too much, a grate.
fal people would have applauded and seconded his efforts to reform
and to improve them.

James II. Crichton, the most able man of thoie, who had the direaionoi

affairs during the minority of James II. had been the miniffer of
James I. and well acquainted with his res~olution of humbling the
nobles. He did not relinquilh thle design, and he endeavouredto
inspire his pupil with the fame sentiments. But what James had
attempted to effea slowly, and by legal means, his fan and Crich,
ton purs~ued with the impetuosity natural to Scotsmen, and with
the fierceness peculiar to that age. William the sixth Earl of
Douglas was thle firit viaim to their barbarous policy. That
young nobleman (as we have already obs~erved) contemning the
authority of an infant Prince, almost openly renounced his alle-
giance, and aspired to independency. Crichton, too high-fpirited
to bear such an insult, but too weak to curb or to bring to juffice
so powerful an offender, decoyed him by many promises to an in-
terview in the castle of Edinburgh, and, notwithflanding thele,
murdered both him and his brother. Crichten, however, gain-
ed little by this aAt of treachery, which rendered him universally
odious. William the eighth Earl of D~ouglas was no less powerful
and no less formidable to the crown. By forming the league which
we already mentioned with the Earl of Crawffird and other Ba-
rans, he had united against his Sovereign almost one half of his
kingdom. But his credulity led him into the fame [nare, which
had been fatal to the former Earl. Relying on the King's pro-
miles, who had now attained to the years of manhood, and having
abtained a safe condua under the great feal, he ventured to meet
him in Stirling caffle. James urged him to abandon that danger-
ous confederacy into wKhich he had entered; the Earl abitinately
refused; "L If you will not, Ifaid the enraged monarch drawing
his dnagger) th~is thallj" and flabbed him to the heart. An aalon
fa unwforthy of a King filled! the nation with aftoniihment and with

horror. The Earl's vassals ran to arms with thle utmost fury, and Roox T.
dragging thle s~afe conduat, which the King had granted and vio-
lated, at a horfe's tail, they marched towards Stirling, burnt the
town, and threatened to befiiege the caffle. An accommodation
ensued, on what terms is not known. But the King's jealoufyr,
and the Earl's power and resentment, prevented it from being of
long continuance. Both tooki the field, at the hiead of their ar-
mies, and met near Abercorn. That of the Earl, composed chief-
ly of borderers, was far superior to the Kiingls both in number, and
in valour; and a single battle maitR, in all probability, have decid-
ed whether the house of Stewart or of Douglas was henceforth to
poirefs the throne of Scotland. But, while his troops impatient-
ly expe61ed the figrnal to engage, the Earl ordered them to retire
to their camp, and Sir James Hamilton of Cadvow, the person in
whom he placed the greatest confidence, convinced of his want
of genius to improve an opportunity, or of his want of courage to
s~eize a crown, deserted him that very night. This example was
followed by many; and the Earl, defpiled, or forlsaken by all, was
soon driven out of the kingdom, and obliged to depend for his sub-
filtence, on the friendship of the King of England. The ruin of
this great family, wihich had so long rivalled and overawved the
crown, and the terror with which fach an example of unfucceifsful
ambition filled the nobles, secured the King, for some time, from
opposition; and the royal authority remained uncontrolled and
almost ablolute. James did not fuffer this favourable interval to
pass unimproved; he procured the consent of parliament to laws
more advantageous to the prerogative, and more subversive of the
privileges of the aristocracy, than were ever obtained by any for-
mer or futbfeqjuent monarch of Sjcotland.

By one of these, not only all the vast poilReions of the Earl of

Douglas were annexed to the crown, but all prior and future a-
lienations of crown lands were declared to be void, and the King-
was empowered to seize them at pleasure, without anly process or
form of law, and oblige the poffeffors to refund whatever they
had received from them *. A dreadful infirumenlt of oppreftion in
the hands of a Prince.

Another law prohibited the wardenship of the marches to be

granted hereditarily ;-reflrained, in several instances, the jurifdic-
tion of that off ce ; and extended the authority of the King's courts t.

* ARt. 41. P. 1455. -t Ibid. AC1. 42.

Boor I. By a third, it was ordained that no Regality, or exclusive right

-'-of adminiffring juilice within a man's own lands, thould be grant.

ed in time to come, without thle consent of parliament *, a con.
dition, which implied almost an exuprels prohibition. T`hose nobles
who already poi~effed that great privilege, would naturally be so.
licitous to prevent it from becoming common, by being beffowed
on many. Thole, who had not themselves attained it, would en.
vy others the acquisition of such a flattering diflin~ion; and both
would concur in rejeAingr the claims of new pretenders.

By a fourth aA, all new grants of hereditary offices were pro.

hibited, and those obtained since the death of th~e last King were
revoked 1-.

Each of there statutes undermined some of the great pillars on

which the power of the ariflocracy refied. During the remain.
der of his reign, this Prince pursued the plan which he had be.
gun, with the utmoff vigour; and had not a sudden death, occa.
fioned by the [~plinter of a cannon which burf1 near him at the
siege of Roxburgh, prevented his progress, he wanted neither ge·
nius nor courage to perfea it : and Scotland might, in all pro.
bability, have been the Biri kingdom in Europe, which would
have seen the fubverflon of the feudal lyfitem.

James mr. James III. discovered no less eagerners than his father or grand.

father to humble the nobles; but far inferior to either of them iu
abilities and address, he adopted a plan extremely impolitic, and
his reign was dilafirous, as well as his end tragical. Under the feu·
dal governments, the nobles were not only the King's miniffers
and poffelfed of all the great offices of power or of truit; they were
likewise, his companions and favourites, and fearce any but them
approached his person, or were entitled to his regard. But James,
who both feared and hated his nobles, kept them at an unusual
difiance, and bef10wed every mark of confidence and affe8ian
upon a few mean persons, of profetions 10o ditionourable, as on h
to have rendered them unworthy of his presence. Shut up wfith
there, in his castle of Stirling, he seldom appeared in public, and
amused himself with architeaure, music, and other arts, which
were then little efleemed. The nobles beheld the power andfa-
vour of there minions with indignation. Even thle sanguinary
measures of his fath~er provoked them less than his negleA. Indivi-
duals alone fuffered by the former; by the latter, every man thoughlt
himself injured, becaule all were contemned. Their dilcontent wnas

* Ibid. A&*. 43. -F AR. 44·

rnuch heightened by the King's recalling all rights of crown lands, BOOK I.
hereditary offices, regalities, and every other concellion, which was
detrimental to his prerogative, and which had been extorted during
his minority. Combinations among themselves, secret intrigues
with England, and all the usual preparatives for civil war were the
effeas of their resentment. Alexander Duke of Albany, and John
Earl of Mar, the King's brothers, two young men of turbulent and
ambitious s~pirits, and incens~ed against James, who treated them
with the fame coldness as he did the other nobles, entered deeply
into all their cabals. The King deteaed their designs, before they
were ripe for execution, and seizing his two brothers, committed
the Duke of Albany to Edinburgh caffle. The Earl of Mar, hav-
ing remonfirated with too much boldness againit the King's con-
duat, was murdered, if we may believe our hifforians, by his com-
mand. Albany, apprehensive of the fame fate, made his escape
out of the castle, and fled into France. Concern for the
King's honour, or indignation at his measures, were perhaps the
motives, which firit induced him to join the malecontents. But
James's attachment to favourites rendering him every day more
odious to the nobles, the profpea of the advantages which might
be derived from their general diffaffeaion, added to the resent-
ment which he felt on account of his brother's death, and his
own injuries, soon inspired Albany with more ambitious and cri-
minal thoughts. He concluded a treaty with Edward IV. of
England, in which he allumed the name of Alexander King of
Scots, and in return for the affifiancee which was promised him
towards dethroning his brother, he bound hims~elf, so soon as he
was put in poffeflion of the kingdom, to sw~ear fealty and to do
homage to the English monarch, to renounce the ancient alli-
ance with France, to contraA a new one with England, and to
surrender fame of the firongeft castles, and most valuable counties
in Scotland *. That aid, which the Duk~e so basely purchased at
the price of his own honour, and the independency of his country,
was punaually granted hlim, and the Duke of Glouceffer with a
powerful army conduaed him towards Scotland. The danger of
a foreign invasion obliged James to implore the afiftiance of those
nobles whom he had so long treated with contempt. Some of them
were in close confederacy with the Duke of Albany, and approved
of all his pretensions. Others were imtpatient for any event, which
would reffore their order to its ancient pre-eminence. They took

* Abercr. Mart. Atch. v. ii. 443.

BOOK L. thle si 1d, however, at the head of a powerful army of their fol.

10V lwers, but with a fironger difpolition to redrels their own griev.
ances, than to annoy thre enemy; and with a fixed relolution of
puni~ling those minions, whole infolenre they could nolongerto.
lerate. TIhis reso~lution they executed, in the camp near Lawder,
wtith a military dispatch and rigour. H~aving previously concerted
their plan, the Earls of Augius, Huntly, Lennox, followed by al.
mast the whole Barons of chief note in the army, forcibly entered
the apartment of their Sovereign, seized all his favourites except
one Ramlay, whom they could not tear from the King, in w~hole
arms he took ihelter, and without any form of trial hangied them in.
flantly over a bridge. Among thre most remarkable of thole
who had engrossed the King's affct~ion, were Cochran a mason,
Hammil a taylor, Leonard a finith, Rogers a musician, and Tor·
6ifan a fencing master. So despicable a retinue dilcovers the ca·
pricioufnels of James's charaater, and accounlts for the indigna.
tion of the nobles wnhen they beheld the favour, due to thlem, be.
flowed on such unw~orthy objedts.

James had no reason to confide in an army so lit Je under hir

command, and difmilling it, thaut himself up in the cattle of Edin-
burgh. After various intrigues, Albany's lands anld honourswere
at length restored to him, and he seemed even to have rega~ined his
brother's favour, by some important services. But their friendbip
was not of long duration. Jam ·, once mole, abandoned himfeli
to the guidance of favourites; and the fate of thos~e who had iful
fered at Lawder, did not deter othe~rs, from courting that danger·
ous pre-eminence. Alban~y, on p~retex~t th~at an attempt hlad been
made to take away hlis life by poison, fled from court, and retiring
to his caffle of Dunbar, drew thither a greater multitude of no·
b~les than attended on thle King himfclf. At the Exme time, here-
newed his former confederacy wyith Edward; the Earl of Angus
openly n·gaciated that in~famous treaty; other Barons were ready
to concur with it; and if thle sudden death of Edwald had not
prevented Albany's receivingr any aid from England, the Crown of
Scotland woulld, probably, have been the reward of this unworthy
combi ration with the enemies of hris countly. But, inflead of any
hopes of reig~ning in Sc otland, he found, upon the death of Ed-
wvald, tha~t he could not reside there in faf ty, and flyinng sirs to
Englanld, and th~en to France, he seems fro~m that time to have
taken no palt in the affairs of his native country. Emboldened
by his retreat, the King anid his r1hniiders, multiplied thle insults

wvhich they offered to the nobles. A flanding guard, a thing un. Boaxt I.
known under the feudal governments, and inconsistent with the fa- -
miliarity and confidence with which monarchs then lived amidst
their nobles, was raised for the King's defence, and the command
of it given to Ramsay, lately created Earl of Bothwell, the fame
person who so narrowly escaped when his companions were put to
death at Lawder. And, as if this precaution had not beep suss-
clent, a proclamation was ifuled forbidding any person to appear
in arms within the precinas of the court *; which, at the time,
when no man of rank left his own hadie without a numerous re-
tinue of armed followers, was, in effea, debarring the nobles from
all access to the King. James, at the fame time became fonder
of retirement than ever y and funk in indolence, or fuperitition,
or attentive only to amurements, devolved his whole authority
upon his favourites. So many injuries provoked the most con-
fiderable nobles to take arms, and having perfunded or obliged
the Duke of Rothfay, the King's eldest ion, a youth of fifteen, to
set himself at their head, they openly declared their intention of
depriving James of a crown, of which he had discovered himself
to be to unworthy. Routed by this danger, the King quitted his
retirement, took the field, and encountered them near Banno'ck-
burn; but the valour of the Borderers, of whom the army of the
malecontents was chiefly composed, Soon put his troops to flight,
and he hims~elf was slain in the pursuit. Suspicion, indolence,
imnmoderate attachment to favourites, and all the vices of a feeble
mind, are visible in his whole condua; but the charaaer of a cruel
and unrelenting tyrant seems to be unjustly zffixed to him by our
hifforians. His neglea of the nobles irritated, but did not weak-
en them; and their dis~content, the immoderate ambition of his
two brothers, and their unnatural confederacies with England,
were fufficient to have diflurbed a more vigorous adminiffration,
and to have rendered unhappy a Prince of superior talents.

The indignation, which many of the nobles expressed against

the conduA of the conspirators, together with the terror of the fen-
tence of excommunication which the Pope pronounced against them,
obliged them to use their viaory with great moderation and hu-
manity. And being conscious how detefiable the crime of im-
bruing their hands in the blood of their Sovereign appeared, they
endeavoured to regain the good opinion of their countrymen,
and to attone for their treatment of the father, by their loyalty

* Ferrerius, 398*

Boole I. and duty towards the son. They placed him inflantly on the

the~ frone, and thie whiole kringdom soon united in ack~nowrledginghis
authority.

James IV. was naturally generous and brave; he felt, in an high

degree, all the pat~ions which animate a young and noble mind.
He loved magnificence, he delighted in war, anld was eager to ok
tain fame. During his reign, the ancient and hereditary enmity
between the King and nobles seems almost enltirely to have cealed.
He envied not their [plendor, because it contributed to the orna.
Inent of his court; nor did he dread their power, which he con.
iidered as the security of his kingdom, not as an objea of terror
to himself. This confidence, on his part, met with the proper
return of duty and affea~ion on theirs; and, in his war with Eng.
land, he experienced how much a King beloved by his nobles is
able to perform. Though the ardour of his courage, and the
[pirit of chivalry, rather than the prospeR of any national
advantage, were the motives of that expedition; fuich was the
zeal of his fubjeats for the King's glory, that he was followr.
cd by as gallant an army, as ever any of hlis anceffors had led
upon English ground. But though~ James himself formed no
ich'eme dangerous or detrimental to the nobles, his reign was dif.
tinguilhed by an event, extremely fatal to them; and one acci-
dental blow humbled them more than all the premeditated at-
tacks of preceding Kings. In the rath and unfortunate battle
of Flowden, a brave nobility chose rather to die, than to
desert their Sovereign. T'welve Earls, thirteen Lords, five eldest
sons of noblemen, and an incredible number of Barons fell with
the King *. The whole body of the nobles, long and sensibly felt
this difaiter; and if a Prince of full age had then ascended the
throne, their confirnmation and feebleness would have afforded
him advantages, which no former monarch ever poff~effed.

Jarnes v. But James V. who facceeded his father, was an infant of year

old j and though the offce of reu~ent was cons tred on the Duke of
Albany, a man of genius and ent prise, a native of France, and
accuf10med to a government where thle pow er of the King was al-
ready great; though he made many bold attempts to extend the
royal ruthority; though he put to death Lord Hlome, and banished
t! e Earl of Augus, the two noblemen of glr Ici lnflence in the
kingdom, the aristocracy 1011 no ground under L~s admin'firation.
A 11ranger to the manners, the lawrs, and tne la. guagre of the

* ib:r. ii 540.

people whom he was called to rule, he aaed, on some occasions, BOO)K .-
rather like a Viceroy of the French King, than the governor of -
Scotland; but the nobles asserted their own privileges, and contend-
ed for the interest of their country, with a boldnels, which convin-
ced him of their independency, and of the impotence of his own
authority. After several unfuccef~sful firugg~les, he voluntarily re-
tired to France, and the King, being then in his thirteenth year,
the nobles agreed that he thould assume the government, and that
eight persons thould be appointed to attend him by turns, and to
advile and assist him in the admciniitration of public affairs. The
Earl of Angus, who was one of that number, did not long remain
satisfied with fhch divided power. He gained some of his col-
leagues, removed others, and intimidated the reft. WGhen the term
of his attendance expired, he flill retained authority, to which all
were obliged to s~ubmit, because none of them was in a condition
to dirpute it. The aff~eaion of the young King was the only thing
wanting, to fix and` perpetuate hris power. But an aaive and high-
[pirited Prince submitted to the reffraint, in which he was kept,
with great impatience. It ill su~ited his years, or difpolition, to be
confined as a prisoner, within his own palace; to be treated with
no refpe& 5 and to be depriv·ed of all powfer. He could not, on folne
occaflous, conceal his indignation and resentment. Angus fore-
saw that he had much to dread from these, and as hie could not
gain the King's heart, he resolved to make sure of his person. James
was continually s~urrounded by the Earl's spies and confidents; ma-
ny eyes watched all his motions, and observed every itep he took.
But the King's eagerness to obtain liberty eluded all their vi-
gilance. He escaped from Falkland, and fled to the castle of
Stirling, the residence of the Queen his mother, and the only
place of firength in the kingdom which was not in the hands of
the Douglaffes. The nobles, of whom some were influenced by
their hatred to Augus, and others by their refpea for the King,
crowded to Stirling, and his court was soon £11led with persons of
the greatest diftinaion. The Earl, though affonihed at this un-
expeaed revolution, refrolved, at first, to make one bold pufk for
recovering his authority, by marching to Stirling at the head of
his followers; but he wanted either courage, or firength to exe-
cute this resolution. In a parliament held soon after, he and his
adherents were attainted, and after escaping from many dangers,
and enduring much misery, he was at length obliged to fly into
England for refuge.

Boose I. James had now not only the name, but, though extremely young,

- the fullanthority of a King. He was inferior to no Prince of that

age in gracefulnels of person, or in vigour of mind. His under.
itanding was good, and his heart warm; the former capable of
great improvement, and the latter fulceptible of the best imprel.
fions. But according to the uiual fate of Princes who are called
to the throne in their infancy, his education had been negleaed.
His private preceptors were more ready to flatter, than to infiru8
him. It was the interest of those who governed the kingdoin,
to prevent him from knowing too much. And the Earl of An.
gus, in order to divert him from business, gave him an early taste
for such pleasures, as afterwards occupied and engrossed him more
than became a King. Accordingly, we discover in James all the
features of a great but uncultivated spirit. On the one hand,
violent patfions, implacable resentment, an immoderate desire of
power, and the utmost rage at disappointment. On the other,
love to his people, zeal for the punilhment of private oppressors,
confidence in his favourites, and the most engaginlg opennels and
affability of behaviour.

What he himself had fulf~ered from the exorbitant power of the

nobles led him early to imitate his predecessors, in their attempts
to humble them. The plan he formed for that purpole was more
profound, more ijyftematic, and purfixed with greater conflancy and
fleadinefs, than that of any of his anceitors. And thle influence
of the events in his reign upon those of the Fublequent period,
render it neceflary to explain his conduA, at greater length, and
to enter into a more minute detail of his saions. He had pene-
tration enough to dis~cover those defecas in the schemes adopted
by former kings, which occasioned their mikcarriage. The ex·
ample of James I. had taught him, that wife laws operate slowly
on a rude people, and that the fierce Spirit of the feudal nobles
was not to be subdued by there alone. T'he effeAs of the violent
measures of James II. convinced him, that the opprellion of one
great family is apt either to excite the Fulpician and resentment
of the other nobles, or to enrich with its rpeils some new family,
which would soon adopt the fame sentiments, and become equally
formidable to the crown. He saw, from the fatal end of James
III. that negled was still more intolerable to the nobles than op-
prefilon, and that the miniffry of new men and favourites was
both dishonourable, and dangerous to a Prince. At the fame time, he
felt that the authority of the crown was not fufficient to counter-
balance the powver of the nobles, and that without some new ac·

cetiTon of firength, he could expea no better fuiccefs in the firuggle BeOK I
th~an his anceitors. In this extremity, he applied himself to the
clergry, hoping that they would both rePilth his plan, and concur,
with all their influence, in enabling hlim to put it in execution.
Under the feudal government, the church being efleemed a third
efnate, had its representatives in parliament; the number of there
was considerable, and they poff~effed great influence in that as-
fembly. The fuperflition of former kings, and the zeal of an ig-
norant age, had beltowed upon ecclefiaftics, a great proportion of
the national wealth, and the authority wfhich they acquired by
the reverence of the people, was superior even to that which they
derived from their riches. This powerful ody, howcever, de-
pended entirely on the crown. The Popes, notwithilanding their
attention to extend their ufurpations, had negleaed Scotland as a
difiant and poor kiingdom, and permitted its kings to exercise
powers, which they dis~puted with more considerable princes. The
Scottish monarchs had the sole right of nomination to vacant
bilhoprics and abbeys*) and James naturally conclutded, that
men who expeaed preferment from his favour, would be willing
to merit it, by promoting his designs. Happily for him, the
nobles had not yet recovered the blow given them at Flowden,
and if we may judge, either from their condua, or from the cha-
raaer given of them by Sir Ralph Sadler the Engliih envoy in
Scotland, they were men of little genius, of no experience in bu-
fi~nes, and incapable of a~ing either with unanimity, or with vi-
gour. IMany of the clergy, on the other hand, were diftinguilh-
ed by their great abilities, and no les~s by their ambition. Vari-
ous causes of dis~gust had alifen between them and the nobles,
who delpiled their chara~er, and envied their power, or their
wealth. By ac~ing in concert with the King, they not only gra-
tified him, but avenged themselves, and hoped to aggrandize their
own order, by depressing those, who were their sole rivals. Secure
of so powerful a concurrence, James ventured to proceed with
greater boldness. In the first heat of resentment, he had driven the
Earl of Angus out of the kingdom; and sensible that a person,
so far superior to the other nobles in abilities, might create many
obitacles, which wouldc retard, or render ine~ffeual all his fchelnes,
he solemnly iiwore, that he would never permit him to return in-
to Scoland, and, notwithftandingr the repeated folicitations of the
Kiing of England, he adhered to his vow with unrelenting obfti-
nacy. He then proceeded to repair the fortifications of Edin-

* Epift. Reg. Scot. x. r97, &c. AA. 125 P* AS40.

BOOK 1. burgh, Stirling, and other cafl1es, and to fill his magazines wilth

arms and ammunition. Having taken there precautions by wray
of defence, he began to treat the nobles with the utmost coldneir
and reserve. Those on~ces, which they were apt, from long po&
feflion, to confider as appropriated to their order, were now be.
flowed on ecclefiaftics, who alone pafirefed the King's ear, and
together with a few gentlemen of inferior rank, to whom he had
communicated his schemes, were intruffed with the management
of all public affairs. There miniffers were chosen with judgment;
and Cardinal Beatoun, who soon became the most eminent among
them, was a man of superior genius. They served the King
with Eidelity, they carried on his meafulres with vigour, with re·
putation, and with success. James no longer concealed his con.
tempt of the nobles, and fuffered no opportunity of mortifying
them to escape. Slight offences were aggravated into real crimes,
and punished with severity. Every accusation against persons of
rank was heard with pleasure, every appearance of guilt was ex-
amined with rigour, and every trial proved fatal to the perron ae·
cufed : the banithing Hepburn Earl of Bothwell, for reasons ex.
tremely frivolous, the beheading the Master of Torbes without
fufficient evidence of his guilt, and the condemning Lady Glamip,
a fiffer of the Earl of Angus, to be burnt for the crime of witch·
craft, of which even that credulous age believed her innocent,
are monuments both of the King's hatred of the nobles, of the
severity of his government, and of the firetchles he made towards
absolute power. By there aas of authority, he tried the spirit of
the nobles, and how much they were willing to bear. Their pa*
tience increased his contempt for them, and added to the ardour
and boldness with which he pursued his plan. The nobles 05
served the tendency of his schemes with concern, and with re·
fentment; but the King's sagacity, the vigilance of his miniiers,
and the want of a proper leader, made it dangerous to conceit
anly measures for their defence, and impollible to sa with becom-·
ing vigour. James and his counsellors, by a falle fiep which
they took, presented to them, at length, an advantage which
they did not fail to improve.

Motives, which are well known, had prompted Henry VIll~

to disclaim the Pope's authority, and to seize the revenues of the
regular clergy. His System of Reformation fdtisfied none of hir
fubjeas. Some were enraged because he had proceeded to far,
others murmured becaule he proceeded no farther; and by his
imperious temper, and alternate perfecutions of the zealots for

Popery, and the converts to the Protestant opinions, he was BOOK .-
equally formidable to both. Henry was afraid that this general y-)
diffatisfaaion of his people might encourage his enemies on the
Continent to invade his kingdom. He knew that both the Pope
and Emperor courted the friendship of the King of Scots, and
endeavoured to engage him in an alliance against England.
He resolved, therefore, to disappoint the effeas of their negocia-
tions, by entering into a closer union with his nephew, and for
that purpose sent ambassadors into Scotland, to propole a perlonal
interview with him at York. It was plainly James's interest to
accept of this invitation; the affifiance of so powerful an ally,
the high honours which were promised him, and the liberal sub-
fidies he might have obtained, would have added no little digni-
ty to his domestic government, and must have greatly facilitated
the execution of his favourite plan. On the other hand, a war
with England, which he had reason to apprehend, if he rejeaed
Henry's offers of friendship, was inconsistent with all h~is views.
This would bring him to depend on his nobles; an army could
not be raised without their assistance: to call nobles incensed a-.
gainft their Prince into the field, was to unite his enemies, to
make them sensible of their own firength, and to afford them an
opportunity of revenging their wrongs. James, who was not ig-
norant that all these consequences might follow a breach with
England, listened at £ftl to Henry·'s proposal, and consented to
the interview at York. But the clergy dreaded an union, which
must have been eftablinthd on the ruins of the church. H-enry
had taken great pains to infus~e into his nephew his own senti-
ments concerning religion, and had frequently solicited him, by
ambassadors, to renounce the usurped dominion of the Pope,
which was no less dishonourable to Princes, than grievous to
their fubjeas. The clergy had hitherto, with great address, di-
verted the King from regarding these folicitations. But, in an
amicable conference, Henry expeaed, and they feared that
James would yield to hris entreaties, or be convinced by his ar-
guments. They knew that the revenues of the church were an
alluring objea to a Prince, who wanted money, and who loved
it; that their pride and ambition railed the indignation of the
nobles; that their ind~ent lives gave offence to the people;
that the Protefiant opinions were spreading fast throughout the
nation; and that an universal defeaion from the eflablifhed church,
would be the consequence of giving the fmnalleft degree of encou-
ragementt to these principles. For these reasons, they employed

7 ij

BOOK L. 3!1 their credit with the K;'ngr, and h d recourse to every artificr

- and insinuation, in ordP1r to divert him fiom a journey, whick

mult hlave been 10 fatal to thl ir interest. ? hey endeavoured to
inspire him with fear, by m guify ingr the danger to which he
would expole his person, by venlturing 10, far into England, with.
out any security but the word of a Prince, whlo hax ing violated
eiery thing venerable and s~acred in religion, was no longer tobhe
trulled; and by wPay of compensation for the sums wh~ch he might
have received from Henry, they offered an annual donative of
fifty thousand crowns; they promniid to conttribute liberally to.
wards carrying on a war with~ England, and flattered him w~ith
t'le prospect of immense riches a 'Gh g f -om the forfeiture of per-
sons, who were to be tried a Id cond m led as heretics. Infla.
enced by thlefe confrident:ons, J m~ s broke h~is agreement with
Henry, who, in expeAution of ln-c~i ing h m, h, d already come
to York ; and that haughty at d impaticnt monarch, Icinltd the
affront, by dec1-ring war aCga' i Scotla d. H~is army was soon
ready to invade the kin gdom. J m s \w s OLligred to have re·
coulife to the nobles, so- the defince of his dominions. At his
command, they assembled thI ir follo ucrs; b It with the fame dil-
politions, which animat d therir anceffers in the reign of James
III. and with a full refalution of imitatin~g their euwnsple, by pu.
nifhing thofi to v homn they imlputed the gr' r· nce , of which
they had reason to cox pl in; an1d if the K~it 's miniffers had not
been men of abilities, fixp lior to those of James III. and of con-
fiderable interest evtn with theLir enemies, who could not ar-ee
among themselves what victims to faclifice, the c mp of T la
would have been as ren:1Lab:le as that of L· wder, for the d, ing~
encroachments of the nobles on the prero I ir, of tl - Prinlce.
But though his miniffers wer~e saved by thi, accident, the nobles
ha-d soon another opportenlty of difoovering to thle Kinrr, their
diffatisfanion with his govtlnment, end their contem~pt of l is aU-
thority. Scarcity of provifilo 9 at d the ribour of the season hav-
ing obliged the Engl'thl ally \ 1ich had invaded Scotl ad, to
retire, James imagined thiat i e could alttac them, with great ad-
vantage, ;·1 their retreat; b' t t: e nobL s, with an obftin, cy and
disdain, wh~ich greatly amr~datted thecir disobedience, reful d to
advance a step beyolld t~e L~m'ts of ti e'r own country. Plovok;-
ed by this insult to himTlf, and fulp~icious of a new conspiracy a-
gainft his miniffers, the K:ng infantly difL nded an army, which
paid to little regard to his order4, and he returned abruptly into
the hcart of the king~dom.

An ambitions and high fphlited Prince could not brook such a BOOK I.

mortifyingr affront. His hopes of success had been rash, and his
desp~air upon a disappointment was excetlive. He felt himself en-
gaged in an unnecelrary war with England, which, initead of
vielding him the laurels and triumphs that he expeated, had be-
gun with such circumitances, as encouraged the infalence of his
fEubjeAs, and ex~pos~ed him to the scorn of his enemies. He s~aw
how vain and ineffeAual all his projeas to humble the nobles had
been, and that, though in times of peace, a Prince may endea-
vour to depres~s them, they will rife, d~uring war, to their former
importance and dignity. Impatience, relentment, indignation
filled his bosom by turns. The violence of there pationss altered
his temper, and, perhaps, impaired his reason. He became pen-
five, sullen, and retired. He s~eemed, through the day, to be
fivallowed up in profound meditation, and through the night, he
was diflurbed with those viflonary terrors, which make impref-
sion upon a weak underflanding only, or a disordered fancy. In
order to revive the King's spirits, an inroad on the weffern bor-
ders was concerted by his miniffers, who prevailed upon the Ba-
rons in the neighbouring provinces, to raise as many troops as
were thought necessary, and to enter the enemy's country. But
nothing could remove the King's averflon for his nobility, or di-
minis his jealousy of their power. He would not even intruff
them with the command of the forces which they had assembled;
that was reserved for Oliver Sinclair his favourite, who no sooner
appeared to take poffef~lon of the dignity conferred upon him,
than rage and indignation occasioned an universal mutiny in the
army. Five hundred English, who happened to be drawn up in
fight, attacked the Scots in this disorder. Hatred to the King,
and contempt of their General produced an effea, to which,
there is no parallel in hiffory. They overcame the fear of death,
and the love of ,liberty ; and ten thousand men surrendered to a
number so far inferior, without firikiing a single blow. No man
was desirous of a viaory, which would have been acceptable to
the King, and to his favourite; few endeavoured to save them-
se~lves by flight; the English had the choice of what prisoners
they pleased to takre and almost every person of diftinaion, who
was engaged in the expedition, remained in their hands. This
affoniithing event was a new proof to the King of the general difl
afieation of the nobles, and a new discovery of his own weaknes~s,
and want of authority. Incapable of bearing there repeated in-
fults, and unable to revenge them, his ipirit fiunk altogether.

Booic L The deepcil melancholy and deipair fucceedcd to the furicer

Lc-J transports of rage and indignation, which the filft account ofth

rout of his army occalloned. All the violent patrions, which at
the enemies of life, preyed upon his minQ and walked and con·
fumed a youthful and vigorous conflitution. Some authors oi
that age impute his untimely death to poison; but the difeafesci
the mind, when they rife to an heighrlt, are aften mortal;and
the known effe~ts of disappointment, rage, and indignation upoc
a sanguine and impetuous temper, fuffciently account for his un·
happy fate. "L His death (says Drummond) proveth his mindto
have been ralled to an high flrain, and above mediocrity; b
could die, but could not digest a difafter." Had James survives
this misfortune, one of two things muff have happened: eitho;
the violence of his temper would have engraged hlim openlyte
attacki the nobles, who would have found in Hernry a willing ad
powrerful proteaor, and have derived the fame affilance from
h~im, whiich the malecontents, in the fucceedinlg reign, did fiom
his daughter Elizabeth; in that c fe, a dangerous ill war wedu
have been the certain consequence. Or, p~erha~ps, receffity migh
have obliged him to accept of Henry's offels, and be reconcildi
to his nobles. In that event, the chu ch would have falenl
sacrifice to their union, a Reformation, upon Henrq's plan, wed9
have been established by law, a great part of the tempolalitient;
the church would have been seized, and the friendfl~p of the
liing and nobles cemented by dividing its spoils.

Such were the efforts of our kings, t,wa ds leducing the e

orbitant power of the nobles. If they wele not attended witi
success, we must not, for that reason, conclude that they weer
not condu~ed with prudence. Er ery c:icumldnce fiems to have
combined against the crown. Accident i events concurred ailt
political causes, in rendering t'le best concerted measures zEr-
tive. The affaffination of one king, the sudden death of anoth~er
and the fatal delpair of a third, contributed no 1les than its one
natural firength, to preserve the aliflocra y from ruin.

Amidst these firuggler, the ii fluence wh~ich1 cur kings potLI

fed in their Parliaments, is a ciic;m9ance f e~mingly inex.plicabkc
and which merits particular attention. A the e a ebltties were
compofedl chiefly of the nobles, they, we are al t to imagine

The extra- must have di£1ated all their decifi u~s but, i dle d of this, eveil

aunef n~King found them oblequious to his will, and obta'nod fcch laws,

ther Scottish as he esteemed necessary for extendinb his autho;ity. All thirp,

I al~

. e!t, w~ere conduaed there with difpratch: andc ux..Ydirlty: and, is none

of our hiflolians, do we find an instance of any opposition formed coo r .
against the court in Parliament, or mention of any difficulty in
carrying through the meafhres which were agrecable to the
King. In order to account for this singular sac?, it is necessary
to inquire into the origin and conflitution of Parliament.

T'he genius of the feud~l government, uniform in all its ope- The re-ror a

rations, produced the fame effeats in fmlall, as in great societies; Of it,
and the territory of a Baron, was, in miniature, the model of a
kingdom. He poffelled the right of jurifdiaion, but thole, who
depended on himn, being free men, and not slaves, could be tried
by their Peers only; and, therefore, his vaialas were bound to
attend his courts, and to afifit both in palling and executing his
sentences. WVhen assembled,, on thefc occasions, thley eflablifhed,
by mutual consent, such regulations, as tended to the welfare of
their small fac-iety; and often granted, voluntarily, such s~upplies
to their Sulperior, as his necessit~ies required. Change now a
fingrle name : in place of B~aron, fubfitiute Kiing, and we behold
a Parliament in its first rudiments, and observe the f~irt exertions
of those powers, which its members now possess as Judges, as
Legislators, and as dispensers of thle public revenues. Suitable
to this idea, are the appellations of the King's Court *, and of the
Kling's Greait Council, by which, Parliaments were anciently dif-
.tingued; and s~uitable to this, lik~ewise, were the constituent
members of which it was compofred. In all the feudal kingdoms,
those who held of the King in chief were bound, by the condition
of their tenure, to attend and to assist in his courts. N~or was
thlis esteemed a privilege, but a service. It was exaacd likewise:
of Biihops, Abbots, and the greater ecclefiaftics, who holding
vast poffetions of the Crown, were deemed fubjeat to the fame
burden. Parliaments did not continue long in this slate. Citics
gradually acquired wealth, a conf~derable Ihare of th-, public
tax~es were levied on them, the inhabitants grew into eflimation,
and being enfranchised by the Sovereign, a place in Parliament
was the consequence of their liberty, and of their importance.
But as it would have been absurd to confer such a privilege, 01
to impos~e such a burden on a whole community, every borough
was permitted to chufe one or two of its citizens to appear in the
name of the corporation; and the idea of repre/entation was firP
introduced in this manner. An innovation, still more important,
naturally followed. The vassals of the Crown were originally
few in number, and extremely powerful; but as it is impoi~ble

* Du Cange, Voc. Curia.

Boom I. to render property fiued and permanent, many of their poireflon

Scame, grad tally, andi by various methods of alienation, to be

[pl!it and parcelled out into different hands. Hlence arose the dit,
tindian between the Greater and the Lefer Barons. The form.
er w~ere those who retained their original fiefs undivided, the lat.
ter wele the n-w and less potent vassals of thle Crown. Both
were bould, how-ever, to perform all feudal services, and, of
consequence, to give attende-nce in Parlizment. To the leifer
Earons, who formed no inconsiderable body, this was an intoler·
able grievance. Barons sometimes denied their tenure, boroughs
renounced their right of eleccing, c'larters were obtained, con·
tainling anl exemption from attendance; and thle anxiety, with
which our anceflors endeavoured to get free from the obligation
of fitting in Parliament, is furpaffecd by that only, with which
their pollerity solicit to be admitted there. In order to accorn
modate both parties, and, at once, to secure to the King a fuffi
clent number of members in his great council, and to save his
vass~als from an unnecess~ary bmrden, an easy expedient was found
out. The obligation to personal attendance was continued upon
the Greater Barons, from which the Less~er Barons were exempt·
cd, on condition of' their eleaing, in each county, a certain
number of Reprc/st~atives, to appear in their name. Thus a Par-
liament became complete in all its members, and was composed
of' Lords Spiritual and Temporal, of Knights of the thires, and
of Eurgeffe~s. As many caules contributed to bring government
earlier to perfeAion in Engl]and, than in Scotland; as the rigour
of the feudal initlitutions abated s~ooner; and its defeas were sup-
plied with greater facility in the one kingdom, than in the other;
England, led the way in all there changes, and Burgesses, and
Knights of the thire appeared in the Parliaments of that nation,
before thesy were heard of in ours. Burgesses were first admitted

A. D. 13-6. into the Scottish Parliaments by Robert Bruce *; and in thle

prearable to the law-s of Robert III. they are ranked among the
conflituent members of thant assembly. The Lesser Barons were

127.7 indebted to James I. for a flatute exempting them from personal

attendance, and p~ermitting 11 em to eleft representatives; the ex-
emption was eagerly Jaid hold on, but the privilege was to little
valued, thlat, except one or twro inflances, it lay neglefied during
one hun:dred and sixty years; and James VI. first obliged thern
to fend represen~tatives, regularly to Parliament ·f.

* Abercromby, r. 63r.
-i Eiffays on 13rit, Antiq.· Elf. II. Dalrymp. Iiift, of Feud. Prop. ch. 8.

A Scottish Parliament, then, consisted anciently of Great Ba. BOOK I.

rons, of Ecclefiaftics, and a few representatives of boroughs. Nor
were these divided, as in England, into two houses, but compoled
one assembly, in which the Lord Chancellor presided*. And in
rude ages, when the s~cience of government was extremely imper-
feB, among a martial people, unacrquainted with the arts of peace,
firang~ers to the talents which make a figure in debate, and de-
fpifing them, Parliaments were not held in the fame effimation as
at present j nor did haughty Barons love those courts, in which
they appeared, with such evident marks of inferiority. Parlia-
ments were often hastily assembled, and it was, probably, in the
King's power, by the manner in which he illued his writs for that
purpole, to exclude those who were averse from his measures. At
a time when deeds of violence were common, and the reitraints
of law and decency were little regarded, no man could venture
with safety to oppole the King in his own court. The Great Ba-
rons, or Lords of Parliament, were extremely few; even so late
as the beginnings of James VI. reigns·, they amounted only to fiftyr-
three. The Ecclefiaftics equalled them in number, and being de-
voted implicitly to the Crown, for reasons which have been al-
ready explained, rendered all hopes of vicaory in any firuggle def-
p~erate. Nor were the nobles themselves so anxious, as might be
imagined, to prevent afts of Parliament favourable to the royal
prerogative; conscious of their own firength, and of the King's
inability to carry these aAs into execution without their concur-
tence, they truffed either to elude, or to contemn them; and the
flatute revoking the King's property, and annexing alienated ju-
ridialaons to the Crown, repeated in every reign, and violated and
defpiled as often, is a flanding proof of the impotence of laws,
when opposed to power. So many concurring caules are fufficient,
perhaps, to account for the ascendant, which our Kings acquired
in Parliament. But without having recours~e to any of there, a

* In England, the Peers and Commons s~eem early to have met in s~eparate

houses; and James I. w~ho was fond of imitating the English in all their cuitoms,
had probably an intention of introducing some considerable dillination betwecen
the Greater and Lesser Barons in Scotland; at lealt he determined that their con-
Fultations thould not be carried on under the direttion of the fame President; for
by his law, A. D. r427, it is provided, " that out of the Commiffloners of all
the thires shall be chosen a wife and expert man, called the Common Speaker of
the Parliament, wvho shall propose all and sundry needs and causes, pertaimlng
to the Commons in the Parliament or generalcouncil." No such Speaker, it
would s~eem, was ever chos~en; and by a fubtreauent law the Chancellor was de-
clared perpetual PreTident of Parliament.

"r And. Coll. v. i. pref. 40,

BOOK1 i. Digle c TCUM RaneC, pecul'·r tO the constitution of the Scottifi

L-dParliarent, thle mention'ng of wh~ich we have hithlerto atroided

will abundantly explain this fair, fieemingly so repugnant to all
our reafoaogrs concening the wealknefs of the Kiing, and the

poerofth nobles.
As far ba~ck, as our records enable us to trace thle conflitution

of our Parliaments, we find a committee, diitinguilhed by the name
of Lor-ds ofAr~ticles. It v as their business to prepare, and to
digest all matters which were to be laid before the Parliantent;
every motion for a new law was first made there, and approved or
rejeated by them at ploafure; what they approx ed was formed into
a bill, and pres~ented to Parliament; what they reje~ted could not
be introduced into the house. This committee owed the extra.
ordinary powers vested in it, to the military genius of the ancient
nobles; too imlpatient to submit to the drudgery of civil~ business,
too impetuous to oblerve the forms, or to enter into the details ne·
ceffary in condu~tingr it, they were glad to lay that burden upon
a small number, while they themselves had no other labour than
fxmply to give, or to refuse their fadndion to the bills, which were
presented to them. The Lords of Articles, then, not only direa-
ed the whole proceedings of Parliament, but poffeff d a negative
before debate. That committee was chosen and conflituted in such
a manner, as p~xt this valuable privilege entirely in the KI;ng\'
hands. It is egtremely probable, that the King once hlad the soke
right of nominating the Lords of Articles*. They came aftri
wards to be eleated by the Parliament, and consisted of an eqiual

* It appears from authentic lecor15s, that a Parl'ament was appointed to b*

held M~arch r2, 15-66, and thlt th· L 's of Art cl s w re hof 1 and met on the
7th, five dazys before the a'rmblingr of Ial'asfamnt, if tl ey couldi be reguk~ry
eleaed so longs before the meetirg of Parlilment, It is nltural to coulder
that the Prince alone poff~e~e the r -'1 o' eletti igr thefm. Ther are two; dite~
ent accounts of the manlner of th ir elrRton at th t time, one by ?Iary herflf,
in a letter to the Archbill op of Glasgow, " Wie, a com a i d with our nebbityr
for the tim·, past to the Tolbuitn eC Ed'. bt -gh f r h~ Id' , of our P· ·iament
on the 7th day of th's inflant, ard ekPE J thP L ris Arti ,l·ars." If wve ex-
plain there n rdls, ac or·!ing to firift C mmer, we mt co 1 lu 10 thlat the Queen
hers if ielead th m. It is, how ve ·, n r- r· b,. le tl at Mary meant to lay
that the nobles then profent n it h i, v iz. I r pr'~y cou i allors, alnd othel,
ele~ed thle Lorls of A~rd<.1 s. h t s :1. of S <trlard, p. 3.31. The other ac.
Lou t is Lord Rlio~ven's, who ex 'y 1Er a t rat tl e Queen h· ills elende
th~~m. Ke ith's Append. 126. 1Vh t er w emb-a e th~e eor the ot'l f th f
opinions, is of no col ferquence. If t e: privvy coun fe: lors and n >bks attending
tile court had a right to el it th- L r s o .Il.icl s, it was tqually adrlantageous
for thle Crown, as ifthie Pri, e b J 1 1 l-- f ni;.iation of them.

aumb~er out of each eltate, and most commonly of eight Temporal rpose 1.
and eight Spiritual Lords, of eigh~t representatives of boroughis, - I
and of the eight great offcers of the Crown. Of this ~body, the
eight ecclefiaics, together with th~e officers of the Crown, were
entirely at the King's devotion, and it was fearce polible that the
choice could fall on s~uch Temporal Lords and Burgesses as would
unite in opposition to his measures. Capable either of influencing·
their eleaion, or of gaiaing them when eleAed, the King com-
rnonly found the Lords of Articles no less obsequious to his will,
than his own privy council, and by means of his authority with
them, he could put a negative upon his Parliament before debate,
as well as after it; and w-hat may seem altogether incredible, the
most limited Prince in Europe aaually poffeffed, in one initance,
a prerogative which the most ablolute could never attaia*.

T'o this account of the internal conflitution of Scotland, it a ill state of F. -

not be improper to add a view of the political slate of Europe at
that period, where the following hiflory commences. A thorough of th- r6th
knowledge of that general tyfiem, of which every kingdom in Eu- ces turY
rope forms a part, is not less requisite towards underflauding the
history of a nation, than an acquaintance with its peculiar govern-
ment and laws. The latter may enable us to comprehend do-

* H~aving deduced thne hitnory of the committee of Lords of Aricles, as low as

the fubjea of this preliminary book reqiuired, it may be agreeabl-, perhapp, to
some readers, to knlow th- fi~lbrequent variat'o Is in th's singular i~l~imtuton, and
the political use whi~ch our K~ingrs made of th fe. W.:hen Parliamnents became
more numlerous, and more colfiderable by the admillion of the re refcntat'ves
of the Lesser Barons, the preserving the'r it fluence over th· L rds of Artizles
became, likewise, an objea: of greater importance to our Kiings. James VI. on
pretence, that the Lords of Articles could not find leisure to confider the grea
multitude of affairs laid before thiem, obutai led an ac?, appointing four perCons to
be named out of each ESTATE, W110 fl10211 meet t~venty days before the com-
mencement of Parliament "r, to receive all fupplications, &c and rejetai ng hat
they thought fr~ivolous, thoukl ergrrof~s in a book what they thounght w Ishy tl~e
attention of the Lords of Articles. No provision is made in the aER for the cho'ce
of this f~ele body, andl the Kin~g wvould, of course, have claim~ed tha 1r~vil ge.
In 1633, when Ciarles I. was beg;!nning to introd~ice those i anova.' us 1· h'ch
gave so much oB nlce to theB nation, hie dreaded the oppoiide I of his P. rl'am ut,
and in order to yres ent that, aa artifice was made ude of to f cure th L r Is
of Articles for the Crown. The Temyoral Peers w~ere app in, d to chul'e ci,1 t
Bilhops, and thle Bish~opS eight Peers; thlefe sixteen met t go h.r, and el L? d
eight K~night~s of the th~ire, and eight Burgelf s, and to theie the th~e crowv1 f-
ficers were added as u~ual. If nc can only f~uppofce eight p rs` 1 s of 10 num r-
cus a body, as the Peers of Scotland w~ere become by that time, attached to tl e
court, these, it is obviouis, wrould be the men whnom the Bifibops would chure,
and of consequence, the whole Lords of Articles were the tools and creatulces of

·f Aat. 222. p. Is94

BOOK T. Thel 1C OCCUT1-ences and revolutions, but without the former, fe

-v-reign tranfaaions must be altogether myfierious and unintelligible.

By attending to this, many dark passages in our history may be
placed in a clear light 3 and where the bulk of historians have
seen only the effe61, we may be able to dilcover the cause.

The fhbverflon of the feudal government in France, and its de·

clenfion in the neighbouring kingdoms, occasioned a remarkable
alteration in the political itate of Europe. Kingdoms, which were
inconsiderable when broken, and parcelled out among nobles, ac.
quired firmnels and firength, by being united into a regular mo·
narchy. Kings became conscious of their own power and impor-
tance. They meditated schemes of conquest, and engaged in wars
at a distance. Numerous artnies were railed, and great taxes im.
posed for their subsistence. Considerable bodies of infantry were
kiept in constant pay; that service grew to be honourable; aud ca.
valry, in which the firength of European armies had hitherto con·
rifted, though proper enough for the thort and voluntary excur·
sians of nobles who served at their own expence, were found to
be unfit either for making, or defending any important conquest,

It was in Italy, that the powerful monarchs of France and Spain

and Germany first appeared to make a trial of their new firength.
The divilion of that country into so many small slates, theluxury
of the people, and their effeminate averflon for war, invited their
more martial neigrhbours to an easy prey. The Italians, who had
been accuffomed to mock battles only, and to decide their quarrehs
by innocent and bloodless viaories, were allonifhedl at the fightof
real war; and as they could not resist the torrent, they fufferedit
to take its course, and to [pend its rage. Intrigue and policy sup-
plied the want offitrength; and necellity and felf-prefervation taught
that ingenious people the great iecret of modern politics, and Rew-
ed them how to balance the power of one Prince, by throwing
that of another into the oppof te feale. By this happy device, the

the K~ing. This pralice, so inconsistent with liberty, was aboliihed during the
civil war; and the statute of James VI. was repealed. After the Reitoration,
P'arliaments became more servile than ever. W~hat w-as only a temporary device,
in the reign of Charles I. was, thenl, converted mnto a flanding law. " For my
"~ part," says the author from wrhom I have borrowed many of these particulars,
" I th~ould have thought it less cri-ninal in our Reikoration Parbiament, to have
** openly beffowed upon the Km;, a negative before debate, than, in such an
" underhand artificial manner, to bettay their constituents, and the nation."
Essays on Brit. Antiq. 55. It is pr bable, however, from a letter of Randolph'a
to Cecil, I0. Aug. I360, that this Parliament had some ap~pearance of ancient
precedent to juffify their unworthy condu8.

lIfberty of Italy was preserved. The scales were poiled by very Bcox I.
Okilful hands; the fmlalleft variations were attended to, and no
Prince was allowed long to retain any fuperiolity, that could be
dangerous.

A ryftem of condu61, pursued with to much success in Italy

was not long confined to that country of political refinement. The
maxim of preserving a balance of power is founded so much upon
obvious reasoning, and the situation of Europe rendered it to ne-
ceffary, that it soon became a matter of chief attention to all wife
politicians. Every itep any Prince took was observed by all his
neighbours. Ambassadors, a kind of honourable fpics, authorized
by the mutual jealousy of Kings, resided almost constantly at every
different court, and had it in charge to watch all its motions. Dan-
gers were foreseen at a greater difiance, and prevented with more
eas~e. Confederacies wereformed to humble anly power which role
above its due proportion. Revenge or felf-defence were no longer
the only causes of hostility, it became common to take arms out
of policy; and war, both in its commencement, and in its opera-
tions, was more an exercis~e of the judgment, than of the pailions
of men. Almost every war in Europe became general, and the
most inconsiderable slates acquired importance, becaule they could
add weight to either scale.

Francis I. who mounted the throne of France in the year '515,

and CharlesV. who obtained the Imperial Crown in the year I519,
divided between them the firength and affeations of all Europe.
Their perpetual enmity was not owing either to personal jealousy,
or to the caprice of private patiion, but was founded so much in
nature and true policy, that it fubifted between their potterity for
several ages; and, notwithflanding their present accidental and un-
natural union, must again revive. Charles succeeded to all the do-
minions of the hnoufe of Auffria. No family had ever gained 10
inuch by wife and fortunate marriages. By acquisitions of this kind
the Auffrian Princes rose, in a ihort time, from obscure Counts of
Hapfbourg, to be Archdukes of Auffria, and Kings of Bohemia,
and were in poffef~ion of the Imperial dignity by a fort of heredi-
tary right. Besides these territories in Germeny·, Charles was heir
to the Crown of Spain, and to all the dominions which belonged to
the house of Burgundy. The Burgundian provinces engroff'ed, at
that time, the riches and commerce of one half of Europe ; and he
drew from them, on many occallons, those immense sums, which
no people without trade and liberty are able to contribute. Spain
furnished him a gallant and hardy infantry, to whole dilcipline he

POOK T. was inde'oted for all hris conquets. And at the fime timle, by the

s~difcovery of the new world, a vein of ne-al h was opened to him,

whiich all the extravagance of ambition could not exl aufl. T'hde
advantages rendered Charles thle fixft P in e in Eurole; but he
wvi'hed to be more, and openly aspired to uni ·edl ~monarchy. Hir
genius was of that kind which ripens slowly, at dl lies long conceal.

' ed 3 but it grew up without observation, to an unexpeaed height

and vigour. He poffeffed, in an eminent degree, the chara~eriffic
virtues of all the different races of Princes to whom he was allied,
In forming his schemes, he dilcovered all the subtlety and pene.
tration of Ferdinand his grand-father; he pursued them with that
abitinate and int!exible perseverance w hich has ever since been pe-
culiar to the Auffrian blood; and in executing them, he could esn-
play the magnanimity and boldnef, of his Burgundian Anceitors.
His abilities were equal to h~is power, and neither of them would
have been inferior tohIis designs, had not Provide nce, in pity tonian-
Lind, anel in order to preserve them from thle worst of all evihs,
Univeral1 Monarchy, railed up Frlncis I. to deforld the liberty of
Europe. His dominions nele 1le exitenfive, but more united than
the Emperor's. S-is fubje3As were nume ous, a'tive, and wsarlikie,
lovers of glory, and 10* czs of t' e'r King!. To Charles power was
the only objea of defre, and I e Ipurbe~d It withl an unn earied and
joyles~s induffry. Francis could mingle pre 'ure and elegance with
hris ambition, and thoughl he negil Ftd fame adlval toges, which a
more flegmatic or more frugal Pl'nce w ou'd h ve i p-oved, an
sative and intrepid courage funril'cd all his deftas, at d checked
or defeated many of thet Eupelo 's defi us.

The reft of Europe obrelene all the motions oc Il re n',hity

rivals, with a jealous attention. On thle on- f r, the Itl!ans law
the danger which threatened Chri 10 dom, a 1 in ordct to avert
it, had recourse to the expedient, whi'ch t1 cy d alttn employed
writh success. T'hey endeav~oured to dividec she power of thie two
contending M'onarchls in 0 eqt al fea'es, at d by t re i nion of several
small states, to counterpoise 1"m, wl~or power b cam· too great.
But, what they concerted with much wild m, tl ey w-ere able to
execute with little v;,rour; ardl intr~gue ardc ze Lc 1C ent were feeble
fences agrainit the encloachlments of mif' ty power.

On the other fide, Henry VIII. of Eng'and held the balance

vith less delicacy, but wi h a flr rn r hand. He was the third
Prince of the age in dignity and in power; and thle advantageous
iCtuation of his dominions, his domneflic tranqu'lityi, his immenfele
wealth, and atfolute authority reld ed 1'm thle naturalguardian

of the literty of Europe. Each of the rix 1s courted him with Boar L
emulation; he knew it to be his interest to keep the balance e ren, -
and to restra~in both, by not joining entirely with either of them.
But he was seldom able to reduce his ideas to praaice; he was
governed by caprice more than by princ ple; and the pafflons of
the manl were an overmatch for the marins of the King. Vanity
and resentment were the great [prings of all his undertakinrg,
and hisr neig~hbours eaiily found the w~ay, by touching these, to
force him upon many rash and inconf;9ent enterprif s. His re'g r
was a perpetual series of blunders in pol'tics, and while he esteem-
ed himse~lf the w-isest Prince in Europe, he was a con~ant dupe to
those, who found it neceffatry, and could submit to flatter him.

In this situation of E~rope, Scotland, which had hitherto waited

her firength in the quarrels betwveen France and England emerged
from her obf'curity, took; her flt,.ion in the system, and began to
have fame influence upon thle fate of' didlant nations. Her af~.lance
was, frequently, of confeqluence to the contending pa.rtles, and the
balance was often to nicely adjailed, that it was in her pow er to
make it lean to either fide. 'The part alligned her was to di ·,t
Henry from carrying his arms into the Continent. That Prince,
having routed the French at Guinegrat, and invefied Terou"nne,
France attempted to divide his forces, by engaging James IV. in
that unhappy expedition which ended with his life. For the fame
reason, Francis encouraged and atified the Dukte of Albany to
ruin the families of Angus and Home, which were in the interest
of England, and would willingly hav~e perfitaded the Scots to
revenge the death of their King, and to enter into a new war
with that k~ingdom. Henry and Francis having united not long
after againit the Emperor, it was thle interest of both Kings, that
the Scots thould continue inaaive; and a long tranquillity was the
er~eA of their union. Charles endeavoured to break this, and to
embarals H-enry by another inroad of the Scots. For this end, he
made g~rea~t advances to James V. flattering the vanity of the yo
Mi~onalch, by ele~ing him a Knight of the Golden Fleece, and b
offering him a matchin the L~nperial family; andl~n return for tnefe
empty honours, he demanded of him to renounce hn's alli nce wvi
France, and to declare wvar against Eligland. Bu~t Ja mes, who
had much to lose, and whvlo could gain little by embracing the
Emperor's proposals, rejeaed them with decency, and kie ~ing
firm to his ancient allies, left Henry at fu111 iberty to aB uponl
the Continent with his whole firength.

BOOK I. 'Eenry himself began his reign, by imitating the example of

-Ihis anceffors with regard to Scotland. He held its power in such

extreme contempt, that he was at no pains to gain its fiiendihip;
but on the contrary, he irritated the whole nation, by reviving
the antiquated pretenflons of the Crown of England to the fore·
reignty over Scotland. But his own experience, and the ex.
ample of his enemies, gave him an higher idea of its importance.
It was impofi~ble to defend an open and extensive frontier, agaidl
the incursions of an ac"tive ahd martial people. IDuring any war
on the Continent, this obliged him to divide thle firength of his
kingdom. It was necefi~ary to maintain a kind of army of ob.
servation in the north of England ; and after all precautions, the
Scottilh borderers, who were fuiperior to all mankind in the prac·
Stice of irregular war, often made faccefsful inroads, and spread
terror and desolation over many counties. He fell, at last, upon
the true secret of policy, with refpeat to Scotland, which his
predecessors had too little penetration to discover, or too Inuch
pride to employ. The ftuation of the country, and the bravery
of the people made the conquest of Scotland impossible; but the
national poverty, and the violence of fa~ion rendered it an enly
matter to divide, and to govern it. He abandoned, therefore,
the former design, and res~olved to employ the utmofI address in
executing the latter. It had not yet become honourable for one
Prince to receive pay from another, under the more decent name
of a subsidy. But, in all ages, the fame arguments have been good
in courts, and of weight with ministers, fa~ious leaders, and
favourites. What were the arguments, by which Henry brought
over to many to his interest during the minority of James V. we
know by the orig~inal warrants for remitting considerable sums
into Scotland, which are still extant *. B3y a proper diffribution
of there, many persons of note were gained to his party, and a
fac~ion which held secret correspondence with England, and re-
ceived all its direaions from thence, appears henceforward in all
our domestic contests. In the sequel of the hiffory, we shall
find Henry labouring to extend his influence in Scotland. His
su~ccessors adopted the fame plan, and improved upon it. The
affairs of the twfo kingdoms became interwoven, and their inte-
rests were often the fame. Elizabeth divided her attention al-
most equally between them, and the authority, which the inhe-
xited in the one, was not greater than that, which the acquired
in the other.

* Burn. Fjfr. PEcf. v, i. p 7.

# BOOK SECOND.

THE

H I S T O Y

OF

SCOTLAN D.

BOOK SECON\D.

CONTENTS.

EITTH ofQueen Mary State ofScotland. Earl of Arran regent. Scheres of

H'enry VIII. State of Parties. Persecution of the reformers. Inv-asion of
Scotland. A peace. The murder of Beatoun. N~ew breach nith1 Eng'and.
Battle ofPinkiey. Treaty with France. Peace concluded. Queen Dowfager
regent. Progress of the Reformation. Its causes. lalrrige of Queen Mary
with the Dauphin. Elizab3eth. Persecution of the reformed. Condu10f the
Queen Regent. Her faud. Infurrettion at Perth. A treaty concluded. A
second rupture. A s~econd treaty made and violated. Success of the Protef-
tants. A third treaty. Accefl~on ofFrancis II. TrooI-s arrive from France.
Proteitants take arms. Deprive the Queen Regent of authority.

AYnR Queen of Scots was born a few days before the death of Booir II

her father James V7. The situation in which he left the king- v
domn alarmed all ranks of men, with the prolpea of a turbulent Dec. ,·
and difafirous reign. A war agrainft England had been undertaken Birth orryI
waithaot necessity, and carried on withiout success. Many persons "y'P
of the first rankn had fallen into the hands of the Eng~lish~, in the dom.
unfortunate rout near the firth of Solway, and were flill prisoners
at London. Among the reft of the nobles there was little union,
either in their views, or in their affeaions; and the religious dif~
putes, occasioned by the opinions of the reformers, growing eve-.
ry day more violent, added to the rage of those fa~tions which
are natural to a form of government nearly ariftocratical.

The government of a Qxeen was unknown in Scotland, and,

did not imprint much reverence in the minds of a martial
people. The government of an infant Queen was flill more def-
titute of real authority; and the prof~pea of a long and feeble
rainority invited to faaion, by the hope of impunity. James had
not even provided the common remedy against the disorders of a

BOOK II* 23 DOrity, by COmmitting to proper persons the care of his daug6.

ter's education, and the adminiltration of affairs in her name.
Though he saw the clouds gathering, and foretold that they
would quickly burlt into a florm, he was to little able to difpede
them, or to defend h~is daughter and kingdom against the immi.
nent calamities, that, in mere delpair, he abandoned them botih
to the mercy of fortune, and left open to every pretender, it
office of regent, which he could not fix to his own fagtisfadion.

PretenTions Cardinal Beatoun, who had for many years been considered as
of Cardinal prime minister, was the first who claimed that high dignity; and
Beatoun to
theregency. in support of his pretenfrons, he produced a tellament*, which

he himself had forged in the name of the late King; and with·
out any other right, inflantly assumed the title of Regent. He
hoped, by the amlitance of the clergy, the countenance of France,
the connivance of the Qp~een Dowager, and the support of the
whole Popilh fa~tion, to hold by force, what he had seized on
by fraud. But Beatoun had enjoyed power too long to be a fa.
vourite of the nation. Those among the nobles who withed for
a Reformation in religion dreaded his s~everity, and others conl-
dered the elevation of a churchman to the highest office of the
kingdom as a deprefilonn of themselves. At their infligation,
James Hamilton Earl of Arran, and next heir to the Queen,
rouled himself from his inaAivity, and was prevailed on to r·
spire to that flation, to which proximity of blood, and the prac-

Tarl of Ar. tice of the kingdom gave him an undoubted title. The nobles,
ran chosen who were assembled for that purpose, unanimously conferred on

ren him the offce of regent ) and the public voice applauded their

choice.

Chara~erof No two men ever differed more widely in difpolition and cha-
Beatoun. rzder, than the Earl of Arran and Cardinal Beatoun. The Car-

dinal was by nature of immoderate ambition 9 by long experi-
ence he had acquired address and refinement; and insolence grew
tipon him from continual success. His high flation in the church
placed him in the way of great employments; his abilities were
equal to the greatest of there ; nor did h~e reckon any of them to
be above his merit. As his own eminence was founded upon the
power of the church of Rome, he was a zealous defender of that
fuperitition, and for the fame reason an avowed enemy to the doc-
trine of the Reformers. Political motives alone determined him
to support the one, or to oppole the other. His early application
to public business kept him unacquainted with the learning and

* Sardler's Lett. z6r.

controversies of the age , he gave judgment, however, upon all EcoK II
the points in dilpute, with a precipitancy, violence, and rigour,
which cotemporary historians mention with indignation.

The charaaer of thle Earl of Arran was, in almost every thing, Of Arran.

the revers~e of the other's. He was neither infe8ed with ambi-
tion, nor inclined to cruelty : The love of ease extingulfhed the
former, the foftners of his temper preserved him from the latter.
Timidity and irresolution were his predominant failings, the one
occalloned by his natural conititution, and the other arising from
a consciousness that his abilities were not equal to his flation.
Wi~th these difpolitions, he might have enjoyed and adorned pri-
vate life - but his public condua was without courage, or digni-
ty, or confillence. The perpetual slave of his own fears, and,
by consequence, the perpetual tool of those, who found their ad-
vantage in pra~ising upon them. But as no other person could
be set in opposition to the Cardinal, with any probability of fuc-
cess, the nation declared in his favour with so general a con-
sent, that the artifices of his rival could not withstand its united
firength.

The Earl of Arran had fearce taken poffetiion of his new dig- Schemes of

nity, when a negociation was opened with England, which gave aVr~li
birth to events of the most fatal consequence to himself, and to to Scotland
the kingdom. After the death of James, Henry VIII. was no
longer afraid of any interruption from Scotland to his designs a-
gainft France; and immediately conceived hopes of rendering
this security perpetual, by the marriage of Edward his only son
with the young ~een of Scots. He communicated his inten-
tion to the prisoners taken at Solway, and prevailed on them to
favour it, by the promise of liberty, as the reward of their fuc-
cess. In the mean time, he permitted them to return into Scot-
land, that, by their presence in the Parliament which the Regent
had called, they might be the better able to perfunde their coun-
trymen to fall in with his proposals. A cause, intruffed to such
able and zealous advocates, could not well miss of coming to an
happy issue. All those who feared the Cardinal, or who desired
a change in religion, were fond of an alliance, which afforded
proteaion to the doarine which they had embraced, as well as
to their own persons, againfl the rage of that powerful and haugrh-
ty Prelate.

But Henry's rough and impatient temper was incapable of im- Ill condua.

e4l by h mn-

proving this favourable conjunature. Addrels and delicacy in py,l
managing the fears, and follies, and interests of men, were arts

BOOK .I with which he was utterly unacquainted. The designs he ha

Sformed upon Scotland were obvious from the marriage which I

had propos~ed, and he had not dexterity enougrh to dlifyife, or to
conceal them. Initead of vielding to the fear or jealodfy of the
Scots, what time and accidents would soon have enabled him to
recover, he, at once, alarmed and irritated the whole nation, by
demanding that the Queen's person should be immediately com.
mitted to his cuffody, and that the government of the kingdom
thould be put in his hands during hier minority.

Odious to Henry could not have prefclibed more ignominious conditions
tbnhi to a conquered people, and it is no wonder they were reje8ed,
part accept- with indignation, by men who scorned to pard! ar an alliance
ed by tnem. with England, at the prxce of their own lbutly. T.he Padlia

ment of Scotland, however, h Buenced by the nobles who re.

March Is, turned from England, delirous of peace 1 Ith that kingdom, and

x343. delivered, by the Regent's confining the Cardinal as a priloner,

from any opposition to which he m'gh~t have gh~ en r're; codent·
ed to a treaty of marriage and of unio n, but up n somewhat of a
more equal footing. And after some dark and unfuccefsful in·
trig~ues, by which his ambassador endeavoured to carry off the
young Queen and Cardinal Beatoun into En rland, Henry wvas
obliged to gjive up his own proposals, and to accel t of theirs. On
his fide, he codiented that the Qecen should continue to rcfide
in Scotland, and himself remain excluded from any share in the
government of the kingdom. On the other hand, the Scots a-
greed to fend their Sovereign into England so soon as the attain-
ed the full age of ten years, and inflantly to deliver fix persons,
of the firlt rank, to be kept as hollages by Henry till the Quleen's
arrival at his court.

Favouredby TIhe treaty was still so inanifeftly of advantage to England,
the regent. that the Regent 10ft much of the public confidence by codfenting

to it. The Cardinal, who hlad now recovered liberty, watched
for such an opportunity of remadining credit, and he did not fail

Opposed by to cultivate and improve this to the utmost. H-e complained
thcardi- loudly, that the Regent had betrayed the kingdom to its mol

inveterate enemies, and faclified its honour to his own ambi-
tion. He foretold the extindlion of true catholic religion, un·
der the tyranny of an excommunic-lted heretic ; but above all, he
lamented to fee an ancient k'ngdom codernting to its own slave-
ry, des~cending into the ignominious flation of a dependent pro-
vince; and, in one hour, the n eaknefs or treachery of a single
man surrendering every thing, for whlich the Scottiih nation h41

struggled and foughlt, during to many ages. There remonfiran, nOOK I.
ces of the Cardinal were not without effea. T hey were ad-
dressed to prejudices and patirons which are deeply rooted in the
humnan heart. The fame hatred to the ancient enemies of their
country, the fame jealorify of national honour, and pride of in-
dependency, which, at the beginning of the pres~ent century,
went near to prevent the Scots from consenting· to an union with
England, upon terms of great advantage, did, at that time, inl-
duce the whole nation to declare against the alliance which had
been concluded. In the one period, an hundred and fifty years
of peace between the two nations, the habit of being fubje~ted to
the fame King, and governed by the fame maxiims, had confider-
ably abated old animofities, and prepared both people for incor-
porating. In the other, injuries were still fresh, and the wounds
on both sides openj and, in the warmth of res~entment, it was
natural to seek revenge, and to be averse from reconcilement.
At the Union in 1707, the wisdom of Parliament deifpiled the
groundless murmurs occaiioned by antiquated prejudices; but in
1543, the complaints of the nation were better founded, and
urged with a zeal and unanimity, which it is neither just, nor safe
to disregard. The rage of the people role to such an height, that
the Englith ambassador could hardly be prote~ted from their in-
fults. The clergy contributed a great fum towards preserving the
church from the dominion of a Prince whole lyfiem of Reforma-
tion was to fatal to their power. The nobles, after having mor-
tified the Cardinal, so lately, in such a cruel manner, were, now,
ready to appland and to second him, as the defender of the ho-
nour and liberty of his country.

Argyle, Huntly, Bothw~ell, and other powerful Barons openly He exates

declared against the alliance with England. By their affifiance, alm'ot the

whole na-

the Cardinal seized on the persons of the young Queen and her tion against
mother, and added to his party the ifplendor and authority of the the EInghl.l
royal name *. Hle received, at the fame time, a more real ac-
cession to his firength, by the arrival of Matthew Stewart Earl of
Lenlnox, whole return from France hie had earnestly solicited.
This young nobleman was the hereditary enemy of the house of
Hamilton. H-e had many claims upon the Regent, and pretend-
ed a right to exclude him, not only from succeeding to the
Crown, but to deprive him of the poi~ffeon of his private f'or-
tune. T'he Cardinal flattered his vanity with the profpe£1 of
plarrying the Qu~een Dowfager, and affe~ted to treat hlim with 10

* Keith's Hiift of Scot. j0.

BOOK IL· much fludied refpea, that the Regent became jealous of himai

- a~rival in power.

T'his fulpicion was artfully heightened by the Abbot of PaiLle

who returned into Scotland fame time bes re the Earl of Len
nox, and aaed in concert with the Cardin11. He was a natural
brother of the Regent, writh whom he h~ad great credit; a waq
partizan of France, and a zealous defender of the eflablithedre.
ligion. He took hold of the Regent by the proper handle, ani
endeavoured to bring about a change in his sentiments, by work,
ing upon his fears. The differtion of the nobility, the difaffec.
tion of the clergy, and the rage of the people; the refentmental
France, the power of the Cardinal, and the pretenflons of Len·
nox, were all represented with aggravation, and with their maR
threatening afpea.

Meanwhile, the day appointed for the ratification of the treaty

with England, and the delivery of thle hofteges approached, and
the Regent was flill undetermined in his own mind. He a8ed
to the last, with that ilrefolution and inconfillency, which is pe.
culiar to weak men, when they are 10 unfortunate as to have the
chief part in the condua of diflicult affairs. On the 25th of
August, he ratified the treaty with H-enry, and ploclaimed the
Cardinal who flill continued to oppole it, an enemy to his coun.

Obliges the try. On the 3d of September, hie lecretly withdrew from Edin.
"froent -~ burgh, met with the Cardinal at Callendar, renounced the friend-
friendship thip of England, and declared for the intexcits of France *.

ijwthEng- Henry, in order to gain the Regent, had not [partd the motl

magnificent promises. He had offered to give the Pincers C11.
zabeth in marriage to hlis eldeit son, and to confitute him Kiing
of that part of Scotland, which lies beyond the river Tol'h. But
upon Einding his interest in the k~ingdlom to be less considerable
than he had imagined, the Engl'fh monarch beg .n to treat him
with little refpeA. The young Queen was now in the cuffody
of hris enemies, who grew every day more n In erous and more
popular. They formed a separate court at Stirling, and thr~eat-
ened to elea another Regent. T'he T -ench fli ag v-as ready to
afford them his proteAion, and th~e na lon, out of hatted to the
English, would have united in their defence. In tl is fltuation,
the Regent could not retain his authoijty, w~ithollt a sudden
change of his measures s and thoughl he endcar oured, by ratify.
ing the treaty, to preserve the appearances of good faith wfith

* Sadler, 339, 356. '

Englanc1, he was obliged to throw himself into the arms of the BOOK IT.
party, which adhered to France.

Soon after this surprising revolution in his political principles, And to per-

fecute the

the Regent changed his sentiments concerning religrion. T'he spirit Reformers.
of controverlyr was then new and warm; bookrs of that kind were
eagerly read by men of every rank; thle love of novelty, or the
convialion of truth, had led thle Regent to exprels great elicem for
the writings of the Reformers; and having been powerfully sup-
ported by those who had embraced their opinions, he, in order to
gratify them, entertained, in his own family, twco of the most noted
preachers of the Protestant doarine, and, in his first Parliament,
consented to an aB, by which the laity were permitted to read
the scriptures in a language which they underflood. Truth need-
ecl only a fair hearings to be an over-match for error. Abfurdi-
ties, wh]ich had long imposed on the ignorance and credulity of
mankind, were dete~ted and expolced to public ridicule; and under
the countenance of the Regent, th~e Reformation made great ad-
vances. The Cardinal observed its progrlefs with concern, and
was at the utmuft pains to obitrua it. He reprelented to the
Regent his great imprudence in giving encouragement to opinions
so favourable to Lennox's pretenflons; that his own legitimacy
depended upon the validity of a sentence of divorce founded on
the Pope's authority; and that by fuffering it to be called in quel-
tion, he weakened his own title to the succession, and furnished
his rival with the only argument, by which it could be rendered
doubtful*. Ther~e insinuations made a deep impreflion on the
Regent's timorous f~pilit, who, at the profpe&t of such imaginary
dlangers, was as much startled as the Cardinal could have wished;
and his zeal for the Protefiant religion was not long proof againil
his fear. He publicly abjured the doarine of the Reformers
in the Franrircan church at Stirling, and declared not only for
the political, but the religious opinions of his new confidents.

The Protellant doArine did not fuff~er much by his apoffacy.

It had already taken to deep root in the kingdom, that no dif~cou-

* The pretensions of the Earl of Lennox to the faucceffion were thus foundled.

Mary, the daughter of James II. was married to James Lord H-am ilton. Elizabeth,
a daughter of that marriage, was the wife of MIatthew Earl of Lennox, 9nd theP
prelent Earl was her grandson. The Regent was lik~ewfie the grandson of the
Princess Mary. But his father, being divorced from his s~econd wyife Eliza-
beth Hlome, married Janet Beatoun, the Regent's mother. Lennox pretended
that the sentence 6f divorce wfas unjuff, and that thle Regent, being born while
Elizabeth Home w'as still aive, ought to be considered as illegitimate.
Crawf. Peer. 192.

BooK 11. ragement or severity could extirpate it. The Regent indeed con.

fented to eve ·y thlinS, that the zeal of the Cardinal thought necel.
fary for the preservation of the established religion. The Reform.
ers were perf ecuted w ith all the crueltyr, w I 'ch superstition inspires
into a barbarous people. Many were condemned to that dreadful
death, which the church has appointed for the punish~ment of its
enemies; but th~ey fuffered with a spirit so nearly resembling the
patience and fortitude of the primitive martyrs, that more wheie
convetted, than terrified by these f~pecacles.

Reatoun en. The Cardinal, however, was now in poss lion of every thinghis

$~~~r~~ ambition could desire; and exercised all the authority of a Re-

tlon of gent without the envy of the nam~e. He had nothing to fear from
arairs. the Earl of Arran, who having by his inconflancy forfeited the

public esteem, was contemned by one half of the nation, and little
truffed by the other. ? he pretenflons of the Eall of Lennox w'ere
the only thing which remained to embaral~s him. He had made
use of that nobleman very fuiccelsfully to work\ upon the Regent's
jealouiy and fear, but as he no longer flood in need of such an
infirument, he was wYillingr to be rid of him with decency. Len·
nox soon began to ~ulpec'l his intention; promi!'es, flattery, and
refpet? were the only returns he had hitherto reccir ed for fubftan·
tial services; but at lait the Cardinal s artifices could no longerbe
concealed, and Lennox, inflead of attaining power and dignity
himself saw that he had been enployed only to procure there fr
another. Res~entment and disappointed ambition pulhed him on
to seek to be revenged on that cunning plelate, who, by facri-
ficing his interett, hlad t~o ungenerously purchased the Earl of Ar-
ran's fliendllhip. H~e withdrew, for that reason, from court, and
declared for the party at enmity with the Cardinal, which, with
open arms, received a convert, wyho added to much luffre to their
cause.

The two fa3ions which divided the kingdom were flill the fame,

without any alteration in their views or principles; but, by one
of those firange revolutions. which were frequent in that age,
they had, in the couife of a few week~s, changed their leaders.
The Regent was at the head of the partizans of France and the
defenders of Popery, and Lennox in the fame flation with the
advocates for the English~ alliance, and a reformation in religion.
The one laboured to pull down his own work;, which the other
xxpheld with the fame hand, that had hitherto endeavoured to de·
firoy it.

LCennox's impatience for revenge got thle flart of the C11Jinal's BOOK I.

scaivity. Hle surprised both him and the R-gent by a sudden ma.ch 1~-
to Edinburg~h with a numerou~s almy ; and m'blht easily hale
crushed them before they could prepare for their defence. But
he was weak enough to liflen to proposals for an accommad ,ionl;
and the Caldinal amused him so astrolly, and spun out thle ticoty
to such a length, that the greater palt of the Earl's troops, Hl 0
served, as is usual wherever the feudal inflitutions prevail, at tl cir
own expence, deserted. him; and in concluding a peace, infkcad
of giving the law, he was obliged to receive it. A second at-
tempt to retrieve his affairs ended yet mole unfortunately. One
body of his troops was cut in pieces, and the reft difped~ed; and
with the poor remains of a ruined party, he mult either have
submitted to the conqueror, or have fled out of the kingdom,
if the approach of an English army had not brought him a thlolt
relief.

Henry was not of a temper to bear tamely the ind',nity, with Penry in-

whlich he had been treated, both by the Regent and Parliament of vades Scot.

land.

Scotland, who at the time w-hen they renounced their alliance
with him, had entered into a new and fit~ier confederacy with
France. The rigour of the seas~on retarded for some time the exe-
cution of his vengeance. But in the spring a considerable body
of infantry which was destined for France, received orders to fail
for Scotland, and a proper number of cavalry was appointed to
join it by land. The Regent and Cardinal little expeaed such a
visit. They had truffed that the French war would find emplay-
ment for all Henlry's forces 3 and, from an unaccountable security,
were wholly unprovided for the defence of the kingdom. The
Earl of Hartford, a name fatal to the Scots in that age, command-
ed this army, and landed it, without opposition, a few miles above
Leithl. H-e was quickly master of that place; and marching di-
re81y to Edinburgh, entered it with the fame ease. After plun-
dering the adjacent country, the richest, and most open in Scot-
land, he set on fire both these towns; and upon the approach of
fame troops gathered together by the Regent, put his booty on
board the fleet, and with his land forces retired safely to the Eng-
lifh borders, delivering the kingdom, in a few days, from the
terror of an invaiion, concerted with little policy, carried on at
great expence, and attended with no advantage. If Henry aimed
at the conquest of Scotland, he gained nothing by this expedition;
if the snarriage he had proposed, was f1111 in his view, he 10ft a great
deal. Such a rough courtship, as the Earl of Huntly humorously

BOOK II. called it, difgulkd the wh~ole nation; their averflon so r the match

grew into abhonlence; and exasperated by so many mndlgnitie,
the Scots were never, at a ly per iod, more attached to France, or
more alienated from Enhland.

The Earl of Lennox alone, in si ite to the Regent and Frendh

King, continued a correspondence w ith England, w hich ruined hi
own interest, without promoting Henry's. M~any of his ownvl~
fals preferring their duty to their country before their affeaion to
him, refused to concur in any defigjn to favo Ir the public enemy.
And after a few feeble and unfuccefsful attempts to diflurb the Re.
g~ent's adminiitration, he wasj obliged to fly for safety to the court
of England, where HIenry rewarded services which he had thein·
clination, but not the power to perform, by giving him in m.r
riage his niece the Lady Mlargaret Douglas. Thiis unhappy exike,
however, was dehlined to be the father of a race of Lings. He
saw his son Lord D~arnley mount the throne of Scotland, to the
perpetual exclusion of that rival who now triumphed in his ruin.
And fiom that time, hris pofferity have held the feeptre in two
kingdoms, by one of which he was cast out as a criminal, and by
the other received as a fugitive.

A peace Meanwhile hoffilities were continued by both nations, but
concluded. with little vigour on either fide. T'he hifforians of that age re.

late minutely the circumi'tances of several fkiirmithes and inroady,
but they were without any considerable effeAt, and at this dil-
tance of time deserve no remembranlce*. At last an end wa

* Thot gh this wrar wls dilling lifhed by no impostlnt or decisive aff'on, it

was, however, extremely ruii ous to indil iduals. "Jkre Pilil remain twvoorigi·
nal papers, wh'c2h gil e us famie idea of th n ircric s, to \ hi h the most fertile
counties In the kingrlom scr e- pof d, by th fuddecn a Jl dchurivie incurf~oi
of the borderecrs. T~he first fL nast b thi 1 p tmlad to 11 nry) by the Engln
nardens of the mnarch, s, for he ·cear if , an I c n.ai · th ir cry Its fromth:
3d of Jully, to thle 17th of N~ovemt er. Thle account it ,incs of the dilferent in·
roals, or rorans, as they ·Ire called, 's rery mh ute, and in c nclufion, the
fum total of mif h'ef tl ey d' I is thuls co n} ut d:

Towns, towers, fled s, barnck!us, ptry) ne-churchl s, b, elhlours

caR' down or burnt, 1

- -- J

Scots slain, - - - 4
Prisoners taken, - - - - 81
1\olt, i. e. black cattle, taken, - - 1,i86
S teep, - ,4
ihags and g ila'ngs, - ,296
GoaRts, - 0
Bolls of corn, - - - - 8
Infight-gear, i. e. hou I 11 furnit re, not reckined.

I' n vE b State Papyers, 43.

pult to this langunihinr: and inaaive wNar, by a peace, in which rnOOK II.
En~;gland, France, and; Sjcotland were comlprehlended. Henry 12- June 154
boured to exclude the Scots from the bentfL. of this treaty, and
to reserve them for that vengeance, which his attention to the
affairs of the continent had hitherto delayed. But although a
peace with England was of the last consequence to Francis I.
whom the Emperor was preparing to attack with all his forces,
he was too generous to abandon allies, wh!o had f rved him with
fidelity, and chose rather to pulchalfe Hemly's fiiendil ip with dif-
advantage to himself, than to leave them exposed to danger. By
yielding forne things to the interest, and more to the vanity of
that haug-hty Prince; by fubmiiron, flattery, and addlefs, he, in
the end, prevailed to have the Scots included in the peace agreed
urpon.

The coniternation occalloned by an event, which happened a Tin rl 1

th~ort time before the conclcfion of this peace, rendered it moreofLt
acceptable to the whole nation. Cardinal Beatoun had not used
his. power wyith moderation, equal to the prudence by which he
attained it. N~otwithftandingr his great abilities, he had too
many of the pafirons and prejudices of an angry leader of a sac-
tion, to govern a divided people with temper. His resentment
against one party of the nobility, his insolence towardis the reft,
hiis severity to the Reformers, and, above all, the barbarous and
illegal execution of the famous George Wjithart, a manl of ho-
nourable birth, and of primitive fIAn~ity, wore out the patience
of a fierce age; and nothing but a bold hand was wanting to gra-
tify the public wvith by hib deflruaion. Private revenge, inlamn-
ed and fandEified by a false zeal for religion, quickly rupphled this
want. Norman Lefly, the eldest so~n of the Earl of Rothes, had

The other contains an account of an ;nroad by the Elrl of Hartford, between

the 8th and 23d of Se~ptember, 1444; the narrative is more general, but it ap-
pLars thlat he had burnt, raz-d, and deilroyed in the counties of Bernick aid
Roxburgh] onlY,

Mion~afteries an1d Friar-hod~les, - - - - 7
Caffles, towers, and pikis, - - - 1
Mlark~et towns, - - - - - - 5
Villages, - - - - - 243

Nin, - - 3

Hospitals, - 3

All thlere were cast down or burnt. HAYKEs, 52. As the Scots were no ~r,

f~iliful in the pra~ice of irregular war, we may conclude th t thle d mage
which they did in England wras not inconsiderable; and that their R4IUs v.ere
no IleS waftefull, than the roseras of the Enginh.

Boote 11- been treated by the Cardinll with irjcfice and contempt. It

was not the temper of the min, or the fpilit of the times, quietly
to digest an affront. And as thre profeff~on of his adversary
iArcened him from the et~ieA of w1 1 is called an honourable re.
fentmnent, he resolved to take t' at sati fa~ion, which he could
not demund. This refolut'on deserves as much confere, asthe
singular coul~age and candta v ith which he put it in exeoution
cuite wonder. The C Id'nal, -t th.t time, refid d in the castle
of Saint Andrew's, which he hadc fort'fied at great expence, and
in the opi,.ion of the age had ren I ·r dl it imrpte I able. His re.
tinue was nurmerous, th~e toma~ at his devotior, and the neigh.
bouling country full of I is d a dIi nts. In this situation, sis.
te~n persons undertook; to fe-p i - hris cAttle, and to affafirnate
himself 3 and thecir fu~ccels wa:s qual to the Lollnefs of the at.

21ay 29, tempt. Early in the mornn gT they f z7ed onl the gate of the

13'16. cltle, which- was- set open. to t1, e ,~ soke ho were employ·ed

in fini~ling the fortificat' as; anld hlavil g placed f ntries at the
door of thle Cardinl's a! artment:, they aw~akened his numerous
d~ometics one by one, and turn' s them out of the ca91e, they
wlthout nolle, or tumult, or viol nce to any other pedfon, dell.
vered their country, tho igh by a molt unjustifiable amion, from
an ambitions min, whofc pri <e was infupportlble to the nobles,
as his cruelty and cunt ing ·i,ere the great checks to the Refor.
mation.

he Reaert His desthl was fatal to the catholic rel:,ion, ard to the French
~en ~.' interest in Sootland. 7 hre fame zeal for both continued among a
ec miur ler- great party in the nation, b~ t wh-n deprived of thle g nius and

ers. au~thority of so fuilful a :-der, wvas of fmnall c l.fequence.No

thl'rg can equal the codlerna~tiox 1 lich ablowrfo unexpeted
occelio Icd ,mong7 his a lbects; w hile the Re ent secretly en-
joyed an1 event, which rid i' 1 of a rival whlo had not only e-
clipfecd l is greatndfs, bit el 01t extings~ilhed his power. De-
cency, however, the honour of the church, the importunity of
the Q cen Dowager a ad her ftAdian, his en -a ements with
SI nce, and above all thefsc, t1 e deflre of recox eringr his eldest
son, whom the Caldrnal h I d· Inedc for fame timne at St. An-
drewv's i? pledge of hib si kl' y, and who, together with the
castle, had fallen into the bands of the confrirators, induced him
to tnke a as in order to rel ,e th~e d athl of a man he hated.

He threatened vege 7TIce, bit was unable to execute it. One

part of military science, the art of attacking fortified places, was
then unknown in Scotland. The~ weayon~s, the discipline, and

im~petuosity of the Scots, rendered their armies as unst for G ges, Racx II.
as they were a~ive in the field. An hundred and fifty men,
which was the greatest number the conspirators ever ass~embled,
resifted all the efforts of the Regent for five months *, in a place,
which a single battalion, with~ a few battering cannon, world
now reduce in as many days. This tedious siege was concluded
by a truce. The Regent undertook to procure for the conr ira-
tors an absolution from the Pope, and a pardon in Parliament j
and upon obtaining these, they engaged to surrender the castle,
and to set his son at liberty.

It is probable, that neither of them were sincere in th's treaty.

On both sides, they foug~ht only to amuse, and to gain~ time.
The Regent had applied to Trance for allznce, and expeaed
soon to have the conspirators at mercy. On the other hand, if
Lefly and his allociates were not at first incited to murder the
Cardinal by Henry, they were, in the sequel, powerfully sup-
ported by him. N~otw~ithstanding the silence of coteniporary his-
torians, there are violent prefaumptions of the former j of the
latter there is undoubted certaintyt. During the siege, the
conspirators had received from England supplies both of money
and pr'ovifions; and as Henry was preparing to renew his propo-
fitions concerning the marriage and the union he had projeaed,
and to feclond his negaciations with a numerous army, they hop-
ed, by concurring with him, to be in a situation, in which they
would no longer need a pardon, but might claim a rewvard.

The death of Hienry blasted all there hopes. It happened in

the beginning of next year, after a reign of greater [plendor than Ja·nuly "-,
true glory j buffling, though not aaive; oppressive in domestic I5-47.
government, and in foreign politics wild and irregular. But the
vices of this Prince were more beneficial to mankind, than the
virtues of others. His rapacioufnlels, his profuflon, and even his
tyranny, by depreffingr the ancient nobility, and by adding new
property and powver to the Commons, laid the foundations of the
British liberty. H-is other paflions contributed no less towards
the downfal of Popery, and thte eflablifhment of religious freedom
in the nation. EIs resentment led! him to abolish the power, and
his covetoufhiefs to s~eize the wealth of the church; and by with-
drawing these ftpports, made it eafyr, in the following reign, to
overturn the whole fabric of fuperfition.

Francis I. did not long survive a Prince, who had been alter-

pately his rival and his f~ieqd; but his successor Henry II. was

* EpiftRg. S~·Icot. 2* 377. ·t Ke'th, 60.

BooK TI. DOt Ofgltrful Of ti 6 Frenrh interest inl Scotland. H~e feta

considerable body of men, us der the command of Leon Strozzi,

rive from to the Regent's airlitance. By tl eir longs expelience in the Ita
France. lian and German wats, the French had become as dex~trous in

the conduA of sieges, as the Scots were ignorant; and as th
boldness and despair of the consp~irators could not defend them

Force th- againit their thperior art, they surrendered to Strozzi, after a

S 0~~~t short resistance, who engaged, in the name of the Kiing his mal

surrender. ter, for thle security of their lives; and as his plifoners transport.

ed them into France. The calile itself, the monument of Bea·
toun's power and vanity, was demolinhed, in obediencet O the ca.
non law, whlich, with admiltale policy, denlounces its anathemas
even againlt thle houfts ii which the Sacred blood of a Cardinal
happens to be thed, and ordains thiem to be laid in ruins*.

The archbishopric of St. Andr~en's was bellowed by the Re.

gent upon his natural brother, John Haml'Iton Ab~bot of Pailey,

Ker breach The" delay of a few weeks would hale faled the cronfpirators.
wijth Eng- Those minillers of Henry VIII. who had th~e chief direaion of

Sallairs during the minority of his son Edward VI. condu~ed

themrelves, with regard to Scotland, by the maxims of their hate
master, and resolved to flighten thle Scots into a treaty, which
they had not abilities or address to brings about by any other
method.

B3ut before we proceed to relate the events whlich their inva.

son of Scotland occasioned, we thall stop to take notice of a ch.
cumitance unoblerved by cotemporary hil'rorians, but extremely re·
markable for the discovery it makes of the sentiments and Spirit,
whiich then prevailed among the Scots. The confpiratols against
Cardinal Beatoun found thle Regent's eldefif on in the caille of St,
Andrew's; and as they needed tle protecrion of she Engiib, it was
to be feared that they mi ht endeavour to purchase it, by delivering
to thlem this important prize. The prefum, tive lieir to the Crown,
in1 the hands of the avowed enemlies of thle kingdom, was adread·
fel profpea. And, in order to avoid it, thle Pariament fell upon
a very extraordinary expedient. B5y an aSt m· de on purpole, they
excluded " th~e Regent's eldest son from all right of faucceffion,
" pu'olic or private, 10 long as he thiould be detained a prisoner,
" and fubiituted in his place, his other brothers, according to their
" seniority, and in failure of them, those who were next heirs to
'· the Regent f-." Suced~on by hered!:tary right is an idea so ob-

* Burn. H 1. Ref. I. 308-
t C,111 Deg Scot 2 359-

t10us and to popular, that a nation seldom v\ent Ires to m kre a P >0
breach in it, but in cafes of extreme neceffty. Such1 a necell y
did the Parliament dircover in the present fltuatiol. Iiatred to
England, founded on the memory of past hoililities, and hoibghten-
ed by the fmnart of recent injuries, was thle ntional palli n7. ? his
di~ated that uncommon flatute, by which the ordler of lineal f~uc-
cetion was so remarkably broken. T`he modern th ories, whlich
represent this right as divine and unalienable, and th~at ought not
to be violated upon any consi;deration wha soever, seem to have
been then altogether unknown.

In the beginning of September, the Earl ofr H-artford, now S otln `n-

Duke of Somerset, and Protc80r of E~ngland, entered Scotland 'e,
atthe head of eighteen thouijnd men ; and, at the fame t:m-, a flcet
of sixty ships appeared on the comit, to second hris forces by land.
The Scots had for some time observed this florm gathering, and were
prepared for it. Their army was almost double to that of the ene
my, and posted to the greatelt advanitagre on a rising ground, abox e
Mluffelburgh, not fa.~r from the bankbs of the river Efke. Bot'
these circumilances alarmed the Duke of Somerset, who f. v 1;
danger, and would willingly have extricated himself out of it, by
a new overture of peace on conditions ex~trem,-ly reasonable. L1 t.
this moderation was imputed to fear; and his propofa's r; ] od
with that s~corn, which the confidence of success infpircs. And
had the condua of the Riegent, who commanded the Scots army,
been in any degree equal to his confidence, the deflrua~ion of the
Engliih must have been inevitable. They were in a situation,
precisely similar to that of thleir countrymen under Oliver Crom-
well, in the following century. The Scots had chosen their ground
so well, that it was improiiible to force thlem to giv'e battle; a ftw
days had exhauffed the forage and proviflon of a narrow country;
the fleet could only furnish a scanty and precarious Fublfii'ence; a
retreat therefore was necfifary; but difgiace, and perhaps ru~l ,
were thle consequences of retreating.

On both ther~e occafionls, the national heat and impetuof y of

the Scots saved the English, and precipitated their own country
into the utmost danger. The undisciplined courage of the private lt' tr
men became impatient at the fighlt of an enemly. 7 he Gr leral
was afiald of nothing, but that the Lo·glifi would escape from i ' n
by flight; and leaving his advantageous '1tuata n, he a~tac~ed t re
Duke of Somerset near Pinkey, with no better fucce'`s tl n I is 9 p en
raihnefs defe~rred. The Proteaor had dla sn up h~s I 01 9 on a 20,' x
gentle eminence, anld had now thle advantage of gr u.d on h's

BooK I. fide. The Scottish army confilted almost entirely of infantry, whole

chief weapon was a long spear, and for that reason their files were
very deep, at d their ranks clefe. They adv need towards the
enemy in three great bodies, and as they passed the river, were con·
fzdera'1y expoled to the fire of the Engrlifh fle t, which layiinthe
bay of Muffelburgh, anld had drawn near the thlore. The Englilk
cavalry, flu~hed with an advantage wh~ich th~ey had gained in a fkir.
mifh some days before, began the attack w'th more impetuosity,
than good condua. A body 10 firm and compaat as the Scots,
easily reiifted thme impretion of cavahry, broke them, and drove
them off the fieldl. Thle E~nghih infdntry, however, advanced,
and the Scots were at once expos d to a flight of arrows, to a sue
in tiank from four hum dred foreign I'ufiliers who ser ved the enemy,
and to their cannon whlich were planted behind the infantry, on
the highest part of the emi.dence. The depth and closeness of their
or~der made it impolTlle for th~e Scots to fland long in this litu·
ation. Thle Earl of Angrus, nl o commanded the vanguard, en·
deavoured to change his ground, and to retire towards thie main
body. But his friends ulnhappily miltook this motion for a flight,
and fell into confusion. At that very instant, the brokecn cavalry
ha;·iag ralli-d, returned to the charge; the foot pulfued the ad-
van'age they had gain~ed; the prospeR of x idory redoubled the
aidor of both; and, in a moment, the rout of the Scottifhl army;
became univerfhl, and irretrievable. The encounter in the field
was not lon6, or bloody; but, in the pursuit, thle Englilh discover-
ed all the rage and fierceness, which national ant'pathy, kindled
by long emulation, and indlamed by reciprocal injulies, is apt to
inspire. Th~e purfu't was continued for five h urs, and to a great
dillance. A11 the three roads, by Rl ich the Scots 8 d, were firew-
ed w ith sp~ears and swords, and ta -gets, and covet ed w ith the bodies
of the slain. Above ten thousand men fellon tl is day, one of the mol1
fatal Scotlan~d had ever seen. A few were taken prisoners, and
among there some pedfons of difiin~ion. And the Plotedlor had
it now in his power to become ma 'er of a iit ·dom, out of which,
noct manyr hours before, he was almost obliged to retire with in·
famy *.~

* The following pa'Thge in a curious an I rare ] ur; z1 of tT e rrotedlor's exped'-

tion into Scotlald, written by W'. Ta en, who was j in d in commifflon with
Cecil, as Ju Jg- MaIrflal of the army, and printed in1 1548, deserves our not ce;
as 't give, a juff 'Jea of the m I ary 'rilc'yline a, the SL ts at that time. " But
w hau.fter I learned, fpa~ially .oudl .nz th ir orde-, t icir armuour, and thieir man-
ner as welli of go l ag to of~enld as of fundcing to defend, t have thought neceiiary
hlere to utter. Hiackbastero have they few or none, and appoint thwir f ,ht moit

But this viaory, hlowever great, was of no real utility; for want ro r

of skill, or of leifiute to improve It. Ex ery new injury rendered ·I , r,
the Scots more averse from an union w\ithl Lrgland; and th~e Pto- us~ t 'e

S1 to

te~or neleaed the only measure, which would have malde it ne- tievI,1 i.
ceffary for them to have given their confcnt to it. He amuled
himself in waiting the open country, and in taking or builoing
petty caffles; whereas by fortifying a few Places whi~ch were ac-
cemble by sea, he we~dd have laid the kringdom opcu to thle E~ng-
liih, and, in a short time, the Scots must either have accepted of
his terms, or have submitted to his power. By such an improl L-
ment of it, his victory at Dunbar g~ave Cromwe~llthe commai d of
Scotland. Thle battle of Pinkiey had no other efifedc but to p oci-
pitate the Scots into new engagements with France. Thle si 1-
ation of the Engrlifh court may, indeed, be pleaded inl excule. for
the D~uke of Somerfet's condua. That cabal of his enemies,
which occalloned his tragical end, was already formed; and while
he triumphed in Scotland, they secretly undermined his Ipower and
credit at home. Self-prefervation, therefore, obliged him to pre-
ser his safety before his fame, and to return without real ingS the
fruits of his viaory. At this time, however, the cloud blew over;
the conspiracy by which he fell was not yet ripe for execution;
and his presence fulpecnded, for some time, its effec?. The fu-
preme power flill remained in his hands, and he employed it to re-

common~ly always a-foot. They come to the field well furithiied all ulth j-r '
and skull, dagg~er and buckler, and Tw·ords all broad and thin, of exce dir gr g·oo
temper, -nd. universally- so made to Ilice, that as I neverfaw none to Goodi, so think
I it hard to devises the better. Hereto every man his pike, and a great kercher
wrapped tw ice or thlrice about his neck;, not for cold, but for cutting. In their
array towards jo;ining with the enemy, they cling and thruit so nearr in the fore
rank, shoulder and thoulder together n ith their pikes in both their hands mil1rail
afore them, and their followvers in that order so hard at their backs, laying their
pikes ovrer the~ir foregoers thoulders,, that, if they do assail undiscOVEred, no force
can well withiland. them. Standing at defence they thruf t thoulders liken ife so
nigh together, thle fore ranks wvell nigh to kneeling, sloop low before, their fel-
10wis behind holding their pikes with both hands, and therewith in their left their
buck~lers, the one end of the pikte against their right foot, and the other against
the enemy brean-high; their followers crofling their pike points ws~h .hemn for-
w~ard; and thus each with other to nigh as space and place will fuffecr, through
the whole ward, so thick, thiat as eailly shall a bare finger pierce through thle
skin of an angly hedgre hog, as anly encounter the front of their pikes." Othier
curious particulars are found in this journal, from wrhich Sir John Hayw ard has
borrowed his account of this expedition. Life of Edward VI. 279, sc.

The length of the Scots pike or spear w~as appointed by AsL 44 P 1471. tO

be fix ells; i. c. eighfeen sket fix inch s.

Boomi IL cover the ooportunity, wb'1'h he had lot. A body of troors, i,

- his command, seized and forticLd Ha ddingtoun, a pl ce, whid,;

April, 1548. on account of its diffnce fiom t' e fe7, and f on any Lnolith gar.

rifon, could not be defend d without Eveat eXl ence and danger,

Forcs sthe Mveanwl ile the Trec' 7ClC-inedl more by the defetat of their al
S ·ots into a
clar-r union lies, thaJ the Englith d:3 by their vitory. After thle deathoi

vihCard' lal Beatoun, M-ly of Gnife, the Queen Dowagrer, tookz

Fraince. "

considerable fhlare in thle disec~ion of a4'i ·s. Shte was warnalya.
tached by blood, and by inclination, to th~e French interest; and
in order to promote it, 'wp oied with grrelt d tLII'y every evenl
which occurred. The [pirit and firength of t' e Sc. ts were broker
at Pinkey; anl in an ass mbly of no ' s vn0' h met at Stirlingle
consult upon thle situation1 of t. e hlL JumI, a'1 eyes were turntd
towvards Fiance, and no plorpect of I iety appear·ed but in alin
ance from thence. But Henry II. Litig then at peace with Eng~
land, the Queen reprefe lted thlt t ,c/ cou.ld not e.:pect himta
takre part in their quarrel, but aLn v~tns of personal advantage
and that without extlaordi ary co cefhlous in his favour, noaM·
ance: in proportion to tl e'r p -dlent exiigencies could be obtained,
'Ihe pr jud'ces of tl e na ion po s er; 11y fecoi ded t1 efe reprefenta.
tions of the Queen. W~hat often happens to indi\:1uals tookrplate
among the nobles in this conr en 'an; they were si ayed entirdy?
by their pa,;ons, and in order to g a ifyl them, th~ey deserted their
former princ'lles, and dif elarded their true interest. In the via.
lence of resentment, thley fo~rgo that z~al for the independencydi
Scotlard, wh~ch had prompte~d them to rejeao th'e plopor~tionsr,

Anedtooffer Henry VIII. and by off ring~ voluntarily, their young Queenik
their Quleen marriage to the Dauphin eldc 1 to 1 of Henry II. and wh~ich sa
in marrigeiy
to the Dau- itill more, by propofng to lend htr immediately into France tobe
phin. educated at his court, they gr.,nted, out of a thlirit of ve Imeanice,

what formerly they would not yield upon any confldecration ofthdi
own safety. rT~o gain at once such a k~ingdom as Scotland, wasa
matter of no fnall confeqil ene~e to France. Helnry, without h,·
iitation, accepted the off is of the Scottish ambuffadors, and pre-
pared for the vigorous defence of his new acqju;'tion. Srto
sand veteran so <tiers, under the comm nd of Maxt fiur Defek, rb
sifted by some of the best 09xcels, whto wecre fotmed in the longa
wars of Francis I. arril ed at Li-th. 'l ey served two campaign
in Scotland, with a fpiit eqjual to their formller fame. But their
exrploits we~re not considerable. The Scots soon hocan.e jealoui
of their defirms, and neglec9-d to fippiort them with proper vigour;
and the caution of the CL.g!iah, in ad"' g v-E v upon thne defea.

Eve-, prevented them from attempting any enterplife of confe. Booh II.
qiuence; and obliged them to exhault their firengtrh, in tedious
Ileges, undertak~en undrr many difadvantagee. 7 heir ec`orts, how-
ever, were not without fame benefit to the Scots, bq compelling
the Englith to evacuate Haddingeoun, and to thrrender several
fmnall forts, which they poff~effetd in dlrffrent parts of the kingdom.

But the consequences of these operations of hlis troop v ete flill

of greater importance to the French K~ing. The divedfion which
they occalloned enabled him to wrest Boulognle out of th~e hands
of the Engl1fh; and thle influence of his army in Scot1 nd obtain-
ed the concurrence of Parliament with the overtures m .de to i im,
by the airembly of nobles at Stirling, concerning the Qee i's mar-
riage with thle Dauphlin, and her education at the comlt of France.
In vain did a few patriots remonfirate againit such extravagant
concellions, by which Scotland was reduced to be a protince of Ti· tre t,
France; and Henry, from an ally, railed to be master of thle king- or th

n-~

dom; by wrhich, the friendship of France became more fatal than f~cl us.
the enmity of E~ngrland; and every thing was fondly given up to
the one, that had been bravJely defended against the other. A
point of so much confeluence was hastily decided, in a Padliament, Junie c,
assembled in the camp before Haddingtoun; the intrigues of the '5< -
Queen Dowager, the zer-l of the clergy; and resentment ag:inft
England had prepared a great party in the nation for such a P~ep;
the French General and Ambalador, by their liberality and pro-
miles, gained over many more. 'Ihe Regent hi'nfelf wrs week
enough to sloop to the O~-er of a penflon from France, togerther
with thle title of Duke of Chatelherault in that kingdom. A con-
fiderable majority declared for thes treaty, and the interest of a
fa~ion was preferred before the hionour of the nation.

Having hurried the Scots into this rathl andl fatal resolution, the va, i- It

source of many calamitics to themselves, and to their Sovereign, to b e

clte~d in

the French allowed thiem no time for refle~ion or repentance. Frtal
Thle fleet, which had brought over their forces, was still in Scot-
land, and without delay, convoyed the Qgeen into France. lr
was then fix years old, and by her education in that court, the
politest, but most corrrupted in Turox e, the acqluired ev~ery accom-
plilhment that could add to her charms as a woman, and con~raa-
ed many of those picjadices, which occalloned her misfortunes as
a Qgeen.

From the time thlat Mary was put into their hands, it was thle

interest of the French to fuffer the war in Scotland to languish.
The recovering of the Boulornois was the obtjea? H-nry I ad mob

K ij

Boox II- at heart; and a flight diverflon in B.1 ainl was fufficient to dbici

-Y-the attenti'on and firength of the Englilh, whole domethle fa~ious

depriv·ed both their arms and counc'1s of their acc~ullomed vigour.
? he government of England hald undergone a great resolution.
The Duke of Somerfet's power w~as acquired w~ith too much via.
lence, and ex~ercised w~ith too l'ttle moderation, to be of longcon.
tinuance. Mlany goodqu·aljitie adlded to the gicat loyc of his coun.
try, could not attone for his ambition in l f~ri rrp the sole direc.
tion of affairs. Almoff the nl 01e nol les condl ined .Igui lfhim;and
the Earl of W~lar ick, no less Tmbi 'ous, bu~t more ar tful, condue.
ted his measures with 10 much d \terit?, ns to ralle l imflf upon
the ruins of his rival. Withllout thle ins idl'ns nlme of Proteclar,
he succeeded to all the po r and intinen , of whlich Somerset
was deprived, and he quickly- found p :ee to be ne essay for the
eflabliihment of his new author ity, and the e: ecution of the vad
defigens he had conceived.

Pealce con- Henry was no firanger to WaTrwick\ s fl Ition,) an 1 improved

his k~now~ledge of it, to good purpole, in c alduccth g tle nogocia.
tions for a general peace. He pi fetibe d what te ms he pleased to
the English MCiniffer, who f rupled at notl.ingr however advanta-

Manrch -4, geous to that 1Monarch and hij alli s. En-gland cons nted to re·
2330. iore Boulogne and its dependen les to fla Ice, and gave up all

pretenflons to a treaty of marmlbe withl thle Q~een of Scots, orto
the conquest of her country. A few f;loall foxts, of which the
Enfilifh troops had hitheirto L, pt poil man, n ere razed ; ·ndi neace
between the two Linodoms was cft.bhfhed or it ancient foun-
dation.

B~oth the British nations 10ft power, as well TS reputtion, by

thlis unhappy quatrol. It we s on botl f des a war of emulation aad
relentmlent, rather than of intereit; a Id w as carried on, under the
influence of national animofitieg, n rich were 11lind to all advan-
tages. The French, who entered 11to it with grre-cer coolnels,
conduffed it with more F ill; .nd by derteroufly avail. g them·
feh~es of every circumit nce which o-carred, recovered poffel-
flan of an important tenl:t -y n' "ch they I ad 1011, and added to
their monarchy a new iis > om. '1eabiinofteEnlf
Miniffer betrayed to thlem tlt i,

f ; the inconfidelate rage

of the Scots against their a ien~t en~en ics beffoned on them the
latter; their own· addre~s and gcoo' folicy merited both.

bThe sonSts Immediately after the conclu ionl of the pelce, the Frenchforces

jea usf left Scotland, as much to th~eir on n sati fadlion, as to that of the
theroch- nation. The Scots foonl founld, that theC calling to their afflb

ance a people more powerful than themselves, was a dangerous noOK r.
expedient. They beheld, with the utmost impatience, thlofe who
had come over to protea thle kingrdom, taking upon them to com
mand in it; and on many occasions they repented'the rath invita-
tion they had given. T'he peculiar genius of the French nation
heightened this disgust, and prepared the Scots to throw off the
ygoke, before they had well begun to feel it. The French we -e,
in that age, what they are in the present, one of the most pohtihed
nations in Europe. But it is to be obfleaed, in all their expedi-
tions into foreign countries, whether towards thle south or north,
that their manners have been remarkably incompatible witl t1 e
manners of every other people. Barbarians are tenacious of tl eir
own cuffoms, because they want knowledge and taste to dilcover
the reasonableness and propriety of cuffoms which dif"tr from
them. Nations, which hold the first rank in politeneG, are fre-
qu~ently no less tenacious out of .plide. The Greeks were to
in the ancient world; and the French are the fame in the
modern. Full of themselv:es, and accuitomed, by the imitation
of their neighbours, to confider their own modes as the flandalds
of elegance, they scorn to disguise, or to lay aside the difting~uiih-
ing manners of their own nation, or to make any allowance for
what may differ from them among othlels. For this reason, the
behaviour of their armies has, on every occasion, been infupport-
able to firang-ers, and has always exposed them to hatred, and
often to defiruaion. In that age, they over-ran Italy four lev·e-

z~ral times, by their valour, and lofr it, as often, by their info~ence.

The Scots, naturally an irascible and high-fpirited people, and
who, of all nations, can leait bear the moit difiant infinu tion of
contempt, were not of a temper to admit all the pretenflons of
such assuming guests. The symptoms of alienation were s~oon vi-
Able 3 they seconded the French in their military operations with
the utmost coldnlefs, and this secret disgust grew ins~ensibly to a
degree of indignation that could hardly be reflrained; and on oc-
cafion of a very fighlt accident, broke out with fatal violet ce. A
private French soldier had an idle quarrel with a citizen of Eidin-
burgh: both nations tcook arms, w~ithl equal rage, in def 1 c of
their countrymen. The Provost of Edinburgh, his son, and fe-
veral citizens of ditin3ion w-iere Lilled in the fray j and the French
were obliged to avoid the fulry of the in~abitants, by retiring out
of the city. Niotwithftanding~r the ancient alliance of Fiance and
Scotland, and the long intercours~e of good ofmces betwYeen t1 e
twou nations, an averflon to the French took its rif'e, at this time

BOOK IY. at Ig the Scot ; the eitrAs whxcof nere deeply felt, and ope.

b - rated powelfu:l t' rouglh the fuibfequent pelrid.

ProgreTs of From the dl th of C.uldin1 1 B atoun, nothmng has been said of

fh;~,or~ thle slate of rel ion. WThile the w\ar with Elngland continued,

the clergy had no leilure to mol 11 th Protestants; and they were
not yet considerable enough to expeA any thing more than coil.
nivance and impunity. The new docfrines were itill in their in.
fancy; but, during this thort interval of tranquillity, they acquir.
ed firength, and advanced, by large and film fleps, towards a full
establishment in the kingdom. T'he first preach~ers agrainft Popery
in Scotland, of whom several h d appeared diuringr the reignof
James V. were more eminent for zeal 7nd pie y, than for learn-
ing. Their acquaiintlnce with thle princ'yles of Reformation
was partial, and at fCecond hand; some of them Ind been educated
in England; all of them h.d borrowed their not~ions from the
b~ooks publinhed there; and, in thie fixft dann of the new light,
they did not venture many flel s before th ii leaders. EIt in a
thoit time, the do~tines an 1 wcritic s of tl efor ign Reformers
became gencrllly know n; thle i 1' illiv genius of the ag~e prelfed
forward in quest of tu~ th ; thle dit` oiery of one error opened the
way to others; the downLE1 Ls one impoflure drew m, ny after it;
the whole fabric, wh~lic'l ignolance and fuperflition had ere~ed
In time·s of darkndl, b : n to te tter; and nothing was w~anting
to complete its ruin, but a dy:14 ~ and a~ive leader to direcT the
attack. Such was thle famo s John Knou who, with better
rlu'ifications of learninrr, anld Ir re e. Ifive v'ews thanl anyof
I is predzeirors in Scotland -Oirt ed a n: t lr9l intrepidiity of mind,

whc et him at ove fear.- Hie b~e, n his i Lobic minifry at St

Andrewv's in the year r .947, w: h that face Is, which always ac·
companies a bold and, popular cloquence. Initead of amusing
'I'mlelf with loppingr t'le branches, he sic Ick d rc~tly at the root
of Popery, and atta:cked Lot 1 thle do~rtli e :·ld dici line of the
diab'ilhed church, u tth a v,' ,: Ie p-cul:Tr to himlelf, but ad·
mirably faited to t'le t-mper and wiif.s of the age.

An adversary so folmidshlle as Ynor, would not hlave easily

ofeaped thle rage of the clerry;, who obrerved the tendency and
progress of his ag aio rs, with the utmilct concern. Evt, at firR,
h~e reti ed for safety into t'ae e-sfl'e of St Andrew's, and while the
conspirators 1-ept poffellon of it, preachecd putlicly under thieir
pioteition. The gr-eat Revolution in Englnnd, which followed
ul'on the death of Hlenry VIII. contri' uted no less than the zeal
of Kinox, towards demolith~ing the Popith church in Scotland.

Hen'cry hrad loos~ened the chains, and 1"ghtened th- y Le, of Pop - F h
ry. T'he miinifters of his son Edfwnrd VI. clt tl c n oTal tl r,
andu chbni l~ihed~ theC P~V~rotedt religion upo7 s h oft th, fame fe t'n ,
whereon it now stands in th~at Li ;6dom. 'Ih intlgence 0: 1 ' c.
ample reached Scotland, and t1 e hape'y e~FiAs of ecclefliz lical 11-
berty, in th~e one natlon, inii'led th~e other with an equal dLrne of
recovering it. Th~e Rlefosces h-cd, 11' exto, been ob igcd to con-
dua themrfelves wcith the utmnot caution, and fcldom ventur d to
preach, but in priv~te houses, and t a diitance fism c ultt th y
gained credit, as happeins o i the ii ? pubication of evcry newv re-
ligion, chiety amaong pedorns in the ower a rd m'dusl r nk of
life. But fevera! noblemen of greatest dl1'n~tion, huI'1g, a-
hout this time, openly efpaidd their prialc` les, tll y n e e no
longer under the necelic~y of a~ing with the fame ref rve; and
with more s~ecurity and encouragemeni, tL~e! had 1lew'fe reater
faccers. The means of acquniring; and f} re,.dingr knowlvedge be
came mor~e common, and the spirit of inlnovation, peculial to that
period, grew every day bolder and more ui iverf 1.

Happily for the Reformation, th~is fphlit was flill ul der fom·

restraint. It had not yet attained firmnels an~d vigour, fu fiki t >
overturn a lyitem, founded on the deepe I polic~y, and fu~ tedi
by the most formidable power. On er the prele~nt circur 1 tarceq,
any attempt towards a~ioin mult have been fatal to the P-ctei-
tant do~rines 9 and it is no fmanll proof of theL authorit -, as well as
penetration of the heads of th, party, that ti cy w~ere able to re-
firain the zeal of a fiery and impetuous people, till that crit'caland
matture juneaure, whlen every itep they took; was decisive a d ftc-
cefsful.

M~eanwhlile, their cause received reinforcement fro-n two d1 .

ferent quarters, w-hence they never could have expeceed It. The
ambition- of the- house~ of Guise, and the bigotry of M~ary of En,-
la~nd haitenect the fibSverflon of the Payal throne in Scotland; and
by a f ngular dirpolition of Piovidence, the perfor s a ho a pored
the Reformation in every other part of Europe with the fie ceft
zeal, were made in~truments for advancing it in that L'l2 gdom.

Mary of Guis~e pof i~ted the fame bold and alp~irin, f irit, whl'ch T1e O 'rn

diflinguilfhedher famiily. B~t in her, it was ofton by the fe-, Puto
male charaa~er, and accompanied with gre t-r tcemp r and ad-'l th 0 e of
dress. Her brothers, in older to attain the high objeas at wh' h ent
they aimed, ventured upon such daring measures, as faited their
great courage. Her designs upon the s~upreme power were con-
coaled with the utmost care, and advanced by address and refine-

BOOK TI mentS mOre natural to her fev. By a dexterous application i

L-~I those talents, the had acquired a confideral le intuence on th

councils of a nation, hlitherto unacquabsrtid with the government
of women; and without the fmallett right to any share in the ad.
miniffration of affairs, had engrroffed the chief dire~ion of than
into her own hands. But ihe did not long reft satisfied with the
enjoyment of th~is precarious power, which the fick~leness of thr
Regent, or the ambition of those who governed him, mighltle
easily diflurb-; and began to s~et on foot new intrigues, with a de
sign of undermining him, and of openinr: to I erfelf a way to sue.
ceed him in that hi,hi dulnty. ,"er brothers entered warmly in,
to ·this ich-me, and fii po~ttd it wT~;h all the~ir credit at the court
o; Flance. Thle I're~nch I ing williamly concurred in a measure,
Ly whlich he hloped to bring Scotl.l I entixcly under manage.
mcut, and in anly futate bioll withl En 1.nd, to turn its whoke
sol-e upon that kingdom.

In order to active at thle desired elevaltion, the Qteen Dowfager .

had onl!y one of two ways to chule j either violently to wre!!
th~e .owerc out of thle hat ds of the Regent, or to obtain it by his
consent. Unlde,- a minority, and an ong a warlike and fa~ious
peop~le, the fortner was anl u a c tain and dlngerous experimrent,
T'he latter appeared to be no less impraticablc. To persuade a
manl voluntarily to aldicate thle supreme pow er ; to descend te a
level. with thoile, above whom hie was raised; alnd to be content
w~ith th~e second ph-ce, where he hath1 h~eld the firit, may well
pdlsj for a wild and chlmeical projeat. Thir, however, the
Queen attempted; anld the prudence of the attempt was fuffici-
ently jo fi~ieid by its luccefs.

T he Reg nt's ii contancy and irrclolution, together with ttb

calam:tics wvhic~h had b fallen the kingdom under hiis adlminiffra-
tion, raised the prejudices both of the nobles and of the peopke
againfl him, to a great height j and the Queen fccretly famented
thie e with much induffry. All who withcd for a change met
* with a gracious reception in her court, and the'r f ilit of dif~ab

feaion was noulilhed by such hopes and promifres, as, in every

Courts the age, impole on the credulity of the fac~i us. The favourers of
R~eformers. the Reformation bding the most numerous and s~preading body of

the Rcgent's cnemies, the applied to them, with a particular at·
tention; and the gentleness of her dilpolitions, and seeming in-
ditderence to the religious points in disp~ute, made all her promises

~ga I55e. of proteclion and indulgence pals upon them for sincere. Find-

ing 10 great a part of the nation willing to fall in with her mel·

Aires, the Qu~een set out for France, under pretence of v~ifting BOOK I.
her daughter, and tooki along with her those noblemen, who pof- 08t ,U
sessed the greatest power and credit among their countrymen.
Softened by the pleasures of an elegant court, flattered by the
civilities of the French King, and the caresses of the house of
Guile, and influenced by the seasonable distribution of a few fa-
vours, and the liberal promile of many more, they were brought
to approve of all the Queen's pretenflons.

W~hile thee advanced by these flow but irrportant fleps, the Re-

gent either did not foresee the danger which threatened him, or
neg~le~ted to provide against it. The first discovery of the train
which was laid, came from two of his own confidents, Panter
Eilhop of Ross, and Carnegie of Kiinnaird, whom the Queen had
gained over to her interest, and then employed as the mast pro-
per infiruments for obtaining his codfent. The overture was
made to him in the name of the French King, enforced~by pro-
per threatenings in order to work upon his natural timidity, and
fiveetened by every promise that could reconcile him to a pro-
poalI so dis~agreeable. On the one hand, the confirmation of his
French title, together with a conflderable pension, the parlia-
mentary acknowledgment of his right of fuccetiion to the Crown,
and a public ratification of his condua during his Regency, were
offered him. On the other hand, the displeasure of the French
King, the power and popularity of the Quteen Dowager, the dif-
affeaion of the nobles, with the danger of an after-reckoning,
were repres~ented in the firongreft colours.

It was not pollible to agrree to a proposal io extraordinary and

unexpeaed without some previous firuggle , and had the Arch-
bishop of St. Andrew's been present to fortify the irresolute and
passive s~pirit of the Regent, he would, in all probability, have
rejec~red it with disdain. Happily for the Queen, the fagracity
and ambition of that Prelate could, at this time, be no obffruc-
tion to her viewfs. He was lying at the point of death, and in
his abl~ence, the influence of th~e Qufeen's agents on a flexible
temper counterbalanced s~everal of the firongeft paflions in the
human mind, and obtained his consent to a voluntary surrender
of the supreme power.

After gaining a point of such1 difficulty with i0 much ease, Dec.155 *

the Queen returned into Scotlrjnd, in full expe~ation of taking
immediate poffetlion of her new dignity. But, by this time, the
Archbilhop of St. Andrew's had recovered of that distemper,
which the ignorance of the Scottish physicians had pronounced

BOOK 11. tO beincurable. Thishe owed tothe ali'tan-e of th~efamous

Cardan, one of those irregular adventurers in philosophy, of whom
Italy produced to many about this period. A bold genius kd
him to some useful dilcoveries, which merit thle esteem of a
more dikcerning age; a wild imagination engaged him in thof
chimerical s~ciences, wh~ich drew the admiration of his catempo.
raries. As a pretender to affrologry and mazic, he was revered
and consulted by all Europ7e; as a prof cient in natural philosophy,
he was but little known. The Arc biifhop, it is probable, can.
f dered him as a powerful magician, when I e appl'ed to him for
relief 3 but it was his knowl dge as a ph~ilof'pher', which enabkid
him to cure his disease *.

Together with his htalth, the Archbithrop rc overed the entire

government of the Regent, and quickly detellm ned him to recal
thlat dilhonourable promile, which he had been fed ·ced by the
artifices of the Queen to grant. However great hier surprise and
indignation were, at this freth inflance of hris inconflancy, the
was obliged to dissemble, that fl e might have leirare to renew
her intrigues with the Ploteftants, whom the fdvoured and court·
ed more than ever; with the nobles, to whom 11 e rendered her-
self agreeable by various arts; and with the Rcgent himself, in
order to gain whom the employed every argument. But what.
ever impreflion her cmifibries might have made on the Regent,
it was no easy matter to over-reach or to intimidate the Archbi-
thop. Under his management, the negociations were spun out to
a great length, and his brother maintained his station w-ith that
address and firmnels, which its importance 10 well merited. The
universal defecaion of the nobles, the growing power of the Pro-
tellants, who all adhered to the Queen Dowfager, the reiterated
folicitations of the French Kiing, at d, above all, the interport
tion of the young Queen, who was now en-cring the twelfth year
of her age, and claimed a ligh~t of nominating whom the plealed

Prevailson to be Regent, obliged him, at left, to resign that high of~ce,
toe egT hs which he had held many years.Heotndfohmelth
office. Fame terms of advantage, which had been formerly flipulated.
She obtains It was in the Parliament which met on the loth of April,

teeec.1354, thlat the Earl of Arran extcuted this extraordinary refig·

* Cardan himself was more desirous of being considered as an Afirokoger

than a Philosopher; in his book DE GENITlI R', we find a calculation of the
Archbilhop's nativity, from which he pret nds bot~h to have predi~ed his di-
ease, and to have effeaed h~s cure. He received, from the qrchblihop, a re·
wrard! of eighteen hundred crowns. A grout f 'm in that age. De Vita fua, p. 3:

hation; and at the fame time, Mary of Guise was ralled to that P~ooK 11.
·iignity, which had been so long the objeia of her v·ilhles. Thus, -
with their own approbation, a woman, and a firanger was advanced
to the supreme authority over a fierce and turbulent people, wtho,
·seldom s~ubmitted, without reluAance, to the legal and ancient
government of thieir native monarchs.

While the Qu~een jDowagrer of Scotland contributed to mulch Refonm~-

towards the prog~ress of the Reformation, by the proteRion which nunsto .
she affarded it, from motives of ambition; the Englifhl Queen, make great
by her indiscreet zeal, filled the kingdom with persons saive in progress.
promoting that cause. Mary ascended the throne of Enygland, July 6,I553·
on the death of her brother Edward, and s~oon after married Phi-.
lip II. of Spain. To the persecuting [pirit of the Romith super-
flition, and the fierceness of that age, the added the private re-
fentment of her own, and of her mother's fufferingrs, with which
the 10aded the Reformed religion; and the peevishness and feve-
rity of her natural temper carried the acrimony of all these
patiions to the utmost extreme. The cruelty of her persecution
equalled the deeds of those tyrants, who have been the greatest
reproach to human nature. The bigaotry of her clergy could
fecarce keep pace with the impetuosity of her zeal. Even the
unrelenting Philip was obliged, on some occasions, to mitigate
the rigour of her proceedings. Many among the mos1 eminent
Reformers fuffered for the doarines which they had taught; 0-
thers fled from the florm. To the greater part of thlere, Swit-
zerland and Germany opened a fTecure afyilum; and not a few,
out of choice or necessity, fled into Scotland. What they hact
seen and felt in England, did not abate the warmth and zeal of
their indignation against Popery. Their attacks were bolder and
more fuccefsful than ever; and their doarines made a rapid
progress among all ranks of men.

These doarines, calculated to reaify the opinions, and to re-

form the manners of mankind, had hitherto produced no other
effeats; but they soon began to operate with greater violence,
and proved the occasion, not only of subverting the eflablifhed
religion, but of thaking the throne, and endangering the king-
dom. The causes which facilitated the introdnlaion of there new A view of
opinions into Scotland, and which disseminated thenT so fast the political
through the nation, merit, on that account, a particular and care- whi b con-
ful inquiry. The Reformation is one of the greatest events in a at u
the hiffory of mankind, and in whatever point of light we view
it, is infiru~ive and interesting,.

Boose II. The revival of lear l 21 in thl z5th and r6th centuries ro-,re

-* - the world from that llth gy5, illn wi h it had been funk for a

my ages. The humanl mi. d salt its owrn firenlgth, brok~e the set·
ters of authority by whichl it h d been so long restrained, aud
venturing to mlove in a la-ger fghe~re, pulhed its inquiriesinto
every fubjea, with great boldness, and frplrifin g Acrefs.

N~o foonler did mankind recover thle cay acity of exerclifng their

reason, than religrion was one of thle fielt objecls whliCh drew their
attention. Lolg before Luthler published his famous Thel4,
which thooki the Papal thlor e, 11 n ce and phlilofophiy hadlaid
open, to many of the Italidan, the impailure and ahfurdity of th
efiablithed superstition. 7 hlt s~ubtle and ref~ningr people, fatisfi.
ed with enjoying those dilcove~ics in secret, were hittle difpoled
to aflfume the dangerous chlaraAer of Reformers, and concludrd
the knowledge of truth to be the prerogative of the wife, whike
vulgar minds muff be overawed and governed by popular errors.
Eut, animated with a more noble and disinterested zeal, the Ger.
man T'heologian boldly ere~ed the flandard of truth, and up
held it with an unconquerable intrepidity, which merits the ad·
miration and gratitude of all succeeding ages.

T'he occasion of Luther's being fixft difguited with the tenet

of the Romith church, and how from a finall rupture, the quar.
rel widened into an irreparable breach, is known to ev'ery one
who has been the leait convedf nt in hiltloy. Trom the heart d
Germany, his opinions [pread, with allonifl ing rapidity, allowr
Europe; and wherever th y came, eldineered or overturned
the ancient, but ill-founded fy16c n. Thle vibilance and addrdl
of the court of Rome, and t1 e p ·mer and bigotry of the Auithian
family, fupp!reifed these: ro io Is or thleir fuli aypearance, in the
southern k~ingdomns of Europe B3ut th~e ficlce fphiit of the north,
irritated by multiplied illpof 1 ns, coul I neither be mollified b!
the fame arts, nor subdued by th~e fame force; and encouraged
by faome Princes from picty, at d by 0 hcrs out of autl~ce, it eali
ly bore down the fochle opposition of an i 'iserate and immora
clergy.

The fuperflition of Popely leccis to have giown to the molt

extravagant heidht, in thoife coun ries which alc f tuated towfard
the different extremities of E~uro pe. ? he vigouc of imagination,
and sensibility of frame, peculiar to the inhabienl ts of southern
climates, rendered them su~sceptible of the deepcil imiprdli'ons of
fuperflitious terror and creduh~ty. 1 .0 · lice L.1d blabarity were
no less favourable to the progrsfs of thle fame f irit, among the

horthern nations. They knew little, and were diiportd to be. ra x HI
lieve every thing. The moit glaring ablurdities did not thock
their gross underflandings, and the most impro'oable fic~ions were
received with implicit assent and admiration.

Accordingly, that form of Popery, which prevailed in Scot-

land, was of the most bigatted and illiberal kind. T'hofe doc-
trines which are most apt to thiock the human underflanding, and
those legends which farthest~ exceed belief, were propoled to the
people without any attempt to palliate or dilguile them; nor did
they ever call in qiueftion the reas~onableness of the one, or the
truth of the other.

The power and wealth of the church kept pace with the pro-

grels of fuperftitiion j for it is the nature of that ifpirit to oblerrve
no bounds, in its refp~ea and liberality towards thole~, whose cha-
raaer it efleems sacred. The Scottish K~ings early demonfirated
how much they were under its influence, by their vast additio~ns
to the immunities and riches of the clergy. The procu ~e picty
of David I. who acquired on that account the name of Saint,
transferred almoRt the whole crow-n lands, w~hich were at tha3t
time of great extent, into the hands of ecclefiatics. The ex-
ample of that virtuous Prinlce was imitated by his fuccefo s.
The fpyirit spread among all orders of men, who daily loaded th~e
pr'iefthood with new poflefions. The riches of the church all
over Europe were exorbitant s but Scotland was one of those
countries, wherein they had farthleft exceeded the just propor-
tion. The Scottish clergy paid one half of every tax imposed on
land; and as there is no reason to think that, in that age, they
would be loaded with any unequal fhlare of the burden, wre may
conclude, that, by the time of the Reformation, little less than
one half of the property inl the nation had fallen into the hands
of a society, which is always acquiring, and can never lose.

The nature, too, of a considerable part of their property exT

tended their influence. Many estates, throughout the k~ingdom,
held of the church; church lands were let in lease at an easy
rent, and were poirifed by the younger fans, and descendents of
the belt families ". The connexion between Jiyrio1r and s, fa/
between the landlord and tenant, created dependencies, and ga e
rife to an union of great advantage to the church; ad in c
mating thle intinence of the Popiilh ccckfiiaftics over the nat' i,
these, as well as the real amount of their revenues, mull be dt-
tended to, and tak~en into the account,

* Keith, 52r. Not. (b.)

Boox II. This extraordinaly share in the national property wvas accaa.

-Y panied with proportionable weight in the supreme council of the

kingdom. At a time, when the number of temporal Peers we
extremely small, and when the Lesser Barons and representatives
of boroughs seldom attended Parliaments, the Ecclefiatics form.
ed a considerable body there. And it appears from the ancient
rolls of Parliament, and from the manner of chufing the Lordl
of Articles, that the proceedings of that high court mufrhave
been, in a great meafulre, under th~eir dire~ion J-.

The reverence due to their sacred chara~er, which w~as often

carried incredibly far, contributed not a little towards the growth
of their power. The dignity, the titles, and precedence of tkr
Popith clergy are remarkable, bothl as causes and effeats of tbat
dominion, wYhich they had acquired over the reft of mankind,
T`hey were regarded by the credulous laity as beings of a fuperi·
or species; they were neither fubjeA to the fame laws, nor tried
by the fame judges. Every guard, that religion could supply,
was placed around their power, their poffeionz, and their per.
sons; and endeavours were cfed, not without fuccels, to repts
sent them all as equally sacred.

The reputation for learning, which, however inconsiderable,

was wholly engrossed by the clergy, added to th~e reverence w~hidh
they derived from religion. The principles of found philosophy,
and of a just taste, were altogether unknown; in place ofthefe,
were substituted fludies, barbarous and uninfiruaive; but as the
ecclefiaffics alone were converf nt in them, this procured them
eileem; and a very little knowledge drew the admiration of rude
ages, which krnew nothing. WTar was the sole profefiion of the
nobles, and hunting their chief amurement; they divided their
time between these; and unacquainted with the arts, or unim-
proved by science, they difdIained any employment foreign from
military affairs, or which required rather penetration and addrels,
than bodily vigrour. WCherever the former w ere neceffiary, the
clergy were intruited; becaule they alone were properly qualifi-
ed for the trust. Almost all the high onfces in civil government
devolved, on this account, into their hands. The Lord Chan-
cellor was the firfl fubje8 in the kmngdom, both in dignity and
in pow~er. From the earlieit ages of the monarchy, to the death
of Cardinal Beatoun, fifty-four persons had held that high office;

j· Spots. Ilift. of the Ch. of Scot. 449,

and of there, forty-three had been ecclefiaftics *. The Lords of Boog II.
Se~ion were supreme Judges in all matters of civil right; and by
the original conflitution, the President and one half of the Sena-
tors in this court were churchmen.

To all this we may add, that the clergy being separated from

the reft of mankind by the law of celibacy; and undiffra~ed by
those cares, and unincumbered with thos~e burdens which occupy
and oppress other men, the interest of their order became their
only objeat, and they were at full 1eif~ure to pursue it.

The nature of their fanaion gave them access to all persons,

and at all seasons. They could employ all the motives of fear and
of hope, of terror and of consolation, which operate most power-
fully on the human mind. They haunted the weak and the cre-
dulous; they besieged the beds of the sick and of the dying.
They fuffered few to go out of the world without leaving marks
of their liberality to the church; and taught them to compound
with the Almighty for their fins, by beffowing riches upon those,
who called themselves his servants.

When their own induffry, or the fuperflition of mankind fail-

ed of producing this effea, they had influence enough to call in
the aid of law. Whoever died inte~fate, was prefumned to have
destined his moveables to pious dfes. The church took poilef-
sion of them. The children, the wife, the creditors of the per-
son deceal~ed were often excluded from any share in what was
effeemed a sacred property J-. As men are apt to trust to the
continuance of life with foolish confidence, and childiihly thun
every thing, that forces them to think of their mortality, many
die without fettling their affairs by will; and the bold usurpation
of ecclefiaitics in this cafe, of which there are frequent vestiges
in our laws, though none in our hifforians, may be reckoned a-
mong the most plentiful sources of the wealth of the church.

At the famne time, all matrimonial and testamentary caus~es

could be tried only in the spiritual courts, and by laws which
the clergy themselves had framed. The penalty too, by which
the decillons of there courts were enforced, added to their autho-
rity. A sentence of excommunication was no les~s formidable,
than a sentence bs out-lawvry. It was pronounced on many oc-
cafions, and againit various crimes: and besides excluding thole,
upon whom it fell, from Christian privilegpes, it deprived them of
all their· rights as men, or as citizens. A~nd the aid of the fecu-

* Craw-f. Offic. of State.
t Ess~ays on Brit. Antig. '74.

BooK II. lar power concurred with the fuperitition of mankind, in renderp

--·ing the thunders of the church no less defiruaive than terrible.

To there general causes, may be attributed the immense growth

both of thec wealth, and power of thle Popith church y; and without
entering into any more minute detail, this may serve to discover
the foundations, on which a firuaure so flupendous was erec~ed.

But though the laity had contributed, by their own f~uperfli-

tion and profufenefs, to raise the clergy from poverty and con-
tempt to riches and dignity, they began, by degrees, to feel and
to murmur at their encroachments. N~o wonder haughty and
martial nobles thould view the power and poflfelions of the church
with envy; andi regard the lazy and inaaive charaater of church-
rnen with the utmost contempt. W;Shile, at the fame time, the
indecent and licentious lives of the clergy gave great and just
offence to the people, and considerably abated the veneration,
which they were accuffomed to yield to that order of men.

Immense wealth, extremne indolence, gros~s ignorance, and, above

all, the severe injun~ion of ceiliacy, had concurred to introduce
this corruption of morals among the clergy; who presuming too
much upon the rubmitionn of the people, were at no pains ei-
ther to conceal, or to dis~guise their own vices. According to
the accounts of the Reformers, confirmed by several Popith writ-
ers, the most open and scandalous dlifolution of manners prevail-
ed among the Scottiih clergy 4. Cardinal Beatoun, with the fame
public pomp, which is due to a legitimate child, celebrated the
marriage of his natural daughter with the Earl of Crawfurd's sonS;
and, if we may believe Knox, he publicly continued to the end
of his days a criminal corres~pondence with her mother, who was
a woman of rank. The other prelates seem not to have been more
,egular and exemplary than their PrimateS.

* Winset. ap.Kseith Appead. 202, 205. Lefl. de Reb. Gest. Scot. 232-
·- The marriage articles fubrcribed w~ith his own hand, in wchich he calls her

Nr DA~UGHTER, are still extpnt. K~eith, p. 42.

t A remarkable proof of the difiolute manners of the clergy is found in the

public records. A greater number of letters of LEGITIMATIowT was granted du-
rin~g the firit thirty years after the Reformation, than d~urIng the wrhole period,
thant has elapsed finlce that time. These were obtained by the fans of the Popilh
clergy. The ecclefiaftics, who were allow·ed to retain their benefices, alienat-
ed them to their children; who, when they acquired we-alth, were desirous that
the slain of illegitimacy might no longer remain upon their families. In KE1TH'S
CATALOGUE OF THE ScoTTIsa BISHOPS, Wye f1nd several inflances of such alie*
r.ations of church lands, by the Popith incumbeats, to their natural children.

M~en of such chara~ers ought, in reason, to have been alarmed BooK UI.

at the first clamours raised against their own morals, and the doc-
trines of the church, by the Proteflant preachers; but the Popiih
ecclefiaftics, either out of pride or ignorance, negleaed the pro-
per methods for silencing them. Initead of reforming their lives,
or disguising their vices, they affeAed to derpife the censures of
the people. And while the Reformers, by their mortifications and
sufferities, endeavoured to resemble the first propagators of Chril-
tianity, the Popilh clergy were compared to ali those persons, who
are most infamous, in hiffory, for the enormity and scandal of
their crimes.

On the other hand, instead of mitigating the rigour, or colour-

ing over the absurdity of the established doffrines; instead of at-
tempting to found them upon scripture, or to reconcile them to
reason 4 they left them without any other support or recommenda-
tion, but the authority of the church, and the decrees of councils.
The fables concerning purgatory, the virtues of pilgrimage, and
the merits of the faints, were the topics, on which they insisted
in their discourses to the people; and the duty of preaching being
left whll6~y to Monks of the lowest and most illiterate orders, their
compositions were flill more wretched and contemptible, than the
fubje~ts on which they insisted. While the Reformers were at-
tended by ctowded and admiring audiences, the Popiih preach-
ers were either univers~ally deserted, or listened to with scorn.

The only device which they employed in order to recover their

declining reputation, or to confirm the wavering faith of the peo-
ple, was equally imprudent, and unf~uccefsful. As many doatrines
of their church had derived their credit, at Birit, from the autho-
rity of falle miracles, they now endeavoured to call in there to
their aid*. But those lying wonders, which were beheld with
unfulpicious admiration, or heard with implicit faith, in times of
darkness and of ignorance, met with a very different reception, in
a more enlightened period. The vigilance of the Reformers de-
te~ted these impoftures, and exposed not only them, but the cause
which needed the aid of such artifices, to ridicule.

As the Popith ecclefiaftics became more and more the objeas

of hatred and of contempt, the discours~es of the Reformers were
liffened to, as to many calls for liberty; and besides the pious in-
dignation which they excited againfi thos~e corrupt doffrines, which
had perverted the nature of true Christianity; besides the zeal,
which they inspired for the knowledge of truth, and the purity of

SSpotfwood, 69.

B7OK *I Tel g On; they gave rife a100, among the Scottilhi nobles, to other

Sviews and pallions. They hoped to shak~e off the yoke of eccle-

fiaftical dominion, which they had long felt to be oppreflive, and
which they now dilcovered to be unchristian. T'hey expeaed to
recover pofelEIion of the church revenues, which they were now
taught to confider as alienations made by their ancestors, with a
p~rofusion no less undifcerningr, than unbounded. They flattered
themselves that a check~ would be given to the pride and luxury
of the clergyr, who would be obliged, henceforward, to confine
themselves within the [phere, peculiar to their sacred charaaer.
.An averflon for the eftablithed church, which flowed from so many
concurring causes, which was railed by considerations of religion,
and heightened by motives of policy, spread fast through the nation,
and excited a spirit, that burst out, at last, with irresistible vio-
lence.

Religious considerations, alone, were fufficient to have routed

this s~pirit. The points in controverly with the church of Rome
were of so much importance to the happiness of mankind, and to
ess~ential to the nature of true Christianity, that they merited all
the zeal with which the Reformers contendell in order to eflablifh
them. But the Reformation havings been represented as the effe8.
of s~ome wild and enthusiastic frenzy in the human mind, this at-
tempt to account for the eagrerners and zeal, with which our an-
ceffors embraced and propagated the Protefiant doarines, by taking
a view of thle political motives, alone, which influenced them, and
by thewingr how naturally there prompted them to acT with 10
much ardour, will not, perhap:s, be efleemed an unnecessary di-
grellion. We now return to the course of the hiflory.

r554. The Queen's elevation to the once of Regent seems to have

transported her, at firit, beyond the known prudence, and mode-

The Qu'een ration of her chara~er. She began her administration, by con-
Regent be- ferring upon foreigners l~everal offices of trust and of dignity; a
ginls her ad-
miniffration flep, which both from the inability of firangers to dilcharge thee
with some offces with vigour, and from the envy which their preferment
unpopular
mtafures. excites among the natives, is never attended with good confe-

quences. Vilmort was made Comptroller, and intruited with the
management of the public revenues; Bonot was appointed Go-
vernor of Orkney; and Rubay honoured with the cuffody of the
Great Seal, and thle title of Vice Chancellor,. It wads with the
utmofl indignation, that the Scots beheld otlices of the greateit
eminence and authority, dealt out among firangr~1s. Ty there pr7-

* Lefly, de Reb. Gest. Scot r189.

motions they conceived the Queen to have offered an insult both BOO0K .T
to their underflandings, and to their courage ; to the former, by LC-
thppofing them unfit for those stations, which their anceffers had
filled with so much dignity ; to the latter, by imagining that they
were tame enough not to complain of an affront, which, in no
former age would have been tolerated with impunity.

Wihile their minds were in this difpolition, an incident happen-

ed which inflamed their averflon for French councils to the high-
eft degree. Ever since the famous contest between the houses of
Valois and Plantagenet, the French had been accuffomed to em-
barals the English, and to divide their firength by the sudden and
formidable inicurflons of their allies, the Scots. But, as there in-
roads were fetldom attended with anly real advantage to Scotlanld,
and exposed it to the dangerous resentment of a. powerful neig~h-
bour, the Scots began to grow less traatable than formerly, and
scrupled, any longer, to serve an ambitious ally at the price of
their own quiet and security. The change, too, which was daily
introducing into the art of war, rendered the atfliiance of the
Scottith forces of less importance to the French 11Ionarch. For
these reasons, Henry having resolved upon a war with Philip II.
and foreseeing that the Queen of England would tak~e part in her
hufband's quarrel, was exutremely solicitous to secure, in Scotland,
the affitance of some troops, whlich would be more at his com-
mand than an undilcipined army, led by nobles who were almost
independent. In prosecution of this defigrn, but under pretence
of relieving the nobles from the expence and danger of defending
the borders, the Queen Regent proposed, in Parliament, to regil~- 1555.
ter the value of lands throughout the kiingrdom, to impose on them
a fmnall tax, and to apply that revenue towards maintaining a
body of regular troops, in conflant pay. A fixed tax upon land,
which the growing ex~pence of government hath introduced into
almost every part of Europe, was unkinown, at that time, and
seemed altogether inconsistent with the free and independent spirit
of the feudal government. Nothingr could be more fhlockiing to
a generous and brave nobility, than the intruiting·, to mercenary
hands, the defence of those territories which had been acquired, or
preserved by the blood of their anceffors. They received this pro-
pofal with the utmost indignation. About three hundred of the
Lesser Barons repaired in a body to the Queen Regent, and repre-
fented their sense of thle intended innovation, with that manly and
determined boldness, which is natural to a free people, in a martial
age. Alarmed at a remonfirance delivered in so firm a tone,

M Iij

Booic IT. and supported by such formidable numbers, the Queen prudently

abandoned a Ccheme, which the found to be universally odious.
As the Queen herself was known perfe81y to underfland the cir-
cumitances and temper of the nation, this measure was imputed
wholly to the s~uggestions of her foreign counsellors ; and the
Scots were ready to proceed to the most violent extremities against
them.

Attempts to The French, initead of extinguiihing, added fuel to the flame,
enlgage the
kiingdom in They had now commenced hoffilities ag-ainst Spain, and Philip
a w wth had prevailed on the Queen of England, to reinforce his army

with a considerable body of her troops. In order to depr~ive him
of this aid, Henry had recourse, as he projeAed, to the Scots; and
attempted to excite them to invade England. But, as Scotland had
nothing to dread from a Princess of Mary's chara~er, who, far
from any ambitious scheme of diflurbing her neighbours, was whol-
ly occupied in endeavouring to reclaim her hereticalfiubjearsj the
nobles, who were assembled by the Qu~een Regent at N~ewbottle,
lifrened to the folicitations of the French Monarch with extreme
coldness, and prudently declined engaging the kingdom in an en.
terprife to dangerous and unnecefiary. What the could not obtain
by perfuation, the Queen Regent brought about by a firatagem,
N~otwithstanding the fubliftence of pelce between the two king-
doms, the commanded her French soldiers to rebuild a small fort
near Berw~ick, which was appointed, by the last treaty, to be razed.
The garrison of Berwicki fllied out; interrupted the w~ork;; and
ravaged the adjacent country. This insult rout~ed the Scery spirit
of the Scots, and their promptness to revenge the least appearance
of national injury diflipated, in a moment, the wife and pacific
resolutions which they had to lately formed. Wjiar was determined,
and orders initantly given for raising a numerous army. But be-
fore their forces could assemble, the ardour of their indignation
had time to cool, and the Eng~lish having dis~covered no intention
to push the war with vigour, tlie nobles resumed their pacific lyf

I556. tem, and resolved to stand altogether upon the defensive. They

marched to the banks of the Tweed, they prevented the incurflons
of the enemy, and having done what they thought fufficient for
the safety and honour of their country, the Queen could not in-
duce them, either by her entreaties, or her artifices, to advance
another flep.

While the Scots persisted in their ina~tivity, D'Oyfel, the Com-

mander of the French troops, who paireffed entirely the confidence
of the Queen Regent, endeavoured, wvith her connivance, to en-

gage the two nations in hoflilities. Contrary to the orders ofthe 1COoK l
Scottith General, he marched over the Tweed with his own fol-
diers, and invelted W~erk, a garrison of the English. The Scots,
inficad of seconding his attempt, were enraged at his presumption.
The Quieen's partiality towards France had long been fulpeaed,
but it was now visible that the wantonly s~acrificed the peace and
[afety of Scotland, to the interest of that ambitious and affumning
ally. Under the feudal governments, it was in camps, that sub-
jects were accuffomed to addres~s the boldest remonfirances to
their Sovereigns. While arms were in their hands, they felt
their own firength; and at that time all their representations of
grievances carried the authority of commands. On this occallon,
the indignation of the nobles broke out with such violence, that
the Queen perceiving all attempts to engage them in saion to be
vain, abruptly dismissed her army, and retired with the utmost
ihame and difguit; having discovered the impotence of her own
authority, without effeating any thing which could be of advan-
tage to France.

It is oblervable, that this firfl inflance of contempt for the Re-

gent's authority can, in no degree, be imputed to the influence of
the new opinions in religion. As the Q~een's pretensions to the
Regency had been principally supported by thos~e who favoured
the Reformation, and as the still needed them for a counterpoise to
the Archbishop of St. Andrew's, and the partizans of the house
of Hamilton j they were now treated by her with great refpea,
and even admitted to no inconsiderable share in her favour and
confidence. Kirk~aldy of Grange, and the other surviving con-
fpirators against Cardinal Beatoun were, about this time, recalled
by her from banishment; and, through her connivance, the Pro-
teftant preachers enjoyed an interval of tranqiuillity, which was
of great advantage to their caus~e. Soothed by these instances of
the Qu~een's moderation and humanity, the Protefrapts abandon-
ed the office of remonfirating to others j and the leaders of the
opposite faAion set them the firit ex~ample of disputing the will of
their Sovereign.

As the Quteen Regent felt how lim~ted and precarious her au- The

thority was, while it depended on the poise of these conordry sic- Green's

mairre·ige

tions, thie endeavoured to establish it on a broader and more fe,ul e -:. tnle
foundation, by haftenipg the conclusion of her daughter's mnrria e Dahn
with the Dauphin. Amiable as the Qpecn of Scots thlen wras, in
the bloom ofyouth; and considerable as the territories wete,
which the would have added to the French Mailnarchy j there did?

BOOK T. Dt W2Dt rea ORS to perfaade H~enry to depart from his firit plap

of marrying her to his son. The Conflable 1\Iontmorency em.
ployed all his interest to defeat an alliance, which refleded 10
much luffre on the Princes of Lorrain. He represented! the im-
pollibility of maintaining order and tranquillity among a turbu-
lent people, during the ablence of their Sovereign; and for that
reason, advised Henry to beltow the young Qu~een upon one of th·
Princes of the blood, who, by residing in Scotland, might pre·
serve that kingdom an useful ally to France, which, by a nearer
union to the Crown, would become a mutino,.s and ungovernable
province *. But, at this time, the Conflable was a prisoner in the
hands of the Spaniards, and the Princes of Lorrain at the height
of their glory; and their influence, seconded by the charms of
the young Queen, triumphed over the prudent, but envious re-
monfirances of their rival.

Dec. I4, The French King accordingly applied to the Parliament of

2557' Scotland, which appointed eight of its members -F to reprdecnt the

whole body of the nation, at the marriage of the Queen. Among
the persons on whom the public choice conferred this honourable
charaAer, were some of the most avowred and zealous adr ocates
for the Reformation; by wihich, may be eflimated the degree of
refp~eA and popularity, which that party had now attained in the
kingdom. The minfiruions of the Parliament to thiofe Commis-
froners still remain II, and do hlonour to thle wnifdom and integrity
of that assembly. At thle fame time that they maniffited a laud-
able concern for the dignity and interest of their Sovere~ign, w-ith
refpea to the articles of marr~iage, they employed every precau-
tion which prudence could diaate, for preserving th~e liberty
and independence of the nation, and fo~r securing the faucceio:in of:
the Crown in the house of Hamilton.

Artifices of With regard to each of thes~e, the Scots obtaine~d whatever fa~-
thle French
in the mar- tisfamion their fear or jealousy could demand. The youngs Qeen,
riagetrearty. the Dauphlin, and the King~ of France ratified every article, with

thle most solemn oaths, and confirmed them by deeds in form, ul-
dier their hands and seals. But on the part of France, all this n s
ene continued scene of fludied and elaborate deceit. Previous to
these public tranfaaions with the Scottish dcp~utiesi , 16y Lazd been

* Mely. Mem. 15-
"r Viz. T'he Arch~bilhop of Glasgow, th e Efhiop of Re', the B3fhop of Ork-

ney-, the Earrls of Rothes and Caffils, LorJ ileeming, Lord Seton, the Prior of
St. Anldrelr's, and Joh~nEr!Line of Dun.

jj K~eith, Append. r3.

i. - ?ded to subscribe privately three deeds, equally unjuit, and nOOK II.
II lidl, by which, thle, faii~ngr the heirs of her own body, con-
f cred the kingdom of Scotla.nd, with whatever inheritance or
a ce~lan might accrue to it, in frce gift upon the Crown of Trance,
d -l ii g all promises to the contrary, which the necefr~ty of her
inirsc and the folicitations, of her fubjeas~ had extorted, or migrh
extore from her, to Let void and~ of no0 obligation *. As it gives us

plop~er idea of thle charaaer of the French court under Henrjr
II. we may observe that the King himfrelf, the Keeper of the
Great Seals, the Duke of Guise, and the Cardinal of Lorrain,
were the persons engaged in conduaing this perfidious and dif-
honourable projea. 7 he Qpjeen of Scots was the only innocent
adtor in that scene of iniquity. Her youth, her inexperience, her
education in a foreign country, and her deference to her uncle's
will, with every impartial perfemn, vindicate her from anly impu-
tation of blame on tha~t a~ccunt.

This infamous grant, by which M~ary beffowed the inheritance

of her Lingdom upon firangers, was concealed with the utmost care
from her fubjeas. ? hey seem, h~owever, not to have been unac-
quainted with the intention of the Firench to overturn the fettle-
ment of the f~uccefr~on in favour of the Dukre of Chatelherault.
? he zeal, with whiich the Archbifhopp of St. Andrew's opposed all
the mealixres of the Q~ueen Regent, evidently proceeded from the
fears and fulpicions of that prudent prelate, on this head f .

The marriage, however, was celebrated with great pomp; and April! v4

th~e French, who had hitherto affea~ed to draw a veil over their 8
dedgn~ls upon Scotland, began now to unfold their intentions with-
out anly disguise. In the treaty of marriage, the deputies had a-
4reed that the Dauphnin thlould assume the name of King of Scot-
land. Thlis they considered only as an honorary title; but the
French laboured to annex to it some solid privileges and power.
Thley insisted that the Dauphin's title thould be publicly recog-
liz~ed; that the Crown Ma~trimnonialfihould be conferred upon him;
a nd that all the rights pertaining to the husband of a Queen thould
be velled in his person. By the lawYs of Scotland, a person who
mlrried an heires~s k~ept poffeion of' her estate during his ow-ns
life, if th~e happened to die without children Ij. This was called

il'C s Diplomnat. tom. v. 21. K~eith, y3.
i Ab~out this time, the Fr-nch seem to hzve had fame design of reviving the

F rl of L~enn~o's pretensions to the iiccefr~on, in order to intimidate and alarm

D Iuke of Cha elherault. F~aynes, 21r50 19. Forbes Colleft. vol. i. r89.

BOOK IT, theC Gurtii, oSC01/In'r . The French aimed at applying this rule,

Swhich takes place in private inheritances, to the fucce~iTon of the

kingdom; and that seems to be implied in their demand of the
Criown Matrimonial, a phras~e peculiar to the Scottish hiflorians,
and which they have negleated to explain. As the French had
reason to exped diffculties in carrying through this measure, they
began with founding the deputies who were then at Paris. The
English, in the marriage articles between their Queen and Philip
of Spain, had set an example to the age, of that prudent jealousy
and reserve, with whlich a foreigner thould be admitted to
near the throne. Full of the fame ideas, the Scottish deputies
had, in their oath of allegiance to the D9auphin. expressed them.
se~lves with remarkable caution *. Their answer was in the fame
pirit, refpeaful, but firm; and discovered a fixed resolution of
consenting to nothing, that tended to introduce any alteration in
the order of succession to the Crown.

Four of the deputies -F happening to die before they returned

into Scotland, this accident was universally imputed to the effeass
of poison, which was supposed to have been given them by thle
emiiraries of the house of Gulfe. The hillorians of all nations dif-
cover an amazing credulity with refpea to itories of this kind,
which are to well calculated to please the malignity of some men,
and to gratify the love of the marvellous which is natural to all,
that, in every age, they have been sw~allowed without examina-
tion7, and believed contrary to reason. No wonder the Scots
thould easily give credit to a s~uspicion, which received such firong
colours of probability, both from their own resentment, and from
the known charafter of the Princes of Lorrain, so little fcrupu-
lous about the juitice of the ends which they pursued, or of the
means which they employed. For the honour of human nature,
it must, however, be observed, that as we can discover no motive,
wh~ich could induce any man to perpetrate such a crime, to there
appears no evidence to prove that it was committed. But the
Scots of that age, influenced by national animofities and preju-
dices, were incapable of examining the circumstances of the cafe
with calmners, or of judging concerning them with candour.
All parties agreed in believing the French to have been guilty
of this detestable a~ion j and it is obvious how much this tended
to increas~e the averflon for them, which was growing among all
ranks of men.

* Felth, Append. 20.
j· The Bi"-op of Orlazey, the Earl of Rothes, the Earl of Caffils, and Lord

~Fleeming?

NTotwithflanding the cold reception whic~h their proposal con- BOOK IT·

cerning the Cronton Matrimoniclmet with from th~e Scottith de- T neet
puties, the French ventured to move it in Parliament. The par- prevails on
tizans of the house of Hamilton, fuipicious of their designs upon the Parlia-
the luccetion, apposed it with great zeal. But a party, which the grantit.
feeble and uniteady condua of their leader had brought under NioV. 29.
much difreputation, was little able to withstand the influence of
France, and the address of the Queen Regent, seconded, on this
occasion, by all the numerous adherents of the Reformation. Be-
sides, that artful Princess dressed out the French demands in a les~s
otffnfive garb, and threw in so many limitations, as fezemed to ren-
der them of small cons~equence. T'here either deceived the Scots,
or removed their s~cruples; and in compliance to the Qxeen, they
passed an aB, conferring the Crowzn Mlatrimonialon the Dauphin;
and, withl the fondest credulity, truffed to the frail security
of words and statutes, againit the dangerous encroachments of
powjer ".

The concurrence of the Protefnants, with the Qu~een Regent, tcontinue

in promoting a measure io acceptable to France, while the Popith Proteltants.
clergy, under the influence of the Archb~ilhop of St. Andrew's, op-
posed it with 10 much violence-f, is one of those singular circum-
itances, in the condua of parties, for which this period is to re-
markable. It may be aferibed, in some degree, to the dexterous
management of the Quteen, but chiefly to the moderation of those
who favoured the Reformation. The Protellants were, by this
time, almost equal to the Catholics both in power, and in num-
ber; and, conscious of their own firength, they submitted with
impatience to that tyrannical authority, with which the ancient
laws armed the ecclefiaftics ag~ainst them. They longed to be ex-
empted from this oppreflive jurifdiaion, and publicly to enjoy the
liberty of profeffing~ those opinions, and of exercising- that worship,
which so great a part of the nation deemed to be founded in truth,
and tobe acceptable to the Deity. This indulgence, to which the
whole weight of priestly authority was opposed, there were only
two ways of obtaining. Either violence muff extort it from the

*The all of Parliament is worded w~ith the utmost care, with a view to guard

againit any breach of the order of succession. But the Duke, not relying on
this alone, entered a solemn protellartion to secure his own rig~ht. K~eith, 76. It
Is plain that he fufpe~ed thne French of having some intention to set aside his
r'ght of fucceffon; and, indeed, if they had no design of that kinld, the eager-
ness with which they urged their demand, was childish.

t Slely. 47.

BOOK II. reluaant hand of the Sovereign, or by prudent compliances, tley

-Ymight extpea it from her favour, or her gratitude. The former

is an expedient for the redress of grievances, to which no nation
has recourse suddenly; and fabjeAs seldom v·enture upon resistance,
which is their last remedy, but in cafes of extreme necellity. On
this occasion, the Reformers wifely held the opposite course, and
by their zeal in forwarding the Queen's designs, they hoped to
merit her proteAion. This disposition the Queen encouraged to
the utmost, and amuled them so artfully with many promises,
and some concetiions, that, by their affillance, the surmounted in
Parliament the force of a national, and perhaps a laudable jea.
10uly, which would, otherwise, have fwvayed with the greater
number.

Another circumitance contributed Somewhat to acquire the Re·

gent such considerable influence in this Parliament. In Scotland,
all the bilhoprics,, and those abbeys which conferred a title to a
feat in Parliament, were in the gift of the Crown*. From the
time of her accession to the regency, the Queen had kept in her
own hands almost all those which became vacant, except such as
were, to the great diifguft of the nation, bestowed upon foreigners.
Amongst there, her brother the Cardinal of: Lorrain had obtained
the abbeys of Kielfo and Melrofs, two of the most wealthy founda-
tions in the kingrd om -f. By this condua, the thinned the eccle-
fiaftical bench), which was entirely under the influence of the
Archbitlhop of St. Andrew's, and by its numbers and authority
had great weight in the house, so as to render any opposition it
could give of little consequence.

The Earl of Argyle, and James Stewart Prior of St. Andrewf's,

one the most powerful, and the other the most popular leader of
the Protefiants, were appointed to carry the Crown and other
enligns of royalty to the IDauphin. But from this they were di-
verted by the part they were called to na, in a more interesting
scene, which now begins to open.

Elizbeth Before we turn towards this, it is necessary to observe, that, on

S~cc r~s the roth of November, Mary of England finished her short, and
ofEngland. inglorious reign. Her sifter- Elizabeth took poffeflon of the

throne without opposition; and the Protestant religion was, once
more, established by law in England. The accefr~on of a Queen,
who, under very difficult circumffances, had given firongr indi-

* See Book L. tLefly, 202.
g It appears from the rolls of this Parliament, w~hich Lefly calls a very fidt

one, that only s~even Bilhopss and sixteen Abbots were pres~ent.

cartons of those eminent qualities, which, in the sequel, rendered BOOK IT.
her reign so illuffrious, attraded the eyes of all Europe. Among
the Scots, both parties observed her first motions with the utmost
concern, as they easily foresa8w that the would not remain long an
indifferent f~pe~ator of their tranf~aaions.

Under many dtifcouragements, and much oppreflion, the Re-

formation advanced towards a full establishment in Scotland. All
thle low country, the most populous, and, at that time, the most
warlike part of the kringdom, was deeply tinaured with the Pro-
tellant opinions j and if the fame impreflions were not made in
the more difiant counties, it was owing to no want of the fame
dispositions among the people, but to the fearcity of preachers,
whole most indefatigable zeal could not satisfy the avidity of those
who desired their infiruaions. Among a people bred to arms,
and to prone to mutiny as the Scots I and in an age, when religi-
cus patiions had takien such firong· poffeflion of the human mind,
and moved and agitated it with so much violence; the peaceable
and regular demeanor of so numerous a party is truly affonifhing.
From the death of Mr Patrick Hamilton, the first who fuffered in
Scotland for the Protestant religion, thirty years had elapsed, and
during so long a period, no violation of public order or tranquilli-
ty had proceeded from that s~eA ; and though rodecd and irritat-
ed by the most cruel excesses of ecclesiastical tyranny, they did,
in no inflance, transgress those bounds of duty which the law pre-
icribes to fubjeas. Besides the prudence of their own leaders,
and the proteaion which the Queen Regent, from political mo-
tives, afforded them, the moderation of the Archbilhop of St.
Andrew's encouraged this pacific difpolition. That prelate,
whole private life cotemporary writers taxt with great irregulari-
tiest-, governed the church, for fame years, with a temper and
prudence, of which there are few examples in that age. But
some time before the meeting of last Parliament, the Archbishop
departed from those humane max~ims, by which he had hitherto
regulated his condua; and whether in spite to the ~een, who
had entered into so close an union With the Protefiants, or in com-
pliance with the importunities of his clergy, he let loos~e all the
rage of persecution against the Reformed ; sentenced to the flames
an aged priest, who had been conviaed of embracing the Protef-

* The murder of Cardinal Beatoun was occasioned by private revenge, and be-

Ing contrived and executed by sixteen persons, cannot, with justice, be impulted
to thle wrhole Protestant party.

f Knox. Buchan~an. Keith, 208.

B KI.tant opinions; and summoned several others, ifupected of the

fame crime, to appear before a lynaod of the clergy, which was
soon to convene at Edinburgh.

Nothing could equal the horror of the Protestants at this un.

expeAed and barbalous execution, but the zeal3 with which they
efpoured the defence of a cadfe, that now feemned devoted to de-
firuaion. They had immediate recourse to the Qu~een Regent;
and as her fuccrfs in the Parliament, wYhich wras then about to
meet, depended on their concurrence, the not only theltered them
fr~om the impending florm, but permitted them the exercise of
their religion, with more freedom than they had hitherto enjoyed.
Unsatisfied with this precarious tenure, by which they held their
religious liberty, the Protellants laboured to render their posses-
sion of it more secure and independent. With this view, they
determined to petition the Parliament for some legal prote~ion,
againf1 the exorbitant and oppreflive jurifdiaion of the eccle-
fiaftical courts, which, by their arbitrary method of proceeding,
founded in the canon law, were led to sentences the moss thock-
ing to humanity, by maxims the most repugnant to justice. But
the Queen, who dreaded the effeAss of a debate on this delicate
fub~jea, which could not fail of exciting high and dangerous pas-
fions, prevailed on the leaders of the party, by new and more so-
leI~ promises of her proteaion, to desist from any application to
Parliament, where their numbers and influence would, in all pro-
bability, have procured them, if not the entire redress, at least,
some mitigation of their grievances.

J~s9·They applied to another assembly, to a convocation of the Po.

pith~ clergy, but with the fame ill succes~s, which hath always at-
tended every proposal for Reformation, addressed to that order of
men. T'o abandon usurped power, to renounce lucrative error, is
a sacrifice, which the virtue of individuals has, on some occasions,
offered to truth ; but from any society of men, no such effort can
be expeAed. The corruptions of a society, recommended by
common utility, and jultified by universal praaice, are viewed,
by its members, without thame, or horror; and Reformation
never proceeds from themselves, but is always forced upon them
by some foreign hand. Suitable to this unfeeling and inflexible
[pirit, was the behaviour of the convocation in thle present con.
junAure. All the demands of thle Protestants were reje~ted with
contempt; and the Popith clergy far from endeavouringo, by any
prudent concetiions, to sooth and to reconcile such a numerous
body, afterted the doarines of their church, with refpe8 to forne

of the m~oil exiceptionable articles, withl an ill-timed igrour, which BO T
gave new offence *. 559·

During the fitting of the convocation, th~e Proteflants first be-

gan to ufupeat some change in the Regent's difportion towards
them. Though joined w ith them for many years by interest, and
united, as they conceived, by the firongefi ties of aff~eCion and of
gratitude, the dilcovered, on this occasion, evident symptoms, not
only of coldness, but of a growing dis~gust and averflon. In order
to account for this, our hifforians do little more than produce the
trite oblervations concerning the influence of prosperity to alter
the chara~er, and to corrupt the heart. The Queen, fay they,
having reached the utmost point to which her ambition aspired,
no longer preserved her accustomed moderation, but, with an in-
folence usual to the fortunate, looked down upon thole, by whose
affiltance the had been enabled to rife so high. But it is neither
in the depravity of the human heart, nor in the ingratitude of thle
Qu~een's disposition, that we must search for the motives of her pre-
sent conduA. These were derived from another, and a more re-
mote source, which, in order to clear the subsequent tranfaations,
we shall endeavour to open with some care.

The ambition of the Princes of Lorrain had been no less fuc- Jimb;itons

views ofthle

celkful, than daring; but all their schemes were diftinguilhed by Princes of
being vast and unbounded. Strangers at the court of France, their Lonrain.
eminent qualities hlad raised them, in a thort time, to an height of
power, fhlperior to that of all other fubjeas, and had placed them
on a level even with the Princes of the blood themf'elves. The
church, the army, the revenue, were under their direAion.No
thing but the royal dignity remained unattained; and to a ncar al-
liance with it, they were elevated by the marriage of the Queen
of Scots to the Dauphin. In order to gratify their own vanity,
and to render their niece more worthy the heir of France, they
set on foot her claim to the Crown of England, which was found-
ed on pretences not unplaufible.

The tragical amours and marriages of Henry VIII. are knowrn

to all the world. Mvov-ed by the caprices of his love, or of his re-
fentment, that impatient and arbitrary Monarch had divorced or
beheaded four of the fix Queens, whom he married. In order to
gratify him, both his daughters had been declared illegitimate by
AA of Parliament ; and yet, w ith that fantastic inconfifency which
diflinguilhles his charaaer, he, in his last w ill, whereby he was em-
powered to fettle the order of fu~ccef2ion, called both of them to

BooK TI. the throne, upon thle death of their brother Edw~ard; and, at the

f kme time, paning by the pofferity of his eldest fill~er Margaret

I559- Queen of Scotland, he appointed the line of fuccefi~on to continue

in the descendents of his younger fiffer the Dutchess of Suffolkr.

In consequence of this deflination, the validity whereof was ad

mitted by the Elnglifh, but never recognized by foreigners, M~ary
had reigned in England, without the least complaint of neighbour.
ing Princes. But the fame causes, which facilitated her accession
to the throne, were obstacles to the elevation of her fifrer Eliza·
beth, and rendered her pof~etiron of it precarious and insecure.
Rome trembled for the Catholic faith, under a Protestant Queen
of fach eminent abilities. The fame superstitious fears alarmed
the Court of Spain. And France beheld, with indignation, a
throne, to which the Q~een of Scots could form 10 many preten-
fions, occupied by a rival, wfhole birth, in the opinion of all good
Catholics, excluded her from any legal right of fucceflion. The
impotent hatred of the Roman Pontiff, or thle flow councils of
Philip II. would have produced no sudden or formidable effect.
The ardent and impetuous ambition of the Princes of Lorrain,
who, nt that time, governed the court of France, was more de-

They per- cifive, and more to be dreaded. Infligated by them, Henry,
thladelNory soon after the death of Mary, perfualded his daughter-in-law and
to aifflue
thle title of her husband, to afllhme the title of King and Queen of England.
Q~ueen of They affec~ed to publish th~is to all Europe. They used that
En~gland. 11yle and appellation in public papers, some of which flill re-

Inain ". The arms of England were engraved on their coin and
platte, and borne by them on all occasions. No preparations,
howecver, were made to support this premature and impolitic claim.
E~lizabeth was already s~eated on her throne; the poffeffed all the
intrepidity of spirit, and all thle arts of policy, which were necef-
furyr for maintaining that flation. England was grrowilgr into re-
pu~tation for naval power. The marine of France had been utter-
ly negle!eted; and Scotland remained the only avenue, by which

,, ie ,o the tortitailes of Elizabeth could be approached. It was on that
;madeEWy fide, therefore, that the Princes of Lorrain determined to make

thleir attack (; and, by using thle name and pretenflons of the
Scottith Queen, they hoped to rouse the Englinh Catholics, for-
midable at that time for their zeal and numbers, and exasperated
to thle utmost against Elizabeth, on account of the changre w~hich
the had made in the national religion.

* Anders. D~iplom. Scot. No. 68, ct 164.
1 Forbes, Collect i. 25C3>

It was vain to ex~peA the aliffance of the Scottilh Proter- BooK c8.

tanlts to dethrone a Queen, whom all Europe efleemed the guar-
dian and defender of the reformed faith. To break the power jg

In order to

and reputation of that party in Scotland, became, for this rea- this, necef-
son, a necessary flep towards the invaiion of England. With farytoch~ck
this the Princes of Lorrain rerolved to open their scheme. And ation in
as persecution was the only method for fuipprefiing religious opi_ Scot~ad.
nions, k~nown in that age, or diatated by the despotic and fangui-
nary spirit of the Romith fuperltition, this, in its utmoif violence,
they determined to employ. The Earl of Argy~le, the Prior of
St. Andrew's, and other leaders of the party, were marked out
by them for immediate defiru~tion * ; and they hoped, by punish-
ing them, to intimidate their followers. Infirua~ions for this
purpole were sent from France to the Queen Regent. T'hat hu-
mane and sagacious Princess condemned a measure, which was
equally violent and impolitic. By long residence in Scotland,
she had become acquainted with the eager and impatient temper
of the nation; the well k~new the power, the nu~mber, and popu-
larity of the Proteflant leaders 3 and had been a witness to the
intrepid and unconquerable resolution which religious fervour
could inspire. Wha?:t, then, cou~ld be gained by rousing this dan-
gerous spirit, which, hitherto, all the arts of policy had fearce
been able to reflrain ? If it once brok~e loose, the authority of a
Regent wrould be little capable to subdue, or even to mode-
rate its rage. And if, in order to quell it, foreign forces were
called in, this would give the alarm to the whole nation, irritat-
ed already at the excessive power which the French poffeffed in
the kringrdom, and fulpicious of all their designs. Amidst the
thock which this might occasion, far from hoping to exterminate
the Protefiant doarine, it would be well if the whole fabric of
the en~abliihed church were not thaken, and perhaps overturned
from the foundation. These prudent remonfirances made no im-
prefilon on her brothers; precipitant, but inflexible in all their
resolutions, they insisted on the full and rigorous execution of
their plan. Mary, pafflonately devoted to the interefls of France,
and ready, on all occasions, to sacrifice her own opinions to the
inclinations of her brothers, prepared to execute their commands,
with implicit fubmillion f 9 and, contrary to her own judgment,
and to all the rules of found policy, the became the infirument
of exciting civil commotions in Scotland, which ended with thle

# Sorb s, i- '5"-
t Mlely, 48 M~em. de Caftelnau. aP. Jebb. vol. ii. -1l6.

BOOK; fT. 18i oi

Of 1 Fiench pow~er, and of thle Popithl religion in thla*

Skingdom.

Th R at From the time of the Quieen's competition for the Regency
alters hier with the Duke of` Chatelherault, the Popith~ clergy, under the
conduct direAion of the Archbilhop of St. Andrew's, had set themsel:ves

w-ith regiant l2

~ c ICII

to the ero- in opposition to all her meafulres. Her first flep towards the ex.
tefumts. ecution of her new scheme, was to regain their favour. Nor

was this reconcilement a matter of difficulty. The Popifhl ec-
clefiatiics, separated from the reft of mankind by the law of celi.
bacy·, the boldest and most fuccefsful invention of human policy~;
and combined among themselves in the closest and most sacred
unio; 3 have been acenflomed, in every age, to sacrifice all pri-
u-te and particular patfions to the dignity and interest of their or.
der. D~elighted, on this occasion, with the profpeB of triumph.
iit ove-r a fataion, whll~e encroachments they had long dreaded;
andc nnImated with the hopes of re-eftablithing their declining
g~randeur on a firmer basis j they, at once, cancelled the memo·
ry of palt iniuries, and engaged to s~econd the Quteen in all her
,tetnemps to check; the prongreis of the Reformation. The (teen,
be~in~g secure of thesir afiirance, openly approved of the decrees of
thle conviocation, by wvhich the principles of the Reformers were
condemned; and at the fame time, the ilriued a proclamation, en-
joining~ all persons to obierve the aFProachintg feflival of Easter,
accordinlg to the R~omithl ritual.

As it was no longer poirble to millak~e the Queen's intentions,

thle Protestants, who fawv the danger approach, in order to avert
it, employed thle Earl of Glencairn, and Sir Hugh Campbell of
L~oudon, to expollulate with her, concerning this change towards
feverlty, which their former services had so little merited, and
which her reiterated promiles gave them no reason to expea. She,
v ithout disguise or apology, avowed to them her resolution of ex-
tirpsating the Reformed religion out of the kingdom. And, up·
on their urging her former eng~agements, with an uncourtly, but
honest boldnels, the 10 far forgot her usu~al moderation, as to ut-
ter a sentiment, which, however apt those of royal condition
may be to entertain it, prudence thould teach them to conceal
with the utmost care. The promis~es of Princes, says the, ought
not to be too carefully remembered, nor the performance of them
enA~ed, unless it suits their own conveniency.

summons Th'e indignation which betrayed the Q~een into this rash ex-
theirpira ch- premion, was nothing in comparison of that, with which the was
"~CC~~L

" " aimata~l? Ipon hearing that the public exrercife of the Reformed

teligion had been introduced into the town of Perth. At once, BOOK II.
the threw off the mask, and commanded all the Protestant preach-
ers in the kingdom to be summoned to a court of juffice, which I539,
was to be held at Stirling on the rath of M~ay. The Protefiants,
who, from their union, began about this time, to be distinguish-
ed by the name of the CONGREGATION, were alarmed, but not in-
timidated by this danger; and instantly resolved not to abandon
the men, to whom they were indebted for the most valuable of
all blessings, the knowledge of truth. At that time, there pre-
vailed in Scotland, with refpea to criminal trials, a cuffom, in-
troduced, at Brit, by the inflitutions of vassalage and clanfhip,
and tolerated, afterwards, under a feeble government; anly per-
son acculed of a crime was accompanied to the place of trial, by
a retinue of his friends and adherents, assembled for that purpose,
from every corner of the kingdom. Authorized by this ancient
pra~ice, the Reformed convened, in great numbers, to attend
their paffors to Stirling. The Qujeen dreaded their approach with
a train so numerous, though unarmed, and in order to prevent
them from advadncing, the empowered John Erikine of Dun, a
person of eminent authority with the party, to promile, in her
name, that the would put a flop to the intended trial, on condi-
tion, the preachers and their retinue advanced no nearer to Stir-
ling. Erikrine, being convinced himself of the Qu~een's finceri-
ty, served her with the utmost zeal. And the Protestants,
averse from proceeding to anly aat of violence, listened with plea-
sure to 10 pacific a propolition. The preachers, with a few lead-
ers of the party, remained at Perth; the multitude, which had
gathered from different parts of the kingdom, dispers~ed, and re-
tired to their own habitations.

But, notwithflanding this solemn promile, the Queen, on the Breaks a

loth of May, proceeded to call to trial the persons who had been h'"ieon
summoned, ~and upon their non-appearance, the rigour of justice had relied.
took place, and they were pronounced outlaws. By this ignoble
artifice, so incompatible with regal dignity, and to inconsistent
with that integrity which thould pr evail in all tranfaaions be-
tween a Sovereign and his people, the Queen forfeited the efleem
and confidence of the whole nation. The Protefiants, shocked
no less at the indecency, with which the violated the public faith,
than at the danger which threatened thems~elves, prepared boldly
for their own defence. Erikine, enraged at having been made
the infirumlent for deceiving his party, instantly abandoned Stir-
ling, and repairing to Perth, added to the zeal of his associates,

BOOKr IL. by his representations of the Qu~een's inflexible resolution to sup.

p-Irefs their religion.

1559- The popular rhetoric of Knox powerfully reconded his repre.

This occa.
Dons an i?- fentations. Kinox, having been carried a prisoner into France,
thlrreAion~at together with the other persons taken in thle caffle of St. An-
Perth. drew's, soon made his escape out of that country; and ref ding

sometimes in England, sometime~s in Scotland, had, at last, been
driven out of both kingdoms by the rag~e of the Popiifh clergy,
and was obliged to retire to Genleva. Thence hie was called by
the leaders of the P'roteft.ants in Scotland j and, in compliance
with their folicitations, he set out for hris native country, where
he arrived a few days before the trial appointed at Stirling. He
hurried initantly to Perth, to fhlare with his b~rethren in thle corn-
mon danger, or to atlit them in promoting the common caule.
WVhile their minds were in that ferment, which the Queen's per-
fidioufnels and their own danger occasioned, he mounted thle pul-
pit, and by a vehement harangue againfl idolatry, in~amed the
multitude with the utmroft rage. The indiferation of a priest,
who, immediately after K~nox's sermon, was preparing to cele-
brate mals, and began to decorate the altar for that purpole, pre-
cipitated them into immediate a~ion1. With tumultuary, but ir-
resistible violence, they fell upon the churches in that city, over-
turned the altars, defaced the piAures, broke in pieces the
images; and proceedings next to the monlafteries, they, in a few
hours, laid thos~e sumptuous fab~rics almost level with the ground.
This riotous infurreaion was not the e~feA of any concert, or pre-
vious deliberation; cedulred by the reformed preachers, and pub-
licly condemned by the persons of most power and credit wYith
the party, it mufr be regarded merely as an accidental eruptiion
of popular rage ".

TheRegent But to the Queen herself, there proceedings appeared in a very
marches different light. Besides their manifest contempt for her auth~ority,
aainftl them. the Protestants had violated every thing in religion, which th~e

efleemed venerable or holy; and, on both there accounts, thie
determined to inflidt the fevrereit vengeance on the whole party.
She hlad already drawn the troops in French pay to Stirling,
with there, and what Scottithl forces the could levy of a s~udden,
the marched dire81y to Perth, in hopes of f~urpri~lng the Protef-
tant leaders, before they could ass~emble their followers, wfhorn
out of confidence in her difingienuous promiles they had rathly
been induced to difmifrs. Intelligence of there preparations and

* Knox, Hist. I27, I28,

trenaces was soon conveyed to Peithl. The Protefiants would, BOOK T
gladly, have soothed thle Queen, by addales ot t erel, n
to the persons of greatest credit in her court; but findings her in-
exorable, they, with great vigour, took measures for their own

deec.Their adherents, animated withl zeal for reiligion, and

eagrer to expol~e thlemelve~s in 10 good a cause, flockled, in such
numbers, to Perth, that they not only s~ecured the town from dan-
g~er, but were, w~ithin a few days, in a condition to tak~e the field,
and to face the Queen, wyho advanced with an army sev~en thou-
fund firong.

Neither party, however, was impatient to engage. Thie Qge~en

dreaded the event of a battle with men, whmtefroro e
lig~ion raised above the sense of fear, or of dangler. T`he Protef-
tants beheld, with regret, the Earl of Argyle, and Prior of St.
Andrewv's, and some other eminent persons of their party, itill ad-
hering to the Qgieen; and deilitute of their aid and council, de-
clined hazarding an a~ion, the ill success of whiich mighlt have
proved the ruin of their cause. The profpea of an accommoda-
tion was for there reasons highly acceptable to both sides, Argyle
and thle Prior, who were the Queen's commitlioners for condua-
ing the negociation, seem to have been sincerely desirous of recon-
cililng the contendingi faAions; and the Earl of Glencairn arriv-
ing unexpe~c~cly with a powferful reinforcement to the Congrega-
tion, augmented thle Queen's eagerness for peace. A treaty was A treaty
according~ly concluded, in which it was flipulated, that both armies concluded,
thlould be disbanded, and the gates of Perth set open to the Queen;
that indemnity fhlould be granted to the inhabitants of that city,
and to all others concerned in the late infurreaion; that no
French garrison thould be left in Perth, and no French soldiers
thould approach within three miles of that place; and that a
Parliament thlould immediately be held, in order to compose what-
ever differences might still remain ".

The leaders of thle Congregation, diffrufiful of the Queen's

Sincerity, and sensible that concetions, flowing not from inclina-
tion, but extorted by the necessity of her affairs, could not long
remain in force, entered into a new association, by which they Rlay 29.
Lound themselves, on the first: infringement of the prelent treaty,
or on the least appearance of danger to their religion, to re-af-
femble their followers, and to take arms in defence of what they
eteemed the cause of God, and of their country -t.

* Keish, 89. ·t Knox, r;9 o ij

BooK II. The Q~een, by her conduB, demonfirated ther~e precautions to

be the res~ult of no groundless or unnecessary fear. Nuo foonet

Broke 7 were the Protestant forces dism~issed, than the broke every article
the Regent. in the treaty. She introduced French troops into Perth, fined

some of the inhabitants, banished others, removed the Magistrates
out of office, and, on her retiring to Stirling, the left behind her
a garrison of fix hundred men, with orders to allow the exercise
of no other religion than the Roman Catholic. The situation of
Perth, a place at that time of some firength, and a town the most
proper of any in the kingdom for the flation of a garrison, seems to
have allured the Queen to this unjuffifiable, and ill-judged breach
of public faith; which the endeavoured to colour, by alleging
that the body of men left at Perth was entirely composed of na.
tive Scots, though kept in pay by the King of France.

The Q~een's scheme began gradually to unfold; it was now

apparent, that not only the religion, but the liberties of the king.
dom were threatened; and that the French troops were to be em-
ployed as infiruments for subduing the Scots, and wreathing the
yoke about their necks. Martial as the genius of the Scots then
w-as, the poverty of their country made it impofirble to keep their
armies long assembled; and even a very imnall body of regular
troops might have proved formidable to the nation, though con-
sifting wholly of fioldiers. But, what number of French forces
were then in Scotland, at what time, and under what pretexts they
returned, after having left the kingdom in the year 1530, we can-
not, with any certainty, determine. Cotemporary hiflorians of-
ten feleB, with little judgment, the cir~cumitances which they
transmit to pofferity; and, with refpeR to matters of the greatest
curiosity and importance, leave fucceedinlg ages altogether in the
dark. We may conjeaure however, from some passages in Bu-
chanan, that the French and Scots in French pay, amounted at
least to three thousand men, under the command of 1Mons. D'Oy-
fel, a creature of the house of Guise; and they were soon aug-
mented to a much more formidable number.

The Queen, encouraged by having to considerable a body of

welt dis~ciplined troops at her command, and infligated by the
violent councils of D'Oyf~el, had ventured, as we have observed,
to violate the treaty of Perth, and, by that rash amion, once more

The proter- threw the nation into the most dangerous convulflons. . The Earl
tants again
take arms. of Argyle and Prior of St. Andrew's inflantly deserted a court

where faith and honour seemed to be no longer regarded. Thie
Barons from the neighbouring counties repaired to them, the

preachers routed the people to arms, and wherever they came, BOOK II.
the fame violent operations, which accident had occasioned at
Perth, were now encouraged out of policy. The enraged mul- 1559*
titude was let loose, and churches and monasteries, the monu-
ments of ecclesiastic pride and luxury, were sacrificed to their
zeal.

In order to check their career, the Queen, without 10sing a

moment, put her troops in motion; but the zeal of the Congre-
gation got the ft-rt, once more, of her vigilance and aaivity.
In that warlike age, when all men were accuffomed to arms, and
on the least profpeA of danger were ready to run to them, the
leaders of the Protefiants found no diificulty to raise an army.
Though they set out from St. Andrew's with a slender train of
an hundred horfre, crowds flocked to their standards from every
corner of the country through which they marched, and before
they reached Falkland, a village only ten miles difiant, they were
able to meet the Queen with superior force *.

The Queen, surprised at the apiproach of so formidable a body,

wchich was drawn uip by its leadlers in such a manner, as added
greatly in appearance to its numbers, had again recourse to ne-
gaciation. She found, however, that the preservation of the Pro-
tellant religion, their zeal for which had at first routed the lead-
ers of the Congregation to take arms, was not the only objee? they Theyaim at
ha~d now in view. They were animated with the w-armest love redref~ng civilaswvell
of civil liberty, which they conceived to be in imminent danger, as relig~ious
from the attempts of the French forces; and there two pallions gnievances.
mingling, added reciprocally to each other's strength. Together
wvith more enlarged notions in religion, the Reformation fil!led
the human mind with more liberal and generous s~entiments con-
cerning civil government. The genius of Popery is extremely
favourable to the power of Princes. The implicit fubmifflon to
all her decrees, which the Romith Church exaats, prepares and
breaks the mind for political fervitucle; and the doarines of the
Reformers, by overturning the established system of f~uperflition,
weakened the firmest foundations of civil tyranny. That bold
fkirit of inquiry, which led men to rejeet theological errors, ac-
companied them into other sciences, and dis~covered every where
the fame manly zeal for truth. A new fludy introduced at the
fame time, added greater force to the spirit of liberty. Men
became acquainted with the Greek and Roman authors, who de-

* Knox, r4I.

BOOK II. fcribed exquisite models of free governmen:, far fupenor to thr

39-inaccurate and opprefirve fy~tem eflablifhetd by the feudallaw; and

produced such illuffrious examples of public virtue, as wonderful-
ly suited both the circumfiances, and fpiirit of that age. Mlany,
among thle most eminent Reformers, were themselves considerable
mallers in ancient learning; and all of them eagerly adopted the
maximns and spirit of the ancients, with regard to government+.
The mos1 ardent love of liberty accompanied the Protefiant re-
ligion, throughout all its progress; and wherever it was embra-
red, it roused an independent spirit, which rendered men atten-
tive to th~eir privileges as fubjeAs, and jealous of the encroach-
ments of thieir Sovereigns. K~nox, and the other preachers of the
Recformation, infused! generous sentiments concerning governmntn
into the minds of thieir hearers, and the Scottith Barons, natu-
rally free and hold, were prompted to afeZrt their rights with more
freedom and boldness than ever. Inflead of obeying the Quteen
Regent, who had en~joined them to lay down their arms, they dem-
mandedd not only the redress of their religious grrievances, but as
a pre~liminary towanrd fettling the nation, andl focuring its liberties,
required the immediate expulflon of the French troops out of
Scotland. It was not in the Queen's power to makie 10 impor-
tant a concellion, without the concurrence of the French Mo-
narch; and as s~ome time was reqiuifite in order to obtain that, thie
hoped, during this interval, to receivie fach reinforcements from
France, as would insure thle accomp:lifhmlent of thlat design, which
fie hlad twice attempted with unequal fitenlgth. Meanwhile,

June r3· she agrreed to a cessation of arms for eight days, and, before the

expiration of there, engaged to transport the French troops to the
other fide of the Forth; and to fend commiironers to St. Andrew's,
wfho thould labour to bring all differences to accommodation. As
thle hoped, by means of the French troops, to overawre thle Protel-
tants in the southern counties, the former article in the treaty
was punacually executed; the latter, havings been inserted merely
to amule the Congregation, was no longer remembered.

* The excef~iye admiration of ancient policy wis thle occasIon1 of KnIox's fa-

mous book concerning the GOVEShAMENT OF WOMIEN, WVheein,~ conformable to
tkl maxsims of the ancient legislators, wh;ich nlodern exper~ience has proved to
b~e ill-foundied, he pr1orounces the elevation of wvomen to the s~upreme authority,
to be utterly deftrueiive of good government. Ilis pl inciples, authorities, and
examples were all drawn from alncient wrriter~s. Thle f~ame observation may be
maode whhll rgard to Buc~hllan's D `aloogue, DE JTrPE REGSI APUD ScOooS
IIt ;E foun~lded not on th:e ma-~jwn of p:n 10, b~ut of anienC;~ t gw7~r'nmentr

By there reiterated and w'anton inflances of perfidy, the Queen Boo c HI.

10ft all credit with her adverhides 3 and no safety appearing in anly
otherr course, they again took arms with more intiamed resentment, A enq
nnd with bolder and more extensive views. The removing of the trearyv e-
French forces had laid open to them all the country situated be. Iated.
tween Forth and Tay. Perthl alone remained fubjec~ed to the in-
folence and exadlions of the garrison, which the Queen had left
there, and implored the afflitace of the Congregation for their
relief. Thither they marched, and having, without effect, re-
quired the Queen to evacuate the tow-n in terms of the former
treaty. they preparedt to befiegre it in form. The Quteen employ-
ed the Earl of Huntly and Lord Erfkiine to divert them from
this enterprise. But her wonted artifices were of no avail; re-
peated 10o often, they could deceive no longer; and without lif`-
tening to them, the Protellants continued the siege, and soon
obliged the garrison to capitulate.

After the loss of Perth, the Queen endeavoured to seize Stir- Rapidl

ling, a place of some firength, and, from its command of the only a~e s o
bridge over the Forth, of great importance. But the leaders of the ProteC
the Congregation, having intelligence of her defigrn, prevented the tanu.
execution of it, by an hasty march thiither, with part of their forces.
The inhabitants, hleartily attached to the cause, set open to them
the gates of their town. Thence they advanced, with the fame
rapidity, towards Edinburgh, which the Queen, on their approach,
abandoned with precipitation, and retired to Dunbar.

The Protefiant army, wherever it came, kindled, or spread the

ardour of Reformation, and the utmost excesses of violence were
committed upon churches and monasteries. The former were
ipoiled of every decoration, which was then eficemed sacred, the
latter were laid in ruins. We are apt, at this difiance of time,
to condemn the furious zeal of the Reformers, and to regret the
overthrow of so many flately fabrics, the monuments of our anceffors
magnificence, and among the noblest ornaments of the ktingdom.
But, amidst the violence of a Reformation, carried on in oppofi-
tion to legal authlority, some irregularities were unavoidable j and
perhaps no one could have been permitted more proper to allure
and interest the multitude, or more fatal to the grandeur of the efta-
blifhed church. Hoev~ecr absurd and ill-fo~unded the sp~eculative
errors of Popery may be, fame inqjuiry and attention are requisite
towards difcoveringr them. The abuses and corruptions, whLich
had crept into the public w-o:fip of thiat churchl, lay more open
to oblervation, and by firikingr t!,e fedts, excited more univ~ert 1

BooK II, difguR. Under the long reign of H-eathenism, fuperfititon feeml

to have exhauffed its talent of invention, so that when a fuperfli.

x559* tious fphlit seized Christians, they were obliged to imitate the

H-eathens in the pomp and magnificence of their ceremonies, and
to borrow from them the ornaments and decorations of their tem.
ples. To the pure and simple worship of the primitive Christians,
there fuicceeded a species of splendid idolatry, nearly resembling
thos~e Pagan originals, whence it had been copied. The contrariety
of such observances, to the [pirit of Christianity, was almost the
sirs1 thing, in the Romith fyfitem, which awfakened the indignation
of the Reformers, who applying to there, the denunciations in
the Old Testament against idolatry, imagined that they could not
endeavour at suppressing them, with too much zeal. N~otalk
could be more acceptable to the multitude, than to overturn there
feats of superstition i they ran with emulation to perform it, and
happy was the man whole hand was most adventrous and success.
ful in executing a work; efleemed so pious. Nor did their leaders
labour to reffrain this impetuous spirit of Reformation. Irregular
and violent as its sallies were, they tended dire~tly to that end
which they had in view; for by demolithing the monalteries
throughout the k~ingdom, and setting at liberty their wretched
inhabitants, they hoped to render it impofi~ble ever to re-edify the
one, or to re-assemble the other.

But amidst there irregular proceedings, a circumltance, which

does honour to the condudt and humanity of the leaders of the
Congregation, deserves notice. They so far restrained the rage
of their followers, and were able 10 to temper their heat and zeal,
that few of the Roman Catholics wr cre exposed to any perfonalin-
fult, and not a single man fuff~ere~d death*.

At the fame time, we discover, by thle facility with which these

great revolutions were effected, how violently the current of na-
tional favour ran towards the Reformation. No more than three
hundred men marched out of Perth under the Earl of Argyle and
Prior of St. Andrewr's-i 5 with thiis inconsiderable force they ad-
vanced. But wherever they came, the people joined them in a
body; their army was seldom less numerous than five thouland
men ; the gates of every town were thrown open to receiv~e themj

Jure 29. and, w ithout firiking a single blow, they took; poffef~lon of the ca-

pital of the kiingdom.

This rapid and affonifhing- success seems to have encouraged the

Reformers to extend their views, and to rife in their demands.

* Lefly, 23r. ·t Keith~, 94.

Not [atisfied with their first claim of toleration for thieir religion,
they now, openly, aimed at eliablithingr the Protestant doa~rine on 155.99
the ruins of Popery. For this reason, they determined to fix their
residence at Edinburgh; and, by theirappointmen~t, Knox and some
other preachers taking pofiifion of the pulpits, which had been
abandoned by the affridhtened clergy, declaimed against the errors
of Popery, with such fervent zeal, as could not fail of gaining
many profelytts.

In the mean time. the Queen, who had prudently griven way

to a torrent which the could not refill, Otlerved, with pleasure,
that it now began to subside. The leaders of the Congregation had
been above two mlonths in arms, and by the expences of a cam-
paign protraaced 10 long beyond the usual time of f~erivce in that
age, had exhlauffed all the money, which a country, where riches
did not abound, had been able to s~upply. The multitude, dazzled
with their success, and concluding the work to be already done, re-
tired to their own habitations. A~ few, only, of the more zealous
or wealthy Barons remained with their preachers at Edinburgh.
As intelligence is procured in civ·il wars with little difficulty,
whatever was tranfaaed at Edinburgh, was soon known at Dunbar.
And the Queen, regulating her own condua by the situation of
her adversaries, artfully amuled them with the profpea of an im-
mediate accommodation; whlile, at the fame time, the, by fludied
delays, s~pun out the negociations for that purpose to such a lengthl,
that, in thle end, the party dwindled to an inconsiderable number,
and, as if peace had been already re-eflablilhed, became careless
of military dilcipline. The Queen, who watched for such an op-
portunity, advanced, unexpec~edly, by a sudden march in the
night with all her forces, and appearing before Edinburgh, filled
that city with the utmost coniternation. The Protefiants, weak-
ened by the imprudent difperflon of their followers, durit not en-
counter the French troops in the open field; and were even unable
to defend an ill-fortified town, against their assaults. Unwilling,
however, to abandon the citizens to the Qu~een's mercy, they
endeavoured, by facing the enemies army, to gain time for col-
le~ing their own associates. But the Queen, in s~pite of all their re-
filance, would have easily forced her way into the town, if the
seasonable concluflon of a truce had not procured her admitlion,
without the effufion of blood.

Their dangerous situation easily induced the Congregation to Athird

treatyv

listen to any overtures of peace; and as the Queen was looking

Loos II. daily for the arrival of a firong reinforcemnent from France, and

expeaed great advantages from a cessation of arms, thle also agreed

39*to it upon no unequal conditions. Together with a ufupenfion of hof.

tilities, from the 24th of July to the rath of January, it was fi.i
pulated, in this treaty, that, on the one hand, the Protellants
should abandon Edinburgh next morning; remain inl dutiful sub.
jeaion to the government of the Queen Regent; abstain from all
future violation of religious houses; and give no interruption to
the efiablirned clergy, either in the discharge of their func~ions,
or in the enjoyment of their- benefices. On the other hand, the
Quteen agreed to g've no moleilation to thle preachers or profef.
f~ors of the Protestant religion; to allow no other form of worflip
in Edinburgh but the Reformed; and to permit the free and
public exercise of it all over the kiingdom. The Queen hoped to
sooth the P~roteflants, by there liberal concellions in behalf of their
religion, and expeAed, from indulging their favourite pafiion, to
render them more compliant with refpea to other articles, parti-
cularly the expulflon of the French troops out of Scotland. The
anxiety which the Queen expreifed for retaining this body of
men, rendered them, more and more the objeas of national jea-
10ufy and averflon. The knmediate expulflon of them was there-
~fore demanded a-new, and with greater warmth; but the Queen,
tak~ing advantage of thle diffrers of the advers~e party, eluded the
request, and would consent to nothing more, than that a French
garrison thould not be introduced into Edinburgh.

The delrperate slate of their affairs impofred on the Congregra-

tion the neceifity of agreeing to this article, which, however, was
very far from giving them fatisfraaion. Whatever apprehenflons
the Scots had conceived, from retaining the French forces in the
k~ingdom, were abundantly juffified during the late commotions.
A small body of those troops, maintained in conflant pay, and ren
dered formidable by regular discipline, had checked the progrds
of a martial people, though animated wcith zeal both for religion
stnd liberty. The smallest addition to their number, and a confi-
derable one was daily expeacd, might prove fatal to public liber
ty, and Scotland might be exupofed to the danger of being re-
duced, from an independent kingfdom, to the mean condition of
a province, annexed to the empire of its Powerful ally.

In order to provide against this imminent calamity, the Duk~e

of Chatelherault, and Earl of Huntly, immediately Pfter conclud-
inlg the truce, desired an intelview wvi h tl~e TcherS of the Coilgre-

polon. Ther~e two noblemen, the most potent at that time in BOCK I.
bcotland, were the leaders of the party, which adhered to the
ditablilhed church. They had followed the Queen, during the '559.
12te commotions, and having access to observe more narrowly the
dangerous tendency of her councils, their abhorrence of the yoke
which was preparing for their country, surmounted all other con-
Eiderations, and determined them rather to endanger the religion
which they profeffed, than to give their aid towards the execution
of her pernicious defigrns. They proceeded farther, and promil~ed
to Argyle, Glencairn, and the Prior of St. Andrew's, who were
appointed to meet with them, that if the Queen thould, with her
usual insincerity, violate any article in the treaty of truce, or re-
fuse to gratify the withres of the whole nation, by difmif~ing her
French troops, they wvould, then, inflantly join with their coun-
trymen, in compelling her to a measure, which the public safety,
and the pres~ervation1 of their liberties rendered necessary *.

About this time, died Henry II. of France 3 just when he had Jub, 8.

adopted a fyfiem, with regard to the affairs of Scotland, which
would, in all probability, have reffored union and tranquillity to
that kingdom t. Towiards the clof'e of his reign, the Princes of
Lorrain began, visibly, to decline in favour, and the Conflable
Montmorency, by the afflitance of the Dutchess of Valentinois,
recovered that as~cendant over the spirit of his master, whichl his
great experience, and his faiithfull, th~oughl often unfortunate ser-
vices, seemed justly to merit. T`hat prudent IVinilter imputed
the infurreations in Scotland, w-holly to the D~uke of Guise and
Cardinal of Lorrain, whose violent and precipitant councils could
not fail of transporting, beyond all bounds of moderation, men,
whole minds were poffe1Ted with that jealousy, which is infepa-
rable from the love of civil liber'y, or inflamed with that ardour
which accompanies religrious zeal. And, in order to convince
Henry, that he did not load his rivals with any groundlers accu-
fation, he prevailed to have P\Ielvrilf, a Scottish gentleman of
his retinue, dilpatched into his nlative country, with infiructions
to oblerve the motions both of the Regent, and of'her adverfa-
ries; and the Kiing agreed to regulate his future proceedings, in
that kingdom, by M'elvil's report.

Did history indulge herself in such speculations, it w ould be

amusing to inquire what a dlifferent direftion might have been

* Knoxu, I f4. 4 Mel. 49-
i The Author of the Memoris.

Boor II. given by this resolution, to the national spirit; and to what a dd.-

L-Jferent issue, Melvil's report, which would hlave set the condua

1359* of the malecontents in the most favourable light, mig~ht have

conduAed the public disorders. Perhaps, by gentle treatment,
and altful policy, the progress of the Reformation might have
been checked, and Scotlalnd brought to depend upon France.
Perhaps, by gaining poiletiion of this avenue, the French might
have made their w~ay~ into England, and, under colour of sup-
porting Mary's title to the Crown, they might have re-efrablifh-
the Roman Catholic religion, and defrroyed the liberties of that
kingdom. But, into th;is boundless tield of fancy and conjeaure,
the historian must make no excursions; to relate real occurrences,
and to explain their real causes and effeats, is his peculiar and
only province.

The tragical and untimely death of thle French Manarch put

an end to all moderate and pacific measures, with regard to Scot-

Accemionof land. The Duk~e of Guise, and the Cardinal his brothier, upon

r sI.the accellion of Francis II. a Prince void of genius, and without

Crown of experience, ailamed the chief direaion of French affdirs. Allied

Sac. so nearly to the throne, by the marriage of their niece the Queen

of Scots with the young king-, they now wanted but little of re-
gal dignity, and nothing of regal power. This power did not
long remain im~aive in their hands. The fame vast schemes of
ambition, which they hlad planned out under the former reign,
were again resumed; and theS· were enabled, by poilefling such
ample authority, to pursu~e them with more vigour, and greater
probability of faccefs. Th'ley beheld with infinite regret, the
proglefs of the Protellant relig-ion in Scotland; and sensible
wvhat an unsurmountable obilacle it would prove to their def~gns,
they bent all their thrength to check its growth, before it role to
anly greater height. For this purpose, they carried on their pre-
parations, with all p)offhle expedition, and encouraged thle Queen
their fiffer, to expea, in a thort time, the arrival of an army, 10
powrerfl, as the zeal of their adversaries, however delperate,
would not venture to opp~ole.

N~or were thle Lords of the Congregation either ignorant of

therre violent counsels, wh-!ich prevailed in thle court of F~rance,
iince the death of H-enry, or careless of providing agrainft the
danger, wvhich threatened th~em from that quarter. The faccell
of their cause, as well as their p~erfemal safety, depending entirely
on the unanimity and vigou~r ofC thecir own refclutions, they en

deavoured to guard againfit divilion, and to cement together more E0OOK T.
closely, by entering into a firi~ter bond of confederacy and mu-
tual defence. Two persons concurred in this new association,
w~ho brought a great accellion both of reputation and of power to
thle party. Ther~e were the Duke of Chatelherault, and his eld-
eft son the Earl of Arran. T`his young nobleman, having re-
sided some years in France, where he commanded the Scots
Guards, had imbibed the Protestant opinions concerning religion.
Hurried along by the heat of youth, and the zeal of a proselyte,
he had uttered sentiments, with ref~peat to the points in contro-
verly, which did not fait the temper of a bigotted court, intent,
at that junaure, on the extinaion of the Protestant religion; in
order to accomplish which, the utmost excceffes of violence were
committed. 7 he church was fuffered to ureak its utmost fury
upon all who were fufpeAed of herely. Courts were ereAed, in
difkr~ent parts of France, to take cognizance of this crime, and by
their sentences, several persons of diftination were condemned to
thle flames.

But, in order to inspire more universal terror, the Princes of

Lorrain resolved to felert, for a sacrifice, fame person, whole fanll
migrht convince all ranks of men, that neither splendor of birth,
nor eminence in flation, would exempt from punishment, those who
thould be guilty of this unpardonable tranfgreflion. ? he Earl of Ar-
ran was the person deffined to be the unhappy vic~im*. As he was
allied to one throne, and the presumptive heir to another; as he pof~-
sessed the first rank in his own country, and enjoyed arthonourable
flation in France; his condemnation could not fail of making the
desired imprefilon on the whole kingdom. But the Cardinal of Lor-
ra'n,having let fallfome expremlons, w hich raised the Earl of Arran's
fulpicions of the design, he escaped the intended blow, by a timely
flight. Indignation, zeal, resentment, all prompted hlim to seek
rev~enge upon these persecutors of himself and of the religion which
h~e profeffed; and as he paired through England, on his return to
his native country, Ehizabeth, by hopes and promises, inflamed
those patiions, and sent him back into Scotland, animated with the
fame implacable av-erflon for France, which pofkffed a great part
of his countrymen. Ile quick~ly communciated these s~entiments rarl of
to his father the D~uke of Chatelherault, who was already extremely Anlan j ;ns
difguffed with the meafa~res carrying on in Scotland; and as it $tl~rter
was the fate of that nobleman to be governed, in every inflance,
by thofre about him, he nowv fuffered hims~elf to be drawn from

* Thuan. lib xxiv. p 46t2. Edit. Trncof.

BOOK I. the ~een R~egent ; and having joined the Congreg~ation, nas

considered, from that time, as the head of thle arty.

B59 ut with rtfpeA to hiim, this diitinAion wvas merely nominrl

James Stewvart, Prior of St. Andrewf's, was the person who moved
and a8uated the whole body of the Proteflants, among whom, he
poikefed that unbounded confidence, which his firenuous adhe.
rence to their interest, and his eminent abilities, to juffly merited.
He was the natural fan of Jarnes V. by a daughter of Lord
Erfkiine ; and as that amorous Monarch hlad left several others, a
burden upon the Crown, they were all destined for the church,
where they could be placed in flations of dignity and affluence.
In consequence of this resolution, the priory of St. Andrewv'J
had been conferred upon James: but) during so busy- a period, he
soon became difguffed with the indolence and retirement of a
monailic life; and his enterprising genius called him forth, to aA
a principal part on a more public and conspicuous theatre. The
scene, in which he appeared, required talents of different kinds;
and military virtue, and political discernment, were equally ne·
ccirary, in order to rendfer himn illuilrious. These he poil~eted in
anl eminent degree. To the mait unquestionable personal bravery,
he added great skill in the art of war, and in every enterprise his
arms were crowned with f~uccers. His s~agacit-y and penetration in
civil affairs enabled him, amidst the reeling and turbulance of
f taions, to hold a prosp~erous courfre. W'ihile his boldness in de-
fence of th~e Reformation, together with the decency, and even
s~everity of his manners, se~cured him the reputation of being
sincerely attached to religion, without which, it was impofirble,
in that age, to gain an afcendiant over mankind.

It was not without reafosn, that the Queen dreaded the enmity

of a man, so capable to obfirua her designs. And as th~e could
not, wvith her utmost address, anake thle least imprefilon on his
fidelity to his associates, the e~ndeavoured to lessen his infinence,
and to scatter among them the feeds of jealouly and diffruff, by
insinuating that the ambition of thle Prior alpired beyond the con-
dition of a fub~jea, and aimed at nothing less than the Crown it-
self.

An accusation so improbable, gained but little credit. And

thatever thoughts of this kind, the presumption of unexpe~ed
fuiccefs, and his elevation to the high~est dignity in the kingdom,
may be alleged to have insp~ired, at any fubiequent period, it is
certain that, at this junature, he could form no fach vast design.

To dethrone a Qu~een, who was lineal heir to an ancient race of InOOK 11.
AlIonarchs; who had been guilty of no aaion, by which the
could forfeit the eficem and affe~ion of her fubjec~s; who could I339-
employ, in defence of her rights, the forces of a kingdom, much
more powerful than her ow-n; and to fubiritute, in her place, a
person, whomn the illegitimac~y of hris birth, by the praaice of all
civilized nations, rendered incapable of any inheritance, either
public or private; was a project, 10 chimerical, as the most ex-
travagarnt ambition would fearce entertain, and could never con-
ceive to be pra~icable. The promile, too, which the Prior mad-
to luelvil, of' residing conflantly in France, on condition thle pub-
lic grievances were redrefedt *; the confidence reposed in hint
by the Duke of Chatelhnerault and his son, the prefulmptive heirs
to the Crown; and the concurrence of almost the whole Scottish
nobles, in promoting thioif meafuires, by which he gave Oiience
to the French court, go far towards his vindication from thlofe
Illegal and criminal designs, with the imputation of whichl, the
Queen endeavoured, at that time, to load him.

The arrival of a thousand French soldiers compensated, in iame Troops

degree, for the loss wrhich the Quieen fatained by thie deLa'ion of r e~:P~1
the Duke of Chateilherault. T'her~e were, imlmedliately, commanded I; r y
to fortify Leith, in which place, on account of its commodious Leith.
Ilarbour, and its situation in the neighbSourhood of EIdinburgh,
and in the heart of a p'entifrul country, thle ~een resolved to
fix the head quarters of her foreig·n forces. This unlpopular
meathre, by thle manner of executing it, was rendered still more
unpopular. In order to bring the town entirely under their
command, the French turned out a great part of thle at clent inha-
bitants, and taking po~ieti~on of the houmes, which they had obli-
ged them to abandon, presented, to the view of the Scots, two
objee8s equally irritating and offenfive; on t'le one hand, a num-
ber of their country-men expelled their hab;tations by violence,
and wnandering without any certainabod~e; on the other, a colony
of foleigners, fettlirg, w xth their wives and children, in the heart
of Scotland, growi;ng into firength by dailyr reinforcements, and
openly preparing a yoke, to whlich, without some timely exertion
of national fpinlt, the whole kingdom mult, of necetiity, submit.

It was wi~h the utmost concern, that the Lords of the Congre- The ~rote-

gation behleld this bold and decisive flep, takecn by the Queen fmoslre-
Regent; nor did they hesitate, a moment, whether they thouldl againit Buls.

* Melvil, 54-

BlOOK II. CmtrlOg 1100r whole firengrth, in one generous effort, to rescue

their relig~ion and liberty from impending deftrualon. But, id

'339* order to juffify their own conduat, and to throw the blame er?-

tirely on thieir. adversaries, they resolved to p~reserve the appear-
ance~s of decency and refpeQ towards their superiors, and to have
no recourse to arms, without the most urgent apparent neceffty.

Sept. 29. They joined, with this view, in an addlref~s to the Regent, repre-

fenting, in thle firongeft terms, their diffatisfa~ion with the mea.
fures fle was purfcuing, and besee~ching her to quiet the fears and
jealousies of the nattion, by deiliting from fortifying Leith. The
Queen, conscious of her present advantageous situation, and elat-
ed with the hopes of frefhl succours, was in no disposition for lil-
tening to demands, utterly inconsistent with her views, and urged
with that bold importunity, which is to little acceptable to
Princes.

The Regent T'he f~uggellions of her French Counsellors contributed, with-

gar~~ds out doubt, to alienate her still farther from anly scheme of accom·

rnonfiran- modlation. As the Queen was ready, on all occallons, to diT·
ces. cover an extraordinary deference for the opinions of her country-

men, her brothers, who knew her secret disapprobation of the vio-
lent measures they were driving on, took care to place near her
such persons, as betrayed her, by their insinuations, into many
amions, which her own unbiaffed judgment would have highly
condemned. And as their success in the prelent jun~ure, when
all things were hlaftening~ towards a crisis, depended entirely on
the Qeen's firmness, thle Princes of Lorrain did not truss wholly
to the influence of their ordinary agents; but, in order to add the
greater weight to their counsels, they called in aid the Mliniffers
of religion; and, by the authority of their ~sacred chara8er, they
hoped effeAually to recommend to their fiffer, that ifyllem of fe-
verity which they had espoused* W;Cith this view, but under the
pretex~t of confounding the Protestants by the skill of such able
mafers in controversy, they appointed several French divines to
reside in Scotland. At the head of there, and with the charac-
ter of Legate from the Pope, was Pelleve Bishop of Amens, and
afterwards Archbithop and Cardinal of Sens, a furious bigot, ser-
vilely devoted to the house of' Guise, and a proper infirument
for recommending or executing the most outrageous measures.

Amidit the noise and danger of civil arms, these Do80rs had

little opportunity to display their addrel~s in the dfe of their theo-

* LeCy, 2r5. Ca~elnlau. ap Jebb. vol. ii.4465. 473-

logical weapons. But they gave no small offence to thie nation OK T
by one of their amions. T'hey perfunded the Queen to fecize the 59
church of St. Giles in Edinburgh, which had remained, ev~er since
the late truce, in the hands of the Proteitants; and having, by a
new and solemn cons~ecration, purified the falbric from the pollution,
with which th~ey fb~ppofed the profane ministrations of the Protef`-
tants to have defiled it, they, in dire61 contradiaiion to one ar-
ticle in the late ticaty, re-eflabifh~ed there the rites of the Romithl
church. T'his, added to the indifference, and even contempt,
with which the Queen received their remonfirances, convinced
the Lords of the Congregation, that it was not only vain to expeft
any redress of their grievances at her hands, but ablolutely necef-
Fary to take arms in their own defence.

The cager and impetuous spirit of the nation, as well as every They takie

al~mS Ill

consideration of good policy, prompted them to tak~e this bold theirown
flep without delay. It was but a small part of the French aux~i deance.
liaries which had as yet arrived. The fortifications of Lieth,
though advancing fast, were still far from being complete. Under
these circumfiances of disadvantage, they conceived it pollible to
fulrprife the Queen's party, and, by one fidden and decisive blow,
to prevent all fature bloodfhled and contention. Full of there ex-
pectations, they advanced rapidly towards Edinburgh with a nu-
merous army. But it was no easy matter to deceive an advarfary, Oftobr 16.
so vigilant anod attentive as the Queen Regent. W'ith her usual
sagacity, the both foresaw the danger, and took the only proper
course to avoid it. Initead of keeping the field against enemies,
Liperior in number, and formidable on a day of battle, by the ar-
dour of their courage, the retired into Leith, and determined pa-
tiently to wait the arrival of new reinforcements. Slight and
unfinilhed as the fortifications of that town then were, the did not
dread the efforts of an army, provided neither with heavy cannon
nor with military flores, and utterly ignorant of thle method of
attacking any place, fortified with more art than those ancient
towers, ereaed all over the kingdom, in defence of private pro-
perty against the incurflons of banditti.

Nor did the Queen, meanwhile, neglea to have recourse to

those arts, which the had often employed, to weaken or divide
her adversaries. By private folicitations and promises, the shook;
the fidelity, or abated the ardour of some. By open reproach and
accusation, ihe blasted the reputation, and diminished the authori-
ty of others. Her emissaries were every where at work, and, not-
w~ithltandingr the zeal for religion and liberty, which then animat-

B1OOK IT. ed the nation, they seem to have laboured not without fuccers.

We find K~nox, about this period, abounding in complaints of

55*the lukewarm and languid spirit, which had begun to spread

among his party *. But, if their zeal slackened a little, and
fufFered a momentary intermitiion, it soon blazed up with frethvi.
gour, and role to a greater height than ever.

Renew The Queen hers~elf gave occasion to this, by the reply which

their re. she made to a new remonfirance from the Lords of the Congrega-
monfiran' tion. Upon their arrival at Edinburgh, they once more repre.

fented to her the dangers arising from the increase of the French
troops, the fortifying of Leith, and her other measures, which they
conceived to be defiruaive to the peace and liberty of the king-
dom; and in this address, they spoke in a firmer tone, and avow-
ed, more openly than ever, their resolution of proceeding to the
utmost extremities, in order to put a flop to such dangerous en-
croachments. To a remonfirance of this nature, and urged with
so much boldness, the Queen replied in terms no less vigorous
and explicit. She pretended that the was not accountable to the
confederate nobles for any part of her condu~t. And upon no
representation of theirs, would the either abandon measures, which
she deemed necessary; or dismiss forces, which the found useful*,
or demolilh a fortification, which might prove of advantage. At

IEut with, thie fame time, the required them, on pain of treason, to disband
out s~ucces~s. th~e forces which they had assembled.

This haughty and imperious style founded harthly to Scottish

nobles, impatient, from their national charafter, of the slig~htest
appearance of injury; accuffomed, even from their own Ma~narchs,
to the most refpe~ful treatment; and poffefling, under an ariflo-
cratical form of government, such a share of power as equalled,
at all times, and often controlled that of the Sovereigri. They
were sensible, at once, of the indignity offered to themselves, and
alarmed with this plain declaration of the Qujeen's intentions;
and as there now remained but one flep to take, they wanted nei-
ther public spirit nor resolution to take it.

]Deliberate But that they might not seem to depart from the established

~Cern / forms of the conflitution, for which, even amidst their mast vio-
w-hich they lent operations, men always retain the greatest reverence, they as-
oukght to embled the whole Peers, Barons, and Representatives of boroughs
O~ober 2:. who adhered to their party. These formed a convention, which

exceeded in number, and equalled in dignity, the ufulal meetings
of Parliament. The leaders of the Congregation laid before themt

* Knox, 180.

the declaration which the Queen had given in answer to their re. BOOK II.
monfirance; reprelented the unavoidable ruin, which the measures -
the therein avowed and justified, would bring upon the kingdom; 39
and requiring their dire~tion with regard to the obedience due
to an adminiffration to unjust and oppreflive, they s~ubmitted to
their decillon, a question, one of the most delicate and intereffing
that can pollibly fall under the consideration of fulbje~ts.

This assembly proceeded to decide, with no less dispatch, than

unanimity. Strangers to those forms, which protraA bus inefs 3 un-
acqluainted with the arts, which make a figure in debate; and
much more fitted for amion, than discourse; a warlike people al-
ways hasten tp a conclusion, and bring their deliberations to the
shortest issue. It was the work but of one day, to examine and
to resolve this nice problem, concerning the behaviour of fubje~ts
towards a ruler who abules his power. But, however abrupt their
proceedings may appear, they were not destitute of solemnity. As
the determination of the point in doubt, was conceived to be no
less the offce of divines, than of laymen, the former were called
to allift with their opinion. Knox and Willox appeared for the
whole order, and pronounced, without hesitation, both from the
precepts and examples in scripture, that it was lawful for fubjeAs
not only to resist tyrannical princes, but to deprive them of that
authority, which, in their hands, becomes an infirument for de-
firoying those, whom the Almighty ordained them to protea.
The decision of persons, revered 10 highly for their sacred cha-
ra61er, but more for their zeal and their piety, had great weight
with the whole assembly. Not satisfied with the common indil-
criminate manner of signifying cons~ent, every person present was
called in his turn to declare his sentiments, and rising up in or- They de-
der, all gave their fuffrag~es, without one dissenting voice, for de- prive the

Queen of

priving the Queen of the oface of Regent, which the had exer- the oflice of
cifed to much to the detriment of the kingdom *. Regent.

This extraordinary sentence was owing no les~s to the love of The rights

liberty, than zeal for religion. In the aB of deprivation, reli- eir cn
gious grievances are slightly mentioned; and the dangerous en-
croachments of the Queen upon the civil conflitution are produced,
by the Lords of the Congregation, in order to prove their condua
to have been not only just, but necessary. The introducing foreign
troops into a kingdom, at peace with all the world; the seizing and
fortifying towns in different parts of the country; the promoting
ftrangrers to offices of great power and dignity; the debasing the

*Knox, 184.

CQij

BOOK IT. current coin *; the fabverting thre ancient laws); the imposing of

L- Jnew and burdensome tares; and thle attempting to subdue the king.

I559* dom, and to oppress its liberties, by open and repeated ac?s of vio.

Jence are enumerated at great length, and placed in the firongeft
light. On all there accounts, the Congregation maintained that the
nobles, as counsellors to their monarchs, and the guardians and de-
fenders of the conflitution, had a right to interpose, and there-
fore, by virtue of this right, in the name of the Kiing and Queen,
and w~ith many expreions of duty and fubmifilon towards them,
they deprived the Queen Regent Of her offce-, and ordained, that,
for thle future, no obedience thouldl be given to her commands t.

Violent as thlis a~tion may appear, there wanted not principles

in the coultitution, nor precedents in the hillory of Scotland, to
juffify and to authorize it. Uinder thr: ariflocratical form of go-
vernment eftablithed among the Scots, the power of the Sovereign
wvas extremely limited. Thle more considerable nobles were them-
selves petty Princes, poiS'eilngg extensive jurisdictions, almost in-
dependent of the crown, and followed by numerous vaifals, who,
in every contest, efpouled their chieftain's qjuarr.el, in opposition to
thle Kiing. Hence the many inflances of the impotence of regal
authority, which are to be found in the Scottish hiffory. In every
aTge, the nobles not only claimed, but exercised the right of con-
trolling the Kiing. Jealous of their privileges, and eager to take
the field in defence of them, every error in adminiRration was
observed, every encroachment upon the rights of the aristocracy
excited indignation, and no Prince ever ventured to tr·ansgress
the boundaries, which the law had pres~cribed to prerogative, wvith-
out meeting refillance, which thook, or overturned his throne.
Encouraged by the spirit of the conflitution, and countenanced

* The standard of m~onley in Scotland was continually varying. In thle J6th of

James V. A.D. Is29, a pound weight of gold, w-hen coinled, produced one hun-
dred and eight pounds of current money. B~ut under the Queen Regent's al-
miniffration, A.D. 1536, a poun"d weigh:t of gold, although the quantity of ?1.
loy was conlfidlerably increafedl, produced one hundred and forty-four pounds
current money. In 1529, a pounld weig~ht of flver, when coined, produced nin~e
p~ounds two fbiilling~s; but in I5.C6, it produced thirteen pounds current money.
Ruddim. Priefht. ad Anderlf Diplomat. Scotim, p. 80, 81. from which it appears
that this complaint, whiih the mal~econtents often repeated, was not altogether
deflitute of foundation.

-f M\. Caftelnau, after condemningr~ the dang-erous ccuncils of the Princes of

Lorrain with regard to the affairs of Scotland, acknowledges, with his usual can-
dour, that the Scots declared wvar nagaint the Queen Regent, rather from a de-
fire of vindicatingr their civ~il libetrties, than frcm aly motiv·e of religi;o?
Mecm. 446.

by the example of their anceffors, the Lords of the Congregation BO 1
thougrht it incumben!t on them, at this jundkure, to inquire into
the mal-adminiltration of the Qgeen Regent, and to preserve their 155F9*
country from being enslaved or conquered, by depriving her of
the powfer to execute such a pernicious scheme *.

*The aB of depr;ivation, and a letter from the Lords of the Congrregation to

thle Queen Regent are itill extant, K~nox, 184. They discover not only, that maf-
culine and undaunted spirit, natural to men capable of so bold a resolution; but
are remarkable for a precilion, and vigour of exprefilon, which we are fur-
prifed to meet with in an age so unpolif hed. The fame obs~ervation may be made
with refpeft to the other public papers of that period. The ignorance or bad tafre
of an agr may render the compolitions of aauthors by profblion obscure, or at~ea-
ec' or abrard; but the language of business is nearly the fame at all times; and
whereler men thinki clearly, and are thoroughlly interefied, they exp~ress thiem-
I'.cs with pedp~icuity and force.

# BOOK THIRD.

THE:

HI STOR.Y

S C O-T LAND.

BOOK THIRD.

CONTENTS.

SITUATrozr of the Reformed. Their repulse at Leith. Apply to Elizabeth. Ar-

nval of an English fleet. Siege of Leith. Death of the Queen Dowager.
A treaty of peace. A parliament. Successful attacks on Popery. Death of
Francis II. Establish~ment of Presbyterian government. Causes of discontent
between Elizabeth and Mlary. The arrival of M~ary in Scotland. State of
the kingdom. Extraordilnary progress of a court of juffice. Poverty of the
Protefiant clergy. Diffenflons among the nobles. Rebellion of Huntly.
Battle of Carrichie. Proposals for the Queen's marriage. Darnly. Rizzio.
Convention of nobles. Two confp~iracles. The Queen's marriage with Darnly.
Flight of Murray and his associates. Perfidious conduat of Elizabeth. Church
abf~irs.

HE. Lords of the Congregation soon found, that their zeal had nosoom .

engaged them in an undertaking, which it was beyond their ut- -
molt ability to accomplish. The French garrison, despising their '59
numerous, but irregular forces, refused to s~urrender Leith, and to greganon
depart out of the kingdom; nor were they ifuficiently skilful in 01 ~led
the art of war to reduce the place by force, or poileffed of the artil-
lery, or magazines, requisite for that purpose j andtheir followers,
though of undaunted courage, yet being accuffomed to decide
eve'y quarrel by a battle, were firangers to the fatigues of a long
campaign, and s~oon became impatient of the severe and conitant
duty which a siege requires. The Queen's emissaries, who found
It easy to ming~le with their countrymen, were at the utmost pains
to heighten their difguit, which discovered itself at first in mur-
mnurs and complaints, but on occasion of the want of money for
paying the army, broke out into open mutiny. The most emi-
nent leaders were fearce secure from the unbridled insolence of
the soldiers; while some of inferior rank, interposing too rathly

nooK III. in order to quell them, were torn in pieces by their rage. DI(

cord, coniternation, and perplexity reigned in the camp of the

I.5* Reformers. Thle Duke, their General, funk, with his usual ti-

m~idity, under the terror of approaching danger, and discovered
manifest symptoms of repentance for his rashness, in efpoufingr such
a desperate cause.

Apply to In this situation of their affairs, the Congregation had recourse

Sto Elizabeth, from whole proteaion they could derive the only

ance. reaonable hopes of their success. Some of their more sagacious

leaders, having foreseen that the party might probably be involh.
ed in great difficulties, had endeavoured to secure a resource in
anly such exigency, by entering into a secret correspondence with
the court of England *. Elizabeth, awfare of the dangrerous
desig7ns which thle Princes of Lorrain had formed againit her Crown,
was early sensible of how much importance it would be, not only
to check the progress ~of the French in Scotland, but to extend
her own influence in that kingdom $; and perceiving how
effeAually the present infu~rredions would contribute to retard or
defeat the schemes formed against England, the listen~ed wiith
pleasure to thes~e applications of the malecontents, and gave them
private aflitrances of powrPfulfupport to their cause. Randolph II,
an agent, extremely proper for condufting any dark intrigue, was
dispatched into Scotland, and residing secretly among the Lords
of the Con~gregation, observed and quickened their motions.
Money seemed to be the only thing they wanted at that time j
and it was owring to a seasonable remittance from England ),that
the Scottith nobles had been enabled to take the field, and to ad-
vance towards Leith. But as Elizabeth was diffrufiful of the
Scots, and fludious to preserve appearances with France, her sub-
fidies were beffowed at first with extreme frugality. The sub-
fiftence of an army, and the expences of a siege soon exuhauffed
this penurious supply, to which the Lords of the Congregation
could make little addition from their own fulnds; and the ruin
and difperflon of the party must have inflantly followed.

Shhee ~red In order to prevent this, Cock~burn of Orm~ilon was sent withi
fmantiunot the utmost expedition, to the governors of the town and castle of
money, Berwick. As Berwick was, at that time, the town of greatest

importance on the Scottilh frontier, Sir Ralph Sadler and Sir

* Burn. H-ill. Ref. 3. Append. 278. Keith, Append. 2I.
-t See App ·nd. r. / KEcith, Appe~nd. 29.

james Crofts, persons of considerab~le figSure, wvere employed to Boar III.
command there, and were intrufted wvith a diferetionary power of
supply~ing the Scottil'n malecontents, according to the exigency of L339*
their affairs. From them Cockburn received four thodaknd crowns,
but little to the advantage of his party. The Earl of Bothwell, which is In-
by the Queen's initigation, lay in wait for him on his return, dif- tercepted.
perfed his followers, wounded him, and carried off the money.

This unexpedted disappointment proved fatal to the party. In

mere delpair, some of the more zealous attempted to assault Leith,
but the French beat them backi with disgrace, seized their can-
non, and puriking them to the gates ofr Edinburgrh, were on the
point of entering along with them. A11 the terror and confusion,
which the prolped of pillage or of massacre can excite in a place
taken by florm, filled the city on this occallon. The inhabitants
tBed from the enemy by the oppoiite gate ; the forces of the Con-
gregation were irresolute and dismayed j and the Queen's partizans
in the town openly insulted both. At last, a few of the nobles
ventured to face the enemy, who, after plundering some houles
in the suburbs, retired with their booty, and delivered the city
from this dreadful alarm.

A second skirmish, which happened a few days after, was no

less unfortunate. The French sent out a detachment to intercept
a convoy of provillons which was designed for Edinburgh. The
Lords of the Congregation, having intelligence of this, marched
in all haste with a considerable body of their troops, and falling
upon the enemy between Refialrig and Leith, with more gallantry
than good conducT, were almolt surrounded by a second party of
French, who advanced in order to support their own men. In
this situation, a retreat was the only thing which could save the
Scots; but a retreat over marshy ground, and in the face of an
enemy superior in number, could not long be conduaed with
order. A small body of the enemy hung upon their rear, horse They retire
and foot fell into the utmost confusion, and it was entirely owiing. ifroch
to the caution of the French, that any of the party escaped being sion.
cut in pieces.

On this second blow, the hopes and spirits of the Congregation

Funk altogether. They did not think themselves secure, even
within the walls of Edinburgh, but infltantly determined to re-
tire to some place at a greater difiance trom the enemy. In vain
did the Prior of St Andrew's ana a few others oppole this coward-
ly and ignominious flight. T`he dread of thle present danger pre-
vailed over both the sense of honour, and zeal for the cause. A~t

BOOKIILL midnight, they set out from Edinburgh, in great confufidn, and

marched without halting till they arrived at Stirling.

No P' During this last infurreAion, the great body of the Scottith

nobles joined the Congregation. The Lords Seton and Borth-
wick were the only persons of rank who took arms for the Queen,
and allfled her in defending Leith *. Bothwell openly favoured
her cause, but resided at hris own hous~e. The Earl of Huntly,
conformable to the crafty policy which distinguishes his charac·
ter, amuled the leaders of the Congregation, whom he had en-
gaged to afi~ft, wvith many fair promises, but never joined them
with a single man J. The Earl of Morton, a member of the
Congregation, fluAuated in a state of irresolution, and did not aB
heartily for the common cause. Lord Erik~ine, Governor of
Edinburgh caffle, though a Protestant, maintained a neutrality,
which he efleemed becoming the dignity of his office ; and having
been intrufted by Parliament with the command of the principal
fortress in the kingdom, he resolved that neither faaion thould
get it into their hands.

Mrairland A few days before the retreat of the Congregation, the Queen

"je fffered an irreparable 10fs by the defecrion of her principal Se-

Queen cretary, William Maitland of Lethington. His zeal for the Re-
Dowvager. formed religion, together with his warm remonfirances againfl the

violent measures which the Qu~een was carrying on, exposed him
so much to her resentment, and to that of her French Counsellors,
that he, fulpeaing his life to be in danger, withdrew secretly
from Leith, and fled to the Lords of the Congregation II; and
they, with open arms, received a convert, whole abihties added
both firength and reputation to their cauie. Maitland had early
applied to public business admirable natural talents, improved by
an acquaintance with the liberal arts j and, at a time of life,
when his countrymen of the fame quality were following the
pleasures of the chale, or se~rving as adventurers in foreign armies,
he was admitted into all the secrets of the cabinlet, and put upon
a level wyith persons of the most consummate experience in the
management of affairs. He po~ffefd, in an eminent degree, that
intrepid s~pirit, which delights in pursuing bold designs, and was
no less master of that political art and dexterity w'nich is necef-
Eary for carrying them on with fuccers. B3ut these qualities were
deeply tin~ured with the neighbouring vices. His address some·
-times degenerated into cunning; his acuteness bordered upon

:Ibid. Ayppnd* 33. Knox, 222.

* Keitl1, Append. 3r.
I! Kinox, 192.

exceGs of subtlety and refinement; his invention, over fertile, BOOK 111.
loggfited to him, on some occallons, chimerical sy~stems of policy,
little faitable to the genius of the age ; and his enterprising spirit 59
engaged him in projees vast and Splendid, but beyond his utmost
pswer to execute. All the cotemporary writers, to whatever
ha8ion they belong, mention him with an admitation, which no-
thing could have excited but the greatest superiority of penetra-
tion and abilities.

The precipitate retreat of the Congregation increased, to such

a degree, the terror and confusion which had seized them at Edin-
burgh, that before they reached Stirling, their army dwindled to
an inconsiderable number. T'he fpiirit of Kinox, however, still re-
mained undaunted and erea, and having mounted the pulpit. he
addreired to his delponding- hearers, an exhortation w-h' h-wondier-
fully animated and revived them. The heads of this discourse
are inserted in his hiftery X, and afford a firiking example of the
boldness and freedom of reproof assumed by the first Reformers,
as well as a specimen of his own skill in chufing the topics most
fitted to influence and roule his audience.

A meeting of the leaders being called, to confider what The Lords

course they thould hold, now that their ownn resources were all on.'
exihaulted, and their deftruAion appeared to be unavoidable, with- app~ly again
out foreign aid; they turned their eyes once more to England, thza
and resolved to implore the allifance of Elizabeth towards finish-
ing an enterprise, in which they had so fatally experienced their
own weaknes~s, and the firength of' their adversaries. Maitland,
as the most able negociator of the party, was employed in this
embassy·. In his ablence, and during the inaaive season of the
year, it was agreed to dismis~s their followers, worn out by the
fatigues of a campaign, which, had so far exceeded the time of
service usual in that age. But, in order to pres~erve the counties
most devoted to their interest, the Prior of St. Andrew's, with
part of the leaders, retired into Fife. T'he Dukie of Chatelhe-
rault, with the reft, fixed his residence at Hamilton. There was
little need of Maidland's addrels or eloquence to induce Elizabeth
to tak~e his country under her proteaion. She observed the pre-
valence of the French councils, and the progress of their arms in
Scotland, with great concern; and as the well foresaw the dan-
grerous tendency of their schemes in that kin~gdom, the had al-

* Knlox, 193. R ij

BOOK -I ready come to a resolution with regard to the part the herself

Swould adt, if their power there thould grow still more formidable.

M~~B. In order to give the Qu~een and her Privy Council a full van

which de. diftin~t view of any important matter which might come before
~ee"" them, it seems to have been the praaice of Elizabeth's Miniffers
them. to prepare memorials, in which they clearly stated the point under

deliberation, laid down the grounds of the condua, which they
held to be most reasonable, and proposed a method for carrying
their plan into execution. Two papers of this kiind, written by
Sir Wlilliam Cecil with his own hand, flill remain *; they are in-
titled, " A thort diltcuffion of the weigohty matter of Scotland,"
and do honour to the icndufry and penetration of that great Mi.
niller. The motives, which determined the Queen to elou les
warmly the defence of the Congregation, are reprelented with
perspicuity and force; and the cons~equences of fuffering th~e French
to eilablifh themselves in Scotland, are prediaed with great ac.
curacy and discernment.

He lays it down as a principle, agreeable to the laws both of

God and of nature, that every faciety hath a right to defend itself,
not only from present dangers, but from fach as may probably
ensue; to which, he adds, that nature and reason teach every
Prince to defend himself by the fame means, which his adverfi.
lies employ to diffrefs him. Upon there grounds, he establishes
the right of England to interpose in the affairs of Scotland, and
to prevent the conquell of that kingdom, at which the French
openly aimed. The French, he oblerves, are the ancient and im,
placable enemies of England. Hostilities had subsisted between
the two nations for many centuries. Nho treaty of peace, into
which they entered, had ever been cordial or sincere. No good
effeft was therefore to be expeated from the peace lately agreed
upon, which being extorted by present necessity, would be ne-
gligently oblerved, and brokecn on the slightest pretences. In a.
very Ihort time, France would recover its former opulence, and
though now drained of men and money by a tedious and unfuc-
cefsful war, it would quickly be in a condition for a~tingr, and
the restless and martial genius of the people would render aftion
neceifary. T he Princes of L~orrain, who at that time had the en-
tire dire~tion of French affairs, were animated with the most vi.
rulent hatred against the English nation. They openly called in
question the legitimacy of the Queen's birth, and by advancio3

;r Burn. vol, iii. Append. 283. Kecihth Append. -4.

the title and pretenflons of their niece the Queen of Scotland, flu- BOOK 111.
died to deprive Elizabeth of her Crown. With this view, they
had laboured to exclude the Englilh from the treaty of Chateau 15
en Cambrefis, and endeavoured to conclude a separate peace with
Spain. They had persuaded Henry II. to permit his daughlter-in-
law to axnume the title and arms of Queen of England; and even
iince the conclusion of the peace, they had solicited at Rome, and
obtained a bull, declaring Elizabeth's birth to be illegitimate.
A4nd though the wisdom and moderation of the Conflable Mont-
morency had, for some time, checked their career, yet these re-
firaints being now removed by the death of Henry II. and the
disgrace of his Mliniffer, the utmost excesses of violence were to
be dreaded from their furious ambition, armed with sovereign
powver. Scotland is the quarter, whence they can attack Eng-
land with most advantage. A war on the borders of that country
expoles France to no danger, but one unf~uccefsful a~tion there
may hazard the Crown, and overturn the government of England.
In political conduat, it is childish to wait till the designs of an
enemy be ripe for execution. T'he Scottish nobles, after their
utmost efforts, have been obliged to quit the field s and far from
expelling the invaders of their liberties, they behold the French
power daily increasing, and muff at last ceas~e from firuggling any
longer in a contest so unequal. T'he invading of England will
immediately follow the reduaion of the Scottish malecontents,
by the abandoning of whom to the mercy of the French, Eliza-
beth will open a way for her enemies into the heart of her own
kringdom, and ex~pose it to the calamities of war, and the danger
of conqueft'. Nothing therefore remained but to meet the enemy
while yet at a difiance from England, and by supporting the
Congregation with a powerful army, to render Scotland the theatre
of the war, to crush the designs of the Princes of Lorrain in their
infancy, and, by such an early and unexpeaed effort, to ex~pel
the French out of Britain, before their power had time to take
root, and grow up to any formidable height. But as the matter
was of as much importance, as any which could fall under the
consideration of an English Monarch, wildom and mature counsel
were necessary in the first place, and afterwards vigour and ex-
pedition in conduA; the danger was urgent, and, by losing a
single moment, might become unavoidable Y.

*The arguments which thE. Scots employecd, in order to obtain Elizabeth's

af~itance, are urged with great force, in a paper of Mazitland's. See Appendix,

EOOK III. Thele argurments produced th~eir full effea upon Elizabeth,

Swho was jealous, in an extreme degree, of every pretender to her

55J9· Crown, and no less anxious to preserve the tranq~uillity and hap.

pinefs of her f~ubjeAs. From these motives Ihe had a~ed, in grant.
ing the Congregation an early supply of money; and from the
famze principles thle determined, in their present exigency, to afford
them more effea~ual aid. One of Maitland's attendants was in-
flantly dispatched into Scotland with the firongeft assurances of
her prote~tion, and the Lords of the Congregation were desired
to fend commilloners into England, to conclude a treaty, and to
fettle the operations of the campaign, w~ith the Duke of N'orfolk *.

The" Queen Mean-wfhile, the Queen Regent, from whom no motion of the
Dowvager mean-whlile Congregation could long be concealed, dreaded the luiccefs of
sends her this negaciation with the court of England, and foresaw how lit.
trorlps a. tie she would be able to resist thle united efforts of the two kting.
gainitthem. doms. For this reason the determined, if possible, to get the

start of Elizabeth; and by venturing, notwfithfianding the in-
clemency of the winter season, to attack the malecontents in their
present dispersed and helples~s situation, the hoped to put an end
to the war, before the arrival of their English allies.

A considerable body of her French forces, who were aug-

mented, about this time, by thle arrival of the Count de
Martigues, with a thousand veteran foot, and fame cavalry, were
commanded to march to Stirling. Having there craffed the
Torth, they proceeded along thle coast of Fife, destroying and
plundering, with excellive outrage, the houses and lands of those
whom they efleemed their enquies. Fife was the mnof pop~ulous
and powerful county in the kingdom, and most devoted to the
Congregation, who had hitherto drawn from th~ence their most
considerable s~upplies, both of men and provisions; and therefore,
besides punilhing the difaff~eaion of the inhabitants, by pillaging·
the country, the French proposed to seize and fortify St. An-
drew's, and to leave there a garrison fufficient to bridle the mu-
tinous spirit of the province, and to keep poefeionn of a port situ-
ated on th~e main ocean.

Cut on this occasion, the Plior of St. And'rew's, Lord Ruth-

1 en, Kiirkaldy of Grangre, and a few of the moil aaive leaders of
the Congregation, performed, by their bravery and good condu8,
a service of the utmost importance to their party. Having al-
fci~emble fix hundred horse, they infefied the French with conti-

* K~eith, xx4.

raal jncurflons, beat up th~eir quarters, intercepted their controys BOOKIIN.
of proviians, cut off, their firaggling parties, and so harassed
them wYith perpetual alarms, that they prevented them for more 1539*
than three weeks from advancing *.

At lait the Prior, with his feeble party, was conflrained to re- r536.

tire, and the French set out fiom Kirkaldy, and began to move
along the coast towfards St. Andrew's. They had advanced but
a fewv miles, when from an eminence they deferied a powerful Jan. 23·
fleet fleering its course up thle F~irth'of Forth. As they knew
that the Marquis D'Elbeuf was, at that time, preparing to fail
for Scotland withl a numerous army, they hastily concluded that
there flhips belonged to him, and gave wpy to the most imnmode-
rate tranrports of joy, on the prolpec of his1; long-expe61ed succour.
T'heir great guns were already fired to welcome their friend ,
and to spread the tidin~gs and terror of their arrival among their
enemies, when a 6mall boat from the opnpofite coai' landed, and
blasted their premature and short-lived triumph, by informing
them, that it was the flect of England whichl was in fight, in- The Erar
tended for the aid of thle Cong~regation, and was soon to be fol- 12 deletr a -.

" ~tivestokie'

lowedIU by a formid~abl lilland ary J hne

Throughout her whole reign, Elizabeth was cautious, but de-

cifive; and by her promptitude in executing her resolutions, join-
ed to the deliberation with which the formed them, her admini-
f1ration becamne remarkable, no les~s for its vigour, than for its
wildom. No sooner did the determine to afford her proteAion
to the Lords of the Congregation, than they experienced the
Idivity, as well as the extent of her power. The season of the
lear wvould not permit her land army to takre the field; but left
the French thouldl, in the mean time, receive new reinforce-
ments, the instantly ordered a firong iquadron to cruize in the
Firth of Forth. She seems, by her infiruaions to Wi~inter her A-
dmiral, to have been desirous of preserving the appearances of
fiiendihip towards the French J. But ther~e were only appear-
ances; if any French fleet thould attempt to land, he was com-
manded to prevent it, by every aB of hofiliity and violence. It
was thle fight of this squadron, which occalloned at first so much
joy among the French, but which soon inspired them with fach
terror, as saved Fife from the effeas of their vengeance. Ap-
prehenfive of being cut off from their companions on the oypo-

* Knox-, 02. t Knox, 203.
i K~eith, Alppendix 43.

BOOKe I . site iOre, they retreated towards Stirling with the utmost prec;.

LL pitation, and, in a dreadful season, and through roads almoff im·
I 6.passable, arrived at Leith, harassed and exhauffed with fatigue *.

The Engiifh fleet cait anchor in the road of Leith, and conti

nuing in that flation till the conclusion of peace, both prevented
the garrison ofC Leith from receiving su~ccours of any kind, and
confiderablyj facilitated thle op~erations of their own forces by land.

Theyr con. Soon after the arrival of the Englith squadron, the Commillion·

itlx ers of the Congregation repaired to Berw-icki, and concluded w~ithl

Enlgland. thle duk~e of Niorfolk, a treaty, the bond of that unioln with Eliza-

Fe.2- beth1, which was of so great ad-vantage to the cause. To give a

check; to the dangrerous and rapid progrels of the French arms in
SCOtland,) was the profeffe~d defiign of the contraeting· parties. In
order to this, the Scots engaged never to fuffer any closer union
of their country with France; and to defend themselves to the
uttermost against all attempts of conquelt ) and for their alfltance,
Elizabeth promil~ed to employ, in Scotland, a powerful army,
which the Scots undertook to join with all their forces; no place
in Scotland was to remain in the hands of the English;; whatever
th~ould be taken from the enemy was either to be razed, or kept
by the Scots, at thleir choice; if any invasion thould be made
upon En:gland, the Scots were obliged to aflift Elizabeth with
part of their forces; and to ascertain their faithful observance of
thle treaty, thley bound themselves to deliver hostages to Eliza-
both, before the march of her army into Scotland j in conclusion,
theZ Scots made many protestations of obedience and loyalty to-
wards their own Queen, in every thing not inconsistent with their
religion, and the liberties of their country J-.

'rh, Engs The1 EngSlifh army, consisting of fix thousand foot, and two

la ry thousand horse, under the command of Lordl Grey of Wilton,

la s siege to
L~eith. entered Scotland early in the ipring. The members of the Con-

Arl. gregation assembled from all parts of the kingdom to meet their

newv allies; and havings joined them with great multitudes of
th~eir followers, tney advanced together towards Leith. The
French were little able to k~eep the field against an enemy So
much superior in number. A firong body oftroops, deflined for
thecir relief, had lately been (cattered by a violent itorm, and had
either perithed on the coast of Fran~ce, or with difficulty had re-
covered the ports of that imingdom J. B~ut they hoped to be able
to defend Leith, till the Princes of Lorrain th~ould make good

* Kniox, 203. i knoxu, 2I7*
9 Alem. de Caitl. 550.

the magnificent promises of allifiance, with which they daily fed BOOK II1.
them; or till scarcity of provirlons thould confirain the English 1360.
to retire into their own country. In order to heften this latter
event, they did not neglea the usual, though barbarous precaution
for diffreffing an invading enemy, by burning and laying waste all
the adjacent country *. The zeal, however, of the nation fruffra-
ted their intentions 3 eager to contribute towards removing their
opprefrors, the people produced their hidden flores to support
their friends; the neighbouring counties supplied every thing
necessary, and far from wanting fubliftence, the English found, in
their camp, all forts of provisions, at a cheaper rate, than had for
some time been known in that part of the kingdomt.

On the approach of the English army, the Queen Regent re-

tired into the caffle of Edinburgh. Her health was now in a de-
clining state, and her mind broken and depressed by the misfor-
tunes of her adminiffration. To avoid the danger and fatigue
of a flege, the committed herself to the proteAion of Lord Er-
fk~ine. This nobleman still pres~erved his neutrality and by his
integrity and love of his country, merited eqjually thle efleem of
both parties. He received the Queen hers~elf with the utmost
honour and refped, but took care to admit no such retinue, as
might endanger his command of the castle |j.

A few days after they arrived in Scotland, the Englilh invelted April 6.

L~eith. The garrison, thut up within the town, was almoil half
as numerous as the army which fat down before it, and by an ob-
flinate defence protraaed the siege to a great length. The cir-
cumilances of this siege, related by cotemporary hifforians, men
without knowledge and experience in the art of war, are often
obscure and imperfeat, and at this difiance of time are not confi-
derable enough to be entertainmng.

At Biri the French endeavoured to keep poflfeffon of the

IIawrk Hill, a riiing· ground not far difiant from the town, but were
beat from it with great slaughter, chiefly by the furious attack of April rg,
the Scottish cavalry. Within a few days, the French had their
full revenge ; having sallied out with a firong body, they entered
the Englith trenches, broke their troops, nailed part of their can-
non, and killed at least double the number themselves had loft in
the former fk~irmith. Nor were the English more fortunate in
an attempt which they made to take the place by assault; they May 7,
wrere met with equal courage, and repulled with considerable loss.

# Knox, 225. t K~nox, ibid.
B Forbas Coll·ed. vol. i.503· ie~jth, r22,

BOOK 1II. FrOm the detail of ther~e circumstances by the writers of that agd,

Ly J it is eafyr to observe the different chara~ers of the French and

1360. English troo'ps. The former, trained to war, under the a~tive

reigns of Francis I. and Henry II. defended thiemfelves not only
with the bravery, but with the fkiill of veterans. Thle latter,
who had been more accuffomed to peace, ftli1 pres~erved the in-
trepid and desperate valour peculiar to thle nation, but discovered
few marks of military genius, or of experience in the prac~ice of
war. Every misfortune or disappointment during the siege must
be imputed to manifeit errors in condua. The success of the be-
fieged in their aLily was owing intirely to the fecucrity and negli.
gence of the English: many of their officers were absent j their
soldiers had left their flations; and thie trenches were almost
without a guard. The ladders, which had been provided for
the assault, wanted a great deal of the necessary length ; and the
troops employed inl that service were ill supported. The trenches
were opened, at Birit, in an improper place j and as it was found
expedient to change the ground, both time and labour were loft.
The weakness of their own Generals, no less than the firength of
the French garrison, rendered the progress of the English wonder-
f'ully flow. The length, however, of the siege, and the loss of part
of their magazines by an accidental fire, reduced the French to
extreme diffrefs, which the profpea of relief made them bear
with admirable fortitude.

While the hopes and courage of the French protra~ed the siege

to far beyond expeaation, the Scottilh~ malecontents were not idlle.
By new associations and confederacies, they laboured more per-
fe81y to unite their party. B3y publicly ratify~ing the treaty con-
cluded at Berwvick, they endeavoured to render thle alliance with
England firm and indilfoluble. Among the subscribers of thef'e
papers, we find the Earl of Huntly, and s~ome others who had not
hitherto concurred with the Congregation in anly of their mea-
fures X. Several of ther~e Lords, particularlyr the F~arl of H~untly,
still adhered to the Popith church; but on this occasion, neithler
their reliigous se~ntiments, nor their former, cauticus maxims,
were regarded; the torrent of national resentment and indigna-
tion against the French hurried them on t.

* Burn. vol.~i~l·i. 28. nox, 221I.
t The dreadl of the French power did, on m~any ccafConc, thrmounot the zea,

whlich the Catholic nobles h d for thelr religion. Besides thie pietmptive evi·
dence for Ihis, ar-ifirg from the memorial mentionedi by E~urnet, HIfit. of th R -
formation, voL, iii. 281 anld puriS;hod by him, p,. 78; i the infi~ruione of E.;L

The Q~ueen Regent, the infirument, rather than the caule of BOOK111.

involving Scotland in these calamities, under which it groaned I360.
at that time, died during the heat of the siege. No Princels ever Death and
pof~llted qualities more capable of rendering her administration i1. ch"araer of

the Queen

luffrious, or her people happy. Of much discernment, and no nowager.
lels addrefsj of great intrepidity, and equal prudence; gentle June Io.
and humane, without wceaknefs; zealous for her religion, without
bigotry; a lover of justice, without rigour. One circumstance,
however, and that, too, the excess of a virtue, rather than any
vice, poisoned all these great quali~ties, and rendered her govern-
ment unfortunate, and her name odious. Devoted to the inter-
eft of France, her native country, and attached to the Princes of
Lorrain her brothers, with most patiionate fondness; thle depart-
ed, in order to gratify there, from every maxim, which her owrn
wisdom or humanity would have approved. She outlived, in a
great measure, that reputation and popularity, which had smooth-
ed her way to the highest flation in· the kringdom; and many ex-
amples of falfhood, and some of severity, in the latter part of her
adminiffration, totally alienated from her the affeAions of a peo-
ple, who had once placed in her an unbounded confidence. But,
even by her enemies, these unjuffifiable a~ions were imputed to
the facility, not to the malignity of her nature; and while they
taxed her brothers, and French counsellors, with rashnes~s and
cruelty j they still allowed her the praise of prudence and of le-,
alty*. A few days before her death, the deiired an interview
wyith the Prior of St. Andrew's, the Earl of Argyle, and other
chiefs of the Congregation. To them the lamented the fatal if-
sue of those violent couns~els, which the had been obliged to fol-
low; and, with the candour natural to a generous mind, confeffed
the errors of her own adminiffration, and begged forgiveness of
those, to whom they had been hurtful; but, at the fame time,
thle warned them, amidst their firuggles for liberty, and the shock
of arms, not to los~e fight of the loyalty and fubjeAion, which was
due to their Sovereign J. The remainder of her time, she em-
ployed in religious meditations and ex~ercises. She even invited
the attendance of Wiillox, one of the most eminent among the

beth to Randolph her agent, put it beyond all doubt, that mainy zealous Papifts
thought the alliance with England to be necessary for prefervirgr the liberty and
judependence of the kingdom. K~eith, I58. Huntly himielf began a correfpon-
den~ce with E~lizabeth's Mlinifkers, before the march of the Englith army into Scot-
land. F aynes State Papers, 261, 263. See Append.N~o III.

* Buchan* 324, t Lefly, de Rebus. Gest. Scot. 222.

BOOK InI. Reformed preachers, listened to his infiruaions with reverence

Sand attention *, and prepared for the approach of death with a

1360. decent fortitude.

M'o~ires of Nothing could now save the French troops, ihut up in Leith,
:e >oFLe ' but the immediate conclusion of a peace, or the arrivalof a power-
a peace. full army from the continent. The Princes of Lorrain amuled

their party in Scotland, with continual expec~ations of the latter,
and had thereby kept alive their hopes and their courage. But
at last, the fituatiorf of France, rather than the terror of the Eng.
liFh arms, or the remonfirances of the Scottilth malecontents, con-
irained them, though with reluatance, to turn their thoughts to-
wards pacific councils. The Protestants in France were, at that
time, a party formidable by their number, and more by the val-
our and enterprising genius of their leaders. Francis II. had treat.
ed them with extreme rigour, and dilcovered, by every flep he
took, a fettled resolution to extirpate their religion, and to ruin
those who profeffed it. At the prof~peA of this danger to them-
s~elves, and to their cause, the Protestants were alarmed, but not
terrified. Animated with zeal, and inflamed with relentment,
they not only prepared for their own defence, but resolved, by
some bold amion, to anticipate the schemes of their enemies. And
as the Princes of Lorrain were effeemed the authors of all thle
King's violent measures, they marked them out, to be the first
viatims of their indignation. Hence, and not from any difloy-

M~arch rS. alty to the King, proceeded the famous conspiracy of Ambolfe;

and though the vigilance and good fortune of the Princes of Lor-
rain discovered and disappointed that design, it was easy to ob-
s~erve new flortns gathering in every province of the kingdom,
and ready to burst out with all the fury and outrage of civil war.
In this situation, the ambition of the hous~e of Lorrain was called
off from the thoughts of foreign conquests, to defend the honour
and dignity of the French crown; aind instead of sending new
reinforcements into Scotland, it became necessary to withdraw
the veteran troops already employed in that kiingdomS.

The neg-o. In order to condua an affair of so much importance and deli-
citions for cacy, the Princes of Lorrain made choice of Monlue Bilhop of
pore. Valence and of the Sieur de Randan. As both there, especially

the former, were reckoned inferior to no perfous of that age, in
address and political refinement; Elizabeth oppoled to them Am·
bailadors of equal abilities j Cecil her Prime Minister, a man per-

* Knox, 228. t Lefly, 224.

haps of the greatest capacity who had ever held that of~ce; and BOOK HII
W2otton Dean of Canterbury, grown old in the art of negociatin,7
under three fucceffve Monarchs. The intereits of thle French and
Engliifh courts were Toon adjuffed by men of so great dexuterity in
business; and as France easily consented to withdraw those forces,
which had been the chief occaflon of the war; the other points
in disp~ute, between that kingdom and Englan~d, were not matters
of tedious, or of difficult dil'ufflon.

The grievances of the Congregation, and their demands upon

their own Sovereigns for redrers, employed longer time, and re-
quired to be treated with a more delicate hand. After so many
open attempts, carried on by command of the King and Queen,
in order to overturn the ancient conflitution, and to fixpprels the
religion which they had embraced, the Scottilh nobles could not
think themselves secure, wfithout fixingr some new barrier against
the future encroachments of regal power. But the legal fleps to-
wards accomplithing this were not so obvious. T'he French am-
baffadors considered the entering into ?ny treaty with fub~jeas, and
with rebels, as a condefcenflon, unworthy the: dignity of a Seve-
reign; and their scruples on this head might have put an end to
the treaty, if the impatience of both parties for peace had not
fuggefied an expedient, which seemed to provide for the security
of the fubjeAt, writhout derogating from the honour of the Prince.
The Scottish nobles agreed, on this occallon, to pals from the Amelels of
point of right and privilege, and to accept the redress of their th'e treacy.
grievances, as a matter of favour. WThatever additional iccurity
their anxiety for personal ifafety, or their zeal for public liberty,
prompted them to demand, was granted in the name of Francis
and Mary, as a~s of their royal favour and indulgence. And
left conceflons of this kind thould seem precarious, and liable to
be retraAed by the fame power wihich had made them, the French
Ambassador agreed to insert them in the treaty with Elizabeth, and
thereby to bind the Kiing and Queen inviolably to oblerve: them*.

In relating this tranfac~ion, cotemporary hiltorians have con-

founded the ~conc-eflions of Francis and Mary to their Scottiith sub-
jeAs, with the treaty between Fr ance and Eingrland; the latter,
besides the ratification of former treaties between the two liing-
doms, and flipulations with regard to the time and manner of re-
mo; ing both ar mies out of Scotland, contained an article, to w~hich,
as the source of many important events, we shall often have oc-
callon to refer. The right of Elizabeth to her crown is, there-

Boon: IIL. by, ackpnowledged in the firongeft terms; and Francis and iEl ry

Sfoiemnly engage, neither to assume the title, nor to bear the ann
56.of King and Queen of England, in any time to come.

Honourable as this article was for Elizabeth herself, the can

ditions the obtained for her allies the Scots, were no less advanta.

fuly 6. geous to them. Monlic and Riandan codfented, in the name of

Francis and Mary, that the French forces in Scotland thould in-
flantly be fentc back into their own country, and no foreign troop·
be hereafter introduced into the kingdom, w~ithlout the knowledge
and codeknt of Parliament; that the fortifications of Leith and
Dunb~ar thould immediately be razed, and no new fort be ere~ed
without the permitiion of Parliament; that a Parliament thould he
held on the fjirt day of Auguit, and that assembly be deemed as
valid, in all refpeas, as if it had been called by the expr~els com-
mandment of the King and Queen; that, conformable to the an-
cile-t laws and customs of the country, the King and Queen thould
not declare w-ar, or conclude peace, without the concurrence of
Parliament 3 that, during the Queco's absence, the adminiffration
of government thould be vefic4 in a cojuncilof twelve persons, to
be chosen ort of twenty-four named by Parliament, seven of which
counccil to be eleaed by the Queen, andu five by ther Parilamentj
that hereafter, the K~ing and Quteen thould not advance foreigrner
to places of truit or dignity in the kingdom, nor confer the Oit~cs
of T'reafurer or Comptioller of the revenues upon any ecclefiaf-
tic s that an aA of oblivion, abolifhling thle guilt and memory of
all orFfeces committed since thle sixth of March, 1558, thould be
pass~ed in the ensuing Fariament, and ratified by the King and
Queen; that-the King and Queen thould not, under colour of
punilhling any violation of their authority during that period, seek
to deprive any of their febjeas-of the offces, benefices, or efrates
which they now held; that the redlefs due to churchmen, for the
in~juries w-hich they had fbuitained d:rinig the late infurre~tions,
thoul~d be left entirely to the cognizance of Parliament WTith
regard to religious controversies, thle Ambafadors declared that
the-y would not presume to decide, but permitted the Par-
liameint, at their fjrik meeting, to examfine the pqints in differ-
en~ce, and to replefent their s~ens`e of them to thle King and Queen*.

h m s Tio fach a memorable period, did the Lords of the Congrega-

of` it, tion, by their courage and perseverance, condua an enterprize,

which, at firit, promised a very diiffrent iflue. From beginnings
exrtrcrocy feeble, and even contemptible, the party grew by de·

grees to great power 3 and being favoured by many fortunate in- B ox HI.
c dents, barted all the efforts of their own Queen, aided by the
forces of a more considerable kingdom. Thle w-hole forereign au- 60
thority was transferred, by this treaty, into the hands~ of the Con
grerration; that limited prerogative, which the crown had hitherto
poffeifed,, was almof1 entirely annihilated, and thle arillocratical
power, which always predominated in the Scottiih government, be-
came supreme and incontroulable. By th~is treaty, too, the in'lu-
ence of France, which had long been of much weight in the as-
fairs of Scotland, was greatly diminiifhed, and not only were the
present encroachments of that ambitions ally· refirined, but, by
confederating with England, protecaion was provided against anly
future attempt from the fame quarter. At the fame time, the con-
traverfies in religion beings left to thle cons .deration of Parliament,
the Proteltants might reckon upon obtaining what~ever decision
was most favourable to the opinions whlich they profeff~ed.

A few days after the conclusion of the treaty, both the French

and Engliih armies quitted Scotland.

The eyes of every man in that kiing~domn were turned towards A Parlia3-

the approaching Parliament. A meeting, summoned in a manner eta
10 extraordinary, at s~uch a cr-itical junAure, and to deliberate up-
on matters of so much consequence, was expeaed with the utmoit
anxilety.

A Scottish Parliament, faitable to the ariffocratical genius of the

government, was properly an assembly of the nobles. It was com-
posed of Bilhops, Abbots, Barons, and a few commimioners of bo-
roughs, who met altogether in one house. The Lesser Bar-ons,
though poffeffed of a right to be pr-efef, either in ped~on, or by
their reprelentatives, seldom exercise~d it. Thne expellce of at-
tendingr, according to the fashion of the times, with a numerous
train of vaffalls and dependents; the inattention of the age to any
legal or regular-fyftem of government: but, a'oove all, the exor-
bitant authority of thle greater nobles, who had drawn1 the whole
power into their own hands, made this privilege of so little value,
as to be almost negrleAed. It appears from thle ancient rolls, that
during times of tranquillity, few commiffloners of' boroughs, and
1xo't n ne of thle leffier Barons appeared inl Parlinment. Thie
ordinary admr;inifration of goverment was abndne wthu
scruple or jealouufy. to thle King and to thle nobles. But in exitra-
ordinary conjundlures, whien the 11ruggle for lib-erty was 1lak!nt,
and the fitit of opposition to the Crown rose to an h~eigh~t, the·
Et. " S and le~er Barons were ro-ed from their insdivity,

BOOKc ITL and flood forth to vindicate the rights of their country. The

I6.turbulent reign of James III. affords examples in proof of this ob.

servation *t. T~Ihe public indignation against the rath designs of
that weak; and ill-;cdvifed Prince, brought into Parliament, be-
sides the nobles and prelates, a considerable number of the lel~er
Earons.

T`he fame caures occafloned thleunufual confluence of all orders

of men to the Parliament, which met on the first of Auguff. T'he
universal patlion for liberty, civil and religious, which had seized
th;e n~ation, fhffered fewY persons to remain unconcerned fpeftators
of an assembly, whole aAs we~re likely to prove decisive with re-
specT to both. From all c.0rners of the kingdom, flocked in men,
eager and determined to aid, with their voices in the senate, the
fame cause, which they had defended with their fwvords in the
field. Besides a full convention of Peers, Temporal and Spiritu-
al, there appeared the repref'entatives of almost the whole boroughs,
and above an hundred Barons, who, though of the lesser order,
were Genltlemen of the first rank and fortune in the nation t.

The Parliament was ready to enter on business with the utmrolt

zeal, when a difficulty was flarted concerning the lawfulnels of the
meeting. No Commillioner appeared in the name of the King
and Queen, and no signification of their consent and approbation
was yet received. TIhere were deemed, by many, essential to the
very being of a Parliament. But, in opposition to this fentimenlt,
the express words of the treaty of Edinburg-h were urged, by which
this ailembily was declared to be as valid, in all refpeAs, as if it had
been called and appointed by the express command of the King
and1( Queen. As the adherents of the Congregation greatly out-
numbered their adversaries, the latter opinion prevailed. Their
holde~ll leaders, and those of most approved zeal, were chosen to be
Lords of the Articles, who formed a committee of ancient uTLe,
andi of great importance in the Scottish Parliament. The delibe-
rt1ion1s of thle Lords of the Articles were carried on with the most
u~nnimous and zaive real. The ac? of oblivion; the nomination
of twrenty-four persons, out of whom the council, entrusted with
supreme authority, was to be ele~ed; and every other thipg pre-
fcib~edl by the late treaty, or which feemned necessary to render it

Its pro1-l e0 fidi~ual, passed without dispute or delay. T'he article of religion

nemployed lo~nger time, and was attended with greater dii~culty. it
r io waa brought inzto Par:liament, by a petition from those who had

ado~pted the principles of the Reformation. Many do8rines of thle

) Ke:Jal I]7 p. Ibid, r46.

Popith church were a contrad;Aion to reason, and a dis~grace to Booa mI.
religion; its dilcipline had become corrupt and appreflive; and
its revenues were both exorbitant and ill applied. A gainft all there,
the Protestants remonfirated with the utmost fevelity of flyle,
which indignation at their absurdity, or experience of their p~er-
nicious tendency, could inspire; and encouraged, by the number
and zeal of their friends, to improve such a favourable junaure,
they aimed the blow at the w hole fabric of Popery; and besough~t
the Parliament to interpose their authority for rcaifying there
multiplied abul~es *.

Several prelates, zealouily attached to the ancient f~uperfition,

nere present in this Parliament. But during there vigorous pro-
ceedings of the Proteitants, they flood confounded, and at a gaze,
and pers~evered in a silence which was fatal to their cadfe. They
eiteemed it impossible to resist or divert that torrent of religious
zeal, which was still in its full fireng8th; they dreaded that their
opposition would irritate their adversaries, and excite them to new
acds of violence; they hoped that the King and Queen would
soon be at leisure to put a stop to the career of their insolent s~ub-
jeas, and that after the rage and havock of the present florm, the
former tranquillity and order would be reffored to the church
and k~ingdom. 'Ihey were w~illinlg, perhaps, to sacrifice the doc-
trine, and even the power of the church, in order to ensure the
safety of their own persons, and to preserve the poffetion of thos~e
revenues, which were still in their hands. From .whatever mo-
tives they aAed, their fillence, which was imputed to the confci-
outhefs of a bad caus~e, afforded matter of great triumph to the
Protestants, and encouraged them to proceed with more boldners
and ailacrity J·.

The Parliament did not think it enough to condemn those doc-

trines mentioned in the petition of the Protellants j they, more-
over, gave the fan~ion of their approbation to a Confetlion of
Faith prelented to them by the Reformed teachers $, and com-
posed, as might be expeated from such a performance in that age,
on purpose to expose the absurd tenets and praaices of the Romith
church. By another aB, the jurifdiaion of the ecclesiastical
courts was abolished, and the causes, which formerly came under
their cognisance, transferred to the decifians of civil judges jj.
By a third statute, the exercise: of religious worship, according to
the rites of the Romish church, was prohibited. The manner in

I K~nor, 237* + 1814- 253. ( Id. iblij I Keith, I 2.

BOOKtIII. Which the Parliamenrt inforced the observation of this law ditc>

-Vvers the zeal of that afllemblyy the first tranfgretlion fubje~ed the
56'offender to the forfeiture of his goods, and to a corporal punish.

ment, at the discretion of the judge; banishment was the penalty
of a second violation of the lawj and a third aB of disobedience
was declared to be capital *. Such firangers were men, at that
time, to the spirit of toleration, and to the laws of humanity; and
with such indecent haste did the very persons, who had juff es-
caped the rigour of ecclesiastical tyranny, proceed to imitate those
examples of se~verity, of which they themselves had so justly com-
plained.

\vith re. The vigorous zeal of the Parliatnent overturned, in a few days,
garrd to the the ancient system of religion, which had been established to many
revenues of
the church. ages. In reforming the doarine and dilcipline of the church,

the nobles kept pace with the ardour and expeAations even of Knox
himself. But their proceedings, with refpea to there, were not
more rapid and impetuous, than they were flow and dilatory when
they entered on the consideration of ecclefiaffical revenues. A.
mong the lay-members, some were already enriched with the rpoils
of the church, and others devoured in expeelation the wealthy
benefices which itill remained untouched. The alteration in re-
ligrion had afforded many of the dignified ecclefiallics themselves,
an opportunity of gratifying their avarice or ambition. The de-
molition of the monasteries, having s~et the Monks at liberty from
their confinement, they inflantly dispersed all over the kingdom,
and commonly betookr themselves to s~ome secular employment.
The Abbot, if he had been to fortunate as to embrace the prin·
ciples of the Reformation from convi~ion, or 10 cunning as to el-
poule them out of policy, seized the whole revenues of the frater·
nity, and, except what he allowed for the subsistence of a few
fu~peranhuated Monks·1, applied them entirely to his own use.
The proposal, made by the Reformed teachers, for applying these
revenues towards the maintenance of Ministers, the education of
youth, and the support of the poor, was equally dreaded by all
there orders of men. They oppos~ed it with the utmost warmth,
and by their numbers and authority, easily prevailed on the Par-
liament to give no ear to fach a disagreeable demand $. Zealous
as the first Reformers were, and animated with a spirit superior
to the low considerations of interest, they beheld these early
iiymptoms of felfifhnef~s and avarice among their adherents, with

* K'nox, 254. t Kelth, ~496. APppend. 190, >91. ( See A~ppend. No IV

indignation; and we find Knox exprefi~ng the utmost feni~bility
of that contempt, with which they were treated by many, from I 60.
whom he expeAed a more generous concern for the success of re-
lIg~ion, and the honour of its Ministers *.

A difi~culty hath been flarted with regard to the aAs of this Te isldi-

Parliament, concerning religion. This difficulty, frivolous in it- Parliament
self, and at this difiance of time of no importance, is founded on can a

i

the words of the treaty of Edinburgh. By that, the Parliament
was permitted to take into consideration the state of religion, and
to signify their sentiments of it to the King and Queen. But in-
flead of presenting their desires to their Sovereigns, in the hum-
ble form of a supplication or addrers, the Parliament converted
them into so many aas; which, although they never received the
royal assent, obtained, all over the kingdom, the weight and au-
yhority of laws In compliance with thtir injun~tions, the efla-
blilhed fyfiem of religion was every where overthrown, and that
recommended by the Reformers introduced in its place. The par-
tiality and zeal of the people overlooked or supplied any defea
in the form of there aAs of Parliament, and rendered the obfer-
vance of them more universal than ever had been yielded to the
flatutes of the most regular or conititutional assembly. By there
proceedings, it must, however, be confeffed, that the Parliament,
or rather the nation, violated the last article in the treaty of Edin-
burgh, and even ex~ceeded the powers competent to fiutjeas.
But when once men have been accuffomed to break through the
common boundaries of f~ubje~tion, and their minds are inflamed
wvith the patiions, which civil war inspire, it is mere pedantry or
ignorance to measure their condua by those rules, which can be
applied, only where government is in a slate of order and tran-
quillity. A nation, when obligad to employ s~uch extraordinary
efforts in defence of its liberties, avails itself of every thing which
can promote this great end; and the neceffty of the cafe, and
the importance of the objea, judtify any departure from the com-
mon and eltablithed forms of the conflitution.

In consequence of the treaty of Edinburgh, as well as by the Ambaffa.

dors s~ent b

ordinary forms of business, it became necessary to lay the proceed- the Parlia.
ings of Parliament before the King and Queen. For this pur- ment o

France.

pole, Sir James Saudilands of Calder Lord St. John, was appoint-
ed to repair to the court of France. After holding a cours~e to
irregular, the nobles had no reason to flatter thems~elves that
I'rancis and Mary would ever approve their condua, or confirm

* Knox, 239, 256.

BOOK III. it, by their royal assent. Thle reception of their Ambassador was

Sno other than they might hav·e expetedl. He was treated by the
136. ing and Queen with the utmost coldness, and dismissed wfith.

out obtaining the ratificatio~n of the Parliament's proceedings.
From the Princes of Lorrain and their partizans, he endured all
the scorn and insult, which it was natural for them to pour upon
the party he represented *.

And to Eli- Though the Earls of Morton, Glencairn, and Maitland of Le.

zeh, thington, the Ambaffdors of the Parliament to Elizabeth their

ProteArefs, met with a very different reception; they were not
more f~uccetfafl in one part of the negociation intruffed to their
care. The Scots, sensible of the sec@urity which they derived
from their union with England, were desirous of rendering it in,
dissoluble. With this view, they empowered ther~e eminent leaders
of their party, to testify to Elizabeth their gratitude for that sea.
fonable and effeaual aid which the had afforded them, and at the
fame time, to beseech her to render th~e friendnhip between the
nations prepetual, by condescending to marry the Ear-l of Arran,
who, though a fabjec?, was nearly allied to the royal family of
-Scotland, and after Mary, the undoubted heir to the Crowrn.

To the former part of this commillion Elizabeth listened with

the utmost f~atisfa~ion, and encouraged the Scots, in any future
eXigency, to hope for the continuance of her good ofmces; with
regard to the latter, the discov·ered those s~entiments to which the
adhered throughout her whole reign. Averse from marriage, as
some pretend through choice, but reore probably out of policy,
that ambitious Princess would never admit any partner to the
throne; but delighted with the entire and uncontrolled exercise
of power, she sacrificed to the enjoyment of that, the hopes of
transmitting her Crown to her own posterity. The marriage
with the Earl of Arran could not be attended with any s~uch ex-
traordinary advantage, as to thake this res~olution. f he declined
it, therefore, but with many expreflions of good-will towards the
Scottish nation, and of refpea for Arran himself J-.

The death Towards the conclusion of this year, distinguished by so many
ofFranciall* remarkable events, there happened one of great importance. On

the 4th of December, died Francis II. a Prince of a feeble con-
fkitution, and of a mean underitanding~. As he did not leave any
ifue by the Queen, no incident could have been more fortunate to
thole, who, during the late commotions in Scotland, had taken

* Knox, 25~5. Buch. 3'7. t Burn. 3. Append* 308. Keith, 15.;, &c.

part with the Congregation. M~ary, by the charms of her beauty, Boo,: mI.
had acqluired 'an entire ascendant over her husband; and as th~e I560.
transferred all her influence to her uncles the Princes of Lorrain,
Francis followed thera implicitly in w\hatever traA they were
pleal ~d to lead him. Thte power of Trance, under such dire~ion,
alarmed the Scottith malecontents, with apprehension~s of danger,
no less formidable, than well founded. The inteliine disorders
which raged in France, and the seasonable interpolition of Eng-
Jand in behalf of the Congregation, had hitherto prevented the
Princes of Lorrain from carrying their deigrns upon Scotland in-
to execution. But under their vigorous and decisive admini-
nration, it was impoibule that the commotions in France could
be of long continuance, and many things might fall in to divert
Elizabeth's attention, for the future, from the affairs of Scotland,
In either of there events, the Scots would stand exposed to all the
vengeance, whlich the resentment of the Trench court could in-
flic?. The blow, however long ulipended, was unavoidable, and
Inuft fall at lail with redoubled weight. From this prof~peA and
expeaation of danger, the Scots were delivered by the death of
Francis; the ancient confederacy of t'he two kingdoms had al-
ready been broken, and by this event, the only bond of union
which remained was dissolved. Catherine of Medicis, who dur-
ing the minority of Charles IX. her second son, engrossed the
entire direaion of the French councils, was far from any thoughts
of vindicating the Scottish Queen's authority. Catherine and
Mfary had been rivals in power during the reign of Francis II.
and had contended for the government of thast weak and unex-
perienced Prince ; but as the charms of the wife eaiily triumphed
over the authority of the moth~er, Catherine could never forgive
such a dilappointment in her favourite pation, and beheld now,
with a recret pleasure, the dift~cult and perplexing feene, on
which her daughter-in-law was about to enter. Mary, over. Maryretires
whelmed with all the sorrow which so fad a reverfet of fortune m
could occallon; slighted by the Queen mother*; and forsaken France.
by the tribe of courtiers, who appear only in the sunshine of
prosperity, retired to Rheims, and there, in folitudie, indulged
her grief, or bid her indignation. Even the Princes of Lorrain
were obliged to contraA their views; to turn them from foreign
to domestic objets ; and inficad of forming vast projeas with re-
gard to Britain, found it neceffaty to think of acquiring, and
sitablifhing an interest with the new adminiffrotion.

* lienaut. 340. Caftelp. 4/4,

c~Joo~ III It is impatible to describe the emotions of joy, which, on all

J560. ther~e accounts, the death of the French IVonarch excited among

the Scots. T'hey regarded it as the only event? which could give
firmnels and Itability to that ijyftem of religion and government,
which was now introduced; and it is no wonder cotemporary
hifforians thould alcribe it to the immediate care of Providence,
wvhich, by unforeseen expedients, can secure the peace and hap-
pinef~s of kingdoms, in those situations, where human prudence
and invention would utterly delpair *.

,,,,.fAbout this time, the Protestant church in Scotland began to

Prefbyteri. assume a regular form. Its principles had obtained the fanAlon
aoen cuc- Of public authority, and some fixed external policy became necef-
Ipent. fary for the government and preservation of the infant faciety.

The model introduced by the Reformers, differed extremely from
that, which had been 10 long eftablilhed. The motives, which
induced them to depart so far from the ancient fyfiem, deserve to
be explained,

As the vices of the clergy had, at firit, excited the indignation

of manki~nd, and roded that spirit of inq~uiry, w-hich proved 10
fatal to the whole Popish system: as this disg~ust at the vices of
ecclefiatics was soon transferred to their perions, and thifting
from them, by no violent transition, fettled at last on the offices
which they enjoyed; the effeas of the Reformation wvould na-
turally have extended not only to the doarine, but to the govern,
ment of the Popi~h church; and the fame spirit which aboilihed the
former, would have overturned the latter. But, in Germany,
England, and the northern kingdoms, its operations were check,
ed by the power and policy of their Princes; and the ancient
Epitcopal jurifdiaion, under a few limitatiolas, was flncontinued
in those churches. The Episcopal hierarchy appears to be more
conformable to the praaice of the church, since Christianity be-
came the eftablifhled religion of thle Roman emnpire. The eccle-
fiaical government was, at that time, plainly copied from the
civil; the Biri not only borrowed its form, but derived its
authority from the latter j and the diocefes and jurifdialons of
Patriarchs, Archbiihops, and Bilhops, correiponded with the di-
vision and conflitution of the empire. In Switzerland, and the
Low-countries, the nature of the government allowing full scope
to the genius of the Reformation, all pre-eminence of order in
the church was destroyed, and an equality eftablifhled more faita

* Knox, 259.

ble to the sp~irit of republican policy. The situation of the pri- IlooRIlL
Initive church fuggefied the idea, and furnifhled the model of thle
latter system, which has since been called PreJbytrerian. The '-560.
firlt Christians, oppressed by continual perfecutions, and obliged
to hold their religious assemblies by filelth, and in corners, were
contented with a form of government extremely limple. The
influenee of religion concurred, with the sense of danger, in exv-
tinguiihing among them, the spirit of ambition, and in preserving
a parity of rank, thle e~ffc? of their fulferings, and the caus~e of
many of their virtues. Calvin, whose decisions were received,
among the Protefrants of that age, with incredible fubmiioin,
w~as the patron and rellorer of thlis scheme of ecclesiastical policy.
The church of Geneva, formed under his eye, and by his direc-
tion, was efleemed the most perfec? model of this government i
and Knox, who, during his residence in that city, had fludied
and admired it, warmly recommended it to the imitation of his
countrymen.

Among the Scottilh nobles, fame hated the persons, and others

coveted the wealth of the dignified clergy; and by abolifhingg that
order of men, the former indulged their resentment, and the lat-
ter hoped to gratify their avarice. The people, inflamed with
the most violent averflon to Popery, and approving of every s~cheme
that departed farthest from the praAice of the Romith church
were delighted with a system, so admirably suited to their predo-
minant patiron. Wlhile the friends of civil liberty beheld, with
pleasure, the Protefrant clergy pulling down, with their own
hands, that fabric of ecclesiastical power, which their predecessors
had reared with so much art and induffry; and t~attered them-
selves, that by lending their aid to fIrip churchmen of their dig-
nity and wealth, they might entirely deliver the nation from their
exorbitant and opprefirve jurifdicaion. The new mode of govern-
mentt easily made its way among men, thus prepared, by their
various interests and patlions, for its reception.

But, on the first introduaion of his lyfitem, Knox did not deem

it expedient to depart altogether from the ancient form*. In-
flead of B3ishops, he proposed to eftablifhl ten or twelve Superin-
tendants in different parts of the kingdom. There, as the name
implies, were impowered to infpeA the life and doarine of the
other clergy. T'hey presided in the inferior judicatories of thle
church, and performed several other parts of the Episcopal func-
tion. Their juridiiAion, however, extended to sacred thirgs

* Spotfw 000, 158.

BOOK III. Only; they claimed no feat in Parliament, and pretended no nght

to the dignity, or revenues, of the former Biflhops.

The number of inferior clergy, to whom the care of parochial

duty could be committed, was still extremely small; they had
embraced the principles of the Reformation at different times,
zad from various motives j during the public commotions, they
were scattered, merely by chance, over the different provinces of
the kingdom; and, in a few places only, were formed into regu.

dEc. 20. lar claires or societies. The first General Assembly of the church,

which was held this year, bears all the marks of an infant and
unformed aciiety. The members wyere but few in number, and
of no considerable rank; no uniform or consistent rule seems to
have been observed in eleaing them. From a great part of the
kiingdom no representatives appeared. In the name of s~ome entire
counties, but one perso~n wats present; w-hile, in other places, a
single towvn or church sent several members. A convention, 10
feeble and irregular, could poffers n egreat authority ; and confci
ous of their own weakness, the members put an end to their de.
bates, wyithout venturing upon any decision of much importance*

rj6r. In order to give greater firength and consistency to the Pr:e

thyterian plan, Knox, with the assistance of his brethren, compoled
the first book of difciplib~e, which contains the model or platform
of the intended policy -f. They presented it to a convention of

January I5*. efates, whiich was held in the beginning of this year. Whatever

regulations were proposed with regard to eccleiiaftic dilcipline
and jurifdiaion, would have easily obtained the fanaion of that
asse~mbly; but a design to recover the patrimony of the church,
whrlich is there insinuated, met with a very different reception.

In vain did the clergy display the advantages which wfould

accrue to the public, by a proper application of ecclefiatical re-
venues. In vain did they propole, by an impartial diffribution
of this fund, to promote true religion, to encourage learning, and
to support the poor. In vain did they even intermingle thlreat-
nings of the divine dif'pleafure, against the unjust detainers of
what was appropriated to a sacred use. The nobles held fast the
prey, which they had seized; and bellowing upon the propoial,
the name of pBdevout imagination, they affe~ed to confider it, as a
projea~ altogether visionary, and treated it with the utmost [corn g.

Tihe Q zn T'his convention appointed the Prior of St. Andrew's to repair

00ur ilto thIle Queern, and to invite her to return into hier native country,

Scotland.

shh,?; q8. i S20tfivood, I52. 5 Knox, :56.

and to~aifume the reigns of government, which had been too Boox III.
long committed to other hands. And though some of her sub- L-
Jects dreaded her return, and others foresaw dangerous confe_ 5-
quences with which it might he attendied ", thle bulk of them de-
Ered it with io much ardour, that the invitation was given with
the greatest appearance of unanimity. But the zeal of the Roman
Catholics got the flart of the Prior in plying court to Mary; and
Lefly, afterwards Bilhop of Ross, who was commiffloned by thcm,
arrived before him, at the place of her refidencet. Lefly endeav-
oured to infuse into the Queen's mind fhfpicions of her Protellant
fubje~ts, and to persuade her to throw herself entirely into the arms
of 'thofe who adhered to her own religion. For this purpole, he
in~fited that she thould land at Aberdeen; and as the Protestant
do~trines h-d made no considerable progress in that part of the
kingdom, he gave her afrurance of beings joined, in a few day ,
by twenty thousand men; and flattered her, that with fach an
Brmy, encouragedc by her presence and authority, the mi hlt easily
overturn the Reformed Church, before it was Airmly fettled on
its foundations.

But at this junaure, the Princes of Lorrain wsere not disposed

to lifien to this extravagant and dangerous proposal. Intent on
defending thlemfelves againaft Catherine of Mledicis, whof~e,infidi-
ous policy was employed in undermining their exorbitant power,
they hiad no leis~ure to attend to the affairs of Scotland, and with-
ed their niece to take poffe~Tion of her kingdom, with as little dif-
turbance as possible. The French officers, too, who had served
in Scotland, di~ffaded Mary from all violent measures; and, by
representing the power and number of the Protestants to be irre-
fimible, determined her to court' them by every art; and rather
to employ the leading men of that party as her Miniffers, than
to provok~e them, by a fruitless opposition, to become her ene-
miesl. Hence proceeded the confidence and affeaion, with
which the Prior of St. Andrew's was received by the Queen.
His representation of the slate of the kingdom gained great cre-
dit; and Lefly beheld, with regret, the new channel in which
court favour was lik~ely to run.

Another Convention of the estates was held in May. The

arrival of an Ambassador from France, seems to have been the oc-
caslon of this meeting. He was infiruaed to follicit the Scots to
renew their ancient alliance with France, to break, their new con-

* See Append. No. V. J· Lefly, 227i. t. Mely. 6r.

BOOKIII. fed~eracy with England, and to reflore the Popinh ecclefiaftecs t&

Ijr the poff~eflron of their revenues, and the exercise of their funalons

It is no easy· matter to form any conjec~ure concerning the inten-
tions of the French court, in mak~ing these extraordinary and ill-
timed propositions. They were rejea8ed w-ith that scorn, which
might well have been expet~ed from the temper of the nation*.

In this Convention, the Protestant clergy did not obtain a more

favourable audience than formerly, and their profpea of recover-
ing the, patrimony of thle church flill remained as difiant and un-
certain as ever. But with regard to another point, thney found
the zeal of the nobles in no degree abated. T'he book of dilci-
pline seemed to requnire, that the monuments of Popery, which
flill remained in the kin~gdom, thould be demolished t·. And,
though neither the lame pretence of policy, nor the fame ungo.
vernable rage of the people, remained to justify or excule this
barbarous havock, the Convention. con~sidering every religious fa-
bric as a reliA of idolatry, passed senten~ce upon thlem by an aR
in form; and person:s, the moit remnarkiable for the a8ivity of
their zeal, were appointed to put it in execution. Abbies, cathe-
drals, churches libraries, records, and even the sepulchres of the
dead, perithedd in one common ruin. T`he B~ri florm of popula:
inf~urrec~ion, though impetuous and irresistible, had extended only
to a few counties, and soon sp-ent its rage , but now a deliberate
and universal rapine completed the devaffation of every thing, re-
nerable and magnificent, which hlad escaped its violence J.

Mary be- In the mean time, Mary was in no haste to return into Scot-

2 I~r:i land. Accuffomed to the elegance, iplendlor, and gaiety of a po-

lite court, the still fondly lingered in Fiance, the feene of alltheL
enjoyments, and contemplated, with horror, the barbarism of her
own country, and the turbulence of her fubjeas, which presented
her with a very different face of things. 7 he impatience, howr-
ever, of her people, the perfuations of her uncles, but above shl
the fludied and mortifying negledt, with which the was treated by
the Quteen M~iother, forced her to think of beginning this difa-
greeable voyage II. But wh~ile the was preparino for it, there
wcrere sown between her and Elizabeth, the feeds of that perronal
jealousy and dilcord, which imbittered thle life, and iihortened the
days of the Scottish Queen.

nh~ ~ The ratification of the late treaty of Edinburgrh was the im-

bctwen hnler mediate occasion of this fatal animority; the true caules of it
and Lliza-
leeth. '* Kinox, 269. 273. J Spotfwacd, 153. (Ii.14

|1 Braptorte, Jebb. vol. ii. 482.

lay much deeper. Almolt every article, in that treaty, had been BOOK III.
executed by both parties, with a scrupulous exaanels. The for-
tifications of Leith were demolished, and the armies of France 6.
and England wyithdrawn within the appointed time. The griev-
ances of the Scottish malecontents were redressed, and they had
obtained whatever they could demand for their future security.
W~ith regard to all there, Mary could have hittle reason to decline,
or Elizabeth to urge the ratification of the treaty.

The sixth article remained the only source of contest and difEi-

culty. No minister ever entered more deeply into the schemes of
his Sovereign, or pursued them with more dexterity and success
than Cecil. In the conduA of the negociation at Edinburgh, the
found underitanding of this able politician proved greatly an over-
match for Mlouluc's refinements in intrigue, and artfully induced
the French Ambassadors, not only to acknowfledge that the Crowns
of England and Ireland did of rignt belong to Elizabeth alone, but
also to promile, that in all times to come, Ml/ary thould abitain
hrom using the titles, or bearing the arms of those kingdoms.

The ratification of this ar ticle would have been of the moss fa-

tal consequence to MLary, The Clown of England was an objeR
worthy of her ambition. Her pretenflons to it gave her great dig-
nity and importance: in the eyes of all Europe. By many, her
title was esteemed pre erable to that of Elizabeth. Among the
Engliih themselves the Roman Catholics, who formed, at that
time, a numerous and a~iv·e party, openly efpouled this opinion;
and even the Proteftznts who supported Elizabeth's throne, could
not deny the Queen of Scots to be her immediate heir. A proper
opportunity to avail herself of all these advantages, could not in
the course of things, be far difiant, and many incidents might fall
ini, to bring this opportunity nearer than was expeaed. In there
circumitances, M~ary, by ratif'ying the artic-le in dilpute, would
have loft that rank; which the had h:therto held among neighbour-
ing Princes; the zeal of her adherents mult have gradually cool-
ed; and the might have renounced, from that moment, all hopes
of ever wearing the English Crown.

N\one of these beneficial consequences es~caped the penetrating

eye of Elizabeth, who, for this reason, had recourse to every thing,
by which the could hope either to sooth or frighten the Scottiih
Queen into a compliance with her demands. And if that Prin-
cess had been to unadvised as to ratify the rash concem~ons of her
AmbalTadors. Elizabeth, by that deed, would have acq~uired an ad-
vantage, which, unnder her managemnent, must have turned to great

U ij

UCoKIIE* aCCOunt. By such a renunciation, the question, with regard to

the right of faccefT~on, would have been left altogether open and

56.undecided; and, by means of that, Elizabeth might either have

kept her rival in perpetual anxiety and dependence, or, by the
authority of her Parliament, the might have broken in upon the
order of lineal fuccetfion, and transferred the Crown to fame 0-
ther descendant of the royal blood. The former condeft the ob.
served towards James VI. whom, during his whole reign, the
held in perpetual fear and fubjec~ion. The latter and more ri-
gorous method of proceeding, w·ould, in all probability, have been
employed ag~ainst Mary, whom, for many reasons, the both envied
and hated.

Nor was this flep beyond her pow er, unprecedented in the hillo,

ry, or inconsistent with the conflitution of England. Thoughfuc-
cefEion by hereditary right be an idea so natural and so popular,
that it has been eftabliibed almost in every civilized nation, yet
England affords many memorable inflances of deviations from that
rule. T'he Crown of that kringdom having once been seized by
the hand of a conqueror, this invited the bold and enterpfi~ng in
every age to imitate falch an Illuffrious ex~ample of fortunate am-
bition. From the time of William I. the regular course of de-
ficent had seldom continued through three fuccetlive reigns. Those
Princes, whol~e intrigrues or valour opened them a way to the
throne, called in the authority of the great council of the nation
to confirm their dubious titles. Hence, parliamentary and here-
ditary right became in Enlgland of equal consideration. That great
assembly claimed and acuTully poiffEffd a power of altering the
order of regal fuccetiTon; and even 10 late as Henry VIII. an ac?
of Parliament had authorized that capricious Monarch to fettle thle
order of fa~ccetion at his pleasure. T'he English jealous of their
religious liberty, and averse from the dominion of firangers, would
have eagerly adopted the patiions of their Sovereign, and might
have been easily induced to exaclude the Scottish line from the
right of succeeding- to the Crown. There seem to have been the
views of both Queens, and thofc were the difficulties which re-
ratardecd the ratification of the treaty of Edinburgh.

But, if the sources of their discord were to be traced no b~igher

than this treaty, an inconfidelable alteration in the words of it,
might have brought the present quetlion to an amicable illine.. The
indefinite and zn tbiuou!s exprd~ian, which Cecil had inserted in-
to the treaty, might have been chlangecd into onie more lirmtedr

butmore precise. And Mary, inficad of promifingr to ab9?-in from nBoom m
bearing the title of Queen of England in all times to come, might
have engaged not to assume that title, during the life of Eliza- 6.
beth, or the lives of her lawful posterity,

This amendment, however, did not suit the views of eithler

Queen. Though Mlary had been obliged to fulfpend, for some time,
the prosecution of her tl to the English Crown, th~e had not,
however, relinquilhed it. She determined to revive her claim
on the first profpedt of s~ucces~s, and was unwilling to bind herself,
by a positive engagement, not to take advantage of any such for-
tunate occurrence. Nor would the alteration have been more ac-
ceptable to Elizabeth, who, by agrreeingto it, would hate tacitly
r~cognized the right of her rival to ascend the throne after her
decease. But neither the Scots nor Englinh Qu~een durit avow
there secret fentirnents of their hearts. Any open discovery of
an inclination to diflurb thle tranqluillity of England, or to wvrcit
the sceptre out of Elizabeth's hands, might have proved fatal to
Mcary. Any sus~picion of a design to alter the order of fuccefT~on,
and to set aside the claim of the Scottish Queen, would have ex-
posed Elizabeth to much and deserved censure, and have raised
up against her many and dangerous enemies. There, however
carefullly concealed, or artfully difguifred, were, in all probability,
the real motives which determined the one Queen to follicit, and
the other to refuse the ratification of the treaty, in its original
form; while neither had recourse to that explication of it, which,
to an heart unwvarped by political interest, and sincerely dlfir-
ous of union and concord, would have appeared so obvious and
natural.

But though considerations of interest first occafloned this rup-

ture between the Britilh Queens, rivalfhip of another k~ind con-
tributed to widen the breach, and female jealousy incleafed the
the violence of their political hatred. Elizabeth, with all thlofe
eatraordinary qualities, by which th~e equalled or furpaild those
of her sex, who have merited thle greatelt renown, difcov-red an
admiration of her ow~n person, to a degree, wrhlch w omen of ordi-
nary underflandings either do not enteltain, or pruld ntly en-
deal our to conceal. Her attention to dress, her solicitude to dif-
play her charms, her love of flattery, were all excellive.No
were there w~eaknesses colnfined to that poliod of life, when thecy

are ore ardobl. Even in very advanced years, th~e wifet~i

v man of t!at, or perha-ps of any other agre, were~ the garb, and

BOOK 8 I. afft~ece the manners of a girl*. Though Elizabeth was as muc

inferior to Mary, in beauty, and gracefulness of person, as the

10 excelled her in political abilities, and in thle arts of government,

the was weak enough to compare herself with the Scottith ueenS;
and as it was impofi~ble th~e could be altogether ignorant how
much Mary gained by the comparison; the envied and hated her
as a rival, by whom the was eclips~ed. In judging of the conduat
of Princes, we are apt to aferibe too much to political motives.
and too little to the pa~Tion which they feel in common with the
reit of mankind. In order to account for Elizabeth's present, as
well as her subsequent condua towards Mary, we muff not al-
ways confider her as a Queen, we must sometimes regard her as

a woman.

Elizabeth, though no firanlger to Mary's difficulties with re,

fpea~ to the treaty, continued to urge her, by repeated applica-
tions, to ratify it f. Mary, under various pretences, still contri-
ved to gain time, and to elude the request. But while the one
Quen follicited with perfevecring importunity, and the other evad·
ed with artful delay, they both fludied an extreme politeness of
behaviour, and loaded each other wvith profefiouns of fifferly love,
with reciprocal decplarations of ulnchangeable efleem and amity.

Elizabeth It was not long before Mary was convinced, that, among

ePrinces, thlefe expreflions of fr-iendfhtip are commonly far distant

Londua. from the heart. In failing from France to Scotland, the course

lies along the English coast. In order to be safe from the infuh~s
of the English fleet, or in cafe of tempefluous weather, to secure
a retreat in the harbours of that kiing~dom, Mary sent M. D'Oy-
fel to demand of Elizabeth a safe condua during her voyage.
This requell, which decency alone obliged one Prince to giant
to another, Elizabeth rejeaed, in such a manner, as gave rife tQ
no flight fulpicion of a design, either to obfirruA the palibge, or
to intercept thle person of the Scottish Queen II.

3'arvr. Th r-is ungenerous behaviour of Elizabeth filled Mary with in-
gpnsher diignation, but did not retard her departure from France. She
Ioyage. was accompanied to Calais, the place where the embarked, in a

manner faitable to her dignity, as the Queen of two powerful
k~ingrdoms. Six Princes of Lorrain her uncles, with many of the
mail eminent among the French nobles, were in her retinue.

* Johlriton F-ifi. Rer. Eritan.346> 314** Carte, vol. iii. 699. Catalogue of

Roya~l an~d NebleAuthors. Article Essfx.Y

t MIelvil, 98. ( Keith, x y7, '60, &c.
1 Ibid. xyr. Camden. See Apend. No. VI.

C' therine, who secretly rejoiced at her departure, graced it with BOO"K liI
exery circumdlance of magnificence and refpeA. Aifter bidding 5*
adieu to her mourning attendants, with a fad heart, and eyes bath-
ed in tears, Alary left that kingdom, the tho;·t, but only scene of
her life, in which fortune smiled upon her. WVhile the French
coast continued in fighlt, fhle intently gazed upon it, and musing,
in a thoughtful poflure, on that hight of fortune whence thle had
fallen, and preladging, perhaps, the difaiters and calamities wh~ich
imbittered the remainder of her days, the sighed often, and cried
out " Farewel France!i Farewel beloved country, which I shall
"L never more behold!" Even when the darkness of the night
had hid the land from her view, thle would neithler retire to thle
cabin, nor taste food, but commanding a couch to be placed on
thle deck, the there waited the return of day, with the utmolt im-
Patience. Fortunle soothed her on this occasion ; the galley made
little wray during the night. In th~e morning, the coait of France
was flill within fight, and the continued to feed her melancholly
with the profpea; and as long as her eyes eould diftinguilh~ it,
to utter the fame tender expret~on~s of regret*. At last a brisk
gale arose, by the favour of whlich for fame days, and afterward
under the covert of a thick fog, M~ary es~caped the Englilh iticet,
wrlich lay in wait to intercept her?-; and on the 19th of Augruf,
after an ablence of near thirteen years, landed safely at Leith in Ar r' s a

. Scorla 1J.

hler native kingdom.

Alary was received by her fubjeAs with thouts and acclama-

tic as of joy, and writhl every demonfiration of welcome and re-
ga'"·d. But as her arrival was unexpeated, and no suitable pre-
parltion had been made for it, th~ey could not, with their utmolt
eflo~rts, hide from her the poverty of the country, and were 0-
blided to condua her to the palace of H~olyrood-houfe with little
pomp. The Queen, accuitomed from her infancy to thle utmoit
iplendor and magnificence, and fond of them, as was natural at
her age, could not help observing the change in her Sruation, and
seemed to be deeply affeaied with its.

N\ever did any Prince ascend the throne at a junature, which state of the

called for tnore wisdom in council, or more courage and fledldi_ ku' gd am

£111 LH110.

ness in acaion. The rage of religious controverjy was flill unabant-
ed. T`he memory of past oppretion erafperated thle P:0te~ants;
the tinart of recent in~juries rendered th~e Papifts des~perate; I oth
nere ze-10us, fielce, and irreconcilable. The abktnce of their
Soxereign had accuitomed the nobles to independency; and, du-

* Enntome, 8S3. He hilmf If was: in the face- galley- wilh th- Queen,
I- Coodall. vol. l. 175. C·fteln, 455.· ( Branct. ,S

Bnoo r . ring the late comnmotions, they had aclu~ired fiich an increase of

56.wealth, as threw great weight into the scale of ariflocracy, which

flood not in need of any accefflon of power. The kingdom had
long been under the government of Regents, wh~o exercised a de-
legrated jurifdi~cion, attended with little authority, and which in-
spired no reverence. A slate of pure anarchy had prevailed for
the two lait years, without a Regent, without a s~upreme council,
without the power, or even the form of a regular government*,
A licentious spirit, unacquainted with faboardination, and disdain·
ing the refiraints of law and juflice, had spread among all ranks
of men. The influence of France, the ancient ally of the king-
dom, was withdrawn or depilied. The Englinh, of enemies be.
come confederates, had grown into con:fidence with the nation,
and gained an ascendant over all its councils. The Scottifhl Mo
narchs did not derive more sp~lendor or power from the friendship
of thle former, than they had reason to dread injury and dimi-
nution from the interposition of the latter. Eve~ry confidera·
tion, whether of interest, or of s~elf pres~ervation, obliged Eliza
beth to depres~s the royal authority in Scot-land, and to create the
Prince perpetual difficulties, by fomenting the spirit of difafee
tion among the people.

In this pollure were the affairs of Scotland, when the admini·

firation fell into the hands of a young Queen, not nineteen years
of ag-e, unacqjuainted with the manners and laws of her country,
a firanger to her fubjea~s, without experience, without allies, and
almost without a friend.

On the other hand, in Af~ary's situation we find some circum·

frances, which, though they did not balance these disadvantages,
contribjuted, however, to alleviate them; and, with skillful ma-
nag'ement, might have produced great effe~As. Her fatbjeas,
uinaccuffomecd so long to the residence of their Prince, were not
only dazzled by the novelty and splendor of the royal preilence,
but inspired with awe and reverence. Besides the places of power
and profit beffowed by the favour of a Prince, his protec~ion, his
familiarity, and even his smiles, confer honour and win the hearts
of men. From all corners of the k~ingdom, the nobles crowfded
to teffify their duty and affet~ion to their Sovereign, and fludied,
by every art, to wipe out th~e memory of pass mifconduA, and to
lay in a ftockr of future merit. 'The amusements and gaiety of
her court, which wacs filled with the mos1 accomplished of the
French nobility who had attended! her, began to soften and to

* Keith, Appenld. 92.

poh 11 the rudle manners of the nation. Ala~ry hler6;f po~ieffed BOOK 11 ,
manyj of these qualifications, n~h-ch rlife affeition, and procure
eiteem. T he beauty and gracefu~lnei* of h r person d-ew univer-
fal admiration, the elegrance andi politendfs of hier manners com-
manded general refp~eA. To all the charms of her own sex, hie
adided many of the accomplishments of the other. The progrds~
the had made in all the arts alnd sciences, which were then
esteemed necessary or ornamental, was far beyond what is co~m-
monly attained by Princes. And all her other qualities were
rendered more agreeable by a courteous affability,, which, without
lessening the dignity of a Prince, fleals on the hearts of f~ubjec'is
with a bewitching insinuation.

From thelre circumilances, notwvithilanding the threatening

afpee? of affairs at Ma·Iry's return inlto Scotland, notwrithfianding
thie clouds which g~athlered on every hand, a political observer
w~ould hlave prediaedl a very different i'ifue of hier reign; and
whaltever sudden guits of fad~ion hre might have expec~ed, he would
never have dreaded the deftruative violence of that florm which
fo'lowed.

WThile all parties were contending wvho thould dilcover thle

m~ost dutiful attachment to the Queen, the zealous and impatient
[p~irit of the age brok~e out in a remarkable inflance. On the
Sunday after hier arrival, the Q~een commanded mass to be ce-
lobtated in the chapel of hier palace. The firfl rumour of this
occalioned a secret murmuring among the Protestants whlo at-
tendtd the court j complaints and threatenings soon followed.
Thle fervints beclonging to the chapel were insulted and abused;
lad, if the Fiior of St. Andrew's hatd not seasonably interpose~d,
the ricters mighrlt has c proceeded to the utmost excefies *.

It is impollibile, at thlis dillance of time, and under circum-

flances f> very different, to conceive the violence of that zeal
against Popery, which then poffeffed the nation. Every instance
of conldfcenflon to the Papifts was efleemed an aA of apoffacy,
and th~e toleration of a single mass pronounced to be more formid-
a'DIC t0 thle nation than th~e invasion of tenl thousand armed men-t.
Under thle influence of the~se opinions, many Protellants would
have ventured to go dangerous lengths; and, without attempting
to convince their Sov~ereign by argument, or to reclaim her by
'ndulgrence, would have abruptly denied her the liberty of
wrorhipp~ing God in that manner, which alone she thoug-h accept-
able to h'm. But the Prior of St. Andrewv's, and other leaders

* K~nort :84. j K~nox, 28-. XC

BOOKII 11-Of the party, not only rcitrained this impetuous Ipirit; bult, 1-

15i.[ite of the mucrmuris of thle people, and the exclamations of the

preachers, obtained for the Q~een and her domeitics the undil-
turbed exercise of the Catholic religion. Near an hundred year-
after this period, v.hen the violence of religious animofities had
begun to flbfide, whecn time, and the progress of learning had elf
larged the viewj~s of the human mind, an English house of Com-
mons refused to indullge the wife of their Sovereign in the private
use of the mals. T'he P-rotefeant leaders deserve, on this occallon,
the praise both of wildiom and of moderation for condua 10 dif-
ferent. But, at the fame time, whoever refleas upon the en-
croachingr and fangruinary fphlit of Popery, w-ill be far from treat·
ing the fears and caution of the more zealous Reformers as alto-
gethler imaginary, and deflitute of anly real foundation.

The Protellants, however, by this compliance with the Queen'l

prejudices, obtained a proclamation highly favourable to their re-
lig~ion. The Reformed doarine, though eftabliihed all over th:
ktingdomn, had never received the countenance or fTanaion of rop-

lug-uft25. al authoity. On this occaflojn, the Queen declared any attempt

towards an alteration or f~ubverflon of it, to be a capital crime'.

Sheemp~loys The Qgeen, conformable to thle plan which had been concer -
a x -~ ed in France, committed the adminiffration of affairs enltirely to
adminiffra. Protestants. Her council wvas 1111ed wijth the most eminent per-

t n. fns of that party; not a Tfmgle Papist was admitted into any

degree of confidence t·. Thle Prior of St. Andrewf's and M~ait-
land of Lethington seemed to hold the first place in the Queent'
affQion, and poffefed all the power and reputation of favouri e
nIinifrers. He chic col no have fallen upon persons mor~e
acceptable to her peop~le. Aind, by their prudent advice, tie
Qtueen conducaed herself with so much moderation, and deference
to the sentiments of the nation, as could not fail of gaining tl
a.Teaion of her fabjeAst, the firmlef foundation of a Prince's
power, and the only genuine source of his happind~s and glory.

Attemnptsto A cordial reconclilement with Elizlbethwsante oj6o

,Ti zi:a- g~reat import·ane to M~ary; and thlough! thle seems to have had it

yot.j: muc'l at heartin the begcinnh:g of her; admiuiltirri tion to accom-

plih b uchl a desirable conjunciolo, yet manyv everts occurred to
wsilen, rathler than to close the breach. Th:!e femal ofilces of
fr~iendjh' 3, howevevr, are se-ldom negle·Acd amon g~i Pr'nices, andi

Elizbet, wo L-di attempted so or enly to ob:;rect thle Qe.n's

* Keidl> 504. ( Knox, 2(7. ( L/, 23-

ve .ge into Scotland, did not fail, a few days after her arrival, Boomno
to command Randolph to congratulate her safe return. Mary, I56r.
that Chle might be on equal terms with her, sent M~aitland to the
Enghih court, with many ceremonious expreflions of regard for
Elizabeth*. Both the Ambassadors were recived with the utmost
civ·ility; and, on each fide, the profetions of krindnels, as they
were made with little sincerity, were liffened to with proportional
credit.

Both were intruRed, however, with something more than mere

m-tter of ceremony. Randolph urged 1Lary, w ith fresh~ importu-
nity, to ratify the treaty of Edinburgh. Mvaitland endeavoured
to amule Elizabeth, by apologizilgr for the dilatory conduc? of
his Aliffrefs with regard to that point. The multiplicity of pub-
lic affairs since her arrival in Scotland, the im~portance of the
question in dilp~ute, and the ablence of many noblemen, w~ithl
whom the was obliged in decency to confuit, w~ere the pretences
offered in excuse for her condu61; the real caules of it were
those, which have already been mentioned. In 0-der to extricate
herself out of there ditliculties, into which the treaty of EdinbSurgh
had led her, Mary was brought to yield a point, whlich formerly
the seemed determined never to give up. bhle infhu<Red Ikalit-
land to signify her willingners to ditclaiml any right to the Crown
of England, during the h~fe of Elizabeth, and the lives of her
poilerity 3 if, in failure of thlefe, thle were declared next hleir by
a61 of Parliament t·.

Reasonable as this propofral might appear to M\ary, who there-

Ly precluded herself from dilulusing Elizabeth's poffenion of the
throne, nothing could be more inconsistent with Elizabeth's in-
terest, or more contradictory to a p?3ion, wrhiL]h predominated in
the charaaer of that Princels. N~othwithflancding all the great
qualiities, which threw such luffre on her reign, we may observe,
that the was tinAured with a jealoufqy of her right to the Crown,
which often betrayed her into mean and ungrenerox~s acions. The
peculiarity of her situation heigh~tened, no doubt, and increased,
but did not infuse this pdiTon. It descended to her from Hecnry
VII. her granzd-fanther, whom, in leveral features of his characaer,
the nearly resembled. Likte him, the fuffered the title by which
the held the Crown to remain ambiguous and controverted, ra-
thier than submit it to parliamentaly discussion, or derive any -d-
di ion to her right, from such authority. Like him, th~e oblenr e

* JFeith. 181, &ce i Camaen, 387. Buch. j29.

x ij

Bloou. mI. every pretender to the fucceff~on, not only with thiat atter.tio,,

*36I. which prudence preferibes; but with that averflon whlichifidic'on

inspires. The present uncertainty with regard to thre r;rght of fulc-
cellion, operated for Elizabeth's advantage, both on her fabjeas,
and on hier rivals. Among the former, every lov~er of his country
regarded her life as the great security of the national tranquillity;
and chose rather to acknowledge a title which was dubious, than
fearchl for one that was unknown. The latter, while nothingr was
decided, were held in dependence, and obliged to court her.
The manner in which the received this ill-termed propo~l of the
Scottifhl Queen, was no othler thann migh~t have been eupe~ed.
She rejeaed it in a peremptory tone, with many exprefl~ons of a
resolution never to permit a point of so much delicacy to be
touched.

sept. r, About this time, the Quteen made her public ertry into Edin.

burgh with great pcmp. Nothing was neglearcd, wfhich1 could
excprefs the duty and affeAion of the citizens towvards therir Sove-
reign. But amidit th~e:e demonfirations of regard, the genius
and sentiments of the nation discovered themselves, in a circum-
flance, which, though inlconflderable, ought not to be overlookied
As it was the mode of the times to ex~hibit many pageanSTts at
every public solemnity 3 on this occasion, mos1 of these were con-
trived to be representations of the vengeance which the Almighlty
hath infliaed upon idolaters *. Even while they fludied to amule
and to flatter the Queen, her f~ubjeAs could not refrain from tef-
tifying their abhorrence of that religion which thle profeired.

Reltrains T'o restore the regular adminiffration of juffice, and to reform

nftebr th'e internal police of the country, became thre next objea of thie

derers. Queen's care. The laws ena~ed for preservation of public order,

and the focurity of private property, were nearly the fame in
Scotland, as in every other civilized country. But the nature
of the Scottish constitution, the impotence of regal authority, the
exorbitant power of the nobles, the violence of fa~ion, and the
fierce manners of the people, rendered the execution of there ha. s
feeble, disorderly, and partial. In the countics Which border on
England, this defea was most apparent 3 and the confequenlces of
it most sensibly felt. T'he inhabitants, firangers to indulbly, averse
from labour, and unacquainted with the arts of peace, falbfi~ed
intirely by spoil and pillage, and being confederated in fepts or
clans, committed there exrce!"s c-ot only with impunity, ba.

* Keith, 189.

even w~ith Lonor~r.. During the unsettled slate of the kingdojm EooK III,
from the death of James V. this dangerous licence had grown to
anl undiual height j and the inroads and rapine of there freebooters 6.
nwe-e become no less intolerable to their own countrymrenr, than
to the Englilh. To reitrain and punilh these outrages, was an
sr~ion equally popular in both Lingdoms. The Prior of St.
A~ndrew's was the person chosen for this important ferv'ce, and.
ext aordinary powers, together with the title of the Qteen's Lieu-
tenant, were vefied in him for this purpole.

N~othing can be more surprising to men, accuffomed to regular

government, than thle preparations made on this occasion. They
were fach as might be exupe~ted in the rudest and most imperfie&
11ate of faciety. Thd freeholders of eleven several counties,
s' hi all their followers completely armed, were fiummoned to
act their Lieutenant in the dilcharge of his once. E:-ery
th-ing resembled a military expediton, rather than the progress
of a court of jultice". The Prior executed his commifl~on withz
such vigour and prudence, as acquired him a great increase of re-
putation and popularity among his countrymen. Numbers of
the banditti fuffered the punishment due to their crimes; and, by
the impartial and rigorous adminiffration of justice, order and
tranquillity were reffored to that part of the kingdom.

During the abs~ence of the Prior of St. Andrew's, the leaders The rarifts.

of the Popith fa~ion seem to have taken some fIeps towards infi- a anyt me~:
nuating themnfelves into the Queen's favour and confidence J-. into favour

wilthhker

Bult the Archbilhop of St. Andrew's, the most remarka~ble per-
f n in the party for abilities and political addrel, was received
with little favour at court s and whatever secret partiality thle
Queen might hlave towards thofre who profeffed the fame religionl
with herself, the discovered no inclination, at that time, to tak~e
t' e adminiffration of affairs out of th~ose hands, to which thle had
already committed it.

The cold reception of the Archbilhop of St. Andrew's was

owving to his conneaion with the house of Hamilton; from whlich
the- Qeen was much alienated. The D~uke of Guise and the
Cardinal could never forgive the zcal, with which the Duke 01'
Ch~atelherat.1t and his so~n the Earl of Arran hlad efpoofed the cause
of thle Congregation. Princes seld~om view their fuccefiors withl-
olt jealoury and distrust. T'he Prior of St. Andrew's, perhai~s
dr de-d the- Duk-e as a riv·al in power. Altl t1" c·au~s concur-

tILi~. 103.

COOK T!T. Ted 11 ins ig 18@tO the Queen's mind an averflon for thant famly,

-YThe IDuke, indulging his love of retirement, lived at a difiance
36. from court, without taking painsi to insinuate himself into favour.

And though the Earl of Arran openly al~pired to marry the Queen
he, by a most unpardonable aBt of imprudence, was thle only no
bleman of diftinAion who opposed Mlary's enjoying the exercile
of her religion; and by raihly entering a public protefiation a-
gainft it, entirely forfeited her favour *X. At the fame time, the
so~rdid parsimony of his father obliged hlim either to hide himself
in some retirement, or to appear in a manner unbecoming his dig-
nity as first Prince of the blood, or his high pretenflons as fhlitor to
the QuteenS. His love, inflamed by difi'apointment, and his im-
patience, exal~perated by neglea, preyed gradually on his reason;
and, after many extravagancies, broke out at last in urgos ernable
frenzy.

Dec. 20 Towards the end of the year, a Convention of Estates was hleld

chiefly on account of ecclefialical arfairs. The aflrembly ofthe
church, which fat at the fame time, presented a petition, contain-
ingr many demands with refpeB to the fuppreflingr of Popery, thle
encouraging the Protestant religion, and the providing for the~
maintenance of the clergy J. T'he 1011 was a~matter of great im·
portance, and the fleps taken towards it deserve to be traced.

A newv re_ Thfough the number of Protefiant preachers was now confider-
giulation ably increased, many more were still needed, in every corner of
co~ncermnng .
thef revenues the kingdom. No legal provilion havmng been made for them,
of the they had hitherto drawn a scanty and precatious fubliftence from
Lhurib. the benevolence of their people. To fuffer the M~iniffers of an

eflabliahed church to continue in this slate of indigency and de-
pendence, was an indecency equally repugnant to the principles
of religion, and to the maxhns of found policy; and would have
justified all the imputations of avarice, with which th~e R~eforma-
tion was then 10aded by its enem~i-s. TPhe revenues of th~e Po-
pilh church were the only fund, which could be employed for
their relief 9 but during the three last years, thle state of th~ele was
greatly altered. A great majority of Abbots, Priors, and other
h~eads of religiious houses, had, either from a f~ede of duty, or
Lom views of interest, renounced the errors of Popery; and, not-
w~ithl~anding this change in their fentimaents, they retained their
ancient revenues. Almost the w-hole order of the Bilhnops, and
several of the other dignitaries, fill~ adhered to the Romifn fu-

* Keith, -,01, 204. Knox-, 2C6. ( Keit, 46. Ibid. 2Ie

P o'htion; and though debarled from ever-y [pilitual fuha~lon, O I.
continued to enjoy the tempolalities of their benefices. Some 6.
laymen, eSpecially those whlo had been ac~ive in promoting the
Reformatio~n, had, unde~r various pretences, and amnidft thle li-
cene of civil wars, got into their hands poiTef~ions, which belonged
to the church. And thus, before any part of the ancient ecclefiaf-
tical revenues could be applied towards the maintenance of the
Protefiant1\Iinilters, many difielent interests were to be adjuffted j
many claims to be exuaminedj and the prejudices and patlions of
the twPo contending parties required the application of a delicate
hand. After much contention, the follow~ing plan was approv-
ed by a majority of v~oice·, and acquierced ia even by thle Po-
piih clergy themeflves. Anl ecaA account of the valve of ec-
clefiallical benefices throug~hout the kingdom was appointed to be
taken. T'he prelent incumbents, to whlatever party they adhered
were allowed to keep poffe~ilon; two thirds of their whiole reve-
nee were reserved for tEilir ow~n ure, the remainder was ann~exed
to the Crown; and out of that, the Queen undertook to assig~n a
ufu81cient maintenance for thle Protellant clergy *.

As most of the Blilhops and several of the other dignlitaries

were flill firmly attached' to thet Popiih religion, the extirpation
of the whlole order, rather thlan an aA of fach extraordinary in-
e.lgence, might have been expeared from the zeal of the preachn-
crs, and from the f,,irit which had hitherto animated the nation.
But, on this occallon, other principles obitruc~red the opetstion
of those whichl were purely religious. Zeal for liberty, and thle
1we~t of wealth, two pafi~ons extremlely opposite, concurred in de-
telmininS the Protefiant leaders to fall in with~ this plan, w-hichl
dex te fri o manildi!ly orom thle maxsims, by which they had hither-
to regulalted their colndua?.

SIS the Reformers had been allowed to aA without controul, and
to kr el all diftin~tions in the church, the immense revenues an-
n med to ecclefiadtical dignities could not, with any colour of
juiiice, have been retained by those in wvhole hands they now
nere; but muil either have been diffributid among the Protefiant
c~ergy, w~ho performed all religious otiices, or mutt have fallen
to te icl' en, fromn the bounty of whol~e ancedtors, the greater
par t of ther w a originally deris ed. The former, however suit-
al', to t' e Itlh ious fp;ilit of mlny among the people, was attend-
ed with mdnifoldl danger. Th:e Pop-ii eccle.,ad'cs L~ad acquired
a . are in the I ational proy,-rty-, v. i-h! fr exceeded the propor-

P;oax III. tion,) th;at was confilent with the hlappinef~s of the kingdom; and;

156I. thne nobles were detennined to guard against this evil, by pre

venting5 those vast poffeflions from ever returning into the hands
of the church. N\or was the latter, which exposed the conflitu.
tion to more imminent hazard, to be avoided with less care.
Even that circumrfcribed prerogative, which the Scottish King
pF~fele~d, was the objca of jealousy to the nobles. If th~ey hadi
allowved the Crown to seize the [poils of the church, such an in
crease of power mruff have followed that accef~on of property, as
would have raii~fd the royal authority above cont-roul, and h ve
rendered the most limited Prince in Europe the most abfiolute ane
independent. The reigrn of Hienry VIII. p~refeated a recent and
alarming example of this nature. The wealth, which flowfed in
upon that Prince, from thle fopprefilon of the monasteries, not only
changed the maxims of his government, but the temper of hes
mindg and he who had formerly submitted to his Parliamen:-,
and courted his people, dic~iated, from that time, to the folmer·
w-ithl intolerable insolence; and tyrannized over the latter witi
unpr-ecedented severity. And if his policy had not been ex-
tremely thort-ih~ted, if he had not sq~uandered what he acquired,
with a profusion equal to his rnpacioufh~efs, and which defeated
his ambition, he might have eRablifhecd defpotifin in England, on
a basis so broad and firrongr, as all the efforts of the fixbjeas wou~ld
never hiave been a'ole to thakie. In Scotl-rnd, where the riches of
the clergy bore as great a proportion to the wealth of the kin4-
dom, the acquifiitionr of church-lands would have been of no less
importance to the Crown, and no less fatal to the ari~ocrac!.
Th'e nobles, for this reas~on, guarded against such an increale o;
the royal power, and thlereby secured in their own independence.

Avarice mingled itfilf with thleir concern for the interest o~

their order. Thle re-uniting the po~femTons of the church to the
Crown, or the b~ellow~ing them on the Protefiant clerg~y, would
have been a fatal blow both to those nobles, who had, by fraud or
violence, seized part of these revenues, and to thlofe Abbots and
Priors who had totally renounced thleir ecclefiaffical charzaer.
But as thle plan, w-hichl was proposed, gave some fanation to their
ufurpations, they promnoted it with their utmost influence.Te
Popith ecclefiatiics, though the 10pping$ off a third of their reve-
nues was by no means agrceable to them, conf'ented, under thleir
prelent circumilances, to facriSce a part of their poficilions, in or-
der to purchase the secure enljoyment of the remainder; and afte!
deeming thle whole irrecoverably lot, they confldered whaterr

they could retrive as 10 much gain. M'any of the ancient digni. B~Oo m1.
taries were men of noble birth; and as they no longer entert Ion- V -
ed hopes of refloring the Popillh religion, they with~ed their a wn 5.
relations, rather than the Crown, or the Protellant clergy, to be
enriched with the spoils of the church. T'hey connived, for this
reason, at the encroachments of the nobles; they even aided their
avarice and violence; they dealt out the patrimony of the
church among their own relations, and by granting feus and
perpetual leases of lands and tithes, gave, to the utmost of their
powler, some colour of legal poffefflon, to what was formerly mere
usurpation. Many vestiges of such alienations itill remain *. TIhe
nobles, with the concurrence of the incumbents, daily extended
their encroachments, and gradually firippect the ecclefiaffics
of their richest and most valuable poeilefions. Even that third
part, which was given up in order to silence the clamours of the
P'rotefiant clergry, and to be some eqiuivalent to the Crown for its
claims, amounted to no considerable fium. The thirds due by the
more powerful nobles, especially by thos~e who had embraced the
Refotmation, were almost universally remitted. Others, by pro-
ducing fraudulent rentals; by estimating the corn, and other pay-
ments in kind, at an under value ; and by the connivance of col-
lec~ors; greatly diminished the charge against themselves t; and
thle nobles had much reason to be satisfied with a device, which,
at 10 finall expencd, feccured to them fach vast poffenmons.

Nor were the Protestant clergy considerable gainers by this new 'TheProteft.

regulation; they found it to be a more easy matter to kindle zeal, ant clergyr

o no gainers

than to extinguilh avarice. Those very men, wnhom formerly they by it.
had fivayed withl ablf1ute authority, wvere nowv deaf to all their
remonl'1rances. The Prior of St. Andrewv's, the Earl of Argyle,
thle Earl of Mlorton, and MI~aitland, all the most zealous leaders of
the Congregation, w~ere appointed to assign, or, as it was called,
to miodfyr their flipends. An hundred merks Scots was the al-
lowance which their liberality afforded to the generality of Mi-
niffers. To a few three hundred merks were granted f. About
twenty-four thloufand pounds Scots appears to have been the whole
fum alloted for the maintenance of a national church eftablilhed
b~y law, and efleemed, throughout the kingdom, the true church
of God jI. Even this f~um was paid with little exachnefs, and the
Miinifers were kept in the fame poverty and dependence as for.
merly.

* Keitl, 507. Spott 173. 1- Keith, Append. 188. Spots. r8,.
( Knox, 30J. I1 Neith, Append, 188.

Boo-<ntI The gecntlenefs of the Queen's adminiffration, and the elega ed

1 2. of her court, had mitigated, in some degree, th~e f erocity of the

Di~lentions nobles, and accutomed them to greater mi'ldnefs and humanity·;
among the while, at the fame time, her prerence and authority were a check;

obe' to their fac~ious and tumultuary spirit. Bt safaeo re

and tranqiuillity w-as not natural to the feudal aristocracy, it could
not be of long continuance ; and this year became remarkanble for
the moR violent eruptions of intestine diltcord and animnofty.

Among the great and independent nobles of Scotland, a IVlo.

narch could poilefs little authority, and exercis~e no extensive or
rigorous jurifdidtion. The interfering of interest, the unsettled
slate of property, the frequency of public commotions, and the
fierceness of their own manners, forred, among the great famiies
the feeds of many quarrels and contentions. T~here, as we have
already oblerved, were decided not by law, but by violence. The
offended Bar-on, without havings recourse to the 1910narch, or ac-
k~nowledging his superior authority, assembled his own followers,
and invaded the lands of his rival in an hostile manner. Toge-
ther with his estate and honours, every nobleman transmitted fomne
hereditary feud to his pofferity, who were bound in honour to a-
dopt and to prosecute it with the fame inveterate rancour.

Such a dilTention had fublifted between the house of Hamilton

and the Earl of Bothwell, and was heightened by mutual injuirie
during the late commotions *. Both the Earl of Arran and
Bo0thwell hsppening to be in waiting at the fame time, their fol-
10wers qjuarrelled frequently in the fireets of Edinburg-h, and ex-
cited dangerous tumults in that city. iAt lat, thie mediation oi

rtbruary. their friends, particularl-y of Kinox, brought about a reconcilkment,

but an unfortunate one to both there noblemen t.

A few days after, Arran came to Kn~ox, and with the utmof1

terror and confusion, confeffed firit to him, and then to the Plior
of St. Andrew's, that, in order to obtain the role dire~tion of as-
fairs, Bothwvell and his kintmnen the Hamiltons, had conspired to
murder thle Prior, Maitiand, and the other favourits of the Qgeen.
The Duke of Chatelherault regarded the Prior as a rival, who had
supp~lanted him~ in the Q~ueen's favour, and wh'o filled thlat place at
tLhe helm, wh!ich he imagined to be due to himlilf, as first P ince
of the blood. Bothwfell, on account of the personal injuries n1:ic'l
he had received from the Prior during the late comma;3t:n , c
no less exasperated againRt him. But w~hether he and the Ham,:1tons

* Keith, 2I5. -t Knox, 305.

h d ugreed to cement their new alliance, with the blood of their BOOK ITI
common enemy, or whlether the conspiracy ex\isted only in the
frantic and disordered imag~ination of the Earl of Arran, it is im- 6.
po'fble, amidst the contradition of hitiorians, andr the defeaive-
ness of records, politively to determine. AmongS men in~lmed
with refentmenrt, and impatient for revenge, rash exp efilons might
be uttered anld violent and crimninal expedients proposed ; and on
that foundation, Arran's dliftempered fancy might rear the whlole
fuperitruaure of a conspiracy. All the p~erfrons acculred, denied
their guilt with thle utmost confidence. But the knowvn charc-
ters of the mecn, and thle violent iipirit of the age, added greatly
to the probab"ility of thie accusation, and abundantly jufifiied the
conduat of the Qteen's Mlin;fters, who confined Bothwvell, Ar-
ran, and a fewY of the ringleaders, in separate prisons, and oboliged
the Dukie to f~urrcnder the firong castle of Dunbarton, which he
had held ever E~nce the time of h~is refigrning the office of Re-
gent *.

The designs of the Earl ofr Huntly agrainft the Prior of St. An- The Earl of

drew's were deeper laid, and produced more memorable and more Hmll t7''s enl-

tragcalvent. Go~e

ordn ~aloCmity to t'r

traicl eens. eoge oron ar o Hun~tly, having been one Queev's Mt-

of the nobles who con lired againit James III. azd who raised his sitters.
so0 James IV. to the throne, enjoyred a great share in the confi-
dence of that generous Prince i-. By his bounty, great accefions of
wealth and power were added to a fdmily, already opulent at d
powferful. On the death of that Mlonarch, Alexander the next
Earl, being appointed Lord L~ieutenant of all thle counties be-
yond Forth, left the other nobles to contend for offices at
court; and retiring7 to the north, where his eflate and influence
lay, resided there, in a k~ind of princely independence. The no-
bles in that part of the iingrdomi dreaded the growing dominion of
fach a dal gerous neighbsour, but were unable to prevent his en-
croachmlents. Some of' his riv·als he secretly undermined, others
he 'ubdued by open force. HI-s ellate far exceeded that of any
other fub~je8, and his /bperiojriders and juridiations extended over
many of the northern counties. With power and pot~ireons so
immense, under two long and feeble mrinoities, and amidit the
sh~ock of civil commotions, the Earls of HIuntly might have in-
dulgedc the moil elevated hopes. But happily for the Crown, an
aeive and enterprising spirit wvas not the charaAeriftic of that fa-
mily, and whatever objeA their ambition might have in view,

#Knox, 3 7, 308. Keith, 202. *( Crawff Officers of State, 56.,

Y ij

BOOK III, they chose rather to acquire it by political address, than to feiz·

56.it openly and by force of arms.

The condua of George the present Earl, during the late com-

motions, had been perfe81y faitable to the chara~er of the fa-
mily, in that age, dubious, variable, and crafty. While the sac-
cess of the Lords of the Congregation was uncertain, he affilled
the Qu~een Regent in her attempts to crush them. When their
afFairs put on a better alpteA, he pretended to join them, but ne-
ver heartily favoured their cause. He was courted and feared
by each of the contending parties; both connived at his en·
croachments in the north; and, by artifice and force, which he
w-ell knew how to employ alternately, and in their proper places
he added every day to the exorbitant power and wealth which he
poffeffed.

He obs~erved the growing reputation and authority of the Prior

of St. Andrew's, with the utmost jealousy and concern, and con-
fidered him as a rival, who had engrossed that share in the Qyleen's
confidence, to which his own zeal for the Popith religion seemed
to give him a preferable title. Pelfonal injuries soon increased
the mif~underflanding occalloned by rivalfhip in powfer. The
Queen having determined to reward the services of the Prior of
St. Andrew's by creating him an Earl, thne made choice of Mar,
as the place whence hie thlould take his title; and, that he might
be better able to support his new honour, beffowed upon him, at

Feb. zo. the fame time, the lands of that name. There were part of the

royal demefnes*, but the Earls of Huntlyr had been permitted,
for several years, to keep poffeflion of them-f. On this occasion,
the Earl not only complained, with some reason, of the loss
which he sustained, but had real cause to be alarmed at the in-
trufion of a formidable neighbour into the heart of his territories,
who might be able to rival his powver, and excite his oppreifed
vassals to fhlake off his yoke.

June 27. An incident, which happened soon after, encreafed and con-

firmed Huntly's f~uipicions. Sir John Gordon, his third fonl, and
Lord Ogilvie had a dispute about the property of an estate.
This dispute became a deadly quarrel. They~happened, unfortu-
n-.'ely, to meet in the fireets of Edinburgh, and beipg both at-
tended with armed followers, a f~cuffe ensued, in which Lord
Ogilvie w-as dangerously wounded by Sir John. T'he Magistrates
seized both thle offenders, and the Queen commanded them to be

* Crawf. Peer. 297. ( El,. 334·

(i31y confined. Under anyregrular government, such a breach BOOK er
of public peace and order would expole the person offending~, to Y
certain punilhment. At this time, some reverity was necessary, 10
in order to vindicate the Queen's authority from an insult, the
most heinous which had been offered to it, since her return into
Scotland. But in an age accustomed to licence and anarchy,
even this moderate exertion of her power in ordering them to be
kept in cuffody, was deemed an aci of intolerable rigour; and
the friends of each party began to convene their vassals and de-
pendants, in order to overawe, or to fruffrate the decisions of
justice*. Mean while, Gordon made his escape out of prison,
and flying into Aberdeenfhire, complained loudly of the indignity
with which he had been treated. And as allthe Queen's a~ions
were, at this junaure, imputed to the Earl of Mar, this added
not a little to the resentment, which Huntly had conceived
against that nobleman.

At the very time when thele pations fermented, with the ut- Auguitz23

molt violence, in the minds ps the Earl of Huntly and his family
the Queen happened to set out on a progress into the northern
parts of the kingdom. She was attended by the Earls of Mar
and M~orton, M'aitland, and other leaders of that party. The
presence of the Qu~een, in a country where no name greater than
the Earl of Huntly's had been heard of, and no power superior
to his hlad been exercised, for many years, was an event, of it-
self, abundantly mortifying to that haughty nobleman. But
while the Queen was interely under the direaion of Mar, all her
saians were more apt to be miireprelented, and confirued into in-
juries; and a thousand circumitances could not but occur to
awaken Huntly's jealousy, to offend his pride, and to inflame his
resentment. Amidst the agitations of so many violent pafi~ons,
fomle eruption was unavoidable.

On MIary's arrival in the north, Huntly employed his wife, a

woman capable of executing the commillion with abundance of
derctelity, to sooth thle Queen, and to intercede for pardon to
their son. But the Queen peremptorily required, that he thould
again deliver himlfeli into the hands of juffice, and rely on her
clemency. Gordon was persuaded to do so; and being enjoined
by the Queen to enter himself prisoner in the castle of Stirlingr
he promiled likewise to obey that command. Lord Erfikine,
Mar's uncle, was, at that time, Governor of this fort. The
Que'en's severity, and thle place in which the appointed Gordou

' Kith~i, 2'3,

BooKIII. t0 be confined, were interpreted to be new marks of Mal'r id,

-'-cour, and augmented thle hatied of the Gordons against hirn.

I56" · Ma ie i onGro etottwrsSiln;btn

Sept. I. flead of performing his promise to the Queen, made his escape

from his guards, and returned to take the command of his fol.
10wers, who were rising in arms, all over the north. These were
deitined to second and improve the blow, by which his fatherpro
posed, secretly, and at once, to cut off Mar, M~orton, and Mait
land, his principal adversaries. The time and place for perpetrat.
. ing this horrid deed were frequently appointed; but the execut.
ing of it was wonlderfully prevented, by some of those unforefees
accidents, whlich so often occur to disconcert the i[chemes, and to
intimidate the hearts of affallins*. His own house at Strathbogie
was the last and most convenient f~cenle, appointed for committing
the intended violence. But, on her journeyr thither, the Qpeen
heard of young Gordon's flight and rebellion, and re~fusing, in
the first transports of her indignation, to enter under the father's
roof, by that fortunate explemfon of her resentment, laved her
IViniff~ers from unavoidable deffrudtion [,

Takes arms The ill s~uccess of there efforts of private revenge precipitated
agiith Huntly into open rebellion. As the Qu~een was intirely under

the direaion of his rivarls, it was impofllble to work their ruin
w~ithlout violating the allegiance which he owfed his Sovereign.
On her arrival at Inverner~s, the command~ing of~cer ini the cathl,
by Huntly's order, that the gates against her. Mary was obf'-
ged to lodge in the town, which was open and def'encelefs; bit
this, too, was quickly surrounded by a multit~ude of the Eari's
followerst. T'he utmost coniternation seized thle Queen, who
was attended by 'a very slender train. She every moment ex;-
pec?ed the approach of the rebels, and som~e ships were already
ordered into the yiver to iecure her eleape. The loyalty of t'le
Mionroes, Frazers, Mackintoihes, and some neighbsouring chesc,
who took arms in her defence, s~aved her from this danger. By
thleir afi~ilance, the even forced the cafil to furrendier, and in
didied on the Governor the punish:ment which his infoleace d~e
served.

This open aft of disob~edience was the occasion of a measure

more galling to Huntly than any the Qgeen had hithierto tak~en.
Lord Erikrine, having pretended a right to the earldom of Mar,
Stewvart resig~ned it in his fa~vour; and at the fame time M~ary
conf'erred upon him the title of Erl of Mlurrayr, with the eitate

* Kieith, 2j0. t Kinox, 318. ' Crawf. Offices of Stnte, 87, 88.

:t:EadC to tha~t dlbgnity, whlich had been in the poffen;on of the BOOK 111,
Lul1 of Hiuntly since th- year 1548 *. From this he concluded -
thlt his femly wfas devoted to defrruc~ion; and dreading to be 62
!1ripped~, piecemeal, of therei poileEions, which in reward of their
services, thle gratitude of' thle Crown had beflowed on himself, or
his anceitors, he no longer $ilguifed his intentions, but, in defi-
ance of the Queen's proclamation, openly took arms. Iiedo
vielding those places of thengthl, which Mary required him to
fi~render, his foiloloers disp~ers~ed or cut in pieces the parties which
fle difpatc~,ed to take T~pleion of them -r ; and he himself, ad-
vancing with a considerable body of men towards Aberdeen, to
which place thle Q~een was now returned, filled her finall court
with th~e utmoil conflernation : Mulrray had only a handful of men
in whom he could con~cde J. In order to form the appeaxan~ce of
an army, he was obligied to call in the afflit~ance of thle neighl-
bouring~ nobles; but as most of thiefe either favoured Huintly's
designs, or flood in awue of his power, from them no cordial or
effcaual service could be eapeAed.

With these troops, Mlurray, who could gain nothing by delay,

marched briskly tow-ards the enemy. Hle found the n at Corrichie,
poiled to great advantage; hie commanded his northern allociates OLaober 28.
inflantly to begin the attack; but on the first motion of the ene-
my, they treacherouty turned their backs; and Huntly's follow-
ers, throwring· aside their spear-s, and breaking their ranks, drew
th~eir fwvorda, and ruthed forward to the pursuit. It was then, Pe is d~e.
that Mfurray gave proof both of fleady courage, and of prudent rie at£ of
condu9. Hle flood im~movedble, on a riling ground, with the EIlura\.
finall but truity bo~dy of his adherents, who pref'enting their spears
to the enemy, received them w~ith a determined resolution, which
they little expedetd. The H~ighland broad fiv-ord is not a weapon
fit to encounter the the Scottish Cpear. In every civil commotion,
the su~periority of the latter has been evident, and hlas always de-
cid-d the contest. On this occasion, the irregular attack of
H~untly's troops was eardiy repulled by M~ulray's firm battalion.
Be"ore thl y recovered from the coniufion occalioned by this
unforde~en refillance, thdie who had begun thle flight, wil-
linS to regain toeir credit withl the viat·ricas party, fell upon"
thecm, and completed the .out. Huntly himiclf, who was exu-
tremely corpulent, was trode to death in the pursuit. His fans,

f Knox, 3T9. i Kieith, ^30.

* Crau E. Peer 339.

BOOK IITL Sir Joh~n and Adam, were takien, and M~urray returned in triumph

to Aberdeen with his prisoners.

J562. The trial of men taken in ae~ual rebellion against their Sove.

reign was extremely sh~ort. Three days after the battle, Sir John
Gordon was beheaded at Aberdeen. His brother Adam was par.
done~d on account of his youth. Lord Gordon, who had been
privy to hlis father's designs, was seized in the south, and upon
trial found guilty of treason ; but, through the Queen's clemency,
the punishment was remitted. The Birlt Parliament proceeded
againit this great family, with the utmost rigour of law, and re·
duced their power and fortune to the lowest ebb *.

*Thiis confir~lacy of thle Earl of Huntly is one of the most intricate and

mfiterious p~assages in the Scoittifh hiffory. As it wras a tranfjaaon purely· domes.
tic, and in w~hich the Englifhi were little interefled, few original papers con-
cerniing it have been foulnd in Cecil's Colle~ion, the great florehoule of evi.
dence and information with regard to the BTdairs of this period.

Buchanan supposes Mary to have ferred a design, about this time, of ddl-

troying MuIrray, and of emp~loy-ing the power of the Earl of Huntly for thi
pulprpoe B3ut his account of this w hole tranfraErion appears to be so void of tru h,
and even of probab~ility, as to deserve no serious examination. At that tinie,
Ma~ry winted power, and feemsJ to have had no inclination to commit any ad~
of violence upon her brother.

Twvo other hypotheles have been advanced, in order to explain this matter;

but they appear to be eqlually removed fromn truth.

I. It cannot well be conceived, thlat the Queen's journey to the n-rth was a

ftheme~ conferted by nTurray, in order to ruin the Earl of Huntly. i. H'untly
had resided at court almost ever since thle Queen's return. K'eith, 198. Append.
175, &c. This wans the proper place in which to have seized him. To attack
him in Aberdeenflrice, the feat of his power, and in the midit of his raffals,
was a projeCt equ-lly absurd and hazardous. 2. The Queen wvias not accomp3-
nied with a body- of troops, capab~le of attempting any thing against Huntly by
v·iolence; her train was not mo1re numerous, than was urual in times of grreateft
tmranqillity. Kieith, 230. 3. There remain two original letters with regard to
this conspiracy, one from Randolph the Englif h Resident, and anotherfrom Manit.
Jand, both direded to Cecil. They talk of Huntly's measures as notoriously trea-
fonable. Rand~olph mentions his repeated atttempts to arfiialnate Murray, &~c.
No hint is given of any previous resolution, formed by M~ary's Mlinifters, to
ruin Huntly and his family. Ilad any- filch design ever exifted,lit was Randolylh'9
duty to have d~iscovered it; nor would M2aitland have laboured to conceal it from
the English Secretary. K~eith, 229, 232-

II. To fuppole that the Earl of Huntly had laid any plan for feizingrthe Queen,

and her Miniffers, seems to be no les~s improbable. r. On the Queen's arri~al
in the north, he2 laboured, in good earnett~, to gain her favour, and to obtain a
pardon for his son. Knoxu. 3r8. 2. He met the Queen, firfi at Aberdeen, and
then at Rothemay, whether he would not have ventured to come, had he
harboured any such treasonable relolutioJn. K~nox, 318. 3. His condiu~aas
irresolute andi waveri~g·, like that of a man dilconcerted by anly unfores~een das -

As the fall of the Earl of Huntly is the most important event BOOK; I11.

of this year, it would have been improper to interrupt the narra-
tive, by takiing notice of lesser tranfaaions, which may now be 62
related with equal propriety.

In the beginning of summer, Mary, who was deilrous of enter. An inter-

ing into more intimate correspondence and familiarity with Eliza- ,~e n S~i-
beth, employed Maitland to desire a personal interview with her, zabeth and
famewvhere in the north of England. As this proposal could not p e d.po
be rejeaed with decency, the time, the place, and the circum-
flances of the meeting were initantly agreed upon. But Eliza-
beth was prudent enough not to admit into her kingdom, a rival,
wuho outshone hers~elf, so far, in beauty, and gracefulness of per-
son; and who excelled, so eminently, in all the arts of infinua-
tion and address. Uinder pretence of being confined to London,
by the attention which the was obliged to give to the civil wars
in France, the put off the interview for that season *, and prevent-
ed her fubjeAs from feeing the Scottilh Queen, the charms of
whole appearance, and behaviour, he env~ied, and had some rea-
son to dread.

During this year, the AfTembly of the church met twice. In June 2.
both these meetings, were exhibited many complaints of the po- Dec 25
verty and dependence of the church; and many murmurs against
the negligence or avarice of thole, who had been appointed to
collea, and to d~ifribute the small fund, appropriated for the main-
tenance of preacherst-. A petition craving redress of their griev-
ances, was prelented to the Quteen; but without any effeat. There
was no reason to expe61 that Mary would dilcover any forward-
ness to grant the requests of such su~pplicants. And as her Mini-
fiers, though all most zealous Protestants, were themselves grow-
ing rich on the inheritance of the church, they were equally re-
gardlefs of the indigence and demands of their brethren.

ger, nor like one executing a concerted plan. 4. The most considerable per.
sons of his clan submitted to the Queen, and found surety to obey her com-
mcands, Keith, 226. Had the Earl been previously determined to rife in arms
againit the Queen, or to seize her Miniffers, it is probable he would have im-
parted it, to his principal fo3llowers, nor would they have deserted him in this

Inanner.

For these reasons, we have, on the one hand, vindicatedl th~e Earl of Murray

from any deliberate intention of ruining the family of Gordon; and, on the
odler hand, we have imputed the violent condua of the Earl of Huntly, to a fud.
den flart of Resentment, without charging him with any premeditated purpole
of rebellion.

* Keith, 216. 1- Knox, 3'z, 323*

Mary had now continued above twoa years in a ftte of widow.

153*Iod. Her gentle adminiffration had s~ecured the hearts of her

Negocia~ fubjeAs, who were impatient for her marriage, and withed thle
tioi s with Crown to descend in the right line from their ancient Manarchs.
regardtothe Queen'smar_ She herself was the soft amiable woman of the age, and the fame
riage. of her accomplilhments, together with the favourable circumitance

of her having one k~ingdom already in her poffet~ion, and the pro.
fpeB of mounting· the throne of another, prompted many difler-
ent Princes to solicit an alliance to illuffrious. Scotland, by its
lituation, threw 10, much weight and power into whatever scale it
fell, that all Europe waited with solicitude for Mary's determina-
tion. And no event in that age excited fironger political fears
and jealousies; none interefled more deeply the pafflons of fever-
al Princes, or gave rife to more contradiAory intrigues, than the
marriage of the Scottish Queen.

she is soli- The Princes of the honfe of Auffria remembered what vail pro.
cited by dif-
ferent Prin. jess the French had founded on their former alliance with the
ces. Queen of Scots; and though the unexpeaed death, Biri of Hen-

ry and then of Francis, had hindered there from taking effee9, yet
if Mary thrould again make choice of a hufl~and among the French
Princes, the fame de~gns might be revived and prosecuted with
better success.

By the In order to prevent this, the Emperor entered into a negacia-
Archduke
Charles. tion with the Cardinal of Lorrain, who had proposed to marry

the Scottish Queen to the Archduke Charles Ferdinand's third
fop, The matter was communicated to Mary; and M~elvil, who,
at'that time, attended the ele~or Palatine, was commanded to
inquire into the charaaer and situation of the Archduke *.

Bynon Car- Philip II. though no less apprehensive of Mary's falling once
losof spain. more into the hands of France, envied his uncle Ferdinand the

acquisition of s~o important a prize E and as his own insatiable am-
bition grasped at all the k~ingdoms of Europe, he employed his
ambassador at the French court, to solicit the Princes of Lorrain
in behalf of his fonl Don Carlos, at that time, the heir of all tile
extensive dominions, which belonged to the Spanish monarchyt.

BytheDuke Catherine of Miedicis, on the other hand, dreaded the marri-
ofAnjou. age of the Scottish Queen to any of the Auffrian Princes, which

would have added to much to the power and pretenflons of that
ambitious race. Her jealousy of the Princes of Lorrain render-
ed her no less averse from an alliance, which, by securing thieni

* Mely. 63,65. K~eith, 239. See Append. No. VII.

Cafteln. 461. Addit. de Labor. S'I, j03.

the proteaion of the Emperor or King of Spain, would ve new L--b-
boldness to their enterprising fpiiit, and enable them to set the S563*
power of the Crown, which they already rivalled, at open defi-
ance. And as the was afiaid that thtTf [lendid propof'als of the
A~ufrian family would dazzle the young Queen, the inflantly dif-
patched Caftelnau into Scotland, to offer her in marriage the
Duke of Anjou, the brother of her former hubannd, who soon
after mounted the throne of France *.

Mary attentively weig~hed the pretenflons of 10 many rivals. a 'sdseli-

The Archdukie had little to recommend him, but his high birthl. concering
The example of Henry VIII. was a warning against contra~ing t
a marliajie with the brother of her former husband; nor could
the bear the thoughts of appearing in France, in a rank inferior
to that, which thle had formerly held in that Lingdom. She lif.-
tened therefore, with partiality, to the Spanish propolitions, and
the profpeat of such vast power and dominions flattered the ambi-
tion of a young and aspiring Princes~s.

Three several circumitances, how-ever, concurred to divert

M~ary from any thoughts of a foreign alliance.

The first of these was the murder of her Pncle the Duke of

Guile. The violence and ambition of -that noblernan had involv-
ed his country in a civil war; which was conduited with furi-
ous animosity, and various iiuccefs. At lait the Duke laid siege
to Orleans, the bulwark of the Protestant cause; and he had redu-
ced that city to the last extremity, when he was affaffinated by the
frantic zeal of Poltrot. This blow proved fatal to the. Qgeen of
Scots. The young Duke was a minor. And thle Cardinal,
though subtile and intriguing, wanted that undaunted and enter-
prifing couragre, which rendered the ambition of his brother to
formidable. Catherine, instead of encourag~ing the ambition, or
furthering the pletenfions of her d~aug~hter-in-law, took pleasure
in mortifying the one, and in diffappointing' the oth~er. In this
situation, and without fach a prote~or, it became necessary for
Miary to contraa her views, and to proceed with caution; and
w~hatever profpeA of advantage might allure her, the could ven-
ture upon no dangerous or doubtful measure.

The irecond circumitance, which weighed with Mary, was the The viewvs

epinion of the Queen of England. The marriage of the Scottish of EIla-
Qeen interefied Elizabeth more deeply than any other Prince; beth.
and the oblerved all her deliberations concerning it with the most

SCaftelnau, 46I.

B~omeIII. anxious attention. She herself seems early to have formed a re.

foilutionl of living unmarried, and the discovered no small inclina

33*tion to impose the fame law on the Queen of Scots.Shhdal

ready experienced what use might be made of Mary's power and
pretenflons, to invade her dominions, and to diflurb her poilefilon
of the Crown. The death of Francis II. had happily delivered
her from this danger, which the determined to guard against for
the future, with the utmost care. And as the refilefs ambition
of the Auffrian Princes, the avowed and bigatted patrons of the
Catholic fuperitition, made her, in a particular manner, dread
their neighbourhood, the infiruaed Randolph, to remonfirate, in
the firongeft terms, against any alliance with them; and to ac-
quaint Mary, that as the herself would confider such a match to
be a breach of the personal friendship, in which they were 10 hap-
pily united, so the English nation would regard it as the diffo·
lation of that confederacy which now fubfilled between the two
k~ingdoms. That, in order to preserve their own religion and11.-
berties, they would, in all probability, take some itep prejudicial
to her right of fuccetiion, which, as the well knew, they neither
wanted power nor pretences to invalidate, and set aside. This
threatening was accompanied with a promise, but exrpreired in
very ambiguous terms, that if Mary's choice of a husband thould
prove agreeable to the English nation, Elizabeth would appoint
proper pers~ons to examine her title to the f~uccellion, and, if well
founded, command it to be publicly recogniled. she oblerved,
however, a mnytteriouls silence concerning the person, on whom
the withed th~e choice of the Scottilh Queen to fall. The reveal-
ing of this secret w-as referted for fame future negociation. IVean
while the threw out some obscure hints, that a native of Britain,
or one not of Princely rank, would be her fafeft and most inof-
fenfive choice *. A~n advice, offered with fach an air of fuperi-
ority and command, mortiged, no doubt, the pride of the Scot-
tfh Queen. But, under her prelent circumitances, the was 0-
bliged to bear this indignity. Destitute of all foreign assistance,
and intent upon the Englifhl faccetlion, the great ob~jeA of her
wishes and ambition, it became ne~cessary to court a rival, whom,
without manifest imprudence, the could not venture to offend.

TherntiThe inclination of her own f~ubjeas was Bnother, and not the

mens o~f least considerable circumflance, which called for M,~ary's attention
Fabjeas. at this conjunaure. They had been taught, by the fatal experi-

* Tgeth, 2412, 245·

menit of her former marriage, to dread an union with anly great
Prince, whole power might be employed to opprefrs thleir religion 1563-
and liberties. They t~rembled at the th~oughts of a match with a
foreigner; and if the Crow~n thiould be firengthened by newr do-
minions, or alliances, they foresaw that the royal preroganticve
would soon be firetched beyond its ancient and legal limits. ThXe;.
eagerners to prevent this could scarce fail of throwing them into
the arms of England. Elizabeth would be ready to afford them
her aid, towards obfiruAing a measure 10 diragreeable to herfelf'.
'Twas easy for them to seize the perfou of their Sovereign. By
the afiiance of the Engblifh feet, they could render it dirficult
for any foreign Prince to l-nd in Scotland. The Rcoman Catho-
lics, now an inconsiderable: party in the L~ingrdom, and diffirited
by the loss of the Earl of Hiuntly, could give no obitruaion to
their designs. To what violent extreme~s, the cnaiona~l abho;-
rence of a foreign yoke might have been carried, is manifefit fromt
thle tlanfanions both previous, and ft~brequent to the prelent period.

For these reasons, Mary laid aside, at that time, r01 thoughts of

a foreign alliance, and seemed willing to sacrifice her own ambi-
tion, in order to remove the jealousies of Elizabeth, and to q~ui-t
the fears of her own fubjeAs.

The Parliament met this year, for the first time, since the A ParEt -

rnn tl,1

Queen's return into Scotland. M~ary's adminiffration had hithecr- 3q 4 '
to been extremely popular. Hier M~iniffers poifefeid the confi-
dence of the nation. And, by consequence, the proceedings of
that assembly were condu~led with perfced unanimity. The
grant of the earldom of Murray to the Prior of St. Andirewf's
was confirmed : the Earl of Huntly, and reveral of his vassals
and dependants were attainted : the attainder against Kirkaldy of
Grange, and some of his accomplices in the murder of Cardinal
Beatoun, was reversed*: the acR of oblivion, mentioned in t'le
treaty of Edinburgh, received the royal fanaion. But Mary,
who had determined never to ratify that treaty, took care that
this f~an~tion thlould not be deemect any acknowledg~ment of its
validity; thee granted her consent merely in condescension to the
Lords in Parliament, w-ho, on their knees, befcought her to allay
the jealousies and apnprehnenlions of her fubjeats, by s~uch a graci-
ous law ).

No attempt was made, in this Parliament, to procure thle Not gde.

Qpeen's airent to the laws efiablithing the Protestant religion, wiih regard

to ~rligi~on.

* Knox, 330. 4 Spotfiv. 188.

BO : Her Ministers, though zealous Protestants themselves, were aware

ri6 . that this could not be urged without manifest danger and impru.

dence. She had consented, through their influence, to tolerate
and prote&t the reformed doarine. They had even prevail~d on
her to imprison and prosecute the Archbishop of St. Andrew's, and
Prior of Whithorn, for celebrating mars contrary to her procla.
mation *. Mary, however, was still paffonately devoted to the
R~omith fuperflition. Though, from political motives, the had
granted a temporary indulgence to opinlions, which the difapprov-
ed, there were no grounds to hope that the would agree to efta-
blilh them for perpetuity. The moderation of thos~e who profeffed
it, was the bell method for reconciling the Queen to the Protest-
ant religion. Time might abate her bigatry. Her prejudices
might wear off gradually, and at lat the might yield to the vithes
of hier people, what their importunity or their violence could ne-
ver have extorted. Mlany laws of importance were to be propo-
fed in Parliament ) and to defeat all there, by such a fruitless and
ill-timed application to the Qu~een, would have been equally in-
jurious to individuals, and detrimental to the public.

W~hich of. The zeal of the Protestant clergy was deaf to all these confl-
sends thle
cle~rgy, derations of policy. Eag~er and impatient, it brooked no delay.

Severe and inflexible, it: would condescend to no compliances.
The leading men of that order insisted, that this opportunity of
cliablifhing religion by law, was not to be negle(5ed. They pro-
nounced the moderation of the courtiers, apoflcy ; and their en-
deavours to gain the Queen, they reckoned criminal and servile.
Knox solemnly renounced the friendfhlip of the Earl of Murray,
as a man devote~d to Mary, and 10 bl~indly zealous for her service,
as to becorne regardless of those objeats which he had hitherto
efleemned mol sacred. This rupture, which is a firong proof of
Myurray's Cincere attachment to the Qu~een at that period, conti-
nued above a year and an halfl-.

Thle preachers being dilappointed by the men in whom they

placed the greatest confidence, gave vent to their indignation in
their pulpits. 'There ecchoed more loudly than ever, with decla-
rations against idolatry; with dismal pres~ages concerning the
Qu~een's marriage with a foreigner; and with bitter reproaches

An~d occa- ag~ainst thole, who, from interefied motives, had deserted that
mu amng cause, whlichl they once reckoned it their honour to support. The
the~ people-c peopl!e, infl~arned by these vehement declamations, which were

* Ke:th,-: ^ f Knox, 3 p.

diLkated by a zealmore sincere than prudent, proceeded to rarin and BOOK III.
unjuffifiable aa~s of violence. During the Queen's ablence, on ai '563.
progrels into the weft, mass continued to be celebrated in her
chapel at Holy-rood-houf~e. The multitude of thol~e, who openly Augui.
resorted thither, gave great offence to the citizens of Edinburgh,
who, being free from the reflraint, which the royal presence im-
posed, aiiembled in a riotous manner, interrupted the s~ervice, and
filled those who were present, with the utmost confrernation.
Two of the ringleaders in this tumult were seized, and a day ap-
pointed for their trial*.

Knox, who eiteemed the zeal of there persons laudable, and K~nox tried

their condua meritorious, conFdered them as fufferers in a good ~on 2 -
cause; and in ordtr to s~creen them from danger, he ilizued clrcu- acquitted.
lar letters, reqjuiring 311 who profe~ffed the true religion, or wrere OAober 8.
concerned for the preservation of it, to assemble at Edinburgh
on the day of trial, and by their presence, to comfort and af~ift
their difireffed brethren (. One of there letters fell into the
Queen's handsr To affemrble the fabje~ts without the authority
of the Sovereign, was confirued to be treason, and a resolution
was taken to prosecute K~nox for that crime, before the Privy
Council. Happily for him, his judges were not only zealous Dec. r5*
Protefiants, but the very men, who, during the late commotions,
had openly resifted, and set at defiance the Quteen's authority.
It was under precedents, drawn from their own conduA, that
Knox endeavoured to thelter himself. Nor would it have been an
easy matter for these Couns~ellors to have found out a diflinAion,
by which they could censure him, without condemning them-
selves. After a long hearing, he was unanimously acquitted.
Sinclair Bilhop of Ross, and President of the Court of Seflion,
a zealous Papist, heartily concurred with the other Counsellors
in this decision f; a remarkable faB, wvhich sh~ows the unsettled
slate of government in that age; the low condition to which re-
gal authority was then funk; and the impunity with whichl sub-
je~ts might invade those rights of the Crown, which are now held
sacred.

The marriage of the Scottish Queen continued flillto be the 2564-·

abjea of attention and intrigue. T`hough Elizabethn, even while N~egocia-
sh~e wished to direa Mary, treated her with a difguilful res~erve; nri
though the kept her, without necessity, in a slate of fulpence:;the qu~een's
and hinted often at the perfcn, whom fle defriined to be her hus- 'naire,,e.

-(lIdL ?36. tEKnor, 343

Boor III. band, vsithout dire81y mentioning his name; yet Mary frame4

L-"J all her ac~ions to express such a prudent refpea for the English
154-Qeen, that foreign Princes began to imagine the had given her-

self up implicitly to her direation ". The profpeA of this union
alarmed Catherine of Medicis. Though Catherine had takes
pleasure, all along, in doing ill offices to the Quteen of Scots;
though, soon after the Duke of Guife's death, the had put upon
her a most mortifying indignity, by floppinlg the payment of her
dowyry, by depriving her fubjeA the Duke of Chatelherault of his
penflon, and by beffowing the command of the Scottish Guards
on a Frenchman $; the resolved, however, to prevent this danger.
ous conjunalon of the Briti~h Queens. For this purpole, fbe
now employed all her art to appease Mary 1, to whom the had
given 10 many caus~es of offence. The arrears of her dowry were
inflantly paid; more punAual remittances were promiled for the
future; and offers made, not only to reflore, but to extend the
privleges of the Scottish nation in France. It was easy for Mary
to penetrate into the motives of this sudden change; t he well knewr
thle charaaer of her mother-in-law, and laid little firefs upon
profefiains of friendship, which came from a Princels of falch 1
false and unfeeling heart.

The negaciation with England, relative to the marriage; ufilfer-

ed no interruption, from this app'lication of the French Queen. As
Mfary, in compliance to her fub~jeccs, and pressed by the firongeft
miotives of interest, determined speedily to marry, Elizabeth was
o~bligred to break that unaccountable silence, which the had hither-

'Trn to affeaed. The secret wvas difelofed, and her favourite Lord

Ehlzabeth Rob)ert Dudley, afterwards Earl of Leiceffer, was declared to be
recom~- the h~appy nian, whom the had chosen to be the husband of a
mends Lp;-
cesser to her Cueen, courted by so many Princes )I.
forahul- Elizabeth's wisdom and penetration were remarkable in the

Schoice of her Miniiters; in diitinguifhing her favourites, those

great qualities were less conspicuous. She was influenced in two
cafes so opposite, by merit of very different kinds. Their capa-
city for business, their kinowuledge, their prudence, were the ta-
lents to which alone the attended, in chufing her M~inifers,
wh~iereas beauty and gracefulness of pers~on, polithled manners, and
courtly address, were the accomplishments on which the beffow-
ed he favour. She aaed in the one cafe with the wisdom of a
Queen, in the other, the dil~covered the weaknefcs of a wroman.

* K~eih, 248. ? d 24 See Appendix, No. VIII.
Ij Keith, 251.

T'othis Lieceffer owed hisgrandeur. Though remarkiable nei- BOOK 111.
ther for eminence in virtue, nor s~uperiority of abilities, the
Qgieen's partiality dillinguifhled him on every occaflon. She 1564.
Faifed him to the highest honours, the bestowed on him the moit
important employments, and manifefied an affeaion to difpropor-
tionate to his merit, that, in the opinion of that age, it could be
accounted for only by the power of planetary influence *.

The high [~pirit of the Scottish Qpleen could not well bear the Maryoc.

sirs overture of a match with a fubjea. Her own rank, the fplen- f dedar
dor of her former marriage, and the folicitations, at this time of
so many powerful Princes, crowded into her thoughts, and made
her sensibly feel how humbling and dif~refpeaful Elizabeth's pro-
pofal was. She dissemb~led, however, with the English Resident;
and though the declared, in firong terms, what a degradation the
would deem this alliance, which brought along with it no advan-
tag~e that could juffify such neglea of her own dignity, the men-
tioned the Earl of Leiceiter, notwithstanding·, in terms full of re-
[p eB £t

Elizabeth, we may presume, did not with that the proposal Elizabeth's

vieWrS 18 re-

thould be received in any other manner. After the extraordinary commend-
marks she had given of her own attachment to Leiceffer, and ing him.
while he was still in the very height of favour, it is not probable
the could think seriously of beffowving him upon another. 'Twas
pot her aim to persuade, but only to amule Marys. Almost three
years were elapsed since her return into Scotland; and though
solicited by her fabjeAs, and courted by the greatest Princes in
Europe, the had hitherto been prevented from marrying, chiefly
by the artifices of Elizabeth. And if, at this time, the Englilh

nceen could have engaged Miaryr to listen to her propos~al in fa-
vour of Leiceffer, her power over this creature of her own would
have enabled her to protraa the negociation at pleasure; and by
keeping her rival unmarried, the would have rendered the pro-
[peA of her f~uccefilon les~s acceptable to the English.

Leiceffer's own situation was extremely delicate, and embarraf~-

sing. To gain poffeffion of the most amiable woman of the age,
to carry away this prize from so many C0ntending Princes, to
mount the throne of an ancient kingdom, might have flattered the
ambition of a fubjea much more considerable than him. He law~
rll these advantages, no doubt; and, in secret, they made th~eir
full impreflion on him. But, without offending Elizabeth, he

* Camden, 549. t eith, 252. 4 Mely. ro4, ros.

Aa

BOOK lIT. durit not venture on the most difiant dis~covery of his sentiments,

Sor take any fiep towards facilitating his acquisition of obje £s to
56* worthy of desire.

Onu the other handl. Elizabeth's partiality tow rds him, which

the was at no pains to conce ' , might int, ire him with hopes of
att .iling the supreme rank in a kingdom, more illuffrious than
Scotldnd. Elizabeth had often declaied, that nothing but her
resolution to lead a single lfe, and his being born her own sub.
je·A, would have hindered her from chuting the Earl of Leiceffer
for a husband. Such confiderntions of prudence are, however, of.
ten farmounted by love ; and Le cesser might flatter himself, that
the violence of her affeAionn wou d at length triumph both over the
max~ims of policy, and the s~cruple· of pri .e. These hopes induced
him, now and then, to conclude the proposal of his-marriage with
the Scottish Qeen to be a p~rojea for his deftruaion; and he im,
puted it to the malice of C~cil, who, under the ifpecious pretence
of doing him honour, intended to ruin him in the good opinioq
both of Elizabeth and Mary $.

A treaty of marriage, propos~ed by one Qu~een, who dreaded itS

success; listened to by another, who was secretly determined a.
gainit it; and fearce desired by the man himself, whose interest
and reputation it was calculated, in app~earance, to promote; could
not, under so many unfavourable circumitances, be brought to a for·
tunate lifue. Both Elizabeth and Mary continued, however, to
na with equal dilirmulation. The former, notwithstanding her
fears of10fing Leiceffer, solicited warmly in his behalf. The
latter, though the began about this time to cast her eyes upon ana
other fubjea of England, did not, at once, venture finally to re,
je~f E4lizabeth's favourite.

Maryen- Ihe person towards whom Mary began to turn her thoughts,

rhi h s of was Hienry Stewvart L~ord Darnly, eldest son of the Earl of Lennox.

m.nyr:·lg ~1 at nobleman, having been driven out of Scotland under the re-

Darn geno.y of the Duke of Chatelherault, had lived in banishment for

t\o.ntY years. His wife, Lady Mlargaret Douglas, was Mary's moll
dali rous rival in her claim upon the English f~uccellion. She was
th daughter of Marg~aret, the eldest fiffer of Henry VIII. by the
Earl of Angus, whom that Qu~een married after the death of her
huthand James IV. In that age, the right and order of faccetion
was I., fet~tled with the fame accuracy, as at present. Time, and
the dec~ilon of almost every cafe that can pollibly happen, haver

*Mely. 93,Y4. tIbid. 100

ft last introduced certainty into a matter, which, naturally, is BOOK IIT.
s~ubj R to all the variety, arising from the caprice of lawyers,
guided by obscure and often imaginary analo.gies. Lady Lennox, I6
though born of a second marriage, wais one degree nearer the royal
blood of Enggland, than Mary. She was the daughter, Mary
only the grand-daughter of Margaret. TIhis was not the only advan-
tage over Mary which Lady Lennox enjoyed. She was born in
England, and by a maxim of law in that country, with leg~ard to
private inheritances, " whoever is not born in England, or at least
of parents, who, at the time of his birth, were in the obedience
of the King of England, cannot enjoy any inheritance in that
kingdom*." Th~is maxim, Hales, an English~ lawyer, produc~ed
in a treatise, which he publishe~d at this tinie, and endeavoured
to apply it to the right of fuccetlion to the Crown. In a priv·ate
caui'e, these pretexts might have given rife to a long and doubt-
ful litigistion; where a Crown was at flake, such nice disputes and
fhbtleties were to be avoided with the utmost care. If D~arnly
th~ould happen to contraa an alliance with any of the powerful fa-
milies in England, or thould publicly profess the Ps oteftant reli-
gion, thlere plausible and popular topics might be so urged, as to
prove fatal to the pretenflons of a foreigner, and of a Papist.

M~ary was aware of all this; and in order to prevent any dan-

ger from that quarter, had early endeavoured to cultivate a friend-
ly correspondence with the family of Lennox. In the year I562 f-,
both the Earl and the Lady Margaret were taken into cuitody
by Elizabeth's orders, on account of their holding a secret corre-
fpondence with the Scottish Qufeen.

From the time that Mary became sensible of the diffculties,

which would attend her marrying a foreign Prince, the entered
into a flill closer connexion with the Earl of Lennoxt, and invit-
ed him to return into Scotland. This the endeavoured to conceal Elizabeth
from Elizabeth; but a tranaadion of 10 much importance did not dwit~h
escape the notice of that dik~erning Princes~s. She oblerved, but this.
did not interrupt it. Nothing could fall in more perfealy with
her views, concerning Scottish affairs. She was pleased to fee the
pride of the Scottish Qu~een sloop, at last, to the thoughts of tak-
ing a fabjed2 to her bed. Darnly was in no situation to excite
her jealousy, or her fears. His father's estate lay in England, and
by means of this pledge, the hoped to keep the negoclation en-
tirely in her own hands, and to play the fame game of artifice and

+ Carte, Hilt. ofEng. vot iii. 4:2. t Camd. 389. 2 Id. 382-

A aij

BOOK III. delay, wh-ich the had planned out, if her recommendation of Let-

L- Jceffer had been more ;avourably received.

16. As before the union of the tw~o Crowns, no fubjee of one king.

dom could pals into the other without the perminllon of both So-
vereigns; no looner did Lennox, under pretence of prosecuting
his wife's clainx upon the earldom of Ang7us, apply to Elizabeth
for her licence to go into Scotland, than he obtained it. Together
with it, the ga-e him letters, warmly recommending his pefon and
cause to Mary's friendship and proteftion *. But, at the fame time,
as it was her manner to involve all her tranfa~tions with regard
to Sco*1and, in faome degree of perplexity and contradi~ion5 the
warned Mary, that this indulgence to Lennox might prove fatal
to herefef, as his return could not fail of reviving the ancient ani.
mofity between him and the houff of Hamilton.

This admonition gave umbrage to Mary, and drewo from ber an

angry reply, which occasioned, for some time, a totalinterruption
of all correspondence between the two Qu~eens 1-. Mary was nota
little alarmed at this; thfe both dreaded the effeas of Elizabeth's
resentment, and fuffered, by being deprived of a free intercourse
with England, where her Ambassadors had, all along, carried on,
with s~ome s~ucces~s, secret negociations, which increased the number
of her partizans, and paved her way towards the throne. In or-
der to remove the causes of the pres~ent difficulty, Melvil was sent
expreft to the court of England. He found it no difficult matter
to bring about a reconcilement; and soon re-established the ap-
pearance, but not the confidence of friendship, which was all that
had fublifted, for some time, between the two Queens.

IDuring this negociation, Elizabeth'o profelffons of love to Ma-

ry, and Melvil's replies in name of his Miffrefs, were made in
the language of the warn~iet and most cordial friendship. But
what Melvil truly observes, with refpec? to Elizabeth, may be
extended without injuffice to both Queen's. " There was neither
plain dealing, nor upright meaning, but great diflmulation, envy
and fear J."

Lennox ar- Lennox, however, in consequence of the licence which he had
rivaisot- obtained, set out for Scotland, and was received by the Queen,

not only with the refpea due to a nobleman, so nearly allied to
the royal family, but treated with a diftinguilhed familiarity,
which could not fail of inspiring him with more elevated hopes.
The rumour of his fon's marriage to the Queen began to ipread

? Ibid. a53. Mely. 83. 4 Melvil, ro4.

* Keith, 2-55, 268.

ever the kingdom; and the eyes of all Scotland were turned up. con
on him, as the father of their future Mailer. The Duke of Cha. -~
telherault was the firit to takre the alarm. He considered Len- 64
nox, as the ancient and hereditary enemy of the house of Hamil.
ton; and, in his grandeur, saw the ruin of himself and his friends.
But the Queen interposed her authority to prevent any violent
rupture, and employed all her influence to bring about an accom-
tnodation of their differences *.

The powerful family of Douglas no less dreaded Lennox's re-

turn, from an apprehension, that he would wrest the earldom of
Angs" out of their hands. But the Queen, who well knew how
dangerous it would be to irritate Mlorton, and otnler great men of
that name, prevailed on Lennoxu to purchas~e their filendfhip, by
allowing his Lady's claim upon the earldom of Angus to dropi-.

After these preliminary fleps, M~ary ventured to call a meeting December.

of Parliament. The nA of forfeiture pai~ed againit L~ennox in
the year 1345, was repealed, and he was publicly restored to the
honours and estate of his anceffors $.

The ecclefiaitical tranfaaions. of this year were not confider. June·-5.
bl~e. In the Aflemblies of the church, the fame complaints of the D c 23.
mecreafe of idolatry, the fame representations concerningr the po- The· Cl~rgy
verty of the clergy, were renewed. The reply which the Queesn ,k~~ i us
anade to theie, and her promiles of r~edress, were more s~atisfy ing? queen's
to the Protestants, than any they had hitherto obtained jj. But, zeal for Pa

pery.

notwithflanding ther~e declarations in their favour, they could not
help harboulingr many fulpicions concerning Mary's defigls against
their religion. She had never once confrented to hear any preach-
er of the reformed do~rine. She had abated nothing of her bi-
gotted attachment to the Romith faith. The genius of that fuiper-
flition, averse, at all times, from toleration, was, in that age,
fierce and unrelenting. Mary had given her friends on the Con-
tinent repeated aiiurances of her resolution to re-establish the Ca-
tholic church 9. She had induffrioufly avoided every opportuni-
ty of ratifying the aas of Parliament IS60, in favour of the. Re-
formation. Even thle prote~ion, which ever since her return,
the had afforded the Protestant religion, was merely temporary,
and declared by her own proclamation to be of force, only, " till
the thould take some Einal order in the matter of religion **."
The sigilant zeal of the preachers was inattentive to none of
thele circurmiances. The coldness of their principal leaders,'

* Kieith, 259. f Id. 268. Not. (R). #. See Appendixi, N~o. IX.
]) Id* 533, 539.· 5Carte, vol. iii. 4I5. +* Keith, 5o4, Sto.

fBOOK I!I. Who were, at this time, entirely devoted to the court, added to

their jealousies and fears. These they uttered to the people, in

56.language which they esteemed suitable to the necessity of thle

times, and which the Queen reckoned difrefpeaful, and insolent.
In a meeting of the Generalt Assembly, Maitland publicly ac-
culed Knox of teaching f~e stious doarh~e, concerning the rights
of fubjeas to resist t o e Soverei e-ns, who trespass ag~ainst the
duty which they owe to the people. Knox was not backward to
juffify what h. ad augh~t. And upon this general do~trine of
resistance, so just in its own nature, but so delicate in its applica·
tion to particular cafes, there ens~ued a debate, which. admirably
displays the talents and charaater of both the dif~putants'; the a-
cuteness of the formner, emlbellifhed with learning, but prone to
subtlety; the vigorous underflanding of the latter, delighting in
bold fentimrents, and superior to all fear ",

r365* Two years had already been consumed, in fr-uitlers negociations

nrinmula- concerning the marriage of the Scottish (2ueen. Mary had full
tson both of leilure and opportunity to discern the fallacy and deceit of all
E~lizabeth
and Mary, Elizabeth's proceedings, with ref~pea to that affair. But, in or-
with regard der to set the real intentions of the Englifhb Quieen in a clear
to her mar-

rzg. light, and to bring her to fame explicit declaration of hier senti

Feb. 5. ments, Mary, at las1, intimated to Randolph, that, on condition

her right of fuccemion to the Crown of England were publicly
acknowledged, the was ready to yield to the folicitations of his
IViffrefs in behalf of Leiceffer t. Nothing· could be farther than
this from the mind and intention of Elizabeth. The right of
f~uccetion was a mystery, which, during her whole reign, her jea-
louly preserved untouched, and unexplained. She had promiled,
however, when the fhlit began to interest herself in the marriage
of the Scottish Queen, all th~at was now demanded. How to
retreat with decency, how to elude her former offer, was, on that
account, not a little perplexing.

The facility with which Lord Darnly obtained permillion to

visit the court of Scotland, was owing, in all probability, to that
embarrassment. From the time of Melvil's embassy, Lady Len-
InoxY had warmly solicited this liberty for her son. Elizabeth wa

no firanger to the ambitious hopes,- with which that young noble·
man f-lattered himself. Shte had received repeated advices, from
hier Miniffers, of the sentiments, which Mary began to entertain

': in his favour 1. It was entirely in her power, to prevent his flir-

* Yeox, 349. ( Keith, 269. ( Id. 259, 26r, 266.

ring out of London. In the present conjunaure, however, no, BOOK I1 .
tl.mg could be of more advantage tober, than Darnly's journey
into Scotland. She had already rought one aaor upon the flage, 6.
who, under her management, h~ad, for a long time, a..ufed the
Scottish Queen. She hope , no less abiolutely, to direa the
motions of Darnly, who was likcfwife her fubjea; and again to
involve M/ary in all the tedious intricacies of negociation. T~here
motives determined Elizabeth and her Mliniffers to yield to the
folicitations of Lady Lennox.

But this deep laid [cheme was in a moment disconcerted. Darnlyar.

Such unexpeAed events, as the fancy of poets ascribes to love, Scta 4
are, at some times, really produced by that pafflon. An affair,
which had been the obj a of so many political intrigues,
and had moved and interefied to many Princes, was at last de-
cided by the s~udden liking of two young persons. Lord Darnly
wias, at this time, in the Birit bloom and vigour of youth. In beau-
ty, and gracefulneils of person, he surpassed all his cotemporaries;
he excelled, eminently, in those arts, which add ease and ele-
gance to external form, and which enable it not only to dazzle,
but to please. Mary was of an age, and of a temper, to feel the Gainsthe
full power of thes~e accomplishments. The impreflion which atf'
Lord Darnly made upon her, was visible, from the time of their
first interview. The whole business of the court was to amure, Feb.r3
and entertain this illuffrious guest *; and in all thes~e scenes of
gaiety, Darnly, whos~e qualifications were altogether superficial
and thewy, appeared to great advantage. His conquest of the
Queen's heart became complete. And inclination now prompted
her to conclude a marriage, the firil thoughts of which had been
fuggefied by considerations merely political.

Elizabeth contributed, and perhaps not without design, to increase
the violence of this pation. Soon after Darnly's arrival in Scot-
land, the, in return to that mess~age, whereby Mary had signified
her willingners to accept of Leiceller, gave an answer, in such
terms, as plainly unravelled her original intention in that intrigueJ.
She promiled, if the Scottith Queen's marriage with Leiceller
thouldd take place, to advance him to great honours; but with re-
gard to her title to the Engliih fucceion, the syould neither sus-
ser any legal inquiry to be made concerning it, nor permnit it to
be publicly recognaifed, till the herself should declare her refolu-
tion never to marry. M~ary, notwithstanding Elizabeth's former

t Keith, spo. Append. t58*

*Knox, 369.

BOOK1 -II prom~il~es, had reason to expea every thing contained in this reply;

LT her hligh sp~irit, however, could not bear, with patience, such a
56*cruel dis~covery of the contempt, the artifice, and mockery, wiith

which, under the veil of friendship, the had been to long abuted.
She burst into tears of indignation, and expressed, with the ut-
moit bitterness, her s~ense of that disingenuous craft, which had
been employed to deceive her *

The natural effeat of thlis indignation was to add to the impe.

tuofity with which thle pursued her own Ccheme. Blinded by re,
[entment, as well as by love, the observed no defeas in the man,
whom the had chosen; and began to take the necessary iteps to·
wards accompliihing her design, with all the impatience, natural
to those patiions.

As Darnly was so nearly related to thle Qucen, thle canon lawv

made it neceitry to obtain the Pope'4 dis~pensation, before the
celebration of the marriage. For this purpafe, the early Set on
foot a negaciation with thle court of Rome $.

The French Sh'e was busy, at the fame time, in procuring the codent of
court ap- the French King and his mother. Having communicated her
mrv fh~atch[ defgn", and the motives which determined her choice, to Caftelnaq

the French AmbaffTador, thle employed him, as the molt proper
person, to bring his court to fall in with her views. Among 0-
ther arguments to this purpol~e, Caftelnau mentioned Mary's at-
tachment to Darnly, which he reprelented to be to violent and
deep-rooted, that it was no longer in her own power to breakr off
the match f. Nor were the French MLiniffers backwrard in en-
couraging Mary's patiosn. Her pride would never sloop to an
alliance with a f`ubjeA of France. By this choice, they were de-
livered from the aIpprehenflon of a match with any of the Au-
firian Princes, as well aslthe danger of too olofe an union w~ith
Elizabeth. And as Darnly profefied the Roman Catholic rell-
gion, this faited the bigatted schemes which that court had a·
dopted.

Darn~v~lydic hile Mary was endeavouring to reconcile foreign courts to a

ra ofte. reafure which the had to much at heart ; Darnly, and his father,
obles, by their behaviour, were raising up enemies at home, to obitrud

it. Lennox had, during the former part of his life, discovered
no great compals of abilities, or political wildom ; and appears to
have been a man of weak underffanding, and violent pations.
Darnly was not superior to his father in underfiandinlg, and all

* Keith, Append. 239. t Cam~d. 396. t Cafteln. a63*

hus passions were still more impetuous *. To there, he added that BOOK III.
Insolence, which the advantage of external form, when accom- kS
panied with no quality more valuable, is apt to inrpire. In- 6.
toxicated with the Queen's favour, he began already to assume
the haughtines~s of a K~ing, and to put on that imperious air, which
majefy itself can fearce render tolerable.

It was by the advice, or at least with the content of Mlurray, Particularrly

and his party, that Lennox had been invited into Scotland -f-; and sury
yet, no sooner did he acquire a firm footing in that kingdom, than
he began to enter into secret cabals with those noblemen, who
were knownv to be avowed enemies to M~urray, and with regard
to relig-ion, to be either neutrals, or favourers of Poperyf.
D~arnly, still more imprudent, allowed some raifh exprefilons con-
cerning thlefe favours, which the Qujeen's bounty had c mferred
upon M~urray, to escape him f .

But, above all these, the familiarity which Darnly cultivated

w\ith David Rizio the Italian, contributed to increase the ulpicion
and d;~rpuft of the nobles.

The low birth, and indigent condition of this man, placed him The rice of

in a fiation, in which he ought naturally to have remained un- Itizio-s fa-
hnowvn to posterity. But what fortune called him to aQ, and to
fufferr in Scotland, obliges hillory to descend from its dignity,
ard to record his adventures. He was the son of a musician inl
Turin, and hav~ingr accompanied the Piedmontele Ambassador in-
to Scotland, gained admi~ion into the Queen's family, by his skill
in mL~fc. His servile condition had taught him suppleness of
ipirit, and influ-ting manners. He quickly crept into the Queen's
favour, and her French Secretary, happening to return at that
time into his own country, was preferred by her to thlat office.
He now began to mak~e a figure in court, and to appear as a man
of weigh't and consequence. The whole train of faitors and ex,
pee~ants, who have an extreme sagacity in dilcovering the paths
wh~ich lead most direAly to success, applied to him. His recom-
mendations were observed to have great influence over the Queen,
and he grew to be considered, not only as a favourite, but as a
Miniftner. N~or was Rizio careful to abate that envy, which al-
nays attends such anl extraordinary and rapid change of fortune.
He fludied, on the contrary, to display the whole extent of his
favour. He affe~ed to talk often, and familiarly, with the Queen
mn public. He equalled the greatest and moit opulent fubjeAs,

* K~eith, 2;2, 2;9. -iKnox; 36:· Keith, -;4. f- Id. 31
5 Keith, 27+ n

BOOK 111. in richness of dress, and in thle number of his attendants. lie

discovered in all his behaviour, that af~uming insolence, with

155*xhich unmerited prosperity ins~pires an igno'ole mind. It was

with the utmost indigrnetion that the nobles beheld the power;
it was with the utmoil di~ficulty, that thley tolerated the arro-
gance of this unworthy minion. Even in the Qu~een's prelence
they could not forbear treating him with malrks of contempt.
Nor was it his exorbitant power alone, which exafrperated the
Scots. They consid~ered him, and not without reason, as a dan-
gerous enemy to the Protellant religion, and fuilpea8e that he
held, for this purpole, a secret correspondence with the court of
Rome *

Darnly's It was Canl~y's misfo~rtune to fall under the management of
a e ~nn this m m, who, by flattery and assiduity, easily gained on his

vanity, and inexcperience. Rizio's whlole influence on the ~een
was employed in his behalf, and contributed, without doubt, to-
wards establishing him more firmly in her affeations 1. But w hatever
benefit he mighti reap fiom his patronage, it did not counterba-
lance the contempt, and even the infamy, ter which he was ex.
posed, on account of his familiarity with such an upstart.

Thoug-h Darnly daily made progress in the Q een's affeaions,

thie conduaecd herself, however, with such prudent reserve, as to
inpolez on Randolsh the Englifhl Resident, a man othlerwzi'e
thiewvd and pe··etratingr. It appears from his letters at this pe-
riod, that he entertained not the least ufupicion of the intrigue
wrhichl wBs carrying on; and gave his court repeated afilurance·,
tl:at the Scottilih Qeen had no design of marrying Darnlyf. In
the midf% of his security, Maryj dispatched Mlaitland to signify
her intention1 to Elizabeth, and to solicit her coni'ent to the mar-
riage with Darnly. This embaiTyr was the firfl thing, which
opened the eyes of Randlolph.

AprlI8. Elizabeth affeaed the greatest surprise at this sudden refolu-

l'ash tion o the ScottiT:h Qeen, but wvithout reason. The train was

g~ainfi the laid bjy herself, and the had no cause to wonder when it took es-

Sefeit. Sh~e expressed, at the fame time, her difapprobsation of the

withl)artly. match, in the iirongeft terms; and pretended to foresee many

dangers and inconveniencies arilingr from it, to ' oth Lingdoms.
But this, too, was mere affeaation. Mary had aften and plainly
declared her resolution to marry. It was imp~ossible fee could

*Buchen.340. Mely~. to . (1 t
( Keith, 273 and 4ppenl r Is

make any cho:ce more inoffenfive. The danger of introducing BOOKX I 1.
a foreign intereit into B~ritain, which Elizabeth had 10 juffly
dreaded, was entirely avoided. Darnly, though allied to both 6*
Crowns, and poileffed of lands in both kiingdoms, could be for-
midable to neither. It is evident, from all there circumfiances,
that Elizabeth's appreh~ensions of danger couldl not pofiibly be
serious; and that, in all her violent declarations against Darnly,
there was much more of' grimace than of reality I.

There were not wanting, however, political motives of much

weight, to induce that wYife Princers to put on the appearance of
great displeasure. Miary, intimidated by this, might perhaps de-
lay her marriage; which Elizabeth desired to obfhrua with a
weakneifs, that little suited the dignity of her mind, and the ele-
vation of her chara~er. Besides the tranquillity of her own king-
dam was the great obJjea of Elizabeth's policy; and by dec'aring
her diffatisfa~ion with M1'ary's condua, the hoped to alarm that
party in Scotland, which was attatched to the Englithl interest,
and to encourage Luch of the nobles, as secretly difsproved the
match, openly to oppole it. T'he feeds of discord would, by this
means, be s~cattered through that kingdom. Intestine commo-
tons might arise. Amidit these, Mrary could form none of those
dangerous schemes, to which the union of her people might have
prompted her. She herself would become the umpire between
her, and her contending fubjeas. And England might look on,
with security, wihle a florm, which she had raised, wuffed the
only kingdom, which could pollibly diiturb its peace.

In prosecution of this scheme, the laid before her Privy lit y

Council the mefa~ge from the Scottith Queen, and confullted them
w-ith regard to the anfw'er she thould return. Their determina-
tion, it is cafy to conceive, was perfea1y conformable to hier fe-
cret views. T`hey drew up a remnonfirance against the intendrd
match, fall of the imaginary dangers, with which that event
threatened the kiingcdom $. N~or did the think it enough, to figni-
fy her disappro~bation of the medfure, either by Ma~itland, Mazry's

'Even the F-ifforlans of that age acktnowl!edge, that th~e marriage of the Scote

t~ih Queen with a fu'jeCt wa fir cromT b ing diladr,ea~ble to Elizabeth. Knox,
3 9, 373. Fuchan. - o. Caftrinau, w ho, at that t'me, was well acquainted writh
the intrigues of be t'l .le Bul'h,; courts, assen s, and upon grounds of great proba-
b lIty-, that thle rat h w-as who~lly Ehiz-beth's ownl work; and: that thie rejoiced at
the a compf fhnrent of it, Caiteln. 462. app~ears from the letters of her own Ar..
b fladors. Kieitt ,3C 280, 8

1 K~eith, 27 *. See Agnd;i. No X.

B bij

BOOK 11, Amboaffador, or by Randolph~, her own Resident in Scotland; in

I6*order to add more dignity to the farce which the chose to aB,

th~e appointed Sir Nicholas Throgmorton her Ambassador Ex-

Throe- traordinary. She commanded him to declare, in the firong~eft

nstuat terms, her diffatisfa~ion with the flep which Mary propoled to

take; and, at the fame time, to produce the determination of
the P'ri'vy Council, as an evidence that the sentiments of the na.
tion were not different from her own. Not longs after, the con-
finled Lady L~ennox as a prisoner, first in her own house, and then
sent her to the T ower ".

Intelligence of all this reached Scotland, before the arrival of

thle Englif~hAmbaffador. In the first trpnfports of her indignation,
Mary resolved, no longer, to keep any measu~res with Elizabeth;
and sent orders to Maitland, who accompanied Throgmorton, to
return inflantly tothe English court, and, in her name, to declare
to Elizabeth, that after being amused 10 long to so little purpole ;
after being fooled, and imposed on so grossly by her evasive arti-
fices ; the was now resolved to gratify her own inclination, and
to ask no other codfent, but that of her own fub~jeEts, in the
choice of an husband.` Maitland, with his usual sagacity, fore-
saw all the effeats of fach a ranh and angry message, and ventured
rather to incur the displeasure of his Miffrefs, by dlifobeying her
commands, than to be made the infirument of tearing asunder, so
violently, the few r~emaining ties, which ftill1inked together thle
two Queens t.

M\'ary herself soon became sensible of her error. She received

the Eng-lish Ambassador with refpea; juffified her own condcR:
with decency; and though unalterable in her resolution, the as-
fe~ed! a wonderful solicitude to reconcile Elizabeth to the mea-
sure; and even pretended, out of complailance, towards her, to
put off the consummation of the marriage for some monthst.
It is probable, iowever, that the want of the Pope's dilpenfation,
and the profpedt of gaining th~e consent of her own fu~bjeAs, were
the real motives of thlis delay.

FlUray's This consent Mary laboured with thle utmost induflry to obtain,
averho~n to
Darnly. The Earl of Murray was the person in the kingdom, whole con-

currence was of the greatest importance; but the had reason to
fear that it would not be procured wvithlout extreme diffculty.
From the time of Lennox's return into Scotland, Murray per-
ceived that the Queen's affeaions began gradually to be eftran= d

*Keith, Ayppn'. 16r.- 1Id. r50 Id. "8.

iloln him. Darnly, Ath~ole, Rizlo, all thle court favourites, com. BOOK TI .
bined ag7ainit him. His ambitious spirit could not brookr this di-
minution of his powfer, which his former se2rvices had 10 little 65
merited. He retired into thle country, and gave way to rivals,
with wvhom he was unable to contend*. The return of the Earl
of Bothw~ell, his avowed enemy, wh~o had been accused of a defg~n
Ipon his life, and who had resided for fomne time in foreign coun-
tries, obliged him to attend to his own safety. N\o entreaty of
the Qu~een could perfuiade him to a reconcilement with that noble-
man. He infilled on having him broughlt to a public trial, and
prevailed, by his importunity, to have a day fixed for it. Bothl-
we~lldurft not appear in opposition to a man, who came to the
?'ace of trial, attended by five thousand of his followers onl horse-
back. He was once more confirained to leave the k~ingdom;
but, by the Queen's command, the sentence of outlawry, which
is inlcured by non-appearance, was not pronounced against him t.

But M~ary, sensible of how much importance it was, to gain a M1ay 8.

fubje8 so powverful and to popular as thle Earl of Murray, invited
him back to court, and received him with many demonfirations
of rerfeat and confidence. At last sh~e desired him to iet an ex-
ample to her other fubjeas by fableribing a paper, containing a
formal approbation of her marriage with Darnly. Mrurray had
many reasons to hesitate, and even to withhold his assent. Darnly
had not only undermined his credit with the Qpeen, but dif-
covered, on· every occallon, a rooted averflon to his person. By
confanting to his elevation to the throne, he would give him fach
an acceffon of dignity and power, as no man willingly beffows on
an enemy. Thle unhappy consequences which might follow up-
on a breach with England were, likewise, of considerable weight
with~ Murray. He had always openly preferred a confederacy
with England, before the ancient alliance with France. By his
means chie~y, this change in the fy-item of national politics had
been brough~t about. ~A league with England had been eftabliih-
ed; and he could not think; of sacrificing, to a rath and youthful
pation, an alliance of so much utility to the k~ingdom; and
w~hich, he and the other nobles were bound, by every obligation,
to mraintaint. N'or was the interest of religion forgotten on
this occasion. Mlary, though fulrrounded by Protestant Coun-
fellors, had found means to hold a dangei-ous correspondence with
foreign Catholics. Shie had even courted the Pope's proteaion,

* Keith, 3j3, 274. Apnr- n r -r ITd IbY~. 160. t Keithp I69

noox mr. who had sent her a subsidy of eight thouland crowns*. Though

SMurray had hitherto endeavoured to bridle the zeal of the re-
1.6-formed clergy, and to s~et the Queen's condua in the mast fa.

vourable light, yet her obitinate adherence to her own religion,
could not fail of alarming him, and by her resolution to marry a
Papist, the only hope of reclaiming her, which rernained, was
for ever cut off. Each of there considerations had its influence
on M~urray, and all of them determined him to decline comply.
ing, at that time, with the Queen's request.

Miay 14. The Convention of nobles, which was assembled a fewi days
Aconven- after, discovered a greater difpolition to gratify the Queen,
tion of the
nobles ap. Many of them, without hesitation, expressed their approbation of
proves of the intended match j but as others were flartled at the fame
riage. dangers which had alanned Murrry, or were influenced by his

exiample, to refuse their codfent, another Convention w-as appoint-
ed at Perth, in order to deliberate more fully concerning this
2natter t.

M'ean while, Mary gave a public evidence of her own inclina-

tion, by conferring upon Darnly titles of honour peculiar to the
royal family. T'he opposition the had hitherto met with, and the
many contrivances employed to thwart and disappoint her~inclina-
tion, produced their ufulal effea on her heart, they confirmed her
patiion, and increased its violence. The simplicity of that age
imputed an affeaion, 10 excellive, to the influence of witchcraft).
It was owing, however, to no other charm, than th~e irresistible
power of youth and beauty, over a young and tender heart,
Darnly grew giddy with his prosperity. Flattered by the love
of a Queen, and the aIpplaule of many among her fubijeas, L~is na-
tural haughtiness and insolence became insu3pportable, and he
could no longer bear advice, far kf~s contradic?ion. Lord Ruth-
ven, happening to be the firfl person who informed him that Mary,
in order to sooth Elizabeth, had delayed, for some time, creating
him Duke of Albany, he, in a frenzy of rage, drevy his dagger
and attempted to flab him ((. It requ~ired all Mary's attention,
to prevent his falling under that contempt, to which such beha-
viour deservedly exposed h~im.

Malr 's ad. In no feene of her life was ever Mary's own addrels more re.
re'` he markably displayed. Love fharpFened her invention, and made

bjs.her fludy every method of ga~ining her fab~jeas. Many of th~e

nobles thie won by her caresses, and more by her promises. On

* Keith. 295. P6017. I14. t Keith, -0 . Knox, 373

4~ ~ ~ 1

Ke

h 23 1. i e--nd. Iso

/ me ihe beffow-ed landls, to others the gave new titles of hlonour *. Ro000T.
She even con~defcended to court the Protefiant clergy. And hav- -
ing invitedl three of their fuperintendants to Stirling, the de- 6*
clared, in firo~gr terms, her refulution to protec? their religion,
expreffedl her wrillingnels to be present at a conference upon the
points in doarrine which were disputed between the Proteitants
and Papills, and went so far as to fhlow some desire to hear such
of their preachers, as were most remarkable for moderation t·. By
these arts, the Queen gained wonderfully upon the people, wh'o,
unless their jealousy be raiLed by repeated injuries, are always·
ready to view the a8ions of their Sovereign with an indulgent

eye.

Onl the other hand, Murray and his associates were plainly the

dupes of Elizabeth's policy. She talkred in so hligh a firain, of
her displeasure at the intended match; the treated Lady Lennox
with so much rigour; lihe wrote to the Scottith Qgeen in such
fIrong terms; the recalled th~e Earl of Lennox and his son in Ach1
a peremptory manner, and with s~uch severe denunciations of lar~
vengeance, if they presumed to disobeys; that all these expref-
11008 of averflon fully persuaded them of her sincerity. T'his be-
lief fortified their feruples with refpea to the match, and encou-
raged them to oppole it. They began with forming among thecm-
selves bonds of confederacy and mutual defence; they entered inl-
to a secret correspondence with the English Resident, in order
to secure Elizabeth's affifiance,, when it thould become needful p;
they endeavoured to fill the nation witih fchl apprehenflons of dan1-
ger, as might counterbalance the infl7uence of those arts, which
the Queen had employed.

Besides there intrigues, there were Ipecretly carried on, by both s hemesof

patties, dark designs of a more criminal nature, and more suit- rn anyvd
11e to the 1,irit of thle age. Da~nly, impatient of that oppofi- pi·?ft ea,h
tion, s~lich he imputed wholly to Miurray, and resolving· at othe'.
ny rate to get rid of s~uch a powerfcul enemy, formed a plot to as-
'aoinate hlim, during the meeting of the Convention at Perth.
Murray, on his palt, dcolpailing of preventing the marriage by
any other means, h-d, together with the Duke of Chatelherault,
and thle Eat1 of Argyle, concerted mreduires for seizing Darnly,
and carrying him a priloner incp Engrland.

If cither of there con iracies had takren efi: 0, this Convention

might Iare been atte~nc'.d with~ consequences extremely trag~icali

* Keith, 283. t Knoxm, 373.
[j Keith 28 , 92, 298. t Keith, 285, 286.

B~oozen. but both were rendered abortive, by the vigilance or grood fjl·

I56j. tune of those against whom they were formed. 1Murray, being

warned of his danger by some retainers to thle court, who ftd1l
favoured his interest, avoided the blow, by not going to Perth.
Miary, receiving intelligence of Murray's enterprise, retired with
the utmost exp~edition, along with Darnly, to the other fide or
Forth. Cons~cious, on both sides, of guilt, and inflamed with~
resentment, it was impoirble they could either forget the vio-
lence, which themselves had meditated, or forgive the injuries
intended againit them. All hope of reconcilement was at an end
from thlat moment, and their mutual enmity burit out with ever-
symptom of implacable hatred *I

* The reality of' thelfe two opposite conspiracies h~as given occallon to mar -

diifputes, and much contradiction. Some deny that any defiin wpas formed as
gainiZ the 11fe of Murray; others call in question thle truth of the confpiiracy a-
gainft Darnly. There s~eem, however, to be good reasons for believing both,
though the zeal and credulity of party-writers have ajddd to each, many exaz
gerated! circumitances. The followving arguments rendei it probable, that Fom,
violence was mntended aga; ins Murray.

I. This is politively affected, I. By; Buchanan, 341. 2.· The English ReidE.nt

writes to Cecil, that Mlurray was afiredly informed that a defigrn was laid to
murder him at Perth, and deferibes the manner in which this plot was to hive
been executed. Kieithn, 287- 3. M~urray himfolf conflantly and publicly affrm
ed, that such a design was formed against his life. K~elth, Ap. ro8. And thou b
he w~as called upon by the Queen to bring legal evidence of his a~ertion, and a
safe condua otfered him, while he damle to court for that purpoire. Ibid. Yu'L
wvhoever consider~s Murray's situation, and the spirit of those who ruled in court
at that time, will fesarce deem it any p7roof of his guilt, that he did not chufe to
risk his per-son on such fectrity. 4. The fulrious patirons of Darnly th~e fierce
re·fs of his relentment, which scrupled at no violence, and the manners of the
age, render the imp~utation of such a crime less imnprobable.

II. That M~urray and his associate~s had resolved to seize Drnlly's person a

pears, I. From the express teffimony of Melvill, rr2. Buchanan, p. 34x, anc.
K~nox, P. 377, "ie61, but withotit reas~on, to reprefealt this as an idle rumoul
2. The ueftion was put to Randolph, whether the Governor of Berwfick wouild re
ceive Lennox and his son, if they were carried prisoners to that place. This plain-
ly- fl~ews, that fame such design was in hand, and. Randoolph did not discourage
nr, by the answ~er which he ganve. Kieith, 290· 3. The precipitation, lut,
whlich the Queen retired, and the re~ason the gave for this iidde~n High~t, are mein
tioned by· Rando!ph, 29r. 4t. A great part of the Scottith nobles, and amnor,
thlefe the Earls of Argyle and Rothes, who were themselv-es privy to the defrn
asnert the reality of the conspiracy. Good. vol. ii. 358.

All these circumnjances leave little room to doubt of the truth or'both~ confplrn

at s. But we may obfk~rve hows far this proof, though drawn from public record
falls thiort, onl both1 sides, of lega~l and formal evidlence. Buchanan and RandolFI
in the~ir accounts of the coniiiracy aga;infl Mrurray, differ widely in almost every
Lihcumlive~e. Thie accoun~ts of the a:ttempt uponO Drnily, are not more confif

On Mary's return to Edinburgh, the summoned her vairals by Booze III.

proclamation, and solicited them by her letters, to repair thither
in arms, for the proteaion of her person agrainfl her foreign and 65

Mary fun-

domeltic enemies *. She was obeyed with all the promptness and mlonsher
alacrity, with which fubjeas run to defend a mild and popular va(Tals to

take arms

adminiffration. This popularity, however, the owed in a great againlt
measure to Murray, who had direaed her adminiffration with MUrray.
great prudence. But the crime of opposing her marriage, obli-
terated the memory of his former services; and Mary, impatient
of contradi~tion, and apt to confider those who disputed her will,
as enemies to her person, determined to let him feel the whole
weight of her vengeance. For this purpore, the summoned him July r9.
to appear before her upon a thort warning, to answer to such things
as thould be laid to his charge -f. At this very time, Murray,
and the Lords who adhered to him, were assembled at Stirling,
to deliberate what cours~e they thould hold, in such a difficult con-
jun~ture. But the current of popular favour ran to firongly a-
gainft them; and, notwithstanding some fears and jealousies, there
prevailed in the nation, such a general dilpolition to gratify the
Queen in a matter which so nearly concerned her, that, without
coming to any other conclusion, than to implore the Queen of
England's proteaion, they put an end to their ineffeatual consul-
tations, and returned every man to his own houf'e.

Together with this discovery of her enemies weaknels, the

confluence of her f~ubjeas from all corners of the kingdom, as-
ent. Melvil alleges, that the design of the confpiartors was to carry D~arnly a
prisoner into England; the proposal made to Randolph agrees with this. Ran-
dolph says, that they intended to carry the Queen to St. Andrew's, and Darnly
to Calile Campbell. The Lords, in their declaration, affirm the derign of the
conspirators to hnve been to murder Darnly and his father, to confine the Queen
in Lochleven during life, and to ~urp the government. Tobelieve, implicitly
whatever they· find in an ancient paper, is a folly to which Antiquaries are liable,
But ancient papers often contain nothing more than the slanders of a party, and
the lie of the day. The declaration of the nobles referred to, is of this kind; it
is plainly rancorous, and written in the very heat of fatlion . Many things are
aIferted in it, evidently falle, or exaggerated. Let Murray and his confede-
rates be as ambitious as we can furppofe, they muf have had some pretences,
and plaufllbe ones too, before they could venture to imprison their Sovereign for
life, and to seize the reins of government; but, at that time, the Queen's con-
dult had afforded no colourable excule for proceeding to such extremities. It
is, likewise, remarkable, that in all the proclamations against Murray, of which
so many are published in Keith, Appendix 108, &c. neither the violent attempt
upon Darnly, nor that which he is alleged to have formed againit the Queen her-
lelf, are ever once mentioned.

* Keith, 298. ? Id. Append. ro8.

BO I forded Mtary an agreeable proof of her own firengtrh . While tne

1363* Queen was in this pros~perous situation, the determined to bring

to a period, an affair, which had to long engrossed her heart, and

Celebrates occupied her attention. On the 29th July, the married Henry
r ge wth Stewart Lord Darnly. The ceremony was performed in the Queen's

Dry. chapel, according to the rites of the Rolnifh church; the Pope'l

bull, dispensing· with their marriage, having been previously ob.
tained *. She ifiued, at the fame time, proclamations, conferring
the title of King of Scots tipon her hu~band, and commanding that
henceforth all writs at law thould run in the joint names of King
and Queen f·. Nothing can be a fironger proof of the violence of
1Vary's love, or the w~eak~ness of her councils, than this las t fep.
Whether the had anly right to chufe a husband. without consent
of Parliament, was, in that age, a matter of some difputet; that
the had no right to confer upon him, by her private authority, the
title and dignity of King; or, by a simple proclamation, to raise
her husband to be the master of her people, seems to be beyond
all doubt. Francis II. indeed, bore the fame title. It was not,
however, the gift of the Queen, but of the nation; and the con-
sent of Parliament was obtained, before he ventured to affumr~e it.
IDaruly's condition, as a lubjeA, rendered it still more necefiaryto
have the concurrence of the supreme Council in his favour. Such
a violent and unprecedented 11retch of prerogative, as the fubfti-
tuting a proclamation iii place of an aB of Parliament, might
have juffly alarmed the nation. But the Queen poffeffed To en·
tirely the confidence of lier fubjeas, that, notwithstanding all the
clamours of the mal~econtents, no symptoms of general discontent
appeared on that account.

E~ven amidit that sc~ene of joy, which always accompanies fuc-

cef~sful love, Mary did not fuffer the cours~e of her vengeance a-
gainft the malecontent nobles to be interrupted. Three days after
the marriage, Murray was again summoned to court, under the
severest penalties, and upon his non-appearance, the rigour of jus-
tice took place, and he wias declared an outlaw |j. At the fame
time, the Queen set at liberty Lord Gordon, who ever since his
father's inf~urre~ion in the year 15~62, had~been detained a prison-
er; the recalled the Earl of Sutherland, who, on account of his
concern inl that conspiracy, had fled into Slanders; and the per-
mitted Bothwell to return again into Scotland. The firit,. and last
of there, were among the most powerful fubjeas in thle kingdom,
and all of them animated with implacable hatred to Miurray,

* Keith, ApApend. zo8. ( Anderf'on, 1. 33. See Append. No. XL.
t Buchan. 34r. II Keith, 3d9, 3'0 .

whom they eiteemed the enemy of their families, and the author ExO U:L~

yfteron~feig. Ti cm o ardbcm h on

of hei ow

fuferngs Ths cmmo haredbecme he oun I6 .

dation of the firia~eft union with the Queen, and gained them an
ascendent over all her councils. Murray himfrelf considered this
confederacy with his avowed enemies, as a more certain indication
than any meas~ure the had yet taken, of her inexorable resentment.

The malecon~tents had not yet openly taken up arms *. But the Mazrches z.

Queen having ordered her fubjeas to march against them, they jdv -I~
were driven tothe laR extremity. They foundi themselves unable, associates.
however, to make head against the numerous forces, which Mary
had assembled; and fled into Argylefhire, in expeAation of aid
from E~lizabeth, to whom they had secretly dispatched a mellen-
ger, in order to implore her immediate aittance-l.

M~eanwhile, Elizabeth endeavoured to embarals M\ary, by a El zaboth

new declaration of her: dis~gust at her condua. She blamed both ffi su~:~ n
her choice of Lord Darnly, and the precipitation w-ithl which the
had concluded the marriage. She required Lennox and Darnly,
whom the flill called her fubjeats, to return into England. And
at the fame time, the wFarmly interceded in beh-lf of Miurray,
whole behaviour the represented to be not only innocent, but
laudable. This metrage, 10 mortifying to the pride of the Queen,
2nd to full of contempt for her humband, was rendered filil more
insupportable, by the petulant and faiucy demeanour of Tamworth,
the person w~ho delivered itt. M~ary vindicated her own con-
dua with warmth, but with great firength of reason, and rejea~-
ed the interceti~on in behalf of Murray, not without signs of re-
fentment at Elizabeth's pretending to intermeddle in the in~ter-
nal government of her kingdom jJ.

She did not, on that account, intermit in the least the ardour,

with which the pursued Mu~rray and his adherents **. They now
appeared openly in arms; anld having received a small supply in

*After th-ir fruitless confu:tation at Sthtling, the Lords retired to their own

houses, Keith, 304. Murray was still at St. Andrew-'s on July 33. Keith, 306.
Ey the places of rendezvous, appointed for t he inhabitants of the diferent coun-
ties, August 4. it appears that thle Queen's intention was to march Into Fife, the
county in which M~urray, Rothes, K~irkaldy, and other chiefs of the malecontents
resided. Kelth, 3I0. Their flighnt into the weft, K~eith7, gr2. prevented th~s
expedition, and the former rendezvous was s:tered. Keith, 3I0.

t Keith, 3r2. K~nox, 38. t Camd. 298. 1| Keith, Append. 99.
** The mnoft considerable persons wrho joined M\urray, were the Duke of Cha-

telheraul:, the Earis of Argyle, Glencairn, Rothes; Lords Coyd and Och:1tlee;
The Lalrds of Grangre, Cunininghamhead, Eakiomie, Car.nylie, Lawe~rs, Bar,
Dreghorn, Pitarrows, Comptroller, and the Tutcr of Pitcur. Knoxu, j32.

Cc ij

BoPK IIL money from Elizabeth *, were endleavouring to raise their follow-

LcJers in the weffern counties. But Mary's vigilance hindered thens
56.fromt assembling in any considerab~le body. All her military ope-

rations, at that time, were concerted With wisdom, executed with
vigour, and attended with success. In order to encourage her
~troops, the herself marched along with them, rode with loaded
piitolsf, and endured all the fatigues of war with admirable for.
titude. 11er alacrity inspired her forces with an invincible re.
solution, which, together with their superiority in number, de-
terred the malecontents from facing them in the fieldj but hav.
ing artfully, paired the Queen's army, they marched with the ut.
most precipitation to Edinburgh, and endeavoured to rodfe the

Auguitzz. inhabitants of that city to arms. The Queen did notfuffef thens

to remaits long unatolefied; and, on her approach, they were
forced to abandon that place, and retire in confution towards the
wellern borderst.

They are 0. As it was uncertain, for some time, what rout they had taken,
I ug~re- Mlary employed that interval in providing for the security of the
England. counties in the heart of the kingdom. She seized the places of

firength, which belonged to the rebels; and obliged the confidep
able liarons in those thires, which the mast fufpeAed, to join is
associations for her defence (f. Having thus left all the country
behind her in tranquillity, the, with an army eighteen thou.
sand firong, marched towards Dumfries, where th6 rebels then
were. During their retreat, they had sent letters to the Queen,
from ailmoft every place where they halted, full of fubmifflon,
and containing various overtures towards an accommodation. But
Mary, who determined not to let flip such a favourable opportuni-
ty of crushing the mutinous spirit of hbr fubjeAs, rejeaed them
with disdain. As the advanced, the malecontents retired; and,
having received no effeatual aid from Elizabeth (, they defpaire4

Onober 20. of any other means of safety, fled into England, and put them·

selves under the proteaion of the Earl of Bedford, Warden of
the marches.

" Nothing, which Bedford's pedfonal friendship for Murray could

pedted ill [upply, was wanting to render their retreat agreeable* But Eli-

a-m~B zseth herself treated them with extreme neglea. She had fully

beth. gained her end, and, by their means, had excited such dilcord

ppd jealousies among the Scots, as would, in all probability, long

* Knox, 380. - iKeith, Append. 164. t Id. 3ly.
i) Id. Append. z z3. $ See Appendix, No. XII, XIII.

diffrad and weaken Mary's councils. Her business now, was to BooK mI.
iave aFPearances, and to juffify herself to the Ministers of France
and Spain, who acculed her of fomenting the troubles in Scotland 1
by her intrigues. The expedient she contrived for her vindica-
tion, firongly dil~plays her own charaaer, and the wretched con-
dition of exiles, who are obliged to depend on a foreign Prince.
1Murray, and Hamilton Abbot of Kilwinning, being appointed
by the other fugitives to wait on Elizabeth, initead of meeting
with that welcome reception which was due to men, who, out of
confidence in her promises, had hazarded their lives and fortunes,
could not even obtain the favour of an audience, until they had
meanly codfented to acknowledge, in the presence of the French
and Spanish Ambassadors, that Elizabeth had given them no en-
cour-geement to take arms. No sooner did they make this de-
claration, than the affonilhed them with this reply, " You have
declared the truth; I am far from setting an example of rebellion
to my own fubjeas, by countenancing those who rebel against
their lawful Prince. The treason, of which you have been guil-
ty, is detefiable; and as traitors I banish you from my pre-
fence "." Notwithfianding this scene of farce and of fallehood,
so dishonourable to all the persons who aded a part in it, Eliza-
beth permitted the malecontents peaceably to reside in her domi-
nions, supplied them secretly with money, and renewed her soli-
citations with the Scottish Queen in their favourt.

The advantage the had gained over them did not satisfy Mary;

the resolved to follow the blow, and to prevent a party, which
the dreaded, from ever recovering any footing inthe nation. With
this view, the called a meeting of Parliament ; and in order that
a featence of forfeiture might be legally pronounced against the
banilfhed Lords, the summoned them, by public proclamation, to
appear before its. Dec. r

The Duke of Chatelherault, on his humble application, ob-

tained a s~eparate pardon; but not without diffculty, as the King
violently opposed it. He was obliged, however, to leave the
kingdom, and to reside for fame time in France j .

The numerous forces which Mary brought into the field, the

vig~our with which the a~ed, and the length of time the kept
them in arms, resemble the efforts of a Prince with revenues
much more considerable than those which the pofeflled. But
armies were then levied and maintained by a Prince, at Imlall

* Mely. Ix2. ( Kinx, 389. t Keith, 32o.
(I Knoxr, 389.

BooxIiI. Lharge. 'he -afT'al followed his superior, and the fuperlor as

Stended t!2e Manarch, at his own exupence. Six hundred horsemen,

1563* however, and three companies of foot, besides her guards, receiv.

ed regular pay from the Queen. This ex~traordinary charge, to-
gether with the disburs~ements occafloned by her marriage, ex.
hauffed a treasury, which was far from~ being rich. In this exi-
gency, many devices were fallen upon for raising money. Fines
were levied on the towns of St. Andrew's, Perth, and IDundee,
which were fulpeAed of favouring the malecontents. An und~ual
tax was imposed on the boroughs throughout the kringdom; and
a great f~um was demanded of the citizens of Edinburgh, by way
of loan. T'his unprecedented exasion alarmed the citizens.
They had recours~e to delays, and flarted diflculties, in order
to avoid it. These Mlary confirued to be zAs of avowed difobe-
dience, and initantly committed several of them to pris~on. But
this severity did not s~ubdue the undaunted spirit of liberty, which
prevailed among the inhabitants. The Qu~een was obliged to
bestow upon the city, the fupJeriority of the town of Leith, in
return for which the obtained a considerable fam of money *.
The thirds of ecclesiastical benefices proved another sou~rce,
whence the Queen derived some supply. About this time, we
find the Protestant clergy complaining more bitterly than ever of
their poverty. The army, it is probable, exhauffed a great part
of that fund, which was appropriated for their maintenanceS.

Chiriat-The Assemblies of the church were not unconcerned [pe8ators

tar. of the commotions of this turbulent year. In the meeting June

24. several of the malecontent nobles were present, and seem to
have had great influence on their decisions. The high firain, in
which the Assembly addressed the Queen, canl be imputed only to
those fears and jealousies, writh regard to religion, which they en-
deavoured to infuse into the nation. The allembly complained,
with some bitterness, of the flop which had been put to the pro-
grefs of the Reformation by the Queen's arrival in Scotland;
they required not only the total iiupprell0n of the Popilh warship
throughout the kingrdom, but even in the Queen's opn chapell
and besides the legal establishment of the Protestant religion,
they d~emanded that Mary herself thould publicly embrace it.
The Queen, after some deliberation, replied, that neither her
conscience, not her interest, would permit her to take such a flep.
The former would for ever reproach her for a change, which pro

? Maltl. 1:h?.of Eiidinburh.

* Knox, 3:33 386.

ceeded fromn no ionard. con~viaion; thle latter would fuffer by 0'I.
the offence,, which her apoitacy muff gi;ve to the King of France> 2363-
and her other allies on the continent*.

It is remarkable, that the prosperous fitu-tion of the Queen's

affairs, dluring this year, began to work fame changre in favour of
her religion. The Earls of Lennox, Athol, and Caffils, openly
attended mals: the hErself afforded the Catholics a more avowed
prote~tion then formerly ; and, by her permillion, some of the an-
tient bl~onks ventured to preach publicly to the people f-.

# BOOK FOURTH.

THE

H1I STORYY

S C OT L AND.

BOOK FOURTH.

CONTENTS.

THE COr~duR Of Queen Mary to the exiled nobles. To Darnly. Rizio. His

murder. The Queen's confinement. Her eleape. The flight of the confpira-
tors. Imprudence of 1)arnly. Bothwell. Birth of James VI. Attachment
of the English Parliament to Mary's title. Perplexity and address of Eliza-
beth. Aversion of the Queen of Scotland to Darnly. Church affairs.
Daml~y's sickness. His murder. His charalter. Bothwell accused of his death.
Trial and acquittal of Bothwell. A Parliament. The Queen carried to Dun-
bar, Her marriage to Bothwell Public difguit. Combination of the nobles.
An accommodation. Flight of Bothwell. Mary's surrender to the rebels.

As thle day appointed for the meeting of Parliament approached, Boore V.
Alary and her Ministers were employed in deliberating concern- ·
ing the course which it was most proper to hold with regard to 1566
the exiled nobles. Many motives prompted her to set no bounds rya~~o~
to the rigour of juffice. The malecontents had laboured to de- concerning
feat a scheme, which her interest conspired with her pafions in hbe exled
renderings dear to her; they were the leaders of a party, whole
friendship the had been obliged to court, while the held their prin-
ciples in abhorrence; and they were firmly attached to a rival,
whom the had good reason both to fear and to hate.

But, on the other hand, several weighty considerations might

be urged. The noblemen, whole fate was in fulpence, were
among the most powerful fubjeas in the kingdom; their wealth
great, their conneaions extensive; and their adherents numer-
ous. They were now at mercy, the objeas of compatiion, and
faing for pardon with the most humble fubmiiTon.

In those circumfiances, an aB of clemency would exalt the

Queen's charaaer, and appear no les~s sp~lendid among foreign.

Dd

BOOKIV*. ers, than acceptable to her own fub~jeAs. Miary herself, thoug I

highly incen fed, was not inexorable ; but the Kiing's rage was im
placable and unrelenting. They were solicited in behalf of the
fugitives, from various quarters. Miorton, Rutthven, M~aitland,
and all who had been members of the Congregation, were not
forgetful of their ancient union with Murray, and his fellow-fuf.
ferers; nor neglec?ful of their safety, which they esteemed of
great importance to the kingdom. Melvil, who at that time pof-
sessed th~e Queen's confidjence, s~econded their folicitations. And
M~urray, having flooped to low as to court Rizio, that favourite,
who was desirous of fecuringr his proteAion against the King,
whose difpleafore he had lately incurred, seconded the intercef-
fions of his other friends, with thle whole of his influence*.
The interpolition of Sir Nicholas Throgmorton, who had lately
been Elizabeth's Ambassador in Scotland, in behalf of the exiles,
was of more weight thlan all thcfe, and attended with more fuc-
cess. Throgmorton, out of enmity to Cecil, had deeply embarked
in all the intrigues which were carried on at the English court,
in order to undermine the power and credit of that Miniller.
He epCoured, for this reason, the cause of the Scottish Qeenl, to-
wards whole title and pretensions the other was known to bear
little favour; and ventured in the present critical june~ure, to
write a letter to Mary, containing the most salutary advices with
regard to her condua. He recommended the pardoning of the
Earl of Murray and his associates, as a measure no less prudent,
than p~opular. An a~tion of this nature, says he, the pure effeRt
of your M~ajefly's generosity, will sp~read the fame of your lenity
and moderation, and engage the English to look towards your
acceiron to their throne, not only without prejudice, but wfith
desire. By the fame means, a perfeA harmony will be reffored
among your own fubjeas, who, if anly rupture thlouldd happen wihl
England, will serve you with that grateful zeal, which your cle-
mency cannot fail of insp~iring t-.

She resolves Ther~e prudent remonfiirances of Throgrmorton, to which his
tet@ ~ith reputation for wisdom, and kinowfn attachment to the Quieen, ad-
clemency. ded great authority, made a deep imporetlion on her spirit. Her

courtiers cultivated this happy difpolfition, and prevailed on her,
notwithilanding the King's inflex~ible temper, to sacrifice her own
private resentment to the intercefr~on of her futbit~s. and the
w-ifhles of her friends t. With this view, the Pailiament, w~hlch

"*Melvil, 'z5. tId. Iz9. (Id. 225.

lad been called to meet on the 4th of February, was prorogrued BOOK IV.
to the 7th of: April*. And in the mean time, the was bufyr in 66
considering the manner and form in which thle thould extend her
favour to the Lords who were under disgrace.

3 houg~h M~ary dilcovered, on this occasion, a mind naturally Is div-erted

prone to humanity, and capable of forgiving, the wanted, how- f~~ntsm.-bltnn
ever, firmnels to resist the influence, which was fatally employed thle fol~iita-
to disappoint the effedts of this amiable difpolition. About this can
time, and at no great difiance from each other, two envoys arriv- her ze-l for
ed from the French King. The former was intruffed with mat- Popery

Feb. 3·

ters of mere ceremony alone; he congratulated the Qp~een on
her marriage, and inveited the King with the ensigns of the order
of St. Michael. The infiruaions of the latter related to matters
of more importance, and produced greater effeAs f.

An interview between Charles IXi. and his fiffer the Queen

of Spain had been often proposed; and after many obitacles arif`
ing from the interference of political interest, was at last appoint-
ed at Bayonne. Cathlerine of Me.dicis accompanied her son;
the Duke of Alva attended his miffrels. Amidit the scenes of
public pomp and pleafulre, which seemed to be the sole occupa-
tion of both courts, a feheme was formed and measures concert-
ed, for exterminating the Hugonots in France, the Protestants
in theI L.ow Coulntries, andl for fuppnreilinh the Repforttation througrh-
out all Europe J. Thbe aalve policy of Pope Pius IV. and the
zeal of the Cardinal of Lorrain, confirmed and encouraged dif-
politions, so suitable to the genius of the R~omith religion, and
to beneficial to their own order.

It was an account of this holy league which the French en-

voy brought to M~ary, con~juring- her, at the fame time, in the
name of the King of France, and the Cardinal of Lorrain, not to
reffore the leaders of the Proteflants in her kingdom to power
and favour, at the very time when the Catholic Princes were
combined to defiroy that fcet, i~n all the countries of Europe | .

Popery is a rpecies of falle religion, remarkable for the firong

Potfeflion it takes of the heart. Contrived by men of deep in-
fght into the human charnaer, and improved by the experience:
and observation of many fuccellive ages; it arrived at last to a
degree of perfeaion, which no former system of fuperflition had
eler attained. There is no power in the understanding, and no
pafEan in the heart, to which it does not present objeas, adapted

* Good. vol. i. 24. -j- eith: 325. .Append. 167. 4Thuau. lib. 37*

1] Mely. 126.

I)d 1j

BOOK IV. to rouie, and to interest them. Neither the love of pleasure,

Swhich, at that time, prevailed in the court of France, nor the

56.pursuits of ambition which occupied the court of Spain, had secured

them from the dominion of bigotry. Laymen, and courtiers,
were agitated with that furious and unmerciful zeal, which is
commonly considered as peculiar to ecclefiaftics; and Kings and
Mlinifters thought themselves bound, in conscience, to extirpate
the Protefiant doarine. Mary herself was deeply tinaured with
all the prejudices of Popery; a patlionate~ attachment to that super-
flition is visible in every part of her charafter, and runs through
all the scenes of her life: the was devoted, too, with the utmoit
fubmi~Tion to the princes of Lorrain, her uncles; and had been ac-
cuffomed, from her infancy, to listen to all their advices, wyith a
filial refpea. The profpe&t of refforing the public exercise of
her own religion, the pleasure of complying with her uncles, and
the hopes of gratifying the French Monarch, whom thle preLent
situation of her affairs in Engrland made it neceirary to court,
counterbalanced all the prudent considerations which had former-
ly weighed with her. She instantly joined the confederacy,
which had been formed for the deftruaion of the Protellants,
and altered the whole plan of her conduat, with regard to Murray
and his adherents *.

To this fatal resolution may be imputed all the subsequent ca.

lamities of Mary's life. Ever since her return into Scotland,
fortune may be said to have been propitious to her, rather than
adverse; and if her prosp~erity did not rife to any great height,
it had, however, Auffered no considerable interruption. A thick
and I'ettled cloud of adveriity, with few gleams of hope, and
none of real enjoyment, covers the remainder of her days.

A Parlia. The effeais of the new fyfiem, which Mary had adopted, were
rnet cla:d loon visible. The time of the prorogation of Parliament was
the exiled shortened; and by a new proclamation, the I2th of March was
nobles' fixed for its meeting 1-. Mary resolved, without any further de.

lay, to proceed to the attainder of the rebel Lords, and, at the
fame time, determined to tak~e some fieps towards the re-e~ablith-
ment of the Romith religion in Scotland f. The Lords of the

* See Appendix, N~o XIV. j Keith~, 326-
4 It is not on the authority of Kinox alone, that we charge the Queen with

the design of re-eftabli~ing the Roman Catholic religion. He, indeed, asserts
that the altars, wrhich thould have been ereaed in the Chnrch of St. Giles were
already provided, 394.· '. Mary herself, in a letter to the Archbilhop of Glaf·
gow her Ambassador in France acknowledg-es, " that in that Parliamenlt, the in·
tended to hav-e done f'ore good, w~ith refpea to reitoringr the old reli;ion.'i

Articles were chosen, as diual, to prepare the business which was EOOK IV.
to come before the Parliament. They were all persons in whom >56
the Queen could confide, and bent to promote her designs. The SG
ruin of MCurary and his party seemed now inevitable, and the
dang~er of the Reformed Church imminent, when an event unex-
peAedly happened, whiich saved both. If we regard either the And pre-
barbarity of that age, when such aas of violence were common, ;heenteodn~'
or the mean condition of the unhappy perfion who f~uffered, the racy agairgL
event is little remarkable; but if we refleA upon the circum- oo
flances with which it was attended, or upon the consequences
which followved it, it appears extremely memorable; and the rife
and progrrefs of it deserve to be traced with great care.

D~arnly's external accomplishments had excited that fuidden and Darnly

loses Sthe

violent pafEion which raised him to the throne. But the qualities Queen'saLf
of his mind corresponded ill w~ith the beauty of his person. Of fearionl.
a w-eak underflanding, and without experience, conceited at the
fa~me time of his own abilities, and ascribing his extraordinary
Fuccels entirely to his diftinguilhed merit. All the Queen's favour
made no impretfion on such a temper. All her gentleness could
not bridle his imperious and ungovernable spirit. All her atten-
tion to place about him persons capable of direffing his condua,
could not preserve him from rash and imprudent altions*. Fond
of all the amusements, and even prone to all the vices of youth, he
became, by degrees, careles~s of her person, and a firanger to her
company. To a woman, and a Q~een, suc~h behaviour was in-
tolerable. The lower the had flooped to raise him, his behaviour
appeared the more ungenerous and criminal. And in proportion
to the firength of her firlt affeaion, was the violence wvith which
her diifappointed pation now operated. A few months after the
marriage, their domestic quarrels began to be observed. The ex-
travagrance of Darnly's ambition gave rife to these. Initead of
being satisfied with that firetch of powfer, by which Mary had
conferred on him the title of King, and admitted him ~to a share

Keith, j33. 2. The Sp~iritual Lords, i.e. the Popith ecclefiaftics, ha~d, by her
authority·, refun-~ed. their ancien~t place in that arembly, ibid. 3. She had join-
ed the confederacy a2t Bayonne, Kieith, Append. 167. 4. She allowed, mass to
be celebrated in different parts of the kingdom, i'oid. and declared that the
would have mass free for all men wfho would hear it, Good. vol. i. z74.
5. Blackwuood, who wfas furnithed by the Archbishop of Glasgow with materials
for writing his MIARrrYE DE 11ARKIE, affirms tha~t the Queen intended to have
procured, in thlis Parliament, if not the re-efiabli'l ment of the Cathate c Rh-
gion, at least fomlething: for the eaTe of Cathol:es, Jebb. vol ii. -04..

* Good ·-c i. Ic2

BOOK1C I. il the aclmiitdH tio0, hie demanded the Crown M~atrimonial wd

Smoft insolent importunity *. And though Mary alleged that

'566. this grist was beyond her power, and that the authority of Pailia-

ment muff be interposed to beffiow it, he wranted either under-
flandingr to comprehend, or temper to admit so just a defence,
and often renewed and urged his request.

Surpeais Ri- Rizio, whom the King had at firit tak~en into great confidence,

ai, fl did not humour him in there sallies. By this, he incurred Henry's

displeasure 3 and as it was iznpomfble for Mary to behave towards
her husband with ihe fame affeaion, which diftingui(hed the frirt
and happy days of their union, he imputed this coldness, not to
his own behaviour, wvhich had so well merited it, but to the infi-
nuations of Rizio. M~ary's own condua confirmed and firengthien-
ed these s~uspicions. Shle treated this 11ranger w-ith a familiarity,
and admitted hlim to a share in her confidence, to which neither
his first condition, nor the offce the had lately beitowed upon him,
gave him anly title. H~e was perpetually in her presence, inter-
meddled in every business, and, together with a few favouritea,
was the companion of all her private amulements. The haug~hty
i firit of Darnly could not bear the interference of such an upitart.
And inripattient of any delay, and unrestrained by anly scruple·, he
inflantly resolved to get rid of him by violence.

Rizio hated At the fame time, another design, which took its rife from very

fin of di'Terent motives, was carrying on agrainft the life of Rizio. Mior-

the exiled ton, Ruthven, Linds~ay, and M-itland, were the contrivers of it.

n In all former commotions they had been firiftly united with Mur-

ray, though in the late infurre~tion they had deserted him, for va-
tious reasons. 11Iorton was nearly allied to the family of Angus
and during the minority of the prelent Earl, a~ted as Chief of th~e
name of Douglas. Ruthven was married to the King's aunt.
Lindfay's w~ife was of the faye blood. A~the~re had warmly con-
curred wYith the Queen jn promoting a marriage, which did so much
honour to the house of Douglas, and naturally elpeaed, that under
a King of their own blood, the chief management of affairs would
L~e committed to them. Ma4itland, with his usual sa-gacity, fore-
[aw that M~urray's opp~osition to the match woulld prove danlgeroua
and increcaualf but wrhoever ruled at cou;t, he h~oped, by his dex-
terity and talents, to render himse~lf necessary and of importance.
They were all equally disappointed in their expec~ations. The
K~ing's headfirong temper rendered him incapable of advice. The

Leen could not help difiruiling men w~ho had been 10 long and

* Keith, pp. K~ror, 404.

{o mntimately conneAed with ~unrray, and gave herself up entirely BOOK n.
to those Counsellors w~ho complied n ith all her inclinations. The
return of that nobleman and his followers was therefore the only 66
event which could reflore Mlorton, Maitland, and their af~ciates
to their former a!`cendent over the Queen's councils. For this
rreaon, noth~ing could be more mortifying to them, than the refo-
lution which Mary had taken to treat the euiles with rigour.
This they imputed to Rizio, whlo, after he had engapged to aid
nIlurray with all his intercRt, was now the most aaive infirument
in promoting the me-ifures wYhichl were concerted for the ruin of
that nob·leman. This o9:cious zeal completed the ditSui which
the nobles had conceived againf1 him, and inspired them with
thoughlts of vengeance, in no wife fauitable to juffice, to humanity,
or to their own dignity.

W~hile they were ruminating upon their s~cheme, the King com- Thev com-

municated his resolution to be avenged of Rizio to Lord Ruthven, a, to lr-
and implored his afill3ance, and that of his friends, towards th~e der hlm
execution of thlis design. Nothiingr could be more acceptable to
thern than this overture. T`hey fh~w at once all the advantages
they would reap, by thle concurrence of such an affciate. 'Thtir
owfn private revenge upon Rizio would pass, they hoped, for an
aft of obedience to the King; and they did not del~pair of obtaining
thle retoration of their banithed friends, and security for the Pro-
tefant religion, as the price of their compliance with his will.

But as H~enry wals no less fickle, th~an rath, they hesitated! for

some tirne, and determined to advance no farther, withiout tak~ing
every ponbile precaution for their own safety. They did not, ii
the mean time, fuffer the King's resentment to abate. M~orton,
whlo was inferior to no man in that intriguing age, in all thle arts
of insinuation and address, took the young Prince under hia
man. gemernt. H~e wrought upon hris ruling panfion,, ambition, to
obtain thle Matrimonial Crown. He reprelrented Rizio's credi
wkih the Qeen to be thle chief and only obf acle to his Alccefs in
that demand. T`his mlinion, alone, he said, pol~effed h,r confi-
dence; and out of comnplailnce to him, her futjeas, her nobility,
and even her huiband, were excluded from any pTrticipationl of
her Cecret councils. Under the appearance of a confiderce merely
political, he insinuated, and the King perhaps believed, that a
familiarity of another and more criminal nature might be conceal
ed *. Such various and complicated paiffons raged in the K~ing'

* Of all our nat~orians, Buchanan alone avowredl) accules Z1-ry of a ctiminal

love f'or Rizio, 340, 344. Knox fli:'i 17 insinuates that fu b a thfpkiiou r as en-

B0oo IV. befa~m, with the utmost fury. He became more impatient thah

- ever of any delay, and even threatened to firik;e the intended
I6. blow with hris own hand. At latt, preliminaries were fettled on

both sides, and articles for their mutual security agreed upon. The
King engaged to prevent thle attainder of the banilhed Lords,
to codfent to their return into Scotland, to obtain for them an
ample remiflion of all their crimes, and to support, to the ut-
most of hris power, the religion which was now eflablifhed in the
kingdom. On their parts, they undertook to procure the MLatri-
monial Crown for Henry, to secure his right of f~uccellion, if
the Queen fthould die before him, and to defend that right to the
uttermost, against whatever person thould presume to dispute it;
and if either Rizio, or any other person, thould happen to be krill-
ed in prosecuting of the design, the King promis~ed to acknowledge
himself to be the author of the enterprise, and to prote61 those
wh'o were embarked in it*.

Perpetrate Nkothing now remained but to concert the plan of operation, to
thtci me chiure the aaors, and to assign them their parts in perpetrating
Queen'sPa. this detefiable crime. Every circumstance here paints and cha-

lc. raaefiz~es the manners and men of that age, and fills us withhor-

ror at both. The place, chosen for committing such a deed, was
the Queen's bed-chamber. Though Mary was now in the fikth
month ofsher pregnancy, and though Rizio might have been
~ seized elsewhere, without any difficulty, the King pitched upon

tertained, 39r. Melivil, in a conversation with the Queen, intimates that hre was~
afraid her familiarity with Rizio might be liable to mifconfiruflion, I10. The
King himlelf seems, both by Melvil's account, and by his expostulation with the
Queen, which Ruthven mentions, to have given credit to there suspicions, Mely.
127. Kieith, Append. 123, r24. But, in opposition to there furpicions, and they
are nothing more, wre mayr observe that Rauletthe Queen's French Secretary was
difhiffed from her service, and Rizio advan~ced to thtat office in December 1464-
IKeithn, ·6s. It waRs in consequence of this prefermenlt, that he acquired h~is great
credit n ith the Queen, Mlelv. rcy. Darc ly arrived in Scotland about two months
acter, KE;ith, L69. The Queen immediately conceived for him a p~ation, wfhich
had all the sympt~oms of genuine and violent love. Rizio aided this pafl~on, and
promoed the marriage wvith all his interest, M~ely. Ill. During some months
aftr;, the ma~rria,-e, the Cueen's fondners for Darnly continued. She soon proved

wihchl. rm this enumeration of circt-mildnces, it appears almost impof.

fible 'hat the Que-en, u:idefsw-efuypofe her to have been a woman utterly abndon-
ed, could carry on any criminal intrigue with Rizio. But the silence of Ran-
dolph the Engliflh Resid~ent, a man abundantly ready to mention, and to aggra.
vate Marin's fall ts, and who does not once insinuate that her confidence in Rizio
concealed any thling~ criminal, is in itrelf a fufficient vindication of her inna-

ce~.ne.

* Cood. vol. i. -66.

this place, that he might enjoy the malicious pleasure of reproach- BOOK N.
ing Rizio with his crimes before the Qxeen's face. The Earl
of Morton, the Lord High Chancellor of the kingdom, under- *
took to direat an enterprise, carried on in defiance of all the laws
of which he was bound to be the guardian. The Lord Ruthven,
who had been confined to his bed for three months, by a very
dangerous distemper, and who was still s~o feeble that he could
fearce walk, or bear the weight of his own armour, was intruit-
ed with the executive part; and while he himself needed to be
rupported by two men, he came abroad to commit a murder in
the presence of his Sovereign.

On the 9th of March, Morton entered the court of the palace

with an hundred and fixuty men 9 and without noise, or meeting
with any refifiance, seized all the gates. While the Queen was
at supper with the Counter~s of Argyle, Rizio, and a few domeltics,
the King suddenly entered the apartment, by a private paiiage.
At his back, was' Ruthven, clad in complete armour, and with
that ghailly and horrid look which long sickness had given him.
Three or four of his most trufly accomplices followed him. Such
an unusual appearance alarmed those who were present. Rizio
inftanly apprehended that he was the viaim at whom the blow
was aimed; and in the utmoil conflernation retired behind the
Queen, of whom he laid hold, hoping that the reverence due to
her person might prove (ome proteaion to him. The conspirators
had proceeded too far to be restrained by any consideration of
that kind. Numbers of armed men rushed into the chamber.
Ruthven drew his dagger, and with a furious mien and voice, com-
manded Rizio to leave a place of which he was unworthy, and
which he had occupied too long. Mary employed tears, and entrea-
ties, and threatenings, to save her favourite. But, notwithstanding
all these, he was torn from her by violence, and before he could be
dragged through the next apartment, the rage of his enemies put
an end to his life, piercing his body with Eifty-fix wounds *.

Athol, Huntly, Bothwell, and other confidents of the Queen,

who lodged in the palace, were alarmed at the uproar, and filled
with the utmost terror on their own account; but either no vio-
lence was intended against them, or the conspirators durst not thed
the noblest blood in the kingdom, in the farne illegal manner with
which they had ventured to take the life of a firanger. Some
of them were difiniifed, and others made their escape.

* Se~e Apnpendiix, No 7?.

BoDK IV* The conipirators, in the mean time, kept poffeCTion of the pa,
r566. Jace, and guarded the Qu~een wuith the utmost care. A proclama.
They con- tion was published by the K~ing, prohibiting the Parliament to
fine- the meet on the day appointed; and measures were taken by him for
31 ;en her- preventing any tumullt in the city *. Murray, Rothes, and their

followers, being inlformed of every itep taken against Rizio, arriv-
ed at Edinburgh next evening. Murray was graciously received
<both by K~ing and Queen. By the former, on account or the
Articles which had been agreed upon between them; by the
the latter, because the hoped to prevail on him, by gentle treat-
ment, no: to take part with thle murderers of Rizio. Their
power the flill felt, and dreaded ; and the insult which they had
offered to her authority, and even to her person, so far exceeded
any crinie the couldl impute to M~urray, that in hopes of wreak~ing
her vengeance on thnem.: the became extremely willing to be re-
conciled to hiim. The obligationrs, hiowever, w-hich Murray lay,
under to men, wrho had hazarcied their lives on his account, en·
Sgagd him to labour for their safety. The Queen, who fearce
had the liberty of choice leit, was persuaded to admit Morton and
Rutl~ven into her presence, and to grant them thle promise of
pardon in whiatfoever terms they thould deem necessary for their
own security.

The King-, meanwhile, flood affoninhed at thle boldness and

success of his own enterprise, and uncertain what course to hold.

nut the The Qgteen obiferved his irresolution, and availed herself of it.
gains the
hing', and She emplsye~d all her art to disengage him from his new affoci
snakes hier ates. His confloufnefs of the insult which he had offered to 10
es~cape. illuffrious a benefu1Arefs, inlfyired him with uncommnon facility

and complaisance. In ipite of all the warnings he received to
diltruft the Queen's artifices, The prevailed on him to dilmifs the
guards which the conspirators had placed on her person. And
that fame night he made his escape along with her, attended by
thlre,- persons only, and retired to D~unbar. T'he scheme of their
flight had been communicated to Hiuntly and Bothwell, and they
were quickly joined by them, and several other of the nobles.
Bo~hwvells eitate lay in that corner of t'le kingdom, and his fol-
lowers crowded to th~eir Chief, in fach nu:mbers, as soon enabled
thle Queen to set the po Ner of thle conspirators at defiance.

This ludden flighbt filled them with inexprellible conflernation.

Isr;concill They had obtained a plomif~e of palr'ln, 7tnd i'. now appeared,
e a sh-ex- from the Que-n's conduc?, that nothing: more waS intended by
iled nobles.

* Keiih, Aypenil I6.

this prom~if, than to amule thiem, and to gain time. They ven- A'OOK IV.
tured, hower cr, to demand thle accomplishment of it; but their 6.
messenger was detained a prisoner, and the Queen advancing to-
wards Edinburg~h. at the head of eight thousand men, talked in
the highest firain of refentmnent and revenge. She had the adt-
drds,~ at the fame time, to separate Murray and his associates
from the conspirators againit Rizio. Sensible that the union of
there parties would foim a confederacy, wh~ich might prove for-
midable to the Crown, the expressed great willin rnefs to receive
the former into favour; towards the latter, the declared her-
self inexorable. Murra1y and his followers were no less wilinq
to accept of pardon, on her own termls. The consp:irators againit
Rizio, deprived of every resource, anld inclpable of refintance,
fled precipitately to N~ewcaitle, having thus changed situations 3 arch 29.
with Murray and his party, who left that place a few doys before.

No man so remarkable for wisdom, and even for cunnilng, as rhP confe~-

the Earl of 111rton, ever engaged in a mlore unfortunate enter- lr' i s-i
plife. DeCerted basely by the King, w.ho now deni d I is know 7,4 ;, ·
ledge of the conspiracy, by public pioclamations; and abandorned L-ng' nd.
ungen~erously by M~urray and his party *, he was otbliged to fly
from his native country, to resign the highult office, and to part-
wi~h one of the moit opulent fortunes in the k~ingdom.

On her return to Edinburgh, Mary began to proceed against

thlofe concerned in the murder of Rizio, with tbe utmost rigour

oflw ut. in praise of her clemency, it must be observed,

th~at only two pers~ons, and there of no considerable rankc, fufcfered
for this crime t.

In this conspiracy there is one circumitance, wh~ich, thlorgh

famewhat detached, deserves not to be forgotten. In the confe-
deracy between the King and the conspirators, the real intention
of which was affaffination,, the preserving of the Reformed church
is, nevertheless, one of the mo~t considerable articles; and the
fame men who were preparing to violate one of the firit dutics of
morality, affe~ed the higTheft regard for religion. History re-
lates there extravagancies of the human mind, without pretend-
ing to juffiCfy, or even to account for them; and regulating her
oitn opinions by the eternal and immutable laws ofjuffice and of
Tirtue, points out such inconfiltencies, as features of the age
which the del~crib s, and records them for the inftruation of ages

to come.

* Mely I3o, t Keith, Appendix J30, 334*

E e j

BOOK( I'L As this is thle recond ·inflance of deliberate alliflination which

I 6.has occurred, and as we thall hereafter meet with many other

An account instances of the fame crime, the causes which give rife to a prac·
of the fre- tice so shocking to humanity, deserve our particular attention
quencyof
aiiaml~na Resentment is, for obvious and wife reasons, one of the firongeft
tion~s in that pafflons in the human mind. The natural demand of this pallion

ag. is, that the person who feels the injury thould himself inflidt

the vengeance due on that account. The permitting this, how-
ever, would have been deltruaive to society; and punishment
would have known no bounds, either in s~everity, or in duration.
For'this reason, in the very infancy of the facial slate, the rword
was taken out of private hands, and committed to the magif.
trate. But, at firit, while laws aimed at refcraining, they really
firengthened thle principle of revenge. The earliest and most
simple punishment for crimes was retaliation; the offender forfeit·
ed limb for limb, and life for life. The payment of a compen·
fation to the pedron injured, succeeded to th~e rigour of the former
inflitution. In both there, thle gratification of private revenge
was the objea of law; and hie who fuffered the wrong, was the
only person who had a right to pursue, to exas, or to remnit the
punishment. While laws allowed futch full scope to the revenge
of one party, the interests of the other were not negle~ed. If
the evidence of his guilt did not amount to a full proof, or if he
reckoned himself to be unjuilly accus~ed, the per-son to whom a
crime was imputed had a right to challenge his adversary to
single combat, and on obtaining· thle viatory, vindicated his own
honour. In almolt every considerable cause, whether civil or cri-
minal, arms were appealed to, in defence, either of the innocence,
or the property of thre parties. Juffice had seldom occallon to
use her balance; the sword alone decided every contest. The
passion of revenge was nourished by all thes~e means, and grew,
by daily indulgence, to be incredibly firongr. Mankind became
habituated to blood, not only in times of war, but of peace;
. and from this, as well as other caules, contraaed an amazingr
ferocity of temper, and of manners. This feracity, however,
2nade it necessary to discourage the trial by combat; to abolish
the payment of compedantions in criminal cafes; and to think of
some milder method of terminating dilputes concerning civil
rights. Thie punishments for crimes became rnore severe, and
the regulations concerning property more fixed; but the Princes,
whose province it was to inricia the one, and to enforce the other,
poffeffecd little power. G-reat offenders defyifed their authority;

Gmaller ones sheltered themselves under the juridiiAion of thole, BOOK ,.
from whole proteaion they excpeAed impunity. The adminiffra-
tion of juffice was extremely feeble and dilatory. An attempy
to punish the crimes of a Chieftain, or even of his vassals, often
excited rebellions, and civil wars. To nobles, haughty and in-
dependent, among whom the causes of dis~cord were many and
unavoidable, who were quick in discerning an injury, and impa-
tient to revenge it; who eflreemed it infamous to thbmit to an
enemy, and cowardly to forgive him; who considered the right of
punishing those who had injured them, as a privilege of their order,
and a mark of independency; such flow proceedings were ex-
tremely unfatisfaaory. The blood of their adversary was, in
their opinion, the only thing which could wash away an affront;
where that was not shed, their revenge was disappointed, their
courage became fulp~eded, and a slain was left on their honour.
That vengeance, which the impotent hand of the Magiltrate could
not inflia, their own could ealily execute j under governments
so feeble, men assumed, as in a slate of nature, the right of judg-
ing, and redrefirng their own wrongs. And thus affaffination, a
crime of all others the most deftruAive to society, came not only
to be allowed, but to be deemed honourable.

The hiflory of Europe, during the 14th and I~th centuries,

abounds with detestable inflances of this crime. It prevailed chief-
ly among the French and Scots, between whom there was a cl0fe
intercourse at that time, and a surprising resemblance in their na-
tional charaaers. In I407, the only brother of the King of France
was murdered publicly in the fireets of Paris, and inhtead of pu-
nilhingr this horrible aaion, an eminent lawyer was allowed to
plead in defence of it before the Peers of France, and avowedly to
mnaintain the lawfulneifs of affaffination. In 14'7, it required all
the eloquence and authority of the famous Gerfon, to prevail on
the Council of Constance to condemn this proposition, " That there
are some cafes in which affaffnation is a virtue more meritorous
in a Knight than in a Squire, and more meritorious in a King
than in a Knight *." The number of eminent perlons who were mur-
dered in France and Scotland, on account either of private, or po-
litical, or religious quarrels, during the Ijth and x6th centuries, is
almost incredible. Even after those caules, which firRt gave rife
to this barbarous praaice were removed; after the jurifdialon of
SI7giffrates, and the authority of laws were better established, and

* L'Evalt. Hist. Cone. d. ConBt

Boa; IVi. become more universal; after the progress of learning and philo.

so~- phy had polished! the manners, and humanized the minds of me~n,

16.this crime continued in some degree. I a oad h ls

of the Iyth century before it disappeared in France. The addi-
tional vigour, which the royal authority acquired by the acceff~on
of James VI. to throne of England, seems to have put a flop to it
in Scotland.

The influence, however, of any national cuffom, both on the

underfianding and on the heart, and how far it may go towvards
perverting or extinguilhing moral principles of the greatest import.
ance, is remarkable. The authors of thos~e ages have perfe~tly im·
bibed the sentiments of their cotemporaries, with regard to aff~affi-
nation; and they, who had leisu~re to refle(S, and to judge, appear
to be no more thocked at this crime, than the persons who com-
mnitted it during the heat and impetuosity of pallion. Euchanan
relates the murder of Cardinal Beatoun, and of Rizio, without
exprel~ng those feelings which are natural to a man, or that in-
dignation which became an hifforian *. Knoxu, wh~ole mind was
Siercer and more unpolifhed, talks of the death of Beatoun and of
the Duke of Guise, not only without cediure, but with the utmost
extultation t. On the other hand, the Bilhopof Rotmentions the
airafi~nation of the Earl of Murray, with some degree of applaule J.
Blackiwood dwells upon it with the most indecent triumph, and
ascribes it direAly to the hand of God )I. Lord Ruthven, the prin-
cipal aaor in the conspiracy against Rizio, wrote an account of it
some short time before his own death, and in all his long narra-
tive there is not one expreflon of regret, or one Ijymptom of com-
pundlion for a crime not less dilhonourable, than barbarous **. Illor.
ton, equally guilty of the fame crime, entertained the fame senti-
ments concerning it j and in his last moments, neither he himself,
nor thle ministers who attended him, seem to have considered it as
an aalion which called for repentance;- even then he talkis of Da.
*oid's faughter as coolly, as if it had been an innocent or commend-
able deed tt·. The vices of another age aftonith and shock us;
the vices of our own become familiar, and extcite little horror,
We return from this dig~refion to the course of the hiffory.

~The~ The charm, which had at firit attached the Queen to D~arnly,
Queen's ha- and hleld them for some time in an happy union, was now entire-

nt10~ in. ly dissolved ; and love no longer coverings his follies and vices with

creases.

* Buchan. 295, 345. t Knox, 332 ·4 Anders. 3. 84. 1| Jtbb. 2. 263*
** K~eith, Append. rI:. ift Crawf,Mem. Append.

Its friendly veil, they appeared to 1\Iary in their full dimenflon and BOOK IV.
deformity *. Thbough Henry published a proclamation, disclaim-
ing anly knowledge of the conspiracy against Rizio, the Queen 1366.
was fully convinced, that he was not only access~ory to the con-
trivance, but to the commillion of that odious crime t. That very
power, which, with liberal and unfulpicious fondness, the had
conferred upon him, he had employed to insult her authority, to
limit her prerogative, and to endanger her person. Such an out-
rage, it was impof~ble any woman could bear, or forgive. Cold
civilities, secret diithuft, frequent quarrels, succeeded to their for-
mer transports of affeaion and confidence. The Queen's favours
were no longer conveyed through his hands. The crowd of ex-
pec~ants ceased to court his patronage, which they found to avail
10 little. Among the nobles, some dreaded his fixrious temper,
others complained of his perfidioufnefs; and all of them defpiled
the weakness of his und~edianding, and the inconflancy of his
heart. T'he people themfclves observed some parts of his condua,
which little faited the digrnity of a king. AddiAed to drunken-
nels, beyond what the manners of that age could bear, and indulg-
ing itreg~ular pafi~ons, which even the licent:iouthefs of youth could
not excule, he, by his indecent behaviour, provoked the Q~een
to the utmost; and the patr~ons which it occasioned, often forced
tears from her eyes both in public and in private f. Hier averflon
for him increased every day, and could be no longer concealed.
Hie was often ablent from court, appeared there with hittle splendor,
and was truffed with no power. Avoided equally by those who
endeavoured to please the Quleen, who favoured nluo on dnd his as-
fciztes, or who adhered to the hodek of' Haimilton; he was left
ahnloft alone in a negleaced and unpitied solitude ).

Ab'out t1-is time a new favourite grew into great credit with The r!e of

the Queen and soon gained an ascendent ov·er her heart, which hwell's
encouraged hlis enterpridngr genius to form designs that proved
fatal to himself, and the occasion of all 11ary's subsequent misfor-
tunes. This was Jsmes Hepburn Earl of Bothwell, the head of
an arcient family, and by his extensive poffelions and numerous
va !;dI. one of the most powerful noblemen in the kingdom. Even
in tnat turbulent age, when so many vait projeAs were laid open
to an af~iling mind, and invited it to a~ion, no man's ambition
was more daring than Bothwiell's, or had recourse to bolder or

* ee Appendix, NSc. XVI t Keith, 350. ( Ibid. 329·

BOOKTV, more I~ngular expedients for obtaining power. When almost eve.

56.ry person of diflinaion in the kingdom, whether Papist or Pro.

tefiant, had joined the Congregation in opposing the dangerous
encroachrnents of the French upon the liberties of the nation, he,
though an avowed Protestant, adhered to the Queen Regent, and
aaed with vigour on her fide. The luccels which attended the
arms of thle Congregation having obliged him to retire into France,
he was taken into the Queen's service, and continued with her
till the time of her return into Scotland *. From that period,
every fiep of his conduaf towards Mary was remarkably dutiful;
and amidit all the fhiftings of fa~ion, we fecarcely ever find hint
holding any course which could be offenfive to her. When Mur-
ray's proceedings with regard to her marriage gave umbrage to
the Q~een, the recalled Bothwell from that banishment into
which the had with reluaance driven him, and considered his
real and abilities as the most powerful su~pports of her authority.
W~hen the conspirators agcainft Rizio seized her person, he be.
came the chief infirument of recovering her liberty, and served
her, on that occaffon, with 10 much fidelity and luccefs, as made
the deepest impref~lon on her mind, and greatly increased the
confidence which the had hitherto placed in him J. Her grati-
tude loaded him with marks of her bounty; the raised him to of-
fices of profit and of truss , and tranfaaed no matter of importance
without his advice%. By complais~ance and assiduity, he confirm.
Ed and fortified there dilpofitions of the Qgeen in his favour, and
insensibly paved the way towards that vast projea, which his im-
moderate ambition had perhaps already conceived, and which, in
[pite of many difficulties, and at the expence of manty crimes, he
at last accomplifhled.

The hour of the Queen's delivery now approached. As her

palace was defended only by a slender guard, it seemed impru-
dent to expose her person, at that time, to the infullts she might
fuffer in a kingdom torn by famions, and prone to mutiny. For
this reason, the Privy Council advised the Queen to fix her refi-
dence in the caffle of Edinburg~h, the firongeft fortrets in the
kingdom, and the most proper place for the securit-y of her per-
son jI. In order to render this fecktrity more perfect IVary la-
boured to extingruifh the domeltic feuds which divided some of
the principal nobles. M/urray and Argyle were exasperated a·
gainit Hluntly and Bothlwell, by reciprocal and repeated injurics.

* nderf.i. 90. ·t lbil, r. 92> 93. ? Mely, 133. Kn~ox,396.
[1 Keith> 335·

The Queen, by her authority and entreaties, effecaed a recon- BOOK IV.
cilement among them, and drew from them a promise to bury
their dilcords in everlasting oblivion. This reconcilement Mary 66
had to much at heart, that the made it the condition on which
the again received M~urray into favour *.

On the 19th of June, Mary was delivered of her only son Birth of

James, a Prince whos~e birth was happy for the whole island, and James vl.
unfortunate to her alone. His accellion to the throne of Eng-
land united the two divided kingdoms in one mighty monarchy,
and eflablifhed the power of Great Britain on a firm foundation.
While the, torn early from her son by the cruelty of her fate,
wras never allowed to indulge those tender pafflons, nor to taste
those joys which fill the heart of a mother.

Melvil was instantly dis~patched to London with an account of

this event. It firuck Elizabeth, at Biri, in a sensible manner ;
and the advantage and superiority which her rival had acquired
by the birth of a son, forced tears from her eyes. But before
M/elvil was admitted to audience, thle had 10 far recovered th~e
command of herself, as to receive him not only with decency, but
with excellive cheerfulness; and willingly accepted the invitation
which Mary gave her, to stand godmother to her fonts.

As Mary loved splendor and magni~cence, thee resolved to ce-

lebrate the baptism of thle young Prince with great pomp; and
for that purpole sent invitations of the fame kind to the French
King, and to the Duke of Savoy, the uncle of her former huC.
band.

The Quueen, on her recovery, discovered no change in her fen- The Queen

timents with refpea to the Kingt. The death of Rizio, and the funu~es
countenance he had given to an saaon to insolent and unjuffifi- Darnlywith
able, were flill fresh in her memory. She was frequently pen- annelet
five and dejeaed (I. And though Henry sometimes attended at
Court, and accompanied her in her progrefies through different
parts of the kingdom, he tnet with little reverence from the no-
bles, while Mary treated him with the utmost reserve, and did
not ufufer him to pofiefs any authority 8. The breach between
them became every day more apparent**. Attempts were made
toward a reconcilement, particularly by Cafrelnau the French Am-
baffador; but after such a violent rupture, it was found no easy
matter to bind the nuptial knot a-new; and though he prevailed
on the Iting and Quieen to pals two nights together -ty, we may,

* Keith, 336. Append.139. t ;Mely. 138. t See Append. No. XVII.
( Ibid r48. g K~eith:,35'0·1Melr. r32. " ~eith, Append r69. -tt Ibid.

Fs

BOOK IV* with great probability, pronounce this appearance of unio1, td

1366. which Caftelnan truffed, not to have been sincere; we kmno

with certainty that it was not lasting.

Her attach. Bothwell, all the while, was the Q~ueen's prime confident.
ment to
Bothwell Without his participation no bufine' was conc.uded, and no fa-
incredes. vour beffowed. Together with this ascendent over her councils,

Bothwell, if wec may believe the cotemporary hillorians, acquired
no less [way over her heart. But at what precile time, this am.
bitioufLord frit allowed the se~ntiments of a lover to occupy the
place~ of that duty and refpea which a fubjea owes his Sovereign-,
or when M~ary, initead of gratitude for his faithful services, felt
a pat~ion of another nature rising in her bosom, it is no easy mat-
ter to determine. Such delicate transitions of pafiron can be dil-
cerned only by thol~e, who are admitted near the persons of the
parties, and who can view the secret working s of the heart w~ith
calm and acute observation. Neither KnC~x nor Buchanan en-
joyed there advantages. Their hurnible station allow-ed them on-
ly a d~ifant accefs.to the Queen and her favourite. And the ar-
dout~ of their zeal, and the violence of their prejudices, render
their opinions rath, precipitate, and inaccurate. It is by the es-
se~ts of this reciprocal pali~on, rather than by their accounts of
it, that subsequent hifloriarms can judge of its reality.

Adventurous as Bothwell's proje61 to gain the Queen may ap

pear, it wa's formed and carried on under very favourable cir-
cumitances. Mary was young, ga r an 1affable. She poffeff~ed
great sensibility of temper, and was capable of the utmost tender-
ness of affeAion. She had placed her love 06 a very unw~orthy
objeat, whol requited it with ingratitude, and treated her withl
neglea, with insolence, and with brutality. All there the felt,
and resented. In this situation, the attentiofi and complailance
of a man, whlo had vindicated her :tuthority, and prote~ted her
person; who entered into all her viewss, who soothed all her pal-
fions, who watched and improved every opportunity of infinuat-
ing his design, and recommending his pallon *, could Scarce fail
of' making an imprefiion on a heart of fixch a frame as Mary's.

The King The haughty [p~irit of Djarnly, nursed up in flattery, and ac-
reiCv- t cuffomed to command, could' not bear the contempt under wh~ich
land. he had now fallen, and tole slate of insignificancy to' which he

saw himself reduced. But in a country, where he was universal-
ly ILatedl or deipiled, he could never hope to form a party, which
wYould second anly attempt he might mak~e to recover powver. He

* Anders. i. 93, 94*

;ddreifed himself, therefore, to the Pope, and to the Kings of BOOK TV.
France and Spain, with many profetions of hris own zeal for the -
Catholic religion, and with bitter complaints against the Q2ueen, 66
for negle~ing to promote that interest *. And soon after, he
took a resolution, equally wild and delperate, of embarking on
board a thip, wvhich he had provided, and of flying into foreign
parts. It is almost impofirble to form any fatisfaa~ory conjeaure
concerning the motives which inf-luence a capr1icious and irregu?-
lar mind. He hoped, perhaps, to recommend himself to the Ca-
tholic Princes on the continent, by his zeal for religion, and that
they would employ their interest towards reinflating him in the
polfeflion of that power which he had 10ft. Perhaps, he expea-
ed nothing more than the comfort of hiding the disgrace under
which he was now fallen, among firangers, who had never been
wnitneffes of his former plofp~erity.

He communicated his design to the French Amrbaffador Le His capric?-

Croc, and to his fa~ther· the Earl of Lennox. They both endea- behvi
voured to diss~uade him from it, but without fuccels. Lennox,
who3 seems, as well as his son, to have loft the Queen's confi-
dence, and who, about this time, was seldom at court, instantly
communicated the matter to her by a letter. Henry, who had
refulfed to accompalny the Queen from Stirling to Edinburg7h, was
likewise ablent from court. He arrived there, however, on the
[amne day th~e received the account of his intended flight. He
was more than usually wayward and peevish. He forupled to en-
ter the palace, unless certain Lords who attended the Queen were
difmri'rd. Mary was obliged to meet him without the gates. At
last he fufFered her to condua him into her own apartment. She
endeavoured to draw from him the reasons of the fIrange refolu-
tion which he had takien, and to divert him from it. But in spite
of all her arguments and entreaties, he remained £1ent and in-
flexible. Nuext day thle Privy Council, by her direaion, ex-
pllulated with him on the fame head. He perfified, however,
in his fuillennels and obilinacy; and neither deigned to explainl
t1 e motives of his conduA, nor signified any intention of altering-
it. As he left the apartment, he turned towards the Queen, and
told her, that the th~ould not fee his face again, for a long time.
A few days after, he wrote to Malry, and mentioned two thmngs
as grounds of his difEuff. She herself, he said, no longer admit-
ted him into any confidence, and had deprived him of all poweri
ard the nobles, af~ter her examFle, treated him with open negleft,

* Knox, :399 F Eij

BOOKIV. io that he appeared in every place without the dignity and fpler.

dor of a King.

Nothing could be more mortifying to Mary, than this intend.

deavours to ed flight of the King's, which would have spread the infamy of
ri~even hi their domeltic quarrel all over Europe. Compafiion for a Mo-
flight. narch who would then appear to be forced into exile by her ne-

gleB and ill us~age, might have disposed mankind to entertain fen.
timents concerning the causes of their discord, little to her ad-
vantage. In order, therefore, to prepossess the minds of her al-
lies, and to facreen her reputation from any censure with which
Darnly might endeavour to load it, the Privy Council transmit-
ted a narrative of this whole tranfaaion, both to the K~ing, and
to the Qnleen Mother of France. It is drawn with great art, and
sets Mary's condua in thle most favourabl- point of lig-ht *.

About this time, the licence of the borderers called for redress,

And Mary resolving to hold a court of juffice at Jedburgh, the
inhabitants of leveral adjacent counties were fummi~oned to attend
their Sovereign in arms, according to cuitomrf. Bothwell was,
at that time, Lieutenant or W7arden of all the marches, an once
among the most important in thle kingdom; and though usually
divided into three diftina governments, beffowed by the Qu~een's
favour upon him alone. In order to display his own valour and
aaivityr in the dikhargre of this truit, he attempted to seize a gang
of banditti, who, lurking among the marshes of Liddefdale, in-
fefied the reft of the country. But while he was laying hold of
one of these delperados, he was wounded by him in l~everal places,
so that his followers were obliged to carry him to Hermitage

OAober16. caffle. Mary inflantly flew thither, with an impatience which

firongly markrs the anxiety of a lover, but little suited the digni-
ty of a Queen f. Finding that Bothwell was threatened with
no dangerous fyrmptons, the returned that fame day to Jedburgh,

* Keith, 345, 347. ( Ibid. 353. Good. vol. i. 302.
( The difiance between Jedburgh andi Hermitage is eighteen Scots miles,

through a countr~y almost impairable. The f~eafocn of the year was far advanced.
Bothwell seems to have been wounded in a f'cullie, occasioned by the defrair. of
a fingrle man, rather than in anly open infurre~tion of the borderers. It does not
app-ar that the Queen was attendedi thither by any· considerable train. Had any
militazry operation been necefrary, as is fhppIofed, Good. vol. i. 304. it would
have: be,n extremely improper to risk the Queen's person in an expedition against
thiieves. So soon as the Queen found Bothwvell to be in no danger, the initantly
returned; and after this we hear no more of the infhrreaion, nor have we an?
proof that the rioters tooki refuge inl E~ngland. No other reason but that wh~ich
wye haC Produlced) seems lufficient to acc~unt for the queen's conduft.

The fatigue of such a journey, added to the angulfh of mind she BOOK TV.
had ~fufered on Bothwell's account, threw her next morning into
a violent fever t Her life was des~paired of ; but her youth, and 56
the vigour of her conititution resifted the malignity of her dileafe.
Duxing the continuance of the Queen's illness, the King, who
resided at Stirling, never came near Jedburgh t·. And when he
afterwards thought fit to make his appearance there, he met with No 3.5
such a cold reception, as did not encourage him to make any long
itay J. Mary soon recovered Arength enough to return along the
caftern borders to Dunbar.

While the resided in this place, her attention was turned to-

wards England. Elizabeth, notwithstanding her promis~e, and
evecn proclamations to the contrary, not only allowed, but encou-
ragred M'orton and his associates to remain in England II. Mary,
on the other h·and, affrorded her prote~ion to several English fu-
gitives. Each Queen watched the motions of the other with a
jealous attention, and secretly countenanced the praaices, which
were carrying on, to diflurb the adminifkration of her rival.

For this purpole, Mary's Ambassador, Robert Melvil, and her

other emissaries,, were extremely saive and fuccefsfu~l. We may The Eng-
irnpute, in a good degree, to their intrigues, that [pirit which ap- lifh Parlt-

ment sav.

peared in the Parliament of England, and which raised a florm oursiIary's
that threatened Elizabeth's domeltic tranquillity, more than any n a~:"'~~
ather event of her reign, and required all her art and dexterity cellion-
to allay it.

Elizabeth had now reigned eight years, without discovering the

leaR intention to marry. A violent distemper, with which the
had lately been seized, having endangered her life, and alarmed
thle nation with the prof~peA of all those calamities which are oc-
cafloned by a disputed and dubious f~uccellion; a motion was made
and eagerly listened to in both houses, for addrelfing the Queen,
to provide againit any s~uch danger in times to come, either by
f~gnify-ing her own resolution to marry, or by codienting to an
aft establishing the order of f~uccefr~on to the Crown J. Her love
to her fubjeAs, her duty to the public, her concern for pofferity,
it was pretended, not only called upon, but obliged her to take
one of these fleps. The insuperable averflon which she had all a-
long discovered for marriage, made it improbable that the would
chlule the former; and if the complied with the latter request, no
title to the Crowrn could, with any colour of juffice, be set in op-

* Keith, 35r, 352.· Ibid. Append. r33. t Knox, 40s.
fj Cald. vol ii. :;. g D'Ewes Journ· of Tarl, rog.

BOOK17. pC Ition to that of the Scottish Quen. Elizabeth was fqaciousa

- enough to fee the remotell consequences of this motion, and ob-

1366. served them w~ith the utmost anxriety. Mary, by refusing 10 of-

ten to ratify the treaty of Edinburgh, had plainly intimated a
design of embracing the firfr promising opportunity for prosecuting
her right to the English Crown; and by her secret negociations,
the had gained many to favour her title ". All the Roman Ca-
tholics ardently withed for her accellion. Her gentleness and hu-
manity had removed many of those: apprehensions which the Pro-
tefl~ants entertaiped on account of her religion. The ·court sac-
tion, which envied the power of Cecil, and endeavoured to wrest
the adminiffration out of his haInds, advanced the pletenflons of
the Scottish Qpeen in oppofcitin~ to him. T he union of the tw-o
kingdoms was a desirable objea to all wife men in bothl cntionS,
and the birth of the young Prince was a security for the continu.
ance of this blelling, and gave hopes of its perpetuity.

Elizabeth's Under there circumitances, and whlile thie nation was in foch
pe~rlll-ity a temper, a parliamentary declaration of M~ary's title ·would hawP

tha ac been highly detrimental to Eljzabeth. Th!e present unsettled

slate of thle faccefT~on left much in her power. Her relentment
alone might have gone far towrards excludmin any of thte competr
tors from the Crowin; alnd the dread of this had hithlerto reltrain-
ed, and qverawed the ambition of the Scotti(h Queen. But it
this checkr thould be removed, by thie legal acknowledgment of
hier title, Mary would be at fal liberty to pursue her dangrerous
aefigns, and to aat without' fea3r or reterv~e. Her partizans were
;lready meditating schemes for infurreations ini dillerent parts of
the kiingdomif; and an acc of Parliament, recognizing the righits
of that Princes~s, wh~ol~e pretensions they favoured, would have
'peen nothing less than a signal to arms; and, notwithitanding
Elizabtethl's juffl title to the affeaions of her fubjeaEs, might have
Ihak;en and endangered ber throne.

Marve, While this tr~atter remained in fulp~ence in both houses, an ac-
d-o s to countC of it was tranfinitted to Mary by Melvil her Ambassador.

0,i~- As the did not wanF advocates for her r·ight, even among those

1Jinty. y!4 were near Elizabieth's pedojn, thle endeavoured to cultivate

thle dilFpolition phich1 ayppared tow~ards fe-ttling the right of sac-
cel~on in her favour, by a letter to the Privy Counsellors of Eng-
land. She expressed in it a grrateful sense of Elizabeth's fiiend-
thip, which thie chiefly akcribes to their good onices, with their
Sovereign, in her behalf. Sh~e declared her refulution to live la~

* h:-ly. I36. t Ibid. I4:·

gerpetial amity with Eng-land, without urging or purfixi~ng her Dan Iv.
claim upon the Crown, any farther than thould be agreeable to the ·-
Qu~een. But, at the fame time, as her right of succession was un- 1 job.
doubuted, the hoped it would be examined with candour, and judgred
of w~ith intlpartiality. The nobles who attended her wrote to the
Englilh Privy Council in the fame strain *. Mlary artfully gave
thele letters the air of being nothing more than a declaration of
her own, and of her fubjes's gratitt~de towards Elizabeth. But
as the could not be iginorant of the jealousy and fear with which
Elizabeth observed the proceedings of Parliament, a step 10 un-
common as this, of one P-rince's enter-ing inlto public correfpon-
dence with the PDrivy· Counsellors of another, could not be other-
wife confirued than asitakien with an intention to encourage the
spirit which had a~lre-dy been raliled among the Englifih. In this
light it feemns to have ap-eared t3 Elizabeth herse~lf` t. But the
difpolition of her people rendetring it neceirtury to treat Mary's
person with great decenlcy, and her title w~ithl much regard, the
mentioned it to her only in the fofteft language.

Nothing,7 however, could be a more cruel mortification to a
Princess of Elizabeth's chara~ter, than the temper which both
houles of Parliament dilrcovered on thlis occaflon. She bent all
her policy to defeat, or elude the motion. After allowing the
firit fumes and heat of their zeal to evaporate, the called into her
presence a certain number of eachl house. She soothed and caref' Ehlzabeth
fed them; the threatened and promised; thl remitted fubofidies fooih-s ani
which wrere due; and refused those which w re oiffred; and, in nt.;si~rm
*he enid, prevliled to have this fcamidab e motion put off for that
Fe::la. H-appily for her, thle condua of the Scottiflh Qpeen, and
the mcisfortunes which befel her, prevented the revival of fach a
m tion in any future Parliamont J.

Me~an time, in order to preierve the reputation o" impartiality·,

an~d that the mright not drive Mary itxto any de" erate measure, the
committed to the T'ower one Tlhornton, w ho had publithed some-
thing derogatory to the righit of the Scottith line II; and signified
her dlfpleaiure ag~ainf' a member of the hocufe of Commons, who
feemned, by focme words in a i[peech~, to gl;ance at MalSy S.

Amiddt all her other cares, Mlary was ever solicitous to promote

the interest of tlhat religion which the profeffed. 'The re-eflablith-
ment of the Romith domrine seems to have been her favounite

* A·;h, 3'4. Append. 136. i Kei~h, 39.·
t D)'Ewes J·,um. 104.--130. Cat i. 399. MIely. II9 H~aynes; 446
I CIlid 4": 5 -laynes, 449L

BOOK I. f2 100; and though ghe design was concealed with care, and cea.

Sduaed with caution, the pursued it with a persevering zeal. At

An elr aor- this time, the ventured to lay aside somewhat of her usual reserve;
dinaryftep and the aid which the expeaed from the Popith Princes, who
ofMary'sin
favou of had engaged in the league of Bayonne, encouraged her to take a
Popery. flep, which, if we confider the temper of the nation, appears to be

extremely bold. Having formerly held a secret correspondence
ivith the court of Rome, the now resolved to allow a Nuncio from
the Pope giublicly to enter her dominions. Cardinal Laurea, at
that time Bilhop of Mdondovi, was the perfoix on whom Pius V.
conferred this office, and along with him he s~ent the Quteen a pre-
s~ent of twenty thoufsand crowns *. It is not the chara~ter of the
Papal court to open its trealiry upon difiant or imaginary hopes.
The bufixiefs of the Nuncio in Scotland, could be no other than
to attempt a reconciliation of the kingdom to the Romith fee.
Thus Mary herself underflood it. And in her answer to a letter
which the received from the Pope, after expressing her gratefulfenfe
of his paternal care and liberality, thle promises that the would bend
her whole firezigth towards the re-establishment and propagation
of the Catholic faith; that the would receive the Nuncio with
every pofirble demonfiration of refpea, and concur, with the ut.
Smoft vigour, in all his designs towards promoting the honour of
God, and refloring peace to the kingdomj that the would cele-
brate the baptism of the Prince, according to the ceremonies which
the.Romith ritual prescribes, and hoped that her fubje£1s would
be taught, by this example, again to reverence the sacraments of
the church, which they had to long treated with coatempt; and
that the would be careful to initil, early, into her' son the principles
of a sincere love and attachment to the Catholic faith J·. But
though the N'uncio was already arrived at Paris, and had sent over
one of his attendants with part of the money, the Queen did not
think the juna~ure proper for his reception. Elizabeth was pre-
paring to fe>2d a magnificent embassy into Scotland, against the
time of the Prince's baptilmn, and as it would have been improper
to offend her, the wifely contrived, under various pretences, to
detain Laurea at Paris f. The convulflons into which the king.
dom was throwvn soon after, made it impoilible for him to pursue
his journey any farther.

At thle very time that Mary was Cecretly carrying on there nego.

clations for fabverting· the Reformed Church, the did not scruple

X Vita Card. Laur. ap. Burn. vol. iii. 325-
j- C-inai Vita Ml;ari, ap. Jebb. vol. ii. St. t Kieith, Append 135-

publicly to employ her authority towards obtaining for its Mlini- Ecoox Ivr.
fters a more certain and comfortable fubfidetnce*. During this -
year, the ifuied several proclamations and a~s of council for that I366.
purpose, and readily approved of every scheme which was proposed
for the more effeaual payment of their flipends. This part of her
condua does little honour to Mary's integrity; and thoughjufifiled
by the example of Princes, who often reckon falsehood and de-
ceit among the neceffry arts of government, and even authlorifed
by the pernicious caluiltry of the Romith Church, which transfers
breach of faith to heretics, from the lift of crimes, to that of du-
ties, must, however, be numbered among those blemithes which
never slain a truly great and generous chara~er.

As neither the French nor Piedmontele Ambassadors were yet December,

arrived, the baptism of the Prince was put off from time to time.
Mleanwhile MPrary fixed her residence at Craigmillar J. Such a re-
tirement, perhaps, suited the present temper of her mind, and in-
duced her to prefer it before her own palace of Holyroodhoufe.
H-er averflon for the King grew every day more confirmed, and Her aver-
was become altogether incurable. A deep melancholy facceed- "_orlhEigecf
ed to that gaiety of ifpirit, which was natural to her. The rath- five.
ness and levity of her own choice, and the King's ingratitude and
obitinacy, filled her with shame and with delpair. A variety of
paif~ons prcyed at once on a mind, all whole s~ensations were ex-
quifite, and all its emotions firong, and often exctorted from her,
the last with, of the unfortunate, that life itself would come to an
end f.

Murray and Maitland observed all th~ofq workings of pation in A divorw

the breast of the Queen, and conceived hopes of turning them to thmpopo
the advantage of their ancient associates, Morton, and the other fed·
conspirators againf1 Rizio. They were still in banishment, and the
~Queen's resentment against them continued unabated. Murray and
the Secretary flattered themselves, however, that her inclination to
be separated from Darnly, would surmount this deep-rooted aver-
s~on, and that the hopes of an event so desirable might induce
her to be reconciled to the conspirators. It was easy to find rea-
fans, in the King's behaviour, on which to found a sentence of di-
vorce. This sentence they had interest enough to obtain, and to
procure the ratification of it in Parliament. In return for this s~er-
vice, they proposed to flipulate with the Queen to grant a pardon
to Morton and his followers. The design was first of all commu-

* Keith, 56I, 562. Knor, 4or t Keith, 355. 1 lbid. Pref, vii.

BOOK IV. n Cated 10 Argryle, who. as well as Murray, owed his return int',
z566. Scotland to the conspiracy againf1 Rizio. Huntly and Bothwelf,

who at that time direaed all Mary's councils, were likewfife ad-
mitted into the concert. They all joined togiethler in making the
overture to the Qu~een, and enforced it with all Maitland's elo.
quence ". Bfut Mary, however desirous of obtaining that deliver.
ance from Darnly's caprices, with which they endeavoured to al.
lure her, had nevertheless good reasons for reje~ing the method,
by which they prorpofed to accomplish it. The birth of her son
had greatly firengthened her claim upon the English succession,
and encouraged the abettors of it to appear with greater boldness,
and to aB with more vigour. She could fearce hope to be di-
vorced from her husband, without throwing some imputation on
her son. This might open a new dispute with regard to the fuc·
cession, and put it the power of Elizabeth and her Ministers to
call in question the Prince's legitimacy, or at least to fubje8 it to
all the delays and cavils of a judicial inquiry. The fear of these
inconveniencies weighed with Mary, and determined her rather
to endure her hard fate, than to seek relief, by venturing on inch
a dangerous experiment.

The Earl of Bedford, and the Count de Brienne, the English

and French Ambassadors, being arrived, Mary set out for Stir-
ling, to celebrate the baptism of her son. Bedford was attended
by a numerbus and splendid train, and brought presents from Eli-
zabeth, faiitable to· her own dignity, and the refpea with which
the atfeaed, at that time, to treat the Queen of Scots. Grealt
preparations had been made by Mary, and the magnificence dil-
played by her on this occallon, exceeded whatever had been

Dec. r7. formerly known in Scotland. The ceremony itself was perform-

ed according to the rites of the 110mith Church. But neither
Bedford, nor any of the Scottish nobles who profeffed the Protel-
tant religion, entered within the gates of the chapel -t. The iyi-
rit of that age, firm and uncomplying, would not, upon any in-
ducement, condescend to witness an a~ion, which it efleemed
idolatrous.

a i1gs Hen~r's behaviour at this junaure, perfealy dilcovers the ex-
bavorcefs of his caprice, as well as of his folly. He chose to reside

at the bap-
tifml of the at Stirling, but confined himself to ·his own apartment. And as
Prince. the Queen diffruffed every nobleman who ventured to converse

with him, he was left in absolute solitude. N~othting could be
more singular, or was less expeaed, than his chufing to appear in

? Ande r. ol. iv. Part. ii. 188. *| Keith, 360

C -manner, that both published the contempt under which he had BOOK TV.
fallen, and, by exposing the Queen's domeltic unhappiness. to the -
observation of so many foreigners, looked likce a flep taken on pur_
pole to mortify and to offend her. Mary felt this insult sensibly; and
notwithstanding all her efforts to alliame the gajety which suited
the occasion, and which was necefifary for the polite reception of her
guests, the was sometimes obliged to retire, in order to be at liberty
to indulge her s~orrow, and give vent to her tears*. The King flill
perfliked in his design of retiring into foreign parts, and daily
threatened to put it in execution -f-.

Thle ceremony of w-itnefT~ug the Prince's baptilm was not the Elizabeth

sole business of Bedford's embaffyr. His infiru~ions contained an en cmour
overture, which ought to have gone far towards extinguishing modate her

diffe~rences

those jealousies which had so long fublifted between the two with M\ary
Queens. The treaty of Edinburghl, which has been so often
mentioned, was the principal occafian of these. The spirit, hon-
ever, which had risen to such an height in the late Parliment, the
power of the party which ahetted the Scottith Queen's title, the
number and acaivity of her agents in diff~erent parts of the king-
dom, alarmed Elizabeth, and induced her to forego anly advan-
tage, wyhich the ambiguous and artful ex~preifions in that treaty

* Reith, PreE. vii.
*( Camden afmrms, 401. that Bedford was commanded by Chlzabeth~not to give

Darnly the title of King. As this was an indligity, not to be borne, either by
Mary or her husb~and, it hath been asserted to be the caqfe of the Kiing's absence
from the ceremony of his fon's baptj~n. Kerith, 360 Good. 3r9. But, I. N~o
kUh thing is to be found among Bedford's infiruaions, the original of n hich flill
remains. Keith, 336. 2. Bedford's advice to the Queen by Melvil is utterly in-
confif~ent with Camden's assertion. Mely. I43. M~elvil's account is confirmed
by Elizabeth's infkruaions to Sir Henry Norris, where the affrms that the com-
manded Bedford to employ his best offices towards reconciling Mlary to her hus-
bnnd, whlich he had attempted to no purpose. Digrges's Compl. Ambaff p. r3
A paper publish~ed Appen No. XVIII. agrees in the fame thing 3. La Croc
the I rench Refidentmentions the Kiing's ablence, but without giving that rea-
son for it, which has been founded on Camden's words, though if that had
been the real one, he would fearce have failed to mention it. His account of
this matter is that which we have followed, K~eith, Pref. vii. 4. He informs his
court, that on account of the differenice betwixt the K~ing and the Queen, h-
had. refused to hold any further correspondence with the former, though he ap-
pears, in many initances, to have been his great confident. Ibid 3. As the
K~ing was not present at the baptism, he seems to have been exrcluded from any
share in? the ordinary adminifiration of bufinels. Two acts of Privy Council,
C.·e on the 2cth, and the other on the 21flos December, are found in K~eith, 562
They both run in the Queen's name alone. The K~ing seems not to ha~ve been
efen~t Ti~s could not be owinlg to Elizabeth's infiruhions to B~edford.

G gij

BOOK IV. might afford her. All she now demanded of Mary was to renounce

6.any title to the Crown of England during her life, and t~he lives

of her posterity; and on the other hand, the engaged to take no
step, which might prove injurious to Mary's claim upon the fuc-
cession*.

Mary could not, with decency, rejecT a proposition 10 equit-

able; she insisted, however, that Elizabeth thould order the right
upon which the claimed to be legally examined, and publicly recog-
nifed, and particularly that the teframent of Henry VIII. wihere.
by he had excluded the descendents of his eldest sifter the Qu~een
of Scotland, from the place due to them in the order of fuccer
sion, might be produced, and considered! by the English nobility.
MVary's Ministers had credulously embraced an opinion, that this
testament, which they to jufrly conceived to be in~jurious to their
Miffrefs, was a mere forgery ; and on different occaflons had ur-
ged Eliza'beth to produce it. M~ary would have fuffered confider-
ably by gaining this point. The orig~inal tellament is flill ex-
tant, and not the least doubt can be entertained of its genuine-
ness and authenticity. But it was not Elizabeth's intention to
weaken or to set aside the title of the house of Stewart. She
aimed at nothing more, than to keep the queition concerning the
f~uccetlion perplexed and undecided, and by induffrioufly eluding
this request, the did real service to M~ary's cause ).

A few days after phe baptism of the Prince, Morton and all

the other conspirators against Rizio obtained thleir pardon, and
leave to return into Scotland. Mary, who had hitherto conti-
nued inexorable to every entreaty in their behalf, yielded at last
to the folicitations of Bothwvenlt. He couldihope for no fuccels
in those hold designs on which his ambition resolved to venture,
without drawing aid from every quarter. By procuring a favour

, for Morton and his associates, of which they had good reason to

despair, he expeated to s~ecure a band of faithful and determined
adherents.

The King flil remained at Stirling, in solitude, and under con-

tempt. His impatience in this situation, together with the alarm
given him, by the rumour of a design to seize his person, and
confine him to prison jI, was the occasion of his leaving Stirling
in an abrupt manner, and retiring to his father at Glasgow.

June 23. Two Assemblies of the Church were held during this year.

an£~f New complaints were made, and upon good grounds, of the pa-

fairs. * Keith, 336. *(Ibid. 36r, 3j8. Note (c.)

. /Good vol. i. z40. Mely. r54 II Keith, Pref. viii.

rerty and contempt under which the Protestant clergy4 were sus- BooK Iv.
fered to languiih. Penurious as the allotment for their fbbliftence C6
wtas, they had not received the least part of what was due for the
preceding year *. N\Ioth~ing less than a zeal, ready to endure
and to fuffer every thing for a good cause, could have persuad~ed
men to adhere to a church, so indigent and so negledted. The
extraordinary expences, cccafioned by the Prince's baptism, had
exhausted the Queen's treasury, and the sums appropriated for the
fubliftence of the clergy were diverted into other channels. T'he
Queen was therefore obliged, to prevent the just remonfirances of
the assembly, by falling on iome new method for the relief of the
church. Some symptoms of liberality, s~ome firetch towards muni-
ficence might have been expe~ted in an allignment which was made
with an intention of so~othing and silencing the clergy. But both
thle Qu~een and the nobles held fast the riches of the church whichl
they had seized. A fum, which, at the hig~hest computation,
can fearce be reckoned equal to nine thousand pounds fier-
lingt, was deemed fufficient for the maintenance of a whole
national church, by men whio had lately seen sing-le monasteries
poile~ffed of revenues far superior in value.

The ecclefaiatics in that age bore the grievances which affeAed

themselves alone, with affonifhing patience; but wherever the
Reformed religion was threatened, they were exctremely apt to
be alarmed, and to proclaim, in the loudelt manner, their appre-
henflons of danger. A just occasion of this kinld was given them,
a thort time before the meeting of the Assembly. T he usurped
and oppressive jurifdiaion of the spiritual courts had been abolith-
ed by the Parliament IJ60, and commiffaries were appointed to
hear and determine the cauf~ies which formerly came under their
cognisance g. Among the few ad~s of that Parliament, to which
Mary had paid any regard, this was one. She had confirmed the
authority of the commiffaries, and had given them infiruaions for
direAing their proceedings |1, which are itill of great authority in
that court. From that time there judges had continued in the
uninterrupted exercise of their funaian, when of a sudden th~e
Queen illued a proclamation, refforing the Archbilhop, of St. An-
drew's to his ancient jurifdidiion, and depriving the Commifferies
of all authority *".

A motive, which cannot be juffified, rendered the Queern not un-
willing to venture upon this rathz aaiona. She had been contliv-
ing, for it me time, how to re-eflablifh the Popith religion; and

* Keith: 362. ( II. 5f2. ( Id. r52. I1 Id ?5' " Know, .73

Roox IV. the refforing the ancient ecclefiallics to their former jurifdic~lon,

f

- eemed to be a considerable itep towards that end. The motive
156. xhich prompted Bothwell, to wfhofe influence over the Queen

this ac~ion must. be chiefly imputed*, was ftd1 more criminal.
Hiis enterprising ambition had already formed that bold design,
which soon after he put in execution, and the use which we fball
hereafter find him makling of that authority, which the Popish ec-
clefiaftics regained, discovers the reasons of his present condua,
in contributing to revive their power. The P'roteftant cle gy
were not unconcerned fpe~tators of an event, which threatened
their religion with unavoidable deiluftion*, but as they despair-
ed of obtaining the proper remedy from the Queen herself, they
addrefl'ed a remonfirance to the whole body of thie Protellant no-
bility, full of that ardent zeal for religion, which the danger to
which it was expoled at that time, seemed to requiret. What
effeais this vehement exhortation might have pro~duced, we have
no opportunity of judging, the attention of the nation being quick-
ly turned towards events of another, and more tragical nature.

The KI;ng Immediately upon the King's leaving Stirling, and before he
£1 bhak at could reach Glalgow, he was [eized with a dangerous distemper

The ijymptoms which attended it were violent and unusual, and
in that age it was commonly imputed to the effec~s of poifont.
It is impoffble, amidit the contradi~ions of hiforians, to decide
with certainty concerning its nature, or its caule j. Hiis life was
in the utmost danger; but after langu~inhing for some weeksp, the
rigour of his conititutiona formnounted the maignity of the difeare.

* Knox, ibid. t Keith, .567- t lueisl. 15.nox, 4c7.
( Buicha~nan anld Knlox are politive thast the Kincg hiad been poifor~ed. Tley

mention the blak.k nd. putr~id puitules whicih broke out all ovrhiiS bodY. nI-
chsr an ad1ds, that Abern~ethy his phy fician plainly declared that po`T n was the
caulfe of there ijymptoms, ans that the Queen refied to allow her own h) (ician
toattend him. Biush 349. Knox,401. 2. Elackwood Cadi~n. &L· Jhbo. vol II.

4-+ 59. La·lter, that the small1 px w~as the dif~e;fe writh h~i~ch the Kinrg was feirsd
Hie i:, called a pocklith man in the Queen'sletter. God,~. vl. ii.'5· T! he ea n
given by! Far.::ca PAnuS for lodginlg th~e King· at thet Kirk of Field. viz. left th*
?oun~g Prince Lol.cid catch the inf~eaion1 If he fluid In th~e palat e, s~eems to favou
this opinion, Anders. vol. ii. 193.3 Carte mentions it as a pirof of hlary's tender-
Rc!S to her hu,ba~nd, that though f he never had the fmnaU pox he rielf, the ventu
red to attendi brn. vol hii. 446. This, if it h~d teen true, w-ould have ·Iffrted a
;000 p:'etenIce for not vi~t~ingr him sooner; b~ut Ma~ry hal rth ful~li Iox i i her-
iEncy~, Sadler's I-ttr-s 3. Eir(~(ip Lefly a~lirmis, that the Kiw;i's dife~re va·sth
Fresh Tcox, K~cih, 364, N'ote (b.) Inl that ·ge, thlis dif` ar n as elleem so
coat ..oius, that persons inf2e2e with it we~re remov;ed witho:.t thL waiC o C~ e

1\hzr)'s negliea of the King, on this occasion, was equaltoth-t -Ee

w: h wh.cal hL had treatedl her during her illneLs at Jedburgh. r566.
She no loaer felt tha~t warmth of conjugal a4eaion which prompits Neg~le,-ed
to lympathy, and delights in all those tender offices whichl sooth by ZeasY.
and alleviate sickness and pain. At this junaure, the did not
even put on the appearance ~of this patio~n. N~otwithflandingr the
King's danger, the amuled herself with excurflons to dh~erent parts
of the country, and f~ufered near a month to elapl~e before the vi-
iited him at Glasgow. By that time, the violence of the diftem-
per was over, and the K~ing, thlougrh weak and languirhing, was
cut of all dangerr.

The breach between Mt'ary and her hufbjand was not occafianed The b'renach

by any of those flight difguits, which interrupt the dometlic union then ir~re-
aithout altogether dilo~lvingr it. Almost all the patiions, which parable.·
operate with greatelt violence on a female mind, and drive it to
the moit dangerous exitremes, concurred in raising and fomenting
this unhappy quarrel. Ingratitude for the favours the h..d be-
flowed, contempt of her person, violations of the marriage-vow,
encroachrnents ont her power, confiri:acies against her favourities,
jealousy, idoulence, and obitinacy, were the injuries of which
Mlary had great reason to complain. She ftlt them with the ut-
matt renfi'oility; and added to the anguifhl of disappointed love,
they produced those fymptOIIS Of delpair which we have already
deferibed. Her resentment against thle King seems not to have
abated from the time of his leaving Stirling. In a letter written
writh her owrn hand, to her ambassador in France, just before the January 26.
set out for Glasgow, no takens of sudden reconcilement appear.
On the contrary, the mentions, with fame bitterness, the K~ing's
ingrat~tude, the jealousy with which he oblferved her adions, and
the inclination he discovered to diflurb her govenment, and at the
fame time talks of all his attempts with the utmost iicorn '.

After this dilcovery of Mkary's sentimen~ts, it was fe'arce to be T'ifits the

expeL~ed that the would vilit the Kiing·, or that any thing but Gla,igow
marks of jealouly and diffruf f thould appear in such an interview.
Thia, however, was far from being the cafe; thle not only visited
Ihraly, but, by all her words and a~ions, endeavoured to exprels
an uncommon affeaion for him: And though this made impref-
sion on the credulous spirit of her husband, no less flexible, on
some occasions, than obstinate on others; yet, to those who are
acquainted with the human h~eart, and who know how seldom and
how flowfly fach wounds in dlomeltic happiness are healed, this

* Ke'th, Fref, vill

loOK Iv. sudden transition will appear with a very fulpicious air, and wlll

be considered by them as the effeB of artifice.

He3 But it is not on fulpicion alone, that Mlary is charged with

m~ulaton. dissimulation in this part of her condua. Two of her famous let.

ters to Bothwell were written during her stay at Glasgow, and
fully lay open this scene of iniquity. He had To far succeeded
in his ambitious and criminal design, as to gain an absolute afcen-
dent over the Queen. And, in a situation fach as Mary's, merit,
not so confpicious; services, of far inferior importance 3 and address
much less insinuating than Bothwell's, may be s~upposed to fleal,
imperceptibly, on a female heart, and entirely to overcome it.
Among those in the higher rankis of life, scruples with regard to
conjugal fidelity are, unhappily, tieither many nor firagg. Nor
did the manners of that court, in which Mary had been educated
contribute to increase or to fortify them. T'he amourous turn of
Francis I. and Herny II. the wildness of the military charac·
ter in that age, and the liberty of appearing in all companies,
which began to be allowed to women, who had not yet acquired
that delicacy of sentiment, and those poliihed manners, which a-
10ne can render this liberty innocen:t, had introduced, among the
French, a licentiousnes~s of morals that role to an at~onithing height.
Such examples, which were familiar to Mary from her infancy,
could hardly fail of dimininhing that horror of vice which is na-
tural to a virtuous mind. The King's behlaviour would render
the first approach of forbidden feentiments less thocking; resent-
ment, and disappointed love, would be apt to represent wthatever
soothed her revenge, as juffifiable on that account; and so many
concurring caures might, almost imperceptibly, krindle a new pal
iion in hier heart.

The ma- But whatever opinion we may form with regard to the rife and
' tiesofit.progrefs of this pafflon, the letters thlemfelves breathe all the ar-

dour and tenderness of love. The affeaion which Mary there
expresses for Bothwell, fully accounts for every fuibfequent part
of her condua; wvhichl, without admitting this circumitance, ap-
pears altogether mysterious, incontiflent, and inexplicable. That
reconcilement with her husband, of which, if we allow it to be
genuine, it is impofirble to give any plaufble account, is di:co-
vered, by the Qu~een's own confetfion, to have been mere artifice
and deceit. As her aversion for her husb~and, and the fulpicious
attention with which the oblerved his condua, became universal·
ly known, her ears were offciou~y filled, as is ufixal in such cafes-
\~th~ groundless or aggravated acec -ats of his a~ions. By some,

fne was told, that the King intended to seize the person of the BOOK IV.
Prince his son, and in his name to usurp the government; by
others th~e was airmred, that he relolved instantly to leave the king-
dom; that a vessel was hired for this purpose, and lay in the river
Clyde ready to receive him*. ~The last was what Mary chiefly
dreaded. Henry's retiring into a foreign country must have been
highly difkonourable to the Qujeen, and would have entirely dif-
concerted Bothwell's measures. While he resided in Glasgow,
at a distance from her, and in that part of the kingdom where the
interest of his family was greatest, he might, with more facility,
accomplish his defigrns. In order, therefore, to prevent his exe-
cuting any such wild scheme, it was necessary to bring him to
fame place, where he would be more immediately under her own
eye. For this purpole, (he first employed all her art to regain Prevai s on
his confidence, anld then propoied to remove him to the icigh- hi a'
bourhood of Edinburgh, under pretence, that there he would have Edinburgh,
cafier access to the advice of physicians, and that th~e herself
could attend him without being absent from her lan t-. The King
was weak enough to fuffer himself to be perfauded j and being
itill feeble and incapable of bearing fatigue, was carried in a lit.
ter to Edinburgh.

The place prepared for his reception was a house, belonging

to the Provost of a collegiate church, called Kirk of Field. It
flood almost upon the fame spot where thle house belong~ing to the
Principal of the University now flands. Such a situation, on a
rising· ground, and at that time in an open field, had all the ad-
vantages of healthful air to recommend it; but on thle other hand,
the solitude of the place rendered it extremely proper for the com-
million of that crime, with a view to which, it seems manifestly
to have been chosen.

Mary continued to attend the King with the most afliduous He is mur

care. She seldom was absent from him through the day; the slept deredthere.
several nights in the chamber under his apartment. She heaped on
him to many marks of tenderness and confidence, as, in a great
measure, quieted those fulpicions which had so long diflurbed him.
BuJt while he was fondly indulging in dreams of the return of his
former happiness, he stood on the very brink of defiruation. On
Sunday the 9th of February, about eleven at night, the Qu~een
lect the K~irk of Field, in order to be preient at a masque in the
palace. At two next morning, the houle in which the King lay

* Jeith, Prel. viii. t( Good. vol. ii 8.

BOOK 17. WaS blown up with gunpowder. The noise and thock, wchlch

-V-this sudden explosion occalloned, alarmed the whole city. The in-
56.habitants ran to the place whence it came. The dead body of

the King, with that of a servant who slept in the fame room, were
found lying in an adjacent garden, without the city wall, untouch-
ed by fire, and with no bruise or mark of violence.

His charac- Such was the unhappy fate of Henry Stewart, Lord Darnly,
ter. in the twenty-firft year of his age. The indulgence of fortune, and

his own external accomplishments, without any other merit, had
railed him to an height of dignity, of which he was altogether
unworthy. By his folly and ingratitude, he 1011 the heart of a
woman who doated on him to diffraftion. His id~olence and in-
constancy alienated from him those nobles who had contributed
most zealously towards his elevation. His levity and caprice ex-
posed him to the scorn of the people, who once revered him as tl e
descendent of their ancient kings and heroes. Had he died a na-
tural death, his end would have been unlamented, and hris me
mory have been soon forgotten; but the cruel circumilances of
his murder, and the flackrnef~s with which it was afterwards aven.
ged, have made his name to be remembered with regret, and h~ave
rendered him the objeat of pity to which he had otherwise no
title.

Every one's imagination was at work to guess who hiad con-

trived and executed this execrable deed. The fulpicion fell, w~ith

Bothwell almost a general cons~ent, on Bothwell"; and some refleAions were

e tthrown out, as if the Queen herself were no firang~er to the crime,

peaied of Of Bothwell's guilt there remains the fullest evidence, that the
tdermur- nature of the aAion will admit. The Queen's knows fentimnents

with regard to her h~usband, gave a great appearance of probabi-
lity to the imputation with which the was loaded f-.

Two days after the murder, a proclamation was ifrued by the

Quen, offering a considerable reward to any person who thrould
discover those who had been guilty of foch a horrid and detell-
able crimet. And though Bothwell was now one of the great-
eft f~ubjeats in the kingdom, formidable on account of his ow~n
flower, and proteAed by the Qu~een's favour, it was impom~ble to
suppress the sentiments and indignation of the people. Papers
were affixued to the most public places of the city, accuin:g him

* 1Wely. 155. Anders vol. i. If6.
*(- See D~ifertation concerning the murdecr of HemyT Darnly·, and the gernuine-

ness of Mary's letters to Bothwell. Appendix.

t Anders. vol. i. 36.

of the murder, and naming his accomplices; piaures appeared to fs
the fame purpole, and voices were heard, in the middle of the J666.
night, charging him with that barbarous a~ion. B3ut the au-
thors of these rumours did not confine their accusations to Both-
well alone, they insinuated that the Qu~een herself was accessory
to the crime*. This bold accus~ation, which so direaly attacked
IMary's reputation, drew the attention of her council; and by
engaging them in an inquiry after the authors of these libels, di-
verted them from searching after the murderers of the King J.
It could fearce be expeAed that M~ary herself would be extreme-
ly solicitous to dis~cover those who had rid her of an husband,
whiom the had so violently hated. It was Bothwell's interest,
wrho had the supreme direation of thlis, as well as of all other as-
fairs, to flifle and suppress whatever evidence thould be offered,
and to cover, if possible, the whole tranfadion under the veil of
dar-kness and of silence. Some inquiry, however, was made, and
fame persons called before the council; but the examination was
conduaed with the most indecent remissness, and in such a man-
ner, as to let in no ligh~t upon that s~cene of guilt J.

It was not her own fubjeAs alone who fulpeaed Mary of being

accessory to this unnatural crime; nor did an opinion, so dif.
honourable to her charaaer, owe its rife and progress to the jea-
10uly and malice of her faamous nobles. The report of the man-
ner and circumflances of the King's murder ifpread quickrly over
all Europe, and, even in that age, which was accuffomIed to
deeds of violence, it excited universal horror. And as her un-
hsppy breach with her husband had long been matter of public
discours~e, the Birit conjeaures which were formed with regard to
his death, were extremnely to her disadvantage. Her friends, at
a loss what apology to olffer for her condua, called on her to pro-
fecute the murderers with the utmost diligence, and expeaed that
the rigour of her proceedings would prove the bell and fullest
vindication of her innocence Ij.

Lennox, at the fame time, incited Mary to vengeance with Lennot ac-

cules Both-

incessant importunity. This nobleman had fhlared in his lon's well ofthe
disgrace, and being treated by Mary with neglea, usually resided Kmng's murder.
at a distance from court. Rodfed, however, by an event no less
fhlocking to the heart of a father, than fatal to all his schemes of
ambition, he ventured to write to the Qeen, and to offer his reb. 2:e
advice with repeQt to the most effer~ual method for discovering

*Ander f. vol. ii. 156. ? (Id. vol. i. 38.

? ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ I

Id 0 I

6 6.( erh, Pret. ir.

H hij

BOOK IV. and conviaing those who had to cruelly deprived him of a so4

56.and her of a husband. He urged her to pros~ecute those who were

guilty, with vigour, and to bring them to a speedy trial; he de.
clared his own fulpicion of Bothwell, and of those who were
named as his accomplices; he required that, out of regard to de-
cency, and in order to encourage evidence to appear against them,
the persons acculetd of such an atrocious crime thould be com-
mlitted to cuffody, or at least excluded from her court and pre-
fence *K,

Mary w~as then at Seaton, whlither she had retired after the

burial of the King, whose body was depoilted among the Mdo-
narchs of Scotland, in a private, but decerit manner J. The
former part of the Earl's demand, could not, on any pretence,
be eluded; and it was resolved to brihg Bothwell immediately

M~ary con- to trial. But, infl~ead of confining him to any prison, Mlary ad-
nuestim. mitted him into all her councils, and allowed a person, universal-

ly reputed the murderer of her husband, to enjoy all the security,
the dignity, and the power of a Cavourite f. T'he offices which
Bothwell already poileffed, gave h~im the command of all the south
of Scotland. Thie castle of Edinburgh, however, was a place of
t'oo much cons~equence, not to with it in his own power. The
Queen, in order to prevail on the Earl of iS1ar to surrender it,
consented to put the person of the young Prince in his hands,

Mlarch;9. and immediately bjeffowed the government of that important for-

tress upon Bothwell|J. So many iteps in her conduat inconiift-
ent with all the rules of prudence, and' of decency,-muit be im-
puted to an excess either of folly or of love. MVary's known cha-
raaer fullyi vindicates her from the formner 7 of th~e latter, manyi -
and striking proofs soon appeared.

Mlarch. r9. _No direA evidence had yet appeared againfl Bothfwell; but as

time might bring to light the circumitances of a crime, in which:
So many accomplices were concerned, it was of great importance

Hastens on to haff~en on the' trial, while nothing more than general fulpicions,
his trial. and uncertain furnilfes could be produced by his accueles. For

this reafbn, in a meeting of Privy Council held on thle 28th of
Mlarch, the 12t~h of April wtas appointed for the day ofr trial,
And though the lawt allowed, anld the manner in which criminal
caules were carried on in that age reqjuired a much longer inter-
val, it appears, from several circumstances, that this thort [pacr:

*k'ih K r

o", 4'·ArT. vol. i. 23.

I Id. ibid. Fref. 64. Keith, 379, t. Id, ibid. 40, iEr

\tas considerably contrasted, ·and tha~t Lennox had only ektven Boox IV,
days warning to prepare foi- accusing a person, so far superior to
himself, both in power ard in favour *. No man could be les~s 1566.,
in a condition to contend' with an antagonist who was thus sup-
ported. Though Lennox's paternal errate had been reffered to
him, when he was recalled into Scotland, it s~eems to have been
considerably impaired during his banithient. His vassals, while
he resided In England, had been accultomed to s~ome degree of
independence, and he had not recovered thati ablrolute ascendent
over them, which a feudal chief usually polfefkd. He had no
reason to ex~peEt the concurrence of any of those faitions into
which the nobles wfere divided. During~ the fhortt period of his
fon's prolperity, he had tak~en such ite~ps as gave rife to ark open
breach with Murray and all his adherents. The partizans ~f the
houle of Hamilton were his hereditary and mortal enemies. Hunt-
ly was linkied in the closest confederacy with Eathwfell; and thus,
to the disgrace of the nation, Lennex; flood alone in a cause, where
both~ honour and humanlity called 10 loudly on his cofmntrym~en to
second him.

It is remarkable too, that Bothwell himself was present, and

fat as a member in that meeting of Privyr Council, which gave
direitions with regardt to the time and manner of his trial. And
he till enjoyed not only full liberty, but was received into the
Queen's presence wich the fame diitinguilhed familiarity as for.
Inerly f.

Nothingr could be a more cruel disap~pointment to the wishes Lenroxt

alnd relenturent of a father, thanr such a premature trial; every craves adE-

lay.

*The aAt of Privy Council, aprpointing the day of Bothwell's trial, bears

date M~arch the 28th, which happened on a Th:ur eay. Anders. vol. i. go. The
Queen's warrant to th~e mefengers, impow-ering ttem to fulmmon Lennox to be
present, is dated on the ,,th1. Anders. vol. 11. v7. He wvas summoned by pub-
lic proclamaition at the cross of Edlinburgh on thie fame day. Ibid. zoo. He was
summoned at his dwelling-honufes in Glasgow and Dumbarton the 30th of M~arch,
the Ift and ,d d3.ys of Apr~il. lbid. roJ. He was flanmoned at Perth, April I1
Ib~id. f o2. Thoug~h Lennoxu ref ided at that time forty miles from Edinb~urgh,
the citation might have been givenu him sooner. Such anl unnecessar~y delay as-
fords fonlle cause of furg;ion. 'Tis true, Aliayy, inl her letter, 1\Tarch 24th,~ in-
v to I Lennox to come to Edinbergh1 the enluing week;; this gave him wmarning
fame day~s sooner, that the intended to bring on the trial without delay. But
the precise time could not ba legally, or ce-rtairnly known to Lenucx, sooner
than eleven or twelve days before the day on which he was requiired to al p--r.
Bly the law and praCrice of Scotland, at that time, parties were summoned, in
c 'es of treason, f rty days previous to the tr;al.

t AnderT. vol. i* 50,~ 51·

BOOK1-* itP tOwar~ds which seemed to be taken by dire~ions from tfie

person who was himself accused of the crime, and calculated on

rg66c. purpole to conceal, rather than to detea his guilt. Lennox fore-

saw what would be the iiflue of this mock inquiry, and with how
little safety to himself, or success to his cause, he could venture
to appear on the day prefixed. In his former letters, thoug~h un-
der exipretlions the mast refpeffful, fame sy~mptoms of his diffruit-
ing the Qu~een may be discovered. He f'pokre out now, in plain
langulage. He cortiplained of the injury done him, by hurrying~
on the trial with s~uch illegal precipitation. He represented once
more, the indecency of allowing Bothwell, not only to enjoy
personal liberty, but to retain his former influence ovei her coun-
cils. He again required her, as the regarded her owvn honour,
to give some evidence of her sincerity in prosecuting the murder,
by confining the person whlo was f~ulpeaed, on good grounds, to
be the author of it; and, till that were done, he signified Iis oil?
resolution not to be prelent at a trial, the manner and circum-
itances of which were 10 irregular, and unfatisfsaory *.

Applies for He seems, however, to have expened little success from this
this arpof~e application to Mary 9 and therefore, at the fame time, befoughit
beih. Elizabeth to interpol~e, in order to obtain such a delay as he de-

mainded -1. Nothing can be, a firongrer proof, how violently he
fulpe~ed the one Queen, than his submitting to implore the aid
of the other, who had treated his son with the utmost contempt,
and himself and family with the g~reatest rigour. Elizabeth, who
was never unwilling to interpole in the affairs of Scotland, wrote
inflantly to Mary, advised her to delay the trial for some time,
and urged, in such firong terms, the fame arguments which Len-
nox had used, as might have convinced her to what an unfavour-
able confiruAion her condua would be liable, if th~e pexflled in
her prelent method of proceeding t.

The tri·l Neither her entreaties, however, nor those of Lennox, could
proceeds. prevail to have the trial put off. On the day appointed, Both-

well appeared, but with such a formidable retinue, that it would
have been dangerous to condemn, and impof~ible to punith him.
Besides a numerous body of his friends and vassals assembled, ac·
cording to cuffom, from different parts of thle kingdom, he was
attended by a band of hired soldiers, who marched with flying·
colouls along the fireets of Edinburgh P. A court of juffice na

* And~ers vol. i. 52.· t Good. vol. ii. 332-
j Ainderl Pref 60. See App~endix, N3. XirX. : Aniderf. voL, i I13

hleld, with the accuffamed formalities. An indicament was pre. Boor IvT.
fented agrainft Bothwell, and LennOK Was called upon to make
good his accusation. In his name appeared Robert Cunningham, 66
one of his dependents. He exicufed his mafter's ablence, on ac,
count of the thortnefs of the time, which prevented his affemb.
ling his friends and vailals, without w~hose amit~ance he could
not, with safety, venture to set himself in opposition to fachl a
powerful antagonist. For this reason, he desired the court to
flop proceeding, and protefied, that any sentence which th~ould
be passed at that time, ought to be deemed illegal and void,
Bothwell, on the other hand, insisted, that the court thould in-
flantly proceed to trial. One of Lennox's own letters, in which
he craved of thie Queen to prosecute the murderers without delay,
wfas produced. Cunningham's objeetions were over-ruled; and
the jury, confilling of Peers and Earons of the firit rank, found
Bothwfell not guilty of the crime.

No person appeared as an acculer, not a Eingle witness was ex- Bothwrellis

amined, nor any evidence produced agrainft him. The jury, un- acqui~tted
der these circumitances, could do nothing else but acquit him.
Their verdia, however, was far from gratifying the withes, or
fl~encing the murmurs of the people. Every circumflance in the
trial gave grounds for fulpicion, and excited! indignation; and
the judgment pronounced, inficad of being a proof of Bothwrell's
innocence, was esteemed an argument of his guilt. Pafqluinades
and libels were affixed to different places, expref~ing the senti-
ments of the public, with the utmost virulence of language.

The jury themselves seem to have been aware of the centulre,

to wyhich their proceedings would be exposed; and, at the fame
time, that they retur~ned their verdia acquitting Bothwnell, the
Earl of Caithness protefied, in their name, that no crime th~ould
be imnputed to them on that account, becaufc no accuser had ap-
peared, and no proof was brought of the indiament. He took
notice, lik~ewise, that the ninth inflead of the tenth of February
was mentioned in the indiament, as the day on which the mur-
der had been committed. A circumflance which diifcovers the
extreme inaccuracy of those who prepared the indic~ment; and
at a time when men were disposed, and not without reason, to be
falpicious of every thing7, this small matter contributed to confirm
and to increase their fulp;-icions *,

E~ven Bothw-ell Fimfellf did not rely on the judgment which

hie had obtained in his favrour, as a full vinldication of his inno-

* Bothw. Trial. Andce'·f vol. i.n**, &ic,

Bcou IV. cence. Immediately after his acquittal, he, in compliance avht

SyJ a cuitom which was not then o~bsolete, published a writing, in
z56.xhich he offred to fiht, in single combat, any Gentleman of

good fame, who thould presume to accus~e him of being accessory
to the murder of the King.

Mlary,~ however, continued to treat him as if he had been clear-

ed by the most unexcreptionable and fatisfaAory evidence. The
alcendent he had gained over her heart, as well as over her coun-
cils, was more visible than ever I and Lennox, who could not ex,
peB that his own person would be safe in a country where the
murderer of his fou had been ablolved, without regard to juffice,
and loaded with honours, in contempt of decency, fled with pre·
cipitation towards England *.

A ParlIa- Two days after the trial, a Parliament was held, at the open·

enhl.ing of which the Queen diftinguithed Bothwfell, by appointing

him to carry the feeptre before her J. Most of the Aas passed
in this Assembly, were calculated on purpole to firengthen his
party, and to promote his designs. He obtained the ratification
of all the po~ffelins and honours which the partiality of the
Queen had conferred upon him; and the a~t to that eff~eT con-
tained the firongeit declarations of his faithful services to the
Crown, in all times patt. The furrendler of the caffle of Edin-
burgh by Mar was confirmed. The law of attainder against Hunt.
17 was repealed, and he, and his adherents, were reflored to the
efiates and honours of their anceffors. Several of those who had
been on the jury which acquitted him, obtained the ratifications
of the grants made in their favour. And as pafquinades daily mnul-
tiplied, a law passed, whereby those, into wholre hands any paper
of' that kind fell, were commanded inflantly to destroy it i and
if, through their neg7lc?, it thould be allowed to spread, they
w\ere thLbjeaed to a capital punithimept, in the faae manner as if
they had been the original authors f.

Remark- But the ablolute dominion, whichl Bothwell had acquired over

r

'n ary's mind, appeared in the clearest manner, by an aB in fa-

the Ref~or- vour of the Proteltant Religion, to which, at this time, the gave

mao. her assent. Mary's attachment to the Romith faith was uniform

and fuperfitious; the had never laid aside the design, nor 10ft the
hope"s of retroring it. She had, of late, come under new engage-
men~ts to that purpose, and in confeqluence of ther~e, had ventured
a y~n some 11eps more public and vigorous than any the h~ad for-

*K~eiih 378 Note (D.) -f Ibid. 378. Note (D.) (Ibid. 280.

nerly taken. But, Bothwell was prompted, by powerful motiv~es
to promote this law. He had been guilty of crimes, which ren- I366.
dered him the objea of just and universal detellation. He was
meditating others, which he easily forefagw would heighten
the public indignation against him. By this popular law, he
might hope to divert, or to delay the resentment of the nation,
and flattered hinifelf, that the obtaining this unexpeaed and legal
security for the Protefrant religion, would atone for much guilt,
silence the clamours of the clergy, and induce the people to con-
nive at', or to tolerate his crimes. The aa itself was to favour-
able to thle dotrine of the Reformers, that the Parliament, which
inet next year, under very different leaders, could substitute no-
thing fironger or more explicit in its place; and thought it f~uffi-
clent to ratify it word for word *. To pass such an aB, was ut-
terly inconfifterit with all the maxims which Mary followed in
every other period of her life; but what could never be extort-
ed from her by the folicitations of the Aflemblies of the church,
or by the entreaties of her people, the more powerful influence of
Bothwell nowy obtained 1-.

Evei-y fiep tak~en by Bothwell had hitherto been attended with Bothwell

all the faccefs which his most sanguine withes could excpeat. He t;ren~a bslosn
had entirely gained the Qu~een's heart; the murder of the King to recom-
had excited no publfc commotion; he had been acquitted by his neandh~~m
peers of anly fhlare in that crime; and their deciiion had been, in band to the
some fort, ratified in Parliament. But in a kixigdom, where theKig
regal authority was to extremely limited, and the power of the
nobles to formidable, he durst not venture on the last a~ioti, to-
wards which all his ambitious projeas tended, without their ap-
probation. In order to secure this, he, immediately after the April r9-
dissolution of Parliament, iilvited all the nobles who were present
to an entertainment. Having filled the house with his Friends

* Parl. I. Jac. VI. c. 31.
. Buchanan, Hist. 3755, not only omits taking any notice of this law, but al'.
ferts, that the Queen, though the had given promises in favour of the reformed
religion, refused to permit any aB to pass in support of it, and even difminifed
the deputies of the church with contempt. Spotfwood, 202. and Calderwood,
vol. iii. 41. both aflirmn the fame thing. It would not haive been necessary to
observe this inflance of Buchanan's inaccuracy; but that an authot so conversant
in our laws as Spotfivood, and one so induffrious as Calderwood, thould com-
mit such an error, when a printed art of Parliament to the contrary was before
their eyes, is remark;able E··en Eucha~naa himse~lf has taken notice of this ad~
Dete~n'og &

8

BOOKIV. and dependents, and surrounded it with armed men 0, he opened

2566. to the company his intention of marrying the Queen, whole con-

sent, he told them, he h~ad already~ obtained ; and demanded their
approbation of this match, which, he said, was no less acceptable
to their Sovereign, than honourable to himfelft-. Huntly and
Seaton, who were privy to all Bothwell's schemes, and promoted
them with the utmost zeal; the Popilh ecclefiaftics, who were
ahf~olutely devoted to the Queen, and ready to sooth all her pal.
tions, inflantly declared their fatisfa~ion with what he had pro-
posed. T'he reft, who dreaded the extorbitant power which Both-
well had acquired, and oblerved the Qujeen's growing affeaion
towards him in all her amions, were willing to make a merit of
yielding to a measure, which they could neither oppole, nor de-
feat. Some few were confounded and enraged. But, in the end,
Bothwell, partly by promises and flattery, partly by terror and
force, prevailed on all who were present to fablecribe a paper,
which leaves a deeper slain than anly occurrence in that age, on
the honour and chara8er of the nation.

This paper contained the firongeft declarations of Bothwell's

innocence, alid the most ample acknowledgment of his good ser-
vices to the kingdom. If any future accusation thould be brought
aadr~int him, on account of the King's murder, the subscribers
promised to fland by him as one man, and to hazard their lives
and fortunes in his defence. They recommended him to the
Queen, as the most proper person the could chufe for a husband I
and if the thould condescend to beffow on him that mark of her
regard, they undertook to promote the marriage, and to join him
with all their forces, in opposing any person who endeavoured to
obitrudt it 1. Among the subscribers of this paper, we find fame
who were the Queen's chief confidents, others who were firan-
gers to her counsels, and obnox~ious to her displeasure; some who
faithfully adhered to her, throug~h all the vicissitudes of her for-
tune, and others who became the principal authors of her iifuffr-
ingrs.; some paifianately attached to the Romith fuperflition, and
others zealous advocates for the Protefiant faith (. No common
interest can be fixppofed to have united men of such opposite prin-
ciples and parties, in recommending to their Sovereign a flep 10
injurious to hier honour, and so fatal to her peace. This firange
coalition was the e~fe8 of much artifilce, and must be considered
as the boldest and moit maiterly firoke of Bothwell's addrels. It

* Good. vol. ii 1r4L

$ Keith, 382. t Anders vol. i· 94. ( AnderT. vol. i. 177.

Is oblervable, that amidst all the altercations, and mutual re. BOOK 1V.
proaches of the two parties whbich arole in the kingdlom, this un- k6
worthy tranfaaion is seldom mentioned. Conscious, on both sides, 66
that in this particular, their conduQ could ill bear examination,
and would redound little to their fame, they alwazys touch upon
it unwillingly, and seem desirous that it thould remain in dark~ness,
or be buried in oblivion. But as so many pers~ons, who, both at
that time, and ever after, poffexred the Queen's favour, subscribed
this paper, the ful~picion becomes firong, that Bothwell's ambi-
tious hopes were neither unkrnown to Mary, nor dilapproved by
her*.

ThefeT fupicions are confirmed by the most direA proof. Mel-

vil, as that time, enjoyed a considerable share in her favour,
He, as well as his brother, k~ept a secret correspondence in Eng-
land, with those who favoured her pretenflons to that Crown,
The rumour of her intended marriage with Bothwell having ear-
ly [pread in that kingdom, excited the utmolt indignation; and
bie received a letter from thence, which reprelented, in the firong-
eft tertns, what would be the fatal effeas of s~uch an imprudent
itep. Melvil put this letter into the Queen's hands, and ensor,

* Of all the different fyitems wIth regard to this tranfhiAlon, that of Camden

seems to be the least accurate, anld the woirit founded. H-e suppos~es that Bothi-
well was hated by Mlurray, Morton, £Fe1. who h~ad been his associates in the mur-
der of the King, and that they now wanted to ruin him. He arlirms, at the
fame time, that the fabfcriptions to this paper were obtained by them, out of fear
that Boghwell might link in his hopes, and betray the whole bloody secret. 404. But
besides the absurdity of supposing, that any man's enemies would contribute to.
wards raising him to such high dignity, on the uncertain hopes of afterwards de-
priving him of it; besides the impossibility of accomplishing s~uch a marriage,
if it had been either unknown to the. Queen or disagreeable to her; we may
observe that this firppofition is destroyed by the dired testimony of the Queen
herself, who alrcribes the confeat of the nobles to Bothwvell's artifices, wuho per-
thafed it by giving them to unde~rjid that ·we were content th~erewoith. An,
derf. vol. i. 94. It would have been no small adv-antage to Mary if the could
hace reprefeated the consent of the nobles to have been their own voluntary deed~
It is still more furp~rifinlg to find Lefly aleribing this paper to Murray and his
faAlon. Anders. vol. i. 26. The Bilhop himself was one of the persons who
Ablecribed it. Keith> 383. The King's commiffloners, at the conference held at
York Is68, pretended that none of the nobles, except the Earl of Huntly, would
fublcnlbe this paper till a warrant from the Queen was produced, by w-hich they
were allowed to do so; this warrant they had in their cuffody, and exhibited
Andert vol. iv. Part ii. 59. This diiffers from Buchanan's account, who sup- .
poses that all the nobles present subscribed the paper on the Ijth, and that, next
dry, they obtained thp approbation of what they had done, by way of security
to themse~lves, 355-

BOOK IV ced it with the utmost warmth. She not only disr~egarded there

136 remonfirances, but communicated the matter to Bothwell. Mel-

vil, in order to save his life, was obliged to fly from court, whi-
ther he durst not return, till the Earl's rage began to abate *. At
the fame time, Elizabeth warned Mary of the danger and infa-
my to which the would expole herself, by such an indecent choice,
but an advice from her met with ftlil11efs regard-s.

Earthwre~ll Three days after the rising of Parliament, Mary went from
Quleen by Edinburgh to Stirling, in order to visit the Prince her lon. Both-

meb ell had now brought his schemes to full maturity, and every

precaution being taken, which could render it safe to venture on
the 1211 and decisive flep, the natural impetuosity of his spirit did
not fuffer him to deliberate, any longer. Under pretence of an
expedition against the free-booters on the borders, he assembled

April 24. his ~fg110wers; and marching out of Edinburgh with a thousand

hors~e, turned suddenly towards Linlithgow·, met the Queen on
her return near that place, dispersed her slender train without re-
fillance, seized on her perfion, and conduaed her, together with
a few of her courtiers, as a prisoner to his caffle of IDunbar. She
expressed neither surprise, nor terror, nor indignation, at such an
outrage committed on her person, and luch an insult offered to her
authority, but seemed to yield without firuggle or regrets. Mel-
vil was, at that time, one of her attendants; and the ofmcer by
whom he was seized informed him, that nothing was done with.
out the Queen's own consent J. If we may rely on the letters pu-
blifhed in Mary's name, the scheme had beeri commrunicated to herl

* Mely. Isd. According to NMelv-il, Lord Herreis lIkewise riemonfitrbted a.

gainft the marriage, and conjurael the Queen, on his knees, to lay aside all
though~ts of such a dishonoura~ble alliance. r6. But it has bet a observed, thlat
H~erreis is one of the nobles who thbfcribed the bond, April r9. K~eith, 383
=. That he is one of the witnesses to thle marriag~e articles between the Queen and
Bothwell, May 14. Good. vol. 11. 61. 3. That he fat in council w-ith Bothwfell,
May 17. Kieith, 386. But this remonfirance of Lord Herreis againlt the malrri.
age hap'pened before there, made by Melvil himself, 157. *Melvil's remon-
itrance must have happen~ed some time before the meeti-g of Parliament; for as.
ter o~endin~g Bothwmell, he retired from court; hk allowred his ragre time to sub·
TEde, and had a~gain joined the Quleen, when the was seized, April 24. 138-
The time n hich must have elapsed, by this accoupt of the matter, was perl aps
0i~fcient to havie gained 11erreis, from being an opp~oser, to becomne a prom~oter
of thle marriage.· PerhapIs M~elvil may have committed fomne millakse writh re
gard to this feat, so far as relates to Lord Herreij. He could not well be n~i,
taken with7 regard to wrhat himself did.

i Anders. vol. i. I06. j K~eith, 383. . 5 ely r5'

and every fiep towards it was taken with her participation and BOOK 17.
advice *.

Both the Queen and Bothwell thought it of advantage to em- 6.

ploy this appearance of violence. It afforded her a decent excuse
for her condu61; and while thee could plead that it was owing to
force rather than choice, Ihe hoped that her reputation, among
foreigners at leaf1, would escape without centure, or be expos~ed to
less reproach. Bothwell could not help diffruffing all the me-
thods which had hitherto been used, for vindicating him from any
concern in the murder of the King. Something was itill want-
lng for his security, and for quieting his guilty fears. This was
a pardon under the Great Seal. By the laws of Scotland, the
mo~t henious crime must be mentioned by name in a pardon, and
then all lesser offences are deemed to be included under the ge-
neral clause, and all other crimes whatfoever-f. To seize the per-
lon of the Prince, is high treason j and Bothwell hoped, that a
pardon obtained for this, would extend to every things of which
he had been accused J.

Bothwell, having now got the Queen's person into his hands, Is divorced

it would have been unbecoming either a politician or a man of gal- rom hisfe
lantry to have delayed consummating his schemes. For this pur-
poLe, he instantly commenced a fulit, in order to obtain sentence
of divorce from his wife Lady Jean Gordon, the Earl of Hunt-
ly's fiffer. This proces~s was carried on, at the fame time, both April 29.
before Protestant and Popith judges; before the former, in the
court of Commiffaries; and before the latter, in the ifpiritual court
of the Archbilhop of St. Andrew's, whole jurifdi8ion the Queen
had lately reffored. The pretexts which he pleaded were trivial
or scandalous. But his authority had greater weight than the
juffice of his cause; and in both courts, featence of divorce was
pronounced, with the fame indecent and fulicious precipitancyg.

Wxhile this infamous tranf~a~ion was carrying on, the Queen

resided at Dunbar; detained as a prisoner, but treated with the *
utmost refpea. Soon after Bothwell, with a numerous train of ay 3.
his dependants, conduaed her to ]Edinburgh; but instead of 10dg-
ing her in the palace of Holyroodhode, he conveyed her to the
caffle, of which he was governor. The discontent of the nation
rendered this precaution necessary. In an house unfortified, and
of easy access, the Qg~cen might have been rescued without diff-

*Good vol. ii- 37. t P-rl. 6. Jac. IV. 63.
I Andierl vol iv Tart. ii 6r. 5 Ibid. r. '32.

BOOKIV. culty out of his hands. In a place of firength, the was secured

from all the attem ts of his enemies.

1566. One small difficulty still remained to be surmounted. As the

Queen was kept in a fort of captivity by Bothwell, a marriage
concluded in that condition might be imputed to force, and be

Ivay r2. held invalid. In order to obviate this, Mary appeared in the

court of feflion, and in prelence of the Chancellor, the other
judges, and several of the nobility, declared that the was now at
full liberty; and though Bothwell's violence in seizing her per-
son had, at firit, excited her indignation, yet his refpeaful beha-
viour since that time had not only appeased her relentment, but
determined her to rail~e him to higher honours *.

Is married WNhat these were, soon became public. The title of Duke of

Ce Orkney was conferred upon Bothwell; and on the Ijth of M~ay

his marriage with the Qu~een, which had to long been the objea
of his withes, and the motive of his crimes, was solemnized.
The peremony was performed, in public, according to the rites
of the Protestant Church, by Adam Bothwell bishop of Ork~ncy,
one of the few prelates who had embraced the Reformation, and
on the fame day, was celebrated in private, according to the
forms prefecribed by the Popish relig-iont. The boldness with
wfhich Craig, the Miniffer who was commanded to publish thie
banns, testified against the design 3 the small number of the nobles,
who were present at the marriage; and the sullen and diferepea-
ful silence of thle people, when the Qu~een appeared in public;
were manifest symptoms of the violent and general difiatisfattion
of her own fubjeas. The refusal of Du Croc the French ambaf-
fador- to be present at the nuptial ceremony or entertainment dil-
covers the s~entiments of her allies, with regard to this Fart of her
conduA. And although every other salon in Mary's life could
be jufitfied by the rules of prudence, or reconciled to the princi-
ples of virtue, this fatal marriage would remain an inconteftible
proof of her raanefs, if not of her guilt.

Malry's firlt care was to offer some apology for her condu8t, to

the courts of France and England. The infirnAions to her am.
bailhdors still remain, and are drawn by a mailerly hand. But
r~nder all the artificial and false colouring thie employg, it is easy
to dilcover not only that many of the fleps the had tpken. were un-
jaiifiable, but that the herself was colnfaious th2at they could no:
be juffified J.

* Anid r~ I 87. t Id r 13· 2* 276. 1 Id. I 80?

The title of King was the only t'hing, which was not beffoied ROOK ITT,

tipon Bothwell. N~iotwithftanding her attachment to him, Mlary
remembered the inconveniencies, which had arisen from the rash 156
advancement of her former husband to that honour. She agreed,
however, that he thould sign, in token of cod~ent, all the public
writs ifiued in hier name *. This was nothing more than mere
form, but, together with it, he poffeffed all the reality of power.
The Queen's person was in his hands; a he was s~urrounded more
closely than ever by his creatures j none of her fabje~ts could ob-
tain audience without his permillion; and, unless in his own pre-
fence, none but his confidents were permitted to converse with
hert·. The Scottifb Manarchs bvere accuffomed to live among
their fabjeats as fathers or as equals, without diftruff, and with
little slate; armed guards flanding at the doors of the royal apart-
ment, difficulty of access, difiance and retirement, were things
unknown and unpopular.

There precautions were necet~ary for securing to Bothwell the E~ndeavours

power, which he had acquired. But, without being mat~er of t,,COn~'e
the person of the young Prince, he efleemed all that he had gain- the rrince's
ed to be precarious and uncertain. The Queen had committed pe'rcon
her fan to the care of the Earl of M~ar. The fidelity and loyalty
of that nobleman were too well known to expea that he would
be willing to put the Prince into the hands of the man, who was
to violently fulpe~ed of having murdered his father. Bothwell,
howvever, laboured to get the Prince into his power, with an
anxiety, which gave rife to the blackest suspicions. All his ad-
drels as well as authority we~re employed to perfunde, or to force
Mlar, into a compliance with his demands f. And it is no flight
proof both of the firmnels and dexterity of that nobleman, that he
preserved a life of so much importance to the nation, from lying
at the mercy of a man, whom fear or ambition might have
prompted to violent attempts against it.

The eyes of neighbouring nations were fixed, at that time, d ,-ne n.

upon the great events, which had happened in Scotland, during wrhich the
three months. A King murdered, with the utmost cruelty, in a~e n ae-
the prime of his days, and in his capital city; the perlon fulpe61. cited.
ed of that odious crime Lfuffred not only to appear publicly in
every place, but admitted into the pres~ence of the Queen, diftin-
guiihed by her favour, and intruffed with the chief direation of
her affairs; fubje~ted to a trial, which was carried on with most

* Good. 2 60. *EAnd. I. I36. ( Mely. 160. Buch- 361

BOOKIV. thamelefs partiality, and acquitted by a sentence, which fervect

only to confirm the ufupicions of his guilt; divorced from his

56.wife, on pretences frivolous, or indecent; and after all this, in-

flead of meeting with the ignominy due to his a~tions, or the pu-
nilhment merited by his crimes, permitted openly, and without
opposition, to marry a Queen, the wife of the Prince whom he
had affaffnated, and the guardian of those laws which he had
been guilty of violating. Such a quick fuccetiion of incidents,
to singular, and so detefiable, is not to be found in any other his-
tory. They left, in the opinion of foreigners, a mark of infamy
on the chlaraaer of the nation. The Scots were held in abhor-
rence all over Europe; they durit fearce appear any whlere in
public; and after fulffering; so many atrocious deeds to pals with
impunity, they were univers~ally reproached as men void of cou-
rage, or of humanity, :is equally regardlels of thle reputation of
their Queen, and the honour of their country *.

The nobles These repr-oachres rouied the nobles, who had been hitherto
anne a amused by Bothlwel's artifices, or intimidated by his power. T'he
and Both- manner in which he exercised the authority which he had acqui-
well. red, his repeated attempts td' become master of the Prince's per·

son, together with some rath threatenings against him, which he
let sally, added to the violence and promptneies of their refo-
lutions. A considerable body of them jidembled at Stirling, and
entered into an association for thie defence of the Prince's person.
Argyle, Athol, Mar, Morton, Glencairn, Homne, Lindsay, Boyd,
Mlurray of Tullibardin, Kirkaldy of Grange, and Maitland the
Secretary, were the heads of this confederacy t1. Stewart E~arl
of Athol was remarkable for an uniform and bigotted attachment
to Popery, but his indignation on account of the murder of the
Kiing, to whom he was nearly allied, and his zeal for the safety
of the Prince*, overcame, on this occafian, all considerations of
religion, and on~ited him with the most zealous Protestants. Se-
veral of the other nobles aaed, without quellion, from a laudabLe
concern for the safety of the Prince, and the honour of their
country. B~ut the spirit which some of th~em discovered, during
the subsequent revolutions, leaves little room to doubt, that am-
boition or resentment were the real motives of their condua: and
that, on many occasions, while they were pursuing ends juff and
necessary, they were aauated by principles and pations altoge-
ther unjustifiable.

* Andlerlvol. i 18, 134. Hle~vly. 6 See Appendix, No.XX ·

t Ibid

r51. Keith, 3?4

The first accounts of this league filled thle Queen and Bothwell BooK Iv.

with great conflernation. They were no firangers to the senti.
ments of the nation, with reEpea to their condu~t; and though 66
their marriage had not met with public opposition, they knew
that it had not been carried on withouit thle feclet disgust and
murmurings of all ranks of men. They foresaw the violence with
which this indignation would burfl out, after being so long sup-
pressed. And in order to prepare for the florm, Alary iflfued a
proclamation, requiring her f~ubj'eas to take arms, and to attend May 28.
her huiband by a day appointed. At the fame time, the publith-
ed a fort of manifeffo, in which the laboured to vindicate her go-
vernment from those imputations with which it had been loaded,
and employed the firongeft terms to express her concern for the
safety and welfare of the Prince her son. NIeither of there pro-
duced any considerable effe61. Her proclamation was ill obeyed,
and her manifesto met with little credit*.

The confederate Lords carried on their preparations with no The nueen

less aaivity, and with much more fulccefs. Among a warlike and Both-e
people, men of 10 much power and popularity found it an easy to Dunbar
matter to raise an army. They were ready to match before the
Queen and Bothwerll were in a condition to resist them. The
caffle of Edinburgh was the place whither the Queen ought na-
tarally to have retired, and there her perfom might have been per-
fe81y safe. But the confederates had fallen on means to thake,
or corrupt the fidelity of Sir Jsmes Balfour the deputy governor,
and Bothwvell durst not commit to him such an important truss.
He condu~ed the Queen to thle calile of Borthwick;, and on the June 6.
appearance of Lord Home, with a body of his followers, before
that place, he fled with precipitation to Dunbar, and was follow-
ed by the Queen, disguis~ed in men's clothes. The confederates
advanced towards Edinburgh, where H~untly'endeavoured, in vain,
to animate the inhabitants to defend the town against them. 7 hey
entered without opposition1, and were instantly joined by many of
the citizens, whose zeal became the firmest support of their cause -.

In order to set their own condua in the meft favourable light,

and to rottle the public indignation cgaintl Eothwell, the nobles
published a declaration of the motives which had induced them to
tak~e arms. All Bothwfell's pall crimes were enumerated, all his
wicked intentions displayed and aggravated, and every true Scotfr-
ra n was called upon to join them in as enging· the one, and in
yrevecnting the other t.

* Kith, 3 S: 335, 396. ( Keith> 39. ( Anclef. vol. i. I-

Kk

BOOK IV. leanvjhle, Bothwell assemb~led hris forces at Du·nha,, and as

hre had many dependents in that corner, he soon gat~hered falch

15 itrength that he ventured to advance towhards the corfederates.

Their troops were not numerous; the th~ddenefs and secrecy of
their enterprise grave their filends at a difiance no time to jobn
them; and as it does not appear that they were firpported eithler
wfith money, or fed with hopes by the Qgeen of England, they
could not have kept long in a body. B~ut on thle other hand,
Bothwvell durst not rifque a delay ". His army followed him wi h
reluaance in this qjuarrel, and served him with no cordial affec-
tion; so that his only hopes of s~uccess was in fuiprifing thle enemy,
or in firiking the blow before his own troops had leisure to recol-
leat thems~elves, or to imbibe the fame unfavourablle opinion of hiis
saltons, which had i[pread over thle reft of the nation. T'hefe me
tives determined thle Cueen to march forward, withi an incoa
fider-te an~d fatal speed.

The nobles On the frirt intelligence of her approachn, the confederates ad-

ibr~ m. vanced to meet her. They fuoud her forces dirawnu up on the

June 15. fame ground whichl the Engrilh had poileied at the battle of

Pinky. T'he numbers on both sides wvele nearly eqlual; but there
w-as no equality in point of difcipine. The Queen's army confill-
ed chiefly of a multitude, haliliiy affelmbled, withlout courage or
exprrience in war. T`he troops of the confederates were compi-
ed of gentlemen of rank and reputation, followed by their mAl
trusty dependents, who were no less brave than zealousl-.

Aun ccom. Du Croc the Fren~ch Ambd'andor, who was in the field, la,-
ate o' c~boured, by negociating· both withi the Queen and the nobles, to

put an end to th;e quarrel without the effufion of blood. Hie Ie
presented to the confederates the Queen's inclinations towfards
peace, and hier w!llingncS to pardon the offences which they hadi
committed. Ivorton replied, with warmth, that thley had taken
arms nrot againit the Qu~een, but against the murderer of her hus-
band, and if he were given up to justice, or banilhed from her
p'efence, the thould find them ready to yield the obedience wfhichl
is du~e from subjects to thesir Sovereig~n. Glencairn added, that
they did not come to afkB pardon for any offence, but to punish
those who had o:Tended. TIhere haughty adivers conv·inced the
Ambassador, that his mediation would be ineffeaual, and that
their paflions were too high to allow them to 1:!1en to any pacite
propolitions, or to think; of retreating after having proceeded 10

t Kieith, 401,

* Keith, 401J. ? Cald. vol. 11. 4P, 49,

The Queen's army was posted to advantage, on a riCng7 ground. BOOK IV.

TheO confederates advanced to the attack resolutely, but slowly,
and with the caution whlich was natural on that unhappy field.
Her troops were alarmed at their approach, and discovered no in-
clin~ation to Eight. M~ary endeavoured! to animate them; the wept,
thle threatened, the reproached them with cowardice; but all in
vain. A fi·w of B5othweil's immediate attendants were eager for
the encounter; the reft stood wvavering and irresolute, and fame
began to fleal out of the field. Bothwell attempted to in-
spirit them, by offering to decide the quarrel, and to vindicate
his owvn innocence in single combat with any of hris adversaries.
Kiilkaldy of Grange, Mdurray of Tullibardin, and Lord Lindf'ay
contended for the honour of entering the lifts against L~im. Eut
this challenge proved to be a mere bravade. Either the confci-
oufnels of guilt deprived Bothwell of his wonted courage, or the
Qu~een, by her authority, forbade the combat*.

After the rymptomns of fear dilcovered by her followers, M~ary

would have been inexculable, had the hazarded a battle. 'To have
retreated in the face of an enemy, who had already surrounded
the hill on which the flood, with part of~their cavalry, was utter-
ly impra~icable. In this situation, thle was under the cruel ne-
cellity of putting hers~elf into the hands of those fabjeas who had
taken arms againit her. She demanded an interview with Kiirki-
aldy, a brave andl generous man, who commanded an advanced
body of the enemy. Hie, with th:e consent and in name of the
leaders of the party, promiled that, on condition the would dif-
miss Bothwell from her presence, and govern thle kingdom by the
7dvice of her nobles, they would honour and obey h~er as their
Sovereignt·.

During th~is parley, Bothwell took his las1 farewell of the Queen, Bothwenl

and rode off. thle field with a few followers. This dismal reverse obhgped to
happened exa81y one month after that marriage, which had cost
him 10 many crimes to accomp~lish, and which leaves to foul a
slain o:1n ary's mlemory.

As soon as Bothwell retired, M~ary surrendered to Kilkaldy, Masry fir-

whlo conduaed hier toward the confederate army, the leaders of h o s
which received her with much refpeA and Morto~n, in thehr name,
made ample profefilons of their future loyalty and obedience J.
Bu~t the was treated by th~e common soldiers with the utmost in-
;ulence and indigrnity. As thle mnarched along, thley youred upon

* Cell.vrol. ii. 50. i C7-l 7c1 ii 164. M1ely. 63.
i Good. wl. ii· r64,

K k ij

BOOKIV. her all the opprobrious names, which are bestowed only on th~e

Slowest and most inf-lmous criminals. Wherever the turned her
I6'eyes, they held up before her a flandard, on which was painted

the dead body of the late King, firetched on the ground, and the
young Prince knaeeling before it, and uttering thes~e words, " Judge
and revenge my cause, O Lord !" Mary turned with horror from
such a thocking fight. She began already to feel the wretched
condition to which~ a captive Prince is reduced. She uttered the
2nof bitter complaints, the melted into tears, and could fearce be
k~ept from finkiing to the ground. The confederates carried her
towards Edinburgh, and, in spite of many delays, and after look-
ing with the fondness and credulity natural to the unfortunate for
some unexpeaed relief, the arrived there. The fireets were co-
v~ered with multitudes, whom zeal or curiosity had drawn together,
to behold fulch an unus~ual scene. The Queen, worn out with fa-
tigue, covered with duff, and bedewed with tears, was exposed
as a f~peaacle to her own fubjeas, and led to the Provoft's houle.
N~otwithilanding all her arguments and entreaties, the fame flan-
dard was carried before her, and the fame insults and reproaches
repeated. A woman, young, beautiful, and in diffrefs, is natu-
rally the objeat of compaflion. The comparison of their present
znifery with their former splendour, usually ifofens us in favour of
illuffrious f~ufferers. But the people beheld the deplorable fitua-
tion of their Sovereign with insensibility; and to firong was their
perhfuaion of her guilt, and so great the violence of their indig.
nation, that the fufferings of their Queen did not, in any degree
mitigate their resentment, or procure her that sympathy, which is
seldom denied to unfortunate Princes*,

* Melvil, 166. Buch-364.

# BOOK FIFTH.

THE

HISTORY

S CO8T L AND.

BOOK FIFTH.

CONTENTS.

1)ELIBERATIOas of the Scottith Kobles. Impnfcnm~ent of the Queen. Inter-

prilition of Eiza~beth. The ref gnation of the Qeen of Scotland. James VI.
crowned. Murray Regent. Fate ofBoth~well. A parliament. Ls ape of
Queen Mary. Battle of Langfide. The Queen's ff'ght into England. Art
and perfidy of Elizabeth. M\ary carried to Bolton. S~er condu&t A pallia.
ment. The conference at Y~ork. Its removal to W~efimin~ter. Mr-y de-
mands an audience of Elizabeth. T'he accusation by F~urray. Ldr'h tre-t.
ment of Mary. Difl~mulation of Llizabeth. DiRurban~ces in Scotland. & Leme
of Norfolk Discovered by Elizabeth. Secretary Mlaitland impris~oned by
M~urray. Rebellion in the north of England. Conspiracy to deliver up the
Queen ofr Scotland to Murraiy. His death, and charafter.

HE, confederate Lords had proceeded to fach extremities againii EOOK V

their Sovereign, that it now became almost impof;.ble for thent
either to flop thort, or to purfute a course less violent. Many of Deea -
the nobles had refused to concur with them in their enterprise; tions of the
others openly condemned it. A small circumfiance mighlt abate norb n-
that indignation with which the multitude were, at present, ani- Queen,
mated against the Queen, and deprive them of that popular ap-
plause which was the chief foundation of their power. Thiefe
considerations inclined some of them to treat, the Qu~een with
great lenity.

But, on the other hand, Mary's affeation for Bothwell conti-

nued as violent as ever; the obstinately refused to hearken to any
proposal for dissolving their marriage, and determined not to a-
bandon a inan, for whose love the had already sacrificed to much ".
If they should allow her to recover the s~upreme power, the first
elertion of it would be to recall Bothwfell 3 and they had reafou,

+ Kith 4ty, 446, 449. Mely. 167. See Append. No. XXI.

BOOK V* both ~from his resentment, from her condua, and from their away

L to expeB the severest edeas of her vengeance. .Thele confidera-

15;61. tions furmiounted every other motive j and reckoning themselves

ablolved, by Mlary's incurable attachmlent to Bothwell, from the
engagements which they had come under when the yielded her-
self a prisoner, they, without regarding the duty wvhich they owed
her as their Quetn, and without cons~ulting the reft of the nobles,

'rhey im- carried her next evening, under a firong guard, to the caffle of
pif, her Lochlerin, and signed a warrant to William Douglas the owner
levishi of it, to detain her as a prisoner. This castle is situated in a

fmst11ifland, ist the middle of a lake. Douglas, to whom it be·
longed, was a near relation of Morton's, and had married the
Earl of Murray's mother. In this place, under firia cuffodyr
with a few attendants, and fubjeAed to the infirlts of a hanghty
woman, who boasted daily of being the lawful wife of James V.
Mk~ary fuffered all the rigour and miseries of captivrity *.,

Immediately after the Qu~een's imprifoninent, the confederates

were at the utmost pains to firengthen their party j they entered
into new bonds of associat~ion ; they allumed the title of Lords of
the Secret Courncil, and without any other right, arrogated to thero-
felve8 the whole regal authority. One of their first aas of power
w:1s to search the city of Edinburgh for those who were concern-
ed in the murder of the King. This thew of zeal gained reputa.
tion to themselves, and threw an oblique refleaion on the Queen
for her remiffneifs. Several ~ulpeaed persons were seized. Cap-
tain Blackadder and three others were condemned and executed.
But no dis~covery of iriportance was made. If we believe some
hillorians, they were conviaed by fuffcient evidence, If we
give credit to others, their sentence was unjust, and they denied,
with their last breath, any knowledge of the crime, for which
they fuffered-(-.

An unexpeaed accident, however, put into the hands of Ma-

2y's enemies what they deemed the fullest evidence of her guilt,
Bothwell having left, in the castle of Edinburgh, a casket, con·
taining several sonnets and letters written with the Qu~een's own
hand; he now sent one of hi·6s confidents to bring to him this
precious depofite. But as his mellenger returned, he was inter-
cepted, and the casket seized by MortonZ. And the contents of
it were always produced by the party, as the most ample juftifica-

* Fei'h, 4e- .Note (3I). i Card.vol 11.43;. Crawf.Mem.M..
? Anders. \lo ii 92. Good. t0L ii. 90.

tiol of thleir own conduca, and thle moll unadw'~erable proof of rOoxy
their not having losd-d thlir Sovereign with the imputation of q 7
,maginary crimes."

But the confederates, notwfithfrrlnding their extraordinary fuc. So~me of th~e

cess, were flill far from being perfeftly at edre. Th~at so small a ,,,~
part of the nobles th~ould pretend to dispose of the perronl of their Qu!Een
Sovereign, or to afllume the authority which belonged to hier,
wvithnout the concurrence of the reft, app~eared to many of that
body to be unprecedented, and presumptuous. Several of there
were now aiffmbled at Hamilton, in order to deliberate w-hat
course they thlould hold, in this dijrcult conjun~ture. The con-
federates made some attempts towards a coalition with them, but
without effeEr. T hey employed the mediation of the AfTemnbly
of th~e Ch~urch, to draw them to a personal interview at Edin-
burgrh, but wihn ete aes hat party, however, though
its numbers wrere formidable, and the power of its leaders great,
soon 10fit reputation by the want of~ unanimity and vigour; all its
consultations evaporated in murmurs and complaints, and no scheme
was concerted for obitruaing the progress of thle confederates f.

There appeared some profpent of danger from another quarter. Eljzabethl

Thlis great revolution in Scotland had been carried on without it ,f~
any aid from Elizabeth, and even without hier k~nowledg~e J. And half.
though the was far from being clifpleafed to fee the aff~airs of that
kingdomn embroiled, or a rival, whom the hated, reduced to dif-
tress, the neither wyithed that it thould be in the power of the one
fa~iion entirely to fulpprefrs the other, nor could thle view the fleys
taken by the confederates without great offence. Netwithfland-
ing the popular maxims by which the governed her own fabjeO-s,
her notions of royal prerogative were very exalted. The confe-
derates had, in her opinion, encroached on the authority of their
Sovereign, which th:ey had no right to controul, and had offered
violence to her person, which it was thleir duty to esteem sacred.
They had Ict a dangerous example to othePr fubja, n Mr
cause became the common cause of Princes II. If ever Elizabeth
wvas influenced with regard to the affairs of Scotland, by the feel-
ings of her heart, rather than by considerations of interest, it was
on this occasion. Sh~e inflantly dispatched Throgrmorton into June 3n
Scotland, with powers to negociate both with the Queen, and
with the confederates. InI :is infirua~ions there appears a remark-
able solicitude for Mfary's liberty, and even for her reputation O.

* see Dii~crtation at the end! of thle Appentix. t K~eltl's 4c7
fId 415 jj Id. $I2, 415. gId, 411*

BOOK V. And the cho3ice of an Ambassador, so devoted to the interest at

the Scotti~h Qu~een, proves this solicitude to have been fmcere.

15 E ut neither Elizabeth's friendship, nor Thlrogmorton's real,

were of much avail to Mary. The confederates foresaw what
would be the effeas of these good offces; and that the Queen,
elated by the profpea of protedion, would rejea with icorn the
overtures which they were about to make her. They, for that rea.
son, peremptorily denied Throg~morton access to their priioner.
And what propositions he made to them in her behalf, they ei.
ther refused, or eluded *.

schemes of Meanwhile they deliberated with the utmost anxiety, can.

rtnb- cerning the settlement of the nation, and the future difpol~l of

the Qgeen's person. Elizabeth, observing that Throgmortos
made no progress in his negaciations with them, and that they
would listen to none of his demands in Mary's favour, turned to-
wards that party of the nobles who were assembled at Ham~iltor,
incited them to take arms in older to reflore their Queen to licer-
ty, and promised to aflit~ them in such an attempt, to the utmost
of her powver-f. But th~ey discovered no greater union or viguor
than formerly, and behaving likre men wh1o had given up all con-
cern either for their Qpeen or their country, tamely allowed an
inconsiderable part of their body, wtheth~er we confider it wfith
refpea to numbers, or to powYer, to fettle thle government of the
kingdom, and to dif~pole of the Queen's person at pleafure.1\a
ny confuitations were held, and various opinions arole with regard
to each of these. Some seemed derrous of adh-ring to tl e plan
on which the confederacy was at fhlfr formed; and after punish
ing the murderers of the Ki'ng, a; d diiTolving the mlarriage v kh
Bothenell; after providlingo for the safety of the youngs Prinice and
the security of thle Ploteft at religion; they proposed to re-efia-
blith the Queen in the poffefEon of her legal authority. The
fuccLfs with which their armns had been accomplnied, infpirel
others with holder and more des~perate thoughts, and nothing~ less
would: ftisfy them th~an the trial, the coodemnation and pun'ih-
ment of the Queen herself, as the principal conspirator agaicn tl

t

life of her hulhand and the ifafty· of her son f: the former was
Idlatland's fyfiem, and breathed too much of a pa3clcl and modecr-te
[pirit, to be agreeable to the temper or wh-ihes of the party-. The
latter wya· recommended by the clergyj, and warm'y a'opted! b -

* Keith.r, qz, :. t See Appendix, 50J, 777
t Keith, 420, 420r 424, 582,

rrntny laics; but the nobles duril not, or n ould not venture on such BOOK V-
an unprecedented and audacious deed *. I567-

Both parties agreed at las1 upon a scheme, neither 10 moderate Theyoblige

as the one, nor so daring as the other. Ma~ry was to be perfuad- thp Queen
ed or forced to resign the Crown; the young Prince was to be eh penrn.
proclaimed King, and the Eall of Mlurray was to be appointed to ment.
govern the kingdom during his minority, with the name and au-
thority of Regent. With regard to the Qu~een's own person, no-
thing was determilined. It seems to have been thle intention of
the confederates, to k~eep her in perpetual imprifonmernt; but in
order to intimidate herself, and to overawe her partizans, they
iHill reserved to themselves the power of proceedings to more vio-
lent extremles.

It was8 obvious to foresee difficulties in the execution of this
plan. Mary ·was young, ambitious, higrh-fpirited, and accuitomn-
edl to command. To induce her to acknowledge her own inca-
pacity for governing, to renounce the dignity and power which
she was born to enjoy, to become dependent on her own fubjeas,
to contrent to her own bondage, and to invest thnofe persons, whom
the coniidered as the authors of all her calamities, with that ho-
nour anld authority of which the herself was 4tripped, were points
hard to be gained. There, however, the confederates attempted,
,nd th~ey did not want means to ins~ure fuiccefs. M~ary had endu-
red, for several week~s, all the hardships and terror of a prison; no
profpc8 of liberty appeared; none of her fixbjeas had either taken
arms, or so much as solicited her relief f- ; no person in whom the
could confide was admitted into her prel~ence ; even the A~mbaff~a-
dors of the French King anl Queen of E~ngland were refu~sed access
to her. In this solitary slate, without a counsellor or a friend,
under the pressure of diffrefs, and the apprehension of danger, it
was natural for a woman to hearken almost to any overtures.
T'he confederates took advantage of her condition, and of her
fears. They employed Lord Lindsay, the fiercest zealot in the
party, to communicate their scheme to the Qu~een, and to obtain
her fableription to those papers which were necessa8ry for render-
ing it effe~tual. He executed his commiflion with harthnefs and
brutality. Certain death was before M5ary's eyes, if thre refus~ed
to comply with his demands. At the fame time, the was inform-

* The intention of putting the Queen to death seems to havie been carried on

by forte of her f~ubedis: at this time we often find Elizabeth boasting that 1Va-
rt ow-ed her 11"s to her· i: tEr·poltion. D'ggelaj Compl. Amb. 14, &tc. See Appen-

K ed by Sir Robert Melvil, in name of Athol, Maitland, and Klrk-

1567- aldy, the persons among th6~ confederates wh~o were most atten-

tive to her interest, that a resignation extorted by fear, and grant-
ed during her imprisonment, was void in lawv, and might be re-
voked to soon as the recovered liberty. Throgmolton, by a
note which1 he found means to convey to her, fuggefied the fame
thing*. Deference to their opinion, as well as concern for her own
safety, obliged her to yield to every thing which was required,
and to sign all the papers which Lindsay presented to her. By

July 24. one of there, the resigned the Crown, renounced all share in the

government of the kiingdom, and consented to the coronation of
the young King. By anlother, the appointed the Earl· of M~ur-
ray Regent, and conferred upon him all the powers and privilegpes
of that high oface. By a third, the sub~stituted some other noble-
man in Murnay's place, if he thould refuse the honour which was
designed for him. Mlary, when thle subscribed these deeds, was
bathed in tears; and while the gave away, as it were with her
own hands, the sceptre which the had swayed so long, the fe~lt a
pang of grief and indignation, one of the s~everest, perhaps, which
can touch the human heart t.

James VI. The confederates endeavoured to give this resignation all the

amue, weight and validity in their power, by proceeding, without delap

ray chosen to crown the young Prince. The ceremony was performed at
Regent. Stirling, on the 29th of July, with much solemnity, in presence

of all the nobles of the party, a considerable number of lelCer Barons
and a great .alembly of the people. From that time, all public.
writs were ifiued,, and the government carried on, in name of"
James VI J.

No revolution to great was ever effected with more ease, or by

means so, uneqiual to the end. In a warlike age, and in less time
than two months, a part of the noblcs, who neither poffeffe~d thle
chief power, nor the g~reatest wealth in the nation, and who ne-
ver brought thzree thouiand men into the field, seized. imprisoned
and dethroned their Qu~een, and wuithout thedding· a single drop of
blood, set her son, an infant of a year old, on the throne.

Rerlonings During this rapid progress of the conlfederates, the eyes of all
gfboth ar-' the nation were turned on them, with affonifhlment; and various

and contradiffory opinions were formed, concerning the extraor-
dinary f eps which they had takien.

Even under the ariffocratical form of government, which pre-

vails in Scotland, said thle favourels of the Qeen, and notwith-

* Keith. "'5. Note (b). M~ely. r69. 1 Ibid, 430· Crawf. Mlem. gi
f Keith, 437*

iRanding the exorbitant privileges of the nobles, the Prince pof- BOOK V.
festes cons iderable power, and his person is treated with great venera-
tion. N-o encroachments thould be made on the former, and no r567.
injury offered to the latter, but in cafes where the liberty and
happiness of thie nation cannot be s~ecured by any other means*
Such cafes seldom exist, and it belongs not to any part, but to thle
whole, or at least to a majority of thle faciety, to judge of their
existence. By what a~ion could it be pretended, that Mary had
invaded thle rights or property of her fabjeas, or what scheme
had the formed agrainft the liberty and conflitution of the king-
dom ? Were fears, aind fulpicions, and furmiles, enough to juffi-
fy the imprisoning, and the deposing a Queen, to whom the Crown
descended from 10 long a race of M~ionarchs ? The principal au.
thor of whatever was reck~oned culpable in her condua, was now
driven from her presence. T`he murderers of the King might
have been brought to condign punitiment, the fadfety of the Prince
have been frcured, and the Proteltant religion have been eftablith-
ed, without wvrefting; the sceptre out of her hands, or condemning
her to perpetual imprifocnment. Whatever right a free Parlia-
snent might have had to proceed to lo~ch a rigorous conclufioo., or
whatever name its determinations might hanve merited, a featence
of this nature, passed by a few nobles, without acknowledging
or consulting the reft of the nation, muff he deemed a rebellionp
againit the g·ovelament, and a conspiracy ag~ainit the perfoln of
their Sovereign.

The partizans of the confederates reasoned very differently.

'Tis evident, said they, that Mary either previously gave codetnt
to the King's murder, or did afterwards approve of that horrid
ac~ion. Hier attachment to B3othwell, the power and honours
with which fbe loaded him, the manner in which the fuffe~red his
trial to be carried on, and the indecent ipeed with which th~e mar-
ried a man, flained with so many crimes, raise fkrong fixfpiions
of the former, and put the latter beyond all doubt. To have sus-
fered the supreme power to continue in the hands of an ambitious
man, capable of the most attrocious and des~perate aaions, would
have been disg~raceful to the nation, dishonourable to the Queen,
and dangerous to the Prince. Recourse was, therefore, had to
armas. 'The Queen had been compelled to abandon a hulhand, so
unworthy of hlerfelf. But her affe~ian toward him still continu-
ing unabated, her indignation against the authors of this fepera-
tion being visible, and often exupreffed in thlefrongeft terms; they,
by refloring her to her ancient authority, wou~ld have armed hier

L 1ij

Boox V. with power to deflroy thlemfelves, have enabled her to recall Bjoths
I567. well, and have afforded her an opportunity of pursuing schemes

fatal to the nation, with greater eagerners, and w~ith more luccefs.
Nothing, therefore, remained, but by one bold aalon to deliver
themfeves and their country from all future fears. The expedi-
ent they had chosen was no less reipeaful to the royalblood, than
necessary for the public fafcty. While one Prince was set aside
as incapable of governing, the Crown was placed on his head,
who was the undoubted representative of their ancient Kings.

Whlatever opinion poflerity may form on comparing the argu-

ments of thle two contending parties, whatever fetientns we may
entertain concerning the juffice or necefiity of that course whlich
the confederates held, it cannot be denied tha~t their conducT, to
far as regarded themselves, was extrernely prudent. Other ex-
pedients, les~s rigorous towards Mary, might have been found for
fettling the nation; but, after the injllries they had already offer-
ed thle Qpeen, there was none so effeatbal for securing their ownn
safety, or perpetuating their own power.

To a great part of the n1·tion, the condua of the confedelates

ap'peared not only wife, but just. The King's acceflon to the
throne was every where proclaimed, and his authority submitted
to, without oppolition. And though several of the nobles where
still assembled at Hamilton, and s~eemed to be entering into fame
combination againlt his government, an association for sup~porting
it was formed, and figrned by to many persons of power and intH-
ence throughout the nation, as entirely discouraged the attempt *

M\urray af' The return of the Earl of Mlurray, abort this time, added
"omes ithe rength to the party, and gave it a regular and finished form.
m'ent. Soon after the murder of the King, this nobleman hadi retired inr-

to France, upon what pretence hifforions do not mention. Du-
ring his residence there, he *bad held a close c'arrefpondence with
the chiefs of the confederacy, and, at their desire, he now re-
turned. He seemed, at Birit, unwilling to accept the office of Re-
gent. This hesitation cannot be al~cribed to the kcruples either of
diffidence, or of duty. M~urray wanted neither abilities to en-
title him, nor ambition to alpire to this high dignity. H-e had re-
ceiv~ed the firit accounts of his promotion with the utmost fatisfac-
tion; but by appearing to continue for some days in fufpence, he
gained time to view with attention the ground on which he was
to hat; to balance the firength and res~ources of the two contend

* Anders. vol. ii. 23r:

Sn= faa10ns, and to examine whether the foundation on which~ his Boole V
future fame and success mut reft, were found and firm. -

Befole he declared his final resolution, he waited on Mary a: 57

Lochlevin. This vilit, to a sifter, and a Queen, in a prison, from
which he had neither any intention to relieve her, nor to miti-
gate the rigour of her confinement, may be mentioned among the
circumilances, which discover the great want of delicacy and re-
finement in that age. M'urray·, who was naturally rough and un-
courtly in hlis mannner * expoftulated so warmly with the ueen
concerning her past conduA, and. charged her faults to home upon
her, that naary, who had flattered herself with1 more gentle and
brotherly treatment from him, melted into tears, and abandoned
hcedklf entirely to delpairyf. This interview, from which Miur-
ray could reap no political adv~antag~e, and wherein he discovered
a spirit to severe and unrelenting, may be reck~oned among the
most bitter circumRances in M~ary's life, and is certainly one of
the most unjuiitifable in his condua.

Soon after his return from Lochlevin, Mutrray accepted the: of-

fice of Regent, and began to aB in that charaaer without, oppofi- Auguf ->
(lon.

Amidst 10 many great and unexpecaed events, thne fate of Both- Fate of

wrell, the chief caulre of them all, hath been almost forgotten. As- Boiwh.Z1
ter his fliaht from the confederates, he lurk~ed for fame time a-
mong his valT~ls in the neighbourhood of Dunbar. But finding
it impossible for him to makie head, in that country, againit his
enemies, or even to secure himfeklf from their pursuit, he fled for
fhlelter to hris kiinrfman the bilhop of Murray; and when he, over-
awed by the confedierates, was obliged to abandon him, he reti-
red to the Orkney illes. Hunted from place to place, deeleted by
his friends, and accompanied by a few retainers, as desperate as
hiimfelf, he fufferedl at once the miseries of infamy, and of want.
His indigence forced him upon a course which added to his infa-
my. He armed a few fmnall thips, wh:ich had accompanied him
from Dunbar, and attack~ing every ve~elk which fe~ll in his way,
endeavoured to procure uilbftfence for himself and followers by
Piracy. Kirkraldy and Ml'urray of Talliibardin were sent out a-
gainft him by the conlfederates; and surp~rising him while he rode
at anchor, scattered his finall fleet, took a part of it, and obliged
him to fly with a single fhlip towards N~orwray. On that coast he
fell in with a veirel richly laden, and immediately attacked itS

-f Id* 445, @6."

' Keith, 96.

BaoonV, the Norwvegians fail-d wiith armed boats to its as lidanlce,, and -f.

bPdter a defFerate fight, Bothw~ell and all his crew were taken pri-
rg7.fners. HI~s name and quality were both unknow-n, and he waj

treatred at first with all the indignitjr and rigour, which thle odi-
ous crimne of piracy merited. His real charaaer was soon dilco-
vered; and thouJgh it saved him from the infamous death to which
his affciates were condemned, it could neither procure hime li-
berty, nor mitig7ate thle hardships of his imprisonment. He lan-
gUilh~ed ten years in this unhappy condition; melancholy and de-
fpsir deprived him of reafop, and at aitu he ended his days, unpiti-
ed by his countrymein, and unalilifed by firanlgers'. Few men
ever accomplithed their ambitious projccas by warfe means, or
reaped from them less F~atisfam~on. The early part of his life wEas
reflekrs and enterpriiing, full of danger and of vicissitudes. Eis
en~joyment of the grandeur, to whi,-h he attained by so mrany crimes,
was e~t~remlely short; impbittered by~ much anxiety, andJ djifquieted
byg many fears. In1 iis la~tter years, he fifered the meft intoler-
able calamities, to whlichl the wretched are fub~jea, and from
wihicha persons who have movraer in to high a [phere are commozsn-
ly exempted.

.,q~~ The good effits of lifurrays accetion totec regeancy were

a ~ninrsua- qucicly felt. TFhe party forming for the Queen was weak, bre&-

solute, and difitnited; and$ no sooner was the governmelnt of the
k~ingdom in the hands of a man, so rearkabla7e b~oth for his abti-i
ties and popularity, thnan th~e nobles of wh~om it was compafed
10{\ all hopes of gaining· grgoud, and began to treat separately with
thle Regent. So many oi them were brought to acTknowl-dge
the Kinggs authority, that fearce any appearance of opposition
to thle etablifhed governmrent wsas left in the kingdomn. Had they
adherred to the Quleen withl any firmners, it is probable, from Eh~-
zabeth's dil~~fporion at thiat time, that the would have aff~orded
them such aaliftance as might have enablJedt them to face their ene-
m~ies in the field. But there apypeared so Iittle vigour or harmo-
ny' in their councils, that the was dircouraged firom efpouting their
cause; and thLe Rege~nt takiingr advan~tage of their situation, obE;
ged th~em to s~ubmit to his government, without granting any
terms, either to themselves, or to the Queent.

The Regent was no less foccefsf~ul in his attempt, to get into

hiis hands the placess of firength in the kringdom. Balfour the
deputy-go~vernor, surrendered the castle of Edinburgh; andB as th~e

t Keithe 445r 45%r 43.

rerard of his treachery, in def'erting Bocthwell his patron, obtain. Ecori V.
ed terms of great advantage to himflfi. The Governor of Dun-
bar, who dis~covered more Gdelity, was soon forced to capitulatei 57
some other small forts fulrrendered without refiltance.

This face of tranquillity in the nation encouraged the Regent A Parlia.

to call a meeting of Parliament. Nothing was wanting to con- Dee . S
firm the K~ing's authority, and the proceedings of the confede-
rates, except the approb~ation of this s~upreme court; and after the
faccefs which had attenderd all their measures, there could be little
doubt of obtaining it. The numbers that resorted to an Assembly,
which was called to deliberate onl matters of so much importance
were great. Thle meeting was opfened with the utmost solemnity,
and all its a~s pafiled with much unanirrity. Many, however,
of thre Lords who had disco: cred: the wvarmeit attachment to the
Queen, were present. Bu~t they had made their peace with thle
Regent. ·Argyle, H-untly. andl Herreis acknowledged, openly,
in Parliment, th:1t their bcEhaviour towatrds the K~ing had been un-
dutiful and criminal*. Their compliance, in th~is manner, with
the meathres of the Regitat's party, was either the condition on
which they were admitted into favour, or intended as a proof of
the sincerity of their reconcileenrrt.

The Parliament granted every thing the confederates could de- C nfirnss

the pro-

inand, either for the safety of their own persons, or the l~ecurity cee Ilngs of'
of that form of government which they had established in the the confe.

erates.

kiingdom. Mary's reignation of the Crown was accepted, and
declared to beP valid. The King·'s authority, and Mlurray's ekec-
tion, w~ere- recognized, and confirmed. The imprifoningr the
Queen, and ali the other proceedings of the confederates, were
pronounced lawful. The letters which Mary had written to
Bothwell were produced, and the was declared to be accessory to
the murder of the King J. At thle fame time, all the aAs of
Parliament 1560, in favour of the Protestant religion were pub-
licly ratified; new statutes to the fame purpole were ena~ted.
And nothing that could contribute to root out the remnains of
Popery, or to encourgfe the growth of the Reformation, was
negleaed.

It is obfei~rvable, however, that the fame parfimnonious iOphit

prevailed in this Parliament, as in that of r560. The Protellant
clergy, notwithilanding- many dilcouragemrents, and thecir ex-
tieme poverty, hadl, for seven years, performed all religious of

* Anaerf vsl.; i 53. S e Append No. XXII(.
t Ocol.vol ii. 66j. ArdelT vol, 11. 2o6.

BOOK 7* siC&S in the kingdom. The expedients fallen upon for their sub.;

fiftence had hitherto proved ineffertual, or were intended to be

r567. so. But, ixotw~ithitandingr their known indigence, and the warm

remonltrances of the Assembly of the church, which met this
year, the Parliament did nothing more for their relief, than pre-
scribe s~ome new regulations concerning the payment of the thirds
of benefices, w'hich did not produce any considerable chang~e in
the situation of the clergy.

i568. ' A few days after the dhlTolution of Parliamen~t, four of Both-
January 3. well's dependents were conviated of being~r guilty of the Kingi's

murder, and fuffered death as traitors. Their confef~ous brougL~t
to lig~ht manqy circumtiiances relative to the manner of corhmitting
that barbarous ctime; but they wer, persons of a low rank, and-
s`eem not to have been admitted into th~e fearets of the confpi-
racy *.

Npotwfithitanding the univerful f~ubmiiron to the Regent's au

thority, there still abounded mn the kingdom many secret mur-
murs and cabals. The partizans of the house of Hamilton ree
koned M~urray's plromotion an injury to the Duke of Chateilhe-
rault, who, as first Prince of the blood, ILad, in their opiiion
an undoubted right to be Riegent'. The length and rigour of
MIary's fufferingrs began to move many to com~miserate her ca'e.
All whlo leanled to the ancient opinions in religion dreaded the
effeac"s of Murray's zeal. And he, though his abilities were
great, did not pofrefs the talents requiiite for foothingr thle rage
or removing the jealouffes of the!'e different f3ations. By infinu-
ation, or address, he might have gained or softened many, who
had opposed himj but he was a firanger to these gentle arts. Hi·
virtues were severe; and his deportment towards his equals, c-
Epecially after his elevation to the regency, didennt and haughty.
This be~haviour offended fomne of the nobles, and alarmed others
The Queen's faEtion, which had been so easily dispersed, begian
again to gather, and to unite, and was fecletly favoured by fame
wh·!o had hitherto zealously concurred with the confederatesS.

Pi ev es- Such was thle favourable difjooiticn of the nation towards th~e
fjtjin.f Queen, wh-len the recovered her liberty, in a mannetno lefa fr-

prifingr to hier friends, thain unexpe~ed by her enemies. Several
attempts had been mad~e to procure her an opportunity of ereap-
irg, wrhichl some unforeffeen accidelnt, or the vigillnce of her
keepers, had hitheirto alC ypoinctd. At last, M~ary employed all

b An~cr- CL: ii iC,

her art to gain George Douglas her keeper's brother, a youth of Eoax v.
·i,hnteen. As her manners were naturally affable and infinuat- I368,
ing, the treated him with the molt flattering diftinaion; the
even allowed him to entertain the most ambitious hopes, by let-
Eng fall s~ome expretions, as if the would chule him for her
husband *. At his age, and in fa~ch circumstances, it was im-
pofilble to resist such a temptatron. He yielded, and drew others
into the plot. On Stinday the 2d of May, while his brother fat
at supper, and the reft of the family were retired to their devo-
tions, one of his accomplices found means to fleal the keys out
of his brother's chamber, and opening the gates to the Queen
and one of her maids, locked them behind her, and then threw
thie keys into the lak~e. Mary ran with precipitation to the boat
which wgs prepared for her, and on reaching thle thore, was re-
ceived with the utmost joy, by Douglas, Lord Seaton, and Sir
James Hamilton, who, with a few attendants, waited for her.
She instantly mounlted on horseback, and rode full [peed towards
Niddrie, Lord Seaton's feat in WCeft Lothian. She arrived there
that night, without being pursued, or interrupted. After halt-
ing three hours, the set out for Hamilton j and travelling at the
fame pace, the reached it next morning.

On the first news of Mary's escape, her frierids, whom, in their A";rreS at

Hamdlton,

prel~ent difpolition, a much fmnaller accident would have rouled,and ,riife a
ran to arms. In a few days, her court was filled with a great num'e'ous

arm).

and [plendid train of nobles, accompanied by s~uch numbers of
followers, as formed an army above fix thousand ftrongr. In their
prelence, the declared that the res~ignation of the Crown, and the
other deeds which the had signed during her imprisonment, were ex-
torted from her by fear. Sir Robert M'elvil confirmed her de-
claration j and on' that, as well as on other accounts, a council
of the nobles and chief men of her party pronounced all there
tranfaaions void and illegal. At thle fame time, an afiociation Maly 8.
wazs formed for the defence of her person and authority, and sub-
fcribed by nine Earls, nine biihops, eighteen Lords, and many
gentlemen of difrin~tion t·. Among them, we find several who
had been present in the last Parliament, and who had signed the
counter-affociation in defence of the King's government; but such
~sudden changes were then 10 common, as to be no matter of re-
proach.

* Keit., 46,0, 48;. TI lbid 473.

M~m

BOOK V. At the tiine when the Queen made hier escape, thle Regent

Swas at Glasgow, holding a court of juffice. An event 10 con-

Coniterna- trary to their expeaations, and to fatal to their schemes, gave a
tion ofth~e great thock to his adherents. M~any of them appeared wvaver-
Regent's adherents. ing and irrefiolute; others began to carry on private negociations

with the Queen; and some openly revolted to her fide. In so
difficult a'junaure, where his own fame, and the being of the
party depended on his choice, the Regent's most faithful affo-
ciates were divided in opinion. Some advised him to retire,
without 10fs of time, to Stirling. The Queen's army was already
nrong, and onty eight miles difiant; the adjacent country was
full of the friends and dependents of the hous~e of Hamilton, and
other Lords of the Queen's fa~ion; Glasgow w~as a large and
unfortified town; his own train consisted of no greater number
than was usual in times of peace; all there reasons pleaded for a
retreat. But on the other hand, arguments' were urged of no
inconsiderable weight. The citizens of Glasgow were well as-
feaed to the cause; the vassals of Glencairn, Lennox, and Semple
lay near at hand, and were both numerous, and full of zeal; fuc-
cours might arrlfve from other parts of the kingdom in a fewi
days; ini war, faccefs depends upon reputation, as much as upon
numbers; reputation is gained, or 10ft, by the first itep one
takes 3 in his circumstances, a retreat woiuld be attended with all

Hisprudent the ignominy of a flight, and would at once difptirit his friends,
condUR. and inspire his enemies with boldness. In such dangerous exi-

gencies as this, the superiority of M~urray's genius ap~peared, and
enabled hh~n both to chufe with w-ifdomn, and to aS with vigou~r.
He declared againit retreating, and fixed his head quarters at
Glal~gow. And while he amuled the Queen for some days, by
pretending to hearken to s~ome oversures, which the made for ac-
commodating their differences, he was employed, with the ut-
most induffry, in drawing together his adherents, from different
parts of the kingdom. He was soon in a condition to take tl;,
field; and though far inferior to the enemy in number, he con-
Eided so much in the valour of his troops, and the experience of
his officers, that he broke off the negociation, and determined to
hazard a battle*.

M~ay '3. At the fame time, the Queen's generals had commanded her

army to move. Their intention was, to condua her to Dumbart
ton castle, a place of great firength, which the Regent had n t

* Buchan. 36p

been able to wrest out of the hands of Lord Fleming the gover. Boote v.
norj but if the enemy thould endeavour to interrupt their march, -
they resolved not to decline an engagement. In Mary's fitua-
tion, no resolution could be more imprudent. A part only of
her forces was assembled. Huntly, Ogilvie, and the northern
clans were soon expeaed; her fufferings had removed, or di-
minifhed the prejudices of many among her subjects; the addref4
with which she surmounted the dangers that obitruaed her es~cape,
dazzled, and interefied the people; the s~udden continence of so
many nobles added luffre to her cause; the might affuredlyy de-
pend on the fliendfhip and countenance of France; th:e had rea-
son to expied the protecaion of England; her enemies could not
possibly look for fhpport from that quarter. She had much to
hope from purfbing9 flow and cautious measures 3 they had every
thing to fear.

But M~ary, whole hopes were naturally sang~uine, and her pas-

fIons impetuous, was so elevated by her sudden transition frong
the depth of diffref~s, to s~uch an unufulal appearance of pros~perity,
that thle never doubted of succes~s. Her army was almo lt double
to the enemy in number, and consisted chiefly of the Hamiltons,
and their dependents. The Archb~ilhop of St. Andrew's had the
chief direAion of these, and hoped, by a vic~ory, not only to
cruth~ Murray, the ancient enemy of his house, but to get thle
person of the Queen into his hands, and to oblige her, either to
marry one of the Duke's sons, or at least to commit the chief di-
rec~ion of her affairs to himself. His ambition proved fatal to
the Qgeen, to himrelf, and to his family *.

Mary's imprudence, in resolving to fight, was not greater than Battle of

the ill conldua of her generals in the battle. Between the two LanGfidc.
armies, and on the road towards Dumbarton, there was an emi-
nence called Langfid~e-Hill. This the Regent hlad the precau-
tion to seize, and potted his troops in a Cmall village, and among
some gardens and inclofureS adjacent. In this advantageous situ-
ation he waited thie approach of the enemy, whole superiority in
cavalry could be of no benefit to them, on such broken ground.
The Hamiltons, who composed the vanguard, ran so eagerly to
thle attack, that they put themselves out of breath, and left the
main battle far behind. The encounter of the fpearmen was
fierce and desperate; but as the forces of the Hamiltons were
exposed, on the one flank, to a continued Eire fronx a body of muf-

* Auhi vrol. iv- 3?. Mely. 18r.

Mr m ij

ROOK . queteers, attacked on the other by the Regent's most chol r:

troops, and not supported by the reft of the Q~ueen's army, thejr

*n's. were soon obliged to give ground, and the rout immediately be.

army de. came univerfl1. Few viAories, in a civil war, and among a bar-
seated. barous people, have been pursued with less violence, or attendc4

with les~s bloodsh~ed. Three hundred fell inl the field, in the
flight fearce any were killed. The Regent and his principal of-
ficers rode about, bes~eeching the soldiers to spare their country-
men. The number of prisoners was great, and among them ma.
ny persons of diftinalon. The Regent marched back to Glal-
gow, and returned public thanks to God for this great, and, on
his Ede, almost bloodles~s viatory *.

During, the engagement, nlary flood on a hill, at no great dif-

tance, and beheld all that passed in the fieldl, with fach emotions
of mind as are not easily deferibed. When (h~e [aw the army,
which was her last hope, thrown into irretrievable confusion, her
spirit, which all her past misfortunes had not been able entirely
to subdue, funk altogether. In the utmost conflernation, th~e be-

Her flight- gan her flight, and so lively were her impreflions of fear, that the

never closed her eyes till the reached the abbey of Dundrenan in
Galloway, full Ex~ty Scots miles from the place of battles·.

These revolutions in M~ary's fortune had been no less rapid.

than singular. In the thort s~pace of eleven days, she had been a
prisoner at the mercy of her most inveterate enemies; t he had
seen a powerful army under her command, and a numerous train
of nobles at her devotion; and now the was obliged to fly, in the
utmost danger of her life, and to lurk, with a few attendants, in
a corner of her kingdom. She did not think hers~elf safe, even
in that retreat 3 and her fears impelled her to an a~tion, the most
unadvised, as well as the mos1 unfortunate in her whole life.
This was her retiring into England, a flep, which, on many ac-
counts, ought to have appeared to her rash and dangerous.

Resolves on Before Mary's arrival in Scotland, mutual diffruit and jealou-

Egato. fies had arisen between her and Elizabeth. All their s~ubsequent

tranfaaions had contributed to exasperate and inflame these pas-
fions. She had endeavoured, by s~ecret negociations and intrigues,
to diflurb the tranquillity of Elizabeth's government, and to ad-
vance her own pretensions to the English Crown. Elizabeth,
who ponieffd greater powfer, and aaed with less reserve, hlad
openly supported M~ary's rebellious fubjeAs, and fomented all tbs

*~~~~ Keith

47 /Ibi 41

d;Ifenflons and troubles in which her reign had been involved. BOOnK v.
E'ne maxims of policy 11ill authorised that Queen to pursue the -
fame cours~e; as by keeping Scotland in confusion, the effeAually 6.
secured the peace of her own kingdom. The Regent, after his
vic~ory, had marched to Edinburgh, and not knowing what conife
the Qu~een had taken, it was several days before he thought of
perfuing her*. Sh~e might have been concealed in that retired
corner, among f~ubjec~rs devoted to her interest, till her party,
which was dispersed rather than broken by the late defeat, thould
gather fach firength, that the could again appear with safety at
their head. There was not any danger, which the ought not to
have run, rather than throw herself into the hands of an enemy,
from whom the had already fuffereC1 so many injuries, and who
was prompted both by inclination, and by interest, to renew
them.

Eut, on the other hand, during Marv's confinement, Eliza-

beth had declared against the proceedings of her fubJet~s, and so-
licited for her liberty, with a warmth which had all the appear-
ance of sincerity. She had invited her to take refuge in Eng-
land, and had promifedl to meet her in pers~on, and to give her
such a reception as was due to a Queen,,and an allyt. WVhat-
ever apprehenflon Elizabeth might entertain of Mary's designs,
while th~e had power in her hands, the was at present, the obje£1,
not of fear, but of pity; and to take advantage of her situation,
would be both ungenerous and inhuman. The horrors of a pri-
son were frefhh in Mary's memory, and if the thlould fall a second
time into the hands of her futbjeas, there was no injury to whlich
the presumption of s~uccess might not embolden them to proceed.
To attempt escaping into France, was dangerous; and in her si-
tuation, almost impoillble; nor could the bear the thoughts of ap-
pearing as an exile, and a fugitive, in that kingdom, where the
had once enjoyed all the s~plendor of a Queen. England remain-
ed her only asylum; and, in spite of all the entreaties of Lord
Herries, Fleming, and her other attendants, w~ho conjured her,
even on their knees, not to confide in Elizabeth's promiles or
generosity, her infatuation was invincible, and the resolved to
fly thither. Herries, by her command, wrote to Lowther the:
deputy governor of Carlille, to know wh~lat reception he would H~er recrp.
give her; and, before his answ~er could return, her fear and im- 1t L;,r
patience were 10 great, that the got into a fither-boat, and with
,hout twenty at~tendants, landed at Wirkington in Cumberland, ?ray i6.

·t Cam7d 489· AnderC: vol iv 99, I20.

*C·3~vf.?Lm 59.

BOOK V. and thence the was condu~ed with many marks of relpetl ta

L~J Carlisle*.

Elil2~i So soon as Mary arrived in England, the wrote a long letter to
dclliberates the Queen, representing, in the firongeft terms, the injuries which
ficefn"I the had fuirered from her own fuh-jeAs, and imploring that pity
oftreamsllg and assistance which her prel~ent situation demandedyf. An event

r. so extraordinary, and the condua which might be proper in con-

sequence of it, drew the alttenticn, and employed the thoughts of
Elizabeth and her council. If their deliberations had been influ-
enced by considerations of juffice or generosity alone, they would
not have found them long or intricate. A ~u~een, vanquiflhed by
her own fubjeAs, and threatened by them withl the loss of her li-
bery, or of hier life, had fle8 from their violence, and thrown her-
self into the arms of her neareit neighbour and ally, from whom
fthe had receive~d repeated allurances of friendship and protec~ion.
These circumilances entitled her to refpe8 and to compatlion, and
required that the sh~ould e-ither be reffered to her own kingdom,
or at least be left at full liberty to seek aid from any othier quar-
ter. But with Elizabeth and her counsellors, the qlueftion was
not, what was most just or generous, brit what was most benefici-
al to herself, and to the Englith nation. Three different refolu-
tions might have been takien, with regard to the Queen of Scots.
To re-in~tate her in her throne, w-as one; to allowr her to retire
into France, was another; to detain her in Englan~d, wnas a third.
Each of there drew confequnces after it, of the utmost imyort-
ance, which were examined, as appeais from papers flill eatantt
with that minlute accuracy, which Elizabeth's Mlinidters employ--
ed in all their consultations upon affairs of moment.

To~ refore Mfary to the full exercis~e of thle royal authority in

Scotland, they observed, would render her more powerful than
ever. The nobles who were roofs firmly attached to the Eng~liih
interest, would qulickly feel th~e utmost wPighit of her resentment.
.And as the gratitude of Princes is seldom firongr or lasting, regard
to her own interest might soon efface the memory of her obliga-
tions to Elizabeth, and prompt her to renew the alliance of the
Scottish nation with France, and revive her own pretenfi as to
the Eng~ifh Crewn. Noer was it pollle to fetter and circumscribe
the Scottimh Queen, by any conditions that would prevent these
dangers. Her party in Scotland was numerous and powerful.
HFer return, even without any s~upport from England, would in.

* Keith~, 483. Ardcrf. vol. iv. 2. t 11. :9.
t Anders vol. iv. yl 99, I(0:.

spire her friends with new zeal and couragre; a sing~le viAory BOOK V.
migrht give them the sup~eriority, wfhich they had loft by a Engle
defeat, and render M/ary a more formidable rivial than ever to 1368.
Elizabeth.

The dangers arifingr from ufu~ring Mlary to retire into France,

were no less obvious. The French Kiingr could not ref~use his as-
fiftance towards refforing his fiffer and ally to her throne. Eli-
zabeth would, once more, fee a foreign army in the island, over-
awing the Scots, and ready to enter her kingdom ; and if the com-
Inotions in France, on account of religion, were fettled, the Prin-
ces of Lorrain might res~ume their am'oitious projeas, and th~e u-
nited forces of France and Scotland might invade England, where
It is weakest and most defenceless.

Nothing therefore remained but to detain her in England; and Refolvess

to permit her either to live at liberty there, or to confine her in aetain; her

mn Enlanid-

a prison. The former was a dangerous experiment. Hler court
would become a place of resort to all the Roman Catholics, to the
difraffec~ed, and to the lovers of innovation. Though Elizabeth
affec~ed to represent M~ary's pretenlions to the English Crowvn as
altogether extravagant and ill-founded, the v~as not ignorant thnat
they did not appear in that light to the nation, and thate many
thoaught them preferable even to her own title. If the aRivity
of her emissaries hlad gained her so, many abettors, her own per-
fonal influence was much more to be dreaded; her beauty, her
address, her fufferings, by the admiration and pity which they
w~ould excite, could not fail of making many converts to her
party *.

'Twas indeed to be apprehended, that the treating M~ary as a

priloner would excite univeral indignation against Elizabeth, and
that by this unexampled severity towards a Qgeen, who implored,
and to whom fhle had promised her proteclion, ithe would forfeit
the praile of juffice and humanity, which n as hitherto due to her
adminiffration. But the E;ngiih MaSnarchis w~ee often 10 folici-
tous to focure their kingdom ag7ainst the Scots, as to be little f~crui-
pulous about the means which they employed for that purpose.
Henry IVT. had fe~zed the heir of the Crown of Scotland, who
was forced, by the violence of a florm, to take refuge in one of
the ports of his kingdom; and, in contempt of thle rights of ho-
fpit·a'isy, without regarding his tender age, or the tears and entrea-
ies of his father, detained him a priloner for many years. This

* Anders. vol. iv. 56, 6e.

Saamon, though detefied by pofferity, Elizabeth resolved now to

1;68. imitate. Hier virtue was no more proof than Henry's had been,

againit the temptations of interest 9 and the poffeflion of a present
advantage was preferred to the profpea of future fame. The fa-
tisfa~ion which the felt in mortifying a rival, whole beauty and
accomplish~ments the envied,r had, perhaps, no less influence than
political considerations, in bringing her to this resolution. But,
at thle fame timre, in order to screen herself from the cedfure whiich
this condua merited, and to make her treatment of the Scottiih
( ~leen lookr lik~e thle effeA of neceityp rather than of choice, the
determined to put on the appearance of concern for her interest,
and of deep lympathy with her fufferings.

May 20. WiL~th this view, th~e inflantly dilpatched Lord Scroope warden

of the weft marches, and Sir Francis K'nollys her Vice-chamber-
Iain, to the Queen of Scots, with letters full of expressions of kind-
ness and condolence. But, at the fame time, they had priv·ate in-
itrualons to watch all her motions, and to take care that the thould

~e c not efeape into her own kingdom*. On their arrival, Mfary de-

mlintancein.- manded a personal interview wlith the Queen, that the migh~t lay

zp e- befrore her the injuires which the had fuffered, arnd receive from

Itnce. her those friendly ofmces which the had been encouraged to ex.

pea8. They answered, that it was wnithl reluatance this honour
was at present denied hier; that while the lay under the imputa-
tion of a crime so hlorrid, as the murder of her hluf~and, their Mil-
tres~s, to whom he was s~o nearly allied, could not, withlout bring-
;ilg a stain upon hier own reputation, admit her into her prelence;
bult as soon as the had cleared herself from that al~perflon, they
promiletd hier a reception faita:bl- to her dignity, and aid propor·
tionedl to her diffrefs i.

the~offers to N~othirig could be more fr-ivolous than thnis pretence. It was
Vin :iCate
hsrcon~dua. th~e occasion, hiowever, of leading the Queen of Scots into the

[nare, illn wich Elizabet-h and her Ministers withed to entangle
hier. M~ary expressed the utmost surprise at thiis unexpe~ted man-
ner of evading her request; but as the could not believe to many
profefflons of friendship tO be void of sincerity, th~e frankly offered

Zuaeh to thbmit her caule to the cognizrgace of Elizabeth, and undertook;
te toi I p'ULrodc fuLch proofIs of her o)wI Inn1cnceCC and~ of Lithe allfehood

oarer of the accusations brought against her, as thould fully remove the

[cruples, and satisfy the delicacy of thle English Queen. This
was the very point to which Elizabethn laboured to bring the mat-

* An;d-rT. vol. iv- 34 7, 9" 2. t Ibid. ?oL· in 8. 55*

ter. By this appeal of the Scottish Queen, the became the um. Boox v.:
pire between her and her f~ubjecas, and had it entirely in her own
power to protraA the inquiry to any length, and to perplex and 68
involve it in endiefs difficulties. In the mean time, the was fur-
nithed w ith a plaulble pretence for keeping her at a difiance from
court, and for refusing to contribute towards replacing her on
her throne. As Mary's conduc? had been extremely incautious,
and the presumptions of her guilt were many and firong, it was
possible her fubjeas might makie good their charge against her;
and if this thlould be the result of the inquiry, the would, thence.
forth, cease to be the objea of regard, or of compamon, and the
treating her with coldness and negleat would merit little censure.
In a matter so dark and mysterious, there was no probability that
Mary could bring proofs of her innocence, so incontefted, as to
render the condua of the English~ Qeen altogether culpable.
And perhaps, her impatience under restraint, her fuilpcion of Dli-
zabeth's partiality, or her discovery of her artifices, might I pge
her in fuich c~jals, as would juitify the using her with greater ri-

gour.

Elizabeth early foresaw all those advantages, which would a-

rife from an inquiry into the condulA of the Scottiih Qlueen, car-
ried on und-r her diredlion. T here was8 some danger, however,
that Mary m~ighrt discover her s~ecret intentions too soon, and by
receding from the offer which the had made, endleavour to dif~-
appoint them. But even in that event, the determined not to
drop the inquiry, and had thought of several different expedients
for carrying it on. The Counters of Lennox, convinced that
Mary was accessory to the murder of her son, and thirfling for
that vengeance which it was natural for a mother to demand, had
implored Elizabeth's juffice, and solicited her, with many tears,
in her own name, and in her hufband's, to bring the Scottish
Queen to a trial for that crime ". The parents of the unhappy
EFrince had a just right to prefer this accusation , nor could the,
who was their nearest Irinfwoman, be condemned for listening to
10 equitable a demand. Beiides, as the Scottish nobles openly
accused Mlary of the fame crime, and pretended to be able to
confirm their charge by fuffcicint proof; it would be no difficult
matter to prevail on them, to petition the Queen of England to
takie cognizance of their proceedings againf their Sovereign; and
it was the opinion of the EngSlifh~ council, that it would be rea-

* Camb. 4u. Haynes, 460

BOOK V. fonable to comply with the reqlueft *. At the Idme time, the

oblolete claim of the superiority of Eng-land over Scotland begas
to be talk~ed of I and, on that account, it was pretended that the
decision of the contest betwveen Mary and her fubjeas 1 -:onged
of right to Elizabeth. But though Elizabeth revolved all these
expedients in her mind, and kept them in res~erve, to mak~e ule
of as occasion mighlt require, the wifhied that the inquiry inl o
Mary's condua thould appear to be undertaken purelq in compli.
ance with her own demand, and in order to vindicate her inl 1o-
conce; and to long as that appearance could be preferred, none
of the other expedients were to be employed.

W~hen7 Mary consented to submit her cauke to Elizabeth, fl e

was far from fulpe~ing that any bad consequences could fo:lkw,
or that anly dangerous pretenflons could be founded on her off r
She expedecd that Elizabeth herself would receive, and examine
her defencest~; the meant to confider her as an equal, for whole
fatisfa~ion the was willing to explain anly p~art of her conduc',
that was liable to censure; not to ack~nowiedgse her as a fupeli-
or, before whom the was bound to plead hier cause. But Eliza
bethl put a very different fenlfe on Mary's oiffer. She considered
hers~elf as chose~n to be judge in the controverly betw~een the Scot-
tifh Qgeen and her thb~jeas, and began to aia in that capacity.
She proposed to appoint commifiioners to hear the yleadings of
both parties, and wrote to the Regent of Scotland, to empower
proper persons to appear before them, in his name, and to pro-
duce what he could allege in vindication of his proceedings a-
gainit his Sovereign.

MI~ary great- Mary had, hitherto, relied with unaccountable credulity on

nddElizabeth's profeflions of regard, and expea~ed that so many kindc

beth's con- [peeches would, at last, be accompanied with some faitable ac-

du.tions. But this propofl entirely undeceived hier. She plainly

perceived thle artifice of Elizabeth's condua, and saw what a di-
minution it would be to her own honour, to appear on a level
with her rebellious fuibjeas, and to fland together wfith them at
the bar of a fo~perior and a judge. She retrac~ed the offer whlich
the had made, and which had been perverted to a purpole so con-
trary to her intention. She demanded, with more earnefntnes
than ever, to be admitted into Elizab~eth's yrekence; and wrote

June r3. to her, in a firain very different from whalt thne hald formelly usEd,

and which fully discovers the grie~f and indignation that preyed

SAnaerf vol. iv. 37. ?- ILe', vol Iv. 10

on her heart. " In my present fituation," says the, " I neither Booxy.
"L Rill, nor can reply to the accusations of my fubje~ts. I am
" rtady, of my own accord, and out of fiiendthiip o you, to fa-
" tisfy your [~cruples, and to vindicate my own conduat. My
"L fabjeAs are not my equals; nor will I, by submitting my cause
LL to a judicial trial, acknowledg~e them to be 10o. I fled into
"L your arms, as into those of my nearest relation, and most per-
" sec? friend. I did you honour, as I imagined, in chufing you
"L preferably to any other Prince, to be the refforer of an injured
"' Qeen. Was it ever known that a Prince was blamed for
" hearing, in pedon, the complaints of those who appealed to
" his juffice, ag~ainst the false accusations of their enemies ? You
" admitted into your prelence my baffard-brother, w ho had been
" guilty of rebellion; and you deny me that honour ! God for.
"L bid that I hould be the occallon of bringing any slain upon
"' your reputation. I expeated that your manner of treating me
" would have added luffre to it. Suffer me either to implore the
" aid of other Princes, whole delicacy, on this head, will be less,
"L and their resentment of my wrongs greater; or let me receive
" from your hands that affifance, which it becomes you, more
" than any other Prince, to grant; and by that benefit, bind me
" to yourself in the indissoluble ties of gratitude *."

This letter fomewvhat disconcerted Elizabeth's plan, but did June20. Elizabeth's

not divert her from the prosecution of it. She laid the matter precannons,
before the Privy Council, and it was there determined, notwith- againther.
itanding the entreaties and remonfirances of the Scottith Queen,
to go on with the inquiry into her condua, and till that were
finithled, it was agreed that Elizabeth could not, consistently
with her own honour, or with the safety of her government, ei-
ther give her the alliftance which the demanded, or peranit her
to retire out of the kingdom. And left thle thould have an op-
portunity of escaping, while ihe resided to near Scotland, it was
thought advileable to remove her to fame place, at a greater dil-
tance from the borders 4.

WThile the English court was occupied in there deliberations, Proceed-

the Regent did not negrlea to improve the viaory at Langfide. insofh
T hat event was of the utmoff importance to him. It not only gainit the
drove the Qu~een herself out of the king~dom, but left her ad- uee 's ad-
hlerents dispersed, and without a leader, at his mercy. He seem-
ed resolved, at firit, to proceed against them with the utmail ri-

Ander" Tol 17 94. t Id, ibid. zo2.

N n j

BOOK V. gour. Six pe-rsons of some diftinnion, who had been taken pr;-

i58.fners in the battle, were tried, and condemned to death as re-
bels against the King's prernment. Thcy were led to the place
of execution, but by the powerful intercellion of Knox they ob-
tained a pardon. H-amilton of Bothw~ellhaugh was one of the
number, who lived to give both the Regent and Knox reason to
repent of this commendable aQ of lenity *.

Soon after, thle Regent marched with an army, consisting of

four thousand horse and one thousa8nd foot, towards the weft bor-
ders. The nobles in this part of the kingdom were all of the
Queen's fa~ion; but as they had not force fufficient to obitrua
hiS progress, he must either have obliged them to submit to the
King, or would have laid waffe their lands with fire and rvword.
But Elizabeth, whole interest it was to keep Scotland in confu-
fron, by preserving the balance between the two parties, and
who was endeavouring to sooth the Scottish Queen by gentle
treatment, interposed at her desire. After keeping the field two
week~s, the Regent, in compliance to thle English Ambaildor,
difmniffed his forces 3 and an expedition, which might have proved
fatal to his opponents, ended with a few aAs of feverityt.

iMarycarri- 'The resolution of the English Privy Council with regard to
edto~olton. nlary's perso~n, was soon carried into execution; and, withlout

regarding her remonfirances or complaints, th~e was condua~ed to

July I3' Bolton, a caffle of Lord Scroop's, on the borders of Yorkshire t.

In this place, her correspondence with her friends in Scotland
became more difticult, and any profpea of mak~ing her escape was
entirely cut off. She now felt herself to be entirely in Eliza-
beth's power~, and though treated as yet with the refpe8 due to
a Queen, her real condition was that of a prisoner. Miary krn.w
what it was to be deprived of liberty, and dreaded it as the worit
of all evils. While the remembrance of her late imprisonment
was still lively, and the terror of a new one filled her mind, Eli-
zabeth thought it a proper j~unAure to renew her former prop~i-

July28. tion, that the would fuffer the Regent and his adherents to b

called into England, and consent to their being heard in defence
of their own conduat. And on her part, the promised, whatever
th~ould be the issue of this inquiry, to employ all her power and

Aigrees that influlence towards replacing Mary on her throne, under a few li-

T~rln mitations, which were far from being unreasonable. Fear, im-

to iler con- patience, des~pair, as well as this soothing promil~e, with which
ault.

t Alnderf. vol. iv. 14

* Cald. vol. ii. 99. ( Id. ibid. 99.

the proposition was accompanied, induced the Scottish Queen to EOOKV.

comply" 1. 68J.

In order to persu~ade Elizabeth that the desired nothing 10 much ar reimmu.

as to render the union between them as close as possible,, the th~ew- la- 1 x with
ed a diifofition to relaxe famewhat in on,- point, with regard to e rdore
which, during all her past and f~ublequent misfortunes, the was
uniformly infeible. Sh~e expreifed a great veneration for the
liturgy of the church of England; thle was often present at reli-
glous worship,, according to the rites of the reiformed church;
made choice of a Protefiant clergyman to be her chaplain; heard
him preach againfl the errors of Popery with attention and seem-
ing pleasure; and dilcovered all the lymptoms of an approachir.gr
converflon t. Such was M~ary's knowvn and bigotted attachment
to the Popinh religion, that it is impotirble to believe her fincele
in this part: of her condua; nor can anly thing mark more firong-
ly the wretchednels of her conidition, and the excess of hier feats,
than that they betrayed hier into ditlimulatiion in a matter, con-
cerning which her sentiments were scrupulously delicate.

At this time the Rorenlt called a Parliament, in order to pro. AugFiR rs,

ced to the forfeiture of those who refdfed to acknowledge the A a-:'"
Kiing's authority. T'he Qgeen's facction,was alarmed, and Argyle Scotland.
and Huntly, whlom Mlary hlad appointed her lieutenants, the one
in the ou~thl, and the other in the north of Scotland, began to al-
femble forces to obitrua thlis meetin~g. Compafflon for the Queen,
and envy at those who gov~erned in the K~ing's name, had added
to much fireng-th to the party, that the Regent would have found
it di~ticult to withftanld its effobrts. But as Mary had s~ubmitted
her caule to Elizabeth, fne could not refuse, at her desire, to com-
mmnd her friends to lay down their arms, and to wait patiently
till matters were brought to a decision in Englarrd. By procu-

ringthi cefatin o ars, llzabeth1 afforded as feafondble re-

lief to the Regent's Gfaion, as the had formerly given to the

'i he Regent, however, would not cod~ent, even at Elizabeth's

req~eft, to put off~ the meeting of Parliament. But we may a-
scribe to her influence, as well as to the eloquence of M/aitland,
wh~o laboured to prevent the one half of hris countrymen
from exterminating the other, any appearances of moder~ation
which this Parliament dilcovered in its proceedings. The most

'Anderl· vol iv. 109. Haynes, 468. tAnderf. vol. iv. ny· Haynes1509.
t Anders~ vol. iv. us.

aoOK V* VIOlent Opponents of ·the King's government were forfeited; the

Sreft were allowed still to hope for favour *.

+lizabeth No sooner did the Queen of Scots fulbmit her cause to her ri-
requires the val, than Elizabeth required the Regent to fend to York, depu·
~fe eff, ties properly infiruaed for vindicating his condua, in presence
condua. of her commiflioners. It was not without heiitation and anxie·

ty, that the Regent consented to this meas~ure. His authority
was already eflablifhed in Scotland, and confirmed by Parlia·
ment. To fuffer its validity now to be called in question, and
fubjeAed to a foreign juridiaiion, was extremely mortifying.
To accule his Sovereign before firangers, the ancient enemies of
the Scottish name, was an odious task. To fail in this accusation
wvas dangerous; to succeed in it was disgraceful. But the
firength of the adverse fa~ion daily increased. He dreaded the
interpolition of the French King in its behalf. In his situation,
and in a matter which Elizabeth had to much at heart, her com-
mands were neither to be disputed, nor disobeyed -f-.

Roth the The necessity of repairing in person to York added to the ige
hee anxo't nominy of the Itep which he was abliged to take. All his affo-
comminfion- ciates declined the office; they were unwilling, it ivould seem,
ers, to expose themselves to the odium and danger with which it was

easy· to forsee that the dilcharge of it would be attended, unleis

septem. 18. he himself codeknted to thare these in common with them. The

Earl of Morton, Bothwell Bithop of Orkney, Pitcairn, Com-
mendator of Dumfermline, and Lord Lindsay were joined with
him in commillion. Macgill of Riankeilor, and Balnaves of Hal-
hill, two eminent Civilians, George Buchagan his faithful adhe-
rent, a man whole genius did honour to the age, Maitland, and
s`everal others, were appointed to attend them as assistants. Mait-
land owed thlis dilinelon to the Regent's fear, rather than to his
affeaion. He had warmly remonflated against this measure. He
wished his country to continue in friendship with England, but
not to become dependent on that nation. He was desirous of re-
eitablifhing the Queen· in fame degree of power, not inconsistent
with that which the King poff~elied ; and the Regent could not
with safety, leave behind him a span, whole views were to con-
trary to his own, and who, by his superior abilities, had acqui-
red an influence in the nation, equal to that, which others deriv-
ed from the antiquity and power of their families f.

* Buch. 371. f ld. 372. See Append. No, YXV
t3. ibidt. Anded. 101. iv as Mely. x86, x88.

Mlary· empowered Lefly Bilhop of aofs, Lord Livingiton, Lord O V

]loyd, Lord Herreis, Gavin Hamilton Commendator of Kilwin- 2568,
ping, Sir John Gordon of Lochievar, and Sir James Cbckiburn
of Skirling, to appear in her name *.

Elizabeth nominated Thomas Howard Duke of Norfolk, Tho-

;mas Ratcliff Earl of Sufkex, and Sir Ralph Sadler, her Commis-
Soners~ to hear both parties,

The fourth of OAober was the day fixed for opening the Con- The conferr

feretpce. The great abilities of the deputies on both sides, the ynb~a
dignity of the judges before whom they were to appear, the high
rank of the persons whole cause was to be heard, and the import-
ance of the points in dispute, rendered the whole tranfaaion no
less illuffrious, than it was singular. The situation in which Eli-
zabeth appeared, on this occalion, firikes us with an air of mag-
pificence. Her rival, an independent Queen, and the heir of an
ancient race -of IVonarchs, was a prisoner in her hands, and ap-
peared, by her ambassadors, before her tribunal. The Regent
of Scotlalnd, who reprefeated the majefly, and poffeired the ana
thority of a King, flood in person at her bar. And the fate of
a kingdom, whole power her anceitors had often dreaded, but
Could never subdue, was now absolutely at her dis~posal.

The views, however, with Which the seve~ral parties contented Views of

to this conference, and the issue to which they expeaed to bring th @ir
it, were extremely different.

Mary's chief objea was the recovering her former authority.

This induced her to codfent to a measure, againit which the had
long firuggled. E~lizabeth's promises gave her ground far enter-
taining hopes of being reffered to her kingdom; in order to which
the would have, willingly, made many concessions to the K~ing's
party; and the influence of the Engrlifh Queen, and her own im-
patience under her present iituation, might have led her to many
more 1. T'he Regent aimed at nothing but securing Elizabeth's
prote~tion to fhis party, and seems not to have had the most dif-
tant thoughts of corizing to any composition with Mary. Eliza.
beth's viewls were more various, and her schemes more intricate,
She seemed to be full of concern for Mary's honour, and folici-
tous that the thould wipe off the sfperfions phich blemith~ed her
charader. This the pretended to be the intention of the confe-
Fence; amusing Mary, and eluding the folicitations of the French
and Spanish ambai~adors in her behalf by repeated promites of al.

* Anders. vol iv. 33. t Id. 3*
/ Andert vol iv. 33 Good. vol. ii j337 .

BooK y. fifing her, as soon as the could venture-to do so, without bring·.

Csding difi:ace on herse~lf. But, under this veil of friendship and
16.generosity, Elizabeth concealed entiments of a different nature.

She expeaed that the Regent wioumc accule Alary of being ccel-
fory to the murder of her husband. She encouraged him, as far
as decen~cy would perm ,t, to tak: this des~perate fiep*. And as
this accufdtion might terminate two diffErent ways, the had con-
certed measures for her future condua suitable to each of there.
If the charge against 11Lry thould appear to be welIlfounded, nie
resolved to pronounce her unwo thy of wearing a Crown, and to
declare that the would never burthen her own conscience with the
guilt of an acaion 10 detestable, a~s thle refforing her to her k~ing-
domt. If it thould happen, that what her acculers alleged, did
not amount to . proof 0, g~uilt, but only of mal-adminiflration,
the determined to, let on tuoo a treaty ~or restoring her, but on
fach con~ditions, as would render her for ever dependent on Eng-
land, and the slave of her owvn fabjetts1. And as every Rtep in
the progrels of thle conference, as well as the final result of it, was

t in her own power, the wvould Htill be at liberty to chule which of

thtre courses the would hold; or if there appeared to be any dan.
goer or inconveniency in pu~rsuing either of them, the might protrat
the whole caul~e by endless delays, and involve it in inextricable
perplexity.

Comphant T'he conference, however, was opened with much solemnity.
Of the
Queen's But the very firlt fiep dif'covered it to be Llizabeth's intention to
comminian- inflame, rather than to extinguish thle diffnfions and animofities

rsagainilt

the Regent. among the Scots. Nio endeavours v:ere used to ;econcile thle con-

tending parties, or to mollify the fierceners of their hatred, by
bringing thc Queen to offer pardon for wrhat was past, or her sub-

omober 8. jeas to promise more d'utiful obedience for the future. On the

contr-ry, Mar3y's commii'loners were permitted to prefer a com-
plaint against the Regent and his party, containing an enumera-
tion of their treasonable altions, of thleir seizing her person by
force of arms, committing her to prison, comp~elingr her to refigrn
thle Crown, and makting use of her lon's name to colour their u-
furpaion"ic of the whole royal authority. And of all these enolmi-
ties, they required fach speedy and ieffe~ual redress, as the inju·
ries of one Quieen demanded from the juffice of another J.

It was thiun expected that the Regent woulld have dillof~ed the

whole circum~tances of that unnatural crime, to whiich hd pre·

* And~crC vol. iv. II, 45. Thaynes, 487.
t Anders. vol. iv. r6, 5 Id. ibid. p~. -t Anded.l vol. iV. xx

tended the Queen had been accessory, and would have produced B~oon v.
evidence in support of his charge. But far from accusing M~iary,
the Regent did not even answer the complaints brought against 68
hidnelf. He discovered a relulaance at undertaking that office,
and flarted many doubts and s~cruples, with regard to which he de-
manded to be resolved by Elizabeth herself *. His reserve and
bef~tation were no less surprising to the greater part of the Engr·
lilh commimioners than to his own allociates. They knew that
he could not vindicate his own condua without charging the mur-
der upon the Quteen, and he had not hitherto thown any extraordi-
nary delicacy on that head. An intrigue, however, had been fe-
cretly carried on, since his arrival at York, which explains this
myfiery.

The Duke of Norfolk was, at that time, the most powerful and In 'Rus of

most popular man in England. His wife was lately dead; and with the
he began already to form a projea, which he afterwards more itegent.
openly avowed, of mounting the throne of Scotland, by a marri-
age with the Queen of Scots. He saw the infamy which would
be the consequence of a public accusation against M~ary, and how
prejudicial it might be to her pretenfzons to the English ruccefiion.
In order to save her from this cruel mortification, he applied to
Mlaitland, and exprefied his astonishment at feeing a man of so much
reputation for wifiocm, concurring with the Regent in a meas~ure
to dilhonourable to themselves, to their Queen, and to their coun-
try; submitting the public tranfaaions of the nation to the judg-
ment of foreigners; and publishing the ignominy, and exposing
the faults of their Sovereign, which they were bound, in good po-
licy, as well as in duty, to conceal and to cover. It was easy
for M~aitland, whose sentiments were the fame with the Duke's,
to vindicate his own condua. He assured him, that he had em-
played all his credit, to dissuade his countrymen from this mea-
sure j and would still contribute, to the utmost of his power, to
divert them from it. This encouraged N~orfolk to communicate
the matter to the Regent. He repeated and enforced the fame
arguments which he had used with Maitland. He warned him
of the danger to which he muff expol~e himself, by such a violent
a~ion, as the public accusation of his Sovereign. Mary would
never forgive a man, who hlad endeavoured to fix-fuch a brand of
infamy on her charaaer. If the ever recovered any degree of
power, his defiruaion would be inevitable, and he would juffly
merit it at her hands. Nor would Elizabeth [creen him from

( Haynes, 478*

BOOK v* t is, by a public approbation of his con'dua. For whatever ev·i-

56.dence of Mary's guilt he might produce, the was resolved to give

no definitive sentence in the caus~e. Let him only demand that
the matter thould be brought to a deciiion, immediately after hear-
ing the proof, and he would be fully convinced how falle and in-
fidious her intentions were, and, by consequence, how improper
it would be for him to appear as the acculer of his own Sove-
reign *. The candour which Norfolk seemed to discover in theie
remonfirances, as well as the truth which they contained, made
a deep imprefilon on the Regent. He daily received the firong-
eft assurances of Mary's willinguefs to be reconciled to him, if he
·abitained from accuting her of th~ch an odious crime, tog-ether
w~ith the denunciations of her irreconcileable hatred, if hie a~ed a
contrary part t-. All there conliderations concurred in dete~rmin-
ing him to alter his purpole, and to make trial of the expedient
which the Duke had f~ugg~efied.

He demanded, therefore, to be informed, before he proceeded

C~tober g. fatrther, whether the Enlglifh commiffloners were impowrered to de-

clare the Queen guilty, by a judicial sa; whether they would
promile to pass sentence, without delay; whether the Queen thould
be kept under such refitaint, as to prevent her from diflurbilgr
the government now effablifhed in Scotland; and whether Eliza-
beth, if the approved of the proceedings of the Kiing's party,
would engage to protea it for the future f. The paper contain-
ing these demands was signed by himself alone, without commu-
nicatingr it to any of his attendants, except Maitland and Melvilf.
N~othing could appear more natural than the Regent's s~oli itude,
to know on what footing he flood. To have ventured on a fiep
10 uncommon and dangerous, as the accusing his Sovereign, with-
out previounly aftertaining that he might take it with safety, would
have been unpardonable imprudence. But Elizabeth, who did
not expea that he would have moved any such diflculty, had not
impowered her commillioners to give him that fatisfaAion which
he demanded. It became necessary to transmit the articles to her-
self, and by the light in which Norfolk placed them, it is ealy
to fee that he withed that they thould make no flight imprefilon
on Elizabeth and her MI~iniffers. 1' Think not the Scots, said
" he, over-felrupulous or precise. Let us view their conduAt, as
"L we would with our own to be viewed, in a like situation. T'he
(' game they play is deep; their estates, their lives, their honour

* Mely. 187. H-aynes, 573*
*E Anders: vol. iv. 77. Good. vol. 11. I57. See Appendix, No. XXKVI,

SAnders. vol. iv*5. 5Id- 56. Mlely. 190

i' are at flake. It is now in their own power to be reconciled to BOOK; V.
", their Quteen, or to offend her irrecoverably, and in a matter of
" so much importance, the utmolt degree of caution is not excef. 1568.
"( fve *."

While the English commilloners waited for fuller infiruaions

with regard to the Regent's demands, he gave in an answer to the
complaint, which had been offered in name of the Scottiih Qgeen.
It was express~ed in terms perfeelly conformable to the fyfiem
which he had at that time adopted. It contained no infinua-
tion of the Queen's being accessory to the murder of her husband;
the bitterneis of flile peculiar to the age was considerably abat-
ed; and though he pleaded, that the infamy of the marriage with
Bothwell, made it necessary to takre arms in order to diffalvee it;
though Mary's attachment to a man so adious justified the keep-
ing her for fame time under restraint; yet nothing more was said
on these fubjeas than was barely requisite in his own defence.
The Quen's commillioners did not faill to reply -1. But whlile the oa~ober I?.
article with regard to the murder remained untouched, these
were only fkiirmithes at a difiance, of no consequence towards end-
ing the contest, and were little regarded by Elizabeth or her com-
mifiloners.

The conference had, hitherto, been conduaed in a manner The confer.

which difadppointed Elizabeth's views, and produced none of there ""ggt~
discoveries which she had expeaed. T'he difiance between York miniter,
and London, and the necessity of consulting her upon every dif-
ficulty which occured, confhrmed much time. Norfolk's negocia-
tion with the Scottilh Regent, however secretly carried on, was
not, in all probability, unknown to a Princess so remarkable for
her sagacity in penetrating the designs of her enemies, and feeing
through their deepest schemes f. Initcad, therefore, of returning
any answer to the Reg~ent's demands, the resolved to remove the
conference to Westminster, and to appoint new commiironers, fu
whom the could more absolutely confide. Both the Scottilh
Queen and the Regent were brought, without difficulty, to ap-
prove of this resolution II.

We often find Mary boasting· of the superiority of her commif'

fioners during the conference at York, and how, by the fireng~th
of their arguments, they confounded her adversaries, and silenced
all their cavils 9. The dilpute flood, at; that time, on a footing

* Anders. vol. iv* 77. *(- bid. vol. iv. 64, 80.
t Good. vol. ii. 160. Anderl: vol. iii. 24.
(I Hay-nes, 484. Anders vol iv* 94- g Good. vol. ii. I86, 284, Ejc.

Oo ij

BooR va which rendered her via0ry not only apparertt, but easy. Her

'y participation of the guilit of the King's murder was the only cir-

r568. cumitance, which could jullify the violent proceredings of her

fubjeas. And while they induffrioufly avoided mentioning that,
her cause gained as much as that of her adversaries by fupprefling
this capital argument.

Elizabeth resolved that Mary thould not enjoy the fame advan-

tage in the conference to be held at Westminster. She deliberat-
ed with the utmost anxiety, how the might overcome the Regent's
scruples, and persuade: him to accuse the Queen. She confider.
ed of the most proper method for bringing Mary's commillioners
to answer such an accusation ; and as the foresaw that the promises
with which it was tieceifary to allure the Regent, and which it
was impatible to conceal from the Scottish Queen, would natu-
rally exasperate her to a great degree, the determined to guard
her more narrowly than ever; and though Lord Scroop had given
her no, reason to difiruit his vigilance or fidelity, yet becaus~e he
was the Duke of Norfolkr's brother-in-law, the thought it proper
to remove the Queen as soon as possible to Tuthbury in Staford-
thire, and commit her to the keeping of thre Earl of Shirewfbury,
to whom that caffle belonged*.

1ilary's rd Mary began to f~ulpeA the design of this second conference)
@ ' j'r~C s and notwfithfianding the Fatisfa~ion the expressed at feeing· her
mntennions cause taken more immediately under the Queen's ow~n eyet, the
O~tober 2I. framed her infiruAions to her commillioners, in such a manner,

as to avoid being brought under the necessity of answ~ering the
accuf~ationl of her fabjeas, if they should be so delperate as to ex-
hibit one against her1. T`hes~e fulpicions were soon confirmed
by a circumstance extremely mortify~ing. The Regent having
strived at London, in order to be prel~ent at the conference, wvas
immediately admitted into Elizabeth's presence, and received
by her, not only with refpeaR, but wvith affeaion. This Mary
juffly cotifidered as an open declaration of that Queen's partiality
towards her adversaries. In the first emotions of her resent.

Nrovem.22. ment, the wrote to htr commifio~ners, and commanded them to

comp~lain, in the presence of the Etnglifh nobles, and beforie the
ambassadors of foreign Princes, of thle usage the had hitherto met
with, and the additional injuries which thee had reas~on to appre-
hend. Her rebellious f~ubjeAs were allowed accels to the Queen,

* Haynes, 487. t Antderi. vol. iv 95*
5 Geod. vol. ii* 349.

the wias excluded from her prelence; they enjoyed full liberty, Booze V.
I~e l ar guilhed under a long impriifonment ; they were encouraged to 58
accute her, in defending herflf thle laboured under every difad-
vantage. For these reasons the once more renewed her demand, Claims a
of being admitted into the Queen's presence ; and if that were p~~f~a na a
deniedl, the infiruaed them to declare, that the recalled the con. lizabeth
sent the had given to thle conference at Weftminfier, and protest-
ed, that whatever wfas done there, thould be held to be null and
invalid *.

This, perhaps, was the most prudent resolution Mlary could

have taken. The pretences on which thle declined the conference
were plausible, and the junature for offering them well chosen.
11ut either the Queen's letter did not reach her commillioners in
due time, or they fuffered themselves to be deceived by Eliza-
beth's profetions of regard for their Mistress, and consented to the
openingr of the conference J.

'To the commiiffoners who had appeared in her name at York, Novem. 2<.

Elizabeth now added Sir N~icholas Bacon keeper of the Great
Seal, the Earls of Arundel anid Leiceffer, Lord Clinton, and Sir
William Cecil $. ,The difficulties which obltruAed the proceed-
ings at York were quickly removed. A satisfying anfwfer was
given to the Regent's demands; nor was he to much disposed to
hesitate, and raile obje~ions as formerly. His negociation with
Norfolk had been discovered to Morton by so~me of Mary's at-
tendants, and he had communicated it to Cecil jj. His personal
safety, as well as the continuance of his power, depended on E-
lizabueth. By favouring IVary, th~e might, at any time ruin him.
And by a question which the artfully flarted, concerning the per-
son who had a right, by the law of Scotlan~d, to govern the kring-
dom during a minority, the let him fee, that even without reftor-
ing the Queen, it was an easy matter for her to deprive him of
the Thpreme direAion of alfairs 9. There considerations, which
were powerfully leconided by most of his attendants, gt length
determined the Regent to produce his accusation against the
Queen.

He endeavoured to leflen the infamy, with which he was Ten. The Regen~t

lible this a~ion would be attended, by protesting, that it was ue f
with the utmost reluatance he undertook this disagreeable task.; beingaccef.
that his party had long fuffered their conduA to be mifconfirued, hu rd~
and had borne the woriR imputations in silence, rather than expole murder

* Good. vol. ii. 184. ?AnderT. vol. iii. 25.
( Mely. r91. g Haynes, 48+ ( Id. vol. iv. 99.

BOOKV. the crimes of their Sovereign to the eyes of firangers; but that

now the insolence and importunity of the adverse fa~tion forced

56.them to publish, what they had hlitherto, though with 10fs to

thlemfelves, endeavoured to conceal *. These pretexts are de-
cent; and had the party discovered any delicacy or r-eserve, with
regard to the Qujeen's amions, in the reit of their conduat, might
have pailed for the real principles by which they were influen-
ced. B~ut their former treatment of the Queen renders it impof
Eible to give any credit to there profefiions. And the Regent, it
is plain, was drawn by the necessity of his afflairs, and Elizabeth's
artifices, into a situation, where no liberty of choice was left
`him; and was obliged either to acknowfledg~e himself to be
guilty of rebellion, or to charge Mary with having committed
murder.

The accufadtion itself was conceived in the firongeft terms.

Muary was charged, not only with having conse-nted to the mur-
der, but with being accessory to the contrivance and execution
of it. Biothw~ell, it was pretended, had been screened from the
purfaits of juffice by her favour; and the had formed designs no
less dangerous to the life of the young Prince, than subversive of
the liberties and conflitution of the kingdom. If an~y of these
crimes thould be denied, an o~Fer was made, to produce the molt
ample and undoubted evidence in confirmation of the charge f·.

N~ovem. 29. At the next meeting of the commillioners, the Earl of Len-

nox appeared before them; and after bewailing the tragical and
unnatural murder of his son, he implored Elizabeth's juffice a-
gainft the Queen of Scots, whom he accused, upon oath, of be-
ing the author of that crime, and produced papers, which, as he
pretended, would makie good what he alleged. The entrance
of a new aaor on the flage, so opportunely, and at a junaure so
critical, can fearce be imputed to chance. T`his contrivance was
manifestly Elizabeth's, in order to encreafe, by this additional
accufatices, the infamy of the Scottish Quieen1.

Hier com., Mary's commissioners expressed the utmost surprise and indig-

nmnation at the Regent's presumption, in 10ading the Queen with

aniiver. calumnies, which~, as they affrmed, the had so little merited. But,

Bee2 .inicad of attempting to vi~ndicate her honour, by a reply to thle

charge, they had recourse to an article in their infiruaions, which
they had formerly negleaed to mention in its proper place. They
demanded an audience of Elizabeth; and having renewed their

* Anders. vol. iv. I15, J Id. ibid. xxp. tid. ibid.122.

Miffrels's requell, of a personal interveiw, they protefied, if that DOOK V.
were denied her, against all the future proceedings of the com- -
mitioners *. A protellation of this nature, offered just at the r568.
critical time, when such a bold accusation had been preferred a-
gainft Mlary, and when the proofs in su~pport of it were ready to
be examined, gave reason to fulpe8. that the dreaded the event
of that examination. This fulpicion received the firong~eft con-
firmation from another circumstance; Ross and Herreis, before
they were introduced to Elizabeth, in order to make this protef-
tation, privately acqjuainted Leiceffer and Cecil, that as their Mif-
tress had, from the beginning, dilcovered an inclination towards
bringing the differences between herself and her fubjeAs to an
amicable accommodation, so the wa-s flill desirous, notwithitand-
ing the Regent's audacious accusation, that they thould be ter-
minated in that manner t.

Such moderation is fearce compatible with thle firong resent-

ment, which calumniated innocence naturally feels; or with
that eagerness to vindicate it'felf, which it alway~s discovers. In
Mary's situation, an offer to ill-timed must be considered as a con-
fetion of the weakness of her cause. The known charaaer of her
commillioners exempts them from the imputation of folly, or the
fulpicion of treachery. Some secret conviAion, that the conduat
of their Mistress could not bear so, fria a forutiny, seems to be the
most probable motive of this imprudent proposal, by which they
endeavoured to avoid it.

It appeared in this light to Elizabeth, and afforded her a pre- Decem 4.

tence for rejeaing it. She told Mary's commillioners, that, in
thle present junarure, nothing could be 10 dithanourable to their
Mifref~s, as an accommodation; and that the matter would seem
to be huddled up in this manner, merely to suppress discoveries,
and to hide her shame; nor was it poflible that the could be ad-
mitted, with any decency, into hier prefrence, while the lay un-
der the infamy of such a public accusation.

Upon this repulse, Mary's commillioners withdrew; "and as

they had declined anfwveringr, there seemed now to be no further
reason for the Regent's producing the proofs in support of his
charge. Bu~t without getting these into her hands, Elizabeth's
schemes were incomplete. And her artifice for this purpole was
as mean, but as fuccefsful as anly the had hitherto employed.
She commanded her commidioners to testify her indignation and

tId. ibid 134. Cabbala, I5o

rAnderi: vol iv. r3, rj8.

BOOK V. difpleafore at the Regent's presumption, in forgetting so far the

duty of a fubjea, as to accule his Sovereign of s~uch atrocious
crimes. He, in order to rrgain the good opinion of such a
powerful protearefs, offered to (hew that his accusations were not
malicious, nor ill-grounded. Then were produced, and deliver.
ed to the English commitiioners, the aAs of the Scottish Parlia-
rnent inl confirmation of the Regent's authority, and of the
Queen's refigrnation; the confeffionss of the persons executed for
the King's murder; and the fatal casket which contained the
letters, founfets, and contraats, that have been already mentioned,

Elizabeth Elizabeth having got there into her polfef50on, began to lay a-

ad yfide the expretions of friendship and refpea which the had hi-

er rigour. therto used in all her letters to the Scottih Queen. She now
Decem. 14. wrote to her in such terms, as if the presumptions of her guilt had

amounted almoRt to certainty; the blamed her for refusing to
vindicate hers~elf from an accusation which could not be left un-
answ~ered, without a manifell injury to her charafcter; and plain,
ly intimated, that unless that were done, no change would b'e
2nade in her present situation*. She hoped that f~uci· adikorery
of her fentimnents would intimidate Mary, who wvas i'earce reco-
vered from thle thock of th~e Regent's attack on her reput tion,
and force her to confirm her resignation of the CrownB, to ratify
M~urray's authority as Regent, and to content that both herself
and her son thould reside in England under her proteAion. This
fTcheme Elizabeth had much at heart; the proposed it \both to
Mlary and to her commitioners, and negle~ed no argument, nor
artifice, that could possibly recommend it. Miary saw- how fatal
this would prove to her reputation, to her pretenflons, and even
toherperfonal safety. She reje~ted it without hesitation. "Death,"
said she, 'L is less dreadful than such an ignominious flep. Ra.
"L ther than give away, with my own hands, the Crown which
"' des~cended to me from my anceffors. I will part with life;
"L but the last words I utter, ihall be those of a Queen of Scot-
" landf."

At the fame time the seems to have been sensible how open

her reputation lay to censure, while the fuffered such a public ac-
cufation to remain unanswered; and though the codference v~as
now dihir~ved, she impowered her commillioners to present a re-
ply to the allegations of her enemies, in which the denied, in

Decem. 24...the firong~eft terms, the crimes imputed to her; and recriminat.

* AnderC: vol. iv. 179, '83. Good. vol. ii. 260.
tHaynes, 497. See Appnd. o.XXX. Good. vol. ii3 74, 30 s

td upon the Reg~ent and his party, by accusing them of having nOOK- \:
dev~ised and executed the murther of the Kiing *. The Regent LV~
and his associates allerted their innocence with great warmth. 6.
Mary continued to insist on a personal interview, a condition
which the k~new would never be granted J. Elizabeth urged
her to vindicate her own honour. B~ut it is evident from the
del··s, the evaflons, and fubterfugies, to which both Queens had
recourse by turns, that Mary avoided, and Elizabeth did not de-
fire to mak~e any further progress in the inquily.

The Regent was now impatient to return Into Scotland, where I569

his adverfacries were endeavouring, in his ablence, to rail~e some Feb. 2.
commotions. Before he let out, he was called into the Privy Dimif"ifes

the Regent

Council, to receive a final declaration of Elizabeth's sentiments. w-ithout ei-
Cecil acquainted him, in her name, that on one hand nothing had ther approw-
been objeaed to his condJA, which the could reckon detrimental demning hi
to his honour or inconfidlent with his duty 3 nor had he, on the tcondca
other hand, produced any thing againit his Sovereign, on which
L~e could found an unfavourable opinion of her aaxlons; and for
this reason, the resolved to leave all the a~airs of Scotland, preclifely
in th~e fame situation, in whic~h file had found them, at thle be-
ginning of the conference. T`he Queen's commii~oners were dif-
miff~ed much in the fame manner 1.

After the attention of both nations had been fixed so earnefily

on this conference, upwards of four months, such a conclusion of
the whole appears, at firlt figjht, triding and ridiculous. Nothing
however, could be more conformable to Elizabeth's origin-l
viewvs, or more fuibiervient to her future schemes. N~otwithftand. But recret-
Ing her seeming partiality, thle h~ad no thoughts of continuing neu- hi poarts
ter; nor was th~e at any loss on whLom to beffow her proteaion.
Before the Regent left London, the s~upplied him with a confider-
able fum of money, and engaged to support the K~ing's autho-
rity, to the utmof1 of her power II. M~ary, by her own condua,
fortified this res~olution. Enraged at the repeated initances of Eli-
zabeth's artifice and deceit, wh~ich the had dilcovered during the
progress of the conference, and despairing of ever obtaining any
faccour from her, the endeavoured to route her own adherents in
Scotland to arms, by im~puting fulch designs to Elizabeth and
Mlurlay, as could not fail to inspire every Scotsman with indigna-
tion. Murray, thle pretended, had agreed to convey the Prince her
ion into England; to surrender to Elizabeth the placesof greatef t

* Good. 2. 285. j- Ibid. 283. Cubbala, 15: t. Good. 2- 3r c 333-·
I Id. 213. Carte>3. 4 -.

BOOK V. firengeth in the kingdom; and to ackinowledge the dep ndclnce of

the Scots upon the Engi~lhn nation. In retu~rn for this, he wa, to

3S69. be declared the lawfull heir of the Crown of Scotland s and, at the

fame time, the question with regard to thle Englinl fuccelion wfas
to be decided in favour of the Earl of Hartford, whlo had promif.
ed to marry one of Cecil's daughters. An account of thdfe Rild
and chimerical proje~s was spread induihioufly among thle Scots.
Elizabeth, perceiving it wvas calculated of purpole to bring her
government into difteputation, la-boulred to destroy its effec~s, by
a counter-proclamation1, and became more difguled than ever
with the Scottith Qu~een ".

Efforts of T'he Regent, on his return, found the kinlgdom in the utmoff

Il~ ts a- tranqluillity. But the rage of the Q teen's adlherents, w-hich had

gainit him- been ifupended in expeitation tha-t the conference in England

wfould terminate to her advantage, w\as now ready to break out
with all the violence of civil war. T'hey wrere encouraged, too,
by the appearance of a leader, whlofe h~igh quality anld pretenfons
intitled hliml to great authority inl thle nation. T`his was the Duke
of Chatelhlerault, who had resided for fomre years inl France, and
wras n~ow fcn~t over by that court, writh a fmnall supply of money,
in hop~es that the prelence of the firR noblemam in thle kingdont
would firengthen the QL~cen's famion. Elizabeth hadd detained~
hlim in England, for some months, under tarious pretenlces, butr
w~as obliged at last to fuffer him to proceed on h~is journey. Ec-
fore h~is departure, Mlary invelled him with the hiih dignity of

Tecb. 25· her Lieutenant General in Scotland, together will the fantaf`-

tic title of her adopted father.

lFis VigOUr- The Regent did not give him time to form hiis par ty irto any
b1.3{ he regular body. He assembled an army, with hris uiual exp~eii ion
Iarty. and marched to Glasgow. The followers of Argyle and Hu~ntly,

who composed the chief part of the Queen's faion, lying in
very difiant coiners of the kingdom, and mnany of the Duk'e's d:-
pendents having fallen, or having been tak~en in tT e battle or
Langfide, the spirit and firength~ ofhiis adherents was totally bro-
kien, and at accommodation with the Ri egent was the only· thing,
wh;ich could yrevent the deflruAion of his eflate and vai~als. This
w-as effeiaed without difiiculty; and on no unreasonable telrrs.
Thie Dukre promised to acknowl~edge the authority both of the
K~ing and of the Regent; and to claim no jurifdiaion in confe-
Squence of the commi!'ion, which he had received from the Queen
ThEe Regent bound himself to repeal the aA, wh-·ich ha-d I·p f1

, i~aynes, 50', 403· See nyrend, No ZXII'I.

f01 attainting ieveral of thle Qgeen's adherents; to reilore all, POOKe v.
who would fubmnit to the King:'s overnment, to the poffefl~on of -
their elatses and honours; and to holl a Convention, wherein all
the differences btw·teen thle two parties th~ould be lettled by mu-
tual coden~t. Ther Duke gave holtages for his faithlful perform-
ance of the treaty; andl, io tokenl of their sincerity, he and Lord
Herreis accompsnied~ the Riejent to Stirling;, and vilited the
y~oung Kii g. Th'e Regrnt let at liberty the prisoners taken at
Lanilde *.

Argyle and H-urltly refused to be included in this treaty. A fe-

cret negociation was carrying on, in England, in favour of the
captive Qgeen~ with so mnuch success, that her affairs began to w~elr
a better acpnelt, and her return into her own kingdom seemed to be
an event not very dillant. The French K~ing had lately obtained
such advantages over the H-ugonots, that the extinaion of that
par'ty appeartd to be inlevitable, and Trance, by recovering do-
meft:c tranquillity, would be no longer prevented from proteAinS
hecr friends in BClitain. Ther~e ci-cumilances not only influenced
Argyle and Hluntly, but made to deep an imprellion on the Duke,
that he appeared to be wravering7 and irresolute, and plainly disco-
v-ered that hie withed to evade the accompliahment of the treaty.
TIhe Regent saw the dangcr of allowfing the Dukie to thlake him-
ftaf loose, in this manlner, from his engagements; and inflantly-
formed a resolution equally bold and politic. He commanded hiis
guards to fcize Chatelherault in hris own house in Edinburgh,
whither he had comne, in older to attend the Convention agreed
upon; an:d, regardllers either of his dignity as the first nobleman
in the kingdom, and nexst heir to the Crowrn, or of the promipes
of personal s~ecurity, on wvhich~ he had relied, committed hlim and
Lor·d Herreis, pri'oners to the caffle of Edinburgh -f. A blow Aprl 16.
To fatal and unexpeaed dispirited the party. Argyle submitted
to the Kiing's goverment, and made his peace with the Regent,
on very easy terms y and Huntly, being left alone, was at lait
obliged to lay dowvn his arms.

Soon after, Loid Boyd returned into ScotLncd, and brought let- July 2Ir.

ters to the Reg~ent both from the Eng~lith and Scottinh ceens. A propatlr
A Convention was held at Perth, in order to confider them. Eli- ~~y ljc
zabeth', letter containled three different proposals with reg~ard to ed.
T4ary; th~at the thould either be reffored to the fu~ll pokirion of
hler former authority; or be admitted to reign jointly with the
K~ings her son; or at L~al' be allowed to reside in Scotland, in

h"'·' ,' Cre \f Nor!n 106. ( C· vs. Mem. III. TIsly. 20:

P o j

EcoxK V. fame decent retirement, without any ihare in the adminifruatloh o:

L- J government. These over tures were extorted by the imrportunit!
x 9'of Fenclon the French ambalildor,. and have some appe-rance of

being favourable to the captive Queen. They were, how~ever,
perfe~tly faitable to Elizabeth's general fyfiem with regard to
Scottish a,4aIrs. Among propositions to inequal and difpropor-
tionate, hle easily fawv where the choice would fall. T'he two
former were rejedled!; and long delays must neideffarily have in-
tervened, and many dimfcuties have arisen, before every circum
flance relative to thle lIl9 could be finally adjuffed *.

Mary, in her letter, demanded that her marriage with Both-

well thould be reviewred by the proper judges, and if found inva-
lid, thould be difirolved by a legal sentence of divorce. This fa-
.tal marriage was the principal source of all the calamities fne had
endured for two year;; a divorce was the only thing which could
repair the injuries, her reputation had fufeered by that step. It

Korfolk's was her interest to have proposed it early; and it is not easy to

moraccount for her long silence with refpedt to this point. H~er par-

the Queen ticular motive for proposing it, at this time, began to be To well

ofet. known, that thle demand was rejeded by the Convention of ellates.

Thejr imputed it not so much to any abhorrence of Bothwfell, as
to her eagerneirs to conclude a marriage with the Duk~e of Nor
folk.

This rnarriage was the objea of that secret negociation in Eng-

Jund, which' we have already mentioned; but, like all those con-
certed for the relief of the Queen of Scots, it ended tragically.
The fertile and projeating genius of Mai~tlandl sirs1 conceived
thlis scheme. During the conference at York, he communicat-
ed it to the Dukre himself, and to the Bifhlop of Ross. The for
2ner readily closed with a scheme, so flattering to his ambition.
The latter considered it as a probable device for refforing his
M~ithefs to liberty, and replacing her on her throne. N\or was
M~ary, with whom Norfolk held a correrpondence, by mea'ns of
his Gfter Lady Scroop, averse from a measure, which would have
reflored her to her kingdom, with so much splendor-s. T'he fud-
den removal of the conference from York to Weftmninter sus-
pended, but did not break off thlis intrigue. Miaitland and Ross

ercie itill the Dukte's promrpters, and his agents, and many let-
ters -and love-tokrens were exchanged! betw~een him and the ueen~
of Scots.

But as he could not hope, that under an adminiffration to vi-

* Sp'os. 230. t Camd. 419. Haynes, 573. State Trials, I.73*

Eliant as Elizabeth's, such an intrigue could be kept long con- EOOK 17.
tealed, he attempted to deceive hier by the appearance of open- I 969.
ness and candor, an artifice -which seldom fails of success. He conceals it
mentioned to her the rumour, which was spread of his marriage from Eliza
with the Scottish Qu~een 3 he complained of it as a groundless ca-
Jumny; and disclaimed all thoughts of that kind, with many ex-
preliions full of contempt, both for 1\Iary's charaaer, and domi-
nions. Jealous as Elizabecth was of every thing relative to the
Queen of Scots, the seems to have credited there profefflous*.
But, iditcad of difcontiriuing the negrociation, he renewed it with
greater vigour, and admitted into it new affociates'. Among
there was the Regent of Scotland. He had given great offence
to NPorfolk, by his public accusation of the Queen, in breach of
the concert into which he had entered at York. He was then
ready to return into Scotlanld. T'he influence of the Duke, in
the North of Englanid, was great. The Earis of Northumberland
and Weflmorland, the most powerful noblemen in that palt of
the kinugdom, threatened to teven~ge upon the Regent, the inju-
ries which he had done his Sovereign. In order to secure his safe
retreat, he addressed himself to Norfolk;, and, after some apology
for his pall conduat, he insinuated that the Duke's scheme of
marrying the Queen, his fiffer was no les~s acceptable to him,
than beneficial to both kingdoms; and that he would concur,
with thle utmoil ardour, in promoting so defireable an event t. Nor-
folk heard him with the credulity, natural to thos~e, who are pail-
flanately benlt upon any design. He wrote to the two Earls to
desist from anly hoffile attempt against Murray, and to that he
owed his passage through the Northern Counties, without diflurb-

2DCE.

Encouraged by his ilccefs in gaining the Regent, he next at- Gains the

tempted to draw the E~nglish nobles to approve his design. The conrent Of

the English

nation bega~n to despair of E~lizabeth's marrying. Her jealouly nobles.
kept the question with regard to the right of fuccetiTon undecided.
The memory of the civil wvars, which had desolated England
for more than a century, on account of the disputed titles of the
haoules of York and LancaRer, was still recent. Almost the whole
ancient nobility hiad perilhed, and the nation itself had been brought
to thle br~ink of deftruaion, in that unhappy contest. The Scot-
ti!h Qu~een, thlough her righlt of fuccen~on was generally held to
be undoubted, might meet with1 formidable competitors. She
might marry a foreign an~d a Popiifh Prince, and bring both liber-

* Haynes, 574.· State Tials, r, 79, 80. t Anders* 3- 3+·

BOOK t'· ty land religion1 into danger. But, by marrying her to an Eng.

lithmanl, a zealous Protestant, the most powverful and most unk-

16. verfhlly beloved of all the nobles, an effeatual remedy seemed to

be provided against all there evils. The greater part of the Peere,
either direaly, or tacitly, approved of it, as a salutary proje~t.
TIhe Earls of Arundel, Pembroke, Leiceffer, and Lord Lumley
fabfclibed a letter to the Scottith Queen, wyritten with Leicellet'P
hand, in whlich they wyarmly recommended the match, but its-
fa~tedi, hy way of preliminary, on Ma~ry's prormile, that the thould
attempt nothing, in consequence of her pretenflons to the En:-
lith Crown, prejudicia;l to Elizabeth or to her posterity; that (Le
thould confatnt to a league offenfiv~e and defensive between the
tao ~ing7doms; that the thould confirm the prelent ditablith.
ment of religion in Scotland; and receive into favour fich of her
fabjeas as had appeared in arms againit her. U~pon her agreein:
to the marriage, and ratifying there articles, they engaged thkt
the Enyglifh nobles would not only con:cur in relforing her, her
mediately, to her own throne, but in securing to hier that of En -,
land, in reverflon. M~ary readily cons~ented to all ther~e propofld,
elcept the feconld, writh regard to which, the demanded fam?
time for consulting her ancient ally the Fr~ench King Y.

'Ihe whiole of this negociation was induetrioufly concealed frort

Elizabethl. He~r jealou~ry of th~e Scottish Queen wvas well k~nown,;
nor could it be expeAcd, that the wvould willingly come into a
measure, wihich tended 10 visibly to sal-e the reputation, and t>
increase thle powrer of her rival. Eut, in a matter of so much con-
feqiuence to thle nation, the taking a few fieps w~ithout her k~non-
ledge, could fearce be reckoned criminal; and wrhile every per-
son concerned, even Mlary and Norfolk thlemfelves, declared that
nothing thould be concluded without obtaining her consent, the
d::ty and allegiance of fub~jeAs seemed to be fully preserved. The
greater part of thle nobles regprded the matter in this light. Thole
who 1 condul~ted the inltrigue, had farther and more dangerous view-s
T1' ey f;ew the adva·ntages whichl MRary procured by this treaty,
to be preiect and CerT:n:l; and the exuecution of thle promif~z
whillch thie came unider, to be difiant and uncertain. T`hey had
ealy commu~nicated their fehleme to thle Kingrs of France as &
Spain, anld obtained th:eir approbation J. A trecty, concerning·
RhlIch they confiithcltdf i;,t n: Princes, wh~ile they Goncealed ;t
fr-om their on~ 'at·r ··I, could not be deemled innocent. i hey
hoped, howevecr, t'st thei a.llca 3f so mnany nobles wrould render
it cef::.,y 161 LlzabunL1 to) com2ly they ilattered themfelve,

that~ a combilnatin 10 firong: would b~e altogether irreflliblle; and OO Y
fach wvas their confidence of fuccers, that when a plan wvas con-
c.erted in the N\orth of England, for rescuing Mary out of the 69
hands of her keepets, Norfulk, who was afraid that if thle recover-
ed liberty, her sentiments in his favour might change, use~d all
hlis interest to dilfuade the conspirators from attempting it ".

In thlis situation did the affair remain, when Lord Eoyd arrIo.

ed from England; and, besides the letters which he produced
pub~licly, biou~ght others in cyphers from N\orfolk and Throgrmor-
tonl to th~e Regecnt, and to M~aitlandl. Thecfe were fu~llof thle
most fangluine hopes. The whole nobles of England concurred,
fnid they, in favouring the design. Every prelimlinaly was aid-
juff ed; nor wvas it patib~le that a fchcme so d~eep laid, conduc'ted
w-ith 1o much ar t, and supported both by power and by nulnders,
could mri~rcarry, or b~e defeated in thle elecutionl. Niohingil nowv
was w-antingf, b~ut the concluding ceremony. It dep~ended on
the Regent to hasten that, by procuring: a 1 at:ence of divorce,
which would remnove the only abitacle that dood in thle way.
This was excpeated of him, in confreguence of h~is p:cmile to N'or-
folkr; and if he regarded either hris inltereft or h~is £1tme, or even
his safety, he would not fail to fudfil thiefe eng~agements-t.

But the Regrent was now in very dtl~erent circumtances, from

those which had formerly induced hlim to iffeA an approb~ation of
Norfolk's schemes. He fawJ that the downrEdl of his own poner
must be the firit consequence of the D~uke's faccers. A~nd if the
Queen, who considered him as thecheauoroalhrmsor
tunles, thiould recover 19er ancient authority, he could n~ever ex-
pee? favour, nor fearce hope for impunity. No wonder he declin-
ed a fiep so fatal to hlindelf, and which would have elibblithed
thle grandeur of anoth;er on the ruins of his own. This re~ifuf
occalloned a delay. E~ut, as every other circumitance was fettled,
the Bilhop of Ross, in name of his Miiltrefs, and the Dukle, in per-
son, declared, in plefence of the French amnbnalador, their mutual
consent to the maniagre, and a contrai? to thlis purpose was sign-
ed, and intruffed to thle k~eeping of the Ambalador t.

Thle intigu~e was now in 10 many hands, that it could notlong to"1 fT v.

remain a £ecret. It begaRn to be whlilpered at court j and Elizabethl TV~~l ab
calling the Dul~e f ato h~er presence, expreired the utmore indigna- ::~~
tion at his conded t~anld chanrgedl him to lay· aside all thoughts ofC dei ·1, ai d
profe~cullting fach a dange ~ou1s de'iign. Soon after, Leiceffer, who

* Camd. qco. $ Py1 nles, 520. Spotl` 230. See Appendix, No. Z~(XIX
( C rte, 101 'll 486.·

EOOK V*I perhaps had countenanced the projea with no other intention, ree

vealed the whole circumfiancis of it to the Queen. Pembroke, A-

16.rundel, Lumley, and Throgrmorton were confined, and examined.

Mlary was watched more narrowly than ever; and Hallingrs Earl
of Huntington, who pretended to dispute with the Scottih Queen,
her right to the fucceiron, being joined in commii~on with Shrews-
bury, rendered her imprisonment more intolerable, by the excels
of his vigilance and rigour *. The Scottilh Regent, threatened
with Eliz-beth's difpleafulre, me-anly betrayed the Duke s put his
letters in her hands 3 and furnilthed all the intelligence in his pow-
erS. The Dukie himself retired first to Howard-houfe, and then, in
contempt of a iummons to appearbefore the Privy Council, fled to
his feat in Norfolk. Intimidated by the imnprifonment of his affo-
ciates; coldly received by his friends in that county; unprepared for
a rebellion j and unwilling perhaps to rebel; he hesitated for fame

Gaube:r 3. days, and at lait obeyed a secon~d call, and repaired to WSindfor.

He was firit kept as a prisoner in a private house, and thlen sen~t to
the Tower. After being confined there upwards of nine months,
he was released upon1 his humble fubmiillon to Elizabeth, giving
her a promile, on his allegiance, to hold no farther correspondence
wvith the Scottish Qu~een f. During the prog~ress of Norfolk's nego-
ciations, thle Queen's partizans in Scotland, who made no doubt
of their iflu~ing in her refforation to the throne, withi an increase· of

Mattland authority, were wonderfully elevated. Maitland was the foul of that.
"9 ah Re·ITOed party, and the pedfon, whose aaivityr and abilities the Regent chief-

get y dreaded. He had laid the plan of that intrigue, which hlad

kiindled ~Luch combtution in England. He continued to foment
the s~pirit of difa~feaion in Scotland, and had, seduced from the Rie-
gent Lord Home, K~irkaldy, and several of his former associates.
Wihile he enjoyed liberty, the Regrent could not reckon his own
powrer secure. For this reason, he employed Captain Crawffurd, one
of his creatures, to accuse him of being acedfiory to the murder
of the King; and under that pretence carried him a prisoner to
Edinburgh. He would soon have been broughlt to trial, but was
saved by the friendship of Kirkaldy, governor of the calile, w~ho,
by pretending a warrant for that purpose from the Regent, got
him out of the hands of thle person, to wvhofe care he was com-
mitted, and conduated him into thle castle, which, from that time,
w-as entirely under Miaitland's command. The loss of a place of
so much importance, and the defeaion of a man so eminent for
military skill as Kirkaldy, brought the Regent into fame difre-

" klaynes, 525, 526, 530, 532. ? See Append. o. XXX, /IlcynesS o520, 5

putation, for which, however, the falccef~s of hib ally Elizabeth BOOKC V.
abundantly compensated.

The intrigue carried on for refforing the Scotti3h Queen to h1- A re 1 :nn

berty having been discovered, and dilappointed, an attempt was aqai..l II
made, to the fame purpole, by force of arms; but with no bet- ~~j
ter s~uccess. The Earls of N~orthumberland and Wefimorland, here ts.
though little dit~inguilhed by their personal merit, were two of
the moit ancient and powerful of the Englidx peers. T`heir estates
in the northern counties were great, and they poffeffed that in-
fluence over the inhabitants, wh~ich was hereditary in the popu1-
lar and martial families of Percy and of Nevil. They were both at-
tached to the Popilh religion, and difcantented with the court,
where new men, and a new system prevailed. Ever since Md-
ry's arrival in Englaind, they had warmly efpouled her interest,
and zeal for Popery, oppafition to thle court, and comm~i;eration
of her futFeings, had engaged them in different plots for her te-
lief. N~otwitbitanding the vigilance of her keepers, they holdi
a close correspondence· with her, and communicated to her all
their defig:ns". They were privy to Norfolk's scheme~s; but the
caution with whlich he proceeded did not fait their ardour and

impetuofty. 'Iheliberty of the· Scottilh Qu3een was not their

sole objeaB. T'hey aimed at bringing about a change in the re-
ligion, and a re Jolution in the government of the kingdom. For
this reason, thiey foliite:d the aid of the King of Spain, the a-
vowed and zealot s patron of Popery in that age. Nothingr
could be mole delightfull to the reitlefs spirit of Philip, or more
neceilbry towards fdcilitating· his fachemes in the Netherlands,
thuan the involving England in the confufian and mrileries of a c-:
vil war. The Duke of Alva, by his direation, encouragedl the
two Ealxh, and promised, 10 fopn as they either took the field
with their forces, or fa~rpifed any place of firength, or refcuedl
the Queen of Scots, that he would supply them both with money,
and a dtrong body of troops. La 1\Iothe, the governor of Dun-
krirk, in the dtifguife of a sailor, founded the ports where it would
be molt proper to land. ~Ad Chiapini Vitelli, one of Alva's a-
blest oflicers, was dispatched into England, on pretence of set-
tling fame cormmercial di~lerences between the two nations; but,
in reality, that the re'oels might be s~ure of a leader of experience,
10 soon as they ventured to take arms -1.

The condua of this negociation occasioned many meetingsj and D c. .- i

meifges between the two Earls. Elizabeth was inforra d f

* Hayne a 595. 'r Carte, vol· iii. 489. 490. Ca'r.'~ c,.

Boar v. there; and though the Cfupeaed nothing of their real design, it~

concluded that they were among the number of Norfolk's conft-

36.dents. They were summoned, for this r-eason, to repair to Court.

Conscious of guilt, and afraid of discovery, they delayed giving
obedience. A second, and more peremptory order was ifu~ed.
This they could not decline, without thaking off their allegiance.
And, as no time was left for deliberation, they inflantly eredled

Nuov-em. 9. their flandard ag~ainst their Sovereign. The re-efiablifhing the

cathalic religion; the fettling the order of fuccefiion to the Crown;
the defence of the ancient nobility; were the motives they alledg-
ed to juffify their rebellion "; Many of the lower people flock-
ed to them, with s~uch arms as they could procure; and had the ca-
pacity of the leaders been, in any degree, equal to the enter-
prise, it must have soon grown to be extremely formidable. Eli-
zabeth aAed with prudence and vigour; and was f~ervred by her
f~ubjeAs with fidelity and ardour. On the firit rumour of an in-
f~urreetion, Mary was removed to Coventry, a place of firength,
which could not be taken without a regular siege j a detachment
of the rebels, which was s~ent to res~cue her, returned without sac-
cess. Troops were assembled in different parts of the kingdom;
as they advanced, the malecontents retired. In their retreat
their numbers dwindled away, and their ifpirits funk. Delpair
and uncertainty whither to direa their flight, kept together, for
some time, a small body of them among the mountains of Nor-

Decem. 2x. thumberland. But they were at length obliged to disperse, and

the chiefs took refuge among the Scottish borderers. The two
Earls, together with the Countess of Northumberland, wandering
for some days in the wastes of Liddildale, were plundered by the
banditti, expos~ed to the rigours of the season, and left destitute
of the neceilariess of life. Westmorland was concealed by Scot
of Buccleugh and Kerr of Ferniherit, and afterwards conveyed
into the Netherlands. Northumberland was seized by the Re-
gent, who had marched with some troops towards the b~orders,
to prevent any impression the rebels might make on those muti-
nous provinces t·.

Church as. Amidst so many surprising events, the affairs of the church,
fa~irS. for two years, have almost escaped our notice. Its General As-

femblies were held regularly; but no butinefs of much importance
employed their attention. As the number of the Protenant clergy
daily increas~ed, the deficiency of the funds, set apart for their sub.

* Strvpe, vol. i. 547. ? Cabbala, 17r. Camd. 423.

flitence, became greater. Many efforts were made towards re. BOOK V
covering the ancient patrimony of the church, or at least so much
of it, as was poireffed by the Popilh incumbents, a race of men, 16
~whow~erenow, not onlyuifelefs, butburdenfome to the nation. But
though the manner in which the Regent received their addresses
and complaints, was very different from that to which they had
been accuffomed, no effeaual remedy was provided; and while
they fuffered intolerable opprefilon,, and groaned under the most
extreme poverty, fair words, antliberal promises, were all they
were able to obtain*.

Elizabeth began now to be weary of keeping such a danger- z570.

ous prisoner as the Scottih Queen. During the former year, the Elizabeth
tranquillity of her government had been diflurbed, sirs by a secret obl:I~~
combination of 10me of her nobles, then by the rebellion of others; ry to the
and the often declared, not without reason, that Mary was the ent
hidden cause of both. Many of her own fubjeats favoured, or pi-
tied the captive Queen; the Roman Catholic Princes on the con-
tinent were warmly interefied in her cause. The detaining her
any longer in England, the foresaw, would be made the pretext or
occallon of perpetual cabals and inf~urreaions among the former,
and might expole her to the hoffile atternpts of the latter. She
resolved, therefore, to give up Mary into the hands of the Regent,
whose security, no less than her own, depended on preventing her
from re-afcending the throne. The negociation for this purpole
was carried forpe length, when it was dis~covered by the vigilance
of the Bilhop of Ross, who, together with the French and Spaniih
Ambalfadors, remonfirated ag~ainst the infamy of such an aaion,
and represented the surrendering the Qgeen to her rebellious sub-
jests, to be the fame thing, as if Elizabeth thould, by her own
authority, condemn her to inflant death. This procured a de-
lay; and the murder of the Regent prevented the revival of that
design t.

Hamilton of Bothwellhaugh was the person who committed But he Is

this barbarous aaion. He had been condemned to death soon as- murdered
ter the battle of Langfide, as we have already related, and owed
his life to the Regent's clemency. But part of his estate had been
beffowed upon one of the Regent's favourites, who seized his
houie, and turned out his wife naked, in a cold night, into the
open fields, where, before next morning, the became furiously mad.
This injury made a deeper imnpretion on him, than the benefit he

*CJd vot ii. 80, &c. t Carte, vol. iiL 39r. AnderC vol, iii, 84~

BOOK V- had received, and from that moment he vowed to be revenged

Io.upon thle Regent. Party-rage firengthened and inflamned his pri.

vate rclentment. His kinsmen the Hamiltons applauded the en-
terprife. The maxims of that age juffified the most delperate
couife he could take to obtain vengeance. He followed the Re-
gent for some time, and watched for an opportunity to firike the
blowr. H~e resolved at last to wait till his enemy thould arrive at
Linlithgow, through which he was to pass in his way from Stir-
ling to Edinburgh. He took htl~and in a wooden gallery, wfhich
hlad a window towards the fireet; spread a feather-bed on the
floor, to hinder thle noise of his feet from being heard; hung up
a black cloth behind him, that his thadow might not be observed
from without; and after all this preparation, calmly expeaed the
Regent's approach, who had lodged during the nib-ht in a house
not far difiant. Some indiftina information of th~e danger which
threatened him, had been conveyed to the Regent, and he paid
to much regard to it, that he resolved to return by the fame gate
through whlich he had entered, and to fetch a compals round the
town. But as thle crowd about thle gate was great, and he himself un-
acquainted writh fear, he proceeded direatly along the fireet; and
thle throngs of the people obliging him to move very slowly, gave
the affTnin time to take to true an aim, that he thaot him writh a
single bullet, thirough the lower part of his bs11ly, and killed the
horse of a gentleman who rode on his other fide. His followfers
inflantly endeavoured to break into thehLoufe whence the blow had
come, but they found the door firongly barricaded; and before it
could be forced open, Hamilton had mounted a fleet horse, which
flood ready for him at a backr paffrage, and was got far beyond their
reach. The Regent died the fame night of his wound *.

His Charac· . There is no person, in that age, about whom hillorians have

te.been more divided, or whose chlaraaer has been drawfn with such

opposite colours. Personal intrepidity, military fkrill, sagacity and
vigour in the admiajitration of civil atPairs, are virtues, which even
his enemies allow him to have poffeffed, in an eminent degree. His
moral qualities are more dubious, and ought neither to be praired,
nor censured, without great refer ve, and many diftinalions. In a
fierce age, he was capable of ufingf viAory with humanity, and of
treating the vanquished with moderation. A patron of learningr,
which, among martial nobles was either unknown, or defpiled.
Zealous for religion, to a degree, which difiinguilhed him, even

# Buch- 383. Crawf. Mem. r24.

at a time, when profefifonss of that kind were not uncommon. His Boor V.
confidence in his friends was extreme, and inferior only to his libe- L-V
rality towards them, which knew no bounds. A difinterefied pas- J go.
sion for the liberty of his country, prompted him to oppole the per-
nicious fyfiem, which the Princes of Lorrain had obliged the Queen-
mother to pursue. On Mary's return into Scotland, he served her
with a zeal and affeaion, to which he sacrificed the fr-iendship of
those who were most attached to his person. But, on the other
hand, his ambition was immoderate; and events happened, that
opened to him vast profpeas, which allured his enterprising genius,
and led him to acnions, incon~iftent with the duty of a fubjea~. His
treatmentof the Queen, to whole bounty he was fTo much indebted,
wa1S unbrotherly and ungrateful. The dependelice on Elizabeth,
tinder wvhich he brought Scotland, was disgraceful to the nation.
He deceived and betrayed N\orfolk, with a bafeneis unwvorthy of a
man of honour. His elevation to su~ch unexpeaed dignity, in-
spired him with new patlions, with haughtiness and res~erve; and
inficad of his natural manner, which was blunt and open, he as-
fefied the arts of diflimulation and refinement. Fond, towards
the end of his life, of flattery, and impatient of advice, his crea-
tures, by soothing his vanity, led him afiray, while his ancient
friends flood at a difiance, and prediaed his approaching falL.
But, amidit the turbulence and confusion of that faltious period,
he dispensed juffice with 10 much impartiality, he repreifed the
licentious borderers with so much courage, and established such
uncommon order and tranquillity in the country, that his admi-
niffration was extremely popular, and he was long and affe~tion,
ately remembered among the commons, by the name of the Good
Begent.

# BOOK SIXTH.

THE

HI STORYS P

S C OT L AND.

BOOK SIXTH.

CONTENTS.

CON~sE UENCEs of~lurray's death. Lennox ele~ed Regent. Artifices of Eli-

zabeth. Dunbarton castle surprised by the Regent. Archbish~op of St. An-
drew's executed. TwvoParliaments. State of faitions. Regent surprised and
krilled at Stirling. Mar suc.ceeds him. Proceedings in England against Qu~een
Mary. Norfolk's conspiracy. Discovered by Elizabeth. League between
England and France. Massacre atPars. Death of the Regent Mar. Mlor-
ton Regent. Afa~irs ofthe Church. Death and charaater of Knox. A trea-
ty between the factions. Siege and surrender of Edinburgh caffle. Execution
of Kirkaldy the Governor. Odious tyranny of Morton. James A plot a-
gainft thleRegent. His resignation. Farther commotions. Fall of~orton.
Histrial and execution. Conspiracy of the nobles. James seized. His escape.
The Clergy favour the Conspirators. A Parliament. Severe laws agdainf
the Church.

H~E unexpeaecd blow, by wRhich the Regent fell, fruck the fiOOK 71.

King's party wtith the utmost conflernation. Elizabeth bewfailed -
his death as the most fatal difaiter, which could have befallen her I570.

Disorders

king~dom; and was inconsolable to a degree that little faited her occalloned
dignity. Mary's adherents exulted, as if, now, her refloration were by the Re-
not only certain, but near at hand. The infamy of the crime na- Stt
turally fell on thole, who expressed Cuch indecent joy at the com-
mition of it. And as the allafiin made his escape on a horse,
which belonged to Lord Claud Hlamilton, and fled direaly to
Hamilton, where he was received in triumph, it was concluded
that the Regent had fallen a sacrifice to the resentment of the
Queen's party, rather than to the revenge of a private man. On
the day after the murder, Scot of Buccleugh, and Kerr of Ser-
niherit, both zealous ahettors of the Queen's cause, entered Eng-
land in an hostile manner, and pluedered and burnt the country,

Boo~rVI. thle inhabitants of which expeaed no such outrage. If the Re-

g ent had been alive, they would fearce have ventured on such an

x0.irregular incurflon, nor could it well have happened to soon after

his death, unless they had been privy to the crime.

This was not the only irregularity, to which the anarchy that

followed the Regent's death gave occallon. During such gener-l
confusion, men hoped for universal impanity, and broke out into

Steps taken excei~ej of every kind. As it was impollible to restrain thefe',

"ltigr without a fet~tled form of government, a Convention of the nobles
another Re- was held, in order to deliberate concerning the eleaion of a Re-

x2~b
. z gent. The Qgeen's adherents refuled to be present at th~e m~eet-

ing and proteited against its proceedings. The King's own party
stas irref'olute, and divided in opinion. Ma~itland, whom Kir-
L~aldy had set at liberty, and who obtained from the nobles thenl
aifembled a declaration acquitting him of the crime which had
been laid to his chargre, endeavoured to bring about a coahitionl
of the two parties, by proposing to admit the Qgeen to the joint
adminil~ration of government w~ithl her son. Elizabeth adhered
to hier old fyfltem with regard to Scottish affbirs, and notw~ithf~land-
ing the folicitations of M'ary's adherents*, laboured to multiply,
and to perpetuate the faEtions, which tore in pieces the kringdom.
Randolph, whom the dilrpatched into Scotlanld on the first news
of thle Regent's death, and who was her usual agent for such ser-
vices, found all parties 10 exasperated by mutual injuries, and to full
of irreconcileable rancour, that it cost him little trouble to inflame
their diifcord. Th!e Convention broke up without coming to any
agreement; and a new meeting, to which the nobles of all parties
were invited, was appointed on the first of Ma~,y t-.

A tcoai;;ry Meantime, Mfaitland and Kirkaldy, who £1111 continued to ac-

knwldg their Kin' aUthlority, were at the utmost pains to re-

m1 vain, flore some degree of harmony among their countrymen. They

procured for this purpole, an amicable conference among the lead-
ers of the two faalions. B3ut while the one demanded the refto-
ration of the Qgeen, as the only thing which could re-eflablith
the public tranquillity; whlile the other esteemed the King's au-
thority to be so sacred, that it was, on no account, to be called
in question or impaired; and neither of them would recede in the
leatt point from their opinions, they separated without any pro-
[peR of concord. Both were rendered more averse from recon-
cilcment, by the hope of foreign aid. An em oy arrived from
France with promiles of powerful succour to the Queen's adhe-

* See Append. No· . Lt Crawf. Me;m. rgr. Calle~rw. 2. 15?.

rents 3 and as the civil wars in that kiingdom seemed to be on the BJoOK ' 71
point of terminating in a peace, it was expedied that Charles would
soon be at liberty to fulfil what he promiled. On the othler- hand, IS70
the Earl of Sussex was assembling a powerful army on the borders,
and its operations could not fail of adding spirit and firength to the
K~ing's party #

Though the attempt towards a coalition of the faftions proved Queen's

ineffe~tual, it contributed somewhat to moderate, or fulp~end their n~"," c
rage; but they soon began to a61 with their usual animosity. Mor- Edintburgh~.
ton, the most vigilant and able leader on the King's fide, solicit-
ed Elizabeth to interpoile, without delay, for the safety of a party
to devoted to her interest, and which flood in such need of her aC-
£11ance. The Chiefs of the Oneen's faation, assembling at Lin- Apr;1 ro.
lithgow, marched thence to Edinburgh; and Kirkaldy, who was
both Governor of the caffle, and Provost of the town, prevailed
o~n the citizens, though with some, difficulty, to adtnit them with-
in the gates. Together with Kirkialdy, the Earl of Athole, and
Maitland, acceded almost openly to their party; and the Dukre,
anld L~ord Herreis, having recovered their liberty by K~irkaldy's
favour, resumed the places, which they had formerly held in their
counc;ls. Ericouraged by the acquisition of persons, so illuffrious
by their birth, or s~o eminent for their abilities, they published a
proclamation, cleclaring their intention to support the Queen's au-
thority, and feemned refoclved not to leave the city before the meet-
ing of the approaching Convention, in which, by their numbers
and intinence they did not doubt of securing a majority of voices
on their fide t·.

At the fame time, they had formed a de~gn of kindling a war Endeavour

between the two kingdoms. And if they could engage them in einvo,,
hotiliities, and revive their ancient emulation and satipathy, they mn a War

with Eng·

hoped, not only to dissolve a confederacy of great advantage to land.
the K~ing's cause, but to reconcile their countymmen to their own
Sovereign, Elizabeth~'s natural and most dangerous rival. With
this view, they had, immediately after the murder of the Regent,
prompted Scot arid Ker to commence hostilities, and had since
infligated them to continue and extend their depredations. As
Elizabeth foresaw, on the one hand, the dangerous consequences
of rendering this a national quarrel; and resolved, on the other,
not to fuffer such an insu~lt on her government to pals with impu-
nity; the ilirzed a proclamation, declaring that the imputed the
outragres h~ich had been committed, not to the Scottish nation, but

( Crawi. J1e:n. r3E, ·t Id. ibid- '37. Caldlerw.z 2 x6.

R~r

BOOKVI to a few derperate and ill-defigning persons; that, with the for-

Iner, the was resolved to maintain an inviolable friendship, wNhere-

57.as the duty, which the owed to her own f~ubjeas, obliged her to

chaftile the licentioufnels of the latter *. Suirex and Scroop, ac-
cardingly, entered Scotland, the one on the east, the other on
the welt borders, and laid waite the adjacent countries with fire
and iiwordS. Fame magnified the number and progr.fs of their
armies, and Mlary's adherents not thinking thems~elves safe in Edin-
burgh, the inhabitants whereof were ill affeaed to their cause, re.

April 28. tired to Linlithgow. There they openly proclaimed thle Queen's

authority, and forbad giving obedience to any, but the D~uke, or
the Earls of Argyle and Hluntly, whom the had coaftituted her
Lieutenants in the kingdom.

Iting'sprty The nobles who adhered to the K~ing·, though considerably

r Fdinl- weakened by the defeaion of so many of thieir friends, assembled
MayI. at Edinburgh on the day appointed. They illized a counter-pro-

clamation, declaring those who appeared for the Qu~een, enemies
of their country; and charging them with the murder both of the
late King, and of the Regent. They could not, however, pre-
fume to much on their own firength as to venture either to eleB
a Regent, or to take the-field against the Queen's party ; but the
affillance, which they received from Elizabeth, enabled them to
do both. By her order, Sir: William Drury marched into Scot-
land, with a thousa8nd foot, and three hundred horse; the Kingi's
adherents joined him with a considerable body of troops, and ad-
vancing towfards GlafgSow, where the adverse party had already
begun hoffilities by attacking the caffle, they forced them to re-
tire, 'plundered the.neighbouring country, whiich belonged to the
Hamiltons, and, after seizing iome of their cafiles, and razing
others, returned to Edinburgh,

Maiues oft Under D~rury's protettion, the Earl of Lennox returned into
El'ribeth's
cor .ua Scotland. It was natural to comrnit the government of the king-
with re- dom to him, during the minority of his grandson. His illuffrious

tTfo birth, and alliance with the royal family of England, as well as

of Scotland, rendered him worthy of that honour. And as his
resentment againg M~iary was imp~lacab~le, as his estate lay in Eng-
land, and his family resided there, E~lizabeth considered him as a
man, who, both from inclination, and from intereit, would aA in
concert wvith her, and ardently withed that he might succeed Mari
lay in the offce of Regent. But, on many accounts, the did not
think it prudent to dil~cover her own s~entiments, or to favour his

* Cald. 2. xrz. t Cabala, r74.

Ipretenflons too openly. The civil wars in France, whch nchad BOOK VI.
Leen excited by a pretended zeal for religion, and carried on
with a fierceness that did it real dishonour, appeared now to be on
the point of coming to an iifue; and after thedding the best blood,
;nd waiting the richest provinces in the kiingdom, both parties
deficed peace with an ardour, that facilitated the negociations,
which were carrying on for that purpose. Charles IX. was known
to be a pailionate admirer of Mary's beauty. Nor could he, in
honour, fuffer a Queen of France, and the most ancient ally of
his crown, to languxfh in thch a cruel situation, without attempt-
ing to pro·cure her relief. He had, hitherto, been obliged to con-
tent hirnfelf with remonfirating, by his ambassadors, againit the
indignity, with which the had been treated. But if he were
once at full liberty to pursue his inclinations, Elizabeth would
have every thing to dread from the impetuosity of his temper, and
the power of his arms. It therefore became necessary for her to
it with fame reserve, and not to appear, avowedly, to counte-
nance the choice of a Regient, in contempt of Mazry's authority.
The jealoufyi and prejudices of the Scots required no less manage-
mnent. Had the openly supported Lennox's claim; had the recom-
mended him to the Convention, as the candidate, whom the ap-
proved; this might have roused the independent spirit of the
nobles, and by too plain a dil~covery of her intention, the might have
defeated its success. For these reasons, ihe helitated long, and
returned ambiguous anfwvers to all the mei~ages, which the receiv-
ed from the Kiing's party. A more explicit declaration of her
Eentiments was at last obtained, and an event of an extraordinary
nature seems to have been the occallon of it. Pope Pius V.
having ilizued a bull, whereby he excommunicated Elizabeth, de-
prived her of her kringdom, and absolved her faubjec~s from their
oath of allegiance, Felton, an Englithman, had the boldness to
fix it on the gates of the Bilhop of London's palace. In former
ages, a Pope, moved by his own ambition, or pride, or bigotry,
denounced this fatal sentence against the most powerful manarchs;
but as the authority of the court of Rome was now less regarded,
its proceedings were more cautious; and, it was only when they
were routed by some powerful Prince, that the thunders of the
church were ever heard. Elizabeth, therefore, imputed this flep,
which the Pope had takren, to a combination of the Roman Ca-
tholic Princes against her, and ful~pe61ed that so~me plot was on
foot in favour of the Scottith Qu~een. In that event, the knew
tha~t the safety of her owd~ kingdom depended on preserving her

R rij

Boox VI- influence in Scotland; and in order to firengthen thiis, the renem.

ed her promires of prote~ing the King's adherents, encouraged

1570. them to proceed to the ele~ion of a Regent, and even ventured

to point out the Earl of Lennox, as the person who had the bei1
title. That honcer w-as accordingly conferred upon him, in ai
Convention of thle whole party, held on the Izth of July f.

]eed w The Regent's first care was to prevent thle meeting of the Par-
gent. 11amnent which the Qpeen's party had fhmmoned to convene at

Linlithgow. Having effea~ed that, he marched ag~ainst the Earl
of Huntly, Mary's lieutenant in the North, and forced the garri-
son, wh~ich he had placed in Brechin, to surrender at discretion.
Soon after, he made himself master of some other caffles. Em-
boldened by this faccefsful beginning of his adminitiation, as
well as by the appearance of a considerable army, with which the
Eiarl of Sufieex haovered on the borders, he deprived M\aitland of
his onice of secretary, and proclaimed hlim, thle Duk~e, Huntly,
and other leaders of the Qge~en's pnrty, traitors and enemies of
their country J.

Mlary\s ad- In this desperate 11tuation of' their afifkirs, the Qpeen's adhe-

'~iae mthrgS~F rents had recourse to the King of Spain f, with whom Mary had

Spain. held a close correspondence ever since her confinement in Eng-

land. They prevailed on the Duke of Alva, to fend twro of his
officers to take a view of the country, and to examine its coasts,
and harbours; and obtained from him a small supply of money
and arms, which were sent to the Earl of Hufntly 9. But this
aid, so dis~proportionate to their exigencies, would have availed

Flizabsth them little. They were indebted for their safety to a treaty,
rroa sa~c- which Elizabeth was carrying on, under colour of refforing: th~e
cominoda- captive Qu~een to hier throne. The first fleps in this negociation

ne enary were tak~en in the month of May; but hitherto little progress

and her sub- had been made in it. The peace concluded between the Roman

ea. Catholics and Hugonots in France, and her apprehenians that

Charles would intrerpofe with vigour in behalf of his fifter-in-law,
quickened Elizabeth's motions. She affeaed to treat her prison-
er wvith more indulgenge, thle listened more graciously to the so-
lIcitations of foreign amballadors in her favour, and seemed fully
determined to replace her on the throne of her anceflors. As a
proof of her sincerity, thie laboured to procure a cessation of arms
between the two contending faetions in Scotland. Lennox, elat-

* Spotfw. 240. Cald. 2. 86. See Appendl. No~. 1.
*E CrawE· Mem. r59. Cald. 2. 198. t See Aypend. No III.
g An~deri 3 r 3. Crawvf. Mem, r53

ed wvithl the good fortune, which hlad hitherto attended his admi. BOOK VI,
nifhlation, and flattering himself with an easy triuroph over ene-
anies, whole eftaltes were wafled, and their forces dispirited, re- 10
fused, for some time, to come into this measure. It was not safe
for him, hlowever, to dispute the will of his protearefs. A ceflk-
tion of hoffilities during two months, to commence on the third
of Septemier, was agreed upon; and being renewed from time
to time, it continued till the first of April next year ".

Soon after, Elizabeth difpatchecd Cecil and Sir WTalter M~!id-

may to the Queenl of Scots. Thle dignity of there ambass~adors,
thle former her Prime Miniffer, the latter Chancellor of the Exchec-
quer, and one of her ablest counsellors, convinced all parties that
the negociation was serious, and that th~e hour of M'ary's liberty
was now approaching. The propolitions, whlich they made to her,
were advantageous to Elizabeth, but such as a Prince, in Malry's
situation, had reafan? to expea. The ratification of the treaty of
E1dinburgh; the renouncing any pretenflons to the English Crow~n,
during Elizabeth's own life, or that of h~er pofferity ; thle adher-
ing to the alliance between the two kingdoms; the pardoning-
her fubje£1s who had taken arms against her; and her promifingr
to hold no correspondence, and to countenance no enterprise, that
might diflurb Elizabeth's government; were among the chief ar-
ticler. Ey way of security for the accomplishment of there, th~ey
demanded that some persons of rank thould be given as hoffsges,
that the Prince her son thould reside in England, and that a few
castles on the border thould be put into E~lizabethl's hands. To
fame of there propolitions Mary consented 9 some the endea-
voured to mitigate; and others the attempted to evade. In
the mean time, the transmitted copies of them to the Pope, to
the Kings of France and Spain, and to thle Duke of Alva. Sh:e
insinuated, that without fame timely and vigorous effort in her
behalf, thle would be obliged to accept of there hard conditions,
and to purchase liberty at. any price. But the Pope was a dif-
tant and feeble ally, and by his eflbrts against the Turks, his
treasury was entirely ex~hauffed. Charles had already begun to
meditate that conspiracy againit the Huganots, which mark~s his
reign with such infamy; and it required much lelfure, and perfeft
tranquillity, to bring that execrable plan to maturity. Philip was
employed in fitting out that fleet, which acquired so great renown
to the Christian arms, by the vi610ry ov~el the Infidels at Lepanto;

* Spo0tfiv. 243*

BooKtVf- 1 C MOOrs in Spain threatened an infurreAion; andl his fubjeFts

in the Netherlands, provoked by much oppreflion, and many in.

1570. dignities, were breakingr out into open rebellion. All of them, for

ther~e different reasons, advifld Miary, without depending on
their aid, to conclude the treaty on the best terms the could pro-
cure *.

Elizaibeth's M~lary, accordingly, consented to many of Elizabeth's demands,

,fcodra and discovered a facility of difpolition, which promised flill fur.

of it- ther concetlions. But no concefllon the could have made, would

have satisfied Elizabeth, who, in ipite of her repeated profetions
of sincerity to foreign ambassadors, and notwithfianding the folem-
nity with which she carried on the treaty, had no other objea in
it, than to amule Mary's allies, and to gain time -f. After hav-
ing so long treated a Queen, who fled to her for refuge, in so un-
generous a manner, the could not now dismiss her with safety.
Under all the disadvantages of a rigorous codfnement, Mary had
fgund means to excite commations in England, which were ex-
tremely formidable. What de~sperate ef~EcAs of her just resent,
mnent might be expeated, if the were set at liberty, and recovered
her former power ? What engagements could bind her, not to re-
v-enge the wrongs the had fuffered, nor to take advantage of the
favourable conjun~tures, that might prelent themselves ? Was it
possible for her to give such security for her behaviour, in times
to come, as might remove all furfpicious and fears? A nd was there
not good caus~e to conclude, that no future benefits could ever ob-
literate the memory of pall injunries ? It was thus Elizabeth rea-
foned; though the continued to aB as if her views had been en-
tirely different. She appointed seven of her privy counsellors to
be commitfioners for fettling the articles of the treaty; and as
Mary had already named the Bilhlops of Ross, and Galloway, and
Lordi Levingiton, for her ambafifadors, the required the Riegent
to impower proper persons to appear in behalf of the King. The
Earl of Morton, Pitcarn abbot of Dunfermling, and Sir James

By.Mjcgill were the persons choien by the Regent. They prepared

for their journey, as slowly as Elizabeth1 herself could have with-

F~b. r9. ed. At length they arrived at London, and met the commif~on-

ers of the two Queens. Mvary's ambaffdadrs diifcove~rd the firong-
Eft inclinstion to comply with every thing, that would remove
the obtacles, which flood in the way of their millrefs's liberty.
But when Mlorton and his ei'ciates were called upon to vindicate

* Anders. vol. iii. Top, ne. *( Digg-, Compyl. Amb· ?8.

their condua, and to explain the sentiments of their party, they BooKvI.
Legan, in juitificationr of their treatment of the Queen, to advance -
luch maxims concerning the limited powers of Princes, and the 1572,
natural rights of fubjedts, as were extremely thocking· to 1.1iza-
beth, whole notions of regal prerogative were very exalted. W'ith
regard to the authority which the King now poffeffed, they de-
clared that they neither had, nor could possi;bly receive infiruc-
tions, to consent to any treaty, that tended to futbvert, or even
to impair it, in the least degree *. Nothing could be more tris-
ling and ridiculous, than itch a reply from the comnmitioners of
the Kings of Scots, to the Queen of England. His party depend-
ed absolutely on her proteaxon, her hand had seated him on the
throne, and to her power he owed the continuance of his reign.
With the utmolt ease, the could have brought them to talk in a
very different manner; and whatever conditions the might have
thought fit to preferibe, they would have had no other choice but
to submit. This declaration, however, the aiffeed to conflder
as an insuperable dit~culty. And finding that there was no rea. It provyes
son to dread any danger fr~om.the French King, who had not disco- faes
vered that eagerness in s~upport of MValy, which was expeded; the
reply made by Morton fi~urithed her with a pretence for putting
II flop to the negociation, till the Regent should fend ambassadors Mvarch 24.
with more ample powers. And after being amused for ten months
with the hopes of liberty, the unhappy Queen of Scots remained
under firiater cuffody than ever, and without any prof~pea of e-
scaping from it; while those fubjeas, who still adhered to her,
were exposed, without ally or proteaor, to the rage of enemies,
wvhom their fauccefs in this negociation rendered still more infor
lent t.

On the day after the expiration of the truce, which had been Duobarton

oblervedi with little exaatnel on either fide, Captainl Crawford of ~i ~
Jordan-hill, a gallant and enterprising officer, performed a service the Recgent.
of great importance to the Reg~ent, by furplifing the caf11e of Dun-~
barton. This was the only fortified place in the kingdom, of which
the Queen had kept poflfetion, ever since the commencement of
the civil wars. Its situation on the top of an high and almof1 inac-
ce~llbe rock, which rises in the middle of a plain, rendered it ex-
tremely firong, and in the opinion of that age impregnable; as it
commanded the river Clyde, it was of great consequence, and e-
fleemed the most proper place in the kingdom for landing any so-
reign troops, that might come to IMary's aid. The firength of the

*Cald. 2,. "34, Dipgges, 51, Haynes, j23, 424, t Anderl: 3. 9', ke,

Boos vI. place rendered Lord Fleming, the governor, more secure than he

Sr ought to have been, confiidering its importance. A soldier, who had

1571* served in the garrison, and had been difguited by some ill ulage,

proposed the scheme to the Regent, endeavoured to demontrate
that it was prac~icable, and offered himfelfto go the foremost man
on the enterprise. It was thought prudent to rifque any danger,
for so great a prize. Scaling-ladders, and whatever else was ne-
ceffary, wrere prepared with the utmost secrecy and dispatch. All
the avenues to the castle were seized, that no intelligence of the
design might reach the governor. Towards the evening, Crawfford
marched from Glasgow, with a small but determined band. By
midnigiht, they arrived at the b-ottom of the rock. The moon was
set, and the sky~, which hitherto had been extremely clear, was
covered with a thick fog. It was where the rocki was high-
eli, tha~t the allailantss made their attempt, because, in that place
there were few sentinels, and the hoped to find them least alertr
Thbe Birit· ldder wvas fearce fixed, when the weight and eagernefrs
cf th~ose who moun~ted it, brounht it to the, ground. None of the
af~llants were hurt by the fall, and none of the garrison alarmed
by the noiire. Their guide and Crawford scrambled up th~e rock,
andl fallened the ladder to the roots of a tree, which grew in a
cleft. This place they all reached with the utmost dift~culty, but
v ere ftli1 at a great difiance from the foot of the wall. T`heir
l.!dders were made fast a second! time; but in the middle of the
nfcent, they met with an unforeseen difficulty. One of their com-
panions was seized with famne sudden f t, and clung, seemingly
wvithout life, to thie ladder. All were at a fland. It w-as impof-
fible to pass him. To tumble him headlong was cruel; and might
occzllon a discovery. But Crawfford's presence of mind did not
forrfake him. H~e ordered the soldier to be bound fast to the lad-
der, that he migh~t not fall when the fit was over; and turning the
oth-er fide of the ladder, they mounted, with ease, over his b 117.
1%sy now began to bireak, and there still remained an higrh wall to
scale; but after furmoountingr 10 many greater difficulties, this was
so~on accomplithed. A featry observed the ficit man who appear-
ed on thle pa.rapett, and had just time to give the alarm, before he
was knlocked1 on thte head. ~The o:F~cers and foildiers of the gar-
rifon ranl out naked, unarm~ed, and more anxious for their ow~n
Oftyc~, than capable o~f mak~ing resistance. The affihuilts rushed
f or wards, writh reperted thiouts, and with the utmolt fury; took
Fairdliton of the magazinej fizerd thle cann~on; and turned them
against th~eir enemiies. Lai~d FleI..I?,re got irto a th sll bvat, and

fled all alone into Argylefhire. Crawford, in reward of his val. Boor VI.
our and good conduat, remained mailer of the caffle; and as he did
notlocfe a single man in the enterpris~e, he enjoyed hisiiuccefs with un- 5.
mixed pleasure. Lady Fleming, Verac the French Enyoy, and
Hamilton archbishop of St. Andrew·'s, were the prisoners of great-
eft diftinaion *.

Verac's charaaer prote~ed him from the usage, which he me- Archbishop

rited by his aAivity in flirring up enemies ag~ainfi the King. The Ofst~An
Regent treated the lady with great politeness, and humanity. But to death pp
a very different fate awaited the archbishop s he was carried under him.
a firong guard to Stirling; and as he had formerly been attainted by
a~t of Parliament, he was, without any formal trial, condemned
to be hanged; and on the fourth day after he was taken, the fen-
tence was executed. An attempt was made to bring him in as ac-
celljry to the murder both of the King and Regent, but these ac-
culations were supported by no proof. Our hifforians oblerve that
he was the firfl bilhop in Scotland who died by the hands of the
executioner. The high offices he had enjoyed, both in church and
slate, ought to have exempted him from a punishment, infliaed
only on the lowest criminals. But his zeal for the Queen, his a-
bilities, and his profemion, rendered him odious and formidable to
the King's adherents. Lennox hated hira as th~e person, by wihole
counsels the reputation and power of the house of Hamilton were
(upported. And party rage, and personal enmity, dic?ated that in-
decent sentence, Tor which some colour was fought, by impulting
to him such odious crimes 1-.

T'he loss of Dumbarton, and the severe treatment of the arch- Kirkaldy

bilhop, perplexed and enraged the Queen's party; and hostilities ofthe

o

were renewed with all the fierceness, which disappointment and Edinburgl1
indignation can inspire. Kirkaldy, who, during the truce, had ste n'S
taken care to increase the number ps his garrison, and to provide namne.
every necessary for a siege, ill'ued a proclamation declaring Len-
nox's authority to be unlawful, and usurped; and commanded all
who favoured his cause to leave the town within fix hours; seized
the arms, belonging to the citizens; planted a battery on the fleeple
of St. Giles; repaired the w~alls; and fortified the gates of the
city; and, though the affeAions of the inhabitants leaned a diffe-
rent way, held out the metropolis againf1 the Regent. The Duke,
Huntly, H~ome, Herries, and other chiefs of that faaion, repaired
to Edinburgh with their followers; and having received a small
(ulm of money, and fame ammunition from France, formed no con-

* i~buc394· . (Spot.Pw. "52.

BooK vtI temptible army within the walls. On the other fide, Mvorton ferw

C"' e4 Leith, and fortified it; and the Regent joined him with a con-

OFj7. fderable body of men. While the armies lay 10 near each other,

claily fkirmithes happened, and with various foccefs. The Queen's
party was not firong enough to take the Eield against the Regent,
nor was his superiority so great as to undertake the siege of the
castle, or of the town *.

nothparties Some time before Edinburgh fell into the hands of his enemies,
hold parlia- the Regent had fixnmoned a Parliament to meet in that place. In

rnt. Order to prevent any obje~ion against the lawfulnels of the meet-

ing, the members obeyedl the proclamation as exacTly as pomble;
and airenabled in a house at the head of the Canongate, which
though without the walls, lies within the liberties of the city.
Kirkaldy exerted hims~elf to the utlrroft to interrupt their meetinlg;
but they were so firong-ly guarded, that all his efforts wYere vai4.
They passed an a&t attainting Majtland, and a few others, and
then adjourned to the 28th of AuguffJ.

The othler party, in order that their proceedings might be coun-

tenanced by thi- (ame thlew of legal authority, held a meeting of
parliament soon after. there was produced in this afifembl~y, a dy-
claration by the Queen, of the invalldity of that deed, whereliy
the had resigned the crown, and coenitted to the coronation of her
ion. Conforynable to this declaration, an aA was palt, pronoun-
cing the resignation to have been extorted by fe~ar; to 'oe null it
itself, and in all its consequences; and enjioining all good fubjecas
to acknowvledge the Queenl alone to be their lawful sovereign, and
to su~pport thlofe who aaed in her name. The prelent eftablith-
ment. of the Protellant religion was confirmed by another statute;
and, 62 imitation'of the adlveie party, a new meeting was appointef
on the 26th of Augnut i;,

Mliferable IMianwvhlle, all the miseries of civil war desolated thle kingdom.
coniditionof
the king- Fellow cipizens, friends, brothers, took differentt sides, and ranged
dom* themselves under the itandards of the contending feacions. In

every county, and almost Iu every town and village, Ki'ng's-mrer
and (neen's-men were names of diftin~tion. Political hatred dif-
s~olved all natural ties, and extinguiihed thle reciprocal good wiil
and confidence, which hold mankind together in faciety. Reli-
gvious Zeal mingled itlelf with there civil diflinations, and contri·
buted not a little to heighten, and to inflame them.

Stateof far- The fa~ions which divided the kingdom were, in appearance,
tions. only two. But in both there, there were persons, with views,

SCald. 2. 233, &c. -f Craw-f. Mem.? 177. ( Id. ibid. I:;.

sid princples, 10 differerit from each other, that they ought to be MOoK Vt.
dift~inguiihed. With some, considerations of religion ivere predo-
2ninant, and they either adhered to tlie Queen, because they hop- SI
ed, by her means, to re-establish Popery, or they defended the
King's authority, as the belt fulpocrt of the Protellant faith. A-
anong there the opposition was vriolent and irreconcileable. Others
were induenced b~y political motives only, or allured by views of
interest; tlie Regent aimed at uniting there, and did not despair
of gaining, by gentle arts, niany of Mary's adherents to acknowf-
ledge the Kinlg's authority. Maitland and Kirkaldy~ had fornl-
ed the fanie design of a coalition, but on such terris, that the
Qu~een might be refrored to some thafte in the govsrfiment, and
the king-dom thak;e off its dependen~ce on Eng~larld. Mor~ton,
the ablest, the moit anibitious, gnid the most polverful man of the
King's party, held a particular course; and moving only as he was
frromptect by the court of England, thwarted every measure, that
tended towards a reconcilement of the faaions; and as he s~erved
Elizabeth with much Eidelityr, he derived both power and credit
frLom her avowed prot'eaich.

T'he time ajipointed bjr both parties, for the meetirig of their

parh~aments, now approached. Oh~ly three peers sind two bishops
appeared in that, which was held iix the Qiteeix's name at Edin-
burgih. But "contemptib~le as their nuinhers were, they passed an
aft for attainting upw~ardis of twvo hundered of the adverse fa8ion.
T'he meeting at Stirling was nuzixercus and s~plendid. The Regent
had prevailed ori the Earls of Argyle, Eglinton, Cafils, and Lord
Boyd, to acknowledge the King's authority. The three Earls
;vere among the most powerful sablemen in the kringdom, and had
hitherto been zealous in the Queen's citure. Lord Boyd had been
one of Mary's comminainers at York and Weliminfier, and, since
that time, had been admitted into all her most secret councils.
But, during that turbillent Period, the condua of individuals, aP
wvell as the principles of famions, varied to often, that the sense
of honour, the chief preservative of ibonfillency in charaaer, was
entirely loss ; and without any jfegard to decorum, mett suddenly
abandonedl one party, and adopted all the violent panlons of the
other. The defeaion, however, of so many persons of diftinAion
not only weakened thre Queen's party, but added reputatiop to
her adversaries.

After the example of the Parlianient at Edinburgh, that at TheI~ingh

Stirling begrali with framing a~ts against the oppofxte fa~ion But rpa@~~;~
in the midst of i~ll the security, which confidence in their own num- Stirling.

BOOK; VI. bers, or dillance from danger could ins~pire, they were awakbened-,

L V early one morning, by the Ithouts of the enemy in the heart of the
I0,town. In a moment, the houses of every person of diitinioh

sept. 3 were surrounded, and before they knew what to think of so firange

an event, the Regent, the Earls of Argy-le, Mkorton, Glencairn,
Cam~js, Eg~linton, Moritrofe, Buchan, the Lords Sempil, Cathcart,
Oglive, were all made prisoners, and snounted behind troopers,
who were ready to cary them to Edidburgh. Kir~kaldy was the
author of this daring enterprise; and if he had not been induced,
by the ill-timed anxiety of his friends about his safety, not to
hazard his own person in conduAing it, that day would have ter-
minated the contest between the two faaions, and havre reffored
peace to his country. By his d'ire~tion, four hundred men, un-
der the command of Huntly, Lord Claud Hamnilton, and Scot
of Buccleugh, set out from Edinburgh, and the better to con.
ceal their design, marched towards the south·. But they soon
wheeled to the right, and horses having been provided for the in.
f'antry, rode fIreight to Stirling. By four Zn the morning, they
arrived there; not one sentry wais posted on the walls, nor a single
man was awake about the place. They me~t with no refiffance
from any pedfon they had seized, except Morton. H-e defending
his houre with obitinate valour, they were obliged to set it on fire,
and Ire did not surrender till forced out of it by the flames. In
performing this, some time was consumed; and the private men,
unaccustomed to regular dilcipline, left their colours, and began to
rifle the houses, and thops of the citizens. The noise and uproar
in the town reached the castle. The Earl of Masr sallied out with
thirty soldiers; fired briskly upon the enemy, of whom almost
none but the officers kept together in a body. The townsmen
took arms to amTit their governor; a sudden panic struck the assail-
ants; some fled, some th~rrendred themselves to their own prison.
ers; and had not the borderers, who followed Scot, prevented a
pursuit, by carrying off all the horses within the place, not a man
would hlave escaped. If the Regent had not unfortunately been
killed, the loss on the King's fide would have been as inconfider-
able, as the alarm was great. Think on the archbyhop of St. Anr-
dreav's, was the word among'the Queen's soldiers; and Lennox

TheRegent fell a sacrifice to his memory. The officer, to whom he furren-
killed. dered, endeavouring to proteat him, 10ft his own life in his de-

fence. He was 11ain, according to the general opinion, by com-
mand of Lord Claud Hamilton. Kirkaldy had the glory of con-
certingP this plan with great secrecy, and pruldencej but Morton'E

hrtunate abitinacy, and the want of discipline among his own BOOK VL.
troops, deprived him of faccefs, the only thing wanting to render
this equal to the most applauded military enterprises of the kind *. 157I.

As so many of the nobles were assembled, they proceeded, Mlar chosen

without delay, to the eleaion of a Regent. Argyle, Morton, Re n .
and Mar, were candidates for the offce. Mar was chafen by a
majority of voices. Amidit all the fierce diffentions, which had
prevailed so long in Scotland, he had distinguished himself by his
moderation, his humanity, and his difintereftednels. And as his
power was far inferior to Argyle's, and his abilities not so great
as Morton's, her was, for there reasons, less formidable to the
other nobles. Hlis merit, to,, in having to lately rescued the Lead-
ers of the party from imminent deftruaion, contributed not a
little to his preferment.

While there things were carrying on in Scotland, the tranfac. Proceed-

tions in England were no less interesting to Mary, and flill more an o
fatal to her cause~. Th~e parliament of that kingdom, wh-lich met Mary.
in April, paired an aB, by which, it was declared to be high trea-
son to claim any right to the Crown during the life of the Queen;
to allirm that thle title of any other person was better than hers; or
to maintain that thle parliament had not power to fettle, and to
limit the order of furccellion. This remarkable 11atute was intend-
ed not only for the security of their own sovereign, but to curb
the refilefs and intriguing spirit of the Scottith Queen, and her
adherentsf.

At this time, a treaty of marriage between Elizabeth and the Maurrhge

Duke of Anjou, the French King's brother, was well advanced. gociated
Both courts seemed to desire it with equal ardour, and gave out, Elizabeth
with the utmost confidence, that it could not fail of taking place. ll~hef
Neither of them, however, withed its s~ucces~s; and they encou- Ax jou.
raged it for no other end, but becaule it served to cover or to pro-
mate their particular designs. The whole policy of Catherine of
Mledicis was bent towards the accomplithment of her detestable
projea for the deftruaion of the Hugonot chiefs; and by carry-
ing on a negociation for the marriage of her fan with a Princess,
who was justly efleemed the proteArefs of that party, by yielding
some things in point of religion, and by discovering an indifference
with regard to others, the hoped to amule all the Protellants in
Europe, and to lull asleep the jealousy even of the Hugonots them-
selves. Elizabeth flattered herself with reaping advantages of

* Mely. 2a6, Cra~wf M~em. 204. ·r Camd- 436.

Boox YT. another kind. During thle dependence of the negociation, the

SFrench could not with decency give any open anifiance to the

'157I. Scottihh Qgeen; if they conceived anly hopes of success in the

treaty of marriage, they would, of course, interest themnfelves but
coldly in her Concerns; Mary herself must be dejeaed with los-
ing an ally, whom the had hitherto reckoned her most powerful
prote~or; and by interrupting her correspondence witli France,
one source, at least, of the cabals arid intrigues which diflurbed
the kingdom, would be flopt. Both Qgeens succeeded in their
schemes. Catherine's artifices imbpofed on Elizabeth, and blinded
the Hugonots. The French discovered the utwoft indiffe~rence
about the interest of the Scottish Qgeen; atid Mary, confldtering
that court as already united with her rival, turned herself, for

N~orfolk's prote~ion, towards the King of Spain t Philip, whole dark and
c-nfpiracy thoughtful mind, delighted in the myfieryr of intrigue, had held
an favour of
M~ary a secret correspondence with Ma~ry, for fame time, by means of

tihe Bilhoop of Ross, and had supplied both hers~elf, and her adhe-
rents in Scotland, with small funis of money. 14idolphi, a F10.
rentine gentleman, who resided at Lbndon uncier the charaaer of
a banker, and who a~ed privately as im agent for the Pope, was
the perfen whom the Binhop ititrufted with thisrnegaciation. Mary
thouglit it neceiliry, likewfife, to communicate the secret to the
Duke of Norfolk, whiom Elizabeth had lately restor~ed to liberty,
u~pon his solemn promise~ to have no fu~rther intercourse with the:
Queen of Scots; which, however, he regarded so little, that the.
took no flep in any matter of momen;, without his advice. She
complained in a long letter, which the wrote to him in cy~phers, of
the bafeners, with which the French court hadl abandoned her inte-
reft; the declared. her resolution of imploring: the assistance of the
Spanith Monarch, which was now her only resource j and recom-
mended Ridolphi to his confidence, as a pedion, capable both of
explaining, and of advancing the Ccheme. The Duke command-
ed Hickford, his secretary, to decypher, and then to brirn this
letter; but whither he had been already gained by the court, or
resolved at that time to betray his malter, he disobeyed thelatter
part of the order, and hid the latter, together with ckher treason-
able papers, under the Duke's own bed'.

Ridolphi, in a conference with Norfolk;, omitted none of thof6C

srguments, and spared none of those promiles, which are the ufud~
incentives to rebellion. T'he Pope, he told him, had a great fud

*Dig~ges, r44, 148~. Cam3. 4314*

in readiness to bestow in so good a cause. The Duke of Alva B'oOK 71
had undertaken to land tenl thousand men, not far from London.
TIhe Catholics to a man would rife in arnas. Many of thle nobles I577*
were ripe for a revolt, and wanted only a leader. Half the na-
tion had turned their eyes on him, and expeated him to revenge
the unmerited in~juries, which he himself had fuffered; and to re-
Ecue an unfortunate Queen, who offered him her person, and her
crown, as the reward of his success. N'orfolk approved of the de-
sign, and though he refused to give Ridolphi any letter of credit,
allowed him to d~e his name, in negociating with the Pope, and
Alva *. The Eithop of Ross, who, from the violence of his
temper, and impatience to procure relief for his miffrefs, was apt
to run into rash and derperate designs, advised the Dukte to al-
femble secretly a few of hris followers, and at once to seize Eli-
zeabeth's person. But this the Duke reje~ted, as a scheme equal-
17 wild and hazardous. Mleanwhile, the Englith court had re- Discovered
ceived some imperfeft information of the plot, by intercepting one liza.
of Ridolphli's agentsj and an accident happened, which brought Auguit,
to light all the circumfiances of it. The Duke had employed
Hiickford to tranfnuit to Lord Herreis, some money, which was
to be diffributed among Mary's adherents in Scotland. A per-
son not in the secret was intruffed with conveying it to the bor-
ders; and he fulpe~ting it from the weight to be gold, whereas
he had been told that it was silver, carried it direc?1y to the pri-
vy council. The Duke, his domeftics, and all who were privy,
or could be ufule61ed of being privy to the design, were taken in- sept 7·
to custody. Never did the accomplices in a conspiracy dilcover
less firmness; or servants betray an indulgent maller, with greater
baseness. Every one confeffed the whole of what hie knew. Hick-
ford gave dire~tions how to find the papers, which he had hid.
The Duke himlelf, relying at first on the fidelity of his associates,
and believing all dangerous papers to have been destroyed, con-
fidently asserted his own innocence; but when their depositions,
and the papers themselves were produced, afloniihed at their
treachery, he ackrnowledged 14is guilt, and implored the Queen's
mercy. His offence was too heinous, and too often repeated, to
obtain pardon; and Elizabeth thought tt necessary to deter her
fub~je~ts by his punishment, from holdirg a correspondence with
the Queen of Scots, or her emissaries. - Being tried by his Peers,
hie was found guilty of high treason, and, after ieveral delays, fulf-
fered death for the crime f-.

* Anderl 3. '61. ·t Ibid· 3. 149. State Triarls, r. 85·

nOOK vt. The diicovery of this conrpiracy produced many effeas extreme,

l2

J y detrimental to Mary's interest. The Biilhop of Ross, who ap,

Fs1 eared by the confeflion of all concerned, to be the prime mover in
every cabal against Elizabeth, was taken into cuffody, his papers ·
searched, himself committed to the Tower, treated with the utmost
rigour, threatened with capital punilhment, and after a long con-
finement, let at liberty, on condition that he thould leave the
kingdom. Mary was not only deprived of a servant, equally emi-
nent for his zeal, and his abilities, but was denied, from that time,
the privilege of having an ambassador at the Englilh court. The
Spanish ambassador, whom, the power and dignity of the Prince
he reprelented, exempted from suc~h insults, as Rols had fuffered,
was commaded to leave England *. Mary herself was kept under
a firic~er guard than formerly, the number of her domeftics abridg-
ed, and no perfos permitted to fee her, but in presence of her
kteepers-.

Eiizabeth At the fame time, Elizabeth, foreseeing the fierm which was

delrej gathering, on the continent, against her kingdom, began to with

gainft the, that tranquillity were restored in Scotland; and irritated by Mia-

""t·~~~e' ry's late attempt against her government, the determined to ac?,

without disguise or ambiguity, in favour of the Kiing's party. This

oct 35 resolution the intimated to the leaders of both faaions. Mary, the

told them, had held such a criminal correspondence with her a-
vowed enemies, and had excited such dangerous conspiracies both
against her crown and life, that the would henceforth confider her
as unworthy of proteaion, and would never consent to restore her
to liberty, far less to replace her on her throne. She exhorted them,
therefore, to unite in ackinowledging the King's authority. She
promiled to~rocure by her mediation equitable termrs for th~ole,
who had hitherto opposed it. But if they flill continued refraao-
ry, the threatened to employ her ptmoft power to compel them to
submit 1. Though this declaration did not produce an immediate
etiea; though hoffilities continued in the neighbourhood of Edin-
burghl; though Hluntij 's brother, Sir Adam Gordon, by his bravery,
anid good condua, routed the King's adherents in the North, in
many encounters; yet such an explicit discovery of Elizabeth's
sentiments contributed not a little to animate one party, and to
dieprefs the spirit and hopes of the other S.

757. s Morton who commanded the Regent's forces, lay at Leith,

' nd K~irkaldy still held out the town and carll of Edinburgh, fearce

* Diggecs, r63. -j- Strype, Am. 2I. 5o. t See Append No.IV.
.j Cld. 2. 289, 29· Strypc, . 96.

a day passe~d without a fkirmiih. And while both avoided any de. BOOKc VI.
cifive aaion, they harassed each other by attacking imall parties,
beating up quarters, and intercepting convoys. T'hefe operations> Hostilities
though little memorable in thems~elves, kept the passions of both carried on

. between

faaions mn perpetual exercise and agitation, and wrougrht them up, them.
at last, to a degree of fury, which rendered them regardilefs not
only of the laws of war, but of the principles of humanity.No
was it in the field alone, and during the heat of combat, that
this implacable rage appeared; both parties hanged thle prisoners
they took;, of whatever rank or quality, without mercy, and with-
cut trial. Great numbers fbffered in this thocking. manner; the
unhappy vidims were led, by fifties at a time, to execution; and
it was not till both sides had smarted severely, that they difcon-
tinlued this barbarous praaice, so reproachful to the charader of
the nation*. Meanwfhile, those in the town and caffle, though
they had received a supply of money from the Duk~e of Alva t, be-
gan to ifufer for want of provisions. As Morton had destroyed all
the mills in the neighbourhood of the city, and had planted small
garrisons in all the hous~es of firength around it, fearcity daily in-
creased. At last all the mis~eries of famine were felt, and they
must have been soon reduced to such extremities, as would have for-
ced them to capitulate, if the E~nglish and French amballadors had
not procured a fulpention of hostilities, between the two parties f .

Though the negaciation for a marriage, between Elizabeth and League be-

the Duke of An~jou, had been fruitless, both Charles and the were tween Eng-

land and

desirous of concluding a defensive alliance between the two crowns. Franc.
He considered such a treaty, not only as the best device for blind-
ing the Protefiants, the conspiracy against whom was now almost
ripe for execution j but as a good precaution, likewis~e, agrainft the
dangerous consequences, to which that atrocious measure might
expole him. Elizabeth, who had hitherto reigned without a single
ally, saw her kingdom now so threatened with intestine comma-
tions, or expos~ed to invasions from abroad, that she was extreme.
ly solicitous to secure the assistance of so powerful a neighbour.
T'he difficulties, arising from the situation of the Scottifhl Queen,
were thle chief occallons of any delay. Charles demanded some terms
of advantage for M/ary, and her adherents. Elizabeth refused to
liflen to anly proposition of that kind. Her obstinacy overcame
the faint efforts of the French Monarch. Mary's name was not
so much as mentioned in the treaty, and with regard to Scottih .April z:.

BOOK VI. gffairS, a short article was inserted, in general and ambiguous tert4,,

to this purpole, " that the parties conltraaing thall make no in.

57*navations in Scotland; nor fuffer any firanger to enter, and to so-

ment the fa~-ions there; but it fhalll be lawful for the Queen of
England to chailife, by force of arms, those Scots who shall con-
tinue to harbour the English rebels now in Scotland*." In con-
fCequence of this treaty, France and Eng~land affeaed to aA in con-
cert with regard to Scotland, and Du Croc, and Sir William Dru-
ry, appeared there, in name of their refpeaive lovereigns. By
their mediation, a truce, for two months, was agreed upon, and
during that time, conferences were to be held between the leaders
of the opposite fa~iens, in order to accommodate their differences,
and reffore peace to the kingdom. This truce afforded a season-
able interval of tranquillity to the Qpeen's adherents in thre South;
but in the North, it proved fatal to her interest. Sir Adam Gor.
don had ftillmaintained his reputation and thperiority there. Sever-
al parties, under different officers, were sent against him. Some
of them he attacked in the field; against others he emuployed fira-
tagem -, and as his courage and condua were equal, none of his
enterprises failed of s~ucces~s. He made war, too, with the hu-
manity, which became to gallant a man, and gained ground by
that, no les~s than by the terror of his arms. If he had not been
obliged, by the truce, to suspend his operations, he would, in all:
probability, have brought that part of the kingdom to submit en-·
tirely to the Qu~een's authority t·.

Prceed· Notwfithfianding Gordon's brarvery andl f'uccefs, Mary's intereit
ingsinEng- was on the decline, not only in her own kingdom, but amongthe
]lar ag-ainit
Mary. English. Nothing could be more offenfive to that nation, jealouri

of foreigners, and terrified at the profpeB of the Spanish yoke,
than her negociations withl the Duke of Alva. The Parliament,
which met in May, proceeded against her as the most dangerous
enemy of the kingdom; and after a folema conference between
the Lords.and Commons, bothl houses· agreed in bringing in a billt
to declare her guilty of high treafbn, and -to deprive her of all
right of fuccef~ion to the crown. '1his greac call/e, as it was then
called, occupied them during the whole f~effien, and was carried
on with much unanimity. Elizabeth, though the applauded their
zeal, and approved much of the course they were takiing, was fa-
tisfied with thewing Mary what the might expe8 from the re-
fentment of the nation; but as the did not yet think it time to

* Digges, spo, rl91. Camnd. 444, ·f Crawnf. Meom.

prceed to the moil violent extremity against her, the prorogued BOOK V .
the parliament" .

Ther~e severe proceedings of the Engliih Parliament were not 1572-

The French

more mortifying to Mary, than the coldnefsi and negleA of her al- negleat he
lies the French. The IDuke of IVontm~orency, who came over to intereit.
ratify the league with Elizabeth, made a thewof interesting him-
self in her favour, but instead of soliciting for her liberty, or her
refforation to her throne, all that he demanded was a flight miti-
gation of the rigours of her iniprifonment. And tven this Imall
request he urged with so little warmth or importun'ty, that no re-
gard was paid to it t-.

The alliance with France afforded Elizabeth much fatisfa~ion, The massa-~

and the expeaed from it a great increase of Security. She now creof Paris,
turned her whole attention towards Scotland, where the animofities
of the two famious were itillfo high, and to many interfering inte-
rests to be adjuffed, that a general pacification seemed to be at a
great difiance. But while thle laboured to bring them to some
agreement, an event happened which filled a great part of Eu-
rope, with affonithment, and with horror. This was thle mailacre
of Paris; an attempt, to which there is no parallel in thle hittory
of mankind, either for the diflimulation which led to It, or for the
cruelty and barbarity, with which it was put in execution. By
the moit solemn promises of Lfafty and of favour, the leaders of
the Protefiants were drawn to court; and though doomed to de-
itruaion, they were received with careires, loaded with honours,
and treated, for seven months, with every possible mark of fami-
liarity, and of confidence. In the midst of their security, the war. August 24
rant for their deftruaion was iifued by their lovereig~n, on wrhole
word they had relied; and, in obedience to it, their countrymen,
their fellow citizens, and companions, imbrued their hands in
their blood. Ten thousand Protestants, without diftinaion of
age, or s~ex, or condition, were murdered in Paris alone. The
fame barbarous orders were feat to other parts of the kingdom, and a
like carnage enilued. This deed, which no Popith writer, in the
prelent age, mentions without detestation. was, at that time, ap-
plauded in Spain; and at Rome, solemn thanksgivings were of-
fered to God, for its fuccers. But among the Protellants it ex-
cited incredible horror; a firikiing pidure of which is drawn by
the French ambassador at the court of England, in his account
Qfhis firit audience after the massacre. " A gloomy forropr

P'ewes Journ. 206( Ac· t Jfebb P. 5:~2.

T tii

BooK VI. says he, fat on every face; silence, as in the dead of nighlt, reigis..

S' ed through all the chambers of the royal apartment; the ladies.

1572* and tourtiers were ranged on each fide, all clad in deep mourn-

ing, and as I paired through them, not one beffowed on mle a ci-
vil look, or made the least return to my falutes*."

retriment- But horror was not the only patrxon, with which this event in-
al to10~ary's
interest. spired the Protestants; it filled them with fear. They confiderect

it as the prelude to fame greater blow, and believed, not without
great probability, that all the Popith Princes had conspired the
deftru~ion of their sea. This opinion did no imall disservice to
Miary's affairs in Scotland. Many of her adherents were Protef-
tants; and though they wished her refforation, were not willing,
however, on that account, to sacrifice the faith which they pro-
sessed. They dreaded her attachment to a religion, which al-
lowed its votaries to violate the most solemn engagoements, and
prompted them to perpetrate the mos1 barbarous crimes. A ge,
neral confederacy of the Proteatants s~eemed to them, the only
thing that could uphold the Reformation againit the league, which
was formed to overturn it. Nor could the pres~ent eflablifhmnent
of religion be long maintained in Britain, but by a firia union
with Elizabeth, and by the concurrence of both nations, in es,
poufing the defence of it, as a common cause t.

The tegent The Regent took hold of this favourable conjunaure for ne-

no urst gaciating a general peace. And as he laboured for this purpole,

both parties with the utmost- zeal, and the adverse faaion placed entire confi-

dence in his integrity, his endeavours could fearce have failed of
being f~uccef~sful. Maitland and Kirkaldy came To near to an a-·
greement with him, that fecarce anly thing remained, extcept the
formality of signing the treaty. But Morton had not forgotten
the difa~ppintment he met with in his pretenflons to the Regen-
cy; his abilities, his wealth, and the patronage of the court of
England, gave him greater s~way with the party, than even the
Regent himself 3 and he took pleasure in thwnarting~ every measure
pursu~ed by him. Hre was afraid that if Maitland and his affo.
ciates recovered any (hare in the administration, his own influ-
ence would be considerably diminilhed; and the Regent, by their
means, regain that ascendant, which belonged to his flation.
With him, concurred all thole, who were in poffemfon of the lands,
which belonged to any of the Queen's party. And his ambition,
and their avarice, fruffrated the Regent's pious intentions, and re-

* Carte> 3- 522. t Digges, 244, 2C?.

tarded a blessing to neceffiry to the kingdom, as the ef~a~ol~lh. Eaox VL.
ment of peace *. L\·

Such a discovery of the felit(hnefs and ambition, which ref ined Hi Ce~

·among his party, made a deep imprefilon on the Regent, who lov-
ed his country, and wished for peace with much ardour. T`his in-
ward grief broke his spirit, and by degrees, brought on a fettled
melancholy, that ended in a distemper, of which he died on the
z9th of Oaober. He was, perhaps, the only person in the kingdom,
who could have enjoyed the office of Regent, without envy, and
have left it, without loss of reputation. NIotw?~ithfianding their
mutual animoiities, both faAions acknowledged his views to be
honourable, and his integrity to be uncorruptedS.

N~o competitor now appeared against MLorton. The Queen of Mdortanche-

fen Regent.

England powerfully s~upported his claim, and notwithilanding the Novm~ 2a
fears of the people, and the jealousy of the nobles, he was elec't
ed Regent; the fourth, who in the space of five years, had held
that dangerous offce.

As the truce had been prolonged to the firit of January, this

gave him an opportunity of continuing the negociations with the
opposite party, which had been set on foot by his predecessor.
They produced no effeAs, however, till the beginning of the next

year.

Before we proceed to there, some events, hitherto untouched,

deserve our notice.

The Earl of Northumberland, who had been kept prisoner in

Lochleren, ever since his flight into Scotland in the year 1569,
was given up to Lord Hunfdane Governor of Berwfick; and be-
ing carried to York, fuffered there the puniihment of his rebel-
lion. The King's party depended so entirely on Elizabeth's pro-
te~ion, that it was fearce possible for them to refuse putting into
her hands a person who had taken up arms againit her. B~ut as a
fum of money was paid, on that account; and shared betweea
1\Iorton and Douglas of Lochleven, the former of whom, during
his exile in England, had been much indebted to Northumber-
land's friendship, the abandoning this unhappy nobleman, in such
a manner, to certain defirudtian, was deemed an ungrateful and
mercenary aaion J.

This year was remarkable for a considerable innovation in the Afrairs of

government of the Church. Soon after the Reformation, the Po- teC.rh

*Mely. 233. Crawf. Mem. 237. *(- Id. 241.
I Crawf. Mem- 3, 222. Camd.445*

BOOK I. 91111 Biihops being confirmed by law in pofieti~on of part of their

Sbenefices, the spiritual jurifdidion, which belonged to their order

"5i2 was eixercifed by fuperintendants, but with more moderate autho.

rity. On the death of the Archbishop of St. Andlrew's, Mlorton
obtained from the Crown a grant of the temporalities of that fee.
But as it was thought indecent for a layman to hold a benefice,
to which the cure of fouls was annexed, he procured Douglas,
re~tor of the university of St. Andrew's, to be chos~en archbishop;
and allotting him a Emall pension out of the reventres of the fee,
retained the remainder in his own hands. The nobles, who saw
the advantages they might reap from such a pra~tice, supported
hlim in the execution of his plan. It gave great offence, however,
to the Clergy, who, initead of perpetuating an o~rder, whole name
and power was odious to them, wribed that the revenues which
had belonged to it, might be employed in supplying such parithes,
as were still unprovided with fettled paffors. But on the one
hand, it would have been rash in the Clergy to have irritated, too
mtuch, noblemen, on whom the very existence of the Protestant
Church in Scotland depended; and M~orton, on the other, con-
dtuaed his scheme with such dexterity, and managed them witly
so much art, that it was, at last, agreed, in a Convention com-
yofed of the leading men among the Clergy, together with a com-
mnittee of privy council, "' that the name and office of archbi-
ihop, and bilhlop, thould be continued during the King's minority,
and these dignities tbe conferred upon the best qualified among
the Proteffant Ministers; but that with regard to their spiritual
jurifdiitions, they thould be f~ubjea to the general~ assembly of the
Church." The rules to be observed in their eleaion; and the
persons who were to supply the place, and enjoy the privileges,
which belonged to the Dean and Chapter in times of Popery,
wrere likewis~e particulary specified *. And the whole being laid
before the General Assembly, after lame exceptions to the name
ofA'rchbyhop, Dean, Chapter, &c. and a protefiation that it thouldd
be considered only as a temporary conflitution, till one more
perfeQ could be introdtced, it obtained the approbation of that
courtfy. Even Knox, who was prevented from attending the As.
femnbly by the ill slate of his health, though he declaimed loudly
against the Simoniacal paaion, to which Douglas owed his pre-
ferment, and blamed the nomination of a person, worn out witly
ag~e and infirmities, to an office, which required unimpaired vi-

)Fald. 2: 303. t la 3~5+

gaur both of body and mind, seems not to have condemned the BooK VI.
proceedings of the Convention j and in a letter to the Assembly, -
recommended some of th~eir regulations with refpea to the elec- 1572*
tion of Bilhops, as worthy of being carefully observed *. In con-
sequence of the Airembly's consent to the plan agreed upon in the
Convention, Douglas wias inst~alled in his office j and at the fame
time, an archbilhop of Glasgow, and' a bishop of Dunkeld were
chosen frorir among the Protellant Clergy. 'They were all admit-
ted to the place in parliament, which belonged to the ecclefiafti-
cal order·. But in imitation of the example set by Mortorr, such
pa8ions were made with them by different noblemen, as gave
them poffefilon only of a veryi smelt part of the revenues, belong-
ing to their fees(f.

Soon after the breakiisg up of this assembly, Knox, the prime Novem. 27.

infirument of spreading and eitablifhingr the Reformed religion its Death and
Scotland, ended his life, in the 67th year of his age.Zelin aaero
trepidity, difintereflednefs, were 3irtues which he pofrcifed, in an
eminent degree. Hle was acquainted, too, with the learning,
cultivated in that age; and excelled in that species of elaouence,
which is calculated to rode, and to inflamle. His maxims, how-
ever, were often too s~evere, and the impetuosity of his tem~per·
excetive. Rigid and uncomeplying himself, he thlewed no indul-
gence to the infhrmities of others. Regiardlefs of the diflinc~ions
of rank and charaaer, he uttered his admonitions with an acri-
mony and vehemence, more apt to irritate, than to reclain. T'his
often betrayed him into indecent and undatiful expreflions, w ithl
refpeA to the Queen's person and condua. Those very cqualities,
however, which now render his chara~er less amiable, fitted hin
to be the infitrument of Providence for advancing the Refortra
tion, among a fierce people, and enabled him to face danger , and
to surmount opposition, from which, a person of a more gentle fpi-
rit would have been apt to thrink back. By an unwrearied appr~cl-
tion to fludy, and to business, as well as by the frequency and
fervour of his public discourses, he had worn out a conlflitution,
Raturally firong. During a lingering illness, he dis~covered the
utmoff fortitude; and met the approaches of de3th, v ith a mag-
nanimity inseparable from his chalaaer. H~e was conitantly emp-
ployedd in aats of devotion, and comforted himself with thos~e pro-
fpeAs of immortality, which not only preserve good men from
delponding, but fill them with exultation in their last mom-nts,

tj Spott, 26r.

_CSee Appenb No,. V.

EOOK VI. The Earl of Morton, who was present at his funeral, pronouncedl

L-TJ his culog~ium in a few words, the more honourable for Knox, as

1572- they came from one, whom he had often censured with peculiar

severity, " T'here lies He, who never feared the face of man *."

1573* Though Morton did not deiire peace from such generous
hie Regent motives as the former Regent, he laboured, however, in good
treats with earnest, to establish it. T'he public confulions and calamities, to
patheQee' which he owed his powfer and importance when he was only the

second person in the nation, were extremely detrimental to him,
now that he was rairLed to be the firit. While to many of the
nobles continued in arms against him, his authority, as Regrent,
was partial, feeble, and precarious. Elizabeth was no less de.
firous of extinguilhing the flame, which she had kindled, and
kept so long alive in Scotlandt f . Shte had discovered the alliance
wcith France, from which the had expeated such advantages, to
be no foundation of security. And though the appearances of
riendfhip itill fubiffed between her and that court, and Charles
daily renewed his protestations of inviolable adherence to the
treaty, th~e was convinced, by a fatal example, how little the
ought to rely on the plomifes or oathls of that perfidious Monarch,
HIer ambairador warned her that the French held a secret corre-
fpondence wjith MLary's adherents in Scotland, and encouraged
them in their obitinacy t. The Duke of Alva carried on his in-
tr;gues in that kingdom, with less dilrguife. Shle was persuaded
that they wvould embrace the first serene interval, which the com-
motions in France and in thle Netherlanlds wotuld allow them, and
openly attempt to land in Scotland. She res~olved, therefore, to
prevent thleir getting any footing in the island, and to cut off all
thleir hopes of finding any aliftance there, by uniting the two par-
ties.

His over- Th'e ftuation of M~ary's adherents gave the Regent great ad-
turey~ reyc- vanltage" in his negaciations. They were now divided into two
N:aitiand facaions. At the head of the one, were Chatelherault and Hunt-
an Krirkl;3- ly. Mlaitland and Kirkraldy were the leaders of the other. Their

high rank, their extensive property, and the numbers of their fol-
10wers, renldered the former cons~iderable. The latter were in-
deb~ted for their importanlce, to their personal abilities, and to the
I-rength of the castle of Edinburgh, whilch was in their poff~eflion..
T`he Rege~nt had no intention to comprehend both in the fame

Mreaty; but as he dreaded that the Queen's party, if it remained EOOK V .
·entire, would be able to thwart and embarals his adminiffration,
he resolved to divide and to weaken it by a separate negaciation. 5S73*
He made the first overture to Kiirkaldy and his associates, and en-
deavoured to renew the negociation withl them, which, during
the life of his predecessor, had been broken off by his own arti-
fices. But Kirkaldy knew Miorton's views, and fyitem of govern-
ment, to be very differenlt from thos~e of the former Regent. Mait.
land considered him, as a pedfonal and implacable enemy. They
received repeated affiurances of proteaion from France. And
though the siege of Rochelle employed the French arms at that
time, the fame hopes, which had 10 often deceived the party, still
amuled them, and they exipeaed that the obitinacy of the Hugo.
nots, would soon be subdued, and that Charles would then be at
liberty to aB with vigour inl Scotland. Meanwhile, a supply of
money was sent, and if the castle could be held out till Whitfimu-
day, effeauall aid was promiled *. Maitland's genius delighted
in forming schemes, that were enterprising and dangerous; and
Kirkaldy poffeffed the intrepidity, necefiary for putting them in
execution. The caffle, they knew, was to situated that it might
defy all the Regent's power. Elizabeth, they hoped, would not
violate the treaty with France, by Lending forces to his af~ifiance.
And if the French thould be able to land any considerable body
of men, it might be possible to deliver the Queen from captivity,
or at least to balance the influlence of France and England in such
a manner, as to res~cue Scotland from the dinhonourable depend-
nce on the latter, under which it had fallen. This splendid,
but chimerical projea, they preferred to the friendship of Morton.
They encouraged the negociation, however, becaus~e it served to
gain time; they propeled, for the fame purpose, that the whole
of the Queen's party thould be comprehended in it, and that Kir-
kaldy should retain the command of the cattle, fix months after
the treaty was Egrned. His interest prompted the Regent to re-
jeB the former; bis penetration fuggefied the danger of comply-
ing with the latter; and all hopes o( accommodation vanished J.

As soon as the truce expired, Kirkaldy began to fire on the

city of Edinburgh, which, by the return of the inhabitants whom
he had expelled, was devoted as zealously, as ever, to the King's
calufe. But as the Regent had now set on foot, a treaty with

·t Mely. 235, &c.

Boox VI. Chatelherault and Huntly-, the celfation of arms flill continued

-Ywith them.

Artce 15~7 - ?'They were '1efs scrupulous thian the other party, and lillened
the treaty. eagerly to his overtures. The Dukie was naturally uniteady, and
Feb. 23* the approach of old age increased his irresolution, and avertion to

allion. T'he miseries of civil discord had af~iaed Scotland, al-
Inoft five years, a length of time far beyond the duration of any
former contest. The war, inficad of doing service, had been de-.
trimental to the Queen; and more ruinous than any foreign in.
vaiion, to the kingdom. In prosecuting it, neither party had
gained much honour; both had fuffered great losses; and had ex-
hauffed their own estates, in wasting those of their adversaries.
The commons were in thle utmolt misery, and longed ardently
for a peace, which might terminate this fruitless, but deftrunive
iluarrel.

Accepted A great flep was taken towards this desirable event, by the

ry C~thl-~a;lnd treaty concluded at Perth, between the Regent on one hand, and

Hluntly. Chatelherault and Huntly on the other, under the mediation of

Killegrew, Elizabeth's ambassador *. The chief articles in it
were there; that all the parties comprehended in the treaty thould
declare their approbation of the Reformed religion, now establish-
ed in the kingdom; that they th~ould submit to the King's govern-
ment, and own M/orton's authority as Regent; that they thould
acknowledge every thing done in opposition to the King, since
his coronation, to be illegal; that on both sides, the prisoners
who had been taken thould be set at liberty, and the lands reffor-
ed to their proper owners; that the aB of attainder passed against
the Queen's adherents thould be repealed, and indemnity granted
for all the crimes, of which they had been guilty since the 15th
of June 1567; that the treaty flrould be ratified, by the common
consent of both parties, in parliament J.

Siege of the Kirkaldy, though abandoned by his allociates, who neither dil-
castle of E-
dinbu~hrgh. covered solicitude nor made proviiion for his safety, did not 10fe

courage, nor entertain any thoughts of accommodation t. And
though all Scotland had now submitted to the King, he flill re,

* See Append. No. VI. -t Crawf. Mem. 2st.
$ Mlelvil, wvhole brother Sir Robert w-as one of thos~e who joined with Kir·

haldy in the defence of the caffle, and w-ho w~as himself firongly attached to
their party, asserts that Kirkaldy or~ered to accept of any reasonable terms of
composition, but that all his offers were rejeaed by the Regent. M\ely. 240. But
as Elizabeth was, at that time, extremely desirous of refioring peace in Scot.
lond, and her ambassador Kiillegrewf, as well as the Earl of Itothes, used the,ir

falved to defend the caffle, in the Queen's name; and to wait BOOK VI.
the arrival of the promfied succours. 'The Regent was in want -
of every thing necessary for carrying on a siege. But Elizabeth, 73
who determined, at any rate, to bring the diffentions in Scotland
to a period, before the French could find leisure to takre part in
the quarrel, soon at~orded him fuffcient supplies. Sir William
DUrury marched into Scotland, with fifteen hundred foot, and a
considerable train of artillery. The Regent joined him, with all
his forces; and trenches were opened, and approaches regularly April-5.
carried on, against the castle. Kirkaldy, though discouraged by
the lofTs of a great fum of money, remitted to him from France,
and which fell into the Regent's hands, through the treachery of
Sir James Balfour, the moRl corrupt manl of that age, defended
himself w ith bravery, augmented by deifpair. T`hree and thirty
days he refilied all the efforts of the Scots and English, who puihl-
ed on their attacks, with courage, and with emulation. Nor did
he demand a parly, till the fortifications were battered down, and
onle of the wells in the castle dried up, and the other choaked
with rubbish. Even then, his spirit was unfubdued, and he de-
termined rather to fall gloriously behind the last intrenchment,
than to yield to his inveterate enemies. But his garrison was not
animated with the fame heroic and desperate resolution, and rif`-
ing in a mutiny, forced him to capitulate. He surrendered him- M~ay 29.
self to Drury, who promiled, in the name of his miftrers, that he
thould be favourably treated. Together with him, James Kir-
kaldy his brother, Lord Home, Maitland, Sir Robert Melvil, a
few citizens of Edinburgh, and about one hundred and sixty f~ol-
diers were made prisoners*.

Several of the officers, who had been kept in pay during the

war, prevailed on their men to accompany them into the Low-
countries, and entering into the service of the slates, added, by
their gallant behaviour, to the reputation for military virtue,
which has always been the charaeaeriffic of the Scottish nation.

T`hus by the treaty with Chatelberault and Huntly, and the Review of

surrender of the caffle, the civil wars in Scotland were brought ther as at

parties.

unmoRt endeavours to persuade Kirkaldy to accede to the treaty of Perth, it seems
more credible to impute the continuance of hostilities to K~irkaldy's obitinacy-,
his diftrudl of Morton, or his hope of foreign aid, than to any other cause.

That this was really the caf~e, is evident from the politive teitimony of Spotfiv

"-69, 2:. Cnmd. 448. JohnR. Hist 3, a Digge~ss 334 CrJwford's account
agreres, in the main, with the~irs, Mem. 263-

* Cald. 2. 48. M~ely.q 24. raws. Mem. 265*

vU i

BOOK * (O a period. When we review the slate of the nation, and con,~

pare the firength of the two faalons, Mary's partizans among the

53*nobles appear, maanifefily, to have been superior both in numbers,

and in power. But there advantages were more than counterba.
Ianced by others, wrhich their antagonists enjoyed. Political abi-
lities, military skill, and all the talents, which times of aaiona

'form, or call forth, appeared chieP.y on the King's fide. Nor

could their enemies boast of any man, who equalled the intrepi-
dity of Murray, tempered with wisdom; the profound sag~acity of
' Morton; the subtle genius, and insinuating address of Maitland;
or the fauccefsful valour of Kirkaldy; all which were, at firit, em.
ployed in laying the foundations of the King's authority. On the
one fide, m~easures were concerted with prudence, and executed
with vigour; on the other, their resolutions were rath, and their
conduat feeble. The people, animated with zeal for religion, and
prompted by indignation against the Queen, warmly f~upportedi
the King's cause. The Clergy threw the whole weight of their /
popularity Into the fame scale. By means of there, as well as by
the powerful interposition of England, the King's government
was Sinally established. Mary 10ft even that thadow of s~overeignty
which, amidst all her fufferings, thee had hitherto retained among
her own fubjeAs. And as the was no longer permitted to have
an ambairador at the court of England, the only mark of dignity
which the had, for~fome time, enjoyed there, the must henceforth
be considered as an exile firipped of all the ensigns of royalty;
guarded with anxiety in thse one kingdomj and totally deserted·
or forgotten insthe other.

Ki;rkaldy Kirkialdy and his associates remained in Drury's cuffody, and

were treated by him with great humanity, till the Queen of Eng-
land, wr~hole prisoners they were, thould determine their fate.
Morton insisted that they thould fuffer the punishment, due to their
rebellion and obitinacy; and declared that to long as they were
allowed to live, he did not reckon his ow-n person or authority
secure 3 and Elizabeth, without regarding Drury's honottr, or his
promises in her name, abandoned themi to the Regent's dilpofal.

Augutt 3. He first confined them to separate prisons; and, soon after, with

Elizabeth's content, condemned Kirkaldy, and his brother, to be
hanged at the cross of Edinburgh. Maitland, who did not exc-
peA to be treated more favourably, prevented the ignorniny of a
public execution, by a voluntary death, and " ended~r his days,
says Melvil, after the old Roman fashion *"~~

* Mely. 242.

Wi5hile the Regent was wreaking his vengeance on the xemain~s Boax YL

of her party in Scotland, 111ary, incapable of aff~ording them any
relief, bewailed their misfortunes in the solitude of her p~rison. I p p
At the fame time, her health began to be much impaired by con-
finement, and want of exercise. At the entreaty of the French
ambassador, Lord Shrewsbury her keeper was permitted to carry
hier to Buxton-wells, not far from Tuthbury, the place of her im-
prifonment. Cecil, who had lately been created Earon of Bur-
leigh1, and Lord High I'reafurer of England, happened t~o be there
at the f~rame time. And though no Ivliniller ever entered more
warmly into the views of a sovereign, or gave firong'er proofs of
his fidelity and attachment, than this great man, yet such was Eli-
zabeth's diftruff of every pedfon, who approached the Queen of
Scots, that her ~fulicions even extended to him; and while M~ary
justly reckoned him her molt dangerous enemy, he found some
difficulty in perfuadingr his own millrels, that he was not partial
to that unhappy Quteen*;

The Duk~e of Alva was this year recalled from the government

of the Netherlands, where his haughty and opprdlive adminiltra-
tion roused a spirit, in attempting to subdue which, Spain exharull-
ed its treasures, ruined its armies, and 10ft its glory. Reqjuef us,
who facceeded him, was of a milder temper, and of a less enter-
prifingr genius. This event delivered Elizabeth from the perpe-
tual disquietude, occasioned by Alva's negociations with the Scot-
tilh Vueen, and his zeal for her interest.

Though the kingdom was noiv fettled in profound peace, many 1374*

of the evils, which accompany civil war, were still felt. The re T~e E~
ftraints of lawv, which, in times of public confusion, are little re- a dMutp
garded even by civilized nations, were totally deifpiled by a fierce becomess,
people, unaccuffomed to the regular admriniftration of jefti~e. The <iu
disorders in every corner of the kingdom were become mntolerable;
and under the prote~ion of the one, or the other fa~tion, crimes
of every kind were committed, with imprunity. The Regent set
himself to redres~s these, and by his induff ry and vigour, order and
security were re-eftablifhecd in the kingdom. But he loft the re-
pu"tation, due to this important service, by the avarice, which he
discovered, in performing it; and his own exaamous became more
pernicious to the nation, than all the irregularities, which he re-
itrained-t. Spies and informers were every where employed; the
remembrance of old offences was revived; ima.ginary crimes were

SStrylpe, 2. 248, 288 . ·t See Append, So. V'IL

BOOK71* itVented; petty trespasses were aggravated; and delinquents were

forced to compound for their lives, by the payment of exorbitant

54*fines. At the fame time, the currenlt coin was debafed~j licenceJ

were fold for carrying on prohibited branches of commerce, un-
usual taxes were imposed on commodities ; and all the refinements
1In oppreiron, from which, nations so imperfea1y polished as the
Scots are usually exernpted, were put inl praaice. None of these
wfere complained of more loudly·, or with greater reason, than his
injuffice towards the Church. The thirds of benefices, out of
wvhich the Clergy received their subsistence, had been slowly and
irregularly paid to colleAors, appointed by the General Airembly;
and during the civil wars, no pay8ment could be obtained in fev~e-
ral parts of the kingdomt. Under colour of redressing this griev-
ance, and upon a promile of affigningg every Minister a flipend
within his own parifhl, the Regent extorted from the Church the
thirds to which they had right by law. But the Clergy, inflead
of reaping any advantage from this alteration, found that payments
became more irregular and dilatory than ever. One Miniffer,
with a pitiful salary, was commonly burdened wiith the care of four
or five parishes, and the Regent's insatiable avarice seized on the
reft of the fund-i.

'The death of Charles IX. which happeined this year, wras a new

tinisfortune to Mary. H-enry III. who succeeded him, had not
the fame attachment to her person, and his jealousy of the house
of Guise, and oblequiodfnefs to the Queen M~other, greatly alie-
nated him from her interest.

'575. The death of the Duke of Chatelherault must likewise be con·
a~nuary 2:- fidered as some loss to Mary. As the parliament had frequently

declared him next heir to the Crown, this entitled him to great
refped among his countrymen, and enabled him, more than any
othcr person in the kingdom, to counterbalance the Regent's power.

Soon after, at one of the usual interviews between the wardens

of the Scots and Engrlifh marches, a fcuf~e happened, in which

* The corruption of the coin, d~uring Morton's adlminiffration, was very greant.

Although the quantity of current money coinedj ouit of a pound of Bullion, wa~s
gradually increas~ed by former princes; the flandard or finenels fulfered liale
aljteration, and the mixtuie of alloy w-as nearly the fame, with wihat isnowv used.
B~ut Mlorton mixed a fourth part of alloy, with everypIound of silver, and funk
by consequence, the value of coin, in proportion. In the year 138r, all the mo-
ney- ioined by him was called in, and! appointed to be recoined. The flandard
n as ref lered to'the fame purity as former-ly. Rudd~im· Prd. to And·ers. Diplonz.

the English were worited; a few killed on the spot; and Sir James BOOK V}.
Foreffer the warden, with fetveral gentlemen who attended him, V
taken prisoners. But both Elizabeth and the Regent were too I575.
fenfble of the advantage, which resulted from the good under-
Handingg thnt subsisted between the two kingdoms, to allow this
fig~ht accident to interrupt it.

The domeltic tranquillity of the kingdom was in some danger Attempts of

of being diflurbed by anoth~er cause. Though the persons, raised ahe Ce~
to the dignity of bithops, poL~effed very small revenues, and a very ip~itcopal
moderate degree of power, the Clergy, to w~hom the Regent and order,
all his measures were become extremely odious, began to be jealous
of that order. Knowing that corruptions iteal into the Church,
gradually, under honourable names, and upon decent pretences,
they were afraid that, from such imall beginnings, the hierarchy
might grow, in time, to be as powerful and oppreirve as ever. The
chief author of there: fulpficions was Mr. Andrew Melvil, a man,
dillinguilhled by his uncommon erudition, by the severity of his
manners, and the intrepidity of his mind. But, bred up in the
retirement of an academy, he was unacquainted wFith the arts of
life; and being more attentive to the ends which he pursued, than
to the means which he employed for promoting them, he often
defeated laudable designs, by the impetuosity and imprudence with
which he carried them on. A question was moved by him in the
assembly, "' whether the office of bishop, as now exercised in th~e
kingdom, were agreeable to the word of God ?" In the ecclesial-
tical judicatories, continual complaints were made of the bishops,
for negleft of duty, many of which, their known remilnefs too
waell jufitfied. 'The b~ihop of Dunkeld, being acculed of delapi-
dating his benefice, was found guilty by the assembly. And the
Regent, inficad of checking, connived at thes~e dilputes about Ec-.
cdefialtical government, as they diverted the zeal of the Clergy
from attending to his daily encroachments on the patrimony of
the Church*.

The weight of the Regent's oppreffivee administration, had, hi. 1376.

therto, fallen chiefly on those in the lower, and middle rank; but He irritates

some of the

he began now to take such iteps, as convinced the nobles, that nobles.
their dignity would not long exempt them from feeling the effe£1s
of his power. An accident, which was a frequent caus~e of diffen-
tion among the Scottith nobles, occafianed a difference between
Ihe Earls of Argyle and Athole. A vassal of thle former had made

* Cald Assemblies, 15-4, &~c. JohdlB Hist, IS*

BOOK VL f ome depredations on the lands of the latter. Athole took armns

-'-to punish the offender; Argyle, to proteat him; and this ignoble
56.quarrel they were ready to decide in the field, when the Regent,

by interpoling his auithority, obliged them to disband their forces.
B~othi of them had been guilty 0: irregularities, which, though-
common, were contrary to the letter of the law. Of these the
Regent took advantage, and resolved to found on them a charge
of treason. This deiign was revealed to the two Earls by one of
M'orton's retainers. The common danger, to which they were
expos~ed, compelled them to forget 01d quarrels, and to unite in a
clos~e confederacy, for their mutual defence. Their junaion ren-
dered them formidable; they despised the summons which the
Regent gave them to appear before a Court of juffice, and he was
obliged to desist from any further prosecution. But the injury
he intended made a deep impreflion, and drew on him severe
vengeance'.

P5:77 Nlror was he more fucceleful in an attempt, which he made, to

load Lord Claud Hamilton with the guilt of having formed a con-
fpiracy againf1 his life. Though those, who were supposed to be
hris accomplices were seized, and tortured, no evidence of any
thing criminal appeared; but, on the contrary, many circum-
itances discovered his innocence, as well as th~e Regent's secret
views, in imputing to him fuILch an odious design f.

a-y turn The Scottiih Nobles, who were almost equal to their Maonarchs
toarsthe in power, and treated by them with much difiniaon, observed

-~i there arbitrary proceedings of a Regent, with the utmost indig-

nation. The people, wvho under a form of government extreme-
ly fimnple, had been little accuffomed to thle burden of taxes, com-
plained loudly of the Regent's rapacity. And all began to turn
their eyes towards thle young King, from whom they expeacd the
redrdfs of all their grievances, and the return of a more gentle,
and more equal adminiffratioan.

Jamefs e- James was now in the twelfth year of his age. The Qu~een

on.ii,; soon atfter his birth, had committed him to the care of the Earl of

TMbE Mar, and during the civil wars,' he had resided l~ecurely in the

caflle of Stirling. Alexander Erikrine, that nobleman's brother,
had the chief direaion of his education. Under him, was the fa-
raous Buchanan, together with three other preceptors, thle mast
eminent, the nation afforded, for skill in those s~ciences, which were
deemed n~ecessary for a Prince. The young K~ing thewed an un-

r Cr·awf. Mem. 285. t Ib~id. 297

contman patiosn for learning, and made great progrels in it. And BOOK VL·
the Scots fancied that they already dilcovered in him, all those vir-
tues, which the fondness or credulity of faubjects urhally alcribe to ~577·
princes delling their minority. But as James was still far from that
age, at which, he was permitted, by law, to afiume the reins of
government, the Regent did not fufmciently attend to the feuti-
Ipntus of the people, nor reflec?, how eaturally there prejudices
in hris favour might encourage the King to anticipate thdt period.
He: not only negleacd to focure the friend'bip of thole, whlo were
about the King·'s person, and who ponfferd his ear, but had evtn
exasperated some of them, by personal injuries. Their resen~tment He; is thfpi
concurred with the ambition of others, in infuting into the King~ cious of thle
early fulpricions of IVorton's power and designs. A Kinlg, they ,,
told h:im, had~ often reason to fear, seldom to love a Regent.
Prompted by amnbition, and by in~terest, he would endeavour tokGeep
the prinlce in perpetual infancy, at a difiance from his fubje~ts, and
unacquainted with bufinels. A small degree of vigour·, however,
was fufficient to breaki the yoke. Subje~ts naturally reverence
their Sovereign, and become impatient of the temporary and de-.
Legated jurifidl~iion of a Regent. Morton had governed with a ri-
gour, unknown to the ancient M~onarchs of Scotland. The na-
tion groaned under his oppreifiions; and would welcome the first
profpea~ of' a milder aIdminiffration. At prelent, the King's name
was fearce mentioned in Scotland, his friend-, were without in-
iluence, and his favourites without honour. But one effort would
discover Morton's power to be as feeble, as itwas arbitrary. The
fame attempt would put himself in poiremlon of his just authority,
and rescue thle nation from intolerable tyranny. If he did not re-
gard his own rights as a King, let him listen, at least, to the cries
of his people *.

There fuggeflions made a deep imprelfion on the young King, Aplotterm.

who was trained up in an opinion that he was born to command. againR the
H~is approbation of the design, however, was of small confequence,Rent
without the concurrence of the nobles. The Ead-s of Argyle and
Athole, two of the molt powerful of th~at body, were animated
with implacable resentment against the Regent. To them the Ca-
hal in Stirling-cattle communicated the plot, which was on foot;
and they entering warmly into it, Alexander Erikine, who, since
the death of his brother, and during the minority of his nephew,
had the command of that Cort, and the cuffody of the King's per-
son, admitted them secretly into thle King's presence. They gave

* Mely 247.

BOOK VIl. him the fame account of the mnif~ery of his fabjeas, under the Re-

Sgent's arbitrary adminiffration; they complained loudly of thein-

J517*· juffice, with which themselves had been treated; and befoughtl

the King, as the only means for redressing the grievances of the
nation, to call a coundil of the whole nobles. James cod~ented,
and letters were iffuedt, in his name, for that purpole; but the
two Earls took care that they thould be sent only to those, who'
were~ known to bear no good will to Mortort*,

IF78. The number of these was, however, so considerable, that, on
MIarch 4. the day appointed, far the greater part of the frobles assembled at

Stirling; and to highly were they inrcenfed against Morton, that
although, on receiving intelligence of Argyle and Athole's inter-
view with the King, he had made a feint as if he would refign'
the Regency, theyr advised the King, without regakding this of-
ser, to deprive him of his office, and to take the admniniffration of
government into hris own hands. Lord Glamis the Chancellor,
and Herrcis, were appointed to signify this resolution to Mlorton,
who was, at that time, in Dalkeith, his usual place of residence.
Nothing could equal the joy, with which this onexpeaed refolu-

Herengns tion filled the nation, but the Surprise occasioned by the seeming
18dor i
ees. alacrity, with which the Regent defeended frott so highi a flation.

He neither wanted sagacity to' foresee the danger of refigrning,
£10r inclination to keep poffetion of an ofmee, for the exupiration
of which, the law haid fixed 10 distant a term. But all thle sources,
whence the faAlon, of which he was head, had derived their
strength, were either failed, or now Supplied` his adversaries with
the means 'of humbling him. The Commons, the city of Edin-
burgh,' the Clergy, were all totally alienated front hirn, by his
2nultiplied opprelrions. Elizabeth, having lately boubd herself,
by treaty, to fend a considerable body of troops to the alliftance
of the inhabitants of the Netherhands, who were firuggling for
liberty, had little leis~ure to attend to the affairs of Scotland; and
as the had nothing to dread from France, in whole councils the
princes of Lorrain hlad not, at that time, much influence, the
was slot displeased, perhaps, at the birth of new faAions in the
Skingdom. Even those nobles, who had long been joined with
Mortori ia fa~tion, or whom he had attached to his person by be-
nefits, Glamis, Lindsay, Ruthven, Pitcairn the Secretary, Mur.
ray of Tillibardin Comptroller, all deserted his falling fortunes,
and appeared in the council at Stirling. So mauny concurring cir-
cumitances, convinced Morton of his own weakners, and deter-

* spotfw. 27?.

aidned him to give way to a torrent, which was too impetuous to Boose VI.
be; : : d. He attended the Chancellor and Herreis to Edin-
buigh; was present when the King's acceptance of the govern-
ment was proclaimeda; and, in the presence of the people, furren-
dered to the King, all the authority, to which he had any claim
in virtue of his office. This ceremony was accompanied with
such exceliv~e joy and acolamations of the multitude, as added no
damt t~o the anguish, which an ambitious spirit must feel, when
comupehrd to renlounce s~upreme power 3 and convinced Mlorton
howN elntirely he had 10ft the affeAions of his countrymen. He
at tiaied, howvever, from the King an aB containing the approba-
tion of every thing done by him in the exercis~e of his office, and
a pardon, in the moil ample form, that his fear or caution could
devile of all pall offences, crimes, and treafons. The nobles,
who adhered to the King, bound themselves, under a great pe-
nalty, to procure the ratification of this na, in the first parlia-
ment*,

A council of twelve nobles was appointed to afift8 the King, in continues

thle adminiffration of affairs. And Morton, deserted by his own "'"adnhhe
party, and unable to firugrgle with the fa~ion, which governed theadiverf~e
absolutely at court, retired to one of his feats, and seemed to en- party.
joy the tranquillity, and to be occupied only in the amulements,
of a country life. His mind, however, was deeply difquieted with
all the uneafyr refleaions, which accompany disappointed ambition,
and intent on schemes for recovering his former grandeur. Even
in this retreat, which the people called the ILion's-dePn, his wealth
and abilities rendered him formidable. And the new Counsellors
were so imprudent as to route him, by the precipitancy with which
they hastened to firip him of all remains of power. They requir-
ed him to surrender the cattle of Ediqburgh, which was flill in
his poiletiron. He refused at sirs1 to do so, and began to prepare
for its defence; but the citizens of Edinburgh having taken arms,
and repulled a part of the garrison, which was sent out to
guard a convoy of provilions, he was obliged to give up that im-
portant fortress, without refillance. This encouraged his adver-
faries to call a parliament to meet at Edinburgh, and to multiply
their demands upon him, in such a mannner, as convinced him
that nothing less than his utter ruin would satisfy their inveteratC
11atred.

Their plower and popularity, however, began already to de-

cline. The Chancellor, the ablest and most moderate man in the

C Spotf~r, 2j8. Crawvf. Mem, 289. Cald. 2. 522.

Sx iJ

Boob VrI. Fprty, having been k~illed at Stirling, in an accidental rencounteF

between his followers, and those of the Earl of Crawford , Athole

57*who was appointed his lucceffor in that bigh office, the Earls of

Eglinton, Cathnefs, and Lord Ogrilvie, all the prime favolurites
at court, were either avowied papifts, or fulpe.Ae of leaning to,
the opinions of that sea. In an age, when the return of Popery
was, so much, and so juff ly, dreaded, this gave universal alarm
And as Mlorton had always treated the papifts with rigour, this
unle~afonable indulgence made all zealous Protellants remember
that circumst~ance in his adminiffration, with great praile *

Refbmeshnis Morton, to whom none of these particulars were unk~nowrn,
thrmerffl~ au- thougsht this thle proper jun£1ure for setting to work; the infiru.

ments, which he had been preparing·. Having gained the confi-
dence of th~e Earl of Malr, and of' thle Countes~s his mother, he in-
finuated to them that Alexander Erfikine had fortned a plot to de-
prive his nephew of the government of Stidling caflie, and the
cuffody of thle Kiing's person; and cafily induced an, ambitious wo-
man, and a youth of twenty, to employ force to prevent th~is flp-
posed injury. The Earl repairing, suddenly, to Stirling, and be-
ing admitted, as usual, into the caffle wvith: his attendants, fEiz~d

April 26. the gates early in the morning, and turned out his uncle, who

dreaded no danger from his hands. The soldiers of th~e garrifcx
submitted to him as their governor, and, with little danger, and
no effalon of blood, he became matter both of thle K~ing's person,
and the fortress?-.

An event 10 unexpe~ted occalloned great conflerqation. And

though Morton's hand did not appear in the execution, he was
universally believed to be the author of the attempt. The new
Counsellors saw it to be necessary, for their own s~afety, to change
their measures, and inficad of pursuing him with1 such implacable
relentmnent, to enter into terms of accommodation with an adlver-
fary, flill 10 capable of creating them trouble. Four were named,
on each fide, to adjust their differences. They met not far from
Dalkieith. And when they had brought matters ne-r a conclusion,
M~ort-on, who was too sagacious not to improv~e the adv-!ntage,

nlay 24* which their security and their attention to the treaty afforded hlim,

set out in thle night-time for Stirling, snd having gained Murray
of T illibardin, Mar's uncle, was admitted by him into thlecaffle;
and managing matters there with his dual dexterity, he had soon
more the command of thte fort, than the Earil himself. He w s

? spotfw. 283. t Cald· 2. 535-

I~lkewife admitted to a feat in the privy council, and acquired the Boovrev.
faine ascendant in it ". -

As the time appointed for theo meeting of parliament at Edin, 5l

burg:h now approached, thiis gave him some anxiety. He was
afraid of carrying the youngi King to a city, whole inhabitants were
to much at thle devotion of the adverse faction. He was no less
unwilling toleave Jzmes behind at Stirling. In order to avoid this
dilemma, he illinedd a proclamation, in thie K~ing's name, changing
the place of meeting from Edinburgh to Stirling caffle. T`his,
Athole an~d his party represented as a step altogether unconftitu-
tional. The Kiing, skid they, is Morton's prisoner; the pretend-
ed Councellors are his slaves; a parliament, to which all the no-
bles mny repair without fear, and where they may deliberate with
freedora, is absolutely tIeceifary for feettling the nation, after dif-
orders of fachl long continuance. But in an assembly, called con-
trary to all form, he~ld within the walls of a garrison, and overs
awed by armed men, what safety could members expeA ? what
liberty could prevail in debate ? or what benefit result to the pu-
blic ? The Parliament met, however, on the day appointed, and July =5.
notwrithftanding the proteflation of the Earl of Montrose and Lord
Lindsay, in name of their party, proceeded to business. The
K~ing's acceptance of the government was confirmed; the a&2
granted to Morton, for his security, ratified; faome regulations,
with regard to the numbers and authority of the privy council, were
agreed upon; and a pension for life granted to the Counters of
Mfar, who had been to infirumental in bringing about the late re-
volution f.

Meanwhile, Argyle, Athole, and their followers, took arms, Argyle and

upon the specious pretence of rescuing the King from captivity, ae
and the kingdom from oppression. James himself, impatient of him.
thle servitude in which he was held, by a man whom he had long
been taught to hate, secretly encouraged their enterprise a though,
at thle fame time, he was obliged not only to disavow them in pu-
b~lic, but to levy forces against them, and even to declare, by pro-
clamation, that he was perfe81y free from any confiraint, either
upon his person, or his will. Eoth sides quickly took the field.
Argyle and Athole were at thle head of seven thousand men;
the Earl of Angus, Morton's nephew, met them with an army
fivet~houfand firongr; neither party, however, was eager to engrage. Auguit Ix,
;1orton diftruffed the fidclity of his own troops. The two Earls

* Cald. -. 536. ·i 1bid. 2. 5;:, rTarl V. Jac,. S`I.

nOOK vt· were renfble that a single viaory, however complete, would not,

CLIbe decisive 3 and as they were in no condition to undertake the
57*siege of Stirling caffle, where the king was krept, their firengtly

would froon, be exhaulted, while Mlorton's own wealth, and the pa-
trortage of the Qu~een of England, might furnish him with endless
resources. By the mediation of Bowes, whom Elizabeth had sent
into Scotland to rnegociate an accommodation between the two

Elizabethn faaious, a treaty was concluded, in consequence of which, Argyle
negomiates and Athole were admitted into the King's prelence; some of
modation their party were added to the privy council; and a Convention

tween of nobles called, in order to bring all remaining diffrences to

an amicable iirue *

So soon as James aflamed the government into his own hands,

he dispatched the abbot of Dunfermling to inform Elizabeth of
that event j to offer to renew the alliance between the two king-
doms ; and to demand poffefion of the estate, which had lately
fallen to him, by the death of his grand mothe~r, the Countels of
Lennox. That Lady's second son had left one daughter, Arabells
Stewart, who was born in England. Ancf as the chief obje~tios
again~t the pretentions of the Scottith line to the crown of Engr.
land, wias that maxim of Englilh law, which excludes aliens
from any right of inheritance within the kingdom, Elizabeth, by
granting this demand, would have eftablithled a precedent in
James's favour, that might have been esteemed decisive, with re-
ganrd to a point, which it had been her ponflant cars; to keep unde-
decided. WTithopt. fufferinrg this delicate question to be tried, or
allowing any new light to be thrown on that, which the confi.
dered as the great myfiery of her reign, f1e commanded the rents
of the enate to be fequeffered by Lord Burleigh, matter of the
wards; and by this method of proceeding, gave the Scottith King
early warning howy nece~fary it would be to court her favour, if
ever he hloped for success in claims of greater iroportance, but
equally liable to Ipe controverted t.

J379* After; many delays, and with much difficulty, the contending

nobles were at last brought to igme agreement. But it was follow-

April 24- ed by' a tragical event. Alorton, in token of reconcilement, having

invited the leaders of the opposite party to a great entertainment,
Athole the Chancellor was, soon after, taken ill, and died within
a few days. The lymptoms and violence of the dileafe gave rife
to Prong ful'picians of his being poisoned. And though the phy~

SCrawf. Il1em. d30p - Camnd. 46z.

Gcians, who opened his body, differed in opinion as to t~he caule Rocs vt.
of the distemper, the Chancellor's relations publicly accused M~or-
ton of that odious crime. And the advantage which visibly ac- 1S5 9-
crued to him, by the removal of a man of great abilities, and a-
verse from all his measures, was fuffcient proof of his guilt to the
people, who are ever fond of imputing the dedith of eminent per-
sons to extraordinary causes *.

The officee of Chancellor was bellowed upon Argyple, whom this Morton's i;-
preferment reconciled, in a great measure, to Morton's admini_ ealpo
firation. He had now recovered lall the authority he poffeffed gainft the
duringh his Regency, and had entirely brokers, or baffled, the power ls
gnd cabals of his enemies. None of the great families remained to
be the objeAs of his jealoufyr, or to obitrua his designs, but thast
of Hamilton. The Earl of Arran, the eldest brother, had never
recovered the thock, wh~ich he received from the ill success
of his patiron for the Queen, and had now altogether 1011 his rea-
son. Lord Johri, the second brother, was in poffeffiott of the fa-
mily eflate. L~ord Claud w~as Coinmendator of Paisley; both of
them young men, ambitious and exiterprifing. Morton dreaded
their influence in the kingdom; the courtiers hoped to fhure their
spoils among them; and as all Princes naturally viecw their iAccef-
fors with jealousy and hatred, it was easy to infuse there patiions
into the mind of the young K~ing. A pretence was at hand t3·
juffify the most violent proceedings. The pardon, flipulated in
the treaty of Perth, did not extend to thole, whlo were accessory
to the murder of the Regents M'urray, or Lennox.u Lord John
sind hris brother were fufpeaed of being the authors of both these
crimes, and had been included in a general aB of attainder on
that account. Without summoning them to trial, or examining
a fmngle witness to prove the charge, this- attainder was now thought~
filfficient to fubjeat them to all the penalties, which they would
have incurred by being formally conviaed. The Earls of Mor-
ton, M'ar, and Eglinton, together with the Lords R~uthven, Boyd,
and Cath~cart, received a commillion to seize their persons and
eflates. On a few hours warning, a considerable body of troops
was ready, and marched towards H-amilton, in hoffile array.
Happily, the two brothers made their eicape, though with great
diil~culty. But their lands were confiscated. The caliles of Ha-
milton and Draffan besieged; those who defended them punished.
The Earl of Arran, though incapable, from his situation. of com-
mitting any crime, was involved, by a shameful abule of law, in

* Spotfw. 306.

Roos vt. the common ruin of his family; and as if he, too, could have been

gruilty of rebellion, confined a clos~e prifroner. T'here proceedings,

17 so contrary to thle fundamental principles of justice, were allratified

in the fablequent parliamcent #.

About~ this time, M~aly sent by Naui: her secretary, a letter to

her son, together with fame jewels of value, and a vest embroider-
ed with her own hands. Eut as the gave him only the title of
Prinlce of Scotland, the messenger was difmiffied, without being
admitted into his presences·.

Negocia- T'hough Elizabeth had, at this time, no particulrir reason to fear
tions for a
mamange any attempt of the Popilh Princes, in M~ary's favour, the still con.
between E- tinued to guard her with the fame anxious care. T'he acquifitionl
lizabethand
the Duke of of Portug~al, on the one hand, and the defence of the Netherlands,
Aleilon. on the other, fully employed the councils and arms of Spain.

France, torn in pieces by intelline commotions, and under a weak
and capricious prince, delpiled and difiruffed by h~is owns fubjeas,
was in no condition to dillaib its neighbour-s. Elizabeth had long;
amused that court by carrying on a treaty of marriage wfith the
Duke of Alencon, the King's brother. But whether, at the age
of forty-five, the really intended to marry a Prince of twenty ?
whether the pleafulre of being flattered and courted, made her lif-
ten to the addressers of so youngs a lov~er, whom the allowed to vi-
fit her at two different times, and treated with the most diftin-
guilhing refpea ? or whether considerations of interest, predomi-
nated in this, as well as in every other tranfnaion of her reign,
are problems in history, which wye are not concerned to resolve ?
During the progrrefs of this negociation, which was drawn out to
an extraordinaryi length, Mi~aryi could expea no allifiance from the
French court, and seems to have held little correspondence with
it. And there was no period in her reign, whereinl Elizabeth
enjoyed more perf~ea s~ecurity.

Twiofavour. Morton seems, at this tirne, to have been equally secure; but
a 0~: his security was not so well founded. H-e had weathered out
ver James. one florm, had crushed his adversaries, and was again in pofff-

sion of the sole direaion of affairs. But as thle King was now of
as age, when the charaaer and difpolit~ions of thle mind begin to
unfold themselves, and to become visible, the fmazlleft attention to
these might have convinced him, that there was reason to exped
new and more dangerous attacks on his power. James early dif-
covered that excefilvee attachment to favourites, which accompa-

* Craf MPem.3xx, Spotfs 30~6. t Crawf Tem-.3r4.

2nled him through his whole life. This pafion, which naturally BOOK VI.
arises from inexperience, and youthful warmth of heart, was, at -
his age, far from being culpable; nor could it well be expeaed l9
that the choice of the objeats, on whom he placed his affeaions,
should be made with great ikill. The most considerable of them,
was Efme Stewart, a native of France, and son of a ilecond bro-
ther of the ~Earl of Lennox. He was distinguished by the title of
Lord D'Aubignk, an eflate in France, w1hich descended to him
from his anceff ors, on whom it had been conferred, in reward of
their valour, and services to the French crown. He arrived in
Scotland, about this time, on purpose to demand the estate and sept. E:
title of Lennox, to which he pretended a legal right. He was
received, at first by the King, with the refped due to So near a
relation. T'he gracefulness of his person, the elegance of his dress,
and his courtly behaviour, made a great impref~ion on James,
who, even in his more mature years, was little able to resist there
frivolous charms ; and his affeation flowed with its usual rapidity,
and profusion. Within a few days after Stewart's appearance at
court, he wats created Lord Aberbrothock, soon after Earl, and then
D~uke of Leonox, Governor of Dumbarton castle, Captain of the
guard, first Lord of the bedchamber, and Lord High Chamberlain.
At the fame time, and without any of the envy, or interference,
w hich is dual among candidates for favour, Captain James Stewart,
the recond son of Lord Ochiltree, grew into great confidence. But
notwithstanding this union, Lennox and Captain S'tewart were
persons of very opposite charaaters. The former was naturally
gentle, humane, candid; but unacquainted with the state of the
country, and milled, or miiinformed by thole, whom he truffed 5
not unworthy to be the companion of the young King in his amus~e-
ments, but utterly dis~qualified for aaing as a Minister, in direaing
his affairs. The latter was remarkable for all the vices, which
render a man fonnidable to his country, and a pernicious counsel-
10r to his Prince; nor did he poffcfs anly one virtue, to counter-
balance there vices, unless dexterity in conduAing his own de-
signs, and an enterpifingr courpge, superior to the sense of danger,
may pals by that name. Unrestrained by religion, regardless of
decency, and undifmnayed by opposition, he aimed at objeas, seem-
ingrly unattainable; but under a Prince, void of experience, and
blind to all the defeans of thole, who had gained his favour, his
audacity was iuccefsful; and hencurs, wealth, and power, were
the retrard of his crimes.

Door rI. Both the favourites concurred in employing their whole address

to undermine Morton's credit, which alone obitrucaed their full

1579*

They labour polfeffion of power. And as James had been bred up with an a-
to nader- verflon for that nobleman, who endeavoured rather to maintain
2ne lo b-0 the authority of a Tutor, than to aA with the oblequloufnels of
rity. a Minister, they found it no difficult matter to accompliih their

design. Morton, who could no longer keep the King ihut up
within the walls of Stirling castle, having called a parliament to

Oaober v7. meet at Edinburgh, brought him thither. James made his entry

into the capital, with great solemnity; the citizens received him
with the loudest acclamations of joy, and with many expensive
pageants, according to the mode of that age. After a long~pe-
riod of thirty-feven years, during which, Scotland had been ixb5-
jeaed to the delegated power of Regents, or to the feeble govern-
ment of awoman, and had fuffe red all the miseries of civil war, andfetlt
the insolence of foreign armies, the nation rejoiced to fee the sceptre
once more in the hands of a King; and fond even of that thadow
of authority which a Prince of fifteen could poffcfs, they flatter-
ed themselves, that union, order, and tranquillity would now be
reffored to the kingdom. James opcued the parliament with ex;-
traordinary pomp, but nothing remarklable passed in it.

These demonfirations, however, of the people's love and attach-

ment to their Sovereign, encouraged the favourites to continue
their insinuations agrainft M~orton; and as the King nowv reflidedi
in the palace of Haly-rood-houfc, to which all his lubjeas had
access, the cabal againit the Earl grew daily firong-er, and the
intrigue, which occasioned his fall, ripened gradually.

M/orton began to be fenfble of his danger, and endeavoured to

1380.

Morton en- put a flop to the career of Lennox's preferment, by reprel~enting
deavours to him as a formidable enemy to the Reformed Religon, a secret

vent agent~in favour of Popery, and a known emiiisary of the house of

Guise. The Clergy, apt to believe every rumour of this k~ind,
spread the alarm among the people. But Lennox, either out of
complaisance to his master, or convinced by the arguments of some
learned Divines, whom the King appointed to infiru61 him in the
principles of the Protestant Religion, publicly renounced the er-
rors of Popery, iri the Church of St. Giles, and declared himself
a member of the Church of Scotland, by signing her Confellion of
Faith. This, though it did not remov~e all fulpicions, nor fillence
fpme zealous preachers, abated, in a great degree, thE, force of the
accufsation Y.

* Crarwf. Ment 3J9. Spotfw. 3c8·

On the other hand, a rumour prevailed that MVorton was pre_ BooK VI.

paring to seize the King's person, and to carry him into England.
Whether despair of maintaing his power, by any other means, hlad
driven him to make any overture of that kind to the English court,
or whether it was a calumay, invented by his adversaries to ren-
der him odious, cannot now be determinled with certainty. As
he, declared at hris death, that fach a defgpn had never entered in-
to his thoughts, the latter seems to be most probable. It afford-
ed a pretence, however, for reviving the office of Lord Chamber-
lain, which had been, for some time, disused. That honour was
conferred on Lennox. Alexander Erikrine, Morton's capital ene-
my, was his deputy; they had under them a band of Gentlemen,
who were appointed constantly to attend the King, and to guard
his person *

M'orton was not ignorant of what his enemies intended to infi- El~zabeth~

nuate, by such unusu3al precautions for the King's Safety. And as fe a:el:'
his last resource, applied to Elizabeth, whole proteAion had often
flood him in flead, in his greatest difficulties. In consequence of
this application, Bowres her Envoy accused Lennoxu of pra~ices
against thie peace of the two lingdoms, and insisted, in her name,
that he thould instantly be removed from the privy council.
Such an unprecedented demanti was considered, by the Couns~ellors,
as an affront to the King, and an enroachment on the independen-
cy of the k~ingdom. They affeaed to call in question the Envoy's
powers, and upon that pretence, refused him farther audience.
He retired in difguff, and without taking leave; Sir Alexander
Home was feat to expollulate with Elizabeth on the fubjeA. As-
ter the treatment, which her Envoy had received, Elizabethl
thought it below her dignity to admit Home into h~er presence.
B3urleigh, to whom he was commanded to impart his commifiion,
reproached him with his mafter's ingratitude towards a benefac-
tress, who had placed the cr-own on his head, and required him
to advise the King to beware of sa8crificing the friendship of so ne-
ceiflbry an ally, to the giddy humours of a young man, without
experience, and firongly ufupe~ed of principles, and attachments,
incompatible with the happines~s of the Scottish nation.

This accus~ation of Lennox hastened, in all probability, M'orton's stonon ac-

fall. The ac? of indemnity, which he had obtained when he re. curedof~the
signed the Regency, wyas worded with such scrupulous extaAners, enue of
as almost [creened him from any legal prosecution. The murder K~i'!.

* Cni`raw. 21m.20

Y v i'

BOOK VI. Of the late King was the only crime, which could not, with de-

cency, be ins~erted in a pardon, granted by his s~on. Here Mortolr

'580. flill lay open to the penalties of the law. And Captain Stewart,

who shunned no aaion, however desperate, if it led to power, or
to favour, entered the council-chamber, while the King and no-

Dec. 30. bles were assembled, and falling on his knees, accused Morton of

being accessory, or according to the language of the Scottish law,
art and part, in the conspiracy against the life of his Majefly's fa-
ther, and offered, under the usual penalties, to verify this charge by
legal evidence, Morton, who was present, heard this accusation
with firmnels i and replied with a disdainful fmnile, proceeding
either from conternpt of the infamous charaAer of his acculer, or
from confcioufnels of his own innocence, " that his known zeal,
in punishing those who were fufpeaed of that detestable crime,
might well exempt himself from any ful~picion of being accessary
to it, nevertheless, he would cheerfully submit to a trial, either
in that place, r in anly other court, and doubted not but his own
innocence, and the malice of his enemies, would then appear in
the clearest light. Stewart, who was itill on his knees, be-
gan to inquire how he would reconcile his beffowing so many
honours on Archibald Douglas, whom he certainly knew to be
one of the murtherers, with his pretended zeal against that crime.
Morton was ready to answer. But the King commanded both of

1501. them to be removed. The Earl was confined, first of all,
January 3_. to his own house, and then committed to the castle of Edin-

burgh, of which Alexander Erifkrine was Governor; and as if it
had not been a fufficient indignity to f~ubjea him to thle powuer of

January r8. One of his enemies, he was, soon after, carried to D~umbarton, of

-which Lennox had the command. A warrant was, likewise, if-
sued for apprehending Archibald Douglas, but he, having re-
ceived timely intelligence of the approaching danger, fled into
~England *.

The JBarl of Angus, who imputed there violent proceedings

not to hatred against Morton alone, but to the ancient enmity be-
tween the houses of Stewart and of Douglas, and who believed!
*that a cons~piracy was now formed for the defiruaion of the whole
name, was ready to take arms in order to rescue his k~insman.
But Morton ablolutely forbade anly such attempt, and declared
that he would rather fuffer ten thodfand deaths, than bring an im-
putation on his own charaater by seeming to decline a trial t.

'd Crawf. M~ent 323. ? Johnit 64. Spots 3::

Elizabeth did not fail to interpole, with warmth, in behalf of a B3OOK vI.

mnan who had contr~ibuted 10 much to preserve her inlfluence over
Scotland. The late tran~a~ions in that kingdom had given her Elizabeth's
great uneasiness. Thle power which Lennoxt had acquired inde- meas~ures n

orderr torave

pendent of her was dangerous; the treatment her ambassadors had laim.
met with, differed greatly ~from the refpea, with which the Scots
were in use to receive her Miniffers; and the attack now made on
M~orton fully convinced her, that there was an intention to sow
the feeds of dis~cord betwveeen the two nations, and to seduce James
illto a new alliance with France, or into a marriage with some
Popith Princess. Full of there apprehensions, thle ordered a con-
fiderable body of troops to be asse-mbled on the borders of Scot-
Jand, and dispatched Randolphl as her ambassador into thiat kin.--
dom. He addrefied hims~elf not only to James, and to his coun-
cil, but to a convention of e'Ltes met at that time. HIe begaln
writh enumerating the extraordinlary benefits whichl Dizabeth had
conferred on the Scottilh nation: T`hat without demanding a fin-
g~le foot of land for herself, without encroaching on thle lib~ertle9
of the kingdom in the smallest article, the had, at the expence of'
the blood of her f~ubjeas, and the treasures of her Crown, rescued
the Scots from the dominion of France, eftabliahed amongr them
true Religion, and put them in pofrfetion of thieir ancient righ~ts:
TIhat from the beginning th~e had prote~ed those, who efpouil d
the King's cause, and by her assistance alone, the Crown wa~s ple-
served on his head, and all the the attempts of the adverse £16lionl
bas~ed: That an union, unknownta their ancellors, but equally be-
neficial to both kingdoms, had subsisted for a long period of years,
and though so many Popith~ Princes hadl combined to diflurb this
happy slate of things, her care, and their conflancy, hlad hlitherto
defeated all there efforts: T'hat thle had observed, of late, an on-
usual coldness, diffruff, and estrang~eme~nt, in the Scottish Council,
which thle could impute to none but to Lennlox, a fub~jeft of France,
a retainer to the hioufe of Guise, bred Iup in the errors of Popery,
and filil fulpIe~ed of favouring that fuptrfixtlon. Not Pitisfied
w ith having mounted so fast to s~uch an uncommon height of power,
which he exercised with all the rash~ness of youth, and all the ig-
norance of a firanger; nor thinkiing- it enough to have deplived
thle Earl of M~orton of the authority, due to his abilities, and ex-
petience, he had conspired the ruin of that nobleman, wh~o had of-
tEn expofetd his life In thle K~ing's caule, wh~o had contributed mole
than anly other futbjea to' place him on the throne, to resist the en-
croachments of Popery, and to preserve the union betwreen the two

BooK VI- kingdoms. If any zeal for religion remained among the nobles of

Scotland, if they withed for thle continuance of amity with Eng-

58*land, if they valued the privileges of their own order, he called

upon them, in the name of his Miffrefs, to remove such a perni-
clous counsellor as Lennox from the presence. of the young K~ing,
to rescue Morton out of the hands of his avowed enemy, and fe-
cure to him the benefit of a fair and impartial trial. And if force
wkere necessary towards accomplithing a design, to salutary to the
King and kingdom, he promiled them the proteaion of his Mif~-
tress in the enterprise, and whatever affiRance they thould demand
either of men or money *.

But these extraordinary remonfirances, accompanied with fuchl

an unusual appeal from the Kiing to his fub~jeas, were not the only
means employed by Elizabeth, in favour of Morton, and againit
Lennox. She persuaded the Prince of Orange to fend an agent
into Scotland, and under colour of complimenting James on ac-
count of the valour, which many of his f~ubjeats had displayed in
the service of the States, to enter into a longs detail of the reillefs
enterprises of the Popilh Princes ig-ainft the Protellant Religion;
to beseech him to adhere inviolably to the alliance with England,
the only barrier which fccured his kingdom against their danger-
ous cabals; and above all things, to diffruit the insinuations of
those, who endeavoured to weaken or to dissolve that union between
the British nations, which all the. Protestants in Europe beheld
with so much1 pleasure f-.

Jamesdeter- James's Counsellors were too intent upon the deflru~ion of
n ~iew~ their enemy to liflen to these remonfirances. The officious inter-
him. polition of the Prince of Orange, the haughty tone of Elizabeth's

message, and 10 avowed an attempt to excite futbjeas to rebel a-
gainft their Sovereign, were considered as unexampled insults on
the Majest~y and independence of a crowned head. A general and
evasive answer was given to Randolph. James prepared to ass~ert
hiis own dignity writh [pirit. All those fulfpeaed of favouring
Mdorton were turned out of offce, some of them were required to
su~rrender themselves prisoners; the fencible men throughout the
kingdom were commanded to take arms; and troops were levied
and posted on the borders. The English ambafllador, finding that
neither the public manifeffo which he had delivered to the Con-
vention, nor his private cabals with the nobles, could excite them
to arms, fled in the night-time out of Scotlan~d, where libels a-
gainft him had been daily published, and even attempts made upon

* Cald. 3. 6. Stry-pe, 2. 62r. ( Cald. 5. 9.

hlis life. In both king~doms every thing wore an hoffile afpea. BoV
But Elizabeth, though the withed to have intimidated the Scottifhfi38 £.
King by her preparations, had no inclination to enter into a war
with him, and the troops on the borders, which had given such~
umbrage, were s~oon dispersed *.

T'he greater solicitude Elizabeth discovered for 1Morton's safety,

the more eagerly did his enemies drive on their schemes for his
deftruaion. Captain Stewart his accuser was sirs1 appointed tutor
to the Earl of Arran, and soon after both the title and estate of
his unhappy ward, to which he advanced fame frivolous claim,
were conferred upon him. The new made Peer was commanded
to condua M/orton from Dumbarton to Edinburgh, and, by that
choice, the Earl was not only warned what fate he might expea,
but had the cruel mortification of feeing his mortal enemy alrea-
dy loaded with honours, in reward of the malice with which he
had contributed to his ruin.

The records of the court of juiciary at this period are loft. The Hfe is tri

account which our hillorianls give of Morton's trial is inaccurate demned.
and unfatisfaabry. The whole proceedings seem to have been
violent, irregular, and oppreflive. Arran, in order to extort evi-
dence, tortured f~everalof the Earl's domeflics with unusual cruelty.
During the trial, great bodies of armed men were drawn up in
dii~erent parts of the city. The jury was compoled of the Earlba
known enemies; and though he challenged se~veral of them, his
objeAions were overruled. After a thort consultation, his peers
found him guilty of concealing, and of beings art andpart in, the
confpriracy against the life of the late King. The first part of the
verdia did not surprise him, but he twice repeated the words arte
and part with some vehemence, and added, Godlinows it is not
so. The doom, which the law decrees against a Traitor, was pro.
nounced. The King, however, remitted the cruel and ignomi-
nious part of the featence, and appointed that he thould fuffer
death nexvt day, by being beheaded f-.

During that awful interval, Morton pofieffed the utmost com- liiS death,

pofulre of mind. He fupped cheerfully; f lept a part of the night,
in his usual manner; and employed the reft of his time in religi-
ous conferences, and in ac~s of devotion, with some Miniffer-s of
the city. The Clergymen who attended him, dealt frecly wjith1
his conscience, and prdfled his crimes home upon him. What he
confelled with regard to the crime for whlich he fuffered is re-

* Crawf. Mem- 328 S.rep~e, 2. App. 38-
·t Spo~tfw- 25. Johal ;6S. C:2sf SCIcu> 332. C3ll 3. 4.5

BOOK VI· mark~able, and supplies, in some measure, the imperfe~tion of our

records. He acknlowledgred, that on hris return from England as-

18 ter the death of Rizio, - Bothwell had informed him of the con-

fpirac~y ag~ainst the King, whlich the Queen, as he told him, knew
of and approved ; that he solicited him to concur in the execution
of it, which, at that time, he ablolutely declined; that, soon as-
ter, Bothwell himself, and Archibald Douglas, in his name, re-
newing their folicitations to the fame purpole, he had requiled a
warrant, under the Queen's hand, authorising the attempt, and as
that had never been produced, he had refused to be any farther
concerned in the matter. "' But, continued he, as I neither con-
" fented to this treasonable aft, nor affifed in the committing of
"' it, so) it was impofllble for me to reveal, or to prevent it. To

wh 2lom could I make the discovery ? The Queen was the author

"' of the enterp~rise. Darnly was lfuch a changeling, that no secret
" could be safely communicated to hlim. Huntly and Bothwell,
" who bore the chief i;way in the kingdom, were themselves the
"L perpetrators the crime." T'hefe circumitances, it must be conl-
sessed,, go some length towards exitenuating- Morton's guilt; and
thlough hris apology for the favour he had shewn to Archibald
D~oug:las, w·hom he knew to be one of the conspirators, be far less
fatisfatory, no uneasy refleaions seem to have difq~uieted h~is own
mind on that account *. Whlen his keepers told him that the
guards were attending, and all things in readiness, " I praise my
'· God, said he, I am ready likewife."' Arran commnanded there
Suards; and even in thofc: moments, when the moil implacable
hatred is apt to relent, the malice of his enemies could not for-
bear thisi insu~lt. On the fecaffold his behlaviour was calm; his
countenance and voice unaltered ; and after some time spent in
devotion, he f~uffered death with the intrepidity, which became
the name of Douglas. His head was placed on the public jail of
Edliaburg~h; and his body, after lying till sun-set on the fecatfold,
cove~r-d with a begrgarly cloak, was carried by common porters to
the usual burial-place of criminals. No~ne of his friends durit ac-
com;·an-y it to the grave, or difoover their gratitude and refpea8
by :1'1y symptoms of rorrown f.

s t un co-r- A ra, no less~ profligate in private life, than audacious in his

e f

r ubic conduat, soon after drewv the attention of his countrymen,

by~ h~i inf:amous marriage with the Countess of \Iarch. Before
he- g-~lw into favour at court, he had been often entertained in
her- !miiband's hloufe, an~d writhout rega~rding thet law s of hoipitality

C ra-v·f. M·eml. A~pp. 3. t Crawf. Melm. 334. Syotfw. 313-

or1 of gratitude, carried on a criminal intrigue with the wife of BOOK VI.
h~is benefaaor, a woman young anld beautiful, but, according to LV-

I 81.

the defeription of a cotemporary Historian, " intolerable in ali the
imperfeaions, incident to her fex." Impatient of any restraint
upon their mutual desires, they, with equalardour, w inted to avow
their union publicly, and to legitimate, by a marriage, the off-
[prinlg of their unlawful paimon. T'he Countels petitioned to be
divorced from her husband, for a reason, which no modest woman
will ever plead. The judges, overawed by Arran, pass~ed se~ntence
without delay. And this infamous scene was concluded by a mar- July 6.
riag~e, solemnized with great pomp, and beheld by all ranks of
men with the utmoil horror *.

Al Parliarment was held this year, at the opening of which some Ocrtober 24.

disputes arole between Arran and the Earl now created Duk~e of
Lennox. Arran, haughty by nature, and pushed on by his wife's
ambition, began to affea an equality with the Duke, under wvhol~e
proteation he had hitherto been contented to place himself. A~fter
various attempts to form a party in the council agrainft Lennox, he
found him fixed to firmly in the King's affeAions, that it was im-
pollible to thake him, and rather than lose all interest at court,
from which he was banished, he made the moRl humble fubmiflions
to the favourite, and again recovered his former credit. This
rupture contributed, however, to render the Duke still more odi-
ous to the nation. During the continuance of it, Arran affeaed
to court the Clergy, pretended an extraordinary zeal for the Pro-
tellant Religion, and laboured to confirm the fulpicions, which
were entertained of his rival, as an emiffagry of the house of Gulfe,
and a favourer of Popery. As he was supposed to be acquainted
wyith the D~uke's most secret deig~ns, his calumnies were lillened
to with more credit, than was due to his charaaer. To the fame
cause, we must alcribe several aAs of Parliament uncommonly fa-
vourable to the Church, particularly one, which abolished the
prairice, introduced by Morton, of appointing but one minister
to several parinhes.

No notice hath been taken for fame years of Ecclesiastical as- Ecclelht~i.

fairs. While the civil government underwent to many extraordi. cal affhirs.
nary revolutions, the Church was not free from convulsions. Two
objeAs, chiefly, ingroflfed the attention of the clergy. The one
was the forming a lylltem of discipline, or Eccleilaflical polity. A£.
ter long labour, and many dillicultiep, this was at last brought to

BOOK VL~ fame degree of perfeaion1. The assembly solemnly approved of ;t,

and appointed it to be laid before the privy council, in order to

S8.obtain the ratification of it in parliament. But Morton, during

his adminiffration, and those who, after his fall, governed the
King, were eq-ually unwilling to fee it carried into executionj
and by starting diffculties, and throwing id obje~tions, prevented
it from receiving a legal fan~ion. The other point in view was
the abolition of the Epis~copal order. The bishops were so de-
voted to the King, to whom they owed their promotion, that the
funaion itself was by some reckoned danigerous to civil liberty.
Being allowed a feat in parliament, and diftinguilhed by titles
of honour, thiefe not only occasioned many avocations from their
spiritual employments, but soon rendered their charaaer and man.
ners extremely different from those of the Clergy in that age.
The nobles viewed their power with jealouiry, the populace con-
fidered their lives as profane, and wished their downfal with e-
qual ardour. T`he personal emulation between Melvil and Adam-
son, a man of learning, and eminent for his popular eloquence,
who was promoted, on the death of Douglas, to be Archbishop·
of St. Andrew's, mingled itself with the pafflons on each fide, and
heightened them. Attacks were made, in every assembly, on
the order of bishops; their privileges were gradually circumforib-
ed; and at last an a&t was paired, declaring the office of bishop,
as it was then exercised within the realm, to have neither foun-
dation nor warrant in the word of God j and requiring, under pain
of excommunication, all who now pofefeled that office, inflant-
ly to resign it, and to abitain fromt preaching or administering the
s~acraments, till they thould- receive permillion from the assembly.
The court did not acquiesce in this decree. A vacancy happen-
ing, soon after, in the fee of Glasgow, Montgomery M~iniffer at
Stirling, a man vain, fickle, presumptuous, and more apt, by the
blemithes in his charaaer, to hiave alienated the people from an
order already beloved, than to reconcile them to one which was the
objea of their hatred, struck up an infamous bargain with Len-
nox, and on his recommendation was chosen Archbishop. The
Presbytery of Stirling of which he was a member, the Presbytery
of Glalgow whither he was to be translated, the General Assembly,

1582* vied with each other in prosecuting him on that accounlt. In order

to rcreen M~ontgomery, James made trial both of gentle and of
rigorous measures, and both were equally ineffiz~ual. The Gene-
ral Assembly was just ready to pronounce againit him the sentence
of excommunication, when an Herald entered and commanded

them, in the Kiing's name, and under pain of rebellion, to flop BOOK V
further proceedings. Even this injunalon they defpil~ed. And 5*
though Montgomery, by his tears, and seeming penitence, pro-
cured a short respite, the s~entence was at last ifued by their ap-
pointment, and publithed in all the churches throughout the kinlg-
dom.

The firmers of the Clergy in a colleaive body, was not greater

than the holdnefs of some individuals, particularly of the Miniffers
of Edinburgh. They inveighed daily against the corruptions in
the adminiffration, and, with the freedom of ipeech admitted in-
to the pulpit in that age, named Lennox and Arras as the chief
authors of the grievances, under which the church and kingdom
groaned. The courtiers, in their turn, complained to the King
of the insolent angl seditious spirit of the Clergy. In order to
check the boldnes~s of their discourses, James issued a proclama-
tion, commanding Dury one of the most popular Miniffers, not
only to leave the town, but to abflain from preaching in anly other
place. Dury complained, to the judicatories of the Church, of
this encroachment upon the immunities of his office. They ap-
proved of the doarine which he deliveredj and hedetermined to
disregard the royal proclamation. But the magiffrates being de.
termined to compel him to leave the city, according to the King's
orders, he was obliged to abandon his charge, after proteffing
publicly, at the cross of Edinburgh, against the violence, which
was put upon him. The people accompanied him to the gates,
with tears and lamentations; and the Clergy denounced the ven-
geance of heaven against the authors of this outrage *.

In this perilous situation flood the Church; the authority of

its judicatories called in question, and the liberty of the pulpit
restrained, when a sudden revolution in the civil government pro-
cured them unexpeaed relief.

The two favourites, by their ascendant over the King, posses- His favou-

fed uncontrouled power in the kingdom, and exercised it with the ritesengage

thelmgin I

utmoff wantoninefs. James dfually resided at D~alkeith or Kinneil, unpopular
the feats of Lennox, and of Arran, and was attended by such com- mealites.
pany, and employed in fach amnuiements, as did not suit his dig-
nity. The services of thole, who had contributed moHt to place
the Crown on his head, were but little remembered. Many who
had oppos~ed him with the greatest virulence, enjoyed the rewards
and honours, to which the others were entitled. Exalted notions.

SCald. Aff~mb. r576--482· $potS. 277, &c.

Sz ij

BooK\l. of regal prerogative, utterly inconfiflent with the conftuittion of

Scotland, being infli~lele by them into the mind of the young Mo-
narch, unfortunately made, at that early age, a deep impreion
there, and became the source of almost all his future errors in thle
government of both ktingdoms *. Courts of juffice were held in al-
most every county, the proprietors of land were called before
them, and upon the flightefit neglea of any of the numerous forms
which are peculiar to feudal holdings, they were finled with un-
usual and intolerable rigour. The Lord Chamberlain revived the
ablolute jurifdriaon of his onfce over the Boroughs, and they
were f~ubjeAed to exla~ins~ no less grievous.~ A design se~emed,
likcewife, to hlave been formed to exasperate Elizabeth, andi to
dissolve the alliance with her, which all good Protestants esteem-
ed the chief feculity of their religion in Scotland. A close cor-
refpondence was set on foot between thle King and his mother,
and considerable: progress made towards unliting their titles to the
Crown, by such a treaty of allociation, as Maitland had projeA-
ed; which could not fail of endangering or diminishing his au-
thority, and mnult have proved fatal to those, who h~ad a~ed PgainRt
her with greateit vigourt-.

The nchles All th-re circumilances irritated the impatient f[phit of the
coyfpire a- Scottish nobles, who refolvefd to tolerate no longer the idrolence
gainit them. of the two minions, or to fland by, while their presu~mption and

inexperience ruined both the King and kiingdom. Elizabeth,
who, during the admniniftration of the four Regents, had the en-
tire direAion of the affairs of Scotland, felt heprfelf deprived of all
influence irr that k~ingdom ever since the death of Morton, and
was ready to countenance any attempt to rescue the King out of
the hands of favourites, who were leading hini into mealbures, so
repugnant to all her views. The Earlis of Mar and Glencairo,
L~ord Ruthven, lately created Earl of Gowfrie, Lord Linfdlay,
Lord Boyd, the Tutor of Glamis, the Master of Oliphant, with
several Barons and gentlemen of diftinaion, entered into a com-
bination for that purpoie. And as changes in adminiffration,
which among polithed nations, are brought about slowly and
silently, by artifice and intriguce, were in that rude age effeEted
suddenly and by violence, the Kingr's situation, and the security
of thle favourites, encouraged the conspirators to have immediate
recours~e to force.

Seize the James, after having resided for fame time in A4thole, where
King'sper- }xe enjoyed his favourite amurfement of hunting, wazs now retura-
son at Ruth-
ven. * 1.

Cald- 3. sp. ( - 3- 07-

ing towards Edinburgh, with a small train. He was invited to EOOKV .
Ruthven caffle, which lay in his way; and as he fuipeAed no I (82.
danger, he went thither in hopes of farther sport. The multitude Aug it 2 .
of firangers whom he found there gave him some uneasiness; and
as those who were in the secret arrived every moment from caif-
ferent parts, the appearence of so many new faces increased his
fears. He disse~mbled, however, and next morning made ready
for the field, extpe~ting to find there some opportunity of making
his escape. But the nobles entering his bed-chamber, presented
a memoridl against thle illegal and oppressive aaions of his two
favourites, w~homn they reprclented as most dangerous enemies
to the religion and liberties of the nation. James, though he
received this remonfirance with the complailance which was ne-
ceffary in his prelent situation, was extremely impatient to be gone;
but as he approached the door of the apartment, the Tutor of Gh9-
mis rudely flopped him. The King complained, expollulated,
threatened, and finding all there without effca, burst into tears,
"N\o matter, said Glamis fiercely, better children weep than beard-
ed men." These words made a deep imprefiion on the King's
mind, and were never forgotten. T`he conspirators, without re-
garding hIs tears or indignation, difmnifed such of his followers
as they fulrpelted; allowed none but their own party to have ac-
cess to him; and though they treated him with great refpea,
guarded his person with the utmofit care. This enterprifeis diually
called, by our hiflorians, The raid of Ruthwe .

Lennox and Arran were affonifhed to the last degree at an Comm

event so unexpeaed, and so fatal to their power. The former rantop
endeavoured, but without succes~s, to excite the inhabitants of Edin-
burgh to take arms, in order to rescue their Sovkereign from cap-
tivity. The latter, with his ufuall impetuosity, mounted on horse-
back the moment he heard what had befallen the King, and with
a few followers, rode towYards Ruthven caffle; and as a confider-
able body .0f the conspirators, under the command of the Earl of
M/ar, lay in his way ready to oppose him, he separated himself
from his companions, and with two attendants arrived at the gate
of the castle. At thle fight of a man so odious to his country,
the indignation of the Eonfpirators role, and inflant death muit
have been the punishment of his raIhnef~s, if the friendnhip of
Gowrie, or some other cause not ex~plained by our hitorians, had
not saved a life, 10 pernicious to the kin gdom. He was confined,

* Call.3 134-. SIotf3'0. M~ly. 35·

BOOK VI. however, to the castle of Stirling, without being admitted into

C- Jthe King's pretence.

5~8 The King·, though really the prisoner of his wcn fabjeas, with

Lennox to whose conduA he could not help discovering many symptoms
kVe e of difguff, was obliged to publifhr a proclamation, signifying

his approbation of their enterprise, declaring that he himself
was at full liberty, without any refitaint or violence offered to
his perfonj and forbidding any attempt against those concerned
in the Rlaid of Ruthven, under pretence of rescuing him out of

_augu 28. their hands. At the fame time, hie commanded Lennox to leave

Scotland before the 20th of Seprtember*.

The~onfpi. Soon after, Sir George Carey, and Bowes, arrived as ambaffadore
rators coun- from Elizabeth. The pretext of their embassy· was to inquire after
senancedby
Elizabeth, the King's fadfety; to encourage and countenance the conspirators

was the real motive of it. By their intercetion, the Earl of An-
gus, who, ever since the death of his uncle Morton, had lived in
exile, obtained leave to return. And the accetlion of a noble-
man so powerful and to popular itheathened the faaion t.

Lennox, whose amiable and gentle qualities had procured hint

anany friends, and who received private aflurancess that the King's
favour towards him was in no degree abated, seemed resolved, at
firi, to pay no regard to a command, extorted by violence, and
no less disagreeable to James, than it was rigorous with regard to
himself. But the power of his enemies, who were masters of the
Jiing's person, who were secretly supported by Elizabeth, and
openly applauded by the Clergy, deterred him from an enterprile,
the success of which was dubious, and the danger certain both to
himself, and to his Sovereign. He put off the time of his depar-
ture by various artifices, in expeaation either that James might
make his escape from the conspirators, or that fortune might pre-
sent some more favourable opportunity of takiing arms for his re-
lief.

Theircon- On the other hand, the conspirators were extremely solicitous not

windiaprrov. Only to secure the approbation of their countrymen, but to obtain
ed YBya Ali-
fembly and fame legal fanaion of their enterprise. For this purpole, they pu-
a conven- blinhed a long declarationl, contaning the motives, which had in-
tion of e- Raeduced th~em to venture on s~uch an irregular fiep, and endeavoured

to heightenthe public indignation against the favourites, by repre-
fenting, in the firongreR colours, their inextperience and insolence,
their contempt of the nobles, their violation of thle privileges of

* Cald 3. z35. x38. bd.3 9

thre Church, and their oppretiron of thle people. They chliged Boo vL
Sthle Kiing, who could not with sa~fety refuse any of their demands, Y
to grant them a remiiron in the moil ample form j and not fatis- 32
fied with that, they applied to the Assembly of the Church, and Ottobe r 3,
easily procured an aA, declaring " that they had done good and
acceptable service to God, to their Sovereign, and to their native
couutry;" and requiring allfincere Protestants to concur with them
in carrying forward such a laudable enterpris~e. And in order to add
the greater weight to this aA, every Miniffer was enjoined to
read it, in his own pulpit, and to inflia the censures of the Church
on those w h-o s~et thernfelves in opposition to so good a cause. A
Convention of eilates, aiTembled a few days after, passed an aBto
the fame effea, and granted full indemnity to the conspirators for
every thing they had done *.

James was conduacd by them, sirs1 to Stirling, and afterwards Lennox's

to thle palace of Haly rood-houle; and though he was received copar re,
every where with the external marks of refpea due to his dig- land.
nrity, his motions were carefully observed, and he was under a re-
firaint no les~s firift, than at the first moment when he was seized
by the conspirators. Lennox, after cluding many commands to
depart out of the kingdom, was at last obliged to begin his jour-
ney. He lingered, however, for some time in the neighbourhood
of Edinburgh, as if he had still intended to make one effort to-
wards refforing the King to liberty. But either from the gen-
tlenefs of his own disposition, averse to blood-shed and the disorders
of civil war, or from s~ome other cause, unknown to us, hie aban-
doned the design, and set out for France, by the way of England. Decern.30
The King illued the order for his departure, with no less reluc-
tance, than the Duke obeyed it. And both mourned a separation,
which neither of them had power to prevent. Soon after his ar-
rival in France, the fatigue of the journey, or thle anguilh of his
rnind, threw him into a fever. In his last moments, he dilcovered
such a firm adherence to the Protefiant faith, as fully vindicates
his memory from the imputation of an attachment to Popery, with
which he had been uncharitably 10aded in Scotlandt-. As he
was the earliest, and belt beloved, he was perhaps, the most defery-
ing, though not the most able of all James's favourites. The
warmth and tenderness of his MWafter's affection for him was not
abated by death itself. By many aas of kindness and generosity to-
wards his pofferity, the Kin~g not only did great honour to the

* Cald. 3. zyg, x87, 2Lco. Spots 322. t spott. 324

BOOK Ti. ThellOff Of Lennox, but s~et his own character in one of the moll

favourable points of view.

I582.

blary'sa xi- The success of the conspiracy, which deprived James of liberty,
ety about made great noise over all Europe j and at last reached the ears of

he o. Mary in the prison to which thle was confined. As her own ex-

perience had taught her what injuries a captive prince is exposed
to fufferj and as many of those who were now concerned in the
enterprise against her son, were the fame persons whom the confi-
dered as the chief authors of her own misfortunes, it was natural
for the tenderners of a mhther to apprehend that the fame cala-
Inities were ready to fall on his headj and such a profpeA did
not fail of adding to the diitrefs and horror of her own situation.
In the anguidsl of her heart, thne wrote to Elizabeth, complaining
in the bilttreli terms of thre unprecedented rigour, with which thie
herself had been treated, and befeching her nlot to abandon
her fan to thle mercy of his reb~ellious fubjeBs; nor pe~rmit him
to be invl:Oved in the thme misfortunes, under which the had so
lolg~ gloaned. · The peculiar vigour and acrimony of itile, for
w~hich this letter is remarkable, discover both the higih spirit of
the Scottinl Qgeen, unfiibdued by hter fuffe~rings, and thle vio-
lence of her iid-ignation at Elizabeth's artifices anld severity.
But it was ill adapted to gain the endI the hlad in view, and ac-
caldingly~ it neithier procured anly mitigbation of the rigour of her
owvn confineinent, nor anly inlterpofliton in favour of thle Kiing.

1~383 H-enry III. wvho, thoulgh he feared and hated the Princes of

Ambdfader~~s Gulfe, was often obliged to court their favour, interposed with
airrive si om .
Fraoceand warmti', ml order to extr~icate James out of ther hands of a party
En:gland. [o entirely devoted to the Englilth interest. H-e commanded M.

de la Moutte Fenelon, hlis amb~aflador at thle court of England, to
repair to Edinburgh, and to contribute his utmoil endeavours to-
mards placing 3ames in a situation, more faitable to his dignity.
As Elizabethi could not, with deceny, reficu him liberty to exe-
cute this commifiion, thie appointed Davison to attend him into
Scotlandi as her Enivoy, under colour of concurring with him in
the ntgotiation, but in reality, to b~e a lipy upon h~is motions, and.
to ob~lhua~ his faLccefs. James, whlole title to ther Crow~n had not
hlitherto been recognized by any of the princes on the continent,
was extremely fond of fach' an honourable emblaffy from the French
Monarch:, and, on that account, as wel~l as for thie fadke of thle er-

January :. rand on which he came, leceived Fendlon wvithl great refpea. The

nob~les, unlder whiole pow er the K~ingr wva.-, did not relish this in-
terpolition of thle Frenchr court, which hadd long loit its ancient

Enfluence over the affairs of Scotland. The Clergy were alarmed BOOK VI.
Pt the danger to which religion would be exposed, if the Princes -
of Guise thould recover any ascendant over the public councils. 83
And though the Kinlg tried every method for restraining them
within the bounds of decency, they declaimed against the court
of France, against the Princes of Gulfe, against the ambassador,
against entering into any alliance with such notorious persecutors
of the Church of God, with a vehemence, which no regular go-
vernment would now tolerate, but which was then extremely com-
mon. The ambassador, watched by Davison, diffruffed by the
nobles, and expos~ed to the insults of the Clergy, and of the peo-
ple, returned into England without procuring any change in the
King's situation, or receiving anly answer to a proposal which he
made, that the government thould be carried on in the joint names
of James, and the Queen his mother*.

Meanwhile, James, though he dissembled with great art, be- James es.

came every day more uneasy under his confinement; his uneasiness fgPhslts o
rendered him continually attentive to find out a proper oppor- the confipi-
tunity for making his eieape; and to this attention, he at last rators.
owfed his liberty, which the King of France was not able, nor the
Queen of England willing to procure for him. As the confpira-
tors had forced Lennox out of the kingdom, and kept Arran at a
difiance from court, they grew secure 3 and imagining that time
had reconciled the King to them, and to his situation, they watch
ed him with little care. Some occasions of dis~cord h~ad arisen
among themselves; and the French ambassador, by fomenting
these during the time of his residence in Scotland, had weakened
the union, in which alone their safety confiftedl-. Colonel Wil-
liam Stew-art, the commander of the band of gentlemen, who
guarded the King's pers~on, being gained by James had the prin-
cipal merit in the scheme for refforing his master to liberty. Un-
der pretence of paying a visit to the Earl of March his grandun-
cle, James was permitted to go fr-om Falkland to St. Andrew's. June ·I·
That he might not create any ufupician, he lodged, at firit, in an
open defenceless house in the town, but pretending a curiosity to
fee the caffle, no sooner was he entered with fame of hlis attend-
ants whom he could trufl, than Colonel Stewart commanded
the gates to be shut, and excluded all the reft of his train. Next
morning the Earls of Argyle, Huntly, Crawfford, Montrose, Ro-
thes, with others to whom the secret had been communicated, en-

SCald. 3. 10. Spott 94. See Append. No. VIIL i· Camd. 48:

BOOK VI. tered the town with their followers; and though Mar, with f~e-

veral of the leaders of the faction, appeared in arms, they found

53-thems~elves to far out-numbered, that it was in vain to think of

recovering poffeiron of the King's person, which had been in their
power famewhat longer than ten months. James was naturally of
so soft and duatile a temper, that those who were near his person,
commonly made a deep imprefilonn on his heart, which was form-
ed to be under the sway of favourites. And as he remained, du-
ring so long a time, and at a period of life when refentments are
rather violent than lasting, implacable and unreconciled to the
conspirators, they must either have improved the opportunities of
insinuating themselves into favour with little dexterity, or the in-
dignation, with which this first insult to his person and authority
filled him, muff have been very great.

Resolves, His joy at his escape was youthful and excessive. He resolved,
roare ,mo however, by the advice of Sir James M~lelvil, and his wi~ifel coun-
with mode- fellors, to aB with the utmoif moderation. Having called, into

rao. Iis presence, the leaders of both faaions, the neighlbouring· gentry,

the deputies of the adjacent boroughs, and the Mmiifters and the
heads of colleges, he declared, that althoug~h he had been held
under restraint for some time by violence, he would not impute
that as a crime to any man, but without remembering the irregu-
larities, wvch;ch had been to frequent during his minority, would
pals a general aB of oblivion, anld govern all his fubjeas with un-
dillinguifhling and equal affe~ion. And as an evidence of his fin-
cerity, he visited the Earl of Gowrie at Ituthven castle, and
granted him a full pardon of any guilt he had contraAed, by the
crime committed in that very place *.

But Arran But James did not adhere long to this prudent and moderate
regains his
ascendant plan. His former favovourite, the Earl of Arran, had been per-
Overhim* mitted for some time to reside at Kenneil, one of his country feats.

As soon as the King felt himself at liberty, his love for him began
to revive, and. he expreifed a firong desire to fee him. The cour-
tiers violently opposed the return of a minion, whole insolent and
overbearing temper they dreaded, as much as the nation detefied
his crimes. James, however, continued his importunity, and pro-
2nifing that he thould continue with him no longer than one day,
they were obliged to yield. This interview rekiindled ancient as-
feaion; the Kting forgot his promise; Arran regained his alcen-
dant over him, and within a few days resumed the exercise of
power, with all the arrogance of an undeferving favourite, and all
the ralhnefs peculiar to himself f-.

If Mely. 2i2. t Ibid. 274.

The first effea of his influence was a proclamation with regard BooK vI.

to those concerned in the Ra'd of Ruthven. They were required
to acknowledge their crime in the humblest manner; and the nte
King promiled to grant them a full pardon, provided their future King pur-
conduat were such, as did not oblige him to remember past mif- fuesanother

plan.

carriages. The tenor of this proclamation was extremely dif-
ferent from the aB of oblivion, which the cons~pirators had been
encouraged to expeat. Nor did any of them reckon it safe to rely
on a promile, clogged with such an equivocal condition, and grant-
ed by a young Prince, under the influence of a Miniffer, void of
faith, regardless of decency, and transported, by the desire of re-
venge, even beyond the usual ferocity of his temper. Many of
the leaders, who had at first appeared openly at court, retired to
their own houfres; and foreseeing the dangerous florm which was
gathering, began to look out for a retreat in foreign countries*.

Elizabeth, who had all along prote~fed the cons~pirators, was ElizabDeth's

extremely difguffed with measures which tended 10 vifibily to f~lf ~
their deftru~tion, and wrote to the King a harth and haughty let- the confp~i-
ter, reproaching him in a stile, very uncommon among Princes, r0 o .
withn breach of faith in recalling Arran to court, and with impru-
dence in proceeding 10 rigorously againit his best and most faith-
ful fubjeas. James, with a becoming dignity, replied, that pro-
2nifes extorted by violence, and conditions yielded out of fear,
were no longer binding, when these were removed; that it belong-
ed to him alone to chufe what Miniffers he would employ in his
service ; and that though he resolved to treat the conspirators at
Ruthven with the utmost clemency, it was necefrary, for the sup-
port of his authority, that such an insult on his person thould not
pals altogether uncentulred f-.

Elizabeth's letter was quickly followed by Walsingham her fe. Sept. r.

Walfing-

cretary, whom the appointed her ambassador to James, and who ham'sem-
appeared in the Scottish court, with a ifplendor and magnificence, b~lyit
well calculated to pleas~e and dazzle a young Prince. Walfing-
ham was admitted to several conferences with James himself, in
which he infilled on the fame topics containect in the letter, and
the King repeated his former anfivers.

After fuffering several indignities, from the arrogance of Arran,

and his creatures, he returned to England, without concluding any
new treaty with the King. Wallingham was, next to Burleigh,
the Minister on whom the chief w~eight of the English adminiftra-

* M'ely. 2 8. Spots.326. Cald- $* 30, -jMely. 179·

3 Aij

BOOK VI. tion rethed; andi when a person of his rank, slept to far otit of ithd

ordinary road of business, as to undertake a long journey, in hisl

58*old age, and under a declining slate of health, fame affair of con-

sequence was supposed to be the cause, or fame important event
was expeAed to be the effea of this mreafure. But as nothing con.
fpicuous either occasioned, or followed this embassy, it is probable
that Elizabeth had no other intention in employing this sagacious
Minister, than to dilcover, with exaaners, the capacity and dif-
polition of the Scottith King, who was now arrived at a time of
life, when, wjith some degree of certainty, conjeaures might be
formed concerning his charaaer, and future con3duat. As James
poileffed talents of that kind, which makre a greater figure in con-
verfa7tion, than in aalon, he gained a great deal by this interview
with the English s~ecretary, who, notwithflanding the cold recep-
tion he met with, gave s~uch an advantsageous~reprefentation of his
abilities, as determined Elizabetly to. treat him, henceforward,
with more decency and refpe t"

Elizabeth's eagerners to proted the conlpirators renderied James

more violenit in his proceedings against them. As they had all
refused to accept of pardon, upon the terms· which he had of.
fered, they were required, by a new proclamation, to surrender
thems~elves prisoners. The Earl of Augus alone compliedj the
reft either fled into England, or obtained the King's licence to

Decem. r7. retire into foreign parts. A: Convention of efrates was held, the

members of which, deceived' by an unworthy artifice of Arran's,
declared those concerned in the RaiJ of Ruthven to have beca
guilty of high treason j appointed the na palled last year approving
of their condua to be expunged out of the records ; and engaged
to support the King in prosecuting the fugitives with the utmost
rigour of law.

The conspirators, though far from having done any thing that

was uncommon in a barbarous age, among motinous nobles, and
under an unsettled slate of government, must be acknowledged to
have been guilty of an aA of treason against their lovereign; and
James, who considered their condua in this light, had good rea-
son to boast of his clemency, when he offered to pardon them,
upon their confefling their crinle. But, on the other hand, it
must be allowed that, after the King's voluntary promise of a ge-
neral oblivion, they had some reason to complain of breach of
faith, and could not, wvithout the most unpardonable imprudence,
have put their lives in Arran's.power.,

* Mely, 293. Cald. 3. 48. Jebb 2. 536,

The interest of the Church was considerably affeaed by these BOOK VI.

contrary Revolutions. While the conspirators kept polfell~on of
power, the Clergy not only recovered, but extended their privileges. TeCeg
As they had formerly declared the hierarchy to be unlawful, they favour the
took fame bold measures towards exterminating the Epilcopal or- a as;Pt~
der out of the Church; and it was owing more to Adamfon's dexr- the King,
terity in perplexing and lengthening out the process for that pur-
pose, than to their own want of zeal, that they did not deprive,
and perhaps excommunicate all the Eithops in Scotland. Whenthe
Kbing recovered his liberty, things put on a very different alpeA.
TIhe favourbeffowed upon Arran, the enemy of every thing decent
and sacred, and the rigorous prosecution of those nobles, who had
been the most realous defenders of the Protefiant caule, were con-
fidered as sure presages of the approaching ruin of the Church.
The Clergy could not conceal their apprehenflons, nor view this
impending danger in silence. Dury, who had been reffored to his
office as one of the Minillers of Edinburgh, openly applauded the
Raid of Ruthven in the pulpit, at which th~e King was to enraged,
that, notwithflanding fame fyrmptoms of his fubmillion, he com-
manded him to resign his charge in the city. Mr. Andrew Mel-
vil, being summoned before the privy council to answ~er for thle
doarine he had uttered in a sermon at St. Andrew's, and acculed
of comparing the present grievances of the nation with thos~e under
James III. and of intimating obliquely that they ought to be re-
dreifed in the fame manner, thought it incumbent on him to be-
have with greater firmness. He declined the jurifdiaion of a Civil
court, in a cause purely Eccleliaftical; the Preibytery of which he
was a member had, as he contended, the s~ole right to call him to
account for words [poken in the pulpit; and neither the King nor
council could judge, in the first inflance, of the doarine delivered
by Preachers without violating the immunities of the Church. This
exemption from civil jurif~diaion was a privilege, which the Po-
pith Ecclefiaftics, admirable judges of whatever contributed to in-
crease the luffre or power of their body, had long firuggled for,
and had at last obtained. If the fame plea had now been admitted,
the Protestant Clergy would have become independent on the ci-
vil magiffrate, and an order of men, extremely uleful to society
while they inculcate those duties which tend to promote its hap-
pinefs and tranquillity, might have become no less pernicious by
teaching, without fear or controul, the most dangerous principle~s
or by exciting their hearers to the most delperate and lawless ac-
tions. James, jealous to exceb of his prerogative, was alarmed c.

BDOK VI· t1 S d2£ Hg enrCOachment on it. And as Melvil, by his learning

and zeal, had acquired the reputation and authority of head of

I4.the party, he resolved to punish him with the rigour, which that

pre-eminence rendered neceflfary, and to discourage, by a timely
severity, the revival of such a dangerous claim. Melvil, however,
avoided his rage by flying into England; and the pulpits resound-
ed with complaints that the King had extinguished the light of
learning in the kingdom, and deprised the Church of the ablell
and most faithful guardian of its liberties and diLcipline*.

These violent declamations of the Clergy, against the measures

of the court, were extremely acceptable to the people. The con-
fpirators, though driven out of the kingdom, flill poffeffed great
influence there. And as they had every thing to fear from the re-
fentment of a young prince, irritated by the furious counsels of
Arran, they never cealed soliciting their adherents to take arms in
their defence. Gowrie, the only person among them who had
submitted to the King, and accepted of a pardon, soon repented of
a flep, which loft him the efleem of one party, without gaining
the confidence of the other. And, after fuffering many mortifica-
tions from the King's negleft, and the haughtiness of Arran, he
was at lait commanded to leave Scotland, and to reside in France.
While he waited at Dundee for an opportunity to embark, he was
informed that the Earls of Angus, Mlar, and the Tutor of Gla-
mis, had concerted a scheme for furprifmng the caffle of Stirling.
In his situation, little pers~uasion was necessary to draw him to en-
gage in it. Under various pretexts, he put off his voyage, and lay
ready to take arms on the day fixed, by the conspirators, for the ex-
ccution of their enterprise. His lingering t~o long at Dundee,
without any apparent reason, awakened the Efupicion of the court,
proved fatal to hims~elf, and disappointed the success of the confpi-
racy. Colonel William Stewart surrounded the houle where he
lodged with a body of soldiers, and in spite of his resistance, took
him prisoner. Two days after, Angus, Mar, and Glamis, seized
the cattle of Stirling, and ereating their flandard there, published
a manifeffo declaring that they took arms for no other reason, but
to remove from the King's presence, a minion who had acquired
power by the most unworthy a~tions, and who exercised it with
the most intolerable insolence. The account of Gowrie's impri-
fonment struck a damp upon their s~pirits. They imputed it to his
own treachery, and fulfpedted that as he had formerly des~erted, he

* Syoti 330. Cald, J. e4

had now betrayed them. At the fame time, a fum of money, with BOOK I.
which Elizabeth had promiled to s~upply them, not being duly -
paid, and their friends and vass~als coming in slowly, they appeared 54
irresolute and difheartened I and as the King, who aaed with
great vigour, advanced towards them at the head of twenty thou-
sand men, they fled precipitately towards England, and with dif-
ficulty made their escape *. This rash and feeble attempt pro-
duced such effeas, as usually follow disappointed conspiracies. It
not only hurt the cause, for which it was undertaken, but added
firength and reputation to the King; confirmed Arran's power s
and enabled them to pursue their measures with more boldners,
and greater fuccers. Gowrie was the frirt viaim of their res~ent-
ment. After a very informal trial, a jury of peers found him
guilty of treason, and he was publicly beheaded at Stirling.

To humble the Church was the King's next itep. But as it be- May22.

came necessary, for this purpole, to call in the aid of the legifla- ,parl~d
tive authority, a parliament was hastily summoned. And while
t~o many of the nobles were banished out of the kingdom, or for-
bidden to appear in the King's prerence; while Arran's haughti-
ness kept some at a distance, and intimidated others; the meeting
consisted only of those, who were ablolutely at the devotion of the
court. In order to conceal the laws which were framing from severelaws
the knowledge of the Clergy, the Lords of the Articles were sworn :dthe
to secrecy. And when some of the Miniffers, who cither fulpeB-
ed, or were informed of the danger, deputed one of their num-
ber to declare their apprehenflons to the King, he was seized at
the palace-gate, and carried to a difiant prison. Others, attempt-
ing to enter the parliament houre, were refused admittance (.
And such laws were passed, as totally overturned the conititution
and discipline of the Church. The refuiing to acknowledge the ju-
rifdiaion of the privy council; the pretending an exemption Mlay=:.
from the authority of the civil courts ; the attempting to diminish
the rights and privileges of anly of the three eflates in parliament,
were declared to be high treason. The ho~lding Assemblies, whe-
ther Civil, or Ecclesiastical, without the King's permili~on or ap-
pointment; the uttering, either privately, or publicly, in sermons,
or in declamations, any fulfe and scandalous reports against the
King, his anceffors, or miniflers, were pronounced capitalcrimes tJ.

When thlefe lawrs ware published at the cross of Edinburgh,

according to the ancient cuffom, Mr. Robert Pont, Minister of St.

* Home's Hist. of House of Doug~l- 379. Spotl: 330.
t Cald! 3. 3f5. t rarl, 8 Ja- 1I.

BOOK VL. Cuthberts, and one of the Lords of Sellin, solemnly proteffed

LV against them, in the name of his brethren, becaule they had been
54*paired without the knowledge or consent of the Church. Ee

iince the Reformation, the pulpits and ecclesiastical judicatories
had both been esteemed sacred. In the former, the Clergy had
been accuitomed to cediure, and admonilh, with unbounded liber-
ty., In the latter, they exercised an uncoun-trouled and indepen-
Sdent juridiaiion. The blow was now aimed at both thes~e privi-
leges. There new statutes would have rendered church men as
inconsiderable, as they were indigent; and as the avarice of the
nobles had firipped them of the wealth, the King's ambition was
about to deprive them of the power which once belonged to their
order. No wonder the alarm was universal, and the complaints
loud. All the Miniffers of Edinburgh forsook their charge, and
fled into England. The most eminent Clergymen, throughout
the kingdom, imitated their example. IDefolation and aflonifh-
ment appeared in every part of the Scottish Church; the people
bewailed the loss of Paflors, whom they efleemed; and full of
coniernation, at an event so unexpeaed, openly expressed their
rage against Arran, and began to ful~pea the King himself to be
an enemy to the Reformed Religian Yt

* SpotS. 3331

END OF VOLU;ME FI1RSTi.
