.- A D D I T I 0 N S '

AND
CORRECTIONS

T
THE FORMER EDITIONS

Io-'

Dr. R O B E -R T:S 0 N's /--
HISTONkF SCOTL'AND.

LOND ON:

0 N
PRINTPE FOR T. CADELL, IN THE STRAND.

M DCC LXXXYII.

[ Price X s. ]

# PREFACE TO THE ELEVENTH EDITION.

PR E F A C E

TO THE
ELEVENTH EDITION.

T is now twenty-eight years since I pub-
lifhed the Hiiory of Scotland. During

that time I have been favoured by my friends
with several remarks upon it; and various
ftriaures have been made by persons, who
entertained Sentiments different from mine,
with respeCt to the tranfations in the reign
of Queen Mary. From whatever quarter in-
formation came, in whatever mode it has been
communicated, I have confidered it calmly
and with attention. Wherever I perceived
that I had erred, either in relating events, or
in delineating characers, I have, without he-
fitation, correced those errors. Wherever I
am satisfied that my original ideas were just
and well-founded, I adhere to them; and reft-
ing upon their conformity to evidence already
produced, I enter into no discussion or contro-
verfy in order to support them. Wherever
the opportunity of consulting original papers,

5 ~ ~either

either in print or in manuscript, to which I
had not formerly access, has enabled me to
throw new light upon any part of the History,
I have made alterations and additions, which,
I flatter myself, will be found to be of some
importance.

COLLEGE OF EDINBUTGH,

MARCH 5th, 1787.

# ADDITIONS AND CORRECTIONS TO THE FORMER EDITIONS OF Dr. ROBERTSON's HISTORY of SCOTLAND. [These Additions refer to the OCTAVO EDITION printed in 1781.]

# VOL. I. Page 101, line ult. after the word disregard, add,

ADDITIONS AND CORRECTIONS

T O
THE FORMER EDITIONS

OF
Dr. Ro6iRTsoN's HISTORY of SCOTLAtND.

[ bhef Additions refer to the OCTAVO EDITION

printed in 1781. ]
VOL. I. Page lox, line ult. after the word dif-

regard, add,

A RASH measure of the king of England
XA - added greatly to the violence of this na-
tional animosity. The Scots, relying on the treaty
of marriage and unions fitted out several ihips for
France, with which their trade had been inter-
rupted for some time. These were driven by
fPrefs of weather to take refuge in different ports
of England ; and Henry, under pretext that they
were carrying provisions to a kingdom with which
he was at war, ordered them to be seized and
condemned as lawful prizes *. The Scots, afto-
nifhed at this proceeding of a Prince, whose in-

* Keith, 32. 34. Epift. Reg. Scot. ii. App. 3.1.
Hamilton MSS. vol. 389.

A terest

terest it was manifestly, at that jun&ure, to court
and to sooth them, felt it not only as an injury,
but as an insult, and expressed all the resentment
natural to an high-fpirited people *

* In the MSS. Collection of Papers belonging to the

Duke of Hamilton, Sir Ralph Sadler describes the spirit
of the Scots as extremely outrageous. In his letter from
Edinburgh, September i, 1543: " The flay of the ships
has brought the people of this town, both men and wo-
men, and especially the merchants, into such a rage and
fury, that the whole town is commoved againf_ me, and
swear great oaths, that if their ships are not retfored, that
they would have their amends of me and mine, and that
they would set my house here on fire over my head, so
that one.of us. should not escape alive; and also it hath
much incensed and provoked the people against the Go-
vernor, faying, that he hath coloured a peace with your
Majefly only to undo them. This is the unreasonable-
ness of the people which live here in such a beaitly liberty,
that they neither regard God nor Governor; nor yet
justice, or any good policy, doth take place among them;
assuring your Highness that, unless the (hips be delivered,
there will be none abiding here for me without danger."
Vol. 451. In his letter of September 5, he writes, that
the rage of the people still continued so violent, " that
neither I nor any of my folks dare go out of my doors;
and the Prooft of the town, who hath much ado to flay
them from assaulting me in my house, and keepeth watch
therefore nightly, bath Cent to me sundry times, and prayed
me to keep myself and my folks within, for it is feant in
*his power to repress or resist the fury of the people. They
fay plainly, I (hall never pass out of the town alive, ex-
cept they have their {hips restored. . 'his is the rage and
beaflinefs of this nation, which God keep all honest men
from." Ib. 47i.

# VOL. I. Page 143, line 10, after judges, add the following Note:

# VOL. I. Page 159, line 19, after explain, add the following Note:

VOL. I. Page 143, line io, after judges, add the

following Note:
H OW far this claim of the clergy to exemption

from lay-jurifdiction extended, appears from

a remarkable transaction in the parliament held in
15 6. When that courtwas proceeding to the for-
feiture of the murderers of Cardinal Beatoun, and
were about to include a priest, who was one of the
aaffafins, in the general sentence of condemna-
tion, odious as the crime was to Ecclesiastics, a
delegate appeared in their name, and repledged or
claimed exemption of him from the judgment of
Parliament, as afiritual man. This claim was
sustained; and his name is not inserted in the
A& of Forfeiture. Epift. Reg. Scot. ii 350.361.
VOL. I. Page 159, line 19, after explain, add tbe

following Note:
AS far as I can judge, the husband of the

Q2een, by the grant of the Crown Matrimo-

nial, acquired a right to assume the title of King,
to have his name flamped upon the current coin,
and to sign all public instruments together with
the Queen. In consequence of this, the fubjets
took an oath of fidelity to him. Keith, Ap-
pend. 20. His authority became, in some mea-
sure, co-ordinate with that of the Queen; and
without his concurrence, manifested by signing
his name, no public deed seems to have been

A 2 confidered

# VOL. I. Page 248, line 5, instead of the paragraph, beginning As the vices, &c. and ending countrymen, insert what follows:

confidered as valid. By the oath of fidelity of
the Scottiih Commifflioners to the Dauphin, it is
evident that, in their opinion, the rights belong-
ing to the Crown Matrimonial subsisted only dur-
ing the continuance of the marriage. Keith, Ap-
pend. 20. But the conspirators against Rizio
bound themselves to procure a grant of the Crown
Matrimonial to Darnley during all the days of his
life. Keith, Append. 120. Good. i. 227.
VOL. I. Page 248, line 5, inJfead of the paragraph,

beginning As the vices, &c. and ending coun-
trymen, insert what follows:
THE licentious lives of the clergy, as has

been already observed, seem to have been

among the first things that excited any suspicion
concerning the truth of the doctrines which they
taught, and roused that spirit of inquiry which
proved fatal to the Popilh system. As this disgust
at the vices of ecclesiastics was soon transferred
to their persons, and. histing from them, by no
violent transition, fettled at last upon the offices
which they enjoyed; the effecs of the Reform-
ation would naturally have extended not only to
the do&rine, but to the form of government in the
Popilh church; and the fame spirit which abo-
lilfled the former, would have overturned the
latter. But in the arrangements which took place
in the different kingdoms and iates of Europe
in consequence of the Reformation, we may ob-
serve something similar to what happened upon

the

the firt establishment of Christianity in the Ro-
man Empire. In both periods the form of eccle-
fialtical policy was modelled, in some measure,
upon that of the civil government. When the
Christian church was patronized and established by
the state, the jurifdition of the various orders of
ecclesiastics, distinguished by the names of Pa-
triarchs, Archbilhops, and Bishops, was made
to correspond with the various divisions of the
Empire; and the ecclesiastic of chief eminence
in each of these possessed authority, more or less
extensive in proportion to that of the civil ma-
giftrate who presided over the fame diflri&.
When the Reformation took place, the Epifco-
pal form of government, with its various ranks
and degrees of subordination, appearing to be
most consistent with the genius of Monarchy, it
was continued, with a few limitations, in several
provinces of Germany, in England, and in the
northern kingdoms. But in Switzerland, and
some parts of the Low Countries, where the po-
pular form of government allowed more full
scope to the innovating genius of the Reforma-
tion, all pre-eminence of order in the church was
destroyed, and an equality eftablilhed more suit-
able to the spirit of republican policy. As the
model of episcopal government was copied from
that of the Chritlian church as established in the
Roman Empire, the situation of the primitive
church, prior to its eftablilhment by civil autho-
thority, seems to have suggested the idea, and fur-
niffled the model of the latter system, which has
since been denominated PreIbyterian. The first

A 3 Christians,

# VOL. I. Page 259, line 14, after posterity, add the following Note:

Christians, oppressed by continual persecutions,
and obliged to hold their religious assemblies by
fiealth, and in corners, were contented with a
form of government extremely simple. The in-
fluence of religion concurred with the sense of
danger, in extinguishing among them the spirit
of ambition, and in preserving a parity of rank,
the effect of their sufferings, and the cause of
many of their virtues. Calvin, whose decisions
were received among many Protestants of that age
with incredible fubmifflion, was the patron and
restorer of this scheme of ecclesiastical policy.
The church of Geneva, formed under his eye
and by his diretion, was deemed the most per-
sect model of this government; and Knox, who,
during his residence in that city, had studied and
admired it, warmly recommended it to the imi-
tation of his countrymen.
VOL. I. Page 259, line 14, after posterity, add the

followzing Note :
TH I S expedient for terminating the difference

between Elizabeth and Mary was so obvious,

that it could not fail of presenting itself to the
view of the Engliffi Ministers. " There hath
been a matter secretly thought of (fays Cecil, in a
letter to Throkmorton, July 14, 156 ), which I
dare communicate to you, although I mean never
to be an author thereof; and that is, if an accord
might be made betwixt our MiRfrefs and the
Scottilh Queen, that this should by Parliament

in

# VOL. I. Page 262, line 10, after Queen, add the following Paragraph:

in Scotland, &c. surrender unto the Queen's Ma-
jefty all matter of claim, and unto the heirs of her
body; and in consideration thereof, the Scottilh
Queen's interest Ihould be acknowledged in de-
fault of heirs of the body of the Queen's Majesty.
Well, God fend our Miflrefs a husband, and by
time a son, that we may hope our posterity [hall
have a masculine fucceflion. This matter is too
big for weak folks, and too deep for simple. The
Queen's Majesty knoweth of it." Hardw. State
Pap. i. 174. But with regard to every point re-
lating to the succession, Elizabeth was so jealous,
and so apt to take offence, that her molt confi-
dential Ministers durR not urge her to advance
one ftep farther than she herself chose to go. Cecil,
mentioning Tome scheme about the fuccefilon if
the Queen hfould not marry or leave issue, adds,
with his usual caution: " This song hath many
parts; but, for my part, I have no ikill but in
plain song." Ibid. 178.
VOL. I, Page 262, line Io, after Queen, add the

following Paragraph:
M ARY, in a long conference with Throk-

morton, the Englilh ambassador in France,

explained her sentiments concerning this unge-
nerous behaviour of his Miflrefs, in a Itrain of
dignified expostulation, which conveys an idea of
her abilities, address, and spirit, as advantage-
ous as any tranfaftion in her reign. Mary
was, at that time, only in her eighteenth year;

A 4 and

# VOL. I. Page 263, line 15, after intercept her, add the following Note:

and as Throkmorton's account of what passed in
his interview with her, is addressed directly to
Elizabeth*, that dexterous Courtier, we may be
well assured, did not embellilh the discourse of
the Scottish Queen with any colouring too fa-
voutable.

WHATEVER resentment Mary might feel, it
did not retard her departure from France.

* Cabbala, p. 374. Keith, 17o, &c.
VOL. I. Page 263, line 15, after intercept her,

add tbe following Note:
CAMDEN insinuates, rather than affirms, that

it was the object of the Englilh fleet to inter-

cept Mary. This, however, seems to be doubt-
ful. Elizabeth positively asserts, that at the re-
quest of the King of Spain (he had fitted out a
few Ihips of slender force, in order to clear the
narrow seas of pirates, which infelted them and
ihe appeals for the truth of this to Mary's own
Ministers. App. No. VI. p. 329. Cecil, in a
letter to Throkmorton, Aug. 26, 1561, informs
him, that " the Queen's fhips,which were upon the
seas to cleanse them of pirates, saw her [i. e. Mary],
and saluted her galleys, and staying her ships,
examined them of pirates, and dismissed them
gently. One Scottilh ship they detain as vehe-
mnently suspected of piracy." Hard. State Pa-
pers, i. I76. Caffelnau, who accompanied Mary
in this voyage, confirms the circumstance of her
galleys being in fight of the Englifa fleet. Mem.
ap. Jebb. xi. 455.

# VOL. I. Page 268, line, 6, instead of the paragraph beginning The Protestants, &c. and ending capital crime, insert as follows:

# VOL. I. Page 367, line 3 from bottom, after horror, add the following Note:

VOL. I. Page 268, line 6, infJead of the paragraph

beginning The Protestants, &c. and ending ca-
pital crime, insert as follows:
THE leaders of the Protestants, however, by

this prudent compliance with the prejudices

of their Sovereign, obtained from her a procla-
mation highly favourable to their religion, which
was issued fix days after her arrival in Scotland;
The Reformed dotrine, though established over
all the kingdom by the Parliament, which met in
consequence of the treaty of pacification, had
never received the countenance or fandtion of
royal authority. In order to quiet the minds of
those who had embraced that dotrine, and to
remove any dread of molestation which they
might entertain, Mary declared, " that until she
should take final orders concerning religion, with
advice of Parliament, any attempt to alter or
subvert the religion which the found universally
praftifed in the realm, Ihould be deemed a capital
crime." Next year, a second proclamation to
the fame effe&t was publifhed.-Keith, 510.
VOL. I. Page 367, line 3 from bottom, after horror,

add the following Note :
IN the first accounts of Rizio's murder sent to

England, there seem to have been mingled

(as is usual in relating extraordinary events) some
circumltances, which afterwards appeared to be

faife:

# VOL. I. Page 369, line 6 from bottom, after power, add the following Note:

false: among others, that a Friar, named Black,
had been lain at the fame time with Rizio. 'Park-
hurst Bifiop of Norwich, in communicating this
intelligence to his correspondent Bullinger, an
eminent Reformed Divine of Zurich, expreflcs
no condemnation of the murder of Rizio, and
exults over the supposed death of the Friar, in
terms which, in our times, will appear as shock-
ing as they are puerile: " Fraterculus quidam,
nomine Black, Papiftarum antefignanus, eodem
tempore in aula occiditur: Sic niger hic nebulo,
nigra quoque morte peremptus, invitus nigrum
subito defcendit in Orcum." Burn. Hist. of
Reform. iii. App. 360.
VOL. I. Page 369, line 6 from bottom, after power,

add the following Note:
T-HE enterprising spirit of Bothwell was so

conspicuous as to procure him several marks

of diftinaion during his residence in France.
Hardwicke's State Papers, i. 143. Throkmor-
ton, the English ambassador at Paris, and one of
the mos fSagacious Miniffers employed by Eliza-
beth, points him out as a person who was to be
dreaded and observed. " The Earl of Bothwell,
fays he in a letter, Nov. 28, 1560, is departed
to return into Scotland, and hath made boast
that he will do great things, and live in Scotland
in defpire of all men. He is a glorious, rash, and
hazardous young man; and therefore it were meet
that his adversaries should both have an eye to
him, and also keep him short." Ibid. p. 149.

# VOL. I. Page 411, line 18, instead of the paragraph beginning But the absolute dominion, &c. and ending obtained, insert what follows:

VOL. I. Page 4 i1, line 18, inflead of the paragraph

beginning But the aboblure dominion, &c. and
ending obtained, insert what follows:
BUT the absolute dominion which Bothwell

had acquired over Mary's mind, appeared in

the clearedl manner, by an at in favour ofch'e Pro-
teftant religion, to which, at this time, she gave
her afient. Mary's attachment to the Romiff
faith was uniform and superstitious; she had
never laid aside the design, nor loft the hopes of
restoring it. She had, of late, come under new
engagements to that purpose, and, in confe-
quence of these, had ventured upon tome steps
more public and vigorous than any she had for-
merly taken. But though none of these cir-
cumftances were unknown to Bothwell, there
were powerful motives which prompted him, at
this jun&ure, to conciliate the good-will of the
Protestants, by exerting himself in order to pro-
cure for them Tome additional security in the
exercise of their religion. That which they en-
joyed at present, was very precarious, being
founded entirely on the royal proclamation if-
sued soon after the arrival of the Queen in Scot-
land, which, in express terms, was declared to
be only a temporary regulation. From that
period, neither the solicitations of the General
Assemblies of the Church, nor the inrreaties of
her people, could extort from Mary any concef-

sion

lion in favour of the Protestant religion, on
which the professors might reft with greater con-
fidence. This, however, by the more powerful
influence of Bothwell, they now obtained. An
A& was passed in this Parliament, repealing all
the laws, canon, civil, and municipal, adverse to
the Reformed religion, and exempting such as
had embraced it from the penalties to which
they might have been fubjeaed by these laws,
either on account of their past condu& or present
profeliion declaring, at the fame time, that their
persons, estates, honours, and benefices, were
taken under public protection against every court,
civil or ecclesiastical, that might attempt to
molest them on account of their religious senti-
ments. Thus the Protestants, instead of holding
their sacred rights by no better tenure than a
declaration of royal indulgence, which might be
revoked at pleasure, obtained legal and parlia-
mentary proteaion in the exercise of their re-
ligion. By prevailing on the Queen to assent to
this law, Bothwell seems to have flattered him-
self that he would acquire such merit both with
the clergy and with the people, as might induce
them to favour his ambitious schemes, and to
connive at what he had done, or might do, in
order to accomplifl them. The Proreftants, ac-
cordingly, though this ac was far from amount-
ing to a legal eftabliliment of the Reformed
faith, seem to have confidered it as an additional
security of such importance, that it was pub-
lilfed among the laws enaced in a Parliament

xi~~~ ~~~held

held towards the close of this year, under very
different leaders*.

* I am indebted to the accuracy of Sir David Dal-

rymple, for pointing out (Remarks on the History of
Scotland, ch. 9.) a considerable error into which I had
fallen with refpe& to this a6, by supposing it to be so fa-
vourable to the doctrine of the Reformation, that the Par-
liament which met Dec. 15, could substitute nothing
stronger or more explicit in its place, and thought it sus-
ficient to ratify it word for word. This error I have now
corrected; but after confidering the aa with particu-
lar attention, though I am satisfied that it neither establish-
ed the Reformed religion as the religion of the ifate, nor
abolished Popery, yet it granted such new and legal fe-
curity to the Protestants, as was deemed, in that age, an
acquisition of great value. The framers of the law feeri
manifestly to have viewed it in that light; after reciting
" that the Queen, since her arrival, had attempted no-
thing contrary to the Rate of religion, which /he found
publicly and universally flanding, on which account Ihe
was most worthy to be served, honoured, and obeyed, &c."
-the aa goes on, " that as she intends to continue the
fame goodness and government in all times coming, the
professors of the religion aforelaid may and shall have oc-
cafion to praise God for her happy and gracious govern-
ment, &c.: and to the effeed that the professors of the
religion aforesaid may assure themselves to be in full surety
thereof, and of their lands, lives, &c. and may with the
better will jeopard and hazard their lives and goods in her
Highness's service, against all enemies to her, and to the
commonwell of this realm, &c. therefore our Sovereign,
with the advice of the whole estates in Parliament, &c.":
then follow the statutory clauses mentioned in the text.
The intention of passing the at is apparent, and it is
drawn with great art. This art is peculiarly manifefl in
the concluding clause. In her first proclamation the

Queen

Queen had declared, that it should continue in force only
until ihe should take final order concerning religion with
the advice of Parliament. In this a& the intention of
taking further order concerning religion is mentioned,
probably with a view to please the Queen ; but it is word-
ed with such studied dexterity, that the proteAion granted
by this law is no longer to be regarded as temporary, or
depending upon the Queen's taking such final order. Parl.
I K. Ja' VI. c. 31. In the fame light of an important
acquisition of security to the Reformed religion, this aA
is represented by the Privy Council in a proclamation
issued May 23, 1567. Keith, 571. Mary's principal
adherents, in a paper subscribed by them Sept. 12, I568,
declare, that she, " by the advice of the three estates,
had satisfied the desire of the whole nobility in an a& con-
cerning all the points of religion passed in the Parliament
held April 1567." Goodal, ii. 357. The fame is aflerted
to be the intention and eftfe of this aa in another public
paper in the year 1570. Haynes, 621. From confi-
dering all there particulars, one need not wonder that a
hlw " anent cafling (as its title bears), annulling and
abrogating of all laws, asrs, and conflitutions, canone,
civile, and municipal, with other constitutions, contrare
to the religion now profefit within the realme," confirm-
ed by the royal assent of the Queen, ihould be published
among the flatutes securing the Prateftant religion. We
find accordingly, in a very rare edition of the aAs of Par-
liament, imprintit at Edinburgh by Robert Lekprevik,
printar to the King's Majellie, 6 day of April 1568, the
ac of April 19 inserted among the ads of the Regent's
Parliament in December.

# VOL. I. Page 419, line 3, instead of the paragraph beginning Bothwell having now got, &c. and ending suspicious precipitancy; insert as follows:

VOL. I. Page 419, line 3, inflead of theparagraph

beginning Bothwell having now got, &c. and
ending suspicious precipitancy; iifert as follows:
BOTHWELL having now got the Queen's

person into his hands, it would have been un-

becoming either a politician or a man of gallantry
to have delayed corifummating his schemes. The
firfR fep towards this was to have his marriage
with Lady Jane Gordon, the earl of Huntly's
sifter, dissolved. In order to accomplilh that, in
a manner confirlent with the ideas of the Queen
on -one hand, and with the sentiments of his
countrymen on the other, two different processes
became necessary: one founded on the maxims
of the Canon law, the other accommodated to the
tenets of the Reformed Church. Buthwell, ac-
cordingly, commenced a suit, in his own name,
in the spiritual court of the Archbishop of St.
Andrew's, the jurifdiftion of which the Queen
had restored by a Ipecial commifion granted for
this purpose, and pleaded that Lady Jane and
himself being cousins within the prohibited de-
grees, and having married without a papal dii-
penfation,' their union was null from the begin-
ning*. At the fame time he prevailed with

Lady

* In herown time, it was urged as an aggravation of

the Queen's guilt, that flie gave her content to marry the
husband of another woman; and the charge has been
often repeated since. But, according to Mary's own
ideas, consonant to the principles of her religion, the

marriage

Lady Jane to apply to the Protestant court of
Commiffaries for a divorce, on account of his
having been guilty of adultery. The influence
of Bothwell was of equal weight in both courts.
In the course of four days, with the fame in-
decent and suspicious precipitancy, the one de-
clared the marriage to be illegal and null, the
other pronounced a sentence of divorce*.

marriage of Bothwell with Lady Jane Gordon was un-
lawful and void, and /he confidered them as living to-
gether not in the hallowed bonds of matrimony, but in a
state of criminal intercourse. Bothwell's addrefles, which
firuck her Protestant fubjeas not only as indecent but
flagitious, could not appear in the fame light to her; and
this may be pleaded in extenuation of the crime imputed
to her of having lifened to them. But it will not exempt
her from the charge of great imprudence in this unfortu-
nate ftep. Mary was well acquainted with the ideas of
her fubjeois, and knew what they would think of her
giving ear for a moment to the courtship of a man lately
married under her own eye, in the church of her palace.
Appendix, No. XXXI. p. 449. Every consideration should
have refrained her from forming this union, which to her
people must have appeared odious and hocking. Remarks
on the History of Scotland, p. 199, &c.

Anders. i. 132. Append. No. XXXI. p. 449.

# VOL. I. Page 437, line 16, after occasion, delete the rest of the paragraph to the word eluded, page 438, line 2, and insert as follows:

VOL. I. Page 437, line 16, after occasion, delete

the rejf of the paragraph to the word eluded,
page 433, line 2, and iJnert as follows:
M ARY, in her present condition, degraded

from her throne, and covered with the in-

famy attending an accusation of such atrocious
crimes, could be no longer the obje& of Eli-
zabeth's jealouly, either as a woman, or as a
Queen. Sympathy with a Sovereign in distress
seems, for a moment, to have touched a heart not
very susceptible of tender sentiments; and, while
these were yet warm, she dispatched Throkmorton
into Scotland, with power to negociate both with
the Queen and with the confederates. In his in-
truftions there appears a remarkable solicitude
for Mary's liberty, and even for her reputation ;
and the terms upon which she proposed to re-
eftablifl concord between the Queen and her
fubjets, appear to be to reasonable and well di-
gested, as might have ensured the safety and hap.
piness of both. Zealous as Throkmorton was to
accomplish this, all his endeavours and address
proved ineffcttual. He found not only the con-
federate nobles, but the nation in general, so
far alienated from the Queen, and so much of-
fended with the indecent precipitancy of her
marriage with the reputed murderer of her former
husband, as to be incapable of listening to any
proposition in her favour.

DURING the state of anarchy, occasioned by the

imprisonment of the Queen, and the dissolution
of the eltablilhed..government, which afforded

B such

such ample scope for political speculation, four
different schemes had been proposed for the set-
tlement of the nation. One, that Mary should
be replaced upon the throne, but under various
and strict limitations. The second, that she
Thould resign the crown to her son, and retiring
out of the kingdom, should reside, during the re-
mainder of her days, either in England or in
France. The third, that Mary should be brought
to public trial for her crimes, and after con-
vicaion, of which no doubt was entertained,
ihould be kept in perpetual imprisonment. The
fourth, that after trial and condemnation, capital
punishment should be infiEted upon her. Throk-
morton, though dilpofcd, as well by his own in-
clination as in conformity to the fpiric of his in-
ftrucions, to view matters in the light mofl fa-
vourable to Mary, informed his Court, that the
milder schemes, recommended by Mait}and alone,
would undoubtedly be reprobated, and one of the
more rigorous carried into execution.

IN justification of this rigour, the confederates

maintained that Mary's affection for Bothwell
was still unabated, and openly avowed by her;
that she rejected with disdain every proposal for
dissolving their marriage; and declared, that she
would forego every comfort, and endure any ex-
tremity, rather than give her content to that mea-
sure. While these were her sentiments, they con-
tended, that concern for the public welfare, as
well as attention to their own safety, rendered it
necessary to put it out of the Queen's power ro
restore a daring man, exasperated by recent inju-

ries,

# VOL. I. Page 472, line 10, after conduct, delete the rest of the paragraph to the end, at the word comply, and insert as follows:

ries, to his former station, which muff needs
prove fatal to both. Notwithstanding their soli-
citude to conciliate the good-will of Elizabeth,
they foresaw clearly what would be the effect, at
this junture, of Throkmorton's interposition in
behalf of the Queen, and that she, elated with
the protpeet of protection, would refuse to lften
to the overtures which they were about to make
to her. For this reason, they peremptorily de-
nied Throkmorton access to their prisoner; and
what propoitions he made to them in her behalf
they either refused or eluded *.

* Keith, 417. 427.
VOL. I. Page 472, line io, after condu&, delete

the reft cf the paragraph to the end, at the word
comply, and insert as follows:
SHE declared it to be far from her intention to

claim any right of judging between Mary and

her subje&s, or of degrading her so far as to require
that she should answer to their accusations. On
the contrary, Murray and his associates were fum-
moned to appear, in order to justify their con-
duct in treating their Sovereign so harshly, and
to vindicate themselves from those crimes with
which she had charged them. On her part,
Elizabeth promised, whatever should be the issue
of this inquiry, to employ all her power and in-
fluence towards replacing Mary on her throne,
under a few limitations, by no means unrea-
fonable. Mary, deceived by this seeming atten-
tion to her dignity as a Queen; soothed, on one

B 2 hand,

# VOL. I. Page 491, line 8, delete the sentence beginning Elizabeth having got, &c. and ending Scottish Queen, line 11, and insert as follows:

hand, by a promise more flattering than any
which she had hitherto received from Elizabeth,
and urged, on the other, by the feelings which
were natural on being conduced into a more in-
terior part of England, and kept there in more
rigorous confinemenr, complied at length with
what Elizabeth required, and promiifd to fend
commifioners to the conferences appointed to
be held at York .

Anders. iv. part i. p. It, 12, &c. 109, &c. Haynes,

468, &c. State Trials, edit. Hargrave, i. 9o.
VOL. I. Page 9gr, i;ce 8, delete the sentence begig-

.,ig Elizabeth having got, &c. and ending
Scortilh QOeen, i;;e 11, and iifert as follows:
j S focn as Elizabeth got these into her posses-

sion, she laid them before her Privy Council,

to which fhejoined, on this occasion, fcveral no-
blemen of the greatest eminence in her kingdom;
in order that they might have an opportunity of
confidering the mode in which an inquiry of such
public importance had been hitherto conducted,
as well as the amount of the evidence now brought
againif a pefibn who claimed a preferable right
of 1ucceflion to rhe Englifli crown. In this re-
fpecitble assembly all the proceedings in the con-
ferences at York and Weetminffler were reviewed,
and the evidence produced by the Regent of
Scotland against his Sovereign was examined
with attention. In particular, the letters and
other papers said to be written by the Queen of
Scots, were carefully compared " for the manner

of

# VOL. II. Page 36, line 18, after common cause, add,

of writing and orthography," with a variety of
letters which Elizabeth had received at different
times fi-om the Scottish QuOeen; and, as the result
of a most accurate collation, the members of the
Privy Council, and noblemen conjoined with
them, declared that no difference between these
could be discovered *. Elizabeth, having ella-
blifhed a fact so unfavourable to her rival, began
to lay aside the expressions of friendflip and re-
spect which fle had hitherto used in all herletters
to the.Scottiin Q(jeen.

* Anders. vol. iv. part ii. 170, &c.

VOL. II. Page 36, line 18, after common caufe,add,
EIN COURAGED by this general difpoition

to place confidence in her, Elizabeth refurned

a scheme which she had formed during the re-
gency of the Earl of Murray, offending Mary as
a prisoner into Scotland. But her sentiments and
situation were now very different from what they
had been during her negociation with Murray.
Her animosity against the Queen of Scots was
greatly augmented, by recent experience of her
inclination as well as power not only to disturb
the tranquillity of her reggn, but to wrest from
her the crown; the party in Scotland favourable
to Mary was almost entirely broken; there was
no reason to dread any danger from France,
which still continued to court her friendfnip.
She aimed, accordingly, at something very dif-
ferent from that which she had in view three
years before. Then she discovered a laudable
solicitude not only for the safety of Mary's life,

B 3 but

# VOL. II. Page 41, line 11, after inflame, add the following Note:

but for securing to her, treatment suited to her
ranks Now ihe required, as an express condi-
tion, that, immediately after Mary's arrival in
Scotland, {he should be brought to public trial;
and having no doubt that sentence would be
passed according to her delerts, she insisted that,
for the good of both kingdoms, it ihould be exe-
cuted without delay *. No tranfacion, perhaps,
in Elizabeth's reign merits more revere censure.
Eager to cut Ihort the days of a rival, the obje&
both of her hatred and dread, and no less anxious
to avoid the blame to which such a deed of violence
might expose her, she laboured, with timid and
ungenerous artifice, to transfer the odium of it
from herself to Mary's own fubjtcs. The Earl
of Mar, happily for the honour of his country,
had more virtue than to liften to such an igno-
minious proposal; and Elizabeth did not venture
to renew it.

* Murdin, 224.
VOL. II. Page 41, line lI, after inflame, add

tbe following Note:
A STRIKING description of that species of

eloquence for which Knox was diftinguilh-

ed, is given by one of his contemporaries, Mr.
James Melville, Minister of Anftruthr. ' But
of all the benefites I had that year [1571], was
the coming of that molt notible prophet and
apostle of our nation, Mr. John Knox, to St. An-
drews, who, by the faction of the Queen occupy-

ing

# DISSERTATION on King HENRY's Murder. Page 9, line 23, after Craigmillar, add,

ing the castle and town of Edinburgh, was com-
pelled to remove therefra with a number of the
bes, and chufed to come to St. Andrews. I
heard him teach there the prophecies of Daniel
that summer and the winter following. I had my
pen and little buik, and took away ic things as
I could comprehend. In the opening of his text
he was moderat the space of half an hour; but
when he entered to application, he made me so
to grue [thrill] and tremble, that I could not
hald the pen to write.-He was very weak. I
saw him every day of his doEtrine go hulie [slowly]
and fair, with a furring of marticks about his
neck, a staff in the one hand, and good godlie
Richart Ballanden holding him up by the oxter
[under the arm] from the abbey to the parish kirk;
and he the said Richart and another servant lifted
him up to the pulpit, where he behoved to lean
at his firfm entrie; but e're he was done with his
sermon, he was so aacive and vigorous, that he
was like to ding the pulpit in blads [beat the pulpit
to pieces], and fly out of it." MS. Life of Mr.
James Melville, belonging to Mr. Paton of the
Custom-house, Edinburgh, p. 14. 21.
DISSERTATION on King HENRY'S Murder.

Page 9, line 23, after Craignillar, add,
6. BUT even if all this reasoning should be set

aside, and the authenticity of the Protefta-
tion should be admitted in its full extent, it may

B 4 still

flill be a question, what degree of credit should be
given to the assertion of the two Earls, who were
not only present in the first Parliament, held by
Murray as Regent in December 1567, in which
the one carried the sceptre, and the other the sword
of state, Spofwl. 214. but were both members of
the Committee of Lords of Articles, and in
that capacity assisted in framing all the ac's by
which the Qteen was deprived of the Crown, and
her son feared on the throne; and in particular
concurred in the as by which it was declared,
that whatever had befallen the Queen, "' was in her
awin default, in fa far as, be divers hir previe let-
ters written halelie with hir awin hand, and fend
by hir to James fometyme Erie of Bothwell,
cheif executour of the laid horribill murthour,
as weill befoir the committing thairof as thair-
astir: And be hir ungodlie and difhonourabill
proceeding to anc pretendit marriage with him,
fuddaindli and unprovifitlie thaircftir, it is
maift certane that fche was previe, airt and pairt,
of the atual devise and deid of the foirnamit
murthour of the King her lauchfull husband,
and thairfoir juftlie defirvis quahtfumever hes
bene done to hir in ony tyme bvgaine, or that
fa! be ufit towards hir, for the said caule." An-
d ri..2;..

# DISSERTATION, Page 20, line 20, after also p. 44, add,

DISSERTATION, Page 20, line to, after also p. 44,

add,
IN all their negociations with Throkmorton,

the Confederates mention this unalterable at-

tachment of the Queen to Bothwell, as a fuffi-
cient reason for rejecting his proposals of an ac-
commodation with their Sovereign. Keith, 419.
449. This assertion they renewed in the confer-
ences at York. Anders. iv. part ii. p. 66.
Murray, in his interview with Mary in Lochle-
vin, charged her with persisting in her inordi-
nate affetion to Bothwell. Keith, 446. All these,
however, may be confidered merely as accufa-
tions brought by the Confederates, in order to
vindicate their rigour towards the Queen. But
Throkmorton, who, by his residence in Edin-
burgh, and by his intercourse with the Queen's
partizans, as well as with her enemies, had many
opportunities ofdifcovering whether or not Mary
had exprefled herrelf in such terms, and who was
disposed to view her actions in the mofl favour-
able light, appears, by the passage which I have
quoted from his letter of the 14th of July, to be
persuaded that the Confederates had not mifre-
presented her sentiments. He had soon an op-
portunity of being confirmed with greater cer-
tainty in this opinion. Although the Confe-
derates had refused him access to the captive
Queen, he found means of holding a secret cor-
refpondence with her, and endeavoured to per-
fuade her to give her consent to have her marriage
with Bothwell dissolved by a sentence of divorce,

as

as the most probable means of regaining her
liberty. She hath sent me word that she will in
no wife content unto that, but rather die. Ap-
pend. to Vol. I. No. XXI. There is evidence
of the continuance of Mary's attachment frill
more explicit. LordHerries, in the parliament
held the isth of December 1567, acknowledged
the Queen's inordinate affection to that wicked
man, and that {he could not be induced by per-
suasion to leave him; and that in sequestering
her within Lochlevin, the Confederates had done
the duty of noblemen. App. to Vol. I. No. XXIII.
In the year 1571 a conference was held by some
deputies from a Convention of Clergy, with the
Duke of Chatelherault, Secretary Maitland, Sir
James Balfour, and Kirkaldy; and an account of
it written by Mr. Craig, one of the Ministers of
Edinburgh, is extant in Calderwood MS. Hilt.
ii. 244. In pretence of all there persons, most of
whom were in Edinburgh when the Queen was
taken at Carberry, Maitland, who was now an
avowed partizan of Mary, declares, that on the
fame night she was brought to Edinburgh, he
himself had offered that if Ihe would abandon
Bothwell, she Ihould have as thankful obedience
as ever the had since (he came to Scotland. But
no wife would she consent to leave Bothwell.
According to Sir James Melvil, the Queen
found means of writing a letter to Bothwell on
the evening of that day when she was conducted
as a prisoner to Edinburgh, in which (he declared
her affection to him in the most tender expressions,
and her resolution never to abandon him. This

7 letter,

# DISSERTATION, Page 22, line 28, after Good. ii. 154. delete 4. After the conferences, &c. to Good. ii. 156. in page 23, line 13, and insert as follows:

letter, he fays, was intercepted by the Confede-
rates, and determined them to confine Mary in
the catle of Lochlevin. But as neither Buchanan
nor Knox, both abundantly disposed to avail
themselves of every fad and report that could be
employed in order to represent Mary's condut
as improper and criminal, mention this letter;
and as the Confederates themselves, in their ne-
gociations with Throkmorton, as well as in their
acculations of the Queen before the English Com-
mifflloners at York and Westminster, maintain
the fame silence with regard to it, I am satisfied
that Melvil, who wrote his memoirs for the in-
formation of his son, in his old age, and long
after the events which he records happened, has
been mistaken with regard to this particular.
DISSERTATION, Page 22, line 28, after Good. ii.

I54. delete 4. After the conferences, &c. to Good.
ii. 156. in page 23, line 13, and insert as follows:
N OR did Norfolk declare there to be his senti-

ments only in public official letters, he ex-

pressed himself in the fame manner to his most
confidential friends. In a secret conference with
the Bilhop of Ross at York, the duke informed
him, that he had seen the letters, &c. which the
Regent had to produce against the Queen, where-
by there would be such matter proved against her,
as would dishonour her for ever. State Trials,
edition of Hargrave, i. 91. Murdin, 52. The
Biflop of Ross, if he had known the letters to be

a noto-

a notorious forgery, must have been naturally led,
in consequence of this declaration, to undeceive
the Duke, and to expose the imposture. Bur,
instead of this, the Duke and he and Lethingron,
after consulting together, agreed, that the Bilhop
thould write to Mary, then at Bolton, and in-
Ifruct her to make such a proposal to Elizabeth as
might prevent the public producion of the letters
and otherevidence. S.ate T'rials, i. 94. Murdin, 45.
Indeed, the whole of this fecrer conference seems
to imply, that Lethington, Rols, and Norfolk,
were conscious of some defe& in Mary's cause,
and therefore exerted all their ingenuity in order
to avoid a public accusation. Murdin, 52, 53.
To Banister, whom the Duke seems to have trust-
ed more entirely than any other of his servants,
he expressrd himftlf in similar terms with refpe&
to the QOeen of Scots. State Trials, i. 58. The
words of Banifler's evidence are remarkable:

I confess that 1, waiting of my Lord and

Master, when the Earl of SuiTcx and Mr. Chan-
cellor of the Dutchy that now is, were in com-
mission at York, did hear his Grace fay, that
upon examination of the matter of the murder, it
did appear that the Queen of Scots was guilty
and privy to the murder of Lord Darnly, whereby
I verily thought that his Grace would never join
in marriage with her." Murdin, 134. Elizabeth,
in her instructions to the Earl of Shrewsbury and
Beale in 1583, afierts, that both the Duke and
Earl of Arundel did declare -to herrelf, that the
proof, by the view of her letters, did fall (ut f'ufli-
cent againit the Queen of Scots; however, they

ere

were after drawn to cover her faults and pro;
nounce her innocency. MS. Advoc. Library.
A. iii. 28. p. 314. from Cot. Lib. Calig. 9.
4. A similar impreflion was made upon other con-
temporaries of Mary by the production of the
letters, which implies a full belief of their being
genuine. Ctcil, in his correspondence with Sir
Henry Norris, the English ambassador in France,
relates this tranfaftion in terms which leave. no
room to doubt with refpetd to his own private
opinion. In his letter, Decem. I4th, 1568, the
very day on which the letters, &c. were laid be-
fore the meeting of Privy Counlellors and Peers,
he informs him, " that the Regent was driven, for
his defence, to disclose a full fardel of the naughty
matter, tending to convince the Queen as deviser
of the murther, and the Earl of Bothwell as her
exectour ; and now the Queen's party, so great,
refuse to make any answer, and press that their
Mistress may come in peroln to answer the matter
herself, before the Queen's Majesty, which is
thought not fit to be granted until the great blot
of the marriage with her husband's murtherer, and
the evident charges, by letters of her own, to be
deviier of the murther, be omnewhat razed out or
recovered; for that as the matters are exhibited
against her, it is far unseemly for any Prince,
or for challe ears, to be annoyed with the filthy
noile thereof; and yet, as being a Commissioner,
I must and will forbear to pronounce any thing
herein certainly, though as a private perron I
cannot but with horror and trembling think
thereof." Cabala, I56. 5. From the correspond-

ence

ence of Bowes, the English Resident in Scot-
land, with Walsingham in the year 1582, pub-
lifhed towards the close of this Dissertation, it
is manifest that both in England and Scotland,
both by Elizabeth and James, both by the Duke
of Lennox and Earl of Gowrie, the letters were
deemed to be genuine. The eagerness, on one
fide to obtain, and on the other to keep poflef-
lion of the casket and letters, implies that this
was the belief of both. These sentiments of
contemporaries, who were in a situation to be
thoroughly informed, and who had abilities to
judge with discernment, will, in the opinion of
many of my readers, far outweigh theories,
suppositions, and conjecures, formed at the dif-
tance of two centuries. 6. The letters were sub-
jected to a solemn and judicial examination with
refpet to their authenticity, as far as that could be
ascertained by resemblance of character and fa-
fhion of writing: For after the conferences at
York and Westminster were finished, Elizabeth,
as I have related, assembled her Privy Counsel-
lors, and, joining to them several of the most
eminent noblemen in her kingdom, laid be-
fore them all the proceedings against the Scottish
Queen, and particularly ordered, that " the let-
ters and writings exhibited by the Regent, as the
Queen of Scots' letters and writings, should also
be shewed, and conference [i. e. comparison]
thereof made in their fight, with the letters of
the said Queenes, being extant, and heretofore
written with her own hand, and sent to the
Queen's majesty whereby may be searched and

examined

# DISSERTATION, Page 24, line ult. after Bothwell, add,

examined what difference is betwixt them." Good.
ii. 252. They assembled accordingly at Hamp-
ton Court, December 14 and I5, I568; and,
" The originals of the letters supposed to be writ-
ten with the Queen of Scots' own hand, were then
also presently produced and perused; and being
read, were duly conferred and compared, for the
manner of writing, and fashion of orthography,
with sundry other letters long since heretofore
written, and sent by the said Queen of Scots to the
Queen's Majesty. In collation whereof no differ-
ence was found." Good. ii. 256.
DISSERTATION, Page 24, line ult. after Both-

well, add,
8. IN opposition to all these reasons for believ-

ing the letters, &c. to be authentic, the

condua of the Nobles confederated againit Mary,
in not producing them directly as evidence
against her, has been represented as an irrefra-
gable proof of their being forged. According
to the account of the Confederates themselves,
the casket containing the letters was seized by
them on the twentieth of June one thousand five
hundred and fixty-feven; but the first time that they
were judicially stated as evidence againfi the Queen
was in a meeting of the Regent's Privy Council,
December fourth, and they afterwards served as
the foundation of the acts made against her in
the Parliament held on the fifteenth of the fame
month. If the letters had been genuine, it is
contended, that the obtaining poffeflion of them

must

murs have afforded such matter of triumph to the
Confederates, that they would instantly have
proclaimed it to the whole world; and in their
negociations with the Englilh and French Mini-
fters, or with such of their fellow-fubjets as con-
demned their proceedings, they would have
silenced, at once, every advocate for the Queen,
by exhibiting this convincing proof of her guilt.
Bur in this reasoning sufficient attention is not
paid to the delicate and perilous situation of
the Confederates at that juncure. They had
taken arms against their Sovereign, had seized
her person at Carberry-hill, and had confined her
a prisoner in Lochlevin. A considerable num-
ber, however, of their fellow-fubjects, headed by
some of the molt powerful noblemen in the king-
dom, was combined against them. This combi-
nation, they loon perceived, they could not hope
to break or to vanquish without aid either from
France or England. In the former kingdom,
Mary's uncles the Duke of Guise and Cardinal
of Lorrain were, at that period, all-powerful,
and the King himself was devotedly attached to
her. If the Confederates confired their views
to the diflolurion of the marriage of the Queen
with Bothwell, and to the excluficn of him for
ever from her presence, they might hope, per-
haps, to be countenanced by Charles IX. and his
Ministers, v.ho had il n an envoy into Scot-
land of purpose to diffuadce Mvary from that ill-
fated match; Append. No. XXI. wherecs the
loading her publicly with the imputation of be-
ing accessory to the murder of her husband,

would

would be deemed such an inexpiable crime by
the court of France, as muff cut off every hope
of countenance or aid from that quarter. From
England, with which the principal Confederates
had been long and intimately connected, they
had many reasons to expect more effectual sup-
port; but, to their aftonithment, Elizabeth con-
demned their proceedings with asperity, warmly
espoused the cause of the captive Queen, and
was extremely follicitous to obtain her release
and restoration. Nor was this one of the arti-
sices which Elizabeth often employed in her
tranfations with Scotland. Though her most fa-
gacious Mihiffers confidered it as the wisest po-
licy to support the confederate Lords rather than
the Queen of Scots, Elizabeth disregarded their
counsel *. Her high notions of royal authority)
and of the fubmifflon due by fubjeas, induced

* This was the opinion of Throkmorton) as appears

from an extrat of his letter of July ilth, published in
the Append, No. XXI. The fame were the sentiments
of Cecil, in his letter of Aug. I9th, 1567, to Sir Henry
Norris, Elizabeth's ambassador to France, " You shall
perceive, fays he, by the Queen's letter to you, at this
present, how earhefily (he is bent in favour of the Queeh
of Scots, and truly since the beginning fle hath been
greatly offended with the Lords; and, howsoever her Ma-
jefty might make her profit by bearing with the Lords in
- this acion, yet no counsel can flay her Majesty from
manifesting her mifliking of them." Cabala, 140. And
in his letter of Sept. 3d, " The Queen's Majesty, our
Sovereign, remaining still offended with the Lords for the
Queen; the example moveth her." Ib. I4r. Djgges
Comp. Amb. i4

C her,

her, on this occasion, to exert herself in behalf of
Mary, not only with sincerity but with zeal; she
negociated, she follicited, she threatened. Find-
ing the Confederates inflexible, she endeavoured
to procure Mary's release by means of that party
in Scotland which continued faithful to her, and
instructed Throkmorton to correspond with the
leaders of it, and to make overtures to that effect.
Keith, 451. App. No. XXII. She even went
so far as to direc her ambassador at Paris,
to concert measures with the French King how
they, by their joint efforts, might perluade or
compel the Scots to " acknowledge the Queen
her good sifter to be their Sovereign Lady and
Queen, and renounce their obedience to her son."
Keith, 462, 3, 4. From all there circumflance!,
the Confederates had every reason to apprehend
that Mary would soon obtain liberty, and by some
accommodation be restored to the ,whole, or at
least to a considerable portion of her authority as
Sovereign. In that event they foresaw, that if
they should venture to accuse her publicly of a
crime so atrocious as the murder of her husband,
they must not only be excluded for ever from
power and favour, but from any hope of personal
safety. On this account they long confined them-
selves to that which was originally declared to
be the reason of their taking arms; the aveng-
ing the King's death, the dissolving the mar-
riage with Bothwell, the inflicting on him con-
'dign punishment, or banishing him for ever from
the Queen's pretence. It appears from the let-
ters of Throkmorton, publilhed by Bilhop Keith,

and

and in my Appendix, that his sagacity early dif-
covered that this would be the tenor of their con-
duEt. In his letter from Edinburgh, dated July
I4th, he observes, that (" they do not forget their
own peril conjoined with the danger of the Prince,
but, as far as I perceive, they intend not to touch
the Queen either in surety or.in honour; four they
speak of her with refpe& and reverence, and do
affirm, as I do learn, that, the condition aforesaid
accomplished [i. e. the reparation from Bothwell],
they will both pur her to liberty, and restore
her to her estate." Append. No. XXI. His
letter of August 22di contains a declaration
made to him by Lethington, in name and in pre-
fence of his associates, " that they never meant
harm neither to the Queen's person nor to her
honour-that they have been contented hitherto
to be condemned, as it were, of all Princes, ftran-
gers, and, namely, of the Queen of England,
being charged of grievous and infamous titles,
as to be noted rebels, traitors, seditious, ingrate
and cruel, all which they susser and bear upon
their backs, because they will not justify them-
selves, nor proceed in any thing that may touch
their Sovereign's honour. But in cafe they be
with these defamations continually oppressed, or
with the force, aid, and pracices of other Princes,
and namely of the Queen of England, put in
danger, or to an extremity, they shall be compel-
led to deal otherwise with the Queen than they
intend, or than they desire; for; added he, you
may be sure we will not lose our lives, have our
lands forfeited, and be reputed rebels through the

C 2 world,

world, feeing we have the means to justify our-
selves." Keith, 448. From this view of the flip-
pery ground on which they stood at that time,
their condu& in not producing the letters for
several months, appears nqt only to have been
prudent but essential to their own safety.

Btrr, at a fubefquent period, when the Confe-

derates found it necessary to have the form of
government which they had established, confirm-
cd by authority of Parliament, a different mode
of proceeding becanme requisite. All that had
hitherto been done with refpedt to the Queen's
difmiffon, the feating the young King upon the
throne, and the appointment of a Regent, was
in reality nothing more than the deed of private
men. It required some exhibition of some legal
evidence to procure a constitutional a& giving
the sanction of its approbation to such violent
measures, and to obtain " a perfect law and security
for all them that either by deed, counsel, or sub-
scription, had entered into that cause since the be-
ginning." Haynes, 453. This prevailed with the
Regent and his secret counsel, after long delibe-
ration, to agree to produce all the evidence of
which they were possessed; and upon that pro-
ducion Parliament passed the acts which were
required. Such a change had happened in the
slate of the kingdom as induced the Confederates
to venture upon this change in their condut.
In June, a powerful combination was forming
against them under the leading of the Hamiltons.
In December, that combination was broken;
most of the members of it had acknowledged the

King

King as their lawful Sovereign, and had submit-
ted to the Regent's government. Huntly, Argyll,
Herries, the most powerful nobleman of that party,
were present in the Parliament, and concurred
in all its acts. Edinburgh, Dunbar, Dunbarton,
and all the chief strong holds in the kingdom,
were now in the hands of the Regent; the armsof
France had full occupation in its civil war with the
Hugonots. The ardour of Elizabeth's zeal in
behalf of the captive Queen seems to have aba-
ted. A ftep that would have been followed with
ruin to the Confederates in June, was attended
with little danger in December. From this long
deduction it appears, that no proof of the letters
being forged can be drawn from the circum-
stance of their not having been produced imme-
diately after the twentieth of June; but though no
public accusation was brought instantly against the
Queen, in consequence of seizing the casket, hints
were given by the Confederates, that they poffefled
evidence sufficient to convi& her. This is plainly
implied in a letter of Throkmorton, July 21ft,
Keith, Pref. p. xii. and more clearly in the
passage which I have quoted from his letter
of August 22. In his letter of July 25, the pa-
pers contained in the casket are fill more plainly
pointed out. " They [i. e. the Confederates] fay,
that they have as apparent proof against her
as may be, as well by the testimony of her own
hand-writing, which they have recovered, as also
by sufficient witnesses." Keith, 426.

10

# DISSERTATION, Page 35, line 19, after already examined, add,

DISSERTATION, Page 35, line 19, after already

examined, add,
T HESE proofs may beclafled under two heads.

i. The erroneous and contraditory accounts

which are said to be given of the letters, upon the
first judicial production of them. In the Secret
Council held Decem. 4, 1567, they are described
"c as her privie letters written and fubfcrivit with
her awin hand." Haynes, 454. Good. ii. 64. In
the a: of parliament, passed on the l5th of the
fame month, they are described as " her privie
letters written halelie with hir awin hand." Good.
ib. 67. This diversity of description has been
confidered as a lirong presumption of forgery;
The manner in which Mr. Hume accounts for
this is natural and plausible, vol. v. p. 498. And
leveral ingenious remarks, tending to confirm his
observations, are made in a pamphlet lately pub-
lifhed, intitled, Miscellaneous Remarks on the En-
quiry into the Evidence against Mary Qateen of Scots.
To what they have observed it may be added,
that the original act of Secret Council does not
now exist; we have only a copy of it found
among Cecil's papers, and the transcriber has
been manifestly so ignorant, or so careless, that
an argument founded entirely upon the supposition
of his accuracy is of little force. Several errors
into which he has fallen, we are enabled to point
out, by comparing his copy of the act of Secret
Council with the aft of Parliament passed in

coneq u ence

consequence of it. The former contains a pe-
tition to Parliament; in the latter the real peti-
tion is resumed verbatim, and converted into a
law. In the copy, the Queen's marriage with
Bothwell is called " a priveit marriage," which
it certainly was not; for it was celebrated, after
proclamation of banns, in St. Giles's church three
several days, and with public solemnity; but in
the at it is denominated " ane pretendit mar-
riage," which is the proper description of it ac-
cording to the ideas of the party. In the copy, the
Queen is said " to be so thrall and bludy assec-
tionat to the privat appetite of that tyran," which
is nonsense, but in the aft it is " blindly assec-
tionat." In the copy, it is said, "all nobill and
virtuous men abhorring their traine and com-
pany." In the aft, " their tyrannie and com-
panie," which is evidently the true reading, as
the other has either no meaning, or is a mere tau-
tology. 2. The other proof of the forgery of
-the letters, is founded upon the impofribility of
reconciling the account, given of the time when,
and the places from which, the letters are sup-
posed to have been written, with what is cer-
tainly known concerning the Queen's motions.
According to the paper published, Anders. ii. 269.
which has been called Murray's Diary, and which
is formed upon the authority of the letters.

# DISSERTATION, Page 42, line 9, after approbation, add,

DrSSERTATION, Page 42, line 9, aft'er pproba'

tion, Add,
W IITH refpe& to the Sonnets, Sir David

Dalrymple has proved clearly, that they

mult have been written after the murder of the
King, and prior to Mary's marriage with Both-
well. But as hardly any part of my narra-
tive is founded upon what is contained in the
Sonnets, and as in this Differration I have been
constrained to dwell longer upon minute and ver-
bal criticisms, than may be intereffing or agree-
able to many of my readers, I shall reft satisfied
with referring, for information concerning every
particular relative to the Sonnets, to Rearks on
the Hiftry of Scotland, Chap. XI.

TrHE END. . i.
. BR-TV^' j)
