THE
H I STORY

O F
SCOTLAND.

DURING THE REIGNS OF
Queen M A R Y and of King J A M ES VI.

TILL
His ACCESSION to the Crown of ENGLAND.

WITH A
REVIEW of the SCOTTISH HISTORY previous to that Period;

And an AP PE N DI containing OR I G I NAL PAP £ R S.

IN TWO VOLUMES.
By WILLIAM ROB ERTSON, D.D.

Minister of LADY YES T ER'S, Edinburgh.

VOLUME I.
THE THIRD EDITION.

LONDON:
Printed for A. MILL AR, in the Strand.

MDCCLX.

# PREFACE.

PREF AC E
IDeliver this book to the'world with all the diffi-

dence and anxiety natural to an Author on publifl-

ing his firRf performance. The time I have employed,
and the pains I have taken, in order to render it
worthy of the public approbation, it is, perhaps, pru-
dent to conceal, till it be known whether that appro-
bation shall ever be beefowed upon it.

BUT as J have departed, in many infiances, fromn

former Historians, as I have placed fadts in a different
light, and have drawn chara&ers with new colours, I
ought to account for this conduct to my readers; and
to produce the evidence, on which, at the distance of
two centuries, I presume to contradict the teflimony of
less remote, or even of cotemporary historians.

THE tranfadions in Mary's reign gave rife to two

parties, which were animated against each other with
the fiercecf political hatred, embittered by religious zeal.
Each of these produced HifRorians of considerable me-
rit, who adopted all their fcntiments, and defended all
their acions. Truth was not the sole obje& of thele

A 2 Authors.

Authors. Blinded by prejudices, and heated by the
part which they themselves had ated in the scenes they
describe, they wrote an apology for a facion, rather
than the history of their country. Succeeding Hifto-
rians have followed these guides almost implicitly, and
have repeated their errors and misrepresentations. But
as the fame pafrons which inflamed parties in that
age have descended to their poflerity; as almost every
event in Mary's reign has become the object of doubt
or of dispute; the eager spirit of controversy soon dif-
covered, that without some evidence more authentic and
more impartial than that of Historians, none of the
points in quellion could be decided with certainty.
Records have therefore been searched, original papers
have been produced, and public archives, as well as the
repositories of private men, have been ransacked by the
zeal and curiosity of writers of different parties. The
attention of Cecil to colled whatever related to that
period, in which he aded so conspicuous a part, hath
provided such an immense flore of original papers for
illustrating this part of the English and Scottish hiflory,
as are almost sufficient to satisfy the utmost avidity of
an Antiquarian. Sir Robert Cotton (whole library is
now the property of the public) made great and valu-

able

able additions to Cecil's collection; and from this ma-
gazine, Digges, the compilers of the Cabbala, Ander-
son, Keith, Haynes, Sorbes, have drawn most of the
papers which they have printed. No Hiflory of Scot-
land, that merits any degree of attention, has appeared
£nce thele collections were published. By consulting
them, I have been enabled, in many inflances, to cor-
reft the inaccuracies of former Historians, to avoid their
mistakes, and to detec their misrepresentations.

BUT many important papers have escaped the notice

of those industrious Collectors, and after all they have
produced to light, much still remained in darkness, un-
observed or unpublished. It was my duty to search for
these, and I found this unpleasant talk attended with
considerable utility.

THE library of the honourable faculty of Advocates

at Edinburgh, contains not only a large collection of
original papers relating to the affairs of Scotland, but
copies of others no less curious, which have been pre-
served by Sir Robert Cotton, or are extant in the public
offices in England. Of all these, the Curators of that
library were pleased to allow me the perusal.

THilou Gil

THOUGH the British Mufeumr be not yet open to;

the public, Dr. Birch, whose obliging dihpofition is well
known, procured me access to that noble collection,
which is worthy the nngnificence of a great and po-
liffied nation.

THAT vast and curious collection o papers relating

to the reign of Elizabeth, which was made by Dr. For-
bes, and of which he published only two volumes, hav-
ing been purchased, since his death, by the Lord Vis-
count Royflon, his Lordship was so good as to allow me
the use of fourteen Volumes in Quarto, containing that
part of them which is conneced with my subject.

SIR Alexander Dick communicated to me a very va-

luable collection of original papers, in. two large Vo-
lumes. They relate chiefly to the reign of James.
Many of them are marked with Archbishop Spotfwood's
hand; and it appears from several pafliges in his hiflory,
that he had perused them with great attention.

MR. Calderwood, an eminent Prcfbyterian Clergyman

of the last century, compiled an History of Scotland from
the beginning of the reign of James V. to the death of
James VI. in fix large Volumes; wherein he has in-

ferted

forted many papers of consequence, which are no where
,else to be found. A copy of this history, which itill
remains in manuscript, in the poffeion of the Church of
Scotland, was put into my hands by my worthy friend,
the Reverend Mr. George Wifhart, principal Clerk of
the Church.

SIR David Dalrymple not only communicated to me

thecpapers which he has colleted relating to Gowrie's
conspiracy; but by explaining to me his Sentiments with
regard to that problematical passage in the Scottish his-
-tory, has enabled me to place that tranfadion in a light
which difpells much of the darkness .and confusion in
which it has been hitherto involved.

MR. Goodall, though he knew my sentiments wilt

regard to the conduct and charader of Queen Mary
to be extremely different from his own, communicated
to me a Volume of manuscripts in his poffeflion, which
·contains a great number of valuable papers copied from
the originals in the Cottonian Library and Paper Office,
by the late Reverend Mr. Crawford, Regius Professor of
,Church History in the University of Edinburgh. I like-
wife received from him the original Register of letters
kept by the Regent Lennox during his adminiitration.

3 I HAVE.

I HAVE consulted all these papers, as far as I thought

they could be of any use' towards illuifrating. that period
of which I write the hifory. With what success I have
employed them to confirm wvhat was:already known, to
ascertain what was dubious, or to determine what was
contraverted, the public must judge.

I MIGHT eafly hatve drawn, from the different repofl-

tories to which I had access, as many papers as would
have rendered my Appendix equal in si:ze to the mofi
bulky collecion of my predecessors. But I have satisfied
myself with publi(hing a few of the most curious among
them, to which I found it neceflary to appealas vouch-
ers for my own veracity. None of there, as far as I
can recolled, ever appeared in any former colledion.

I HAVE added to the Appendix a Critical Dirta-

tion concerning the murder of King Henry, and the ge-
miunenefs of the een's letters to Bothwel. The fads
and observations which relate to Mary's letters, I owe
to my friend Mr. John Davidson, one of the Clerks. to
the Signet, who hath examined this point with his usual
acuteness and indufiry.

4 DE 65

# THE HISTORY OF SCOTLAND. BOOK I. Containing a review of the SCOTTISH History previous to the Death of JAMES V.

THE
HISTORY

O F
SCOTLAN D.

BOO K I.
Containing a review of the SCOTTISH Hflory previous ta

the Death of A M E S V.
T H E sirs ages of the Scottifih hifory are dark and fabulous. BoK I.

Nations, as well as men, arrive at maturity by degrees,'

·- , '.

1'' The oripin of

and the events, which happened during their infancy ornations iabu.

early youth, cannot be recollected, and defervezS:t to be remem- ureand
bered. Thegrofs ignorance, which anciently covered all the North
of Europe, the continual migrations of its inhabitants, and the fre-
quent and destructive revolutions which these occasioned, render
it impossible to give any authentic account of the origin of the dif-
ferent kingdoms now eftablilhed there. Every thing beyond that
short period, to which well attested annals reach, is obscure; an im-
mense space is left for invention to occupy; each nation, with a va-
<nity inseparable from human nature, hath filled that void with

VoL., . B events

BOOK I. events calculated to display its own antiquity, and lufhr e. And his:
'...-'to tory, which ought to record truth and to teach wisdom, often sets-

out with retailing ficions and absurdities.

Origin of the THE Scots carry their pretensions to antiquity as high, as any of
Scots. their neighbours. Relying upon uncertain legends, and the traditions

of their bards, fill more uncertain, they reckon up a series of kings
several ages before the birth of Chri t; and give a particular detail
of tle occurrences, which happened in their reigns. But with re-
gard to the Scots, as well as the other northern nations, we receive
the earliest accounts on, which we can depend, not from their own,
A. D; a8. but from the Roman authors. When the Romans, under Agricola,

first carried their arms into the northern parts of Britain, they
fpovn it possesed by ^th Caledonians, a fiere and warl1ie people;
and having repulsed, rather than conquered them, they ereaed a
firong wall between the firths of Forth and Clyde; and there fixed
the boundaries of their empire. Adrian, on account of the dif-
ficulty of defending such a distant frontier, contrated the limits of
.A. D. I. the Roman province in Britain, by building a second wall, which,

ran between Newcastle and Carlisle. The ambition of succeeding
Emperors endeavoured to recover what Adrian had abandoned; and
the country between the two walls was alternately under the domi-
nion of the Romans, and the Caledonians. About the beginning
of the fifth century, the inroads of the Goths and other Barbarians
obliged the Romans, in order to defend the centre of their empire,
to recal those legions, which guarded the frontier provinces; and at
that time they quitted all their conquests in Britain..
A. D. 4:Z. THEIR long residence in the illand had polished, in some degree,

the rude inhabitants, and the Britons were indebted to their inter-

course

course with the Romans, for the art of writing, and the use of BooK I.
numbers, without which it is impofTible long to preserve the me-
mory of past events.

NORTH BRITAIN was, by their retreat, left under the dominion

of the Scots and Picts. The former, who are not mentioned by any
Roman author, before the end of the fourth century, were pro-
bably a colony of the Celtas or Gauls ; their affinity to whom ap-
pears from their language, their manners, and religious rites; circum-
stances more decisive, with regard to the origin of nations, than ei-
ther fabulous traditions, or the tales of ill-informed, and credulous
Annalifis. The Scots, if we may believe the common accounts,
fettled at first in Ireland; and, extending themselves by degrees,
landed at lafi on the coasts opposite to that island, and fixed their
habitations there. Fierce and bloody wars were, during several ages,
carried on between them and the Pi&s. At length, Kenneth II. the A. D. 38.
fixty-nintfi King of the Scots (according to their own fab'ulous au-
thors) obtained a complete victory over the Pibts, and united under
one monarchy, the whole cotuntry, from the wall of Adrian, to the
northern-ocean. And his kingdoimn became known by its present
name, which it' derived from a people who at first fettled there as
irangers, and remained long obscure and inconsiderable.

FROM this period the hiflory of Scotland would merit fomeHiatory or

Scotland pe-

attention, were it accompanied with any-certainty. But as our re-culiarly obp
mote antiquities are involved in the fame darkness with those ofcu"'e.
other nations, a calamity peculiar to ourselves has thrown al.most an
equal obscurity over our more recent tranfations. This was occa-
sioned by the malicious policy of Edward I. of England. Towards
the end of the thirteenth century, this monarch called in qucflion

B2 the
3.

BOOK I. the independence of Scotland; pretending that that kingdom was

held as a fief of the crown of England, and fubjeded to all the
conditions of a feudal tenure. In order to establish his claim, he
seized the public archives, he ransacked churches and monasteries,
and getting possession, by force, or fraud, of many historical monu-
ments, which tended to prove the antiquity or freedom of the king-
dom, he carried some of them into England, and commanded the
reft to be burned *. An universal oblivion of past tranfadions might
have been the effed of this fatal event, but some imperfec Chro-
nicles had escaped the rage of Edward; foreign writers had recorded
iome important fads relating to Scotland; and the traditions con-
cerning recent occurrences were fre(h and worthy of credit. These
broken fragments, John de Fordun, who lived in the fourteenth
century, collected with a pious industry, and from them picked
out materials, which he formed into a' regular hiflory. His work
was received by his countrymen with applause; and, as no recourse
could be had to more ancient records, it supplied the place of
the authentic annals of the kingdom. It. was copied in many mo,
nafteries, and the thread of the narrative was,. by different monks,
continued through the subsequent reigns. In the beginning of the
sixteenth century, John Mahjor and Hetor Boethius published their
hiltories of Scotland, the former a fuccindcand dry writer, the latter
a copious and florid one, and both equally credulous. Not many
years after, Buchanan undertook the fame work; and if his accu-
racy and impartiality had been, in any degree, equal to the elegance
of his tafle, and to the purity and vigour of his style, his history
might be placed on a level with the moit admired compositions of
the ancients. But, inflead of rejecting the improbable tales of
Chronicle writers, he was at the utmost pains to adorn them; and

Innes, Efay 552.

hath.

bath cloathed with all the beauties and graces of fiction, those le-BooK I.
gends, which formerly had only its wildness and extravagance.

THE history of Scotland may property be divided into four pe-Four remark-

riods.. The first reaches from the origin of the monarchy, to the Scottil
reign of Kenneth II. The second, from Kenneth's conqteft ofhifROry.
the Pids, to the death of Alexander III. The third extends to
the death of James V. The last, from thence to the accession of
James VI. to the crown of Englandc

THE first period is the region of pure fable and conjecture, and

ought to be totally neglected, or be abandoned to the industry and
credulity of antiquaries, Truth begins to dawn in the second pe-
riod, with a light, feeble at first, but gradually increasing; and the
events which then happened, may be slightly touched, but merit
no particular or laborious enquiry. In the third period, the history.
of Scotland, chiefly by means of records preserved in England, be-
comes more authentic: not only are events related, but their causes
and effets explained; the characters of the actors are displayed;
the manners of the age described; the revolutions in the confitu-
tion pointedout: and here every Scotsman flould begin not to read
only, but to study the history of his country. During the fourth
period,. the affairs of Scotland were so mingled with those of other
nations, its situation in the political slate of Europe was so important,
its influence on the operations of the neighbouring kingdoms was so
visible, that its history becomes an objec of attention to Foreigners,
and without some knowledge of the various and extraordinary revo-
lutions which happened there, they cannot form a jutf notion either
of the most illustrious events, or of the charadcrs of the most
diltinguilhed personages in the fixtecnth century..

T Wi

BOOK I. 'TIE following history is confined to the last of these periods: To
L-,-eview give a view of the political state of the kingdom, during that which
A review of "
the third rra immediately preceded it, is the design of this preliminary Book. The

imperfeCt knowledge which firangers have of the affairs of Scotland,
and the prejudices Scotfinen themselves have imbibed with regard
to the various revolutions in the government of their country, ren-
der such an introdution equally neceffiry to both.

THE period, from the death of Alexander III. to the death of

James V. contains upwards of two centuries and an half, from the
year 1286, to the yeai 1542.

Rife of the IT opens with the famous controversy concerning the indepen-
concerning dence of Scotland. Before the union of the two kingdoms, this was
the indepen- a question of much importance. If the one Crown had been confi.
dence of Scot-
land. dered not as imperial and independent, but as feudatory to the other,

a treaty of union could not have been concluded on equal terms, and
every advantage which the dependent kingdom procured, must have
been esteemed the concefflon of a Sovereign to his vassal. Accord-
ingly, about the beginning of the present century, and while a treaty
of union between the two kingdoms was on foot, this controversy
was agitated with all the heat, which national animofities naturally
inspire. What was then a subjeCt of serious concern, the union of
the two kingdoms hath rendered a matter of mere curiosity. But
though the objects, which at that time warmed and interested both
nations, exist no longer, a question which appeared so momentous to
our ancestors, cannot be altogether indifferent or uninftruEive to us.

SOME of the northern counties of England were early in the halnds
of the Scottifl Kings, who, as far back as the feudal customs can be

traced,

traced, held these possessions of the Kings of England, and did ho-BooK I.
mage to them on that account. This homage due only for the ter- - --
ritories which they held in England, was in no wife derogatory from
their royal dignity. Nothing is more suitable to feudal ideas, than
that the fame person should be both a Lord and a Vassal, indepen-
dent in one capacity, and dependent in another *. The Crown of
England was without doubt imperial and independent, though the
Princes who wore it were, for many ages, the vassals of the Kings
of France ; and, in consequence of their possessions in that kingdom,
bound to perform all the services, which a feudal Sovereign has a
title to exaEt. The fame was the condition of the Monarchs of Scot-
land; free and independent as Kings, but, as possessing English ter-
ritories, vassals to the King of England. The English Monarchs,
satisfied with their legal and uncontroverted rights, were neither
capable, nor had any thoughts of usu'rping more. England, when
conquered by the Saxons, being divided by them into many smalL
kingdoms, was in no condition to extend its dominion over Scot-
land, united at that time under one Monarch. And though these
petty principalities were gradually formed into one kingdom, the
reigning princes exposed to continual invasions of the Danes, and
often fubjeded to the yoke of those formidable pirates, seldom turned
their arms towards Scotland, and were utterly incapable of efablifh-

* A very singular proof of this occurs in the French hifiory. Arpin fold the vi.

compte of the city Bourgcs toPhilip I. who did homage to the Count of Sancerre for
a part of there lands, which held of that Nobleman, A. D. i oo. I believe that no
example, of a King's. doing homage to one of his own fubjets, is to be met with in
the hiltories either of England or Scotland. Philip le Bel abolished this practice in,
France A. D. 1302. ienaut Ahrege ChroNml. Somewhat similar to this, is a char-
ter of the Abbot ofMelrofs, A. D. 1535, constituting James V. the Bailiff or Stew-
ard of that Abbey, veiling in him all the powers which pertained to that office, and
requiriug him to be anfwcrable to the Abbot for his exercise of the fime. dirchiv.
publ,. Edn.

ing

BOOK I. ing new rights in that country. The first Kings of the Norman race,

-v-- busied with introducing their own laws and manners into the king-

dom which they had conquered, or with maintaining themselves on
the throne which some of them possessed by a very dubious title, were
as little solicitous to acquire new authority, or to form new pretensions
in Scotland. An unexpeaed calamity that besel one of the ScottifhKings
fiLrf encouraged the English to think of bringing his kingdom under
dependence. William King of Scotland being taken prisoner at Aln-
wick, Henry II. as the price of his liberty, not only extorted from
him an exorbitant ransom, and a promise to surrender the places of
greatest strength in his dominions, but compelled him to do homage
for his whole kingdom. Richard I. a generous Prince, solemnly
renounced this claim of homage, and absolved William from the
hard conditions which Henry had imposed. Upon the death of
Alexander III. near a century after, Edward I. availing himfelfof the
situation of affairs in Scotland, acquired an influence in that king-
dom, which no English Monarch before him ever possessed, and imi-
tating the interested policy of Henry, rather than the magnanimity
of Richard, revived the claim of sovereignty to which the former
had pretended.

rrctenfions of MARGARET of Norway, Grandaughter of Alexander, and heir to
Brue andiBa his Crown, did not long survive him. The right of succession be-
liol examined,. To c o

longed to the descendants of David Earl of Huntington, third son
of King David 1. Among these, Robert Brace, and John Baliol,
two illufirious competitors for the crown, appeared. Bruce was the
son of Isabel Earl David's second daughter; Baliol, the grandson
of Margaret the eldest daughter. According to the rules of fuccef-
sion which are now eltab)lifled, the right of Baliol was preferable,
and notwithstanding Bruce's plea of being nearer in blood to Earl
David, Baliol's claim, as the representative of his mother and grand-

mother

mother would be deemed incontefIible. But, in that age, the or-BooK I.
der of succession was not ascertained with the fame precision. The -
queflion appeared to be no less intricate, than it was important. And
though the prejudices of the people, and perhaps the laws of the
kingdom, favoured Bruce, each of-the rivals was supported by a pow-
erful faaion. Arms alone, it was feared, must terminate a dispute
too weighty for the laws to decide. But, in order to avoid the mi-
series of a civil war, Edward was chosen umpire, and both parties
agreed to acquiesce in his decree. This had well nigh proved fatal
to the independence of Scotland; and the nation, by its eagerness to
guard against a civil war, was not only exposed to that calamity, but
almost fubjeaed to a foreign yoke. Edward was artful, brave, en-
terprifing, and commanded a powerful and martial people, at peace
with the whole world. The anarchy which prevailed in Scotland
and the ambition of competitors ready to sacrifice their country in
order to obtain even a dependent Crown, invited him firit to seize,
and then to subjed the kingdom. The authority of an umpire, which
had been unwarily bestowed upon him, and from which the Scots
dreaded no dangerous consequences, enabled him to execute his
schemes with the greater facility. Under pretence of examining the
question with the utmofl solemnity, he summoned all the Scottish
Barons to Norham, and having gained some, and intimidated others,
he prevailed on all who were present, not excepting Bruce and Ba-
liol, the competitors, to acknowledge Scotland a fief of the English
Crown, and to swear fealty to him as their Sovereign or Liege Lord.
This flep led to another frill more important. As it was vain to pro-
nounce a sentence which he had not power to execute, Edward de-
nianded poffeflion of the kingdom, that he might be able to deliver
it to him whose right ihould be found preferable. And such was the
pusillanimity of the nobles, and the impatient ambition of the com-

VOL. I. C petitors,

BOOK I. petitors, that both assented to this firange demand, arid Gilbert de
-- - Umfraville, Earl of Angus, was the only man, who refused to fur-

render the calies in his custody to the enemy of his country. Ed-
ward finding Baliol the rioft obsequious and the leaf formidable of
the two competitors, soon after gave judgment in his favotr. Ba-
liol once more professed himself the vassal of England, and submitted
to every condition, which the Sovereign whom he had now acknow-
ledged was pleated to prescribe.

EDWARD, having thus placed a creature of his own upon the

throne of Scotland, and compelled the nobles to renounce the an-
cient liberties and independence of their country, had reason to con-
clude that his dominion was now fully efablifhed. But he began
too soon to assume the master; his new vassals, fierce and indepen-
dent, bore with impatience a yoke, to which they were not accuf-
tomed. Provoked by his haughtiness, even the passive spirit of Ba-
liol began to mutiny. But Edward, who had no longer use for such
a pageant King, forced him to resign the Crown, and openly at-
tempted to seize it as fallen to himself, by the rebellion of his vaflal.
At that critical period, arose Sir William Wallace, a hero, to whom
the fond admiration of his countrymen hath ascribed many fabulous
acs ofprowefs, though his real valour, as well as integrity and wis-
dom, is suchs as needs not the heightenings of fiction, He, almoftl
single, ventured to take atms in defence of the kingdom, and his
boldness revived the spirit of his countrymen. At last, Robert Bruce,
the grandson of him who flood in competition with Baliol, appeared
to assert his own rights, and to vindicate the honour of his country.
The nobles, ashamed of their former baseness, and inrnged at the
many indignities offered to the nation, crowded to his standard. In
order to crus1h him at once, the Engliflh Monarch entered Scotla'nd,

at

at the h.ad .of a xmighty army. Many battles were fought, anld thego Bo I.
Sc.ots, though often vanquished, were not subdued. The ardent ' -r -'
zeal with which the jnobjes contended for the independence of the
iingdpm,, the prudent yalour of Bruce, and above all a national en-
thufiafm inspired by such a cause, baffled the repeated eftorts of Ed-
ward, and counterbalanced all the advantages which he derived from
the number, and wealth ofhis fubjelts. And though the war con-
tinued with little inrtermiffion upwards of seventy years, Bruce and
his posterity .kept possession of the throne of Scotland, and ruled
wit.h an authority not inferior to that of its former Monarc.hs.

BUT while the sword, the ultimate judge of all disputes between

contending lnations, was employed Ito termainate this controversy, nei-
ther Edward nor the Scots seemed ,to distrust thejuftice oftheir cause;
and boqh appealed to history and records, and from.thefe produced,
in their own favotur, frch evidence as they.pretended to be unanfwer-
able. The letters and memorials addreised ,by each party to the Pope,
who was then reverenced as the cqmmon father, and often .appealed
to as the common judge of all Christian Princes, are still extant. The
fabulous tales of the early British hitfory; the partial testimony of ig-
norant Chroniclers; fiuppofititious treaties and charters; are the proofs,
on ,which Edward founded his title to the sovereignty of Scotland;
and the homage dqne by the.Scottifh Monarchs for their lands in
England, is ;prepofteroupy uRuppoed to imply the fubjedion of their
whole kingdon *. !111 founded, however, as their right was, the
Englifl did rnt.fail to revive it, in all the subsequent qqarrelsbetween
the two kingdoms; while the Scots disclaimed it with the utmost
indignation. To this, we muff impute the fierce and implacable ha-
tred to.each other, which long inflamed bpth. Their national an-

* Anderson's Historical Eflay concerning the Independency, &c.

C 2 tipathies

BOOK I. petitors, that both assented to this strange dmiand, and Gilbert de

U- fUmfraville, Earl ofAngus, was the only man, wyho refused to fur-
render the calies in his cutody to the enemy of his country. Ed-
ward finding Baliol the rioft obfeqiious and the least formidable of
the two competitors, soon after gave judgment in his favotir. Ba-
liol once more professed himself the vassal of England, and Submitted
to every condition, which the Sovereign whom he had now acknow-
ledged was pleaSed to prescribe.

EDWARD, having thus placed a creature of his own upon the

throne of Scotland, and compelled the nobles to renounce the an-
cient liberties and independence of their country, had reason to con-
clude that his dominion was now fully eflabliihed. But he began
too soon to assume the malter; his new vassals, fierce and indepen-
dent, bore with impatience a yoke, to which they were not accuf-
tomed. Provoked by his haughtiness, even the passive spirit of Ba-
liol began to mutiny. But Edward, who had no longer use for such
a pageant King, forced him to resign the Crown, and openly at-
tempted to seize it as fallen to himself, by the rebellion of his vaflal.
At that critical period, arose Sir William Wallace, a hero, to wholn
the fond admiration of his countrymen hath ascribed many fabulous-
ads bfprowefs, though his real valour, as well as integrity and wis-
dom, is such, as needs not the heightenings of fidion, He, almofl
single, ventured to take arms in defence of the kingdom, and his
boldness revived the spirit of his countrymen. At lart, Robert Bruce,
the grandson of him who flood in competition with Baliolo appeared,
to assert his own rights, and to vindicate the honour of his country..
The nobles, ashamed of their former baseness, and inrnged :at the
many indignities offered to the nation, crowded to his standard. In
order to crush him at once, the English Monarch entered Scotland,

at

at the h.d .of g migjhty army. Many battles were fought, and theBo9K I.
SCets, thoughf ofte vanquished, *were pot subdued. The ardent --
zeal with which the nobJle contended for ,the independence of the
kingdopm, the prudent .valour of Bruce, and above all a national en-
thufiafm inspired by such a cause, baffled the repeated efor,ts of Ed-
ward, and counterbalanced all the advantages which he derived from
the number, and wealth of his fubj.eds. And though the war con-
tinued with little inrtermiffion upwards of seve,nty years, ,ruce and
his pofce,rity kept p.offieion of the throne of Scotland, and ruled
with an authority not inferior to that of its former Monarchs.

B.UT while the sword, the ultimatejudge of all disputes between

contending jations, was erm.ployed to .terminate this controversy, nei-
ther Edward nor the Scots seemed to distr.ust thejuftice of their cause;
and bqh ,appealed to Jhiftory and records, and from these produced,
in ,t.jeir own ,favQ, r, .ich ,evilence as they pretended to be unanfwer-
able. The let-ters and me morials 3ade1,esd ,by each party to the Pope,
who was then reveenced as the commnon fther, .and often .appealed
to as the common judge of all Chriflian Princes, are ftillextant. The
fabulous tales of the early British history; the partial tetimony of ig-
norpnt Chroniclers; supposititious treaties and charters; are the proofs,
on ,which Edward founded his title to the -fvereignty of Scotland;
and the homage done by the .Sco.tfih Mloarchs for their lands in
England, is preposterously fupgpod to implythe fubjetion of tleir
whole i^pgdol *. Ill founded, however, as their right was, the
Er glifh did.npttail to revive it, in all tbe subsequent q!arrels.hetween
the two kingdoms; while the Scots disclaimed it with the utmost
indignation. To this, we must impute the fierce and implacable ha-
tred to each other, which long inflamned bpthl. Their national an-

* Anderson's Hiflorical Essay concerning the Independency, &c.

C 2 tipathi;es

BOOK I. tipathies were excited, not only by the usual circumstances of fre-

_ ---.J quent hostilities, and reciprocal injuries; but the English confidered

the Scots as vaflals who had presumed to rebel, and the Scots, in
their turn, regarded the Englifli, as usurpers who aimed at enslaving
their country.

1306. AT the time, when Robert Bruce began his reign in Scotland, the

State of the fame form of government was eflablifhed in all the kingdoms of Eu-
kingdom
when Bruce rope. And the surprising similarity, in their conffitution and laws,
began his
reign. demonfirates that the nations which overturned the Roman empire,

and ereaed these kingdoms, though divided into different tribes, and
diffinguifhed by different names, were originally the fame people.
When we take a view of the feudal system of laws and policy, that
stupendous and singular fabric erected by them; the first object that
strikes us is the King. And when we are told that he is the sole
proprietor of all the lands within his dominions, that all his fubjets
derive their possessions from him, and in return consecrate their lives
to his service ; when we hear that all marks ofdiftin&ion, and titles of
dignity, flow from him as the only fountain of honour; when we be-
hold the most potent peers, on their bended knees, and with folded
hands, swearing fealty at his feet, and acknowledging him to be their
Sovereign, and their Liege Lord; we are apt to pronounce him a
powerful, nay an absolute Monarch. No conclusion, however,
would be more rash, or worse founded. The genius of the feudal
government was purely ariftocratical. With all the ensigns of royalty,
and with many appearances of despotic power, a feudal King was
the most limited of all Princes.

Origin of the BEFORE they sallied out of their own habitations to conquer the
Feudal Go-
vcrnmclt,and world, many of the northern nations fcem not to have been subjec
its arilti'crti- t
cal genius.

to the government of kings *; and even where monarchical govern- BOOK I.
ment was eflablifhed, the prince poffefled but little authority. A '
general rather than a king, his military command was extensive,
his civil. jurifdidion almost nothing.t. The army which he led
was not composed of soldiers, who could be compelled to serve,
but of such as voluntarily followed his flandard i. These con-
quered not for their leader, but for themselves; and being free in
their own country, renounced not their liberty when they acquired
new settlements. They did not exterminate the ancient inhabitants
of the countries, which they subdued, but seizing the greater part
of their lands, they took their persons under protetion. And the
difficulty of maintaining a new conquest, as well as the danger of
being attacked by new invaders, rendering it neceflary to be always
in a posture of defence, the form of government which they efta-
blifhed, was altogether military, and nearly resembled that to which
they had been accustomed in their native country. Their general
till continuing to be the head of the colony, part of the conquered
lands were allotted to him ; the remainder, under the name of bene-
ficia orfiefs, was divided amongst his principal officers. As the com-
mon safety required that these officers should, upon all occalions, be
ready to appear in arms, for the common defence, and fiould con-
tinue obedient to their general, they bound themselves to take the
field, when called, and to serve him with a number of men, in
proportion to the extent of their territory. These great officers;
again parcelled out their lands among- their followers, and annexed
the fame condition to the grant. A feudal kingdom was properly
the encampment of a great army; military ideas predominated,
military Subordination was established, and the poffefiion of land was
the pay which soldiers received for their personal service; In con-

* Caf. lib. vi. c. 23. t Tacit. de Mor. Germ. c. 7. 1 . $ Caef. ibid.

fe qucnce

BooK I. sequence of these notions, the poffefflon of land was granted dur-

" ig pleasure only, and kings were eletive. In other words, an
officer difagreeabie to his general was deprived of his pay, and
the per so who was most capable of conducting an army, was cho-
fen 'to command it. Such were the fits rudiments, or infancy of
fedal government.

BUT long before the beginning of the founrtee.re l cntwy , *the

feudal sysem had unidergone ma-ny .hanges, of whiph hbe foJlow,
ing were the most considerable. Kings formerly -el¢cive, were
then hereditary; and fiefs graated at ,first during pleasure, de-
scended from father to son, and were become perpetual. These
changes, snot less advantageous to the nobles, than to tbhe prince,
made no alteration in the ariltocratical spirit of the feudal confti-

General cau- tution. The king, who at a distance, seemed to be invefled with
ies which li-

a a

mited the majesty and power, appears, on a nearer view, to possess none of
power of thethofe advantages, which bestow on monarchs their grandeur and
feudal mo-
narchs. authority. His revenues were scanty; he had not a flanding rmy;

and he enjoyed no properjurifdidion.

Their reve- At a time when pomp and splendor were unknown, even in
nues were the palaces of kings; when the officers of the crown .received

little salary besides the fees and perquisites of their office; when
embassies to foreign courts were rare; when armies .were corn-
posed of soldiers who served without pay; it was not necessary that
a king should possess a great revenue; nor did the condition of Eu-
rope, in those ages, allow its princes,to be opulent. .Cmnmerce
made little progress in the kingdoms, where .the feudal :gQvernmenrt
was established. Institutions, which had no other object lbut to
inspire a martial spirit, to train men to be soldiers, and to make
arms the only honourable profession, naturally discouraged the

4 commer-

commercial arts. The revenues, arising from the taxes impoed on BOOK I.
the different branches of commerce, were by consequence inconfi-
derable, and the prince's treasury received little supply from a source,
which, among a trading people, flows with such abundance, and
is almoit inexhaustible. A fixed tax was not levied even on land;-
fach a burthen would have appeared intolerable to men who re-
ceived their efates, as the reward of their valour, and who con-
fidered their service in the field as a full retribution for what they
possessed. The'king's demeJnes, or the portion of land which he
fill retained in his own hands unalienated, furnished subsistence
to his court, and defrayed the ordinary expence of government '.
The only stated taxes which the feudal law obliged vafrals to pay
to the king, or to those of'whom they held their lands, were three;
eoe when his eldest Ion was made a knight; another when his eldest
daughter was married; and a third in orderto ranfomhim if he should
happen to be taken prifnner. Betides these, the king received the
feudal casualties ds 'the ward, mamriage, &c. of his own vassals.
And, on some extraordinary occasions, his fubjeAs granted him.
an aid, Whidh they diftinguihfed by the name of a benevolence, in-
order to declare that he received it not in consequence of any
right, btt as -a gift, flowing from their good-will -. All these:
added together, produced a revenue, scanty and precarious, which
far from enabling the king to attempt any thing that could excite
the jealousy or fear of the nobles, kept him in continual indigence,,
anxiety, and dependence.

NoR could the king supply the defe& of his revenues, by theThey had na

standing ar-

terror of his arms. Mercenary troops, and standing armies weremies.
un-known as long as the feudal government fuslifted in vigour.

* Craig.de Feud. lb. r. Dieg. 14. Du Caqge Gloss. vo..D.ominicumn

-I' Du 'Cange voc. Auxilium,

Europae

BooK I. Europe was peopled with soldiers. The vassals of the king, and

''- the fub-vafals of the barons were all obliged to carry arms. And

while the poverty of princes prevented them from fortifying their
frontier towns, while a campaign continued but a few weeks, and
while a fierce and impetuous courage was impatient to bring every
quarrel to the decision of a battle, an army, without pay, and-with
little discipline, was sufficient for all the purposes both of the
security and of the glory of a nation. Such an army, however,
far from being an engine at the king's disposal, was often no less.
formidable to him, than to his enemies. The more warlike any
people were, the more independant they became; and the fame
persons being both soldiers and fubjeEts, civil privileges and immu-
nities were the consequence of their victories, and the reward of their
martial exploits. Conquerors, whom mercenary armies, under our
present forms of government, often render the tyrants of their own
people, as well as the scourges of mankind, were commonly, under the
feudal constitution, the most indulgent of all princes to their subjects,
because they flood most in need of their assistance. A prince whom
even war and viatories did not render the master of his own army,
possessed no (hadow of military power during times of peace. His
disbanded soldiers mingled with his other fubjeEs ; not a tingle man
received pay from him; many ages elapsed even before a guard
was appointed to defend his person; and destitute of that great in-
ftrument of dominion a Itanding army, the authority of the king
continued always feeble, and was often contemptible.

Their jurif- NOR were these the only circumstances, which contributed to-
ditid was liwards depressing the regal power. By the feudal system, the king's

judicial authority was extremely circumscribed. At first, princes
seem to have been the supreme judges of their people, and, in per-
son, heard and determined all controversies among them. The mul-

tiplicity

tiplicity of causes soon made it necessary to appoint judges, who, BooK I.
in the king's name decided matters, that belonged to the royal --
jurifdition. Bat the Barbarians, who overran Europe, having
destroyed most of'the great cities, and the countries which they
seized being cantoned out among powerful barons, who were
blindly followed by numerous vassals, whom, in return, they
were bound to protec from every injury; the administration of
justice was greatly interrupted, and the execution of any legal
sentence became almost impracticable. Theft, rapine, murder, and
disorder of all kinds prevailed in every kingdom of Europe, to a
degree almost incredible; and scarce compatible with the fubliftence
of civil society. Every offender sheltered himself under the pro-
teation of some powerful chieftain, who screened him from the
pursuits of juffice. To apprehend, and to punish a criminal, of-
ten required the union and effort of half a kingdom *. In order

A A remarkable inltance of this occurs in the following hiltory, so late as the

year 1561. Mary, having appointed a court of juflice to be held on the borders,
the inhabitants of no less than eleven counties were summoned to guard the person,
who was to a& as judge, and to enable him to enforce his decisions, p. 234. The
words of a proclamation, which afford such a convincing proof of the feebleness of
the feudal government, deserve our notice. -" And because it is necelrary for the
execution of her'highners' commandments, and service, that herjuftice be well accom-
panied, and her authority sufficiently fortified, by the concurrence of a good power
of her faithful fubjets- Therefore commands and charges all and sundry Earls,
Lords, Barons, Freeholders, Landed-men, and other Gentlemen, dwelling within the
said counties, that they, and every one of them, with their kin, friends, servants, and
houlhold men, well bodin in feir of war in the most fubltantious manner, i. e.
compleatly armed and provided,] and with twenty days victuals, to meet and to pass
forward with .him to the borrough of Jedburgh, and there to remain during the ffai
space of twenty days, and to receive such direcaion and commands, as fliall be given
by him to them in our Sovereign Lady's name, for quietness of rhe country; and to
put .the fame in execution under the pain of losing their life, lands, and goods.'
Keith's Hilt. of Scotland, 98.

VOL. 1. D to

BOQK I. to remedy there evils, many perfops of dilt iniw werm {nrufed

-- ' with the administration of juitice within their own territories,

But what we may presume was, at, firt, only a temporary grant,
or a personal privilege, the incroaching spirit of the ,oblJe fopi, can
verted into a right, and rendered hereditary. The lands ps some,
were ereded into Baronies, those of others into Reg]itiern. The
jurisdiction of the former was extensive, that of the latter, as the
name implies, royal, and almost unbounded. All causes, whether
civil or criminal, were tried by judges, whom the lord of the re-
gality appointed; and if the king's courts called any person within
his territory before them, the lord of regality might put a flop to
their proceedings, and by the privilege of repledging, remove the
cause to his own court, and even punish his vassal, if he submitted
to a foreign jurifdiaion *. Thus almost every question, in which
any person, who resided on the lands of the nobles, was interested,
being determined by judges appointed by the nobles themselves,
their vassals were scarce sensible of being, in any degree, subjed
to the crown. A feudal kingdom was split into many small prin-
cipalties, almost independent, and held together by a feeble and com-
monly an imperceptible bond of union. And the king was not
only stripped of the authority annexed to the person of a supreme
judge, but his revenue suffered no small dimunition, by the loss
of those pecuniary emoluments, which were, in that age, due to
the person who adminiftred justice.

IN the fame proportion that the king funk in power, the nobles

rose towards independence. Not satisfied with having obtained a
hereditary right to their fiefs, which they formerly held during plea-

* Craig, lib. iii, Dieg. 7.

sure,

sure, their ambition aimed at something bolder, and by introducing Book IL
entails, endeavoured, as fat as human ingenuity and invention can
reach that end, to render their possessions unalienable and ever-
lasting. As they had full power to add to the inheritance transmit-
ted to them from their ancestors, but none to diminish it ; tithe
alone, by means of marriages, legacies, and other accidents, brought
continual accessions of wealth, and of dignity; a great family, like
a river, became considerable from the length of its course, and as
it rolled on, new honours and new property flowed successively
into it. Whatever influence is derived from titles of honour, the
feudal barons, likewise, possessed in an ample manner. These
marks of diftinaion are, in their own nature, either official or per-
fonal, and being annexed to a particular charge, or beflowed by
the admiration of mankind upon illuitrious characters, ought to be
appropriated to these. But the son, however unworthy, could not
bear to be firipped of that appellation, by which his father had
been diftriguifhed. His presumption claimed, what his virtue did
not merit; titles of hondur became hereditary, and added new Iuftrd
to nobles already in poffefiion of too much power. Something more
audacious, and more extravagant fill remained. The fuipreme di-
retion of all affairs, both civil and military, being committed to the
great oficers of the crown, the fame and safety of princes, as well
as of their people, depended upon the fidelity and abilities of these
officers. But such was the prepoflerou$ ambition of the noblest and
so faccefsful even their wildest attempts to aggrandize thenmfelves,
that in all the kingdoms where the feudal institutions prevailed,
molt of these offices were annexed to great families, aond held, like
fiefs, by hereditary right. A person, whose undutiful behaviour
rendered him odious to his prince, or whose incapacity exposed him

D 2 to

BOOK L to the-contempt of the people, often held a place of power and trnfl,,
'- - of the greatest importance to both. In Scotland, the offices of Lord,

Justice General, Great Chamberlain, High Steward, High Constable,,
Earl Marlhal, and High Admiral, were all hereditary; and in many
counties, the office of Sheriff was held in the fame manner.

NOBLES, whose property was so extensive, and whose power so,

great, could, not fail of being turbulent and, formidable.. Nor did
they want instruments for executing their boldest designs. That:
portion of their lands, which they parcelled out among their fol-
lowers, supplied them with a numerous band of faithful and de-
termined vaflals; while that, which they retained in their own
hands, enabled them to live with a princely splendour. The great
hall of an ambitious baron was often more crowded than the court
of his sovereign. The firong castles, in which they resided, as-
forded a secure retreat to the difeontented and seditious. A great
part of their revenue was spent upon multitudes of indigent, but
bold retainers. And if at any time they left their retreat, to ap-
pear in the court of their sovereign, they were accompanied, even;
in times of peace, with a vast train of armed followers. The usual'
retinue of William the Sixth Earl of Douglas consisted of 200oo
horse. Those of the other nobles were magnificent and formidable
in proportion. Impatient of subordination, and forgetting their pro-
per rank, these potent and haughty barons were the rivals, rather
than the fubjeds of their Prince. They often despised his orders,
insulted his person, and wrested from him his crown. And the
hiflory of Europe, during several ages, contains little else, but tlie
accounts of the wars and revolutions, occasioned by their exorbitant
ambition..

BUT,

BULT, if the authority of the barons far exceeded' its proper BOOK I.

bounds in other nations of Europe, we may affirm that theT r power
balance which ought to be preserved between a King and hisreater in
nobles was intirely loft in Scotland. Scottish nobles enjoyed, inin an) other
common with those of other nations, all the means for extendingn
their authority which arise from. the ariftocratical genius of the
feudal government. Besides these, they possessed advantages pe-
culiar to themselves;. the accidental sources of their power were
considerable; and singular circumstances concurred with the spirit
of the constitution. to aggrandise them, To enumerate the most
remarkable of these, will serve both to explain the political slate ofThe particu--

., lar caules of

the'kingdom, and to illustrate many important occurrences, in thechis.
period now. under our review.

I. THE nature of their country was one cause of the power andThe nature of,

independence of the Scottish nobility. Level and open countriesh ntr
are formed for servitude. The authority of the supreme magifsrate:
reaches with ease. to the most distant corners, and when nature has.
ereced no barrier, and affords no retreat, the guilty or obnoxious:
are soon detected,, and punished. Mountains, and. fens,. and rivers.
set bounds to despotic power, and amidst there,. is the natural feat.
of freedom and independence. In such places, did the Scottilh
nobles usually fix. their residence. By retiring to his own castle,.
a mutinous Baron could defy the power of his Sovereign; it being
impraticable.to lead an army, through a barren country, to places,,
almoit inacceflible to a tingle man. The fame causes, which checke;.
the progress of the Roman arms, and rendered all the efforts of
Edward I. abortive, often protected the Scottish. nobles from the
vengeance of their Prince ; and.they owed their personal indepen-

dence,.

BOOK I. dence, to those very mountains and marshes, which saved their
t.-- -- country from being conquered.

,'he small` II. THE want of great cities in Scotland contributed not a little
number of to increase the power of the nobility, and to weaken that of the
great cities.

Prince. Where-ever numbers of men assemble together, order must
be established, and a regular form of government instituted, the
authority of the magistrate must be recognized, and his decisions
meet with prompt and full obedience. Laws and subordination
take rife in cities; and where there are few cities as in Poland, or
none as in Tartary, there are few or no traces of any fort of police.
But under the feudal governments, commerce, the chief means o
assembling mankind, was negleded; the nobles, in order to strengthen
their influence over their vassals, resided among them, and fel-
dom appeared at court, where they found a superior, or dwelt in
cities, where they met with equals. In Scotland, the rich coun-
ties in the south lying open to the English, no town situated there
could rife to be great or populous amidst continual inroads and
alarms; the residence of our monarchs was not fixed to any parti-
cular place; many parts of the country were barren and unculti-
vated; and in consequence of these peculiar circumstances, added to
the general causes flowing from the nature of the feudal infiitutions,
the towns in Scotland were extremely few, and very inconsiderable
The vaials of every baron occupied a diftin& portion of the king.
dom, and unmingled with others, formed a separate and almost
independent society. Instead of giving aid towards reducing to
obedience the seditious Chieftain, or any whom he took under his
protection, they were all in arms for his defence, and obftruded the
operations of justice to the utmost. The prince was obliged to
connive at criminals, whom he could not reach; the nobles, con-

3 fcious

fcious of this advantage, were not afraid to offend and the difficulty Booi I,
of punishing almost assured them of impunity.

II1. THE division of the country into clans had no small effectTheinftitu-

tion of Clans.

in rendering the nobles considerable. The nations, which over-ran
Europe, were originally divided into many small tribes; and when
they came to parcel out the lands which they had conquered, it
was natural for every chieftain to beflow a portion, in the first
place, upon those of his own tribe or. family. These all held
their lands of him; and as the safety of each individual depended on
the general union, these fmrall societies clung together, and were
diflinguifhed by some common appellation, either patronymical, or
local, long before the introdudion of firnames, or etzigns armorial.
But when there became common, the descendants and relations of
every Chieftain assumed the fame name and arms with him; other
vassals were proud to imitate their example, and by degrees they
were communicated to all those who held of the fame superior.
Thus clanfhips were formed; and in a generation or two, that
consanguinity which was, at firfi, in a great- measure, imaginary,
was believed to be real. An artificial union was converted into a
natural one; men willingly followed a leader, whom they regarded
both as the superior of their lands, and the chief of their blood,
and served him not only with the fidelity of vassals, but with the
affetion of friends. In the other feudal kingdoms, we may ob-
serve such unions as we have described, imperfectly formed; but in
Scotland, whether they were the production of chance, ocr the es-
feEt of policy, or introduced by the Irilh colony above mentioned,
and strengthened by carefully preserving their genealogies both ge-
nuine and fabulous, clanfhips were universal. Suc h a confederacy
might be overcome, it could not be broken ; and no change of man-

ners,

Book I. .ners, or of government, has been able, in some parts of the kin-g-

^'" .·dom, to dissolve associations which are founded upon prejudices so

natural to the human mind. How formidable were nobles at the
.head of followers, who, counting that cause just and honourable
which their chief approved, were ever ready to take the field at his
command, and to sacrifice their lives in defence of his person, or
of his fame ? Against such men, a king contended with great dif-
advantage, and that cold service, which money purchases, or au-
thority extorts, was not an equal match for their ardour and zeal

The fmnall IV. THE smallness of their number may be mentioned among the
numberof the causes of the grandeur of the Scottish nobles. Our annals reach
nobles.

not back to the first division of -property in the kingdom; but so
far as we can trace the matter, the original possessions of the nobles
seem to have been extensive. The ancient Thanes were the
equals and the rivals of their prince. Many of the earls and
barons, who succeeded them, were masters of territories no less
.ample. France and England, countries wide and fertile, afforded
Settlements to a numerous and powerful nobility. Scotland, a
kingdom neither extensive nor rich, could not contain many such
overgrown proprietors. But the power of an ariflocracy always
diminilhes, in proportion to the increase of its numbers; feeble if di-
vided among a multitude; irresistible if centered in a few. When
nobles are numerous, their operations nearly resemble those of the
people, they are routed by what they feel only, not by what they
apprehend; and submit to many arbitrary and oppressive ads, be.
fore they take arms against their sovereign. A small body, on the
contrary, is more sensible, and more impatient; quick in discern-
ing, and prompt in repelling danger; all its motions are as sudden,
.as those of -the other are flow. Hence proceeded the extreme jea-

lousy,

2

lousy, with which the Scottish nobles observed their monarchs, and BOOK I.
the fierceness with which they opposed their incroachments. Even ' '
the virtue of a Prince did not render them less vigilant, or less eager
to defend their rights; and Robert Bruce, notwithstanding the
splendor of his victories, and the glory of his name, was upon the
point of experiencing the vigour of their refitance, no less than his
unpopular descendent James IlI. Besides this, the near alliance of
the great families, by frequent intermarriages, was the natural con-
sequence of their small number. And as consanguinity was, in
those ages, a powerful bond of union, all the kindred of a nobleman
interested themselves in his quarrel, as a common cause, and every
contest the king had, though with a single baron, soon drew upon
him the arms of a whole confederacy.

V. THOSE natural connexions both with their equals, and withTheir leagues

their inferiors, the Scottish nobles strengthened by a device, which d ombina.
if not peculiar to themselves, was at least more frequent among them,
than in any other nation. Even in times of profound peace, they
formed associations, which when made with their equals, were called
leagues of mutual defence; and when with their inferiors, bonds of
manrent. By the former, the contracing parties bound themselves
mutually to affit each other, in all causes, and against all persons. By
the latter, protetion was flipulated on the one hand, and fidelity
and personal service promired on the other*. Self-prefervation, it
is probable, forced men at firfi into these confederacies, and while
disorder and rapine were universal, while government was unsettled
and the authority of laws little known or regarded, near neigh-
bours found it necelsary to unite in this manner for their fecuritv,

* Aft. 30. Parl. 1424. A. 43. P. xi55.
VOL. 1. E and

BOOK I.'and the weak were: obliged to court the patronage of the. ilrong.
<--'- By degrees, there aflbciations became so many alliances offensive and

defensive against the throne; and as their obligatioh was held to be
more sacred than any tie whatever, they gave much umbrage to
our kings, and contributed not a little:to the power and indepen-
dence of the nobility. In the reign of James II. William the eighth
earl of Douglas entered into a :league of this kind with the earls
of Crawford, Ross, Murray, Ormond, the lords Hamilton, Bal-
veny, &c. and so formidable was -this combination to the king, that
he had recourse to a tieasure no less violerit'than unjust, in order
to dissolve it.
The fiequent VI. The frequent wars between;England :and Scotland proved

a with another cause of augmenting the power of the nobility. Nature

has placed no barrier between the two -kingdoms; a river, 'al.most
every where fordable, divides them towards'the east on the weft
thev are separated by an imaginary line. The small revenues of
our kings prevented them from fortifying, or placing garrisons in
the towns on the frontier; nor would the jealoufyof their fubjets
have permitted such a method of defence. The barons, whose
erfates lay near the borders, confidered themnfelves as bound in ho-
nour and interest to repel'the enemy. The wsardenJhips of the dif-
ferent marches, offices of .great trust and dignity, were always be-.
flowed on them. This-gained :tlhmti'the leading of the warlike
counties in the south; and their vaffals,'living in a state of perpetual
hostility, or enjoying at bet an insecure peace, became more in-
ured to war than eventthe reft of their couritrymen, and more wil-
ling to accompany their- hieftain in his thoft hardy and dangerous
enterprizes. It was the valour, no less than the number of their
followers, that rendered the Douglases great. The nobles in the
northern and midland counties were often dutiful and obsequious to

the

the crown, but our monarchs always found it impracticable to fub-Book I.
due the mutinous and ungovernable spirit of the borderers. In all '- -
our dometfic quarrels, those, who could draw to their fide the in-
habitants of the southern counties, were sure of vicory; and con-
fcious of this advantage, the lords who possessed authority there,
were apt to forget the duty which they owed their sovereign, and to
aspire beyond the rank of fubjeds.

VII. THE calamities which befel-our kings contributed more than The frequent

any other cause to diminish the royal authority. Never was any raceminoritiep
of monarchs so unfortunate as the Scottish. Of fix successive princes,pened in Scot-
from Robert III. to James VI. not one died a natural death; and
the minorities, during that time, were longer, and more frequent,
than ever happened in any other kingdom. From Robert Bruce
to James VI. we reckon ten princes; and seven of these were cal-
led to the throne, while they were minors, and almost infants. Even
the most regular and befl established governments feel sensibly the
pernicious effects of a minority, and either become languid and in-
adtive, or are thrown into violent and unnatural convulsions. But,
under the imperfet and ill adjusted system of government in Scot-
land, there effets were frill more fatal; and the fierce and muti-
nous spirit of the nobles, unrestrained by the authority of a king,
scorned all fubjedion to the delegated jurifdidcion of a regent, or
to the feeble commands of a minor. The royal authority was
circumscribed within narrower limits than ever; the prerogatives of
the crown, naturally incoofiderable, were reduced almost to no-
thing; and the ariftocratical power gradually rose upon the ruins
of the monarchical. Left the perfQnal power of a regent should
enable him to ad with too much vigour, the authority annexed
to that office, was Sometimes rendered inconfiderablc, by being

E divided;

BooK- I divided ; or if a tingle regent was chosen, the greater nobles, and'

C-~^~' the heads of-the more illustrious families, were seldom raised to that

dignity. It was often conferred upon men, who poffefled little
influence, and excited nojealoufy. They, conscious of their own.
weakness,. were obliged to overlook some irregularities, and to per-
rmit others; and in order -to support their authority, which was de-
ftitute of real strength, they endeavoured to gain the most power--
ful and active barons, by granting them possessions and immunities,.
which raised them to itill greater power. When the king himself
came to afluime. the reins of government, he found his revenues.
wafted or alienated, the crown lands seized or given away, and the
nobles so accustomed to. independence, that after the firuggles of a-
whole reign, he was seldom able to.reduce them to the fame Itate,.
in which they had been at the beginning, of his minority, or to.

Review ofthereft from. then what they had usurped during that time. If we.
events fathou take a view of what happened to each of our kings, who was so un-
nobles duringfortunate as to be placed in this situation,, the. truth and. imortance
ca:h minori-
ty. of this observation will fully appear..

139 THE minority of David II. the son of Robert Bruce, was dif,L

1329. Y
David I. turbed by the pretensions of Edward Baliol, who, relying on the

aid of England, and on the support of some difaffe.ted barons
among the Scots,, invaded the kingdom. The success which at
firfl attended his arms, obliged the young king to retire to France.;
and Baliol took poflefion of the throne. A small body of the
nobles, however, continuing faithful to their exiled prince, drove
Baliol out of Scotland; and after an absence of nine years, David
returned from France,_ and took the government of the kingdom
into his own hands. But nobles, who were thus wafling their
blood and treasure in defence of the crown, had a right to the un-

disturbed.

d'iturbed possession of their ancient privileges; and even Come title BoOK I..
to arrogate new ones. It seems to have been a maxim, in that age,
that every leader might claim as his own, the territory which his
sword had won from the enemy. Great acquisitions- were gained
by the nobility in that way ; and to there the gratitude and libera-
lity of David added, by distributing, among such as adhered to him,,
the vant possessions which fell to the crown by the forfeiture of his
enemies. The family of Douglas, which began to rife above the
other nobles, in the reign of his father, augmented both its power
and its property, during his minority.

JAMES I. was seized by the Englifi during the continuance of

a truce, and ungenerously detained a, prisoner, almost nineteenJames
years. During that period, the kingdom was governed, first by
his uncle Robert Duke of Albany, and then, by Murdo his son.
Both these noblemen aspired to the crown, and their unnatural am-
bition, if we may believe most of our historians, not only cut flort
the days of Prince David, the King's elder brother, but prolonged'
the captivity of James. They flattered themselves, that they might-
ftep with less opposition into a throne, when almost vacant; and'
dreading the King's return, as the extinction of their authority, and
the end of their hopes, they carried on the negociations for ob--
taining his liberty, with extreme remissness. At the fame time,,
they negle&ed nothing that could either sooth or bribe the nobles
to approve their scheme. They slackened the reins of government,.
they allowed the prerogative to be encroached upon; they suffered:
the most irregular ads of power, and even wanton instances of op-
pression, to pass with impunity; they dealt out the patrimony. of
the crown among those whose enmity they dreaded, or whose fa-
vour they had gained; and reduced the royal authority to a [late

of.

BooK I. of imbecility, from which succeeding monarchs laboured in vain to
.-,. raise it.

1437. , DURING the minority of James II. the administration of affairs
James 1. and the custody of the King's person were committed to Sir Wil-

liam Crichton, and Sir Alexander I ivington. Jealousy and dif-
cord were the effects of their conjunt authority, and each of them,
in order to strengthen himself, beflowed new power and privileges
upon the great men, whose aid he courted. While the young
Earl of Douglas, encouraged by their divisions, ereAed a fort of
independent principality within the kingdom; and forbidding his
vafTals to acknowledge any authority but his own, he created Knights,
appointed a privy council, named officers civil and military, assumed
every ensign of royalty, but the title of King, and appeared in pub-
lic with a magnificence more than royal.

1460. EIGHT persons were chosen to govern the kingdom during the
James III. minority of James III. Lord Boyd, however, by seizing the per-

son of the young King, and by the ascendant which he acquired
over him, soon engrossed the whole authority. He formed the am-
bitious project of raising his family to the fame pitch of power and
grandeur with those of the prime nobility; and he effected it.
While intent on this, he relaxed the vigour of government, and the
Barons became accustomed, once more, to anarchy and indepen-
dence. The power, which Boyd had been at so much pains to
acquire, was of no long continuance, and the fall of his family, ac-
cording to the fate of favourites, was sudden and deftrucive;
but upon its ruins, the family of Hamilton rose, which soon at-
tained the highest rank in the kingdom.

3

As

1 As the minority of James V. was longer, it was likewise mo e BOOK I.
turbulent than those of the preceding Kings. And the contendingjame V
nobles, encouraged or proteted either by the King of France, or
of England, formed themselves into more regular fations, and dif-
regarded more than ever the refl-aints of order and authority. The
French had the advantage of feeing one, devoted to their interest,
raised to be regent. This was the Duke of Albany, a native of
France, and a grand-son of James II. But Alexander Lord Home,
the mofi eminent of all the Scottibh peers, who survived the fatal
battle of Flowden, thwarted all his measures,' during the sirs years
of his adminiifration; and the intrigues of the Queen Dowager,
filter of Henry VII.I. rendered the latter part of it no less feeble.
Though supported by French auxiliaries, the nobles despised his
authority, and regardless either of his threats, or his entreaties, pe-
remptorily refused, two several times, to enter England, to the bor-
ders of which kingdom he had led them. Provoked by there re-
peated instances of contempt,.the regent abandoned his troublesome
flation, and retiring to France, preferred the tranquillity of a pri-
vate life, to an office destitute of real authority. Upon his retreat,
Douglas Earl of Angus became master of the King's person, and
governed the kingdom in his name. Many efforts were made to
deprive him of his usurped authority. But the numerous vafials and
friends of his family adhered to him, because he divided with
them the power and emoluments of his office; the people reve-
renced and loved the name of Douglas; without the title of re-
gent, he exercised a fuller and more absolute authority than any
who had enjoyed that dignity; and the ancient, but dangerous pre-
eminence of the Douglases, seemed to be restored.

To

BooK 1. To tlhefe, and to many other causes, omitted or unobserved by

_-.. us, did the. ScottiTh nobility owe that exorbitant and uncommon

power, of which instances occur, so frequently, in our history,
Nothing, however, demonstrates so fully the extent of their power,
as the length of its duration. Many years after the declension of the
feadal fyfiems in the other kingdoms of Europe, and when the
arms or policy of Princes had, every where, shaken, or laid it in
ruins, the foundations of that ancient fabric remained, in a great
measure, firm and untouched in Scotland.

The c,.wer of The powers, which the feudal institutions veited in the nobles,
thi fudal

, soon became intolerable to all the Princes of Europe, who longed

·n>,lbc5 became
;,:tc!era.ble t, to possess Something more than a nominal and precarious authority.

Their impatience to obtain this, precipitated Henry III. of England,
Edward 11. and some other weak Princes, into rash and premature
attempts against the privileges of the Barons, in which they were
disappointed, or perified. Princes, of greater abilities, were con-
tent to mitigate evils which they could not. cure, they fbught oc-
cupation for the turbulent spirit of their nobles, in frequent wars;
a.nd allowed their fiery courage to evaporate in foreign expeditions,
which, if they brought no other advantage, secured at least do-
meftic tranquillity. But, time and accidents ripened the feudal go-

The attemptsvernments for deftrucion. Towards the end of the fifteenth cen-
to humb'e the
noblts fll,- tury, and beginning of the sixteenth, all the Princes of Europe at-
cerCfll i" tacked, as if by concert, the power of their nobles. Men of ge-
France and in
England. nius then undertook with success, what their unskilful predecessors

had attempted in vain. Lewis XI. of France, the most profound
and the most adventrous genius of that age, began, and in a single
reign, almoff ccmpleated the scheme of their deftrudion. The sure
but concealed policy of Henry VII. of England produced the fame

effea.

6

effect. The means, indeed, employed by these monarchs were BOOK I.
very different. The blow, which Lewis struck, was sudden and
fatal. The artifices of Henry resembled those flow poisons, which
waste the constitution, but become not mortal till some diflant pe-
riod. Nor did they produce consequences less opposite. Lewis
boldly added to the crown whatever he wrested from the nobles.
Henry undermined his Barons, by encouraging themi to fell their
lands, which enriched the commons, and gave them a weight in
the legislature unknown to their predecessors. But while these greatgt the nobles
revolutions were carrying on in two kingdoms, with which Scot-continue to

gather
land was intimately connected, no alteration happened there; theltrength in

Scotland.

King neither extended his own prerogative, nor enabled the com-
mons to encroach upon the arifiocracy; the nobles not only retain-
ed their ancient privileges and poieffions, but daily made new ac-
quifitions.

THIS was. not owing to the inattention of our Princes, or to.our Kingsen-
their want of ambition. They were abundantly sensible of the ex-devoured to

ex-entend the
orbitant power of the nobility, and extremely solicitous to humbleroyal autho-

rity.

that order. They did not, however, poiejfs means sufficient for ac-
cdmplifhing that end. The resources of our monarchs were few,
and the progress which they made inconsiderable. But as the numGeneral
ber of their followers, and the extent of their jurifdition, weremeans to-
the two chief circumstances which rendered the nobles formidable ;enrd
in order to counterballance the one, and to restrain the other, all
our Kings had recourse to the fame expedients.

I. AMONG nobles of a fierce courage, and of unpoliflhed manEncourage

ners, surrounded with vassals bold and licentious, whom they weredilcord anmong
bound by interefl and honour to protect, the causes of difcordt

VOL. 1. F were

BooK I. were many and unavoidable. And as the contending parties could
t_ -' seldom agree in acknowledging the authority of any common fupe-

ricr or judge, and their impatient fpitit would seldom wait the flow
decisions of justice, their quarrels were usually terminated by the'
sword. The offended Baron assembled his vassals; and wafted the
lands, or sied the blood of his enemy. To forgive an injury, was
mean, to forbear revenge infamous or cowardly *. Hence quar-
rels were tranfinitted from father to f6n, and under the name of
eadlly, fjeus, fubfired for many generations, with unmitigated ran-
cour. .It was the interest of the crown to foment rather than to ex-
tinguifh these quarrels, and by scattering or cherishing the feeds of
discord among the nobles, that union which would have rendered the
aristocracy invincible, and which muf: at once have annihilated thd
prerogative, was effecdually prevented. To the fame cause, our
Kings were indebted for the success, with which they sometimes at-
tacked the most powerful chieftains. They employed private re-
v1enge to aid the impotence of public laws, and arming against 'the

* The spirit of revenge was encouraged, not only by the manners, but what is

more remarkable, by the laws of those ages. If any person thought the prose-
cution of an injury offered to his family, too troublesome, or too dangerou's, the
Salilqz laws permitted him publickly to desist from demanding vengeance; but the
lame laws, in order-to puninl his cowardice,. and Want of affection to his family, de-
privcd him of the right of succession. Henaut. Abrcge Chronol. p. 8r. Among
t!he Anglo-Saxons, we find a singular institution diftinguifhled by the name of o-
c',;,liulam; a voluntary alrociation, the object whereof was the personal security of
those who joined in it,' and which the feebleness of governrtment at that time ren-
dtrcJ necclTeiv. Among ether r(gulations, which are contained in one of those
.iill extant, the following defcrvcs notice. " If any al'ociate llall either eat or

rinlk with a perion who' has killed any member of the Jodal,'ii]ui, unlcfs in the
i'efencc (if the Kinil, the Bifllop, or the Count, and unless he can prove that he
dii, not \know the perfuin, let him pay a great line," lHicks Diffcrt. Epiftolar. apud

1 .'cl, r

'

i i';. l.itel,. 'lptcn
t,:. v . i. Ip. 21.

perlun

person who had incurred their displeasure, those rival families which BOOK I.
wified his fall, they rewarded their service, by fiaring amongg
them the spoils of the vanquished. But this expedient, though it
served to humble individuals, did not weaken the body of the nqbi-
lity. Those, who were now the instruments of their Prince's ven-
geance, became, in a short time, the objects of his fear. Having
acquired power and wealth by serving the crown, they, in their
turn, set up for independence; and though there might be a fluc-
tuation of power, and of property, though old families fell, and
new ones rose upon their ruins, the rights of the aristocracy re-
mained intire, and its vigour unbroken.

II. As the adminifiration of justice is one of the molf powerful tiesExtend the

juriFdic'ioii of

between a King and his fubje&ts, all our monarchs were at the Ut-jthe Kiis
moil pains to circumscribe the jurisdiction of the Barons, and tocou"rts
extend that of the crown. The external forms of Subordination,
natural to the feudal system, favpured this attempt. An appeal lay
from thejudges and courts of the Barons, to those of the King.
The right, however, of judging in the first inflance, belonged to
the nobles, and they easily found means to defeat the effec of ap-
peals, as well as of many other feudal regulations. The royal ju-
rifdicion was almost confined within ihe narrow limits of the King's
demesnes, beyond which, his judges claimed indeed much autho-
rity, but poffelTed next to none. Our Kings were sensible of these
limitations, and bore them with impatience. But it was impossible
to overturn in a moment, what was so deeply rooted; or to strip
the nobles, at once, of privileges which they had held so long, and
which were wrought almost into the frame of the feudal conftitu-
tion. To accomplish this, however, was an object of uniform and
anxious attention to all our princes. James I. led the way, here,
as well as in other inflances, towards a more regular and perfect

F 2 police.

BODK I. police. He made choice, among the effates of parliament, of a cer-
L'-- -'tain number of persons, whom he diflinguifhed by the name of

Lords of Sefion, and appointed them to hold courts for determin-
ing civil causes, three times in the year, and forty days at a
time, in whatever place he pleased to name. Their jurifdistion
extended to all matters, which formerly came under the cognizance
of the King's council, and being a committee of parliament, their
decisions were final. James II. obtained a law, annexing all rega-
lities, which should be forfeited, to the crown, and declaring the
right of jurifdiAion to be unalienable for the future. James IIT. im-
posed severe penalties upon those judges appointed by the Barons,
whose decisions should be found on a review to be unjust; and by
many other regulations, endeavoured to extend the authority of his
own court*. James IV. on pretence of remedying the inconve-
niencies arising from the ihort terms of the court of Session, ap-
pointed other judges called Lords of daily council. The Seffioi
was an ambulatory court, and met seldom; the Daily council,
was fixed, and fat constantly at Edinburgh; and though not com-
posed of members of parliament, the fame powers, which the Lords
of Session enjoyed, were vefled in it. At lass, James V. erected a
new court, that fill subsists, and which he named the College of
yuzfice, the judges or Senators of which were called Lords of
Council and Se/ion. This court not only exercised the fame ju-
rifdiction which formerly belonged to the Session and Daily Coun-
cil, but new rights were added. Privileges of great importance
were granted to its members, its forms were prescribed, its terms
fixed, and regularity, power and splendor conferred upon it. The
persons conflituted judges in all these different courts, had, in

., 26. P, JI.69, Ad. 94, P. 1493. At, 99. P. 148'7:

many

many refpeets, the advantage of those who presided in the courts BOOK I.
of the Barons; they were more eminent for their skill in law, their ^
rules of proceeding were more uniform, and their decisions more
consistent. Such judicatories became the objects of confidence,
and of veneration. Men willingly submitted their property to their
determination, and their incroachments on the jurisdictions of the
nobles were popular, and for that reason successful. By devices of
a inmilar nature, the jurisdiction of the nobles in criminal causes was
reirained, and the authority of the court of Yuf/iciacy extended.
The crown, in this particular, gaining insensibly upon the nobles,
recovered more ample authority; and the King, whose jurifdidion
once resembled that of a Baron, rather than that of a Sovereign *,

* The moll perfect idea of the feudal system of government may be attained by

attending to the slate of Germany, and to the hiflory of France. In the formeir.
the feudal inititutions flill subsist with great vigour; and though altogether abo-
lilhed in the latter, the public records have been so carefully preserved, that the
French lawyers and antiquaries have been enabled, with more certainty and pre-
cifion, than those of any other country in Europe, to trace its rife, its progress, and
revolutions. In Germany, every principality may be confidered as a fief, and all its
great Princes as vassals, holding of the Emperor. They possess all the feudal pri.
vileges; their fiefs are perpetual; their jurifdicion within their own territories, fe-
parate and extensive; and the great offices of the empire are all hereditary, and
annexed to particular families. At the fame time, the Emperor retains many of the
prerogatives of the feudal monarch. Like them, his claims and pretensions are
innumerable, and his power small; his jurisdiction within his own demesnes, or he-
reditary countries, is compleat; beyond the bounds of these it is almofl nothing.
And so permanent are feudal principles, that although the feudal fyflem be over-
turned in almost every particular state in Germany, and although its Princes have
all become absolute, the original feudal conflitution of the empire flill remains,
and ideas peculiar to that form of government, dirLc: all its operations, and de-
termine the rights of all its Princes. Our obfcirv:tions, with regard to the limited
jurifdiaion of Kings under the feudal governnic-.it&. .uet greatly illullrhatcd by wh;t

happened

BooK I. came more and more to be confidered as the head of the commnu-
b^pd " nity, and the supreme diffpenfer ofjuftice to his people. These ac-

quilitions of our Kings, however, though compaiatively great, were
in reality inconsiderable; and notwithstanding all their efforts, ma-
ny of the separate jurifdiaions poflTffed by the nobles remained.in"
great vigour; and their final abolition was refcrved to a diiltait and
more happy period.

Each of our BUT besides these methods of defending their prerogative,
Kings purfiue I
fonie plan of and humbling the arifiocracy, which may be confidered as com-
hnobleng the mon to all our Princes, we ihall find, by taking a review of

their reigns, that almofl every one of our Kings, from Robert Bruce
to James V. had formed rome particular system for depressing the
authority of the nobles, which was the objec both of their jea-
lousy and terror. This conduct of our monarchs, if we reft satis-
fled with the accounts of their historians, must be confidered as
flowing entirely from their resentment against particular noblemen;
and all their attempts to humble them, muff be viewed as the sallies
of private passion, not as the consequences of any general plan of
policy. But, though some of their actions may be imputed to

happened in France. The feebleness and dotage of the descendants of Charlemaigne
encouraged the Peers to usurp an independent jurifdiltion. Nothing remained in
the hands of the crown; all was seized by them. When Hugh Capet ascended the
throne, A. D. 987. he kept poffeflion of his private patrimony the Comtd of Paris,
and all the jurifdiition, which the Kings his fuccefors exerciscd for rome time, was
wvithin its territories. There were only four towns in France, where he could
ctaiblillh Grands Baillis, or royal judges; all the other lands, towns, and bail-
lages bclonged to the nobles. The methods to which the French monarchs had
recourse for extending their jurifdicioni were cxaclly similar to those employed by
our Princes. Ilenaut's Abregc p. 617, &c. Dc L'Efprit des Loix, Liv. 30.
ch. 20, &c.

those

those passions, though the different genius of the men, the temper BOOK I.
of the times, and the state of the nation necessarily occasioned great
variety in their schemes, yet, without being chargeable with ex-
ceffive refinement, we may affirm that their end was uniformly the
fame. And the projet of reducing the power of the ariflocracyTlis proved
sometimes avowed, and pursued with vigour; Sometimes concealed, beavt'in'
or seemingly suspended; was never altogether abandoned. their reigns.

No Prince was ever more indebted to his nobles than RobertRobert Bruce.

Bruce. Their valour conquered the kingdom, and placed him on
the throne. His gratitude and generosity bestowed on them the
lands of the vanquished. Property has seldom undergone greater
or more sudden revolutions, than those to which it was subjed, at
that time in Scotland. Edward I. having forfeited the estates of
most of the ancient Scottish Barons, granted them to his English
fubjeds. These were expelled by the Scots, and their lands seized
by new masters. Amidst such rapid changes, confusion was una-
voidable; and many possessed their lands by titles extremely defec-
tive. During one of those truces between the- two nations, occa-
sioned rather by their being weary of war, than desirous of peace,
Robert formed a scheme for checking the growing power and wealth
of the nobles. He summoned them to appear, and to Ihew by
what rights they held their lands. They assembled accordingly,
and the question being put, they started up, at once, and drew
their swords, " By these, said they, we acquired our lands, and
with thele we will defend them." The King, intimidated by their
boldness, prudently dropt the projct. But so deeply did they re-
sent this attack upon their order, that notwithilanding Robert's po-
pular and splendid virtues, it occasioned a dangerous conspiracy
against his life.

)A. V ID

BOOK I. DAVID his son, at firfl an exile in France, afterwards a prisoner
David I in England, and involved in continual war with tdward III. had

not leisure to attend to the internal police of his kingdom, or to
think of retrenching the privileges of the nobility.
Robert II. OUR historians have been more careful to relate the military, than

the civil tranfations of the reign of Robert II. Skirmishes and in-
roads of little consequence, they describe minutely, but with regard
to every thing that happened, during several years of tranquillity,
they are altogether silent.
Robert IlI. THE feeble administration of Robert III. muff likewise be passed

over slightly. A Prince, of a mean genius, and, of a frail and
sickly contfitution, was no fit person to enter the lifts with active
and martial barons, or to attempt wresting from them any of their
rights.
James I. THE civil transactions in Scotland are better known since the be-

ginning of the reign of James I. and a compleat series of our laws
supplies the defeAs of our historians. The English made some a-
mends for their injustice in detaining that Prince a prisoner, by their
generous care of his education. During his long residence in Eng-
land, he had an opportunity of observing the feudal system in a more
advanced rfate, and refined from many of the imperfections which
tlill adhered to it, in his own kingdom. He saw their nobles great,
but not independent; a King powerful, though far from absolute;
he saw a regular administration of government; wife laws enacted;
and a nation flourishing and happy, because all ranks of men were
accustomed to obey them. Full of there ideas, he returned into his
native country, which presented to him a very different scene. The

3 royal

royal authority, never great, was now contemptible, by having been BOOic I.
so long delegated to regents. The ancient patrimony, and revenues'
of the crown, were almost totally alienated. During his long ab-
fence, the name of a king was little known, and less regarded. The
licence of many years had rendered the nobles independent. Uni-
versal anarchy prevailed. The weak were exposed to the rapine
and opprefion of the firong. In every corner some barbarous chief-
tain ruled at pleasure, and neither feared the King, nor pitied the
people *.

JAMES was too wife a Prince to employ open force to correa

such inveterate evils. Neither the men, nor the times would have
born it. He applied the gentler, and less offensive remedy of laws
and statutes. In a parliament held immediately after his return, he
gained the confidence of his people, by many wife laws, tending
visibly to re-eftablifi order, tranquillity and justice in the kingdom.
But, at the fame time, that he endeavoured to secure these bleflings
to his fubjeds, he discovered his intention to recover those posses-
lions, of which the crown had been unjuffly bereaved; and for that
purpose obtained an aa by which he was impowered to summon
those, who had obtained crown lands during the three last reigns,
to produce the rights by which they held them -. As this statute
threatened the property of the nobles, another which passed in a fubfe-
quent parliament, aimed a dreadful blow at their power. By it, the

* A cotemporary Monkish writer describes these calamities very feelingly, in his

rude Latin. In diebus illis, non erat lex in Scotia, fed quilibet-potentiorum junio-
rem opprelsit; et totum regnum suit unum latrocinium; homicidia, depredationes,
incendia, et ceetera maleficia remanferunt impunita; et juflitia relegata extra termi-
nos tegni exulavit. Chartular. Morav. apud Innes Esay, vol. i. p. 27z.

t A&. 9. P. 1424.
VOL. I. G leagues

Boox I. leagues and combinations, which we have already described, and

'- --' which rendered the nobles so formidable to the crown, were de-

clared unlawful a. Encouraged by this success in the beginning of
his enterprize, James's next ftep was still bolder and more decisive.
During the fitting of Parliament, he seized, at once, his cousin
Murdo Duke of Albany, and his sons; the earls of Douglas, Len-
nox, Angus, March, and above twenty other Peers and Barons of
prime rank. Toall of them, however, he was immediately recon-
ciled, except to Albany, and his sons, and Lennox. These were
tried by their Peers, and condemned; for what crime is now un-
known. Their execution struck the whole order with terror, and
their forfeiture added vast possessions to the crown. He seized, like-
wife, the earldoms of Buchan and Strathern, upon different pretexts;
and that of Mar fell to him by inheritance. The patience and in-
activity of the nobles, while the king was proceeding so rapidly to-
wards aggrandizing the crown, are amazing. The only obftruc-
tion he met with was from a flight infurredion headed by the.
Duke of Albany's youngest son, and that was easily suppressed.
The splendor and presence of a King, to which the great men had.
been long unaccustomed, inspired reverence: James was a Prince of
great abilities, and conducted his operations with much prudence..
He was in friendship with England, and closely allied with the
French King: He was adored by the people, who enjoyed un-
usual security and happiness under his administration: And all his.
acquisitions, however fatal to the body of the nobles, had been gained
by attacks upon individuals; were obtained by deciiions of law; and
being founded on circumfrances peculiar to the persons who sus-
sered, might excite murmurs and apprehensions, but afforded no
colourable.pretext for a general rebellion. It was not so with the

* Act. 30. P. 1424,

next

next attempt which the' King made. . Encouraged by the facility BooK I.
with which he had hitherto advanced, he ventured upon a measure "
that irritated the whole body of the nobility, and which the event
thews either to have been entered into with too much precipitancy,
or to have been carried'on wit-h too much violence. The father of
George Dunbar Earl of March had taken arms against Robert III.
the King's father; but that crime had been pardoned, and his lands
reflored by Robert Duke'of Albany. James, on pretext that the
regent had ex'ceeded :his power,: and that it was the prerogative of
the King alone to pardon treason,' or' to' alienate 'lands arfiexed to
the crown, obtained a sentence declaring the pardon to be void, and
depriving Dunbar of the earldom. Many of the great, men held
lands by no other right than what they derived from grants of the
two Dukes of Albany. Such a decision, though they had reason
to exped it in consequence of the flatute which the King had ob-
tained, occasioned a general alarm. Though Dunbar was, at pre-
sent, the only sufferer, the precedent might be extended, and their
titles to possessions, which they confidered as the rewards of their
valour, might be fubjetted to the review of courts of law, whose
forms of proceeding, and jurisdiCtion, were in a martial age little
known, and extremely odious. Terror and discontent spread fast
upon this discovery of the King's intentions; the common danger
called on the whole order to unite, and to make one bold stand,
before they were'ftripped fuccefiively of their acquisitions, and reduced
to a state of poverty and insignificance. The prevalence of there fen-
timents among the nobles encouraged a few desperate men, the friends
or followers of those who had been the chief fufl-rers under the
King's administration,. to form a conspiracy againfl his life. The firfl
uncertain intelligence of this was brought him, while he lay in his
camp before Roxburgh castle. HIe durlf not confide in nobles, to

G 2 whom

BooK I. whno he had given so many causes ofddifguft, buit instantly difmifed
.-,-.. them and their vassals, and retiring to a m.caftery near Perth, was

soon after murdered there, in the most 'cruel manner. All our his-
torians mention, with aftonifhmemt, this circumltance of the King's
4dibanding his army, at ,a time when it was so necefary for his
preservation. A King, .fay they, surrounded with his Barons, is fe-
cure from secret treason, and may defy open rebellion. But cihofe
very Barons were the persons whom he chiefly dreaded; and it is
evident, from this review of his adminit-ration, that he had greater
reason to,apprehend danger, than to expect defence, 'from their hands.
It was the misfortune of James, that his maxims andmanners ,were
too-refined forthe age in whidh he lived. Happy ! had he reigned
in a kingdom more .civilized; his love of peace, of jutiice, and of
eleganoe, would have:rendered his fehemes 'successful; and instead
of his perishing becauf he had attempted too much, a-grateful.
people would have applauded and ,feconded-his efforts to reform and.
to improve them.
James Ir. CRt cIHTONt the moat able man of-theofe, 'who iiad the direft:ion

of affairs during the minority of James II. ihad been the -mini-er of
James I. and well acquainted 'with his relolutan .of humbling the
nobility. He did not relinquidl the design, and Ihe endeavoured to
inspire his pupil with the ifame sentiments. But what James had
attempted to effe't slowly, and 'by legal -means, ihis fan andCricjlton
pursued with the impetuosity natural to ;Scotfmnen, and with the
fierceness peculiar to-that age. William the !sixt'h Earl :of Douglas
was the first vi&tim ito their barbarous tpolicy. Ttiat young ndble-
man (as we have already 6bferved) contemning the authority of
an infant Prince, almost openly renounced his allegiance, and as-
spired to independency. Crichton, too highifpirited to bear such

an

an- insult, but too weak to curb *or to bring to justice so powerful BOOK I.
an offender, decoyed him by many promises to an interview in the
cafile of Edinburgh, and, notwithfianding these, murdered both.
him and his brother. Crichton, however, gained little by this a.
of treachery, which rendered him universally odious. William the
eighth Earl of Douglas was no less powerful, and no less formidable
to the crown.. By forming the league which we already men-
tioned with the Earl of Crawfurd and other Barons, he had united
against his Sovereign almost one half of his kingdom. But his-
credulity led him. into. the fame snare, which had been fatal to the
former Earl. Relying on the King's promises, who had now at-
tained to the years of manhood, and having obtained a safe conduct
under the great feal, he ventured to meet him in Stirling castle.
James urged him to dissolve that dangerous confederacy into which
he had entered; the EarT obstinately refused; " If you will not,"
said the enraged monarch, drawing his dagger "' this shall;" and
stabbed him to the heart. An action so unworthy of a King filled
-the nation with aftonihment, and with horror. The Earl's vassals
ran to arms with the utmost fury, and dragging the safe conduce,
which the King had granted and violated, at a horse's tail, they
marched towards Stirling, burnt the town, and threatened to be-
siege the castle. An accommodation ensued, on what terms is .not
kaown. But the King's jealousy, and the new Earl's power and
resentment, prevented it from being of long continuance. Both took.
the field, at the head of their armies, and met near Abercorn. That
of the Earl, comnpofed chiefly of borderers, was far superior to the
King's both in number, and in valour; and a tingle battle muff,
in all probability, have decided whether the house of Stewart or of
Douglas was henceforth to possess the throne of Scotland. But,.
while his troops, impatienly expected .the signal to engage, the

Earl.
4

BooK I. Earl ordered them to retire to their camp, and Sir James Hamilton
'-- of Cadyow, the person in whom he placed the greatest confidence,

convinced of his want of genius to improve an opportunity, or 6f
his want of courage to seize a crown, deserted him that very night.
This example was followed by many; and the Earl, despised, or for-
faken by all, was soon driven out of the kingdom, and obliged to
depend for his subsistence, on the friendship of the King of Eng-
land. The ruin of this great family, which had so long rivalled
and overawed the crown, and the terror with which such an ex-
ample of unsuccessful ambition filled the nobles, secured the King,
for some time, from opposition; and the royal authority remained
uncontrouled and almost absolute. James did not fuffcr this favour-
able interval to pass unimproved; he procured the content of par-
liament to laws more advantageous to the prerogative, and more
subversive of the privileges of the aristocracy, than were ever ob-
tained by any former or subsequent monarch of Scotland.

BY one of there, not only all the vast poifeffions of the Earl of

Douglas were annexed to the crown, but all prior and future alie-
nations of crown lands were declared to be void, and the King was
impowered to seize them at pleasure, without any process or form
of law, and oblige the possessors to refund whatever they had re-
ceived from them . A dreadful instrument of oppreflion in the
hands of a Prince.

ANOTHER law prohibited the wardenship of the marches to be

granted hereditarily ; restrained, in several instances, the jurisdiction
of that officc; and extended the authority of the King's courts -.

* A&. 41. P. I455. 1-- Ibid. Aft. 42.

BY

By a third, it was ordained that no Regality, or exclusive right BOOK I.

of adminiftring jufrice within a man's. own lands, should be grant- ---
ed in time to come, without the consent of parliamentO, a condi-
tion, which implied almost an express prohibition. Those nobles
who already poffeiTed that great privilege, would naturally be folli-
citous to prevent it from becoming common, by being beffowed on
many. Those, who had not themselves attained it, would envy
others the acquisition offuch a flattering diflindion; and both would
concur in rejecting the claims of new pretenders..

BY a fourth a&, all new grants of hereditary offices were prohi-

bited, and those obtained since the death of the last King were re--
voked t.

EACH of these statutes undermined some of the great pillars, on

which the power of the ariflocracy refted. During the remainder
of his reign, this Prince pursued the plan which he had begun,
with the utmost vigour; and had not a sudden death, occasioned
by the splinter of a cannon which burli near him at the siege of
Roxburgh, prevented his progress, he wanted neither genius nor
courage to perfeCt it: and Scotland might, in all probability, have
been the firit kingdom in Europe, wliich would have seen the sub-
version of the feudal fyltem.

JAMES III: discovered no lets eagerness than his father or grand-James ir.

father to humble the nobility; but far inferior to either of them in
abilities and address, he adopted a plan extremely impolitic, and
his reign was difaftious, as well as his end tragical. Under the feu-
dal governments, the nobles were not only the King's miniflers,

* Ibid. Aó&. 43, t. AC. 44.

and

BOOK I. and possesed of all the great offices of power or of trut ; they were,
-~'-'-.likewise, his companions and favourites, and scarce any others

approached his person, or were entitled to his regard. But James,
who both feared and hated his nobles, kept them at an unusual
distance, and beflowed every mark of confidence and affedion
upon a few mean persons, of profemfions so dishonourable, as ought
to have rendered them unworthy of his pretence. Shut up with
there, in his cattle of Stirling, he seldom appeared in public, and
amused himself with architeture, music, and other arts, which
were then little esteemed. The nobles beheld the power and fa-
vour of there minions, with indignation. Even the sanguinary
measures of his father provoked them less than his neglect. Indi-
viduals alone suffered by the former; by the latter, every man thought
himself injured, because all were contemned. Their discontent was
much heightened by the King's recalling all rights of crown lands,
hereditary offices, regalities, and every other concession, which was
detrimental to his prerogative, and which had been extorted during
his minority. Combinations among themselves, secret intrigues
with England, and all the usual preparatives for civil war, were the
effeds of their resentment. Alexander Duke of Albany, and John
Earl of Mar, the King's brothers, two young men of turbulent and
ambitious spirits, and incensed against James, who treated them with
the fame coldness as he did the other great men, entered deeply
into all their cabals. The King detected their designs, before they
were ripe for execution, and seizing his two brothers, committed
the Duke of Albany to Edinburgh catle. The Earl of Mar having
remonfirated with too much boldness against the King's conduct, was
murdered, if we may believe our historians, by his command. Al-
bany, apprehensive of the fame fate, made his escape out of the
catle, and fled into France. Concern for the King's honour, or in-

dignation

dignation at his neafures, were perhaps the motives, which firfi BooK I.
induced him to join the malecontents. But James's attachment to
favourites rendering him every day more odious to the nobles, the
prospect of the advantages which might be derived from their ge-
neral difaffedion, added to the resentment which he felt on account
of his brother's death, and his own injuries, soon inspired Albany
with more ambitious and criminal thoughts. He concluded a treaty
with Edward IV. of England, in which he aflumed the name of
Alexander King of Scots, and in return for the assistance which was
promised him towards dethroning his brother, he bound himself, so
soon as he was put in possession of the kingdom, to swear fealty and
to do homage to the English monarch, to renounce the ancient alli-
ance with France, to contract a new one with England, and to fur-
render some of the strongest castles, and most valuable counties in
Scotland *. That aid, which the Duke so barely purchased at the
price of his own honour, and the independence of his country,
was punctually granted him, and the Duke of Gloucester with a
powerful army conducted him towards Scotland. The danger of
a foreign invasion obliged James to implore the afliflance of those
nobles whom he had so long treated with contempt. Some of them
were in close confederacy with the Duke of Albany, and approved
of all his pretensions. Others were impatient for any event, which
would restore their order to its ancient pre-eminence. They took
the field, however, at the head of a powerful army of their fol-
lowers, but with a fironger disposition to redress their own grievan-
ces, than to annoy the enemy; and with a fixed resolution of pu-
nifhing those minions, whore insolence theycould no longer tolerate.
This resolution they executed, in the camp near Lawder, with a

Abercr. Mart. Atch. v. ii. 443.
VQL. I. H military

BOOK I. military dispatch and rigour. Having previously concerted their plan,
_ _---' the Earls of Angus, Huntly, Lenox, followed by almost the whole

Barons of chief note in the army, forcibly entered the apartment
of their Sovereign, seized all his favourites, except one Ramsay,
whom they could not tear from the King, in whose arms he took
shelter, and without any form of trial, hanged them instantly over
a bridge. Among the most remarkable of those who had engrossed
the King's affetion, were Cochran a mason, Hommil a taylor,
Leonard a smith, Rogers a musician, and Torfifan a fencing-mafter.
So despicable a retinue discovers the capriciousness of James's cha-
rater, and accounts for the indignation of the nobles, when they
beheld the favour, due to them, bestowed on such unworthy ob-
jees.

JAMES had no reason to confide in an army so little under his

command, and difmifling it, shut himself up in the castle of Edin-
burgh. After various intrigues, Albany's lands and honours were
at length restored to him, and he seemed even to have regained his
brother's favour, by some important services. But their friendship
was not of long duration. James, once more, abandoned himself
to the guidance of favourites; and the fate of those who had sus-
sered at Lawder, did not deter others from courting that dangerous
pre-eminence. Albany, on pretext that an attempt had been made
to take away his life by poison, fled from court, and retiring to
his castle of Dunbar, drew thither a greater multitude of Barons than
attended on the King himself. At the fame time, he renewed his
former confederacy with Edward, the Earl of i ngus openly nego-
ciated that infanlous treaty ; other Barons were ready to concur with
it: and if the fuddcn death of i dward had not prevented Albany's
receiving any aid from England, the crown of Scotland would, pro-

3 bably,

bably, have been the reward of this unworthy combination with BoOK I.
the enemies of his country. But, intfead of any hopes of reigning "
in Scotland, he found, upon the death of Edward, that he could
not reside there in safety, and flying firit to England, and then to
France, he seems from that time to have taken no part in the as-
fairs of his native country. Emboldened by his retreat, the King
and his Ministers, multiplied the insults which they offered to the
nobility. A standing guard, a thing unknown under the feudal go-
vernments, and inconfiltent with the familiarity and confidence with
which monarchs then lived amidst their nobles, was raied for the
King's defence, and the command of it given to Ramsay, lately
created Earl of Bothwell, the fame person who had so narrowly
escaped when his companions were put to death at Lawder. And, as
if this precaution had not been sufficient, a proclamation was issued
forbidding any person to appear in arms within the precincts of the
court * ; which, at a time, when no man of rank left his own house
without a numerous retinue of armed followers, was, in effect, de-
barring the nobles from all access to the King. James, at the fame
time, became fonder of retirement than ever; and funk in indolence,
or fuperitition, or attentive only to amusements, devolved his whole
authority upon his favourites. So many injuries provoked the most
considerable nobles to take arms, and having persuaded or obliged
the Duke of Rothfay, the King's eldest son, a youth of fifteen, to
set himself at their head, they openly declared their intention of
depriving James of a crown, of which he had discovered himself
to be so unworthy. Rouzed by this 'danger, the King quitted his
retirement, took the field, and encountred them near Bannockburn;
but the valour of the Borderers, of whom the army of the male-

* Ferrerius, 398.

H 2 contents

BooK I. contents was chiefly compored, soon put his troops to flight; and

'-J he himself was slain in the pursuit. Suspicion, indolence, immo-

derate attachment to favourites, and all the vices of a feeble mind,
are visible in his whole conduct; but the character of a cruel and
unrelenting tyrant seems to be unjuflly affixed to him by our hifto-
rians. His neglect of the nobles irritated, but did not weaken them;
and their discontent, the immoderate ambition of his two brothers,
and their unnatural confederacies with England, were sufficient to
have diflurbed a more vigorous administration, and to have rendered'
unhappy a Prince of superior talents.

THE indignation, which many persons of rank expressed against

the conduct of the conspirators, together with the terror of the fen-
tence of excommunication which the Pope pronounced against them,
obliged them to use their victory with great moderation and huma-
nity. And being conscious how detestable the crime of imbruing their
hands in the blood of their Sovereign appeared, they endeavoured to
regain the good opinion of their countrymen, and to attone for their
treatment of the father, by their loyalty and duty towards the son.
ames IV. They placed him instantly on the throne, and the whole kingdom

soon united in acknowledging his authority,

JAMES IV. was naturally generous and brave; he felt, in an high

degree, all the passions which animate a young and noble mind..
He loved magnificence, he delighted in war, and was eager to ob-
tain fame. During his reign, the ancient and hereditary enmity
between the King and nobles seems almost entirely to have ceased.
He envied not their splendor, because it contributed to the ornament
of his court; nor did he dread their power, which he confidered
as the fccurity of his kingdom, not as an object of terror to him-

self.

self. This confidence, on his part, met with the proper return of BooK. I.
duty and affection, on theirs; and, in his war with England, he
experienced how much a King, beloved by his nobles, is able to
perform. Though the ardour of his courage, and the spirit of chi-
valry, rather than the profpedt of any national advantage, were the
motives of that expedition; such was the zeal of his fubjeds for
the King's glory, that he was followed by as gallant an army as
ever any of his ancestors had led upon English ground. But tho'
James himself formed no scheme dangerous or detrimental to the
aristocracy, his reign was distinguished by an event, extremely fatal
to it; and one accidental blow humbled it more than all the pre-
meditated attacks of preceding Kings. In the ra(h and unfortu-
nate battle of Flowden, a brave nobility chose rather to die, than
to desert -their Sovereign. Twelve Earls, thirteen Lords, five el-
deft sons of noblemen, and an incredible number of barons fell:
with the King *. The whole body of the nobles, long and fen-
sibly, felt this disaster; and if a Prince of full age had then ascended'
the throne, their consternation and feebleness would have afforded,
him advantages, which no former monarch ever poflf~fed.

BUT James V. who succeeded his father, was an infant of a year James V,

old; and though the office of regent was conferred on the Duke of
Albany, a man of genius and enterprize, a native of France, and
accuflomed to a government where the power of the King was al-
ready great; though he made many bold attempts to extend the
royal authority; though he put to death Lord Home, and: banished
the Earl of Angus, the two noblemen of greatest influence in the
kingdom, the aristocracy loft no ground under his adminiitration.

* Aber. ii. 540.

Aó siran-4

BooK I. A tranger to the manners, the laws, and the language of the
v-v- ' people whom he was called to rule, he acted, on some occasions,

rather like a Viceroy of the French King, than the governor of
Scotland; but the nobles asserted their own privileges, and contended
for the interest of their country, with a boldness, which convinced
him of their independence, and of the impotence of his own
authority. After several unsuccessful struggles, he voluntarily re-
tired to France, and the King, being then in his thirteenth year,
the nobles agreed that he ihould assume the government, and that
eight persons flould be appointed to attend him by turns, and to
advise and assist him in the administration of public affairs. The
Earl of Angus, who was one of that number, did not long remain
satisfied with such divided power. He gained some of his col-
leagues, removed others, and intimidated the reft. When the term
of his attend..nce expired, he flill retained authority, to which all
were obliged to submit, because none of them was in a condition
to dispute it. The affection of the young King was the only thing
wanting, to fix and perpetuate his power. But an active and high-
spirited Prince ufbmitted, with great impatience, to the reltraint,
in which he was kept. It ill suited his years, or disposition, to be
confined as a prisoner, within his own palace; to be treated with
no respect; and to be deprived of all power. He could not, on some
cccaiions, conceal his indignation and resentment. Angus fore-
saw that he had much to dread from these, and as he could not
gain the King's heart, he resolved to make sure of his pcrfon. James
was continually surrounded by the Earl's spies and confidents; many
eyes watched all his motions, and observed every flep he took. But
the King's eagerness to obtain liberty eluded all their vigilance. He
escaped from Falkland, and fled to the caflle of Stirling, the refi-
dence of the Q!Lcen his mother, and the only place of ftrcngth in

the

the kingdom which was not in the hand of the Douglases. The BOOK I.
nobles, of whom some were influenced by their hatred to Angus,'- --
and others by their refpet for the King, crowded to Stirling, and
his court was soon filled with persons of the greatest diftintion.
The Earl, though astonished at this unexpected revolution, resolved,
at firfl, to make one hold push for recovering his authority, by
marching to Stirling at the head of his followers; but he wanted
either courage, or strength to execute this resolution. In a parlia-
ment held loon after, he and his adherents were attainted, and as-
ter escaping from many dangers, and enduring much misery, he
was at length obliged to fly into England for refuge.

JAMES had now not only the name, but, though extremely young,

the full authority of a King. He was inferior to no Prince of that
age in gracefulness of person, or in vigour of mind. His under-
flanding was good, and his heart warm; the former capable of
great improvement, and the latter susceptible of the bell impref-
sions. But according to the usual fate of Princes who are called to
the throne in their infancy, his education had been negleced. His
private preceptors were more ready to flatter, than to inftrua him.
It was the interest of those who governed the kingdom, to prevent
him from knowing too much. And the Earl of Angus, in order
to divert him from bufinels, gave him an early taste for fiich plea-
fures, as afterwards occupied and engrossed him more than be-
came a King. Accordsi'giy, we discover in James all the features
of a great, but uncultivated spirit. On the one hand, violent pas-
sions, implacable recentmelt, an immoderate dclire of power, and
the utmott rage at disappointment. On the other, love to his
people, zeal for the puniflhment of private opprcffors, confidence

inl

BooK I. in his favourites, and the most engaging openness and affability of
t --- behaviour.

WHAT he himself had suffered from the exorbitant power of the

nobles led him early to imitate his predecessors, in their attempts to
humble them. The plan he formed for that purpose was more pro-
found, more fyflematic, and pursued with greater constancy and
fieddinefs, than that of any of his ancestors. And the influence of
the events in his reign upon those of the subsequent period, render
it necessary to explain his conduct, at greater length, and to enter
into a more minute detail of his actions. He had penetration
enough to discover those defets in the schemes, adopted by former
Kings, which occasioned their miscarriage. The example of James I.
had taught him, that wife laws operate slowly on a rude people,
and that the fierce spirit of the feudal nobles was not to be subdued
by there alone. The effects of the violent measures of Janfes II.
convinced him, that the oppression of one great family is apt either
to excite the suspicion and resentment of the other nobles, or to en-
rich with its spoils some new family, which would soon adopt the
fame sentiments, and become equally formidable to the crown.
He saw, from the fatal end of James III. that neglect was flill more
intolerable to the nobles than oppression, and that the ministry of
new men and favourites was both dishonourable, and dangerous to
a Prince. At the fame time, he felt that the authority of the crown
was not sufficient to counterbalance the power of the aristocracy,
and that without some new accession of strength, he could expect
no better success in the struggle than his ancestors. In this extre-
mity, he applied himself to the clergy, hoping that they would both
relish his plan, and concur, with all their influence, in enabling him to

put

put it in execution. Under the feudal government, the church being BOOK I.
efleemed a third eflate, had its representatives in parliament; the lnln- --
ber of these was considerable, and they pofnefl'd great influence in
that aflembly. The superstition of former kings, and the zeal of
an ignorant age, had betlowed upon ecclesiastics, a great proportion
of the national wealth, and the authority which they acquired by the
reverence of the people, was superior even to that which they de-
rived from their riches. This powerful body, however, depended
entirely on the crown. The Popes, notwithstanding their attention
to extend their usurpations, had negleced Scotland as a distant and
poor kingdom, and permitted its kings to exercise powers, which
they disputed with more considerable princes. The Scottish mo-
narchs had the sole right of nomination to vacant bifhopricks and
abbeys *; and James naturally concluded, that men who expected
preferment from his favour, would be willing to merit it, by pro-
moting his designs. Happily for him, the nobles had not yet reco-
vered the blow which fell on their order at Flowden, and if we may
judge either from their conduct, or from the character given of them
by Sir Ralph Sadler the English envoy in Scotland, they were men of
little genius, of no experience in business, and incapable of acting
either with unanimity, or with vigour. Many of the clergy, on the
other hand, were distinguished by their great abilities, and no lets by
their ambition. Various causes ofdifguft had arisen between them and
the nobles, who despised their character, and envied their power,
or their wealth. By ating in concert with the king, they not only
gratified him, but avenged themselves, and hoped to aggrandise their
own order, by depressing those, who were their sole rivals. Secure

* Epift, Reg. Scot, i. J97, &c. At-. 125. P. i54o.
VOL. I. I o

BOOK I. of so powerful a concurrence, James ventured to proceed with greater

boldness. In the first heat of resentment, he had driven the Earl of
Angus out of the kingdom; and sensible that a person, so far fupe-
rior to the other nobles in abilities, might create many obtfacles,
which would retard, or render ineffectual all his schemes, he solemn-
ly swore, that he would never permit him to return into Scotland,
and, notwithfianding the repeated felicitations of the king of Eng-
land, he adhered to his vow with unrelenting obstinacy. He then
proceeded to repair the fortifications of Edinburgh, Stirling, and
other castles, and to fill his magazines with arms and ammunition.
Having taken these precautions by way of defence, he began to
treat the nobility with the utmost coldness and reserve. Those of-
sices, which they were apt, from long possession, to confider as ap-
propriated to their order, were now beffowed on ecclesiastics, who
alone possessed the King's ear, and together with a few gentlemen
of inferior rank, to whom he had communicated his schemes, were
entrusted with the management of all public affairs. These mini-
fiers were chosen with judgment; and Cardinal Beatoup, who soon
became the most eminent among them, was a man of superior ge-
nius. They served the King with fidelity, they carried on his
measures with vigour, with reputation, and with success. James no
longer concealed his contempt of the nobles, and suffered no op-
portunity of mortifying them to escape. Slight offences were ag-
gravated into real crimes, and punished with severity. Every accu-
Iation against persons of rank was heard with pleasure, every appear-
ance of guilt was examined with rigour, and every trial proved fatal
to those who were accused : the banifling Hepburn Earl of Bothwell,
for reasons extremely frivolous, the beheading the Master of Forbcs
without furfilent evidence of his guilt, and the condemning Lady
Glamis, a filter of the Earl of Angus, to be burnt for the crime of
witchcraft, of which even that credulous age believed her innocent

are

are monuments both of the King's hatred of the nobility, of the BOOK I.
severity of his government, and of the stretches he made towards
absolute power. By these ads of authority, he tried the spirit of
the nobles, and how much they were willing to bear. Their pa-
tience increased his contempt for them, and added to the ardour and
boldness with which he pursued his plan. Mean while they observed
the tendency of his schemes with concern, and with resentment;
but the King's sagacity, the vigilance of his ministers, and the want
of a proper leader, made it dangerous to concert any measures for their
defence, and impofilble to ad with becoming vigour. James and
his counsellors, by a false siep which they took, presented to them,
at length, an advantage which they did not fail to improve.

MOTIVES, which are well known, had prompted Henry VIII.

to disclaim the Pope's authority, and to seize the revenues of the
regular clergy. His system of Reformation satisfied none of his sub-
jeds. Some were enraged because he had proceeded so far, others
murmured because he proceeded no farther; and by his imperious
temper, and alternate persecutions of the zealots for Popery, and
the converts to the Protestant opinions, he was equally formidable
to both. Henry was asiaid that this general diffatisfadion of his
people might encourage his enemies on the Continent to invade his
kingdom. He knew that both the Pope and Emperor courted the
fiiendflip of the King of Scots, and endeavoured to engage him in
an alliance against England. He resolved, therefore, to disappoint
the eflFecs of their negotiations, by entering into a closer union with
his nephew, and for that purpose lent ambafladors into Scotland,
to propose a personal interview with him at York. It was plainly
James's interest to accept of this invitation ; the assistance of lb power-
ful an ally, the high honours which were promiscd him, and the

I 2 liberal

BooK I. liberal fublidies he might have obtained, would have added no lit-
~.--.v tie dignity to his domestic government, and muff have greatly fa-

cilitated the execution of his favourite plan. On the other hand,
a war with E::gland, which he had reason to apprehend, if he re-
jeied Henry's offers of friendship, was inconsistent with all his
views. This would bring him to depend on his barons; an army
could not be raised without their assistance : to call nobles incensed
against their Prince into the field, was to unite his enemies, to make
them sensible of their own strength, and to afford them an oppor-
tunity of revenging their wrongs. James, who was not ignorant
that all there consequences might follow a breach with England,
listened at first to Henry's proposal, and consented to the interview
at York. But the clergy dreaded an union, which must have been
efiablifled on the ruins of the church. Henry had taken great pains
to infuse into his nephew his own sentiments concerning religion,
and had frequently follicited him, by ambassadors, to renounce the
usurped dominion of the Pope, which was no less dishonourable to
Princes, than grievous to their fubjets. The clergy had hitherto,
vwith great address, diverted the King from regarding these follici-
tations. But in an amicable conference, Henry expected, and they
feared that James would yield to his intreaties, or be convinced by
his arguments. They knew that the revenues of the church were
an alluring objeCt to a Prince, who wanted money, and who loved
it; that the pride and ambition ofecclefiaftics raised the indignation of
the nobles; that their indecent lives gave offence to the people; that
the Protestant opinions were spreading fast throughout the nation;
and that an universal defection from the eftablithed church, would
be the confequcnce of giving the smallest degree of encouragement
to these principles. For thcfe reasons, they employed all their credit
with the King, and had recourse to every artifice and insinuation, in

order
8

order to divert him from a journey, which muff have been so fatal BOOK I.
to their interest. They endeavoured to inspire him with fear, by ---v-'
magnifying the danger to which he would expose his person, by
venturing so far into England, without any security but the word
of a Prince, who having violated every thing venerable and sacred
in religion, was to longer to be trusted; and by way of compenfa-
tion for the fums which he might have received from Henry, they
offered an annual donative of 5o,ooo crowns; they promised to
contribute liberally towards carrying on a war with England, and
flattered him with the profped of immense riches, arising from
the forfeiture of persons, who were to be tried and condemned as
heretics. Influenced by these considerations, James broke his agree-
ment with Henry, who, in expectation of meeting him, had already
come to York; and that haughty and impatient Monarch resented
the affront, by declaring war against Scotland. His army was soon
ready to invade the kingdom. James was obliged to have recourse
to the nobles, for the defence of his dominions. At his command,
they assembled their followers; but with the fame dispositions, which
had animated their ancestors in the reign of James III. and with a
full re'solution of imitating their example, by punishing those to whom
they imputed the grievances, of which they had reason to complain
and if the King's Ministers had not been men of abilities, superior
to those of James III. and of considerable interest even with their
enemies, who could not agree among themselves what vicims to
sacrifice, the camp of Fala would have been as remarkable as that
of Lawder, for the daring encroachments of the nobility on the pre-
rogative of the Prince. But though his ministers were saved by this
accident, the nobles had soon another opportunity of discovering to
the King their diflatisfaLDion wvith his government, and their con-
tempt of his authority. Scarcity of provisions, and the rigour of tlhe

t.'atbon,

BooK I. season, having obliged the English army which had invaded Scot-

?-""- ' land, to retire, James imagined that he could attack them, with

great advantage, in their retreat; but the principal barons, with an
obstinacy and disdain, which greatly aggravated their disobedience,
refused to advance a ftep beyond the limits of their own country.
Provoked by this insult to himself, and suspicious oTa new conspiracy
against his ministers, the King inatantly disbanded an army, which
paid so little regard to his orders, and returned abruptly into the
heart of the kingdom.

AN ambitious and high-fpirited Prince could not brook such a

mortifying affront. His hopes of success had been rath, and his
despair upon a disappointment was excessive. He felt himself en-
gaged in an unnecessary war with England, which, instead of yield-
ing him the laurels and triumphs that he expeced, had begun with
such circumstances, as encouraged the insolence of his fubjeds, and
exposed him to the scorn of his enemies. He saw how vain and
ineffectual all his projects to humble the nobles had been, and
that, though in times of peace, a Prince may endeavour to depress
them, they will rife, during war, to their former importance and
dignity. Impatience, resentment, indignation filled his boson by
turns. The violence of these passions altered his temper, and, per-
haps, impaired his reason. He became pensive, fullen, and retired.
lie seemed, through the day, to be swallowed up in profound
meditation, and through the night, he was disturbed with those
visionary terrors, which make impreflion upon a weak understand-
ing only, or a disordered fancy. In order to revive the King's
spirits, an inroad on the western borders was concerted by his
minilters, who prevailed upon the Barons in the neighbouring
provinces, to raise as many troops as were thought necefiary,

and

and to enter the enemy's country. But nothing could remove BOOK I.
the King's aversion for his nobility, or dimiiifh his jealousy of"-" '
their power. He would not even entrust them with the com-
mand of the forces which they had assembled; that was reserved
for Oliver Sinclair his favourite, who no sooner appeared to take
pofleflion of the dignity conferred upon him, than rage and indig-
nation occasioned an universal mutiny in the army. Five hundred
Englifb, who happened to be drawn up in fight, attacked the
Scots in this disorder. Hatred to the King, and contempt of their
General produced an effect, to which there is no parallel in hifto-
ry. They overcame the fear of death, and the love of liberty; and
ten thousand men surrendered to a number so far inferior, without
striking a single blow. No man was desirous of a vidtory, which
would have been acceptable to the King, and to his favourite; few
endeavoured to save themselves by flight; the English had 'the
choice of what prisoners they pleased to take; and almost every
person of difRinRion, who was engaged in the expedition, remained
in their hands. This astonishing event was a new proof to the
King of the general difaffedion of the nobility, and a new disco-
very of his own weakness, and want of authority. Incapable of
bearing these repeated insults, he found himself unable to revenge
them. The deepest melancholy and despair succeeded to the fu-
rious transports of rage, which the sirss account of the rout
of his army occasioned. All the violent pafions, which are
the enemies of life, preyed upon his mind, and walfed and con-
fumed a youthful and vigorous conflitution. Some authors of that
age impute his untimely dcath to poiobn; but the dilea:es of the
mind, when they rife to an height, are often mortal; and the
kInown effeEts of dilappointment, anger, and refentlmcnt upon a fan-
gtIincl and impetuous temper, sufficiently account for his unhappy

fate.

.BOOK I. fate. " lis death (fays Drummond) proveth his mind to have

.--.-, been raised to an high firain, and above mediocrity; he could die,

but could not digest a disaster." Had James survived this misfor-
tune, one of two things muat have happened: either the violence
of his temper would have engaged him openly to attack the
nobles, who would have found in Henry a willing and powerful
protector, and have derived the fame affifiance from him, which
the malecontents, in the succeeding reign, did from his daughter
Elizabeth; in that cafe, a dangerous civil war would have been
the certain consequence. Or, perhaps, necessity might have ob-
liged him to accept of Henry's offers, and be reconciled to his no-
bility. In that event the church would have fallen a sacrifice to
their union, a Reformation, upon Henry's plan, would have been
eflablifhed bylaw, a great part of the temporalities of the church
would have been seized, and the friendship of the King and Barons
would have been cemented by dividing its spoils.

SUCH were the efforts of our Kings, towards reducing the ex-

orbitant power of the nobles. If they were not attended with
success, we must not, for that reason, conclude that they were not
conducted with prudence. Every circumstance seems to have com-
bined against the Crown. Accidental events concurred with politi-
cal causes, in rendering the best concerted measures abortive. The
assassination of one King, the sudden death of another, and the fa-
tal despair of a third, contributed no less than its own natural strength,
to preserve the aristocracy from ruin.

AMIDST these struggles, the influence which our Kings possessed

in their parliaments, is a circumstance seemingly inexplicable, and
which merits particular attention. As these aifemblies were corn-

pored

pored chiefly of the nobles, they, we are apt to imagine, muff have BOOK I.
diltated all their decisions; but, initead of this, every King foundT ,.

The extraor-
them obsequious to his will, and obtained such laws, as he esteem- din;yi, fl,-

enc¢ of thle

ed necessary for extending his authority. All things were conduct-S.:ottin, Ki.
ed there with dispatch and unanimity; and, in none of our hifto-i'PL4r!ia'"C'l
rians, do we find an instance of any opposition formed against the
court in Parliament, or mention of any difficulty in carrying through
the measures which were agreeable to the King. In order to ac-
count for this singular fad, it is necessary to enquire into the origin
and constitution of Parliament.

THE genius of the feudal government, uniform in all its opera- Th reasons

tions, produced the fame effets in small, as in great societies; andofit
the territory of a Baron, was, in miniature, the model of a king-
dom. He pofiefled the right of jurifdiadion, but those, who de-
pended on him, being free men, and not slaves, could be tried by
their Peers only; and, therefore, his vaifals were bound to attend
his courts, and to aflif both in passing and executing his sentences.
When assembled, on these occasions, they etablifhed, by mutual
consent, such regulations, as tended to the welfare of their small
society; and often granted, voluntarily, such supplies to their Supe-
rior, as his necessities required. Change now a tingle name: in
place of Baron, substitute King, and we behold a Parliament in
its first rudiments, and observe the first exertions of those powers,
which its members now possess as Judges, as Legislators, and as dif-
penfers of the public revenues. Suitable to this idea, are the
appellations of the King's Court *, and of the King's Great
Council, by which, Parliaments were anciently distinguished; and
suitable to this, likewise, were the constituent members of which

* Du Cange, Voc. Curia.
VOL. I. K it

BOOK 1. it was composed. In all the feudal kingdoms, those who held of
'-' ---the King in chief were bound, by the condition of their tenure, to

attend and to assist in his courts. Nor was this esteemed a privi-
lege, but a service. It was exaded likewise of Bishops, Abbots,
and the greater ecclefiaftics,who holding vast possessions of the Crown,
were deemed subject to the fame burden. Parliaments did not con-
tinue long in this state. Cities gradually acquired wealth, a confi-
derable share of the public taxes were levied on them, the inhabi-
tants grew into effimation, and being enfranchised by the Sovereign, a
place in Parliament was the consequence of their liberty, and of their
importance. But as it would have been absurd to confer such a
privilege, or to impose such a burden on a whole community, every
burrough was permitted to chufe one or two of its citizens to ap-
pear in the name of the corporation; and the idea of reprefenta-
tion was first introduced in this manner. An innovation, still more
important, naturally followed. The vassals of the Crown were
originally few in number, and extremely powerful; but as it is
impossible to render property fixed and permanent, many of their
poffiefions came gradually, and by various methods of alienation,
to be split and parcelled out into different hands. Hence arose the
diftintion between the Greater and the Le//er Barons. The for-
mer were those who retained their original fiefs undivided, the lat-
ter were the new and less potent vassals of the Crown. Both were
bound, however, to perform all feudal services, and, of consequence,
to give attendance in Parliament. To the lesser Barons, who formed
no inconsiderable body, this was an intolerable grievance. Barons
Sometimes denied their tenure, burroughs renounced their right of
electing, charters were obtained, containing an exemption from at-
tendance; and the anxiety, with which our ancestors endeavoured
to get free from the obligation of fitting in Parliament, is surpassed

by

by that only, with which their poflerity foicit to be admitted there. BOOK I.
In order to accommodate both parties, and, at once, to secure to-"'
the King a sufficient number of members in his great council, and
to save his vassals from an unnecessary burden, an easy expedient
was found out. The obligation to personal attendance was conti-
nued. upon the Greater Barons, from which the Lesser Barons were
exempted, on condition of their electing, in each county, a certain
n,umber of Representatives, to appear in their name. Thus a Par-
liament became compleat in all its members, and was composed of
Lords Spiritual and Temporal, of Knights of the £hires, and of
Burgesses. As many causes contributed to bring government earlier
to perfection in England, than in Scotland; as the rigour of the
feudal inflitutions abated sooner; and its defects were supplied with
greater facility in the one kingdom, than in the other; England
led the way in all these changes, and Burgesses, and Knights of
the shire appeared in the Parliaments of that nation, before they
were heard of in ours. Burgesses were first admitted into the Scot-
tilh Parliaments by Robert Bruce *; and in the preamble to the lawsA. D. 1326.
of Robert III. they are ranked among'the constituent members of
that anfembly. The Lesser Barons were indebted to James I. for a '4:.
statute exempting them from personal attendance, and permitting
them to eled representatives; the exemption was eagerly laid hold
on, but the privilege was so little valued, that, except one or two
instances, it ,ay neglected during 160 years; and James VI. first
obliged them to fend representatives regularly to Parliament -.

A SCOTTISH Parliament, then, consisted anciently of Great Barons,
of Ecclesiastics and a few representatives of burroughs. Nor were

* Abcrcromby, i. 635.
1- Essays on Brit. Antiq. Efn: II. Dalrymp. Hill. of Feud. Piop. ch. 8.

K 2 these

BOOK 1. these divided, as in England, into two houses, but composed one
'-v- assembly, in which the Lord Chancellor presided *. And, in rude

ages, when the science of government was extremely imperfect,
among a martial people, unacquainted with the arts of peace, ftran-
gers to the talents which make a figure in debate, and defpiling them,
Parliaments were not held in the fame estimation as at present; nor
did haughty Barons love those courts, in which they appeared, with
fu.h evident marks of inferiority. Parliaments were often hastily
assembled, and it was, probably, in the King's power, by the man-
ner in which he issued his writs for that purpose, to exclude those
who were averse from his measures. At a time when deeds of
violence were common, and the restraints of law and decency were
little regarded, no man could venture with safety to oppose the King
in his own court. The Great Barons, or Lo;-ds of Parliament,
were extremely few; even so late as the beginning-of the reign of
James VI. -- they amounted only to fifty-three. The Ecclesiastics
equalled them in number, and being devoted implicitly to the Crown,
for reasons which have been already explained, rendered all hopes
of victory in any struggle desperate. Nor were the nobles them-

- In England, the Peers and Commons seem early to have met in separate houses;

and James I. who was fond of imitating the Englilh in all their customs, had pro-
bably an intention of Introducing some considerable diftinf:ion between the Greater
and Lesser Barons in Scotland; at leafs he determined that theie consultations should
not be carried on under the direOtion of the fame President; for by<his law, A. D.
1327. it is provided, " that out of the Commillioners of all the (hires shall be cho-
fen a wife and expert man, called the Common Speaker of the Parliament, who
flall propose all and sundry needs and causes, pertaining to the Commons in the
Parliament or general council." No such Speaker, it would seem, was ever cho-
fen; and by a subsequent law the Chancellor was declared perpetual President of
Parliament.

And. Coll. v, i. pref. 40.

selves

selves so anxious, as might be imagined, to prevent ats of Parlla- BOOK I.
nent favourable to the royal prerogative; conscious of their own --"
strength, and of the King's inability to carry these aEts into execution
without their concurrence, they trusted either to elude, or to contemn
them; and the tlatute revoking the King's property, and annexing alie-
nated jurifditions to the Crown, repeated in every reign, and vio-
lated and despised as often, is a flanding proof of the impotence of
laws, when opposed to power. So many concurring causes are sus-
ficient, perhaps, to account for the ascendant, which our Kings
acquired in Parliament. But without having recourse to any of
these, a single circumstance, peculiar to the conititution of the
Scottish Parliament, the mentioning of which we have hitherto
avoided, will abundantly explain this fad, seemingly so repugnant
to all our reasonings concerning the weakness of the King, and the
power of the nobles.

As far back, as our records enable us to trace the conflitution of

our Parliaments, we find a committee, distinguished by the name
of Lords of Articles. It was their business to prepare, and to di-
gest all matters which were to be laid before the Parliament;
every motion for a new law was fi.rst made there, and approved or
rejected by them at pleasure; what they approved was formed into
a bill, and presented to Parliament; what they rejected could not
be introduced into the house. This committee owed the extraordi-
nary powers vested in it, to the military genius of the ancient nobles;
too impatient to submit to the drudgery of civil bufincfs, too impe-
tuous to observe the forms, or to enter into the details neccffTry in
conducting it, they were glad to lay that burdcn upon a finall
number, while they themselves had no other labour than simply
to give, or to refuse their fandion to the bills, which were prc-
sented to them. The Lords of Articles, then, not only dircaed

8 the

BOOK I. the whole proceedings of Parliament, but pofeffed a negative be-

,- , fore debate. That committee was chosen and constituted in such

a manner, as put this valuable privilege entirely in the King's hands.
It is extremely probable, that the King once had the sole right of
nominating the Lords of Articles *. They came afterwards to be
elected by the Parliament, and consisted of an equal number out of
each estate, and most commonly of eight Temporal and eight Spi-
ritual Lords, of eight representatives of burroughs, and of the eight
great officers of the Crown. Of this body, the eight ecclesiastics,
together with the officers of the Crown, were entirely at the King's
devotion, and it was scarce possible that the choice could fall on such
Temporal Lords and Burgefies as would unite in opposition to his mea-
fures. Capable either of influencing their election, or of gaining them
when elected, the King commonly found the Lords of Articles no
less obsequious to his will, than his own privy council, and by
means of his authority with them, he could put a negative upon

* IT appears from authentic records, that a Parliament was appointed to be

held March 12, 1566, and that the Lords of Articles were chosen, and met on the
7th, five days before the assembling of Parliament. If they could be regularly
elected so long before the meeting of Parliament, it is natural to conclude, that the
Prince alone polfeffed the right of eleting them. There are two different accounts
of the manner of their ele&ion at that time, one by Mary herself, in a letter to the
Archbishop of Glasgow, "' We, accompanied with our nobility for the time, past

to the Tolbuith of Edinburgh, for holding of our Parliament on the 7th day of

" this instant, and eleted the Lords Articulars." If we explain these words, ac-
cording to ftriet Grammar, we must conclude that the Queen herself eleted them.
It is, however, more probable that Mary meant to fay, that the nobles then present
with her, viz. her privy counsellors, and others, elected the Lords of Articles.
Keith's His. of Scotland, p. 331. The other account is Lord Ruthven's, who ex-
prefly affirms that the Queen herself ele&ed them. Keith's Append. 126. Whether'
we embrace the one or the other of these opinions, is of no consequence. If the privy
counsellors and nobles attending the court had a right to elet the Lords of Articles, it
was equally advantageous for the Crown, as if the Prince had had the sole nomina-
tion of them. 3

his

his Parliament before debate, as well as after it; and what may BOOK I.
seem altogether incredible, the mofl limited Prince in Europe ac-
tually poffefled, in one inltance, a prerogative which the mofl abfo-
lute could never attain. *

To this account of the internal conflitution of Scotland, it willState of Eu-

rope at the be-

not be improper to add a view of the political slate of Europe atginning ofthe
that period, where the following history commences. A thdrough 6th century.

know-

* HAVING deduced the hiflory of the committee of Lords of Articles, as low as

the subje&t of this preliminary book required, it may be agreeable, perhaps, to some
of my readers, to know the subsequent variations in this singular inltitution, and the
political use which our Kings made of these. When parliaments became more nu-
merous, and more considerable by the admilton of the representatives of the Lesser
Barons, the preserving their influence over the Lords of Articles became, likewise,
an obje&t of greater importance to our Kings. James VI. on pretence, that the
Lords of Articles could not find leisure to confider the great multitude of affairs
laid before them, obtained an at, appointing four persons to be named out of each
estate, who flould meet twenty days before the commencement of Parliament -,
to receive all supplications, &c. and rejeting what they thought frivolous, should
engross in a book what they thought worthy the attention of the Lords of Arti-
cles. No provision is made in the a&t for the choice of this felea body, and the
King would, of course, have claimed that privilege. In I633, when Charles I.
was beginning to introduce those innovations which gave so much offence to the
nation, he dreaded the opposition of his Parliament, and in order to prevent that,
an artifice was made use of to secure the Lords of Articles for the Crown. The
Temporal Peers were appointed to chufe eight Bilhops and the Bilhops eight Peers,
there sixteen met together, and elected eight Knights of the Ihire, and eight Bur-
geffes, and to these the crown officers were added as usual. If we can only suppose
eight persons of so numerous a body, as the Peers of Scotland Were become by
that time, attached to the court, there, it is obvious, would be t-.e men whom
the Bishops would chuf-, and of consequence, the whole Lords of Articles were

*t Ac. 222. P. 1594.

the

!. knowledge of that genera-fym, of which every kingdom in Eu-
.-. rope forms a part, is not leTs requisite towards understanding the

history of a nation, than an acquaintance with its peculiar govern-
ment and laws. The latter may enable us to comprehend domestic
occurrences and revolutions, but without the former, foreign tranf-
adions tufit be altogether mysterious and unintelligible. By attend-
ing to this, many dark passages in our history may be placed in a.
clear light; and where the bulk of hiforians have seen only the es-
fe&, we may be able to discover the cause.

THE subversion of the feudal government in France, and its de-

clenfion in the neighbouring kingdoms, occasioned a remarkable
alteration in the political slate of Europe. Kingdoms, which were
inconfiderab'e when broken, and parcelled out among nobles, ac-
quired firnnefs and strength, by being united into a regular mo-
narchy. Kings became conscious of their own power and im-
portance. They meditated schemes of conquelf, and engaged in
nwars at a distance. Numerous armies were raised, and great taxes
imposed for their fubfifence. Considerable bodies of infantry were
kept in conflant pay; that service grew to be honourable; and ca-
valry, in which the strength of European armies had hitherto con-

the tools and creatures of the King. This pracAice, so inconsistent with liberty, was
abolished during the civil war; and the statute of James VI. was repealed. After
the Refloration, Parliaments became more servile than ever. What was only a tem-
porary device, in the reign of Charles I. was, then, converted into a tlanding law.
" For my part, fays the author from whom I have borrowed many of these particu-
' lars, I (hould have thought it less criminal in our ReRoration Parliament, to have
, openly bestowed upon the King a negative before debate, than, in such an un-
"derhand artificial manner, to betray their constituents, and the nation." EfTays
on lrit. Antiq. 55. It is probable, however, sion a letter of Randolph's to Cecil
to. Aug. 150o, printed in the appendix, that this Parliament had some appearance
of antient precedent to juflify their unworthy condut.

fifled,

sifted, though proper enough for the ihort and voluntary excur- BOOK IL
sions of Barons who served at their own expence, were found to be - -
unfit either for making, or defending any important conquest.

IT was in Italy, that the powerful monarchs of France and Spain

and Germany first appeared to make a trial of their new firength.
The division of that country into so many small itates, the luxury
of the people, and their effeminate aversion to arms, invited their
more martial neighbours to an easy prey. The Italians, who had
been accuflomed to mock battles only, and to decide their quarrels
by innocent and bloodless victories, were astonished at the fight of
real war; and as they could not resist the torrent, they suffered it
to take its course, and to spend its rage. Intrigue and policy sup-
plied the want of strength; and necefity and felf-prefervation led
that ingenious people to the great secret of modern politics, by teach-
ing them how to balance the power of one Prince, by throwing
that of another into the opposite scale. By this happy device, the
liberty of Italy was long preserved. The scales were poised by very
skilful. hands; the smallest variations were attended to, and no
Prince was allowed to retain any superiority, that could be dan-
gerous.

A SYSTEM of conduA, pursued with so much success in Italy,

was not long confined to that country of political refinement. The
maxim of preserving a balance of power is founded so much upon
obvious reasoning, and the situation of Europe rendered it so necef-
fary, that it loon became a matter of chief attention to all wife
politicians. Every ftep any Prince took was observed by all his
neighbours. AmbafTadors, a kind of honourable spies, authorized
by the mutual jealousy of Kings, residcd almofl constantly at every

VOL. L L dif-

BooK I. different court, and had it in charge to watch all its motions. Dan-

t-v gers were foreseen at a greater distance, and prevented with more

ease. Confederacies were formed to humble any power which rose
above its due proportion. Revenge or felf-defence were no longer
the only causes of hostility, it became common to take arms out of
policy; and war, both in its commencement, and in its operations,
was more an exercise of the judgment, than of the passions of men.
Almost every war in Europe became general, and the most incon-
fiderable flates acquired importance, because they could add weight
to either scale.

FRANCIS I. who mounted the throne of France in the year g rS,,

and Charles V. who obtained the Imperial crown in the year 15 19,
divided between them the strength and affections of all Europe..
Their perpetual enmity was not owing either to personal jealousy,
or to the caprice of private passion, but was founded so much in
nature and true policy, that it subsisted between their poflerity for
several ages; and, notwithstanding their present accidental and un-
natural union, must again revive. Charles succeeded to all the domi-
nions of the house of Auitria. No family had ever gained so much:
by wife and fortunate marriages. By acquisitions of this kind the
Aufirian Princes rose, in a fhorttime, from obscure Counts of Hapf-
bourg, to be Archdukes of Aufria, and Kings of Bohemia, and
were in possession of the imperial dignity by a fort of hereditary
right. Betides there territories in Germany, Charles was heir
to the crown of Spain, and to all the dominions which belonged to,
the house of Burgundy. The Burgundian provinces engrossed, at
that time, the riches and commerce of one half of Europe ; and he
drew from them, on many occasions, those immense fums, which
no people without trade and liberty are able to contribute. Spain

furnished

4

furnilhed him a gallant and hardy infantry, to whose discipline he BOOK I.
was indebted for all his conquests. And at the fame time, by the
discovery of the new world, a vein of wealth was opened to him,
which all the extravagance of ambition could not exhaust. These
advantages rendered Charles the first Prince in Europe; but he
wished to be more, and openly aspired to universal monarchy. His
genius was of that kind which ripens slowly, and lies long con-
cealed; but it grew up without observation, to an unexpeced height
and vigour. He possessed, in an eminent degree, the characderiitic
virtues of all the different races of Princes to whom he was allied.
In forming' his schemes, he discovered all the subtlety and pene-
tration of Ferdinand his grandfather; he pursued them with that
obstinate and inflexible perseverance which has ever been peculiar
to the Austrian blood; and in executing them, he could employ
the magnanimity and boldness of his Burgundian Ancestors. His
abilities were equal to his power, and neither of them would have
been inferior to his designs, had not Providence, in pity to man-
kind, and in order to preserve them from the worfl of all evils,
Universal Monarchy, raised up Francis I. to defend the liberty of
Europe. His dominions were less extensive, but more united than
the Emperor's. His fubjeds were numerous, acive, and warlike,
lovers of glory, and lovers of their King. To Charles power was
the only objet of desire, and he pursued it with an unwearied and
joyless industry. Francis could mingle pleasure and elegance with
his ambition, and though he neglected some advantages, which a
more phlegmatic or more frugal Prince would have improved, an
active and intrepid courage supplied all his defects, and checked or
defeated many of the Emperor's designs.

THE reft of Europe observed all the motions of there mighty
rivals, with a jealous attention. On the one fide, the Italians saw

L 2 the

BOOK I. the danger which threatened Christendom, and in order to avert
L--- it, had recourse to the expedient, which they had often employed.

with success. They endeavoured to divide the power of the two,
contending Monarchs into equal scales, and by the union of feve-
ral small states, to counterpoise him, whose power became too great..
But, what they concerted with much wisdom, they were able tor
execute with little vigour; and intrigue and refinement were feeble
fences againit the incroachments of military power..

ON the other fide, Henry VIII. of England held the balance

with less delicacy, but with a stronger hand. He was the third
Prince of the age in dignity and in power; and the advantageous
situation of his dominions, his domestic tranquillity, his immense
wealth, and absolute authority rendered him the natural guardian,
of the liberty of Europe. Each of the rivals courted him with'
emulation; he knew it to be his interest to keep the balance even,
and to restrain both, by not joining intirely with either of them.
But he was seldom able to reduce his ideas to practice; he was go-
verned by caprice more than by principle; and the paflions of the
Man were an overmatch for the maxims of the King. Vanity and
efenltment were the great springs of all his undertakings, and his
neighbours easily found the way, by touching these, to force him
upon many rafl and inconsistent enterpriies. His reign was a.per-
petual series of blunders in politics, and while he cfteemed himself
the wisest Prince in Europe, he was a constant dupe to thole, who
found it necelihr'y, and could submit to flatter him.

IN this situation of Europe, Scotland, which had hitherto walked
ecr ftrcngth in the quarrels between France and England, emerged
ftom her obicurity, took her fiation in the fyflcl, and bcgai to

liav

have tome influence up6n the fate of difiant nations. Her assistance BOOK I.
was, frequently, of consequence to the contending parties, and the --
balance was often fonicely adjufRed, that it was in her power to make
itlean toeither fide. The partaffignedher, at this jundture, was to di-
vert Henry from carrying his arms into the continent.. That Prince,
having routed the French at Guinegat, and invested Terouenne,.
France attempted to divide his forces, by engaging James IV.
in that unhappy expedition which ended with his life. For the
fame reason, Francis encouraged and assisted the Duke of Albany,
to ruin the families of Angus and Home, which were in the in-
terest of England, and would willingly have persuaded the Scots
to revenge the death of their King, and to enter into a new war
with that kingdom. Henry and -Francis having united not long
after against the Emperor, it was the interest of both Kings, that
the Scots should continue inacive; and a long tranquillity was the
effect of their union. Charles endeavoured to break this, and to.
embarrass Henry by another inroad of the Scots. For this end, he
made great advances to James V. flattering the vanity of the young
Monarch, by elecing him a Knight of the Golden Fleece, and by
offering him a match in the imperial family; while, in return for
there empty honours, he demanded of him to renounce his alliance
with France, and to declare war againfl England.. But James, who.
had much to lose,. and who could gain little by embracing the Em-
peror's proposals, rejected them with decency, and keeping firm
to his ancient allies, left Henry at full liberty to at upon the con-
tinent with his whole tirength..

HENRY himself beg.an his reign, by iinitating the example of

his anceflors with regard to Scotland. He held its power in such ex-
nreme contempt, that he was at no pains to gain its riicndfhip; but

01.

BooK I. on the contrary, he irritated the whole nation, by reviving the an-

t iquated pretensions of the crown of England to the sovereignty
!over Scotland, But his own experience, and the example of his
,enemies, gave him a higher idea of its importance. It was impof-
fible to defend an open and extensive frontier, against the incur-
rions of an active and martial people. During any war on the con-
tinlent this obliged him to divide the strength of his kingdom. It
was necessary to maintain a kind of army of observation in the
north of England; and after all precautions, the Scottish borderers,
who were superior to all mankind in the pra&cice of irregular war,
often made successful inroads, and spread terror and desolation over
many counties. He fell, at lalt, upon the true secret of policy,
with refped to Scotland, which his predecessors had too little pene-
tration to discover, or too much pride to employ. The situation
of the country, and the bravery of the people made the conquest
of Scotland impofible; but the national poverty, and the violence
of faction rendered it an easy matter to divide, and to govern it. He
abandoned, therefore, the former design, and resolved to employ
the utmost address in executing the latter. It had not yet become
honourable for one Prince to receive pay from another, under the
more decent name of a fibfidy. But, in all ages, the fame ar-
guments have been good in courts, and of weight with ministers,
facious leaders, and favourites. What were the arguments, by
which Henry brought over so many to his interest during the mi-
nority of James V. we know by the original warrants tfill extant*,
for remitting considerable fums into Scotland. By a proper difiri-
bution of these, many persons of note were gained to his party,
and a faction which held secret correspondence with England,
and received all its directions from thence, appears hencefor-

B urn. Hist. Rcf. v. i. p. 7.

ward

ward: in all our domestic contests. In the sequel of the history, BOOK I.
we shall find Henry labouring to extend his influence in Scotland.
His successors adopted the fame plan, and improved upon it. The
affairs of the two kingdoms became interwoven, and their interests
were often the fame. Elizabeth divided her attention almost equal-
ly between them, and the authority, which ihe inherited in the one,.
was not greater than that, which fle acquired in the other.

T HIE

# THE HISTORY OF SCOTLAND. BOOK II.

THE
HISTORY

O F
SCOTLAND.

BOOK II.
M ARY Queen of Scots was born a few days before the BooK II.

death of her father James V. The situation in which he Dec.4,54

left the kingdom alarmed all ranks of men, with the profped of aBirdthaofMiar
turbulent and difaitrous reign. A war against England had been kingdom.
undertaken without necessity, and carried on without success. Many
persons of the first rank had fallen into the hands of the English, in
the unfortunate rout near the firth of Solway, and were still prison-
ers at London. Among the reft of the nobles there was little union,
either in their views, or in their affections; and the religious dif-
putes, occasioned by the opinions of the reformers, growing every
day more violent, added to the rage of those factions which are na-
tural to a form of government nearly ariftocratical.

VOL. I. M THE

BOOK Ir. THE government of a Queen was unknown in Scotland, and did
~'-----J not imprint much reverence in the minds of a martial people. The

government of an infant Queen was still more destitute of real au-
thority; and the profpe~ of a long and feeble minority invited to.
faction by the hope of impunity. James had not even provided;
the common remedy against the disorders of a minority, by com-
mitting to proper persons the care of his daughter's education, and
the adminifitation of affairs in her name. Though he saw the
clouds gathering, and foretold that they would quickly burfi into a:
itorm,. he was so little able to disperse them, or to defend his daugh-
ter and kingdom against the imminent calamities, that, in mere de-
Ipair, he abandoned them both to the mercy of fortune, and left
open to every pretender, the office of Regent, which he could not
fix to his own fatisfadion.
Pretenrfon of CARDINAL Beatoun, who had for many years been confidered as:

rdinal Bea-prim minister, was the first who claimed that high dignity; and,

tcunto there- p Ie sii w ta
gency. in support of his pretensions, he produced a testament *, which he

himself had forged in the name of the late King; and without any
other right, instantly assumed the title of Regent. He hoped, byr
the affiflance of the clergy, the countenance of France, the con-
nivance of the Queen Dowager, and the support of the whole Po-
pith faction, to hold by force, what he had seized on by fraud.
But Beatoun had enjoyed power too long to be a favourite of the:
nation. Those among the nobles who wished for a Reformation,
in religion dreaded his severity, and others confidered the eleva-
tion of a Churchman to the highest office in the kingdom as a de-
pression of themselves. At their instigation, James Hamilton Earl

* Sadler's. Lett. x 6x.

of

of Arran, and next heir to the Queen, rouzed himself from his BOOK ITI
inactivity, and was prevailed on to aspire to that flation, to which -
proximity of blood gave him a natural title. The nobles, who were Earl of Arran
assembled for that purpose, unanimously conferred on him the office chosen Re-
;of regent; and the public voice applauded their choice.

No two men ever differed more widely in disposition and charac- Charaaer of

,ter, than the Earl of Arran and Cardinal Beatoun. The Cardinal Beatoun.
was by nature of immoderate ambition; by long experience he had
acquired address and refinement; and insolence grew upon him from
continual success. His high station in the church placed him in
the way of great employments; his abilities were equal to the great-
elt of there; nor did he reckon any of them to be above his merit.
As his own eminence was founded upon the power of the church
of Rome, he was a zealous defender of that fuperflition, and for
the fame reason an avowed enemy to the doctrine of the Reformers,
Political motives alone determined him to support the one, or to op-
pose the other. His early application to public business kept hitn
unacquainted with the learning and controversies of the age; he gave
judgment, however, upon all the points in dispute, with a precipi-
tancy, violence, and rigour, which cotemporary historian.s mention
with indignation.

THE character of the Earl of Arran was, in almost every thing, Of Arrax.

the reverse of the other's. He was neither infeced with ambition,
nor inclined to cruelty: The love of ease extinguithed the former,
the softness of his temper preserved him from the latter. Timidity
and irresolution were his predominant failings, the one occasioned
by his natural constitution, and the other arising from a conscious-

M 2 ness

BOOK II. ness that his abilities were not equal to his station. With these dif-

positions he might have enjoyed and adorned private life; but his
public condut was without courage, or dignity, or consistence.
The perpetual slave of his own fears, and, by consequence, the
perpetual tool of thoSe, who found their advantage in pradifing
upon them. But as no other person could be set in opposition to the
Cardinal, with any probability of success, the nation declared in his
favour with so general a content, that the artifices of his rival could
not withstand its united strength.

Schemes of THE Earl of Arran had scarce taken poffleiion of his new dig-
HenrY VII. nitv, when a negociation was opened with England, which gave
with regard to
Scotland. birth to events of the most fatal consequence to himself, and to

the kingdom. After the death of James, Henry VIII. was no longer
afraid of any interruption from Scotland to his designs against France;
and immediately conceived hopes of rendering this security perpe-
tual, by the marriage of Edward his only son with the young Qeen
of Scots. He communicated his intention to the prisoners taken
at Solway, and prevailed on them to favour it, by the promise of
liberty, as the reward of their success. In the mean time, he per-
mitted them to return into Scotland, that, by their pretence in the
Parliament which the Regent had called, they might be the better
able to persuade their countrymen to fall in with his proposals. A
cause, entrusted to such able and zealous advocates, could not well
miss of coming to an happy issue. All those who feared the Car-
dinal, or who desired a change in religion, were fond of an al-
liance, which afforded protection to the docrine which they had
embraced, as well as to their own persons, against the rage of that
powerful and haughty Prelate.

BUT

BuT Henry's rough and impatient temper was incapable of BooKII.

improving this favourable conjuncture. Address and delicacy in 1 conduaed
managing the fears, and follies, and intereits of men, were arts with by himself.
which he- was utterly unacquainted. The designs he had formed
upon Scotland were obvious from the marriage which he had pro-
posed, and he had not dexterity enough to disguise, or to conceal
them. Inlead of yielding to the fear orjealoufy of the Scots, what
time and accidents would soon have enabled him to recover, he, at
once, alarmed and irritated the whole nation, by demanding that the
Queen's person should be immediately committed to his custody,
and that the government of the kingdom should be put in his hands
during her minority.

HENRY could not have prescribed more ignominious conditions to Odious to the
a conquered people, and it is no wonder they were rejeaed, with Scots, though

·~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~

W h

- m1in part accept-

indignation, by men who scorned to purchase an alliance with ed by them.
England, at the price of their own liberty.. The parliament of
Scotland, however,. influenced by the nobles who returned from
England; desirous of peace with. that Kingdom; and delivered, by
the Regent's confining the Cardinal as a prisoner, from any oppo- Marl,,4"
fition to which he might have given rife.; consented to a treaty of
marriage and of union, but upon somewhat a more equal foot-
ing. And after some dark and unsuccessful intrigues, by which his
ambassador endeavoured to carry off the young Queen and Cardinal
Beatoun into England, Henry was obliged to give up his own pro-
pofals, and to accept of theirs. On his fide, he consented that the
Queen should continue to reside in. Scotland, and himself remain
excluded from any (hare in the government of the kingdom. On
the other hand, the Scots agreed to fend their Sovereign into
England as soon as she attained the full age of ten years, and in-

flantly
4

Bo3K II. ftantly to deliver fix persons, of the first rank, to be kept as hof-
I,-*- tages by Henry till the Queen's arrival at his court.

Favoured by THE treaty was fill so manifestly of advantage to England, that
the Regent. the Regent lo1s much of the public confidence by consenting to it.

The Cardinal, who had now recovered liberty, watched for such

Oppoed by an opportunity of regaining credit, and he did not fail to cultivate
the Cardinal. and improve this to the utmoit. He complained loudly, that the

Regent had betrayed the kingdom to its most inveterate enemies,
and sacrificed its honour to his own ambition. He foretold the
extincion of true catholic religion, under the tyranny of an excom-
municated heretic; but above all, he lamented to fee an ancient
kingdom consenting to its own slavery, descending into the igno-
minious station of a dependent province; and, in one hour, the
weakness or treachery of a single man Surrendering every thing, for
which the Scottish nation had struggled and fought during so many
ages. These remonfirances of the Cardinal were not without effet.
They were addressed to prejudices and passions which are deeply
rooted in the human heart. The fame hatred 'to the ancient ene-
mies of their country, the fame jealousy of national honour, and
pride of independence, which, at the beginning of the present cen-
tury, went near to prevent the Scots from consenting to an union
twith England,. upon terms of great advantage, did, at that time,
induce the whole nation to declare against the alliance which had
been concluded. In the one period, an hundred and fifty years
of peace between the two nations, the habit of being fubjeEed to
the fame King, and governed by the fame maxims, had considerably
abated old animofities, and prepared both people for incorporating.
In the other, injuries were still fresh, the wounds on both fides were
.open, and, in the warmth of resentment, it was natural to seek re-

vcnge,

2

yenge, and to be averse from reconcilement. At the Union in BOOK II.
1707, the wisdom of parliament despised the groundless murmurs
occasioned by antiquated prejudices; but in 1543, the complaints
of the nation were better founded,. and urged with a zeal and una-
nimity, which it is neither juss, nor safe to disregard. The rage
of the people rose to such an height, that the English ambassador
could hardly be prote&ed from their insults. The clergy contri-
buted a great fum towards preserving the church from the dominion
of a Prince, whose system of Reformation was so fatal to their power.
The nobles, after having mortified the Cardinal, so lately, in such
a cruel manner, were, now, ready to applaud and to second him,
as the defender of the honour and liberty of his country,

ARGYLL, Huntly, Both-well, and other powerful Barons, openly He excites aT-

declared against the alliance with England. By their afiltlance, the nation ahainss
Cardinat seized on the persons of the young Qteen and her mother, the Englil.
and added to his party the splendor and authority of the royal name *'
He received, at the fame time, a more real acceflion to his strength,
by.,the arrival of Matthew Stewart Earl of Lennox, whose return
from France he had earnefily follicited. This young nobleman
was the hereditary enemy of the house of Hamilton. He had ma-
ny claims upon the Regent, and pretended a right to exclude him,
not only from succeeding to the Crown, but to deprive him of the
poffeflion of his private fortune. The Cardinal flattered his vanity,
with the profpea of marrying the Queen Dowager, and asseted to
treat him with so much refped, that the Regent became jealous of
him as a rival in power..

THIS suspicion was artfully heightened by the Abbot of Paisley,
who returned into Scotland omen time before the Earl of Lennox,

* Keith's Hill, of Scotl. 30.

and

*Bo OK II. and' aded in concert with the Cardinal. He was a natural brother

'-- - 6of the Regent, with whom he had great credit; a warm partizan

·of France, and a zealous defender of the established Religion. He
took hold of the Regent by the proper handle, and endeavoured to
*bring about a change in his sentiments, by working upon his fears.
The desertion of the nobility, the difaffedion of the clergy, and the
rage of the people; the resentment of France, the power of the
Cardinal, and the pretensions of Lennox, were all represented with
aggravation, and with their molf threatning afpest.

MEAN while, the day appointed for the ratification of the treaty

with England, and the delivery of the hostages approached, and
the Regent was still undetermined in his own mind. He aaed to
the last, with that irresolution and inconsistence, which is peculiar
to weak men, when they are so unfortunate as to have the chief
part in the conduct of difficult affairs. On the 25th of August, he
ratified the treaty with Henry, and proclaimed the Cardinal, who
still continued to oppose it, an enemy to his country. On the 3d

Obliges the of September, he secretly withdrew from Edinburgh, met with
Regent to re- the Cardinal at Callender, renounced the friendship of England, and
nounce the
friendship declared for the interests of France e.
with England.

HENRY, in order to gain the Regent, had not spared the most

magnificent promises. He had offered to give the Princess Eliza-
beth in marriage to his eldest son, and to constitute him King of
that part of Scotland, which lies beyond the river Forth. But
upon finding his interest in the kingdom to be less considerable
than he had imagined, the English monarch began to treat him

Sadler, 339, 356.

with

with little refpec:. The young Q.een was now in the custody of BooK II.
her enemies, who grew every day more numerous and more po-
pular. They formed a separate court at Stirling, and threatened to
elect another Regent. The French King was ready to afford them
his protection, and the nation, out of hatred to the English, would
have united in their defence. In this situation, the Regent could
not retain his authority, without a sudden change of his measures;
and though he endeavoured, by ratifying the treaty, to preserve
the appearances of good faith with England, he was obliged to
throw himself into the arms of the party, which adhered to
France.

SOON after this sudden revolution in his political principles, theAnd to perse-
Regent changed his sentiments concerning religion. The spirt OfOut he Re-

ormers.

controversy was then new and warm; books of that kind were eagerly
read by men of every rank; the love of novelty, or the conviction
of truth, had led the Regent to express great esteem for the writings
of the Reformers; and having been powerfully supported by those
who had embraced their opinions, he, in order to gratify them, enter-
tained, in his own family, two of the moit noted preachers of the Pro-
teflant doarine, and in his firfl Parliament, consented to an ad, by
which the laity were permitted to read the scriptures in a language
which they underflood. Truth needed only a fair hearing to be an
over-match for error. Absurdities, which had long imposed on the
ignorance and credulity of mankind, were detected and exposed to
public ridicule; and under the countenance of the Regent, the Refor-
mation made great advances. The Cardinal observed its progress
with concern, and was at the utmost pains to obftrud it. He re-
prelented to the regent his great imprudence in giving encourage-
nent to opinions, to favourable to Lennox's pretentions; that his

Vo r. I. N own

BooK II. own legitimacy depended upon the validity of a sentence of di-
i.-.--J vorce, founded on the Pope's authority; and that by ifiutring it to

be called in quei'ion, le weakened his own title to the fuccefllon,
and furnifted his rival with the only argument, by which it could
be rendered doubtful *. These insinuations made a deep impref-
sion on the Regent's timorous spirit, who, at the profped of such
imaginary dangers, was as much startled as the Cardinal could have
wished; and his zeal for the Proteflant religion was not long proof
againit his fear. He publickly abjured the do6trine of the Reformers
in the Franciscan church at Stirling, and declared not only for the
political, but the religious opinions of his new confidents.

THE Proteflant dotrine did not susser much by his apoflacy.

It had already taken so deep root in the kingdom, that no difcou-
ragement or severity could extirpate it. The Regent indeed con-
sented to every thing, that the zeal of the Cardinal thought necef-
fary for the preservation of the established religion. The Reform-
ers were persecuted with all the cruelty, which fuperflition inspires.
into a barbarous people. Many were condemned to that dreadful
death which the church has appointed for the punifllment- of its
enemies; but they suffered with a spirit so nearly resembling the pa-
tience and fortitude of the primitive martyrs, that more were con-
verted, than terrified by those fpectacl]s.

* The pretensions of the Earl of Lennox to the fuccefflon were thus founded.

Mary, the daughter of James II. was married to James Lord Hamilton. Elizabeth,
a daughter of that marriage, was the wife of Matthew Earl of Lennox, and the
present Earl was her grandson. The Regent was likewifc the grandson of the Prin-
cess Mary. But his father having married Jnnct Beaton the Regent's mother, after
he had obtained a divorce from Elizabeth Home his former wife, Lennox pretended
that the sentence of divorce was unjufi, and that the Regent, being born while Eli-
zabeth Home was flill alive, ought to be confidercd as illegitimate. Crawf. Peer. 192.

TII

4

THIE Cardinal, however, was now in poffefflon of every thing BoOK II.

hi: ambition could desire; and exercised all the authority of a Re-Beatoun en-
gent, without the envy of the name. He had nothing to fear fromg'rofes the

s chief direction

the Earl of Arran, who having by his incoiRftancy forfeited theofaffairs.
public eiteem, was contemned by one half of the nation, and little
trusted by the other. The pretensions of the Earl of Lennox were
the only thing which remained to embarrass him. He had very
successfully made u'se of that nobleman to work upon the Regent's
jealousy and fear, but as he no longer flood in need of such an
instrument, he was willing to get rid of him with decency. Len-
nox soon began to fufpeA his intention; promises, flattery, and
refped were the only returns he had hitherto received for fubfran-
tial services; but at last the Cardinal's artifices could no longer be
concealed, and Lennox, inflead of attaining power and dignity
hirnfelf, saw that he had been employed only to procure these for
another. Resentment and disappointed ambition pushed him on
to seek revenge on that cunning prelate, who, by sacrificing his
interest, had so ungenerously purchased the Earl of Arran's
friendship. He withdrew, for that reason, from court, and de-
clared for the party at enmity with the Cardinal, which, with
open arms, received a convert, who added so much lustre to their
cause.

TIIE two factions which divided the kingdom were fill the fame,

without any alterations in their views or principles; but, by one of
those strange revolutions, which were frequent in that age, they had,
in the courSe of a few weeks, changed their leaders. The Regent
was at the head of the partizans of France and the defenders of
Popery, and Lennox in the fame station with the advocates for the
English alliance, and a reformation in religion. The one klboured

N 2 to

BOOK II. to pull down his own work, which the other upheld with the fane

hand, that had hitherto endeavoured to destroy it.

LENNOX'S impatience for revenge got the start of the Cardinal's

activity. He surprised both him and the Regent by a sudden march
to Edinburgh with a numerous army ; and might easily have crushed
them, before they could prepare for their defence. But he was
weak enough to liften to proposals for an accommodation; and the
Cardinal amused him so artfully, and spun out the treaty to such
a length, that the greater part of the Earl's troops, who served, as
is usual wherever the feudal institutions prevail, at their own ex-
pence, deserted him ; and in concluding a peace, inflead of giving
the law, he was obliged to receive it. A second attempt to retrieve
his affairs ended yet more unfortunately. One body of his troops
was cut to pieces, and the reft dispersed ; and with the poor remains
of a ruined party, he mutt either have submitted to the conqueror,
or have fled out of the kingdom, if the approach of an English
army had not brought him a short relief.

henry in- HENRY was not of a temper to bear tamely the indignity, with
J^tI'd SCt which he had been treated, both by the Regent and Parliament of

Scotland, who, at the time when they renounced their alliance
with him, had entered into a new and ftricer confederacy with
France. The rigour of the season retarded for ofme time the exe-
cution of his vengeance. But in the spring, a considerable body
of infantry which was defined for France, received orders to fail
for Scotland, and a proper number of cavalry was appointed to join
it by land. The Regent and Cardinal little expected such a visit.
They had trusted that the French war would find employment
for all Henry's forces; and, from an unaccountable security, were

wholly

wholly unprovided for the defence of the kingdom. The Earl of BOOK II.
Hartford, a leader fatal to the Scots in that age, commanded this.'- '
army, and landed it, without opposition, a few miles above Leith.May 3, 1^,4.
He was quickly master of that place; and marching directly to
Edinburgh, entered it with the fame ease. After plundering the.
adjacent country, the richest, and most open in, Scotland, he set on.
fire both these towns; and upon the approach of some troops ga-
thered together by the Regent, put his booty on board the fleet, and
with his land forces retired safely to the Englifl borders, delivering
the kingdom, in a few days, fiom the terror of an invasion, con-
certed with little policy, carried on at great expence, and attended.
with no advantage. If Henry aimed at the conquest of Scotland,
he gained nothing by this expedition; if the marriage he had pro-
posed, was still in his view, he loft a great deal. Such a rough court-
ship, as the Earl of Huntly humouroufly called it, difgufted'the whole
nation; their aversion for the match grew into abhorrence; and
exasperated by so many indignities, the Scots were never, at any
period, more attached to France, or more alienated from Eng-
land.

THE Earl of Lennox alone, in spite to the Regent and French

King, continued a correspondence with England, which ruined his
own interest, without promoting Henry's. Many of his own vas-
fals preferring their duty to their country before their affecion to
him, refused to concur in any design to favour the public enemy.
And after a few feeble and unfucccfsful attempts to disturb the- Re-
gent's administration, he was obliged to fly for fifety to the court
of England, where Henry rewarded services which he had the in-
clination, but not the power to perform, by giving him in mar-
riage his niece the Lady Margaret Douglas. This unhappy exile,

however,

BOOK II. however, was defined to be the father of a race of kings. He saw

his son Lord Darnley mount the throne of Scotland, to the perpe-
tual exclusion of that rival who now triumphed in his ruin. And,
from that time, his posterity have held the sceptre in two kingdoms,
by one of which he was cast out as a criminal, and by the other
received as a fugitive.

A peace con- MEAN while hostilities were continued by both nations, but with
cluded. little vigour on either fide. The historians of that age relate mi-

nutely the circumstances of several fkirmifles and inroads, which
as they did not produce any considerable effect, at this distance of time
deserve no remembrance . At last an end was put to this languid

and

* THOU GH this war was distinguished by no important or decisive action, it was,

however, extremely ruinous to individuals. There fill remain two original papers,
which give us some idea of the miseries, to which the moss fertile counties in the
kingdom were exposed, by the sudden and destructive incursions of the borderers.
The first seems to be the report made to Henry by the English wardens of the
marches, for the year 1544, and contains their exploit, from the 2d of July, to
the 7th of November. The account it gives of the different inroads, or Forrays,'
as they are called, is very minute; and in conclusion, the fum total of mischief
they did is thus computed:

Towns, towers, fledes, barnekyns, paryfhe-churchcs, baflel-houfes call

down or burnt ---92

Scots slain 403
Prisoners taken -- - - 816
Nolt, i. c. horned cattle, taken - - -10,386
Sheep - - - I 2,492
Nags and geldings - --- --- 1,296
Goats -- - - - - 200
Bolls of corn --- 850
Infight-gear, i. c, houflold furniture, not reckoned.

Haynes's slate papers, 43

The

and inactive war, by a peace, in which England, France, and BOOK II.
Scotland were comprehended. Henry laboured to exclude thet---4 -'
Scots from the benefit of this treaty, and to reserve them for that
vengeance, which his attention to the affairs of the continent had
hitherto delayed. But although a peace with England was of the
last consequence to Francis I. whom the Emperor was preparing to
attack with all his forces, he was too generous to abandon allies,
who had served him with fidelity, and he chose rather to purchase
Henry's friendship with disadvantage to himself, than to leave them
exposed to danger. By yielding some things to the interest, and
more to the vanity of that haughty Prince; by submission, flattery,
and address, he, at length, prevailed to have the Scots included in
the peace agreed upon.

THE consternation occasioned by an event, which happened aThemurder

short time before the conclusion of this peace, rendered it more fBeatoun
acceptable to the whole nation.. Cardinal Beatoun had not used
'his power with moderation, equal to the prudence by which he

The other contains an account of an inroad by the Earl of Hartford, between the

8th and 23d of September, 1545; the narrative is more general, but it appears that
he had burnt, razed, and deflroyed in the counties of Berwick and Roxburgh only,

Monasteries and Friar-houfes - - - 7
Caltles, towers, and piles - - - - 16
Market towns - -- 5
Villages -- - - - 243
Milns - ---- - 13
I-lofpitals - - - - 3

All there were call down or burnt. -la)ynes 52. As the Scots were no less flilful
in the practice of irregular war, we may conclude that the damage whlch they did in
England was not inconfidrable ; and that their raids were no less w.lfcful, than the
forSays of the Englilh;

aftt:;lnIc

BOOK II. attained it. Notwithitanding his great abilities, he had too many
~-.-- of the passions and prejudices of an angry leader of a faction, to

govern a divided people with temper. IJis resentment against
one party of the nobility, his insolence towards the reft, his fe-
verity to the Reformers, and, above all, the barbarous and illegal
execution of the famous George Wifllart, a man of honourable
birth, and of primitive fanrity, wore out the patience of a
fierce age; and nothing but a bold hand was wanting to gratify
the public wiflh by his deftrudtion. Private revenge, inflamed
and fantified by a false zeal for religion, quickly supplied this
want. Norman Lefly, the eldest son of the Earl of Rothes, had
been treated by the Cardinal with injustice and contempt. It was
not the temper of the man, or the spirit of the times, quietly to
digest an affront. And as the profession of his adversary screened
him from the effects of what is called an honourable resentment,
he resolved to take that fatisfaation, which he could not denand.
This resolution deserves as much censure as the singular courage
and conduct with which he put it in execution excite wonder. The
Cardinal, at that time, resided in the castle of St. Andrews, which
he had fortified at great expence, and in the opinion of the age
had rendered it impregnable. His retinue was numerous, the town
at his devotion, and the neighbouring country full of his dependents.
In this situation, sixteen persons undertook to surprise his castle,
and to aflafiinate himself; and their success was equal to the bold-
ness of the attempt. Early in the morning they seized on the gate
M, 46.of the castle, which was set open to the workmen who were em-

ploycd in finishing the fortifications; and having placed sentries at
the door of the Cardinal's apartment, they awakened his numerous
domcflios one by one, and turning them out of the castle, they
without noise, or tumult, or violence to any other person, delivered

their

their country, though by a most unjustifiable action, from an am- BOOK II.
bitious man, whose pride was insupportable to the nobles, as his '
cruelty and cunning were the great checks to the Reformation.

His death was fatal to the Catholic religion, and to the French The Regent

attempts in

interest in Scotland. The fame zeal for both continued among avainto seize
great party in the nation, but when deprived of the genius and autho- themurderers.
rity of so skilful a leader, was of small consequence. Nothing can
equal theconfiernation which a blow so unexpeced occasioned among
his adherents; while the Regent secretly enjoyed an event, which
removed out of his way a rival, who had not only eclipsed his great-
ness, but almost extinguished his power. Decency, however, the
honour of the church, the importunity of the Qeen Dowager and
her faction, his engagements with France, and, above all there,
the desire of recovering his eldest son, whom the Cardinal had de-
tained for some time at St. Andrew's in pledge of his fidelity, and
who, together with the castle, had fallen into the hands of the
conspirators, induced him to take arms in order to revenge the death
of a man he hated.

HE threatened vengeance, but was unable to execute it. One

part of military science, the art of attacking fortified places, was
then unknown in Scotland. The weapons, the discipline, and im-
petuofity of the Scots, rendered their armies as unfit for sieges, as
they were aAive in the field. An hundred and fifty men, which
was the greatest number the conspirators ever assembled, refifed
all the efforts of the Regent for five months *, in a place, which
a single battalion, with a few battering cannon, would now re-

* Epift. Reg. Scot. 2. 379.
VOL. I. O duce

BooK II. duce in as many days. This tedious siege was concluded by a

-^- truce. The Regent undertook to procure for the conspirators an

absolution from the Pope, and a pardon in Parliament; and upon
obtaining these, they engaged to surrender the cafile, and to set his
fin at liberty.

IT is probable, that neither of them were sincere in this treaty.

On both fides, they fought only to arnufe, and to gain time. The
Regent had applied to France for affiflance, and expeAed soon to
have the conspirators at mercy. On the other hand, if Lefy and
his associates were not at first incited by Henry to murder the Car-
dinal, they were, in the sequel, powerfully supported by him..
Notwithstanding the silence of cotemporary historians, there are
violent presumptions of the former; of the latter there is undoubted.
certainty . During the siege, th9 conspirators had received from
England supplies both of money. and provisions; and as Henry was-
preparing to renew his proposals concerning the marriage and
the union he had projected, and to, second his negotiations with a.
numerous army, they hoped, by concurring with him, to be in a;
situation, in which they would no longer need a pardon, but might.
claim a reward.

January z8, THE death of Henry blasted all these hopes.. It happened in
'5s47. the beginning of next year, after a reign of greater splendor than

true glory; bustling, though not ative; oppressive in domestic go-
vey/ment, and in foreign politics wild and irregular. But the vices
of this Prince were more beneficial to mankind, than the virtues of
others. His rapaciousness, his profusion, and even his tyranny, by.
depressing the ancient nobility, and by adding new property and

* Keith, 6o.
LL4 power

ptower to the Commons, laid the foundations of the British liberty. BOOK II.
His other paflions contributed no less towards the downful of Popery,
and the efRablifhment of religious freedom in the nation. His re-
fentment led him to abolish the power, and his covetousness to seize
the wealth of the church; and by withdrawing there supports,
made it easy, in the following reign, to overturn the whole fabric
of fuperflition.

FRANCIS I. did not long survive a Prince, who had been alter-

nately his rival and his friend ; but his successor Henry II. was not
negletful of the French interest in Scotland. He sent a confiderab!e Troops arrive

from France.

body of men, under the command of Leon Strozzi, to the Regent's
afliftance. By their long experience in the Italian and German
wars, the French had become as dextrous in the conduct of sieges,
as the Scots were ignorant; and as the boldness and despair of the
conspirators could not defend them againiR their superior art, they,
after a short resistance, surrendered to Strozzi, who engaged, in the Force the
name of the King his mafier, for the security of their lives; and Anarew'f to
as his prisoners transported them into France. The cafsle itself, surrender.
the monument of Beatoun's power and vanity, was demolished, in
obedience to the canon law, which, with admirable policy, de-
nounces its anathemas even against the houses in which the sacred
blood of a Cardinal happens to be shed, and ordains them 'to be
laid in ruins A.

THE archbifhoprick of St. Andrew's was bestowed by the Re-
gent upon his natural brother, John Hamilton Abbot of Paisley.

* Burn. Hilt. Ref. I. 338.

0 2 THE

BOOK II. THE delay of a few weeks would have saved the conspirators.
New breach Those Ministers of Henry VIII. who had the chief direction of as-
withEngland. fairs during the minority of his son Edward VI. conducted them-

selves, with regard to Scotland, by the maxims of their late master,
and resolved to frighten the Scots into a treaty, which they had not
abilities or address to bring about by any other method.

BUT before we proceed to relate the events which their inva-

sion of Scotland occasioned, we shall flop to take notice of a cir-
cumfrance unobserved by cotemporary historians, but extremely re-
markable for the discovery it makes of the sentiments and spirit,
which then prevailed among the, Scots. The conspirators against
Cardinal Beatoun found the Regent's eldest son in the castle of St.
Andrew's; and as they needed the protection of the English, it was
to be feared that they might endeavour to purchase it, by delivering
to them this important prize. The presumptive heir to the Crown,
in the hands of the avowed enemies of the kingdom, was a dread-
ful profpe&. And, in order to avoid it, the Parliament fell upon
a very extraordinary expedient. By an ad made of purpose, they.
excluded " the Regent's eldest son from all right of succession,
" public or private, so long as he should be detained a prisoner,
"and fubflituted in his place, his other brothers, according to their

seniority, and in failure of them, those who were next heirs to

"the Regent *." Succefion by hereditary right is an idea so ob-
vious and so popular, that a nation seldom ventures to make a breach,
in it, but in cafes of extreme necessity. Such a necessity did the
Parliament discover in the present situation. Hatred to England,,
founded on the memory of past hostilities, and heightened by the
smart of recent injuries, was the national passion. This ditated.

* Epill. Reg. Scot. 2. 359,

that

that uncommon itatute, by which the order of lineal fuccefflon was BOOK. II.
so remarkably broken. The modern theories, which represent this
right as divine and unalienable, and that ought not to be violated
upon any consideration whatsoever, seem to have been then alto-
gether unknown.

IN the beginning of September, the Earl of Hartford, now Duke Scotland in-

vaded by the

of Somerset, and Protector of England, entered Scotland at the head Englidth
of i8,o0o men; and, at the fame time, a fleet of 60 ships ap--
peared on the coast, to fecohd his land forces. The Scots had
for some time observed this storm gathering, and were prepared.
for it. Their army was almost double to that of the enemy, and-
posted to the greatest advantage on a rising ground, above Muffel--
burgh, not far from the banks of the river Efke. Both these circum-
itances alarmed the Duke of Somerset, who saw his danger, and.
would willingly have extricated himself out of it, by a new over-
ture of peace on conditions extremely reasonable. But this mode-
ration was imputed to fear; and his proposals were rejected with that
scorn, which the confidence of success inspires. And had the con-
dut of the Regent, who commanded the Scottish army, been in any
degree equal to his confidence, the dedlruion of the English
muff have been inevitable. They were in a situation,. precisely
similar to that of their countrymen under Oliver Cromwell, in the
following century. The Scots had chosen their ground so well,
that it was impossible to force them to give battle; a few days had'
exhausted the forage and provision of a narrow country; the fleet
could only furnish a scanty and precarious fiubfiflnce; a retreat
therefore was neccffary; but disgrace, and perhaps ruin, were the.
consequences of retreating.

ON-

BaoK 11. ON both these occasions, the national -heat and impetuosity of
`-- ~' the Scots saved the English, and. precipitated their own country in-
Batt,, of to the utmost danger. The undisciplined courage of the private

Pin. men became impatient at the fight of an enemy. The General

was afraid of nothing, but that the English would escape from him
by flight; and leaving his advantageous situation, he attacked the
Sptenmbcrl, Duke of Somerset near Pinkey, with no better success than'his rafll-

ness deserved. The Proteetor had drawn up his troops on a gentle
eminence, and had now the advantage of ground on his fiue. The
Scottish army consisted almost intirely of infantry, whose chief wea-
pon was a long spear, and for that reason their files were very deep,
and their ranks close. They advanced towards the enemy in three
great bodies, and as they passed the river, were considerably ¢x-
posed to the fire of the English fleet, whichlay in the bay of Muf-
felburgh, and had drawn near the shore. The Englifi cavalry,
fluffed with an advantage which they had gained in a fkirmiflf
some days before, began the attack with more impetuosity, than good
conduct. A body so firm and compaa as the Scots, easily refifred.
the impression of cavalry, broke them, and drove them off the
field. The English infantry, however, advanced, and the Scots
were at once exposed to a flight of arrows, to a fire in flank from
400 foreign Fusileers who served the enemy, and to their cannon
which were planted behind the infantry, on the highest part of the
eminence. The depth and closeness of their order making it impoffi-
ble for the Scots to stand long in this situation; the Earl of Angus,
who commanded the vanguard, endeavoured to change his ground,
and to retire towards the main body. But his friends unhappily mif-
took this motion for a flight, and fell into confusion. At that very
initant, the broken cavalry having rallied, returned to the charge;
the foot pursued the advantage they had gained; the profped of

victory

victory redoubled the ardor of both; and, in a moment, the rout BOOK II.
of the Scottish army became universal, and irretrievable. The en- '
counter in the field was not long, nor bloody; but, in the pursuit,
the English discovered all the rage and fierceness, which national
antipathy, kindled by long emulation, and inflamed by reciprocal
injuries, is aptto inspire. The pursuit was continued for five hours,
and to a great diflance. All the three roads, by which the Scots
fled, were firewed with spears and (words, and targets, and covered
with the bodies of the slain. Above lo,ooo men fell on this day,
onre of the most fatal Scotland had ever seen. A few were taken
prisoners, and among these some persons of diflindion. And the
Protetor had it. now in his power to become master of a kingdom,.
out of which, not many hours before, he was almost obliged to,
retire with. infamy *.

BUT'

* Thd following passage. i a curious.anti rare journal of the Ptotecor's expedi-

tion into Scotland, written by W. Patten, who was joined in commission with Cecil,-
as Judge Marf.l of the army, and printed in 1548, deserves our notice; as it gives
ajuf.t idea of the military discipline of the Scots at that time. " But what after I
learned, specially touching their order, their armour, and their manner as well of
going to offend, as of sanding to defend, I have thought necessary here to utter.
Hackbutters have they few or none, and appoint their fight molt commonly always
a-foot. They come to the field well furnished all with jack and skull, dagger and
buckler, and swords all broad and thin, of exceeding good temper, and universally
so made to fice, that as I never saw none so good, so think I it hard to devise the
better. Hereto every man his pike, and a great kercher wrapped twice or thrice
about his neck, not for cold, but for cutting. In their array towards joining with
the enemy, they.cling and thrust so near in the fore rank, nhoulder and fhotlder to-
gcller, with their piles in both their hands flreight afore them, and their followers
in that order so hard at their backs, laying their pikes over their foregoers (houl-
ders, that, if they do assail unl'dncoered, no force can well withfland them. Stand-
hig at defence they thrust Shoulders likewise so nigh together, the fore ranks well

Digh

BooK II. BUT this victory, however great, was of no real utility, for
Their viaoywant of skill, or of leisure, to improve it. Every new injury ren-
oflittlebeneit dered the Scots more averse from an union with England; and the
to tihe English.

Protetor neglected the only measure, which would have made it
necefliry for them to have given their consent to it. He amused
himself in wafting the open country, and in taking or building
several petty castles; whereas by fortifying a few: places which were
acceflible by sea, he would have laid the kingdom open to the Eng-
lifh, and, in a short time, the Scots must either have accepted of
his terms, or have submitted to his power. By such an improve-
ment of it, his vitory at Dunbar gave Cromwell the command of
Scotland. The battle of Pinkey had no other effect but to precipi-
tate the Scots into new engagements with France. The situation
of the English court may, indeed, be pleaded in excuse for the Duke
of Somerset's conduct. That cabal of his enemies, which occa,
sioned his tragical end, was already formed; and while he triumphed
in Scotland, they secretly undermined his power and credit at home.
Self preservation, therefore, obliged him to prefer his safety before his
fame, and to return without reaping the fruits of his vitory. At
this time, however, the cloud blew over; the conspiracy by which

nigh to kneeling, stoop low before, their fellows behind holding their pikes with
both hands, and therewith in their left their bucklers, the one end of the pike againfl
their right foot, and the other against the enemy breaft-high; their followers crof-
sing their pike points with them forward; and thus each with other so nigh as
space and place will susser, through the whole ward, so thick, that as easily ihall
a bare finger pierce through the skin of an angry hedge hog, as any encounter the
front of their pikes." Other curious particulars are found in this journal, from
which Sir John Hayward has borrowed his account of this expedition.

Life of Edward VI. 279, &c.

The length of the Scots pike or spear was appointed by AC. 44. P. 1471. to
be fix ells ; i. e. eighteen feet fix inches.

he

he fell was not yet ripe for execution; and his pretence suspended, BOOK II.
for some time, its effet. The supreme power still remained in his '-
hands, and he employed it to recover the opportunity, which he
had loft. A body of troops, by his command, seized and forti-
sied Haddingtoun, a place, which, on account of its distance from April, i548.
the sea, and from any English garrison, could not be defended with-
out great expence and danger.

MEAN while the French gained more by the defeat of their al- Forces the

Scots into a
lies, than the English did by their vicory. After the death of Car- closer union

with France.

dinal Beatoun, Mary of Guise, the Queen Dowager, took a con-it
fiderable {hare in the diretion of affairs. She-was warmly attached
by blood, and by inclination, to the French interest; and, in order
to promote it, improved with great dexterity every event which oc-
curred. The spirit and strength of the Scots were broken at Pinkey;
and in an assembly of nobles which met at Stirling to consult upon
the situation of the kingdom, all eyes were turned towards France,
no profpea of safety appearing but in assistance from thence. But
Henry II. being then at peace with England, the Queen represent-
ed that they could not expect him to take part in their quarrel, but
upon views of personal advantage; and that without extraordinary
concessions in his favour, no assistance in proportion to their pre-
sent exigencies could be obtained. The prejudices of the nation
powerfully seconded these representations of the Queen. What often
happens to individuals took place among the nobles in this conven-
tion; they were swayed entirely by their passions, and in order to
gratify them, they deserted their former principles, and disregarded
their true interest. In the violence of resentment, they forgot that
zeal for the independence of Scotland, which had prompted them
to reject the proposals of Henry VIII. and by offering, voluntarily,

VOL. I. P their

BOOK II. their young Queen in marriage to the Dauphin eldest son of Henry II.
A-.,.--. and which was fiill more, by proposing to fend her immediately
And to o1ler
their Queen into France to be educated a this court, they granted, from a thirst
in marriage to
the Dauphin. of vengeance, what formerly they would not yield upon any con-

fideration of their own safety. To gain at once such a kingdom as
Scotland, was a matter of no small consequence to France.' Hen-
ry, without hesitation, accepted the offers of the Scottish ambaffa-
dors, and prepared for the vigorous defence of his new acquisition.
Six thousand veteran soldiers, under the command of Monsieur
DeisT, assisted by some of the best officers, who were formed in the
long wars of Francis I. arrived at Leith. They served two cam-
paigns in Scotland, with a spirit equal to their former fame. But
their exploits were not considerable. The Scots soon became jea-
lous of their designs, and neglected to support them with proper
vigour; and the caution of the English, in acting wholly upon the
defensive, prevented them from attempting any enterprize of con-
sequence; and obliged them to exhaust their firength in tedious
sieges, undertaken under many disadvantages. Their efforts, how-
ever were not without some benefit to the Scots, by compelling the
English to evacuate Haddingtoun, and to surrender several small forts,
which they possessed in different parts of the kingdom.

BUT the consequences of there operations of his troops were frill

of greater importance to the French King. The diversion which
they occasioned enabled him to wrest Boulogne out of the hands of
the English; and the influence of his army in Scotland obtained
the concurrence of Parliament with the overtures made to him, by
the assembly of nobles at Stirling, concerning the Queen's marriage
with the Dauphin, and her education at the court of France. In
vain did a few patriots remonstrate againit such extravagant con-

ceflions,

ceflions, by which Scotland was reduced to be a province of Booi II.
France; and Henry, from an ally, raised to be master of the king- The treaty br
dom; by which, the friendship of France became more fatal than that Ipurpofe
the enmity of England; and every thing was fondly given up to
the one, that had been bravely defended against the other. A point June 5, 1548.
of so much consequence was hastily decided, in a Parliament, as-
fernbled in the camp before Haddingtoun: the intrigues of the
Queen Dowager, the zeal of the clergy, and resentment against
England, had prepared a great party in the nation for such a ftep; the
French General and Ambassador, by their liberality and promises,
gained over many more. The Regent himself was weak enough
to stoop to the offer of a pension from France, together with the title
of Duke of Chatelherault in that kingdom. A considerable majo-
rity declared for the treaty, and the interest of a fation was pre-
ferred before the honour of the nation.

HAVING hurried the Scots into this rash and fatal resolution, the Mary sent to
source of many calamities to themselves, and to their Sovereign, the beeducatedin

France.

French allowed them no time for reflection or repentance. The
fleet, which had brought over their forces, was still in Scotland,
and without delay, convoyed the Queen into France. Mary was
then fix years old, and by her education in that court, the politell,
but most corrupted in Europe, she acquired every accomplish-
ment that could add to her charms as a woman, and contracted
many of those prejudices, which occasioned her misfortunes as a
Queen.

FROM the time that Mary was put into their hands, it was the

interest of the French to susser the war in Scotland to languish. The
recovering of the Boulonnois was the objec Henry had most at

P 2 heart

BOOK II. heart; and a flight diversion in Britain was sufficient to divide the

-v\'l attention and strength of the Engliih, whose domeflic factions de-

prived both their arms and councils of their accustomed vigour. The
government of England had undergone a great revolution. The
Duke of Somerset's power was acquired with too much violence, and
exercised with too little moderation, to be of long continuance. Many
good qualities, added to great love of his country, could not attone
for his ambition in usurping the sole direction of affairs. Many of
the most eminent courtiers combined against him; and the Earl of
Warwick their leader, no less ambitious, but more artful than Somer-
set, conducted his measures with so much dexterity, as to raise him-
self upon the ruins of his rival. Without the invidious name of
Protector, he succeeded to all the power and influence, of which
Somerset was deprived, and he quickly found peace to be necessary
for the establishment of his new authority, and the execution of
the vast designs he had conceived.

Peace cn- HENRY was no stranger to Warwick's situation, and improved
eluded. his knowledge of it to good purpose, in conducting the negocia-

tions for a general peace. He prescribed what terms he pleased to
the English Minister, who scrupled at nothing, however advanta-

March 24, geous to that Monarch and his allies. England consented to restore
550s. Boulogne and its dependencies to France, and gave up all preten-

sions to a treaty of marriage with the Queen of Scots, or to the
conquest of her country. A few small forts, of which the English
troops had hitherto kept possession, were razed; and peace between
the two kingdoms was eflablifhed on its ancient foundation.

BOTH the Britilh nations loft power, as well as reputation, by
this unhappy quarrel. It was on both fides a war of emulation and

resent-

resentment, rather than of interest; and was carried on, under the BOOK II.
influence of national animofities, which were'blind to all advan- -
tages. The French, who entered into it with greater coolness, con-
duded it with more /kill; and by- dexterously availing themselves
of every circumstance which occurred, recovered possession of an
important territory, which they had loft,- and added to their mo-
narchy a new kingdom. The ambition of the English Minister
betrayed to them the former; the inconsiderate rage of the Scots
against their ancient enemies beltowed on them the latter; their
own address and good policy merited both.

IMMEDIATELY after the conclusion of the peace, the French The Scots be-

come jealous

forces left Scotland, as much to their own fatisfadion, as to thatofthe French.
of the nation. The Scots soon found, that the calling to their
assistance a people more powerful than themselves, was a danger-
ous expedient. They beheld, with the utmost impatience, those
who had come over to protect the kingdom, taking upon them to
command in it; and on many occasions they repented the rash in-
vitation they had given. The peculiar genius of the French nation
heightened this disgust, and prepared the Scots to throw off the
yoke, before they had well begun to feel it. The French were,
in that age, what they are in the present, one of the mofi polished
nations in Europe. But it is to be observed, in all their expeditions
into foreign countries, whether towards the south or north, that their
manners have been remarkably incompatible with the manners of
every other people. Barbarians are tenacious of their own customs,
because they want knowledge and taftc to discover the reasonableness
and propriety of customs which differ from them. Nations, which
hold the firfl rank in politeness, are frequently no less tenacious
out of pride. The Greeks were so in the ancient world; and the

French

BOOK II. French are the fame in the modern. Full of themselves, and ac.;
...--'. customed, by the imitation of their neighbours, to confider their

own modes as the standards of elegance, they scorn to disguise, or
to lay aside the distinguishing manners of their own nation, or to
make any allowance for what may differ from them among others.
For this reason, the behaviour of their armies has, on every occa-
sion, been insupportable to strangers, and has always exposed them
to hatred, and often to deflrudion. In that age, they over-ran
Italy four several times, by their valour, and loft it, as often, by
their insolence. The Scots, naturally an irascible and high-fpirited
people, and who, of all nations, can least bear the most diflant in-
finuation of contempt, were not of a temper to admit all the pre-
tensions of such assuming guests. The symptoms of alienation were
soon visible; they seconded the French in their military operations
with the utmost coldness, and this secret disgust grew infenribly to
a degree of indignation that could hardly be refrained; and on oc-
cafion of a very flight accident, broke out with fatal violence. A
private French soldier had an idle quarrel with a citizen of Edin-
burgh: both nations took arms, with equal rage, in defence of
their countrymen. The Provost of Edinburgh, his son, and feve-
ral citizens of distinction were killed in the fray; and the French
were obliged to avoid the fury of the inhabitants, by retiring out
of the city. Notwithstanding the ancient alliance of France and
Scotland, and the long intercourse of good offices between the two
nations, an aversion for the French took its rife at this time, among
the Scots; the effedts whereof were deeply felt, and operated pow-
erfully through the subsequent period.

Progrcfsofthe FROM the death of Cardinal Beatoun, nothing has been said of
Reformation. the state of religion. While the war with England continued, the

clergy

clergy had no leisure to molest the Protestants; and they were not BOOK II.
yet considerable enough to expect any thing more than connivance
and impunity. The new doEtrines were still in their infancy; but,
during this Ihort interval of tranquillity, they acquired strength,
and advanced, by large and firm steps, towards a full eflablifh-
ment in the kingdom. The first preachers against popery in Scot-
land, of whom several had appeared during the reign of James V.
were more eminent for zeal and piety, than for learning. Their
acquaintance with the principles of the Reformation was partial,
and at second hand; rnome of them had been educated in England;
all of them had borrowed their notions from the books published
there; and, in the first dawn of the new light, they did not venture
many steps before their leaders. But, in a short time, the doctrines
and writings of the foreign Reformers became generally known;
the inquisitive genius of the age pressed forward in quest of truth;
the discovery of one error opened the way to others; the downfal of
one imposture drew many after it; the whole fabric, which igno-
rance and superstition had erected in times of darkness, began to
totter; and nothing was wanting to compleat its ruin, but a daring
and active leader to direct the attack. Such was the famous John
Knox, who, with better qualifications of learning, and more ex-
tensive views than any of his predecessors in Scotland, possesed a
natural intrepidity of mind, which set him above fear. He began
his public ministry at St. Andrew's in the year 1547, with that fuc-
cess, which always accompanies a bold and popular eloquence. In-
flead of amusing himself with lopping the branches, he struck di-
recly at the root of Popery, and attacked both the doctrine and dif-
cipline of the established church, with a vehemence peculiar to
himself, but admirably suited to the temper and wifies of the
age.

I AN

.BOOK II. A N adversary so formidable as Knox, would not have easily

L-<--v- escaped the rage of the clergy, who observed the tendency and

progress of his opinions, with the utmost concern. But, at firif,
he retired for safety into the castle of St. Andrew's, and while the
conspirators kept poffeflion of it, preached publickly under their
protetion. The great revolution in England, which followed
upon the death of Henry VIII. contributed no less than the zeal
of Knox, towards demolishing the Popish church in Scotland.
Henry had loosened the chains, and lightened the yoke of Popery.
The Minilters of his son Edward VI. cafl them off altogether,
and established the Protestant religion upon almost the fame footing,
whereon it now Rands in that kingdom. The influence of this ex-
ample reached Scotland, and the happy effets of ecclesiastical li-
berty, in the one nation, inspired the other with an equal desire of re-
covering it. The Reformers had, hitherto, been obliged to con-
du& themselves with the utmost caution, and seldom ventured to
preach, but in private houses, and at a diifance from court; they
gained credit, as happens on the firat publication of every new reli-
gion, chiefly among persons in the lower and middle rank of life.
But several noblemen of greatest diflindion, having, about this time,
openly espoused their principles, they were no longer under the
necessity of acting with the fame reserve; and with more security
and encouragement, they had likewise greater success. The means
of acquiring and spreading knowledge became more common, and
the spirit of innovation, peculiar to that period, grew every day
bolder and more universal.

HAPPILY for the Reformation, this spirit was flill under some

restraint. It had not yet attained firmness and vigour, sufficient to
overturn a system, founded on the deepest policy, and supported

by

by the most formidable power. Under the present circumftances,BooK I.
any attempt towards adion must have been fatal to the Protestant
dodrines; and it is no small proof of the authority, as well as pene-
tration of the heads of the party, that they were able to restrain
the zeal of a fiery and impetuous people, till that critical and mature
junture, when every ftep they took was decisive and successful.

MEANWHILE their cause received reinforcement from two dif-

ferent quarters, whence they never could have expeced it. The
ambition of the house of Guise, and the bigotry of Mary of Eng-
land hastened the subversion of the Papal throne in Scotland; and
by a singular disposition of Providence, the persons who opposed
the Reformation in every other part of Europe with the fiercest
zeal, were made instruments for advancing it in that kingdom.

MARY of Guise poffefled the fame bold and aspiring spirit, which The Queen

diftinguilhed her family. But in her it was softened by the femalepires to the
charater, and accompanied with greater temper and address. HerOffice of Re-
brothers, in order to attain the high objects at which they aimed,
ventured upon such daring measures, as suited their great courage.
Her designs upon the supreme power were concealed with the ut-
most care, and advanced by address and refinements more natural
to her sex. By a dexterous application of those talents, she had ac-
quired a considerable influence on the councils of a nation, hither-
to unacquainted with the government of women; and without the
fimalleft right to any flare in the administration of affairs, had en-
grossed the chief direcion of them into her own hands. But (le
did not long reft satisfied with the enjoyment of this precarious
power, which the fickleness of the Regent, or the ambition of thole
who governed him, might so easily disturb; and ile began to set

VOL 1. Q on

Book II. on foot new intrigues, with a design of undermining him, and of

-' iopening to herself a way to succeed him in that high dignity. Her

brothers entered warmly into this scheme, and supported it with all
their credit at the court of France. The French King willingly
concurred in a measure, by which he hoped to bring Scotland en-
tirely under management, and in any future broil with England, to.
turn its whole force upon that kingdom.

IN order to arrive at the desired elevation, the Queen Dowager

had only one of two ways to chufe; either violently to wrest the
power out of the hands of the Regent, or to obtain it by his con-
sent. Under a minority, and among a warlike and factious people,
the former was a very uncertain and dangerous experiment. The
latter appeared to be no less impracticable. To persuade a man vo-
luntarily to abdicate the supreme power; to descend to a level with
those, above whom he was raised; and to be content with the second
place where he hath held the first, may well pass for a wild and chi-
merical projeEt. This, however, the Queen attempted; and the pru-
dence of the attempt was sufficiently justified by its success.

THE Regent's inconstancy and irresolution, together with the

calamities which had befallen the kingdom under his adminiftra-
tion, raised the prejudices both of the nobles and of the people against
him, to a great height; and the Queen secretly fomented these
wvith much industry. All who wished for a change met with a
gracious reception in her court, and their spirit of difaffedion was
nourished by such hopes and promises, as, in every age, impose

Courts the on the credulity of the factious. The favourers of the Reforma-
Reformers.

tion being the nmot numerous and Spreading body of' the Regent's
enemies, she applied tothem, with a particular attention; and the

gentle-

gentleness of her dispositions, and seeming indifference to the re-BooK II.
ligious points in dispute, made all her promises of protecion and
indulgence pass upon them for sincere. Finding so great a part of
the nation willing to fall in with her measures, the Queen set out
for France, under pretence of visiting her daughter, and took alongOa. 5Iso.
with her those noblemen, who pofTeffed the greatest power and
credit among their countrymen. Softened by the pleasures of an ele-
gant court, flattered by' the civilities of the French King, and the
caresses of the house of Guise, and influenced by the seasonable
distribution of a few favours, and the liberal promise of many more,
they were brought to approve of all the Queen's pretensions.

WHILE The advanced by there flow but important fleps, the Re-

gent either did not foresee the danger which threatened him, or
negleted to provide against it. The first discovery of the train.
which was laid, came from two of his own confidents, Carnegie
of Kinnaird, and Panter Bishop of Ross, whom the Queen had
gained over to her interest, and then employed as the most proper
instruments for obtaining his content. The overture was made to
him in the name of the French King, enforced by proper threaten-
ings, in order to work upon his natural timidity, and sweetened by
every promise that could reconcile him to a proposal so difagreeabre.
On the one hand, the confirmation of his French title, together
with a considerable pension, the parliamentary acknowledgment of
his right offucceffion to the Crown, and a public ratification of his
conduct during his regency, were offered him. On the other
hand, the displeasure of the French King, the power and popu-
larity of the Queen Dowager, the difaffedion of the nobles, with
the danger of an after-reckoning, were represented in the strongest
colours.

Qz2 IT

BooK II. IT was not possible to agree to a proposal so extraordinary and
L'- ' unexpeced, without Come previous struggle; and had the Archbishop

of St. Andrew's been present to fortify the irresolute and passive
spirit of the Regent, he would, in all probability, have rejected it
with disdain. Happily for the Queen, the sagacity and ambition
of that Prelate could, at this time, be no obitrution to her views.
He was lying at the point of death', and in his absence, the influ-
ence of the Queen's agents on a flexible temper counterballanced
several of the strongest passions in the human mind, and obtained
his content to a voluntary surrender of the supreme power.
Dec. i551. AFTER gaining a point of such difficulty, with so much ease,

the Queen returned into Scotland, in full expectation of taking
immediate -poffefion of her new dignity. But, by this time, the
Archbishop of St. Andrew's had recovered of that distemper, which
the ignorance of the Scottish physicians had pronounced to be in-
curable. This he owed to the affitance of the famous Cardan,
one of those irregular adventurers in philosophy, of whom Italy
produced so many about this period. A bold genius led him to
some useful discoveries, which merit the esteem of a more discern-
ing age; a wild imagination engaged him in those chimerical
sciences, which drew the admiration of his cotemporaries. As a
pretender to astrology and magic, he was revered and consulted by
all Europe; as a proficient in natural philosophy, he was but little
known. The Archbishop, it is probable, confidered him as a power-
ful magician, when he appliedto himfor relief; butitwas his know-
ledge as a philosopher, which enabled him to cure his disease .

* Cardan himSelf was more desirous of being confidecred as an Astrologer than a

Philosopher; in his book De Genituris, we find a calculation of the Archbishop's
nativity, from which he pretends both to have predicted his disease, and to have
effeecd his cure. He received, from the Archbifiop, a reward of 18oo crowns.
A great fum in that age. De vitafi(a, p. 32.

TOGETHER with his health, the Archbishop recovered the en-BooK'II.

tire government of the Regent, and quickly determined him to re-
cal that diflonourable promise, which he had been seduced by the
artifices of the Queen to grant. However great her furprize and
indignation were, at this fresh infrance of his inconstancy, she was
obliged to dissemble, that she might have leisure to renew her in-
trigues with all parties; with the Proteflants, whom fie favour-
ed and courted more than ever; with the nobles, to whom she
rendered herself agreeable by various arts; and with the Regent him-
self, in order to gain whom, ihe employed every argument. But
whatever impressions her emissaries might have made on the Re-
gent, it was no easy matter to over-reach or to intimidate the Arch-
bishop. Under his management, the negociations were spun out to
a great length, and his brother maintained his rfation with that ad-
dress and firmness, which its importance so well merited. The
universal defection of the nobility, the growing power of the Pro-
teltants, who all adhered to the Queen Dowager, the reiterated so-
licitations of the French King, and, above all, the interposition of
the young Queen, who was now entering the twelfth year of her
age, and claimed a right of nominating whom she pleased to be
Regent, obliged him, at last, to resign that high office, which heprevailson
had held many years. He obtained, however, the fame advanta-thegRegentto

resign his of-
geous terms for himself, which had been formerly stipulated. ic e.

IT was in the Parliament which met on the loth of April, 1554,Slhe obtains

that the Earl of Arran executed this extraordinary resignation ; and' e egency.
at the fame time Mary of Guise was raised to that dignity, which
had been lb long the object of her withes. Thus, with their own
approbation, a woman, and a franger, was advanced to the Supreme
authority over a fierce and turbulent people, who seldom submit-

ted,

BooK. II. ted, without relucance, to the legal and ancient government of
'"-' their native Monarchs.

Reformation WHILE the Queen Dowager of Scotland contributed so much
continues to
make great towards the progress of the Reformation, by the protection which
progrei. she afforded it, from motives of ambition; the English Queen,

by her indiscreet zeal, filled the kingdom with persons active in
July' , '553'promoting the fame cause. Mary ascended the throne of England,

on the death of her brother Edward, and soon after married Philip 1I.
of Spain. To the persecuting spirit of the Romish superstition,
and the fierceness of that age, (he added the private resentment of
her own, and of her mother's sufferings, with which she loaded
the Reformed Religion; and the peevishness and severity of her na-
tural temper carried the acrimony of all these passions to the utmost
extreme. The cruelty of her persecution equalled the deeds of those
tyrants, who have been the greatest reproach to human nature
The bigotry of her clergy could scarce keep pace with the impe-
tuofity of her zeal. Even the unrelenting Philip was obliged, on
some occasions, to mitigate the rigour of her proceedings. Many
among the most eminent Reformers suffered for the doctrines which
they had taught; others fled from the storm. To the greater
part of these, Switzerland and Germany opened a secure asylum;
and not a few, out of choice or neceflity, fled into Scotland.
What they had seen and felt in England, did not abate the warmth
and zeal of their indignation against Popery. Their attacks were
bolder and more successful than ever; and their doCrines made a
rapid progress among all ranks of men.

THESE doctrines, calculated to reCtify the opinions, and to reform
the manners of mankind, had hitherto produced no other effects;

I but

but they soon began to operate with greater violence, and proved the BOOK Ii.
occasion, not only of subverting the eftablified religion, but of -"
ihaking the throne, and endangering the kingdom. The caufesA viewof the
which facilitated the introduction of these new opinions into cot-'liticalca-

s ses Which con-
land, and which disseminated them so fast through the nation, me-tributed to-

wards that-

rit, on that account, a particular and careful inquiry. The Refor-
mation is one of the greatest events in the history of mankind, and
in whatever point of light we view it, is instructive and interetfing.

THE revival of learning in the i5th and i6th centuries rouzed

the world from that lethargy, in which it had been funk for many
ages. The human mind felt its own strength, broke the fetters of
authority by which it had been so long restrained, and venturing to
move in a larger sphere, pushed its inquiries into every subjet,
with great boldness, and surprising success.

No sooner did mankind recover the capacity of exercising their

reason, than religion was one of the first objects which drew their
attention. Long before Luther published his famous Theses, which
Shook the Papal throne, science and philosophy had laid open, to
many of the Italians, the imposture and absurdity of the established
superstition. That subtle and refining people, satisfied with en-
joying those discoveries in secret, were little disposed to assume the
dangerous character of Reformers, and concluded the knowledge of
truth to be the prerogative of the wife, while vulgar minds must be
overawed and governed by popular errors. But, animated with a
more noble and disinterested zeal, the German Theologian boldly
erected the flandard of truth, and upheld it with an unconquerable
intrepidity, which merits the admiration and gratitude of all fuc-
cceding ages.

THE

BOOK 1I. THE occasion of Luther's being first disguised with the tenets of

the Romiffi church, and how, from a small rupture, the quarrel
widened into an irreparable breach, is known to every one who has
been the leafi conversant in history. From the heart of Germany,
his opinions spread, with astonishing rapidity, all over Europe; and
wherever they came, endangered or overturned the ancient, but ill-
founded system, The vigilance and address of the court of Rome,
and the power and bigotry of the Austrian family, suppressed these
notions on their first appearance, in the southern kingdoms of
Europe. But the fierce spirit of the north, irritated by multiplied
impositions, could neither be mollified by the fame arts, nor subdued
by the fame force; and encouraged by some Princes from piety,
and by others out of avarice, it easily bore down the feeble oppo-
fition of an illiterate and immoral clergy.

THE fuperfittibn of Popery seems to have grown to the most ex-

travagant height, in those countries which are situated towards the
different extremities of Europe. The vigour of imagination, and
sensibility of frame, peculiar to the inhabitants of southern cli-
mates, rendered them susceptible of the deepest imprefflons of fu-
perflitious terror and credulity. Ignorance and barbarity were no
lets favourable to the progress of the fame spirit, among the north-
ern nations. They knew little, and were disposed to believe every
thing. The most glaring absurdities did not {hock their gross un-
derftandings, and the most improbable fictions were received with
implicit assent and admiration.

ACCORDINGLY, that form of Popery, which prevailed in Scot-

land was of the most bigotted and illiberal kind. Those docrines
which are most apt to shock the human underfianding, and those

legends

legends which farthest exceed belief, were proposed to the peopleBooK II.
without any attempt to palliate or disguise them; nor did they ever -v--
call in question the reasonableness of the one, or the truth of the
other.

THE power and wealth of the church kept pace with the pro-

grefs of fuperflition ; for it is the nature of that spirit to observe no
bounds in its refpea and liberality towards those, whose character
it esteems sacred. The Scottish Kings early demonstrated how much
they were under its influence, by their vast additions to the immu-
nities and riches of the clergy. The profuse piety of David I. who
acquired on that account the name of Saint, transferred almost the
whole crown-lands, which were at that time of great extent, into
the hands of ecclesiastics; The example of that virtuous Prince was
imitated by his successors. The spirit spread among all orders of
men, who daily loaded the priesthood with new possessions. The
riches of the church all over Europe were exorbitant; but Scotland
was one of those countries, wherein they had farthest exceeded the
just proportion. The Scottish clergy paid one half of every tax im-
posed on land; and as there is no reason to think that, in that age,
they would be loaded with any unequal Share of the burden, we
may conclude, that, by the time of the Reformation, little less than
one half of the property in the nation had fallen into the hands of
a society, which is always acquiring, and can never lose.

HTHE nature, too, of a considerable part of their property ex-

tended their influence. Many estates, throughout the kingdom,
held of the church; church-lands were let in lease at an easy
rent, and were poifefled by the younger sons, and descendants of

VOL. . R the
R

BoOK II. the bell families *. The connexion between fliperior and va.a/l,
t'-;-.- between landlord and tenant, created dependencies, and gave rife

to an union of great advantage' to the church; and in estimating
the influence of the Popish ecclesiastics over the nation, these, as
well as the real amount of their revenues, muff be attended to,
and taken into the account.

THIS extraordinary share in the national property was accom-

panied with proportionable weight in the supreme council of the
kingdom. At a time, when the number of temporal Peers was
extremely small, and when the Lesser Barons and representatives of
Burroughs seldom attended Parliaments, the Ecclefiatlics formed a
considerable body there. And it appears from the ancient rolls of
Parliament, and from the manner of chufing the Lords of Articles,
that the proceedings of that high court mutt have been, in a great
measure, under their direction -.

The reverence due to their sacred charater, which was often.-

carried incredibly far, contributed not a little: towards the growth
of their power. The dignity, the, titles, and precedence of the Po-
pish clergy are remarkable, both as causes and effects of that do-
minion, which they had acquired over the reft of mankind. They
were regarded by the credulous laity as beings of a superior species;
they were neither subjea to the fame laws, nor tried by the fame
judges. Every guard, that religion could supply, was placed around
their power, their possessions, and their persons; and endeavouis
were used, not without success, to represent them all as equally
sacred.

* Keith, 52i. Not, (b). t Spots. Hilf. of the Ch. of Scot. 419.

THE

THE reputation for learning, which, however inconsiderable, ooK II.

was wholly engrossed by the clergy, added to the reverence which'c "

'

they derived from religion. The principles of found philosophy, and
of a just tafle, were altogether unknown; in place of there, were
substituted studies, barbarous and unidrifiruive; but as the eccle-
fiaftics alone were conversant in tfiem, this procured them efReem;
and a very little knowledge drew the admiration of rude ages, which
knew nothing. War was the sole profefion of the nobles, and
hunting their chief amusement; they divided their time between
these; unacquainted with the arts, and unimproved by science,
they disdained any employment foreign from military affairs, or
which required rather penetration and address, than bodily vigour.
Wherever the former were necessary, the clergy were entrulted;
because they alone were properly qualified for the trust. Almost all
the high offices in -civil government devolved, on this account, into
their hands. The Lord Chancellor was the first subject in the
kingdom, both in dignity and in power. From the earliest ages
of the monarchy, to the death of Cardinal Beatoun, fifty-four
persons had held that high office; arid of these, forty-three had
been ecclesiastics-*. The Lords of Sefion were supreme Judges in
all matters of civil riglt; and by the original constitution, the Pre-
sident and one half of the Senators in this court were churchmen.

To all this we may add, that the clergy being separated from the

reft of niankiid by the law of celibacy; and undifRrated by those
cares, and unincumbered'with those burdens which occupy and op-
press other men, the intercft of their order became their only objec,
and they' wcre at full leisure to pursue it.

Crawf. Offic. of State.

R THE

BooK II. THE nature of their function gave them access to all persons,, and
'.----' at all feafbns. They could employ all the motives of fear and of

hope, of terror and ofconfolation, which operate moRs powerfully
on the human mind. They haunted the weak and the credulous;
they besieged the beds of the sick and of the dying. They suffered
few to go out of the world without leaving marks of their liberality
to the church; and taught them to compound with the Almighty
for their fins, by beflowing riches upon those, who called them-
fclves his servants.

WHEN their own industry, or the superstition of mankind failed

of producing this effed, they had influence enough to call in the aid
of law. Whoever died intejiate, was presumed to have destined his
moveables to pious uses. The .church took possession of them. The
children, the wife, the creditors of the person deceased were often
excluded from any share in what was esteemed a sacred property *.
As men are apt to trust to the continuance of life with foolish con-
fidence, and childishly ihun ever thing,, that forces them to think
of their mortality, many die without fettling their affairs by will;
and the bold usurpation of ecclesiastics in this cafe, of which there
are frequent vetfiges in our laws, though none in our hiflorians, may
be reckoned among the most plentiful sources of the wealth of tlhe
church.

AT the fame time, no matrimonial or teltamentary cause could

be tried but in the spiritual courts, and by laws which the clergy
themfelvcs had framed. The penalty, too, by which the decisions
of these courts were enforced, added to their authority. A sentence

* EfTays on Brit. Antiq. 174.

of

of excommunication was no less formidable, than a sentence of out-BooK: 3I.
lawry. It was pronounced on many occasions, and against various
crimes: and betides excluding those, upon whom it fell, from
ChriRfian privileges, it deprived them of all their rights as men, or
as citizens. And the aid of the secular power concurred with the
superstition of mankind, in rendering the thunders of the church no
less deftrutive than terrible.

To there general causes, may be attributed the immense growth

both of the wealth, and power of the Popish church; and without
entering into any more minute detail, this may serve to discover the
foundations, on which a ftrudure so flupendous was erected.

Bur though the laity had contributed, by their own fuperfition

and profuseness, to raise the clergy from poverty aind':contempt to
riches and dignity, they began, by degrees, to feel and to murmur
at their incroachments. No wonder haughty and martial Barons
should view the power and poffeflions of the church with envy;
and regard the lazy and inctive characer of churchmen with the
utmost contempt. While, at the fame time, the indecent and licen-
tious lives of the clergy gave great and just offence to the people,
and considerably abated the veneration, which they were accufomned
to yield to that order of men.

IMMENSE wealth, extreme indolence, gross ignorance, and, above

all, the severe injun6tion of celibacy, had concurred to introduce
this corruption of morals among the clergy; who, presuming too
much upon the fubmiflion of the people, were at no pains either
to conceal, or to disguise their own vices. According to the accounts
of the Reformers, confirmed by several Popish writers, the mot:

open

Booi II. open and scandalous dissolution of manners prevailed among the

-'~ Scottish clergy *. Cardinal Beatoun, with the fame public pomp,

which is due to a legitimate child, celebrated the marriage of his
natural daughter with the Earl of Crawfurd's son, -; and, if we may
believe Knox, he publickly continued to the end of his days a cri-
minal correspondence with her mother, who was a woman of rank.
The other prelates seem not to have been more regular and exem-
plary than their Primate lj.

MEN of such characters ought, in reason, to have been alarmed

at the first clamours raised against their own morals, and the doc-
trines of the church, by the Proteflant preachers; but the Popish
ecclefiaffics, either out of pride or ignorance, negleced the proper
methods for silencing them. In.stead of reforming their lives, or
disguising their vices, they affected to- despise the censures of the
people. And while the Reformers, by their mortifications and' au-
flerities, endeavoured to resemble the firif propagators of Chriftia-
nity, the Popish clergy were compared to all those persons, who

* Winzet. ap. Keith Append. 202, 205. Lefl. de Reb; Gest. Scot. 23,. ...v

- The marriage articles subscribed with his own hand, in which he calls her
my daughter, are ftiTrextant. Keith, p. 42.

11 A remarkable proof of the dissolute manners of the clergy is found in the pub-

lic records. A greater number of letters of lgitimntion was granted during, the
firfl thirty years after the reformation, than during the whole period, that has
clapsed since that time. These were obtained by the sons of the Popish clergy.
The ccclefialtics, who were allowed to retain their benefices, alienated them to
their children; who when they acquired wealth, were desirous that the slain of
illegitimacy might no longer rcmain upon their families. In Keith's Cala!ogue of ti
Scotllih ii,/ol/s, we find fevcral infltnces of such alienations of church lands, by the
Popish incumbents, to their natural children.

are

6

are moit infamous, in hiflory, for the enormity ahd scandal ofBooK 11.
their crimes.

On the other hand, intead, of mitigating the' rigour, or colour-

ing over the abfirdity of the eftablifhedr docrines; instead of at-
tempting to found them upon feripture, or to reconcile them to
reason; they-left them withput any other support or recommenda-
tion, than the authority of the church, and the decrees, of councils.
The fables concerning purgatory, the virtues of pilgrimage, and the
merits of the faints, were the topics, on which they insisted in.their
discourses to the people; and the duty of preaching being left wholly
to Monks of the loweft,and most illiterate orders, their compofi-
tions were frill more wretched and contemptible, than the fubjedts
on which they nfifled. While the Reformers were attended by
crowded and. admiring-audiences, the Popih preachers were either
universally deserted, or liffened to with scorn.

THE only device which they employed in order, to recoverltheir

declining reputation, or'to confirm the wavering faith of the people;
was equally imprudent, and unsuccessful. As many dotrines of
their church had derived their credit, at first, from the authority of
false miracles; they now endeavoured to call' in these to their aid*.
But those lying wonders, which were beheld with unfufpicious admi-
ration or heard with implicit faith, in times ofdarknefs and of igno-
rance, met with a very different reception, iln a more enlightened
period. The vigilance of the Reformers detec1ed these impoilures,
and exposed not only them, but the cause, which needed the aid
of such artifices, to ridicule.

* Spotfwood, 69,

As

BOOK II As the Popith ecclesiastics became more-and more the objec& of

L-V-. hatred and contempt, the .discourses of the Reformers were lifiened

to as so many calls to liberty; and betides the pious indignation
which they excited against -those corrupt docrines, whfici had
perverted the nature of true Christianity; besides the. zeal, which
they inspired for the knowledge of truth, and the purity of religion;
they gave rife also, among the Scottish nobles, to other views and
paffibns. - They hoped to flake off the yoke of ecclefiatical domi-
nion, which they had long felt to be oppressive, and which they
now discovered to be unchristian. They expeeted to recover pof-
session of the church revenues, which they were now taught to
confider as alienations made by their ancestors, with a profufion-ho
less undifcerning, than unbounded. They flattered theifelves that
a check would be given to the pride and luxury of the clergv, who
would be obliged, henceforward, to confine themselves wiihin tlie
sphere, peculiar to their sacred character. An aversion for the efta-
blifhedrchurch, which flowed from so many concurring causes, which
was raised by considerations of religion, and heightened by motives
of policy, spread fast through the nation, and excited a spirit, that
burit out, at lait, with irresistible violence.

RELIGIOUS considerations, alone, were sufficient to have rouzed

this spirit. The' points in controversy with the church of Rome
were of so much importance to the happiness of mankind, and so
essential to Chriltianity, that they merited all the zeal with
which the Reformers contended in order to eflablifl them. But
the Reformation having been represented as the effect of some
wild and enthuliaftic frenzy in the human mind, this attempt to
account for the eagerness and zeal, with which our ancestors em-
braced and propagated the Protestant doctrines, by taking a view of

the

the political motives, alone, which influenced them, and by shew- BOOK II.
ing how naturally these prompted them to ad with so much ardor, - '
will not, perhaps, be esteemed an unnecessary digreflion. We now
return to the course of the history.

. .. .

-

,

THE Queen' s elevation to the office of Regent teems to have 554.

transported her, at firfi, beyond the known prudence, and mode-
ration of her charader. She began her adminifiration; by con-
ferring upon foreigners several offices of trul and of dignity; a ftep, The Queen
which both from the inability of israngers to discharge these offices Regent bi-

which both from the in., 9 se os~cesginsher admi-
with vigour, and from the envy which their preferment excites nifrationwith

, -.'*" '

.1 1 . .. . i r ^ "some unpopu-

among the natives,. is never attended with good consequences. Vil- lar measures
mort was made Comptroller, and entrusted with the management of
the public revenues; Bonot was appointed Governor of Orkney;
and Rubay honoured with the custody of the Great Seal, and the
title"of Vice Chancellor $. It was with the utmost indignation, that
the Scots beheld offices of the greatest eminence and authority,
dealt out among frangers. By these promotions they conceived the
Queen to have offered .an in(ult both to their understandings, and to
their courage;, to the former, by supposing them unfit for those
stations, which their ancestors had filled with so much dignity; to
the latter, by imagining that they were tame enough not to com-
plain of. an affront, which, in no former age, would have been to-
lerated with impunity.

WHILE their minds were in this disposition, an incident happened

which inflamed their aversion for French councils 'to the highest
degree. Ever iince the famous contest between the houses of Va-

* Lefly, de Reb. Gest. Scot. I89.
VOL. I. S lois

BtboR 1i. lois itld Pilitnagnet, the Fietch had beeni accufi'dtd toetnbtrrais
'vs- ' the Englifi; and' to divide thti' fttiiglh by the faudtein arid 'fotil

dible incurfiohs of their allies, the Scots. But; as tliefet ihroad!
were seldom attended with any real advantage tb Scotland, ard ex-
posed it to the dangerous resentment of a powerful neighbour, the
Scots began to grow liss tractable than formerly, and icrFpled, any
longer, to serve an aibirbius ally at the price of their own quiet
and security. The chtnge, ttt, whih was daily fntroducig into
tfe art of War, rendered tre afIiance of thd Scottish forees of less
importance to the Frhch Mtibnarch. Fbri there ieaf6ns, tenry
having resolved upon a wai with Philip tI. and forefeeig that the
Queen of Eiiglnd would take part in her hulband's quarrel, was
extremely solicitous to secure, in Scotland, the aflilance of some
troops, which would be fitore at his command than aih uindifciipKned
armiy, led by chikeftains who were almoA ihdepen'dent. Ihi protec.au
tion of tiis design, but under pretence of reievin-g the riobles from
the expence and danger of'de'fiending the borders, thte ^ueen Regent
proposed, ih Parliamient, to regifte thie value of la&ds throughout
the kingdim, to Impoif on the-m a small tax, an'd t'o aaply 'hat
revenue towttds rAaihtiihi'g a body bs tegulaxr troops, ih constant
pay. A ixed tax upon land, which. tre growintg epence of go-
vernment hath introduted into alrfitf every part of Emrope; was un-
known, at that tite, mad fieerned altogethet incoiflifent vith the
free and independent spirit of the feudal gorveltrent. N-othing
could be more flocking to a generous and brave nobility, than the
entrusting to mercenary hands, the d'efetce of thoe territories which
had been acquired, or preserved by the blood of their aicetfors.
They received this propaofl with the uthroft irndignariati. About
300oo of the lesser Barons repaired in a body to the Qeen Regent,
and represented their sense of the intended innovation, with that

manly

nMpIly ;10 4qt gp'nfl9 bqW4pes wb is natq;ixj to -a frpe M, ap~, B)y I

P4
a P4±i3i 1 Alarwd at

a4r1 o1 lra z e deliveorge in so Iirnm SIrWsJ

,g tone, gapd ijppqrWOd y fqph formiai b ,e uinhers, the Qen pri-
dgptly gbgndpor4 A 4 f wxi, wh -h 1.e foiu~1 yq ke vni rf~ally odi-
Pps, As ~4p Qmgn berfplf wa · laQ4, ppr~fe y t s

p td the

..ripi rag m, s4npg gng ndWpqr of the qggi, this - rnafqug-.wcas ituppt~ap
,whplly txq the fugg~Qgp-s ps bqr fqreigr p.c se~pg; a'd the
SpXqts;verp r~g4y t9 preg 4 tQ the PM4L viq1r t e e ci-jts Agairst

THE Frenachb ijnstc Qs ext~wisiiiag, .ddgd :el to I)h $1 M. Attempts to
They had now commenced hostllities againfi Spain, and Philip had engage the

prevailed on t k~~~~~~~~~~~~~ing dom in
prevsilecl On 4he Q~Zeri oif E;pg~ui4, tp re~for~ce.Ij .rary wvjth a a war withi

4~~sn England.

cs9rr~.k1ti l body of hcr trgps. jn p9,,r dgto &piriyr 1jp .qs Egad
aii, JRenry bad gecnurf9, p he proje~ s~, 4 Iie O 4-
tsnpted to-excite them to invq44 ~Eglano. Jt.t ,as, 5ptla d hgd
nqthing to draad ktsx a Pscgss .ps M

gyi

s

ps wM, h~yr

frnm stny 4mbiniQus f~eme 9si istvrlrp,

J~r ieihQI1rS, wgs, bW '4y

.0pupie in i4eid vvptjyig to r-irn

,q h~ y~iqI Fhk-eh j thje np-

blep, who wers AsThzibred by tte ~Cep 8 .t NewbotIe,
lisened to the,(s1jcic onjs of tlae. Fr icb ,Mon.rch with ezte
cQld1nefs, and prLu4ently decline4 engaging zbe kingci9mn fan en-
terprize so dgingqrpsuid unnqcqig ry. What sbe er44 nt -hpgin
by perfualion, the Q;k~een Rcgsnt brougIbt aboutb y a itrgitagepn.
Notwit4fltandilg that peace sahC4ted be~ween the tw o kingdozas
she demanded her French soldiers po rpbiild a fmoll fort npgr per-
wick, which was spp~oilAcg, by t4e 1aft grpBty, to he xnzed. The
garrison of Berwick sUjed Qvt; j Jisrruptoe pbe w.9pgk; agd ravgged
the gdjgpent c~islry. TJids W4fv1t souc the t si ry fPir :t of the
ScetO, gpd their pxomptpefs to revenge the kep appeargin~e of ng-

S2 tional

BOOK II. tional injury dissipated, in a moment, the wife and pacific ref6itr-
<- -* ' tions which they had so lately formed. War was determined, and

orders instantly given for railing a numerous army. But before
their forces could assemble, the ardor of their indignation had time
to cool, and the English having discovered no inten't.on to push.s he
war with vigour, the nobles resumed their pacifitc sy.stem, an'dPre-
.;6. solved to stand altogether upon' the defensive. They: marched to

the banks of the Tweed; they prevented the incursions of the ene-
my, and having done what they thought sufficient for the- safety
and honour of their country, the Queen could not induce them,, ei-
ther by her intreaties, or her artifices; -to advance .anoter' flep.

WHILE the Scots persisted in their inactivity, I'Oyfel, the Comn-

mander-of the French troops, who poflfeied-entirely the confidence.
of the Queen Regent, endeavoured, with her connivance;, to':en-
gage the two nations in-hoftilities. Contrary- to the'orders of;the
Scottifi General, he marched over the Tweed with his own ,soldiers,
and invested Werk, a garrison of the EErglifh.- The Scots, instead
of seconding his attempt, were enr-aged'at his prefumptiorr. The
Queen's partiality towards Franc' had long been fufpered,- but it
was now visible that lhe wantonly sacrificed the -peace dnd safety of
Scotland, to the interest of that ambitious and assuming ally. Under
the feudal governments, it was in camps, that fubjeCs were accuitomed
to address the boldefl remonftrancesto their Sovereigns. While arms
were in their hands; they felt their own strength ; and at that time
all their representations of grievances carried the authority of com-
mands. On this occasion, the indignation of the nobles broke out
with such violence, that the Queen perceiving all attempts to en-
gage'them in action to be vain, abruptly dismissed her army, and
retired with the utmost (hame and disgust; having discovered the

impo-

impotence of her own authority, without effecAing any thing which Boor II.
could be of advantage to France.. '. -

IT is observable, that this first instance of contempt for the Re-

gent's authority can, in no degree, be ..imputed to the influence of
the new opinions in religion. As the Queen's pretensions to the
Regency had been principally supported by those who favoured the
Reformation, and as the flill needed them for a counterpoise to
the Archbishop of St. Andrew's, and the partizans of the house of
Hamilton; they were now treated by her with great refped, and
even admitted to no inconsiderable (hare in her favour and confi-
dence. Kirkaldy of Grange, and the other surviving conspirators
againfi Cardinial Beatoun were; about this time, recalled by her
from banifliment'; and, through her connivance, the Protestant
preachers enjoyed an interval of 'tranquillity, which was of great
advantage to their cause. Soothed by these instances of the Queen's
moderation and humanity, the Protestants left to others the office of
remonfirating; and the leaders of the opposite facion set them the
first example of disputing the will of their Sovereign..

As the Queen Regent felt how limited and precarious her autho- The Queen's

rity was, while it depended on the poise of these contrary fadions, mr'°iage with
fie 'endeavoured to establish it on a broader and more secure foun-
datiori; by hastening the conclusion of her daughter's marriage with
the Dauphin. Amiable as the Queen of Scots then was, in the
bloom of youth; and considerable as the territories were, which
she would have added to the French monarchy; there did not want
reasons to dissuade Henry from compleating his firtf plan of marrying
her to his son. The Constable Montmorency employed all his
interest to defeat an alliance, which reflected so much lutlre on

the

BooK II. the Princes of Lorrain. He represented the impossibility of nmaintain-
'-"v- ) ing order and tranquillity among a turbient peQple, 4duing the ab-

fence of their Sovereign; and for that reason, advised Henry to be-
stow the young Queen upon one of the Princes of the bload, who,
by residing in Scotland, might prefere that kingidom an aufeful ally
to France, which, by a nearer union to the Cr"ov, wwJ bwowQ
a mutinous and ungovernable province . ut,. t thi time, ,the
Constable was a prisoner in the hands of the $paniards, arnd the
Princes of Lorrain were at the height of tfeir glory; and their in-
fluence, seconded by the charms of the young Q.uea., tri ip:ed
over the pruent, but envious rnomffa1ang s of their rjViJ.

Dec. 4, THE French King accordingly applied to the Parlia.tent of Scot-
447-. land, which appointed eight of its members -f to represent the

whole body of the nation, at the marriage of the Q.e.en. Amo.g
.the persons on whom the public choice conferred this honourable
character, were some of the most avowed and aealpu.s advocates
for the Reformation; by which, may be, eQimated the ddgree of
refpet and popularity, which that party had now attained in the
kingdom. The- infiru&ions of the Parliament to those Commis-
fioaers .till remain $, and do honour to the wifdoqm and integrity of
that afiembly. At the fame time that they manifestad a laudable
concern for the dignity and interest of their Sovereign, with re-
fpedt to the articles of marriage, they employed every precaution
which prudence could dictate, for preserving the liberty and inde-

*Me Melv. Me 5.
t Viz. The Archbishop of Glasgow, the Bilhop of Ross, the Bishop of Ork-

ney, the Earls of Rothes and Caflils, Lord Fleeming, Lord Seton, the Prior of
St. Andrew's, and John ,Erskine of .Dn.

t Keith, Append. x3.

pendance

pendance of the nation, and for fecurihg the fuccefrmoh of the Ctown Book II.
in the house of Hamilton.

WITH regard to each of these, the Scots obtained whlatever fa- Artifices of
tisfadion their fear or jealousy could demand. The young Queen, the French in

the marriage

the Dauphin, and the King of France ratified every article, withtreaty.
the most solemn oaths, and confirmed them by deeds in form, un-
der their hands and feals. But on the part of France, all this was
one continued scene of studied and elaborate deceit. Previous to
there public tranfadions with the Scottish deputies, Mary had been
perfaded to fubfdribe privately three deeds, equally unjust, and in-
valid; by which, failing the heirs of her own body, ihe conferred
the kingdom. of Scotland, with whatever inheritance or fuccefmon
might accrue to it, In free gift upon the Crown of France, declar-
ing all pronlifes to the contrary, which the necessity of her affairs,
and the solicitations of her fiibjeast had extorted, or might extort
from her, to be void and of no obligation *. As it gives us a pro-
per idea of the charaaer of the French court under Henry II. we
may observe that the King himself, the Keeper of the Great Seals,
the Duke of Guise, and the Cardinal of Lorrain, were the persons
engaged in conducting this perfidious and dishonourable project.
The Queen of Scots was the only innocent ador in that scene of
iniquity. Her youth, her inexperience, her education in a so-
reign country, and her deference to her uncle's will, vindicate her,
with every impartial person, from any imputation of blame on that
account.

TmEs grant, by which Mary bestowed the inhr-itance of her
kingdom upon £trangers, was concealed with the tutmoft care from

* Corps Diplomat. tom. v. 21. Keith, 73.

4 her

Boo. II. her fubjedts. They seem, however, not to have been unacquaint-

-~ - ed with the intention of the 'French to overturn.the fettlemene'of

the fuccefflon in favour of the Duke of Chatelherault. The zeal,
with which the Archbishop of St. Andrew's opposed all the mea-
*fures of the Q.een Regent, evidently proceeded from the fears and
suspicions of that prudent prelate, on this head *.
April 14, THE marriage, however, was celebrated with great pomp; and

I' 5· the French, who had hitherto affected to draw a veil over their de-

signs upon Scotland, began now to unfold their.intentions without
any disguise. In the treaty -of marriage, the deputies had agreed
that the Dauphin should assume the name of King of Scotland.
This they confidered only as an honorary title; but the French
laboured to annex to it some solid privileges and power. They in-
lifted that the Dauphin's title ihould be publicly recognized, that
the Crown Matrimonial should be conferred upon him; and that
all the rights pertaining to the husband of a Qeen flould be vested
in his person. By the laws of Scotland, a person who married an
heiress kept poffiefion of her estate during his own life, if he hap-
pened to survive her and the children born of the marriage -'. This
was called the courtesy of Scotland. The French aimed at
applying this rule, which takes place in private inheritances,
to the fucceflion of the kingdom; and that seems to be im-
plied in their demand of the Crown Matrimonial, a phrase pecu-
liar to the Scottish historians, and which they have neglected to
explain. As the French had reason to expect difficulties in carry-

* About this time, the French seem to have had some design of reviving the Earl

of Lennox's pretcnfions to the Succession, in order to intimidate and alarm the Duke
of Chatelhcrault. Ilaynes, 215, 219. Sorbes Collet. vol.i. 189.

'1 Reg. Maj. lib, ii. 58.

ing

ing through this measure, they began with founding the deputiesBoolK II.
who were then at Paris. The English, in the marriage articles -
between their Queen and Philip of Spain, had set an example to
the age, of that prudent jealousy and reserve, with which a foreigner
fliould be admitted so near the throne. Full of the fame ideas, the
Scottish deputies had, in their oath of allegiance to the Dauphin,
expressed themselves with remarkable caution*. Their answer
was in the fame spirit, respectful, but firm; and discovered a fixed
resolution of consenting to nothing, that tended to introduce any
alteration in the order of fucceflion to the Crown.

FoUR of the deputies -f happening to die before they returned

into Scotland, this accident was universally imputed to the effects
of poison, which was supposed to have been given them by tle
emissaries of the house of Guise. The hiflorians of all nations
discover an amazing credulity with refped to stories of this kind,
which are so well calculated to please the malignity of some men, and
to gratify the love of the marvellous which is natural to all, that, in
every age, they have been swallowed without examination, and be-
lieved contrary to reason. No wonder the'Scots Should easily give
credit to a suspicion, which received such strong colours of pro-
bability, both from their own resentment, and from the known
character of the Princes of Lorrain, so little scrupulous about the
justice of the ends which they pursued, or of the means which
they employed. For the honour of human nature, it must, how-
ever, be observed, that as we can discover no motive, which could
induce any man to perpetrate such a crime, so there appears no
evidence to prove that it was committed. But the Scogts of that
age, influenced ly national animofities and prejudices, were inca-

* Keith, Append. 20.
-I- Thc Bihop of Orgncy, the Earl of Rothes, the Earl of Caflils, and Lord
Fc.ming.

VoL. I. T pabic

BOOK IL pable of examining the circumstances of the cafe with calmness, or

" -' of judging concerning them with candour. All parties agreed in

believing the French to have been guilty of this deteltable action;
and it is obvious how much this tended to increase the aversion for
them, which was growing among all ranks of men.
TheRegent NOTWITHSTANDING the cold reception which their proposal

'Parlament to concerning the Crown Matrimonial met with from the Scottish de-
grant it. puties, the French ventured to move it in Parliament. The par-
Novem. 29.

tizans of the house of Hamilton, suspicious of their designs upon
the succession, opposed it with great zeal. But a party, which the
feeble and unsteady conduct of their leader had brought under much
difreputation, was little able to withstand the influence of France,
and the address of the Queen Regent, seconded, on this, occasion
by all the numerous adherents of the Reformationt Besides, that
artful Princess dressed out the French demands in a less offensive
garb, and threw in so many limitations, as seemed to. render them
of small consequence. These either deceived the Scots, or removed
their scruples; and in compliance to the Queen, they passed. an. at&,
conferring the Crown Matrimonial on the Dauphin; and, with the
fondest credulity, trufled to the frail security of words and statutes,.
againfl the dangerous encroachments of power *.

Continues to THE concurrence of the Proteflants,. with the QKeen Regent,
wourt the Pro-.
teltr ts. he promoting a measure so acceptable to France, while the Popish

clergy, under the influence of the Archbifliop of St. Andrew's op-
posed it with so much violence t, is one of those fuigtlar circum-

* The a& of Parliament is worded with the utmost care, with. a view to guard

against any breach of the order of succession. But the Duke, not relying on this
alone, entered a folcmn proteftatiou to secure his own right, Keith, 76. rt is plain,
that he fufpeted the French of having some intention to set aside his right of fuccef-
sion; and, indeed, if they had no design of that kind, the eagerness with which
they urged their demand, was childilh. t Melv. 47.

fiances,

fiances, in the conduc of parties, for which this period is so re-BooK II.
markable. It may be ascribed, in some degree, to the dextrous '
management of the Queen, but chiefly to the moderation of those
who favoured the Reformation. The Protelfants were, by this
time, almost equal to the Catholics both in power, and in num-
ber; and, conscious of their own strength, they submitted with
impatience to that tyrannical authority, with which the ancient
laws armed the ecclefiaflics against them. They longed to be ex-
empted from this oppressive jurisdiction, and publickly to enjoy the
liberty of professing those opinions, and of exercising that worship,
which so great a part of the nation deemed to be founded in truth,
and to be acceptable to the Deity. This indulgence, to which the
whole weight of priefily authority was opposed, there were only
two ways of obtaining. Either violence must extort it from the
reludant hand of their Sovereign, or by prudent compliances, they
might expea it from her favour, or her gratitude. The former
is an expedient for the redress of grievances, to which no nation
has recourse suddenly; and fubjeds seldom venture upon refifiance,
which is their last remedy, but in cafes of extreme necessity. On
this occasion, the Reformers wifely held the opposite course, and
by their zeal in forwarding the Queen's designs, they hoped to me-
rit her protecion. This disposition the Queen encouraged to the
utmost, and amused them so artfully with many promises, and some
concessions, that, by their affifance, she surmounted in Parliament
the force of a national, and perhaps a laudable jealousy, which
would, otherwise, have swayed with the greater number.

ANOTHER circumitance contributed somewhat to acquire the Re-

gent such considerable influence in this Parliament. In Scotland, all
the biflopricks, and those abbeys which conferred a title to a feat in
Parliament, were in the gift of the crown * From the time of her

* See Book I.

T 2 accefio~4

BOOK II. accetnionto the regency, the Queen bad kept in her own hands alnmof

& " ,all those which became vacant, except such as were, to the great dif-

gust of the nation, beflowed upon foreigners. Among these, her
brother the Cardinal of Lorrain had obtained the abbeys of Kelfo
and Melrofs, two of the most wealthy foundations in the kingdom .
By this conduct, she thinned the ecclesiastical bench +, which was
entirely under the influence of the Archbishop of St. Andrew's, and
which, by its numbers and authority, had great weight in the house,
so as to render any opposition it could give of little consequence.

THu Earl of Argyll, and James S'tewart Prior of St. Andrew's,

one of the most powerful, and the other the moif popular leader of the
Protestants, Were appointed to carry the Crown and other ensigns
of royalty to the Dauphin. But from this they were diverted by
the part they were called to act, in a more interesting scene, which
now begins to open.

Elizabeth fuc- BEFORE we turn towards this, it is necessary to observe, that,
eeds to the on the i7th of November, Mary of England finished her flort,
Crown of Ot

er, land. and inglorious reign. Her filler Elizabeth took possession of

the throne without opposition; and the Protestant religion was,
once more, established by law in England. The accession of a Queen,
who, under very difficult circumstances, had given itrong indica-
tions of those eminent qualities, which, in the sequel, rendered her
reign so illustrious, attracted the eyes of all Europe. Among the
Scots, both parties observed her first motions with the utmost con-
cern, as they easily foresaw that fie would not remain long an in-
different fpecator of their tranfacions.

Lcfly, 202.

-- It appears from the rolls of this Parliament, which Lefy calls a very full one,
that only fcven Bifiops and fixtccn Abbots were prcfent.

UNDJER

UNDER rit'any difcotiragements, and miuch oppression, the Re- BooK 11.

formation advanced towards a full eftablifihment in Scotland. All '
the low country, .the moss populous, and, at that time, the most
warlike part of the kingdom, was deeply tinCtured with the Pro-
teftant opinions; and if the fame impreflions were not made in the
more ditfant counties, it was owing to no want of the fame difpofi-
tions among the people, but to the scarcity of preachers, whose mofi
indefatigable zeal could not satisfy the avidity of those, who desired
their inftrudions. Among a people bred to arms, and fo'prone to mu-
tiny as the Scots; and in. an age, when religious passions had taken
such ffrong pofleffon of the human mind, and moved and agitated
it with so much violence; the peaceable and regular demeanour of
so numerous a party is truly aflonifhing. From the death ds Mr. Pa-
trick Hamilton, the fii-ft who suffered in Scotland for the Protefrant
religion, thirty years had elapsed, and during so long a period, no
violation of public order or tranquillity had proceeded fi-om that
fed *; and' though rouzed and irritated by the most cruel excefres
of ecclesiastical tyranny, they did, in no inrfance, transgress those
bounds of duty which the law prescribes to fubjeds. Betides the
prudence of their own leaders, and the protection which the QOeen
Regent, from political motives, afforded them, the moderation of
the Archbiflop of St. Andrew's encouraged this pacific disposition.
That Prelate, whlfc private life cotemporary writers tax with great
irregularities --, governed the church, for some years, witl a tem-
per and prudence, of which there are few examples in that age.
But some time before the meeting of last Parliament, the Arch-

* The mi-lder of Cardin.l Beatonn was occasioned by private revenge, and bc.
ing contrived and exccuted by fixtcen persons, cannot, with juftic, be imputed to
llc w\hole Proteflant party.
-1I Knox, Bchanaln, Icith, o2S,

biliop
(I

BooK II. bishop departed from those humane maxims, by which he had hi-

therto regulated his conduct; and whether, in spite to the Queen.
.who had entered into so close an union with the Protestants, or in
compliance with the importunities of his clergy, he let loose all the
rage of persecution against the Reformed; sentenced to the flames
an aged priest, who had been convicted of embracing the Protestant
opinions; and summoned several others, fufpeted of the fame crime,
to appear before a fynod of the clergy, which was soon to convene
at Edinburgh.

NOTHING could equal the horror of the Protestants at this un-

expeEted and barbarous execution, but the zeal, with which they
*espoused the defence of a cause, that now.feerned devoted to de-
ftruction. They had immediate recourse to the Queen Regent;
and as her success in the Parliament, which was then about to meet,
depended on their concurrence, (he not only sheltered them from
the impending storm, but permitted them the exercise of their re-
ligion, with more freedom than they had hitherto enjoyed. Unfa-
tisfied with this precarious tenure, by which they held their re-
ligious liberty, the Protestants laboured to render their possession of
it more secure and independent. With this view, they determined
to petition the Parliament for some legal protetion, against the ex-
orbitant and oppressive jurifdidion of the ecclesiastical courts, which,
by their arbitrary method of proceeding, founded in the canon law,
were led to sentences the moRt shocking to humanity, by maxims
the most repugnant to justice. But the Queen, who dreaded the
effeCts of a debate on this delicate subjed, which could not fail of
exciting high and dangerous paflions, prevailed on the leaders of
the.party, by new and more solemn promises of her protection, to
desist from any application to Parliament, where their numbers

and

and influence would, in all probability, have procured them, if not BooK II.
the entire redress, at lead, some mitigation of their grievances,

THEY applied to another assembly, to a convocation of the Po- 1559.

pish clergy, but with the- fame ill success, which hath always at-
tended every proposal for Reformation, addressed to that order of
men. To abandon usurped power, to renounce lucrative error, is
a sacrifice, which the virtue of individuals has, on some occasions,
offered^ to truth; but-from anyfociety of men, no such effort can
be expected. The corruption of a focietyi recommended by com-
mon utility, and justified by universal practice, are viewed, by its
members, without shame, or horror; and Reformation never pro-
ceeds from themselves, but is, always forced upon them by tome
foreign hand. Suitable to this unfeeling and inflexible spirit, was-
the behaviour of the convocation in the present conjunture. All
the demands of the -Proteflants were reje&ed with contempt; and.
the Popish clergy, far from endeavouring, by any prudent concef.
lions, to sooth and to reconcile such a numerous body, asserted the
doctrines of their church, concerning some of the most exception-
able aridcles, with an ill-timed rigour, which gave-new offence %.

DURING the fitting of the convocation, the Protefants-firif be1-

gan to fufpe&t ome change in the Regent's disposition towards them.
Though joined with them for. many years, by interest, and united,
as they conceived, by the firongeft ties of affecion and of grati-
tude, fle discovered, on this occasion, evident symptoms, not only
of coldness, but of a growing disgust and aversion. In order to ac

* Keith, 8 r,
4 count

BOOK II. count for this, our hiflorians do little more than produce the trite.

]'- 1 observations concerning the influence of prosperity to aker the cha-

rater, and to corrupt the heart. The Queen, fay they, having
reached the utmost point to which her ambition aspired,. no longer
preserved her accuflomed moderation, but, with an info!;nce uifual
to the fortunate, looked down upon those, by whose affiilance the
had been enabled to rife so high. But it is neither in the depravity
of the human heart, nor in the ingratitude of the Queen's dirpo-
fition, that we muff search for the motives of her present conduct.
These were derived from another, and a more remote source, which
in order to clear the subsequent tranfadtions, we shall endeavour to
open witlh ome care.

A!mbitiou; 'TIE ambition of the Princes of Lorrain had been no less fuc-
,ce of the cefsful, than daring; but all their schemes were diftinguifbed by
Pi inces of .

Lrbin. eing vai: and unbounded. Strangers at the court of France, their

eminent qualities had raiied them, in a short time, to an height of
power, superior to that of all other fubjeds, and had placed them
on a level even with the Princes of the blood themselves. The
church, the army, the revenue, were under their direction. Nc-
thing but the royal dignity remained unattained, and to a near al-
liance with it, they were elevated by -the marriage of the Queen of
Scots to the Dauphin. In order to gratify their own vanity, .and to
render their niece more worthy the heir of France, they set on
foot her claim to tle Crown of England, which was founded on
pretences not unplaufible.

TiEr tragical amours and marriages of IIenry VIII. are known

to all the world. Moved by the caprices of his love, or of his
refentmcnt, that impatient and arbitrary Monarch had divorced or

beheaded

beheaded fotu of the fix Queens, whom he married. In order to BOOK II
gratify him, both his daughters had been declared illegitimate by
At of Parliament; and yet, with that fantatic inconfiflence which
diliniguiifhes his character, he, in his last will, whereby he was im-
powered to fettle the order of succession, called both of them to
the throne, upon the death of their brother Edward and, at the
fame time, pasing by the posterity of his eldest sifter Margaret
Queen of Scotland, he appointed the line of succession to con-
tinue in the descendants of his younger sifter, the Dutchess of
Suffolk.

IN consequence of this destination, the validity whereof was ad-

mitted by the English, but never recognized by foreigners, Mary
had reigned in England, without the least complaint of neighbour-
ing Princes. But the fame causes, which facilitated her accession
to the throne, were obflacles to the elevation of her sifter Eliza-
beth, and rendered her possession of it precarious and insecure. Rome
trembled for the Catholic faith, under a Protestant Queen of such
eminent abilities.. The fame fupersiitious fears alarmed the court
of Spain. And France: beheld, with indignation, a throne, to which
the queen of Scots could form so many pretensions, occupied by a
rival, whose birth, in the opinion of all good Catholics, excluded
her from any legal right of fucceflion. The impotent hatred of
the Roman Pontiff, or the flow councils of Philip II. would have
produced no sudden or formidable eff'et. The ardent and impetu-
ous ambition of the Princes of Lorrain, who, at that time, go-
verned the court of France, was more deciive, and more to be dread-
ed. Instigated by them, Henry, soon after the death of Mary, per- They pcr-
fuaded his daughter-in-law 'and her husband, to assume the title ofruae Mary

Ki,,g and Q~een s Engand Tto ublisthis to assume the
King and Queen of England. They a-ffegted to publish this to tile of Queen

of England.
VOL. U U all

BooK II. all Europe. They used that fyle and appellation in public papers,
k---'- some of which still remain . The arms of England were en-

'559. graved on their coin and plate, and born by them on all occasions.

No preparations, however, were made to support this premature
and impolitic claim. Elizabeth was already feated on her throne;
ihe possessed all the intrepidity of spirit, and all the arts of policy,
which were neceflary for maintaining that fiation. England was
growing into reputation for naval power. The marine of France
had been utterly neglected; and Scotland remained the only avenue,

Refolveto in-by which the territories of Elizabeth could be approached. It
vade England.

was on that fide, therefore, that the Princes of Lorrain determined
to make their attack -; and, by using the name and pretensions of
the Scottish Queen, they hoped to rouze the Engliff Catholics, for-
midable at that time for their zeal and numbers, and exasperated
to the utmost against Elizabeth, on account of the change which
ihe had made in the national religion.

In ordr to IT was vain to expect the affilance of the Scottish Proteflants to
thio ,

c eceslary

thi eckthe dethrone a Queen, whom all Europe esteemed the guardian and
Reformation defender of the reformed faith. To break the power and reputa-
'n Scotland. -

tion of that party in Scotland, became, for this reason, a necessary
ftep towards the invasion of England. With this the Princes of
Lorrain resolved to open their scheme. And as persecution was
the only method for suppressing religious opinions, known in that
age, or dictated by the despotic and Sanguinary spirit of the Romish
superstition, this, in its utmost violence, they determined to em-
ploy. The Earl of Argyll, the Prior of St. Andrew's, and other

* Anders. Diplom. Scot. No. 68 & 164;
4 Sorbes, ColleCt. i. 253 277.

leaders

leaders of the party, were marked out by them for immediate de- BOOK II.
Ilruaion *; and they hoped, by punishing them, to intimidate--
their follbwers. Inflrulions for this purpose were sent from 559
France to the Queen Regent. That humane and sagacious
Princess condemned a measure, which was equally violent and
impolitic. By long residence in Scotland, she had become ac-
quainted with the eager and impatient temper of the nation; she
well knew the power, the number, and popularity of the Pro-
teftant leaders; and had been a witness to the intrepid and un-
conquerable resolution which religious fervour could inspire. What,
then, could be gained by rouzing this dangerous spirit, which,
hitherto, all the arts of policy had scarce been able to restrain ? If
it once broke loose, the authority of a Regent would be little ca-
pable to subdue,. or even to moderate its rage. And if, in order
to quell it, foreign forces were called in, this would give the alarm
to the whole nation, irritated already at the excessive power which
the French possessed in the kingdom, and suspicious of all their
designs. Amidst the shock which this might occasion, far from
hoping to exterminate the Proteflant doctrine, it would be well if
the whole fabric of the eflabliflled church were not shaken, and
perhaps overturned from the foundation. These prudent remon-
firances made no impression on her brothers; precipitant, but in-
flexible in all their resolutions, they insisted on the full and rigorous
execution of their plan. Mary, passionately devoted to the
intereits of France, and ready, on all occasions, to sacrifice her
own opinions to the inclinations of her brothers, prepared to exe.
cute their commands, with implicit submission t; and, contrary

* Sorbes i. 152.
t Mel. 48. Mem. de Caftelnau. ap. Jebb. vol. ii. 446.

U 2 to

BOOK I1, to her own judgment, and to all the rules of found policy, shO
'-.-- became the inftrumePt of exciting civil commotions in Scotland,

'59' which ended with the ruin of the French power, and of the Po-

pith religion in that kingdom.

The Regent FROM the time of the Q.een's competition for the Regency
alters her con- i t u
dua hwith re- the Duke of Chatelherault, the Popihl clergy, under the di-
gard to the reltion of the Archbishop of St. Andrew's, had set themselves in
irrotellants.

opposition to all her measures. Her first ftep towards the execu-
tion of her new scheme, was to regain their favour. Nor was
this reconcilement a matter of difficulty. The Popish ecclefiafics,
separated from the reft of mankind by the law of celibacy, the
boldeft.and molt successful invention of human policy; and com-
bined among themselves in the clofetl and most sacred union; have
been accustomed, in every age, to sacrifice all private and particu-
lar passions to the dignity and interest of their order. Delighted,
on this occasion, with the profpeC of triumphing over a faction,
whose encroachments they had long dreaded; and animated with
the hopes of re-establishing their declining grandeur on a firmer
basis; they, at once, cancelled the memory of past injuries, and,
engaged to second the Queen in all her attempts to check the pro-
grefs of the Reformation. The Queen, being secure of their affiil-
ance, openly approved of the decrees of the convocation, by which
the principles of the Reformers were condemned ; and at the fame
time, she issued a proclamation, enjoining all persons to observe the
approaching festival of Easter, according to the Romish ritual.

As it was no longer possible to mitlake the Queen's intentions,

the Protestants, who saw the danger approach, in order to avert
it, employed the Earl of Glencairn, and Sir Hugh Campbell of

i Loudon,

London, to expofulate with her, concerning this change towards BOOK 1I.
severity, which their former services had so little merited, and
which her reiterated promises gave them no reason to expect. She, 559
without disguise or apology, avowed to them her resolution of ex-
tirpating the Reformed religion out of the kingdom. And, upon
their urging her former engagements, with an uncourtly, but ho-
nest boldness, 1he so far forgot her usual moderation, as to utter a
sentiment, which, however apt those of royal condition may be to
entertain it, prudence should teach them to conceal with the utmofi
care. The promises of Princes, fays Ihe, ought not to be too care-
fully remembered, nor the performance of them exacted, unless it
suits their own conveniency.

THE indignation, which betrayed the Queen into this rash ex- Summons

preflion, was nothing in comparison of that, with which the was thea'preachers
animated, upon hearing that the public exercise of the Reformed fore her.
religion had been introduced into the town of Perth. At once, she
threw off the mask, and commanded all the Protestant preachers in
the kingdom to be summoned to a court of jufiice, which was to
be held at Stirling on the tenth of May. The Protestants, who,
fiom their union, began, about this time, to be diftinguithed by the
name of the CONGREGATION, were alarmed, but not intimidated
by this danger; and instantly resolved not to abandon the men, to
whom they were indebted for the most valuable of all blessings, the
knowledge of truth. At that time, there prevailed in Scotland,
with respect to criminal trials, a custom, introduced, at first, by
the institutions of vassalage and clanlhip, and tolerated, afterwards,
under a feeble government; any person accused of a crime was ac-
companied to the place of trial, by a retinue of his friends and ad-
herents, assembled for that purpose, from every corner of the king-

dom.

BooK II. dom. Authorized by this ancient pra&ice, the Reformed convened,

559 in great numbers, to attend their pastors to Stirling. The Queen

dreaded their approach with a train so numerous, though unarmed,
and in order to prevent them from advancing, she empowered
John Erskine of Dun, a person of eminent authority with the par-
ty, to promise, in her name, that the would put a flop to the in-
tended trial, on condition, the preachers and their retinue advanced
no nearer to Stirling. Erskine, being convinced himself of the Queen's
sincerity, served her wi:h the utmost zeal. And the ProtefRants,
averse from proceeding to any ad of violence, listened with plea-
sure to so pacific a proposition. The preachers, with a few leaders
of the party, remained at Perth; the multitude, which had ga-
thered from different parts of the kingdom, dispersed, and retired
to their own habitations.

Breaks a pro- BUT, notwithstanding this solemn promise, the Queen, on the
tfe on which tenth of May, proceeded to call to trial the persons who had been
lied. summoned, and upon their non-appearance, the rigour of juflice

took place, and they were pronounced outlaws. By this ignoble
artifice, so incompatible with regal dignity, and so inconfiflent with
that integrity which should prevail in all tranfations between a So-
vereign and his people, the Queen forfeited the esleem and con-
fidence of the whole nation. The Proteflants, shocked no less at
the indecency, with which (he violated the public faith, than at
the danger which threatened themselves, prepared boldly for their
own defence. Erskine, enraged at having been made the inftru-
ment for deceiving his party, initantly abandoned Stirling, and re-
pairing to Perth, added to the zeal of his associates, by his repre-
fentations of the Queen's inflexible resolution to suppress their re-
ligion.

3 TIlE

THE popular rhetoric of Knox powerfully seconded his reprefen- BOOK II.

tations. Knox, having been carried a prisoner into France, toge-This occasions
ther with the other persons taken in the cattle of St. Andrew's, soon aninfurreftion
made his escape out of that country; and residing sometimes in
England, sometimes in Scotland, had, at lass, been driven out of
both kingdoms by the rage of the Popish clergy, and was obliged
to retire to Geneva. Thence he was called by the leaders of the
Protestants in Scotland; and, in compliance with their solicitations,
he set out for his native country, where he arrived a few days be-
fore the trial appointed at Stirling. He hurried instantly to Perth,
to (hare with his brethren in the common danger, or to assist them
in promoting the common cause. While their minds were in that
ferment, which the Queen's perfidiousness and their own danger
occasioned, he mounted the pulpit, and by a vehement harangue
against idolatry, inflamed the multitude with the utmost rage. The
indiscretion of a priess, who, immediately after Knox'sfermon, was
preparing to celebrate mass, and began to decorate the altar for
that purpose, precipitated them into immediate aAion. With tu-
multuary, but irrefifible violence, they fell upon the churches in
that city, overturned the altars, defaced the pictures, broke in pieces
the images; and proceeding next to the monasteries, they, in a
few hours, laid those sumptuous fabrics almoff level with the ground.
This riotous infurredion was not the effct of any concert, or pre-
vious deliberation : censured by the reformed preachers, and pub-
liLkly condemned by the persons of most power and credit with the
party, it mufft be regarded merely as an accidental eruption of po-
pular rage *.

* Knox, Hilt, J27, J28.

BUT

Boox II. Bur to the Queen herself, there proceedings appeared. in a very
'.---' different light. Besides their manifest contempt for her authority,

5The59 the Prote.ants had violated every thing in religion, which he

The Regent the Protestants had violated every thing in religion, which the
marches esteemed venerable or holy; and, on both these accounts, the de-
againit them.

termined to inflic the severest vengeafice on the whole party. She
had already drawn the troops in French pay to Stirling; with these,
and what Scottifi forces the could levy of a sudden, the marched
dire&ly to Perth, in hopes of surprising the Protestant leaders, be-
fore they could assemble their followers, whom out of confidence in
her disingenuous promises they had been rashly induced to difnifs.
Intelligence of these preparations and menaces was soon conveyed
to Perth. The Protestants would, gladly, have soothed the Queen,
by addresses both to herself, and to the persons of greatefl credit in
her court; but finding her inexorable, they, with great vigour,
took measures for their own defence. Their adherents, animated
with zeal for religion, and eager to expose themselves in so good.a
cause, flocked, in such numbers, to Perth, that they not only fe-
cured the town from danger, but, within a few days, were in a
condition to take the field, and to face the Queen, who advanced
with an army 7000 firong.

N E I T HER party, however, was impatient to engage. The

Queen dreaded the event of a battle with' men, whom the ser-
vour of religion railed above the sense of fear, or of danger. The
Protestants beheld, with regret, the Earl of Argyll, and Prior of
St. Andrew's, and some other eminent persons of their party, flill
adhering to the Queen; and destitute of their aid and counsel, de-
clined hazarding an aCtion, the ill success of which might have
pioved the ruin of their cause. The prospect of an accommoda-
tion was for there reasons highly acceptable to both fides: Argyll

and

;and the Prior, who were the Queen's commissioners for conduc:- BooK II.
ing the negotiation, seem to have been finicerely desirous of recon- '..
ciling the contending factions; and the earl of Glencairn arriving 559
unexpeEtedly with a powerful reinforcement to the Congregation,
augmented the Queen's eagerness for peace. A treaty was accord- A treaty con-
ingly concluded, in which it was stipulated, that both armies should duded.
be disbanded, and the gates of Perth set open to the Queen; that
indemnity should be granted to the inhabitants of that city, and to
all others concerned in the late infurredion; that no French gar-
rifon should be left in Perth, and no French soldiers should ap-
proach within three miles of that place; and that a Parliament
should immediately be held, in order to compose whatever diffe-
rences might fiill remain *.

THE Leaders of the Congregation, diftrufiful of the Queen's fin-

cerity, and sensible that concessions, flowing not from inclination,
but extorted by the neceflity of her affairs, could not long remain
in force, entered into.a new association, by which they bound them- May 2g9
selves, on the first infringement of the present treaty, or'on the lea.l
appearance of danger to their religion, to re-afiemble their followers,
and to take arms in defence of what they esteemed the cause of
God, and of their country -..

THE Queen, by .her conduct, demonstrated these precautions to Broken by the

be the result of no groundless or unneceflary fear. No sooner were Regent.
the Protestant forces difmified, than fle broke every article in the
treaty. She introduced French troops into Perth, fined some of
the inhabitants, banished others, removed the Magistrates out of
office, and, on her retiring to Stirling, she left behind her a garrison

* Keith, 89. 1- Knox, i38.
VOL. L X of

Bo6K II. of 600 men, with orders to allow the exercise of no, other religion
.-,,-- than the Roman Catholic. The situation of Perth, a place at that

1559' time of fame flrength, and a town the most proper of any in the

kingdom for the station of a garrison, seems to have allured the
Q!een to this unjutifiable, and ill-judged breach of public faith;
which she endeavoured to colour, by alledging that the body of
men left at Perth was entirely composed of native Scots, though kept
in pay by the King of France.

T'AE Queen's scheme began gradually to unfold; it was now

apparent, that not only the religion, but the liberties of the king-
dom were threatened; and that the French troops were to be em-
ployed as instruments for ubduing the Scots, and wreathing the
yoke about their necks. Martial as the genius of the Scots then was,
the poverty of their country made it impobiibe to keep their armies
long assembled; and even a very frnrdl body of regular troops might
have proved formidable to the nation, though. confifling wholly of
soldiers. But, what number of French forces were then in Scot-
land, at what time, and under what pretexts they returned, after
having left the kingdom in the year 1550o we cannot, with any
certainty, determine. Cotemporary historians often select, with
little judgment, the circumstances which they transmit to posterity;
and, with refped to matters of the greatefr curiosity and import-
ance, leave succeeding ages altogether in the dark. We may con-
jeaure however, from some passages in Buchanan, that the French
and Scots in French pay, amounted at least to 3000 men, under
the command of Mons. D'Oyfel, a creature of the house of Guise;
and they were soon augmented to a much more formidable num-
ber.

THiE

THE Queen,, encouraged by having so confiderarble a body of well BOOK II.

disciplined troops at her command, and inlfigated by the violent ' '
counsels of D'Oyfel, had ventured, as we have observed, to violate
the treaty of Perth, and, by that rash action, once more threw the
nation into the most dangerous convulsions. The Earl of Argyll and The Protest-

ants again

Prior of St. Andrew's inltantly deserted a court, where faith and ho- take arms.
nour seemed to them -to be no longer regarded. The Barons from
the neighbouring counties repaired to them, the preachers rouzed
the people to arms, and wherever they came, the fame violent ope-
rations, which accident had occasioned at Perth, were now encou-
raged out of policy. The enraged multitude was let loose, and
churches and monasteries, the monuments of ecclesiastic pride and
luxury, were sacrificed to their zeal.

IN order to check their career, the Queen, without losing a mo-

ment, put her troops in motion; but the zeal of the Congregation
got the flart, once more, of her vigilance and activity. In that
warlike age, when all men were accustomed to arms, and on the
least profpet of danger were ready to run to them, the leaders of
the Protestants found no difficnlty to raise an army. Though they
set out from St. Andrew's with a slender train of an hundred horse,
crowds flocked to their tfandards from every corner of the country
through which they marched, and before they reached Falkland, a
village only ten miles distant, they were able to meet the Queen
with superior force *.

THE Queen furprized at the approach of so formidable a body,
which was drawn up by its leaders in such a manner, as added

* Knox, 141.

X 2 greatly

156 THE THE HISTORY
BooK II. greatly in appearance to its numbers, had again recourse to nego-

"-rv m ciation. She found, however, that the preservation of the Pro-

559 teftant religion, their zeal for which had at first rouzed the leaders:

They aim at cos the Congregation to take arms, was not the only object they had:
redretiini civil
a. w.ell as re-now in view. They were animated with the warmest love of civil'
ligious giie-
vanees , liberty, which they conceived to be in imminent danger, from' the

attempts of the French forces; and there two passions mingling,
added reciprocally to each other's strength. Together with more
enlarged notions in religion, the Reformation filled the human mind
with more liberal and generous sentiments concerning civil govern-
ment. The genius of Popery is extremely favourable to the power
of Princes. The implicit submission to all her decrees, which the
Romish Church exats, prepares and breaks the mind for political ser-
vitude; and the dotrines of the Reformers, by overturning the efta-
blifhed sysem of superstition, weakened- the firmest foundations of
civil tyranny. That bold spirit of enquiry, which led men to reject
theological errors, accompanied them in other sciences, and disco-
vered every where the fame manly zeal for truth. A new study
introduced at the fame time, added greater force to the spirit of
liberty. Men became acquainted with the Greek and' Roman au-
thors, who described exquisite models of free government, far fu-
perior to the inaccurate and oppressive system established by the
fudal law; and produced such illuitrious examples of public vir-
tue, as wonderfully fuked both the circumstances, and spirit of that
age. Many, among the most eminent Reformers, were themselves
considerable masters in ancient learning; and all of them eagerly
adopted the maxims and spirit of the ancients, with regard to go-
vernment *.. The molt ardent love of liberty accompanied the Pro-

tecfant

* The excefflvc admiration of ancient policy was the occasion of Knox's famous.
book concerning the. Government of WIcmn,. wihcrein, conformable to. the maxims

of
2

teflant religion, throughout all its progress; and' wherever it was BOOK IL.
embraced, it rouzed an indepnendent spirit, which rendered men at- L
tentive to their privileges as fubjeds, and jealous of the incroach-
ments of their Sovereigns. Knox, and the other preachers of the
Reformation, infused generous sentiments concerning government
into' the minds of their hearers, and. the Scottish Barons, naturally
free and bold, were prompted to assert their rights with more free-
dom and boldness than ever. Inltead of obeying the Queen Re-
gent; who had enjoined them to lay down their arms, they de-
manded not only the redress of their religious grievances, but as
a preliminary toward fettling the nation, and securing its liberties,
required the immediate expulsion of the French troops out of Scot-
land, It was not in the Queen's power to make so- important a
conceflion, without the concurrence of the French Monarch ; and
as some time was requisite in order to obtain that, she hoped, dur-
ing this interval, to receive such reinforcements from France, as
would insure the accomplishment of that design, which. she had
twice attempted with unequal firength. Mean while, she agreed
to a ceflation of arms for eight days, and, before the expirationJune x,.
of there, engaged to transport the French troops to the other fide
of the Forth; and to fend commissioners to St.. Andrew's,, who
should labour to bring all differences to accommodation. As fie.
hoped, by means of the French troops, to overawe the Protestants
in the southern counties,. the former article in the treaty was

of the ancient.legillators, which modern experience has proved to be ill-founded,
he pronounces the elevation of women to the fipreme authority, to be utterly de-

fruCtivc of good government. -lis principles, authorities, and examples were all
drawn from ancient writers. The fime obfcrvation may be made with regar.d to
lBuchanan's Dialogue, De 7ure R&egni apud Scotos, It is founded not. on the maxims
of fxludal,, but of ancient government.

pundlually

BOOK II. puncually executed; the latter, having been inserted merely to

5""" amuse the Congregation, was no longer remembered.
1559.

A second trea- BY these reiterated and wanton instances of perfidy, the Queen
tv vio'ated. loft all credit with her adversaries; and no safety appearing in any

other course, they again took arms with more inflamed resentment,
and with bolder and more extensive views. The removing of the
French forces had laid open to them all the country Situated be-
tween Forth and Tay. The inhabitants of Perth alone remaining
fubjeded to the insolence and exactions of the garrison, which the
Queen had left there, implored the assistance of the Congregation for
their relief. Thither' they marched, and having, without effect,
required the Queen to evacuate the town in terms of the former
treaty, they prepared to besiege it in form. The Queen employed
the Earl of Huntly and Lord Erskine to divert them from this en-
terp ize. But her wonted artifices were now of no avail; repeated so
often, they could deceive no longer; and without listening to her
offers, the Protestants continued the siege, and soon obliged the gar-
rifon to capitulate.

Rapid march AFTER the loss of Perth, the Queen endeavoured to seize Stirling,
and success of a place of some strength, and, from its command of the only bridge
the Prote-
ftantb. over the Forth, of great importance. But the leaders of the Con-

gregation, having intelligence of her design, prevented the execu-
tion of it, by an hasty march thither, with part of their forces. The
inhabitants, heartily attached to the cause, set open to them the
gates of their town. Thence they advanced, with the fame rapi-
dity, towards Edinburgh, which the Queen, on their approach,
abandoned with precipitation, and retired to Dunbar,

THE

THE Protestant army, wherever it came, kindled, or fread the BooK II.
ardour of Reformation, and the utmost excesses of violence were corn- .

I559.

mitted upon churches and monatferies. The former were spoiled
of every decoration, which was then esteemed sacred, the latter were
laid in ruins. We are apt, at this diflance of time, to condemn
the furious zeal of the Reformers, and to regret the overthrow of
so many flately fabrics, the monuments of our ancestors magni-
ficence, and among the noblest ornaments of the kingdom.
But, amidst the violence of a Reformation, carried on in oppofi-
tion to legal authority, some irregularities were unavoidable; and
perhaps no one could have been permitted more proper to allure
and interefl the mulritude, or more fatal to the grandeur of the
established church. However absurd and. ill-founded the fpecula-
tive errors of Popery may be, some inquiry a'rnd attention are requi-
site towards discovering them. The a'b-ues and corruptions, which
had crept into the public worship of that church, lay more open
to observation, and by firiking the senses, excited more universal
difgufl. Under the long reign of Heathenifrn, superstition seems to
have exhaufled its talent of invention, so that when a superstitious
spirit seized Chritfians, they were obliged to imitate the Heathens
in the pomp and magnifience of their ceremonies, and to borrow.
from them the ornaments and decorations of their temples. To the
pure and simple worflip of the primitive Christians, there succeeded.
a species of splendid idolatry, nearly resembling thole pagan origi-
nals, whence it had been copied. The contrariety of such obfer.
vllces, to the spirit of Christianity, was almof: the firfl thing, in
the Romish system, which awakened the indignation of the Re-
formers, who applying'to these, the denunciations in the Old Te(-a-
ment against idolatry, imagined that they could not. endeavour at
fupprcfling them, with too much zeal. No tafl could be more ac-

ceptable
4

BOOK II. ceptable to the multitude, than to overturn those feats of fuperli-

"--tion ; they ran with emulation to perform it, and happy was the
'159. man whose hand was most adventrous and successful in executing a

work esteemed so pious. Nor did their leaders labour to restrain this
impetuous spirit of Reformation. Irregular and violent as its sallies
were, they tended direcly to that end which they had in view;
for by demolishing the monalteries throughout the kingdom, and
setting at liberty their wretched inhabitants, they hoped to render
it impossible ever to rebuild the one, or to re-assemble the other.

BUT amidst there irregular proceedings, a circumstance, which

does honour to the conduct and humanity of the leaders of the
Congregation, deserves notice. They so far restrained the rage of
their followers, and were able so to temper their heat and zeal,
that few of the Roman Catholics were exposed to any personal in-
fult, and not a tingle man suffered death *.

AT the fame time, we discover, by the facility with which these

great revolutions were effeced, how violently the current of na-
tional favour ran towards the Reformation. No more than 300
men marched out of Perth under the Earl of Argyll and Prior of
St. Andrew's -; with this inconsiderable force they advanced. But
wherever they came, the people joined them in a body; their army
was seldom less numerous than 5000 men; the gates of every town
were thrown open to receive them; and, without firiking a .ingle
June 29. blow, they took poffeflion of the capital of the kingdom.

TH IS rapid and astonishing success seems to have encouraged the
Reformers to extend their views, and to rife in their demands.

* Lefy, 231. t Keith, 94.

sot

Not satisfied with their firfl claim of toleration for their religion, BooK II.
they now, openly, aimed at establishing the Protestant doctrine on "-,--
the ruins of Popery. For this reason, they determined to fix their 559
residence at Edinburgh; and; by their appointment, Knox and some
other preachers taking poffffion of the pulpits, which had been
abandoned by the affrightened clergy, declaimed against the errors of
Popery, with such fervent zeal, as could not fail of gaining many
proselytes.

IN the mean time, the Queen, who had prudently given way

to a torrent which she could not resist, observed, with pleasure,
that it now began to subside. The leaders of the Congregation had
been above two months in arms, and by the expences of a cam-
paign, protraaed so long beyond the usual time of service, in that
age, had exhausted all the money, which a country, where riches
did not abound, had been able to supply. The multitude, dazzled
with their success, and concluding the work to be already done, re-
tired to their own habitations. A few, only, of the more zealous or
wealthy Barons remained with their preachers at Edinburgh. As
intelligence is procured in civil wars with little difficulty, whatever
was tranfated at Edinburgh, was soon known at Dunbar. And the
Queen, regulating her own conduct by the situation of her adver-
saries, artfully amused them with the profped of an immediate
accommodation; while, at the fame time, she, by studied delays,
spun out the negociations for that purpose, to such a length, that,
in the end, the party dwindled to an inccnfidcrable number, and,
as if peace had been already re-established, became carclefs of mili-
tary discipline. The QOeen, who watched for such an opportunity,
advanced, unexpectedly, by a sudden march in the night with all
her forces, and appearing before Edinburgh, filled that city with

VOL. I. Y the

Bo6K II. the utmolt consternation. The Protestants, weakened by the im-;

c v59 prudent dispersion of their followers, durst not encounter the French

troops in the open field; and were even unable to defend an ill-
fortified town, againfi their assaults. Unwilling, however, to aban-
don the citizens to the Queen's mercy, they endeavoured, by facing
the enemies army, to gain time for collecting their own afibciates,
But, the Queen, in spite of all their refinance, would have easily
forced her way into the town, if the seasonable conclusion of a
truce had not procured her admiffton, without the effusion of
blood.
Athirdtreaty. THEIR dangerous situation easily induced the Congregation to

liften to any overtures of peace; and as the Queen was looking
daily for the arrival of a firong reinforcement from France, and ex-
pe&ed great advantages from a ceflation of arms, fle also agreed to
it upon no unequal conditions. Together with a suspension ofhof-
tilitics, f-rom the 24th of July to the ioth of January, it was ftipu-
lated, in this treaty, that, on the one hand, the Protestants should
abandon Edinburgh next morning; remain in dutiful fubjetion
to the government of the Queen Regent; abflain from all future
violation of religious houses; and give no interruption to the efla-
blifled clergy, either in the discharge of their functions, or in the
enjoyment of their benefices. On the other hand, the Queen
agreed to give no molefation to the preachers or profffors of the
Protestant religion; to allow no other form of worship in Edin-
burgh but the Reformed; and to permit the free and public ex-
ercife of it all over the kingdom. The Queen hoped to tooth the
Protcftants, by thcf liberal concefions in behalf of their religion,
and expccted, from indulging their favourite passion, to render them

mlore

more compliant with refped to other articles, particularly the cx-BooK II.
pulfion of the French troops out of Scotland. The anxiety which i59
the Queen expressed for retaining this body of men, rendered them,
more and more, the objects of national jealousy and aversion. The
immediate expulsion of them was therefore demanded a-new, and
with greater warmth; but the Queen, taking advantage of the dif-
trefs of the adverse party, eluded the request, and would content to
nothing more, than that a French garrison should not be introdu-
ced into Edinburgh.

THE desperate state of their affairs, imposed on the Congrega-

tion the necessity of agreeing to this article, which, however, was
very far from giving them fatisfadion. Whatever apprehensions
the Scots had conceived, from retaining the French forces in the
kingdom, were abundantly justified during the late commotions.
A fmnall body of those troops, maintained in constant pay, and ren-
dered formidable by regular discipline, had checked the progress of
a martial people, though animated with zeal both for religion and
liberty. The smallest addition to their number, and a considerable
one was daily expected, might prove fatal to public liberty, and Scot-
land might be exposed to the danger of being reduced, from an
independent kingdom, to the mean condition of a province, annex-
ed to the empire of its powerful ally.

IN order to provide against this imminent calamity, the Duke

of Chatelherault, and Earl of Huntly, immediately after concluding
the truce, desired an interview with the chiefs of the Congre-
gation. ,These two noblemen, the most potent, at that time, in
Scotland, were the leaders of the party, which adhered to tile
cflablifled church. They had followed the Qeen, during the

Y 2 late

BOOK II. late commotions, and having access to observe more narrowly the
<-- -V- dangerous tendency of her councils, their abhorrence of the yoke

which was preparing for their country, surmounted all other con-
fiderations, and determined them rather to endanger the religion
which they professed, than to give their aid towards the execution
of her pernicious designs. They proceeded farther, and promised
to Argyll, Glencairn, and the Prior of St. Andrew's, who were ap-
pointed to meet with them, that if the Queen should, with her usual
insincerity, violate any article in the treaty of truce, or refuse to
gratify the wishes of the whole nation, by dismissing her French
troops, they would then, instantly join with their countrymen, in
compelling her to a measure, which the public safety, and the pre-
servation of their liberties rendered necessary .
July a. ABOUT this time, died Henry II. of France; jufi when he had

adopted a fyflem, with regard to the affairs of Scotland, which
would, in all probability, have restored union and tranquillity to
that kingdom t. Towards the close of his reign, the Princes of
Lorrain began, visibly, to decline in favour, and the Constable
Montmorency, by the assistance of the Dutchess of Valentinois,
recovered that ascendant over the spirit of his master, which his
great experience, and his faithful, though often unfortunate ser-
vices, seemed justly to merit. That prudent minister imputed the
infurreaions in Scotland wholly to the Duke of Guise and Cardi-
nal of Lorrain, whose violent and precipitant councils could not fail
of transporting, beyond all bounds of moderation, men, whose
minds were poifeffed with that jealousy, which is inseparable from
the love of civil liberty, or inflamed with that ardour which ac-

Knox, 154. - Mclv. 49.

companies

companies religious zeal. And, in order to convince Henry, that .Boox I.
he did not load his rivals with any groundless accusation, he pre-
vailed to have Melvil *, a Scottish Gentleman of his retinue, def-
patched into his na ive country, with inflruaions to observe the
motions both of the Regent, and of her adversaries ; and the King
agreed to regulate his future proceedings, in that kingdom, by
Melvil's report.

DID history indulge herself in such speculations, it would be

amusing to enquire what a different direcion might have been given
by this resolution, to the national spirit; and to what a different
issue Melvil's report, which would have set the conduc of the
malecontents in the mofl favourable light, might have conducted
the public disorders. Perhaps, by gentle treatment, and artful po-
licy, the progress of the Reformation, might have been checked,
and Scotland brought to depend upon France. Perhaps, by gain-
ing pofflffion of this avenue, the French might have made their
way into England, and, under colour of supporting Mary's title
to the Crown, they might have re-established the Roman Catho-
lic religion, and destroyed the liberties of that kingdom. But, into
this boundless field of fancy and conjecure, the historian must make
no excursions; to relate real occurrences, and to explain their real
causes and effects, is his peculiar and only province.

THE tragical and untimely death of the French monarch put Acceflion of

an end to all moderate and pacific measures, with regard to Scot- FIrancis .n to
land. The Duke of Guise, and the Cardinal his brother, upon France.
the acceflion of Francis II. a Prince void of genius, and without

* The Author of the Memoirs.

experience,

Book II. experience, assumed the chief direetion of French affairs. Allied

,559 £so nearly to the throne, by the marriage of their niece the Queen
2559.

of Scots with the young King, they now wanted but little of re-
gal dignity, and nothing of regal power. This power did not long
remain inactive in their hands. The fame vast schemes of ambi-
tion, which they had planned out under the former reign, were
again resumed, and they were enabled, by possesing such ample
authority, to pursue them with more vigour, and greater probabi-
lity of success. They beheld, with infinite regret, the progress of
the Protestant religion in Scotland ; and sensible what an unfurmount-
able obstacle it would prove to their designs, they bent all their
strength to check its growth, before it rose to any greater height.
For this purpose, they carried on their preparations with all pof-
fible expedition, and encouraged the Queen their sifter, to expect,
in a short time, the arrival of an army, so powerful, as the zeal of
their adversaries, however desperate, would not venture to op-
pose.

NOR were the Lords of the Congregation either ignorant of those

violent counsels, which prevailed in the court of France, since the
death of Henry, or careless of providing against the danger, which
threatened them from that quarter. The success of their cause, as
well as their personal safety, depending entirely on the unanimity
and vigour of their own resolutions, they endeavoured to guard
against division, and to cement together more closely, by entering
into a ltriaer bond of confederacy and mutual defence. Two per-
sons concurred in this new aflbciation, who brought a great ac-
ceflion both of reputation and of power to the party. These were
the Duke of Chatclherault, and his eldest son the Earl of Arran.
This young nobleman, having resided some Years in France, where

he
8

he commanded the Scottish guards, had imbibed the Protestant opi- BOOK If.
nions concerning religion. Hurried along by the heat of youth,

1559.

and the zeal of a proselyte, he had uttered sentiments, with refpeet
to the points in controversy, which did not suit the temper of a
bigotted court, intent, at that juncture, on the extinaion of the
Protestant religion; in order to accomplish which, the utmost ex-
cesses of violence were committed. The church was suffered to
wreak its utmost fury upon all who were fufpeded of heresy. Courts
were erected, in different parts of France, to take cognizance of
this crime, and by their sentences, several persons of distinction
were condemned to the flames.

BUT, in order to inspire more universal terror, the Princes of

Lorrain resolved to felec, for a sacrifice, some person, whose fall
might convince all ranks of men, that neither splendor .of birth,
nor eminence in fiation, would exempt from punishment, those
who should be guilty of this unpardonable transgression. The
Earl of Arran was the pe:fon destined to be the unhappy viCim *.
As he was allied to one throne, and the presumptive heir to an-
other; as he poffefied the firfi rank in his own country, and enjoyed
an honourable station in France; his condemnation could not fail of
making the desired impression on the whole kingdom. But the
Cardinal of Lorrain, having let fall some expressions, which raised
the Earl of Arran's fup.icions of the design, he escaped the intended
blow by a timely flight. Indignation, zeal, resentment, all prompted
him to seek revenge upon there persecutors of himself and of the
religion which he professed; and as he passed through England,
on his return to his native country, Elizabeth, by hopes and

* Thuan. lib. xxiv. p. 462. Edit..Francof.

pr'O'

BoaK II. promises, inflamed those palions, and sent him back into Scotland,
JL>r^ animated with the iame implacable averlion for France, which pof-
Earl Arranfeffed a great part of his countrymen. He quickly communicated
join the Pr- there sentiments to his father the Duke of Chatelherault, who was
te¢ants.

already extremely disgusted with the measures carrying on in Scot-
land ; and as it was the fate of that nobleman to be governed, in
every intfance, by those about him, he now suffered himself to be
drawn from the Queen Regent; and having joined the Congrega-
tion, was confiderled, from that time, as the head of the party.

BUT with refped to him, this diftintion was merely nominal.

James Stewart, Prior of St. Andrew's, was the person who moved
and acuated the whole body of the Proteflants, among whom, he
poffeled that unbounded confidence, which his firenuous adhe-
rence to their interefr, and his great abilities, so justly merited.
He w:s the natural son of James V. by a daughter of Lord Erskine;
aid as that amorous monarch, had left several others a burden upon
the Crown, they were all destined for the church, where they
could be placed in tlations of dignity and affluence. In consequence
of this resolution, the Priory of St. Andrew's had been conferred
upon James: but, during so busy a period, he soon became dif-
gusted with the indolence and retirement of a monastic life; and
his enterprising genius called him forth, to ad a principal part on
a more public and conspicuous theatre. The cfene, in which he
appearcd, required talents of different kinds; and military virtue,
and political discernment, were equally necciTary, in order to render
him illuifrious. These he pofTcffcd in an eminent degree. To the
most unquestionable personal bravery, he added great kill in the
art of war, and in every enterprize his arms were crowned with
success. His sagacity and penetration in civil affairs enabled him,

amidst

amidst the reeling and turbulence of facions, to hold a prosperous BOOK II.
course. While his boldness in defence of the Reformation, toge- 1559
ther with the decency, and even severity of his manners, secured
him the reputation of being sincerely attached to religion, without
which it -was impofible, in that age, to gain an ascendant over
mankind.

IT was not without reason, that the Queen dreaded the enmity

of a man, so capable to obflrud her designs. And as the could
not, with her utmost address, make the least impression on his si-
delity to his associates, the endeavoured to lessen his influence, and
to cfatter among them the feeds ofjealoufy and distrust, by infi-
nuating that the ambition of the Prior aspired beyond the condi-
tion of a subject, and aimed at nothing lets than the Crown it-
self.

AN accusation so improbable gained but little credit. And what-

ever thoughts of this kind, the presumption of unexpected fuc-
cess, and his elevation to the highest dignity in the kingdom, may
be alledged to have inspired, at any subsequent period, it is certain
that, at this juncture, he could form no such vast design. To de-
throne a Queen, who was lineal heir to an ancient race of Monarchs;
who had been guilty of no adtion, by which she could forfeit the
esteem and affedion of her fubjeds; who could employ, in de-
fence of her rights, the forces of a kingdom much more power-
ful than her own; and to substitute, in her place, a person, whom
the illegitimacy of his birth, by the practiceofall civilized nations,
rendered incapable of any inheritance, either public or private ; was
a projei, so chimerical, as the most extravagant ambition would
scarce entertain, and could never conceive to be practicable. The

VOL. I. Z promise,

BOOK II. promtie, too, which the Prior made to Melvil, of residing con.
_-- --' ftantly in France, on condition the public grevances were redref-
1559' fed *; the confidence reposed in him by the Duke of Chatelherault

and his son, the presumptive heirs to the Crown; and the con-
currence of almost the whole Scottish nobles, in promoting those
measures, by which he gave offence to the French court, go far
towards his vindication from those illegal and criminal designs, with
the imputation of which, -the Queen endeavoured, at that time, to,
load him.

Troops arrive The arrival of a thousand French soldiers compensated, in some
from France, degree, for the loss which the Queen sustained by the defedion of
and fortify '
Lekis, the Duke of Chatelherault. These were, immediately, commanded

to fortify Leith, in which place, on account of its commodious
harbour, and its situation in the neighbourhood of Edinburgh, and
in a plentiful country, the Queen resolved to fix the head quar-
ters of her foreign forces. This unpopular measure, by the man-
ner of executing it, was rendered still more unpopular. In order
to bring the town entirely under their command, the French turn-
ed out a great part of the ancient inhabitants, and taking poflefiior
of the houses which they had obliged them to abandon, present-
ed, to the view of the Scots, two objects equally irritating and
offensive; on the one hand, a number of their countrymen expelled
their habitations by violence, and wandering without any certain
abode; on the other, a colony of foreigners,. fettling, with their
wives and children, in the heart of Scotland, growing into frength
by daily reinforcements, and openly preparing a yoke, to which,
without some timely exertion of national spirit, the whole kingdom.
mult, of neceflity, submit.

* Mclv. S4.

IT

IT was with the utmofft concern that the Lords of the Congre- Boo II.
gation beheld this bold and decisive flep, taken by the Queen -

1559.

Regent . nor did they hesitate, a moment, whether they Mhould em- The Prote-
ploy their whole firength, in one generous effort, to rescue their sants remon-
religion and liberty from impending deftrudion. But, in order to this,
juflify their own conduc, and to throw the blame entirely on their
adversaries, they resolved to preserve the appearances of decency and
refped towards their superiors, and to have no recourse to arms,
without the molt urgent and apparent necessity. They joined Sept. .,
with this view, in an address to the Regent, representing, in the
strongest terms their diffatisfadion with the measures she was pur-
suing, and beseeching her to quiet the fears and jealousies of the
nation, by desisting from fortifying Leith. The Queen, conscious of
her present advantageous situation, and elated with the hopes of frefl
succours, was in no disposition for listening to demands, utterly in-
consistent with her views, and urged with that bold importunity,
which is so little acceptable to Princes.

THE suggestions of her French Counsellors contributed with-The Regent
out doubt, to alienate her {till farther from any scheme of accom- disregards

their rernon-

modation. As the Queen was ready, on all occasions, to discover ilrances,
an extraordinary deference for the opinions of her countrymen,
her brothers, who knew her secret disapprobation of the violent
measures they were driving on, took care to place near her such
persons, as betrayed her, by their insinuations, into many acions,
which her own unbiased judgment would have highly condemned.
And as their success in the present junture, when all things were
haflening towards a crisis, depended entirely on the Queen's firm-
ness, the Princes of Lorrain did not trust wholly to the influence of
their ordinary agents; but, in order to add the greater weight to

Z 2 their

BooK II. their counsels, they called in aid the Minifiers of religion; and, by

the authority of their sacred character, they hoped effeaually to
1559. recommend to their sifter, that fyflem of severity, which they had

espoused *. With this view, but under pretence of confounding
the Protestants by the skill of such able matters in controversy,
they appointed several French divines to reside in Scotland. At
the head of these, and with the character of legate from the Pope,
was Pelleve Biflhop of Amiens, and afterwards Archbishop and Car-
dinal of Sens, a furious bigot, servilely devoted to the house of
Guise, and a proper instrument for recommending or executing the
mofl outrageous measures.

AMIDST the noise and danger of civil arms, these Docors had.

little opportunity to display their address in the use of their theological
weapons. But they gave no small offence to the nation by one of
their acions. They persuaded the Queen to seize the church of
St. Giles's in Edinburgh which had remained, ever since the late
truce, in the hands of the Protestants ; and having, by a new and
solemn consecration, purified the fabric from the pollution, with
which they supposed the profane ministrations of the Protestants
to have defiled it, they in dire&t contradiction to one article, in the
late treaty, re-established there the rites of the Romif( church.
This, added to the indifference, and even contempt, with which
the Queen received their remonstrances, convinced the Lords of the
Congregation, that it was not only vain to expect any redress of
their grievances at her hands, but absolutely necefary to take arms
in their own defence.

* Lefy, 215. Cafelnau. ap. Jcbb. vol. ii. 446. 473.

TH E

THE eager and impetuous spirit of the nation, as well as every BooK II:
consideration of good policy, prompted them to take this bold ftep -

"I559.

without delay. It was but a finall part of the French auxiliaries They take
which had as yet arrived. The fortifications of Leith, though ad- armsin their

own defence.

vancing fait, were still far from being compleat. Under these cir-
cumirances of disadvantage, they conceived it pofible to furprize
the Que n's party, and, by one sudden and decisive blow, to pre-
vent all future bloodsled and contention. Full of these expecta-
tions, they advanced rapidly towards Edinburgh with a numerous OAober 6.
army. But it was no easy matter to deceive an adversary, so vigi-
lant and attentive as the Q eeen Regent. With her usual saga-
city, the both foresaw the danger, and took the only proper course
to avoid it. Inflead of keeping the field against enemies, superior
in number, and formidable on a day of battle, by the ardour of
their courage, fle retired into Leith, and determined patiently
to wait the arrival of new reinforcements. Slight and unfinished
as the fortifications of that town then were, fle did not dread the
effors of an army, provided neither with heavy cannon, nor with
military stores, and utterly ignorant of the method of attacking any
place, fortified with Inorn art than thofeancient towers, erected all
over the kingdom, in defence of private property against the incur-
Lons of banditti.

NOR did the Queen, mean while, neglet to have recourse to

those arts, which (he had often employed, to weaken or divide her
adversaries. By private follicitations and promises, file (sook the
fidelity, or abated the ardor of some. By open reproach and ac-
cufation, flie blafled the reputation, and diminished the authority
of others. Icer eminfiries were every where at work, and, notwith-
flanding the zeal for religion and liberty, which then animated the

nation,
8

Book II. nation, they seem to have laboured not without success. We find

55'9L' KNox, about this period, abounding in complaints of the luke-
1559.

warm and languid spirit, which had begun to spread among his
party *. But, if their zeal slackened a little, and suffered a momen-
tary intermission, it soon blazed up with fresh vigour, and rose to
a greater height than ever.

Renew their THE Queen herself gave occasion to this, by the reply which (he
remon-
ftrances. made to a new remonstrance from the Lords of the Congrega.

tion. Upon their arrival at Edinburgh, they once more repre-
sented to her the dangers arising from the increase of the French
troops, the fortifying of Leith, and her other measures, which they
conceived to be deftrudive to the peace and liberty of the kingdom;
and in this address, they spoke in a firmer tone, and avowed,
more openly than ever, their resolution of proceeding to the utmost
extremities, in order to put a flop to such dangerous encroach-
ments. To a remonstrance of this nature, and urged with so much
boldness, the Queen replied in terms no less vigorous and explicit.
She pretended that she was not accountable to the confederate lords
for any part of her conduct. And upon no representation of their's,
would She either abandon measures, which /he deemed necessary;
or dismiss forces, which the found useful; or demolifl a fortifica-
tion, which might prove of advantage. At the fame time, the

But without required them, on pain of treason, to disband the forces which they
success. had assembled.

THIS haughty and imperious flile founded harshly to Scottih nobles,
impatient from their national character, of the slightest appearance

* Knox, 18o.
3 -f

,i inljury; accustomed, even from their own monarchs, to the most BOOK II.
rrrfctful treatment; and possesing, under an ariftocratical form of -o
o,,vernment, such a share of power as equalled, at all times, and 5
often controlled that of the Sovereign. They were sensible, at once,
of the indignity offered to themselves, and alarmed with this plain
declaration of the Queen's intentions; and, as there now remained
but one flep to take, they wanted neither public spirit nor refolu-
tion to take it.

BUT, that they might not seem to depart from the established Deliberate

forms of the constitution, for which, even amidst their most vio- heocernng
lent operations, men always retain the greateif reverence, they atl-which they

ought to

fembled the whole Peers, Barons, and Representatives of burroughs take.
who adhered to their party. These formed a Convention, which Oaober 2.z
exceeded in number, and equalled in dignity, the usual meetings of
parliament. The leaders of the Congregation laid before them the
declaration which the Queen had given in answer to their remon-
ftrance; represented the.unavoidable ruin, which the measures, the
therein avowed and justified, would bring upon the kingdom; and
requiring their direction with regard to the obedience due to an ad-
ministration so unjust and oppressive, they submitted to their deci-
sion, a queflion, one of the most delicate and interesting that can
possibly fall under the consideration of fubjeds.

THIS assembly proceeded to decide, with no less dispatch, than

unanimity. Strangers to those forms, which protrac business; un-
acquainted with the arts, which make a figure in debate; and much
more fitted for action, than discourse; a warlike people always haften
to a conclusion, and bring their deliberations to the (horteft issue
It was the work but of one day, to examine and to resolve this

nice

Book II. nice problem, concerning the behaviour of fubjets towards a ruler
.;,. who abuses his power. But, however abrupt their proceedings

may appear, they w'ee not destitute of solemnity. As the deter-
mination of the point in doubt, was conceived to be no less the of-
fice of divines, than of laymen, the former were called to afflft
with their opinion. Knox and Willox appeared for the whole or-
der, and pronounced, without hesitation, both from the precepts
and examples in scripture, that it was lawful for fubjeds not only
to resist tyrannical princes, but to deprive them of that authority,
which, in their hands, becomes an inftrurment for defhroying those,
whom the Almighty ordained them to protect. The 'decilion of
persons, revered so highly for their sacred chara&er, but more for
their zeal and their piety, had great weight with the whole as-
fembly. Not satisfied with the common indiscriminate manner of
signifying content, every person present was called in his turn to
declare his sentiments, and rising up in order, all gave their futfra-

They dep:iv- ges, without one difenting voice, for depriving the Queen of the
the Qeen of
the office of office of Regent, which fie had exercised so much to the detri-
Regent. ment of the kingdom *

THIS extraordinary sentence was owing no lets to the love of li-
thllr c^idua. berty, than to zeal for religion. In the ad of deprivation, religi-

ous grievances are slightly mentioned; and the dangerous incroach-
ments of the Queen upon the civil constitution are produced, by
the Lords of the Congregation, in order to prove their conducc to
have been not only just, but necetfary. The introducing foreign
troops into a kingdom, at peace with all the world; the seizing and
fortifying towns in different parts of the country; the promoting
Rfrangers to oficcs of great power and dignity; the dcbafing the

* Knox, 184.

current

current coin i ; the subverting the ancient laws; the imporfng of B9oK I,
new and burdensome taxes; and the attempting to subdue the king- 5
dom, and to oppress its liberties, by open and repeated acts of vio-
lence, are enumerated at great length, and placed in the strongest
light. On all these accounts, the Congregation maintained that the
nobles, as counsellors to their monarchs, and the guardians and
defenders of the conflitution, had a right to interpose; and there-
fore, by virtue of this right, in the name of the King and Queen,
and with many expreflions of duty and fubmilion towards them,
they deprived the Qjeen Regent of her office, and ordained, that,
for the future, no obedience should be given to her commands t.

VIOLENT as this action may appear, there wanted not principles

in the confti:ution, nor precedents in the hiifory of Scotland, to
justify and to authorize it. Under the- ariftocratical -form of go-
vernment efablifled among the Scots, the power of the Sovereign
was extremely limited. The more considerable nobles were them-

* The standard of money in Scotland was continually varying. hi the l(th of

James V. A. D. 1529, a pound weight of'gold, when coined, produced i08 pounds
of current money. But under the Queen Regent's adminiflration, A. D. 1556, a
pound weight of gold, although the quantity of alloy was considerably encreafed,
produced 144 pounds current money. In 1529, a pound weight of silver, when
coined, produced 91.2 s.; but in 1556, it produced 131. current money. Rud.
dim.. Prafat. ad Anders. Diplomat. Scotie, p. 80, 8r. from which, it appears that
this complaint, which the malecontents often repeated, was not altogether defli-
tute of foundation.

- M. Caflelnau, after condemning the dangerous councils of the Princes of Lor-

rain with regard to the affairs of Scotland, acknowledges, with his usual candour,
that the Scots declared war against the Queen Regent, rather frcm a desire of vin-
dicating their civil liberties, than from any motive of religion. Mem. 446.

VOL. I. A a flves

B6oK II. selves petty Princes, poffeffiing extensive jurifdia:ions, altnmft iade,
'y-"-' pendent of the crown, and followed by numerous vassals, who, ii

559 every contest, espoused their chieftain's quarrel,. in opposition to the

King. Hence the many instances of the impotence of regal autho-
rity, which are to be found in the Scottish history. In every age,.
the nobles not only claimed, but exercised the right of controuling
the King. Jealous of their privileges, and eager to take the field
in defence of them, every error in adminitfration was observed,
every encroachment upon the rights of the aristocracy excited indigna-
tion, and no Prince ever ventured to transgress the boundaries,
which the law had prescribed to prerogative, without meeting re-
fiftance, which shook,. or overturned his throne. Encouraged by,
the spirit of the conflitution, and countenanced by the example of
their ancestors, the Lords of the Congregation thought it incum-
bent on them, at this juncture, to inquire, into the mal adminifira-
tion of the Queen Regent, and to preserve their country from being:
enslaved or conquered, by depriving her of the power to.execute:
such a pernicious scheme *.

Thle at of deprivation, and'a letter from the Lords of the Congregation to the

Queen Regent are fill extant, Knox, 184. They discover not only' that masculine
and undaunted fpirir, natural to men capable of so bold a resolution;. but-are re-
markable for a.precifion, and vigour of exprelfion, which we are furprized to meet
with in an age. o impolifhed; The.fame observation may be made with refpeft to the
other public papers of that period. The ignorance or bad tafle of an age may
render the compositions of authors by profession obscure, or affleAed; or absurd;
but the language of business is nearly the fame at all times; and wherever men .think
dearly, and are thoroughly interested, they exprcfs themselves with perspicuity and
force.

T H: E'

# THE HISTORY OF SCOTLAND. BOOK III.

THE
H I S T 0 R Y

O F
SCOTLAND.

B 0 0 K III.
T; ^- HE Lords of the Congregation soon found, that their zeal BOOK flI.

had engaged them in an undertaking, which it was beyond _-----
their utmost ability to accomplish, The French garrison, 1Th 559gre-

gation invol-

despising their numerous, but irregular forces, refused to surrender ,vedin in.
Leith, and to depart out of the kingdom; nor were they fuffici-ties.
ently skilful in the art of war to reduce the place by force, or
possessed of the artillery, or magazines, requisite for that purpose;
and their followers, though of undaunted courage, yet being accuf-
tomed to decide every quarrel by a battle, were itrangers to the
fatigues of a long campaign, and soon became impatient of the
revere and constant duty which a siege requires. The Q.een's
emiTfaries, who found it easy to mingle with their countrymen,
were at the utmost pains to heighten their difgufl, which discovered
itself at firlt in murmurs and complaints, but on occasion of the
want of money for paying the army, broke out into open mutiny.

A a 2 The

Bo'o III.The mofft emlnent leaders were scaree secure from the unbridled
'-v"" iinfolence of the soldiers; while some of inferior rank, interposing

too ra(hly in order to quell them, were torn in pieces by their rage-
Discord, consternation, and perplexity reigned in the camp of the
Reformers. The Duke, their General, funk, with his usual timi-
dity, under the terror of approaching danger, and discovered ma-
nifeft symptoms of repentance for his rashness, in espousing such a
desperate cause.

y to 1i-. IN this situation of their affairs, the Congregation had recour.e

Apply to Eli. -
.-.,blth fur as- to Elizabeth, from whose proteaion they could derive their

only reasonable hopes of success. Some of their more sagacious.
leaders, having foreCeen that the party might probably be i:volved
in great difficulties, had'endeavoured to-fecure a resource in any such
exigency, by entering into a secret correspondence with the court of
England *. Elizabeth, aware of the dangerous designs which the
Princes of Lorrain.had formed against her Crown, was early sensible
of how much importance it would be,, not only to check the
progress of the French in Scotrand, but to extend her own influ-
ence in that kingdom f; and perceiving how effetually, the. pre.
sent insurrections would contribute to retard' or defeat the schemes
formed against England, flhe listened with pleasure to there ap-
plications of the malecontents, and gave them private assurances of
powerful support to their cause. Randolph +, an agent extremely
proper for conducing any dark intrigue, was despatched into Scot-
land, and residing secretly among the Lords of the Congregation,
observed and quickened' their motions. Money seemed to be the
only thing they wanted at that time; and it was owing to a season-

-* Burn. Ilif. Ref. 3. Append, 278, Keith, Append. 21.
t See Append. N 1. 1: Keith, Append. 29.

able.

able femittance from England *, that. the Scottith nobles had been BooK III.
enabled ;totake the field, and to advance towards Leith. But as
Elizabeth was distrustful of the Scots, and studious to preserve 15
appearances with France, her subsidies were betlowed at first with
extreme frugality. The fu.bfifence of an army, and the expences
of a iege soon exhausted this penurious supply,. to which the Lords.
of the Congregation could make little addition from their own
funds; and the ruin and dispersion of the party must have instantly
followed..

IN order to prevent this, Cockburn of Ormiflon was sent, with. She fends

them a fiall;

the utmost expedition, to the governors of the town and castle of fumofmonev,.
Berwick. As Berwick was, at that time, the town of greatest im-
portanc.e on the Scottish frontier, Sir Ralph. Sadler and Sir James
Crofts, persons of considerable figure, were employed to command
there, and were entrusted with a discretionary power of supplying
the Scottish malecontents, according to the exigency of their affairs.
From them Cockburn received 400oo crowns, but little to the ad-
vantage of -his party. The Earl of Bothwell, by the Queen's infli- Which is in.
gation, lay in wait for him on: his return, dispersed his followers, tercepted:
wounded him,, and carried off the money.

THIS unexpected disappointment proved fatal to the party. In

mere despair, some of the more zealous attempted to affaut Leith,
but the French beat them back with disgrace, seized their can-
non, and pursuing them to the gates of Edinburgh, were on the
point of entering along with them. All the terror and confusion,
which the profped of pillage or of massacre can excite in a place

': Knox, 214. Keith, Append. 44..

,t ken.

BOOK III.taken by itdrm, filled the dity oht this occasion. The ithabitants
L--v- fled from the enemy by the opposite gate; the forces ds the Cnd-

59 gregation were irresolute and dismayed; and the Queen's partizsans

in the town openly insulted both. At lafi, a few of the nobles ven-
tured to face the enemy, w-ho, after plundering tome houses in the
suburbs, retired with their booty, and delivered the city from this
dreadful alarm.

A SECOND skirmish, which happened a few days after, was no

less unfortunate. The French sent out a detachment to intercept
a convoy of provisions which was designed for Edinburgh. The
Lords of the Congregation, having intelligence of this, marched iri
all haste with a considerable body of their troops, 'and falling upon
the enemy between Reftalrig and Leith, with more gallantry than
good conduct, were almost surrounded by afecond party of French,
who advanced in order to fupp6rt their own men. In this fitna-
tion, a retreat was the only thing which could save the Scots; but
a ietreat over marshy ground, and in the'face of an enemy fupe-

They retire rior in number, could not long be conidu&ed with order. A smal'l
from Leith in
confusion. body of the enemy hung upon their rear, horse and fodt fell intb

the utmost confusion, and it was entirely owing to the caution of the
French, that any of the party escaped being cut in pieces.

'O this second blow, the hopes and spirits of the Congregat'ioh

funk altogether. They did not think themrfelves secure, even
within the walls of Edinburgh, but iriftiantly determined to retire
to some place at a greater distance from 'the enemy. In vain did
t'e Prior of St. Andrew's and a fetw others 'oppose this cowardly
and ignominious flight. The dread of the present danger prevailed
over both the sense of honour, and zeal for the cause. At mid-

night,

2

night, they set out from Edinburgh, in great confusion, and march- BOOK III,
ed without halting till they arrived- at Stirling. 1559.

DURING this lass infirre&ion, the great body of the S.CottifhNovember 6.

nobility joined the Congregation. The Lords Seton and Borthwick
were the only persons of rank who took arms for the Queen, and
affited her in defending Leith.*. Bathwell openly favoured her
cause, hut resided at his own house. The Earl of Huntly, con-
formable to the crafty policy which diftinguihes his character,
amused the leaders of the Congregation, whom he had engaged
to affifl, with many fair promises, but never joined them with a.
single man -.. The Earl of Morton, a member of the Congrega-
tion, fluctuated in a tfate of irresolution, and did not as hearti-
ly for the common, cause. Lord Erskine, Governor of Edin-
burgh castle, thoug. a ProteftaLt, maintained. a neutrality, which.
ae esteemed -becoming the dignity of his office; and having been en.
trusted by Parliament with the command of the principal fortress
in the lingdo.m, he resolved. that, neither fadtion. fQould get it into
their hands.

A FEW days- before the retreat of the Congregation, the Queen Maitland re-
suffered an irreparable loss by the defection of her principal Secre- volts from the

tTT----r ··-

* i·Y. rlll~lt L ^- QueenDowa-

tary,,William Maitland of Lethington. His zeal for. the Reformed re- ger.
ligion, together with his warm remonstrances aginft the violent mea-
fures which the Queen was carrying on, exposed him so much to her.
resentment, and to that of her French Counsellors, that he,. fufped-
ing his lijf to be in danger, withdrew, fereytly from Leith, ad- fled,
to the pords, of the .CongriegatiQn l ;. and ehey, ,et!9 ppRn aes, re-

Keith, Append. 31. t Ibid. Append. 33. Knox, 222. .t Knox 9r2.

ceived:

BOOK III ceived a convert, \vhofe abilities added both strength and reputa-

~-'-"
' tion to their cause. Maitland had early applied to public business

admirable natural talents, improved by an acquaintance with the li-
beral arts; and, at a time of life, when his countrymen of the
fame quality were following the pleasures of the chace, or serving
as adventurers in foreign armies, he was admitted into all the secrets
of the cabinet, and put upon a level with persons of the most con-
T^umn ate experience in the management of affairs. He poffefTed,
in an eminent degree, that intrepid spirit, which delights in pur-
suing bold designs, and was no less master of that political art and
dexterity which is necessary for carrying them on with success. But
these qualities were deeply tindured with the neighbouring vices.
His address sometimes degenerated into cunning; his acuteness bor-
dered upon excess of 'ubtlety ai d refinement; his invention, over
fertile, suggested to him, on some occasions, chirnerical-fyftems of
policy, little suitable to the genius of the age; and his enterprifiwog
spirit engaged him in projects vast and splendid, but beyond his ut.
most power to execute. All the cotemporary writers, to whatever
fadion they belong, mention him with an admiration, which no-
thing could have excited but the greatest superiority of penetration
and abilities.

THE precipitate retreat of the Congregation increased, to- ich

a degree, the terror and confusion which had seized' them at Edin-
burgh, that before they reached Stirling, their army dwindled to
an inconsiderable number. The spirit of Knox, however, flill le-
mained undaunted and eret, and having mounted the pulpit, he
addressed to his desponding hearers, an exhortation which wonder-
plly animated and revived them. The heads of this discourse are

inserted

inserted in his history *, and afford a firiking example of the bold- BOOK III.
ness and freedom of reproof assumed by the first Reformers, as well -----
as a specimen of his own skill in chufing the topics most fitted to '559.
influence and rouze his audience.

A MEETING of the leaders being called, to confider what The Lords of

the Contre-

course they should hold, now that their own resources were allgationagrply
exhausted, and their deftrudion appeared to be unavoidable, with- againto Eli"
out foreign aid; they turned their eyes once more to England, and
resolved to implore the assistance of Elizabeth towards finishing an
enterprize, in which they had so fatally experienced their own weak-
ness, and the strength of their adversaries. Maitland, as the moit
able negociator of the party, was employed in this embafiy. In his
absence, and during the inative season of the year, it was agreed
to dismiss their followers, worn out by the fatigues of a campaign,
which had so far exceeded the time of service usual in that age.
But, in order to preserve the counties most devoted to their interest,
the Prior of St. Andrew's, with part of the leaders, retired into Fife.
The Duke of Chatelherault, with the reft, fixed his residence at Ha-
milton. There was little need of Maitland's address or eloquence
to induce Elizabeth to take his country under her protection. She
observed the prevalence of the French counsels, and the progress of
their arms in Scotland, with great concern; and as she well fore.
law the dangerous tendency of their schemes in that kingdom, (he
had already come to a resolution with regard to the part fle her.
self would ad, if their power there should grow fiill more formi'
dable.

* Knox, 193.
VOL. . B. b IN

BooK IIE. A.N order to give the Queen and her Privy Council, a full and di/r-

-'~- tin& view of any important matter which might come before them,
x559. Motiveswhic!hit seems to have been the practice of Elizabeth's ministers to pre-

her to afie pare memorials, in which they clearly stated the point under deli-
them. beration, laid down the grounds of the condut, which they held

to be most reasonable, and proposed a method for carrying their
plan into execution. Two papers of this kind, written by Sir Wil-
liam Cecil with his own hand, till remain *; they are intitled,
"A short discussion of the weighty matter of Scotland," and do
honour to the industry and penetration of that great Minifler. The
motives, which determined the Queen to espouse so warmly the
defence of the Congregation, are represented with perspicuity and
force; and the consequences of suffering the French to eflabllfh,
themselves in Scotland, are predicted with great accuracy and dif-
cernment.

HE lays it down as a principle, agreeable to the- laws both of

God and of nature, that every society hath a right to defend itself,
not only from present dangers, but from such as may probably en-
sue; to which, he adds, that nature and reason teach every Prince
to defend himself by the fame means, which his adversaries employ
to diflrefs him. Upon these grounds, he eflablifhes the right of
England to interpose in the affairs of Scotland, and to prevent the
conquest of that kingdom, at which the French-openly aimed. The
French, he observes, are the ancient and implacable enemies of Eng-
land. Hostilities had subsisted between the two nations for many cen-
turies. No treaty of peace, into which they entered, had ever been
cordial or sincere. No good effect was therefore to be expeCted from

* Burn. vol. iii, Append, 283. Keith, Append. 24.

the
a

the peace lately agreed upon, which being'extorted by present ne-Boox III
ceffity, would -be negligently observed, and broken on the flighte ftI- ~

559'

pretences. In a very flort time, France would recover its former
opulence; and though now drained of men and rmoney by a tedious
and unsuccessful war, it would quickly be in a condition for acing,
and the restless and martial genius of the people would render .aQion
:necessary. The Princes of Lorrain, who at that timle had the en"
tire direction of French affairs, were animated with the moit vi-
rulent hatred against the English nation. They openly called il
:queflion the legitimacy of the Qeen's birth, and by .advancing
the title and pretensions of their niece the Queen of Scotland, flu-
died to deprive Elizabeth of her Crown. With this view, they
had laboured to exclude the Englifi from the treaty of Chateau
*en Cambrefis, and endeavoured to conclude a separate peace with
Spain. They had persuaded Henry II. to permit his daughter-in-
law *to assume the title and arms of Queen of England; and even
since the conclusion of the peace, they had follicited at Rome, and
obtained a-bull, declaring Elizabeth's birth to be illegitimate. And
though the wisdom and moderation of the Conflable Montmorency
had, for some time, checked their career, yet these reitraints being
now removed by the death of Henry II. and the disgrace of his
Minister, the utmofr excesses of violence were to be dreaded firom
their furious ambition, armed with sovereign power. Scotland is
the quarter, whence they can attack England with nmoft advantage.
A war on the borders of that country exposes France to no danger,
but one unsuccessful aCtion there may hazard the Crown, and
overturn the government of England. In political coi;dut, it is
chiklifll to wait till the designs of an enemy be ripe for execution
'I'he Scottifi nobles, after their utmost efforts, have been obliged
to quit the field ; and far from expelling the invaders of their li-

B b 2 bertics,

Book III.berties, they behold the French power daily increasing, and mufl

at last cease from firuggling any longer in a contefi so unequal. The
invading of England will immediately follow the reducion of the
Scottish malecontents, by the abandoning of whom to the mercy of
the French, Elizabeth will open a way for her enemies into the heart
of her own kingdom, and expose it to the calamities of war, and
the danger of conquert. Nothing therefore remained but to meet
the enemy while yet at a distance from England, and by fupportilng
the Congregation with a powerful army, to render Scotland the
theatre of the war, to crush the designs of the Princes of Lorrain
in their infancy, and, by luch an early and unexpected effort, to
expel the French out of Britain, before their power had time to
take root, and grow up to any formidable height. But as the mat-
ter was of as much importance, as any which could fall under the
consideration of an English Monarch, wisdom and mature coun-
fel were necessary in the first place,, and afterwards vigour and ex-
pedition in conduct; the danger was.urgent, and,. by losing a single
moment,. might become unavoidable *d

THESE arguments produced their full effctd upon Elizabeth, who

was jealous, in an extreme degree, of every pretender to her Crown,
and no less anxious to preserve the tranquillity and happiness of her
fubjets. From these motives she had aced, in granting the Congre-
gation an early supply of money; and from the fame principles lhe
determined, in their present exigency, to afford them more effecual
aid. One of Maitland's attendants was instantly dispatched into
Scotland with the firongeft assurances of her protecion, and the
Lords of the Congregation were desired to fend commissioners into

The arguments which the Scots employed', in order to obtain Elizabeth's afliit-
ane, are urged with great force, in a paper of Maitland's. See Appendix, No. II.

England,

England, to conclude a treaty, and to fettle the operations of the BOOK III.
campaign, with the Duke of Norfolk. *;

1559.

MEAN while; the QOeen Regent, from whom no motion ofThe Qeen

the Congregation could long be concealed, dreaded the success ofDean ehile
this negotiation with the court of England, and forefawhow littleifendher
she would be able to resist the united effort of the two kingdoms.againftthem.
For this reason (he determined, if possible, to get' the start of Eli-
zabeth; and by venturing, notwithstanding the inclemency of the
winter season, to attack the malecontents in their present dispersed
and helpless situation, Ihe hoped to put.an end to the war, before
the arrival.of their- English allies.-

A CONSIDERABLE body of her French forces, who were aug.

mented, about this time, by the arrival of the Count de Martigues;
with a thousand veteran foot, and some cavalry, were commanded
to march to Stirling. Having there crossed the Forth, they pro,.
ceeded along the coast of Fife, destroying and plundering, with ex,
ceflive'outrage, the houses and lands of those whom they esteemed
their enemies. Fife was the moftl populous and powerful county
in the kingdom, and moit devoted to the Congregation, who had
hitherto drawn from thence their most considerable fuppliesi both
of men and provisions; and therefore; besides punishing the difaf-
fetion of the inhabitants, by-pillaging the country, the French pro-
posed to seize and fortify St. Andrew's, and to leave in it a garrison.
fuficient to bridle the mutinous spirit of the province, and to keep:
poffiflion of a port situated on the main ocean.

* Keith, xr4..

PIuT
4

BooKIdI. u BUT n .this occasion, the Prior of St. Andrew's, Lord Rubhve;
'--/--J Kirkaldy of Grange, and a fe.w of the most active leaders of the

1559' Congregation, performed, by their bravery and good condot, a

service of the utmost importance to their .party. Having assembled
fix hundred horse, they infested the French with continual incur-
sions, beat up their quarters, intercepted their convoys ofprovifions,
cut off their .straggling parties, and so harraffed them with perpetual
alarms, that they prevented them for more than three weeks from
advancing *.
I56o. AT last the'Prior, with his feeble party, was constrained to

retire, and the French set out from Kirkaldy, and began to move
along the coast towards St. Andrew's. They had advanced but a few
January 2. miles, when from an eminence they descried a powerful fleet steer,

,ing its cour:.e up the Firth of Forth. As they knew that the Ma'rquij
P'Elheufwas, ,at the time, preparing to fail for Scotland with a nume-
Ious army, they hatily concluded that these ships belonged to him,
and gave way to the most immoderate transports of joy, on the
profpea of this long-expeted succour. Their great guns were al-
ready fired to welcome their friends, and to spread the tidings and
terror of their arrival among their enemies, when a small boat from
the opposite coast landed, and blasted their premature and short.lived
triumph, by informing them, that it was the fleet of England which

The ¥.nglifh was in fight, intended for the aid of the Congregation, and was soon
fheir arv tto be followed by a formidable land army A.
fiftancc.

THROUGHOUT her whole reign, Elizabeth was cautious, but de-
cifive; and by her promptitude in executing her resolutions, joined

* Knox, 202. -- Knox, 203.

to

tothie deliberation with whiclh the formed them, her adminiflration BooK IlI.
became remarkable, no less for its vigour, than for its wisdom. No -°V-"
sooner did the determine to afford her ptotection to the Lords of
the Congregation, than they experienced the activity, as well as
the extent of her power. The season of the yeai would not per-
mit her land army to take the field ; but left the French ihould, in
the mean time, receive new reinforcements, (he intfantly ordered a
strong squadron to cruize in the Firth of Forth. She seems, by her.
inrtirucions to Winter her admiral, to have been desirous of pre
serving the appearances of friendship towards the French*. But these
were only appearances; if any French fleet should attempt to land;
he was commanded to prevent it, by every ad of hoflility and
violence. It was the fight of this squadron, Which occasioned at
firti so much joy among-the French, but which soon inspired them
with such terror, as saved Fife from the effets of their vengeance.
Apprehensive of being cutoff froni their companions on the oppo-
site shore, they'retreated towards Stirling with'the utmost precipita-
tion, and, in a dreadful season, and through roads almbit impassable,
arrived at Leith, harassed and exhausted with fatigue A.

THE English fleet cast anchor in the road of Leith, and conti-

nuing in that fation till the conclusion of peace, both prevented
the garrison of Leith from receiving succours of any kind, and con-
fiderably facilitated the operations of their oWn forces by land.

SOON after the arrival of the English fquddron, the Commission Thely co-

ers of the Congregation repaired to Berwick, and concluded withcluc' :a peace
, ik ithEngland,
the Duke of Norfolk, a treaty, the bond of that union with Eliza-Iibi.uary -7.

'* Kcith, Appendix 45. K Knox, 203.

beth,

BOOK III.beth, which was of so great advantage to the cause. To give -a

ó-0- check to the dangerous and rapid progress of the French arms in

Scotland, was the profefled design of the contracting parties. In
order to this, the Scots engaged never to susser any closer union of
their country with France; and to defend themselves to the utter-
most against all attempts of conquest ; and for their assistance, Eli-
zabeth promised, to employ, in Scotland, a powerful army, which
:the Scots undertook to join with all their forces; no place in.Scot-
land was to remain in the'hands of the English; whatever (hould
be.taken from the enemy was either to be razed, or kept by the
Scots, at their choice; if any invasion should be made upon Eng-
land, the Scots were obliged to aflift Elizabeth with part of their
forces; and to ascertain their faithful observance of the treaty, they
bound themselves to deliver hostages to Elizabeth, before the march
of-her army into Scotland; in conclusion, the Scots made many
protestations of obedience and loyalty towards their own Queen, in
every thing not inconsistent with their religion, and the liberties of
their country *.

The English THE English army, consisting of fix thousand foot, and two
army lays thousand horse, under the command of Lord Grey of Wilton,

entered Scotland early in the Spring. The members of the Congre-
Aril 2 gation assembled from' all parts of the kingdom to meet their new

allies; and having joined them with great multitudes of their fol-
lowers, they advanced together towards Leith, The French were
little able to keep the field against an enemy so much superior in
number. A strong body of troops, destined for their relief, had
been scattered by a violent form, and had either perished on

* Knox, 217.

the

the coast of France, or with difficulty had recovered the ports of BOOK IIL
that kingdom *. But they hoped to be able to defend Leith, till I"' -'
the Princes of Lorrain should make good the magnificent promises
of assistance, with which they daily encouraged them; or till scar-
city of provisions ihould confirain the English to retire into their
own country. In order to haften this latter event, they did not neg-
lec the usual, though barbarous precaution for difireffing an invad-
ing enemy, by burning and laying waste all the adjacent country --.
The zeal, however, of the nation frustrated their intentions;
eager to contribute towards removing their oppressors, the people
produced their hidden fiores to support their friends; the neigh-
bouring counties supplied every thing necessary, and far from want-
ing subsistence, the Englihf found, in their camp, all forts of pro-
<ifions, at a cheaper rate, than had for some time been known in
that part of the kingdom +.

ON the approach of the English army, the Queen Regent re-

tired into the caffle of Edinburgh. Her health was now in a de-
clining slate, and her mind broken and depressed by the misfor-
tunes of her administration. To avoid the danger and fatigue of a
siege, The committed herself to the proteftion of Lord Erfine. This
nobleman still preserved his neutrality, and by his integrity and love
of his country, merited equally the esteem of both parties. He
received the Queen herself with the utmofft honour and respect, but
took care to admit no such retinue, as might endanger his com-
mand of the cattle i.

# Mem. de CalRel. 450. t Knox, 225.
1 Knox, ibid. n Sorbes Colled. vol. x. 503. Keith, 122.
VOL. I. C c A FEW

BOOK IlI. A FEW days after they arrived in Scotland, the Englifl inveffed'

' --ó Leith. The garrison, shut up within the town, was almost half

1i560o.
April 6. as numerous as the army which fat down before it, and by an ob-

Rtinate defence protracted the-fiege to a great length. The circum-
stances of this siege, related by cotemporary historians, men with-
out knowledge or experience in the art of war, are often obscure-
and imperfect, and at this distance of time are not considerable
enough to be entertaining..

A T firit the French endeavoured to keep possession of the

Hawk Hill, a riing ground not far distant from the town, but were
Ail 5 beat from it with great slaughter, chiefly by the furious attack of

the Scottish cavalry. Within a few days, the French had their full.
revenge; having sallied out with a firong body, they entered the
English trenches, broke their troops, nailed part of their. cannon,.
and killed at least double the number themselves had loft in the
former ikirmifh. Nor were the English more fortunate in an at-
lay 7. tempt which they made to take the place by assault; they were

met with equal courage, and repulsed with considerable loss,.
From the detail of these circumstances by the writers of that
age, it is easy to observe the different characters of the French;
and English troops.. The former, trained to war, under the ac-
tive reigns of Francis I. and Henry II. defended themselves not:
only with the bravery, but with the skill of veterans. The latter,
who had been more accustomed to peace, still preserved the in-
trepid and desperate valour peculiar to the nation, but discovered
few marks of military genius,, or of experience in the practice of
war. Every misfortune 9of ifappointment during the siege muff
be imputed to manifest errors in conduct. The success of the. be-
fieged in their rally was owing intirely to the security and negligence
of the English : many of their officers were absent; their soldiers

had

'had left their stations; and the trenches were almost without aBooKIII.
guard. The ladders, which had been provided for the assault, 5
wanted a great deal of the necessary length; and the troops employ-
ed in that service were ill supported. The trenches were opened,
at first, in an improper place; and as it was found expedient to
change the ground, both time and labour were loft. The weak-
ness of their own Generals, no less than the strength of the French
garrison, rendered the progress of the English wonderfully flow.
'The length, however, of the siege, and the loss of part of their
magazines by an accidental fire, reduced the French toextreme dif-
trefs, which the profpedt of relief made them bear with admirable
fortitude.

WHILE the hopes and courage of the French protracted the

siege so far beyond expectation, the leaders of the Congregation were
not idle. By new associations and confederacies, they laboured more
perfectly to unite their party. By publicly ratifying the treaty con-
eluded at Berwick, they endeavoured to render the alliance with
England firm and indissoluble. Among the subscribers of these
papers, we find the Earl of Huntly, and some others who had not
hitherto concurred with the Congregation in any of their meaufres *.
Several of there Lords, particularly the Earl of Huntly, itill adhered
to the Popish church; but on this occasion, neither their religious
sentiments, nor their former cautious maxims, were regarded; the
torrent of national resentment and indignation against the French
hurried them on -.

* Burn. vol. ii. 287. Knox, r21.
t The dread of the French power dia, on many occailons, surmount the zeal,
which the Catholic nobles had for their religion. Besides the .presumptive evidence

C c 2 for

BOOK II. THE Queen Regent, the instrument, rather than the cause of

C--- 9 .involving Scotland in those calamities, under which it groaned at

Dat56a that time, died during the heat of the siege. No Princess ever pof-
charaaer of fefled qualities more capable of rendering her adminitfration illus-
the Queen
Dowager. trious, or her people happy. Of much discernment, and no less-

June 1o. address; of great intrepidity, and equal prudence; gentle and hu-

mane, without weakness; zealous for her religion, without bigotry;
a lover of justice, without rigoTf.. One circumstance, however,
and that, too, the excess of a virtue, rather than any vice, poisoned
all these great qualities, and rendered her government unfortunate,
and her name odious. Devoted to the interest of France,. her na-
tive country, and attached to the Princes of Lorrain her brothers,
with most passionate fondness; she departed, in order to gratify them,
from every maxim, which her own wifdorm or humanity would
have approved. She outlived, in a great measure, that reputation
and popularity, which had smoothed her way to the highest station
in the kingdom; and many examples of falfhood, and some of feve-
rity, in the latter part of her adminiitration, totally alienated from her
the affetions of a people, who had once placed in her an unbounded
confidence. But, even by her enemies, there unjuflifiahle aaions
were imputed to the facility, not to the malignity of her nature;
and while they taxed her brothers, and French counfello:s, with
rashness and cruelty; they still allowed her the praise of prudence

for this, arising from. the memorial mentioned by Burnet, Hist. of the Reformation,
vol. iii. 281, and published by him p. 278 ; the inftru&ions of Elizabeth to Ran-
dolph her agent, put it beyond all doubt, that many zealous Papists thought the al-
liance with England to be neeffiary for preserving the liberty and independence of
the kingdom. Keith, I58. Huntly himself began a correspondence with Eliza-
beth's Minitiers, before the march of the English army into Scotland. Haynes's State
lapers, 261, 263, See Append. Nq III.

4 and

and of lenity*. A few days before her death, the desired an inter- BOOK III.
view with the Prior of St. Andrew's, the Earl of Argyll, and other -V

156o.

chiefs of the Congregation. To them she lamented the fatal issue
of those violent councils, which she had been. obliged to follow;
and, with the candour natural to a generous mind, confessed the
errors of her own administration,, and begged forgiveness of those,
to whom they had been hurtful; but, at the fame time, the warned
them, amidst their firuggles for liberty, and the ihock of arms,
not to lose fight of the loyalty and fubjedion, which was due to
their Sovereign -. The remainder of her time, ihe employed in
religious meditations and exercises.. She even invited the attendance
of Willox, one of the most eminent among the Reformed preachers,
listened to his inftruAions with reverence and attention $, and pre-
pared for the approach of death with a decent fortitude.

NOTHING could now save the French troops,. shut up in Leith, Motivesofthe

but the immediate conclusion of a peace, or the arrival of a powerful dude a peace.
army from the continent. The Princes of Lorrain amused their party
in Scotland, with continual expecations of the latter, and had there-
by kept alive their hopes and their courage. But at last, the fitua-
tion of France,. rather than the terror of the Englifh.arms,. or the re-
monstrances of the Scottish malecontents,. conltrained them, though
with relucance,, to turn their thoughts towards pacific councils.
The Protestants in France were, at that time, a party formidable
by their number,. and more by the valour and enterprising genius of
their leaders. Francis II. had treated them with extreme rigour,
and discovered, by every flep he took, a fettled resolution. to extir-
pate their religion, and to ruin those who profeffedit. At the pro-

t Buchan. 324. - Lesey, dc Rebus Gest. Scot. 222. : Knox, 228.

fpct

BooitIli. fpet of this danger to themselves, and to their cause, the:Proteifants

5 were alarmed, but not terrified. Animated with zeal, ard inflamed

with resentment, they not only prepared for their own defence, but
resolved, by some bold aftion, to anticipate the schemes of their ene-
mies. And as the Princes of Lorrain were esteemed the authors of
all the King's violent measures, 'they marked them out, to be the
first victims of their indignation. Hence, and not from any dif-
loyalty to the King, proceeded the famous conspiracy of Amboise;
and though the vigilance and good fortune of the Princes of Lor-
March r5. rain discovered and disappointed that design, it was easy to observe

new storms gathering in every province of the Kingdom, and ready
to burst out with all the fury and outrage of civil war. In this
situation, the ambition of 'the house of Lorrain was called off from
the thoughts of foreign conquests, to defend the honour and dig-
nity of the French crown; and instead of fending new reinforce-
ments into Scotland, it became necessary to withdraw the veteran
troops already employed in that kingdom *.

The negocia- IN order to condua an affair of so much importance and delicacy,
.tJons for that
purpose. the Princes of Lorrain made choice of Monluc Bishop of Valence,

and of the Sieur de Randan. As both these, especially the former,
were reckoned inferior to no persons of that age, in address and
political refinement; Elizabeth opposed to them Ambalfadors of
equal abilities; Cecil her Prime Minister, a man perhaps of the
greatest capacity who had ever held that office; and Wotton Dean
of Canterbury, grown old in the art of negociating under three fuc-
ceffive Monarchs. The interests of the French and English courts
were soon adjufled by men of so great dexterity in buffnefs 3 and as

* Lefy, 224.

France

p

France-eafily cefented to withdraw those forces, which had been BOOK II.'
the chief occasion ofthe war; the other points in dispute, between I$o
rtat kingdom and England, were not matters of tedious, or of dif-
ficult difcuflion.-

THE grievances of the Congregation, and their demands upon

their own sovereigns for redress, employed longer time, and re-
quired to be treated with a more delicate hand. After so many
open attempts, carried on by command of the King and Queen,..
in order to overturn the ancient constitution, and to suppress the
religion which they had embraced, the Scottish nobles could not
think themselves secure, without fixing some new barrier againit
the future encroachments of regal power.. But the legal tfeps to-
wards, accomplishing this were not so obvious. The French ambaf-
fadors- confidered the entering.into any treaty with fubjeds, and with
rebels, as a, condescension, unworthy the dignity of a Sovereign ;,
and their scruples on this head might have put an end to the treaty,
if the impatience of both parties for peace had not suggested an ex-
pedient,- which. seemed to provide for the security of the subje&c.
without derogating from the honour of the Prince. The Scottish ArticTesofthe
nobles agreed, on this occasion, tor'pafs from. the point of right and treaty°
privilege, and to accept the redress of their grievances, as a matter
of .favuur;. Whatever additional security- their anxiety for personal
safety,. or their zeal, for public liberty, prompted them to demand,
was granted in the name of Francis and Mary, as ats of their royal4
favour and indulgence. And. left concessions of this kind should?
seem precarious, and liable to be retracted by the fame power, which
had made themi the French Ambassador agreed to Insert them in,.
the treaty with Elizabeth, and thereby to bind the King and Qqeen.
inviolably to observe therp *.

* Keith, 134, &c.

IN.

BOOK III. IN relating this tranfa&ion, cotemporary 'historians have con.
'-- "-- founded the conceflions of Francis and Mary to their Scottish sub-

jeds, with the treaty between France and England; the latter, be-
iides the ratification of former treaties between the two kingdoms,
and stipulations with regard to the time and manner of removing
both armies out of Scotland, contained an article, to which, as the
source of many important events, we shall often have occasion to
refer. The right of Elizabeth to her crown is, thereby, acknow-
ledged in the ltrongeft terms; and Francis and Mary solemnly en-
gage, neither to assume the title, nor to bear the arms of King and
Queen of England, in.any time to come.

HONOURABLE as this article was for Elizabeth herself, the con-

ditions she obtained for her allies the Scotch were no less advanta-
july 6. geous to them. Monluc and Randan consented, in the name of

Francis and Mary, that the French forces in Scotland should in-
itantly be sent back into their own country, and no foreign troops
be hereafter introduced into the kingdom, without the knowledge
and content of Parliament; that the fortifications of Leith and
Dunbar should immediately be razed, and no new fort be ere&ed
without the permission of Parliament; that a Parliament should be
held on the first day of August, and that assembly be deemed as
valid, in all refpeds, as if it had been called by the express com-
mandment of the King and Queen; that, conformable to the an-
cient laws and customs of the country, the King and Queen should
not declare war, or conclude peace, without the concurrence of
Parliament.; that, during the Queen's absence, the administration
of government Should be veifed in a council of twelve persons, to
be chosen out of twenty-four named by Parliament, seven of which
council to be eleced by the Queen, and five by the Parliament;

that,

that hereafter the King and Queen should not advance foreigners BOOK III.
to places of trust or dignity in the kingdom, nor confer the offices
of Treasurer or Comptroller of the revenues upon any ecclesiastic;
that an aft of oblivion, abolishing the guilt and memory of all of-
fences, committed since the 6th of March, 1558, should be passed
in the ensuing Parliament, and be ratified by the King and Queen;
that the King and Queen fmould not, under colour of punishing any
violation of their authority during that period, seek to deprive any of
their fubjeds of the offices, benefices, or elfates which they now
held; that the redress due to churchmen, for the injuries which they
had futfained during the late infurreaions, should be left entirely to
the cognizance of Parliament. ' With regard to religious controver-
fies, the Ambassadors declared that they would not presume to de-
cide, but permitted the Parliament, at their firfi meeting, to exa-
mine the points in difference, and to represent their sense of them to
the King and Queen *.

To such a memorable period, did the Lords of the Congrega- The effets of

tion, by their courage and perseverance, conduct an enterprize, it
which, at first, promised a very different issue. From beginnings
extremely feeble, and even contemptible, the party grew by degrees
to great power; and being favoured by many fortunate incidents,
baffled all the efforts of their own Queen, aided by the forces of
a more considerable kingdom. The whole sovereign authority was
transferred, by this treaty, into the hands of the Congregation; that
limited prerogative, which the Crown had hitherto possessed, was
almost entirely annihilated; and the ariffocratical power, which al-
ways predominated in the Scottish government, became supreme

* Keith, 137, &c.
VOL. I. D d and

BOOK III. and incohtroulable. By this treaty, too, the influehce of Fvrnce,
----'--' which had long been of much weight in the affairs of Scotland,

1560.

was greatly diminished, and not only were the present incroach-
ments of that ambitious ally restrained, but, by confederating with
England, protection was provided against any future attempt from
the lame quarter. At the fame time, the controversies in religion
being left to the consideration of Parliament, the Protefants might
reckon upon obtaining whatever decision was most favourable to the
opinions which they profefled.

A FEW days after the conclusion of the treaty, both the French
and English armies quitted Scotland.

THE eyes of every man in that kingdom were turned towards

A Parliamentthe approaching Parliament, A meeting, summoned in a manner
held.

so extraordinary, at such a critical juncture, and to deliberate upon
matters of so much consequence, was expected with the utmost
anxiety.

A- SCOTTISH Parliament, suitable to the ariftocratical genius of the

government, was properly an aflembly of the nobles. It was com-
posed of Bishops, Abbots, Barons, and a few commissioners of bur-
roughs, who met altogether in one house. The Lesser Barons,
though possesed of a right to be present, either in person, or by
their representatives, seldom exercised it. The expence of attend-
ing, according to the fashion of the times, with a numerous train of
vailals and dependants; the inattention of the age to any legal or re-
gular system of government; but, above all, the exorbitant authority
of the greater nobles, who had drawn the whole power into their
own hands, made this privilege of so little value, as to be alnoft

1 negleced.

negleced. It appears from the ancient rolls, that during times of BOOK III.
tranquillity, few commiflioners of burroughs, and almost none of the "560
Lesser Barons appeared in Parliament. The ordinary adminiftra-
tion of government was- abandoned without scruple or jealousy, to
the King. and to the Greater Barons. But in extraordinary conjunc-
tures, when the firuggle for liberty was violent, and the spirit of op-
position to the Crown rose to an height, the Burgesses and Lesser
Barons were rouzed from their inactivity, and flood forth to vindi-
cate the rights of their country. The turbulent reign of James IIl.
affords examples -in proof of this observation *. The public indig-
nation againfl the rash designs of that weak and ill-advifed Prince,
brought into Parliament, besides the Greater nobles and prelates, a
considerable number of the Lesser Barons.

THE fame causes occasioned the unusual confluence of all orders

of men to the Parliament, which met on the first of August. The
universal passion for liberty, civil and religious, which had seized
the nation, suffered few persons to remain unconcerned fpeaators
of an assembly, whose ads were likely to prove decisive with reipea
to both. From all corners of the kingdom, flocked in men, eager
and determined to aid, with their voices in the senate, the fame
cause, which they had defended with their swords in the field.
Besides a full convention of Peers, Temporal and Spiritual, there ap-
peared the representatives of alrnoft all the burroughs, and above an
hundred Barons, who, though of the leser order, were Gentlemen
of the first rank and fortune in the nation -.

TIm Parliament was ready to enter on business with the utmost
zeal, when a difficulty was flarted concerning the lawfulness of the

* Keith, 147. t Ibid, 146.

D d 2 meeting.

BOOK II. meeting. No Commifioner appeared in the name of the King

v-__ and Queen, and no signification of their eonfent and approbationy

was yet received. These were deemed, by many, essential' to the
very being of a Parliament. But, in opposition to this sentiment,
the express words of the treaty of Edinburgh were urged, by which
this afembly was declared, to be as valid; in- all refpets, as if it had
been called and appointed by the express command of the. King
and Queen. As the adherents of the Congregation greatly out-
numbered their adversaries, the latter opinion- prevailed. Their
boldest leaders, and those of most approved, zeal, were chosen to be
Lords of the Articles, who formed a committee of ancient use;
and of great importance in the Scottish Parliament. The delibera-
tions of the Lords of the Articles were carried on with the most
unanimous and acive zeal. The ad of oblivion, the nomination
of twenty-four persons, out of whom the council, entrusted with
supreme authority, was to be eleEed; and every other thing pre-
fcribed by the late treaty, or which seemed necessary to render it

Its proceed- effedual, passed without dispute or delay. The article of religion
ing with re- employed longer time, and was attended with greater difficulty. It
ligion. was brought into Parliament by a petition from those who had

adopted the principles of the Reformation. Many dotrines of the
Popish church were a contradiction to reason, and a disgrace to re-
ligion; its discipline had become corrupt and oppressive; and its
revenues were both exorbitant and ill applied. Againfl all these,
the Protestants remonitrated with the utmost severity of flile, which
indignation at their absurdity, or experience of their pernicious ten-
dency, could inspire ; and encouraged, by the number and zeal of
their fricnds, to improve such a favourable juncure, they aimed
the blow at the whole fabrick of Popery; and besought the Parlia-

ment
8

ment to interpose their authority for reacifying there multiplied BOOK III.
abuses. .

i56o.

SEVERAL prelates, zealously attached to the ancient superstition,

were present in this Parliament. But during these vigorous proceed-
ings of the Protestants, they ltood confounded, and at a gaze, and
persevered in a silence which was fatal to their cause. They.efteem-
ed it impoflible to resist or divert that torrent of religious zeal, which
was still in its full firength; they dreaded that their opposition
would irritate their adversaries, and excite them to new ads of vio-
lence; they hoped that the King and Queen would soon be at
leisure to put a tfop to the career of their insolent fubjets, and
that, after the rage and havock of the present storm, the former
tranquillity and order would be restored to the church and kingdom.
They were willing, perhaps, to sacrifice the dotrine, and even
the power of the church, in order to ensure the safety of their own.
persons, and to preserve the possession of those revenues, which were
still in their hands. From whatever motives they acted, their silence,
which was imputed to the consciousness of a bad cause, afforded.
matter of great triumph to the Proteflants, and encouraged them to
proceed with more boldness and alacrity t.

THE Parliament did not think it enough to condemn those doc-

trines mentioned in the petition of the Protestants; they, moreover,
gave the sanCtion of their approbation to a Confession of Faith
presented to them by the Reformed Teachers $, and composed, as
might be expeted from such a performance at that junCure, on
purpose to expose the absurd tenets and praCtices of the Romish.

* Enox, 237.- t Ibid. 253. $ Id. ibid,

church.

BooK III. church. By another ad, the jurifdidion of the ecclefiaftlcal eour-t

was abolifled, and the causes, which formerly came under their
cognizance, transferred to the decisions of civil judges *. By a third
tfatute, the exercise of religious worship, according to the rites of
the Romish church, was prohibited. The manner in which the
Parliament inforced the observation of this law discovers the zeal of
that aflembly; the first transgression fubjeded the offender to the
forfeiture of his goods, and to a corporal punishment, at the difcre-
tion of the judge; banishment was the penalty of a second vio-
lation of the law; and a third aa of disobedience was declared to be
capital t. Such flrangers were men, at that time, to the spirit of
toleration, and to the laws of humanity; and with such indecent
haste did the very persons, who had jufi escaped the rigour of ec-
clefiaftical tyranny, proceed to imitate those examples of severity, of
which they themselves had so justly complained.

With regard THE vigorous zeal of the Parliament overturned, in a few days,
to the reve-
nues of the the ancient system of religion, which had been established so many
church. ages. In reforming the doctrine and discipline of the church, the

nobles kept pace with the ardour and expectations even of Knox him-
self. But their proceedings, with refpeac to these, were not more
rapid and impetuous, than they were flow and dilatory when they
entered on the consideration of ecclesiastical revenues. Among the
lay-members, some were already enriched with the spoils of the
church, and others devoured in expecation the wealthy benefices
which still remained untouched. The alteration in religion had as-
forded many of the dignified ecclesiastics themselves, an opportunity
of gratifying their avarice or ambition. The demolition of the mo-

* Keith, 152. t Knox, 254.

naflcries,

nafteries, having set the Monks at liberty from their confinement, BOOK III.
they ifitantly dispersed all over the kingdom, and commonly be- -6
took themselves to some secular employment. The Abbot, if he
had been so fortunate as to embrace the principles of the Reforma-
tion from conviction, or so cunning as to espouse them out of po-
licy, seized the whole revenues of the fraternity, and, except what
he allowed for the fubfiflence of a few superannuated Monks, * ap-
plied them entirely to his own use. The proposal, made by the
Reformed Teachers, for applying there revenues towards the main-
tainance of Ministers, the education of youth, and the support of the
poor, was equally dreaded by all these orders of men. They op-
posed it with the uttmoft warmth, and by their numbers and autho-
rity, easily prevailed on the Parliament to give no ear to such a dif-
agreeable demand t. Zealous as the first Reformers were, and ani-
mated with a spirit superior to the low considerations of interest, they
beheld these early symptoms of felfifhnefs and avarice among their
adherents, with indignation; and we find Knox expressing the ut-
most sensibility of that contempt, with which they were treated by
many, from whom he expected a more generous concern for the
success of religion, and the honour of its Minifers +.

A DIFFICULTY hath been started, with regard to the acts OfThevalditv
this Parliament, concerning religion. This difficulty, frivolous in of thisPa, ia-

ment called in

itfeif, and at this distance of time of no importance, is founded on quefion.
the words of the treaty of Edinburgh. By that, the Parliament was
permitted to take into consideration the iate of religion, and to fig-
nify their sentiments of it to the King and Queen. But, inflead of
presenting their desires to their Sovereigns, in the humble form of a

* Keith, 496. Append. 190, 19i. -f See Append. N IV. 1: Knox, 239, 256.

sup-

BOOK III. supplication or address, the Parliament converted them into so ma-

ny acts; which, although they never received the royal assent, ob-
tained, all over the kingdom, the weight and authority of laws.
In compliance with their injundions, the established system of reli-
gion was every where overthrown, and that recommended by the
Reformers introduced in its place. The partiality and zeal of the
people overlooked or supplied any defect in the form of these ads
of Parliament, and rendered the observance of them more universal
than ever had been yielded to the flatutes of the most regular or con-
flitutional assembly. By those proceedings, it muff, however, be
confessed, that the Parliament, or rather the nation, violated the last
article in the treaty of Edinburgh, and even exceeded the powers
which belong to fubjeEts. But when once men have been accustomed
-to break through the common boundaries of fubjetion; and their
minds are inflamed with the passions which civil war inspire; it is
mere pedantry or ignorance to measure their conduct by those rules,
which can be applied, only where government is in a state of order
and tranquillity. A nation, when obliged to employ such extraor-
dinary efforts in defence of its liberties, avails itself of every thing
which can promote this great end; and the necefity of the cafe, and
the importance of the objeE, justify any departure from the common
and established forms of the constitution.

Ambnafadors IN consequence of the treaty of Edinburgh, as well as by the
fealt tiyteto ordinary forms of bu^fnefs, it became necessary to lay the proceed-
'rance. ings of Parliament before the King and Queen. For this purpose,

Sir James Sandilands of Calder, Lord St. John, was appointed to
repair to the court of France. After holding a course so irregular,
the nobles had no reason to flatter themselves that Francis and
Mary would ever approve their conduct, or confirm it, by their

royal

royal aftent. The reception of their Ambafiador was no other than BooK III.
they might have expeted. He was treated by the King and Queen 56.
with the utmost coldness, and dismissed without obtaining the rati-
fication of the Parliament's proceedings. From the Princes of Lor-
rain and their partizans, he endured all the scorn and insult, which
it was natural for them to pour iupon the party he represent-
ed .

THOUGH the Earls of Morton, Glencairn, and Maitland of Le- And to Eli-

zabeth.

thington, the ArnbaiTadors of the Parliament to Elizabeth their Pro-
tecrefs, met with a very different reception ; they were not more
successful in one part of the negotiation intrusted to their care.
The Scots, sensible of the security which they derived from their
union with England, were desirous of rendering it indiifoluble.
With this view, they empowered these eminent leaders of their'
party, to teflify to Elizabeth their gratitude for that seasonable and
effectual aid which she had afforded them, and at the fame time,
to beseech her to render the friendship between the nations perpe-
'tual, by condescending to marry the Earl of Arran, who, though
a subject, was nearly allied to the royal family of Scotland, and,
after Mary, the undoubted heir to the crown,

To the former part of this commiflion Elizabeth liflened with the

utmofl fatisfadAion, and encouraged the Scots, in any future exi-
gency, to hope for the continuance of her good offices; with re-
gard to the latter, ihe discovered those sentiments, to which she
adhered throughout her whole reign. Averse from marriage, as
some pretend through choice, but more probably out of policy, that

* Knox, 255. Buch. 327.
VOL. I. e ambi.

Boos Ill1. ambitious Princess would never admit any partner to the throne; but

ó- -' delighted with the entire and uncontrolled exercise of power, she fa-

crificed to the enjoyment of that, the hopes of transmitting her Crown
to her own posterity. The marriage with the Earl of Arran
could not be attended with any such extraordinary advantage, as to
shake this resolution; She declined it, therefore, but with many ex-
pressions of good-will towards the Scottish nation, and of refped for
Arran himself s.

The death cf TOWARDS the conclusion of this- year, diftingufhed by-fo many
Francis 1. remarkable events, there happened one of great importance. On

the 4th of December, died Francis II. a Prince of a feeble confli-
tution, and of a mean underfianding. As he did hot leave any
issue by the Queen, no incident could have been more fortunate to
those, who, during the late commotions in Scotland,. had. taken
part with the Congregation. Mary, by the charms of her beauty,
had acquired an entire ascendant over her husband; and as she tranf-
ferred all her influence to her uncles the Princes of Lorrain, Fran-
cis followed them implicitly in whatever track they were pleated to
lead him. The power of France, under such direction, alarmed
the Scottish malecontents, with apprehensions of danger, no less
formidable, than well founded. The intefline disorders which rag-
ed in France, and' the seasonable interposition of England in be-
half of the Congregation, had hitherto. prevented the Princes of Lor-
rain from carrying their designs upon Scotland into execution. But
under their vigorous and. decisive administration, it was im.possible
that the commotions in France could be. of long continuance, and
many things might fall in to divert Elizabeth's attention, for the

Burn. 3. Append. 308. Keith, 154, &c.

future,

future, from the affairs of Scotland. In either of there events, the BooK IIi:
Scots would stand exposed to all the vengeance, which the resent-
ment of the French court could inflic. The blow, however long sus-
pended, was unavoidable, and muff fall at last with redoubled weight.
From this profpet .and expectation of danger, the Scots were de-
livered by the- death of Francis; the ancient confederacy of the
two kingdoms had already been broken, and by this event, the only
bond of union which 'remained was d:ifolved. Catherine of Mel-
dicis, who, during the minority of Charles IX. he# fecondfon, en-
grossed the entire direcion of the French councils, was far from
any thoughts of vindicating the Scottish Queeh's authority. Cathe-
rine and Mary had- been rivals in power during the reign of Fran-
cis HI. and had contended for the government of that weak and un-
experienced Prince; but as the charms of the wife easily triumphed
over the authority of the mother, Catherine could never forgive
such. a disappointment in her favourite passion, and beheld now,
with secret pleasure, the difficult and: perplexing scene, on. which
her daughter-in-law was about to enter. Mary, overwhelmed with Mary retires
all the sorrow which so fad a reverse of fortune could occafion,fr°mtbecourt

of France.

flighted.by, the Queen mother *; and forsaken by the tribe of coutti-
ers, whoappear.only in the sunshine of profperity,.retired to Rheims,
and there, in solitude, indulged her grief, or hid her indignation.
Even,the Princes of Lorrain were obliged to contrat their views;
to turn them from foreignito domestic objeds; and, instead of form-
ing vast projects with- regard to Britain, found it necessary. to think
of acquiring, and establishing an interest with, the new admini-
ftration.

* Henatit. 340. Cafteln. 454.

E e 2IT

Baoo m. IT is impofible to describe the emotions of joy, which, on al

156o. these accounts, the death of the French Monarch excited among

the Scots. They regarded it as the only event, which could give
firmness and liability to that system of religion and government,
which was now introduced.; and it is no wonder cotemporary his-
torians should ascribe it to the immediate care of Providence, which,
by unforeseen expedients, can secure the peace and happiness of
kingdoms, in those situations, where human prudence and invention
would .utterly despair *.

Eitablihment ABOUT this time, the Protestant church in Scotland began to iaf-
·of Preflyteri-.
-an church fume a regular form. Its principles had obtained the fandion of
lovernment. public authority, and some fixed external policy became necessary

for the government and preservation of the infant society. The
model introduced by the Reformers, differed extremely from that,
which had been so long established. The motives, which induced
them to depart so far from the ancient fyfterm, deserve to be ex-
.plained.

As the vices of the clergy had, at first, excited the indignation

of mankind, and rouzed that spirit of inquiry, which proved so fa-
tal to the whole Popish system: as this disgust at the vices of ec-
clefiaftics was soon transferred to their persons, and shifting from
them, by no violent transition, fettled at last on the offices which
they enjoyed; the effects of the Reformation would naturally have
extended not only to the docrine, but to the government of the
:Popith church; and the fame spirit which abolished the former,
nwould have overturned the latter. But, in Germany, England,

* Knox, 259;

.and

Sna the northern kingdoms, its operations were checked by theBooxl IL.
power and policy of their princes; and the ancient Episcopal ju- 156
rifdicion, under a few limitations, was itill continued in those
churches. The Episcopal hierarchy appears to be more conform-
able to the practice of the church, since chriflianity became the
eitabliihed religion of the Roman empire. The ecclesiastical go-
vernment was, at that time, plainly copied from the civil; the firfl
not only borrowed its form, but derived its authority from the
latter; and the dioceses and jurifdidions of Patriarchs, Archbish.ops,
and Biflops, corresponded with the division and conflitution of.the
empire. In Switzerland, and the Low-countries, the nature of the
government allowing full scope to the genius of the Reformation,
all pre-eminence of order in the church was defiroyed, and an
equality established more suitable to the spirit of republican policy.
The situation of the primitive church suggested the idea, and fur-
nifhed the model of the latter system, which has since been called
Priebyterian. The first Chriflians, oppressed by continual perfecu-
tions, and obliged to hold their religious assemblies by health, and
in corners, were contented with a form of government extremely
simple. The influence of religion.concurred, with the sense of dan-
ger, in extinguishing among them, the spirit of ambition, and in
preserving a parity of rank, the effec of their sufferings, and the
cause of many of their virtues. Calvin, whose decisions were re-
ceived, among the Proteflants of that age, with incredible fubmif-
sion, was the patron and restorer of this fchemc of ecclefial-ical
policy. The church of Geneva, formed under his eye, and by
his dircdion, was esteemed the most pelfed model of this govern-
ment; and Knox, who, during his residence in that city, had flu-
dicd and admired it, warmly recommended it to the imitation of
his countrymen.

A /AMONC

BoxO MI. IT is impossible to describe the emotions of joy, which, on all

$6bo. there accounts, the death of the French Monarch excited among

the Scots. They regarded it as the only event, which could give
firmness and flability to that system of religion and government,
which was now introduced.; and it is no wonder cotemporary his-
torians should ascribe it to the immediate care of Providence, which,
by unforeseen expedients, can secure the peace and happiness of
kingdoms, in those situations, where human prudence and invention
would .utterly despair *.

Eftablfhment ABOUT this time, the Protestant church in Scotland began to as-
-an curcyh fume a regular form. Its principles had obtained the fandion of
government. public authority, and rome fixed external policy became necessary

for the government and preservation of the infant society. The
model introduced by'the Reformers, differed extremely from that,
which had been so long established. The motives, which induced
-them to depart so far from the ancient system., deserve to be ex-
:plained.

As the vices of the clergy had, at sris, excited the indignation

of mankind, and rouzed that spirit of inquiry, which proved so fa-
tal to the whole Popish system: as this disgust at the vices of ec-
clefiaftics was soon transferred to their persons, and'fhifting from
them, by no violent transition, fettled at last on the offices which
they enjoyed; the effeCts of the Reformation would naturally have
extended not only to the doCtrine, but to the government of the
;Popilh church; and the fame spirit which abolished the former,
awould have overturned the latter. But, in Germany, England,

' * Knox, 259.

;and

anl the northern kingdoms, its operations were checked by theBoox IIT.
power and policy of their princes; and the ancient Episcopal ju- 1(0.
rifdidion, under a few limitations, was still continued in those
churches. The Episcopal hierarchy appears to be more conform-
able to the praicice of the church, since christianity became the
eflablifhed religion of the.Roman empire. The ecclesiastical go-
vernment was, at that time, plainly copied from the civil the first
not only borrowed its form, but derived its authority from the
latter; and the dioceses and jurifdidions ofPatriarchs, Archbifliops,
and Biflops, corresponded with the division and conititution of the
empire. In Switzerland, and the Low-countries, the nature of the
government allowing full scope to the genius of the Reformation,
all pre-eminence of order in the church was defrroyed, and an
equality established more suitable to the spirit of republican policy.
The situation of the primitive church suggested the idea, and fur-
niihed the model of the latter system, which has since been called
PreJbyterian. The firtf Christians, oppressed by continual perfecu-
tions, and obliged to hold their religious assemblies by Ptealth, and
in corners, were contented with a form of government extremely
simple. The influence of religion.concurred, with the sense of dan-
ger, in extinguishing among them, the spirit of ambition, and in
preserving a parity of rank, the effed of their sufferings, and the
cause of many of their virtues. Calvin, whose decisions were re-
ceived, among the Protestants of that age, with incredible fubmif-
sion, wasthe patron and restorer of this fchemc of ecclesiastical
policy. The church of Geneva, formed under his eye, and by
his direction, was esteemed the most perfect model of this govern-
ment; and Knox, who, during his residence in that city, had flu-
died and admired it, warmly recommended it to the imitation of
his countrymen.

^3 ,IAMONC

Root III. AMONG the Scottish nobility, some hated the persons, and others

ó0^ coveted the wealth of the dignified clergy; and by abolishing that'

order of men, the former indulged their resentment, and the lat-
ter hoped to gratify their avarice. The people, inflamed with the
molt violent aversion to Popery, and approving of every scheme that
departed farthest from the pracice of the Romifl( church, were
delighted with a system, so. admirably suited to. their predominant
pafilon. While the friends of civil liberty beheld, with pleasure,
the Proteflant clergy pulling down, with their own hands, that
fabric of eccleflaftica power, which their predecessors had. reared
with so much art and industry; and flattered themselves, that by
lending their aid to strip churchmen of their dignity and wealth,
they might entirely deliver the nation from their exorbitant and op-
prefive jurifdidion. The new mode of government easily made its
way among men, thus prepared, by their various interests and pas-
sions, for its reception.

BUT, on the sirs: introduction of his system, Knox did not deem

it expedient to depart altogether from the ancient form *. Instead
of Bihfops, he proposed to establish ten or twelve Superintendants in
different parts of the kingdom. These, as the name implies, were
impowered to infpec the life and doctrine of the other clergy.
They presided in the inferior judicatories of the church, and
performed several other parts of the Episcopal function. Their
jurisdiction, however, extended to sacred things only ; they claimed
no feat in Parliament, and pretended no right to the dignity, or re-
venues, of the former Biffops.

* Spotfwood, x58.

TiHE

Tr.ft hlumber of inferior clergy, to whom the care of parochial BooK III.

duty could be comm'iitted, was still extremely small; they had em- .---J
braced the principles of the Reformation at different times, and 1So
fromf various motives; during the public commotions, they were
scattered, merely by chances over the different provinces of the
kingdom'; arid, in a few pa'ces onl'y, were formed into regular
clafres or societies. The first General Assembly of the church, Decemberzo.
which was held this year, bears all the marks of an infant and un-
formed society. The members were but few in number, and of
no considerable rank; no uniform or consistent rule seems to have
been' observed in eletingi them. Froh a great part of the kingdom
no repreferittives appetred. In the name of some entire counties,
but one- person Was p'tefent; while, in other places, a single town
or church' fenr several members. A convention, so feeble and irre-
gular, could possess no great authority; and conscious of their own
weakness, the members put an end to their debates, without ven-
turing upon any decision of much importance *.

IN order to give greater strength and coniiftence to the Prefby- I56i.

terian plan, Knox, with the assistance of his brethren, composed
the first book of difeipline, which contains the model or platform of
the intended policy -F. They presented it to a convention of estates;
which was held in the beginning of this year. Whatever regulations January X s.
were proposed with regard to ecelefiaflic discipline and jitrifdiCtion,
would have easily obtained the fandtion of that assembly; but a de-
sign to recover the patrimony of the church, which is there infi.
nuated, met with a very different reception.

IN vain did the clergy display the advantages which would ac-
crue to the public, by a proper application of ecclefiatfical revenues.

* Keith, 498. f Spotfwood, 152.

In

BooI III. In vain did they propose, by an impartial distribution of this fund,

-, 'to promote true religion, to encourage learning, and to support

the poor. In vain did they even intermingle threatnings of the di-
vine displeasure, against the unjust detainers of what was appro-
priated to a sacred use. The nobles held fair the prey, which they
had !eized'; and beflowing upon the proposal, the name of a de-
vcut imagiiJatlio,- they affecaed to .confider it, as a prcjed altoge-
ther visionary, and treated it with the utnmoft scorn %.

TheQueenin- THIS convention appointed the Prior of St. Andrew's, to repair
Vit; )

: c

t ; ,: 't

ti 1

: ' '
into Stctand. to the Q.een, and to invite her to return into her. native coun-

try, and to assume the reins of government, which had been
too long committed to other hands. And though some of her
fubjeas dreaded her return, and others foresaw dangerous confe-
quences with which it might be attended -, the bulk of them de-
fired it with so much ardour, that the invitation was given with the
greatefi appearance of unanimity. But the zeal of the Roman Ca-
tholics got the ilart of the Prior in paying court to Mary; and Lefly,
afterwards bishop of Ross, who was commissioned by them, ar-
rived before him, at the place of her residence +. Lefly endeavoured
to infuse into the Queen's mind fulpicions of her Protestant fubjedts,
and to persuade her to throw herself entirely into the arms of those
who adhered to her own religion. For this purpose, heinfifted that
(he should land at Aberdeen; and as the Proteflant doctrines had
made no considerable progress in that part of the kingdom, he
gave her affirance of being joined, in a few days, by 20o000 men;
and flattered her, that with luch an army, encouraged by her pre-
fence and authority, flie might cafily overturn the Reformed Chuirch,
before it was firmly fettled on its foundations.

* Knox, 256. 1- See Append. No V. L: Lcfly, 227.

BUT

BUT at this juncture, the Princes of Lorrain were not disposed to BooK III.
liften to this extravagant and dangerous proposal. Intent on de- 77'

i 56

fending themselves againit Catherine of Medicis, whose insidious
policy was employed in undermining their exorbitant power, they
had no leisure to attend to the affairs of Scotland, and wished their
niece to take poffeflion of her kingdom, with as little disturbance
as possible. The French officers, too, who had served in Scotland,
dissuaded Mary from all violent measures; and, by representing the
power and number of the Protestants to be irrefitible, determined
her to court them by every art; and rather to employ the leading
men of that party as her Ministers, than to provoke them, by a fruit-
less opposition, to become her enemies *. Hence proceeded the
confidence and affection, with which the Prior of St. Andrew's was
received by the Queen. His representation of the slate of the king-
dom gained great credit; and Lefly beheld, with regret, the new
channel in which court favour was likely to run.

ANOTHER Convention of the efates was held in May. The

arrival of an AmbafTador from France, seems to have been the oc-
cafion of this meeting. He was inftruced to follicit the Scots to
renew their ancient alliance with France, to break their new confede-
racy with England, and to restore the Popish ecclesiastics to the
poiTeflson of their revenues, and the exercise of their functions. It is
no easy matter to form any conjecture concerning the intentions of
the French court, in making these extraordinary and ill timed pro-
positions. They were rejected with that scorn, which might well
have been expected from the temper of the nation f.

* Melv 6r. 1- Knox, 269, 273.
VOL. I. F f IN

BooK II. IN this Convention, the Protestant clergy did not obtain a more

l- - favourable audience than formerly, and their profped of recovering

the patrimony of the church fill remained as distant and uncertain
as ever. But with regard to another point, they found the zeal of
the nobles in no degree abated. The book of discipline seemed
to require, that the monuments of Popery, which still remained
in the kingdom, should be demolished *. And, though neither
the fame pretence of policy, nor the fame ungovernable rage of the
people, remained to justify or excuse this barbarous havock, the Con-
vention, confidering every religious fabric as a relit of idolatry,
passed sentence upon them by an aA in form; and persons, the most
remarkable for the activity of their zeal, were appointed to put it
in execution. Abbies, cathedrals, churches, libraries, records, and
even the sepulchres of the dead, perished in one common ruin.
The first storm of popular infurrecion, though impetuous and ir-
resistible, had extended only to a few counties, and soon spent its
rage; but now a deliberate and universal rapine compleated the de-
vaftation of every thing, venerable and magnificent, which had
escaped its violence t.

Mary begins IN the mean time, Mary was in no haste to return into Scot-
to prepare for land. Accustomed to the elegance, splendor, and gaiety of a po-

lite court, she still fondly lingered in France, the scene of all these
enjoyments, and contemplated, with horror, the barbarism of her own
country, and the turbulence of her fubjees, which presented her
with a very different face of things. The impatience, however,
of her people, the persuasions of her uncles, but above all, the
studied and mortifying neglet, with which {he was treated by the

S* potfwood, 153. 1I Ibid. I74.

Queen

Queen Mother, forced her to think of beginning this disagreeable BooK IIT.
voyage *. But while the was preparing for it, there were town ~-ó.

356I.

between her and Elizabeth, the feeds of that personal jealousy and
discord, which imbittered the life, and shortened the days-of the
Scottilh Queen.

THE ratification of the late treaty of Edinburgh was the:immediate origin of the

occasion of this fatal animosity; the true causes of it lay much deeper. dien her and
Almost every article, in that treaty, had been executed by both par- Elizabeth.
ties, with a scrupulous exaatnefs. The fortifications of Leith were
demolished, and the armies of France and England withdrawn with-
in the appointed time. The grievances of the Scottish malecontents
were redressed, and they had obtained whatever they could de-
mand for their future security. With regard to all these, Mary
could have little reason to decline, or Elizabeth to urge, the ratifi-
cation of the treaty.

THE sixth article remained the only source of contest and diffi-

culty. No Minister ever entered more deeply into the schemes of
his Sovereign, or pursued them with more dexterity and success
than Cecil. In the conduc of the negociation at Edinburgh, the
found understanding of this able politician had proved greatly an
overmatch for Monluc's refinements in intrigue, and had artfully
induced the French Ambassadors, not only to acknowledge that
the Crowns of England and Ireland did of right belong to Eliza-
beth alone, but also to promise, that in all times to come, Mary
should abftain-from ufihg the- titles, or bearing the arms of those
kingodorns.

* Brantome, Jebb, vol. ii. 482.

F f 2 T-IE

BOOK III. THE ratification of this article would have been of the most fa-

i6i. tal consequence to Mary. The Crown of England was an objed

worthy of her ambition. Her pretensions to it gave her great dig-
nity and importance in the eyes of all Europe. By many, her title
was esteemed preferable to that of Elizabeth. Among the English
themselves, the Roman Catholics, who formed, at that time, a nu-
merous and acaive party, openly espoused this opinion; and even the
Protestants, who supported Elizabeth' throne, could not deny the
Queen of Scots to be her immediate heir. A proper opportunity to
avail herself of all there advantages, could not, in the course of
things, be far distant, and many incidents might fall in, to bring
this opportunity nearer than was expected. In there circumstances,
Mary, by ratifying the article in dispute, would have loft that rank
which {he had hitherto held among neighbouring Princes; the
zeal of her adherents must have gradually cooled; and (he might
have renounced, from that moment, all hopes of ever wearing the
English Crown.

NONE of these beneficial consequences escaped the penetrating

eye of Elizabeth, who for this reason, had recourse to every thing,
by which /he could hope either to sooth or frighten the Scottish
Queen into a compliance with her demands. And if that Prin-
cess had been so unadvised as to ratify the ra(h concessions of her
Ambassadors, Elizabeth, by that deed, would have acquired an ad-
vantage, which, under her management, mufft have turned to great
account. By such a renunciation, the question, with regard to
the right of succession, would have been left altogether open and
undecided; and, by means of that, Elizabeth might either have
kept her rival in perpetual anxiety and dependance, or, by the au-
thority of her Parliament, she might have broken in upon the order

of
2

of lineal fucceflion, and transferred the Crown to some other de- BoOK IL.
fcendant of the royal blood. The former condu&t ihe observed '- -
towards James VI. whom, during his whole reign, she held in per- 56
petual fear and fubjedion. The latter, and more rigorous method
of proceeding, would, in all probability, have been employed against
Mary, whom, for many reasons, she both envied and hated.

NOR was this flep beyond her power, unprecedented in the his-

tory, or inconfiitent with the conflitution' of England. Though
fucceflion by hereditary right be an idea so natural and so popular,
that it has been established almost in every civilized nation, yet
England affords many memorable infsances of deviations from that
rule. The Crown of that kingdom having once been seized by
the hand of a conqueror, this invited the bold and enterprising in
every age to imitate such an illustrious example of fortunate am-
bition. From the time of William the Norman, the regular course
of descent had seldom continued through three successive reigns.
Those Princes, whose intrigues or valour opened to them a way to
the throne, called in the authority of the great council of the nation
to confirm their dubious titles. Hence, parliamentary and heredi-
tary right became in England of equal consideration. That great
afTembly claimed and actually possessed a power of altering the or-
der of regal fucceflion; and even so late as Henry VIII. an at of
Parliament had authorized that chpricious Monarch to fettle the
order of succession at his pleasure. The Englifll, jealous of their
religious liberty, and averse from the dominion of strangers, would
have eagerly adopted the paflions of their Sovereign, and might
have been easily induced to exclude the Scottifl limne fiom the
right of succeeding to the Crown. These seem to have been the

views

Boon 1II. views of both Queens, and these were the difficulties which retard-

1- '- ed the ratification of the treaty of Edinburgh.
1561.

BUT, if the sources of their discord were to be traced no higher

than this treaty, an inconsiderable alteration in the words of it,
might have brought the present question to an amicable issue. The
indefinite and ambiguous exprefion, which Cecil had inserted into
the treaty, might have been changed into one more limited, but
more precise. And Mary, instead of promising to abfRain from
bearing the title of Queen of England in all times to come, might
have engaged not to assume that title, during the life of Elizabeth,
or the lives of her lawful posterity.

THIs amendment, however, did not fui the views of either Queen.

Though Mary had been obliged to suspend, for some time, the prose-
eution of her title to the English crown, she had not, however, re-
linquifhed it. She determined to revive her claim, on the first pro-
spec of success, and was unwilling to bind herself, by a positive
engagement, not to take advantage of any such fortunate occurrence.
Nor would the alteration have been more acceptable to Elizabeth,
who, by agreeing to, it, would have tacitly recognized the right of
her rival to ascend the throne after her decease. But neither the
Scottilh nor English Queen durst avow there secret sentiments of
their hearts. Any open discovery of an inclination to disturb the
tranquillity of England, or to wrest the sceptre out of Elizabeth's
hands, might have proved fatal to Mary. Any suspicion of a de-
sign to alter the order of fucceflion, and to set aside the claim of
the Scottish Queen, would have exposed Elizabeth to much and
deserved censure, and have raised up againfl her many and danger-
ous enemies. These, however carefully concealed, or artfully dif-

S guised,

guised, were, in all probability, the real motives which determined BOOK: II.
the one Queen to follicit, and the other to refute the ratification of Z56
the treaty, in its original form; while neither had recourse to that
explication of it, which, to an heart unwarped by political interest,
and sincerely desirous of union and concord, would have appeared
so obvious and natural.

BUT though considerations of interest first occasioned this rup-

ture between the Britilh Queens, rivalfhip of another kind contri-
buted to widen the breach, and female jealousy increased the vio-
lence of their political hatred. Elizabeth, with all those extraordi-
nary qualities, by which she equalled or surpassed those of her sex,
who have merited the greatest renown, discovered an admiration
of her own person, to a degree, which women of ordinary under-
ilandings either do not entertain, or prudently endeavour to con-
ceal. Her attention to dress, her solicitude to display her charms,
her love of flattery, were all excessive. Nor were there weaknesses
confined to that period of life, when they are more pardonable.
Even in very advanced years, the wisest woman of that, or per-
haps of any other age, wore the garb, and asseted the manners of
a girl *. Though Elizabeth was as much inferior to Mary, in
beauty, and gracefulness of person, as file excelled her in political
abilities, and in the arts of government, ihe was weak enough
to compare herself with the Scottish Queen -- ; and as it was impof-
fible the could be altogether ignorant how much Mary gained by
the comparison ; lie envied and hated her as a rival, by whom
ile was eclipsed. In judging of the condut of Princes, we arc
apt to ascribe too much to political motives, and too little to the

* Johnlton ilift. Rer. Britan. 346, 347. Carte, vol. iii 699. Catalogue of
Royal and Noble Authors. Article E.fIx.

i
Ml lvil, 98.

aflion s

BooK III. passions which they feel in common with the reft of mankind.
t.-.'. In order to account for Elizabeth's present, as well as her fubfe-

quent conduct towards Mary, we must not always confider her as
a Queen, we must sometimes regard her as a woman.-

ELIZABETH, though no stranger to Mary's difficulties with re-

sped to the treaty, continued to urge her, by repeated applications,
to ratify it *. Mary, under various pretences, frill contrived to gain
time, and to elude the request. But while the one Queen folli-
cited with persevering importunity, and the other evaded with-art-
ful delay, they both studied an extreme politeness of behaviour, and
loaded each other with profeflions of sisterly love, with reciprocal
declarations of unchangeable efieem and amity.

Elizabeth re- IT was not long before Mary was convinced, that, among Princes,
fuses Mary a there expressions of friendship are commonly far distant from the
safe candut.

heart. In failing from France to Scotland, the course lies along
the English coast. In order to be safe from the insults of the Eng-
lifh fleet, or in cafe of tempestuous weather, to secure a retreat in
the harbours of that kingdom, Mary sent M. D'Oyfel to demand
of Elizabeth a safe conduct during her voyage. This requefr,
which decency alone obliged one Prince to grant to another, Eli-
zabeth rejeced,. in such a manner, as gave rife to no flight suspicion
of a design, either to obltruc the passage, or to intercept the person
of the Scottish Queen --.

Mary begins THIS ungenerous behaviour of Elizabeth filled Mary with indig-
er voyagc. nation, but did not retard her departure from France. She was

* Keith, I57, 160, &c. t Ibid. 171. Camdcn, See Append. N0. VI.

accolm-

accompanied to Calais, the place where (he embarked, in a manner BOOK III.
suitable to her dignity, as the Queen of two powerful kingdoms.
Six Princes of Lorrain her uncles, with many of the most eminent
among the French nobles, were in her retinue. Catherine, who
secretly rejoiced at her departure, graced it with every circum-
fiance of magnificence and refpecl. After bidding adieu to her
mourning attendants, with a fad heart, and eyes bathed intears, Mary
left that kingdom, the fllort, but only scene of her life, in which
fortune finiled upon her. While the French coaQf continued in
fight, fle intently gazed upon it, and musing, in a thoughtful
pofiure, on that height of fortune whence fle had fallen, and pre-
faging, perhaps, the disasters and calamities which imbittered the
remainder of her days, flie sighed often, and cried out " Farewel
"France ! Farewel beloved country, which I fiall never more be-
"hold!" Even when the darkness of the night had hid the land
from her view, (he would neither retire to the cabin, nor taste food,
but commanding a couch to be placed on the deck, she there
waited the return of the day, with the utnoft impatience. Fortune
soothed her on this occasion; the galley made little way during the
night. In the morning, the coast of France was frill within fight,
and fie continued to feed her melancholy with the profpedt; and
as long as her eyes could diflinguifh it, to utter the fame tender
exprefiions of regret *. At last a brifl gale arose, by the favour
of which for some days, and afterward under the covert of a thick
fog, Mary escaped the Englilh fleet, which lay in wait to inter-
ccpt her -; and on the i9th of August, after an absence of near Arrives in
thirteen years, landed safely at Leith in.her native kingdom. s.olll.i.

* Brantome, 483. He himself was in the fame galley with the Queen.
l1) Goodal, vol. i. 175. Caftcln. 455.
VOL. I. Gg RT.\ r

'BoOk Il. MARY was received by her subjects with shouts and acclama-

--,-ó. tions of joy, and with every demonstration of welcome and re-

56:' gard. But as her arrival was unexpected, and no suitable prepara-

tion had been made for it, they could not, with their utmost es-
forts, hide from her the poverty of the country, and were obliged
to conduct her to the palace of Holy-rood-houfe with little pomp.
The Queen, accustomed from her infancy to the utmost splendor
and magnificence, and fond of them, as was natural at her age,
could not help observing the change in her situation, and seemed to
be deeply affected with it *.

St.tc o the NEVER did any Prince ascend the throne at a jundure which
kingdoii at called for more wifdtom in council, or more courage and steadiness
that tim.

in action. The rage of religious controversy was still unabated. The
memory of past oppression exasperated the Protestants; the smart
of recent injuries rendered the Papists desperate; both were zea-
lous, fierce, and irreconcileable. The absence of their Sovereign
had accultomed the nobles to independency; and, during the late
commotions, they had acquired such an increase of wealth, as threw
great weight into the scale of aristocracy, which flood not in need
of any acceflion of power. The kingdom had long been under
the government of Regents, who exercised a delegated jurifdic-
tion, attended with little authority, and which inspired no reverence.
A slate of pure anarchy had prevailed for the two last years, with-
out a Regent, without a supreme council, without the power, or
even the form of a regular government -. A licentious spirit, un-
acquainted with subordination, and disdaining the restraints of law
and juflice, had spread among all ranks of men. The influence of
France, the antient ally of the kingdom, was withdrawn or despised.

* Brant. 484. ' Keith, Append. 92.
3 The

The Englifl, of enemies become confederates, had grown intoBooK III.
confidence with the nation, and had gained an ascendant over all its -T
councils. The Scottish Monarchs did not derive more splendor or
power from the friendship of the former, than. they had reason to
dread injury and diminution from the interposition of the latter.
Every consideration, whether of interest, or of felf-prefervation, ob-
liged Elizabeth to depress the royal authority in Scotland, and to
create the Prince perpetual difficulties, by fomenting the spirit of
difaffedion among the people.

IN this posture were the affairs of Scotland, when the admini-

ftration fell into the hands of a young Queen, not nineteen years
of age, unacquainted with the manners and laws of her country, a
stranger to her fubjeas, without experience, without allies, and al-
most without a friend.

ON the other hand, in Mary's -situation we find some circum-

fiances, which, though they did not ballance these disadvantages,
contributed, however, to alleviate them; and, with ikilful ma-
nagement, might have produced great effeCts. Her fubjecds, unac-
customed so long to the residence of their Prince, were not only
dazzled by the novelty and splendor of the royal presence, but in-
spired with awe and reverence. Besides the places of power and
profit bestowed by the favour of a prince, his protection, his fami-
liarity, and even his smiles, confer honour and win the hearts of men.
From all corners of the kingdom, the nobles crowded to teflify their
duty and affection to their Sovereign, and fludied, by every art,
to wipe out the memory of past misconduct, and to lay in a flock
of future merit. The amusements and gaiety of her court, which
was filled with the most accomplified of the French nobility, who

G g had

BOOK III.had attended her, began to soften and to polish the rude manners
""56 -
of the nation. Mary herself pofeffed many of those qualifications,

which raise affetion, and procure esteem. The beauty and grace-
fulness of her person drew universal admiration, the elegance and
politeness of her manners commanded general refpee. To all the
charms of her own sex, (he added many of the accomplishments
of the other. The progress (he had made in all the Arts and Sci-
ences, which were then esteemed necessary or ornamental, was far
beyond what is commonly attained by Princes. And all her other
qualities were rendered more agreeable by a courteous affability,
which, without lessening the dignity of a Prince, steals on the hearts
of fubjedts with a bewitching insinuation.

FROM these circumitances, notwithstanding the threatening as-

peet of affairs at Mary's return into Scotland, notwithstanding the
clouds which gathered on every hand, a political observer would
have predicted a very different issue of her reign; and whatever fud-
den gusts of facion he might have expected, he would never have
dreaded the deftrudive violence of that florm which followed,

WHILE all parties were contending who should discover the most

dutiful attachment to the Queen, the zealous and impatient spirit of
the age broke out in a remarkable inflance. On the Sunday after
her arrival, the Queen commanded mass to be celebrated in the
chapel of her palace. The firfi rumour of this occasioned a secret
murmuring among the Protestants who attended the court; com-
plaints and thrcatenings soon followed. The fcrvants belonging to the
chapel were insulted and abused; and, if the prior of St. Andrew's
had not seasonably interposed, the rioters might have proceeded to
the utmost exccff:s *.

* Knox, 284.

IT

IT is impossible, at this distance of time, and under circumfiances BOOK III.

so very different, to conceive the violence of that zeal against Pope- --v-'
ry, which then poiffefed the nation. Every initance of condefcen-
sion to the Papists was esteemed an ad of apoftacy, and the tolera-
tion of a iingle mars pronounced to be more formidable to the na-
tion than the invasion of ten thousand armed men *. Under the
influence of there opinions, many Protestants would have ventured
to go dangerous lengths; and without attempting to convince their
Sovereign by argument, or to reclaim her by indulgence, would
have abruptly denied her the liberty of worshipping God in that
manner, which aloneshe thought acceptable to him. But the Prior
of St. Andrew's, and other leaders of the party, not only restrained
this impetuous spirit; but, in spite of the murmurs of the people,
and the exclamations of the preachers, obtained for the Queen and
her domestics the undisturbed exercise of the Catholic religion. Near
an hundred years after this period, when the violence of religious
animofities had begun to subside, when time and the progress of
learning had inlarged the views of the human mind, an English
House of Commons refused to indulge the wife of their Sovereign
in the private use of the mass. The Protestant leaders deserve, on
this occasion, the praise both of wisdom and of moderation for con-
dud so different. But, at the fame time, whoever reflects upon
the encroaching and sanguinary spirit of Popery, will be far from
treating the fears and caution of the more zealous Reformers as al-
together imaginary, and destitute of any real foundation.

THE Proteflants, however, by this compliance with the Queen's
prejudiccs, obtained a Proclamation highly favourable to their reli-

* Knox, 287.

gion.

BOOK IlI.had attended her, began to soften and to poliss the rude manners

- 1~-- of the nation. Mary herself possessed many of those qualifications,

which raise affection, and procure elleem. The beauty and grace-
fulness of her person drew universal admiration, the elegance and
politeness of her manners commanded general respect. To all the
charms of her own sex, Ihe added many of the accomplishments
of the other. The progress (he had made in all the Arts and Sci-
ences, which were then efleemed necessary or ornamental, was far
beyond what is commonly attained by Princes. And all her other
qualities were rendered more agreeable by a courteous affability,
which, without lefTening the dignity of a Prince, steals on the hearts
of fubjeats with a bewitching insinuation.

FROM these circumstances, notwithfranding the threatening as-

ped of affairs at Mary's return into Scotland, notwithitanding the
clouds which gathered on every hand, a political observer would
have predicted a very different issue of her reign; and whatever fud-
den gulls of fadtion he might have expected, he would never have
dreaded the deftruLcive violence of that florm which followed.

WHILE all parties were contending who should discover the mofi

dutiful attachment to the Queen, the zealous and impatient spirit of
the age broke out in a remarkable inflance. On the Sunday after
her arrival, the Queen commanded mars to be celebrated in the
chapel of her palace. The first rumour of this occasioned a secret
murmuring among the Protestants who attended the court; com-
plaints and thrcatenings soon followed. The ifrvants belonging to the
chapel were insulted and abused; and, if the prior of St. Andrew's
had not seasonably interposed, the rioters might have proceeded to
the utmofi exccffis *.

"* Knox, 284.

IT

IT is impofilble, at this distance of time, and under circumstances BOOK III.

so very different, to conceive the violence of that zeal against Pope- v-_~'-
ry, which then poffefied the nation. Every inflance of condefce n-
lion to the Papists was esteemed an a& of apoftacy, and the tolera-
tion of a single mars pronounced to be more formidable to the na-
tion than the invasion of ten thousand armed men *. Under the
influence of there opinions, many Protestants would have ventured
to go dangerous lengths; and without attempting to convince their
Sovereign by argument, or to reclaim her by indulgence, would
have abruptly denied her the liberty of worshipping God in that
manner, which alone he thought acceptable to him. But the Prior
of St. Andrew's, and other leaders of the party, not only restrained
this impetuous spirit; but, in spite of the murmurs of the people,
and the exclamations of the preachers, obtained for the Queen and
her domestics the undisturbed exercise of the Catholic religion. Near
an hundred years after this period, when the violence of religious
animofities had begun to subside, when time and the progress of
learning had inlarged the views of the human mind, an Engliih
House of Commons refused to indulge the wife of their Sovereign
in the private use of the mass. The Proteflant leaders deserve, on
this occasion, the praise both of wisdo.m and of moderation for con-
dudt so different. But, at the fame time, whoever reflects upon
the encroaching and sanguinary spirit of Popery, will be far from
treating the fears and caution of the more zealous Reformers as al-
together imaginary, and destitute of any real foundation.

THE Protestants, however, by this compliance with the Queen's
prcjudices, obtained a Proclamation highly favourable to their reli-

~* Knox, 287.

gion.

Bo6K III. glon. The reformed doctrine, though established all over the

ó-~- kingdom, had never received the countenance or fandion of royal
Auguftl5. authority. On this occasion, the Queen declared any attempt to-

wards an alteration or subversion of it, to be a capital crime *.

She enmploys THE QOeen, conformable to the plan which had been concerted
ants inth, e in France, committed the adminifiration of affairs entirely to Pro-
admi~niia- teiants. Her council was filled with the most eminent persons of

that party; not a tingle Papist was admitted into any degree of con-
fidence t. The Prior of "t. Andrew's and Maitland of Lething-
ton seemed to hold the first place in the Queen's affection, and pof-
sessed all the power and reputation of favourite Miniflers. Her choice
could not have fallen upon persons more acceptable to her people.
And, by their prudent advice, Mary conduched herself with so
much moderation, and deference to the Sentiments of the nation,
as could not fail of gaining the affection of her fubjeas $, the firm-
eft foundation of a Prince's power, and the only genuine source of
his happiness and glory.

ALtempt to A CORDIAL reconcilement with Elizabeth was another objet of
bc.;i's :avor. great importance to Mary; and though she seems to have had it

much at heart, in the beginning of her administration, to accorn-
plifh such a defireable ciijuntion, yet many events occurred to
widen, rather than close the breach. The formal offices offriend-
ship, however, are feldomre negltced among Princes; and Elizabeth,
who had attempted so openly to obltruc- the Queen's voyage into
Scotland, did not fail, a few days after her arrival, to command
Randolph to congratulate her safe return. Mary, that she might

Kcith, 504. t- Knox, 285. . Lefy, 235.

be

be on equal terms with her, sent Maitland to the Englifs court, BOOK 1I.
with many ceremonious expressions of regard for Elizabeth *. Both - --I
the Ambassadors were received with the utmost civility; and, on
each fide, the profeflions of ki:idnefs, as they were made with little
sincerity, were'liftened to with proportional credit.

BOTH were intruded, however, with something more than mere

matter of ceremony. Randolph urged Mary, with fresh importu-
nity, to ratify the treaty of Edinburgh. Maitland endeavoured to
amuse Elizabeth, by apologizing for the dilatory conduct of his
Mistress with regard to that point. The multiplicity of public as-
fairs since her arrival in Scotland, the importance of the question in
dispute, and the absence of many noblemen, with whom (he was
obliged in decency to consult, were the pretences offered in excuse
for her conduct; the real causes of it were those, which have already
been mentioned. But in order to extricate herself out of these
difficulties, into which the treaty of Edinburgh had led her, Mary
was brought to yield a point, which formerly she seemed deter-
mined never to give up. She inftruted Maitland to signify her
willingness to disclaim any right to the crown of England, during
the life of Elizabeth, and the lives of her posterity; if, in failure
of there, she were declared next heir by a6t of parliament t.

REASONABLE as this proposal might appear to Mary, who there-

by precluded herself from disturbing Elizabeth's poifeflion of the
throne, nothing could be more inconsistent with Elizabeth's inte-
refl, or more contradictory to a paflion, which predominated in the
character of that Princess. Notwithstanding all the great qualities

* Keith, 181, &c. t Camden, 387. Buch, 329.

which

B,.ox III. which threw such lustre on her reign, we may observe, that the was

C5ó1 tinftured with a jealousy of her right to the crown, which often

betrayed her into mean and ungenerous actions. The peculiarity
of her situation heightened, no doubt, and increased, but did not
infuse this passion. It descended to her from Henry VII. her grand-
father, whom, in several features of his character, (he nearly refem-
bled. Like him ihe suffered the title by which she held the Crown
to remain ambiguous and controverted, rather than submit it to par-
liamentary discussion, or derive any addition to her right, from
such authority. Like him, she observed every pretender to the
fucceflion, not only with that attention, which prudence prescribes;
but with that aversion which suspicion inspires. The present un-
certainty, with regard to the right of succession, operated for Eliza-
beth's advantage, both on her fubjeAs, and on her rivals. Among
the former, every lover of his country regarded her life as the great
security of the national tranquillity; and chose rather to acknow-
ledge a title which was dubious, than search for one that was un-
known. The latter, while nothing was decided, were held in de-
pendence, and obliged to court her. The manner in which she re-
ceived this ill-timed proposal of the Scottish Queen, was no other
than might have been expeced. She rejected it in a peremptory tone,
with many expressions of a resolution never to permit a point of so
much delicacy to be touched.
September r. ABOUT this time, the Queen made her public entry into Edin-

burgh with great pomp. Nothing was negle&ed, which could
express the duty and affection of the citizens towards their Sove-
reign. But amidtl there demonllrations of regard, the genius and
sentiments of the nation discovered themselves, in a circumnitance,
which, though inconsiderable, ought not to be overlooked. As it

5 was

was the mode of the times to exhibit many pageants at every public BOOK JII.
solemnity; on this occasion, mossos these were contrived to be repre- "

I 561

fentations of the vengeance which the Almighty hath inflicted upon
idolaters *. Even while they fludied to amuse and to flatter the
Queen, her fubjeds could not refrain from testifying their abhor-
rence of that religion which the profelfed.

To restore the regular administration ofjuflice, and to reform the Reflrains the

licence of the

internal police of the country, becamethe next object of the Queens boi derers.
care. The laws enacled for preservation of public order, and the
fecurityof private property, were nearly the fame in Scotland, as
in every other civilized country. But the nature of the Scoltifh
confiitution, the impotence of regal authority, the exorbitant power
of the nobles, the violence of faction, and the fierce manners of
the people, rendered the execution of these laws feeble, disorder-
ly, and partial. In the counties which border on England, this
defeCt was molt apparent; and the consequences of it mofi fen-
sibly felt. The inhabitants, strangers to industry, averse from la-
bour and unacquainted with the arts of peace, fubfitfed intirely
by spoil and pillage, and being confederated in septs or clans, com-
mitted these excesses not only with impunity, but even with ho-
nour. During the unsettled state of the kingdom from the death
of James V. this dangerous licence had grown to an unusual height;
and the inroads and rapine of those freebooters were become no
lcfs intolerable to their own countrymen, than to the English.
To restrain and punifli these outrages, was an action equally
popular in both kingdoms. The Prior of St. Andrew's was
the person chosen for this important service, and extraordi-

* Keith, 189.
VOL. 1. I h nary

Biod III. nary powers, together with the title- of the Queen's lieutenant,,

-56I. were vefied in him for this purpose.

NOTHING can be more surprising to men, accustomed to re-

gular government, than the preparations made on this occasion.
They were such as might be expecaed in the rudest and most im-
perfcnt slate ofcfociety. The freeholders of eleven several coun-
ties, with all their followers completely armed, were summoned to
afi'fl the Lieutenant in the discharge of his office. Every thing
resembled a military expedition, rather than the progress of a court
of juflice ". The Prior executed his commission with such vigour
and prudence, as acquired him a great increase of reputation and
popularity among his countrymen. Numbers of the banditti sus-
sered the punihment due to their crimes; and, by the impartial
and rigorous administration of juRice, order and tranquillity were
re¢tored to that part of the kingdom,

Th.e P.;pi;s DURING the absence of the Prior of St. Andrew's, the leaders.
;'.n"'t ,, i of the Popish fadion seem to have taken some steps towards infi-
i.to favour nuating themselves into the Qteen's favour and confidence A. But

the Archbiflop of.St. Andrew's, the most remarkable person in the
party for abilities and political address, was received with little favour
at court; and whatever secret partiality the Queen might have to-
wards those who professed the fame religion with herself, fle dif-
covered no inclination, at that time, to take the adminifiration of
affairs out of those hands, to which she had already committed it.

THi cold reception of the Archbiflop of St. Andrew's was owing
to his connection with the house of Hamilton; from which the

* Keith, 198, - Ibid. 203.

QuLeen

tQucen was much alienated. The Duke of Guise and the CardinalBooK III.
could never forgive the zeal, with which the Duke of Chatelhe- ' ,-
rault and his son the Earl of Arran had espoused the cause of the 5
Congregation. Princes seldom view their successors withoutjealoufy
and diAruft. The Prior of St. Andrew's, perhaps, dreaded the
Duke as a rival in power. All these causes concurred in infusing
into the Queen's mind an aversion for that family. The Duke,
indulging his love of retirement, lived at a diflance from court,
without taking pains to insinuate himself into favour. And though
the Earl of Arran openly aspired to marry the Queen, he, by a
molt unpardonable ad of imprudence, was the only nobleman of
diftindion who opposed Mary's enjoying the exercise of her re-
ligion ; and by rashly entering a public protestation against it, en-
tirely forfeited her favour *. At the fame time, the fordid parfimo-
ny of his father obliged him either to hide himself in some retire-
ment, or to appear in a manner unbecoming his dignity as first
Prince of the blood, or his high pretensions as suitor to the Queen A.
His love, inflamed by disappointment, and his impatience, exafpe-
rated by neglec, -preyed gradually on his reason; and, after many
extravagancies, broke out at last in ungovernable frenzy.

TOWARDS the end of the year, a Convention of Estates was heldDeccb, 20,

chiefly on account of ecclesiastical affairs. The assembly of the
church, which fat at the fame time, presented a petition, contain-
ing many demands with refpec to the fupprcfling of Popery, the
encouraging the Protestant religion, and the providing for the main-
tenance of the clergy .. The last was a matter of great impor-
tance, and the steps taken towards it'deferve to be traced,

* Keith, 2o0, 204. Knox, 286. f Keith, 196, [ IblJ. 210.

H h a TFIUGI1

BOOK III. THOUGH the number of Protestant preachers was 'now confider-
._.- ably increased, many more were till wanted, in every corner of

i56i.

A ne egu- the kingdom. No legal provision having been- made for them,
laticn cone- they had hitherto drawn a scanty and precarious fubfiflence from
cerning the
revenues of the benevolence of their people. To susser the Miniftcrs of an

thechurcheablifed church to continue in this Rtate of indigence and depen-

dence, was an indecency equally repugnant to the principles of reli-
gion, and to the maxims of found policy ; and would' have jufti-
sied all the imputations of avarice, with which the Reformation
was then loaded by its enemies. The revenues of the Popifl
church were the only fund, which could be employed for their
relief; but during the three last years, the fIate of these was great-
ly altered. A great majority of Abbots, Priors, and other heads
of religious houses, had, either from a sense of duty, or from views
of interest, renounced the errors of Popery; and, notwithstanding
this change in their sentiments, they retained their antient revenues.
Almost the whole order of Biffops, and several of the other dignita-
ries, still adhered to the Romish superstition: and though debarred
from every spiritual function, continued to enjoy the temporalities
of their benefices. Some laymen, especially those who had been
adtive in promoting the Reformation, had, under various pretences,
and amidst the licence of civil wars, got into their hands poffrefions,
which belonged to the church. And thus, before any part of the
ancient ecclesiastical revenues could be applied towards the main-
tenance of the Protestant Ministers, many different interests were
to be adjusted; many claims to be examined; and the prejudices
and paflions of the two contending parties required the application
of a delicate hand. After much contention, the following plan was
approved by a majority of voices, and acquief:ed in even by the Po-
pifl clergy themselves. An exact account of the value of eccle-

fiatical

fiaftical benefices throughout the kingdom was appointed to be ta-Boor: T1l.
ken. The present incumbents, to whatever party they adhered, -'

1 56i.

were allowed to keep possession: two thirds of their whole reve-
nue were reserved for their own use, the remainder was annexed
to the Crown; and out of that, the Queen undertook to assign a
fiiflicient maintenance for the Proteflant clergy '*

As most of the Bishops and several of the other dignitaries were

itill firmly attached to the Popish religion, the extirpation of the
whole order, rather than an aa of such extraordinary indulgence,
might have been expeded from the zeal of the preachers, and from
the spirit which had-hitherto animated the nation. But, on this
occasion, other principles obftruded the operation of those, which
were purely religious. Zeal for liberty, and the love of wealth,
two passions extremely opposite, concurred in determining the Pro-
teflant leaders to fall in with this plan, which deviated so manifestly
from the maxims, by which they had hitherto regulated their
conduc.

IF the Reformers had been allowed to a& without controul,

and to level all diflindions in the church, the immense revenues
annexed to ecclesiastical dignities could not, with any colour of
justice, have been retained by those in whose hands they now were;
but must either have been difiributed among the Protestant clergy,
who performed all religious offices, or muff have fallen to the Queen,
firom the bounty of whose ancestors, the greater part of them was
originally derived. The former, however suitable to the religious
spirit of many among the people, was attended with manifold dan-

* Keith, Appendix 175. Knox, 194.

ger.

BooK III. ger. The Popish ecclefialtics had acquired a share in -the national

vó~^' property, which far exceeded the proportion that was consistent
)56i. with the happiness of the kingdom; and the nobles were deter.

mined to guard againit this evil, by preventing those vail poflef
sions from ever returning into the hands of the church. Norkwas
the latter, which exposed the constitution to more imminent ha-
zard, to be avoided with less care. Even that circumscribed pre-
rogative, which the Scottish Kings possessed, was the object of jea-
lousy to the nobles. If they had allowed the Crown to seize the
spoils of the church, such an increase of power must have fol-
lowed that accefion of property, as would have raised the royal au-
thority above controul, and have rendered the most limited Prince
in Europe the moi: absolute and independent. The reign of
Henry VIII. presented a recent and alarming example of this nature.
The wealth which flowed in upon that Prince, from the fuppref-
sion of the monailtries, not only changed the maxims of his go-
vernment, but the temper of his mind; and he who had former-
ly submitted to his Parliaments, and courted his people, ditated,
from that time, to the former, with intolerable insolence; and ty-
rannized over the latter with unprecedented severity. And if his
policy had not been extremely thort-fighted, if he had not fquan-
dered what he acquired, with a profusion equal to his rapacious-
ness, and which defeated his ambition, he might have eflabliflhed
defpotifin in England, on a basis so broad and strong, as all the es-
forts of the fubjests would never have been able to (fake. In Scot-
land, where the riches of the clergy bore as great a proportion to
the wealth of the kingdom, the acquisition of church-lands would
have been of no less importance to the Crown, and no less fatal to
the arilocracy. The nobles, for this reason, guarded against such

an

an increase of the royal power, and thereby secured their own BOOK III.
independence. r

i56I...

AvARICE mingled itfelr with their concern for the interest of

their order. The re-uniting the possessions of the church to the
Crown, or the bestowing them on the Proteflant clergy, would
have been a fatal blow both to those nobles, who had, by fraud or
violence, seized part of these revenues, and to those Abbots and
Priors who had totally renounced their ecclesiastical character. But-
as the plan, which was proposed, gave some fantion to their ufur-
pations, they promoted it with their utmost influence. The popish
ecclesiastics, though the lopping off a third of their revenues waS'
by no means agreeable to them, consented, under their present cir-
cunmfances, to sacrifice a part of their possessions, in order to pur_
chafe the fecureenjoyment of the remainder; and after deeming;
the whole irrecoverably loft, they confidered whatever they could:
retrieve as so much gain.. Many of the ancient dignitaries were-
men of noble birth; and as they no longer entertained hopes of
refloring the Popish religion, they wished their own relations, rather
than the Crown, or the Protestant clergy, to be enriched with the
Spoils of the church. They connived, for this reason, at the en-
croachments of the nobles; they even aided their avarice and vio-
lence; they dealt out the patrimony of the church among their own'
relations, and by granting feus and perpetual leafes of lands and:
tithes, gave, tothe utmost of their power, some colour of legal poL
fefiion, to what was formerly mere usurpation. Many vestiges of
such alienations still remain *. The nobles, with the concurrence
of the incumbents, daily extended their encroachments, and gra-

7 K(citb, 507. Spots. 175. d
7 dlually

Boo0 III.dually stripped the ecclesiastics of their richest and moR valuable por-

ó-' se-ssions. Even that third part, which was given up in order to silence

the clamours of the Protestant clergy, and to be some equivalent to
the Crown for its claims, amounted to no considerable fum. The
thirds due by the more powerful nobles, especially by those who
had embraced the Reformation, were almost universally remitted.
Others, by producing fraudulent rentals; by eifimating the corn, and
other payments in kind, at an under value ; and by the connivance
of co leators; greatly diminished the charge against themselves *:
and the nobles had much reason to be satisfied with a device which,
at to fnmall expence, secured to them such vatl poffefiions.

The Protef- NOR were the ProteRant clergy considerable gainers by this new
gant clersby ino'reulation; they found it to be a more easy matter to kindle zeal
gainers by it.

than to extinguish avarice. Those very men, whom formerly they
had swayed with absolute authority, were now deaf to all their
remonstrances. The Prior of St. Andrew's, the Earl of Argyll,
the Earl of Morton, and Maitland, all the mofi zealous leaders of
the Congregation, were appointed to alfgn, or, as it was called, to
modif3 their stipends. An hundred merks Scottifhi was the allowance
which their liberality afforded to the generality of Ministers. To
a few three hundred merks were granted 4'. About twenty-four
thousand pounds Scottish appears to have been the whole fum al-
lotted for the maintenance of a national church established by law,
and esteemed, throughout the kingdom, the true church of God +.
Even this fum was paid with little exatnefs, and the Miniflers were
kept in the fame poverty and dependance as formerly.
· Keith, Append. I88. Spots. 183. - Knox, 3o0. $ Keith, Append. 188.:

THE

THE gentleness of tihe Qeen's administration, and the elegance BooK III.
of her court, had mitigated, in some degree, the ferocity of the "'%.-

1562.

nobles, and accustomed them to greater mildness and humanity; Difrenfons
while, at the fame time, her pretence and authority were a checIk nong the
to their factious and tumultuary spirit. But, as a ft.te of order and
tranquillity was not natural to the feudal aristocracy, it could not
* e of long continuance; and this year became remarkable for the
most violent eruptions of intestine discord and animosity.

AMONG the great and independent nobility of Scotland, a Mo-

narch could poflefs little authority, and exercise no extensive or rigo-
rous jurifdiEtion. The interfering of interefl, the unsettled state of
property, the frequency of public commotions, and the fierceness
of their own manners, sowed, among the great families, the feeds
of many quarrels and contentions. These, as we have already ob-
served, were decided not by law, but by violence. The offended
Baron, without having recourse to the Monarch, or acknowledging
his superior authority, assembled his own followers, and invaded
the lands of his rival in an hostile manner. Together with his
eflate and honours, every nobleman transmitted some hereditary
feud to his posterity, who were bound in honour to adopt and to
prosecute it with the fame inveterate rancour.

SUCH a dissention had subsisted between the house of Hamilton

and the Earl of Bothwell, and was heightened by mutual injuries
during the late commotions *. Both the Earl of Arran and
Bothwell happening to be in waiting at the fame time, their

* Keith, 215.
VOL. I. Ii follow-

BOOK III. followers quarrelled frequently in the streets of Edinburgh, and

'--"; excited dangerous tumults in that city. At last, the mediation of
I562.
February. their friends, particularly of Knox, brought about a reconcilement,

but an unfortunate one to both these noblemen .

A FEv days after, Arran came to Knox, and with the utmost

terror and confusion, confefed first to him, and then to the Prior
of St. Andrew's, that, in order to obtain the sole direcion of as-
fairs, Bothwell and his kinsmen the Hamiltons, had conspired to
murder the Prior, Maitland, and the other favourites of the Queen.
The Duke of Chatelherault regarded the Prior as a rival, who had
supplanted him in the Queen's favour, and who filled that place at
the helm, which he imagined to be due to himself, as firit Prince of
the blood. Bothwell, on account of the personal injuries which he
had received from the Prior during the late commotions, was no
less exasperated against him. But whether he and the Hamiltons
had agreed to cement their new alliance, with the blood of their
common enemy, or whether the conspiracy existed only in the fian-
tic and disordered imagination of the Earl of Arran, it is impossible,
amidst the contradiction of hiltorians, and the defetivenefs of re-
cords, positively to determine. Among men inflamed with resent-
ment, and impatient for revenge, rash expreflions might be uttered,
and violent and criminal expedients proposed.; and on that founda-
tion, Arran's distempered fancy might rear the whole fuperftruc-
ture of a conspiracy. All the persons accused, denied their guilt
with the utmost confidence. But the known characters of the men,
and the violent spirit of the age, added greatly to the probability
of the accusation, and abundantly juflify the conduct of the Queen's

* Knox, 305.

Mini-
1k

Minliters, who confined Bothwell, Arran, and a few of the ring- BooK III.
leaders, in separate prisons, and obliged the Duke to surrender the 6 2.
firong cattle of Dunbarton, which he had held ever since the time
of his resigning the Office of Regent .

THE designs of the Earl of Huntly againfl the Prior of St. An- The Earl oF

drew's were deeper laid, and produced more memorable and more ,ity' to thci
tragical events. George Gordon Earl of Huntly, having been one e's ,i-
of the nobles who conspired against James III. and who raised his
son James IV. to the throne, enjoyed a great share in the confi-
dence of that generous Prince -. By his bounty, great accessions of
wealth and power were added to a family, already opulent and power-
ful. On the death of that Monarch, Alexander the next Earl, be-
ing appointed Lord Lieutenant of all the counties beyond Forth,
left the other nobles to contend for offices at court; and retiring
to the north, where his estate and influence lay, resided there, in a
kind of princely independence. The Chieftains in that part of the
kingdom dreaded the growing dominion of such a dangerous neigh-
bour, but were unable to prevent his encroachments. Some of
his rivals he secretly undermined, others he subdued by open force.
His estate far exceeded that of any other subjet, and his fuperio-
rities and jurifdidtions extended over many of the northern coun-
ties. With power and possessions so immense, under two long and
feeble minorities, and amidst the flock of civil commotions, the Earls
of Huntly might have indulged the most elevated hopes. But happily
for the Crown, an acive and enterprising spirit was not the cha-
raaeriftic of that family, and whatever object their ambition might
have in view, they chore rather to acquire it by political address,
than to seize it openly, and by force of arms.

IKnox, 307, 308. Keith, 202. + Cravf. Ofliccrs of State, 56.

I i 2 TIlE

BooHR III. THE conduct of George the present Earl, during the late commo-

ó"r- tions, had been perfectly suitable to the character of the family, in that

5 age; dubious, variable, and crafty. While the success of the Lords of

the Congregation was uncertain, he assisted the Queen Regent in
her attempts to crush them. When their Affairs put on a better
aspeCt, he pretended to join them, but never heartily favoured their
cause. He was courted and feared by each of the contending
parties; both connived at his encroachments in the north ; and, by
artifice and force, which he well knew how to employ alternately,
and in their proper places, he added every day to the exorbitant
power and wealth which he possessed.

HE -observed the growing reputation and authority of the Prior

of St. Andrew's, with the utmost jealousy and concern, and con-
fidered him as a rival who had engrossed that share in the Queen's
confidence, to which his own zeal for the Popish religion seemed
to give him a preferable title. Personal injuries soon increased
the misunderstanding occasioned by rivalfhip in power. The Queen
having determined to reward the services of the Prior of St. An-
drew's, by creating him an Earl, she made choice of Mar, as the
place whence he should take his title; and, that he might be bet-
ter able to support his new honour, bestowed upon him, at the
February o. fame time, the lands of that name. These were part of the royal

demefles *, but the Earls of Huntly had been permitted, for feve-
ral years, to keep poffeflion of them -. On this occasion, the
Earl not only complained, with some reason, of the loss which he
fuflaincd, but had real cause to be alarmed at the intrusion of a
formidable neighbour into the heart of his territories, who might

* Crawf. Peer, 297. f Buch. 334.

be

be able to rival his power, and excite his oppressed vafTals to (hake BOOK Ill.
off his yoke. _ .

1562.

AN incident, which happened soon after, encreafed and confirmed June z7.

Huntly's suspicions. Sir John Gordon, his third son, and Lord
Ogilvie had a dispute about the property of an eflate. This dif-
pute became a deadly quarrel. They happened unfortunately to
meet in the fireets of Edinburgh, and being both attended with
armed'followers, a scuffle ensued, in which Lord Ogilvie was dan-
geroufly wounded by Sir Tohn. The Magistrates seized both the
offenders, and the Queen commanded them to be ftriEtly confined,
Under any regular government, such a breach of public peace and
order would expose the person offending, to certain punishment.
At this time, some severity was necessary, in order to vindicate the
Queen's authority from .:n insult, the moss heinous which had been
offered to it, since her return into Scotland. But in an age accuf-
tomed to licence and anarchy, even thiT moderate exertion of her
power in ordering them to be kept in cuflody, was deemed an at
of intolerable rigour ; and the friends of each party began to con-
vene their vassals and dependants, in order to overawe, or to fruf-
trate the decisions of justice *. Mean while, Gordon made his
escape out of prison, and fying into Aberdeenflirc, complained
loudly of the indignity with which he had been treated. And as
all the Queen's adions were, at this JunLcure, imputed to the Earl
of Mar, this added not a little to the resentment, which Huntly
had conceived againfl that nobleman.

AT the very time when these paflions fermented, with the utmost
violence, in the minds of the Earl of HIuntly and his family, the August 23. '

* Keith, 223.

3 Queen

Booac III. Queen happened to set out on a progress into the northern parts of

ó- ' the kingdom. She was attended by the Earls of Mar and Mor-
i562 2

-ton, Maitland, and other leaders of that party. The presence of

the Queen, in a country where no name greater than the Earl of
Huntly's had been heard of, and no power superior to his had been
-exercised, for many years, was an event, of itself, abundantly mor-
tifying to that haughty nobleman. But while the Queen was en-
tirely under the direation of Mar, all her actions were more apt to
be misrepresented, and confirued into injuries; and a thousand cir-
cumftances could not but occur to awaken Huntly's jealousy, to of-
fend his pride, and to inflame his resentment. Amidst the agitations
of so many violent passions, some eruption was unavoidable.

ON Mary's arrival in the north, Huntly employed his wife, a

woman capable of executing the commission with abundance of dex-
terity, to sooth the Queen, and to intercede for pardon to their son.
But the Queen peremptorily required, that he should again deliver
himself into the hands of justice, and rely on her clemency. Gor-
don was persuaded to do so; and being enjoined by the Queen to
enter himself prisoner in the cattle of Stirling, he promired like-
wife to obey that command. Lord Erskine, Mar's uncle, was,, at
that time, Governor of this fort. The Queen's severity, and the
place in which Ihe appointed Gordon to be confned, were inter-
preted to be new marks of Mar's rancour, and augmented the ha-
tred of the Gordons against him.
September r. MI:AN time, Sir John Gordon let out towards Stirling; but in-

flead of performing his promise to the Queen, made his efcapc
fom his guards, and returned to take the command of his follow-
ers, who were rising in arms, all over the north. These were

detfined

destined to second and improve the blow, by which his father pro- BOOK III.
posed, secretly, and at once, to cut off Mar, Morton, and Mait- *----
land, his principal adversaries. The time and place for perpetrating
this horrid deed were frequently appointed ; but the executing of it
was wonderfully prevented, by some of those unforeseen accidents,
which so often occur to disconcert the schemes, and to intimidate
the hearts of assassins *. His own house at Strathbogie was the last
and most convenient scene, appointed for committing the intended
violence. But, on her journey thither, the Queen heard of young
Gordon's flight and rebellion, and refuting, in the first transports
of her indignation, to enter under the father's roof, by that fortu-
nate expression of her resentment, saved her Ministers from una-
voidable destruction -.

THE ill success of these efforts of private revenge precipitated Talces arm.

Huntly into open rebellion. As the Queen was entirely under the again'll the
direction of his rivals, it was impoflible to work their ruin, without ee
violating the allegiance which he owed his Sovereign. On her ar-
rival at Inverness, the commanding officer in the castle, by Hunt-
ly's order, shut the gates against her. Mary was obliged to lodge
in the town, which was open and defenceless ; but this, too, was
quickly surrounded by a multitude of the Earl's followers +. The
utmost consternation seized the Queen, who was attended by-a
very slender train. She every moment expected the approach of the
rebel,, and some ships were already ordered into the river to fe-
cure her escape. The loyalty of the Monrocs, Frazers, Mackin-
tofles, and some neighbouring clans, who took arms in her dc-
fence, saved her fron this danger. By their afTifiance, flhe cvcn

* Keith, 230. -1 Knox, 318. - Crawf. Officcrs of State, 87, 8'S.

8 forced

EooK III. forced the cafile to filrrender, and infiitRed on the Governor the

ó2_~ puniOrment which lis insolence dcferved.
j 562. P

Tms open ad of disobedience was the occasion of a measure

more galling to Huntly than any the Queen had hitherto taken.
Lord Erlikie, having pretended a right to the earldom of Mar,
Stewart resigned it in his favour; and at the fame time Mary con-
ferred upon him the title of Earl of Murray, with the estate
annexed to that dignity, which had been in the poffeflionl of the
Earl of Huntly since the year 1548*. From this he concluded
that his family was devoted to defiruAion; and dreading to be
stripped, gradually, of those poffeflons, which, in reward of their
services, the gratitude of the Crown had beltowed on himself, or
his ancestors, he no longer disguised his intentions, but, in defiance
of the Queen's proclamation, openly took arms. Instead of yield-
ing those places of strength, which Mary required him to furren-
der, his followers dispersed or cut in pieces the parties which she
dispatched to take possession of them t-; and he himself, advancing
with a considerable body of men towards Aberdeen, to which place
the Queen was now returned, filled her small court with the utmost
consternation. Murray had only a handful of men in whom he could
confide +. In order to form the appearance of an army, he was
obliged to call in the assistance of the neighbouring Barons; but as
most of there either favoured Huntly's designs, or stood in awe of
his power, from them no cordial or effectual service could be ex-
pected.

* Crawf. Peer. 359. f Knox, 319. $ Keith, 230.

WITH

WITH these troops, Murray, who could--gain nothing by le-BooK III.
lay, marched briskly towards the enemy. He found them. at - -

1T62.

Corrichie, posted to great advantage; he commanded his northern oaooer 2ó.
affbciates instantly to begin the attack; but on the firil motion
of the enemy, they treacherously turned their backs; and Hunt-
ly's followers, throwing aflde their spears, and breaking their ranks,
drew their swords, and rushed forward to the pursuit. It was Hei,defeated
then, that Murraygave proof both of fleady courage, and ofpru-,b te Earl of
dent condut. He flood immoveable, on a rising ground, with the
finall but trusty body of his adherents, who presenting their spears
to the enemy, received them with a determined resolution, which
they little expected. The Highland broad sword is not a weapon
fit to encounter the Scottish spear. In every civil commotion, the
superiority of the latter Has been evident, and has always decided
the contest. On this occasion, the irregular attack of Huntly's
troops was easily repulsed by Murray's firm battalion. Before they
recovered from the confusion occasioned by this unforeseen refifr-
ance, those who had begun the flight, willing to regain their cre-
dit with the victorious party, fell upon them, and compleated the
rout. Huntly himfclf, who was extremely corpulent, was trode
to death in the pursuit. His sons, Sir John and Adam, were taken,
and Murray returned in triumph to Aberdeen with his prisoners.

TE trial of men taken in acual rebellion against their Sove-

reign was extremely fiort. Three days after the battle, Sir
John Gordon was beheaded at Aberdeen. His brother Adam
was pardoned on account of his youth. Lord Gordon, who had
been privy to his father's designs, was seized in the south, and up-
on trial )f)und guilty of treason ; but, through the Queen's clemency,
the punishment was remitted. The firit Parliament proceeded again t

VOL. I. K k this

Book III.this great family, with the utmost rigour of the law, and reduced
1-4- their power and fortune to the lowest ebb *,
I562.

As

* This conspiracy of the Earl of Huntly is one of the most intricate and myf-

terious paflages in the Scottish hiflory. As it was a tranfaation purely domestic, and
in which the Engliih were little interested, few original papers concerning it have
been found in Cecil's Collection, the great florehoufe of evidence and information
with regard to the Affairs of this period.

Buchanan supposes Mary to have formed a design about this time, of destroying

Murray, and of employing the power of the Earl of Huntly for this purpose. But
his account of this whole tranfaEtion appears to be so void of truth, and even of
probability, as to deserve no serious examination. At that time, Mary wanted power,
and seems to have had no inclination to commit any aa of violence upon her bro-
ther.

Two other hypotheses have been advanced, in order to explain this matter; but
they appear to be equally removed from truth.

I. It cannot well be conceived, that the Queen's journey to the north was a

scheme concerted by Murray, in order to ruin the Earl of Huntly. I. Huntly had
resided at court almofi ever since the Queen's return. Keith 19g. Append. 175,
&c. This was the proper place in which to have seized him. To attack him in
Aberdecnfhire, the feat of his power, and in the midst of his vasals, was a pro-
jeEt equally absurd and hazardous. 2. The Queen was not accompanied with a
body of troops, capable of attempting any thing against Huntly by violen:e; her
train was not more numerous than was usual in times of grcatcft tranquility, Keith,
230. 3. There remain two original letters with regard to this conspiracy, one
from Randolph the English Resident, and another from Maitland, both direfled
to Cecil. They talk of Huntly's measures as notoriously treasonable. Randolph
mentions his repeated attempts to aafhflinate Murray, &c. No hint is given of any
previus refclution, formed by Mary's Miniflers, to ruin Huntly and his family.
Had any such design ever exiflcd, it was Randulph's duty to have discovercd it
nor would Maitland have laboured to conceal it from the Englifl Sccretary. Keitl,
229, 23Z..

II. To

As the fall of the Earl of Huntly is the mos: important event ofBook III.

this year, it would have been improper to interrupt the narrative, 6
by taking notice of lesser tranfaAions, which may now be related
with equal propriety.

IN the beginning of summer, Mary, who was desirous of en-At inter"viw

between Eli-
tering into more intimate correspondence and familiarity with Eli-zabeth and

Mary propo-

zabeth, employed Maitland to desire a personal interview with her,sed.
somewhere in the north of England. As this proposal could not
,e rejeded with decency, the time, the place, and the circumftan-
es of the meeting were instantly agreed upon. But Elizabeth was
prudent enough not to admit into her kingdom, a rival, who out-
shone herself, so far, in- beauty, and gracefulness of person; and
who excelled, so eminently, in all the arts of insinuation and ad-

II. To suppose that the Earl of Huntly had laid any plan for seizing the Queen,

and her Ministers, seems to be no less improbable. i. On the Queen's arrival in
the north, he laboured, in good earnefi, to gain her favour, and to obtain a pardon
for his ion. Knox, 318. 2. He met the Queen, firt at Aberdeen, and then at
Rothemay, whither he would not have ventured to come, had he harboured any
such treasonable resolution. Knox, 318. 3. His condu& was irresolute and waver-
ing, like that of a man disconcerted by an unforeseen danger, not like one executing
a concerted plan. 4. The molt considerable Persons of his plan Submitted to the
Queen, and found surety to obey her commands, Keith, 226. Had the Earl been
previously determined to rife in arms against the Queen, or to seize her Miniflers,
it is probable he would have imparted it to his principal followers, nor- would they
have deserted him in this manner.

FOR these rcafons, we have, on the one hand, vindicated the Earl of Murray

from any deliberate intention of ruining the family of Gordon; and on the other
hand, we have imputed the violent conduct of the Earl of Huntly, -to a sudden
flart of rcfentment, without charging him with any premeditated purpose of re-
bcllion.

K k 2 drcfs.

BooK III. dress. Under pretence of being confined to London, by the attention

ó-J which she was obliged to give to the civil wars in France, she put

"6z' off the interview for that season *, and prevented her fubjeAs from

feeing the Scottill Queen, the charms of whose appearance, and
behaviour, fie envied, and had some reason to dread.

June 2. DURING this year, the Assembly of the church met twice. In
Decemberz 25.

both these meetings, were exhibited many complaints of the poverty
and dependence of the church; and many murmurs against the
negligence or avarice of those, who had been appointed to collect,
and to distribute the small fund, appropriated for the maintenance
of preachers -. A petition, craving redress of their grievances,
was presented to the Queen but without any effect. There was
no reason to expect that' Mary would discover any forwardness to
grant the requests of such supplicants. And as her Ministers, though
all moil zealous Proteflants, were themselves growing rich on the
inheritanceof the church, they were equally regardless of the in-
digence and demands of their brethren.

i563. MARY had now continued above two years in a state of widow-

Negociations hood. Her gentle adminifltation had secured the hearts of her sub-
eth'e Qn'se jAts, who were impatient for her marriage, and wished the Crown
marriage. to descend in the right line from their ancient Monarchs. She her-

self was the most amiable woman of the age, and the fame of her
accomplishments, together with the favourable circumstance of
her having one kingdom already in her poffeflion, and the pro-
spect of mounting the throne of another, prompted nmany dif-
ferent Princes to solicit an alliance so illustrious. Scotland, by
its situation, threw so much weight and power into whatever

* Keith, 216. '1 Knox, 311, 323.

scale

6

scale it fell, that all Europe waited with solicitude for Mary's deter- Boor, III.
mination. And no event in that age excited stronger political fears'-- I
and jealousies; none interested more deeply the pafions of several 53
Princes, or gave rife to more contradiaory intrigtes, than the mar-
riage us the Scottifi Queen.

TaE Princes of the house of Austria remembered what vaftSheis foici-

ted by differ-

projects the French had founded on their former alliance with the eet Princes.
Q.een of Scots; and though the unexpected death, firrf of Henry
and then of Francis, had hindered there from taking effect, yet if
Mary should again make choice of a husband among the French
Princes, the fame designs might be revived and prosecuted with
better fucccfs.

IN order to prevent this, the Emperor entered into a negocia-By theArch-

tion with the Cardinal of Lorrain, who had proposed to marry theduke Charles,
Scottish Queen to the Archduke Charles, Ferdinand's third son.
The matter was communicated to Mary; and Melvil, who, at that
time, attended the Eletor Palatine, was commanded to inquire into
the charader and situation of the Archduke *.

PHILIP II. though no less apprehensive of Mary's falling oncey Don Car-

more into the hands of France, envied his uncle Ferdinand thelosofSpa~.
acquisition of so important a prize; and as his own insatiable am-
bition grasped at all the kingdoms of Europe, he employed his am-
laflador at the French court, to solicit the Princes of Lorrain in be-
half of his son Don Carlos, at that time, the heir of all the ex-
tcnlfive dominions, which belonged to the Spanish monarchy --.

* Mclv. 63, 65. Keith, 239. See Append. No VIL
t Caltcln. 461. Addit. de Labor. s'o, 503.

CATHERINE

BO.OK III. CATHERINE of Medicis, on the other hand, dreaded the marri-

563.. age of the Scottish QuOeen with any of the Austrian Princes, which
x563.,

By the DukeWould have added so much to the power and pretensions of that
of Anjou. ambitious race. Her jealousy of the Princes of Lorrain rendered

her no less averse from an alliance, which, by securing them the
protection of the Emperor or King of Spain, would give new bold-
ness to their enterprising spirit, and enable them to set the power
of the Crown, which they already rivalled, at open defiance: And
as she was afraid that these splendid proposals of the Austrian family
would dazzle the young Queen, she instantly dispatched Cafielnau
into Scotland, to offer her in marriage the Duke of Anjou, the
brother of her former husband, who soon after mounted the throne
of France *

lary'sdeli- MARY attentively weighed the pretensions of so many rivals.
erationscon-The Archduke had little to recommend him, but his high birth.
:rning it.

The example of Henry VIII. was a warning againtf contracting a
marriage with the brother of her former husband; nor could she
bear the thoughts of appearing in France, in a rank inferior to that
which she had formerly held in that kingdom. She listened there-
fore, with partiality, to the Spanish propositions, and the profpeC
of filch vast power and dominions flattered the ambition of a young
and aspiring Princess.

THREE several circumstances, however, concurred to divert Mary
from any thoughts of a foreign alliance.

THE first of there was the murder of her uncle the Duke cf
4Guise. The violence and ambition of that nobleman had involved

Caflelnau, 461.

his

his country in a civil-war; which was conducted with furious ani- BOOK III.
mofity, and various success. At lafi the Duke laid siege to Orleans, "- -
the bulwark of. the Proteflant cause; and he had reduced that city
to the last extremity, when he was aifafiinated by the frantic zeal
of Poltrot. This blow proved fatal to the Queen of Scots. The
young Duke was a minor. And the Cardinal, though subtle and
intriguing, wanted that undaunted and enterprising courage, which
rendered the ambition of his brother so formidable. Catherine, in-
fiead of encouraging the ambition, or- furthering the pretensions of
her daughter-in-law, took pleasure in mortifying the one, and in
disappointing the other. In this situation, and withbut such a pro-
teaor, it became necessary for Mary to contraA her views, and to
proceed with caution; and whatever profpec of advantage might
allure her, she could venture upon no dangerous or doubtful mea-
sure.

TIE second circumfiance, which weighed with Mary, was the The views of

opinion of the Queen of England. The marriage of the Scottifhibeth
Queen interested Elizabeth more deeply than any other Prince;
and flie observed all her deliberations concerning it with the most
anxious attention. She herself seems early to have formed a refo-
lution of living unmarried, and she discovered no small inclination.
to imnpofe the fame law on the Queen of Scots. She had already
experienced what use might be made of Mary's power and preten-
sions, to invade her dominions, and to disturb her possession of the
Crown. The death of Francis II. had happily delivered her from
this danger, which flme determined to guard against for the future,
with the utmost care. And as the restless ambition of the Auitrian
Princes, the avowed and bigotted patrons of the Catholic fuperfti-
tion, m1ade her, in a particular manner, dread their neighbourhood,

ile
IS

BdoK III.fhe inftruced Randolph, to remonstrate, in the ftrongefl terms,

X~ aó against any alliance with them; and to acquaint Mary, that as she
1563.

herself would confider such a match to be a breach of the personal
friendship, in which they were so happily united; so the English
nation would regard it, as the dissolution of that confederacy which
now fubfiRed between the two kingdoms. That, in order to pre-
serve their own religion and liberties, they would, in all probabi-
lity, take some ftep prejudicial to her right of succession, which, as
the well knew, they neither wanted power nor pretences to invali-
date, and set aside. This threatening was accompanied with a
promise, but expressed in very ambiguous terms, that if Ma-
ry's choice of a husband should prove agreeable to the English
nation, Elizabeth would appoint proper persons to examine her title
to the succession, and, if wellfounded, command it to be publickly
recognized. She observed, however, a mysterious silence concern-
ing the person, on whom fie wished the choice of the Scottish
Queen to fall. The revealing of this secret was reserved for omer
future negociation. Mean while fle threw out tome obscure hints,
that a native of Britain, or one not of princely rank, would be her
safest and most inoffensive choice :. An advice offered with such
an air of superiority and command, mortifed, no doubt, the pride
of the Scottish Queen. But, under her present circumfiances, flle
was obliged to bear this indignity. Deflitute of all foreign affiflance,
and intent upon the Englifl succession, the great object of her
wifles and ambition, it bccame neceflhry to court a rival, whom,
without manifeftiimprudencc, she could not venture to offend.

'Thl fni- TIE inclination of her own fubjecs was another, and not the
mcnts of her
,vwnrulh,.jct. leafl considerable circumstance, which called for Mary's attention

* Keith,, 242, 245.

at

at this conjun&ure. They had been taught, by the fatal experi-BooK III.
ment of her former marriage, to dread an union with any great 563
Prince, whose power might be employed to oppress their religion
and liberties. 'They trembled at the thoughts of a match with a
foreigner; and if the Crown (hould be firengthened by new domi-
nions, or alliances, they foresaw that the royal prerogative would
soon be firetched beyond its ancient and legal limits. Their eager-
ness to prevent this could scarce fail of throwing them into the arms
of England. Elizabeth would be ready to afford them her aid, to-
wards obflruaing a measure so disagreeable to herself. 'Twas easy
for them to seize the person of the Sovereign. By the assistance of
the English fleet, they could render it difficult for any foreign Prince
to land in Scotland. The Roman Catholics, now an inconsiderable
party in the kingdom, and dispirited by the.lofs of the Earl of Hunt-
ly, could give no obftruaion to their designs. To what violent ex-
tremeS, the national abhorrence of a foreign yoke might have been
carried is manifest from the tranfadions both previous, and fubfe-
quent to the present period.

FOR these reasons, Mary laid aside, at that time, all thoughts of

a foreign alliance, and seemed willing to sacrifice her own ambition,
in order to remove the jealousies of Elizabeth, and to quiet the
fears of her own fubjeds.

TH E Parliament met this year, for the first time, since theA pninmrnint

Qteen's return into Scotland. Mary's adminifiration had hithertoh-'d, 'y :6.
been extremely popular. Her Ministers poflefled the confidence
of the nation. And, by consequence, the proceedings of that assem-
bly were conduded with perfec unanimity. The grant of the carl-
dom of Murray to the Prior of St. Andrew's was confirmed: the

VOL. I. L 1 Earl

BOOx Ill.Earl of Huntly, and several of his vaftals and dependants were at-

~~-.' tainted: the attainder against Kirkaldy of Grange, and some of
1563. his accomplices in the murder of Cardinal Beatoun, was reverted *

the ad of oblivion, mentioned in the treaty of Edinburgh, received
the royal fandion. But Mary, who had determined never to ratify
that treaty, took care that this fandion Should not be deemed any
acknowledgment of its validity; fle granted her content merely in
condescension to the Lords in Parliament, who, on their knees, be-
fought her to allay the jealousies and apprehensions of her fiubjets,
by such a gracious law -.

Nothing de- No attempt was made, in this Parliament, to proctue the Queen's
terminedwitha-ffent to the laws eflablifhing the Protestant religion. Her Mi-
regard to re-
ligion.. nilers, though zealos Protestants thenfelves, were aware that this

could not be urged without nadiifeft daiger and imprudence. She
had consented, throtgh their influence, to tolerate and protect the
reformed dotrine. They had even prevailed 6n her to imprison
and prosecute the Archbishop of St. Amdrew's, and Prior of Whit-
horn, for celebrating mass contrary to her proclamation +. Mary
however, was fill passionately devoted to the Romilh fuperftifion.
Thoug-h, from political motives, ihe had granted a temporary pro-
tetion to opinions, which she disapproved, there were no grounds
to hope that the would agree to establish them for perpetuity. The
moderation of those who professed it, was the best method for re-
conciling the Queen to the Protestant religion. Time might abate
her bigotry. Her prejudices might wear off gradually, and at last
she might yield to the wishes of her people, what their importunity
or their violence could never have extorted. Many laws of import-

* Knox, 330. .t Spotfw. 1,88. t Keith, 239,

ance

ance were to be proposed in Parliament; and to defeat all there, byBoot 11.
such a-fruitlefs and ill-timed application to the Queen, would have 1
been equally injurious to individuals, and detrimental to the 53
public.

THE zeal of the protestant clergy was deaf to all theIe confidewhich of-

fends the

rations of policy. Eager and impatient, it brooked no delay. Se-clergy.,
vere and inflexible, it would condescend to no compliances. The
leading men of that order infitled, that this opportunity of eflablifh-
ing religion by law, was not to be neglected. They pronounced the
moderation of the courtiers, apoftacy ; and their endeavours to gain
the Queen, they reckoned criminal and servile. Knox solemnly re-
nounced the friendship of the Earl of Murray, as a man devoted
to Mary, and so blindly zealous for her service, as to become re-
gardlefs of those objeds which he had hithjerto esteemed most
sacred. This rupture, which is a itrong proof of M.urray's fin-
cere attachment to the Queen at that period, contirwtad aiove a yer
and an half*.

THaE preachers being disappointed by the men in whom they

placed the greatest confidence, gave vent to their indignation in
their pulpits. These echoed more loudly than ever, with declara.b
tions against idolatry; with dismal presages concerning the Queen's
marriage with a foreigner; and' with bitter reproaches against those,
who, from interested. motives, had deserted that cause, which they
once reckoned it their honour to support. The people, inflamed byAndoctafioni
these vehement declamations, which were dictated by a zeal. morea atm"1 a-
sincere than prudent, proceeded to rafll and unjustifiable acts of vio.people,

* Knox, 331.

L 1 2 lenceA

Booc IlI.lence. During the Q.een's absence, on a progress into the weft,
'----' mass continued to be celebrated in her chapel at Holy.rocd-houfe.
A,,3't.3 The multitude of tl.ofe who openly retorted thither, gave great

cffence to the citizens of Edinburgh, who, being free from the re-
ftraint which the royal pretence imposed, assembled in a riotous
manner, interrupted the service, and filled those who were present
with the utmost conflernation. Two of the ringleaders in this tu-.
mult were seized, and a day appointed for their trial*.

Knox tried on KNOX, who esteemed the zeal of these persons laudable, and their
that account,
but acqutted.conduct meritorious, confidered them as sufferers in a good cause;

&ober. i- and in order to screen them from danger, he iflued circular letters,

requiring all who professed the true religion, or were concerned for
the preservation of it, to assemble at Edinburgh on the day of trial,
that by their presence, they might comfort and afift their diflreffed
brethren -. One of there letters fell into the Queen's hands. To
affimble the fubjeds without the authority of the Sovereign, was
construed to be treason, and a resolution was taken to prosecute
Decemn. i. Knox for that crime, before the Privy Council. Happily for him,

his judges were not only zealous Protestants, but the very men, who,
during the late commotions, had openly resifted, and set at defiance
the Queen's authority. It was under precedents, drawn from their
own conduct, that Knox endeavoured to shelter himself. Nor
would it have been an easy matter for these CounSellors to have found
out a diftintion, by which they could cenfiure him, without condemn-
ing themselves. After a long hearing, he was unanimously acquit-
ed. Sinclair Bishop of Ross, and President of the Court of Session,
a zealous Papist, heartily concurred with the other Counsellors in

Knox, 335. J Ibid. 236.

this

this decifioti * a remarkable fa&, which /hows the unsettled flateBooK III.
of government in that age; the low condition to which regal autho- ~^

r563.

rity was then funk;. and the impunity with which fubjeds might
invade those rights of the Crown, which are now held sacred.

THE marriage of the Scottith Queen continued till to be, the 1564.
object of attention and intrigue. Though Elizabeth, even whileNegotiatons

wi,h regard to

she wi/hed to dired Mary, treated her with a difguflful reserve ;ihe Qeen's
though she kept her, without necessity, in a Irate of fufpence marriagSe
and hinted often at the person, whom She de/fined to be her hus-
band, without directly mentioning his name; yet Mary framed
all her actions to express such a prudent refped for the English
Queen, that foreign Princes began to imagine ihe had given herself
up implicitly to her direction -. The prospect of this union alarmed
Catherine of Medicis. Though Catherine had taken pleasure, all
along, in doing ill offices to the Queen of Scots; though soon as-
ter the Duke of Guise's death, {he had put upon her a most mor-
tifying indignity, by flopping the payment of her dowry, by depriv-
ing her subjeCt the Duke of Chatelherault of his pension, and by be-
flowing the command of the Scottish Guards on a Frenchman +;
she resolved, however, to prevent this dangerous conjunction of the
British Queens. Sot this purpose, she now employed all her art
to appease Mary [t, to whom ihe had given so many causes of of-
fence. The arrears of her dowry were inflantly paid; more punc-
tual remittances were promired for the future; and offers made, not
only to restore, but to extend the privileges of the Scottill nation
in France. It was easy for Mary to penetrate into the motives of
this sudden change;. fle well knew the character of her motlher-

* Knox, 343. t Keith, z28. :t Id. 2.44. 11 See Append. NO VIII.

in-

BooK IFI.in-law, and laid little Ptrefs upon profeffons of friendship, which

came from a Princess of such a false and unfeeling heart.
1504.

Tn E negotiation with England, relative to the marriage, suffered

no interruption, from this application of the French Queen. As
MIary, in compliance te her :iubjeds, and prefied by the firongeft
motives of interest, determined speedily to marry, Elizabeth was

Mlarh. obliged to break that unaccountable silence, which she had hither-

Elizabezh re-
comnmen(s to affedCed. The secret was disclosed, and her favourite Lo.d Ro-
Leicfrter ou bert Dudley, afterwards Earl of Leicefier, was declared to be the
bar.d. happy man, whom she had.cho.len to be the husband of a Queen,

courted by so. many Pinces.*.

ELIZABETH'S, wisdom and penetration were remarkable in the

choice of her Ministers; in. difiDguifhing her favourites, those great
qualities were less confrpicuous. She was influenced in two cafes
so opposite, by merit of very different kinds. Their capacity for
bufinefa, their knowledge, their prudence, were the talents to which
.alone she attended, in, chufing her. Miniifters; whereas. beauty and
gracefulness of person, polified majnners,, and courtly address, were
the accomplifhrments on which she betaowed her favour. She aded
in the one cafe with the wisdom of a Queen, in the other, the dif,
covered the weakness of a wormn. To this Leicetier owed his
grandeur. Though remarkable neither for eminence in virtue, nor
superiority of abilities, the Queen's partiality distinguished him on
every occasion. She raised him to the highefthonours, she be-
stowed on him the most important employments, and manifefled
an affedion so disproportionate to his. merit, that, in the opinion

4 Keith, 25x,

Of

of that age; it could beaccouned for only by the power of plahe- 'bobK lII
tary influence.. -..._ .

, 15óS4.

THE high spirit of the Scottif/i Queen could not Well bear theMary offen.

first overture of a match with a subject. Her own rank, the fplen-
dor of her former marriage; and the solicitations, at this time, of
so many powerful Princes, crouded into. her thoughts, and: made
her sensibly feel how humbling and difiefpedful Elizabeth's prow
pofal was. She dissembled, however, with the English Resident :
and though the declared, in strong terms, what a degradation.the
would deem this alliance, which brought along with it no advan-
tage, that could juflify such neglet of her own dignity, fie rien.
tioned the Earl of Leicefier, not with:tanding, in terms full of re.
sped t.

ELIZABETH, We may presume, did not with that the prQpofalElizabeth's

views in re-

flould be received in any other manner. After the extraordinarycommending
marks she had given of her own attachment to Leicester, and whilhim'
he was ftill;in the very height of favour, it is not probable, she could
think seriously of bestowing him upon another. 'Twas not her aim
to persuade, but only to amuse Mary +. Almost three years were.
elapsed since her return into Scotland;. and though solicited by her
fubjedts, and courted by the greatest Princes in Europe, the had.
hitherto been prevented from marrying, chiefly by the artifice .of
Elizabeth. And if, at this time, the English Queen could have
engaged Mary to liften to her proposal in favour of Leicefler, her
power over this creature of her own would have enabled her to pro-
trad the negociation at pleasure; and by keeping her rival unmar-
ried, flie would have rendered the profpet of her fuccefion less ac-
ceptable to the Englilh,

* Camden, 549. t Keith, 252. :. Melvy 104, 105.

4 LEICESTER'S

BOOK IIi. LEICE3TER'S own situation was extremely delicate, and 'emba-
x .---" raffing. To gain poffeflion of the most amiable .woman: of the

r 64 age, to carry away this prize from so many contending Princes, to

mount the throne of an ancient kingdom, might have flattered the
ambition of a subject, much more considerable than lim.. He saw
all these advantages, no doubt; and, in secret, they made their full
impieflion on him. But, without offending Elizabeth, he durif
not-venture on the most distant discovery of his sentiments, or
take any flep towards facilitating his acquisition of objects so worthy
of desire.

ON the other hand, Elizabeth's partiality towards him, which

(he was at no pains to conceal *, might inspire him with hopes of
attaining the supreme rank in a kingdom, more illustrious than Scot-
land. Elizabeth had often declared, that nothing but her resolution
to lead a single life, and his being born her own fubjeat, would have
hindred her from chufing the Earl of Leicester for a husband. Such
considerations of prudence are, however, often surmounted by love;
and Leicester might flatter himself, that the violence of her assec-
tion would at length triumph both over the maxims of policy, and
the scruples of pride. These hopes induced him, now and then, to
conclude the proposal of his marriage with the Scottiih Queen to be
a projeft for his deftrution ; and he imputed it to the malice of Ce-
cil, who, under the specious pretence of doing him honour, intended
to ruin him in the good opinion both of Elizabeth and Mary t.

A TREATY of marriage, proposed by one Queen, who dreaded
its success; listened to by another, who was secretly determined

* Mclv. 93, 94. f Ibid. ioi.

again(

2

against it; and scarce desired by the man himself, whose interest and aBOOK II.
reputation it was calculated, in appearance, to promote; could not, _

_-

under so many unfavourable circumstances, be brought to a for.564
tanate issue. Both Elizabeth and Mary continued, however, to a&
with equal dissimulation. The former, notwithstanding her fears
of losing Leicester, solicited warmly in his behalf. The latter,
though fte began about this time to cast her eyes upon another
fubjedt of England, did not, at once, venture finally to rejec
Elizabeth's favourite.

THE person- towards whom Mary began to turn her thoughts, Mary enter-

was Henry Stewart Lord Darnly, eldeff son of the Earl of Lennox. "of mtaiging
That nobleman, having been driven out of Scotland under the re-Lord Darnly.
gency of the Duke of Chatelherault, had lived in banishment for
twenty years. His wife, Lady Margaret Douglas, was Mary's most
dangerous rival in her claim upon the Eriglih -succession. She was
the daughter of Margeret, the eldest fiter of Henry VIII. by the
-Earl-of Angus, whom that Queen married after the death of her
huiband James IV. In that age, the right and order of succession
was not fettled with the fame accuracy, as at present. Time, and
the decision of almost every cafe that can possibly happen, -have
at last introduced certainty into a matter, which, naturally, is
fubjeEt to all the variety, arising from the caprice of -lawyers,
guided by obscure, and often imaginary analogies. Lady Lennox,
though born of a.fecond marriage, -was one degree nearer the royal
blood of'England, than Mary. She was the daughter, Mary only
the grandaughter of Margaret. This was not the only-advantage
over 'iIary which Lady Lennox enjoyed. She was born in Eng-
land, and by a maxim of law in that country, with regard to
private inheritances, " whoever is not born in England, or at leafl

VOL. I. M m of

BOOK III. of parents, who., at the time of his birth, were in the obedi-

ó--J ence of the King of England, cannot enjoy any inheritance in
564' the kingdom *." This maxim, Hales, an English lawyer, pro-

duced in a treatise, which he published at this time, and endea-
voured to apply it to the right of succession to the Crown. In a
private cause, these pretexts might have given rife to a long and
doubtful litigation-; where a Crown was at Rake, such nice disputes
and subtleties were-to be avoided with the utnmof care. If Darn-
ly should happen to contrat an alliance with any of the powerful
families in England, or should publickly profess the Protestant re-
ligion, these plausible and popular topics might be so urged, as to
prove fatal to the pretensions of a foreigner,, and of a Papist.

MARY was aware of all this; and in order to prevent any dan-

ger from that quarter, had early endeavoured to cultivate a friendly
correspondence with the family of Lennox. In the year 15x62 t,
both the Earl and the Lady Margaret were taken into custody by
Elizabeth's orders, on account of their holding a secret correfpon-
dence with the Scottish Queen.

Elizabeth fe- FROM the time that Mary became sensible of the difficulties,
cretly pleased which would attend her marrying a foreign Prince, (he entered

with into a flill closer connexion with the Earl of Lennox , and invited

him to return into Scotland. This she endeavoured to conceal from
Elizabeth ; but a tranfaaion of so much importance did not escape
the notice of that discerning Princess. She observed, but did not
interrupt it. Nothing could fall in more perfectly with her views,
concerning Scottish affairs. She was pleased to fee the pride of

* Carte, Hilt. of Eng. vol. iii. 422. t Camd. 389. Id. 396.

the

the Scottish Queen sloop, at last, to the thoughts of taking a sub- BooK III.
jed to her bed. Darnly was in no situation to excite her jealousy, 1--6.
or her fears. His father's estate lay in England, and by means of
this pledge, hfe hoped to keep the negociation entirely .in her own
hands, and to play the fame game of artifice and delay, which she
had planned out, if her recommendation of-Leicefler had been
snore favourably received.

As before the union of the two crowns, no subjea of one king-

dom could pass into the other without the permission of both Sove-
reigns; no sooner did Lennox, under pretence of prosecuting his
wife's claim upon the earldom of Angus, apply to Elizabeth for her
licence to go into Scotland, than he obtained it. Together with it,
she gave him letters, warmly recommending his person and caule
to Mary's friendship and protection *. But, at the fame time, as it
was her manner to involve all her tranfa'tions with regard to Scot-
land, in some degree of perplexity and contradiction; (he warned
Mary, that this indulgence to Lennox might prove fatal to herself,
as his return could not fail of reviving the ancient animosity between
him and the house of Hamilton.

THIS admonition gave umbrage to Mary, and drew from her an

angry reply, which occasioned, for some time a total interruption
of all correspondence between the two Queens -[. Mary was not a
little alarmed at this; the both dreaded the effects of Elizabeth's re-
fentment, and suffered, by being deprived of a free intercourse with
England, where her Ambassadors had, all along, carried on, with

* Keith, 255, 268. t Ibid. 253. Melv. 83.

M m 2 foine

BoO:K IIf. Iome fuitcet sectet ntgociations, which increased the number of

1-,-- *her partizans, and paved her way towards the throne. In order to
J4' renove the eaufes of the present difficulty, Melvil was sent ex-

trefs to the court of England. He found it no difficult matter to
bring about a reconcilement; and soon re-established the appear-
ance, but not the confidence of friendship, which, was all that had
subsisted, for some time, between the two Queens.

DURI N G this negociation, Elizabeth's profeflions of love to Mary

and Melvil's replies in name of his Mistress, were made in the lan-
guage of the warmest and most cordial friendship. But what Mel-
vil truly observes, with refpeA to Elizabeth, may be extended
without injustice to both Qaeens. " There was neither plain
dealing, nor upright meaning, but great dissimulation, envy and
fear *."

Lenfox ar- LENNOX, however, in consequence of the licence which he had
rives in Scot-
and. co obtained, set out for Scotland, and was received by the Queen, not

only with the refpe&t due to a nobleman, so nearly allied to the
royal family, but treated with a diftingui(hed familiarity, which
could not fail of inspiring him with more elevated hopes. The ru-
mour of his son's marriage to the Queen began to spread over the
kingdom; and ;the eyes of all Scotland were !turned upon him, as
:the l fther of ,heir t future Master. The 'Duke of Chatelherault was
the first to take the alarm. He confidered Lennox, as the ancient
and hereditary enemy of the house of Hamilton; and, in his gran-
leur, flw the ruin of:himfelf and his friends. But the Queen in-
terpofed her authority to prevent any violent rupture, and employed

Melvil, 04.

all

all her influence to bring about an accommodation of their differ- BOOK III.
ences *. L-,__

1564.

THE powerful family of Douglas no less dreaded Lennox's re-

turn, from an apprehension, that he would wrest the earldom of
Angus out of their hands. But the Queen, who well knew how
dangerous it would be to irritate Mortod, and other great men of
that name, prevailed on Lennox to purchase their friendfliip, by
allowing his Lady's claim upon the earldom of Angus to drop t.

AFTER there preliminary iteps, Mary ventured to call a meet-:December.

ing of Parliament. The act of forfeiture, passed against Lennox in
the year 1545, was repealed, and he was publickly restored to the-
honours and estate of his ancestors +:.

THE ecclesiastical tranfadions of this year were not considerable. June 2s;

In the aflemblies of the church, the fame complaints of the increase Dce.ie 2.
of idolatry, the fame representations concerning the poverty of the suspicious of
clergy, were renewed. The reply which the Queen made to these, eal for Pope-
and her promises of redress, were more satisfying to the Protestants, ry.
than any they had hitherto obtained W. But, notwithRtanding
there declarations in their favour, they could not help harbouring
many suspicions concerning Mary's designs against their religion.
She had never once conTented to hear any preacher of the reformed
dofIrine. She had abated nothing of her bigoted attachment to
the Romifl faith. The genius of that superstition, averse at all
times, from toleration, was, in that age, fierce and unrelenting.
Mary had given her friends on the Continent repeated assurances of

* Keith, 259. t Id. 268. Not. (b), : See Appendix, NO IX.

II Id. 533, 539,
4 her

BooK IlI. her resolution to re-establish the Catholic church *. She ha. g in-

L-ó- ' duifrioufly avoided every opportunity of ratifying the adts of.Par-

liament 1560, in favour of the Reformation. Even the protection,
which ever since her return, The had afforded the Proteflant religion,
was merely temporary, and declared by her *owh proclamation to
be of force, only " till she nfould take some final order in the
matter of religion f-." The vigilant zeal of the preachers was in-
attentive to none of these circumstances. The coldness of their
principal leaders, who were, at this time, entirely devoted to the
court, added to their jealousies and fears. These they uttered to
the people, in language which they esteemed suitable to the necef-
;fity of the times, and which the Queen reckoned difrefpedtful, and
insolent. In a meeting of the 'General Assembly, Maitland pub-
lickly accused Knox of teaching seditious doctrine, concerning the
right of subje&s to resist those Sovereigns, who trespass against the
duty which they owe to the people. Knox was not backward to
justify what he had taught. And upon this general doctrine of re-
tfifiance, so just in its own nature, but so delicate in its application
to particular cafes, there ensued a debate, which admirably displays
the talents and charater of both the disputants; the acuteness of
.the former, embellished with learning, but prone to subtlety; the
vigorous underflanding of the latter, delighting in bold sentiments,
and superior to all fear +.

i565. Two years had already been consumed, in fruitless negociations

Dissimulation concerning the marriage of the Scottish Queen. Mary had full lei-
beth and Ma sure and opportunity to discern the fallacy and deceit of all Eliza-
ry, with re- beth's proceedings, with refped t .that affair. But, in order to set
gard to her e a
marriage. the real intentions of the English Queen in a clear light, and to bring

* Carte, vol. iii. 415. + Keith, 504, 510. : Knox, 349.

her

her to some explicit declAration of her fenrtiments, Mary, at lait, in- BOOK IL..
timated to Randolph, that, on condition her right of succession to '-"
the Crown of England were publickly acknowledged, she was ready .ebr,,y 5.
to yield to the-folicitations of his Mistress in behalf of Leicester*.
Nothing could be farther than this from the mind and intention, of
Elizabeth. The right of succession was a mystery, which, dur-
ing her whole reign, her jealousy preserved untouched, and unex-
plained. She had promised, however,. when she first began to in-
terest herfelfin the marriage of the Scottish Queen, all that was now
demanded. How to retreat. with decency, how to elude her for-
mer offer, was, on that account, not a little perplexing.

THE facilit.y, with which Lord Darnly obtained permiflioni to

visit the court of Scotland, was owing, in all probability,. to that
embarrassment. From the time of Melvil's embafly,. Lady Lennox
had warmly solicited this liberty for her son. Elizabeth was no
stranger to the ambitious hopes, with which that young. nobleman
flattered himself. She had received repeated advices from; her Mi-
nifters, of the sentiments, which Mary began to entertain in his
favour -. It was entirely in her power, to prevent his stirring out
of London. In the present: conjundctre, however, nothing could.
be of more advantage to her, than Darnly's journey into Scotland.
She had already brought one actor upon the stage, who, under her
management, had, for a long time, amused the Scottish Queen. She
hoped, no less absolutely, to diret the motions of Darnly, who was
likewise her subjed; and again to involve Mary in all the tedious-
intricacies of negociation. These motives determined Elizabeth and.
her Ministers to yield to the solicitations of Lady Lennox.

* Keith, 269. 'p Id. 2595 26,, 266;

Bun

BoOK III. BUT this deep laid scheme was in a moment difconeerted Such

ó-'r ' unexpected events, as the fancy of poets ascribes to love, are, at

Darnl6 forne times, really produced by that passion. An affair, which had
rives in Scot-been the object of so many political intrigues, and had moved and
land.

interested so many Princes, was at last decided by the sudden liking
of two young persons. Lord Darnly was, at this time, in the first
bloom and vigour of youth. In beauty, and gracefulness of person,
he surpassed all his cotemporaries; he excelled, eminently, in thdfe
arts, which add ease and elegance to external form, and which en-

Gains the able it not only to dazzle, but to please. Mary was of an age,
Queen'sheart. and of a temper, to feel the full power of these accomplishments.

The impression which Lord Darnly made upon her, was visible,
February 13. from the time of their first interview. The whole business of the

court was to amuse, and entertain this illufrious guefl *; and in
-al those feeries of gaiety, Darnly, whose qualifications were alto-
gether superficial and ihowy, appeared to ;great advantage. His
conquest of the Queen's heart ;became compleat. And inclination
now prompted her to conclude a marriage, the firit thoughts of
which'had been figgefted by considerations ;merely political.

ELIZABETH contributed, and perhaps not without design, to

increase the violence of this passion. Soon after Darnvs arrival
in Scotland, she, in return,to that melnage, whereby Maryhad fig-
nified her willingness to accept of Leicester, gave an answer, in
such terms, as plainly unravelled her original intention in that in-
trigue A. She promised, if the Scottish Q teen's marriage with Lei-
cefter should take place, to advance him to great honours; but
with regard to her title to the English succession, she would !nei-
ther susser any legal inquiry to be made concerning it, nor permit

* Knox, 369. + Kcith, 270. Append. x58.

it to-be publicly recognized, till the herself ihould declare her re-BooK III.
solution never to marry. Mary, notwithstanding Elizabeth's for--
mer proinires, had reason to expet every- thing contained in this 5
reply; her high spirit, however, could not bear, with patience,
such a cruel discovery of the contempt, the artifice, and mockery,
with which, under the veil of friendship, the had' been so long
abused. She burst into tears of indignation, and expressed, with
the utmost bitterness, her sense of that disingenuous craft, which
had been employed to deceive her 4.

THE natural effect of. this indignation was to add to the impe-

tuofity with which the pursued her own scheme. Blinded by re-
fentment, as well as by love, she observed no defects in the man,
whom the had chosen; and began to take the necefrary tfeps to-
wards accomplishing her design, with all the impatience, natural
to those paliions.

A s Darnly was so nearly related to the Queen, the canon law

made it necessary to obtain the Pope's dispensation, before the cele-
bration of the marriage. For this purpose, the early set on foot a
negotiation with the court of Rome -.

SHE was busy, at the fame time, in procuring the content ofThe French

the French King and his mother. Having communicated her de- cOrt apPoo'C
sign, and the motives which determined her choice, to Caftelnau
the French Ambassador, (he employed him, as the most proper
person, to bring his court to fall in with her views. Among other
arguments to this purpose, Caftelnau mentioned Mary's attachment
to Darnly, which he represented to be so violent and deep-rooted,

Keith, Append. I59. '1' Camd. 396,
VOL. I. N n that

BooK III. that it was no longer in her own power to break off the match *,

'/c'x' Nor were the French Ministers backward in encouraging Mary's
565. S passion. Her pride would never sloop to an alliance with a fubjeat

of France. By this choice, they were delivered from the appre-
henfion of a match with any of the Austrian Princes, as well as the
danger of too close an union with Elizabeth. And as Darnly pro-
fefled the Roman Catholic religion, this suited the bigotted schemes
which that court had adopted.

Darnly dig- WHILE Mary was endeavouring to reconcile foreign courts to a
gusts several measure which she had so much at heart; Darnly, and his father,
of the nobles,

by their behaviour, were railing up enemies at home, to obftrua
it. Lennox had, during the former part of his life, discovered no
great compass of abilities, or political wisdom; and appears to have
been a man of a weak understanding, and violent pafions. Darnly
was not superior to his father in understanding, and al'l his passions
were frill more impetuous t. To there, he added that insolence,
which the advantage of external form, when accompanied with no
quality more valuable, is apt to inspire. Intoxicated with. the Queen's
favour, he began already to assume the haughtnefs of a King, and
to put on that imperious air, which majeiy itself can fearce render
tolerable.

particularly IT was by the advice, or at least with the consent of Murray, and
Murray.

his party, that Lennox had been invited into Scotland t and yet,
no sooner did he acquire a firm footing in that kingdom, than he
began to enter into secret cabals with those noblemen, who were
known to be avowed enemies to Murray, and with regard to reli-
gion, to be either neutrals, or favourers of Popery IJ. Darnly, itill

Cafteln.464. t Keith, 272, 273. t Knox, 367. Keith, 274. g[ Id. 272.

more

more imprudent, allowed some rash expressions concerning those fa-BooK III.
vours, which the Queen's bounty had conferred upon Murray, to 1565.
escape him *. -

BUT above all there, the familiarity which Darnly cultivated

with David Rizio the Italian, contributed to increase the suspicion
and disgust of the nobles.

THE low birth, and indigent condition of this man, placed himThe rife o
in a station, in which he ought naturally to have remained un- Riz°'s fa-

vour.

known to posterity. But what fortune called him to ad, and to
susser in Scotland, obliges hifftory to descen'd from its dignity, and
to record his adventures. He was the son of a musician in Tu-
rin, and having accompanied the Piedmontefe Ambassador into
Scotland, gained adriffion into the Queen's family, by his skill
in music. His servile condition had taught him suppleness of
spirit, and insinuating manners. He quickly crept into the Queen's
favour, and her French Secretary, happening to return at that
time into his own country, was preferred by her to that office.
He now began to make a figure in court, and to appear as a man
of weight and consequence. The whole train of suitors and ex-
pecants, who have an extreme sagacity in discovering the paths,
which lead most diretly to success, applied to him. His recom-
mendations were observed to have great influence over the Qgeen,
and he grew to be confidered, not only as a favourite, but as a Mi-
nifter. Nor was Rizio careful to abate that envy, which always
attends such an extraordinary and rapid change of fortune. He
fludied, on the contrary, to display the whole extent of his favour.

* Keith, 274.

Nn2 He

BooK II.He affefted to talk often, and familiarly, with the Queen in pub

6 lie. He equalled the greatest and most opulent fubjeds, in rich-

ness of dress, and in the number of his attendants. He discovered,
in all his behaviour, that assuming insolence, with which unme-
rited prosperity inspires an ignoble mind.. It was with the utrmoft
indignation that the nobles beheld the power ; it was with the ut.
most difficulty, that they tolerated the arrogance of this unworthy
minion. Even in the Queen's pretence they could not forbear treat-
ing him with marks of contempt. Nor was it his. exorbitant power
alone, which exasperated the Scots. They confidered him, and not
without reason, as a dangerous enemy to the Protestant religion,
and fufpeated that heheld, for this purpose, a secret correspondence
with the court of Rome ..

Darnly's con. IT was- Darnly's misfortune to fall under the management of
ne-tion with
l wim t this man, who, by flattery and, assiduity, easily gained on his vanity,

and inexperience. Rizio's whole: influence on- the Queen was em-
ployed in his behalf, and contributed, without doubt, towards
establishing him more firmly in her affecions t. But whatever be-
nefit he might reap from his patronage,. it did not counterbalance
the contempt, and even the infamy, to which he was exposed, onr
account of his familiarity with such an upstart.

THOUGH Darnly daily made progress in the Queen's affedions,

fie conducted herself, however, with such prudent reserve, as to
impose on Randolph the English Resident, a man otherwise shrewd
and penetrating. It appears from his letters at this period, that he
entertained not the least suspicion of the intrigue which was-carry-

* Buchan. 340. Melv. 107. ' Id. i i.

ing

ing on; and gave his court repeated assurances, that the ScottilhBooK III.
Queen had no design. of marrying, Darnly ". In the midst of his "
security, Mary dispatched Maitland to signify her intention to Eli-- 565
zabeth, and to solicit her content to the marriage with Darnly..
This embassy was the first thing, which. opened the eyes of Ran--
dolph. .

ELIZABETH affected the greateft'furprize at this sudden refolu- April 18.

tion of the. Scottish Queen, but without reason.. The. train wasElizabeth de-
laid by herself, and fe had no cause to wonder when it took es- the Queen's

marriage with

set. She expressed, at the fame time, her disapprobation of theDarnly. w
match, in the firongeft terms; and. pretended to foresee many dan-
gers and inconveniencies arising from it, to both kingdoms. But.
this, too,, was mere affelation. Mary had often and plainly de-
clared her resolution to.marry. It was impossible she could make
any. choice more:inoffenfive. The danger of introducing a foreign
interest into Britain which Elizabeth had so juffly dreaded, was en-
tirely avoided. Darnly, though allied to both Crowns, and pof-
fefied of lands in both kingdoms, could be formidable to neither.
It is evident, from.all there circumstances, that Elizabeth's appre-
henfions of danger could not poflibly be serious; and that, in all.
her violent declarations against Darnly, there was much more. of.
grimace. than of reality t.

* Keith, 273. and Append. '59.
+ Even the ifltorians of that age acknowledge, that the marriage of the Scottifsi

Queen with a subjet was farfrom being disagreeable to Elizabeth. Knox, 369, 373. -
Buchan. 339. Caftelnau, who, at that time, was well acquainted with the in-
trigues of both the British courts, asserts, and upon grounds of great probability,
that the match was wholly Elizabeth's own work; Catleln. 462. and that fh- rc-
joiced at the accomplishment of it, appears from the letters of her own Ambafladors,
Keith, 280, 288.

THIERE

BOOKIII. THERE were notwanting, however, political motives of much

5 weight, to induce that wife Princess to put on the appearance of
j$65.

great displeasure. Mary, intimidated by this, might perhaps delay
her marriage; which Elizabeth desired to obftruA with a weakness
that little suited the dignity of her mind, and the elevation of her
charader. Besides, the tranquillityof her own kingdom was the
great object of Elizabeth's policy; and by declaring her diffatif-
fadion with Mary's conduEc, he hoped to alarm that party in Scot-
land, which was attached to the English interest, and to encourage
such of the nobles, as secretly disapproved the match, openly to op-
pose it. The feeds of discord would, by this means, be scattered
through that kingdom. Intestine commotions might arise. Amidit
these, Mary could form none of those dangerous schemes, to
which the union of her people might have prompted her. She
herself would become the umpire between her, and her contending
lubjeds. And England might look on, with security, while a
storm, which (he had raised, wafted the only kingdom, which
could possibly diflurb its peace.
May i. IN prosecution of this scheme, she laid before her Privy Coun-

cil the meflage from the Scottilh Queen, and consulted them with
regard to the answer she mhould return. Their determination, it
is easy to conceive, was perfecly conformable to her secret views.
They drew up a remonstrance against the intended match, full of
the imaginary dangers, with which that event threatened the king-

SendsThrog-do *. Nor did she think it enough, to signify her difapproba-
morton to ob- o
iru; t. tion of the measure, either by Maitland, Mary's Ambafador, or

by Randolph, her own Resident in Scotland; in order to add more
dignity to the farce which she chose to adt, th appointed Sir Ni-

*Keith, 274. See Append. No X.

cholas

cholas Thtogmorton her Ambassador Extraordinary. She cornm-ooK IJI.
manded him to declare, in the firongeft terms, her diffatisfadtion -
with the fRep which Mary proposed to t.ke; and, at the far 5 5
time, to produce the determination of the Privy Council, as an
evidence that thefentiments of the nation were not different from
her own. Not long after, she confined Lady Lennox. as a prifo-
ner first in her own house, and then sent her to the Tower *.

IMTELLIGENCE of all this reached Scotland, before the arrival

of the Englih Ambaffa'dbr. In the firfl transports of her indigna-
tion, Mary resolved, no longer, to keep any measures with Eliza-
beth; and sent orders to Maitland, who accompanied Throgmor-
ton, to return inflantly to the English court, and, in her name, to
declare to Elizabeth, that after having been amused so long to so
little purpose ; after having been fooled, and imposed on so grossly
by her evasive artifices; she was now resolved to gratify her own.
inclination, and.to alkno other content, but that of her own sub-
jeds, in the choice of an huiband. Maitland, with his usual saga-
city, foresaw all the effects of such a rash and angry message, and
ventured rather to incur the displeasure of his Mistress, by dif-
obeying her commands, than to be made the instrument of tearing
asunder, so violently, the few remaining ties, which still linked to-
gether the two Queens F.

MARY herself soon became sensible of her error. She received

the Englith Ambassador with refpet: justified her own conduct with
decency; and though unalterable in her resolution, fheaffeeteda won-
derful solicitude to reconcile Elizabeth to the measure; and even
pretended, out of complaisance towards her, to put off the con-

*Keith, Append. 16x. I Id. 16o.

4 fumnmation.

Bo'OK III. summation of the marriage for 'some months *. It is probable,

ó` however, that the want of the Pope's dispensation, and the pro-
565. sped of gaining the content of her own fubjets, were the real mo-

tives of this delay.

Murray's THIS consent Mary laboured with the utmost induflry to obtain.
aversion to The Earlof Murray was the person in the kingdom, whose con-
Darnly.

currence was of the greatefl importance; but she had reason to fear
that it would not be procured without extreme difficulty. From the
time of Lennox's return into Scotland, Murray perceived that the
Queen's affections began gradually to be estranged from him. Darn-
ly, Athol, Rizio, all the court favourites, combined againfl him.
His ambitious spirit could not brook this diminution of his power,
wvhich his former services had so little merited. He retired into
the country, and gave way to rivals, with whom he was unable
to contend --. The return of the Earl of Bothwell, his avowed
enemy, who had been accused of a design upon his life, and who
had resided for some time in foreign countries, obliged him to at-
tend to his own safety. No intreary of the Queen could persuade
him to areconcilement with that nobleman. He insisted on having
him brought to a public trial, and prevailed, by his importunity,
to have a day fixed for it. Bothweil durst not appear in opposition
to a man, who came to the place of trial, attended by Suoo of
his fbllowers on horseback. He was once more constrained to leave
the kingdom; but, by the Queen's command, the sentence of out-
lawry, which is incurred by non-appearance, was not pronounced
againif him l.

* Keith, Appendix 278. 1| Id. 272, 274. Append. I59.
, Id. ibid. 160.

BUT

BUT Mary, sensible of how much importance it was, to gain a fub-BooK JII.
jed so powerful and fopopular as the Earl ofMurray, invited himback 6

1565.

to court, and received him with many demonitrations of refped and May 8.
confidence. At last the desired him to set an example to her other sub-
jeCs by subscribing a paper, containing a formal approbation of her
marriage with Darnly. Murray had many reasons to hesitate, and even
to withhold his assent. Darnly had not only undermined his credit
with the Queen, but discovered, on every occasion, a rooted aver-
sion to his person. By consenting to his elevation to the throne,
he would give him such an acceflion of dignity and power, as no
man willingly bestows on an enemy. The unhappy consequences
which might follow upbn a breach with England were, likewise, of
considerable weight with Murray. He had always openly prefer-
red a confederacy with England, before the ancient alliance with
France. By his means chiefly, this change in the fyfiem of national
politics had been brought about. A league with England had been
established; and he could not think of sacrificing, to a rafli and
youthfulpaffion, an alliance of so much utility to the kingdom;
and which, he and the other nobles were bound, by every obliga-
tion, to maintain *. Nor was the interest of religion forgotten on
this occasion. Mary, though surrounded by Protestant Counfellers,
had found means to hold a dangerous correspondence with foreign
Catholics. She had even courted the Pope's protection, who had
sent her a subsidy of 8000 crowns -. Though Murray had hither-
to endeavoured to bridle the zeal of the reformed clergy, and to
set the Queen's conduct in the most favourable light, yet her ob-
flinate adherence to her own religion, could not fail of alarming
him, and by her resolution to marry a papist, the only hope of

* Keith, 169. - Id. 295. Mclv. 114.
VOL. 1. 0 o reclaim-

BooK III. reclaiming her, which remained, was for ever cut off. Each of there

.65.' considerations had its influence on Murray, and all of them deter-

mined him to deline complying, at that time, with the Queen's
request.

May 14. THE convention of nobles, which was assembled a few days:
A Conven-
tion of the after, discovered a greater disposition to gratify the Queen. Many
nobles ap-
proves of theOf them, without hesitation, expressed their approbation of the in.
marriage, tended match; but as others were startled at the fame dangers which

had alarmed Murray, or were influenced by his example, to refute
their consent, another Convention was appointed at Perth, in order
to deliberate more fully concerning this matter %.

MEAN while, Mary gave a public evidence of her own inclina-

tion, by conferring, upon Darnly titles of honour peculiar to the
royal family. The opposition the had hitherto met with, and the
many contrivances employed to thwart and disappoint her inclination,
produced their usual effect on her heart, they confirmed her passion,
and increased its violence. The simplicity of that age imputed an
affection, so excessive, to the influence of withcraft I. It was ow-
ing, however, to no other charm, than the irresistible power of youth
and beauty, over a young and tender heart. Darnly grew giddy
with his prosperity. Flattered by the love of a Queen, and the
applause of many among her fubjedqs, his natural haughtiness and
insolence became insupportable, and he could no longer bear advice,
far less contradicion. Lord Ruthven, happening to be the 'fir
person who informed him that Mary, in order to sooth Elizabeth,
had delayed, for some time, creating him Duke of Albany, he,
in a frenzy of rage, drew his dagger and attempted to stab him I.

*Keith, 283. Knox, 373. [ Keith, 283. t Ibid. Append. i6o.

It

It required all Mary's attention, to prevent his falling under thatBooK IlI.
contempt, to which such behaviour deservedly exposed him. ^

i$65.
IN no scene of her life was ever Mary's own address more re-Mary's ad-

dress in gain-

markably displayed. Love sharpened her invention, and made hering dhe'nr gb
iludy every method of gaining her fubjedss. Many of the noblesjeas'
/he won by her caresses, and more by her promises. On some she
bestowed lands, to others ihe gave new titles of honour*. She
even condescended to court the Prot-eliant clergy. And having in-
vited three of their fuperintendants to Stirling, she declared, in
strong terms, her resolution to protec their religion, expressed her
willingness: to be present at a conference upon the points in doc-
trine which were disputed between the Protestants and Papists, and
went so far as to (how some desire to hear such of their preachers,
as were most remarkable for moderation '-. By these arts, the Queen
gained wonderfully upon the people, who, unless their jealousy be
raised by repeated injuries, are always ready to view the acions of
their Sovereign with an indulgent eye.

:ON the other hand, Murray and his associates were plainly the

dupes of Elizabeth's policy. She talked in so high a stiring of her
displeasure at the intended match; she treated Lady Lennox with f£
much rigour; she wrote to the Scottish Queen in such strong ternms
(he recalled the Earl of Lennox and his son in such a peremptory
manner, and with such severe denunciations of her vengeance, if
they presumed to disobey $; that all there expreflions of aversion
fully persuaded them of her sincerity. This belief fortified their
£cruples with refpe6t to the match, and encouraged them to opt

* Keith, 283. '1 Knox, 373. : Keith, 285, 286.

0 o 2 pose

BOOK III.pofe it. They began with forming among themselves bonds of con-

ó_--.. federacy and mutual defence; they entered into a secret correfpon.

dence with the English Resident, in order to secure Elizabeth's as-
fiftance, when it should become needful *; they endeavoured to
fill the nation with such apprehensions of danger, as might counter-
balance the influence of those arts, which the Queen had em-
ployed.

Schemes of BESIDES these intrigues, there were secretly carried on, by both
Darnly and
Murray a- parties, dark designs of a more criminal nature, and more suit-
gains each able to the spirit of the age. Darnly, impatient of that opposition,

which he imputed wholly to Murray, and resolving at any rate to
get rid of such a powerful enemy, formed a plot to assassinate him,
during the meeting of the Convention at Perth. Murray, on his
part, despairing of preventing the marriage by any other means,
had, together with the Duke of Chatelherault, and the Earl of Ar-
gyll, concerted measures for seizing Darnly, and carrying him a
prisoner into England.

IF either of these conspiracies had taken effect, this Convention

might have been attended with consequences extremely tragical; but
both were rendered abortive, by the vigilance or good fortune of
those against whom they were formed. Murray, being warned
of his danger by some retainers to the court, who still favoured
his interest, avoided the blow, by not going to Perth. Mary, re-
ceiving intelligence of Murray's enterprize, retired with the ut-
most expedition, along with Darnly, to the other fide of Forth.
Conscious, on both fides, of guilt, and inflamed with resentment,
it was impossible they could either forget the violence, which them-

' Keith, 289, 292, 298.

jelves

selves had meditated, or forgive the injuries, intended against them.BooK III.
All hope of reconcilement was at an end from that moment, and '-
their mutual enmity burt out with every symptom of implacable 5
hatred *.

ON

* The reality of these two opposite conspiracies has given occasion to many dif-

putes, and much contradiction. Some deny that any design was formed against the
life of Murray ; others call in question the truth of the conspiracy against Darnly.
There seem, however, to be good reasons for believing both; though the zeal and
credulity of party-writers have added to each, many exaggerated circumitances.
The following arguments render it probable, that some violence was intended against
Murray.

I. This is positively aferted by Buchanan, 34r. 2. The English Refdent writes

to Cecil, that Murray was assuredly informed that a design was laid to murder him
at Perth, and describes the manner in which this plot was to have been executed.
Keith, 287. 3. Murray himself constantly and pubickly affirmed, that such a
design was formed against his life. Keith, Ap. Io8. And though he was called upon
by the Queen to bring legal evidence of his assertion, and a safe conduct offered
him, while he came to court for that, purpose; Ibid. yet whoever confiders Mur-
ray's situation, and the spirit of those who ruled in court at that time, will scarce
deem it any proof of his guilt, that he did not chufe to risk his person on such fe-
curity. 4. T'he furious passions of Darnly, the ficrcenefs of his resentment, which
scrupled at no violence, and the manners of the age, render the imputation of such
a crime less improbable.

II. That Murray and his associates had resolved to seize Darnly's person appears

with still greater certainty; i. From the express teltimony ofMelvil, I 2. Buchanan,
p. 341, and Knox, p. 377, affect, but without reason, to represent this as an idle
rumour. 2. Thequeltion was put to Randolph, whether the Governor of Berwick
would receive Lennox and his son, if they were carried prisoners to that place. This
Ilainly flews, that tome such design was in hand, and Randolph did not discourage it
by the anfwcr which he gave. Keith, 290. 3. ''he precipitation, with which the
Queen retired, and the reason lhe gave for this sudden flight, are mentioned by Ran-
dolph, 291. 4. A great part of the Scottish nobles, and among these the Earls

of

BoOK III, ON Mary's return to Edinburgh, she summoned her vassals by

v--.-- proclnmation,. and solicited them by her letters, to repair thither in

Mary si, - arms, for.the protetion of her person against her foreign and do-
mons her vaf-meflic enemies . She was obeyed with all the promptness and
fals to take
armsagainat alacrity, with which fubjeds run to defend a mild and popular ad-

'u ayz ministration. This popularity, however, she owed in a great mea-

of Argyll and Rothes, who were themselves privy to the design, aflert the reality of
the conspiracy. Good. vol. ii. 358.

All these circumflances leave little room to doubt of the truth of both confpira.

cies. But we may observe how far this proof, though drawn from public records,
falls short, on both fides, of legal and formal evidence. Buchanan and Randolph,
in their accounts of the conspiracy against Murray, differ widely in almost every
circumfiance. The accounts of the attempt upon Darnly, are not more confifent.
Melvil alledges, that the design of the conspirators was to carry Darnly a prisoner
into England ; the proposal made to Randolph agrees with this. Randolph fays,
that they intended to carry the Queen to St. Andrew's, :and Darnly to Cafile Camp-
bell. The Lords, in their declaration, affirm the design of the conspirators to have
been to murder Darnly and his father, to confine the Queen in Lochleven during
life, and to usurp the government. To believe implicitly, whatever they find in
an ancient paper, is a folly to which Antiqtaries are liable. But ancient papers
often contain nothing more than the slanders of a party, and the lie of the day.
The declaration of the nobles referred to, is of this kind; it is plainly rancorous,
and written in the very heat of faction. Mahry things are asserted in it, evidently
false, or exaggerated. Let Murray and his confederates be as ambitious as we
can suppose, they must have had some pretences, and plausible ones too, be.
fore they could venture to imprison their Sovereign for life, and to seize the reins
of government; but, at that time, the Queen's condua had afforded no colourable
excuse for proceeding to such extremities. It is, likewise, remarkable, that in all
the proclamations against Murray, of which so many are published in Keith, Ap-
pendix e8, &c. neither the violent attempt upon Darnly, nor that which he is al-
ledged to have formed against the Queen herself, are ever once mentioned.

* Keith, 298.

sure

sure to Murray, who had direted her administration with greatBooK III.
prudence. But the crime of opposing her marriage,' obliterated -
the memory of his former services; and Mary, impatient of con-
tradition, and apt to confider thole who disputed her will, as ene-
mies to her person, determined to let him feel the whole weight of
her vengeance. For this purpose she summoned him to appear be-July 19.
fore her upon a short warning, to answer to fuch'things as should
be laid to his charge *. At this very time, Murray, and the Lords
who adhered to him, were affietbled at Stirling, to deliberate what
course they should hold, in such a difficult conjuncture. But the
current of popular favour ran so ftrohgly against them; and, not-
withstanding some fears and jealousies, there prevailed in the nation
such a general .disposition to gratify the Queen, in a matter which so
nearly concerned her, that, without coming to any other conclusion,.
than to implore the Queen of England's protection, they put an end
to their ineffectual consultations, and 'returned every man to his
own house.

TOGET.HER with this discovery of her enemies weakness, the

confluence of her fubjeds from all corners of the kingdom, as-
forded Mary an agreeable proof of her own strength. While
the 'Queen was in this prosperous situation, she determined to bring
to a period, an affair, which had so long engrossed her heart, and
occupied her attention. On the 29th of July she married Lord Celebrates her
Darnly. The ceremony was performed in the Queen's chapel, 3Darev
according to the rites of the Romilh church; the Pope's bull,
dispensing with their marriage, having been previously ob-
tained t. She issued, at the fame.time, proclamations, conferring

* Keith, Append, io8J ' Id. 307.
2 the

BOOK IIH.the title of King of Scots upon her husband, and commanding that

t- --. henceforth all writs at law should run in the joint names of King

. and Queen *. Nothing can be a itronger proof of the violence of

Mary's love, or the weakness of her councils, than this lait tfep.
Whether the had any right to. chufe a huiband, without content of-
Parliament, was, in that age, a matter of some dispute -; that the
had no right to confer upon him, by her private authority, the title
and dignity of King; or, by a simple proclamation, to raise her
husband to be the Mailer of her people, seems to be beyond all
doubt. Francis II. indeed, bore the fame title. It was not, how-
ever, the gift of the Queen, but of the nation; and the content of
Parliament was obtained, before he ventured to assume it. Darn-
ly's condition, as a subjed, rendered it flill more necessary to have
the concurrence of the supreme Council in his favour. Such a
violent and unprecedented firetch of prerogative, as the fubflituting
a proclamation in place of an act of Parliament, might have justly
alarmed the nation. But the Queen possessed so entirely the confi-
dence of her fubjets, that, notwithstanding all the clamours of
the malecontents, no symptoms of general discontent appeared on
that account.

EVEN amidst that scene of joy, which always accompanies fuc-

cefsful love, Mary did not susser the course of her vengeance
against the malecontent nobles to be interrupted. Three days as-
ter the marriage, Murray was again summoned to court, under
the severest penalties, and upon his non-appearance, the rigour of
justice took place, and he was declared an outlaw 4. At the fame
time, the Queen set at liberty Lord Gordon, who ever since his

* Andcrfon, i. 33. See Append. N' XI. f Buchan, 34 . I Keith, 309, 31.

]~J~~~~~ ~~father's

father's infurre&ion in the year i 562, had been detained a prisoner; BOOK Ilr'
Ihe recalled the Earl of Sutherland, who, on account of his con- 6
cern in that conspiracy, had fled into Slanders; and she permitted
Bothwell to return again into Scotland. The first, and last of there,
were among the most powerful fubjets in the kingdom, and all
of them animated with implacable hatred to Murray, whom they
esteemed the enemy of their families, and the author of their own
sufferings. This common- hatred became the foundation of the
ftridteft union with the Queen, and gained them an ascendant over
all her councils. Murray himself confidered this confederacy with
his avowed enemies as a more certain indication than any measure
ihe had yet taken, of her inexorable resentment.

THE malecontents had not yet openly taken up arms ~. But the Marches a-

Queen having ordered her fubjeds to march againit them, they were ay and his
driven to the last extremity. They found themselves unable, how- associates.
ever, to make head against the numerous forces, which Mary
had assembled; and fled into Argyllfhire, in expedtation of aid
from Elizabeth, to whom they had secretly dispatched a messenger,
in order to implore her immediate assistance -.

MEAN while Elizabeth endeavoured to embarafs Mary, by a Elizabeth in-
new declaration of her disgust at her condu&. She blamed both terpofesin

their favour.

" After their fruitless consultation at Stirling, the Lords retired to their own

houses. Keith, 304. Murray was till at St. Andrew's on July 22. Keith, 306.
By the places of rendezvous, appointed for the inhabitants of the different coun-
ties, Auguil 4, it appears that the Queen's intention was to march into Fife, the
county in which Murray, Rothes, Kircaldy, and other chiefs of the malecontents
resided. Keith, 310. Their flight into the weft, Keith, 3I2, prevented this ex.
pedition, and the former rendezvous was altered. Keith, 310.

t Keith, 312. Knox, 380.
VOL. I. P p her

B.ooK III. her choice of Lord Darnly, and the precipitation with which {he

" ~ had concluded the marriage. She required Lennox and Darnly,

5 whom the frill called her fubjeds, to return into England. And at

the fame time, (he warmly interceded in behalf of Murray, whose
behaviour she represented to be not only innocent, but laudable.
This meiage, so mortifying to the pride of the Queen, and so full of
contempt for her husband, was rendered still more insupportable, by
the petulant and saucy demeanour of Tamworth, the person who
delivered it *. Mary vindicated her own conduCt with warmth,
but with great strength of reason, and rejected the intercession in be-
half of Murray, not without signs of resentment at Elizabeth's pre-
tending to intermeddle in the internal government of her king-
dom -.

SHE did not, on that account, intermit in the least the ardour,

with which she pursued Murray and his adherents $. They now
appeared openly in arms ; and having received a small supply
in money from Elizabeth 11, were endeavouring to raise their fol-
lowers in the western counties. But Mary's vigilance hindered
them from assembling in any considerable body. All her military
operations, at that time, were concerted with wisdom, executed
with vigour, and attended with success. In order to encourage
her troops, The herself marched along with them, rode with loaded

* Camd. 398. ' -t Keith, Append. 99.

- The moss considerable persons who joined Murray, were the Duke of Chatel-

hcrault, the Earls of Argyll, Glencairn, Rothes; Lord Boyd and Ochiltree; the
Lairds of Grange, Cunninghamhead, Balcomie, Carmylic, Lawers, Bar, Dreghorn,
litarrow, Comptroller, and the Tutor of Pitcur. Knox, 382.

I Knox, 38o.

pistols,

piatols *, and endured all the fatigues of war with admirable for- BOOK IIIL
tiwude. Her alacrity inrpired her forces with an invincible resolution, 6

I565'

which, together with their superiority in number, deterred the
malecontents from facing them in the field; but having artfully
paged the Queen's army, they niarched with the utmos't precipita-
tion to Edinburgh, and endeavoured to rouze the inhabitants'of
tr:at city to arms. The Queen did not fulfer them to remain long August 31.
unmolefed ; and, on her approach, they were forced to abandon
that place, and retire in confusion towards the western borders t.

As it was uncertain, for some time, what;rout they had taken, They are ob-

Mary employed that interval in providing for the security of the ili Endlante
counties in the heart of the- kingdom. She seized the places of
strength which belonged to the' rebels; and' obliged the confider-
able Barons in those (hires, which she mroft' fuf1iected, to join in as-
fociations for her defence +. Havinrg thus left all'the country be-
hind her in tianquilli:y, 'he, with an army 'i,ooo strong, marched
towards Dumfries, were the rebels then were. During their re-
treat, they had sent letters to the Qeen, from almost every place
where'th-ey halted, full of submission, and containing various over-
tures towalds an accommodation. But Mary, who determined not
to let flip such a favourable opportunity of crushing the mutinous fpi-
rit of her fubjeds, rejected them with disdain. As fie advanced,
the malecontents retired: and, having received no effetual aid fronm
Elizabeth 1, they despaired of any other means of safety, fled into oaober -o.
England, and put themselves under the protection of the earl of
Bedford, Wardcn of the marches.

NOTITING which Bedford's personal fiiend(lip for Murray could 'r'ty meet

with uncx-
filpply, was wanting to render their retreat agreeable. But Eli-Cecdd ill

* Keith, Append. 164. -f- Id. 315. :1: Id. Append. i . ioiii liza-

I See Appendix, NQ XII. XIII. lth.

1P p 2 zabeth

A^

BooK III. zabeth herself treated them with extreme negle:t. She had fully

^ gained her end, and, by their means, had excited such discord and

jealousies among the Scots, as would, in all probability, long diflraat
and weaken Mary's councils. Her business now, was to save appear-
ances, and tojuftify herself to the Ministers of France and Spain, who
accused her of fomenting the troubles in Scotland, by her intrigues.
The expedient the contrived for her vindication, strongly displays
her own character, and the wretched condition of exiles, who are
obliged to depend on a foreign Prince. Murray, and Hamil-
ton, Abbot of Kilwinning, being appointed by the other fug tives
to wait on Elizabeth, instead of meeting with that welcome recep-
tion which was due to men, who, out of confidence in her promises,
had hazarded their lives and fortunes, could not even obtain the
favour of an audience, until they had meanly consented to acknow-
ledge, in the pretence of the French and Spanish Ambassadors,
that Elizabeth had given them no encouragement to take arms.
No sooner did they make this declaration, than she astonished them,
with this reply, " You have declared the truth; I am far from set-
ting an example of rebellion to my own fubjeds, by countenancing
those who rebel against their lawful Prince. The treason, of which
you have been guilty, is detestable; and as traitors I banish you
from my presence *." Notwithstanding this scene of farce and of
falfhood, so dishonourable to all the persons who aced a part in it,
Elizabeth permitted the malecontents peaceably to reside in her
dominions, supplied them secretly with money, and renewed her
intercession with the.Scottiih Queen in their favour 4.

* Melv. 112. 3 Knox, 389.

THE
3!

TIE advantage (he had gained over them did not satisfy Mary; (he BOOK III.

resolved to follow the blow, and to prevent a party, which (he dread- ' - -'
ed, from ever recovering any footing in the nation. With this view, 55
fie called a meeting of parliament; and in order that a sentence of
forfeiture might be legally pronounced against the banished Lords,
file summoned them, by publick proclamation, to appear before it *. December i.

TIrE Duke of Chatelherault, on his humble application, ob-

tained a separate pardon, but not without difficulty, as the King
violently opposed it. He was obliged, however, to leave the king-
dom, and to reside for tome time in France -.

THE numerous forces which Mary brought into the field, the

vigour with which {he ased, and the length of time the kept
them in arms, resemble the efforts of a Prince with revenues much
more considerable than those which the poffefied. But armies
were then levied and maintained by a Prince, at small charge.
The vassal followed his superior, and the superior attended the
MIonarch, at his own expence. Six hundred horsemen, however,
and three companies of foot, besides her guards, received re-
gular pay from the Queen. This extraordinary charge, together
with the deburfements occasioned by her marriage, exhausted a
treasury which was far from being rich. In this exigency, ma-
ny devices were fallen upon for raising money. Fines were le-
vied on the towns of St. Andrew's, Perth, and Dundee, which
were fufpeted of favouring the malecontents. An unusual tax was
imposed on the burroughs throughout the kingdom; and a great rum
was demanded of the citizens of Edinburgh, by way of loan. This
unprecedented exaction alarmed the citizens. They had recourse

* Keith, 320. + Knox, 389.

to

Book IlT, to delays, and farted difficulties; in order to avoid it. These Mary
C"-'-"~ conflrued to be nas of avowed difobedientce, and{ i'nflantly com-

mitted several of them to prison. But this severity did riot iub-
due the undaunted spirit of liberty, which prevailed among the in-
habitants. The Queen was obliged to mortgage to the city; the
filclrriort of the town of Leith, in return for which she obtained
a considerable fiutil of money *. The thirds of eccleiiafical be-
nefices proved another source, whence the Queen derived some
ftipply. About this time, we find the Protestant clergy complain-
ing more bitterly tian ever of their poverty. The army, it is pro-
bable, exhausted a great part of that fund, which was appropri-
ated for their maintenance -t.

Church as- THE afiemblies of the church were not unconcerned fpeta-
fairs.

tors of the commotions of this turbulent year. In the meeting
June 24, several of the malecontent nobles were present, and seem
to have had great influence on their decisions. The high .train in
which the Assembly addressid the Queen, can be imputed only to
those fears and jealousies, with-re'gard to religion, which they en-
deavoured to infuse into the nation. The afembly complained,
with tome bitterness, of the flop which had been put to the pro-
grefs of the Reformation by the Qgeen's arrival in Scotland ; they
required not only the total suppression of the Pbpifh worship through-
out the kingdom, but even in the Queen's own chapel; and be-
fides the legal establishment of the Protestant religion, they de-
manded that Mary h:erself should publickly embrace it, The QOecn,
after some deliberation, replied, that neither her conscience, nor
her interest, would permit her to take such a ftep.' The former
would for ever reproach her for a change, which proceeded from

* Knox, 383, 386. -] Mait. Hill. of Edinburgh, 27.

1To

no inward conviction; the latter would susser by the offence, which BooK III.
her apoftacy must give to the King of France, and her other allies '5
on the continent ó.

IT is remarkable, that the prosperous situation of the Queen's

affairs, during this year, began to work some change in favour of
her religion. The Earls. of Lennox, Athol, and Caffils, openly
attended mass; she herself afforded the Catholics a more avowed
protection than formerly; and, by her permission, some of the an-
tient Monks ventured to preach publicly to the people -.

* Knox, 374, 376. t Id. 389. 390.

T HE

# THE HISTORY OF SCOTLAND. BOOK IV.

THE

~HIST EORY
H I S T 0 R Y.

OF
SCOTLAND.

BOOK IV.
BOOK iV A S the day appointed for the meeting of Parliament approached,

Iv_ /"^ Mary and her MiniRfers were employed in deliberating

M1 56' Aconcerning the course which it was most proper to hold

Mary's deli-
berationscon- with regard to the exiled nobles. Many motives prompted her to
cerning the
exiled nobles. set no bounds to the rigour of jultice. The malecontents had la-

boured to defeat a scheme, which her interest conspired with her
paflions in rendering dear to her; they were the leaders of a party,
whose friendship she had been obliged to court, while she held
;their. principles in abhorrence; and they were firmly attached to a
rival, whom she had good reason both to fear and to hate.

BUT on the other hand, several weighty considerations might be

urged. The noblemen, whose fate was in fufpence, were among the
most powerful fubjeCs in the kingdom; their wealth great, their con-
nections extensive; and their adherents numerous. They were

now

now at mercy, the objets of compassion, and suing for pardon with BOOK IV.
the most humble submission.

1 566.

IN those circumstances, an ad of clemency would exalt the

Queen's character, and appear no less splendid among foreigners,
than acceptable to her own subjeCts. Mary herself, though highly
incensed, was not inexorable; but the King's rage was implacable
and unrelenting. They were solicited in behalf of the fugitives,
from various quarters. Morton, Ruthven, Maitland, and all who
had been members of the Congregation, were not forgetful of their
ancient union with Murray, and his fellow-fufferers; nor neglet-
ful of their safety, which they elteemed of great importance to
the kingdom. Melvil, who at that time poifefled the Queen's con-
fidence, seconded their solicitations. And Murray, having stooped
so low as to court Rizio, that favourite, who was desirous of fecur-
ing his protection against the King, whose displeasure he had late-
ly incurred, seconded the intercessions of his other friends, with
the whole of his influence . The interposition of Sir Nicholas
Throgmorton, who had lately been Elizabeth's AmbafTador in
Scotland, in behalf of the exiles, was of more weight than all there,
and attended with more success. Throgmorton, out of enmity to
Cecil, had deeply embarked in all the intrigues which were carried
on at the English court, in order to undermine the power and credit
of that Minister. He espoused, for this reason, the cause of the
Scottish Queen, towards whose title and pretensions the other was
known to bear little favour; and ventured in the present critical junc-
ture, to write a letter to Mary, containing the most salutary ad-
vices with regard to her conduc. He recommended the pardon-

* Mclvil, 125.
VOL. I. Q q ing

BOOK IV ing of the Earl of Murray and his associates, as a measure no le:s

^66.' prudent than popular. An action of this nature, fays he, the pure

effect of your Majesty's generosity, will spread the fame of your le-
nity and moderation, and engage the English to look towards your
accession to their throne, not only without prejudice, but with de-
fire. By the fame means, a perfect harmony will be restored
among your own fubjeds, who, if any rupture flould happen with
England, will serve you with that grateful zeal, which your cle-
mency cannot fail of inspiring *.

She resolves THESE prudent remonstrances of Throgmorton, to which his
ith temhem reputation for wisdom, and known attachment to the Queen, added
*cy. great authority, made a deep impression on her spirit. Her cour-

tiers cultivated this happy disposition, and prevailed on her, not-
withstanding the King's inflexible temper, to sacrifice her own pri-
vate resentment to the intercession of her fubjeds, and the withes
of her friends t. With this view, the Parliament, which had been
called to meet on the 4th of February, was prorogued to the 7th of
April +. And in the mean time, the was busy in confidering the
manner and form in which file should extend her favour to the
Lords who were under disgrace.

Is diverted THOUGH Mary discovered, on this occasion, a mind naturally
from this rea-prone to humanity, and capable of forgiving, she wanted, how-
solution by
the folicica- ever, firmness to refil( the influence, which was fatally employed to
France, and disappoint thle effets of this amiable disposition. About this time,
her zeal for and at no great distance from each other, two envoys arrived from
Popery.

pbruy 3 the French King. The former was intrufled with matters of mere
February 3.

Melv. 119. I- Id, 125. :: Good. vol. i. 224.

I ceremony

ceremony alone; he congratulated the Queen on her marriage, BooK IV.
and inverted the King with the ensigns of the order of St. Michael. '-- '

1566.

The inftrudions of the latter related to matters of more import-
ance, and produced greater effets *.

AN interview between Charles-IX. and his Sifter the Queen of

Spain had been often proposed; and after many obitacles arising
from the opposition of political interest, was at last appointed at
Bayonne. Catherine of Medicis accompanied her son ; the Duke of
Alva attended his Mistress. Amidst the scenes of public pomp
and pleasure, which seemed to be the sole occupation of both courts,
a scheme was formed, and measures concerted, for exterminating
the Hugonots in France, the Proteflants in the low countries, and
for fuppreflfng the Reformation throughout all Europe t. The
ative policy of Pope Pius IV. and the zeal of the Cardinal of Lor-
rain, confirmed and encouraged dispositions, Co suitable to the
genius of the Romish religion, and so beneficial to their own
order.

IT was on account of this holy league which the French envoy

brought to Mary, conjuring her, at the fame time, in the name of
the King of France, and the Cardinal of Lorrain, not to restore the
leaders of the Protestants in her kingdom to power and favour, at
the very time when the Catholic Princes were combined to destroy
that set, in all the countries of Europe ++.

POPERY is a species of false religion, remarkable for the strong

poffcffion it takes of the heart. Contrived by men of deep infight
into the human charaaer, and improved by the experience and

Keith, 325. Append.1i67. 1 Thuan, lib. 37. : Mcelv. 126.

Q q 2 obfcr-

Booc IV. observation of many fuccetive ages; it arrived at last to a degree of

L-'-^' perftidon, which no former system of fuperIlition had ever attained,
15 6 There is no power in the underltanding, and no paflion in the heart,

to which it does not present objecs, adapted to route, and to inte-
reft them. Neither the love of pleasure, which, at that time, pre-
vailed in the court of France, nor the pursuits of ambition which oc-
cupied the court of Spain, had secured them from the dominion of
bigotry. Laymen, and courtiers, were agitated with that furious
and unmerciful zeal, which is commonly confidered as peculiar
to ecclesiastics; and Kings and ministers thought themselves bound,
in conscience, to extirpate the Protestant doctrine. Mary herself
was deeply tinctured with all the prejudices of Popery; a passion-
ate attachment to that fuperfitiion is visible in every part of her cha-
rader, and runs through all the scenes of her life: ihe was de.
voted, too, with the utmost submission to the Princes of Lorrain,
her uncles; and had been accustomed, from her infancy, to liften
to all their advices, with a filial refpet. The profpede of restoring
the public exercise of her own religion, the pleasure of comply-
ing with her uncles, and the hopes of gratifying the French Mo-
narch, whom the present situation of her affairs in England made
it necessary to court, counterbalanced all the prudent confidera-
tions which had formerly weighed with her. She intfantly joined
the confederacy, which had been formed for the deftruCdion of the
Protestants, and altered the, whole plan of her conduct, with re-
gard to Murray and his adherents *.

To this fatal resolution may be imputed all the subsequent ca-

lamities of Mary's life. Ever since her return into Scotland, for-
tune may be said to have been propitious to her, rather than advcrfe;
and if her prosperity did not rife to any great height, it had, how-

* Sec Appendix, No XIV,
5j ever

ever, suffered no considerable interruption. A thick and fettled BooK IV.
cloud of adversity, with few gleams of hope, and none of real en- v -
joymen, covers the remainder of her days.

THE effets of the new system, which Mary had adopted, were A Parliament

called to at-

soon vitible. The time of the prorogation of Parliament was lhort- taint the exi-
ened; and by a new proclamation, the 12th of March was fixedled nobles.
for its meeting *. Mary resolved, without any further delay, to
proceed to the attainder of the rebel Lords, and, at the fame time,
determined to take some fleps towards the re-efIabli-hment of the
Romish religion in Scotland t. The Lords of the Articles were
chosen, as usual, to prepare the business which was to come before
the Parliament. They were all persons in whom the Qeen could
confide, and bent to promote her designs. The ruin of Murray and
his party seemed now inevitable, and the danger of the Reformed
Church imminent, when an event unexpectedly happened, which

* Keith, 326.

f It is not on the authority of Knox alone, that we charge the Queen with the

design of re-eltablilhing the Roman Catholic religion. He, indeed, asserts that
the. altars, which should have been ere&ed in the church of St. Giles, were already
provided, 394. i. Mary herself, in a letter to the Archbishop of Glasgow her Ara-
bafaidor in France, acknowledges, "' that in that Parliament, she intended to have
done some good, with refpeft to refloring the old religion." Keith, 33 r. 2. The
Spiritual Lords, i. e. the Popish ecclesiastics, had, by her authority, resumed their
ancient place in that assembly, ibid. 3. She had joined the confederacy at Bayonnc,
Keith, Append. 167. 4. She allowed mass to be celebrated in different parts of
the kingdom, ibid. and declared that she would have mass siee for all men who
would hear it, Good. vol. i. 274 5. Blackwood, who was furnished by the Arch-
bilhop of Glasgow with materials for writing his Alartyre de Marie, affirms that
the Quecn intended to have procured, in this Parliament, if not the re-eftablilh-
mcnt of the Catholic religion, at Icaif something for the ease of Catholics, Jebb.
vol. ii. e24.

saved

BooK IV. saved both. If we regard either the barbarity of that age, when

--- such ads of violence were common, or the mean condition of the
1566.

And prevent- unhappy person who suffered, the event is little remarkable; but if
ed by the con- e reflet upon the circumstances with which it was attended, or
fpr-acy against atten , or
Rizio. upon the consequences which followed it, it appears extremely me-

morable; and the rife and progress of it deserve to be traced with

great care.

parnly loses DARNLY'S external accomplishments had excited that sudden and
the Queen's violent passion which raised him to the throne. But the qualities

of his mind corresponded ill with the beauty of his person. Of a
weak understanding, and without experience, conceited at the fame
time of his own abilities, and ascribing his extraordinary success en-
tirely to his diflinguifhed merit. All the Qeen's favour made no
impression on such a temper. All her gentleness could not bridle
his imperious and ungovernable spirit. All her attention to place
about him persons capable of directing his conduc, could not pre-
serve him from ra/h and imprudent adions *. Fond of all the arufe-
ments, and even prone to all the vices of youth, he became, by
degrees, careless of her person, and a firanger to her company.
To a woman, and a Queen, such behaviour was intolerable. The
lower flie had stooped to raise him, his behaviour appeared the
more ungenerous and criminal. And in proportion to the strength
of her firfi affection, was the violence with which her disappointed
passion now operated. A few months after the marriage, their do-
meflic quarrels began to be observed. The extravagance of Darn-
ly's ambition gave rife to there. Inflead of being satisfied with that
stretch of power, by which Mary had conferred on him the title
of King, and had admitted him to a hare in the admniniftration, he

* GooJ. vol. i. 122.

demanded

demanded the Crown Matrimonial with most insolent importunity *. BOOK IV.
And though Mary alledged that this gift was beyond her power, i6
and that the authority of Parliament mufi be interposed to bestow
it, he wanted either understanding to comprehend, or temper to
admit so juit a defence; and often renewed and urged his re-
quest.

RrzIo, whom the King had at first taken into great confidence, Sufpcas Ri-

zio to be the

did not humour him in these follies. By this, he incurred Henry's cauze of it.
displeasure ; and it was impoflible for Mary to behave towards
her husband with the fame affection, which distinguished the first
and happy days of their union, he imputed this coldness, not to
his own behaviour, which had so well merited it, but to the infi-
nuations of Rizio. Mary's own conduc confirmed and strengthen-
ed there suspicions. She treated this stranger with a familiarity, and
admitted him to a share in her confidence, to which neither his first
condition, nor the office She had lately beflowed upon him, gave
him any title. He was perpetually in her presence, intermeddled
in every business, and, together with a few favourites, was the
companion of all her private amusements. The haughty spirit of
Darnly could not bear the interference offuch an upstart. And imn-
patient of any delay, and unrefirained by any scruple, he inflantly
resolved to get rid of him by violence.

AT the fame time, another design, which took its rife from very Rizio hated

different motives, was carrying on against the life of Rizio. Mor-by the fixijed
ton, Ruthven, Lindsay, and Maitland, were the contrivers of it. obles
In all former commotions they had been ftritly united with Mur-

Keith, 329. Knox, 404

ray,

BopK IV. ray, though in the late insurrection they had deserted him, for va-

667 'rious reasons. Morton was nearly allied to the family of Angus,
I566.

and during the minority of the present Earl, ated as Chief of the
name of -Douglas. Ruthven was married to the King's aunt.
Lind`ay's wife was of the fame blood. All these had warmly con-
curred with the Queen in promoting a marriage, which did so much
honour to the house of Douglas, and naturally expected, that under
a King of their own blood, the chief management of affairs would
be committed to them. Maitland, with his usual sagacity, fore-
saw that Murray's opposition to the match would prove dangerous
and ineffectual; but whoever ruled at court, he hoped, by his dex-
terity and talents, to render himself necessary and of importance.
They were all equally disappointed in their expeAations. The King's
headstrong temper rendered him incapable of advice. The Queen
could not help difrrufiing men who had been so long and so inti-
mately connected with Murray, and gave herself up entirely to
those Counsellors who complied with all her inclinations. The re-
turn of that nobleman and his followers was therefore the only event
which could restore Morton, Maitland, and their associates to their
former ascendant over the Queen's councils. For this reason, no-
thing could be more mortifying to them, than the resolution which
Mary had taken to treat the exiles with rigour. This they im-
puted to Rizio, who, after he had engaged to aid Murray with all
his interest, was now the most ative infirument in promoting the
measures which were concerted for the ruin of that nobleman.
This officious zeal compleated the difguff which they had conceived
against him, and inspired them with thoughts of vengeance, in no
wife suitable to juflice, to humanity, or to their own dignity.

WHILE

WHILE they were ruminating upon their scheme, the King com- BooK IV.

municated his resolution to be avenged of Rizio to Lord Ruthven, 66
and implored his afllfiance, and that of his friends, towards the They com-

bine in order

execution of this design. Nothing could be more acceptable to them to murder
than this overture. They saw at once all the advantages they would him.
reap, by the concurrence of such an afociate. Their own private
revenge upon Rizio would pass, they hoped, for an aft of obedi-
ence to the King; and they did not despair of obtaining the reflo-
ration of their banished friends, and security for the Proteflant re-
ligion, as the price of their compliance with his will.

BUT as Henry was no lefs-fickle, than rash, they hesitated for

some time, and determined to advance no farther, without taking
every possible precaution for their own safety. They did not, in the
mean time, susser the King's resentment to abate. Morton, who
was inferior to no man in that intriguing age, in all the arts of infi-
nuation and address, took the young Prince under his management.
He wrought upon his ruling paflion, ambition to obtain the Ma-
trimonial Crown. He represented Rizio's credit with the Queen
to be the chief and only obstacle to his success in that demand.
This minion, alone, he said, pofeffed her confidence; and out of
complaisance to him, her fubjeds, her nobility, and even, her hus-
band, were excluded from any participation of her secret councils.
Under the appearance of a confidence merely political, he infinuat-
ed, and the King perhaps believed, that a familiarity of another
and more criminal nature might be concealed *. Such various and

compli-

* Of all our hiflorians, Buchanan alone avowedly accuses Mary of a criminal

love for Rizio, 34.0, 344. Knox slightly insinuates that such a fufricion was
entertained, 391. Mclvil, in a conversation with the Qleen, intimates that he
was afraid her familiarity with Rizio might be liable to mifconftruclion, 1o.

VOL. I. R r The

BOOK IV. complicated passions raged in the King's bosom, with the utnmof

'6 --fury. He became more impatient than ever of any delay, and even.

threatened to itrike the intended blow with his own hand. At lafi,
preliminaries were fettled on both fides, and articles for their mu-
tual security agreed upon. The King engaged to prevent the at-
tainder of the banished Lords, to content to their return into Scot-
land, to obtain for them an ample remifaion of all their crimes, and
to support to the utmost of his power, the religion which was-
now eftablifhfed in the kingdom. On their parts, they undertook.
to procure the Matrimonial Crown for Henry, to secure his right
of succession, if the Queen should die before him, and to defend.
that right to the uttermost, against whatever person should presume.
to dispute it ; and if either Rizio, or any other person, should hap-
pen to be killed in prosecuting of the design, the King promised to,
acknowledge himself to be the author of the mnterprize,. and toa
protect those who; were embarked in it *..

NOTHING,

The King himself seems, both by Mevirs account, and By his expofiulation with
the Queen, which Ruthven mentions, to have given credit to there suspicions, Melv.
127. Keith, Append. 123, 124. But, in opposition to these suspicions, and they
are nothing more, we may observe that Raulet the Queen's French Seeretary was dif-
misled from her service, and Rizio' advanced to that office in December 1564,
Keith 268. It was in consequence of this preferment, that he acquired his great
credit with the Queen, Melv. 107. Darnly arrived in Scotland about two months
after. Keith, 269. The Queen immediately conceived for him a paflion, which had
all the symptoms of genuine and violent love. Rizio aided this pafiion, and pro-
moted the marriage with all his interest, Melv. i I. During some months after
the marriage, the Queen's fondness for Darnly continued. She soon proved with
child. From this enumeration of circumrfances, it appears almost impossible that
the Queen, unless we suppose her to have been a woman utterly abandoned, could

* Good. vol. i. 266.

carry
4

NOTHING now remained but to concert the plan of operation, toBooK IV.
chute the actors, and to assign them their parts in perpetrating this 566

j 566,

detestable crime. Every circumstance here paints and charaade-perpetrate
rizes the manners and men of that age, and fills us with horror at"th crme in
both. The place, chosen for committing such a deed, was thePalace.
Queen's bedchamber. Though Mary was now in the sixth month
of her pregnaicy, and though Rizio might have been seized
elsewhere, without any difficulty, the King pitched upon this
place, that he might enjoy the malicious pleasure of reproaching
Rizio with his crimes before the Queen's face. The Earl of
Morton, the Lord High Chancellor of the kingdom, undertook to
direc an enterprize, carried on in defiance of all the laws of which
he was bound to be the guardian. The Lord Ruthven, who had
been confined to his bed for three months, by a very dangerous
distemper, and who was still so feeble that he could scarce walk,
or bear the weight of his own armour, was entrufled with the exe-
cutive part; and while he himself needed to be supported by two
men, he came abroad to commit a murder in the pretence of his
Sovereign.

ON the 9th of March, Morton entered the court of the palacewith

an hundred and sixty men; and without noise, or meeting with any
resistance, seized all the gates. While the Queen was at supper with
the Countess of Argyll, Rizio, and a few domefsics, the King fud-
denly entered the apartment, by a private passage. At his back,
was Ruthven, clad in complete armour, and with that ghastly and

carry on any criminal intrigue with Rizio. But the silence of Randolph the Eng-
lifh Resident, a man abundantly ready to mention, and to aggravate Mary's faults,
and who does not once insinuate that her confidence in Rizio concealed any thing
criminal, is in itself a sufficient vindication of her innocence.

R r 2 horrid

BooK IV. horrid look which long sickness had given him. Three or.four

óóJ " of his most trusty accomplices followed him. Such an unusual ap-
66 pearance alarmed those who were present. Rizio instantly appre-

hended that he was the victim at whom the blow was aimed; and
in the utmost consternation retired behind the Queen, of whom he
laid hold, hoping that the reverence due to her person might'
prove some protection to him. The conspirators had proceeded too
far to be reffrained by any consideration of that kind. Numbers of
armed men rushed into the chamber. Ruthven drew his dagger,
and with a furious mien and voice, commanded Rizio to. leave a.
place of which he was unworthy; and which he had occupied too,
long. Mary employed tears, and entreaties, and threatenings, to
save her favourite. But, notwithlsanding all these, he was torn
from her by violence, and before he could be dragged through the
next apartment, the rage of his enemies put an end to his lift.
piercing his body with fifty-fix wounds *.

ATHOL, Huntly, Bothwell, and other confidents of the Queenr
vwho lodged in the palace, were alarmed at the uproar, and filled
with the utmost terror on their own account; but either no violence
was intended against them, or the conspirators durit not Ihed the
noblest blood in the kingdom, in the fame illegal manner with
which they had ventured to take the life of a stranger. Some of
them were dismissed, and others made their escape.

They confine THE conspirators, in the mean time, kept poffefion of the pa-
hrfeit.' lace, and guarded the Queen with the utmoit care. A proclama-

tion was published by the King, prohibiting the Parliament to meet
on the day appointed; and measures were taken by him for pre-

* Sec Appendix, No XV.

venting

venting any' tumult in the city *. Murray, Rothes, and their fol-BooK 1V.
lowers being,,informed of every 'fep taken against Rizio, arrived /ó
at Edinburgh next' evening. Murray was graciously received
both by the King and Queen. By the former, on account of the
Articles' which had been agreed upon between them'; by the
latter, because she' hoped to prevail on him, by- gentlre treat-
ment, not to take part with the murderers of Rizio. Their
power still ihe felt, and dreaded; and the.infult which they had
offered to her authority, and even to her person, so far exceeded any
crime (he could.impute to Murray,;that in hopes of wreaking
her vengeance on them, she became extremely willing to be re-
conciled to him. The obligations, however, which Murray lay
under to men, who had hazarded their lives on his account, en-
gaged him to labour for their safety. The Queen, who scarce had
the liberty of choice left, was persuaded to admit Morton and Ruth-
yen into her presence, and to grant them the promise of pardon in
whatever terms they hould deem necessary for their own. fe-
curity.

THE King, mean-while, flood astonished at the boldness and

success of his own enterprize, and uncertain what course to hold.
The Queen observed his irresolution, and availed herself of it. SheBut nhe gains
employed all her art to disengage him from his new aflociates. Histhe King, and

. * '~~~~~ ~~~~~~~-

0 ~~makes her

confcioifnefs of the insult which he had offered to so illuifrious aefcape.
h.nefaarefs, infpiredhim with uncommon facility and complaisance.
In spite of all the warnings he received to difrruft the Queen's artifi-
ces, fle prevailed on him to dismiss the guards which the conifpi-

* Keith, Append. 126.

rators

BOOK IV. rators had placed on her person. And that fame night he made.his
'-J-J escape along with her, attended by three persons only, and retired

I566.
March it. to Dunbar. The scheme of their flight had been communicated

to Huntly and Bothwell, and they were quickly joined by them,
and several other of the nobles. Bothwell's estate lay in that cor-
ner of the kingdom, and his followers crouded to their Chief, in
such numbers, as soon enabled the Queen to set the power of the
conspirators at defiance.

reconciled THIS sudden flight filled them with inexpressible consternation;

Is reconciled
to the exiled They had obtained a promise of pardon; and it now appeared from
nobles. the Queen's conduc, that nothing more was intended by this pro-

mise, than to amuse them, and to gain time. They ventured, how-
ever, to demand the accomplishment of it; but their messenger was
detained a prisoner, and the Queen advancing towards Edinburgh,
atthe head of 8000 men, talked in the highest strain of resentment
and revenge. She had the address, at the fame time, to separate
Murray and his associates from the conspirators against Rizio. Sen-
fible that the union of there parties would form a confederacy, which
might prove formidable to the crown, the expressed great wil'ling-
ness to receive the former into favour; towards the latter, she de-
clared herself inexorable. Murray and his followers were no less
willing to accept of pardon, on her own terms. The conspirators
against Rizio, deprived of every resource, and incapable of refif-

March , ance, fled precipitately to Newcastle, having thus changed fitua-
The conspira-tions with Murray and his party, who left that place a few days
tors against
Rizio fly into before.
England.

No man so remarkable for wisdom, and even for cunning, as the
Earl of Morton, ever engaged in a more unfortunate enterprize. De-

ferted

tfrted basely by the King, \who now denied his knowledge of the BOOK IV.
confipiracy, by public proclamations; and abandoned ungenerously _----.
by Murray and his party , he was obliged to fly from his native 1566.-
country, to resign the highefl office, and to part, with one of the
most opulent fortunes in the kingdom,

ON her return to Edinburgh, Mary began to. proceed against-

those concerned in the murder of Rizio, with the utmost rigour of
law. But, in praise of her clemency, it must be observed, that
only two persons, and those of no considerable rank, suffered for
this crime -..

IN this con(piracy there is one circumflance, which, though'

somewhat detached, deserves not to be forgotten. In the confede-
racy between the King and the conspirators, the real intention of
which was assassination, the preserving of the Reformed Church is,,
nevertheless, one of the moif considerable articles; and- the fame
men who were preparing to violate one of the first duties of mora-
lity, affeced the highest regard for religion. History relates these
extravagancies of the human mind,, without pretending to jutfify,
or even to account for them ; and regulating her own opinions by
the eternal and immutable laws of justice and of virtue, points out
such inconsistencies, as features of the age which the describes, and,
records them for the inftrution of ages to come.-

As this is the second, initance of deliberate affaflination whichnccu to

has occurred, and as we thall hereafter meet with many other in-the frequency
flances of the fame crime, the causes which gave rife to a praticepofs in that
so shocking to humanity, deserve our particular attention. Refent-age'
mcnt is, for obvious and wife reasons, one of the firongeft paflions
in the human mind. The natural demand of this passion is, that

Melv. 130, sI Keith, Appendix 130, 334.

the

BOOK IV. the person who feels the injury mhould himself inflia the vengeance

-'-" due on that account. The permitting this, however, would have
I566'

been deftruEtive to society; and punishment would have known
no bounds, either in severity, or in duration. For this reason, in
the very infancy of the social state, the sword was taken out of -pri-
vate hands, and committed to the Magistrate. But, at firif, while
laws aimed at refraining, they really strengthened the principle of
revenge. The earliest and moif simple punishment for crimes was
retaliation; the offender forfeited limb for limb, and life for life.
The payment of a compensation to the peifon injured, succeeded
to the rigour of the former institution. In both these, the gratifica-
tion of private revenge was the objet of law; and he who sufferod
the wrong, was the only person who had a right to purfuea to exact
or to remit the punishment. While laws allowed such full scope to
the revenge of one party, the interests of the other were not neg-
leted. If the evidence of his guilt did not amount to a full proof,
or if he reckoned himself to be unjustly accused, the person to
whom a crime was imputed had a fight to challenge his adversary
to tingle combat, and on obtaining .the viaory, vindicated his own
honour. In almorl every considerable cause, .whether civil or cri-
minal, arms were appealed to, in defence, either of the innocence,
or the property of the parties. Justice had seldom occafion,,to use
her balance; the sword alone decided every contest. The passion
of revenge was nourished by all these means, and grew, by daily
indulgence, to be incredibly strong. Mankind became habituated
to blood, not only in times of war, but of peace; and from this,
as well as other causes, contracted an amazing ferocity of temper,
and of manners. This ferocity, however, made it necessary to dif-
courage the trial by combat; to abolifl the payment of compenfa-
tions in criminal cafes; and to think of some milder method of ter-
minating disputes concerning civil rights. The punishments for

8 crimes

crimes became more .evere, and the regulations concerning pro- BooK IV.
pert)' more fixed; but the Princes, whoe. province it was to in-

x566.

flidt the one, and to enforce the other, possessed little power. Great
offenders despised their authority; smaller ones sheltered themselves
under the jurifdiEtion of those, from whose protection they expeced
impunity. The administration of justice was extremely feeble and
dilatory. An attempt to punish the crimes of a Chieftain, or even.
of his vassals, often excited rebellious and civil wars. To nobles,
haughty and independent, among whom the causes of discord were
many and unavoidable, who were quick in discerning an injury,,
and impatient to revenge it; who esteemed it infamous to submit
to an enemy, and cowardly to forgive him; who confidered the right
of punishing those who had injured them, as a privilege of their
order, and a mark of independence; such flow-proceedings were
extremely unfatisfadory. The blood of their adversary was, in their
opinion, the only thing which could wa(h away an affront; where
that was not shed, their revenge was disappointed, their courage be-
came fufpeted, and a slain was left on their honour. That ven-
geance, which the impotent hand of the Magistrate could not inflic,,
their own could easily execute; under governments so feeble, men
assumed, as in a state of nature, the right of judging, and redressing
their own wrongs. And thus assassination, a crime of all others
the most deflructive to society, came not only to be allowed, but to
be deemed honourable.

THE history of Europe, during the J4th and i.5th centuries

abounds with detestable intfances of this crime. It prevailed chiefly
among the French and Scots, between whom there was a close
intercourse at that time, and a surprising resemblance in their na-
tional characters. In 1407, the only brother of the King of France

VOL. I. S f was

BOOK IV. was murdered publickly in the streets of Paris, and infead of punish-

'-"66' ing this horrible aaion, an eminent lawyer was allowed to plead in

defence of it before the Peers of France, and avowedly to main-
tain the lawfulness of assassination. In I417, it required all the
eloquence and authority of the famous Gerfon, to prevail on the
Council of Constance to condemn this proposition, " That there are
tome cafes in which affaflination is a virtue more meritorious in a
Knight than in a Squire, and more meritorious in a King than in a
Knight *." The number of eminent persons who were murdered
in France and Scotland, on account either of private, or political,
or religious quarrels, during the Isth and i6th centuries, is almost
incredible. Even after those causes, which first gave rife to this
barbarous pradice were removed; after thejurifdiaion of Magifirates,
and the authority of laws were better established, and become rtire
tniverfal; after the progress of learning and phildfophy had poliffii d
the manners, and humanized the minds of men, this crime coiti-
nued in some degree. It was towards the close of the i7th cen-
tury before it disappeared in France. The additional vigour, Which
the royal authority acquired by the acceflion of Janies VI. to the
throne of England, seems to have put a flop to it in Scotlanid.

THE influence, however, of any national cuftomn, b6th on the

underitanding and on the heart, and how far it may go tdwards
perverting or extinguishing moral principles of the gieateft import-
ance, is remarkable. The authors of those ages have perfedlly im-
bibed the sentiments of their cotemporaries, with regard to affaffi-
nation; and they who had leisure to refle&, and to judge, appear
to be no more ihocked at this crime, than the persons, who com-
mitted it during the heat and impetuosity of passion. Buchanan

* L'Enfant. Hist. Conc. dc Conft.

relatcs

relates :the myrder of Cardinal Beatoun, and of Rizio, without BooK IV.
exprefling-thofe feelings which.are natural to a man, or that in- '-I6
dignation .which became an historian *. Knox, whpfe mind was
fiercer and ,more unpolifhed, talks of the death of. Beatoun and of
the Puke of Guise, not onlywithout censure, but with the utmost
exultatiQn,+t. On the other ,hand, the Biflhp of Ross mentions the
affafination of the:Earl of Murray, ,with some degrees of applause^.
Blackwood dwells upon it, with.the.moft indecent triumph, and
ascribes it.direly -to. the hand of God II. Lord Ruthven, the prin-
cipal actor in the.confpiracy.againft Rizio, wrote an account of it
some fhort.time before .his own death, and in all his long.narra-
tive there is not one exprefflon of regret, or one symptom of com-
punction for a crime no less dishonourable, .than barbarous *.. Mor-
ton equally guilty of the fame crime, entertained .the fame senti-
ments concerning.it; and in. his:laft moments, neither he himfalf,
nor the Ministers who attended him, seem to have confidered it as
an action ,which called .for .repentance; .even then he talks of Da-
vid'sflaughter as coolly,.as.if it had been.an innocentor commend-
able deed --f. The vices of another age atlonifh and shock us;
the vices of our own become.familiar, and excite little horror. We
return from this digression to the course of the hillory.

T-HE charm, which had at first attached the Queen to Darnly 'Te tQ c

and held them for some time in an .happy union, was now entire- hlat:.'11
ly dissolved; and love no longer covering his follies and vices with c,1a!.
its friendly veil, they appeared to Mary in their full dimension alnd
deformity +I. Tho' Henry published a proclamation, dilclaiming
any knowledge of the conspiracy against Rizio, the Q1ecnl was fllly

e Buchan. 295, 345. -1' Knox, 334. 1 Andcif. 3. ;4.
II Jebb. 2. 263. ** Keith, Append. 119. 1t' Crawt-. Mcni. Appcnt!.

1-t: See Appendix, N" XVI.

S f 2 convinced,

BOOK IV. convinced, that he was not only accessory to the contrivance, but

"66" to the commission of that odious crime 3. That very power,

* which, with liberal and unfufpicious fond ners, she had conferred up-

on him, he had employed to insult her authority, to limit her pre-
rogative, and to endanger her person: Such an outrage, it was
impossible any woman could bear, or forgive. Cold civilities, fe-
cret distrust, frequent quarrels, succeeded to their former transports
of affeAion and confidence. The Queen's favours were no longer
conveyed through his hands. The croud of expeaants ceased to
court his patronage, which they found to avail so little. Among
the nobles, some dreaded his furious temper, others complained of
his perfidiousness; and all of them despised the weakness of his
underffanding, and the inconstancy of his heart. The people them-
selves observed some parts of his conduct, which little suited the
dignity of a King. Addided to drunkenness, beyond what the
manners of that age could bear, and indulging irregular passions,
which even the licentiousness of youth could not excuse, he, by his
indecent behaviour, provoked the Queen to the utmost; and the
passions which it occasioned, often forced tears from her eyes, both
in public and in private -. Her aversion for him increased every day,
and could be no longer concealed. He was often absent from court,
appeared there with little splendor, and was trusted with no power.
Avoided equally by those who endeavoured to please the Qugeen;
who favoured Morton and his associates, or who adhered to the
house of Hamilton; he was left almost alone in a neglected and
unpitied solitude +.

The rife of ABOUT this time a new favourite grew into great credit with the
Bothwell's fa-
Your. Queen, and loon gained an ascendant over her heart, which encou-

Keith, 350. + Ibid. 3z9. :{ Mclv. 131, &c.

A raged

raged his enterprizing genius to form designs that proved fatal to BooK IV.
himself, and-the occasion of all Mary's subsequent misfortunes.

i 566.

This was James Hepburn Earl of Bothwell, the head of an ancient
family, and by his extensive possessions, and numerous vassals, one
of the mofi powerful noblemen in the kingdom. Even in that
turbulent age, when so many vast projects were laid open to an
aspiring mind, and invited it to action, no man's ambition was
more daring than Bothwell's, or had recourse to bolder or more
singular expedients for obtaining power. When almost every per-
son of diftindion in the kingdom, whether Papist or Protestant, had
joined the Congregation in opposing the dangerous encroachments
of the French upon the liberties of the nation, he, though an avowed
Protestant, adhered to the Queen Regent, and ated with vigour on
her fide. The success which attended the arms of the Congrega-
tion having obliged him to retire into France, he was taken into
the Queen's service, and continued with her till the time of her re-
turn into Scotland *. From that period, every ftep of his conduct
towards Mary was remarkably dutiful; and amidst all the shiftings
of faction, we scarcely ever find him holding any course which could
be offensive to her. When Murray's proceedings with regard- to
her marriage gave umbrage to the QEeen, she recalled Bothwell
from that banishment into which {he had with reluctance driven
him, and confidered his zeal and abilities as the most powerful
supports of her authority. When the conspirators against Rizio
fcized her person, he became the chief instrument of recovering
her liberty, and served her, on that occasion, with so much fide-
lity and success, as made the deepest impression on her mind, and
greatly increased the confidence which she had hitherto placed in

* Anders . . o.

himrn

.BOOK. IV. him *. Her gratitude loaded him with marks of her bounty; lhe

-'^^ó' raised him to offices of profit and of trufl, and tranfaaed no mat-
;$66.

ter of importance without his advice f. By complaisance, and as-
fiduity, he confirmed and fortified these dispositions of the Queen
in his favour, and insensibly paved the way towards that vast project,
which his immoderate ambition had perhaps already conceived, and
which, in spite of many difficulties, and at the expence of many
crimes, he at lait accomplished.

THE hour of the Queen's delivery now approached. As her

palace was defended only by a slender guard, it seemed impru-
dent to expose her person, at that time, to the insults fie might
susser in a kingdom torn by faction, and prone to mutiny. For
this reason, the Privy counsel advised the Queen to fix her residence
in the castle of Edinburgh, the strongest fortress in the kingdom,
and the most proper place for the security of her person .. In-order
to render this security more perfea, Mary laboured to extinguish
the domeflic feuds which divided some of the principal nobles. Mur-
ray and Argyll were exasperated againif Huntly and Bothwell, by
reciprocal and repeated injuries. The Queen, by her authority
and entreaties, effected a reconcilement among them, and drew from
them a promise to bury their discords in everlasting oblivion. This
reconcilement Mary had so much at heart, that the made it the con-
dition on which the again received Murray into favour j1.

Bilth of ON the 19th of June, Mary was delivered of her only son James,
Jamnes a. a Prince whose birth was happy for the whole island, and unfortunate

to her alone. His accession to the throne of England united the two

* Andcrf. 1. 92, 93. t- Melv. I33. Knox. 396.
t Keith, 335. 1 Ibid. 336. Append. 139.

divided

divided kingdoms in one mighty monarchy, and established the BOOK IV.
power of Great Britain on a firm foundation. While Lhe, torn 566
early from her son by the cruelty of her fate, was never allowed to
indulge those tender pafilons, nor to tafle those joys which fill the
heart of a mother.

MELVIL was instantly dispatched to London with an account

of this event. It firuck Elizabeth, at first, in a sensible manner;
and the advantage and superiority which her rival had acquired by
the birth of a son, forced tears from her eyes. But before Melvil
was admitted to audience, she had so far recovered the command
of herself, as to receive him not only with decency, but with ex-
ceffive chearfulnefs; and willingly accepted the invitation which
Mary gave her, to tand-godinother to her son *.

As Mary loved splendor and .magnificence, she resolved to ce-

lebrate the baptism of the young Prince with great pomp; and for
that purpose sent invitations of the fame kind to the French King,
and to the duke of Savoy, the uncle of her former hulband.

THE Queen, on her recovery, discovered no change in her fen- The Quecn

timents with refpe& to the King f. The death of Rizio, and the treats rnly
countenance he had given to an a&ion so insolent and unjumifi-with indiffer-

--'~~~~~~ J ~~~~~ence and ne-

able, were fiill fresh in her memory. She was frequently penfivegleI.
and dejected $. And though Henry sometimes attended at court,
and accompanied her in her progresses through different parts of
the kingdom, he met with little reverence from the nobles, while
Mary treated him with the utmost reserve, and did not susser him
to possess any authority 1'. The breach between them became
* Mclv. 138. -- See Append. N9 XVII, : Ibid. 148. II Kcith, 350. Melv. I3 .

every

BOOK IV. every day more apparent *. Attempts were made toward a re.
rV'^. concilement, particularly by Caflelnau the French Ambassador;

but after ifch a violent rupture, it was found no easy mat-
ter to bind the nuptial knot a-new; and though he prevailed on
the King and Queen to pass two nights together t, we- may, with
great probability, pronounce this appearance of union, to which
Caflelnau trusted, not to have been sincere; we know with certainty
that it was not lasting.

Her attach- BOTHWELL, all this while, was the Queen's prime confident.
ment to Both- Without his participation no business was concluded, and no favour
well increases.

bestowed. Together with this ascendant over her councils, Both-
well, if we may believe the cotemporary historians, acquired no
less sway over her heart. But, at what precise time, this ambitious
Lord firit allowed the sentiments of a lover to occupy the place of
that duty and refpeEt which a fubjeEt owes his Sovereign; or when
Mary, instead. of gratitude for his faithful services, felt a passion of
another nature rising in her bosom, it is no easy matter to determine.
Such delicate transitions of passion can be discerned only by those,
who are admitted near the persons of the parties, and who can view
the secret workings of the heart with calm and acute observation.
Neither Knox nor Buchanan enjoyed there advantages. Their
humble station allowed them only a distant access to the Queen and
her favourite. And the ardor of their zeal, and the violence of
their prejudices, render their opinions rash, precipitate, and inaccu-
rate. It is by the effects of this reciprocal passion, rather than by
their accounts of it, that subsequent historians can judge of its reality.

ADVENTUROUS as Bothwell's project to gain the Queen may ap-
pear, it was formed and carried on under very favourable circum-

* Keith, Append. 169. t Ibid.

fiances.

flances. Mary was young, gay, and affable. She pof'effed great Boox IV.
sensibility of temper, and was capable of the utmost tenderness '- -ó
of affedion. She had placed her love on a very unworthy objeCt,
who requited it with ingratitude, and treated her with neglect,
with insolence, and with brutality. Al trhefe she felt, and resented.
In this situation, the attention and complaisance of a man, who
had vindicated her authority, and protected her person; who en-
tered into all her views, who soothed all her paflions, who watched
and improved every opportunity of insinuating his design, and re-
commending his passion *, could scarce fail of making an impref-
sion on a heart of such a frame as Mary's.

THE haughty spirit of Darnly, nursed up in flattery, and accuf- The King re-

solves to leave

tomed to command, could not bear the contempt under which he Scotland.
had now fallen, and the state of insignificance to which he saw him-
self reduced. But in a country, where he was universally hated or
despised, he could never hope to form a party, which would fe-
cond any attempt he might make to recover power. He addref-
fed himself, therefore, to the Pope, and to the Kings of France
and Spain, with many professions of his own zeal for the Catho-
lic religion, and with bitter complaints against the Queen, for ne-
gleting to promote that interest t: And soon after, he took a
resolution, equally wild and desperate, of embarking on board a
ship, which he had provided, and of flying into foreign parts. It
is almost impossible to form any satisfaCtory conjecture concerning
the motives which influence a capricious and irregular mind. He
hoped, perhaps, to recommend himself to the Catholic Princes on
the continent, by his zeal for religion, and that they would em-
ploy their interest towards reinflating him in the pofleffion of that
power which he had loft. Perhaps, he expecded nothing more than

* Andcrr. I. 93, 94. 1| Knox, 399.
VOL. 1. T t the

BOOK IV, the comfort of hiding the disgrace under which he was now fallen,

6 among strangers, who had never been witnefles of his former pro-

fperity,

HE communicated his design to the French Ambassador Le Croc;
His capric;. ourbehaviour.and-to his father the Earl of Lennox. They both endeavoured to

diffwade him from it, but without success. Lennox, who 'feeins,
as well as his son, to have loft the Queen's confidence, and who,
about this time, was seldom at court, instantly communicated the
matter to her by a letter. Henry, who had refused to accompany
the Queen from Stirling to. Edinburgh, was likewise absent from
court. He arrived there, however, on the fame day (le received
the account of his intended flight. But he was more than usually way-
ward and peevish; and scrupling to enter the palace, unless certain
Lords who attended the Queen. were dismissed; Mary was'obliged
to meet him without the gates. At last he su-fferea her to conduct
him into her own apartment. She endeavoured to draw from him
the reaf)ns of the strange resolution which he had taken, and to
divert him from it. In spite however of all her arguments and en-
treaties, he remained silent and inflexible. Next day the Privy Coun-
cil, by her direction, expoftulated with him on the fame head. He
perfifled, notwithstanding, in his sullenness and obstinacy; and neither.
deigned to explain the motives of his condu2, nor signified any in-
tention of altering it. As he left the apartments he turned towards
the Queen, and' told her, that (he flhould not fee his face again, for
a long time. A few days after, he wrote to Mary, and mentioned
two things as grounds of his disgust. She herself, he said, no
longer admitted him into any confidence, and had deprived him
of all power; and the nobles, after her example, treated him with
open neglect, so that he appeared in every place without the dignity
and Iplendor of a King.

NOTHING

NOTHING could be more mortifying to Mary, than this intended BooK IV.
flight of the King's, which would have spread the infamy of their -"

bI66.

domestic quarrel all over Europe. Compassion for a Monarch who Mary endea-
would then appear to be forced into exile by her neglea and ill usage, vOnurso pre-
might have disposed mankind to entertain sentiments concerning the tended flight,
causes of their discord, little to her advantage. In order, therefore,
to prepossess the minds of her allies, and to screen her reputation
from any censure with which Darnly might endeavour to load it,
the Privy council transmitted a narrative of this whole transaction,
both to the King, and to the Queen Mother of France. It is drawn
with great art, and sets Mary's conduc in the miof favourable point
of light *.

ABOUT this time, the licence of the borderers called for redress.

And Mary resolving to hold a court of justice at Jedburgh, the
inhabitants of several adjacent counties were summoned to attend
their Sovereign in arms, according to cufftom+-. Bothwell.was,
at that time, Lieutenant or Warden of all the marches, an office
among the most important in the kingdom; and though usually di-
vided into three diftinc governments, beflowed by the Queen's fa-
vour upon him alone. In order to display his own valour and ac-
tivity in the discharge of this truss, he attempted to seize a gang of
banditti, who, lurking among the marshes of Liddefdale, inferred
the refl of the country. But while he was laying hold of one of
those desperado's, he was wounded by him in several places, so that OAober x6,
his followers were obliged to carry him to Hermitage castle. Mary
instantly flew thither, with an impatience which firongly marks the
anxiety of a lover, but little suited the dignity of a Queen +. Find-

ing

* Keith, 345, 347. I- Ibid. 353. Good. vol. i. 302.

: The diflance between Jedburgh and Hermitage is 18 Scottifi miles, through
a country almost impafl'able. The season of the year was far advanced. Botlhwll

T t 2 fccml

BooK IV. ing that Bothwell was threatened with no dangerous symptom, ml1e

1565 returned that fame day to Jedburgh. The fatigue of such a jour-

ney, added to the anguish of mind fie had fuffcred on Bothwell's
account, threw her next morning into a violent fever *. Her life
was despaired of, but her youth, and the vigour of her constitution.
refited the malignity of her disease. During the continuance of
the Queen's illness, the King, who resided at Stirling, never came
November 5. near Jedburgh -. And when he afterwards thought fit to make his

appearance there, he met with such a cold reception, as did not
encourage him to make any long flay +. Mary soon recovered
flrength enough to return along the eastern borders to Dunbar.

W H r L E the resided in this place, her attention was turned to-

wards England. Elizabeth, notwithstanding her promise, and
even proclamations to the contrary, not only allowed, but encou-
raged Morton and his associates to remain in England. I[ Mary, on
the other hand, afforded her protection to several English fugitives.
Each Queen watched the motions of the other with a jealous atten-
tion, and secretly countenanced the practices, which were carrying,
on, to disturb the administration of her rival.

seems to have been wounded in a scuffle, occasioned by the despair of a single man.
rather than in any open infurreftion of the borderers. It does not apprar that
the Queen was attended thither by any considerable train. Had any military ope-
ration been necessary, as is supposed, Good. vol. i. 304. it would have been ex-
tremely improper to rifque the Qulen's pcrfon in an expedition against thieves. Sol
soon as the Queen found Bothwcll to be in no danger, The inflantly returned; and
after this we hear no more of the infurrcfion, nor have we any proof that the rioters
took refu. e in England. No other reason but that which we have produced, seems
fuffcicnt to account for the Qucen's condu&t.

* Keith, 35r, 352. - Thid. Append. 133.
I Knox, 40o. 1 Cald. vol. ii. 15.

FOR

FOR this purpose, Mary's Ambassador, Robert Melvil, and herBooK IV.
other emissaries, were extremely active and successful. We may '1 66

1566'

impute, in a good degree, to their intrigues, that spirit which ap-TheEnglifh
peared in the Parliament of England, and which raised a storm that fvors in.t
threatened Elizabeth's domestic tranquillity, more than any other rs preten-

sions to the

event of her reign, and required all her art and dexterity to al-fucceffion.
lay it.

ELIZABETH had now reigned eight years, without discovering

tie leafl intention to marry. A violent diflemper, with which she
had lately been seized, having endangered her life, and alarmed the
nation with the profped of all those calamities which are occasioned
by a disputed and dubious succession ; a motion was made, and eager-
ly listened to in. both houses, for addreffing.the Queen, to provide
againrf any such danger in times to come, either by signifying her
own resolution to marry, or by consenting to an aA establishing
the orders of fuccefflon to the Crown . Her love to her sub-
jcets, her duty to the public, her concern for posterity, it was pre-
tended, not only called upon, but obliged her to. take one of these
steps. The: insuperable aversion which the had all along discovered
for marriage; made it improbable that he would chufe the former;.
and if she complied with the latter request, no title to the Crown
could; with any colour of justice, be set in opposition to that of the
Scottish Q]een. Elizabeth was sagacious- enough to fee the re-
nmoteft consequences of this motion, and observed them with the ut-
most anxiety. Mary, by refuting so often to ratify the treaty of Edin-
burgh, had plainly intimated a design of embracing the first promif-
inl opportunity for prosecuting her right to the English Crown; and
by her secret ncgociations, tfle had gained many to favour her title -.
All the Rbman Catholics ardently wished for her fucccffion. Her

D* 'Ewcs Journ. of Parl. xoS: t M]c. 136.

gentleness

Boos IV. gentleness and humanity had removed many of those a;pprehepfions

' which the Protestants entertained on account of her religion. The
court faction, which envied the power of Cecil, and endeavoured
to wrest the adminiitration out of his hands, advanced the preten-
sions of the Scottish Queen in oppoftion to him. The union of the
two kingdoms was a defireable object to all wife men in both na-
tions; and the birth of the young Prince was a security for the con-
tinuance of this blessing, and gave hopes of its perpetuity.
Elizabeth's UNDER these circumstances, and while the nation was in such a

phapaccoLunt temper, a parliamentary declaration of Mary's title would have been

highly detrimental to Elizabeth. The present unsettled slate of
the succession left much in her power. Her resentment alone might
have gone far towards excluding any of the competitors from the
Crown; and the dread of this had hitherto refrained, and over-
awed the ambition of the Scottish Queen. But if this check should
be removed, by the legal acknowledgment of her title, Mary would
be at full liberty to pursue her dangerous designs, and to ad with-
out fear or reserve. Her partizans were already meditating schemes
for infurretions in different parts of the kingdom *; and an ad of
Parliament, recognizing the rights of that Princess, whole preten-
sions they favoured, would have been nothing less than a signal to
arms; and, notwithstanding Elizabeth's just title to the affeEtions
of her fubjeds, might have shaken and endangered her throne.

Mary endea- WHILE this matter remained in fufpence in both houses, an ac-
proe this op- count of it was transmitted to Mary by Melvil her Ambaflador. As
portuniy. he did not want advocates for her right, even among those who

were near Elizabeth's person, flhe endeavoured to cultivate the dif-
position which appeared towards fettling the right of fucceflion in

* Mclv. 147.

her

her favour, by a letter to the' Privy Counsellors of England. She BOOK IV.
expressed in it a grateful sense of Elizabeth's friendship, which he ió- '
chiefly ascribes to their good offices, with their Sovereign, in her
behalf. She declared her resolution to live in perpetual amity with
England, without urging or pursuing her claim upon the Crown,
any farther than should be agreeable to the Queen. But, at the
fame time, as her right of fuccefflon was undoubted, the hoped it
would be examined with candour, and judged of with impartiality.
The nobles who' attended her wrote to the English Privy Council
in the fame itrain *. Mary artfully gave these letters the air of be-
ing nothing more than a declaration of'her own, and of her sub-
jees-gratitude towards Elizabeth. But as the could not be ignorant
of the jealousy and fear with which Elizabeth observed the pro-
ceedings of Parliament, a ftep so uncommon as this, of one Prince's
entering into public correspondence with the Privy Counsellors of
another, could not be otherwise construed than as taken with an in-
tention to encourage the spirit which had already been raised among
the English. In this light it seems to have appeared to Elizabeth'
herselfs . But the disposition of her people rendering it necessary
to treat Mary's person with great decency, and her title with much'
regard, the mentioned it to her only in the softest language.

NOTHING, however, could be a more cruel mortification to alElizabeth

sooths and

Princess of Elizabeth's character, than the temper which both:gains her
houses of Parliament discovered on this occasion. She bent all her Parliament,
policy to defeat, or elude' the motion. After allowing the first'
heat of their zeal to evaporate, fhd called into her presence a cer-
tain number of each house. She ibothed and carefled them; fe
threatened and promised ; he remitted subsidies which were due;

* Keith, 354. Append. 136. t Keith, 357.

and

BOOK: IV. and refused those which were offered; and in the end prevailed to
'-., . have this formidable motion put off for that session. Happily for

566. her, the condut of the Scottish Queen, and the misfortunes which

besel her, prevented the revival of such a motion in any future
Parliament t.

MEAN time, in order to preserve the reputation of impar-

tiality, and that she might not drive Mary into any desperate mea-
sure, she committed to the Tower one Thornton, who had publiih-
ed something derogatory to the right of the Scottish line --; and fig-
nified her displeasure against a member of the house of Commons,
who seemed, by some words in a speech, to glance at Mary +

An extraordi- AMIDST all her other cares, Mary was ever follicitous to pro-
nary flep of
Mary' in fa- mote the interest of that religion which she profefled. The re-
vourofPope-eftablifhment of the Romish doEtrine seems to have been her
ry.

favourite passion; and though the design was concealed with
*care, and conduEted with caution, ihe pursued it with a perse-
vering zeal. At this time, /he ventured to lay aside somewhat
of her usual reserve; and the aid which she expected from the
Popish Princes, who had engaged in the league of Bayonne, en-
couraged her to take a ftep, which, if we confider the temper of
the nation, appears to be extremely bold. Having formerly held a
secret correspondence with the court of Rome, Ihe now resolved to
allow a Nuncio from the Pope publickly to enter her dominions.
Cardinal Laurea, at that time Bishop of Mondovi, was the per-
son on whom Pius V. conferred this office, and along with him he
sent the Queen a present of 20,000 crowns ||. It is not the cha-
rader of the Papal court, to open its treasury upon distant or imagi-

*D'Ewes's Journ. 104--130. Camd. 399. Melv. 119. Haynes, 446.
* Camd. 401. :t Haynes, 449. |1 Vita Card. Laur. ap Burn. vol. iii. 325.

nary

nary hopes. The business of the Nuncio in Scotland could be no BOOK IV.
other, than to attempt a reconciliation of the kingdom to the Romnifh "' '
fee. Thus Mary herself understood it. And in her answer to a
letter which she received from the Pope, after expressing her grate-
ful sense of his paternal care and liberality, the promises that the
would bend her whole strength towards the re-eftabliihment and
propagation of the Catholic faith; that the would receive the Nun-
cio with every possible demonstration of refped, and concur, with
the utmost vigour, in all his designs towards promoting the honour
of God, and restoring peace to the kingdom; that (he would cele-
brate the baptifi of the Prince, according to the ceremonies which
the Romish ritual prescribes, hoping that her fubjeds would be
taught, by this example, again to reverence the sacraments of the
church, which they had so long treated with contempt; and that
The would be careful to instil early into her son the principles of a
sincere love and attachment to the Catholic faith *. But though
the Nuncio was already arrived at Paris, and had sent over one of
his attendants with part of the money, the Queen did not think the
junture proper for his reception. Elizabeth was preparing to fend
a magnificent embassy into Scotland, againfi the time of the Prince's
baptism, and as it would have been improper to offend her, Ihe
wifely contrived, under various pretences, to detain Laurea at Paris -.
The convulsions into which the kingdom was thrown soon after,
made it impossible for him to pursue his journey any farther.

AT the very time that Mary was secretly carrying on these nego-

ciations for subverting the Reformed Church, ihe did not scruple
publickly to employ her authority towards obtaining for its Mini-
fters a more certain and comfortable subsistence . During this

* Consei Vita Mariax ap. Jebb, vol. ii. 51. t Keith, Append. 135.

t Keith, 561, 562. Knox, 401,
VOL. I. U u year,

BoOK- IV. year, the iilhed several proclamations and alCs of council for that
---'6 purpose, and readily approved of every scheme which was proposed

566' for the more effectual payment of their flipends. This part of her

conduEt does little honour to Mary's integrity; and thoughjufiified
by the example of Princes, who often reckon falfhood and deceit
among the necessary arts of government, and even authorised by
the pernicious casuistry of the Romish Church, which transfers.
breach of faith to heretics, from the lift of crimes, to that of duties,
must, however, be numbered among those blemishes which never
stain a truly great and generous charater.

December. As neither the French nor Piedmontefe Ambafladors were yet
Her avefion arrived, the baptism of the Prince was put off from time to time.
for the King
excefive. Mean while Mary fixed her residence at Craigmillar *. Such a re-

tirement, perhaps, suited the present temper of her mind, and in-
duced her to prefer it before her own palace of Holy-rood-.houfe.
Her aversion for the King grew every day more confirmed, and was
become altogether incurable. A deep melancholy succeeded to that
gaiety of spirit, which was natural to her. The rashness and levity
of her own choice, and the King's ingratitude and obstinacy, filled
her with flame and with despair. A variety of passions preyed
at once on a mind, all whose sensations were exquisite, and all its
emotions itrong, and often extorted from her, the las with of the
unfortunate, that life itself would come to an end t.

A divorce bz MURRAY and Maitland observed all those workings of pafflon
twcen them in the breast of the Queen, and conceived hopes of turning them to

prpo the advantage of their ancient associates, Morton, and the other

conspirators against Rizio. They were still in banishment, and the
Queen's resentment against them continued unabated. Murray and

* Keith, 355. t Ibid. Pref. vii.
4 the

the Secretary flattered themselves, however, that her inclination to BooK IV.
be separated from Darnly would surmount this deep-rooted aver- ' 66
sion, and that the hopes of an event so defireable might induce
her to be reconciled to the conspirators. It was easy to find rea-
sons, in the King's behaviour, on which to found a sentence of di-
vorce. This sentence they had interest enough to obtain, and to
procure the ratification of it in Parliament. In return for this ser-
vice, they proposed to stipulate with the Queen to grant a pardon to
Morton and his followers. The design was first of all communi-
cated to Argyll, who, as well as Murray, owed his return into Scot-
land to the conspiracy against Rizio. Huntly and Bothwell, who
at that time direted all Mary's councils, were likewise admitted
into the concert. They all joined together in making the overture to
the Queen, and enforced it with all Maitland's eloquence *. But
Mary, however desirous of obtaining that deliverance from Darn-
ly's caprices, with which they endeavoured to allure her, had ne-
verthelefs goud reasons for rejecing the method, by which they
proposed to accomplish it. The birth of her son had greatly
strengthened her claim upon the English fuccefilon, and encourag-
ed the abettors of it to appear with greater boldness, and to ac
with more vigour. She could scarce hope to be divorced from her
husband, without throwing some imputation on her son. This
might open a new dispute with regard to the succession, and put
it in the power of Elizabeth and her Ministers to call in question
the Prince's legitimacy, or at least to subjed it to all the delays and
cavils of a judicial inquiry. The fear of there inconveniences
weighed with Mary, and determined her rather to endure her
hard fate, than to seek relief, by venturing on such a dangerous ex-
periment.

* Anders vol. iv. Part ii. i88.

U u 2 THE

BOOK IV. TtIE Earl of Bedford, and the Count de Brienne, the English
'-"Sr 6 and French. Ambassadors, being arrived, Mary set out for Stirling,

to celebrate the baptifti of her son. Bedford was attended by a
numerous and splendid train, and brought presents from Elizabethl
suitable to her own dignity, and the refpet with which she affected;
at that time, to treat the Queen of Scots. Great preparations had
been made by Mary, and the magnificence displayed by her on this
occasion, exceeded whatever had been formerly known in Scotland.
Decem. 17. The ceremony itself was. performed according to the rites of the-

Romifl Church.. But neither Bedford, nor any of the Scottish nobles
who professed the Protestant religion, entered within the gates of the
chapel *. The spirit of that age, firm and uncomplying, would not,
upon any inducement, condescend to witness an acdion, which it
esteemed idolatrous.

The King's HENRY'S behaviour, at this juncture, perfectly discovers the
capriciousbe-excefs of his caprice, as well as of his folly. He chose to
haviour at
the baptism reside at Stirling, but confined himself to his own apartment,

And as the Queen dilRrufled every nobleman who ventured to
converse with him, he was left in absolute solitude. Nothing
could be more singular, or was less expected, than his chufing to
appear in a manner, that both published the contempt under which
he had fallen, and, by exposing the Queen's domefic unhappi-
ness to the observation of so many foreigners, looked like a ftep taken
on purpose to mortify and to offend her. Mary felt this insult fen-
sibly; and notwithstanding all her efforts to assume the gaiety which
suitcd the occasion, and which was necefary for the polite reception
of her guests, lhe was sometimes obliged to retire, in order to be at li-
berty to indulge her sorrow, and give vent to her tears t. The King

* Keith, 360. t Ibid. Pref. vii.

flill

f'll perfilted in his design of retiring into foreign parts, and daily BOOK IV.
threatened to put it in execution I.

1566.
THE ceremony of witnessing the Prince's baptism was not the sole Elizabeth en-

deavours to

business of Bedford's embassy. His inflructions contained an over- accommodate
ture, which ought to have gone far towards extinguishing those jea- with Maye s
loufies which had so long fubfiled between the two Queens. The
treaty of Edinburgh, which has been so often mentioned, was the
principal occasion of there. The spirit, however, which had risen
to such an height in the late Parliament, the power of the party
which abetted the Scottish Queen's title, the number and activity
of her agents in, different parts of the kingdom, alarmed Eliza-

* Camden affirms, 401. that Bedford was commanded by Elizabeth not to give

Darnly the title of King. As this was an indignity, not to be born, either by Mary
or her husband, it hath been asserted to be the cause of the King's absence from the
ceremony of his son's baptism. Keith, 360. Good. 319. But, i. No such thing is
to be found among Bedford's inflrutions, the original of which till remains. Keith,
356. 2. Bedford's advice to the Queen by Melvil is utterly inconsistent with Cam-
den's assertion. Melv. I53. Melvil's account is confirmed by Elizabeth's inftruc-
tions to Sir Henry Norris, where she affirms that she commanded Bedford to employ
his best offices towards reconciling Mary to her husband, which he had attempted
to no purpose. Digges's Compl. Ambaff p. 13. A paper published Append. NO XVIII.
proves the fame thing. 3. Le Croc the French Resident mentions the King's ab-
fcnce, but without giving that reason for it, which has been founded on Camden's
words, though, if that had been the real one, he would scarce have failed to men-
tion it. His account of this matter is that which we have followed; Keith. Pref. vii.
4. He informs his court, that on account of the difference betwixt the King and
the Queen, he had refused to hold any further correspondence with the former,
though he appears, in many inflances, to have been his great confident. ibid. 5. As
the King was not present at the baptifim, he seems to have been excluded firom any
fliare in the ordinary adminifiration of business. Two ats of Privy Council, one on
the 2oth, and the other on the 2flr of December, are.found in Kcith, 562. They
both run in the Queen's name alone. The King seems not to have been prefcnt.
Tlhis could not be owing to Elizabeth's inllruaions to Bcdford.

beth,

BOOK.IV. beth, and induced her to forego any advantage, which the amb..

- 66J ' guous and artful expressions in thattreaty might afford her. All fht

now demanded of Mary, was to renounce any title to the Crown
of England during her life, and the lives of her posterity; and on
the other hand, (he engaged to take no ftep, which might prove in-
jurious to Mary's claim upon the fucceflion *.

MARY could not, with decency, reject a proposition so equi-

table; she insisted, however, that Elizabeth lhould order the right
upon which she claimed to be legally examined, and publickly re-
cognized, and particularly that the testament of Henry VIII. where-
by he had excluded the descendants of his eldest filter the Queen
of Scotland, from the place due to them in the order of succession,
might be produced, and confidered by the English nobility. Ma-
ry's Ministers had credulously embraced an opinion, that this testa-
ment which they so justly conceived to be injurious to their Mif-
trefs, was a mere forgery; and on different occasions had urged Eli-
zabeth to produce it. Mary would have suffered considerably by
gaining this point. The original testament is still extant, and not
the leafR doubt can be entertained of its genuineness and authenticity.
But it was not Elizabeth's intention to weaken or to set aside the
title of the house of Stewart. She aimed at nothing more, than to
keep the question concerning the fucceflion perplexed and undecided,
and by indufirioufly eluding this request, she did real service to
Mary's cause f.

A FEW days after the baptism of the Prince, Morton and all

the other conspirators against Rizio obtained their pardon, and leave
to return into Scotland. Mary, who had hitherto continued inex-
orable to every entreaty in their behalf, yielded at lass to the soli-

Keith, 356. 1 Ibid. 36r, 358. Note (c.) Murdin, 368.

citations

citations of Bothwell *.. He could hope for no success in those BooI IV.
bold designs on which his ambition resolved to venture, without I

I566.

drawing aid from every quarter. By procuring a favour for Morton
and his associates, of which they had good reason to despair, he
expected to secure a band of faithful and determined adherents.

THE King frill remained at Stirling, in solitude, and under con,

tempt. His impatience in this situation, together with the alarm.
given him, by the rumour.of a design to seize his person, and con-
fine him to prison t, was the occasion of his leaving that place'
in an. abrupt manner, and retiring to his father at Glasgow..

Two Assemblies of the Church were held during this year. New June 2S.

Decem. 2%.

complaints were made, and upon good grounds, of the poverty Church as-
and contempt under which the Protestant clergy were suffered to firs.
languish. Penurious as the allotment for their subsistence was,.
they had not received the leait part of what was due for the pre-
ceding year +. Nothing less than a zeal, ready to endure and to,
susser every thing for a good cause, could have persuaded men to;
adhere to a church, so indigent and so neglected. The extraordi-
nary expences, occasioned by the Prince's baptism, had exhausted
the Queen's treasury, and the fums appropriated for the subsistence
of the clergy were diverted into other channels. The Queen was-
therefore obliged to prevent the just renonflrances of the aflembly,.
by falling on rome new method for the relief of the church. Some
symptoms of liberality, some stretch towards munificence might
have been expected in an assignment which was made with an in-
tention of soothing and silencing the clergy. But both the Queen
and the nobles held fast the riches of the church which they had
seized. A fum, which, at the highest computation, can scarce be

* Good. vol. i, 140. Melv. 154. t Keith,. Pref. viii. A Ibid. 562.

reckoned-

BooK.IV. beth, and induced her to forego any advantage, which the amblW

-T66. guous and artful expressions in thattreaty might afford her. All she

now demanded of Mary, was to renounce any title to the Crown
of England during her life, and the lives of her posterity; and on
the other hand, the engaged to take no ftep, which might prove in-
jurious to Mary's claim upon the succession *

MARY could not, with decency, reject a proposition so equi-

table; fheinfifed, however, that Elizabeth should order the right
upon which (he claimed to be legally examined, and publickly re-
cognized, and particularly that the testament of Henry VIII. where-
by he had excluded the descendants of his eldest sifter the Queen
of Scotland, from the place due to them in the order of fuccefion,
might be produced, and confidered by the English nobility. Ma-
ry's Ministers had credulously embraced an opinion, that this testa-
ment which they so justly conceived to be injurious to their Mif-
trefs, was a mere forgery; and on different occasions had urged Eli-
zabeth to produce it. Mary would have suffered considerably by
gaining this point. The original tetlament is flill extant, and not
the least doubt can be entertained of its genuineness and authenticity.
But it was not Elizabeth's intention to weaken or to set aside the
title of the house of Stewart. She aimed at nothing more, than to
keep the question concerning the fucceflion perplexed and undecided,
and by industriously eluding this request, she did real service to
Mary's cause f-.

A FEW days after the baptism of the Prince, Morton and all

the other conspirators againfl Rizio obtained their pardon, and leave
to return into Scotland. Mary, who had hitherto continued inex-
orable to every entreaty in their behalf, yielded at last to the soli-

* Keith, 356. 1 Ibid. 36r, 358. Note (c.) Murdin, 368.

citations

citations of Bothwell *. He could hope for no success in those BooK IV.
bold designs on which his ambition resolved to venture, without 66

I566.

drawing aid from every quarter. By procuring a favour for Morton
and his associates, of which they had good reason to despair, he
expected. to secure a band of faithful and determined adherents.

THE King frill remained at Stirling, in solitude, and under con-

tempt. His impatience in this situation, together with the alarmr
given him, by the rumour of a, design to seize his person, and con-
fine him to prison t, was the occasion of hit leaving that place
in an. abrupt manner, and retiring to his father at Glasgow..

Two Assemblies of the Church were held duringthis year. New June 2z.

Decem. 2z.

complaints were made, and upon good grounds, of the poverty Church as-
and contempt under which the Proteflant clergy were suffered tofairs
languish. Penurious as the allotment for their fubfitence was,.
they had not received the least part of what was due for the pre-
ceding year +. Nothing less than a zeal, ready to endure and to;
susser every thing for a good catife, could have persuaded men to
adhere to a church, so indigent and so neglected. The extraordi-
nary expences, occasioned by the Prince's baptism, had exhausted
the Queen's treasury, and the fumrs appropriated for the fubfiRence
of the clergy were diverted into other channels.. The Queen was-
therefore obliged to prevent the just renionftrances of the assembly,.
by falling on some new method. for the relief of the church. Some
symptoms of liberality, some stretch towards munificence might
have been expected in an aflignment which was made with an in-
tention of soothing and silencing the clergy. But both the Queen
and the nobles held fast the riches of the church which they had
seized. A urm, which, at the highest computation, can scarce be

* Good, vol. i, 140. Melv. 154.. * Keith,. Pref. viii. : Ibid. 562.

reckoned.

BOOK IV. reckoned equal to 9000ooo. erling , was deemed sufficient for the

'-'·ó maintenapce of a whole national church, by men who had lately

56 ' seen single monasteries possessed of revenues far superior in value.

THE eccefiaftics in that age bore the grievances which affetde

themselves alone, with astonishing patience; but wherever the Re-
formed religion was threatened, they were extremely apt to 'be
alarmed, and to proclaim, in the loudest manner, their appreheifions
of danger. A just occasion of this kind was given them, a short
time before the meeting of the Assembly. The tifurped and op-
preffive jurifdicion of the spiritual courts had been abolithed by the
Parliament i 560, and Commiffaries were.appointed to hear and de-
termine the causes which formerly came under their cognizance t.
Among the few aas of that Parliament, to which Mary had paid
any regard, this was one. She had confirmed the authority of the
Commiffaries, and had given them infiruaions for direting their
proceedings , which are fill of great authority in that court. From
that time these judges had continued in the uninterrupted exercife.of
their funcion, when of a sudden the Queen issued a proclamation,
reltoring the Archbishop of St. Andrew's to his ancient jurifdiaion,
and depriving the Commiffaries of all authority II.

A MOTIVE, which cannot be justified, rendered the Queen not un-

willing to venture upon this rash ation. She had been contriving, for
some time, how to re-eflablilh the Popibh religion; and the restoring
the ancient ecclefiatics to their former jurifdidion, seemed to be a
considerable ifep towards that end. The motive which prompted
Bothwell, to whose influence over the Queen this acion must be
.chiefly imputed **, was still more criminal. His enterprising ambition
had already formed that bold design, which soon after he put in exe-

* Keith, 562. f Id. I 2. . Id. 251. 1 Knox, 403. ** Id. ibid.

8 cution,

cution, and the. use which we hall hereafter find him, making of that BooK IV.
authority, which the Popish ecclesiastics regained, discovers the rea ..

1566.

sons of his present conduct, in contributing to revive their power.
The Protestant clergy were not unconcerned fpedators of an event,
which threatened their religion with unavoidable detruaion; but
as they despaired of obtaining the proper remedy from the ueen
herself, they addressed a remonfirance to the whole body of the Pro-
teftant nobility, full of that ardent zeal for religion, which the dan-
ger to which it was exposed at that time, seemed to require *. What
effels. this vehement exhortation might have produced, we have
no opportunity of judging, the attention of the nation being quickly
turned towards events of another, and more tragical nature.

IMMEDIATELY upon the King's leaving Stirling, and before he The King

falls tick at

could reach Glafgcw, he was seized with- a dangerous distemper; Glasgow.
The symptoms which attended it were violent and unusual, and in 1567.
that age it was commonly imputed to-the eff&ts of poison -. It
is imp.ofble, amidst the contradi&ions of historians, to decide with
certainty concerning its nature, or its cause +. His life was in the

utmost

* Keith, 567. - Melv. 154. Knox, 401.

5 Buchanan and Knox are positive that the King had been poiloned. They

mention the black and putrid pustules which broke out all over his body. Bu-
chanan adds, that Abernethy his physician plainly declared that poison was the
cause of there symptoms, and that the Queen refused to allow her own physician to at-
tend him. Buch. 349. Knox, 401. 2. Blaek-wood Caufin. &c. Jcbb. vol. ii. 24. 59.
aflert, that the finall pox Was the disease with which the King was seized. He is
called a pockifh man in the Queen's letter, Good. vol. ii. 15. The reason given
by French Paris for lodging the King at the Kirk of Field, viz. left the young prince
should catch the infection if he flaid in the palace, seems to favour this opinion. An-
der. vol. ii. 193. Carte mentions i.tas a proof of Mary's tenderness to her husband,
though fie had never had the small pox herself, she ventured to attend him, vol. iii.
4..16. This, if it had been true, would have afforded a good pretence for not visiting

VOL. I. X x him

BooK IV.utnoft danger; but after languishing for some weeks, the vigour
.- -67. of his constitution surmounted the malignity of the disease.

I167.

Negle&ed by MARY'S neglet of the King, on this occasion, was equal to
MRary. that with which he had treated her during her illness at Jedburgh.

She no longer felt that warmth of conjugal affeAion which prompts
to sympathy, and delights in all those tender offices which sooth
and alleviate sickness and pain. At this juncture, she did not even'
put on the appearance of this paflion. Notwithstanding the King's.
danger, she amused herself with excursions to different parts of the
country, and suffered near a month to elapse before she visited him
at Glasgow. By that time, the violence of the distemper was over,
and the King, though weak and languishing, was out of all danger.

TTHE breach between Mary and her husband was not occasioned

Thebreachk
between them by any of those flight disgusts, which interrupt the domestic union,
ii:eparable without altogether dissolving it. Almost all the passions, which ope-

rate with greatest violence on a female mind, and drive it to the
most dangerous extremes, concurred in raising and fomenting this-
unhappy quarrel. Ingratitude for the favours she had beflowed,
contempt of her person, violations of the marriage vow, encroach-
ments on her power, conspiracies against her favourites, jealousy,
insolence, and obstinacy, were the injuries of which Mary had great
reason to complain. She felt them with the utmost sensibility; and
added to the anguish of disappointed love, they produced those fymp-
toms of despair which we have already described. Her resentment
against the King seems not to have abated from the time of his leav-
ing Stirling. In a letter written with her own hand, to her ambaffa-

him rooner; but Mary had the small pox in her infancy. Sadler's Letters, 3. Bilhnp
Lefly affirms, that the King's disease was the French Pox. Keitl, 364. Note (i).
In that age, this disease was esteemed so contagious, that persons infeded with it
were removed without the walls of cities,

dor

..or in' France, jufi before the set out for Glasgow, no tokens of BOOK IV.
fadden reconcilement ,appear. On the contrary, she mertions, with L-. -J

i567.

·some bitternes, the king's ingratitude, the jealousy with which he January 20.
observed her actions, and the inclination he discovered to disturb
her government, and at the fame time talks of all his attempts
with the utmost scorn *.

AFTER this difcovery.of Mary's sentiments, it was scarce to be Visits the

expected that she would visit the King, or that any thing but goingat
marks of jealousy and diltruft .should appear in such an interview.
This, however, was far from being the cafe; fie not only .visited
Henry, but, by all her words and acions, endeavoured to express
an uncommon affection for him: And though this made impression
on the credulous spirit of her huiband, no less flexible, on some
occasions, than obflinate on others; yet, to those .who are ac-
quainted with the human heart, and who know how seldom and
how slowly such wounds in domestic happiness are healed, this
sudden transition will appear with a very suspicious air, and will
be confidered by them as the effet of artifice.

BUT it is not on suspicion alone, that Mary is charged with Hrdiflmn-

dissimulation in this part of her conduct. Two of her famous let- lation.
ters to Bothwell were written during her flay at Glasgow, and
fully lay open this scene of iniquity. He had so far succeeded
in his ambitious and criminal design, as to gain an absolute afcen-
dant over the 'Queen. And, in a situation, such as Mary's, merit not
so conspicuous, services of.far inferior importance, and address much
less insinuating than Bothwell's, may be supposed to steal imper-
ceptibly on a female heart, and entirely to overcome it. Among
tthofe in the higher ranks of life, scruples with regard to conjugal

* Keith, Pref. viii.

X x z fidelity

BooK IV. fidelity are, unhappily,'neither many, nor strong, 'Nordid the;manz

h -ners of that court, in which Mary had been ;educated, contribute 'to
J567' increase or to fortify them. The amorousturn of Francis I. and Htn-

ry II. the wildness of the military character in that age, and the
liberty of appearing in all companies, which tbegan to be allowed
to women, who had not yet acquired that deicacy of fesntimeet,
and those polished manners, which alone can render this liberty
innocent, had introduced, among the French, a lioentioufneis of
morals that rose to an astoni.shing height. Such exarmples, wnich
were familiar to Mary from her infancy, could hardly fail of dimni-
nifhing that horror of vice which is natural to a virtuous .mind.
The KIng's behaviour would render the first approach of forbid-
den sentiments less ihocking; resentment, and disappointed love,
would be apt to represent whatever soothed her revenge, as ju-fti-
fiable on that account.; and so many concurring causes might, al-
most imperceptibly, kindle a new paflion in her heatt.

The motives BUT whatever opinion we may form with regard to the rife and
of it. progress of this passion, the letters themselves breathe all the ar-

dour and tenderness of love. The affection which Mary there ex-
presses for Bothwell, fully accounts for every subsequent part of her
conduct; which, without admitting this circumstance, appears al-
together mysterious, inconsistent, and inexplicable. That recon-
cilement with her husband, of which, if we allow it to'be genuine,
it is impossible to give any plausible account, is discovered, by the
Queen's own confession, to have been mere artifice and deceit.
As her aversion for her husband, and the suspicious attention with
which ihe observed his conduct, became universally known, her
ears were officiously filled, as is usual in such cafes, with groundless
or aggravated accounts of his actions. By some, she was told, that
the King intended to fcize the person of the Prince his son, and

5 in

in his name to usurp the government; by others she was assured, BOOK IV.
that he resolved instantly to leave tha kingdom; that a vessel was /rV
hired for this purpose, and lay in the river Clyde ready to receive 1567'
him *. The lafi was what Mary chiefly dreaded. Henry's retiring
into a foreign country must have been highly dishonourable to the
Qeen,, and would have entirely disconcerted Bothwell's measures.
While he resided in Glasgow, at a distance from her, and in that
part of the kingdom where the interest of his family was greatest,
he might, with more facility, accomplish his designs. In order, there-
fore, to'prevent his executing any such wild scheme, it was necessary
to bring him to some place, where he would be more immediately
under her own eye. For this purpose, she firt employed all her revals on
art to regain his confidence, and then proposed to remove him to him to come
the neighbourhood of Edinburgh, under pretence, that there he Edinburgh
would have easier access to the advice of physicians, and that she
herself could attend him without being absent from her son -. The
King was weak enough to susser himself to be persuaded; and
being still feeble and incapable of bearing fatigue, was carried in a
litter to Edinburgh.

THE place prepared for his reception was a house, belonging to

the Provoif of a collegiate church, called Kirk of Field. It flood
almost upon the fame spot where the house belonging to the Prin-
cipal of the University now stands. Such a situation, on a riling
ground, and at that time in an open field, had all the advantages
of healthful air to recommend it; but, on the other hand, the so-
litude of the place rendered it extremely proper for the comnif-
sion of that crime, with a view to which, it seems manifestly to
have been chosen.

MARY continued to attend the King with the most assiduous Hes imur-
car,. She seldom was absent from him through the day; flie fleptdered there,

* Keith, Pref. viii, I- Good. vol. ii. 8,

fvcr al

BooK'IV. several nights in the chamber under his apartment. She heaped

1'567. on him so many marks of tenderness and confidence, as, in a great

7 measure, quieted those suspicions which had so long disturbed him.

But while he was fondly indulging in dreams of the return of his
former happiness, he ftcod on the very brink of deftrution. On
Sunday the ninth of February, about eleven at night, the Queen
left the Kirk of Field, in order to be present at a marque in the
palace. At two next morning, the house in which the King lay
was blown up with gun-powder. The noise and {hock, which
fhis sudden explosion occasioned, alarmed the whole city. The in-
habitants ran to the place whence it came. The dead body of the
King, with that of a servant who slept in the fame room, were
found lying in an adjacent garden, without the city wall, untouched
by fire, and with no bruise or mark of violence.
Hlis charaEter. SUCH was the unhappy fate of Henry Stewart Lord Darnly,

in the twenty first year of his age. The indulgence of fortune, and
his own external accomplishments, without any other merit, had
raised him to an height of dignity, of which he was altogether
unworthy. By his folly and ingratitude, he loft the heart of a
woman who doated on him to diftradion. His insolence and in-
constancy alienated from him those nobles who had contributed mofl
zealoufy towards his elevation. His levity and caprice exposed
him to the scorn of the people, who once revered him as the de-
fcendant of their ancient Kings and heroes. Had he died a natural
-death, his end would have been unlamented, and his memory
have been soon forgotten; but the cruel circurnmances of his mur-
der, and the rcmiffnefs with which it was afterwards avenged,
have made his name to be remembered with regret, and have
rendered him the object of pity to which lie had otherwise no
title.

EVERY

EVERY one's imagination was at work to guess who had con- BOOK IV.
trived and executed this execrable deed. The fiufpicion fell, with L"

1567.

almost a general content, on Bothwell*; and some reflecions Bothdell and
were thrown out, as if the Queen herself were no stranger to the the Qeen fs-
crime. Of Bothwell's guilt there remains the fullest evidence, murder.
that the nature of the acion will admit. The Queen's known
sentiments with regard to her husband, gave a great appearance of
probability to the imputation with which she was loaded -.

T w o days after the murder, a proclamation was issued by the:

Queen, offering a considerable reward to any person who should
discover those who had been guilty of such a horrid and detestable.
crime +. And though Bothwell was now one of the greatest sub-
jecs in the kingdom, formidable on account of his own power,
and protected by the Queen's favour, it was impossible to suppress
the sentiments and indignation of the people. Papers were affixed
to the molt public places of the city, accusing him of the murder,
and naming his accomplices; piAures appeared to the fame pur--
pose, and voices were heard, in the middle of the night, charging,
him with that barbarous aftion. But the authors of these rumours
did not confine their accusations to Bothwell alone, they insinuated
that the Queen herself was accefory to the crime 11. This bold ac-
cufation, which so diretly attacked Mary's reputation, drew the at-
tention of ler council'; and by engaging them in an inquiry after the
authors of there libels, diverted them from searching after the mur-
derers of the King **. It could scarce be expected that Mary herself
would be extremely solicitous to discover those who had rid her of an
husband, whom she had so violently hated. It was Bothwell:s in-

* Melv. i55. Anders. vol. i. I56.

t1- See Differtatian concerning the murder of Henry Darnly, and the genuineness.
of Mary's letters to Bothwell. Appendix.

:; Anders. vol. i. 36, E Id. vol. ii. 156. ** Id. vol. i. 38.

terefl,

BooK IV. terest, who had the supreme direction of this, as well as of all other

6 affairs, to tfifle and suppress whatever-evidence should be offered,
1567.

and to cover, if possible, the whole tranfacion under the veil of
darkness and of silence. Some inquiry, however, was made, and
some persons called before the council; but the examination was
conducted with the most indecent remissness, and in such a man-
ner, as to let in no light upon that scene of guilt *.

IT was not her own fubjeCs alone who fufpeded Mary of being

accessory to this unnatural crime; nor did an opinion, so dilhonour-
able to her character, owe its rife and progress to the jealousy and
malice of her fadious nobles. The report of the manner and
circumstances of the King's murder spread quickly over all Europe,
and, even in that age, which was accustomed to deeds of violence,
it excited universal horror. As her unhappy breach with her
husband had long been matter of public discourse, the first con-
jetures which were formed with regard to his death, were ex-
tremely to her disadvantage. Her friends, at a loss what apology
to offer for her condut, called on her to prosecute the murderers
with the utmost diligence, and expected that the rigour of her
proceedings would prove the best and fullest vindication of her
innocence -.

Lennox ac- LENNOX, at the fame time, incited Mary to vengeance with in-
cufesBothwell ceffant importunity. This nobleman had shared in his son's dif-
of the King's
murder, grace, and being treated by Mary with neglec, usually resided at

a distance from court. Rouzed, however, by an event no less flock-
ing to the heart of a father, than fatal to all his schemes of ambi-
February z2. tion, he ventured to write to the Queen, and to offer his advice

Anders. vol. iv. 167, i68. - Keith, Pref. ix.

with

with refpea to the nmoit eflEtual method for discovering and con-BooK1V.
vicing those who had so cruelly deprived him of a son, and her of---. '

tI67.

a liuiband. He urged her to prosecute those who were guilty, with
vigour, and to bring them to a speedy trial; he declared his own
suspicion of Bothwell, and of those who were named as his accom-
plices; he required that, out of regard to decency, and in order to
encourage evidence to appear against them, the persons accused of
such an atrocious crime should be committed to custody, or at least
excluded from her court and presence *.

MARY was then at Seaton, whither she had retired after the bu.-

rial of the King, whose body was deposited among the Monarchs
of Scotland, in a private, but decent manner t. The former part
of the Earl's demand, could not, on any pretence, be eluded; and
it was resolved to bring Bothwell immediately to trial. But, instead
of confining him to any prison, Mary admitted him into all her Mayc°-:i"
councils, and allowed a person, universally reputed the murderer vourhia.
of her husband, to enjoy all the security, the dignity, and the power
of a favourite +. The offices which Bothwell already possessed,
gave him the command of all the south of Scotland. The catlle
of Edinburgh, however, was a place of too much consequence, not
to with it in his own power. The Queen, in order to prevail on
the Earl of Mar to surrender it, consented to put the person of
the young Prince in his hands, and immediately bestowed the
government of that important fortress upon Bothwell II. So manyM"arCh Ii
steps in her conduct, inconsistent with all the rules of prudence,
and of decency, must be imputed to an excess either of folly, or
of love. Mary's known character fully vindicates her from the for-
mer; of the latter, many and striking proofs toon appeared.

Keith, 369. - Andcrf. vo. i. 23. 1: Id. ibid. 40, &c.

II Id. ibid, Pref. 64. Keith, 379.
VOL. . Y y No

BooK IV. No dire& evidence had yet appeared against Bothwell; but as

s-r- ' -time might bring to light the circbmftances of a crime, in which
M5rch7. so many accomplices were concerned, it was of great importance
Haflens on to haften on the trial, while nothing more than general suspicions,.

and uncertain surmises, could be produced by his accusers. For
this reason, in a meeting of Privy Council held on the 28th of.
March, the 12th of April was appointed for the day of trial. And
tho' the law allowed, and the manner in which criminal causes were-
carried on in that age required a much longer interval, it appears,
from several circumstances, that this short space was considerably con,.
traaed, and that Lennox had only eleven days warning to prepare
for accusing a person, so far superior to himself, both in power and..
in favour *. No man could be less in a condition to contend with
an antagonist who was thus supported. Tho' Lennox's paternal
eflate had been restored to him, when he was recalled into Scotland,
it seems to have been considerably impaired during. his banishment.
His vaftals, while he resided in England, had: been accustomed to

* The aa of Privy Council, appointing the day of Bothwell's trial, bears date.

March the 28th, which happened on a Thursday, Anders. vol. i. 50. The Queen's
warrant to the mejfengers, impowering them to summon Lennox to be prefent,':is' .
dated on the 29tli. Anders. vol. ii. 97. He was fummoned'by public proclamation
at the cross of Edinburgh on the fame day. Ibid. Ioo'. ITe was fbnmnnoned at h'is'
dwelling-houfes in Glaigow and Dtlnbatton the 3oth of March,- the-i fiantd J2ddArys
of April. Ibid. loi. He was summoned at Perth, April ilt; Ibid. 02o. Though;
Lennox resided at that time 40 miles from Edinburgh, the citation might have been
given him sooner. Such an unneceflary delay affords some cause for suspicion.
'Tis true, Mary, in her letter, March 24;h, invited Lennox to come to Edinburgih,
the ensuing week; this gave him warning-forme days soon'er, that fie intended to'
bring on the trial without delay. But the- precise tirve could not be legally, orcer-
tainly known to Lennox sooner than 11 or 12 days, before the day on which he
was required to appear. By the law and practice of Scotland, at thlt time, parties
were summoncd in cafes of treason 40 days previous to the trial.

some

:Tome degree of independance, and he had not recovered that ab-BooK IV.
solute atcendant over them, which a feudal chief usually possessed. '---
He had no reason to expec the concurrence of any of those factions 57
into which the nobles were divided. During the short period of his
son's prosperity, he had taken such fleps as gave rife to an open
breach with Murray and all his adherents. The partizans of the
house of Hamilton were his hereditary and mortal enemies. Huntly
was linked in the closest confederacy with Bothwell; and thus, to
the disgrace of the nation, Lennox flood alone in a cause, where
both honour, and humanity called so loudly on his countrymen to
feconad him.

IT is remarkable too, that Bothwell himself was present, and fat

as a member in that meeting of Privy Council, which gave direc-
tions with regard to the time and manner of his trial. And he fill
enjoyed not only full liberty, but was received into the Queen's pre-
fence with the fame distinguished familiarity as formerly .

NOTHING could be a more cruel disappointment to the wiffiesLennox

R-p craves a de,.

and resentment of a father, than such a premature trial; every fteplyv a
towards which seemed to be taken by direcions from the person
who was himself accused of the crime, and calculated on purpose
to conceal rather than to detect his guilt. Lennox foresaw what
would be the issue of this mock inquiry, and with how little safety
to himself, or success to his cause, he could venture to appear on
the day prefixed. In his former letters, though under expressions
the most refpetful, some symptoms of his dirtrufling the Queen
may be discovered. He spoke out now, in plain language. He
complained of the injury done him, by hurrying on the trial with
such illegal precipitation. He represented once more, the indecen-

* Andorf. vol. i. 50, 52.

Yy 2 cy

BooK IV.cy of allowing Bothwell, not only to enjoy personal liberty, but to
-A----' retain his former influence over her councils. He again required her,

567' as she regarded her own honour, to give some evidence of her

sincerity in prosecuting the murder, by confining the person who
was suspected, on good grounds, to be the author of it; and, till
that were done, he signified his own resolution not to be present at.
a trial, the manner and circumfrances of which were so irregular,.
and unfatisfacory '.

HE seems, however, to have expected little success from this'

A pplies for
this 'purpof application to Mary; and therefore; at the fame time, besought
tEAizabctii. Elizabeth to interpose, in order to obtain such a delay as he de-

manded J. Nothing can be a stronger proof, how violently he
fufpeded the one Queen, than his submitting to implore the aid of
the other, who had treated his son. with the utmost contempt, and'
himself and faimily with the greatest rigour. Elizabeth, who was
never unwilling to interpose in the affairs of Scotland, wrote instantly
to Mary, advised her to delay the trial for some time, and urged, in
such Pirong terms, the fame. arguments which Lennox had used, as
might have convinced her to what an unfavourable construction her,.
condud would be liable, if flie perfiled in her present method. of
proceeding a.
Th- trial pro- NEITHER rier intreaties, however, nor tiole of Lennox, could'

prevail to have the trial put off. On the day appointed, Bothwell
appeared, but with fuch.a formidable retinue, that it would have
been dangerous to condemn, and impofible to puni(h him. Be-
fides a numerous body of his friends and vafials afTembled, accord.
ing to custom, from different parts of the kingdom, he was attended.

* Anders. vol. i. 52. *- Good. vol. ii. 35i. Anders. Pref. 6.0.
Sec Appendix, No XIX.

by

by, a band of hired soldiers, who. marched with flying colours. along BOOK IV.
the pre'ets-.of Edinburgh*. A court of justice was held, with the '
accuiomed. formalities. An 'inditment was presented against 57
Bothwell, and Lennox was called upon to make good his-accu-
fatio.'. In his name appeared Robert Cunningham, one of his de-
pennnts i

He excused- his Master's absence, on account of the

lfiortnefs of the time, which prevented his assembling his friends and
vaffais, without whose afiftance he could not, with safety, venture
to set himself in. opposition to such a powerful antagonist. For this
reason, he desired the court to flop proceeding, and protefled, that
any Sentence which should be passed, at that time, ought to be
deemed illegal and void. Bothwell, on the other hand, insisted, that
the court should inflantly proceed to trial. One of Lennox's own
letters, in which he craved of the Queen to prosecute the murderers
without delay, was produced. Cunningham's objections were over-
ruled; iand the jury, confiiing of Peers and Barons of the firit
rank, found Bothvwell not guilty of the crime.

No perfin' appeared' as-an accuser, not a single witness was ex- Bothwell i

amine'd, 'or any evidence produced against him. The jury, undera'"itcd;
these circumstances, couild 'd nothing-elfe but acquit him. Their
verdi, however, was far from gratifying the withes, or silencing
the murmurs of the people. Every circumifance in the trial gave
grounds for suspicion, and'excited indignation; and the judgment
pronounced, instead of being a proof of Bothwell's. innocence, was
efleemed an argument of his guift. Pasquinades and libels were
affixed to different places, expressing the sentiments of the public,,
with the utmosi virulence of language.

Anders. vol. i. 135.

THN.
?»

BOOKIV. THE jury themselves ftem to have been aware of the censure' te

which their proceedings would be exposed; and, at the fame time
that they returned their verdit acquitting Bothwell, the tarl of
Caithness protefed, in their name, that no crime should be imputed
to them on that account, because no accuser had appeared, and no
proof was brought of the indiatment. He took notice, likewise,
that the ninth instead of the tenth of February was mentioned in
the indicment, as the day onwhich the murder had been commit-
ted. A circumstance, which discovers the extreme inaccuracy of
those who prepared the indictment; and at a tirne when men were
difppfed, and not without reason, to be suspicious of every thing,
-this finall matter contributed to confirm and to increase their sus-
picions *.

EVEN Bothwell himself did not rely an the judgment which, ie

had obtained in his favour, as a full vindication of his innocence. Im-
mediately after his acquittal, he, in compliance with a cultom which
was not then obsolete, published a writing, in which he offered to
fight, in single combat, ary Gentleman of good fame, who thoul.d
prefurie to accuse him of being acefory to t he muder of the King.

MARY, however, continued to treat him, as if he had been

cleared by the most unexceptionable and fatisfadory evidence. The
ascendant he had gained over her heart, as well as over her coun-
cils, was more visible than ever; and Lennox, who could not ex-
pea that his own person would be safe in a country where the mur-
derer of his son had been absolved,, without regard to jua(ice ^ and
loaded with honours, in contempt of decency ; fled with precipita-
tion towards England +A.

* Bothw. Trial. Anders. vol. i 9, 7, &c. I Kcith, 378. Notc (d);

8 Two

Two days after the trial, a Parliament was held, at the opening BooK IV.
of which the Queen distinguished Bothwell, by appointing him to -

[$ 67-

carry the sceptre before her -*. Mos of the Ads passed in this At- A Parliament
fembly, were calculated on purpose to strengthen his party, and toheld.
promote his designs. He obtained the ratification of all the posses-
sions and honours which the partiality of the Queen had conferred
upon him; and the ad to that effed contained the strongest decla-
rations of his faithful services to the crown, in all times pati. The
surrender of the castle of Edinburgh by Mar was-confirmed. The
law of attainder againit Huntly was repealed, and he, and his ad-
herents, were restored to the estates and honours of their ancestors.
Several of those who had been on the jury which acquitted him,
obtained the ratifications of the grants made in their favour. And
as pasquinades daily multiplied, a law passed, whereby those, into
whose hands any paper of that kind fell, were commanded instantly
to destroy it; and if, through their neglet, it should be allowed to
spread, they were fubjededi to a capital punlfhment, in the fame
manner as if they had-been the original authors f.

BUT the absolute dominion,. which Bothwell had acquired over Remarkable
Mary's mind, appeared in the clearest manner, by an ad in favour law ihn avour

of the Refor-

of the Protestant religion, to which, at this time, The gave her af-mation.
sent. Mary's attachment to th'e Rotiiih faith was uniform and fu-
perftitious-; fihe' ad: nver lalid asid- the defigri, nor loft the hopes
ofreflbtihg'it. Sni Haid, of late; come undei new engagements to
that purpose, and' in consequence of these, had ventured upon
some steps- more public and vigorous than any flhe had formerly
taken. But Bothwell wa&s pronipted;, by powerful motives, to pro-
mote thsisll. e 'lThd Beh guilty of crine's; ,1iih rendered hihi
the objed' of:juii anhd' iiverfal detiefatioi. lie was meditating

** Kcith, 378. Notc (d.) t IbiJ. 280;

others,

BooK IV. others, which he easily foresaw would heighten the public indigna-
~--ó tion-againft him. By this popular law, he might hope to 'divert, or

I$67'

to delay the resentment of the nation, and flattered himself, that the
obtaining this unexpeded and legal security for the Prcteflant reli-
gion, would atone for much guilt, silence the clamours of the clergy,
and induce the people to connive at, or to tolerate his crimes. The
ad itself was so favourable to the dodrine of the Reformers, that
the Parliament, which met next year, under very different leaders,
could fuhftitute nothing flronger or more explicit in its place; and
-thought it sufficient to ratify it word for word*. To pass such an
.ad, was utterly inconsistent with all the maxims which Mary fol-
lowed in every other period of her life; but what could never be
extorted from her by the solicitations of the Afiemblies of the
church, or by the intreaties of her people, the more powerful in-
fluence of Bothwell now obtained '.

Bothwcll pre- EVLRY tfep taken by Bothwell had hitherto been attended with
vais onthe all the success which his most sanguine wishes could exped. He
nobles to re-
commend him had entirely gained the Queen's heart; the murder of the King had
vis an iufband
o the 'Qun. excited no public commotion; he had been acquitted by his peers

of any flare in that crime; and their decision had been, in some

* Parl. I. Jac. VI. c. 31.

-t Buchanan, Hist. 355, not only omits taking any notice of this law, but afTerts,

that the Queen, though she had given promises in favour of the reformed religion,
refutcd to permit any a& to pass in support of it, and even difiniffed the deputies of
the church with contempt. Spotfwood, 202. and Calderwood, vol. iii. 41. both as-
firm the fame thing. It would not have been neceffiry to observe this inflance of
Buchnana's inaccuracy; but that an author so conversant in our laws as Spotfwood,
and one fb induflrious as Calderwood, ihould commit such an error, when not only
the original Itatute was extant in the records of Mary's Parliament, but even when
the printed ait of Murray's Parliament was before their eyes, is remarkable. Even
Buchanan himself has taken notice of this ad. Dcteaio, p. 8.

fort

fort, ratified in Parliament. But in a kingdom, where the regal au-BooK IV.
thority was so extremely limited, and the power of the nobles so - .

i 567.

formidable, he durst not venture on the last action, towards which
all his ambitious projects tended, without their approbation. In or- April 19.
der to secure this, he, immediately after the dissolution of Parlia-
ment, invited all the nobles who were present to an entertainment.
Having filled the house with his friends and dependants, and fur-
rounded it with armed men *, he opened to the company his inten-
tion of marrying the Queen, whose content, he told them, he had
already obtained; and demanded their approbation of this match,
which, he said, was no less acceptable to their Sovereign, than ho-
nourable to himself-. Huntley and Seaton, who were privy to all
Bothwell's schemes, and promoted them with the utmost zeal; the
Popish ecclesiastics, who were absolutely devoted to the Queen, and
ready to ;sooth all her passions, instantly declared their fatisfadion
with what he had proposed. The reft, who dreaded the exorbitant
power which Bothwell had acquired, and observed the Queen's
growing affecion towards him in all her actions, were willing to
make a merit of yielding to a measure, which they could neither op-
pose, nor defeat. Some few were confounded and inraged. But, in
the end, Bothwell, partly by promises and flattery, partly by terror
and force, prevailed on all who were present to subscribe a paper,
which leaves a deeper stain than any occurrence in that age, on the
honour and characer of the nation.

TirIs paper contained the ftrongeit declarations of Bothwell's in-

nocence, and the most ample acknowledgment of his good services to
the kingdom. If any future accusation flould be brought against
him, on account of the King's murder, the subscribers promised to

* Good. vol. ii. 141. -1- Anders. vol . . 94.
VOL I. Z z stand

BooK IV. fIand by him as one man, and to hazard their lives and fortunes inl

-'-,--' his defence.. They recommended him to the Queen, as the moif
567'. proper perpefon he could chufe for a: husband; and if tle thould con-

descend to beltow on him that mark of her regard, they undertook.
to promote the marriage, and to join him with all. their forces, in
opposing any person who endeavoured- to obftrua ite.. Among the
subscribers of this paper, we find some who were the Queen's chief
confidents, others who' were fbrangers to- her counsels, and ob..
noxious to her displeasure; some who. faithfully adhered to, her,.
through all theviciffitudes of her fortune, and others who became
the principal authors of her sufferings; some- passionately attached
to the Romish superstition, and others zealous advocates- for the
Proteflant faith -,; No, commonintereft can be supposed to have
united- men of fuchl opposite principles and, parties, in recommend.
ing to their-Sovereigna ftep so injurious towher honour, and so fatal
to her peace. This ftiange coalition was the effea of much ar-
tifice, and must be confidered as the boldest and most masterly
itroke of Bothwell's address. It is observable, that amid-st all the
altercations and- mutual reproaches of the two parties which arose
in the kingdom, this unworthy tranfaaion is seldom. mentioned.
Conscious on both fides, that in this particulars their condudt could
ill bear examination, and would redound little to their fame, they
always touch upon it unwillingly, and seem. desirous that it fliould
remain in darkness, or be buried in oblivion. But as so many per-
sons, who, both at that time, and ever after, possessed the Queen's
favour, subscribed this paper, the suspicion becomes strong, that
Bothwell's ambitious hopes were neither unknown to Mary, nor
disapproved by her :.

TH-ESE

* Anders. vol. i. 177.; Keith, 382.

$ Of all the difFerent systems with regard to this tranaAifon, that of Camden
seems to be the leaf accurate, and the worst founded. He supposes that Bothwell

was

THESE suspicions are confirmed by the most direc proof. Melvil, BOOK IV.

at that time, enjoyed a considerable share in her favour. He, as well l
as his brother, kept a secret correspondence in England, with those
who favoured her pretensions to that Crown. The rumour of her
intended marriage with Bothwell having early spread in that kingdom,
excited the utmost indignation ; and he received a letter from thence
which represented, in the strongest terms, what would be the fatal es-
se6ts offuch an imprudent ftep. Melvil put this letter into the Queen's
hands, and inforced it with the utmost warmth. She not only difre-
garded there remonstrances, but communicated the matter to Both-

was hated by Murray, Morton, &c. who had been his associates in the murder of
the King, and that they now wanted to ruin him. He affirms, at the fame time,
that the subscriptions to this paper were obtained by them, out of fear that Both-
well might fink in his hopes, and betray the whole bloody secret. 404. But besides
the absurdity of supposing, that any man's enemies would contribute towards raising
him to such high dignity, on the uncertain hopes of afterwards depriving him of
it; besides the impossibility of accomplishing such a marriage, if it had been either
unknown to the Queen, or disagreeable to her; we may observe that this supposition
is defroyed by the direEt testimony of the Queen herself, who ascribes the consent
of the nobles to Bothwell's artifices, who purchased it by giving them to underfiand
that we were content therewith. Anders. vol. i. 94. It would have been no small ad-
vantage to Mary, if she could have represented the content of the nobles to have
been their own voluntary deed. It is fill more surprising to find Lefly ascribing
this paper to Murray and his faction. Anders. vol. i. 26. The Bishop himself was
one of the persons who subscribed it. Keith, 383. The King's commiflioners, at
the conference held at York, I568, pretended that noneof the nobles, except the
Earl of Huntley, would subscribe this paper till a warrant from the Queen was pro-
duced, by which they were allowed to do so; this warrant they had in their custody,
and exhibited. Anders. vol. iv. Part ii. 59. This differs from Buchanan's account,
who supposes that all the nobles present subscribed the paper on the i9th, and that,
next day, they obtained the approbation of what they had done, by way of fecu-.
rity to themselves, 355.

Z z well.

BooK IV. well. Melvil, in order to save his life, was obliged to fly from
' 6'" ""court, whither he durst not return, till the Earl's rage began to

abate *. At the fame time, Elizabeth warned Mary of the danger
and infamy to which lihe would expose herself, by such an indecent
choice; but an advice from her met with still less regard t.

othvell car- THREE days after the riing of Parliament, Mary went from
riesthe''ueenEdinburgh to Stirling, in order to visit the Prince her son. Both-
by force to
Dunbar. well had novw brought his schemes to full maturity, and every pre-

caution being taken, which could render it safe to venture on the last
and decisive ftep, the natural impetuosity of his spirit did not susser
him to deliberate any longer. Under pretence of an expedition
against the free-booters on the borders, he assembled his followers ;
and marching out of Edinburgh with a thousand horse, turned
April 24. suddenly towards Linlithgow, met the Queen on her return near

that place, dispersed her slender train without resistance, seized on
her person, and conduCted her, together with a few of her cour-

* Melv. 156. According to Melvil, Lord Herreis likewise remonfirated against

the marriage, and conjured the Queen, on his knees, to lay aside all thoughts of
such a dishonourable alliance. i56. But it has been observed, that Herreis is one of
the nobles who fibfcribed the bond, April 19. Keith, 383. 2. That he is one. of
the witnesses to the marriage articles between the Queen and Bothwell, May 14.
Good. vol. ii, 6r. 3. That he fat in council with Bothweli, May 17. Keith, 386.
But this remonstrance of Lord Herreis aga:nft the marriage happened before these,
made by Melvil himself, 157. Melvil's remonstrance must have happened some
time before the meeting of Parliament; for after offending Bothwell, he retired
from court; he allowed his rage time to fublfie, and had again joined the Queen,
when the was seized, April 24. 158. The time which muff have clapsed, by this
account of the matter, was perhaps fufficiint to have gained Herreis, from being an
oppofcr, to become a promoter of the ma.rriage. Perhaps Melvil may have com-
mitted frme rmilake with regard to this fact, so far as relates to Lord Herreis. Ic
could not well be miltaken with regard to what himself did.

t Andcrf. vol, i, o16.

tiers,

tiers, as a prisoner to his ca:lic of Dunbar. She expressed neitherBooK IV.
furprize, nor terror, nor indignation, at such an outrage comrmitted --
on her person, and such an insult offered to her authority, but seemed. 567
to yield without struggle or regret *. Melvil was, at that time, one
of her attendants; and the officer by whom he was seized in-
formed him, that nothing was done without the Queen's own con-
sent i. If we may rely on the letters published in Mary's name,
the scheme had been communicated to her, and every ftep towards
it was taken with her participation and advice +.

BOTH the Queen and Bothwell thought it of advantage to em-

ploy this appearance of violence. It afforded her a decent excuse
for her conduct; and while she could plead that it was owing to
force, rather than choice, she hoped that her reputation, among so-
reigners at least, would escape without censure, or be exposed to
less reproach. Bothwell could not help distrusting all the methods
which had hitherto been used, for vindicating him from any con-
cern in the murder of the King. Something was still wanting for
his security, and for quieting his guilty fears. This was a pardon
under the Great Seal. By the laws of Scotland, the molt heinous
crime muff be mentioned by name in a pardon, and then all lesser
offences are deemed to be included under the general clause, and
a.' other crimes whatsoever I1. To seize the person of the Prince, is
high treason; and Bothwell hoped, that a pardon obtained for this,
would extend to every thing of which he had been accused **.

BOTHWELL, having now got the Queen's pcrfon into his hands rs dlivocc]

fro() Iii owvn

it would have been unbecoming eithcr a politician, or a man ofile.
gallantry, to have delayed consummating his fchemcs. For this

* Keith, 383. -- Mclv. 158. :1: Good. vol. ii. 37.
II Parl. 6. Jac.IV. c. 62. '* Andlerf. vol. iv. Part ii. 6I.

pur pofc,

Book IV. purpose, he instantly commenced a suit, in order to obtain sentence

ó^ of divorce from his wife Lady Jean Gordon, the Earl of Huntly's
567·
April 29. sifter. This process was carried on, at the fame time, both before

Protestant and Popish judges; before the former, in the court of
Commiflaries; and before the latter, in the spiritual court of the
Archbiihop of St. Andrew's, whose jurifdicion the Queen had lately
restored. The pretexts which he pleaded were trivial, or fcanda-
lous. 'But his authority had greater weight than the justice of his
cause; and in both courts, sentence of divorce was pronounced,
with the fame indecent and suspicious precipitancy *.

WHILE this infamous tranfadion was carrying on, the Queen

resided at Dunbar; detained as a prisoner, but treated with the ut-
most refpedt. Soon after Bothwell, with a numerous train of his
dependants, conduted her to Edinburgh; but instead of lodging
her in the palace of Holy-rood-houfe, he conveyed her to the
cattle, of which he was governor. The discontent of the nation
rendered this precaution necessary. In an house unfortified, and of
easy access, the Queen might have been rescued without difficulty
out of his hands. In a place of strength, ihe was secured from
all the attempts of his enemies.

ONE small difficulty still remained to be surmounted. As the

Queen was kept in a fort of captivity by Bothwell, a marriage
concluded in that condition might be imputed to force, and be held
May i2. invalid. In order to obviate this, Mary appeared in the court of

session, and in pretence of the Chancellor, the other judges, and
several of the nobility, declared that (he was now at full liberty;
and though Bothwell's violence in seizing her person had, at first,
excited her indignation, yet his refpetful behaviour since that time

* And. i, 132.

had

iad not only appeased her resentment, but determined her to raifeBooK IV.
him to higher honours '. 7

I.567'

WHAT these were soon became public. The. title of Duke s married to'

of Orkney was conferred upon Bothwell; and on the I5th ofthe Queen.
May his marriage with the Queen, which had so long been the
objeEt of his wishes, and'the motive of his crimes, wasfolemnized-
The ceremony was performed, in public, according to the rites of
the Protestant Church, by Adam Bothwell bishop of Orkney, one
of the few prelates who had embraced the Reformation, and
on the fame day, was celebrated in private, according to the
forms prescribed by the Popish religion f. The boldness with
which Craig, the Minister who was commanded to publish the
banns, testified against the design; the small number of the nobles,
who were present at the marriage; and the fullen and difrefpedful
silence of the people, when the Queen appeared in public; were
manifest symptoms of the violent and general dissatisfaction of her
own fubjeEts The refusal of Du Croc the French ambassador to be
present at the nuptial ceremony, or entertainment, discovers the fen-
timents of her allies, with regard to this part of her conduct. And
although every other action in Mary's life could be juffified by the
rules of'prudence, or reconciled to the principles of virtue, this fatal
marriagewould remain an inconteRible proof of her rashness, if not'
of her guilt.

MARY'S first care was to offer some apology for her conduct, to

the courts of France and England. The initrudions to her am-
baffadors still remain, and are drawn by a mafferly hand. But
under all the artificial and false colouring she employs, it is easy to
discover not only that many of the tfeps (he had taken were un-

*And. I. 87. t And. I. J36. 2 2276. , li

joltifiable,

BjOK IV. justifiable, but that flie herself was conscious that they could not

-7v-.. be juflfied*.

THE title of King was the only thing, which was not beflowed

upon Bothwell. Notwithstanding her attachment to him, Mary
remembered the inconveniencies, which had arisen from the rash
advancement of her former husband to that honour. She agreed,
however, that he should sign, in token of consent, all the public
writs issued in her name -. This was nothing more than mere
form, but, together with it, he possessed all the reality of power.
The Queen's person was in his hands ; fle was surrounded more
closely than ever by his creatures; none of her fubjeds could ob-
tain audience without his permission; and, unless in his own pre-
fence, none but his confidents were permitted to converse with
her 1. The Scottish Monarchs were accuaomed to live among their
fubjets as fathers, or as equals, without distrust, and with little
state; armed guards standing at the doors of the royal apartment,
difficulty of access, distance and retirement, were things unknown,
and unpopular.

Endeavours to THESE precautions were necessary for securing to Bothwell the
become maf- power, which he had acquired. But, without being master of
ter of the
Prince's per- the person of the young Prince, he efleemed all that he had gained

to be precarious and uncertain. The Queen had committed her
son to the care of the Earl of Mar. The fidelity and loyalty of
that nobleman were too well known to exped that he would be
willing to put the prince into the hands of the man, who was so
violently fufpceed of having murdered his father. Bothwell, how-
ever, laboured to get the Prince into his power, with an anxiety,'

* And. I. 89. -*--Good. 2. 6. :1: And. i. 136.

I which

*which gave rife to the blackest suspicions. All his address as well BOOK IV.
,as authority were employed to persuade, or to force Mar, into a --' ~
compliance with his demands*. And it is no flight proof both 7
-of the firmness and dexterity of that nobleman, that he preserved
a life of so much importance to the nation, from lying at the mercy
of a man, whom fear or ambition might have prompted to vio-
lent attempts againfl it.

THE eyes of neighbouring nations were fixed, at that time, Generalin
upon the great events, which had happened in Scotland, duringdignation

which the

three months. A King murdered, with the utmost cruelty, in Qecn', con_
the prime of his days, and in his capital city; the person fufpeteddu"C excited
of that odious crime suffered not only to appear publickly in every
place, but admitted into the presence of the Queen, distinguished
by her favour, and entrusted with the chief direction of her affairs;
fubjedted to a trial, which was carried on with most shameless par-
tiality, and acquitted by a sentence, which served only to confirm
the suspicions of his guilt; divorced from his wife, on pretences
frivolous, or indecent; and after all this, instead of meeting with
the ignominy due to his actions, or the punihnment merited by his
crimes, permitted openly, and without opposition, to marry a
Queen, the wife of the Prince whom he had affaflinated, and
the guardian of those laws which he had been guilty of violating.
Such a quick fucceflion of incidents, so singular, and so detestable,
is not to be found in any other history. They left, in the opinion
of foreigners, a mark of infamy on the charater of the nation.
The Scots were held in abhorrence all over Europe; they durst scarce
appear any-where in public; and after suffering so many atrocious
deeds to pals with impunity, they were universally reproached as

*Melv. 16o. Buch. 36r.
VOL. I. A a a men

BJ)OK IV. justifiable, but that file herself was conscious that they could not

'"67" be juflified
I$67.

THE title of King was the only thing, which was not beflowed

upon Bothweil. Notwithstanding her attachment'to him, Mary
remembered the inconveniencies, which had arisen from the rafl
advancement of her former husband to that honour. She agreed,
however, that he should sign, in token of consent, all the public
writs issued in her name --. This was nothing more than mere
form, but, together with it, he pofieffed all the reality of power.
The Queen's person was in his hands; flie was surrounded more
closely than ever by his creatures; none of her fubjecs could ob-
tain audience without his permission; and, unless in his own pre-
fence, none but his confidents were permitted to converse with
her $. The Scottish Monarchs were accustomed to live among their
fubjeds as fathers, or as equals, without distrust, and with little
Ifate; armed guards standing at the doors of the royal apartment,
difficulty of access, diflance and retirement, were things unknown,
and unpopular.

Endeavours to THESE precautions were necefTary for securing to Bothwell the
terCof tmr power, which he had acquired. But, without being maiter of
Prince's per- the person of the young Prince, he esteemed all that he had gained

to be precarious and uncertain. The Queen had committed her
son to the care of the Earl of Mar. The fidelity and loyalty of
that nobleman were too well known to exped that he would be
willing to put the prince into the hands of the man, who was so
violently fufpcced of having murdered his father. Bothwell, how-
ever, laboured to get the Prince into his power, with an anxiety,,

* And. I. 89. -[-Good. 2. 6o. :1: And. , 136.

I which

-;which gave rife to the blackest suspicions. All his address as well BooK IV.
,as authority were employed to persuade, or to force Mar, into a 5

I567.

compliance with his demands *. And it is no flight proof both
-of the firmness and dexterity of that nobleman, that he preserved
a life of so much importance to the nation, from lying at the mercy
of a man, whom fear or ambition might have prompted to vio-
lent attempts against it.

THE eyes of neighbouring nations were fixed, at that time,Generalin-
upon the great events, which had happened in Scotland, during dgnation

which the

three months. A King murdered, with the utmost cruelty, in Quen': con-
the prime of his days, and in his capital city; the person fufpeded duct excited.
of that odious crime suffered not only to appear publickly in every
place, but admitted into the pretence of the Queen, distinguished
by her favour, and entrusted with the chief direction of her affairs;
fubjedted to a trial, which was carried on with mofi Ihamelefs par-
tiality, and acquitted by a sentence, which served only to confirm
the suspicions of his guilt; divorced from his wife, on pretences
frivolous, or indecent; and after all this, inflead of meeting with
the ignominy due to his actions, or the punishment merited by his
crimes, permitted openly, and without opposition, to marry a
Queen, the wife of the Prince whom he had affafiinated, and
the guardian of those laws which he had been guilty of violating.
Such a quick succession of incidents, so singular, and so deteltable,
is not to be found in any other history. They left, in the opinion
of foreigners, a mark of infamy on the charader of the nation.
The Scots were held in abhorrence all over Europe; they durfl scarce
appear any-where in public; and after suffering so many atrocious
deeds to pass with impunity, they were universally reproached as

Melv. 6o. Buch. 36i.
VOL. I. A a a men

B:3K IV. men void of courage, or of humanity, as equally regardless of' the

l-5ó reputation of their Queen, and the honour of their country *.
,567.

THESE reproaches rouzed the nobles, who had been hitherto

The nobles amused by Bothwell's artifices, or intimidated by his power. The'
combine a- -
ainft her and manner in which he exercised the authority which he had acquired,
thwell his repeated attempts to become mafier of the Prince's person, to-

gether with some rash threatnings againrf him, which he let fall -,
added to the violence and promptness of their resolutions. A con-
fiderable body of them assembled at Stirling, and entered into an as-
fociation for the defence of the Prince's person. Argyll, Athol,
Mar, Morton, Glencairn, Home, Lindsay, Boyd, Murray of Tul-
libardin, Kirkaldy of Grange, and Maitland the Secretary, were the
heads of this confederacy +. Stewart Earl of Athol was remarkable
for an uniform and bigotted attachment to popery, but his indigna-
tion on account of the murder of the King, to whom he was nearly
allied, and his zeal for the safety of the Prince, overcame, on this
occasion, all considerations of religion, and united him with the
most zealous Protestants. Several of the other nobles aded, with-
out question, from a laudable concern for the safety of the Prince,
and the honour of their country. But the spirit which some of
them discovered, during the subsequent revolutions, leaves little
room to doubt, that ambition or resentment were the real motives
of their conduct; and that, on many occasions, while they were
pursuing ends just and necessary, they were acuated by principles
and paflions altogether unjutlifiable.

TIrE first accounts of this league filled the Queen and Bothwell
with great conflernation. They were no firangers to the sentiments

'Andcle. vol.i. 128, 134. Mclv. i63. See Appcndix, No XX.

-I Ibid. 16 . Keith, 394,

of
2

of the nation, with refpec to their conduEt; and though their mar- BOOK IV.
riage had not met with public opposition, they knew that it had '7
not been carried on without the secret disgust and murmurings of
all ranks of men. They foresaw the violence with which this in-
dignation would burst out, after being so long suppressed. And in
order to prepare for the florm, Mary issued a proclamation, requir- May 28.
ing her fubjeas to take arms, and to attend her husband by a day
appointed. At the fame time, she published a fort of manifeflo, in
which file laboured to vindicate her government from those impu-
tations with which it had been loaded, and employed the Rfrongeft
terms to express her concern for the safety and welfare of the Prince
her son. Neither of these produced any considerable effect. Her
proclamation was ill obeyed, and her manifesto met with little
credit *.

THE confederate Lords carried on their preparations with no lefsThe Queen

activity, and with much more success. Among a warlike people, aenr BthoDu
men of so much power and popularity found it an easy matter tobar.
raise an army. They were ready to march before the Qteen and
Bothwell were in a condition to resist them. The castle of Edin-
burgh was the place whither the Queen ought naturally to have re-
tired, and there her person might have been perfectly safe. But the
confederates had fallen on means to shake, or corrupt the fidelity
of Sir James Balfour the deputy governor, and Bothwell durfl not
commit to him such an important trust. He conducted the Queen
to the caflle of Borthwick, and on the appearance of Lord Home, June 6.
with a body of his followers, before that place, he fled with pre-
cipitation to Dunbar, and was followed by the Queen, disguised in
men's cloaths. The confederates advanced towards Edinburgh,

* Keith, 387, 395, 39ó.

A aa 2 where

BOOK IV. where Huntly endeavoured, in vain, to animate the inhabitants et
J" ó-v defend the town againit them. They entered without opposition,

and were inflantly joined by many of the citizens, whose zeal be.
came the firmest support of their cause .

IN order to set their own conduct in the most favourable light,

and to rouze the public indignation against Bothwell, the nobles.
publihed a declaration of the motives which had induced them to.
take arms. All Bothwell's past crimes were enumerated, all his.
wicked intentions displayed and aggravated, and every true Scots-
man was called upon to join them in avenging the one, and in prep-
venting the other -.

MEAN while, Bothwell assembled his forces at Dunbar, and as

he had'many dependants in that corner, he soon gathered such.
strength, that he ventured to advance towards the confederates.
Their troops were not numerous; the suddenness and secrecy of their
enterprize gave their friends at a distance no time to join them;
and as it does not appear that they were supported either with mo-
ney, or fed with hopes by the Queen of England, they could not
have kept long in a body. But on the other hand, Bothwell durfl:
not rifque a delay }. His army followed him with reluctance in
this quarrel, and served him with no cordial affetion; so that his
only hopes of success was in furprizing the enemy, or in firiking
the blow before his own troops had leisure to recolled themselves,
or to imbibe the fame unfavourable opinion of his alions, which had
spread over the refl of the nation. These motives determined the
Queen to march forward, with an inconsiderate and fatal speed.

* Kcith, 398. 1 Andcrf. vol. i. 128. : Kcith, 401.
8 ON

ON the sirss intelligence, of her approach, the confederates ad-BooK IV.
vanced to meet her. They found her forces drawn up on the fame 1-5-.

I567.

ground which.the English had occupied at the battle of Pinkie.The nobles
The numbers on both fides were nearly equal; but there washrc aga
no equality in.point of discipline. The Queen's army confiftedJune Is.
chiefly of a multitude, hastily assembled, without courage, or expe-
rience in war. The troops of the confederates were composed of
Gentlemen of rank and reputation, followed by their most trusty
dependants, who were no less brave than zealous *.

Du Croc the French Ambassador, who'was in the field, la-An accom-

modation at-

boured, by. negociating both with the Queen and the nobles, totermpted.
put an end to the quarrel without the effusion of blood. He repre-
sented to the confederates the Queen's inclinations towards peace,
and her willingness to pardon the offences which they had commit-
ted. Morton replied, with warmth, that they had taken arms not
against the Queen, but against the murderer, of her husband, and
if he were given up to jnftice, or banished from her presence, the
should find them ready to yield the obedience which is due from
fubjeas to their Sovereign. Glencairn added, that they did not
come to ask pardon for any offence, but to punish those who had
offended. These haughty answers convinced the Ambassador, that
his mediation would be ineffectual, and that their passions were too
high to allow them to liflen to any pacific propositions, or to think
of retreating after having proceeded so far -.

THE Queen's army was polled to advantage, on a rising ground.

The confederates advanced to the attack resolutely, but slowly, and
with the caution which was natural on that unhappy field. Her

* Cald. vol. ii.48, 49. f Keith, 401.

troops

BooK IV.troops were alarmed at their approach, and discovered no inclina-

tion to fight. Mary endeavoured to animate them; the wept,
567' she threatened, she reproached them with cowardice; but all in

vain. A few of Bothwell's immediate attendants were eager for the
encounter; the refi flood wavering and irresolute, and some began
to fical out of the field. Bothwell attempted to inspirit them, by
offering to decide the quarrel, and to vindicate his own innocence
in tingle combat with any of his adversaries. Kirkaldy of Grange,
Murray of Tullibardin, and Lord Lindsay contended for the honour
of entering the lifts against him. But this challenge proved to be a
mere bravade. Either the confcioufiefs of guilt deprived Bothwell
of his wonted courage, or the Queen, by her authority, forbade
the combat *.

AFTER the symptoms of fear discovered by her followers, Mary

would have been inexcusable, had She hazarded a battle. To have
retreated in the face of an enemy, who had already surrounded the
hill on which she flood, with part of their cavalry, was utterly
impracicable. In this situation, the was under the cruel necefity
of putting herself into the hands of those fubjeAs who had taken
arms against her. She demanded an interview with Kirkaldy, a
brave and generous man, who commanded an advanced body of the
enemy. He, with the content and in name of the leaders of the
party, promised that, on condition she would difinifs Bothwell
from her pretence, and govern the kingdom by the advice of her
nobles, they would honour and obey her as their Sovereign t.

nBthwcll ob- DURING this parley, Bothwell took his last farewell of the Queen,
liged to fy. and rode off the field with a few followers. This dismal reverse

happened exactly one month after that marriage, which had colt him

* Cald. vol. ii, 50. '- Good. vol. ii. 164, Melv, 165.

so

so many crimes to accomplish, and which leaves so foul a stain on BooK IV.
Mary's memory. ó.

1567.
As soon as Bothwell retired, Mary surrendered to Kirkaldy, who

Mary furren.

condudted her toward the. confederate army, the leaders of whichders to the
received her with much refpet; and Morton, in their name, maden°ble"
ample profeflions of their future loyalty and obedience . But the
was treated by the common soldiers with the utmost insolence and
indignity. As she marched along, they poured upon her all the op-
probrious names, which are bestowed only on the lowelf and most
infamous criminals. Wherever she turned her eyes, they held up
before her a standard, on which was painted the dead body of the
late King, stretched on the ground, and the young Prince kneeling
before it, and uttering there words, " Judge and revenge my cause,
O Lord! " Mary turned with horror from such a (hocking fight.
She began already to feel the wretched condition to which a captive
Prince is reduced. She uttered the most bitter complaints, she
melted into tears, and could scarce be kept from linking to the
ground. The confederates carried her towards Edinburgh, and, in
spite of many delays, and after looking with the fondness and credu-
lity natural to the unfortunate for some unexpected relief, she arriv-
ed there. The fireets were covered with multitudes, whom zeal,
or curiosity had drawn together, to behold such an unusual scene.
The Queen, worn out with fatigue, covered with dust, and be-
dewed with tears, was exposed as a fpedacle to her own subje(s,
and led to the Provof's house. Notwithstanding all her argu-
ments and intreaties, the fame standard was carried before her, and
the fame insults and reproaches repeated. A woman, young, beau-
tiful, and in distress, is naturally the objet of compaflion. The

* Good. vol. ii. 165.

CoQ1-

BooK IV. comparison of their present misery with their former splendour,

67' ufually.foftens us in favour of illustrious sufferers. But the people

beheld the deplorable situation of their Sovereign with insensibility.;
and so strong was their persuasion of her guilt, and so great the vio-
lence of their indignation, that the sufferings of their Queen did not,
in any degree, mitigate their resentment, or procure her that sym-
.pathy, which is seldom denied to unfortunate Princes *.

' Melvil. i66. Buch. 364.

THE

# THE HISTORY OF SCOTLAND. BOOK V.

THE
HISTORY

OF
SCOTLAND.

BOOK V.
T HE confederate Lords had proceeded to such extremities, BOOK V.

against their Sovereign, that it now became almoff impof-

i 567.

fible for them either to flop short, or to pursue a course Deliberations

less violent. Many of the nobles had refused to concur with them f thee nbles
in their enterprize; others openly condemned it. A small circum-the Queen.
fiance might abate that indignation with which the multitude were,
at present, animated againfl the Queen, and deprive them of that
popular applause which was the chief foundation of their power.
These considerations inclined some of them to treat the Queen
with great lenity.

BUT, on the other hand, Mary's affection for Bothwell continued

as violent as ever; she obflinately refused to hearken to any pro-
pofal for dissolving their marriage, and determined not to abandon
a man, for whose love Ihe had already sacrificed so much -. If they
should allow her to recover the supreme power, the firfi exertion of
it would be to recall Bothwell; and they had reason, both from his

* Keith, 419, 446, 449. Mclv. 167. See Append. N° XXI.
VOL. . B b b resent-

BooK V. resentment from her conduct, and from their own, to exped the
'-'-' severest effets of her vengeance. These considerations surmount-

ed every other motive; and reckoning themselves absolved, by
Mary's incurable attachment to Bothwell, from the engagements
which they had come under when she yielded herself a prisoner,
they, without regarding the duty which they owed her as their
Queen, and without consulting the refit of the nobles, carried her

They impri- next evening, under a firong guard, to the caifte of Lochlevin, and
fLochevi. signed a warrant to William Douglas the owner of it, to detain her

as a prisoner. Douglas, to whom, it belonged, was a near relation of
Morton's, and had married the Earl of Murray's mother. In this
place, under ftrit custody, with a few attendants, and fubjeded to-
the. insults of a haughty woman, who boasted: daily of being the
lawful wife of JamesV. Mary suffered' all the rigour and mir.ies
of captivity *.

IMMEDIATELY after the Queen's imprisonment, the confederates

were at the utmost pains to strengthen their party; they entered into
new bonds of association ; they assumed the title of Lords of the
Secret Council, and without any other right,- arrogated to them.
selves the whole regal authority. One of their first. ads of power
was to search the city of Edinburgh for those who were concerned
in the murder of the King. This shew of zeal gained reputation to
themselves, and threw an oblique refledion on' the Queen for her
remissness. Several fufpeded persons were seized. Captain Black-
adder and three others were condemned and executed. But no dif-
covery of importance was made. If we believe some historians,
they were conviced by. sufficient evidence. If we give credit to
others, their sentence was unjust, and they denied, with their last
breath, any knowledge of the crime, for which they suffered -.

* Keith, 403. Note (b). *t Cald. vol. ii, 53. Crawf. Mem. 35.

2 AN

AN unexpected accident, however, put into the hands of Mary's BOOK V.

enemies what they deemed the fullest evidence of her guilt. Both- óV
well having left, in the castle of Edinburgh, a casket, containing fe- 5
veral sonnets and letters written with the Queen's own hand; he
now sent one of his confidents to bring to him this precious depofite.
But as his messenger returned, he was intercepted, and the casket
seized by Morton %. The contents of it were always produced by
the party, as the most ample justification of their own conduct, and
the most unanswerable proof of their not having loaded their So-
vereign with the imputation of imaginary crimes -.

BUT the confederates, notwithifanding their extraordinary fuc-Some of the

cess, were frill far from being perfectly at ease. That so small a part nhe Queen.r
of the nobles should pretend to dispose of the person of their Sove-
reign, or to assume the authority which belonged to her, without the
concurrence of the reft, appeared to many of that body to be unpre-
cedented, and prefimptuous. Several of there were now aflembled
at Hamilton, in order to deliberate what course they (hould hold,
in this difficult conjuncture. The confederates made some attempts
towards a coalition with them, but without effect. They employed
the mediation of the Assembly of the Church, to draw them to a
p.ersonal interview at Edinburgh, but with no better success. That
party, however, though its numbers were formidable, and the
power of its leaders great, soon loft reputation by the want of una-
·nimity and vigour; all its consultations evaporated in murmurs
and complaints, and no scheme was concerted for obstructing the
progress of the confederates +.

THERE appeared some prospect of danger from another quarter. Elizabeth in-

This great revolution in Scotland had been carried on without any terpofesinher
aid from Elizabeth, and even without her knowledge [. And

* Anders. vol. ii. 92. Good. vol. ii. 9o.
t See Diflertation at the end of the Appendix. t Keith, 407. 11 Id. 415.

B b b 2 though

BooK V. though Ihe was far from being displeased to fee the affairs of that

` `ór^ kingdom embroiled, or a rival, whom the hated, reduced to dif-

trefs; she neither wished that it should be in the power of the one
faction entirely to suppress the other, nor could she view the fleps
taken by the confederates without great offence. Notwithstanding
the popular maxims by which she governed her own fubjedSs, her
notions of royal prerogative were very exalted. The confederates
had, in her opinion, encroached on the authority of their Sove-
reign, which they had no right to controul, and had offered vio-
lence to her person, which it was their duty to erieem sacred. They
had set a dangerous example to other fubjeds, and Mary's cause be-
came the common cause of Princes*. If ever Elizabeth was in-
fluenced with regard to the affairs of Scotland, by the feelings of
her heart, rather than by considerations of interest, it was on this oc-
Jtin 30. cation. She instantly dispatched Throgmorton into Scotland, with

powers to negociate both with the Queen, and with the confede-
rates. In his inftrutions there appears a remarkable solicitude for
Mary's liberty, and even for her reputation -. And the choice of
an Ambassador, so devoted to the interest of the Scottish. Queen,
proves this solicitude to have been sincere. But neither Elizabeth's
friendship, nor Throgmorton's zeal,, were of much avail to Mary.
The confederates foresaw what would be the effects of these good
offices; and that the Queen, elated by the profpedt of protection,
would reject with scorn the overtures which they were about to
make her. They, for that reason, peremptorily denied Throgmorton
access to their prisoner. And what propositions he made to them.in.
her behalf, they either refused, or eluded +.

Schemes of MEAN while they deliberated with the utmoit anxiety, con-
thc confede- cerning the settlement of the nation, and the future disposal of the

Queen's person. Elizabeth, observing that Throgmorton made no,

* Keith, 412, 415. ' Id. 411. :t Id. 417, 427.

progress

progress in his negociations with them, and that they would lissen Bool V.
to none of his demands in Mary's favour, turned towards that party -
of the nobles who were assembled at Hamilton, incited them to take
arms in order to reflore their Queen to liberty, and promised to as-
ift them in such an attempt, to the utmost of her power *. But
they discovered no greater union or vigour than formerly, and be-
having like men who had given up all concern either for their
Queen or their country, tamely allowed an inconsiderable part of
their body, whether we confider it with refped to numbers, or to
power, to fettle the government of the kingdom, and to dispose of
the Queen's person at pleasure. Many consultations were held, and
various opinions arose with regard to each of there. Some seemed
desirous of adhering to the plan on which the confederacy was at
first formed; and after punishing the murderers of the King, and
dissolving the marriage with Bothwell; after providing for the safety
of the young Prince, and the security of the Proteitant religion; they
proposed to re-establish the Queen in the poffeflion of her legal au-
thority. The success with which their arms had been accompanied,
inspired others with bolder and more desperate thoughts, and no-
thing less would satisfy them than the trial, the condemnation and
punishment of the Queen herself, as the principal conspirator against
the life of her husband and the safety of her son t: the former was
Maitland's system, and breathed too much of a pacific and moderate
spirit, to be agreeable to the temper or wifles of the party. The
latter was recommended by the clergy, and warmly adopted by
many laics; but the nobles durfl not, or would not venture on
such an unprecedented and audacious deed 4+.

* See Appendix, N" XXII. t Keith, 420, 421, 422, 582..

. The intention of putting the Queen to death seems to have been carried on

by some of her fubjecCts: at this time we often find Elizabeth boasing that Mary
owed hlcr life to her interposition. Digges's Compl. Amb. 14, &c. Sec Appcndix,
No XV1iI.

BOTH

BOOK V. BOTH parties agreed at last upon a scheme, neither to moderate as
' 76-
t the one, nor so daring as the other. Mary was to be persuaded or

1567.

The' oblige forced to resign the Crown; the young Prince was to be proclaimed
the Queen to King a
resign the gKig,o the the Earl of Murray was to be appointed to govern the
vcrnment. kingdom during his minority, with the name and authority of Re-

gent. With regard to the Queen's own person, nothing was de-
termined. It seems to have been the intention of the confederates,
to keep her in perpetual imprisonment; but in order to intimidate
herself, and to overawe her partizans, they fill reserved to themselves
the power of proceeding to more violent extremes.

IT was obvious to foresee difficulties in the execution of this

plan. Mary was young, ambitious, high-fpirited, and accufftomed
to command. To induce her to acknowledge her own incapacity
for governing, to renounce the dignity and power which ihe was
born to enjoy, to become dependant on her own fubjeas, to con-
sent to her own bondage, and to invest those persons, whom she
confidered as the authors of all her calamities, with that honour and
authority of which The herself was firipped, were points hard to be
gained. These, however, the confederates attempted, and they did
not want means to insure success. Mary had endured, for several
weeks, all the hardships and terror of a prison; no profpecq of liberty
appeared; none of her fubjets had either taken arms, or so much
as solicited her relief ; no person in whom fle could confide was
admitted into her pretence; even the Ambassadors of the French
King and Queen of England were refused access to her. In this
solitary slate, without a counlellor or a friend, under the pressure
of distress, and the apprehension of danger, it was natural for a
woman to hearken almofft to any overtures. The confederates took

* Keith, 425.

advan-

advantage of her condition, and of her fears. They employed Lord BOOK V.
Lindsay, the fiercest zealot in the party, to communicate their '-'.

i 567·

scheme to the Queen, and to obtain her subscription to those pa-
pers which were necessary for rendering it effectual. He executed
his commiffoii with harshness and brutality. Certain death was
before Mary's eyes, if the refused to comply with his demands. At
the fame time, she was informed by Sir Robert Melvil, in name
of Athol, Maitland, and Kirkaldy, the persons among the confe-
derates who were most attentive to her interest, that a resignation
extorted by fear, and granted during her imprisonment, was void in
law, and might be revoked so soon as she recovered liberty. Throg-
morton, by a note which he found means to convey to her, fug-
gested the fame thing *. Deference to their opinion, as well as con-
cern for her own safety, obliged heir to yield to eveiry thing which-
was required, and to sign all the papers which Lindsay presented
to her. By one of these, ihe resigned the Crown, renounced' all
share in the government of the kingdbm, ahd consented to the co-
ronation of the young King. By another, the appointed the Earl july 24.
of Murray Regent, and conferred' upon Bimir all the powers and
privileges of that high office. By a third, she substituted some
other nobleman in Murray's place, if he should refuse the honour
which was designed for him. Mary, when she subscribed thefd
deeds, was bathed in tears; and while she gave away, as it were
with her own hands, the sceptre which the had swayed so long,
she felt a pang of grief and indignation, one of the severest, perhaps,
which can touch the human heart -.

THE confederates endeavoured' to give this resignation all thejames vI.
weight and validity in their power, by proceeding without delay torowIlcd, and

lMurray cho-
fen Regent.
* Kcith, 425. Note (b.) Mclv. 169. t Ibid, 430. Crawf, Mer. 38.

crown

BOOK V. crown the young Prince. The ceremony was performed at Stirling,

L on the 29th of July, with much solemnity, in pretence of all the
5 nobles of the party, a considerable number of leifer Barons, and a

great assembly of the people. From that time, all public writs were
iflued, and the government carried on, in name of James VI *.

No revolution so great was ever effeced with more ease, or by

means so unequal to the end. In a warlike age, and in less time
than two months, a part of the nobles, who neither poffeifed the
chief power, nor the greatest wealth in the nation, and who never
brought 3000 men into the field, seized, imprisoned, and dethroned
their Queen, and without shedding a single drop of blood, set her
son, an infant of a year old, on the throne.

Reasonings of DURING this rapid progress of the confederates, the eyes of all
both parties. the nation were turned on them, with aflonifhment; and various

and contradicory opinions were formed, concerning the extraordi-
nary steps which they had taken.

EvrN under the ariftocratical form of government, which pre-

vails in Scotland, said the favourers of the Queen, and notwith-
tanding the exorbitant privileges of the nobles, the Prince posseses
considerable power, and his person is treated with great veneration.
No encroachments should be made on the former, and no injury of-
sered to the latter, but in cafes where the liberty and happiness of
the nation cannot be secured by any other means. Such cafes fel-
dom exist, and it belongs not to any part, but to the whole, or at
leafi to a majority of the society, to judge of their existence. By
what astion could it be pretended, that Mary had invaded the rights

* Kcith, 437.

or

or property of her fubjedts, or what kcheme had (he formed againftBoorc V.
the liberty and constitution of the kingdom ? Were fears, and sus- ---.
picions, and surmises, enough to justify the imprisoning, and the 5
deposing a Queen, to whom the Crown descended from so long a
race, of Monarchs ? The principal author of whatever was reckoned
culpable in her conduct, was now driven from her presence. The
murderers of the King might have been brought to condign punish-
ment, the safety of the Prince have been secured, and the Protestant
religion have been established, without wresting the sceptre out of
her hands, or condemning her to perpetual imprisonment. What-
ever right a free Parliament might have had to proceed to such a
rigorous conclusion, or whatever name its determinations might
have merited, a sentence of this nature, passed by a few nobles,
without acknowledging or consulting the reft of the nation, muff
be deemed a rebellion against the government, and a conspiracy
against the person of their Sovereign.

THE partizans of the confederates reasoned very differently. 'Tis

evident, said they, That Mary either previously gave content to the
King's murder, or did afterwards approve of that horrid action.
Her attachment to Bothwell, the power and honours with which
The loaded him, the manner in which she suffered his trial to be
carried on, and the indecent speed with which ihe married a man,
slained with so many crimes, raise strong suspicions of the former,
and put the latter beyond all doubt. To have suffered the supreme
power to continue in the hands of an ambitious man, capable of
the most atrocious and desperate actions, would have been disgrace-
ful to the nation, diflonourable to the Queen, and dangerous to
the Prince. Recourse was, therefore, had to arms. The Queen
had been compelled to abandon a husband so unworthy of herlt-lf.
But her affection toward him still continuing unabated; her in-

VOL. I. Ccc dignation

BOOK III. dignation againfl the authors of this separation beihg visible, and

ó'- often expressed in the strongest term's; they by refloring her to hbe
15 67 ancient authority, would have armed her with power to defroy

themselves, have enabled her to recall Bothwell, and have afforded
her an opportunity of pursuing schemes fatal to the nati6on with
greater eagerness, and with more success. Nothing, therefore, te-
mained, but by one bold ation to deliver themselVes and their coun-
try from all future fears. The expedient they had chosen was, no
less refpedful to the royal blood, than necessary for the public safety,
While one Prince was set aside as incapable of governing, the
Crown was placed on his heads who was the undoubted feprefen-
tative of their ancient Kings.

WHATEVER opinion poiterity may form on comparing the are

guments of the two contending parties, whatever sentiments we
may entertain concerning the justice or neceflity of that course
which the confederates held, it cannot be denied that their conduct,
so far as regarded themselves, was extremely prudent. Other expe-
dients, less rigorous towards Mary, might have been found for sett.
ling the nation; but, after the injuries they had already offered the
Queen, there was none so effetual for securing their own safety, or
perpetuating their own power.

To a great part of the nation, the condut of the confederates

appeared not only wife, but just. The King's accession to the
throne was every-where proclaimed, and his authority submitted
to without opposition. And though several of the nobles were fRill
assembled at Hamilton, and seemed to be entering into some combi-
nation against his government, an association for supporting it was

2 formed,

formed, and signed by, so many persons of power and influence BooK V.
throughout the nation, as entirely discouraged the attempt*. 67

,1567.
THE return of the Earl of Murray, about this time, addedMurray as-

fumes the go-

strength to the party, and gave it a regular and finilhed form. Sponf vernment.
after the murder of the King, this nobleman had retired into France,
upon what pretence historians do not mention. During his refi-
dence there, he had held a close correspondence with the chiefs of
the confederacy, and, at their desire, .henow returned. He seemed,
at first, unwilling to accept the office of Regent. This hesitation
cannot be gfcribed to tle fcrupkes either of difiidence, pr of duty.
Murray wanted neither abilities to entitle him, por armbition to
aspire to this higl dignity. IHe had rceiyed th e first accounts of
his promotion with thle utmopt fatisfaion,; b yut by appearing to
co n,.nue for fQnAe,day. in fufpene, be gaiNed jime ,to piew ith .at-
tnktion ,ghe ggovin.d Qn whic.h he was to ,t ,to b4.ance the tre.ngth
,;d :e.Qefu es of the' twvg. ntending :ftiopns, dan to .eamjiae whe-
.ther the Fund.it9ons on whic bis :fu-tur. e
f ame and fuc.c.s zuft ret,

o^)luad -pd fir ,m.

BEFORE he declared his final refqlution, he waited on Mary at

;ochleviip. This .ift, to a filer, ,id a,Qeen, in a prison, fromn
which he al ,t.eithr ,agy intention to.relieeher, nor t,9 nitigate
he xrigour :qs jher GiPnfnement, may be nmentiojed ,am-ng the cir-
cunsances ,,hieh discoer the .greAt want of delicacy and refine-
. met ,n ,that age. ,Murray, who w.as naturally rqugt and pncourtly
in his ,iannqr 4, expqftulated so warmly with tle Q.een, concern-
,iqg her pgft ,condut, and charged her ;salts so home upon her,
that Mary, .who hadflattered berfqlf with more gentle and brother-

* Anderson, vol.ii. 231. -t Keith, 96.

C,c c 2 ly

BOOK V. ly treatment from him, melted into tears, and abandoned herself

I-,- ' entirely to despair *. This interview, from which Marray could

reap no political advantage, and wherein he discovered a spirit so £e-
vere and unrelenting, may be reckoned among the most bitter cir-
curnflances in Mary's life, and is certainly one of the most unjufii-
fiable in his conduct.

SoON after his return from Lochlevin, Murray -accepted the of-

Augus 22. fice of Regent, and began to aa in that characer without opposition.

Faeof Both- AMIDST so many great and unexpeaed eventsi, the fate of Both-
win. well, the chief cause of them all, hath been almost forgotten. As-

ter his flight from the confederates, he lurked for some time among
his Vaflals in the neighbourhood of Dunbar.' But finding it impof-
fible for him to make head in that country, against his enemhies, or
even to secure himself from their pursuit,' he fled for fhblter to his
kinsman the Bilhop of Murray; and when he, over-awed by the
confederates, was obliged to abandon him, he retired to the Ork-
ney isles. Hunted from place to place, deserted by his friends,
and accompanied by a few retainers, as desperate as himself, he sus-
sered at once the miseries of infamy, and of want. His indigence
forced him upon a course which added to his infamy. He armed
a few small ships, which had accompanied him from Dunbar, and
attacking every veilel which fell in his way, endeavoured to procure
subsistence for himself and followers by piracy. Kirkaldy and Mur-
ray of Tullibardin were sent out against him by the confederates;
and surprising him while he rode at anchor, scattered his small fleet,
took apart of it, and obliged him to fly with a single ship towards
Norway. On that coalt he fell in with a vessel richly laden, and
immediately attacked it; the Norwegians failed with armed boats

* Keith, 445, 446.

to

to its aflifiance, and after a desperate fight, Bothwell, and all hisBooK V.
crew, were taken prisoners. His name and quality were both un- 6
known, and he was treated at firfl with all the indignity and ri- 567
gour, which the odious crime of piracy merited. His real cha-
raacer was soon discovered; and though it saved him from the
infamous death to which his associates were condemned, it could
neither procure him liberty, nor mitigate the hardships of his im-
prifonment. He languished ten years inthis unhappy condition;
melancholy and despair deprived him of reason, and at last he
ended his days, unpitied by his countrymen, and unaffifled by
strangers*. Few men ever accomplished their ambitious projects
by worse means, or reaped from them less fatisfadion. The early
part of his life was restless and enterprising, full of danger and of
vici/fitudes. His enjoyment of the grandeur to which he attained
by so many crimes, was extremely short; imbittered by much anxi-
ety, and disquieted by many fears. In his latter years, he suffered
the most intolerable calamities, to which the wretched are subjea,
and from which persons who have moved in so high a sphere are
commonly exempted.

THE good effecs of Murray's accefion to the regency wereSuccefsofthe

quickly felt. The party forming for the Queen was weak, irre-mifgitation.
solute, and disunited; and no sooner was the government of the
kingdom in the hands of a man, so remarkable both for his abili-
ties and popularity, than the nobles of whom it was composed loft
all hopes of gaining ground, and began to treat separately with the
Regent. So many of them were brought to acknowledge the King's
authority, that scarce any appearance of opposition to the eflablifhed
government was left in the kingdom. Had they adhered to the

* Melv. i68.
LJ. Queen

BOK V. ly treatment from him, melted into tears, and :abaridoned herself

--·- - entirely to despair *. This interview, from which Murray could
1507. reap no political advantage, and wherein he discovered a spirit so fe-

vere and unrelenting,' may be reckoned among the most bitter cir-
curmfances in Mary's life, and is certainlyone of the most unjufli-
fiable in his condut..

SOON after his return from Lochlevin, Murray -accepted the. of-
Auguf 2z2 fice of Regent, and began to at in that characer without opposition.

AMIDST so many great arid unexpeaeed events', the fate of 'Both-

Fate of Both- .

.
wLll. well, the chief cause of them all, hath been almost forgotten. As-

ter his flight from the confederates, he lurked for some time among
his Vassals in, the neighbourhood of Dunbar. ' tBit finding'it impbf-
fible for him to make head in thattcountry, gainA!his'enemies ,

u or

even to secure himself from their pursuit, he fled for ihl'ter to his
kinsman the Bishop of Murray; and when he, over-awed -by the
confederates, was obliged to abandon hitn, he retired to the Ork-
ney isles. Hunted from place to place, desertrd by his friends,
and accompanied by a few retainers, as desperate as himself, he sus-
sered at once the miseries of infamy, and of want. His indigence
forced him upon a course which added to his infamy. He armed
a few small (hips, which had accompanied him from Dunbar, and
attacking every vessel which fell in his way, endeavoured to procure
subsistence for himself and followers by piracy. Kirkaldy and Mur-
ray of Tullibardin were lent out against him by the confederates;
and surprising him while he rode at anchor, scattered his small fleet,
took apart of it, and obliged him to fly with a single (hip towards
Norway. On that coast he fell in with a veflel richly laden, and
immediately attacked it; the Norwegians failed with armed boats

* Keith, 445, 446.

to

to its afliftance, and after a desperate fight, Bothwell, and all hisBooK V.
crew, were taken prisoners. His name and quality were both un- 6
known, and he was treated at sirs with all the indignity and ri-
gour, which the odious crime of piracy merited. His real cha-
racer was soon discovered; and though it saved him from the
infamous death to which his associates were condemned, it could
neither procure him liberty, nor mitigate the hardships of his im-
prifonment. He languished ten years inthis unhappy condition;
melancholy and despair deprived him of reason, and at last he
ended his days, unpitied by his countrymen, and unassisted by
firangers*. Few men ever accomplished their ambitious projects
by worse means, or reaped from them less fatisfation. The early
part of' his life was restless and enterprising, full of danger and of
vicissitudes. His enjoyment of the grandeur to which he attained
by so many crimes, was extremely short; imbittered by much anxi-
ety, and disquieted by many fears. In his latter years, he suffered
the most intolerable calamities, to which the wretched are subject,
and from which persons who have moved in so high a sphere are
commonly exempted.

THE good effects of Murray's accession to the regency wereSucce of the

Regent's ad-

quickly felt. The party forming for the Queen was weak, irre-minuiration.
solute, and disunited; and no sooner was the government of the
kingdom in the hands of a man, so remarkable both for his abili-
ties and popularity, than the nobles of whom it was composed loft
all hopes of gaining ground, and began to treat separately with the
Regent. So many of them were brought to acknowledge the King's
authority, that scarce any appearance of opposition to the established
government was left in the kingdom. Had they adhered to the

* Melv, 68.

Queen

BooYK V. Quen with any firmness, it is probable, from Elizabeth's difpofi-

ó-- tion at that time, that the would have afforded them fueh affit-

57 ance as might have enabled them to face their enemies in the field.

But there appeared so little vigour or harmony in their councils,
that fle was discouraged from espousing their cause; and the Re-
gent taking advantage of their situation, obliged them to fsbmit to
his government, without granting any terms, eitherlto t-hemselves,
or to the Queen *.

THE Regent was no less successful in his attempt, to get into his

hands the places of strength in the kingdom. Balfour, the.deputy-
governor, surrendered the castle of Edinburgh; and as the reward
of his treachery, in deserting Bothwell, his patron, obtained terms
'of great advantage to himself. The Governor of Dunbar, who
.diLcovered more fidelity, was soon forced to .capitulate.; .some othqr
tfmall.forts surrendered without resistance.

A Parliament. THIS face of tranquillity in the nation .encouraged the Regent.to
Decem. 15. call a meeting of Parliament. Nothing was wanting to confirm the

King's authority, and the proceedings of the confederates, except
the.approbation of this supreme court; and after the fucees -which
had attended all.their measures, there could be little doubt of:ob-
.taining it. The numbers that,retorted to an Assembly, which was
called to deliberate on matters of -so much importance, 'were great.
The meeting was opened with the utmost solemnity, !and all its ads
.passed with much unanimity. Many, however, of theLords who
had discovered the warmest attachment.to the Queen, were prefert.
,But they had made their.peace with the .Regent. Argyll, HIntly,
and Herreis acknowledged, openly, in Parliament, th4at. theljF.beha-

* Keith,. 447, 1450, 463.

viour

viour toward the King had been undutiful and criminal*. TheirBooK V.
compliance in this manner, with the measures of the Regent's 'I'
party, was either the condition on which they were admitted into I567
favour, or intended as a proof of the sincerity of their reconcile,
ment.

THE Parliament granted every thing the confederates could de-ccn1rms the

mand, either for the safety of their own persons, or the security off thedonge-
that form of government which they had eflabliffed in the king-derates.
dom. Mary's resignation of the Crown was accepted, and declared
to be valid. The King's authority, and Murray's election, were
recognized, and confirmed. The imprisoning the Queen, and all
the other proceedings of the confederates, were pronounced lawful.
The letters which Mary had written to Bothwell were produced,
and she was declared to be acceflory to the murder of the King-s.
At the fame time, all the Ads of Parliament i 560, in favour of the
Protestant religion, were publicly ratified; new tfatutes to the fame
purpose were enacted. And nothing that could contribute to root
out the remains of Popery, or to encourage the growth of the Re-
formation, was neglected.

Ir is observable, however, that the fame parsimonious spirit pre;

vailed in this Parliament, as in that of I 560. The Proteflant clergy,
notwithstanding many discouragements, and their extreme pover-
ty, had, for seven years, performed all religious offices in the king-
dom. The expedients fallen upon for their fubfiftance had hi.
therto proved ineffectual, or were intended to be so. But, not-
withstanding their known indigence, and the warm remonitrancesa
of the Assembly of the church, which met this year, the Parlia,

* Anders. vol. iv. s 3. See Append. No. XXIII.
, Good. vol. ii. 66. Anders, vol.ii. 206.

ment

BooK V. Qeen with any firmness, it is probable, from Elizabeth', difpofi-

567.
c tion at that time, that (he would have afforded them such affil-

ance as might have enabled them to face their enemies in the field.
But there appeared so little vigour or harmony in their councils,
that fle was discouraged from espousing their cause; and the Re-
gent taking advantage of their situation, obliged them to fuabmit to
his government, without granting any terms, either to themselves,
or to the Queen *.

THE Regent was no less successful in his attempt, to get into his

hands the places of strength in the kingdom. Balfour, te .deputy-
governor, surrendered the castle of Edinburgh; and as the reward
of his treachery, in deserting Bothwell, his patron, obtained,terms
of .great advantage to himself. The Governor of Dunbar, who
discovered more fidelity, was soon forced to.capitulate; .fpme othqr
sfmall.forts surrendered without resistance.

A Parliament. THIS face of tranquillity in the nation encouraged the Regent ,to
Decem. 15. call a meeting of Parliament. Nothing was wanting to confirm the

King's authority, and the proceedings of the confederates, except
the approbation of this supreme court; and after the fueeefs which
had attended all.their measures, there could ,be little doubt of ;h-
.tainingit. The numbers that,reforted to an ATembly, which was
called 'to deliberate on matters of -so much importance, were great.
The meeting was opened with the utmost solemnity, 'and :all its a41s
.passed with much unanimity. Many, however, of the,Lords who
had discovered the warmest attachment.to the Qeen, were present.
,But they had made their peace with the .Regent. Afgyll, Huntly,
.and Herreis.acknowledged, openly, in Parliament, that.thelt,.beha-

* Keith, 447, 450, 463.

viour

viour toward the King had been undutiful and criminal*. Their BOOK V.
compliance in this manner, with the menfures of the Regent's- -
party, was either the condition on which they were admitted into 567
favour, or intended as a proof of the sincerity of their reconcile-
ment.

THE Parliament granted every thing the confederates could de-Ccniirms the

mand, either for the safety of their own persons, or the security off the conse-
that form of government which they had eflabliffed in the king-derates
dom. Mary's resignation of the Crown was accepted, and declared
to be valid. The King's authority, and Murray's election, were
recognized, and confirmed. The imprisoning the Queen, and all
the other proceedings of the confederates, were pronounced lawful.
The letters which Mary had written to Bothwell were produced,
and she was declared to be accessory to the murder of the King-s.
At the fame time, all the Ads of Parliament 560, in favour of the
Proteflant religion, were publicly ratified; new statutes to the farme
purpose were enaced. And nothing that could contribute to root
out the remains of Popery, or to encourage the growth of the Re-
formation, was neglected.

IT is observable, however, that the fame parlimoniosm spirit pre.

vailed in this Parliament, as in that of 156o. The Protestant clergy,
notwithltanding many discouragements, and their extreme pover-
ty, had, for seven years, performed all religious offices in the king-
dom. The expedients fallen upon for their fubfiftance had hi.
therto proved ineffectual, or were intended to be so. But, not-
withitanding their known indigence, and the warm remonstrances.
of the Assembly of the church, which met this year, the Parlia.

* Anders. vol. iv. 153. See Append. No. XXIII,
t Good. vol. ii. 66. Anders. vol.ii. 206.

ment

BooK V. ment did nothing more for their relief, than prescribe some new re-

5"67' gulations concerning the payment of the thirds of benefices, which

did not produce any considerable change in the situation of the
clergy.

I568. A FEW days after the dissolution of Parliament, four of Both-
janury ;. well's dependants were conviaed of being guilty of the King's mur-

der, and suffered death as traitors. Their confessions brought to
light many circumstances relative to the manner of committing
that barbarous crime; but they were perfbns of a low rank,
and seem not to have been admitted into the secrets of the con-
fpiracy .

NOTWITHSTANDING the universal fubmiflion to the Regent's

authority, there still abounded in the kingdom many secret mur-
murs and cabals. The partizans of the house of Hamilton reckoned
Murray's promotion an injury to the Duke of Chatelherault, who, as
first Prince of the blood, had, in their opinion, an undoubted right to
be Regent. The length and rigour of Mary's sufferings began to move
many to commiserate her cafe. All who leaned to the ancient opi-
nions in religion dreaded the effects of Murray's zeal. And he, tho'
his abilities were great, did not possess the talents requisite for sooth-
ing the rage, or removing the jealousies of the different factions.
By insinuation, or address, he might have gained or softened many,
who had opposed him; but he was a firanger to these gentle arts.
His virtues were revere; and his deportment towards his equals,
especially after his elevation to the Regency, diltant and haughty.
This behaviour offended some of the nobles, and alarmed others. The
Queen's faction, which had been so easily dispersed, began again to

Anders. vol. ii. ó65.

gather,

gether, and to unite, and was secretly favoured by some who had BOOK V.
.hitherto zealously concurred with the confederates *. 68-

J568.
SucH was the favourable disposition of the nation towards the Mary ercares

fioin Loch-

*Queen, when The recovered her liberty, in -a manner no lcfs fur levi.
prifing to her friends, than unexpected by her enemies. Several
attcmpts had been made to procure her an opportunity of escaping,
which some unforeseen accident, or the vigilance of her keepers,
thad hitherto disappointed. At lass, Mary employed all her art to
gain George Douglas her keeper's brother, a youth of eighteen.
As her ma-nners were naturally affable and insinuating, (he treated
him with the most flattering diftindion; she even allowed him to
entertain the molt ambitious hopes, by letting fall some expressions,
as if she would chufe him for her husband -. At his age, and
in such circumstances, it was impossible to resist such a temptation.
He yielded, and drew others into the plot. On Sunday the 2d of
May, while his brother fat at supper, and the reft of the family
were retired to their devotions, one of his accomplices found means
to steal the keys out of his brother's chamber, and opening the
gates to the Queen and one of her maids, locked them behind her,
and then threw the keys into the lake. Mary ran with precipita-
tion to the boat which was prepared for her, and on reaching the

lfore, was received with the utmost joy, by Douglas, Lord Seaton,
and Sir James Hamilton, who, with a few attendants, waited for
her. She instantly mounted on horseback, and rode full speed to-
wards Niddrie, Lord Seaton's feat in Weft-Lothian. She arrived
there that night, without being pursued, or interrupted. After halt-
ing three hours flle set out for Hamilton; and travelling at the fame
pace, ihe reached it next morning.

Mbelv, 179. f- Keith, 469.
VOL, 1. D dd d O

BOOK V. ON the firfe news of Mary's escape, her friends whom, in their

'-q;~ present disposition, a much smaller accident would have rouzed,

Arri s;.l-..'.-ran to arms. In a few days, her court was filled with a great
it1'T,' ri,'e and fplcndid train of nobles, accompanied by such numbers of fol-
c:ii l. low ers, as formed an army above 6000 strong. In their pretence,

she declared that the resignation of the Crown, and other deeds
the had signed during her imprisonment, were extorted from her
by fear. Sir Robert Melvil confirmed her declaration; and on that,
as well as on other accounts, a council of the nobles and chief men
of her party pronounced all these tranfacdions void and illegal. At
;. I.;. the fame time, an aflociation was formed for the defence of her per-

son and authority, and subscribed by nine Earls, nine Bishops,
eighteen Lords, and many gentlemen of diltindion *. Among
them, we find several who had been present in last Parliament,
and who had signed the counter-affociation in defence of the King's
government; but such sudden changes were then so common, as
to be no matter of reproach.

Consternation AT the time when the Queen made her escape, the Regent was
of the Re-
gent's adhc- at Glasgow, holding a court of justice. An event so contrary to
.ke:;ti i their expectations, and so fatal to their lchemes, gave a great shock

to his adherents. Many of them appeared wavering and irresolute;
others began to carry on private negociations with the Queen; and
tome openly revolted to her fide. In so difficult a juncture, where
his own fame, and the being of the party depended on his choice,
the regent's most faithful affoiiates were divided in opinion. Some
advised him to retire, without loss of time, to Stirling. The Queen's
army was already strong, and only eight miles difiant; the adjacent
country was full of the friends and dependants of the house of -la-
milton, and other Lords of the Qlcen's faction; Glasgow was a
large and unfortified town; his own train confited of no greater

Kcith, 475.

number

7

number than was usual in times of peace ; all there reasons pleaded BOOK V.
for a retreat. But on the other hand, arguments were urged of no
inconsiderable weight. The citizens of Glasgow were well as-
feded to the cause; the vaiTals of Glencairn, Lennox, and Semple
lay near at hand, and were both numerous, and fun of zeal; fuc-
cours might arrive from other parts of the kingdom in a few days e
in war, success depends upon reputation, as much as upon num-
bers; reputation is gained, or lolf, by the first flep one takes; in
his circumstances, a retreat would be attended with all the igno-
miny of a flight, and would at once dispirit his friends, and inspire
his enemies with boldness. In such dangerous exigencies as this, His prudee
the superiority of Murray's genius appeared, and enabled him both c""onu.
to chufe with wisdom, and to at with vigour. He declared against
retreating, and fixed his head quarters at Glasgow. And while he
amused the Queen for tome days, by pretending to hearken to some
overtures, which she made for accommodating their differences,
he was employed, with the utmost indufiry, in drawing together his
adherents from different parts of the kingdom, He was soon in a
condition to take the field; and though far inferior to the enemy
in number, he confided so much in the valour of his troops, and
the experience of his officers, that he broke off the negociation, and
determined to hazard a battle *.

AT the fame time, the Queen's generals had commanded herMI 3,

army to move. Their intention was, to condut her to Dunbar-
ton castle, a place of great trcength, which the Regent had not been
able to wrest out of the hands of Lord Fleming the governor; but
if the enemy flould endeavour to interrupt their march, they resolved

* Buchan. 369.

D d d a htot

BooK V. not to decline an engagement. In Mary's situation, no refolutior

ó-S could be more imprudent. A part only of her forces was assem-

bled. Huntly, Ogilvie, and the northern clans were loon expected;
her sufferings had removed, or diminished the prejudices of many
among her fubjeds; the address with which the surmounted the
dangers that obfiruded her escape, dazzled and interested the
· " Cpeople; the sudden confluence of so many nobles added lustre to her

cause;. fie might assuredly depend on the friendship and counte-
nance of France;. ihe had reason to expet the protection of Eng-
land; her enemies could not pofllbly look for support from that
quarter. She had much to hope from pursuing flow and cautious,
meafrues; they had every thing to fear,

BUT MAiRY, whose hopes were naturally sanguine, and her pas-

sions impetuous, was so elevat:d by her sudden transition from the
depth of distress, to such an unusual appearance of prosperity, that-
she never doubted of success. Her army was almost double to the
enemy in number, and chiefly conrfifed of the Hamiltons, and their
dependants. The archbishop of St. Andrew's had the chief direc-
tion of thLcfe, and hoped, by a viAory, not only to crush Murray,
the ancient enemy of his house, but to get the person of the Queen,
into his hands, and to oblige her, either to marry one of the Duke's
sons, or at least to commit the chief diredtion of her affairs to him-
si1s. His ambition proved fatal to the Queen, to himself, and to,
his family -.

Batl.e of MARY'S imprudence, in resolving to fight, was not greater
LangSfidc. than the ill conduct of her generals in the battle. Between the

Y' Anders, vol iv. 32. Mclv. .8.1.

&\VQ

two armies, and on the road towards Dumbarton, there was an BooK V.
eminence'called Langfide-Hill. This the Regent had the precau-
tion to seize, and posted his troops in a small village, and among
some gardens and inclofures adjacent. In this advantageous fitua-
tion he waited the approach of the enemy, whose Superiority in
cavalry could be of no benefit to them, on such broken ground.
The Hamiltons, who composed the vanguard, ran so eagerly to
the attack, that they put themselves out of breath, and left the main
battle far behind. The encounter of the fpearmen was fierce and
desperate; but as the forces of the Hamiltons were exposed, on
the one flank, to a continued fire from a body of mufqueteers, at-
tacked on the other by the Regent's most choice troops, and not
supported by the reft of the Queen's army, they were soon obliged Th
to give ground, and the rout immediately became universal. Few army defeat-
victories, in a civil war, and among a barbarous people, have been
pursued with lets violence, or attended with less bloodshed. Three
hundred fell in the field; in the flight scarce any were killed.
The Regent and his principal officers rode about, beseeching the
soldiers to spare their countrymen. The number of prisoners was
great, and among them many persons of diftinAion. The Regent
marched back to Glasgow, and returned public thanks to God for
this great, and, on his fide, almost bloodless vicory.*

DURrNG the engagement, Mary flood on a hill, at no great dif- I-Icj. .'

tance, and beheld all that passed in the field, with such emotions
of mind as are not easily described. When fte saw the army, which
was her last hope, thrown into irretrievable confusion, her spirit,
which all her palt misfortunes had not been able entirely to fubduc,

* Keith,.4,77.

3'u.n:k.

BOOK V. funk altogether. In the utmost conferfiation, she began her flight,
'-"'ó and so lively were her impressions of fear, that she never closed her
i568. eyes till fle reached the abbey of Dundrenan in Galloway, full sixty

Scottish miles from the place of battle *.

THESE revolutions in Mary's fortune had been no less rapid, than

ingular. In the short space of eleven days, fle had been a prisoner
at the mercy of her most inveterate enemies; (he had seen a power-
ful army under her command, and a numerous train of nobles at
her devotion; and now the was obliged to fly, in the utmost dan-
ger of her life, and to lurk, with a few attendants, in a corner of
her kingdom. She did not think herself safe, even in that retreat
and her fears impelled her to an action, the most unadvised, as well
as the most unfortunate in her whole life. This was her retiring
into England, a ftep, which, on many accounts, ought to have
appeared to her rash and dangerous.

Refrvecs on BEFORE Mary's arrival in Scotland, mutual difiruft and je.a
retiring into loufies had arisen between her and Elizabeth. All their fubfe-
England.

quent tranfations had contributed to exasperate and inflame these
paflions. She had endeavoured, by secret negociations and intrigues,
to disturb the tranquility of Elizabeth's government, and to advance
her own pretensions to the English Crown. Elizabeth, who pof-
sessed greater power, and acted with less reserve, had openly sup-
ported Mary's rebellious fubjees, and fomented all the dissensions
and troubles in which her reign had been involved. The maxims of
policy still authorised that Queen to pursue the fame course; as by
keeping Scotland in confusion, she effetually secured the peace of
her own kingdom. The Regent, after his vitory, had marched

* Keith, 48 1.

HO

to Edinburgh, and not knowing what course the Queen had taken, BOOK V.
it was several days before he thought of purfuing,her *. She might '1- '
have been concealed in that retired corner, among fubjets devoted
to her interest, till her party, which was dispersed rather than
broken by the late defeat, should gather such strength, that She
could again appear with safety at their head. There was not any
danger, which Ehe ought not to have run, rather than throw her-
self into the hands of an enemy, from whom (he had already sus-
sered so many injuries, and who was prompted both by inclination,
and by interelf, to renew them.

BUT, on the other hand, during Mary's confinement, Elizabeth

had declared again'f the proceedings of her fubjeds, and solicited
for her liberty, with a warmth which had all the appearance of
Sincerity. She had invited her to take refuge in England, and had
promised to meet her in person, and to give her such a reception
as was due to a Queen, and an ally -. Whatever apprehension
Elizabeth might entertain of Mary's designs, while Me had power
in her hands, she was, at present, the objed, not of fear, but of
pity; and to take advantage of her situation, would be both un-
generous and inhuman. The horrors of a prison were fresh in
Mary's memory, and if she should fall a second time into the hands
of her fubjeds, there was no iinury to which the presumption of
success might not embolden them to proceed. To attempt escaping
into France was dangerous; and, in her situation, almost impof-
fible; nor could she bear the thoughts of appearing as an exile, and
a fugitive, in that kingdom, where she had once enjoyed all the
splendor of a Queen. England remained her only asylum; and, in
spite of the intreaties of Lord HIerreis, Fleming, and her other at-

a Crawf. Mem.. 9. f Camd. 9. Andter. vol. iv. 99, izo. M0urdin, 369.

tendants,

BOoK V. tendants, who conjured her, even on their knees, not to confide

---'-- in Elizabeth's pronifes or generosity, her infatuation was invincible,
368.

and lie resolved to fly thither. Herreis, by her command, wrote

Her reception to Lowther the deputy-governor of Carlisle, to know what recep-
at Ca;iiie.

tion he would give her; and, before his answer could return, her
fear and impatience were so great, that she got into a fither-boat,
MIY 16. and with about twenty attendants, landed at Wirkington in Cum-

berland, and thence fl(e was conduded with many marks of refped
to Carlisle i

r.li.abctlhde- So soon as Mary arrived in England, (le wrote a long letter to
lii-rates con-
clrning the the Queen, reprefcnting, in the firongeft terms, the injuries which
manner of {he had suffered from her own fubjeds, and imploring thatpity
urdung her.'

and affifance which her present situation demanded A. An event
so extraordinary, and the conduct which might be proper in con-
sequence of it, drew the attention, and employed the thoughts of
Elizabeth and her council. If their deliberations had been influen-
ced by considerations of justice or generosity alone, they would not
have found them long or intricate. A Queen, vanquished by her
own fubjeds, and threatened by them with the loss of her liberty,
or of her life, had fled from their violence, and thrown herself into
the arms of her nearest neighbour and ally, from whom the had
received repeated assurances of friendship and protecion. These
circumflances entitled her to refped and to compassion, and re-
quired that she should either be restored to her own kingdom, or
at least be left at full liberty to seek aid from any other quarter.
But with Elizabeth and her counsellors, the question was not,
what was most just or generous, but what was most beneficial to
herself, and to the English nation. Three different resolutions might

* Keith, 483. Anders. vol, iv. 2. 1 Id. 29.

have

have been taken, with regard to the Queen of Scots. To re-inflate BOOK V.
her in her throne, was one; to allow her to retire into France, 6
was another; to detain her in England, was a third. Each of
these drew consequences after it, of the utmost importance, which
were examined, as appears from papers frill extant *, with that mi-
nute accuracy, which Elizabeth's Minilers employed in all their
consultations upon affairs of moment.

To restore Mary to the full exercise of the royal authority in

Scotland, they observed, would render her more powerful than
ever. The nobles who were most firmly attached to the English
interest, would quickly feel the utmost weight of her resent.
ment. And as the gratitude of Princes is seldom strong or lasting,
regard to her own interest might soon efface the memory of her
obligations to Elizabeth, and prompt her to renew the alliance of
the Scottish nation with France, and revive her own pretensions to
the English Crown. Nor was it possible to fetter and circumscribe
the Scottish Queen, by any conditions that would prevent these
dangers. Her party in Scotland was numerous and powerful. Her
return, even without any support from England, would inspire her
friends with new zeal and courage; a tingle vicory might give them
the superiority, which they had loft by a single defeat, and render
Mary a more formidable rival than ever to Elizabeth.

THE dangers arising from suffering Mary to retire into France,

were no less obvious. The French King could not refuse his as-
filance towards restoring his filter and ally to her thrune. Eliza-
beth would, once more, fee a foreign army in the island, over-
awing the Scots, and ready to enter her kingdom; and if the com-

* Anders. vol. iv. 34, 99, 102.
VOL. I. E e e motions

BOOK V. motions in France, on account of religion, were fettled, the Princes
1 6-. of Lorrain might resume their ambitious projects, and the united

forces of France and Scotland might invade England, where it is
weakest and mofl defenceless.

Refolles to NOTHING therefore remained but to detain her in England; and
England. in to permit her either to live at liberty there, or to confine her in a

prison. The former was a dangerous experiment. Her court would
become a place of resort to all the Roman Catholics, to the difaffedt-
ed, and to the lovers of innovation. Though Elizabeth affected to
represent Mary's pretensions to the English Crown as altogether ex-
travagant and ill-founded, she was not ignorant that they did not
appear in that light to the nation, and that many thought them pre-
ferable even to her own title. If the activity of her emissaries had
gained her so many abettors, her own personal influence was much
more to be dreaded; her beauty, her address, her sufferings, by the
admiration and pity which they would excite, could not fail of
making many converts to her party *.

'TWAS indeed to be apprehended, that the treating Mary as a

prisoner would excite universal indignation against Elizabeth, and
that by this unexampled severity towards a Queen, who implored,
and to whom she had promired her protection, fie would forfeit the
praise of justice and humanity, which was hitherto due to her ad-
ministration. But the English Monarchs were often so solicitous to
secure their kingdom against the Scots, as to be little scrupulous about
the means which they employed for that purpose. Henry IV. had
seized the heir of the Crown of Scotland, who was forced, by the

Anders. vol. iv. 56, 6o.

violence

violence of a florm, to take refuge in one of the ports of his BOOK V.
kingdom; and, in contempt of the rights of hospitality, without C-
regarding his tender age, or the tears and intreaties of his father, de-
tained him a prisoner for many years. This action, though detested
by posterity, Elizabeth resolved now to imitate. Her virtue was
no more proof than Henry's had been, against the temptations of
interest; and the possession of a present advantage was preferred to
the profpet of future fame. The fatisfadion which ihe felt in mor-
tifying a rival, whose beauty and accomplishments the envied, had,
perhaps, no less influence than political considerations, in bringing
her to this resolution. But, at the fame time, in order to screen
herself from the censure which this conduc merited, and to make
her treatment of the Scottilh Queen look like the effed of necefity,
rather than of choice, she determined to put on the appearance of
concern for her interest, and of deep sympathy with her susser-
ings.

WITH this view, (he instantly dispatched Lord Scroope wardenMay 20.

of the weft marches, and Sir Francis Knollys her Vice-chamber-
lain, to the Queen of Scots, with letters full of expressions of kind-
ness and condolence. But, at the fame time, they had private in-
ftruaions to watch all her motions, and to take care that fle fmould
not escape into her own kingdom *. On their arrival, Mary de- Mary dc-

mands adlmit-

manded a personal interview with the Queen, that she might laytanceintoEli-
before her the injuries which file had suffered, and receive firomtnc'. pic-
her those friendly offices which ihe had been encouraged to expee.
They answered, that it was with reluctance this honour was at
present denied her; that while she lay under the imputation of a
crime so horrid, as the murder of her husband, their Mifl-efs, to

' Anidcrf, vol. iv, 36, 70, 92.

E e c 2 whom

BOOK V. whom he was so nearly allied, could not, without bringing a Rfain

~568. upon her own reputation, admit her into her presence; but as soon

as she had cleared herself from that aspersion, they promised her a
reception suitable to her dignity, and aid proportioned to her dif-
trefs *.

She offers to NOTIING could be more frivolous than this pretence. It was
vindicate her the occasion, however, of leading the Queen of Scots into the snare, in
condu&.

which Elizabeth and her Ministers wished to intangle her. Mary ex-
pressed the utmost furprize at this unexpected manner of evading her
request; but as she could not believe so many professions of friendlhip
to be void of sincerity, (he frankly offered to submit her cause to the
cognizance of Elizabeth, and undertook to produce such proofs of her
own innocence, and of the falfhood of the accusations brought against
her, as should fully remove the scruples, and satisfy the delicacy of the

Elizabeth English Queen. This was the very point to which Elizabeth la-
takes advan-
tage of this boured to bring the matter. By this appeal of the Scottish Queen,
offer' lie became the umpire between her and her fubjets, and had it en-

tirely in her own power to protract the inquiry to any length, and
to perplex and involve it in endless difficulties. In the mean time,
she was furnished with a plausible pretence for keeping her at a dif-
tance from court, and for refuting to contribute towards replacing
her on her throne. As Mary's conduct had been extremely incau-
tious, and the presumptions of her guilt were many and strong,. it
was possible her fubjedts might make good their charge against her;
and if this should be the result of the inquiry, she would, thence-
forth, cease to be the object of regard, or of coinpaflon, and the
treating her with coldness and ncgledt would merit little censure.

* Anders. vol. iv. 8. 55.

In

In a matter so dark and mysterious, there was no probability that BOOK V.
Mary could bring proofs of her innocence, so incontefied, as to -- -
render the conduc of the Englilh Queen altogether culpable. And 1568
perhaps, her impatience under restraint, her suspicion of Elizabeth's
partiality, or her discovery of her artifices, might engage her in such
cabals, as would justify the using her with greater rigour.

ELIZABETH early foresaw all those advantages, which would

arise from an enquiry into the conduct of the Scottish Queen, car-
ried on under her direction. There was tome danger, however, that
Mary might discover her secret intentions too soon, and by reced-
ing from the offer which the had made, endeavour to disappoint
them. But even in that event, the determined not to drop the in-
quiry, and had thought of several different expedients for carrying
it on. The Countess of Lennox, convinced that Mary was accef-
fory to the murder of her son, and thirsting for that vengeance
which it was natural for a mother to demand, had implored Eliza-
beth's justice, and solicited her, with many tears, in her own name,
and in her husband's, to bring the Scottish Queen to a trial for that
crime *. The parents of the unhappy Prince had a jutl right to
prefer this accusation ; nor could /he, who was their nearest kinf-
woman, be condemned for listening to so equitable a demand. Be.
fides, as the Scottish nobles openly accused Mary of the fame crime,
and pretended to be able to confirm their charge by sufficient proof;
it would be no difficult matter to prevail on them, to petition the
Queen of England to take cognizance of their proceedings againfl
their Sovereign ; and it was the opinion of the English council, that
it would be reasonable to comply with the requefllf. At the faine

* Camd. 412. Hanyncs, 469. Andcr. vol. iv. 37.

time,

BooK V. time, the obsolete claim of the superiority of England over Scot-

tr.-,_' land began to be talked of; and, on that account, it was pretended
1568. that the decision of the contest between Mary and her 'fubjets be-

longed of right to Elizabeth. But though Elizabeth revolved all
these expedients in her mind, and kept them in reserve, to make use
of as occasion might require, hie wished that the inquiry into Mary's
conduct (hould appear to be undertaken purely in compliance with
her own demand, and in order to vindicate her innocence; and so
long as that appearance could be preserved, none of the other expe-
dients were to be employed.

5WHEN Mary contented to submit her cause to Elizabeth, she was

far from fufpeding that any bad consequences could follow,, or that
any dangerous pretensions could be founded on her offer. She ex-
pedted that Elizabeth herself would receive, and examine her de-
fences *; file meant to confider her as an equal, for whose fatisfac-
tion fle was willing to explain any part of her conduc, that was
liable to censure; not to acknowledge her as a superior, before
whom she was bound to plead her cause. But Elizabeth put a very
different sense on Mary's offer. She confidered herself as chosen
to be judge in the controversy between the Scottiflh Queen and her
fubjeds, and began to at in that capacity. She proposed to ape
point commiflioners to hear the pleadings of both parties, and wrote
to the Regent of Scotland, to impower proper persons to appear be-
fore them, in his name, and to produce what he could alledge in
vindication of his proceedings against his Sovereign.

Mary greatly MARY had, hitherto, relied with unaccountable credulity on
offcndcd att
Elizalbcth's Elizabeth's professions of regard, and expected that so many kind
condu&.

* Andcrf. vol. iv, o0.

I speeches

speeches would, at lass, be accompanied with some suitable aCtions. BooK V.
But this proposal entirely undeceived her. She plainly perceived ' _--
the artifice of Elizabeth's condut2, and saw what a diminution it
would be to her own honour, to appear on a level with her re-
bellious fubjeds, and to stand together with them at the bar of a
superior and a judge. She retrated the offer which the had made,
and which had been perverted to a purpose so contrary to her in-
tention. She demanded, with more earnestness than ever, to be
admitted into Elizabeth's pretence; and wrote to her, in a strain June 30o.
very different from what fle had formerly used, and which fully
discovers the grief and indignation that preyed on her heart. " In
( my present situation, fays the, I neither will, nor can reply to
"the accusations of my fubjeds. I am ready, of my own accord,
"and out of friendship to you, to satisfy your scruples, and to

vindicate my own conduCt. My fubjeds are not my equals;

"nor will I, by submitting my cause to a judicial trial, acknow-
"ledge them to be so. I fled into your arms, as into those of my
"nearest relation, and most perfect friend. I did you honour,
' as I imagined, in chufing you preferably to any other Prince, to
" be the restorer of an injured Queen. Was it ever known that
: a Prince was blamed for hearing, in person, the complaints of

those who appealed to his justice, against the false accusations of

" their enemies ? You admitted into your presence my bastard-
"brother, who had been guilty of rebellion; and you deny me
"that honour ! God forbid that I should be the occasion of bring-
"ing any stain upon your reputation. I expected that your manner
" of treating mc would have added luflre to it. Suffer me either to
"implore the aid of other Princes, whole delicacy on this head,

will be lecs, and their relentment of my wrongs greater; or let
"me receive from your hands that aSfiltance, which it becomes you,

" mnore

BOOK Y. " more than any other Prince, to grant; and by that benefit, bind

J568 "c me to yourself in the indissoluble ties of gratitude ."

THIS letter Somewhat disconcerted Elizabeth's plan, but did

JtIllC 20.
,lizabetli's not divert her from the prosecution of it. She laid the matter be-
,clilll;utc o fore the Privy Council, and it was there determined, notwithftand-

ing the intreaties and remonstrances of the Scottish Queen, to go on
with the inquiry into her conduct, and till that were finished, it
was agreed that Elizabeth could not, consistently with her own
honour, or with the safety of her government, either give her the
afliftance which she demanded, or permit her to retire out of the
kingdom. And left flhe fliould have an opportunity of escaping,
while she resided so near Scotland, it was thought advifeable to
remove her to some place, at a greater dirtance from the bor-
ders -.
Proceedings \VHILE the English court was occupied in there deliberations,

lith ?ec ntthe Regent did not neglect to improve the victory at Langfide.
:ga~init the

een's ad- That event was of the utmotf importance to him. It not only

drove the Queen herself out of the kingdom, but left her adherents
dispersed, and without a leader, at his mercy. He seemed resolved,
at first, to proceed against them with the utmost rigour. Six per-
Ibns of some diftinEtion, who had been taken prisoners in the battle,
were tried, and condemned to death as rebels againit the King's
government. They were led to the place of execution, but by the
powerful intercefiion of Knox they obtained a pardon. Hamilton
of Bothwellhaugh was one of the number, who lived to give both
the RcRgent and Knox reason to repent of this commendable ac of
lenity d:.

* Anders. vol. iv. 94. + Id. ibid. I02. :J- Cald. vol. ii, 99.

SOON

SOON after, the Regent marched with an army, consisting of 4000 BOOK V.

horse and iooo foot, towards the weit borders. The nobles in this /r
part of the kingdom were all of -the Queen's faction; but as they
had not force sufficient to obftrud his progress, he must either
have obliged them to submit to the King, or would have laid waste
their lands with fire and sword. But Elizabeth, whose interest it
was to keep Scotland in confusion, by preserving the balance be-
tween the two parties, and who was endeavouring to sooth the Scot-
tith Queen by gentle treatment, interposed at her desire. After
keeping the field two weeks, the Regent, in compliance to the Eng-
lilh Ambassador, dismissed his forces; and an expedition, which
might have proved fatal to his opponents, ended with a few ats
of severity *.

THE resolution of the Englith Privy Council with regard to Mary's Mary carried

person, was soon carried into execution; and, without regarding her to Bol
remonstrances or complaints, {he was conducted to Bolton, a cafleJuly 13.
of Lord Scroop's, on the borders of Yorkshire --. In this place,
her correspondence with her friends in Scotland became more diffi-
cult, and any profpea of making her escape was entirely cut off. She
now felt berfelf to be entirely in Elizabeth's power, and though treated
as yet with the refped due to a Queen, her real condition was that of
a prisoner. Mary knew what it was to be deprived of liberty, and
dreaded it as the worst of all evils. While the remembrance of her
late imprisonment was fill lively, and the terror of a new one filled
her mind, Elizabeth thought it a proper juncture to renew her for.
mer proposition, that she would susser the Regent and his adherents July Z..
to be called into England, and content to their being heard in de-

* Cald. vol. ii. 99. + Anders. vol. iv. 14;
VOL. I. f f fence

BOOK V. fence of their own conduct. And on her part, (he promised, what-

5i68. ever should be the issue of this inquiry, to employ all her power

and influence towards replacing Mary on her throne, under a few

Agrees that limitations, which were far from being unreasonable. Fear, im-
an inquiry be
made into her patience, despair, as well as this soothing promise, with which the
conduct.

proposition was accompanied, induced the Scottish Queen to com-
ply *.

Her diflimu- IN order to persuade Elizabeth that she desired nothing so much
lation with
regard to re- as to render the union between them as close as possible, ihe_ hewed
liSion. a disposition to relax somewhat in one point, with regard to which,

during all her past and- subsequent misfortunes, she was uniformly
inflexible. She expressed a great veneration for the liturgy of tie
church of England; ihe was often present at religious worlhip, ac-
cording to the rites of the reformed church; made choice of a Pro-
teftant clergyman to be her chaplain; heard him preach againfi the
errors of Popery with attention and seeming pleasure; and discover-
ed all the symptoms of an approaching conversion t. Such was
Mary's known and bigotted attachment to the Popish religion, that
it is impossible to believe her sincere in this part of her conduct; nor
can any thing mark more strongly the wretchedness of her condi-
tion, and the excess of her fears, than that they betrayed her into
dissimulation in a matter, concerning which her sentiments were, at
all other times, scrupulously delicate.

Aurft 18. A T this time the Regent called a Parliament, in order to pro-
A Paliandent ceed to the forfeiture of those who refused to acknowledge the
in Scotland.

King's authority. The Queen's fadion was alarmed, and Argyll
and Huntly, whom Mary had appointed her lieutenants, the one

*Anders. vol. iv. 109. Haynes, 468. f Anders. vol. iv. 1 3. Haynes, 509.

in

in the south, and the other in the north of Scotland, began to as- BOOK V.
femble forces to obftru& this meeting. Compassion for the Queen, 5 68

x$68.

and envy at those who governed in the King's name, had added so
much strength to the party, that the Regent would have found it
difficult to withstand its efforts. But as Mary had submitted her
cause to Elizabeth, fle could not refuse, at her desire, to command
her friends to lay down their arms, and to wait patiently .till mat-
ters were brought to a decision in England. By procuring this
ceflation of arms, Elizabeth afforded as seasonable relief to the Re-
gent's faation, as she had formerly given-to the Queen's *.

T H E Regent, however, would not content, even at Elizabeth's

request, to put off the meeting of Parliament. But we may ascribe
to her influence, as well as to the eloquence of Maitland, who la-
boured to prevent the one half of his countrymen from exterminat-
ing the other, any appearances of moderation which this Parliament
discovered in its proceedings. The molf violent opponents of the
King's government were forfeited; the reft were allowed still to
hope for favour -

N o sooner did the Queen of Scots submit her cause to her rival, Elizabeth re-

than Elizabeth required the Regent to fend to York, deputies pro- gente todeRe
perly infruded for vindicating his conduc, in pretence of her corn- fend his con-
-mifiioners. It was not without hesitation and anxiety, that the
Regent consented to this measure. His authority was already efia-
blifhed in Scotland, and confirmed by Parliament. To susser its
validity now to be called in quefftion, and fubje&ed to a foreign ju-
,rifdicion, was extremely mortifying. To accuse his Sovereign be-

* Adnerf. vol. iv. 125. Buch. 371.

f f2 fore

BOOK V. fore firangers, the ancient enemies of the Scottish name, was an
,.--- odious task. To fail in this accusation was dangerous; to succeed

in it was disgraceful. But the strength of the adverse fation daily
increased. He dreaded the interposition of the French King in its
behalf. In his situation, and in a matter which Elizabeth had so
much at heart, her commands were neither to be disputed, nor dif-
obeyed *.

Both the THE necessity of repairing in person to York added to the ignominy
Qeeont an he of the flep which he was obliged to take. All his associates declined
appoint com-
mifioners. the office; they were unwilling, it would seem, to expose them-

selves to the odiuni and danger with which it was easy to foresee that
the discharge of it would be attended, unless he himself consented to
Septem. 18. share these in common with them. The Earl of Morton, Bothwell

Bishop of Orkney, Pitcairn Commendator of Dunfermling, and
Lord Lindsay were joined with him in commifiion. Macgill of
Rankeilor and Balnaves of Halhill, two eminent Civilians, George
Buchanan his faithful adherent, a man whose genius did honour to
the age, Maitland, and several others, were appointed to attend them
as assistants. Maitland owed this diftintion to the Regent's fear,
rather than to his affetion. He had warmly remonfirated against
this measure. He wished his country to continue in friendship with
England, but not to become dependant on that nation. He was de-
firous of re-ftablifhing the Queen in some degree of power, not in-
consistent with that which the King possessed; and the Regent could
not, with safety, leave behind him a man, whose views were so con-
trary to his own, and who, by his superior abilities, had acquired
an influence in the nation, equal to that, which others derived from
the antiquity and power of their families -.

Buch. 372. See Append. N°. XXV.
i Id. ibid. Anders. vol. iv. 35. Melv. 186, 188.

MARY

MARY impowered Lefly Bishop of Ross, Lord Livingflon, Lord BOOK V.

Boyd, Lord Herreis, Gavin Hamilton Commendator of Kilwinning, '--'
Sir John Gordon of Lochinvar, and Sir James Cockburn of Skir-
ling, to appear in her name ".

E L I Z ABET H, nominated Thomas Howard Duke of Norfolk,

Thomas Ratcliff Earl of Suffex, and Sir Ralph Sadler, her Com-
missioners to hear both parties t.

THE fourth of October was the day fixed for opening the Con-The confe-

ference. The great abilities of the deputies on both fides, the dig-renceatYork.
nity of the judges before whom they were to appear, the high rank
of the persons whose cause was to be heard, and the importance of
the points in dispute, rendered the whole tranfadion no less illuftri-
ous, than it 'was singular. The situation in which Elizabeth ap-
peared, on this occasion, strikes us with an air of magnificence.
Her rival, an independant Queen, and the heir of an ancient race
of monarch, was a prisoner in her hands, and appeared, by her
ambassadors, before her tribunal. The Regent of Scotland, who
represented the majesty, and poIffeed the authority of a King, flood
in person at her bar. And thefate of a kingdom, whose power her
ancestors had often dreaded, but could never subdue, was now ab-
folutely at her disposal.

TH E views, however, with which the several parties consented views of the

to this conference, and the issue to which they expected to bring it, different par.
were extremely different.

* Anders. vol. iv. 33.. % Id. 3.

MARY'S

BOOK V. M A RY 's chief objea was the recovering her former authority.

I-_"ó8 This induced her to content to a measure, againif which she had
I568; long firuggled. Elizabeth's promises gave her ground for enter-

taining hopes of being restored to her kingdom; in order to which,
she would have, willingly, made many conceflions to the King's
party ; and the influence of the Englifih Queen, and-herown impa-
tience under her 'present situation, might have led her to many
more*. The Regent aimed at nothing but securing Elizabeth's
protecion to his party, and seems not to have had, the most
difiant thonghts of coming to any composition with Mary. Eliza-
beth's views were more various, and her schemes more intricate.
She seemed to be full of concern for Mary's honour, and solicitous
that ihe should wipe off the aspersions which blemished her cha-
rader. This she pretended to be the intention of the conference;
amusing Mary, and eluding the felicitations of the French and
Spanish ambassadors in her behalf by repeated promises of affilting
her, as soon as she could venture to do so, without bringing disgrace
on herself. But, under this veil of friendship and generosity, Elizabeth
concealed .sentiments of a different nature. She expected that the Re-
gent would accuse Mary of being acceffiory to the murder of her
husband. She encouraged him, as far as decency would permit, to
take this desperate flep t. And as this accusation might terminate
two different ways, She had concerted measures for her future conduc
suitable to each of these. If the charge against Mary (hould appear
to be well founded, she resolved to pronounce her unworthy of
wearing a Crown, and to declare that (he would never burthen her
own conscience with the guilt of an action so deteflable, as the re-
storing her to her kingdom a. If it {hould happen, that what her

* Anders. vol. iv. 33. Good. vol. ii. 337. f Anders. vol. iv. 1x, 45.
Haynes, 487. t Anders. vol. iv. 11.

accusers

accusers alledged, did not amount to a proof of guilt, but only of BOOK V.
mal-administration, she determined to set on foot a treaty for re- 568

i$68,

floring her, but on such conditions, as would render her for ever
dependant on England, and the slave of her own fubjeds *. And
as every ftep in the progress of the conference, as well as the final
result of it, was in her own power, she would fill be at liberty to
chufe which of these courses she would hold; or if there appeared
to be any danger or inconveniency in pursuing either of them, (he
might protraa the whole cause by endless delays, and involve it in
inextricable perplexity.

T H E conference, however, was opened with much solemnity. Complaint of

But the very firit iep discovered it to be Elizabeth's intention to in- te mmioners
flame, rather than to extinguifl the dissensions and animofities againfithe

Regent.

among the Scots. No endeavours were used to reconcile the con-
tending parties, or to mollify the fierceness of their hatred, by bring-
ing the Queen to offer pardon for what was pat, or her subje&s to
pronmie more dutiful obedience for the future. On the contrary, Otobcr 8.
Mary's commifioners were permitted to prefer a complaint againf
the Regent and his party, containing an enumeration of their trea-
fonable aAions, of their seizing her person by force of arms, com-
mitting her to prison, compelling her to resign the Crown, and
making use of her son's name to colour their usurpation of the
whole royal authority. And of all there enormities, they required
such speedy and effectual red.ress, as the injuries of one Queen de-
manded from the justice of another t.

I T was then expeded that the Regent would have disclosed the
whole circumfiances of that unnatural crime, to which he pre-

* Anders. vol. iv. 16, ' Id. ibid. 52,
2 tended

BOOK V. pretended the Queen had been accessory, and would have produced
-'- '- - evidence in support of his charge. But far from accusing Mary,

I$68.

the Regent did not even answer the complaints brought against
himself. He discovered a relucance at the undertaking that office,
and started many doubts and scruples, with regard to which, he
demanded to be resolved by Elizabeth herself*. His reserve and
hesitation were no less surprising to the greater part of the English
commissioners than to his own associates. They knew that he could
not vindicate his conduc without charging the murder upon the
Queen, and he had not hitherto sown any extraordinary delicacy
on that head. An intrigue had been secretly carried on, since his
arrival at York, which explains this myfteryo

Intrigues of THE Duke of Norfolk was, at that time, the most powerful and
hNorfolk th moit popular man in England. His wife was lately dead; and he be-

gan already to form a project, which he afterwards more openly avow-
ed, of mounting the throne of Scotland, by a marriage with the Queen
of Scots. He saw the infamy which would be the consequence of a
public accusation against Mary, and how prejudicial it might be to her
pretensions to the English succession. In order to save her this cruel
mortification, he applied to Maitland, and expressed his astonish-
ment at feeing a man of so much reputation for wisdom, concurring
with the Regent in a measure so dishonourable to themselves, to
their Queen, and to their country; submitting the public transactions
of the nation to the judgment of foreigners; and publishing the
ignominy, and exposing the faults of their Sovereign, which they
were bound, in good policy, as well as in duty, to conceal and
to cover. It was easy for Maitland, whose sentiments were the
fame with the Duke's, to vindicate his own conduct. He assured

Haynes, 478.

him,

him, that he had employed all his credit, to dilfwade his country-BooK V.
men from this measure; and would still contribute, to the utmost i`
of his power, to divert them from it. This encouraged Norfolk to
communicate the matter to the Regent. He repeated and enforced
the fame arguments which he had used with Maitland. He warned
him of the danger to which he must expose himself by such a vio-
lent action, as the public accusation of his sovereign. Mary would
never forgive a man who had endeavoured to fix such a brand of in-
famy on her charaater. If she ever recovered any degree of power,
h;s deftrution would be inevitable, and he would justly merit it at
her hands. Nor would Elizabeth screen him from this, by a pub-
lic approbation of his conduct. For whatever evidence of Mary's
guilt he might produce, she was resolved to give no definitive fen-
tence upon the cause. Let him only demand that the matter should
be brought to decision, immediately after hearing the proof, and he
would be fully convinced how false and insidious her intentions
were, and, by-confequence, how improper it would be for him to
appear as the accuser of his own Sovereign ". The candour which
Norfolk seemed to discover in these remonstrances, as well as the
truth which they contained, made a deep impression on the Regent.
He daily received the strongest assurances of Mary's willingness to be
reconciled to him, if he abstained from accusing her of such an odi-
ous crime, together with denunciations of her irreconcileable hatred,
if he acted a contrary part t. All there considerations concurred
in determining him to alter his purpose, and to make trial of the
expedient which the Duke had suggested.

HE demanded, therefore, to be informed, before he proceeded fur-Oaobcr 9.
ther, whether the English commissioners were impowered to declare

* Mclv. 187. Haynes, 573. fl Andler. vol. iv. 77. Good. vol. ii. 157.
Sec Appendix, N'. XXVI.

VOL . G. g g the

BOOK V. the Queen guilty, by a judicial aSt; whether they would promise to

ó'- 8. -pass Sentence without delay; whether the Queen should be kept

under such restraint, as to prevent her from disturbing the govern-
ment now established in Scotland; and whether Elizabeth, if fie
approved of the proceedings of the King's party, would engage to
protect it for the future *. The paper containing these demands
was signed by himself alone, without communicating it to any of
his attendants, except Maitland and Melvil -. Nothing could ap-
pear more natural than the Regent's solicitude, to know on what
footing he stood. To have ventured on a flep so uncommon and
dangerous, as the accusing his Sovereign, without previously afcer-
taining that he might take it with safety, would have been unpar-
donable imprudence. But Elizabeth, who did not expect that he
would have moved any such difficulty, had not impowered her
commissioners to give him that satisfaCtion which he demanded. It
became nece-ssary to transmit the articles to herself, and by the light
in which Norfolk placed them, it is easy to fee that he wished that
they Ihould make no flight impression on Elizabeth and her Minis-
ters. " Think not the Scots, said he, over-fcrupulous or precise..
" Let us view their conduct, as we would with our own to be
' viewed, in a like situation. The game they play is deep; their

estates, their lives, their honour are at flake. It is now in their
own power to be reconciled to their Queen, or to offend her irre-
( coverably, and in a matter of so much importance, the utmost
"degree of caution is not exceflive ."

WIILE the English commitlioners waited for fuller inftruc-

tions with regard to the Regent's demands, he gave in an answer
to the complaint, which had been offered in name of the Scottish

*Anders. vol. iv. . 1- Id.56. Mclv. 190. : Anders. vol. iv. 77.

Queeny

Queen. It was expressed in terms perfectly conformable to the BooK V.
system which he had at that time adopted. It contained no infi- .1.ó8

1 568,

nuation of the Queen's being accessory to the ntmurder of her hus-
band; the bitterness of file peculiar to' the age was considerably
abated; and though he pleaded, that the infamy of the marriage
with Bothwell, made it neceflary to take arms in order to dissolve
it; though Mary's attachment to a man so odious justified the
keeping her for tome time under refiraint; yet nothing more was
said on these fubjeds than was barely requisite in his own defence.
The Queen's commissioners did not fail to reply *. But while theoaobe,, .
article with regard to the murder remained untouched, these were
only fkitniflies at a distance,. of no- consequence towards ending
the contest, and were little regarded by Elizabeth or her commis-
fioners.

THE conference had,. hitherto, been condiided in a mannerTheconfer-

which disappointed Elizaberh's views, and produced none of thefeteoremmied
discoveries which fie had expeded.' The distance between Yorkfier.
and London, and the necessity of consulting her upon every difficulty
which occurred, consumed much time.. Norfolk's negociation with
the Scottifl Regent, however secretly carried on, was not, in all
probability, unknown' to a Princess so remarkable for her sagacity
i:n penetrating the designs of her enemies, and feeing through their
deepest fchernes 4-. Inflead, therefore, of returning any answer to
the Regent's demands, the resolved to remove the conference to
Westminster, and to appoint new commissioners, in whom she could
more absolutely confide. Both the Scottih Queen and the Regent.
were brought, without difficulty, to approve of this resolution $.

* Anclcrf. vol. iv. 64, 80. 1- Good. vol. ii. I6o. And.vol. iik 24.
t Hiynes, 484. Anders. vol. iv. 94.

Ggg 2 WiE

BOOK V. the Queen guilty, by a judicial aat; whether they would prominie to

X -'-"-pass sentence without delay; whether the Queen should be kept

68. under such refRraint, as to prevent her from disturbing the govern-

ment now established in Scotland; and whether Elizabeth, if ihe
approved of the proceedings of the King's party, would engage to
protect it for the future . The paper containing these demands
was signed by himself alone, without communicating it to any of
his attendants, except Maitland and Melvil t. Nothing could ap-
pear more natural than the Regent's solicitude, to know on what.
footing he flood. To have ventured on a ftep so uncommon and
dangerous, as the accusing his Sovereign, without previously afcer-
taining that he might take it with safety, would have been unpar-
donable imprudence. But Elizabeth, who did not expect that he
would have moved any such difficulty, had not impowered her
commiftioners to give him that fatisfadion which he demanded. It
became necefiary to tranfrnit the articles to herself, and by the light
in which Norfolk placed them, it is easy to fee that he wished that
they should make no flight impreflion on Elizabeth and her Minis-
ters. " Think not the Scots, said he, over-fcrupulous or precise4.
" Let us view their conduct, as we would with our own to be
"viewed, in a like situation. The game they play is deep; their

estates, their lives, their honour are at flake. It is now in their

" own power to be reconciled to their QCueen, or to offend her irre-
" coverably, and in a matter of so much importance, the utmost

degree of caution is not excessive ."

WHILE the English commillioners waited for fuller inflruc-

tions with regard to the Regent's demands, he gave in an answer
to the complaint, which had been offered in name of the Scottish

Anders. vol. iv. 55. 1- Id. 56. Mclv. 190. $ Anders. vol. iv. 77.

'Qeen,

Queen. It was expressed in terms perfectly conformable to the ooK V.
system which he had at that time adopted. It contained no infi- '-"
inuation of the Queen's being acefsory to the murder of her hu's-
band; the bitterne-s of file peculiar to the age was considerably
abated; and though he pleaded, that the infamy of the marriage
with Bothwell, made it necessary to take arms in order to dissolve
it; though Mary's attachment to a man so odious justified the
keeping her for tomee time under restraint; yet nothing more was
said on there fubjets than was barely requisite in his owni defence,
The Queen's commissioners did not fail to reply*. But while theoaobce 1

,

article with regard to the murder remained untouched, these were
only fkirmiflles at a diltance,. of no confeq.ence towards ending
the contest,. and were little regarded by Elizabeth or her commis-
fioners.

THE conference had. hitherto,. been conduted in a mannerTheconfer-
which disappointed Elizabeth's views, and produced none of thefeece removed

.P to Weftmin-

discoveries which flea had expected.' The distance between Yorkser.
and London, and the necessity of consulting her upon every difficulty
which occurred, consumed much time.. Norfolk's negociation with
the Scottifih Regent, however secretly carried on, was not, in all
probability, unknown to a Pri.ncess so remarkable for her sagacity
in penetrating the designs of her enemies, and feeing through their
deepest schemes --. Instead, therefore, of returning any answer to
the Regent's demands, she resolved to remove the conference to
Westminster, and to appoint new commifiioners, in whom she could
more absolutely confide. Both the Scottish Queen and the Regent
were brought, without difficulty, to approve of this resolution I.

* Anders. vol. iv. (4, 80. - Good. vol. ii. I60. And. vol. iiii 24.

l
H.iynes, 484. Andcrf. vol. iv. 94.

Ggg 2 WE

BooK V. vWE often find Mary boafling of the faperiority of her commis.

'- filoners during the conference at York, and how, by the strength of
568.

their arguments, they confounded her adversaries, and silenced all
their cavils *. The dispute flood, at that time, on a footing, which
rendered her vitory not only apparent, but easy. Her participation
of the guilt of the King's murder was the only circumstance, which
could juflify the violent proceedings of her fubjeEs. And while
they industriously avoided mentioning that, her cause gained as much
as that of her adversaries by suppressing this capital argument.

ELIZABETH resolved that Mary mhould not enjoy the fame ad-

vantage in the conference to be held at Westminster. She deli-
berated with the utmost anxiety, how lhe might overcome the Re-
gent's scruples, and persuade him to accuse the Queen. She con-
fidered of the most proper method for bringing Mary's commiffi-
oners to answer such an accusation; and as Ihe foresaw that the pro-
mises with which it was necessary to allure the Regent, and which
it was impossible to conceal from the Scottish Queen, would natu-
rally exasperate her to a great degree, the determined to guard her
more narrowly than ever; and though Lord Scroop had given her
no reason to distrust his vigilance or fidelity, yet because he was the
Duke of Norfolk's brother-in-law, she thought it proper to remove
the Queen as soon as possible to Tuthbury in Staffordlhire, and com-
mit her to the keeping of the Earl of Shrewsbury, to whom that
cafile belonged -.

Mary's furpi- MARY began to fufpea the design of this second conference;
cions of Eli- and notwithstanding the fatisfadion the expressed at feeing her cause
zabcth's in-
tentons. taken more immediately under the Queen's own eye +, she framed
October z .

* Good. vol.ii. x86, 284, 350. f Haynes, 487. :t Anders. vol. i. 95.

1 her

her inftrutions to her commifioners, in such a manner, as to avoid BooK V.
being brought under the necessity of answering the accusation of 6

,568.

her fubjeds, if they should be so desperate as to exhibit one against
her *. These furpicions were soon confirmed by a circumfiance
extremely mortifying. The Regent having arrived at London, in
order to be present at the conference, was immediately admitted
into Elizabeth's pretence, and received by her, not only with re-
spec, but with affedcion. This Mary juffly confidered as an open
declaration of that Queen's partiality towards her adversaries. InNovem. 22.
the firfl emotions of her reentment, e wrote to her commif-Coaam per-
fioners, and commanded them to complain, in the presence of theence of Eli-

zabeth.

Englilh nobles, and before the ambafadors of foreign Princes, of
the usage ihe had hitherto met with, and the additional injuries
which the had reason to apprehend. Her rebellious fubjeas were
allowed access to the Queen, she was excluded from her presence;
they enjoyed full liberty, the languished under a long imprison-
ment; they were encouraged to accuse her, in defending herself
she laboured under every disadvantage. For these reasons ihe once
more renewed her demand, of being admitted into the Queen's
pretence; and if that were denied, she infruded them to declare,
that she recalled the content she had given to the conference at
Weftminfler, and protested, that whatever was done there, should
be held to be null and invalid j-.

THis, perhaps, was the most prudent resolution Mary could have

taken. The pretences on which she declined the conference were
plausible, and the juncture for offering them well chosen. But
either the Qseen's letter did not reach her commiflioners in due
time, or they fuffcred themselves to be deceived by Elizabeth's

* Good. vol ii. 3i49. t Id. ibid. If4.

pro-

BIoo -V. prOfeflRons of rega;d for their'Miftrefs, and consfented to the open-

'"-" - ing of the co,-fcreice ".
!565.
Novnm. z;. To the commiiloners who had appeared in her name- at York,

Elizabeth now added Sir Nicholas Bacon Keeper of the Great Seal,,
the Earls of Arundel and Leicefler, Lord Clinton, and Sir William
Cecil .. The difficulties which obftruaed the proceedings at York
were quic!ly removed. A satisfying answer was given to the Re-
gent's demands; nor was he so much disposed to hesitate, and
Lpaife oljedions as formerly. His negociation with Nor.folk had.
been discovered to Morton by some of Mary's attendants, and he
had communicated it to Cecil{. His personal safety, as well as the
continuance of his power, depended on Elizabeth. By favouring
sIMary, she might, at any time, ruin him ; and by a question which
the artfully started, concerning the person who had a right, by the
law of Scotland, to govern the kingdom during a minority, fle let
him fee, that even without restoring the Queen, it was an easy mat-
ter for her to deprive him of the supreme direction of affairs l[.
These considerations, which were powerfully seconded by mofi of
his attendants, at length determined the Regent to produce his ac-
cufation against the Queen.

The Regent HE endeavoured to lefren the infamy, with which he was fen-
accuses the
Queen of be- fible this atlion would be attended, by proteiling, that it was with
itog aChehry the uitoft relucaance he undertook this disagreeable task; that his-
balrd's mur- party had long suffered their conduct to be misconstrued, and had

borne the worst imputations in silence, rather than expose the
crimes of their Sovereign to the eyes of strangers; but that now
the infulence and importunity of.the adverse fadion forced them

Andcrf. vol. iii. 25. 1d Id. vol. iv. 99. :t Mlelv. 19. 91 Haynes, 184.

to

to publish, what they had hitherto, though with loss to themfelves,BooK V.
endeavoured to conceal*. These pretexts are decent; and had '
*the party discovered any delicacy or reserve, with regard to the
Queen's actions, in the reft of their conduct, might have passed for
the real principles by which they were influenced. But their former
treatment of the Queen renders it impoflible to give any credit to
these profeflions. And the Regent, it is plain, was drawn by the
neceflity of his affairs, and Elizabeth's artifices, into a situation,
where no liberty of choice was left him; and was obliged either to
acknowledge himself to be guilty of rebellion, or to charge Mary
with having committed murder.

THE accusation itself was conceived in the ftrongeit terms. Mary

was charged, not only with having consented to the murder, but
with being accessory to the contrivance and execution of it. Both-
'well, it was pretended, had been screened from the pursuits of
jutice by her favour; and she had formed designs no less danger-
ous to the life of the young Prince, than subversive of the liberties
and constitution of the kingdom. If any of there crimes (hould be
denied, an offer was made, to produce the most ample and un-
doubted evidence in confirmation of the charge -h.

AT the next meeting of the commissioners, the Earl of Len-Novemb. 29.

nox appeared before them; and after bewailing the tragical and
unnatural murder of his son, he implored Elizabeth's jufticeagainft
the QCeen of Scots, whom he accused, upon oath, of being the
author of that crime, and produced papers, which, as he pretended,
would make good what he alledged. The entrance of a new ac-
tor on the flage, so opportunely, and at a junt-ure so critical, can

* Anders. vol. iv. 115. 1 Idl, ibid, sr9.

3 -scarce

BooK V. scarce be imputed to chance. This contrivance was manifeltly
W--I ' Elizabeth's, in order to cncreafe, by this additional accusation, the

ij68. infamy of the Scottish Queen *.

Her commis- MVARY'S commissioners expressed the utmost furprize and indig-
fion-rs refuse
to an!;'wr. nation at the Regent's presumption, in loading the Queen with ca-
Lecemn.. lumnies, which, as they affirmed, (lie had so little merited. But,

inRfead of attempting to vindicate her honour, by a reply to the
charge, they had recourse to an article in their inftrudions, which
they had formerly negledted to mention in its proper place. They
demanded an audience of Elizabeth; and having renewed their Mif-
tress's request, of a personal interview, they protefied, if that were
denied her, against all the future proceedings of the commissioners -.
A protefRation of this nature, offered jult at the critical time, when
such a bold accusation had been preferred against Mary, and when
the proofs in support of it were ready to be examined, gave reason to
fufped that she dreaded the event of that examination. This fufpi-
cion received the flrongeft confirmation from another circumstance;
Ross and Herreis, before they were introduced to Elizabeth, in or-
der to make this protestation, privately acquainted Leicester and
Cecil, that as their Mistress had, from the beginning, discovered
an inclination towards bringing the differences between herself and
her fubjets to an amicable accommodation, so file was still desirous,
notwithstanding the Regent's audacious accusation, that they should
be terminated in that manner +.

SUCH moderation is scarce compatible with the firong resent-

ment, which calumniated innocence naturally feels; or with that
eagerness to vindicate itself, which it always discovers. In Mary's

*Ancerfln, ve.iv. 122. t Id. 133, i :8, 1: Ibid. iv. 134. Cabbala, 157.

situation,

situation, an offer so ill-timed muff be confidered as a confession of BooK V.
the weakness of her cause. The known character of her commis- '"
fioners exempts them from the imputation of folly, or the suspicion
of treachery. Some secret conviction, that the conduct of their
Mistress could not bear so ftriEt a scrutiny, seems to be the inof:
probable motive of this imprudent proposal, by which they endea-
voured to avoid it.

IT appeared in this light to Elizabeth, and afforded her a pre-

tence for rejecting it. She told Mary's commiflioners, that, in the Decem. 4.
present juncture, nothing could be so dishonourable to their Mif-
trefs, as an accommodation; and that the matter would seem to
be huddled up in this manner, merely to suppress discoveries, and
to hide her shame; nor was it possible that the could be admitted,
with any decency, into her pretence, while She lay under the in-
famy of such a public accusation.

UPON this repulse, Mary's commifiioners withdrew; and as they

had declined answering, there seemed now to be no further rea-
son for the Regent's producing the proofs in support of his charge.
But without getting these into her hands, Elizabeth's schemes were
incompleat. And her artifice for this purpose was as mean, but as
successful as any flle had hitherto employed. She commanded her
commifiioners to testify her indignation and displeasure at the Re-
gent's presumption, in forgetting so far the duty of a subjet, as to
accuse his Sovereign of such atrocious crimes. He, in order to
regain the good opinion of such a powerful protearefs, offered to
fliew that his accusations were not malicious, nor ill-grounded.
Then were produced, and delivered to the Englifi commifionlers,
the adis of the Scottish Parliament in confirmation of the Regent's

VOL. I. H h h authority,

BOOK V. authority, and of the Queen's resignation; the confessions of the
i568p. persons executed for the King's murder; and the fatal casket which

contained the letters, sonnets, and contrats, that have been already
mentioned.

Elizabeth ELIZABETH having got these into her pofTefion, began to lay
treats Mary alide the expressions of friendship and respect which she had hitherto
rigotur. used in all her letters to the Scottish Queen. She now wrote to her

in such terms, as if the presumptions of her guilt had amounted al-
most to certainty; flie blamed her for refuting to vindicate herself
from an accusation which could not be left unanswered, without a
manifest injury to her character; and plainly intimated, that unless
that were done, no change would be made in her present situation *.
She hoped that such a discovery of her sentiments would intimidate
Mary, who was scarce recovered from the (hock of the Regent's
attack on her reputation, and force her to confirm her resignation of
the Crown, to ratify Murray's authority as Regent, and to content
that both herself and her son flhould reside in England, under her
protection. This scheme Elizabeth had much at heart; fie pro-
posed it both to Mary and to her commissioners, and neglected no
argument, nor artifice, that could possibly recommend it. Mary
saw how fatal this would prove to her reputation, to her preten-
sions, and even to her personal safety. She rejected it without hefita-
tion. " Death, said fie, is less dreadful than such an ignomi-

nious flep. Rather than give away, with my own hands, the
Crown which descended to me from my ancestors, I will part
( with life; but the last words I utter, (hall be those of a Queen
" of Scotland t."

* Anders. vol. iv. 179, 183. Good. vol. ii. 260.
t Haynes, 497. See Append. N? XXVII. Good. vol. ii. 274, 301.

I Ar

AT the fame time (he seems to have been sensible how open her BOOK Vr
reputation lay to censure, while (he suffered such a public accufa- -

1568.

tion to remain unanswered; and though the conference was now
dissolved, she impowered her commissioners to present a reply to
the allegations of her enemies, in which she denied, in the ftrongefi
terms, the crimes imputed to her; and recriminated upon the Re- Decem. 2z4
gent and his party, by accusing them of having devised and exe-
cuted the murther of the King*. The Regent and his associates
asserted their innocence with great warmth. Mary continued to
insist on a personal interview, a condition which she knew would
never be granted -'. Elizabeth urged her to vindicate her own
honour. But it is evident from the delays, the evasions, and sub-
terfuges, to which both Queens had recourse by turns, that Mary
avoided, and Elizabeth did not desire to make any further progress
in the inquiry.

THE Regent was now impatient to return into Scotland, where i569.
his adversaries were endeavouring, in his absence, to raise some Febr. 2.

Dismisses the'

commotions. Before he set out, he was called into the Privy Regent vith-
Council, to receive a final declaration of Elizabeth's sentiments. provior
Cecil acquainted him, in her name, that on one hand nothing had condemning
been objected to his conduct, which flhe could reckon detrimental
to his honour, or inconfifent with his duty; nor had he, on the
other hand, produced any thing against his Sovereign, on which
she could found an unfavourable opinion of her acions; and for
this reason, Afe resolved to leave all the affairs of Scotland, precisely
in the fame situation, in which she had found them, at the be-

* Good. 2. 285. 1 Ibid. 283. Cabbala, 157.

I h l 2 ginning

BOOK V; ginning of the conference. The Queen's commiffloners were dif-

L-T miffed much in the fame manner *
1569.

AFTER the attention of both nations had been fixed so earnestly

on this conference, upwards of four months, such a conclusion of
the whole appears, at first fight, trifling and ridiculous. Nothing,
however, could be more conformable to Elizabeth's original views,

But secretly or more subservient to her future schemes. Notwithstanding her
supports his
party. teeming impartiality, the had no thoughts of continuing neuter;

nor was the at any loss on whom to beflow her protection. Be-
fore the Regent left London, she supplied him with a con-
fiderable fum of money, and engaged to support the King's
authority, to the utmost of her power -. Mary, by her own
conduct, fortified this resolution. Enraged at the repeated in-
stances of Elizabeth's artifice and deceit, which ihe had discover-
ed during the progress of the conference, and despairing of ever-
obtaining any succour from her, she endeavoured to rouze her own
adherents in Scotland to arms, by imputing such designs to Eliza-
beth and Murray, as could not fail to inspire every Scotchman with
indignation. Murray, the pretended, had agreed to convey the
Prince her son into England; to surrender to Elizabeth the places
of greatest strength in the kingdom; and to acknowledge the de-
pendance of the Scotch upon the English nation. In return for
this, he was to be declared the lawful heir of the Crown of Ocot-
land; and, at the fame time, the question with regard to the Eng-
lifh fucceflion was to be decided in favour of the Earl of Hartford,
who had promised to marry one of Cecil's daughters. An account

* Good. 2. 315. 333. -1' Id. 213. Carte, 3. 478.

of

of these wild and chimerical projects was spread industriously among BooK V.
the Scots. Elizabeth, perceiving it was calculated of purpose to
bring her government into difreputation, laboured to destroy its es- 9
sects, by a counter-proclamation, and became more disgusted than
ever with the Scottish Queen *.

THE Regent, on his return, found the kingdom in the utmost Efforts of

Mary's adhe-

tranquillity. But the rage of the Queen's adherents, which hadrents againa
been suspended in expectation that the conference in England would him.
terminate, to her advantage, was now ready to break out with all
the violence of civil war. They were encouraged, too, by the ap-
pearance of a leader, whose high quality and pretensions intitled
him to great authority in the nation. This was the Duke of Cha-
telherault, who had resided for some years in France, and was now
sent over by that court, with a small supply of money, in hopes
that the presence of the first nobleman in the kingdom would
strengthen the Queen's faction. Elizabeth had detained him in
England, for some months, under various pretences, but was obliged
at last to susser him to proceed on his journey. Before his depar-
ture, Mary invested him with the high dignity of her Lieutenant Feb. 25.
General in Scotland, together with the fantafftic title of her adopted
father.

THE Regent did not give him time to form his party into any His vigorous
regular body. He assembled an army, with his usual expedition, con°duC

breaks her

and marched to Glasgow. The followers of Argyll and Huntly, party.
who composed the chief part of the Queen's faction, lying in very
distant corners of the kingdom, and many of the Duke's depen-

* Iaycs, 500, 503. See Append. N° XXVII[.

dants

BOOK V. dants having fallen, or having been taken in the battle of Langlfde,

ó..-~ the fitrit and strength of his adherents was totally broken, and an
1569.

accommodation with the Regent was the only thing, which could
prevent the deftrudion of his estate and vassals. This was effected
without difficulty; and on no unreasonable terms. The Duke
promised to acknowledge the authority both of the King and of
the Regent; and to claim no jurifdiition in consequence of the
commission, which he had received from the Queen. The Re-
gent bound himself to repeal the at, which had passed for attaint-
ing several of the Queen's adherents; to restore all, who would
submit to the King's government, to the possession of their estates
and honours; and to hold a Convention, wherein all the differences.
between the two parties flould be fettled by mutual content. The
Duke gave hostages for his faithful performance of the treaty; and,
in token of their sincerity, he and Lord Herreis accompanied the
Regent to Stirling, and visited the young King. The Regent set
at liberty the prisoners taken at Langfide *.

ARGYLL and Huntly refuted to be included in this treaty. A fe-

cret negociation was carrying on, in England, in favour of the
captive Queen, with so much success, that her affairs began to wear
a better aspet, and her return into her own kingdom seemed to be
an event not very diflant. The French King had lately obtained
such advantages over the Hugonots, that the extinEtion of that
party appeared to be inevitable, and France, by recovering do-
meinic tranquillity, would be no longer prevented from protecting
her friends ih Britain. These circumflances not only influenced
Argyll and Huntly, but made so deep an impression on the Duke,

* Cabbala, x6i. Crawf.Mcm. io6.

that

that he appeared to be wavering and irresolute, and plainly discovered BOOK V.
that he wilhed to evade the accomplishment of the treaty. The Re- r- '
gent saw the danger of allowing the Duke to shake himself loose, 569
in this manner, from his engagements; and inltantly formed a refo-
lution equally bold, and politic. He commanded his guards to seize
Chatelherault in his own house in Edinburgh, whither he had come,
in order to attend the Convention agreed upon; and, regardless
either of his dignity as the first nobleman in the kingdom, and next
heir to the Crown, or of the promises of personal security, on which
he had relied, committed him and Lord Herreis, prisoners to the April i6.
catle of Edinburgh *. A blow so fatal and unexpected dispirited
the party. Argyll submitted to the King's government, and made
his peace with the Regent, on very easy terms; and Huntly, being
left alone, was at last obliged to lay down his arms.

SOON after, Lord Boyd returned into Scotland, and brought let- Jly 21
ters to the Regent both from the English and Scottish Qeens. A A proposal ia

favour of Ma-

Convention was held at Perth, in order to confider them. Eliza-ry rejeaed.
beth's letter contained three different proposals with regard to
Mary; that ihe should either be restored to the full poffeflfon of
her former authority; or be admitted to reign jointly with the
King her son; or at least be allowed to reside in Scotland, in
some decent retirement, without any thare in the adminifiration of
government. These overtures were extorted by the importunity
of Fenelon the French ambassador, and have some appearance of
being favourable to the captive Qgeen. They were, however,
perfectly suitable to Elizabeth's general fyitem with regard to Scottiflh
affairs. Among propositions so incqual and difproportionatc, lhe

* Crawf. Mcnm. ir. Melv. 202.

cafily

BOOK V. easily saw where the choice would fall. The two former were re-
.-----' jeted ; and long delays must necessarily have intervened, and many

156 9 difficulties have arisen, before every circumstance relative to the last

could be finally adjusted. *

MARY, in her letter, demanded that her marriage with Both-

well should be reviewed by the proper judges, and if found in-
valid, should be dissolved by a legal sentence of divorce. This
fatal marriage was the principal source of all the calamities ihe had
endured for two years; a divorce was the only thing which could
repair the injuries her reputation had suffered by that flep. It was
her interest to have proposed it early; and it is not easy to account

Norfolk's for her long silence with refpef to this point. Her particular mo-
scheme for tive for proposing it, at this time, began to be so well known, that
marrying the
Qurrg the the demand was rejected by the Convention of eRates. They im-
Scots. puted it not so much to any abhorrence of Bothwell, as to her ea-

gernefs to conclude a marriage with the Duke of Norfolk.

THIS marriage was the object of that secret negociation in Eng-

land, which we have already mentioned; but, like all those con-
certed for the relief of the Queen of Scots, it ended tragically.
The fertile and projecting genius of Maitland first conceived this
fchernc. During the Conference at York, he communicated it to
the Duke himself, and to the Bishop of Ross. The former readily
closed with a scheme, so flattering to his ambition. The latter
confidered it as a probable device for rcftoring his Mifrrefs to li-
berty, and replacing her on her throne. Nor was Mary, with
whom Norfolk held a correspondence, by means of his sifter Lady
Scroop, averse from a measure, which would have restored her to

Spots. 230.

her

her kingdom, with so much fp!endor* . The sudden removal of BOOKV.
the conference from York to Westminster suspended, but did not ~ -'
break off this intrigue. Maitland and Ross were frill the Duke's
prompters, and his agents; and many letters and love-tokens were
exchanged between him and the Queen of Scots.

Bur as he could not hope, that under an administration so vigi-conceals t

lant as Elizabeth's, such an intrigue could be kept long concealed, fro Elza-
he attempted to deceive her by the appearance of openness and can-
dor, an artifice which seldom fails of success. He mentioned to her
the rumour, which was spread of his marriage with the Scottish
Queen; he complained of it as a groundless calumny; and dif-
claimed all thoughts of that kind, with many expressions full of
contempt, both for Mary's characer and dominions. Jealous as
Elizabeth was of every thing relative to the Queen of Scots, {he
seems to have credited these professions t. But, intfead of difcon-
tinuing the negociation, he renewed it with greater vigour, and ad-
mitted into it new afrociates. Among these was the Regent of Scot-
land. He had given great offence to Norfolk, by his public accufa-
tion of the Queen, in breach of the concert into which he had en-
tered at York. He was then ready to return into Scotland. The
influence of the Duke, in the North of England, was great. The
Earls of Northumberland and Westmorland, the most powerful
noblemen in that part of the kingdom, threatened to revenge upon
the Regent, the injuries which he had done his Sovereign. In or-
der to secure his safe retreat, he addrefied himself to Norfolk, and,
after some apology for his past conduct, he insinuated that the

* Camd. 4i9. Hayncs, 573. State Trials, I. 73.
- Haynes, 574. State Trials, i. 79,80.
VOL.. I. I i Duke's

BooKr V. Duke's scheme of marrying the Queen his- siser, Was no lersatccdpt,
--- a ble to him, than beneficial to both kingdoms; and that he would

. concur, with the utmost ardor, in promoting so defitable an

event *. Norfolk heard him with the credulity, natural to those,
who are passionately bent upon any design. He wrote to the two
Earls to desist from any hostile attempt againif Murray, and to that
he owed his passage through the Northern Counties, without dif-
turbance.

Glinste ENCOURAGED by his success in gaining the Regent, he next at-

conent of thetempted to draw the Englifa nobles to approve his design. The
Englht no-
bl¢ngil;. o nation began to despair of Elizabeth's marrying. I-Her jealousy kept

the question with regard to the right of succession undecided.
The memory of the civil wars, which had desolated England for
more than a century, on account of the disputed titles of the
houses of York and Lancaster, was still recent. Almost the whole
ancient nobility had perished, and the nation itself had been brought
to the brink of deftrudion, in that unhappy contest. The Scottiflh
Queen, though her right of succession was generally held to be
undoubted, might meet wifi formidable competitors. She might
marry a foreign and a Popish Prince, and bring both liberty and
religion into danger. But, by marrying her to an Englishman,
a zealous Protestant, the most powerful and most universally be-
loved of all the nobles, an effectual remedy seemed to be provided
against all there evils. The greater part of the Peers, either di-
redly, or tacitly, approved of it, as a salutary project. The Earls
of Arundel, Pembroke, Leicefler, and Lord Lumley subscribed a
letter to the Scottilf Queen, written with Leicester's hand, in which

And. 3. 34..

they

they warmly recommended the match, but infiited, by way of pre- BQOK V.
liminary, on Mary's p;omife, that fle (hould attempt nothing, in 1569
consequence of her pretensions to the English Crown, prejudicial
to Elizabeth or to her posterity; that she (hould content to a league
offensive and defensive between the two kingdoms; that (he should
confirm the prefenteftablifhment of religion in Scotland; and re-
ceive into favour such of her fubjets as had appeared in arms against
her. Upon her agreeing to the marriage, and ratifying there ar-
:ticles, they engaged that the English nobles would not only con-
cur in restoring her, immediately, to her own throne, but in fe-
c.uring to her that of England, in reversion. Mary readily con-
sented to all tbefe proposals, except the second, with regard to
which, the demanded some time for consulting her ancient ally the
French King *.

THE whole of this negociation was indutrioufly concealed from

Elizabeth. Her jealousy of the Scottish Queen was well known,
nor could it be expected, that (he would willingly come-into a
measure, which tended so visibly to save -the reputation, and to in-
crease the power of her rival. But, in a matter of so much confe-
quence to the nation, the taking a few steps without her knowledge,
could scarce be reckoned criminal; and while every person con-
,cerned, even Mary and Norfolk themselves, declared that nothing
should be concluded without obtaining her.confent, the duty and
allegiance of fubjeds seemed to be fully preserved. The greater
part of the nobles regarded the matter in this light. Thofe.who
conducted.the intrigue, had farther and more dangerous views. They
saw the advantages which Mary procured -by this treaty, to be pre-
sent and certain; and the execution of the promires which fle came

* Anders. vol. iii. 5r. Camd. 420.

I i i 2 under,

BOOK V. under, to be difant and uncertain. They had early communicated

-ó9 their scheme to the Kings of France and Spain, and obtained:

569their approbation *. A treaty, concerning which they consulted

foreign Princes, while they concealed it from their own Sovereign,
could not be deemed innocent. They hoped, however, that the
union of so many nobles would render it necessary for Elizabeth to
comply; they flattered themselves, tlat a-combination so strong
would be altogether irresistible; and such was their confidence of
success, that when a plan was concerted, in the north of England,
for rescuing Mary out of the hands of her keepers, Norfolk, who
was afraid that if she recovered liberty, her sentiments in his favour
might change, used all his interest to diffwade the conspirators from
attempting it t.

IN this situation did the affair remain, when Lord Boyd arrived

from England; and, besides the letters which he produced pub-
lickly, brought others in cyphers from Norfolk and Throgmorton
to the Regent, and to Maitland. These were full of the most fan-
guine hopes. The whole nobles of England concurred, said they,
in favouring the design. Every preliminary was adjusted; nor was
it possible that a scheme so deep laid, conducted with so much art,
and supported both by power and by numbers, could miscarry, or
be defeated in the execution. Nothing now was wanting, but the
concluding ceremony. It depended on the Regent to haflen that,
by procuring a sentence of divorce, which would remove the only
obstacle that flood in the way. This was expected of him, in con-
sequence of his promise to Norfolk; and if he regarded either his
interest or his fame, or even his safety, he would not fail to- fulfil
there engagements .

*Andcrf. vol. iii. 63. -1 Camd. 420. i Haynes, 520. Spots. 230.
Sec Appendix, N° XXIX.

BUT

BUT the Regent was now in very different circumstances, from BOOK V.

those which had formerly induced him to asset an approbation of '-'ó-
Norfolk's schemes. He saw that the downfal of his own power mu 569
be the first consequence of the Duke's success. And if the Queen,
who confidered him as the chief author of all her misfortunes, Mhould
recover her ancient authority, he could never expect favour; nor
scarce hope for impunity. No wonder he declined a ftep so fatal
to himself, and which would have eftablifled the grandeur of ano-
ther on the ruins of his own. This refusal occasioned a delay. But;
as every other circumstance was fettled, the Bishop of Ross, in name
of his Mistress, and the Duke, in person, declared, in pretence of
the French Ambassador, their mutual content to the marriage, and
a contract to this purpose was signed, and entrusted to the keeping
of the Ambassador-*.

THE intrigue was now in so many hands, that it could not long Agut ,3
remain a secret. It began to be whispered at court; and Elizabeth Elizabeth dif-

covers the

calling the Duke into her presence, expressed the utmost indigna-Duke's de-
tion at his condut, and charged him to lay aside all thoughts of fats idc
prosecuting such a dangerous design. Soon after, Leicester, who pern-
haps had countenanced the project with no other intention, reveal-
ed the whole circumstances of it to the Queen. Pembroke, Arun-
del, Lumly, and Throgmorton were confined, and examined.
Mary was watched more narrowly than ever; and Hastings Earl
of Huntington, who pretended to dispute with the Scottish Queen,
her right to the fuccefion, being joined in commission with Shrews-
bury, rendered her imprisonment more intolerable, by the excess
of his vigilance and rigour . The Scottish Regent, threatened

Carte, vol. iii. 4.86. 1- Hayncs, 525, 526, 530, 532.

with

Boor. V. with Elizabeth's displeasure, meanly betrayed the Duke; put his

5~ó, ' letters in her hands; and furniflhed all the intelligence in his power *.

569 The Duke himfllf retired first to Howard-houfe, and then, in con-

tempt of a summons to appear before the Privy Council, fled to
his feat in Norfolk. Intimidated by the imprisonment of his affo-
ciates; coldly received by his friends in that county; unprepared for
a rebellion; and unwilling perhaps to rebel; he hesitated for some
OC)cober 3 days, and at last obeyed a second call, and repaired to Windsor.

He was firfl kept as a prisoner il a private house, and then sent to
.the Tower. After being confined there upwards of nine months,
he was released upon his humble fubmiiffion to Elizabeth, giving
her a promise, on his allegiance, to hold no farther correspondence
with the Scottish Queen j-. During the progress of Norfolk's ne-
gociations, the Queen's partizans in Scotland, who made no doubt
of their issuing in her refloration to the throne, with an increase of

Miaitland im- authority, were wonderfully elevated. Maitland was the foul of that
pifoned by party, and the person, whose ativity and abilities the Regent chief-

ly dreaded. He had laid the plan of that intrigue, which had
kindled inch comtbuifion in England. He continued to foment
the spirit of difaffedion in Scotland, and had seduced from the Re-
gent Lord Home, Kirkaldy, and several of his former associates.
While he enjoyed liberty, the Regent could not reckon his own
power secure. For this reason, he employed Captain Crawfurd, one
.of his creatures, to accuse him of being accessory to the murder
of the King; and under that pretence carried him a prisoner to
Edinburgh. He would soon have been brought to trial, but was
saved by the friendship of Kirkaldy, governor of the cafile, who,
by pretending a warrant for that purpose from the Regent, got him
out of the hands of the person, to whose care he was committed,

* See Appendix, N" XXX. -t Haynes, 520, 597.

and

and conducted him into the cattle, which, from that time, was en- BOOK V.
tirely under Maitland's command. The loss of a place of so much '-
importance, and the defection of a man so eminent for military 59
skill as Kirkaldy, brought the Regent into some difreputation, for
which, however, the success of his ally Elizabeth abundantly corn-
penfated.

THE intrigue carried on for restoring the Scottish Queen to liber-A rebellion

ty having been discovered, and difappoin:ed, an attempt was made,beth by M-
to the fame purpose, by force of arms; but with no better fuc-ry'sadherents.
cess. The Earls of Northumberland and Westmorland, though
little distinguished by their personal merit, were two of the most
ancient and powerful of the English peers. Their estates in the
northern counties were great, and they pofieffed that influence over
the inhabitants, which was hereditary in the popular and martial
families of Percy and of Nevil. They were both attached to the
Popish religion, and discontented with the court, where new men,
and a new system prevailed. Ever since Mary's arrival in England,
they had warmly espoused her interest, and zeal for popery, oppo-
fition to the court, and commiseration of her sufferings, had en-
gaged them in different plots for her relief. Notwithstanding the
vigilance of her keepers, they held a close correspondence with her,
and communicated to her all their designs *. They were privy to
Norfolk's schemes; but the caution with which he proceeded did
not sui't their ardor and impetuosity. The liberty of the Scottish
Queen was not their sole objet. They aimed at bringing about a
change in the religion, and a revolution in the government of the
kingdom. For this reason, they solicited the aid of the King of
Spain, the avowed and zealous patron of Popery in that age. No-

* Haynes, 595. Murdin, 44, 62, &c.
7 thl ingl

BOOK V.. thing could be more delightful to the restless spirit of Philip, or

569'-more necessary towards facilitating his schemes in the Netherlands,

than the involving England in the confusion and miseries of a civil
war. The Duke of Alva, by his diretion, encouraged the two
Earls, and promired, so soon as they either took the field with their
forces, or surprised any place of strength, or rescued the Queen of
Scots, that he would supply them both with money, and a strong
body of troops. La Mothe, the governor of Dunkirk, in the dif-
guise of a sailor, founded the ports where it would be most pro-
per to land. And Chiapini Vitelli, one of Alva's ablest officers,
was dispatched into England, on pretence of fettling some commer".
cial differences between the two nations; but in reality, that the
rebels might be sure of a leader of experience, so soon as they ven-
tured to take arms .
Defeated. THE conduc of this negociation occasioned many meetings and

messages between the two Earls. Elizabeth was informed of these;
and though she fufpeded nothing of their real design, she con-
cluded that they were among the number of Norfolk's confidents.
They were summoned, for this reason, to repair to court. Con-
fcious of guilt, and afraid of discovery, they delayed giving obedi-
ence. A second, and more peremptory order was issued. This
they could not decline, without f(aking off their allegiance. And
as no time was left for deliberation, they instantly ereced their
ovem. Iftandard against their Sovereign. The re-eftablilhing the catho-

lic religion; the fettling the order of fuccefion to the Crown; the
defence of the ancient nobility; were the motives they alledged to
justify their rebellion -. Many of the lower people flocked to
them, with such arms as they could procure; and had the capacity of

* Carte,vol. iii. 489, 490. Camd.42. 1- Strypc, vol. i. 5-17.

8 the

.the leaders been, in any degree, equal to the enterprize, it mufRBooK V.
have soon grown to be extremely formidable. Elizabeth aaed with -
prudence and vigour; and was served by her fubjeas with fidelity 59
and ardor. On the first rumour of an insurrection, Mary was re-
moved to Coventry, a place of strength, which could not be taken
without a regular siege; a detachment of the rebels, which was
sent to' rescue her, returned without success. Troops were assem-
bled in different parts of the kingdom; as they advanced, the male-
contents retired. In their retreat their numbers dwindled away,
and their spirits funk. Despair and uncertainty whither to direct
their flight, kept together, for some time, a small body of them,
among the mountains of Northumberland. But they were at length.December a.
obliged to disperse, and the chiefs took refuge among the Scottish
borderers. The two Earls, together with the Countess of Nor-
-thumberland, wandering for some days in the waftes of Liddifdale,
,were plundered by the banditti, exposed to the rigours of the sea-
son, and left detitute of the necessaries of life. 'Weifmorland was
.concealed by Scot of Buccleugh and Ker of Ferniherft, and after-
wards conveyed into the Netherlands. Northumberland was seized
by the Regent, who had marched with some troops towards the
-borders, to prevent any impression the rebels might make on thole
.mutinous provinces *.

AMIDST so many surprising events, the affairs of the church, Church

:for two years, have-almoft escaped our notice. Its General Affem-fai
blies were held regularly; but no business of much importance
.employed their attention. As the number of the Protestant clergy
,*da.ily.encreafed, the deficiency of the funds, set apart.for their sub-

* Cabbala, I 71. Camd. 422.
TOL. I. .K k k .fiftance,

BcoK V. fiflance, became greater. Many efforts were made towards recover-

--- / ing the ancient patrimony of the church, or at least so much of it,'
1 9. as was pofliefed by the Popish incumbents, a race of men, who

were, now, not only useless, but burdensome to the nation. But tho'
the manner in which the Regent received their addresses and com-
plailnt, was very different from that to which they had been ac-
customed, no effeiual remedy was provided; and while they sus-
sered intolerable oppression, and groaned under the most extreme
poverty, fair words, and liberal promises, were all they were able
to obtain *.

ELIZABETHI began now to be weary of keeping such a danger-

:.:'iceth r-- ous prisoner as the Scottifl Queen. During the former year, the
!L,:.\=r. l;'e tranquillity of her government had been disturbed, first by a feciet
r.cJ lC;.:t. combination of some of her nobles, then by the rebellion of others;

and she often declared, not without reason, that Mary was the
bidden cause of both. Many of her own subjects favoured, or
pitied the captive Queen; the Roman Catholic Princes on the con-
tinent were warmly interefRed in her cause. The detaining her
any longer in England, flie foresaw, would be made the pretext or
occasion of perpetual cabals and insurrections among the former, and
nmight expoef her to the hofile attempts of the latter. She re-
solved, thecrfore, to give up Mary into the hands of the Regent,
whose security, no lets than her own, depended on preventing her
from re-afcending the throne. The negociation for this purpose
was carriel some length, when it was discovered by the. vigilance
of the Bifliop of Ross, who, together with the French and Spanih
Ambassadors, remonti ated againif the infamy of such an action,
and represented the surrendering the Qiccn to her rebellious sub-

* CnlJ. vol, l. 80, &c.

jeas,

Jeds, to be the fame thing, as if Elizabeth should, by her own au- BOOK V.
thority, condemn her to instant death. This procured a delay; J57Q>
and the murder of the Regent prevented the revival of that de-
sign *.

HAMILTON of Bothwellhaugh was the person who committed Butheismu-

this barbarous action. He had been condemned to death soon as-
ter the battle of Langfide, as we have already related, and owed
his life to the Regent's clemency. But part of his estate had been
bestowed upon one of the Regent's favourites, who seized his house,
and turned out his wife naked, in a cold night, into the open fields,
where, before next morning, she became furiously mad. This injury
made a deeper impression on him, than the benefit he had re-
ceived, and from that moment he vowed to be revenged upon-
the Regent. Party-rage strengthened and inflamed his private re-
fentment. His kinsmen the Hamiltons applauded the enterprize.
The maxims of that age justified the most desperate course he could:
take to obtain vengeance. He followed the Regent for some time,
and watched for an opportunity to strike the blow. He resolved'
at last to wait till his enemy should arrive at Linlithgow, through,
which he was to pass in his way from Stirling to Edinburgh. He
took his stand in a wooden gallery, which had a window towards,
the fireet; spread a feather-bed on the floor, to hinder the noise of
his feet from being heard; hung up a black cloth behind him,
that his shadow might not be observed fiom without; and after all'
this preparation, calmly expected the Regent's approach, who
had lodged during the night in a house not far distant. Some in-
diftina informnation of the danger which threatened him, had been'

* Carte, vol. iii. 49i. Anderlf vol. iii. 84.

K k k 2. convevcyl

BOOK V. conveyed to the Regent, and he paid so much regard to it, thatl
<1c-- l he resolved to return by the fame gate through which he. had en-

I570. tered, and to fetch .i compass. round the town. But as the croudu

about the gate was great, and he himself unacquainted with fear,.
he proceeded directly along the itreet; and the throng of the people
obliging him to move very slowly, gave the affafin time to take so.
true an aim, that he shot him with a single bullet, through the lower
part of his belly, and killed the horse of a gentleman who rode on,
his other fide. His followers instantly endeavoured to break into
the house whence the blow had come, but they found the door
strongly barricaded; and before it could be forced open, Hamilton
had mounted a fleet horse, which flood ready for him at a back-
passage, and was got far beyond their reach. The Regent died the
fame night of his wound *.-
His charaaer. THERE is no person, in that age, about whom hitorians have-

been more divided, or whose character has been drawan with. such
opposite colours. Personal intrepidity, military skill, fgacity and
vigour in the administration of civil affairs, are virtues, which even
his enemies allow him to have pofeffed, in an eminent degree. His.
moral qualities are more dubious, and ought neither to be praised,.
nor censured, without great reserve, and many difrintions. In a
fierce age, he was capable of using victory with. humanity, and of
treating the vanquished with moderation. A patron of learning,
which, among martial nobles, was either unknown, or despised.
Zealous for religion, to a degree, which diflinguilhed him, even,
at a time, when professions of that kind were not uncommon. His
confidence in his friends was extreme, and inferior only. to his libe-

*Buchan 385. Crawf, Mem, 124;
3 rality

rality towards them, which knew no bounds. A difintereited pa'- BooK V.
sion for the liberty of his country, prompted him to oppose the per-
nicious fyflem, which the Princes of Lorrain had obliged the Queen- 5
mother to pursue. On Mary's return into Scotland,. he served her
with a zeal and affection, to which he sacrificed the friendship of
those who were most attached to his person. But, on the other
hand, his ambition was immoderate; and events happened, that
opened to him vast profpecs, which allured his enterprising genius,
and led him to actions, inconsistent with the duty of a subjed. His
treatment of the Queen, to whose bounty he was so much indebted,
was unbrotherly and ingrateful. The dependance on Elizabeth, un-
der which he brought Scotland, was disgraceful to the nation. IHe
deceived and betrayed Norfolk, with a baseness unworthy of a manr
of honour. His elevation to such unexpected dignity, inspired him
with new passions, with haughtiness and reserve; and instead of
his natural manner,. which was blunt and open, he asseted the
arts of dissimulation and refinement. Fond, towards the end of
his life, of flattery, and impatient of advice, his creatures, by sooth-
ing his vanity, led him astray, while his ancient friends flood at
a distance, and predited his approaching fall. But, amidst the tur-
bulence and confusion of that facious period, he dispensed justice
with so much impartiality, he repressed the licentious borderers with
so much courage, and established such uncommon order and tran-
quillity in the country, that his adminifiration was extremely popular,
and he was long and affectionately remembered among the com-
mons, by the name of the Good Regent.

The END of the FIRST VOLUME.

# BOOKS printed for, and sold by A. MILLAR in the Strand, LONDON.

B O 0 K S printed fir, andfold by A. M I L L A R in the Strand,

LONDON.

FOL 1 0.

T. T
n HE Hijiory and Antiqu.ities of S:ot;'and, from the earliest Account of Time, to tihe

Dea'h of James I. anno 1437. By I/illiam Ataitland, F. R. S. And from that
Period to the Acceffon of James VI. to the Crouvn of England, anno 1603. By
another Hand. The whole compiled from the most authentick Vouchers.

It ought to be observed, that as it -was for many Centuries the Policy of both England and

France, to be allied wuith Scotland, so there is no underfiandirg the Hifories of thoj'
N'ations, qwithout a thorough KInotwledge of that of the Scots, 'cl'.ich hozvce'er cannot be
obtaincdfrom any Hif/ovy of that Piople hitherto published.

2. An Univcrfal eH/iory, from the earlieR Account of Time to the present. Illuifrated
r'ith Maps, Cut:, Chrono'ogical and other Tables. In lo vols. or 2'i in 8vo.

3. The History of the Growth and Decay of the Othman Empire, in 2 Parts, adorned

with zz Heads of the TurkiJhI Er,/erors. Translated from the Latin of Dematius Cantrmir,
late Prince of AMoldav.ia. By N. -indal, M. A.

4. A Com/n1te e SyJim of Geograpy : Illultrated with 70 Maps. In 2 vols.
;. BiJ.op Baurntc's Hjiolr, o'f ohs os-n 'Times. In 2 vol'. or 4 vols 8\o.
BiJhopBuirnet's H/loiy of the Rcfor. ation of the Church of England. The 3d Part. Being
at Supplement to the 2 vols. formerly putblifhed.

6. Britannia: Or, a Chorographical Description of Gre, y-Britain and Ireland. Writtcn

by 'illiamn Camden, Clarenceux King at Arms; and translated into Englif, with Additions
and Improvements. Revised, digefled, and publithed, with large Additions, by Edm. Gib-
'on, D. D. late Lord Bishop of London. The 3d Edition. Illultrated with Maps of all the
Counties, and Prints of the Britih, Roman, and Saxon Coins. In z vols.

7. The genuine W'orks of Flyvius Josephus, the JewiJh Historian. Translated from the
Original Greek, according to Ha.venramp's accurate Edition, into EngliA.

With an Account of the Jewi/h Coins, Weights, and Measures. In 2 vols. Royal Pa-

per. By William Whiton, M. A. some Time Profellor of the Mathema:icks in the Univer-
fity of Camibridge.

The fame Book in i vol. on a smaller Paper, or in 4 vols. in 8vo.

U A R f IO.
8. A New Hiflory of Great Britain. In z vols. Vol. I. Containing the Reigns of

J.L. James 1. and Charles I. Vol. II. Containing the Commonwealth, and the Reigns
of Charles II. and James 1I. By David Hume, Efq;

9. Essays and'Tlcatifes on fevcral Subjeds, in i vol. By David HIume, Efq; To which
is added, an Index.

The fame, in 5 vols. 12mo.
o1. Memoirs of the Reign of oQueen Elizabeth, from the Year x;Sl, till her Death. By
sThomas Bir.l', D. D. F. R. S. In 2 vols.

11. T'he -Iifory of Philofop/y : Containing the Lives, O/inions, Aions, and Difcoufes

of the Phili/oJphers of every Sct. By 'Thomas Stanley, Efq; The Fourth Edition. In which
the innumerable Miflakes, both in the Text and Notes of all former Editions are correded;
the Citations and References exactly adjusted, and compared throughout with the Originals,
and with the Latin Tan,/l..ion, printed at .c/fi/ik.

I z. An H-Iiflical Account ot the l'riJi/h Trade over the Caspian Sea; with the Author's

.ournal of I'ravcls from Englnid through Rul/ia into Persia; and back thiough Russia,
(;c many and Holland. To which are added, the Revolutions of Peio/a during the prfeent
Century, with the particular lliilory of Ihe Great Ufurpcr Nadi Kouli. Illuflrated with
Maps and Copper-plates. The zd Edition, rcvifcd and corredted. In z vols. By Jon.
llanxtay, Meichant,

I L O.
7

SOLI O.

.· . A CAC. Auguli T'lu-ini Hi;fj iaAiY Teiepr.is. Edita per S. Buckley. In 7 vols.
4-. J The Works of the Hon. Robert Boyle. To which is prefixed, A new A<count.

of his Life, confilling partly of Memoirs, drawn up by himself. In 5 vols.

5. The IJ'ow,.s of Francis BRcon, Lord High Chancellor of England. With several addi-

tional Pieces, never before printed in any Edition of,his Works. To .which is prefixed,
*aNew Life of the Author. By Mr. Mallet. In three vols. The 3d'Editioni.

The Additional Pieces and *Life may be had alone, to complete the sirs Edition of the
4 vols. in 1730.

16. The Orawna, and others Works of 7ames Harrington, Efq; The 3d Edition. To
·which is now added, an Index.

The Aepend.x may be had alone, to complete those Gentlemen's Books, who have bought
Mr. To'and's Edition.

17. An Hlifiorical and Political Dfcourfe of'the Laws and Gowernment of England. By

Natbhaiel Bacon of Gray's-Inn, Efq; The 4th Edition. Correaed and improved by a Gen-
.tleman of the Middle-1emple.

18. The Works of Edmund Ludlow. Containing his AIemoirs and other Tra'ss, now col-
le&ted into one vol. To which is prefixed, the Life of the Author, by the Editor.

19. Difcourjes concerning Gowvernment. By Algernon Sidney. To which is added, some

·Letters of Mr. Sidney's never before publilhed, and a Life of the Author, by Thomas Birch,
D. D. and S. R. S. With a copious Index.

There are a few of the above Seven Books printed on a fuperfineWriting-Paper.
20. All the Works of John Locke, Efq; with.Alphabetical Tables. The Sth Edition. In
3 vols.

21. The Ruins of Palmyra, otherwise Tedmor in the DeLart. This Work contains

'59 Plates of the Ruins, and 3 of Inscriptions, chiefly in theGreek and Palmyrian Languages,
with largeiExplications. To which are prefixed, the Publilher's Account of the Undertak-
ing; an Inquiry into the ancient State of Palmyra, and a Journal of the Passage through
the Defart.

The above Work is elegantly printed in French.
22. The Ruins of Balbec, anciently Heliopolis. in Carljria, near the Source of the Orontes,

and within x5 Leagues of DamafuJs. This Work contains Views of the Ruins as they are
at present, with Plans and Elevations of the Buildings, from Drawings and Measures taken
on the Spot, by the Gehtlemen who made the Tour of the Meditetranean in 175o and
1751, and who have given the Publick the Ruins of Pa/lmyra, as a Specimen of their
.-Labours. To which is prefixed, an Account of the ancient and present State of the Place,
such as the Materials colleAced by those Gentlemen afford. The Plates are equal to those
of Palmyra in Number, and are engraved by the fame masterly HandS, and printed on the
fame Size Paper.

The above Work is also elegantly printed in Frenth.
23. Anderfoni 7Thejaurus Diplomatum & Numifiltateio Scotia, auxit & locutpltawt Rudi-
enanus.

24. A DiCtionary of the Englih Langeage, in which the Words are deduced from their

Originals, and illullrated in their different Significations, by Examples from the belt Wri-
ters. To which are prefixed, a'Hiforey of th8 Language, and an .Englih Gamtnar. In
a vols. By Samuel JohnJfn, A. M.

z. A General Di6ionary, Hifiorital and Gritical. By the Reverend Mr. dJhn Peter Ber-

nard, the Rev. Dr. Tahoas Birch, S. R. S. Mr. John Leckyat, and.other Hands. In 1o vols.
Thie Oriental Lives, by the late Gore Salt, . Efq
